A COLLECTION OF SERMONS UPON Several Occasions.

By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Praesident of St. Marie Magdalen College in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall, for Ric: Royston, and Ric: Davis, MDCLXXI.

THE CONTENTS of this VOLUME, ARE SERMONS PREACHED
I.
BEfore the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
London, at St. Paul's Church, upon the first Sunday after his Majesty's
Restoration, 1660.
II.
Before the Honorable the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, at St.
Margarets Church Westminster, upon the 29. day of May, being the Anniversary
Day of the King and Kingdoms Restoration, 1661.
III.
Before the Right Honorable the House of Lords, at the Abbey Church of
Westminster, upon a Solemn day of Humiliation, occasioned by the Great Rain in
June and July, 1661.
IV.
Before the King at Whitehall, upon the Wednesday-Monthly Fast, when the
Pestilence decreased, but yet continued, As did also the War with the French
and Dutch, 1665.
V.
Before the Clergy of England in Convocation Assembled, at S. Paul's Church,
touching the Power of the Church in a National Synod, 1661.
VI.
Before the University, at St. Mary's Church in Oxford, concerning the Rights
of the Civil Magistrate, and especially of the Supreme; upon the opening of the
Term, 1664.
VII.
Before the King at Whitehall, upon Candlemas Day, 1661.
VIII.
Before the University, upon Act-Sunday-Morning, at St. Mary's Church in
Oxford, touching the Usefulness and Necessity of Human Learning, etc. 1664.
IX.
Before the King at White Hall, in Vindication of our Church against the
Novelties of Rome. 1662. To which is added, in this Edition,
X.
A Paraenesis to the Reader touching the Sermon going before, and the Discourse
which follows after of Romes pretended Infallibility.
XI.
Before a Rural Congregation, at the Funeral of Edward Peyto of Chesterton in
Warwickshire Esquire, 1659.
Englands Season FOR REFORMATION OF LIFE.

A SERMON DELIVERED IN St. PAUL'S Church, LONDON: ON THE SUNDAY Next following
His Sacred Majesty's RESTAVRATION. M.DC.LX.

Christian Reader,
THat what I committed the other day to the ears of Many, I now so suddenly
expose to the eyes of All, as I dare not pretend to deserve thy Thanks, so I
conceive I cannot justly incurr thy censure. For it is not in compliance with
my peculiar inclinations, (which of themselves are well known to be
sufficiently averse, from any farther publication of single Sermons,) but
partly to testify my Obedience to the commands of some Learned and pious
Friends, partly to frustrate the ill-meant whispers of some unlearned and
peevish Enemies. How far I was from a design either to please or to provoke
either this or that part of the Congregation, And how probably desirous to
profit both, I leave them both to pass a Judgment, not by any one part, but
by altogether. It would no doubt have been grievous to me, to suffer the
contum^lies of Men for preaching Loyalty, and Love, and Reformation of Life, a
tender care of weak Brethren, and a Christian Forbearance of one another, Act.
5. 41.
if I had not thought it an happy lot, to suffer ought for His sake, Heb. 12. 3.
who endured (for mine) such contradiction of sinners against himself; some
affirming, he was a good Man, and others saying, Nay, but he deceives the
People.

If some are yet so devotedly the Servants of Sin, John 7. 12.
as to hate me for bringing them (unawares) into the light, John 8 34.
because the Light has reproved their evil deeds, it cannot be from any
hurtfulness either in Me, John 3. 20.
or in the light, but from their own sore eyes, that their eyes are hurt. When
Men are exasperated with Lenitives, and throw themselves into Paroxysmes, after
all our Pacifick and most Anodynous applications, we ought not sure to think
the worse, but rather the better of our Praescriptions. That Christ Himself
could do no miracles amongst the Men of his own Country, was only the Fault of
their prejudice, and ^nbeleif. That the heat harden's clay, is from the
untowardness of the clay; For if it were wax, the heat would melt it. Nor is
the fault in the Sun, but in the Dunghill, if the more he shine's on it, ^he
worse it smell's.

I know that those Lovers of public Discord (whom my endeavors to reconcile
have made outrageous) as they are few in point of Number, so in point of
Quality they are of smallest Consideration. And I know there are many most
worthy persons, whom the Virulence of mine enemies hatb made my Friends. So
that if I were studious to promote mine own Interest, and did not very much
prefer the consideration of their Amendment, I should not endure (as now I
shall) to sue for peace whilst I am injured. But still remembering what it is,
to which as Christians we are appointed, (...). 1 These. 3. 3. That no man
should be moved by these afflictions; for your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto.
or as Soldiers marked out, and that we are bound to follow our leader, (even
the Captain of our salvation who was perfected through sufferings,) I shall
cheerfully strive to approve my self as a minister of God, by honor and
dishonor, by evil report, and good report, Heb. 2. 10.
as a deceiver, 2 Cor. 6. 4. and 8.
and yet true; I will bless, being calumniated, And being wronged above
measure, 1 Cor. 4. 13. (...).
I will entreat. The more it seems to be impossible, to win the inventors of
evil things to reconcileableness of Spirit, Diod. Sicul.
the more will I labor for its Attainment. Rom, 1, 30,
For I will never cease to pray, that by that powerful convincing controuling
Spirit, which stilleth the raging of the sea, 1 Cor, 1, 10,
and the madness of the People, we may be knit together in one mind, Ephesians, 4. 31,
and in one judgment; That the present time of our prosperity may prove the
Season for our Amendment, and change of life; that all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, may be put away from us with all
malice; and that as members of one Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, we
may each of us endeavor (in our several stations) to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

That this was really the intent of the Following Sermon, the later part of the
Sermon, will make apparent. For what was spoken in reflection upon the
darkness of the night, was only premised as a Foyl to commend the Day. And as
a thing without which I could not make an impartial parallel between the Text
and the Time. Besides that in the method of healing wounds, (which a flatterer
may palliate, but cannot cure,) there is as charitable an use both of the Probe
and the Abstersive, as there can possibly be of the Oil and Balsam. The
Decollation of Gods Anointed, (which was so far a Deicide, Psalm. 82. 6.
as he was one of those Gods who shall dye like men,) Exo. 22. 28
had been declared by the Parliament (before I made my strictures on it) to
have been a most horrid and hideous Murder. And if my censors did not think
they had once offended, they would not be candidates (as they are) for a Royal
Pardon. It being so natural for a pardon to include and connotate an offense,
that unless we were conscious of having sinned, we could not sincerely ask God
forgiveness. I am not able to ask any, for what I have said in the following
Sermon, tending to Loyalty and Union, and the establishment of both upon the
only sure Basis of impartial Repentance and self-revenge, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
until I am able to be convinced of Unsincerity in my aim at so good an End,
or of unlawfullnesse in the means which I have used for its attainment. And
therefore that which I beg from the Christian Reader, is not the favor of a
partial, but the Justice of an unpassionate and unbyassed perusal of all that
follows.

ENGLAND'S SEASON FOR REFORMATION of LIFE.
ROMANS XIII. xii. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.
TO make you see how the Text is exactly suitable to the Time, (as well to the
Time when 'twas written, as to the Time wherein it is read,) It will be needful
to entertain you with two such Praeliminary Observables, as without which it is
impossible to come at the meaning of the words. And yet the true meaning must
be attained, as well in their Rational, and Historical, as in their Literal
Importance, before I can handle them as I ought, without injustice to the
Apostle, or Apply them as I desire, without defrauding the Congregation.

First then, ye are to take an especial notice, That in the space of forty
years after the Crucifying of Jesus, there was to happen amongst the Jews a
famous day of Discrimination, wherein Matthew. 24. 40.
one was to be taken, and another left. The cruel and the incredulous were to
be utterly destroyed, But the persecuted Believers to be remarkably preserved
from that Destruction. Preserved, not only from that deluge of Judgments, like
Matthew. 24. 38.
Noah in the Ark, but from the mischievous designs of the Mosaical Zelots, by
whom they could never be forgiven their having been Loyal unto their Lord.
Which famous day of Discrimination, as the Scriptures have expressed in those
sublimer sorts of Periphrasis, [The Kingdom of Heaven, the coming of Christ,
the end of all things, and the conclusion of the Age;] so in respect of one
part, that of deliverance unto the Faithful, we find it expressed in other
places, by (...), The Redemption drawing near, (...), The Season, (...), See
Doctor H^mmond (of blessed memory) upon the place, and the Texts by him
referred to.
The Day, (...), The Deliverance,] which Deliverance being nearer at the
writing of this Epistle, than when they had first embraced the Christian Faith,
is therefore the rather introduced with [an (...),] a consideration of the
time; and that as an Argument, or Allective, whereby to win them to the duties
of this whole Chapter; which Duties, that they concern us as we are men of
these Times, and relating in particular to our now happy revolution, I foresee
an occasion to show anon.

As this is the first Praecognition, so it naturally affords me an easy
passage unto the second. For our Apostle having observed certain spots in the
Christians which dwelt at Rome, theie being invelloped at once with a double
darkness, as well of their doings, as of their sufferings, no le^s asleep in
sin, than benighted with Persecution, comes early to them in this Epistle; and
here endeavors to awake them, not only with a Call, but a Reason for it.
Because the night does now begin to be less and less dark, he tells them it is
fit they be less and less drowzie. In the next words before my Text, we have an
Apostolical (...), (the very thing that in English we use to call the
Cock-crow,) whereby he tells the guilty sleepers, it is more than time that they
awake. And the Reason which he gives them is very cogent; (...), for now is our
salvation nearer than when we believed. That is to say in plainer terms, our
deliverance at present is more approaching, than when we were newly
Christianiz'd. It is better with us now, than when we were Neophytes in the
Church. But to acquaint them the more distinctly how late it is that he awakes
them; The Night (says he) is far spent, and the Day is at hand; (that is) the
time of Persecution is now well over, and the day of Deliverance begins to
dawn. At the Tyrant Tiberius, our Sun was set; At the other Tyrant Nero, it is
more than midnight: Do but wait for Vespasian, and you will find it break of
Day.

Nor does the vigilant Apostle merely awake them out of sleep, but also desires
that they will rise, and instructs them in the method how to make themselves
ready. They are to leave off their chamber-Robes, and make them fit to go
abroad; to cast away their Bed-cloaths, as only suitable to the Night; and to
appear in such habits, as are agreeable to the Day.

Let us therefore cast off the works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor
of Light. For a man to Preach on this Text, no more is needful than to explain
it. The Text it self being a Sermon, as full, and pithy, as it is short. [The
Night is far spent, and the Day is at hand;] There is (...), the double
Doctrine. [Let us therefore cast off, and let us therefore put on;] There is
(...), the double Use.

The words, apparelling the matter, have both number, and measure; and the
matter it self is as full of weight. From both together it is obvious to
observe three things in this mighty Preacher; His Logic, his Rhetoric, and
his Divinity.

We have his Logic in the Illative [Therefore] which is a note of
Argumentation, giving the force of an Enthymem, though not the form. And yet
the form is employed with more advantage than if expressed. The Night is far
spent; Therefore night-works and darkness must go away. The Day is at hand;
Therefore Light must be welcome to us.

We have his Rhetoric in the Figures, of which the whole is made up. For
besides the Isoc^la, and Homioteleuta of the Text, (that is) the evenness of
the Members, and Musical Cadence of every Clause; we see the Metaphors in the
Period are just as many as the Members. The first is borrowed from Darkness,
the second from the Day; and both in Allusion to two things more which are very
distant, to wit our Armor, and our Apparel. And yet the whole is an Allegory,
most artificially carried on. For as he begins his holy Trope with the night of
trouble and persecution, so he shuts it up too with the light of Peace. In
Allegoria tenendum est hoc, ut quo in genere incipias, eodem desinas, aliter
consequentia sit turpissima. Quintilian.
Nay, besides all these, the Text affords us three figures more. Three (I say
in kind, but six in number. Here is a single Anaphora, a double Epanodos, and
no less than a threefold Antithesis, by which the terms of the last clauses
(and there are three Terms in each) are thus opposed to one another; Darkness,
to Light; Works, to Armor; and casting off, to putting on.

After the Logic, and the Rhetoric, observe the Divinity of the Apostle; to
which his Art is but the Handmaid, and made to serve. Here is a seasonable
Advertisment, and a most useful Inference. And each of these is twofold,
exactly looking one on another, even as face answers face in a perfect Mirroir.
Observe how the later is strongly enforced out of the former. Since the night
of our sufferings is now far spent, what have we to do with the night of sin?
And since the day of our deliverance is hard at hand, what should we do but
Verse. 13.
walk honestly as in the day? The night of Error and Disorder is now well
over; Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness. The day of Mercy and
Restoration begins to dawn; Let us therefore put on the armor of light. Let
us Ephesians. 5. 8.
walk in the light, as becomes children of the light. Let our light so shine
before God and men, that Men may see our good works, and God reward them. That
men may see our good works, and glorify God in this present world; that God may
see our good works, and glorify Us in the world to come. Thus we see S. Paul's
Divinity, and way of Teaching.

It is indeed a whole Body of his practical Divinity, however summed up in so
small a System. For the whole Duty of a Christian does consist in two things;
first (by way of privation) in casting off the works of Darkness, in denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts; next (by way of Acquisition) in putting on the
armor of light; living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.
Tit. 2. 12. For so the Apostle explains himself in the two verses after my
Text, Let us walk honestly, as in the Day. And how must that be? first he tells
us in the Negative, Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying, not in any of those things which were
yesterday forbid by his Majesty's excellent Proclamation; (for these are some
of the works of darkness, the very worst use that men can make of a
Deliverance,) next he tells us in the Affirmative, It must be by putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ; By sticking close to his Precepts, and taking a copy from
his example; by having a fellowship with his death, and a conformity to his
sufferings; For this is here meant by the Armor of Light.

And each of these is improved by three main circumstances. First by the union
of the one with the other; they are not set with a disjunctive, that we may
take which we please, [Let us cast off, Or let us put on] as if the one would
serve turn without the other; But tied together with a copulative [Let us cast
off, And let us put on,] neither of them must go alone. We stand obliged to do
them both by indispensable necessity; nor must we vainly flatter our selves
that Salvation is to be had upon easier terms. Secondly by the inforcement of
both together, from the seasonable conjuncture of our affairs. For Because the
Night is far spent, we must divest our selves of darkness; And Because the Day
is at hand, we must apparel our selves with light. Thirdly by the order in
which these duties are to be done. We must not put on the Armor, Before we
cast off the Works; But cease from dishonesty in the first place, and talk of
godliness in the second. For a godly Knave is a contradiction in Adjecto. The
(...) has the Precedence, we must begin with casting off whatever is contrary
to virtue; And then comes in the (...), we must proceed to the putting on
whatever is opposite to vice. We must not hope to serve two Masters, Matthew. 6.
24.
(which our Savior tells us is impossible, and which yet has been the project
of some years past,) erecting a Church for the one, and also a Chapel for the
other; But first of all we must abhor, and forsake our Mammon, that so we may
rationally endeavor to cleave with stedfastness unto God.

Thus ye see how the Text is ravell'd out into Particulars. And were I not
really somewhat afraid to spend too much of my time in a mere Division, I would
presently wind up all into three great Bottoms. Whereof the first would provide
against Hypocrisy, the second against Indifferency, the third against
fainting, as also against Procrastination. And when Provision shall have been
made for these four things, not only Zeal, and Sincerity, but also dispatch in
our amendment, and perseverance unto the end; I know not what can be wanting
either to satisfy the Text, or to Edify the Souls of a Congregation.

But before I come to handle the useful Inference of the Apostle, (which to do,
will be the business of more than one or two Sermons) the time does prompt me
to make Advantage of his most seasonable Advertisment, out of which he does
fitly deduce his Inference. So opportune is the Advertisment, as well to these,
as those Times, that I may say in the very language (though not in the very
sense) of our Bles^ed Savior, Luke 4. 21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our Ears. For,

We have had both our Jews, and our Gnostics too; and are in the highest
degree of hope, to be rid of Both. Not (I hope) by their destruction, (like
that alluded to in my Text) but by their happy conversion, and union with us.
For mutual love, as well as loyalty, is the thing that this Chapter does
chiefly aim at. It presses earnestly for loyalty, from the first verse unto
the eighth. And as earnestly for love, from the eighth verse unto the end. By
unavoidable implication, it presses for love throughout the whole, but most
expressly, and on purpose, in no less than four verses, to wit, the eight, the
ninth, the tenth, and the thirteenth. We must not Insult over our Enemies,
though we ought to give thanks for their disappointment. The noblest benefit of
a Conquest, is the opportunity to oblige. Rejoice not (says Solomon) when
thine enemy falls, nor let thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the
Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him, Prove.
24. 17. From whence it is obvious to collect, That to Insult over our Enemies,
may do Them good; but all that We can get by it, is God's displeasure. The
greatest care is to be taken in the present dawning of our day, that it be not
overcast with an utter darkness. We have already had a long and a tedious
night; (though not so long as the Apostles by twenty years,) a Night of sorrow,
and oppression; a Night of disorder, and confusion; a Night of ignorance, and
error; a Night of error in judgment, and practice too; To sum up all, we
have been seized with a night of suffering, which we had drawn over our selves
by a night of sin.

It is so far from my purpose, to make or widen the wounds of any, that you
will see, (before we part) I do intend nothing but Healing. But I must make an
application, as well of the Night, as of the Day; or else the parallel expected
will be imperfect. And as it is reckoned the greatest happiness, to be able to
say, we have been miserable; (yea, St. Gregory boldly called it an happy sin,
which gave occasion to such a Remedy as the coming of Christ into the world:)
so 'twill be useful to reflect upon the darkness of the night, which (by the
blessing of God) is so very far spent, the better to relish the enjoyment of
the glorious day which is now at hand. -- Haec olim meminisse juvabit.
To recount what we have suffered, is no more than to consider how much we are
able to forgive; and for how manifold a deliverance it now concerns us to be
thankful.

When we were dull, and in the dark, and knew not the Happiness we enjoyed,
whilst we enjoyed it; when we could not comport with so hard a lesson, as the 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14.
submitting our selves for the Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as sent by him, and whether those that were sent, were
Ecclesiastical, or Civil; when it seemed to us a Paradox, Cappadoces, (inquit
Strabo) (...) Strab. l. 12. p. 540. cap.
that it is the liberty of the Subject to live in subjection unto the Law, and
therefore in loyalty unto him, whom to obey for Conscience sake, is the
happiest freedom; I say when this Lesson would not otherwise be learnt, God
sent us to School to a Civil War; the severest Praeceptor, by which poor
Scholars could be instructed. So it was called by Thucyd. lib. 3. p. 227.
(...), etc.
Thucydides, [(...), A violent Schoolemaster] and such we found it by sad
experience. For it rigidly taught us through the mouth of the angry Cannon, and
gave us terrible admonitions upon the point of the sword. A lying spirit went
forth into the mouth of the Prophets, Inspiring the Isa. 14. 23. (...). Polyb.
l. 6. p. 458.
meanest of the people to affect Dominion over the mightiest; and never ceasing
to blow the coals, which they had kindled within the Bramble, until they saw it
had devoured the lofty Cedar. A Church forsooth was to be swept, (but with the
Beesom of destruction,) though the best Reformed in all the world; and because
the very Beesom was the uncleanest thing in it, it could not choose but be the
fouler for being swept. Nay, all the foundations of the earth did presently
grow out of course. In the whole body of the Kingdom, there was little to be
seen but wounds and bruises. For our Politic Chirurgions did so follow the
Letter (in opposition to the Sense) of the Poets Rule, as to have taken off
most of the soundest members, which were -- Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum.
incurable indeed, by being faultless. Before the murdering of the King, who
was the Head of our Common Mother, they garbl'd both the Universities, which
were the Eyes. This was the wit of their Impiety, first to pluck out her eyes,
that so she might not see them cut off her head. They did not only (like
Alcides) cruelly bite their Mothers Breast, But (like Nero) rip up her Bowels.
Not only (like Tarquinius) summa papavera amputare, lopp off the chieftains of
the Nation, but (like Procrustes) cut off the feet too. The public calamities
were extended, from him that sat upon the Throne, to him that labored at the
Plough. And, if we extend our consideration to the preparedness of their minds,
had all that were faithful in the land had no more than one Neck, those
Caligula's I allude to had cut it off at one Blow. Nay, in one sense at least,
I may say they did it. For the Head of the Parliament is declared by Law to be
the King; and the Parliament (we know) is a kind of ^ whole Nation Epitomized.
And so to cut off the King, was to behead the Parliament; which, what was it in
effect, but to cut the very throat of the English Nation? Now if we consider
the Revolution, by which we all are transported with joy, and wonder, and do
compare it with every part of that Politic -- (...). Polyb. Megalop. l. 6. p.
456, 457, 458.
wheel, (that (...), as Polyhius calls it,) with which this disgraced and
glorious Kingdom has been both tortured, and turned round; we cannot but hope
that many thousands have found so good an effect of their late Collyrium, that
they are not only quicker, but singler sighted than heretofore; and do make
such severe expostulations with themselves, as not to need any other Censors.

With how vast an expense of blood, and conscience, and as well of the public,
as private Treasure, did we buy the sad Privilege of paying Assesments, and
Excise? How much pains we were at, to purchase the means of our being
Miserable? What a do did we keep, to find out a way to our undoing? we felt an
eminent Decay, of Public Honor, as well as Trade; a Decay of Religion,
because of Unity; a Decay of what not, unless of that that decayed us on every
side? Nay, the more our sinews were shrunk up, and by how much the weaker our
shoulders grew, by so much the more were we laden with heavy Burdens. There was
inflicted on many thousands, a Taste of scarceness; and a sight of the Plague,
though not of Pestilence. For when did we see a new year, which did not bring
along with it a new Disease too? It Is true indeed that many of us had great
enjoyments; But how many others had right to greater, who yet were reduced to
none at all? And all we had being precarious, at the lustful disposal of fellow
subjects, we knew not how soon we might be drowned in the deepest want, how
much soever (for a Time] we might swim in plenty. Nay, even Then we were to
count it our real misery, that we could see, and deplore, but could not Remedy
other men's.

Such was the Darkness of the Night, which now does serve to commend the Day.
The Day by whose light we can see to read, [what was hid from our eyes when we
sat in Darkness, when the great Lamps of the Church were cruelly hid under a
Bushel, and even He was taken from us, who was the light of our Eyes, as well
as the Breath of our Nostrils,] I say, by this light we can see to read, That
our Liberty does consist in a faithful Discharge of our Allegiance. That it is
the Interest of the Subject, Not to be able to Rebel. That the Prerogative of
the King, is the peoples privilege. That to lessen his Power, is to betray
their Rights. For unless he be able to crush, and injure, he is not able to
defend, and protect his Subjects. Any Tyranny will be better, than that of a
prosperous Rebellion, by how much One is less grievous than Many Tyrants; And a
Temporary Mischief, that a perpetual Inconvenience.

Blessed be God that we can say, (at least as far as our Apostle,) that our
Dark state of misery is fairly vanished, and that the Light does begin to show
it self in our Horizon. But so far are we yet from our full Meridian, that it
will never be Day with us, (I mean, not a glorious uncloudy Day,) till Magna
Charta shines forth in its native Luster. And it appears by Salvae sint
Episcopis omnes Libertates suae. Mag. Chart. cap. 1. and ult.
Magna Charta, that all the Rights of the Church are the chiefest Liberties of
the Subject. To be but capable of the Honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
the double Honor of the Clergy, (to wit, the Reverence, and the Revenue) is
an eminent part of the Layman's Birthright. I pray be pleased to consider, what
is not every day observed, That all the Dignities, and Endowments, which do
belong unto the Church, (at once by the Statutes of God and Man,) are so many
Rights which appertain to your childrens children. I must not here be thought
to forsake my Text; For it ye compare it with the Context, (especially from the
first, to the eighth verse of this Chapter,) ye will see the great fitness of
all I say, and that my Text cannot be satisfied, unless I say it. For he that
says in this place by the Spirit of God, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, does also say by the same
Spirit, Obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13. 7, 17
who have spoken to you the word of God, and who do watch for your souls, as
those that must render an Account. And the Interest of the former, is so
entwisted with the later, That till our Bishops receive their Right, though we
are glad to have our King, we may rationally fear we shall not hold him. For
ask (I beseech you) of the days that are past, Deuteronomy. 4. 32.
and ask from the one side of heaven to the other, if ever there were any such
thing as This, that a King could be happy without a Bishop? Lord! What an
Epoch will it make in our future Kalendars, when men shall reckon from this
Year, as from the Year of Restitution? But then (like that which Saint Peter
mentions, Acts 3. 21.) The Restitution is to be general, as well to God, as to
the People. And ye will find in Magna Charta, (which does deserve to be
imprinted in all your memories,) That all the Rights of the Church were
entirely granted unto God; They were granted unto God, and that for ever. Now
of so sacred a force is the word [For ever,] That if a Statute shall be made
against the Liberties of the Church, The Law of the Land has provided against
that Statute; See the first and last Chapter of the 42. of Edward the third.
And by an Anticipation, declares it Null. Shall I guess at the cause of so
great a Caution? It seems to be, as for other Reasons, so in particular for
This; Because to alter that Government, was as well against the Kings Oath, as
against the Oaths of both Houses, which swore the Right of his Supremacy, as
well in all Ecclesiastical, as Civil causes. Besides that in the Judgment of
the most eminent in the world (for depth of knowledge in holy things) The order
of Bishops is by Divine Institution. And if it is so in good earnest, it will be
dangerous to deal with the Laws of Christ, as we read Cum adversus Rempublicam
Lacedaemoniorum conspirationem ortam noctu comperisser, Leges Lycurgi continuo
abrogavit, quae de Indemnatis supplicium sumi vetabant. Vol. Max. lib. 7. c. 2.
p. 208.
Agesilaus once dealt with those of Lacedaemon, which he pretended only to
abrogate, that he might not break them. But whether so, or not so, a thing in
Being and Debate is to pass for good, until the Dispute shall be fairly ended.
And if an Error must be adventured on either hand, Religion tells us, it ought
to be upon the Right.

Would any know why I insist on such a subject in such a place? my Reasons for
it are plainly These.

First, I insist on such a subject, because my Text (as I said) does exact it
of me; And because it is my duty, at least to wish, That the day breaking forth
may be full and lasting; That the Repentance of the Nation may be impartial;
and so to our SOVEREIGNS RETURN, there may be added his Continuance in Peace
and Safety. I say in Safety, not more to his Person, than his Posterity. Nor in
Safety for a season, so long as men are well humored, but so long as the Sun
or the Moon endures. And then for you of this Place, who are an honorable part
of the English Nation, That which I take to be your Duty, I think is your
Interest to endeavor. The most I am pressing on you is this, That ye will
labor for the means of your being happy. If ye think ye cannot be happy, with
the establishment of the Prelacy, I shall pray you may be happy, at least
without it; and also wish I may be able to pray with Faith too. Only as often
as I reflect on King JAMES his Motto, [No Bishop, no King,] and withal do
consider its having been verified once, and before our eyes, I think it my duty
to desire, it may not be verified any more: But that it may rather be here
applied, what was spoken heretofore of the Spartan Laws, [ut semper esse
possent, aliquando non fuerunt.] They only ceased for a Time, to the end they
might continue to all eternity. These are sincerely the very Reasons for which
I insist upon such a Subject.

Secondly I do it in such a place, because I look on This Assembly, as on the
Head and the Heart of the Royal City. I look on the City, as on a Sea, into
which the main stream of the Nation runs. Even the Parliament it self has such
a respect unto the City, that if ye plead for Gods Spouse, as ye have done for
his Anointed (for which your names will be precious with late posterity,) if ye
shall supplicate for a Discipline which is as old in this land as Christianity
it self, and stands established in Law by thirty two Acts of Parliament, and
without which ye cannot live, unless by living under the Breach of your
greatest Charter, they will not only be apt to grant, but to thank you also
for your Petition.

Having gone thus far in prosecution of the Advertisment, That the Night of our
Suffering is fairly spent, and that the Day of our Enjoyment begins to dawn;
And having directed unto the means, (with submission be it spoken to all
Superiors.) by which our Day is to be lengthned, not only into a year, but an
Age of Iubilee; into a kind of perpetual Sabbath, a Day of Rest from those
works, which either wanted Light, or were ashamed of it; which either borrowed
Darkness for their Cover, or else which owned it for their Cause; I humbly
leave what I have said to His acceptance and disposal, in the Hand of whose
Counsel are all your Hearts. It Is more than time that I proceed to the general
Use of this Advertisment; to which I am prompted by the word [Therefore,] as
it is a word of connection betwixt the Duty, and the Deliverance.

Our Apostle does not thus argue; Because the Night of Oppression is now far
spent, and the Day of Deliverance is hard at hand, Let us therefore enjoy the
good things that are present, let us stretch our selves upon (...) bed of
Ivory, let us Crown our selves with Rose-buds, let us drink Wine in bowls, and
let us dance to the sound of the Viol, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in
every street, let none of us go without his share of Voluptuousness, for this
is our portion, our lot is this: I say he does not thus reason, (like the
swaggerers and Hectors in the second Chapter of Wisdom, and in the sixth of the
Prophet Amos,) but on the contrary, That the serious consideration of an
approaching deliverance, should be a double enforcement to change of life, for
such is evidently the force of the particle (...), as that looks back on the
(...). Because the Night is far spent, and because the Day is at hand, (...),
let us therefore cast off those works of darkness, and let us therefore put on
the Armor of light. Which is as if he should have said, At this very Time, and
for this very Reason, let us live better lives than we did before; let us
buckle up close to our Christian duties; The Reformation of our manners will be
the properest Answer to such a Blessing. Such also was the Reasoning which
Moses used to the People Israel. Did ever people hear the voice of God, as thou
have heard and live? (Deuteronomy. 4. 33.) Thou shall keep therefore his statutes,
that it may go well with thee (v. 40.) so again Deuteronomy. 8. 6, 7. The Lord thy God
brings thee into a good Land, Therefore thou shall keep the Commandments of
the Lord. Such was the Reasoning also of Zachary, Luke 1. 71.74, 75.
in his Divine Benedictus, That the use we are to make of being saved from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, is to serve the Author of our
deliverance, in holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life.

What now remains, but that we go, and do likewise? Not arguing thus from our
late great changes; Because the Night of our Sufferings is well nigh spent, and
the Day of Restitution is hard at hand, let us therefore put from us the evil
day, Amos 6. 3.
and cause the seat of violence to come near, for now it comes to our Turn to
oppress the poor, and to crush the helpless, and to call our strength the Law
of Justice, let us never so much as think of the afflictions of Joseph; Verse 6.
Let our Joy run out into Debaucherie, and surfeit into the braveries of vanity,
and the Enjoyments of our lust; or at the best let us express it, by the making
of Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells, by solemn drinking of Healths, and casting
Hats into the Air, whereby to make the World see, that we are glad, rather than
thankful; But let us manifest on the contrary, (and let us do it by
demonstration,) that we are piously thankful, as well as glad. Because the Day
of good things breaks in upon us, Let us Therefore offer to God thanksgiving,
and pay our vows unto the Lord. Psalm. 50. 14.
Our Vows of Allegiance and Supremacy; Our Vows to assert and maintain our
Charters; Our Vows to live according to Law, and obey the Canons of the Church.
But above all, let us pay him our Vow in Baptism, by forsaking the World
before we leave it, by subduing the Flesh unto the Spirit, James 4. 7.
by resisting the Devil until he flies. That whilst God is making all new
without us, we may not suffer our Hearts within us to be the only things
remaining old; But rather (on the contrary) that we may prove we are in Christ,
by that demonstrative argument of our becoming new creatures; which until we do
become, we cannot possibly be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Do the two Twin
Blessings of Peace and Plenty, which have been (for many years) at so low an
ebb, begin to flow in upon us from every quarter? Then let not our Souls be
carried away, with the pleasant violence of the Tide. Let not any Man seekgreat
things for himself, but rather study to deserve, then to enjoy them. Make no
provision for the Flesh, whereby to fulfill the lusts thereof: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and Adorn his Doctrine, by a conformity to his Life. Put on
his Modesty, and his Temperance, in a perfect opposition to Rioting and
Drunkenness; put on his Chastity, and his Pureness, in opposition to
Chambering, and Wantonness; put on his Bowels, and his Mercy, in opposition to
Strife, and Envy.

Ye know (...) I told you in the beginning, that Loyalty and Love are the two
grand duties at which this Chapter does chiefly drive. And having been instant
for the first, in the former part of my discourse, I think it a duty incumbent
on me, to be as urgent for the second. For Love is part of that Armor my Text
commands us to put on. Nay, considering that Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, (in the next verse but one before my Text,) the armor of Light may be
said, to be the armor of Love too. Love must needs be (...), Ephesians. 6. 13.
the whole armor of God, in as much as it comprehends the fulfilling of the
Law. Gal. 5. 14.
As one Scripture tells us, that God is Light, 1 John 1. 5.
so another also tells us, that God is Love; and therefore the children of
light, 1 John 4. 8.
must be children of love too.

Then let the same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus; 1 Pet. 2. 23.
who when he suffered, threatened not, but committed his cause to God who
judges righteously. And let us prove this mind is in us, by our forbearing one
another, forgiving one another, Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.
Ephesians. 4. 32.
As we are stones of that Temple, in which the Head of the Corner is Christ
himself, He meant his Blood should be the Cement, to fasten^ every one of us to
one another, and altogether unto himself. And since we see that Disloyalty is
taking its leave throughout the Land, lets rather shut the Door after it, by
(Love and Unity,) then (by Breaches and Divisions) open ^way for its Return.
Let us effectually make it appear, by the modest use of our Enjoyments, Pacem
Bello quaesitam esse, That we fought only for Peace, and contended only for
Union; that the end of our strife, was our Agreement; that we aimed at Truth,
rather than Victory; or rather at the Victory of Truth and Righteousness. Let
our generous deportment become an evidence, that as the greatest of our
Calamities could not bow down our heads, so the greatest of our Enjoyments
cannot trip up our heels; That as our Crosses could not deprive us of Hope and
Comfort, so the Tide of our Prosperity shall but Illustrate our Moderation.

But above all let us distinguish, betwixt our weak, and our wilful Brethren.
Of some (Saint Jude says) we must have compassion, Jude 22. 23.
making a difference. But others (he says) we must save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire. That is, we must save them, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
even by making them afraid. Must show them the Terrors of the Lord, and fright
them out of the way to Hell. We must in any wise rebuke them, Lev. 19. 17.
and must not suffer sin upon them. It is a Rule amongst Musicians, that if a
string be but True, it is to be cherisht, though never so g^^sly out of Tune;
but to be broken, if it be false, because incapable of amendment. Some are so
scandalous, that we must not receive them into our Houses, 2 John 10. 11.
nor bid them God speed: For to bid them God speed, is to partake of their Evil
deeds. (2 John 10. 11.) But there is nothing more Barbarous, than not to hold
from the breaking a bruised reed, Isa. 42. 3.
or from the quenching a smoking flax. Mat. 12. 20.
Nothing but Pardon belongs to Penitents, although they may have sinned against
us, no less than seventy times seven. Mat. 18. 22.
It is an excellent passage in Herodotus, that whilst Croesus was brewing
Vengeance against the Murderer of his Son, Adrastes being the man that had
killed the Son, threw himself down at the Fathers feet; and in the bitterness
of his Soul passed such a sentence upon himself, as even melted the very bowels
of an enraged King, who straight brake forth into this expression, Herodotus
lib. 1. page 17.
(...). Friend (says he) I am revenged; thy severity to thy self has made me
kind. And I think it fit that thou should live, for thinking it fit that
thou should dye. If we have failed heretofore in so great a duty, let us
learn from that Heathen, to love our enemies for the future. And since it is
dangerous not to love them, Heb. 12. 29.
in as much as our God is a consuming fire, let us love them at least in our
own defense. Have they persecuted us, when it was in Their power? Let us the
rather not hurt them, when it is in Ours. For to Imitate their courses, is to
Approve them. But (...), (as Arrian speaks,) not to be like them in what is
evil, is the most generous kind of revenge, and conquest. Eccles. 12. 13
Now then (if you please) hear the sum of the whole matter. We must demonstrate
to our enemies, by the most practical way of arguing, That the night of sin is
far spent, and that the day of our Amendment begins to dawn; 2 Pet. 1. 19.
that the Day Star (in St. Peter) is arising in our hearts; that we are
followers of Christ, Joh. 13. 15.
and resolved to do sincerely as he has given an Example. Which was not to
call down Fire from Heaven, Luke 9. 54.
much less to conjure it up from Hell, Mat. 26. 50.
but to call Judas Friend, whilst he was Executing his Treason, as well as
Devil, whilst he designed it; nay to lay down his Life, even for them that took
it away. Now since He is (what he calls himself) the light of the World, and as
well our armor, as our apparel, St. Paul did fitly explain his Precept for
putting on the armor of Light, by that of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ.
This is the use we are to make of the Nights going away, and the days
approach, if I may not rather say, its presence with us. This is our practical,
and vital, (not verbal) Oratory, which (next to the pleading of the Spirit,
Romans 8. 26.
who helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for us with groans which
cannot be uttered,) is the only Oratory with God, that will be powerful to
persuade him to pass our Hopes into Fruitions, to Crown our Fruitions with an
Increase, to bless that Increase with a long Continuance, and so to Sanctify
unto us our Temporal things, as that we may not fall short of the things
Aeternal.

This is the rational importance of the word Therefore in my Text, as it is a
particle of connection betwixt our Duty, and our Deliverance.

Now that the Duty of keeping close to the Commandments of Christ, (by casting
off All our works of Darkness, and by putting on the whole armor of light,)
should be enforced upon our Souls from the consideration of the Time, [a Time
of Peace, and Prosperity, succeeding a Time of Persecution; a very bright Day,
after a very Dark Night;] I shall the rather proceed to prove by the several
Reasons of the thing; because the Reasons making for it, will be also the
Motives inducing to it. They will not only clear the Truth, but advance the
practice of my Assertion.

The first Reason is, Because it is generous, and noble, to amend our lives,
with our conditions; and rather out of gratitude, than fordid fear. It will be
ever the greatest glory of Titus Vespasian, (above the rest of the Roman
Emperors) that he was molded by his Empire from the worse to the better; from
having been a very cruel, and a very proud person, to be as eminently mild, and
humble too, as if he had listened to the Precept in Ecclesiasticus, Eccl. 3. 18.
and made his Practice an Answer to it, [My Son, the greater thou art, humble
thy self so much the more.] Happy is the Man that can say with David, It is
good for me that I have been in trouble. Psalm. 119. 71.
But He is the Man of a rarer happiness, who is inwardly the better for having
prosper'd. It Is very much worthier of a Christian, to be led by Gods favor,
then to be driven into duty by his severity. A well natured people, upon the
receiving of a blessing, will be apt to bethink themselves, (with David) by
what expressions of their gratitude they may signify their sense of their
Obligation. Quid retribuemus? (...) Philo (...) page 552.
what shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon us,
(Psalm. 116. 12.) which of his greatest enemies shall we make a sacrifice to his
wrath? what monstrous sin shall we mortify? what darling lust shall we subdue?
how shall we honor him with our lives, and give him thanks by our Reformation?
shall we despise the Riches of his forbearance, because he is willing that his
forbearance should allure us to Repentance, and not that his Judgments should
fright us to it? shall we presume to be evil, because he is good? And offend
the more boldly, because his Grace does so much abound? No, we will not (for
shame) abuse his Love, and corrupt our selves with his Indulgence. Nor will we
(in pity to our Souls) pollute our selves with his gifts, or sin away his
graces and mercies to us, by making them serve to incense his Justice. But by
how much the greater his Mercies are, by so much the more will we tremble to
provoke the eyes of his glory. Because we find by so late experience, He is a
God ready to pardon, swift to show mercy, and slow to wrath; we will endeavor
to let him see, we are a people ready to serve him; swift to ask him
forgiveness, but slow to sin. Thus ye have the first Reason of the word
Therefore in my Text, as it is a particle of connection betwixt the Duty, and the
Deliverance.

The second Reason is, because he will otherwise Repent of his favors to us,
and will punish us the more, for sinning against such Obligations. We ought to
look upon our privilege, with Fear and Trembling: for that which heightens our
dignity, whilst we attend to Gods service, does also aggravate our doom, whilst
we neglect it. The very things which make us capable of greater happiness than
others, may accidentally fit us for greater ruin. Remember those words of our
blessed Savior, [Luk. 10. 15.] And thou Capernaum which art lifted up to
Heaven, shall be cast down to Hell. Whereby it is intimated unto us, that God
will punish Malefactors, as well in respect of the mercies they have received,
as in respect of the sins they have committed. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
When we shall all appear before the judgment seat of God, to answer for the
things which are done in the body, we then must render a strict account, what
Use we have made of our Grand deliverance, and how much we are the Better, for
all that good that is done unto us.

The third Reason is, because our dangers are greater in time of Peace and
Prosperity, than in time of Distress and Persecution; and so we have need of
the greater Caution. Agur prayed against Poverty, Prove. 30. 8, 9.
for fear of Stealth; but he prayed against Riches, for fear of Atheism. If
Iesurun wax fat, he falls a kicking, and quite forgets the God that made him.
[Deut. 32. 15.] If Nabal is drunk with the prosperity of sheering the Innocent
and harmless Sheep, it is no time to tell him, that either David, or God is
Angry. Nay David himself, in his prosperity, began to boast he should never be
moved, [Psal. 30. 6.] From fullness of Bread, arises Idleness. and Pride; and
those (we know) were the sins of Sodom. When God rained Manna upon his people,
and gave them all that they desired, Then [saith the Text] they were not
estranged from their lusts. Psalm. 78. 24. 25.
But when he slew them, they sought him, and inquired early after God. If ever
any mortal was (...), (that is) the White boy of Fortune, and special favorite
of the Fates, (as the Heathens phras'd it) the Youth of Macedon was sure the
Man. But though he could not be overcome by the strength of all Asia, he was by
the weakness, and softness of it. 'Twas this made Cato cry out in Livy, Ne
illae magis res nos ceperint, quam nos illas. Live. lib. 34. page 849.
Quo magis imperium crescit, eo plus horreo. The more our Territories increase,
the more I tremble; for fear the Kingdoms which we have taken, do prove indeed
to have taken Us. He knew that where the Soul is not commensurate with the
success, the Pride arising from the Victory, does so defile the glory of it,
that the prize may be said to lead the Triumph into Captivity. It is so natural
for a man to be transported with prosperity, that it extorted from Moses an
extraordinary caveat, before he could safely admit his people to the delights
of Canaan. When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, Deuteronomy.
6. 10, 11, 12.
to give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, See
Deuteronomy. 8. 10. to 18.
Then beware that thou forget not the Lord, who brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, [Deut. 6. 10. 12.] and so again in the 8 Chapter, When thou have eaten,
and art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt therein, Then beware
least thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, who brought
thee out of the house of Bondage. It Is a dangerous thing, to be imparadis'd on
Earth, because in every such paradise there lurks a Serpent.

The fourth Reason is, Because it is better to have a conquering, then an
untempted Innocence. To live exactly in despite of solicitations to the
contrary, is more thank-worthy, and more rewardable, than only to want the
Importunity, or Opportunity to offend. A man may easily be submissive, whilst
he is under a Persecution; and study compliance, when he is worsted. But it is
as laudable, as it is difficult, if we who sought even for Victory, whilst we
were trodden under foot, shall sue for Peace in our Prosperity. That which
makes us most high, (in the sight of God) is our Humility; for which there is
hardly any place in our Humiliation. But the Taller any man is, by so much the
lower he has to stoop; and so it is the Benefit of success, to be Remarkable
for Modesty, and Moderation. That especially is the season, wherein our Armor
of light is of most honorable Employment, when the Prince of darkness has
most auxiliaries within, and our Lusts are made ablest to War against us.

The fifth Reason is, because there is no other way whereby to prevail with God
Almighty, both to complete that happiness he has begun, and to continue it
when completed. I say to complete it being begun, because the night is far
spent, but not quite over; The day is dawning, or at hand, but not arrived at
its Meridian. God's Anointed is settled, but not his Spouse. Many are sorry for
their Sacrilege, but do not earnestly Repent; Or they Repent a fair way, (as
far as Ahab,) but not (with Zachae the Publican) as far as a fourfold
Restitution. Many who sinned out of Ignorance in a very high manner, do stiffly
argue their being Innocent, from their not apprehending that they were guilty.
But (seeing Repentance is better for them, than a mere Temporal Impunity,) they
should be entreated to consider, and put it a little to the question, whether
their Ignorance was not caused by the Previous Dominion of some great
Prejudice, which had also its Rise from some Reigning sin. Alas! The Jews were
too guilty of killing Christ, although they knew not what they did; for had
they known him, they would not have crucified to themselves the Lord of Glory.
But yet I say they were guilty, because their Ignorance was not invincible. It
was their guilt that they were Ignorant; they might have known what they did,
had they not stood in their own Light. If men will either wink hard, or fling
dust into their eyes, It is not only their Infirmity, but their fault that they
are blind. Saul the Pharisee was excused indeed a Tanto, for having blasphemed
against God, and also Persecuted the Church, because he did it in Ignorance,
and Unbelief. But however it did alleviate, it did not nullify his sins; For
to become the Apostle Paul, he stood in need of a Conversion. Now if we do not
only earnestly, but also rationally desire to see a suitable end (or rather no
end at all) of these fair Beginnings; that the Temple of Ianus may so be shut
by our Augustus, Sueton. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 66.
as never more to be opened by any Caesar; Florus lib. 4. c. 12. p. 136.
and that this Day of our Deliverance may never more be overcast with a cloud
of darkness, but happily lost into Eternity; we cannot better give Thanks to
God for the present breaking in of our glorious day, than by an Annual day of
Fasting for the clamorous sins of our tedious Night. I mean the Profanation of
Holy Places; the sacrilegious perversion of Holy Things; the monstrous Harmony
of Oaths, which some have fancied to arise from the greatest discord; the
effusion of innocent, and (not only so, but of) Royal Blood; with all the
Preparatives and Attendants of that unspeakable Provocation, which of it self
does deserve (and that for ever) a Monthly day of Humiliation. It was the
Policy of Balaam (says Philo the Jew, (...).
) to make the Moabitish Women sell the Use of their flesh to the Hebrew Men;
Philo p. 501. confer. cum Number. 25. and Number. 31. 16.
and that for no other price, than their Sacrificing to Idols. As knowing that
the Hebrews were not otherwise to be worsted, than by their own breaches of
Gods Commandments. And we know not how soon our dawning Day may grow dark, if
we do not cast off the works of Darkness. Which implies a good reason for the
word Therefore in the Text, as it is a particle of connection betwixt the Duty,
and the Deliverance.

Now unto the King Eternal, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.
Die Iovis, 30. Maii. A. 13. Car. Regis Secundi.
ORdered, that the Thanks of this House be returned to Dr. Pierce, for the
Sermon he Preached yesterday, and that he be desired to Print his Sermon.

And Sir Heneage Finch, Mr. Coventrie, and Mr. Pryn, or any one of them, are
desired to give him the Thanks of this House.

Will. Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON PREACHED At St. MARGARETS WESTMINSTER by the Order of the Honorable
the House OF COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT Assembled, Upon the 29th Day of MAY, being
the Anniversary Day of the KING'S and KINGDOM'S RESTORATION. MD.DC.LXI.

Legum Conditores Festos dies instituerunt, ut ad hilaritatem homines public
cogerentur, tanquam necessarium laboribus interponentes Temperamentum. Senec.
de Tranquil. Any. c. ult.

DEUTERONOMY. 6. 12. Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, who brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt.
WHen I look back upon the Church in all her motions out of the East, observing
how Monarchy and Learning have been at once the two Shoulders to bear her up,
and withal the two Legs to bring her hither; And when again I do reflect upon
our Twenty years sins, which were the complicated Cause of our Twelve years
sufferings; I mean our Drunkenness and Luxury, which were deservedly prescribed
so long a Fast; the rashness and vanity of our Oaths, which gave us a
miserable option betwixt a perjury, and an undoing; our profanation of the
Quire, which turned us out of the Cathedral; our gross neglect of Gods Service,
which helped to vote down our public Liturgy; our general idleness and sloth,
which often cast us out of our Houses, and as it were set us to eat our Bread,
in the sweat of our brows, or of our brains; our unprofitable walking under all
God's methods and means of Grace, which left us nothing but his Judgments (for
many sad years) to work upon us; And yet again when I consider, Psalm. 126. 4.
How God has turned our Captivity as the Rivers of the South, and cast the
Locusts out of our Vineyards, that we may sit under our Vines; enjoying our
Judges as at the first, Isa. 1. 26.
and our Counselors as at the Beginning; And that the use we are to make of so
miraculous a Recovery, is to be fedulous in providing against the Danger of a
Relaps; To sin no more after pardon, for fear a worse thing happen unto us;
Joh. 5. 14.
I think I cannot be transported with a more Innocent Ambition, because I
cannot be ambitious of a more profitable Attempt, than that of bringing down
the Heads of certain Hearers into their Hearts; that what is now no more than
Light, may by that means become Fire; That we may All (in this sense) be like
the Baptist, Joh. 5. 35.
not only shining, but burning Lamps; not only beautified with the knowledge of
Christian duties; but zealous too in the discharge; as unaffectedly punctual in
all our carriage, as the greatest Enemies of Godliness are hypocritically
precise. And (though Heresies are to be hated, as things which lead unto
destruction, yet) that Vice may be reckoned the worst of Heresies, by how much
the Error of a man's Practice is worse than That of his bare Opinion.

Last of all, when I consider, That though Peace is a Blessing, and the
greatest in its kind, yet many consequences of Peace are but glittering Snares,
and that the things which are given us as helps to memory, are apt to make us
Isa. 5. 12.
forgetful of Him that gave them; Hab. 1. 13. 16.
I cannot think of a fitter Text for the giving advantage to my design, Amos 6.
1. 3.
than this Remarkable Caveat against Forgetfulness and Ingratitude, Hos. 13. 6.
amidst the pleasant Effects of a Restoration.

When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give thee
great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, when thou shall
have eaten, and art full; THEN beware that thou forget not the Lord, who
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt.

AT the very first view of which holy Caveat, there are five particulars of
Remarque which presently meet my observation. As first, the Downfall of a
Nation: Secondly, the Deliverance: Thirdly, the Author of that Deliverance:
Fourthly, the Duty by him enjoined: And lastly, the Iuncture of Affairs wherein
this Duty is most in Season.

And of all these Particulars each is the greatest in its kind too. For,

greatest Curse, that any poor Nation can struggle under. A Yoke of Bondage and
Captivity, imposed by the hardest and worst of men. A Yoke so insupportable to
some men's Necks, that I remember Hegesistratus (a captive Soldier in
Herodotus) would rather cut off his legs, Herodot. in Calliope.
then endure his Fetters; that by the loss of his Feet, he might be enabled to
run away. So insufferable a thing is the State of Thraldom, very significantly
implied in the Land of Egypt, and exegetically expressed by the house of
Bondage.

Curse is so set, (like Shadows in a Picture, or Foyles with Diamonds) as to
commend and illustrate the greatest Blessing. A Deliverance brought about by
such a miraculous complication, that nothing but the experience that so it is,
can extenuate the wonder that so it should be. A People groaning under the
pressures of several Centuries of years, and so accustomed unto the Yoke, as to
have made it a kind of acquired Nature, ((...), as Galen calls it) De Terra
Aegypti eductus est, is now at last brought out of the Land Egypt. -- And yet
the wonder begins to cease; Because

The Author of this Deliverance is so much greatest to be imagined, that he is
Dominus, the Lord; Isa. 40. 22.
the Lord that stretches out the Heavens; Psalm. 104. 5.
the Lord that lays the foundations of the Earth; Zech. 12. 1.
the Lord that forms the spirit of Man within him. The Lord in whose Hand are
the hearts of all men; who turns man to Destruction, Psalm. 90. 3.
and again who says, Come again ye children of Men In a word, It is the Lord,
to whom Miracles are natural, and by whom Impossibilities are done with ease.
It Is He that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And therefore,

The Duty in proportion must be superlatively great too, however hid in this
place by a little Meiosis of expression. Beware that thou forget not the Lord
thy God; that is, Remember what he has done, and thank him for it by thy
obedience; Let thy gratitude be seen in thy conversation. Be sure to Deuteronomy. 10.
12.
love him, and to serve him, 'with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Forget
him if thou can, unless thou can forget thou were Deuteronomy. 6. 20, 21.
Pharaob's Bondsman. Nay forget him if thou dare, unless thou art so stout
that thou dare be damned. And yet beware lest thou forget him, whilst thou
art swimming in prosperity, the stream of which may either drown thee, or make
thee drunk, if thou are not fore-Armed with circumspection. And therefore
Beware that thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt. And that
thou may not forget him, write the Favors which he has don thee, Deuteronomy. 6.
7, 8, 9.
upon the posts of thine house; and place them as Frontlets between thine eyes;
tell them out unto thy children, as thou walk by the way, both at thy lying
down, and thy rising up; Let them be as a Signet upon thine Arm, and as a Seal
upon thine heart. That the pleasures of thy Deliverance may not make thee
forgetful of thy Deliverer, (forgetful of the Deuteronomy. 32. 15. 18.
Rock out of which thou were hewn, and kicking (like Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 18.
Iesurun) at him that made thee,) keep an Exodus 13. 3, 4, 10, etc.
Anniversary Feast, (a standing Passover in May,) whereby to fix him in thy
Remembrance.

Duty so indispensable, should be enforced upon the Soul by the present season.
A season of Peace and Prosperity, succeeding a season of Persecution. The
greatest Incitement to the Duty, should be the manifold Enjoyment of this
Deliverance. For so it is obvious to infer from the particle THEN, (so strongly
employed in the Hebrew, that in the English it is well expressed,) upon which
there seems to lie the chiefest emphasis of the Text, if we observe how it
stands in a double Relation to the Context. [When the Lord thy God shall have
brought thee into the Land, to give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses
full of all good things; when thou shall have eaten and be full, THEN beware
that thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.]

The Text is so fruitful of particulars, and each particular is so apt to
administer matter of Discourse, that it has been my hardest Question,
whereabouts I should begin, and how I should end my meditations. And after too
much time lost in stating the Question within my self, I have thought it at
once the fittest and the most useful to be resolved, (as most immediately
complying with the solemnity of the Time,) not to yield to the temptation of
comparing our Land with the Land of Egypt, for fear of seeming to have a pique
at the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion; (otherwise 'twere easy to make a
Parallel; because, however our Native Country, yet, for twelve years together,
it was a very strange Land;) But, not advancing one step beyond the Threshold,
to bestow my whole time upon the little word THEN; as being a particle of
connection betwixt our Duty, and our Delivera^ce; betwixt the Business of the
Time, and the Time it self; betwixt the Occasion, and the End of our present
meeting: looking like Homer's wise man, (...), with a visible prospect on all
that follows, and with as visible a retrospect upon the words going before.

When Prosperity breaks in like a mighty stream, Amos 5. 24.
(in so much that I may say with our blessed Savior, Luke 4. 21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears,) Then beware that ye forget
not the Lord that brought you out of Egypt. Beware ye forget him not at any
time, but especially at This. For the particle Then is an Important
monosyllable; and that especially in three respects.

First because of the Difficulty of having God in our Remembrance, much more
Then, than at other times. Next for the Dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than
before or after. Lastly by reason of the Danger of not performing the Duty
Then, when it becomes incumbent on us by many unspeakable obligations.

These especially are the Reasons of the particle Then in this place, on which
alone I shall insist in this Mornings Service. For should I adventure upon the
rest, not only the hour, but (for ought I can conjecture) the day would fail me.

AND first of all let us beware, amidst the Effects of our Deliverance, that we
forget not the Author of it; because it is difficulter THEN, than at other
times. For the Flattery and Dalliance of the world, has perpetually been the
Mother of so much Wantonness, or Pride, that Adam found it dangerous to be in
Paradise, yea and Lucifer to be in Heaven. Do but look upon Solomon in the Book
of Kings, and again look upon him in his Ecclesiastes. How was he there li^ted
up by his Prosperity? and how does he here Preach it down? I know not whether,
as a Prince, he more inioy'd his Pleasures; or, as a Prophet, more condemned
them. Whether the luxury of his Table made him a Wanton, or whether the
vastness of his Wisdom made him a Fool; 'Twas That betrayed him to his
Concubines, and This permitted him to his Idols. Since then a prosperous
condition has such a secret poison in it, as against which no Medicine has
been sufficiently Alexipharmacal; and from the force of whose contagion, there
is no sort of men that has been priviledg'd, no not Adam the Innocent, nor
Solomon the Wise, nor even Lucifer the beatified; who were so hugely swelled up
with this Venom, and so quickly burst; (not the first in a state of sinlesness,
nor the next in a state of grace, nor yet the third in a state of glory;) since
there is no other man than the man Christ Jesus, that has been ever temptation
proof: Lord, how wretched a thing is happiness on this side Heaven! and how
dangerously treacherous are our Enjoyments! I suppose we are taught by our late
experience, how easy it is to be overjoyed, and how equally hard to be truly
thankful, for all those wonders of salvation which God has wrought and is
working for us; the grateful commemorating of which, is religiously the end of
our present meeting. Sweetmeats indeed are pleasant, but then they commonly
turn to choler. It Is sure the state of Humiliation, which though we can worst
feed upon, we are notwithstanding best nourisht with: we are such barren pieces
of clay, that our fruits will be withered with too much laughter, if Grace does
not water them sometimes with tears. It should be matter of real gladness to a
considering Christian, that in the midst of his prosperity he can see himself
sorrowful; that as he was destitute, with comfort, so he abounds, with
moderation; and that he does not live rejoycingly, is many times a chief reason
for which he ought. It was David's resolution (at such a time as this is) to
serve the Lord with fear, and (by a pious Oxymoron) to Psalm. 2. 11.
rejoice unto him with trembling. And if we reflect on the abuses which many
have made of a Restoration, we may charitably pray, that God will give them
some tears to drink; Psalm. 102. 9. 80. 5.
and, having given them some tears, will also put them into his Psalm. 56. 8.
Bottle, that they may serve for this end, to blot their merriments out of his
Ibid. which compare with Mal. 3. 16.
Book.

That the pleasant effects of a Deliverance (which are peace, and plenty,
living securely, and at ease,) are apt to make us turn Atheists, provoking the
Author of our Deliverance to correct us once more in the house of Bondage;
appears, as by many other reasons, so particularly by this; that it is hard for
us to prosper, and not to lie snoring in our prosperities. For it is the (...)
of a prosperous man, (as our Savior i^plies by way of Parable,) Soul take
thi^e ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have much goods laid up for many
years, (Luke 12. 19.) And therefore Agur's wisdom was never more seen, than in
his Prayer; Give me not Riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, lest I say, who
is the Lord? (Prove. 30. 8, 9.) He knew by manifold experience, that Jam. 4. 4.
the friendship of the world is perfect Enmity with God, and tends immediately
to practical, if not to speculative Atheism. He did not therefore pray thus,
Give me not Riches, lest I be liberal to my Coffers; or, Give me not Riches,
lest I be bountiful to my Lusts; but (for fear of a greater mischief) give me
not Riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, lest I say in my heart, who is the
Lord? that is, for fear I turn Atheist, and only sacrifice to my flesh. So also
Solomon, when he was wisest, that is to say, when he repent^d, and of a very
vicious Prince became a Preacher of Repentance, concluded all under the Sun to
be but vanity of vanities; as having found by all his trials (who sure had made
more trials than ever any man did,) that Peace and Plenty, with their two
Daughters, which are Idleness, and Ease, are exceedingly great, though glorious
dangers.

But we need not go farther for an instance, than to the People in my Text;
whom though God might have called a very wild Tam'risk, he was pleased to style
his Beloved Vine. Lord! how carefull^ was it manured, with Rain, and Sunshine?
with Quails, and Manna, and water squeezed out of a Rock? with the Dew of
Heaven, and with the Fatness of the Earth? and yet when all was don that could
be, they either brought forth no Grapes; or if they did, they were commonly
wild ones. And when sometimes they yielded good, 'twas rather for fear of
cutting down, than for the fertility of their soil, or for the manifold helps
of their cultivation. 'Twas their frequently being pruned, which more
especially made them fruitful. It Is true, that God did not evermore punish,
although That people was still offending. For as he owned his being, as well
their Father, as their God; so he was pleased to make use of either Method for
their Amendment; I mean Incou^agement, as well as Terror. God dealt with Them,
as with Us of this Nation. As he prescribed them a Law, so he promised them a
Canaan. As he led them into Egypt, so he delivered them out of Egypt. As he
thundered from on a Cloud, so he whispered out of a Bush. As he pincht them with
scarceness, so he feasted them with plenty. And if the one was even to famine,
the other was even to satiety. But if we compare them with our selves in
another instance, by considering how ungrateful, and how unmalleable they were;
how repining under their Yoke, and how mutinous in their Liberty; How (like
some amongst us in this very day of our Deliverance,) they fell a hungring
after the Garlic, and the Fleshpots of Egypt, quite forgetting the Bondage,
and tale of Brick; how they murmured at their Moses, as if he were worse than a
Pharaoh to them; like some repining at their King, as if he were worse than a
Protector, (For That, ye know, was the Euphemismus, whereby to express the most
Bloody Tyrant;) How like so many untamed Heighfers, they were exceedingly hard
to be brought to hand; or like a Stable of unbackt and unbridled Colts, how apt
to kick at their Rider who gave them Food: How God Almighty was forced to
discipline this stiff-neckt Rabble, first of all by committing them to the
hardships of Egypt, and then by sending them to wrestle with the difficulties
of the Wilderness; And how when all this was don, they were fain to miss of
their Canaan, whilst they were taking it into possession; (for of so very great
a multitude to whom the Promise of it was made, no more than a Number. 13. 30 Hab.
3.
Caleb and a Joshua had a Capacity to inherit it,) we must conclude they were a
People who deserved to be whipped with a Rod of Iron; not so easily reducible by
the Deuteronomy. c. 27. and 28. 17, 18, 19.
allurements of Mount Gerizzim, as by the Curses and the Threats to be thundered
out from Mount Ebal. So far were They from considering, what they suffered a
while ago in the house of Bondage, that they forgot this very Caveat, (as many
will do this very Sermon,) which was meant to bring it to their Remembrance;
When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give thee great
and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, (etc.) THEN beware that
thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.

Pass we now (if ye please) out of the Vineyard, into the Fold; from the People
under the Law, to Us who live under the Gospel; whom though our Lord (out of
goodness) was pleased to call his Flock of Sheep, he might have styled (out of
Justice) his Herd of Swine. For if He, the great Shepherd, withhold his Crook,
Lord how quickly we go astray! And for here and there one who will be led into
the Fold, how many are there that must be driven? like the Prodigal in the
Gospel, (who would not return unto his Father until he was brought to feed on
Husks,) we seldom care for our Physician, until the time that we are sick; and
then as soon as recovered, are very glad, rather than thankful. And this may
point us out a Reason, why for so many years together, (before this last,) our
Heavenly Father made use of his sharpest Methods for our amendment; even
placing us as Israelites amongst Egyptians, like so many flowers amongst
thorns; of which the principal design, was not to torture, but to defend us. To
defend us from the danger of carnal security, and presumption; of pride, and
wantonness; of forgetfulness, and ingratitude. And since the way to be thankful
for our twelve months liberty, is very soberly to reflect on our twelve years
thraldom, Let Us so transcribe a fair Copy of God's Economy on the Jews, as
(with a grateful commemoration,) to consider it also in our selves.

We who flourish at this day like a goodly Tree, not only planted by the River
of God's Rich Mercies, but surrounded (like our Land) with an Ocean of them; we
who stretch forth our branches, not only for our own, but for foreign birds
also to build their nests; and whose spring (blessed be God) does promise at
least to be as lasting, as once our Autumn was like to prove; we who flourish
like a Myrtle, how like a Willow did we droop? How was our verdure almost
exhausted? and our boughs, how deflowered? How did we fall after the measure our
sins had risen? First God blasted our noblest Fruits; then he spoiled us of our
leaves; next he hewed down our branches. Nay, how strangely were we fed on, by
those very vermin which we did feed? how greedily eaten up by all those
Caterpillars, and Locusts, which though ingender'd perhaps by a Nothern wind, I
am sure were bred out of our Body? It is not easy to recapitulate how many
Mercies we now enjoy, which our Iniquities had withheld for so many years; and
how many good things our sins had turned away from us. Jer. 5. 25.
And now if after our Restitution, we shall be found to be a barren, unfruitful
Tree, or fruitful only in our Impieties; so as That which was intended to make
us better, shall render us worse than we were before; what better usage can we
expect, than (after a little tract of years) to be grubbed up by the Root? to
have that sentence sent out against us, which once went out against the
Fig Tree, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Luke 13. 7. Then give me
leave to repeat the Caveat; And in the meekness of a Remembrancer, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
to put you in mind of these things, although ye know them already, and are
established in the Truth. To put you in mind of being wary, not so much for
your selves, as for the people ye represent, by contributing to a Law for the
putting of Laws in Execution; that they may not intoxicate their Souls, with
too many and great draughts of their peace and plenty, for fear a Curse shall
break forth from our this days Blessing, by our unthankfully forgetting the
God that gave it. And let this suffice for the first importance of the word
Then, as it is a particle of connection, betwixt the Occasion, and the End of our
present meeting.

pleasant effects of our Deliverance, (such as liberty and plenty, living in
idleness, and at ease,) that we forget not the Author of it; because of the
dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than before, or after. For, as it is the mark
of a most servile and base-born spirit, to be the worse for the good that is
done unto us; so it is the noblest generosity, to mend our lives with our
conditions. The deep and serious consideration of which great Truth, as it
should lift up our Hearts to a thankful use of our prosperity, so it should
also pluck them down, to an humble sense of our obligations. For That indeed is
the proper season, wherein humility is a noble, because a di^^icult virtue.
Humiliation in a Captive, is not a grace, but a necessity. Nor has Temperance
any place in the house of scarceness. These two must have a Theater, wherein to
set themselves forth; cannot easily be seen in a little Room. The proper time
of seeming base in our own modest eyes, is when we are matter of admiration in
other men's. The time to show our selfdenial, (that is, our victory over our
selves,) is when we are brought out of an Egypt, into a Land overflowing with
Milk and Honey; when our houses are full of all good things, and our Tables
stooping under the weight of their sumptuous load. As our Afflictions a year
ago did make up God's opportunity, whereby to show us his Mercy, and loving
kindness; so prosperity ever since should make up ours, whereby to show him our
meekness, and moderation. The very Atheist will cry [O God!] in a fit of the
Strangury, or the Stone; but let us be Religious in time of health. The
profanest Mariner will be devout in a tempest; but let us be so in a calm: when
the tide of our enjoyments is at the full, Then in a more especial manner let
our ambition ebb lowest: when we are mounted aloft on the wings of Fame, Then
let us retire into the Desert of our most humble contemplations; and be so meek
amidst our eminencies, as to become most eminent for that our meekness.

There are some of whom I may say, they have been armed with infirmities
against the Devil: some, whose Ignorance has kept them safe; some, whose
coldness has passed for continence; who have been phlegmatic, and therefore
meek; or been kept under hatches, and therefore lowly. But then it being their
necessity, and not their choice; rather their luckiness, than their valor;
they having kept their ground, not by virtue of any conquest, but merely
because they never fought; Aristot. Eth. Nichom. l. 1.
(...), we do not properly commend them, but call them happy; they are but
sancti Planetarii, (as a Father of the Church made bold to word it;) All their
armor, if they have any, is but defensive; And for their not being worsted,
they may thank their Bucklers, but not their Swords. Alas, it should not be a
wonder, to see simplicity in the village; or to keep ones integrity, where it is
an hard thing to lose it. Quis abstinens dicetur, sublato eo ^ quo abstinendum
est? Quae Temperantia gulae in fame? quae Ambitionis repudiatio in egestate;
quae libidinis infrenatio in Castratione? Tertul. advers. Marcion. l. 1. C. 29
(We cannot call That man abstemious, who only rises with an appetite, because
he has not enough to appease his hunger; nor is He to be commended for not
being drunk, who either has not sufficient to quench his thirst, or has an
able Brain to carry it, or else loves his purse a great deal more than his
Intemperance, and so is beholding to his baseness for his sobriety. We do not
say that He is strong, who does not fall when no man thrusts him. Nor that he
is cautelous, and wary, who does not stumble when the way is plain. No, it is He
is the brave and the gallant Christian, who can hold out his Castle however
besieged with temptations; who can be chaste even in Italy, or mild in Scythia;
who can be a Spaniard, and yet not Proud; an English man born, yet not
Inconstant; who can be Loyal amidst the Triumphs of the most prosperous
Rebellion; and humbly thankful in his Advancement. He is generously a
Christian, who can keep his Vow in Baptism, where it is Ridiculous not to break
it; who can at once live at Court, and forsake the world; who can be witty, yet
not profane; strong, and mettlesome, yet not presumptuous; conspicuously
handsome, and yet not vain; a Mathematician, and a Chimist, yet not Atheistical;
who will not be covetous in the midst of hid Treasure; nor reconcilable to a
vice, although it offer him all advantages; who has all his five senses (those
Avenues of the heart) at once attaque't by Hell's Artillery, and yet is able to
prevent, or maintain a Breach; and though they batter down the Walls, does not
suffer them (notwithstanding) to take the City. This, I say, is the generous,
because the selfdenying Christian. And agreeable to the figure, by which our
vicious affections are called our members, (Colos. 3. 5.) we know in our
Captain's Interpretation, (Mat. 5. 29.) that to part with an Avarice, is to
pluck out an eye; and to cast away a lust, is to cut off a hand. That, as in
our Military Oath, we Swore to fight under his Banner; so, as often as we part
with a sinful passion, we are reputed (in his account) to lose a Limb in his
Battle. Self-denial, it seems, being one kind of Martyrdom; a dying daily for
his sake, who, Heb. 2. 10.
as the Captain of our Salvation, was made perfect through sufferings. It Is
very true in this sense, that the valiantest Soldier is the very best Man. For
no mau living is truly valiant, but he who bravely dares be good, when the
Times are evil; and dares not be evil, when Times are good; who stands the
shock of temptations, not only in the worst, but the best of days; bravely
holding out his Fort against the batteries and assaults, not of poverty only,
and pain, and other effects of persecution; but against plenty also, and
pleasure, and other Fruits of a Restoration.

To sum up all in a word, and to carry on my Metaphor the most I can to Their
advantage, who will not be carried to any duty, which is not honorable, and
brave: The Battles of Leuctra, and Mantinea, were not half so full of glory to
that immortal Theban, Epaminondas, as the two victories of a Christian over his
(...). That unruly Element of double fire, his anger, and his lust, which his
greatest felicities do most enkindle. And this I hope may be enough for the
second importance of the word Then; as it is a particle of connection betwixt the
business of the Time, and the Time it self.

LAst of all let us beware, that the manifold enjoyments of our Deliverance do
not make us forgetful of our Deliverer, because of the greatness of the Danger
of not performing the Duty THEN, when it becomes incumbent on us by many
unspeakable Obligations. For let a man's sin be never so great, in point of
nature, or degree, Ingratitude will give it an Aggravation. And Ingratitude
taking its stature from precedent obligations, so as the sins we commit run
higher, or lower, as the graces we receive have been more, or less: there are
not any so very capable of provoking Gods Fury, as the men whom he has pleased
to take the most into his favor. The reason of it may be taken from the
Athenians in Thucydides, Thucydides lib. 1. page 52.
(...). The least unkindness from a Friend is of greater smart, than the
hardest usage from an Enemy. The very sight of Brutus more wounded Caesar to
the heart, than all the rest of his Assassinates had don with Daggers. David
indeed was somewhat troubled, that they who hated him did whisper together
against him, (Psalm. 41. 7.) but 'twas his greatest cross of all, that they who
had eaten of his Bread should ingratefully lift up the heel against him. For,
in that he said, He could have born it from an Psalm. 55. 12. 13.
enemy, he did significantly imply, he could not bear it from a friend. And as
it was David's Cordolium, the Type of Christ; so also was it Christ's, the Son
of David: who did not weep over other Cities, from which he met with an ill
Reception; but he wept over Jerusalem, the Royal City, which he had so much
obliged, yet found so cruel. And no doubt but our Savior is so much more
keenly and nearly touched, that the most obliged Christians should break his
Precepts, than that the ignorant Jews should offer violence to his Person, that
we may rationally suppose him thus speaking to us. Had the Jews or the Heathens
spit upon me by their impurities, and buffeted me by their blasphemies, and
stripped me by their sacrilege, and murdered me by their rage; from such as
These I could have born it. But that ye should war against me, and in the
behalf of that base Triumvirate, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, having
sworn to me in Baptism that Ye would fight under my Banner against all Three:
That Ye who have the privilege to be called by my Name, to be admitted into my
House, to have a place at my Table, to hear my Word, and to partake of my
Supper, to be miraculously brought from the house of Bondage, enjoying your
Kings at the first, and your National Councils as at the beginning, and sitting
your selves as (...) many Princes under your Vines and Fig Trees, enjoying the
liberty of your persons, the propriety of your estates, the important benefit
of your Laws, and the glory to be subjected by a most honorable obedience;
that such as Ye should despise me, and cast my Law behind your back, this is
that I can least endure. My greatest favor, thus abused, will be converted
into fury.

And indeed if we consider, that as God (on the one side) accepts according
to what a man has, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
so withal (on the other side) of them who have received much, Luke 12. 48.
much in proportion shall be required; we may with good Logic infer, and
strongly argue within our selves, that an honest Heathen is far better, than a
Christian Knave. And if an Heathen shall be extirpate for being barren, much
more the Christian, if He is fruitless, shall be cast into the fire. A
fruitless Tree, which should by nature bear fruit, being fit to make fuel, and
nothing else. According to that of our Blessed Savior, (which is at once of
universal and endless verity,) Mat. 7. 19.
Every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire. And we who are grafted into the Vine, must not only bear fruit, but
such fruit too, as Christ expects to r^ap from us. A Bramble cannot be censured
for not bearing fruit; because it is in its nature to bring forth none. It was
therefore the Fig Tree, and not the Bramble, on which our Savior bestowed a
Curse, Mat. 21. 19. Nor was it the Bramble, but the Fig Tree, which he
commanded to be cut down, Luke 13. 7. we must one day be called to a dreadful
Mat. 25. 10.
reckoning, for all the uses we have made of our this days Talent. God's
injured Justice must needs be satisfied, (and sure much more his injured
Mercy,) either sooner, or later, either in this, or another world. And if
instead of being thankful for all the blessings we now enjoy, more especially
for That which we this day Celebrate, we shall but turn them into wantonness,
and grow the worse for the effects of so great a Goodness; what can we
reasonably expect, but that the powers of Hell should once again be let loose
upon us and ours? For since to continue in our impieties, is the greatest
dishonouring of God that can be; a filling up the measure of our Iniquities,
and so the vials of his wrath; He must destroy us, se d^fendendo, if for
nothing but to defend, and secure his Glory.

What then remain^s, but that we take up the Words of the Royal Prophet, and
together with Them, his Resolution? We will take the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord. The Cup of Salvation, that is to say, the Cup of
Thanks, for that Salvation which he has wrought; as Iunius and Tremellius do
rightly explicate the Trope. And mark the force of the Copulative, by which
these Duties are tied together. Without the Cup of Salvation, (that is) The Cup
of Thanksgiving unto the Author of our Salvation, all our calling upon his Name
will be quite in vain: For when we spread out our hands, he will hide his eyes,
and when we make many Prayers he will not hear, (Isa. 1. 15.) And then to thank
him as he requires, is not only to entertain him with Eucharistical words, with
the mere Calves of our lips, or a Doxologie from the teeth outward; but to
imitate, and obey him, and to love him after the rate of his favor toward us.
That we may not forfeit all our interest in the temporal salvation we this day
Celebrate, nor bring a reproach on the Author of it, for saving a people so ill
deserving; we must add to our verbal, our vital Prayers; nor only keep an
annual Day, but even an Age of Thanksgiving for our Deliverance.

And then with a greater force of Reason, we must beware that we forget not the
Lord our God, who, if he brought us not out of the Land of Egypt, did yet
deliver us this day from the house of Bondage. We must not any of us forget
him, in whatever Represents, or Presents him to us. But Ye especially must not
forget him presented to you in his Vicegerent; whom the more ye do enable to be
indeed what he is styled, Defensor Fidei, by so much the greater will be your
Glory, and the better ye will provide for your childrens safety. The more ye
strengthen That Hand, which under God is to brandish the Sword of Justice, (and
cease to be a Sword of Justice, when wrested out of That Hand by the hand of
Man,) the better protected your Peace will be, from the ungainable Enemies of
each Extreme. Nor can ye rationally hope to keep your Peace any longer, than
whilst the eviley'd Factions want power to break it. Again beware that ye
forget not the Sovereign Author of your Deliverance, wheresoever ye shall find
him presented to you in his Messengers; (and what I mean by that word, I need
not explain in so wise an Audience;) by whose continuing unrestor'd to their
Ancient Privilege, and Right, your own Restoration remain's imperfect. Again
beware ye do not forget him presented to you in his Members, who are not only
your fellow members, but were your old fellow sufferers in the very same Cause;
to which they ever have adhered with the very same constancy; and for which
they have been Actors with the very same courage; and do rejoice in the
greatness at least of Your Restoration, how much soever they are mourners for
the scandalous littleness of their own. Prosperity (I have showed) is a
dangerous weapon, such as none but the merciful should dare to use. And if ever
there were a Parliament, in which both Mercy, and Justice met, this has the
honor to be reputed so very exemplary for both, that they who stand in need of
both, are very confident to obtain them, now, or never. A Parliament so
prepared by the special Providence of God, for the perpetuating of Peace in our
British world, that nothing less than the presence of all perfections in a
Prince, can make us patiently think of its Dissolution.

Will ye hear the conclusion of the whole matter? Eccl. 12. 13.
I shall deliver it to you briefly, in this Petition. That so far forth as ye
regard the Righteous Judge of all the world, and are seasoned by Him with the
manifold gifts of the blessed Comforter, with the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, with the Spirit of counsel and ghostly strength, Isa. 11. 2.
with the Spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and lastly with the Spirit of
his holy fear, Ye will consider what I have said by your own Authority, because
in an absolute obedience to your own Order, and Command.

ANd now the God of Peace and Power, who brought you forth on this Day from the
House of Bondage, both defend and direct you, from this day forwards, in all
your ways. That every one of your Persons, and the 1 These. 5. 23.
whole of every one, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be kept blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father, in the unity of
the Spirit, who is abundantly able to keep us from falling, and to raise us
when we are down, and to preserve us being raised, and to present us so
preserved, before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only
wise God our Savior, be ascribed by us, and by all the world, Blessing, and
Glory, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this day
forwards for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Mercy and Judgment MET TOGETHER.

A SERMON PREACHED At the ABBEY Church of WESTMINSTER by the Order of the Right
Honorable the House of LORDS IN PARLIAMENT Assembled, Upon a Solemn Day of
Humiliation occasioned by the Great Rain in June and July, MD.DC.LXI.

AMOS 6. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, o Israel; And because I will
do thus unto thee, Prepare to meet thy God o Israel.
. 1. THough it is the Language of the Schoolmen [Quicquid dicitur de Deo est
Deus] That whatsoever is said of God is God, and that all his Attributes are
Himself; so that agreeably to This, Infinitely must be Their stature as well as
His, and Eternity their Duration, yet since the Psalmist has adventured to
take the Altitude of Two, I mean his Mercy, and his Justice; And since my Text
has each of these in so remarkable a Degree, that they seem to be here in
their Apogaeo, I shall be bold to make use of the Psalmist's Figure, Psalm. 36.
5.
and pronounce God's Mercy so much higher than his Justice, as to say in the
words of that Royal Prophet, That his Mercy reaches unto the Heavens, and his
Justice [in comparison but] to the Clouds. Which is as much as to say in
Directer Terms, That though neither can be the greater, where Both are
Infinite, yet he is much more delighted in the exhibition of the one, than it is
possible for him to be in the execution of the other.

. 2. For though the Doom here denounced is sad and direful, even the (...) of
which St. John speaks in the Revelation, (...), Rev. 6. 8.
(that is) The Pale or Green Horse whose name is (...), bringing Death in the
Front, and Damnation in the Rear; Though the Lord of Hosts in this Chapter does
Bellum dicere, proclaim a War against his Rebels, and that so grimly set off
with a Train of Judgments, that War it self is one of the least, And the Plague
of Famine none of the greatest; Yet if we look upon the Object of this
Severity, those Kine of Bashan, the Ungrateful Inhabitants of Samaria, and if
together with their Ingratitude, we compare his Goodness and Longanimity, the
several steps of the Climax, by which his Anger went up to so ^ull a Measure;
and if we consider that even Then, He made them an offer of Reconcilement,
desiring earnestly they would meet him in order to Amity and Peace; we shall
not only be forced to say that the Mercy of God does rejoice against Judgment,
and that in the midst of all his Judgments he thinks of Mercy; but with Philo
(...). p. 23. 7.
Philo the Jew, whom we may English out of the Psalmist, [(...),] that as his
Mercy is (in one sense) over all his works, so it is (in another) over all his
Attributes.

. 3. To give you an Instance in the Text, (as his Majesty's Proclamation has
given an Instance in the Time,) behold a Sacred kind of contention betwixt the
Mercy and Justice of God Almighty. In which however his Indignation (with
proportion to the sins of his people Israel) does seem to be in its Exaltation,
so as his Justice even begin's to pronounce the Sentence; Yet, by a strange
Aposiopesis, his Mercy presently interrupts it. He denounces a Desolation, and
(at the very same Instant) desires a Treaty. No sooner threatens that he will,
that he compassionately Exhorts that he may not punish. No sooner is he entered
upon his Ideo sic faciam, Therefore thus will I do, but he immediately comes
off with a Compone Te in occursum, prepare thy self for a friendly meeting. And
he enforces his Advice with a Cogent Reason, Because I will do thus unto thee.
That is, Repent whilst thou have Time, that I may not do it. Because I threaten
and do intend to turn thy Bewty into Ashes, thy Eden into a Wilderness, thy
oil of Joy into Mourning, and thy Garment of Praise into a Spirit of
Heaviness; Therefore Joel. 11. 12.
Now turn unto me with all thy heart, and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and
with Mourning, that I may alter my purpose, 1 Samuel 15. 29.
and Repent of the things which I have threatened. Which although at first
hearing does seem a Paradox, a kind of (...), a Truth appearing in the disguise
of a Contradiction; yet it deserves to be the Paraphrase, and the Exegesis of
the Text, Therefore thus will I do unto thee, o Israel; And because I will do
thus unto Thee, prepare to meet thy God o Israel.

. 4. In which words being considered (not so much in their literal, as) in
their rational Importance, there are two things expressed, and two implied. We
have first a Command, with a Commination; (Both sufficiently expressed;) And of
the later we have implied, at once the Meritorious, and Final Cause. But in as
much as the first does carry the last along with it. They all are easily
comprised in this Tricotomie.

First a Terrible Commination of no less than utter Ruin to the People of God.
Sic faciam tibi o Israel, Thus and thus will I do.

Next the reasonable Ground of this Commination, which is their living
unreform'd under the Essaies and Methods of lesser Judgments. And this I cannot
but Collect from the Illative Therefore, as it looks back upon the Causal, in
the words immediately going before. For Because Ye have not returned unto me
says the Lord, Idea sic faciam, Therefore thus will I do.

Thirdly the End, or the final Cause, which is not to Execute the Judgment, but
to avert it. For so I gather from the Command, as That relates to the
Commination. Because I will do thus unto thee, Praepara Te in occursum, prepare
to meet thy God o Israel.

These Particulars thus premised, will very naturally afford us four Doctrinal
Propositions.

First, That the Terrors of the Almighty do make up one of his choicest
Methods, whereby to bring Sinners to true Repentance.

Next that his sharper sort of Judgments is a fit Remedy for Those, upon whom
his milder Chastisements have been unhappily ineffectual. And yet

Thirdly, So far is God from delighting in his Inflictions, or from willingly
grieving the Children of men, that the first and chiefest End both of all his
Menaces, and his stripes, is to Execute Destruction not on the sinner, but on
the sin; not to slay, but reduce the Fugitive. And therefore

Fourthly, God antecedently desiring the timely Repentance of a Sinner, and
only by way of Consecution, The final Destruction of the Impenitent, It Is plain
His Menaces are fulfilled by their never coming to pass. Most fully satisfied
and accomplished, not when they Confound, but Convert a Sinner. My Reason is,
because the End of the Command is to anticipate the Effect of the Commination.
Because I will do thus unto thee, in case thou do proudly neglect to meet me;
meet me therefore in the way, to the end that I may not do thus unto thee.

Of these several Propositions, the two former show us Gods Justice, and his
Mercy shines in the two later. All concurring to the ends of our present
meeting; The first to deter us from what is Evil, The last to persuade us to
what is Good. The former respecting our late Plague of Rain; the later our
blessing of fairer weather. Both conducing to our Design of Crying louder by
our Repentance, than we have don by our Imp^eties; That by our timely
Reformation we may retrive the heavy Judgments, which our clamorous Sins have
been lureing down.

natural to the Text, than it is serviceable and fit to lay the Foundation of
the Sermon. For of the many strong Affections which are seated in the Appetite
and Heart of Man, though none is certainly more Infamous, yet (being rationally
determined) there is not any more Useful than that of Fear. It is indeed the
most unhandsome, (as the World now goes,) but being well fixed, the most
wholesome passion; the most ungentlemanly perhaps, but not the most unchristian
Quality; And though the worst for Execution, yet the best for Advise. It was a
very good saying, though of a very ill man, (and meant I suppose to as ill a
purpose,) Primus in Orb Deos fecit Timor. That had there been less Fear, there
had been also less Religion in many Places of the World. For as Fear was the
first Engine which brought in Religion amongst the Heathens; so after the
measure that It departed, Irreligion and Atheism filled up its Room. This was
That that taught the Gentiles, first to make their own Gods, and then to
Worship them. They were Religious (poor Souls!) in their own defense, (if we
may call Superstition by such a Name,) not out of gratitude to their Deities,
for that they had don them any Good, but only out of a Fear that they would
otherwise do them Harm. Hence the Heathen Theologists, (I mean their Poets, and
their Philosophers,) finding the People more apt to be driven, than led, and to
have easier Impressions of Fear, than Hope, thought it convenient to Catechize
them, more in the Torments of their Erebus, than in the Pleasures of their
Elysium. They told them of Minos, and Radamanthus, as the grim Judges of
Offenders; of Haggs, and Furies, as Executioners of the Sentence; of such as
Ixion, and Prometheus, as sad Examples of the Condemned. All which (says
Diodorus) were but (...), so many Bugs, or Mormo's, to fright the People into
Morality.

. 2. So great an Influence had Fear on the False Religions of the World. And to
discover as great an Influx which it had also upon the True, Let me lead you
forth a little out of the Forest into the Garden, wherein the very first
Precept was fens't with Terror. It was not said unto the Protoplast, Thou shall
surely live, if thou eatest not; But (as a method of greater force,) In the day
that thou eatest, thou shall surely dye. If we look into the Bible, from the
Beginning to the End, This we shall find to have been the Method of each Person
in the Trinity. First of all it was the Method of God the Father, when he
delivered his Law from a Burning Mountain, Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
even with Thundering and Lightning, with Blackness and Darkness, with smoke
and Tempest, with the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice
they that heard, entreated that they might not hear it, and so terrible was the
sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake. This again was the Method
of God the Son, who said he came not to destroy, but fulfill the Law; his word
is (...), to fill it up. He did endeavor to Preach his Hearers into the
Highway of Heaven, even by setting before them the pains of Hell. He threatened
them with Weeping, and Gnashing of Teeth; with a Worm that dies not, and with
a Fire that is not quenched. We hear him saying, It is Impossible, (that is to
say, exceeding Hard,) for a Rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. He says
the way to it is straight, and the Gate Narrow, and the Travelers that find it
extremely Few. He bids us strive to enter in; and never leave striving, until
we Conquer. Nay this was the Method of the Comforter, even of God the holy
Ghost; who taught St. Paul to constrain his Scholars, by showing the Terrors of
the Lord. 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Nay to deliver them up to Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
that their Spirits might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

. 3. And indeed if we consider, How many poor Souls have been debauched in
these Times, by the false Apprehensions of Christian Liberty, and Conscience,
of Faith without Love, Justification without Honesty, and Repentance of Sins
without Amendment; so as the stales of those Heresies which had been brewed in
ancient Times, are freshly broached in our Days, and given for Drink to the
giddy People; we cannot but wish that all our Clergy would now become
Boanerges, or Sons of Thunder; at least by showing the strict necessity of
Impartial obedience unto the Gospel; that is to say, unto the Statutes or Laws
of Christ; A living in Holiness, and Righteousness; in Piety, and Probity; in
Godliness, and Honesty; in the Duties of the First, and the Second Table;
without the which (says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews) no man
living shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14.


. 4. This (we see) is so peculiar to that Amazing Lover of Souls, that he does
not only set Hell before us, and sad Examples too behind, but Temporal Crosses
on either side. And however surrounded thus with Terrors, we find them All
little enough. For first it being not the greatness, but the presentness of
Danger which most affrights us; He does not threaten his Rod only, but often
lays it upon our Backs. And then because (like common Mariners) we would not
Pray, though in a Tempest, were it impossible to be drowned, or to suffer
Shipwreck; He does not Punish only at present, and for a Time; But also
threatens he will do it to all Eternity. For if after this Life is swallowed up
of Immortality, He should only have an Heaven for Loyal Subjects, and never a
Hell for his Rebellious ones; men would be readier to say, at the last period
of their lives, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye, Than Let us fast
and pray, for to morrow we shall be happy.

. 5. If any ^iduciary shall say, That Terrors work not a filial, but servile
Fear; and rather cause an hypocritical, than Godly sorrow; the Answer to it is
very Easy, That as Gods severity speaks his Power, and That his Excellence; so
many times a servile Fear begets a Fear of Admiration; And Admiration is apt to
end in a Fear of Reverence; and Reverence is a Compound, which has Love, as
well as Fear, for a chief Ingredient.

. 6. And if again it shall be objected, that John and James are but
uncomfortable Preachers, enough to blast a man's Faith, and Thunderstrike him
into Despair; I Answer to it by these degrees. First that for here and there
one who possibly falls into Despair, Thousands rise to Presumption, and
Millions lie down in carnal Security. Again, The Sin of Despair is not so
commonly understood, as it is dangerously mistaken, and that by some who
Domineer in our open Pulpits. There is a kind of Despair, which is only the
effect of a broken heart, and the manifest sign of a tender Conscience. The
mark of such a (...), as is (...), a Repentance never to be repented. There
have been Persons in the world, who have been so very passionately in Love with
God, and so amorous of his Purity, that they have hated themselves extremely,
because they have suspected they have not loved him; And have been easily
betrayed into such suspicion, by their sense of some things which are
unavoidable, even the natural Infirmities of Flesh and Blood. Every small Mote
in another Eye has seemed a Beam in their own. They have looked upon their
Sins through a kind of Microscope, (for such is the Glass of an holy
Jealousy,) which has made a little Ignorance to look as bigg as an
Infidelity; an human Frailty to seem as monstrous, as an Apostasy from Grace.
Thence come those Syncopes of Spirit, by which they are made to cry out, with
Christ Himself upon the Cross, (although it is quite in another sense,) My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? An evident Argument, and sign, not that God
has forsaken Them, but rather that They have forsaken Sin. So when Peter cried
out (and even to that very Savior on whom he depended for his Salvation,)
Depart from me o Lord, for I am a sinful man,] He drew Christ to him, by his
entreating him to Depart; The more a Saint in Christ's Eyes, for being a Sinner
in his own. As there are many silly Shepherds, who mistake a Repenting for a
Despairing Sheep; so there is oftentimes an Innocent, but silly sheep, which
mistakes his own Weakness for want of Faith. And in as much as he does not at
all Presume, is very apt to apprehend he does not sufficiently Believe; whereas
his seemingness of Despair is a real Argument of his Faith, whilst attended
with an hatred of former sins, and fear of falling into the like. For whilst he
thinks he has not Faith, he does at least desire to have it. And whilst he
desires, it is plain he loves it. And because of just nothing there can be no
love at all, He that loves must needs believe, that the object of his Love has
a real Being. And if he desires what he wants, and truly loves what he desires,
and by consequence believes what he truly loves; Then sure the sequel is
unavoidable, That this falsifying Despair is an excellent good mark of a True
Believer. And to This alone it is I would fain drive Others, because to This I
would fain be driven. But now the Murdering Despair is another Thing, and often
issues from the Preaching of unconditional Reprobation; when whosoever thinks
himself of the Hopeless Number, is apt to hold it so vain a Thing to catch at
an Interest in Heaven, that he resolves to enjoy his good Things upon the
Earth. And as nothing is so daring as a Desperate Coward, when he finds no way
to obtain his safety by his escape, and thence is made by his Despair a most
insufferable fighter, (from whence arises the common saying, That when an
Enemy is flying, it is good to make him a Golden Bridge) so there is nothing
more jovial (at least by Intervals and fits,) than the Desperate Sinner which
now I speak off; whose Famous Character we meet with in the second Chapter of
Wisdom; where the Despairer of Immortality in an extremely better world, does
make an hearty resolution of living merrily in This. This is that desperate
Despair which is as mischievous as Presumption, in that it places the sinner
beyond Repentance. And so the objection notwithstanding, my Doctrine seems to
stand firm, and unremoveable, [That the Terrors of the Almighty do make up one
of his choicest Methods for the bringing of Sinners to true Repentance.]

. 7. Having briefly thus insisted upon the proof of the Doctrine, methinks our
manifold Experience should save me the Labor of Application, whether we fall
under a public, or a private consideration. We must confess, as to the
public, That our sins have been as clamorous as those of Israel; and God has
used the same Method for our Amendment. We have many years felt the effects of
War; and now are exercised afresh with the Fear of Scarceness. The very
Perfection of our Spring has as it were been swallowed up by a Second Winter.
The late Abuses of our Plenty have been the Heralds of a Dearth; And the Deluge
of our Impieties has been so rebuked by that of Waters, That God does seem to
have altered the course of Nature, as 'twere to try if we will alter our course
of Sin. It Is true the Season began to mend, upon its very first sense of our
Humiliation. And God has only said to Us, as to the People in my Text, Ideo
sic faciam, Therefore thus will I do. All is hitherto but a Threat; and That
suspended with a Condition. Genesis 9. 13.
Through the Bow in the Cloud which was set as a sign betwixt God and Us, he
is pleased to shoot comfort throughout our dwellings. But then the ground of
its continuance does stand conditionally in This, That we do all at this
Instant Prepare to meet Him.

. 8. As to our private Consideration, perhaps there is hardly any man here,
whom God has not terrefied one way or other, and sent his Rod for an
Ambassador to speak his Will. As either by the loss of a Darling Child, or of a
most endeared Wife, or else by some pungent and grievous sickness, or by some
eminent miscarriage in point of Honor, or Estate; or if by none of all These,
yet at least he has been threatened, by the woeful Examples of other men. (Nam
tua Res agitur, Paries cum proximus ardet.) The Rod that is brushing but in the
Air, may (we cannot tell how soon) be sharply beating upon our shoulders. The
very weather which now is better, may soon be worse than it was before. And
though the Immoderation of Rain is passed, yet the consequences of it are still
remaining; And the Remembrance of the Threat should be present with us. Nay
since it is clear from that difficult, but useful Text, Mark 9. 49. [(...)] That
we must every one be Seasoned with Salt, or Fire; That our putrid Affections
must be eaten out here, or else our Persons destroyed hereafter; (there being
no medium betwixt the one and the other;) blessed be He who shall preserve us
in Tears of Brine, that he may not consume us in Fire of Brimstone. Rev. 21. 8.
We ought to smile on those stripes, which are meant to drive us to Immortality.

. 9. Let us not think our selves too wise, to be thus Instructed; or too old,
to be thus Educated; or too great to be thus Corrected. Perhaps the Robbins of
our Schools, are in the School of Jesus Christ no more than humble ABC darians;
They that are Aged enough by Nature, may have hardly yet attained to be Babes
in Grace; And they who brandish the Sword of Justice, are themselves under
God's Lash. And since we cannot ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless
we receive it as little Children; Let us therefore, as little Children, down on
our Knees before our Father. Let us confess that we have sinned; Let us ask him
Forgiveness, and promise never to do the like. He will not cast away his Rod,
until he see's that we have Kissed it; And that we can say with the Prophet
David, It is good for us to have been afflicted. For whom his Menaces do not
better, they accidentally make worse; And if we harden our Hearts, we do but
weighten his Hand. The showing of which will be the work of my Second Doctrinal
Proposition.



. 1. I cannot show you this better, than by Example; nor by a better Example,
than what this Chapter does here afford us. For when the Kine of Bashan on the
Mountains of Samaria, (the Schismatical Tribes of the People Israel, whom God
did therefore stigmatize with so disgraceful a Periphrasis,) had oppressed the
poor, and crushed the needy, (ver. 1.) when they had greatly transgressed at
Bethel, and multiplied Transgressions at Gilgal, (ver. 4.) God was pleased to
proceed against them by several steps and degrees of his Indignation; that if a
lesser corrosive would not cure them, a sharper might. For first he sent them
cleanness of Teeth, as his Ambassador or Herald to fetch them in. There was a
want of Bread in all their places, which was the first part of Famine; and yet
for all this they would not return unto the Lord, (ver. 6.) Next he Plagued
them with a Drowth, that second part of Famine; Their Sins had made the Heavens
Brass, and the Earth Iron. So that two or three Cities were fain to wander into
one, and all to drink a little water. But yet for all this they would not
Return unto the Lord, (ver. 8.) After this he proceeded to pour out a Curse
upon all their fruits; The fruits of their Gardens, and of their Vineyards,
which were suddenly blasted, and devoured, partly by the Mildew, and partly by
the Palmer-worm. And this (we know) was a third part of Famine; But
notwithstanding all this, They would not return unto the Lord, (ver. 9.)
Hereupon his Indignation waxt hot against them; For seeing the Ghastly Pale
Horse had been so utterly unsuccesful, He sent the Red Horse amongst them, and
that in both parts of the dreadful Hieroglyphick; I mean the War, and the
Pestilence. And yet for all this, They would not return unto the Lord, (ver.
10.) In the Fifth place therefore, when neither any of these Judgments, nor
altogether, could do the work; what remained but that the Earth should open her
Mouth, and swallow them up? or that a Fire sent from Heaven should send them
hastily into Hell? And even of This they had a Taste, (as appears by the verse
before my Text,) God overthrowing some of them, as he had Sodom and Gomorrah;
and the Rest were but respited, after the manner of a Firebrand plucked out of
the Burning; And yet in despite of all This, They would not return unto the
Lord, (ver. 11.) Sixthly and lastly, when so many Prelusorie Judgments were in
effect cast away on a stubborn People; when all those Emisaries and Heralds
were sent in vain; when Death it self could not fright them, however ushered
and waited on with so grim and formidable a Train; what could in reason be
expected but such an Absolute (...), such a complete Devastation of Them, and
Theirs, as should not leave so much as a Praeco, (no not so much as a (...)) to
carry the Tidings of their Ruin to late Posterity? And even This is also
Threatened in the words of my Text, Ideo Tibi sic faciam, Therefore thus will I
do unto thee o Israel.

. 2. And as Thus unto Israel, so why not Thus unto England too, if we continue
(as they did) to corrupt our selves with his Goodness to us? If we make no
better Use of our Peace and Plenty, and the other effects of a Restoration,
than to turn our Peace into Wantonness, and our Plenty into Luxury, our Liberty
into Licentiousness, and our Strength into Presumption, our Power into
Oppression, and our Dignities into Pride? Nay in as much as the Dimensions of
our Ingratitude, like the Highth and Depth of our Obligations, are far beyond
those of the People Israel; God will not only do Thus unto us, but more to Us,
than unto Israel, unless we timely prepare to meet him, and present him with
the Fruits of sincere Repentance; which, we have nothing to excuse us (when God
has don so much to us to make us fruitful,) if we do not bring forth in the
greatest plenty. It Is true, we have often gone out to meet him; But not with
Prayers, and Tears, the only Armor of a Christian, whereby to hold out against
Omnipotence, and the only Weapons to overcome it. We have rather gone out to
meet him, as we commonly meet a Just Enemy; Not to ask him forgiveness, but
give him Battle. We have gone out to meet Christ, not like Them on Palm Sunday,
who ran before him into Jerusalem, with Doxologies and Hosannahs to the Son of
David; But rather like his first Crucifyers, with Swords and Staves to
apprehend him. And how improsperous soever we have hitherto been in our
Encounters; Though God has many years knocked us against each other, and so
opposed us unto our selves, as that we really became no less his Host, than his
Enemies; yet like Marcellus in the Historian, Certamen ferociter instauramus,
we are as sturdy a sort of Sinners, (many of us,) as if we never yet had
smarted for having sinned. It was Phormio's saying in Thucydides, That conquered
men are commonly Crest-fallen, (...). Thucyd. lib. 2. p. 161.
and do remit of their courage against a second Encounter, as soon as they have
fatally incurred the first. And shall we on the contrary be such a besotted kind
of Warriars, as like the Indians in Valerius, (even in spite of Pythagoras his
Golden Symbol,) to dare Encounter with Fire it self? (For to those that fight
with him, we know our God is a Consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.) And since there is
hardly any Affliction, (no not our late immoderate Rain) but is a spark of Gods
wrath; Job 5. 6, 7. Chapter XLI. ver. 29.
Let us not by our Impenitence presume to heighten it into a Flame. But

. 3. Let it rather be our wisdom, from this day forewards, Venienti occurrere
(non jam morbo quidem, sed) Medico. Since our Endeavors will come too late for
the prevention of the Disease, Let us go meet our Physician, and stay the
sharpness of the means he is preparing for our Recovery. We know not what
Judgments may yet be hovering over our Heads; and perhaps our very Harvest may
be as Terrible as our Spring. God will not give over the Cure, till the Disease
is Desperate. For though his lesser sort of Punishments did scarce incline the
Heart of Pharaoh, his last orecame it; (so far at least as to compel him to let
the People go free.) And if his Lance is unsuccesful, we shall be so much the
surer to feel his Caustic. But yet behold the Sun of Righteousness breaking
forth in this place like the Sun of Nature. There is not wanting matter of
comfort, in the midst of those Terrors which have besieged us; Because the
sharpest Judgments here are but the Regia Medicamenta, or Magisterials of our
Physician; which, though by accident they may kill, are yet intended only to
cure us. And this does lead me to consider the Third Particular in the Division,



. 1. Amongst the Reasons which may be rendered to prove the Truth of this
Doctrine, This may certainly pass for one, That God is never so much in Wrath,
as when he will not vouchsafe to strike. I remember Spartianus observes of
Geta, (much what Tacitus of Tiberius) Quod iis praecipue blandiretur quos ad
Necem destinabat. He made so much of those persons whom he designed for
slaughter, That his Embraces and his best looks became more dreadful than all
his Frowns. And though 'twere Impiety but to imagine, (what some
notwithstanding have dared to Preach,) that God can absolutely will the eternal
Ruin of his Creatures; much less that He can will it, when He has sworn he
wills it Not; much less yet that he can contrive it, by taking care for an
Impenitence to bring it orderly about; Luke 16. 25.
Yet considering how rarely it is given to one and the same man, To sit with
Dives at his Table, and to lie with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom; To have his
Good Things here, and hereafter too; I cannot but say of many persons whom the
World calls happy, that They who have most of God's Bounty, may yet have least
of his Love and Favor. For seeing it is True (what the Scripture says) That
whom God loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6. 7, 8. and Act. 14. 22.
and scourges every son whom he receives; we may with good Logic infer, That
whom he chasteneth not, he does not love; nor receives any Son whom he does
not scourge. 'Twas very shrewdly said by Solon, Herodot. lib. 1. page 14.
(if we believe Herodotus,) (...), That the Minions of the Earth are but the
Prove. 1.
sport of Heaven. God often lends them a kind of happiness, only to show them
he does but lend it. At once does prosper their Branches, and Curse their Root;
turns them loose into Plenty, as fit to be fatted for the Shambles.

. 2. But not to spend time in this Inquiry, How hardly God's Friends can be the
Favorites of the World, or vice versa; And how by Consequence to be pitied
those Creatures are, whom God Almighty in his Wrath permits to wallow in
superfluity; Methinks the Difference may be This, betwixt a good man afflicted,
and an ill man prosperous, that the first does seem to be clearly under God's
Cure, and the second to be beyond it; That indeed a Tormented, but This a
desperate Patient.

. 3. It is another way of proving the Infinite Goodness of God's severity, in
his willingness to Cure whom he vouchsafes to Wound, That he is pleased still
to threaten, before he strikes; whenever he is an Enemy, he is declaredly
such in his written Word. He is (...), (as Aristotle calls a Generous Enemy,
Aristot. Eth. lib. 4. cap. 8.
) And though his Love toward his Children may be sometimes concealed, yet his
Anger at their Rebellions is still professed; and professed even to Them, whom he
does punish with Impunity on this side Hell. Not like Brutus and Cassius, those
reserved Enemies of Caesar, who Plotted to Murder him in secret; But like
Pompey, and Cato, those Brave Antagonists, who bid him Defiance in the Field.
God does tell us when He will Arm himself, that we may stand upon our Guard by
sincere Repentance; and he does show us where he will strike, that we may look
unto our Posture. He Brandishes his Rod, that he may not scourge us; and hangs
his Sword over our Eyes, that it may not fall upon our heads. There is a Story
of Diogenes, That being asked what he would take to receive a Blow upon his
Head, his Answer was, He would take an Helmet. Now such is the Mercy of our
God, that he gives us an Helmet, before he strikes; And when at last our
Provocations have forced his Sword out of his Hand, he is willinger to drop it,
than throw it down. He does not pour out the Vials of his Displeasure all at
once; but first he dispatches his lesser punishments; and those not as
Harbingers, to prepare the way for greater, but rather as Heralds to prevent
them. And when those greater too do follow, (I mean the Punishments inflicted
in this present life,) they are oftener (...), than (...), (as Philosophers
distinguish,) rather as motives to our Amendment, than as Acts of his Revenge.
Thus we find it to have been in the case of Zachary, Luke 1. 19. 20.
whose miraculous Judgment was a Token of his Pardon, as well as Sin. God
indeed struck him Dumb, but it was that ever after he might speak so much the
better, and the Privation of his Language was to habituate his Faith. Nay I
dare be bold to say, (what yet I cannot without Astonishment at the wisdom and
goodness of our Creator, (...), Plotinus Ennead. 2. lib. 3. page 48.
) that Damnation it self was at first meant to save us, in as much as it is
evident that God made Hell, as well for the best as the worst of men; as well
for the Terror of the former, as for the Torment of the later; as well to
fright all men from coming thither, as to punish the Impiety of bold and
desperate Intruders. Much like the merciful severity of former Magistrates here
in England, who set up Pillaries and Gallowses in public places of the Realm,
as well to keep men from stealing, as to hang up Thieves and Robbers; as well
to prevent, as to punish wickedness. And what a fathomless Abyss of God's
compassion must we esteem it, to set his Bridewell before our eyes, as some say
Phalaris did his Bull, merely to compel us to take his Favors? How indulgent a
Father must He be thought, who when his Prodigal Children are running from him,
(...). Barnab. in Epist. p. 249 Edit. Voss.
sets a Lion in their way, to fright them back into his Embraces? Nay so
astonishing is the Depth of the Riches of his Goodness, that He converts our
very Tempter into an Instrument of our Good. For when the Devil was such a
Dunce, as to accelerate and further the Death of Christ, who was to dye the
Propitiation for all our sins, and only by Dying to conquer Hell, he spent his
Malice indeed upon our Savior, but really the mischief was all his Own. So
that considering how the Death of our blessed Savior was at once a sure
passage both to His, and Our Glory, It follows that when Judas did kiss his
Master, he only delivered up Christ, but betrayed the Devil. Thus we find St.
Paul himself making very good use of the Devil's Discipline. For as one while
we have him delivering others up to Satan, and that to this wholesome end, 1
Cor. 5. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20.
That they may learn not to Blaspheme; so another while we meet him under the
buffeting of Satan in his own person also, and that for this important end,
That he may learn not to be haughty, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
or highly minded. And so the Devil, in that case, was made Instrumental to his
Salvation.

. 4. Thus we have the words verified which were written to the Christians who
dwelt at Rome; to wit, That all things work together for good, Romans 8. 28.
that is, to them that love God, to them that are called according to his
purpose. All that befalls us by God's Appointment, and the most things that
happen by God's Permission, are strangely turned to our Advantage, though we
are many times so stupid, as not to be able to apprehend it. First the evils of
affliction are universally made to better us; And next, by the Wisdom of God's
Disposal, the evil of sin, in other men, is many times of great use to secure
our Innocence. Nor have we only heard the obliging Method of God's Proceedings,
but I think I may say we have felt it too. How he first of all threatens, that
he may not inflict; and how he afterward inflicts, that he may not consume.
How he mercifully endeavors to whip the Sinner into a Saint; destroying the
Beast in us, to save the Man. How his Wisdom does sometimes suffer us to be
intangl'd with Temptations, that so his Goodness may deliver us, and help us
out; And that we may be able to say with David, Psalm. 119. 75.
Thou o Lord of very faithfulness have caused us to be troubled. That many
times his severities are Mercies to us, will be intelligible to any, who shall
but consult their own experience. I mean the experience of their lesser, in
prevention of greater Punishments. As the loss of some Chattels, to save a
Limb; or the loss of a Limb, to preserve the whole Body; or the loss of that
Body, to save the Soul. Now if God shall deprive us of one or two Parts, of all
we Have, or of all we Are, when All of Both are confiscate for our Treasons
committed against his Majesty; shall we not think our selves bound to be glad,
and thankful, that even so he has been pleased to reprieve the rest? Admit a
Friend should be falling from off a Tower, Quae per insuavitatem mede^tur,
emolumento curationis offensam sui excusant. Tertul. de Poenit. cap. 10.
and we in the snatching of him back, should put his Arm out of joint; would
he impute his Deliverance to our unkindness, because it cost him some pain in
the purchase of it? And if in our violent Career of Sin, when we are rushing as
it were headlong into the bottomless Pit of Hell, God is pleased to pull us
back with a stronger violence, (be it by Poverty, or Disgrace, by the Plague of
Pestilence, or of Famine, be it by any other purgent or dreadful means,) yet
let us thankfully consider, it is but to snatch us from a Precipice. And again
let us consider, (with as much thankfulness unto God as our hearts can hold,)
That if Amendment is the End of his Threats and Terrors, Then that which
frustrates his Threats, must needs fulfill them. Which I proceed to show at
large in my last Doctrinal Proposition.

That God desiring antecedently the timely Repentance of a Sinner, Qui Poenam
per judicium destinavit, Idem and veniam per poenitentiam spospondit.
and only by way of consecution, the final destruction of the Impenitent; it is
plain his Menaces are fulfilled by their never coming to pass; most fully
satisfied and accomplished, Tertul. de poenit. c. 4.
not when they confound, but convert a sinner.

. 1. For the better Elucidation of what may seem a dark Point, and for the
prevention of such objections as may be made by those men, who are either so
unconsidering as not to think of Gods Methods, or so unlearned as not to know
them, or so profane as to murmur and quarrel at them; we shall do well to take
notice of those two sorts of Menaces, which do occur to us in Scripture under
two several Notions. Some we find under God's Oath, and others only under his
Word. The first of which are positive, the second suppositive. The former are
purposed as Revenges, but the later only as Remedies. The Menaces under his
Oath he does evermore execute; whereas Those under his Word only He does many
times Retract.

. 2. But now it being not consistent with the simplicity of the Almighty, that
either his Oath or his Retractation should differ really from his Will, the
Eighth Council of Toledo will give us the Ground of this Distinction. Iurare
Dei est, Council. Tolet. 8. cap. 2.
a seipso ordinata nullatenus convellere; Poenitere vero, eadem ordinata, cum
voluerit, immutare. When God will Execute his Sentence, he is then said to
Swear; And when he will alter, or remit it, he is said to Repent. Poenitentia
Dei nihil aliud est, qua^ simplex conversio prioris sententiae.
God's Repentance (says Tertullian) is nothing else, but a simple Resuming his
former Purpose. Tertul. contra Marc. lib. 1. c. 24.
And his Oath (says learned Philo) is nothing else but his Word exerting it
self into Effect. So that the Promises and the Threats which are delivered
under his Oath, (...)* Philo Iud. Allegor. lib. 2. page 75.
are That indeed which was but said of the now Antiquated Laws of the Medes and
Persians; Irreversible, and peremptory, and incapable of a Repeal. I shall
make them both plain by a few Scriptural Examples. And

. 3. First of the Promises under his Oath, the Prophet David gives us an
Instance in the 89 Psalm, at the 34 verse, where first he positively
pronounces, My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out
of my lips. And then the reason of it follows, I have sworn by my Holiness that
I will not fail David. Another Instance of it we have in the 7. of Deuteronomy,
at the 8. verse, where God is said to love Israel more than any other Nation,
even for this very reason, and this alone, because he would make good the Oath
which he had sworn unto their Fathers.

Secondly of the Threats which God delivers under his Oath, we have a very
pregnant Instance in the 95 Psalm, at the 11 verse, where speaking of the
Israelites to whom the Holy Land was promised, says He, I swear in my wrath
that they should not enter into my Rest. Nor did one of them enter, excepting
Caleb and Joshua, who were exempted from the Sentence, Number. 14. 30. Nay they
did not enter in, though God had sworn they should enter. From whence arises
an objection, How it can stand with God's Veracity, to Swear they shall, and
they shall not. For Number. 14, 23, Surely, says God, they shall not see the Land
which I swear unto their Fathers; And (verse. 30.) Doubtless ye shall not come
into the Land, concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein. First he
swore they should inhabit in the Land, and yet afterward He swore they should
not see it, much less should they enter, or dwell within it. This objection
seems hard, but yet the Answer is very easy, and may be rationally drawn from
the same verse with the objection. For the Promise was not made to the
Individuals, but to the Nation; not to the Persons, but People Israel. So as
both these Oaths were most inviolately accomplished, the Negative in the
Parents, and the Affirmative in their Posterity. The Negative in the Provokers,
and the Affirmative in the Obedient. So that the (...), does still stand good.
Heb. 3. 16.
The Oath of God does still imply the Immutability of his Decree, Heb. 6. 17.

. 4. But for the Menaces under his Word only, the Case is different. He had
much rather they should be frustrated, than severely fulfilled upon us. And
perhaps I may say with more propriety of speaking, that to frustrate such
Menaces is most perfectly to fulfill them. So very signal is the Indulgence and
Love of God, that he will imitate and follow his very Creatures. For no sooner
can it Repent us of the evil of Sin which we have don, but He as suddenly
repents him of the evil of punishment which he intended. It is his own
Affirmation, Ier. 18. 8. If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn
from their evil, I will repent of the evil which I thought to do unto them. And
again in the same Chapter, Behold (says God) I frame evil against you, Jer.
18. 11.
when straight it follows, Return ye every one from the evil of his way. A fit
example of this we have, 2 Kings 20. 1. where says Isaiah to Hezekiah, (as a
Message sent from God,) Set thy House in order, for thou shall dye, and not
live. And yet so far he is from dying, in the fifth verse of that Chapter, that
There we find tidings of his Recovery; yea and his Lease of Life renewed for
fifteen years longer. Now the reason of it is, because such Menaces are
conditional; And conditio non impleta non obligat Fidem. If it Repents us of
our sins, God Almighty is not obliged to put such Threats in Execution, as were
only denounced on a supposal of our Impenitence. Such was that Threat of God
Almighty to Abimelech, (for unwittingly taking the Wife of Abraham,) Behold
thou art but a dead man. But the meaning of it follows a little after, If thou
restore her not, thou shall surely dye. Now therefore restore the man his Wife;
for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. Genesis 20.
3, 7. And now if any shall yet object, that God did earnestly threaten both
Hezekiah, and Abimelech, without a Proviso, or Reserve; I shall send him for an
Answer to the Rule of Equity in Quintilian. Quaedam, etiamsi nulla legis
significatione comprehensa sunt, natura tamen excipiuntur. The very Nature of
certain words, whether promising, or threatening, do so imply an exception in
certain cases and suppositions, that they save the Author of them the care and
labor of expression. A plain Example of which we have in the 7 Chapter of
Deuteronomy, where God had forbidden his People Israel to have any Traffic or
Commerce with the Neighboring Nations. And yet if any of those Nations should
submit to pay Tribute, and yield obedience to the Precepts which had been given
down of old to the Sons of Noah, from that very Instant Commerce was free. The
Prohibition being silent, where the Cause of it did cease. Nay it is so
absolutely impossible that any Falsehood should proceed from the Mouth of Truth,
or that his words should be found light in the Balance of the Sanctuary, that
we shall find them holding weight in our humane scales. For it is a Rule in our
Law, Comminationes nemini jus confer. And such is the Goodness of our Divine
Legislator, that though he gives us a Title to any Rewards which he shall
promise, yet he denies us all claim to any Punishments which he shall threaten.
The reason is, because Promises are founded in materia favorabili, which is in
Equity to be stretched; But Menaces on the contrary in materia odiosa, which by
consequence is to be straightened. For 'twas exactly said by Aristotle, That as
the proper virtue of the Intellect is (...), so That of the Will is (...). Both
importing such an Equity and Equanimity in the Judge, (that is to say,) such a
propensity toward the right hand of Favor, as blunts and mollifies the Edge
of a Rigid Justice. Thus it ought to be in Man; But in God thus it Is. The
Court of Heaven has been always a kind of Chancery, wherein he uses an
Equiprudence in his judging of the Fact, and a gracious Equity in his passing
of the Sentence.

. 5. To conclude this part of my undertaking, and to vindicate God's Veracity
from any unworthy Imputation, in the judgments of the best, and the worst of
men also, (if they will but deal with God, as they Themselves would be dealt
with by humane Laws,) There are three Cases amongst Civilians, wherein all
obligations (whether by promises to Reward, or by Menaces to Punishment,) do
cease to bind. And we shall find them all applyable to the Doctrine or Thesis
we have in hand. First I say they cease to bind, per Cessationem rationis
unicae; to wit Impenitence. Next per Casus emergentis Repugnantiam cum
voluntate; to wit Repentance. Then per comparationem alterius legis; to wit the
law of forgiveness to such as sincerely do Repent. If God has threatened us
with Destruction upon a supposal of our Impenitence, (which is the sole reason
for which he threatens,) And if our Repentance shall interpose betwixt the
Threat and the Execution, (which Repentance is an Emergency, to which the
Will-of-God-to-punish is most Repugnant,) Then by virtue of the Promise of God
to men, [ That when soever they repent, they shall not fail of his Pardon,] he
cannot possibly be obliged to put his Threat in Execution. For whatsoever may
have been said to a yet-sinning People, (as once to Nineve,) yet such a People
(like the Ninevites) may seasonably break off their sins by Righteousness, and
make it just that the Statute should void the sentence. that is to say, that
the Statute enacting Pardon to the Penitent, should void the sentence of
Destruction which was but made to unrepenting and desperate Sinners.

. 6. Now from all that has been said of the last observable in the Text, it is
obvious to gather this observation. That as the Impenitence of the Jews did
work one Miracle, in that it hindered our blessed Savior from working Miracles
among them, Mat. 13. 58.
which made it look like an infeebling even of Him who was Omnipotent; so
Repentance can do a Miracle as great as That, even change the purpose of the
Immutable; and when his Arrows are flying at us, can send them back into their
Quiver. What a kind of Almightiness has the Almighty thus endowed Repentance
with? And what stratagems does he use to induce us to it? How does he fright us
to this Duty, (after the manner in which we deal with our little Children,) as
well by slight and empty Buggs, as by real Dangers? How does he thunder out his
Threats, as so many gracious Equivocations, which with a blessed kind of Fraud
are meant to beguile us into Obedience? (It is indeed a bold Metaphor, but I
borrow it from St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 16.
who told his Corinthians, that being crafty, he caught them with guile.) How
does he hold forth his Comets to a sinful Nation, very much rather to prevent,
than presage his Plagues? How does he send out his Thunder, before his Bolt?
and affright us with his Lightning, that he may not consume us with his Fire?
How did he scare us very lately with Gluts of Rain, that he might not destroy
us with perfect Famine? I pray contemplate on my Text, a little more attently
before I leave it, and ye will find how exactly it is conformable to the Time.
What Beams of Mercy may we descry, most sweetly breaking forth from a Cloud of
Justice? How does his Pity in a manner give a Counter-check to his wrath?
whilst he says in his Anger, Thus and thus will I do; his Loving kindness
interposeth, Prepare to meet thy God o Israel. Thus will I do, to destroy the
Sin; but prepare to meet me, to the end that I may not destroy the sinner. It Is
true we read that when Adrastes had killed the Son of King Croesus, Croesus was
so touched with that very Murderer's Humiliation, as at that very time to
pronounce his Pardon. A Temper (ye will say) in an Heathen Prince, which the
greatest part of Christians would admire sooner than imitate. But how
transcendently greater is the Patience and the Love of our God to Us? For
although by continuing in our Impieties, we often Crucify his Son, he is not
only inclinable to give a Pardon, or a Reprieve, but does invite and desire us
to give him leave too.

. 7. If ye will take a right Prospect of both together, (I mean the twofold
transcendency both of his Patience and his Love,) hear him speaking unto
Israel, and through Israel unto our selves.

Your Povocations, o Kine of Bashan, have filled my Vials full of Wrath. See a
Description of God's Artillery, Wisd. 5. 17, 18, etc.
Behold my Arrows are on the strings, and my Thunderbolt in my hand. I am now
riding toward you upon the wings of a whirlewind; And as hitherto ye have
found me a quickening Light, ye shall feel me henceforwards a killing Fire. But
is there never a man among you who will make up the Hedge? who will come before
me for the Land, Ezekiel. 22. 30.
that I may not destroy it? Is there never a Moses who will stand in the Gapp?
not a Phineas among you to stand up and pray? not an Abraham to plead for a
Sister of Sodom? nor a Priest to weep out betwixt the Portch and the Altar? Is
there never a man of Wisdom to hear my Voice, Mich. 6. 13.
how long and audibly soever I have been crying unto the City? O come and stop
me in my Carier. Let your Tears disarme me, and let your Prayers bind my hands.
I will destroy you, But fain I would not. I am All^mighty indeed, But I am
All-mercy too. And though ye cannot Resist, ye may Prevent me. Because I will
do thus unto thee, prepare to meet me that I may not.

. 8. Let us imagine within our selves, that God is speaking thus to Us, as once
to Israel. And withal let us consider, what 'twill be fittest for us to do. If
he is coming to meet Us, as heretofore he met Ephraim, Hos. 13. 8.
like a Leopard or a Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps; let us go out to meet
Him, even as Benhadad met Ahab, 1 Kings 20. 32.
even with Sackcloth upon our Backs, and with Halters about our Necks; or else
(as Hushai met David,) with our Coats rent, 2 Samuel 15 32.
and with Earth upon our Heads. If God's Coming be as silent as a Thief in the
Night, and withal as violent as a Thief in the Day; it will be infinitely
better that we meet him halfway, than that we expect him within our Doors. It
will be best for us to meet him, that so his suddainness may not surprise us;
And 'twil be best to prepare, that so his severity may not oppress us. Let us
not meet him so soon, as not first to prepare; nor be so long in preparing, as
not to meet him. They are Both together in my Text; and may they Both be
together in all our Practice. Let us so in good Time meet our God with the
fruits of sincere Repentance, as that our God in great Mercy may be pleased to
meet us with Grace and Pardon.

And This the God of all Mercy vouchsafe unto us, both for the Glory of his
Name, and for the worthiness of his Son. To whom with the Father, in the Unity
of the Spirit, be ascribed the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, from this day
forwards forevermore.

FINIS.
THE Embassy of the Rod AND THE AUDIENCE WHICH IT REQUIRES.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING At WHITE HALL, Upon the Wednesday-Monthly
Fast, when the Pestilence Decreased, but yet Continued, As did also the War
with the French and Dutch, 1665.

MICHA 6. 9. Hear ye the Rod, and who has Appointed it.
. 1. THe Text (as things stand) should now be handled in such a manner, as to
respect the double quality and complexion of the Time. A Time of Thanksgiving,
and Fasting too. A Time of great Comfort, and yet of Mourning. A Time which
places us in the Confine of those two Passions, which seized upon the two
Mary's at the Sepulcher of our Lord; from which they are said to have departed,
with Fear and great Joy. Mat. 28. 8.

First it is matter to us of Joy, that after the very same measure in which our
Enemies from abroad did Increase upon us, our abler Enemy here at home began to
be at Peace with us. And I think I may say without a Figure, that both the
Dutch and the French have one Defeat without Fighting. For, weighing well the
two Grounds whereupon the two Nations presumed against us, The unanimity of our
Countrymen corrects the Insolence of the Dutch, and the Abatement of our
Pestilence does Plague the French for their Supercherie.

But yet it is matter to us of Fear, and of Humiliation, that though the
Pestilence decreases, it also continues in some degree; That whilst the Rod is
removing, it is also hanging over our heads; And though the Fury of the
Judgment is (God be thanked) well passed, yet the sense of its Threatenings is
present with us. We know the Autumn, many times, is a pregnant season; nor can
we Prophecy, This Month, what the Next may bring forth. And as the likelihood
of a Victory must needs be very much allayed by the Possibility of a Defeat; so
must the Hopes of a Recovery by the great Danger of a Relaps. And seeing the
Wisdom of Authority has still appointed this Day (although a Day of no sad
Tidings) to be observed in all our Churches as a Day of Solemn Humiliation; let
us Rejoice with so much Trembling at the Retreat of God's Anger, as by Prayer
and Fasting to stop the way to its Return. The Text which now lies before us is
very fit for this Purpose. For

. 2. Now it was that God's People, the men of Israel and of Judah, after their
manifold obligations to Watch, and Pray, and give Thanks, for their Deliverance
out of Egypt, that House of Bondage, were most securely fallen asleep in a dead
Lethargy of Sin. A sleep in which they lay snoring with such Indulgency to
Themselves, that all his ordinary Calls were too low to wake them. But God has
two sorts of Voices whereby to rouse us into Repentance. The one he utters by
his Prophets, and the other by his Rod. And we have Both in this verse, whereof
my Text is the later part. For what we call the Lord's Voice, in the next words
before my Text, The Chaldee paraphraseth well by [the voice of the Prophets of
the Lord.] And This was it he first used to the men of Jerusalem and Samaria.
Nor did he whisper into the Ear of only here and there one, but extended it to
the hearts and the ears of all. The Lord's Voice cries unto the City, that is,
his voice by the Prophets is lifted up like a Trumpet, to show the people their
Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins. (Isa. 58. 1.) But since the
Voice by his Prophets is only heeded by very few, (that is to say, here and
there by a man of Wisdom,) at least give ear unto the voice which now he
utters by his Rod; and look ye up unto the hand that has laid it on. The
Chaldee Paraphrase on the Persons to whom the words are directed is most
remarkable. For it is not only, hear ye Tribes; as the Septuagint read, and the
vulgar Latin; nor only hear ye the Rod; as the Interlineary Hebrew. But, here
ye Princes, and Rulers, and People of the Earth. Or (as I find it translated by
Learned Grotius) Audite Rex, and Proceres, and Conventus. Which I cannot better
English, than by King, Lords, and Commons. Let your Qualities or Conditions be
what they will, Audite Vos Virgam, Hear Ye the Rod. So that the Voice of the
Prophets, (in the beginning of the verse,) does seem to differ just as much,
from the voice of the Rod, (in the later end,) as the Prophecy from the
Judgment which is Prophesied of; or as the Threat from the Sentence, and some
degree of Execution; or as the Preaching from the Text which is Preached on.

. 3. This is therefore God's Method for the calling of Sinners unto Repentance.
The public Preachers of his Word do first give warning. Then the truly wise in
heart do fear and tremble at the Word Preached. Yet the foolish and
inconsiderate, (who are the most of Mankind) being deaf to that Word, and not
afraid of that Warning, The Rod comes in with its Sermon, or excitation to
Repentance, and All are conjured to hearken to it.

This (considering how the words are made obscure by an Elipsis, which the most
Critical Commentators have several Methods of filling up) I do conceive to be
the plainest and most satisfactory scope of the words in Hand. The Lords Voice
cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy Name.

Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

. 4. The Text in the General, or in the Great, does present us with an Embassy
from Heaven to Earth; which being taken in the Retail, does spread it self into
these Particulars.

First the Ambassador here employed; and that is expressed to be the Rod.

Secondly the People to whom directed; And These are implied in the Pronown Ye.
My Israel, my Chosen, the peculiar Lot of mine Inheritance, Audite Vos, hear Ye.

Thirdly the Audience, or Attention, which is to be given to the Ambassador;
Audite, Hear. Last of all we have the Potentate from whom the Ambassador is
dispatched, described clearly by the Periphrasis of [Him who has appointed it.]

The first and second of these particulars will be best capable of Discourse,
not severally handled, but in conjunction. For the close Application of the
Ambassador to the People, the Rod to Israel, will very seasonably afford us
this Doctrinal Proposition.

That God Almighty is so far from conniving at, or not seeing Sin in his
Children, (though the Tempter in these Times has taught a great number of men
to flatter themselves into Destruction by this Opinion,) that he hates, and
will punish it, much more in Them, than in Those that are Stranger, and Aliens
to him.

. 1. Which to the end I may evince in the clearest Method that I can use, I
shall first of all observe out of Aulus Gellius, Aul. Gell. l. 6. c. 14. p. 224.
(what He himself does observe out of Plato's Gorgias,) That there are three
distinct ends for which Offenders are to be punished. Whereof the first is
(...), for the Amendment of Offenders. The second (...), for the Benefit of
such as are Lookers-on. The third (...), for the Party's Satisfaction who is
Offended. And if we look on all Three, as they are applicable to God, in his
laying on of stripes on the sons of Men; whether the End of his Inflictions is
to redeem us from our Iniquities, or to fright Lookers-on from daring to do as
we have don, or to make some Amends to his injured Goodness; we shall find him
ever Just, after the measure that he is Merciful. And as he is kinder by much
to the little Flock, which he has tenderly Pent up in his rich Enclosure, than
to the numerous Herd which are turned out into the Common, so is he rigider to
the Sheep that rudely break out of the Fold, than to the Swine or the Goats
that were never in it. For the better evidencing of which, let us consider his
Rod of Justice with its three final Causes, and mark how fitly it tends to each.

. 2. First I say the Rod of God is (...), (as Plutarch calls it,) the Med'cin,
or means of Cure, unto the Souls of such men as are sick of Sin. So much the
Med'cin, that Plato will allow it no other end; and Lucius Seneca looks upon
it, as a Thing that can be useful for nothing else. Seneca de Ir^. l. 1. r. 16.
p. 406.
Nemo prudens punit, quia peccatur, sed nepeccetur. We are not punished (says
he) because we have already sinned, but only to the end we may sin no more. And
his Reason is as plausible as the matter will bear. Revocari praeterita non
possunt, futura prohibentur. Whatsoever is past, is past all Remedy; And an
evil of Sin already don, no evil of Punishment can have the power to undo. But
what is future, and yet to come, may be anticipated at present; and though we
cannot retrive yesterday, we may wisely provide against the morrow. Nay the
sharpest of Remedies is so desirable, where continuance in Sin is the Disease,
that when the Patient cannot be cured, it is a kind of a Favor, to cut him off.
Interdum ut pereant, (...). Heliodor. lib. 1.
interest pereuntium. Even Destruction it self is many times very Medicinal.
And many thousands had been undo^, if they had not perished. Sure I am that St.
Paul was of this opinion, when he delivered men up to Satan for the Destruction
of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
that their Spiri^s might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. And reflecting
upon the words which were spoken by Christ of his own Betrayer, Mar. 14. 21.
Good it were for that man that he had never been born; (...). Plotinus Enn. 1.
l. 7. p. 62.
we may infer, with good Logic, It had been good for that man, to have lived
very little beyond his Birth. For when the Devil shall give a Visit to such an
Impenitent on his Deathbed, his wish will unavoidably be one of these two,
That he had led his life better, or sooner dyed. So clear a Truth as this is
the very Heathens could discern by the light of Nature. Alexis in (...).
Not Plotinus only the Platonist, but Alexis the Comoedian. (...),
(...).
That is, the first Degree of Happiness, is not at all to receive a life; And
the next, is to leave it early.

. 3. To make my meaning more plain by a familiar Illustration; Admit the Arm or
the Leg of any man's body is gangrened, we do not say it is the Cruelty, but
the Skill of the Surgeon to cut it off. And if the Patient being angry shall
expostulate with the Artist in such a Case, or demand by what Authority he does
such things, Crysost. ad 2. Cor. 7. 13.
St. Chrysostom tells him he may Answer, (...). Do thou ask me, honest
friend, why I cut thee off a Limb? Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile
vulnus Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trabatur.
That which gave me this Authority was my Art, and thy Disease. My Art informed
me 'twas to be don, and thy Disease bid me do it.

Crudelem Medicum Intemperans Aeger facit. And then considering how much the
Soul is more preferable to the Body, Apul. de Philos. l. 3. p. 48. 49.
than the Body can be to a single Member, I cannot choose but assent to that
Platonic Aphorism in Apuleius, Si nequitia miseros facit, miserior sit necesse
est diuturnior nequa^, quos infelicissimos esse judicarem, si non eorum
mali^iam saltem mors extrema ^iniret. Boeth. de Cons. Philos. l. 4. p. 150
Gravius and acerbius est omni supplicio, si noxio impunitas deferatur; that to
the wicked, in this world, the greatest Punishment is Impunity. For Remedy
being by Nature very much better than Disease, and so a desperate Remedy than a
desperate Disease, it must necessarily follow, that to a sinner who is
Incorrigible, Death it self becomes a Curtesy. The reason is, because it
renders him less unhappy, Mali cum Supplicio ^arent, inest iis aliquid alterius
mali, ipsa Impunitas.
than he would otherwise have been. For that even in Hell there is Room for
Curtesy, is just as clear as that the greater infer's the lesser Damnation, --
Multo igitur infeliciores sunt Improbi injusta impunitate donati, quam justa
^ltione puniti. Id. ib. p. 152.
Mat. 23. 14. And as one Star differs from another Star in Glory; so in the
Territories of Darkness, we are told of a difference between the Sodomites and
the Jews, Mat. 11. 23, 24. and so we read of great difference between the
punishments inflicted on several Servants; some whereof shall be beaten with
many stripes, and some in comparison with but a few. Luke 12. 48. Now they who
know what it is, for the unjust to be reserved unto the Day of Judgment to be
punished, (2 Pet. 2, 9,) will soon confess it to be a Truth which is asserted
by Boethius, (however an Infidel may be so dull as to believe it a
Contradiction,) Cui sententiae consequens est, ut tum dem^m gravioribus
suppliciis urgeantur, cum impuniti, esse creduntur. Id. ib. p. 153.
That wicked men are Then plagued with the more grievous kinds of punishment,
when they are thought by standers-by to escape unpunished. And clear it is that
That Tradition of the wandering Cartophilus, who had been Ianitor (says Cluver)
to Pontius Pilate, Cluverius in Rudolpho Secundo ad an. 1600. p. 759. 760.
(whether Truth, or Fiction,) does show a good part of Christendom to have been
strongly of this Opinion. For it seems they could not invent a severer
Punishment to the Jew, for his having contumeliously struck our Savior, as he
was going from Pilate's House unto the Place of Execution, than that our
Savior should condemn him to an Immortality upon Earth; to wander up and down
in several parts of this world, beaping up wrath against the day of wrath, and
then only to fall, when all the world must rise again. And if it is so in good
earnest, as it has hitherto been contended, That previous Punishments are
conducing to the Amendment of a Sinner, and conducing in such a measure, that
even Destruction is for his Interest, when past Amendment; sure God will not
withhold it from the unworthiest Subjects of his Dominion, much less from Them
who are the Children of his Household. If Pharaoh the Drudge be once admitted
under his Cure, sure Joseph the Darling shall much more be so. For the first
and chiefest end of our being so judged as to be chasten'd in the world, is
(...), that we may not so be judged as to be damned with the world. 1 Cor. 12.
32. And therefore ye that pretend to be none of their number, who by being
uncorrected are known to be Bastards rather than Sons, (Heb. 12, 8,) Audite Vos
Virgam, Hear Ye the Rod.

. 4. The Second End of Punishment is (...), for the Benefit of such as are
Lookers-on. And it tends to their Benefit in two respects. First by removing an
Example of Sin, which might otherwise make them worse, and next by showing one
of Punishment, which has an Aptitude at least to make them better.

. 5. For the first of these two there is very great Reason. Because your
Exemplary Sinners are such a public sort of Mischiefs, such Epidemical
Diseases, that Seneca looks upon them as on Venomous Beasts, Seneca de Ira,
lib. 2.
and professes he would destroy them with the same temper of mind, wherewith
he would chop off a Vipers Head; lest by permitting them to live, and to fill
the Air with their poison, they should happen to be contagious to all that
neighbor within their stentch. So that Seneca (it seems) was a kind of a
Zelot, though not a Jew; and spoke at the rate at which Phineas acted; who
finding Zimri and Cosbi in their openfac'd Villainy, dispach'd them both in as
great have, as a man would have used to a couple of Serpents. And indeed he had
reason for what he did. For as the rational kind of Viper is more malignant
than any other, so of that sort too the most destructive is the religious;
(such I mean as are reckoned such, by their putting on Godliness for a
Disguise.) There are no such false fires for the leading of Passengers out of
their way, as the reputed People of God when they once turn straglers. For as
their good Conversation is the Decoy of Heaven, and brings in Proselites to
God; so their scandalous example is the Pandar to Hell, and makes Clients for
the Devil. If the People of God refuse the Love of the Truth, 2 These. 2. 10.
how shall the Heathens then embrace it, to whom it is but seldom, if sometimes
offered? If Judah her self become an Harlot, Babylon is confirmed in all her
Whoredoms. And if Israel worship a Calf, how shall Egypt not be Idolatrous?
when there arises a Dispute betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles, (as once
betwixt Elijah, 1 Kings 18. 21. etc.
and the Prophets of Baal,) whose God is the truest, and so the fittest to be
adored; The Jews have need to prove Theirs, as well by the Sanctity of their
Lives, as by the strangeness of their Miracles. Aestimari de^ Cultoribus suis
potest ille qui colitur. Quomodo enim bonus Magister est, cujus tam malos
videmus esse Discipulos? Salvian. de Gubern. Dei. l. 4.
Else the Gentiles will conclude them, not to have the truer Prophets, but the
skilfuller Magicians. And all their signs which are drawn from Heaven, will
pass but for Sorcery fetched up from Hell. David laid so great a stress upon
this one consideration, that when an evil Example was shown in Israel, it was
his first and greatest Care to have the matter kept secret from those without,
2 Samuel 1. 20. knowing well that the Example of a scandalous Israel, would soon
redound to the discredit of Him that had owned them for his People; Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
And that it is the usual Custom of the giddily-unjust and censorious world,
to pass their Judgment upon the Master, by the Behavior of his Servants; to
make an estimate of the Father, by the Breeding of his Children; and so to
measure the God too, by the practice of his Votaries.

. 6. Now since Experience it self, as well as Scripture, does serve to prove it
a disgrace to the Truth of God, for the Professors of the Truth to hold the
Truth in unrighteousness; Can we imagine it to be likely, that God will harden
the Pagans Hearts by the prosperous example of Isreal's Sin? no, he will
mollify them rather by the public Example of their Correction, (which is the
second of those Respects, in which the punishment of Offenders is for the
Benefit of such as are lookers on.) So he once tells them by the Prophet
Ezekiel, (chap. 5. verse. 7. and 8.) That he will punish them in the sight of
all the Nations round about. Nay so he tells them in one Chapter no less than 4
or 5 times, (it is the 39. of the same Ezekiel,) I will not let them pollute my
Name any more, and the Heathen shall know that I am the Lord. (ver. 7, 21, 24,)
And again, (ver. 26, 27, 28,) They shall bear their shame, and be led into
Captivity among the Heathen, that God may be sanctified in them in the sight of
many Nations. And why is all this, but that their Sufferings for sin may be as
Exemplary and public, as their Sins for which they suffer? God will be very
far from giving a just occasion, of his being ill thought of amongst the
Heathen; They shall be far from finding Him to be a Sanctuary for sinners,
remaining such. When Israel will not hear, they shall feel his Rod; and the Rod
shall be so laid on, that even Edom and Philistia shall hear its Voice. And the
Voice of this Rod shall be like that of the Prophet Zachary. Zack. 11. 2.
Howl Firr Tree, for the Cedar is fallen; howl o ye Oaks of Bashan, for the
Forest of Vintage is cut down. The Voice of this Rod shall be heard in Babylon;
and it shall make the same Inference, which St. Peter did when he was there. If
Judgment begin at the House of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17.
what shall their end be who are not obedient unto the Gospel? I will shut up
this point with that of Salvian. Deus partim gladio, partim exemplo corrigit,
ut omnibus simul and coercendo censuram and indulgendo pietatem probaret. God
does partly punish by Stripes, and partly by Example, (that is, partly by the
stroke, and partly by the voice of his Fatherly Rod,) that at once he may
testify to the world, as well his Justice, by the one; as by the other, his
Longanimity. This is said by God in Scripture to be a great end of Punishment,
Deuteronomy. 17. 13.
That all the People may hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. And
therefore Ye that have been hitherto the greatest strangers to Affliction, by
the Injoymen^s of your Peace in a Time of War, and of abundance of Plenty in
Times of want, and now of bodily health in a Time of sickness; who seem to look
as unconcern'dly on the miseries of your Brethren, as if yourselves had an
exemption from all Adversity, and were seated above the level of all God's
Arrows; Audite Vos Virgam, hear YE the Rod.

. 7. The Third End of Punishment is (...), for Revenge; (...). Arist. Rher. l.
1. c. 10.
that is, (as Aristotle interprets it) to repair the honor, and to satisfy
the Justice of that Authority, which the Transgressions of a Sinner appear so
highly to have offended. And in this respect also, as God is just to all in
general, so to his People in particular he is severest. He is very much
offended with the Adulteries of the Harlot, but more with the Whoredoms of an
obliged Spouse. If the Doves which have an house on purpose erected for their
Reception, shall fly away from that House, to be Birds of Prey, they deserve by
so much a greater punishment, than Crows and Harpies, by how much the more
they were cared for, and with a more peculiar Providence. So by the same
proportion of Justice, God will much sooner scourge the Flocks of Joseph for
their wanderings, than the Kine of Bashan, because there is much a richer
feeding in the Plains of Jordan, than on the Mountains of Samaria. Now he whips
them with Babylon, That Isa. 10. 5.
Rod of his Anger. Anon he beats them with Egypt, That Isa. 10. 5.
Staff of his Indignation. And if That will not serve, he hews them down at
last with Rome, which we may call (by good Analoge) the Axe or Hatchet of his
Fury.

. 8. And if now after the Jews, the People of God under the Law, we reflect
upon our selves, who are his People under the Gospel, observing whether we have
been falling, as well as from whence, (from the most Christian, the most
Reformed, and the most Disciplined sort of People, to the most barbarous, the
most profane, and I wish I may not ^ay, the most disordered in all the world,)
we shall find this difference betwixt the Heathens and our selves, That They
indeed are a diseased People, but we commonly a relaps't one. They indeed do
disavow the Lord Jesus in their words, But we deny him in our works. They
indeed do not receive the Love of the Truth, But we refuse it. They indeed are
Erroneous in a very deep measure, but (which is infinitely worse) how many
amongst Us are grown Heretical? In so much that whilst They do only want a
Physician, the generality of us do stand in need of an Executioner. And now, to
compare our selves with some of our Fellow Christians, (those I mean in the
Church of Rome,) whilst their Church is called the Whore of Babylon, do not
they call ours the Whore of Babel, though not with any Truth, yet with some
Plausibility? there being a Babel in our Nation, though not in our Church? and
many parts of this Nation being become so much the fouler, (I will not say for
having been, but) since the time of her being swept, that for one Devil of
Popery She has been dispossessed of, She may be thought (by the Care of Rome)
to have given entrance unto seven. It is therefore (as it proves) our unhappy
Privilege of having once drawn nearer, not only to the Mercy, but to the
Holiness of God, than other Nations, that God is the r^adier now in Justice to
stand the farther off from us. And if by a seasonable Repentance, we do not
recover our first Approaches, 'twill be as tolerable for Rome in the last great
Day, as for Us of this Nation. And so (on a Parallel supposition) it will be
somewhat more tolerable for Jerusalem, than for Rome; for Egypt, than for
Jerusalem; for Babylon; than for Egypt; for S^ythia, than for Babylon; and for
the wild Salvages, than for them all.

. 9. Ye will consent the more readily to what I say, by considering those words
of our blessed Savior, Luke 10. 15. And thou Capernaum which art exalted to
Heaven, shall be thrust down to Hell. Therefore to Hell, because from Heaven.
For the higher any one is, by so much greater must be his Fall. When the Eagle
in the Apologue caught up the Shellfish into the Clouds, it was to break it
the more infallibly by letting it fall upon the Stones. And though indeed the
God of Heaven never takes any into his favor, to the end he may give them the
greater Fall; yet when such will needs fall from their highest Station, they
must needs be the unliklier to rise again. They being so broken by their Fall
from so high a Pitch, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
that hardly any thing can joint them, or make them whole. For, in our
Savior's own phrase, Mat. 21. 44.
They will be grinded to Powder. And it is obvious to infer from those other
words of Christ, Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee, Confer John
5, 14. cum 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21.
(Joh. 5, 14,) That God will punish Malefactors, as well in regard of the
Benefits they have received, as for the Sins they have committed. And therefore
ye that make it your Boast, That ye are Members of a Christian Reformed Church,
Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26.
not the Children of Hagar, which is Mount Sinai, and which gendreth to
Bondage, but of Jerusalem which is above, and therefore Children of the
Promise, whereby ye have the privilege to call him Father, who by Them that
are without, is to be looked upon only as a Creator, and a Judge; And by your
being more obliged than other men, are grown by so much the more accountable;
Audite Vos Virgam, Hear Ye the Rod.

. 10. But (Lord) how many have we known, in these last and worst times, who
(like Hiel the Bethelite in the Building of Jericho) have laid the Foundation
of their Greatness in their Firstborn, 1 King. 16. ult.
and set up its Gates in their younger Children, and yet have been deaf as any
Adders, to the Voice of God's Rod in so clear a Cafe? Unto how many of our new
Builders, who have cemented their Walls with the price of Blood, and have set
their Nest on high, (with a presumption to be delivered from the Power of
Evil,) has the well-instructed Stone cried out of the Wall, and the Beam out
of the Timber made answer to it, who yet have stopped their Eyes and Ears
against the Messages of the Rod that has spoken to them? I hearkened and
heard, (said God heretofore of his People Israel,) but no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying, what have I don? every one turned to his Course, Jer.
8. 6.
as the horse rusheth into the Battle. And we do commonly so resemble that
senseless People, (as to the Callousness of our hearts, and inconsideratness of
mind,) that whenever God dispatches any Ambassador of his Displeasure,
although he speaks so loud, that it is hard not to hear him, yet we commonly
care so little, as that we seldom or never give ear unto him. Or if perhaps we
are attentive to the Voice of Gods Rod, yet we are deaf to the Message on which
it comes. Whereas the Audience and Attention which God requires, is rather
meant of the second, than of the first of these two. We are not to hearken how
it sounds only, but to consider what it says too. Every lash of Gods Rod should
make us reflect upon a sin. And as Joseph's false Brethren, when they were
brought into Distress, did straight reflect on that Distress into which they
had brought their Brother Joseph; Genesis 42. 21.
so if at any time we are groaning under the Miseries of a War, we should
examine how many ways we abused our Peace. If at any time we are brought into
some great Degree of Penury, we should consider if we have not abused our
Plenty. And if at any time (as of late) we fall into Times of general sickness,
we should reflect on those Sins which have been the great Abuses, and so the
Forfeitures of our health. Might I ground a conjecture touching the Message or
the Cause of our present Rod, from the words of three Prophets, 2, 12.
Habakkuk, 3, 1.
Naum, and 24, 9.
Ezekiel, I should be prompted to consider, how many Houses in the late Times
have been built with Blood. And Blood we know has a Voice; yea, and such a
Voice too, as Genesis 4. 10.
cries to Heaven for Revenge. And being the loudest of Cryers, it is soonest
heard. But yet the lover of Souls, who is a God ready to Pardon, in the midst
of his Judgments remembers Mercy. From whence it is, the Lords Voice does cry
aloud unto the City, that the Voice of the City may cry as loud unto the Lord;
and that the Voice of men's Tears may even drown that of Blood, as the louder
Stentor. Certainly nothing but Repentance will be able to cry up those hovering
Judgments, which our National Sins have been calling down. Nor can any other
Repentance cry louder unto God than our Sins have don, but that which brings
forth Amendment, and change of life. And this does lead me to the Audience
which God would have given to his Ambassador, the third particular in the
Division, and next in order to be considered.

Audite Virgam, HEAR ye the Rod.. 1. Hear the sound of God's Rod, and hear the
sense, or signification. For as the Voice of his Rod is double, to wit the
lashing of the Air, and the beating upon our shoulders; the former, when he
threatens, and only threatens to inflict it, the later, when he proceeds to put
his Threats into Execution; so the Message which it brings us is double too;
for it is expostulatory in part, as when it chides us for our Sins; and in part
it is exhortatory, as when it presses us to Repentance. Such is the admirable
contrivance and disposition of Gods Inflictions, that they commonly speak his
Mercy at the same instant with his Justice. As if it were not sufficient that
his Balance is equal, and that he puts Punishment into one Scale, as we
Offenses into the other; He makes the Punishment many times to have such a
similitude with the Sin, as that the Patient may see his Malady in the Nature
of the Means which are meant for Cure. (...).
Thus in that famous Controversy 'twixt God and Sodom, we may observe an
Analoge as well of Likeness, as of Proportion; for besides that his Judgment
was just as general as their Sin, and only a Lot exempted from the one, who
only was guiltless of the other; they were appositely burnt with Fire of
Brimstone, as before they had been with the Fire of Lust. And as their Lust was
contrenatural, although from Hell; so likewise was their Fire, because from
Heaven. Thus when Corah and his Confederates (the very first Levellers we ever
read of) had widely opened Their Mouths against Moses and Aaron, straight the
Earth, by way of Talio, opened hers against Them. No sooner were their Throats
become open Sepulchers for the Burying of their King and their Priest alive,
but straight it follows in the Text, that they were swallowed up quick. And
thus as Joseph's cruel Brethren would not hearken to His Request, when he
besought them in the anguish and in the bitterness of his Soul; Genesis 42. 21.
verse. 17.
so for three days together He would not hearken unto Theirs, when in the
bitterness of their Souls they had sought it of him. And so, as Dives denied
Lazarus a Crum of bread to stay his hunger, he was denied by the same Lazarus a
drop of water to cool his Tongue. But we need not go further to find out
Instances of the Harmony, betwixt the Punishment of Sin, and the Sin it self,
than to the words of the Commission with which the Rod was here sent to the men
of Israel. The Lords voice cries unto the City. And first it cries for
Attention, hear Ye the Rod. Next it cries as an Herald, that is, it Proclaims
the Sin and Punishment of the People. Are there yet the Treasures of
wickedness, and the scant measure that is abominable? There Is their Sin. Then
follows the Punishment, (verse. 14.) Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied. Again
the Rod of God says, (verse. 12.) The rich men thereof are full of Violence.
Whereupon it denounces, (verse. 15.) Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap;
thou shall tread the Olives, but not anoint thy self with Oil. Nor is there
any thing more equal, than that wicked men should suffer the heinous things
that they have don; that the covetous Oppressor should be Plagued with Penurte;
and that They who have grinded the very faces of the poor, should finally be
famish't for want of Bread.

. 2. But let us divert our thoughts a while, from the Times of the Text to
these we live in. For God has sent such an Ambassador unto Us of this Nation,
as heretofore to the People Israel. And it is now a great while, since our
Guilts have risen up into a Rod of wickedness. Ezeck. 7. 11.
I mean the Rod of Gods Anger, by which our wickedness is corrected. It being
more than twenty years, (and with but little Respiration) since his Rod has
been speaking to us in several Dialects of severity. First of all it spoke to
us by Drums, and Trumpets, and by as many wide Mouths, as the Sword had made
wounds in our English Nation; by lying Prophets in the Church, by prosperous
Rebels in the State, by loss of honor, and of Religion, by Sacrilege, and
Regicide, and other execrable effects of a Civil War. From which we have not
yet enjoyed more than a five years Respiration, when our Unthankfulness for
That has betrayed us to a greater and sadder Judgment. For so notable is the
difference betwixt our War heretofore, and our Pestilence of late, That the
former might be called a Rod of Chastisement, whereas the later began to look
like a Beesom of Destruction. That Corrected our Nation, but this did threaten
to sweep it away. In a very long War there may be very few Battles; But the
Pestilence is an Enemy so very skilful to destroy, as that it makes both a
nightly and daily Slaughter. It has slain many more Thousands within the
compass of a few months, than our War was found to do in as many years. Just so
it was with the famous Pestilence in Thucydides. Thucyd. l. 2. p. 129. ad p.
134.
More Athenians were taken off by that invisible Arrow in a few days, than by
all the great Armies of the Peloponnesians in diverse years. (...), etc. Ib. p.
129.
Invisible I call it, because it walks in Darkness, and even at that very
time when it destroys at noon Day. (Psalm. 91, 6.) And it is fitly called an
Psalm. 91. 5.
Arrow, as well for the swiftness, as sharpness of it. For how swiftly did it
fly (in Thucydides his Time) from Ethiopia into Egypt, from thence to Libya,
from thence to Persia, from thence to Athens? And how like an Arrow did it fly,
(...). ib. p. 129.
(to give an Instance in our own,) as from Amsterdam to London, so presently
from thence into diverse Countries? Nor did the swiftness of this Arrow exceed
the sharpness of it at Athens. Where having killed up the Physicians, it bred a
general neglect of all Endeavors of Recovery. It made them weary of their
Devotions, which at first they had employed as the means of Cure. And, pushed
on by their Impatience, to a (...). Ib. p. 132, 133.
contempt of things Sacred, as well as secular, they grew elaborately
Voluptuous in the enjoying the goods they had, because they knew not how soon
they might loose or leave them. None would enter on any work, (...). Ib. p. 133.
as looking to dye ere they could end it. Nor did they fear any Breach of Law,
as not believing they could live to be punished for it. Again this Arrow is so
noisome, as well as sharp, (and therefore fitly called by David the noisome
Pestilence, Psalm. 91, 3,) that it does many times kill with the Breath of life.
Nay (which is much worse than killing,) it makes a man to be forsaken by the
Wife of his Bosom, and even abhorred by his inward friends; Job 19. 17, 19.
as Job acquaints us with the Acme of all his sufferings. Zosimus tells us of a
Pest in the Time of the Emperor (...). Zosim. Hist. l. 1. p. 21.
Gallienus, which was so very much more fierce than the fiercest War, that all
they suffered from their Enemies was light and moderate in comparison. Nay he
tells us of a Pest in the Time of Gallus, (and in the Northern parts of the
Roman Empire,) which coming presently after a War, (...), destroyed the whole
of Mankind which the War had left. (...). Zosim. Ib. page 14.
There the Rod of God's Anger was improved into the Beesom I lately spoke of.
It was not only a pungent, but sweeping Rod. And truly such as it was there, it
will be here when God pleases. For our greater means of Grace, and more
abundant measure of knowledge, are apt to aggravate our Judgments, because our
Sins. And if our Punishment is less, when our Sins are much greater than other
men's, it is a just ground of fear, that we are not wholly pardoned, but only
temporally reprieved, not acquitted from the present, but rather reserved for a
future, and greater Judgment.

. 3. Yet so little is this considered, and laid to heart in our English Nation,
that our general unconcernedness in the miseries of others, and our apparent
Inadvertency how much our own may be greater by seeming less, does pass with
some for the greatest of all our miseries. For though the Rod of Gods Anger,
has been thus far the Rod of his tender Love too, that it has sought to gain
from us a Day of Hearing, first by its brushing in the Air, and then by its
beating upon our shoulders; yet so barbarous have we been in our Reception of
God's Ambassador, that we have hardly yet allowed it a patient Audience. We
have not hearkn'd to the Rod, nor to him who has appointed it. Nay so much are
many of us become the worse for those Messages, which God had purposely
designed to make us better, that we may seem to have abused his special Grace
into an Instrument of becoming the more ungracious; And by a necessary
consequence, to have so much of God's Mercy as to be damned by. For should a
Porphiry or a Julian revive amongst us, and together with the profession
compare the practice of many Christians, they would have reason to admire, why
a great part of Christendom should be rather called Christians, than by any
other Name; why rather Christians, than Antichristians, considering how they
live in a direct contrariety, at once to the Doctrine and Life of Christ, What
have such men to do to take his Name within their mouths, whilst they hate to
be reformed, and cast his words behind their backs? Psalm. ^0. 16, 17.) Do they
not call Christ their King by the same kind of Ironie by which the Jews called
him Theirs, when platting a Crown upon his Head, and putting upon him a Purple
Robe, they said in the bitterness of their Spirits, Hail King of the Jews?
Joh. 19. 2. 3.
And just as the Gnostics heretofore, by owning Christ for their Masters
whilst they were servants to the Devil, brought the Christian Religion into
such ha^r^d among the Gentiles, that they esteemed it a mere Device to
legitimate Parricide, and Incest, and some such other enormous Villainies, as
were not so much as to be named, much less committed among the Heathens; so
it is worthily to be feared, that when a sort of Professors amongst our selves,
who call themselves Christians, and Christians of the Reformation, shall be
spoken of in Gath, (...). Clement R^m. in Epist. ad Cor. p. 62.
and published abroad in the streets of Askelon, the Daughters of the
Philistines will too much rejoice, the uncircumcised will greatly triumph. I say
it is too much to be feared, (and cannot be too much considered, unless too late
to be prevented,) least that Christ a second time should become through our
means, To the Jews a stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. The
greatest comfort of hope we have left is This, That as the scandalous
Aspersions which first were cast on Christianity were washed away by the Blood
of the ancient Martyrs, and blotted out by the Ink of the learned Fathers of
the Church; so our Protestant Religion may yet be vindicated and rescued from
those Aspersions and Brands of Schism and Atheism, wherewith some of our
Enemies already have, and others are likely to stigmatize us, by the great
Piety of some, who do express it in their Practice; by the learning of others,
who do assert it with their Pens; and by the Martyrdom of a third sort, who
have readily sealed it with their lives.

. 4. But be our Fame what it will, unless our Nation shall so repent upon the
Preaching of the Rod which God is now holding over us, as once the Ninevites
did at Ionah's; or unless it shall be spared for the few Righteous that are
within it, (as Jerusalem for the righteousness of James the Brother of Christ,
who was the first Bishop there;) God will probably say to us, by the Rod of his
Anger, as heretofore to the Assyrians, by his Prophet Isaiah. I will rise up
against them, and cut off from England the Name, and Remnant, Isa. 14. 22, 23.
and Son, and Nephew. I will also make it a Possession for the Bittern, and
Pools of Water* and I will sweep it with the Beesom of Destruction, says the
Lord of Hosts. Such is the Voice of God's Red, whereby it would fright us out
of our sins; which is the Negative part of a true Repentance. It has another
sort of Voice whereby by it would Woe us to satisfaction, and Reformation of
life; which is the Positive part of a true Repentance. And so it is easy to
hear it speaking, as 'twere in genere demonstrativo, in that persuasive way of
Rhetoric, wherein another holy Prophet did once bespeak another People in
God's behalf. Cast away from you all your Transgressions, Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit. For
why will ye dye o house of Israel? For^ I have no delight in the Death of Him
that dies, says the Lord God. Wherefore turn your selves and live.

. 5. But these are no more than the general Lessons of the Rod. The Lessons it
teaches us in particular are more especially these Three* First it teaches us
to reflect on those particular crying Sins which have probably been the Cause
of our present Judgment. Such as are Sacrilege, and Simonie, Perjury, and
Profaneness, and Impatience of the Cross, Schism, and Faction, and an Itch
after Changes, and that as well in the Civil, as Ecclesiastical Estate. Next it
teaches us the Necessity of casting out the Accursed Thing, however seemingly
as gainful as Achan's wedge; Not an Agag, not an Ox, not the bleating of a
Sheep is to be left in God's Ears, when His command is gone forth for the utter
Destruction of an Amaleck. 1 Samuel 15. 3, 14, 20.
The choicest spoils must not be saved, though it be for Sacrifice, when it
stands in competition with our obedience. Verse. 22.
Lastly the Rod which at the present is threatening every one of Us, by whipping
others into their Graves who are round about us, does teach humility and
dejection to such as pr^de it in their persons, whether for the strength or the
Bewty of them. It seeks to pull down their vain and exalted thoughts of
Themselves, as well as to abate their contempt of Others, by making them to
know whereof they are made, and by compelling them to consider of what
materials they do consist. For if it is true, what is said by the Philosopher,
(...), That natural Bodies are resolved into the very same Ingredients of which
at first they were composed, And so that nothing is dissolvable into any other
Principles, than those of which it does consist, and which it potentially
conteins; It cannot b^t follow that the Pestilence is the best Orator in the
world, to speak the Frailty and the Filthiness of humane Nature; because it
teaches us into what loathsome and detestable matter, the fairest Complexions
may be resolved, and that by a mouthful of filthy Air too.

. 6. If we shall therefore now consent, that God's Rod, as well as his Prophet,
his Deluge, as well as his Noah, is still a Preacher of Repentance, let us
impartially consider, whether the sorrow and Anxiety which the Calamity of the
Time may have wrought within us, does proceed from a Resentment of Sins, or
Sufferings. Whether it be a Contrition, or an Attrition only. Whether a sorrow
that is worldly, and works Death, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11.
and by consequence is to be sorrowed for, or a sorrow according to God, (...)
^hilo I^d. (...). etc. page 141.
which works Repentance to Salvation, and therefore is never to be Repented.
If the first of these two, we ought to beg of God Almighty, that he will add
to our Patience, rather than take from our Punishment; that he will strengthen
our shoulders, rather than lessen our Burden; And much rather sanctify, than
recall his Rod. But if we find it to be the second, we must not pray for a
Remedy, but rather for a Paroxysm of our Disease; and rather exasperate our
pain, than too soon assuage it. We ought to be sadded for nothing more, than
that we cannot be sad enough; and only glad, that we cannot be so. For let the
man of this world but imagine himself upon his Deathbed, And what then would he
not give for the completing of that Anxiety, whereof he is now so over apt even
to conjure for an Abatement? Afflictions help to make us happy even in this
present world, if we have but the Grace to use them rightly; else they will
make us the unhappier in that world which is to come. For without the right
use, even the Grace of God it self does accidentally highten our Condemnation.
And though I never had yet such a Roman Faith, as to believe that there IS such
a thing as Purgatory; yet, with submission to God's Economy, I think the most
of mankind might be glad there were. Because it seems a very easy Composition
with his Justice, to suffer Hell for a time, in order to happiness for
Eternity. It concerns us therefore to pray, in this conjuncture of our affairs,
that God will give us to drink of his bitter Cup, not as our Appetites shall
crave, but as He in his wisdom shall judge expedient. Let him enable us to
choose but this one Requisite for our selves, even His sanctifying Grace; And
then in company with That, let him allot us what he pleases. Be it War,
Pestilence, or Famine; be it Ignomy, Overthrow, or sudden Death. For as by
looking upon our Sins, we cannot but see matter of Terror, whereby to hold us
in constant fear; so by reflecting upon our sufferings, we may discern matter
of Comfort, whereby to couple our Fear with Hope. I say it is matter of some
Comfort, that God does seem by his Correction to own us still for his People;
that he does not severely suffer us to be over prosperous in our impieties;
that he has not so wholly left us, as not to visit us with his Rod; but that at
least he does vouchsafe us the Mercy of his Judgments to work upon us. And
though he threatens to give us up to some of the cruelest of our Enemies, (such
as are the two plagues of perfect beggary, and the Pestilence,) it is that he
may not give us up unto our more cruel selves; that we may never endure the
Tyranny of our own hearts lust, or live under the Yoke of our vile Affections.
And therefore to the end we may rather kiss, than undutifully repine at his
gracious Rod, which does so charitably smite, and would fain wound us into a
Cure; let us continue to fix our eyes, as on the Errand on which it comes, so
withal on the Author from whom it is sent. Which leads me to the Potentate by
whom the Ambassador is dispatched, The last particular in the Division.

Hear ye the Rod, and who has Appointed it.

. 1. That the same Dispensation of the Cup of Trembling and Astonishment should
not only have such diverse, but such contrary effects, upon the several
Complexions it meets withal, as to be one man's Restaurative, and another
Poison, softning one into Repentance, and hardening another into Despair; might
seem a difficult kind of Riddle at the very first hearing, were it not that
this Account may be given of it, That the one looks only downwards, and views
the Rod of his Afflictions as merely springing out of the Dust; whereas the
other looks upwards, and acknowledges the Finger of Him that sent it. They
whose Spirits and Contemplations are ever grovelling on the earth, and look no
higher than second Causes, are commonly sorry in their Distresses as men
without Hope; whereas the men whose Affections are set on things that are
Above, and with the Lyncean Eye of Faith can look on the other side the Veil,
do so submit to, and comply with the will of God in their afflictions, as to
desire it may be don, as well on Earth as it is in Heaven.

I know not whether it is more to be feared, or hoped, that God will never
withdraw his Rod which lies so heavy upon our shoulders, until he has first of
all whipped us into the wisdom to discern, and into so much Humility as to
acknowledge, That the Original, and Increase, and present Continuance of our
Plague, has not only arisen to us out of natural Causes, (much less out of
fortuitous,) to wit from Atoms, or Insects, or from I know not what malignant
and secret qualities in the Air; but from the wrath of a provoked and jealous
God, for the most brutish unconcerdness and Impenitences of Men. The Plague of
Pestilence being a Rod of so astonishing a Nature, that though the Heathens
looked upon it as a thing rooted in the Earth, yet they thought it laid on by
an hand from Heaven. The Diodor. Sic. lib. 14. p. 291.
Carthaginians at Syracuse, and the People of Tolouse in the time Justin. l.
32. p. 271.
of Brennus, ascribed the Cause of their several Pests unto the Anger of their
Gods for the Sin of Sacrilege, and fled for Refuge to Restitution, as the
great means of their Recovery. And however Diodorus did take upon him to assign
the (...). Diodor. Sic. l. 12. p. 100.
natural Causes of the Pestilence that reigned at Athens, yet he assures us
that the (...). Id ib. p. III.
Athenians did look upon it as a Rod of supernatural contrivance. Much more
should we Christians impute the Cause of our Plague unto God's Displeasure; as
being that that serves to humble, and raise us up too. For as it is matter to us
of Terror, to fall into the hands of the living God, (Heb. 10. 31.) so it is
matter also of Comfort, that we do not fall out of the hands of God; no nor yet
into the hands of relentless men. For with God there is Mercy, and that in the
midst of his Judgments too; whereas the very tender mercies of men are cruel,
(Prove. 12, 10.) God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men;
and when at last he is fain to wound, it is to the end that he may heal us. But
men to men are so inhuman, that they will commonly break our heads with their
precious Balmes too. And therefore David having his Option betwixt the Sword of
the Lord (for so the Pestilence was called) and the Sword of man, did soon
determine to choose the former. Let me fall now (says he) into the hand of the
Lord, (for very great are his Mercies,) but let me not fall into the hand of
men. 1 Chronicles. 21. 13.

. 2. If we look back upon the Church whilst she was yet but in her Childhood,
and consider her Tribulations as far as from Nero to Dioclesian, we may observe
how men's reflections upon the Wisdom and Goodness of God's Oeconomies, did
smooth the face of Death it self, as 'twas inflicted by the Rod of Divine
Appointment; and made her Children even to Court it, how grim soever it became
by its greatest Torments. Amongst a thousand Examples which might be given of
this Truth, I shall not trouble or detein you with more than one. In that
dreadful and most bloody Sedition at Alexandria (just as if Cadmus had sowed
his Teeth in that fruitful Soil,) Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 17.
when the Gulf of Arabia became a red Sea indeed, which before was only called
so by either a Diod. Sic.
figure or a mistake; when that Sea was so polluted with Blood and Stentch,
that had its water been to be washed, all the Ocean (says Dionysius) had been
too little to wash it clean; and when, in consequence of This, there was a
Pestilence so extreme, (...).
as that there was not one House wherein there was not one Carcass; They that
were Gentiles in the City were every whit as much terrified, as if Moses once
more had turned their waters into Blood, and had afflicted that Place with the
sad repetition of all his Judgments. Whereas the Christians on the contrary,
who to their War and their Pestilence, had a third Plague added, (That, I mean,
of Persecution,) were so far from sincking under, that rather of the two they
enjoyed their sufferings. Whereof the reason in Eusebius is only this, that
they heard not the Rod only, but had regard unto Him who had laid it on. And so
they looked upon their Judgment, (...), as the Test or Touchstone of God
Almighty, for either the Trial of their Patience, or for the Exercise of their
Faith, or for the Proof of their Fidelity. So extremely much it is for any man's
Interest, and Ease, when the Rod of God is sent in a Message to him, that he
consider why it comes, and by whose Appointment.

. 3. And indeed to speak Truth, whosoever like the Heliotrope that is still
intent upon the Sun, or like the Pilot in a Ship, who, though the waves and the
wind do both conspire his Disturbance, does keep his eye the more carefully on
his Compass and his Star; I say whoever is this steady, well biased Christian,
that is not afraid for any evil Tidings, and though his heels are tripp'd up,
Psalm. 112. 7.
yet his Heart stands fast, and believes in the Lord; He is the Person of
the world, that leads the world into Captivity. And is not only placed above
the level of Fortune, but (as slippery as she is,) seems to have caught her
within his Net. He seems to have gotten the Gladius Delphicus, that Catholical
kind of Sword, by which he easily cuts asunder all the Difficulties of Life.
For if he dwell amongst those that are Enemies unto Peace, who, when he speaks
to them thereof, make them ready to Battle; behold his Remedy is at hand,
whilst he can say with King David, Psalm. 121. 1.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help. Nay if his
Troubles are yet enlarged, so as they that destroy him guiltless are mighty,
and do not come into Misfortunes like other men; yet his Remedy is at hand
still, whilst he can say with David too, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth. Nay if a Messenger
come and tell him (as heretofore 'twas told David) that he who came out of his
Bowels does seek his Kingdom and his life; still his Remedy lies in this, that
he can say with David still, Behold here I am; if the Lord say, I have no
delight in thee, 2 Samuel 15. 26.
let him do with me as it seems good to him. Nay if Isaiah bring him a
Message, that all the Possessions of his house shall be led captive into
Babylon, and that the Sons which Issue from him shall be taken away by force,
to serve as Eunuchs amongst the Heathen; yet still his Remedy is at hand,
whilst he can answer with Hezekiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou
have spoken. 2 Kin. 20. 19.
Nay if the Devil besiege his Patience with all the wittiest of his Engines,
and reduce him from his great Affluence, unto his Potsherd, and his Byles; yet
even then he has his Remedy, whilst he can ask with holy Job, Job.
shall I receive good things at the hand of God, and shall I not receive evil
also? The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. Nay if a Samuel bring him Tidings, not of a private Judgment only, [that
the Iniquity of his house shall not be purged with Sacrifice,] but of a public
Judgment also, (which whosoever shall but hear shall find that both his ears
shall tingle,) to wit, That even the Ark of the Lord is taken, and that the
glory is departed from Israel; yet even then he has his Remedy, whilst he can
say with good old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 11, 18, etc.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. To conclude with an Instance
much nearer Home; Admit the Dutch and French Armies should come upon us whilst
we are sick, Genesis 34, 25.
as Simeon and Levi fell on the Shechemites when they were sore; And so should
be the same to us, which both Egypt and Assyria were once to Israel, to wit the
Rod of God's Anger, and the Staff of his Indignation; yet if We are his
Children, and They his Rod, let us but strive as little children to be the
better for our Correction, and 'twill be natural for the Father to cast his Rod
into the Fire.

. 4. Which being seasonably premised, we are no otherwise to bewail the Rod of
God upon our Country, then as we have either by our Sins helped to betray her to
its Infliction, or have not been helping by our Prayers to ease her of it. Let
us repent us of the first, and betake our selves unto the second, and then
submit the event of All, to his Disposal who has appointed it.

To him therefore who is able to keep us from falling, and to raise us when we
are down, and to present us being risen, before the Presence of his Glory with
exceeding Joy, To the only wise God our Savior, be ascribed by Us and by all
the World, Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and
Thanksgiving, from this time forwards for evermore.

FINIS.
Concio Synodica DE POTESTATE ECCLESIASTICA, AD CLERUM ANGLICANUM, EX Provincia
praesertim Cantuariensi, in Aede Paulina Londinensi habita VIII. Idus Maias,
MDCLXI.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMINO, Do. GUILIELMO, Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi; Totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano; REVERENDIS DOMINIS
EPISCOPIS; Totique Clero Anglicano, Decanis, Archidiaconis, aliisque
Compresbyteris, ex singulis Dioecesibus, and Cathedralibus Ecclesiis,
Provinciae praesertim Cantuariensis, in Synodo Londinensi, Auctoritate Regia
Congregatis,

T. P. (...), Hoc (...) Qualecunque Dicat Dedicatque.

Actorum Capite quindecimo, versu 28. a sancta Synodo Apostolica sic scriptum
legimus;
Visum est enim Spiritui Sancto and nobis, nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris,
quam haec Necessaria.
. 1. QUemadmodum olim apud veteres mos hujusmodi inolevit, ut opus aliquod sive
arduum, sive augustum aggressuri, in ipso operis quasi vestibulo a summo Numine
auspicarentur; pari modo, (quod been vertat,) opus arduum Augustumque (si quod
aliud) aggressuro, (Reverendissimi admodum in Christo Patres, vosque quotquot
adestis, viri and Fratres dilectissimi,) liceat mihi vobis omnibus (si cum
Sancto Psalmista loqui deceat,) ex Psalm. 116. 13. Illud Poculum Salutis
dicitur, quod est revera (...), seu gratiarum actioni^ de omni salute quam Deus
in me contulit. Vide Jun. and Tremell. in Locum. Quem etiam confer cum poculo
(...) sive benedictionis. 1 Cor. 10, 16.
(...) poculo propinare.

. 2. Quid enim homini Christiano, aut prius aut antiquius haberi debet, (aut
nunc praesertim opportunius,) quam ut a laudibus and Elogiis Patri Luminum
buccinandis, verba public facturus exordium sumat? and post naufragium litato
factum, votivam Tabulam suspendat?

. 3. Deo scilicet providente, Deploratissima scelerum mancipia, quorum audacia
ante Decennium Domi fortisque exulabamus, ipsa tandem dispersa vicissim
exulant; nec jam amplius assidentes Cernimus immunes aliena ad pabula fucos.
Deo brachium exerente, Phaethontes isti praecoeiores, qui annos proxime elapsos
alienis curribus insedissent, ceu Brontia quadam perculsi, praecipites ruunt
prout aguntur. Nec aliud illis jam superest protervitatis suae solatium, quam
magnis ausis excidisse, and (quod habemus apud Longinum) (...) illud (...)
documentumque reliquisse, Posteris suis salutiferum, (...), nec ulla mancipiis
Saturnalia in omne aevum duratura. Deo denique curante, and mirum in modum
procurante, ex quam procul dissitis Britanniae partibus, post duodecennem
(...), unius corporis (...) in unum denuo coalescimus? nec jam amplius
periculosa, sed utili fruimur Innocentia?

. 4. O quam gratulor vobis vestrum ad vos Receptum exoptatissimum! quodque non
amplius in Britannia ipsa Britannia sit requirenda! Quin and solennia Gratiarum
vota sunt Hostibus vestris nuncupanda; qui rabie sua effecerunt, ut (...)
accenseamini; deturque vobis conspectiorem de Fortuna ferociente Triumphum
agere. Operae pretium prope erat in tot discrimina incidisse, ut de Divino in
vos favore vel sic constaret; -- -- Aliquisque malis fuit usus in illis.

. 5. Nam si Gregorius Adami Culpam recte dixerit felicem, quippe quae talem
Redemptorem habere meruit: Quidni etiam vobis gratuler Ruinae nuperae
Beneficium, quibus Talem, Tantumque (qualis est Caesar noster Britannicus)
indulsit Deus Instauratorem?

. 6. Illi ergo bonorum omnium Fonti simul and Largitori, qui quantumlibet
immerentibus haec otia fecit, luctumque nostrum tam diutinum in Citharam vertit
sempiternam, utpote nobis in quantum Subditis, Imperii Principem Augustissimum;
(fugientium Charitum cum Camaenis Deo proximum Statorem:) nobis in quantum
Christianis, Ecclesiae Proceres cordatissimos; nobis in quantum Reformatis,
hodiernam Synodum Consultissimam; nec nostra solum, sed nosmetipsos
nobismetipsis etiam restituit; soli (inquam) Thaumaturgo, Triuni Deo,
Sospitatori nostro sapientissimo, sit Honos and Gloria in omnem deinceps
Aeternitatem.

. 7. Nec tantum Deo Heb. 11. 6.
(...) Gratiarum Actiones habendae sunt de tot tantisque beneficiis in nos
collatis; sed insuper nobis orandum est pro Catholica Christi Ecclesia, per
varia Regna Resque publicas quaquaversum disseminata. Nominatim vero, pro
Anglicana hac nostra; Atque inibi ante alios, ejusdem Ecclesiae Nutricio
Carolo, peculiari Dei gratia, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rege,
Fidei Defensore, in omnibus Causis, omniumque Personarum, sive sacrarum, sive
civilium, immediate secundum Deum Supremo in Terris Moderatore. Pro Regina
Matre Henrietta Maria; pro Illustrissimo Principe, Jacobo Duce Eboracensi;
aliisque quibuscunque e Regio stemmate oriundis.

Pro utraque Domo Parliamenti; pro Regni Proceribus Nobilissimis; praesertim
iis qui Regi adsunt a secretioribus consiliis. Speciatim vero Preces apud
Patrem Coelestem sunt effundendae, pro universo Clero Anglicano, in utramque
Domum Convocationis mox deinde coituro; pro Reverendissimis Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis etiam Reverendis; aliisque quibuscunque inferioris subsellii
Clericis, quibus-quibus sive muneribus sive nominibus insigniantur; ut Pater
Luminum benignissimus, cujus verbum est ipsa veritas, and via ad vitam
exploratissima, pro bonitate sua dignetur Hodiernis Caetibus Interesse; Quo
quaecunque demum consilia ab iis erunt ineunda, in publicam cedant utilitatem,
inque Dei nostri Gloriam usque and usque efferendam, per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum: cujus meritis innixi, ejusque adjuti oratione, (brevissima quidem
illa, sed omnibus numeris absoluta,) haec and caetera qualiacunque quae nobis
ex usu futura sunt, a Deo optimo Maximo iisdem verbis exoremus, quibus Ipse
Incarnatus orandum statuit.

Pater Noster qui es in Coelis, sanctificetur nomen tuum. Adveniat Regnum tuum.
Fiat voluntas tua sicut in Coelo, sic and in Terra. Panem nostrum quotidianum
da nobis hodie: and dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimu^
Debitoribus nostris. Et ne nos inducas in Tentationem, sed libera nos a Malo.
Nam tuum est Regnum, Potentia, and Gloria, in Secula Seculorum.

AMEN.
Visum est enim Spiritui Sancto and nobis nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris,
quam haec Necessaria.
INeunti mihi rationem de suscepto munere obeundo, (Reverendissimi admodum in
Christo Patres, Fratres in Domino Dilectissimi,) in mentem illico immissum est,
((...), an secus, aliorum per me licet judicium esto,) quemadmodum Synodi and
Synedria in id praecipue indicuntur, ut hominum animos componant, and paci
publicae velificentur; Ita duo esse potissimum humani generis Propudia,
Loiolitas nimirum and Erastianos, qui (instar Davi illius Terentiani) certatim
omnia interturbant; ac utramque (...), civilem pariter and Ecclesiasticam, (nec
enim illa minus, quam haec, videtur coelitus oriunda,) qua public, qua
privatim, non modo vellicant and delibant, sed pro virili sua part convulsum
eunt. Quicquid est juris Ecclesiastici, aut ad sacram (...) quoquo modo
pertineat, Illi solis Ecclesiasticis (Papae scilicet cum Praelatis) in totum
asserunt; Civilium interim Magistratuum nulla habita ratione. Isti vero e
regione ad stuporem usque abrepti (...), (ut Sancti Basilii verbis utar,)
insuper habitis Ecclesiasticis, ad solos homines seculares Rem totam deferunt.

. 2. Haec sunt Monstra illa Dogmatum, de quibus Primaeva Dei Ecclesia nunquam
vel fando inaudivit; sed quae ab aevis sequioribus ex nescio quo Tartaro
erumpentia, and in Britannias has nostras malis avibus advecta, credentium
animos mentesque ad subjectionem debitam emicantes, ceu pestilenti quodam
sydere eum in modum afflaverunt, uti corrupta Christiani Obsequii Regula
steterit diu, and obmutuerit. Hinc enim odia saepe progerminant plusquam
Vatiniana; ex odiis Schismata, Factiones, Secessiones in parts, and quod
malorum fere omnium extrema linea habenda est, Ne velle quidem sibi ut ab
altera part benefiat. Hinc Templa Templis adversantur, Conciliabula ex
diametro Conciliabulis opponuntur, atque Altar contra Altar ubique loci fere
erigitur. Nec in Schismate (Proh dolor!) sibi terminum figit malorum seges; sed
(gliscentibus indies Animorum Paroxysmis, and (...),) Res subinde repetuntur;
and facta clarigatione, fecialis hasta continuo mittitur; Bellum public
indicitur; adversis concurritur aciebus; and (nisi Divinitus sit provisum) ad
ipsam internecionem jugi tractu dimicatur.

. 3. Neque tamen hic obtinet, quod (...) forte objiciant;

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum; Quod enim Dominus salvator de se
edixit, Nolite arbitrari quod Pacem venerim immissurus in Terram; Non enim
Pacem, Mat. 10. 34.
sed Gladium; non ad Finem adventus Christi, sed tantummodo ad Eventum referri
debet, prae hominum vitiis oriturum. Non est (...), sed (...) tantum (...),
quod ibi loci intelligitur: praedixit Ille quid certo futurum esset, non quid
fieri decrevisset, aut faciendum esse existimaret. Non se causam fore dissidii,
sed puram putam occasionem. Ipse enim qui and Auctor and Princeps Pacis, tanti
Pacem aestimavit, ut etiam sudore suo and sanguine facile duxerit redimendam,
suisque Disciplulis valedicturus Pacem habuit Joh. 13. 27.
commendatissimam, nihil unquam sollicitius in votis habuit (immo vero nec in
Praeceptis) quam ut Pacem Amoebaeam in cunctis hominum commerciis vigere
faceret. Et nequid nobis videretur intentatum reliquisse (quantum humanae
voluntatis ingenium fert,) quo quod maxim cupiebat effectum daret; promisit
suis, abiturus, se missurum Spiritum Sanctum, cujus aura non secus ac Pacis
vinculo, omnes obicem non ponentes in unum corpus coagmentaret. (...).
Chrysostom. Hom. 61. in Mat. 18. p. 659.
Promisit Episcopis vel duobus in nomine suo congregatis (sicut Chrysostomus
and Euthymius Textum illum interpretantur,) se, per spiritus sui virtutem, in
eorum medio affuturum. (Mat. 18. 19, 20.) and si numerus tam exiguus spiritu
sancto non destituitur, (ut recte arguit Coelestinus in iis quos scripsit
codicillis ad Synodum illam Ephesinam,) Quomodo (inquit) non credemus in medio
vestrum futurum esse, ubi in unum simul convenient tanta sanctorum multitudo?
ut quod Apostolus dixit de Juramento, [(...) esse exhibitum, quo
succrescentibus controversiis in Finem esset, ad Heb. 6. 16.] non dubitaverim
etiam de Synodis optimo jure asseverare. Convenit enim inter omnes, (exceptis
solis Socinianis, and si qui sint ejusdem furfuris,) penes Synodum Oecumenicam,
omnis dissidii Ecclesiastici jus supremum decisivum censendum esse; in quantum
nullum sit Tribunal (nec ullum sane vel fingi potest) ad quod a Synodo
Oecumenica ulla competat Appellatio. Quantum autem Oecumenica quaquaversus per
orbem Terrarum valet, Tantundem fere Nationalis, (praesertim in regno pleni
juris, quale Britannicum, Siculumque, quae vere audiunt (...), atque (...),)
intra suarum ditionum Pomaeria obtinet.

. 4. Ne vero long abeatur, dispiciamus jam de Synodo, quam habemus prae
manibus expendendam: Prima scilicet and celeberrima; and ad quam, tanquam ad
normam, Reliquoe omnes sunt exigendae. Nam quemadmodum olim inter Iudaeos, si
quaestio aliqua orta esset quam Schismatis suspicio sequeretur, Synedrium
illico consulebant, prout illis ex Lege Deuteronomy. 17.
praeceptum erat; Pari modo and Christiani, exorta gravi Controversia de Lege
Ceremoniali per Moysen lata, and gliscentibus inter illos de die in diem
simultatibus, evestigio ac sine mora Concilium vere Apostolicum consultum eunt,
(versibus 2, 4, 5.) Apostoli and Presbyteri de proposita controversia consilium
ineunt. (v. 6.) Inter caeteros Assessores, Beatus Petrus and Iacobus sententias
dicunt; and eadem fere dicendi formula, qua Senatores apud Romanos sententiarum
Dictionem solito more concludebant; (...), quamobrem ego sic censeo, (v. 19.)
Mox in Iacobi sententiam illam universi pedibus euntes, de communi plane
consensu hujusmodi placitum decreverunt: (...). Visum est sane Spiritui sancto
and nobis nihil ultra imponere vobis oneris, quam haec necessaria.

. 5. In quo verborum circuitu sive complexione, habetis Canonem Ecclesiasticum,
ab ipsis Apostolis cum Presbyteris (...) congregatis, ad lites quasdam
dirimendas, Hierosolymis constitutum.

Tria sunt autem quae prima front hic se offerunt observanda. Quorum illud
inprimis notandum venit, quod in ipso Canonis statim initio Spiritus Sancti fit
me^tio, ne de negotio plane humano, aut mere humana Auctoritate, hic agi
videretur. Non enim Synodi sibi ipsis, nec (...) multitudini, nec soli Regum
praecellentiae (quorum aut jussu aut permissu in unum coeunt,) sed annuenti
Spiritui Sancto, quicquid habent potestatis acceptum ferunt.

At postquam Synodus dixis^et, (...), quorsum illud etiam adjecit, (...); number
ob istam ratiunculam, (quam tanti faciunt Romanenses,) Quia de Spiritus
Testimonio nequaquam nobis constare potest, nisi Synodus Inspiranti suppetias
ferat? minime Gentium. Sed per figuram illam effertur, quam vocant Rhetores
Hendiadyn, sive (ut alii explicatius) (...). Ut sensus sit; visum est nobis
(...), nobis (...), nobis edoctis and directis per Spiritum Sanctum, (non ne
errare valeamus, sed) ne erremus. Unde and Patres in Conciliis solenniter
dicere assolebant, [Decrevit haec sancta Synodus in Spiritu sancto convocata.]

Secundo vero est observandum, Quod sancta Synodus non censuit, monendas esse
hic Gentes de Rebus ad vitam necessariis, quas jam illis innotuisse compertum
habuit, [nempe a caedibus, Latrociniis, Rebellionibus, Sacrilegiis, atque id
genus aliis omnino esse abstinendum,] sed de iis tantum praecepit, de quibus
potuit litigari, illisque aliquid subesse Dubii; and per quae stetit, quo minus
Gentes cum Hebraeis in unum coetum coalescerent. Cujusmodi erant (...), sive
Immolatitia, sanguis etiam, and suffccata, quae ne Gentes degustarent hic
cautum est. Si quis autumaverit, sub hoc Canone comprehendi quaecunque ad
salutem requiri solent, toto Coelo errasse dicendus erit. Quum praecepta sint
alia atque alia, sub poena mortis etiam sancita, quae adeo non comprehenduntur
(...) sub isto tam brevi verborum ambitu; ut nec legitime ad eundem reduci
queant. De illo uno Quaesitum est, a quibus rebus Incircumcisos cavere sibi
oporteret, (sintne malae, an mediae, non multum refert,) quo inter Gentes and
Judaeos aliquando tandem conveniret. Esu Sanguinis and Suffocatorum.
Christianis etiam est interdictum (implicit saltem and interpretative) a
secundo (...). Conc. Gangr. Can. 2. sed in Cod. Can. Ec. un. Can. 60. A. D. 32^.
Canone Concilii Gangrensis: diuque postmodum fuisse in Ecclesia Dei
observatum, (nempe post tempora Apostolica,) Testes habemus Suffocatis and
Morticinis abstinemus, ne qu^ sanguine contaminemur, vel intra viscera sepulto.
Tertul. Apolog. c. 9.
Tertullianum, Tantumque ab humano sanguine cavemus, ut nec edulium pecorum in
cibis sanguinem noverimus. Min. Fael. in Octavio.
Minutium, (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 3. cap. 3. p. 228. edit. Paris,
1629.
Clementem^ etiam Alexandrinum, quin and Novollam Leonis 58vam (...). (...). p.
475. edit. Scrimger.
Quanquam prorsus exolevisse sub Temporibus (...); Eusebius. Hist. E^c^. edit.
Steph. 1544. l. 2. fol. 46. p. 1.
Augustini, hujusce Canonis Reverentiam, (si non ubique, saltem in Africa,)
ipse nobis Augustinus testatum fecit. Atque vel inde satis constat de rerum
istarum indifferentia, sive (...), quibus tamen accedens Lex moralem impingit
necessitatem. Necesse est enim subjici, Romans 13. 5. and visum est nobis (inquit
Synodus Apostolica) aliud onus non imponere, quam haec necessaria; vel (ut ex
voce illa (...) in promptu est hariolari, praesertim illis qui Graece non vulgo
sapiunt,) visum est nobis ea tantummodo imperare, quae omnino ut fiant, propter
Legem nunc latam necesse est.

Quin and illud est tertio notatu dignum, quod quemadmodum ipse Christus
Religionis corruptelas reformaturus, ad Primordia rerum and Fontes recurri
voluit, (Mat. 19. 8.) ita and Synodus Apostolica de re praesenti decretura, ad
Legem illico respicit Genese^s nono promulgatam, non tantum Gentibus, aut
Judaeis, sed Filiis Noae, Aut (quod in idem plane recidit) Humano Generi
observandam; utut, tempore procedente, apud solos fere Judaeos vigorem tenuit.

Expensis autem his Tribus, in quibus Scopus hujus Canonis praecipue vertitur
and consistit; Tria (...) statim emergunt, cum bono Deo eventilanda.

Inprimis enim videndum habeo De Potestate Ecclesiastica hujusmodi Synodo
competente; quousque scilicet de jure protendi debeat, and quibus cancellis
circumscribi.

Secundo loco agendum erit de Rebus pure Adiaphoris; an, and quatenus, and
cujusmodi, Necessitatem sibi acquirant; and (legitima Synodo decernente) in
Leges abeant.

Tertio demum dispiciendum de Norma illa and Perpendiculo, ad quod decreta
Ecclesiastica necesse habent ut exigantur. Haec sunt Tria illa (...), quae pro
Temporis ratione, and quanta poterunt Brevitate, incumbunt mihi enucleanda.

. 1. Ad primum (...) quod spectat, Quicquid est juris Ecclesiastici ad quatuor
haec capita referri potest. Inprimis nempe Liberam Religionis professionem,
quam Constantinus and Licinius [Libertatem Religionis] in Edicto suo
nuncuparunt; Deinde etiam Immunitatem a cunctis publicis muneribus, quae (...)
Iustiniano appellatur; Tertio vero Exemptionem a Secularibus Iudiciis; postremo
Ius Auctoritativum de Laicorum causis Cognoscendi. Quid ex his Divino jure, and
quid humano sit introductum, (nempe favore Imperatorum, (...).
Constantini, Constantii, and Constantis, Leonis denique, and Anthemii,) facile
cuiquam innotescet, qui cum Scriptis Canonistarum Divina conferet. Graviter
autem errare solent, qui non distinguunt Potestatem a Deo datam Ecclesiasticis,
ab ea quam Regi acceptam ferunt. Illa enim quasi separat Rempublicam ab
Ecclesia, sed Ecclesiam Reipublicae adjungit ille. Nam ante tempora Constantini
qui Magni nomine insignitur, (Nominisque mensuram revera implet,) ita Ecclesia
in Regno erat, ut pars ipsius non censeretur. Neque enim aequo jure cum
reliquis civibus utebatur, nec praeter Iesum Crucifixum (cui sub cruce
militabat) contemptae passim Disciplinae ultorem habuit.

. 2. Quantum ad Ius Ecclesiasticum internum attinet, Jus nimirum praedicandi,
ad preces publicas conveniendi, sacram Synaxin celebrandi, aedes sacras
aedificandi, sacras Synodos cogendi, sacram denique Disciplinam pro rei merito
usurpaudi; Illud Apostolis and Episcopis, qui Apud nos Apostoloru^ locum
Episcopi tenent. Hieron ad Marcellum adversus Montan. Ep. 54. p. 160. B.
tenent Locum Apostolorum, (ut ipse Sanctus Hieronymus diserte docet) non nisi
desuper and a Deo concessum venit. Sed quantum ad juris Exercitium, (quod jus
externum vocare licet,) Jus nimirum faciendi quicquid ad sacram (...) pleno
modo administrandam optari queat,
idque non clanculum and in Latebris, sed (...), (ut loqui solent Imperatores,)
Illud a piis Imperatoribus (sed per illos etiam a Deo) Ecclesiasticae
Hierarchiae indultum fuit.

. 3. Nam licet Synodus Ancyrana atque Neocaesariensis (ipsa Nicaena Anteriores)
absque jussu Constantini coactae sint; Regia tamen auctoritate munitas esse,
nemo sanus inficiabitur. Distinguendum autem est semper inter Synodos
Generales, and mere Topicas; Illae a solis Vide Eutrop. Longobard. p. 10.
Imperatoribus, Hae ab Episcopis Epistolae per fratres a Metropolitano
dirigendae sunt, etc. Council. Tarracon. 500. post Christum annos in Hisp.
celebrati, Canon. 3. (...). Council. Antioch. Can. 19. Sed Cod. Can. Eccl. univ.
Can 98.

(...). Council. Antioch. Can. 20.

(...). Council. Chalced. Can. 18. Codicis vero Can. Eccl. univ. C. 197.


Metropoliticis (sive Principum Iussione, sive tacito consensu,) pro veteri
more indici possunt. Ad rem Consule Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constable. cap. 4.
Evagr. l. 2. cap. 4. Theodoret. lib. 2. c. 8. Anonymum I. C. de liberate Eccl.
cap. 3.
exemplis evincendam, (si per otium meum liceret, aut vestram saltem per
patientiam,) sexcenta sane in medium proferre pos^em. Sed ne testibus
supervacaneis impraesentiarum abuti videar, sufficiat semel vel dixisse, quod
sanctissime recipio in me probandum, (tum contra Papae Parasitastros, tum
contra eos qui hac ex part Mephitim illam Papismi plus nimio redolent,) Quod
sine Regibus annuentibus, ex quo Reges evaserunt Ecclesiae Filii, Nutriciique,
and quasi Episcopi (...), etiam divinitus constituti, (ut Magnus Ille
Constantinus non semel dixit,) nunquam Placitis Synodalibus subscribi licuit.

. 4. Jus autem libere cogendi Synodos, and jus in Synodis celebra^dis condendi
Leges, pars est cultus Christiani necessaria prorsus, and (...). Quomodo enim
fient omnia (...), 1 Cor. 14. 40.
nihil scilicet confuse, and pro cujusque Temeritate? Quomodo controversiarum
figetur Serra, and malae fidei mercatoribus Labia saltem obturabuntur? Unde
tollentur corruptelae, quae in Ecclesiae Disciplinam subrepsisle comperientur?
(ut paucis denique absolvam,) Ubi loci di^ficillimae de Rebus Fidei
Quaestiones, aut tuto poterunt eventilari, aut ad optatum aliquando perduci
Finem, si non in Synodo Nationali in Nomine Domini congregata, cui vel ipse
fidem dedit, se pro certo interfuturum?

. 5. Quotus enim quisque est, etiam in sacris versatissimus, (si privatim
accedat, and extra Synodum,) cui cum abdita mysteria Divinae Naturae
appropinquant, simulque incumbunt enarranda, non refugiat evestigio trementi
sanguis, atque prae metu exalbescat? Quotusquisque vel Ingenio complecti queat,
(nedum verbis assequatur,) quomodo Pater sine initio, and sine fine gignat
Filium, in quem ita Generans sese totum effundit, ut ipsi nihil decedat, and a
quo Generatus ea nascitur ratione, ut ab eo qui generat recedat nunquam? and a
quibus utrisque Spiritus Sanctus eo pacto procedit, ut ne (...) quidem confusis
Personarum Trium proprietatibus, ejusdem naturae inter omnes consortium existat
absolutissimum? Quis est ille in Theologicis usque adeo oculatus, ut expedire
mihi queat (saltem pro rei dignitate) ineffabile illud Divinae cum nostra
Natura contubernium? quove nexu sibi invicem eum in morem sint copulatae, ut
idem qui semper ex Deo vero verus Deus existat necesse est, Homo quoque, and
quidem verus, ex vera homine nasceretur? aut quomodo mulier Desponsata ita
Parentem suum pepererit, ut virgo ^uerit, etiam a Partu, multo quam ante
Immaculatior?

. 6. Certo certius (Auditores) tantum abest ut privatim de rebus hujusmodi sit
statuendum; ut nulla sint capita Theologi^a, unde natae sunt aut plures, aut
certe difficiliores de ipsa Fide Quaestiones. Nulla de quibus erratum est, aut
facilius utique, aut periculosius. Nulla in quibus insudarunt majore cum animi
contentione, supra-quam-dici-potest eximia Scriptorum veterum Ingenia. Nulla in
quibus explicandis, aut magis variant Interpretes, aut majores veritati
offundunt Tenebras. Tanta est hominum imbecillitas, in Rebus Dei investigandis;
Tanta verborum etiam obscuritas, in investigatis enarrandis; Tantaque rerum
difficultas, quae omne verborum artificium plerumque superat, and compluribus
parasangis post se relinquit.

. 7. Egone vero, aut Ille, aut quisquam alius (...), ut ad ejusmodi fere (...)
mysteria, per loca crebris variisque difficultatibus impedita, frequentibus
salebris intersepta, lamis ac saltibus impervia, eluvionibus and voraginibus
saepenumero intercisa, aditum Singuli faciamus, qui vixdum patuit Universis? Hi
sunt vel Synodo tam digni vindice Nodi, Ut sibi in solidum enodandis,
Frequentiam Hominum Angelorumque videantur forsan desiderare. Nec aliusmodi
sane frequentiam, quam cui Christus per Paracletum ita interest, and praeest,
ita dirigit, atque gubernat; ut vere possit and sine fuco Tritum illud
pronunciari, [Decrevit haec Sancta Synodus in Spiritu Sancto Convocata,] aut
quod eodem fere redit, (...), Visum est nobis per Spiritum Sanctum, nihil ultra
imponere vobis oneris, quam haec necessaria.

. 8. Non praecise, and per se, and antecedenter necessaria; Necessaria tamen
omnimode, ut vobis in parts abeuntibus statuatur uniformis vivendi ratio.
Necessaria etiam, quia Praecepta. Charitas enim (fatente Beza) in Rebus Mediis
est necessaria. Charitas autem sine obsequio, nulla potest excogitari. Et
quandoquidem illud (...) usque adeo sit pure Graecum, ut apud Atticos etiam
Scriptores de iis rebus adhibeatur, quas aut fieri, aut omitti Lex ipsa jubet,
ideo recta me ducit ad secundum (...) trutinandum;

Adiaphoris. An, and quatenus, and cujusmodi Necessitatem sibi acquirant, and
(legitima Synodo decernente) in Leges abeant. (...).

. 1. Vocabulum illud [(...)] quod a Sancta Synodo adhibetur, liquido notat
Auctoritatem Praecepto junctam. (...) autem hic dicitur quod (...) supra (v.
10.) Aperte innuens, Materiam Canonis Apostolici Adiaphoris esse annumerandam.
Non de Fornicatione, aut commercio cum Idolis, (quae Natura sua sunt mala, and
quorum merces mors est,) sed de sanguine loquor, and suffocatis, a quibus ut
rigide se abstineant tenentur Gentes. Cujus rei Indifferentiam (si per se
consideretur) ille Christi Aphorismus abunde probat. Non quod intrat in os
coinquinat hominem, sed id quod exit. (Mat. 15. 11.) Et qui forte pauci adhuc
ista tangere formidant, (inquit Episcopus Augustnius ubi supra, lib. 32. cap.
13. p. 200. C. Wirtemb. Confess. art. 35. Vide Bezae Epist. Octava^ ad D.
Edmund. Grindallum Episcop. Land. page 210.
Hipponensis) a caeteris omnibus irridentur. Cui etiam suffragatur universa
Ecclesia Wirtembergensis: Instituerunt (inquit illa) in Actis Apostolicis, ut
Gentes caverent ab esu sanguinis and suffocatorum; non ut haec observatio inter
Gentes esset perpetua, sed Temporalis; and tantisper duratura, dum hujusmodi
esus non esset amplius offendiculum. Ita Ecclesia etiam Bohemica, capite d^^imo
quinto.

. 2. Rerum autem Indifferentiam cessare pos^e, and (...) transire in
Necessaria, (saltem pro temporis condition, necdum legibus abrogatis per quas
jubentur,) Argumentis pene innumeris probare possem, nisi id hominis videretur
liberate loquendi sua intemperanter abutentis. Pace vestra tamen liceat (modo
breviter raptimque) ut inde usque ab initio rem totam repetam. Dignum est enim
quod hic advertam, Post privilegia multifariam primis Parentibus indulta,
placuisse Deo Protoplastas triplici Lege coercere. Prima scilicet naturali,
cujus primum Aquin. 1. 2. q. 94. art. 2.
Praeceptum est, Bonum esse prosequendum, vitandum malum; Altera supernaturali,
de Credendo and sperando in unum Deum, ipsumque animitus diligendo; Tertia
denique speciali, (ut doctissimus Torniellus loquendum putat) De ligno
scientiae Boni and Mali sub poena mortis non comedendo. Si quis autem hic
sciscitetur, cur prioribus non contentus, tertiam insuper Legem adjecerit Deus?
Respondent illico Doctores, id duplici de Causa a Creatore fuisse factum. Prima
causa haec erat, ut sua in homines (...) luculentius aliquanto constare posset;
cui Res per se Medias, nullisque Legibus adversantes, pro absoluto suo imperio,
aut praecipere placuit, aut prohibere, quemadmodum ipsi collibitum fuerit.
Altera causa videtur esse, ut vel sic in primo homine, (Humani Generis plane
Archetypo,) luce clarius innotesceret futuris seculis, quantum obsequii quasi
vectigal (in his quae mala non sunt) (...) solvendum esset. Inprimis Deo, per
Quem Rex Regnat; deinde Regi, qui Dei in Terris vicarius audit; postmodum vero
Potestatibus a Rege missis. Ita enim Beatus Petrus, Pauli optimus Interpres,
Ep. 1. cap. 2. v. 13. and sic deinceps.

. 3. Et sicut in commodum Reipublicae conduntur Leges seculares; ita in usum
etiam Ecclesiae, ab ipsis Ecclesiae incunabulis, Ecclesiasticae quaedam Leges
vigorem suum obtinuerunt. Nascente adhuc Christianismo, ut in externis etiam
Ritibus cultus Dei promoveretur, Beatus Paulus hanc tulit Legem; Omnia
decenter, atque ordine fiant. 1 Cor. 14. 40. ubi vocabulum (...), idem sonat
quod (...). (c. 7. v. 35.) In Col. 2. 5.
Chrysostomus, Oecumenius, and Theophylactus, exponunt (...) per (...). ut
nihil confuse peragatur, and pro cujusque temeritate. Illud enim cum decoro,
(ut S. Ambrosius interpretatur,) quod fit cum Pace and Disciplina. Recte igitur
Calvinus illud Pauli praeceptum vocavit Regulam; ad quam (inquit) omnia quae ad
externam (...) Ecclesiae spectant exigere convenit. Et si quis forte hic
urgeat, quod Apostolus Iacobus pugnare secum videatur, cum negat exhibendam
esse Gentibus molestiam (...).
, (Act. 15. 19.) and tamen Elegisse mihi videntur pro tempore Rem facilem, and
nequaquam observantibus onerosa^. Aug. contr. Faust. l. 32. c. 13.
Ritus praescribit qui in Lege Mosis continebantur; respondet optime Calvinus,
(cujus utinam hac ex part fratres nostri dissidentes sequaces fia^t!) Calvin.
Inst. l. 4. c. 10. p. 30
Primum nihil ab illis exigit, quod fraternae concordiae non deberent. Deinde
etiam haec praecepta nihil eorum conscientiis inquietudinis aut turbae afferre
poterant; in quantum scirent, se coram Deo esse liberos. Praeterea, in externa
Disciplina and Ceremoniis, sigilla^im voluit praescribere quid sequi debeamus.
-- postremo; prout Ecclesiae utilitas requiret, tam ritus usitatos mutare and
abrogare, quam novos instituere conveniet. Et, Demonstravimus de principio,
potestatem h^nc fuisse a Christo Ecclesiae traditam, ut scilicet pro
circumstantiis locorum and temporum, proque necessitate Ecclesiarum leges
concipiat and Canones. Zanch. l. 1. in 4tum praecept. p. 765.
ut in pauca rem conferam, Ecclesiae fere ad unam omnes quae Protestantium
nomine censentur, saltem Bohemica, Helvetica, Gallica, Belgica, Wirtembergensis
etiam, and Suevica, Anglica, Saxonica, and Confessio Augustana, (quas de
industria nudius-tertius hisce oculis usurpavi) uno ore confitentur, etiamsi
non uno verborum ambitu, Quod omnes Ritus and Ceremoniae, quae ad pacem faciunt
and Charitatem, nec verbo Dei adversantur, sive eae ab Episcopis, sive a
Synodis Ecclesiasticis, sive ab aliis Auctoritatibus quibuscunque extiterint,
Vide Harmoniam Confessi^ number Genevae Edit. 1581. d p. 210. ad p. 231.
praesertim p. 213. 214.
semel introductae servari debent; and de eo simpliciores laborare non debent,
neque hoc moveri aut per^urbari, sed quia bonae sunt, iis etiam ad bonum uti.

. 4. Quod illis potissimum notandum arbitror, and remotis Arbitris expendendum,
qui ita videntur animati, ut nihil sibi mandari velint, quod non in ipso sacro
Codice concep^is verbis praecipiatur. Certe graviter in eos censur^m agit
Theologus ille consummatissimus, Episcopus* hodie Lincolniensis, (cujus lauds
sane reticeo, quia crediderim de his reticeri velle, and ipsius modestiae
parcend^m puto;) Posse (inquit) de novo Leges condi, Sanderson de leg. Hum.
oblig. Prael. 7. p. 288.
de Ritibus, de Rebus, and personis Ecclesiasticis, omnibusque sacri cultus
externi circumstantiis, ad ordinem, honestatem, and aedificationem
spectantibus, extra eas quae sunt a Christo and ejus Apostolis traditae in
sacris literis; adeo manifesta res est and rationi consentanea, ut perversi
judicii obstinatique animi suspicione aegre se liberaverit, qui siccus and
sobrius id negaverit.

. 5. Quin and Res per se Medias Necessitatem posse induere, si non satis
aliunde, vel inde liquet; Quod duplici semper Iure, Divino scilicet and
Canonico, Primaeva Dei Ecclesia felici omine regeretur. Quorum illud in Sacro
Codice, Hoc in Codice continetur quod a Concilio Chalcedonensi Corpus Canonum
appellatur. Uterque olim in Conciliis Sedile habuit Peculare, in ipso Consessus
Meditullio eminentissime collocatum; ut ex conspecto eorum jure, Apostolorum
successores Religionis Dogmata explorarent, obortas Haereses succiderent, and
quicquid uspiam controversiae ad Rem-publicam Ecclesiasticam aliquo modo
pertinebat, Divino semper adminiculo ad laetum exitum perducerent.

. 6. Quod autem Leges Ecclesiasticae, Auctoritate Regia statuminatae, ipsas
hominum conscientias in Deo onerant, ex eo facile conficitur, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
quod (...) eo modo ac methodo parendum docet Beatus Petrus, ut Regi in quantum
supremo Domino, Reliquis in quantum a Rege missis, utrisque vero propter Deum
obsequium debitum exhibeatur. Et merito quidem; quum Totum Regimen exprimatur
per (...), (Romans 13. 2.) unde and Petrus nos jubet (apto vocis delectu) (...):
1 Pet. 2. 13.
nimirum (...) Romans 13. 1.
(...). Et quandoquidem in ordine sive Progressu Potestatum, a Presbytero ad
Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad Synodum, a Synodo ad Regem, a Rege statim ad Deum
scandimus; ineluctabili consequentia videtur mihi concludi posse, Quod quicquid
Reges praecipiunt, sive per se immediate, sive per alios quoscunque quos
Potestatis suae participant, si nusquam a Deo prohibeatur, id ipse Deus
praecepisse censendus est. Nam and identidem praecepit, ut unusquisque
Potestatibus obsequium praestet. Nec illud tantum, ut unusquisque; verum etiam
ut Omnis (...). Romans 13. 1.
Anima sublimioribus Potestatibus subjecta sit. Cujusmodi phrase submonetur,
quod non in speciem, aut ore tenus, sed medullitus, and ex animo; non propter
i^am amoliendam, sed propter ipsam Conscientiam, fidemque nostram liberandam,
morem gerere Potestatibus devincti sumus. Non ad oculum servientes, quasi
hominibus placentes, sed ut servi Christi facientes Dei voluntatem, in Cordis
nostri simplicitate; bona fide servientes, sicut Domino, and non hominibus.
(Ephesians. 6. 6.)

. 7. Nec hic immemores esse decet, quod in Synodo Nationali Res Regis agitur;
quippe qui duplicem Personam sustinet, and Jure duplici potitur; unde and Regis
Auctoritatem, non modo in Personas, sed and in Causas Ecclesiasticas agnoscit
Artic. 37.
Ecclesia Anglicana. Et quandoquidem edixit Salvator noster, read Caesari quae
Caesaris, perinde est ac si dixisset, (Judice saltem Aug. in Matthew* de puero
Centurionis judicantis se indignum Praesentia Domini.
Augustino,) Nisi Caesaris praeceptum praecepto Dei adversatur, tanquam judici
supremo parendum est. Cui consonum accinuit Johannes Bekinsau apud Goldastum.
Quicquid jusserit Supremus Magistratus quod Dei mandatis non repugnat, ita ut
locum non habeat illud, [Melius est Deo quam hominibus obedire,] omnes,
cujus-cujus honoris fuerint, nisi Dei ipsius Ordinationi resistere velint,
profecto obsequi tenetur. Eundem in sensum Apud Confess. Bohem. cap. 16. de
Magist. Polit.
Hieronymus, Si Dominus (inquit) jubet quae non sunt adversa sacris literis,
servus Domino subjiciatur. Huc accedunt Confessionum Reformatarum etiam
suffragia, nimirum Vide Harmon. Confess. Sect. 19. page 276, 281, 282, 286.
Belgicae, Bohemicae, Saxonicae, Augustanae. [Universi and singuli eminentibus
Potestatibus subjectionem praestent, in omnibus quae Deo non sunt contraria.
Necessario debent obedire, nisi jubentibus peccare.

. 8. Nec tantum numero suffragantium, sed and gravissimis Rationum momentis
nitimur. Illud enim inprimis incumbit Regi, (aliisque sub eo qui Gladium
habent,) summam curam adhibere, ut Ecclesia Dei Rite, atque ordine Gubernetur;
ne polluatur unquam, aut corruat, sed contra omnigenas corruptelas sarta tecta
praestetur. Privatis omnibus curandum, ut ^incera Ecclesiae membra sint; neve
sinant corpus suum (quod Templum Dei nuncupatur a Spiritu Sancto) pluribus
sordibus inquinari, quam ut purissimus ille Spiritus in eo velit inhabitare.
Regibus ea propter commissus est Gladius secularis, quo extrinsecus accinguntur
ceu Dei vindices in iram, Romans 13. 4. Privatis vero non permittitur ni^i
gladius ille spiritus, (seu verbum Dei,) quo Christianos ad unum omnes adversus
impetus Diaboli accingit Paulus. (Ephesians. 6. 17.) Praefectis denique
Ecclesiasticis commissus est Gladius Spiritualis, quo omnes subditos
immorigeros Matt^. 18. 17, 18. Tit. 1. 13.
(...), (id est, per modum Excisionis,) eosque Satanae etiam tradere 1 Cor. 5.
5.
(...), ab ipso Deo mandatum habent. Frustra enim dixisset Christus, Dic
Ecclesiae, (Mat. 18. 17.) nisi effraenes compescendi facultas ei competiisset.
Ita natura est comparatum, ut Gemella haec Potestas, Sacra pariter, and
Secularis, (prorsus ut Pietas, and Probitas, Prove. 24. 21.
Timor Dei, and Regis,) manus porrigant sibi invicem ab omni part
auxiliatrices.

. 9. Ab utriusque Auctoritate quicquid Legum positivarum de rebus nude
Adiaphoris sancitum fuerit, (ex sententia Ecclesiae Anglicanae,) ipsam obligat
conscientiam. Conscientiam dicimus, non Rei ipsius, (sive prohibitae, sive
praeceptae,) quae per se est (...), sed nostrae saltem obedientiae, quam Lex
Divina a nobis exigit; and adeo non est (...), ut ad salutem etiam aeternam sit
usquequaque necessaria: utpote quam qui non praestiterit, damnationem sibi
accersit, si fides Apostolo sit habenda, diserte illud asseveranti, Romans 13. 2.
Hanc esse mentem Vide Tom. 2. H^mil. 4.
Ecclesiae nostrae, videre est in Homilia de Bonis operibus instituta. Dicit
autem Ecclesia Suevica; Harm. Confess. Sect. 19. page 292. Graviter peccant qui
propter has indifferentes Ceremonias turbant Ecclesias, damnant alios
principes, and Magistratus. Haeccine Pietas quam jactamus? Haeccinecharitas
quam debemus Ecclestis and fratribus? Zanch. de Rel. lib. 1. page 765.
se inter primi Ordinis Bona opera, dedisse locum Obedientiae quae
Magistratibus exhibetur. Et unusquisque studiosius publicis legibus se
accommodat, quo sincerior fuerit Christianus, fideque ditior. Verba sane, si
qua alia, valde (...), prope dixeram etiam dignissima, quae Canonibus nostris
accenseantur. Videant, quibus vacat, Confessionis illius Suevicae caput tertium
supra vicesimum.

. 10. Hac Gemella Auctoritate, Regia scilicet and Ecclesiastica, utraque
coelitus oriunda, adhuc in Lumbis Proavorum innixi sumus, cum ab ill^ sive
Ecclesia sive curia potius discessimus, quam ab omnibus deserendam Romani
fecerant. Unde nihil frequentius in ore erat Pontificiis, quam nihil apud nos
ordine, nihil decenter and (...), sed susque deque potius omnia in sacris
coetibus usurpari. Quibus ut os occluderemus, eo pacto resecuimus quicquid aut
spurcum fuit, aut frigidum, aut sacris literis adversarium; ut retinenda etiam
censuerimus, non tantum ea quae norant omnes ab ipsis Apostolis derivata, verum
etiam and alia quaedam quae ex Nunquam Ecclesia Dei in Terris caruit
Ceremoniis, neque carere potest; cum sine Ceremoniis, nec fideles in unum
convenire and coalescere possunt, nec Deo public servire. Zanch. de Rel. l, 1.
p. 420. These. 2.
usu publico videbantur, quippe quadantenus facientia 1 Cor. 14. 26.
(...).

. 11. Rectene, an secus, non Illorum erat dispicere, nedum certe pronunciare,
quibus dicitur ab Apostolo, obedite Praepositis, and subjacete, Heb. 13. 17. si
quid aut deficit, aut redundat, aut quocunque modo claudicat in i^tis Placitis
Ritualibus, quibus obstrepunt Novatores, totisque viribus adversantur; totum
illud lubentissime Gubernatoribus Ecclesiasticis, in legitima Synodo
convocatis, seu auferendum, seu ampliandum, seu castigandum etiam submittitur.
Absit autem in tali Synodo, ut cum carne and sanguine deliberetur; aut
consilium ineatur de istis Homulis deliniendis, quibus quieta movere magna
merces. Nam (ut optime Hilarious,) Dulce quidem est nomen Pacis, sed aliud est
Pax, aliud servitus. Et aliquanto quidem praestat (...), Ignat. ad ^ol. Edit.
Voss. page 12.
(ut Ignatius scribit ad Polycarpum,) discerpi simul and vincere, quam turpi
cedere contumaciae; and optimas Leges abrogare, ea tantum de causa, quod saepe
a pessimis violantur; aut summis curis distringi nequid illis non placeat,
quibus Romans 131.
Dei Ordinatio vix unquam placuit, and quibus non placet placere Deo. Illud
fere unum Curandum est, ut in omnibus Placitis Synodalibus, identidem
respiciatur ad illam duplicem Evangelium praedicandi rationem, a (...); Clem.
Alex. Strom. lib. 1. p. 270. in 2 Timothy 2. 2, and 15. (...). Id. ib. p. 271.
(...). Id. ib. p. 272.
Clemente Alexandrino indigitatam; nempe (...), quarum una erat (...) altera.
Illud enim in more Catholici ex more suo fidem veram duobus his modis
approbant. -- Non quia Canon solus non sibi ad universa sufficiat, sed quia S.
Scripturam pro suo quisque arbitratu interpretantes varios errores concipiant,
adeoque necesse sit, ut ad unam Ecclesiastici sensus Regulam Scripturae
Coelestis Intelligentia dirigatur. Vinc. Lirin. advers Haeres. cap. 41.
erat Ecclesiae adhuc incorruptae, (testante Vincentio Lirinensi,) Fidem veram
probare duobus his modis; Divini Canonis auctoritate, and Ecclesiae Catholicae
Traditione. Ad quam utramque Beatus Paulus hortatur Thessalonicenses. Itaque
fratres perstate, and retinete Traditiones, quas didicitis, sive per Sermonem,
sive per Epistola nostram, 2. ep. c. 2. v. 15. Atque ita traducti sumus ad
tertium (...) pensitandum; Nempe De Regula illa aut Norma, ad quam decreta
Ecclesiastica necesse habent ut exigantur.

. 1. NOn abhorrebit a proposito (hinc arrepta occasion) secretioribus
aliquantisper suspiriis vicem nostram lugere, nostrisque malis non tantum
Poenae, sed and Reatus ingemiscere. Unde enim in Clerum, and in Ecclesiam, nisi
ab ipsis Ecclesiasticis tam atrociter animadversum? ex quibus quippe quam
plurinii, malae fidei mercatores, (...) quaedam and (...) simpliciorum ex vulgo
hominum credulitati obtruserunt: and nescio quem fucum nundinarium veritatis
Fronti illinentes, offucias fecerunt Religioni, fraudem Populo, and proxime
aberant ne sibi ipsis etiam perniciem. Nam dum sacrae paginae (...)
venditabant, sugillabant interim Ecclesiam, (ut ut 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Columnam and firmamentum veritatis,) and Disciplinae receptissimae Antichristi
stigma inurebant; Patrum Naevos and labeculas sub aspectum vulgi ponebant;
suaque ipsorum deliramenta pro imperio obtrudentes, Scripturas Dei sacrosanctas
in Lesbiam Regulam demutabant. Quae horsum-versum versatilis, ad Fidei dogmata
dijudicanda vice Canonis illius (...) (proh dolor!) adhibebatur. Et quemadmodum
de olivae nucleo mitissimae asper exoritur oleaster, Deque papavere Fici
gratissimae ventosa and vana Caprificus exurgit; Ita and Haereses de nostro
fructificaverunt non nostrae; degeneres veritatis grano, and mendacio
sylvestres.

. 2. Sed Haec utique (inquit ille) and Ipsi habent in nos retorquere, Tertull.
de Praescript. adversus Haeres. cap. 17. 18.
a nobis Scripturarum Adulteria fieri. Ergo non proficit Congressio
Scripturarum [ex privata nimirum interpretatione] nisi ut aut stomachi quis
ineat eversionem, aut Cerebri. Si enim recipit Adversarius, non recipit
integras; Et si aliquatenus integras praestat, nihilominus diversas
expositiones comminiscitur. Tantumque veritati obstrepit Adulter sensus,
quantum utique corruptor stylus. His nituntur Novatores, pro iis scilicet
stabiliendis quae ex falso composuerunt. --

Id. ib. cap. 19.
Ergo non ad Scripturas provocandum est, [pro cujusque Arbitratu explicatas,]
nec his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut nulla aut incerta victoria est,
aut parum certa. Ordo rerum expostulat, ut illud inprimis decernatur, Quibus
competat fides ipsa, cujus sint Scripturae, a quo, and per quos, and quando,
and quibus sit. Tradita Disciplina, qua fiunt Christiani. Ubi enim apparuerit
esse veritatem Discipline, and Fidei Christianae, illic erit Veritas
Scripturarum, and Expositionum, and omnium Traditionum Christianarum.

. 3. Serio dicam, Auditores, (and quantumvis Literatori, liceat tamen vel
dixisse,) quod quotiescunque apud me solum rations ineo, quibus aut funi
Disputationum, aut Schismatum cumulo, aut Haerese^n Congeriei aliquando tandem
occurratur; non videntur haec mihi aliter, quam in Ecclesiasticae Auctoritatis
stabilimento expediri posse. Nec unquam erit ut procedamus in Animorum consensu
and Pace publica stabiliendis, (quae jam sola fere Sparta incumbit Clero
adornanda,) priusquam ad decantatum illud indubitatae per omnia secula In ipsa
Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. Vin. Lir. advers. Here Is. cap. 3.
Traditionis fulcimentum pro sua quisque virili, (...), qua public, qua
privatim, nosmetipsos accinxerimus. Quicquid extra hunc apicem insudabitur,
totum (...) quantum-quantum non nisi (...) comperietur; and utcunque (...)
elaboratum, certe (...) evanescet, Iunone nostra fruamur, sed momentanea;
nullaque extrinsecus adhibita vi, mox in nubeculam desitura. Novatores illi
inter Clericos qui in ipsum os Antiquitatis contemptim admodum oggannierunt,
quot quantisque hoc in Regno (...) quam promptos Aditus patefecerunt? Si
quicquid Vetus Ecclesia sive decrevit, sive admisit, perque decursum tot
seculorum ad hunc usque diem (...) deduxit, susque deque jam tandem habendum
sit; valiant per me licet una cum (...), etiam Decimae, Paedobatismus, and Diei
Dominici Reverentia. Immo (quod totus horreo inter effandum) ipsius Numinis
Tres Personalitates, and Processio Spiritus etiam a Filio, ad privati cujusque
arbitrium tanquam ad Lydium Lapidem revocabuntur, Nihil deinccps in Ecclesia
relinquetur illibatum, sed ex easto Veritatis Sacrario in turpissimum
haeresiarcharum lupanar desinet. In obscurioribus aut ambiguis Scripturae locis
interpretandis, abundet quisque suo sensu per Ecclesiam licet; ea lege
videlicet, ut ad Fidei (...) exigantur omnia; semperque (ut Vincentius
Lirinensis monet) Propheticae and Apostolicae Interpretationis Linea juxta
Ecclesiastici atque Catholici sensus Regulam dirigantur.

. 4. In hujusmodi Thematis tractatione, certe si quantum mihi rerum dicendarum
suppetit, tantum vobis Patientiae in promptu esset, periculum vobis immineret,
ne in suggesto consenescerem.

Sed opportune mihi succurrit, quam non facile condonetur ad clepsammidium
concionanti, prolixius agere. Et ne Tempus praeterlabatur hujusmodi Pensis
praefinitum, satius duco circumscribere quod alioqui restat discutiendum, quam
aut vestro taedio non occurrere, aut modestiae meae limits videri saltem
transilire.

. 5. Interim tamen non possum quin vos obtester, (Reverendissimi admodum in
Christo Patres, Fratres in Domino dilectissimi,) per Patrem Luminum
benignissimum, qui Divini vos Luminis participes fecit; per Sacrosanctum illum
Spiritum, qui vos obsignavit (...): Ephesians. 4. 30.
perque dulcissimum illud Nomen quod super omnibus vobis est invocatum; per
siquid vestris animabus aut unquam Cordi aut Curae fuit; ut ea vestrum
unicuique obeundi muneris sit conscientia, quae memoriam Sui non perhorrescat,
suaeque ipsius non metuat interesse Posteritati. Ut ab hac Synodo Apostolica
Pharmaco vobis indicato, morbis publicis sanandis medicatrices manus
adhibeatis. Ut quod in Synodo Oecumenica, nemine quidem refragrante, Council.
Nicaen. Can. 6. A. D. 325.
id in vestra Provinciali, laeto celeusmate excipiatur, (...). Utque de vobis
unusquisque dicendum putet, contra quam Ille (...) Greg. Naz. Epist. 55. ad
Procopium vero, 42. p. 814.
Nazianzenus de sui seculi Conciliis, (...).

. 6. Nihil mihi ulterius restat, quam ut suppliciter and obnixe atque animitus
Deum venerer, ut ducat vos omnes per Spiritum Sanctum, in omnem omnino
veritatem; suggeratque vobis consilia Ecclesiae suae salutaria, propter Merita
Mortemque Filii sui unigeniti. Cui Filio cum Patre in unitate Spiritus sancti,
Immortali, Invisibili, soli Deo sapienti, sit Honos, and Gloria, and Gratiarum
Actio, and nunc, and deinceps, in Secula Seculorum.

FINIS.
Concio Academica DE HIERARCHIA SECULARI, Speciatim and Praesertim De Iure
Regum, HABITA IN TEMPLO BEATAE MARIAE APUD OXONIENSES, PRO TERMINO INCHOANDO
XIV. CALENDAS MAIAS, M.DC.LXIIII.

In Epistola priore Beati Petri, Capite secundo, Commate decimo tertio, de
Politia Christiana sic scriptum legimus.
Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum; sive Regi, quasi
praecellenti; sive Ducibus, tanquam ab eo missis; in vindictam malefactorum,
laudem vero Bonorum.
. 1. REquirenti mihi nuper, ad hanc Provinciam destinato, (Viri and Fratres
Dilectissimi,) fi quid in ea (non adornanda, sed) pro viriculis obeunda, vel
feliciter inventire, vel observare diligenter, vel accuratius contexere, vel
qualitercunque demum alias praestare possem, quod Audientibus aut Curae aut
Cordi esset, aut quo gratiam non plane nullam ab aequis rerum Aestimatoribus,
vel (quod potius in votis erat) apud Deum saltem inirem; evestigio and sine
mora subibat animum-recordatio, quod nullum certius promptiusve aut Malis
Publicis Remedium, aut Bonis Publicis Fulcimentum videtur posse excogitari,
quam si Principum Jura, cum officiis Populorum qui iis subsunt, ad testatissima
sua Principia in omnium Animis exigantur. Idque methodo tam distincta, verborum
ambitu tam exporrecto, and momentis Rationum cum rationibus argumentandi tam ad
Vulgi Captum accommodatis; ut nemo tam bardus inveniatur, qui officii sui non
gnarus sit, aut sane frontis tam perfrictae, qui satis gnarum se esse negare
ausit. Constat autem apud omnes qui de Rebus civilibus administrandis vel fando
unquam inaudiverunt, perinde Principi ac Populo certos limits and Cancellos
statutos esse, fines certos metasque tam a Deo and Natura quam a Gentium
legibus assignatos, Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere Rectum. Quippe quibus
proculcatis, Sana Rerum Administratio pessum datur, and contabescit. Nec
tantummodo Seditiones, (ut ut Illa satis ampla malorum seges,) sed and quae
inde enascuntur, vitia scilicet omnifaria, radices agunt.

. 2. Videtur ergo totis viribus in id praecipue incumbendum, ut Jura Principum
in PoPopulos, cum horum Officiis erga Principes, and utrorumque Officia
adversus Deum, non modo omnibus innotescant, sed aequa lance trutinentur. Idque
ob alias non contemnendas, sed hanc potissimum rationem, uti tranquillam and
quietam degamus vitam cum omni Pietate and veneratione. 1. Tim. 2, 2. Quod
videatur Sanctus Paulus Succincte admodum loquutus, simulque oppido Copiose.
Quippe qui multum non multis quamvis alibi passim enuntiat, plura tamen
paucioribus nusquam loci enuntiaverit. Nempe Vocabulum illud (...) (fatentibus
ipsis Disciplinariis) complectitnr omne genus officia quae in hominum
Commerciis vigere debent. Et in eo quod superaddit [(...)] plane omnimodam
comprehendit quae Deo debetur observantiam. Nescio enim quo pacto, comparatum
est ita, ut Pietas simul and Politia, quemadmodum Dei and Regis Timor, manus
invicem sibi porrigant ab omni part auxiliatrices. Eum scilicet in finem
constituuntur Magistratus, propter quem and Christiani and Cives sumus, prorsus
ut Pietas cum Pace ubique vigeant, and conjunctissimo perfruantur in omnium
Animis Contubernio. Cujus rei Desiderio nunquam felicius satisfiet, quam si qui
Praesunt and subduntur quod suarum est partium ex aequo praestent, Illud est
maxim Subditorum, ut toti ordini Magistratuum, seu (...) quantumcunque (...),
(ut nostra habent exemplaria,) vel quantumlibet (...), (uti habemus in
Archetypo,) perquam morigeros se praebeant vel propter Deum. Ad Magistratus
autem spectat ex altera part, five in penam, sive in praemium, sua cuique
distribuere; Bonos Clypeo tutari, in malos Gladio animadvertere; Pie viventibus
favere, in immorigeros vero saevire; Parcere Subjectis, and Debellare Superbos.
Quod utrumque simul officium spiritus sanctus hoc Textu complexus est,

Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum: sive Regi, quasi
Praecellenti: sive Ducibus, [aut Praesidibus] tanquam ab eo missis; ad
vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum.

. 3. Quod Praeceptum Apostolicum quo fructuosius participemus, oremus Deum
Misericordiarum, Patrem luminum benignissimum, (cujus verbum est ipsa Veritas,
and via ad vitam exploratissima,) ut misericorditer ei complaceat hodierno
Coetui interesse; ut quicquid e cord meo in linguam, and inde in Aures etiam
vestras, pro Bonitate sua solita ^it perducturus, in nostram omnium qua
privatim qua public cedat Utilitatem, atque in nominis sui Gloriam in majus
indies efferendam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum.

Et ut quod nostra causa oramus, eo facilius exoremus, Oremus insuper and
praecipue pro Ecclesia Christi militante, per varia regna Resque Publicas
quaquaversum disseminata, nominatim vero pro Anglicana hac nostra, Atque inibi
ante alios, pro ejusdem Ecclesiae Nutricio Carolo, peculiari Dei Gratia, Magnae
Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rege, Fidei Defensore, in omnibus Causis
omniumque personarum, sive sacrarum, sive civilium, immediate secundum Deum
Supremo in Terris Moderatore. Pro ejus Conjuge Catharina, Regina nostra
Serenissima; Pro Regina Matre Henrietta Maria; pro Illustrissimo Principe
Iacobo Duce Eboracensi; aliisque quibuscunque e regio stemmate oriundis. Pro
utraque Domo Parliamenti. Pro Regni Proceribus nobilissimis; praesertim iis qui
Regi adsunt a consiliis secretioribus. Speciatim vero preces apud Patrem
Coelestem sunt effundendae, pro universo Clero Anglicano; pro reverendissimis
Archiepiscopis; pro Episcopis Reverendis; aliisque quibuscunque inferioris
subsellii Clericis, quibus-quibus sive muneribus sive nominibus insigniantur.
Pro utraque Academia, ac inprimis hac nostra. Pro Honoratissimo Domino
Cancellario, ejusque Vicecancellario Dignissimo. Pro omnibus Doctoribus;
Procuratoribus utrisque; Collegiorum and Aularum praefectis singulis; and
praesertim (quo me vocat officii ratio singularis) pro Collegio Magdalenensi,
ejusque membris universis.

Grata insuper publicorum qui in Album Academiae referuntur Benefactorum,
facienda est a nobis inpraesentiarum Commemoratio. Nimirum Principis
Illustrissimi, Humphraedi Ducis Glocestriae; Iohannis Kempe, Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopi; Thomae Kempe, Episcopi Londinensis; Margaretae, Comitissae
Richmundiae; Henrici Septimi, and Elizabethae Uxoris ejus; Richardi Litchfield,
Archidiaconi Middlesexiae; Thomae Woolsey Cardinalis, and Archiepiscopi
Eboracensis; Henrici Octavi; Mariae Reginae; Reginae etiam Elizabethae: Iacobi
Regis: Thomae Bodleii, Henrici Savilii, Guilielmi Sidley, Nicolai Kempe,
Militum; Thomae White, S. Theologiae Doctoris; Guilielmi Camdeni, Armigeri:
Aliorumque si qui sint, qui Academiae Oxoniensi quoquo modo benefecerunt.

Et quia Deus est Ille solus Bonorum omnium Largitor, qui aut Nos aut Propatres
nostros per manus hominum locupletavit; (Quibus merito accenseatur Guilielmus
etiam Wainfletus, Episcopus olim Wintoniensis, Magnus Angliae Cancellarius,
Collegii juxta and Aulae Beatae Mariae Magdalenae Fundator long
munificentissimus,) proinde soli and uni Deo, de tot tantisque Beneficiis in
Nos collatis, Gratiarum actiones habendae sunt, per and propter Mediatorem and
Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Cujus meritis jam freti, ejusque adjuti
oratione, Deum Opt, Max. iisdem verbis comprecemur, quibus Ipse Incarnatus
precandum statuit.

Pater noster qui es in Coelis, sanctificetur Nomen tuum. Adveniat Regnum tuum.
Fiat voluntas tua sicut in Coelo, sic and in Terra. Panem nostrum quotidianum
da nobis hodie: and dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus
Debitoribus nostris. Et ne nos inducas in Tentationem, sed libera nos a Malo.
Nam tuum est Regnum, Potentia, and Gloria, in Secula Seculorum.

AMEN.
Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum: sive Regi, quasi
praecellenti; sive Ducibus, tanquam ab eo missis, ad vindictam malefactorum,
laudem vero bonorum.
. 1. Quod ab initio hujus Capitis huc usque dixerat in Thesi Beatus Petrus,
pergit porro jam per parts, and in Hypothesi explicare. Inprimis autem agit de
debita illa obedientia, quam and Legi, and Regi, quin and a Rege Deputatis
praestandam statuit. Ad quam felicius evincendam, Duobus nititur Argumentis;
Quorum alterum ab Authore, a Fine alterum mutuatur. Ordinationis hujus Civilis
(ut ut (...), sive Humanae Creaturae,) Deus ipse and Author and Vindex audit.
Nec enim ideo Humana dicitur, quod sit humanitu^ oriunda, (ut Graeca Scholia
and Didymus videntur velle interpretari,) sed quod hominum sit propria,
interque Homines constituta. Finis autem hujusce Ordinis non modo utilem eum
probat, sed usquequaque Necessarium; Quum hac potissimum ratione, and
Virtutibus and Vitiis stipendia constent: Illis nimirum Praemia, Istis Poenae
constituantur. In quibus duobus quasi Cuneis, sive vitae hujus Cardinibus,
Tranquillitatis nostrae Ianua in totum vertitur atque consistit.

. 2. Sed neque satis sibi duxit Beatus Petrus, hoc officii tantum in genere,
(...) praecepisse; verum insuper nos docet, (and copioso quidem Compendio,)
quonam ordine and methodo, quonam modo atque mensura, in hoc officio exequendo
utendum sit. Nempe a lege Evangelica praeceptum est, ut and Deo, and Regi, and
Regis nomine Gubernantibus Subjecti simus. Sed primum Deo, deinde Regi, demum a
Rege Deputatis. Deo scilicet propter seipsum, Regi vero propter Deum, a Rege
denique Deputatis propter Regem obtemperandum. Ita tamen propter Regem, ut
prius and potius propter Deum per quam Rex regnat, ac magistratus inferiores
Potestatis a Deo datae participes facit, tam His quem Illi parendum sit.

. 3. Ita autem distinguit Petrus inter Regem and Rectores a Rege missos, (Verbi
gratia inter Claudium qui dubio procul imperabat cum haec Epistola scriberetur,
Eosque Imperii procuratores qui tunc provincias Romanorum Claudii nomine
administrabant,) ut Illum vocet (...), Hos tantum (...). Utraeque voces quid
differant, ex diversis Scripturae Locis constare queat. Nam ut supremas
Potestates per (...) expressit Beatus Paulus, (Romans XIII, I,) Ita sanctus etiam
Matthaeus, de Romani Imperatoris Vicario loquens, (...) eum appellat, Mat. 27,
2.

. 4. Duo sunt igitur, inter alia, (quorum certe hic Textus feracior est quam ut
singula tractare per tempus liceat,) quae dignissima mihi videntur ut principe
loco dispiciantur; Magistratuum Ordinatio, and eorundem Subordinatio. Quumque
ita a Deo sit comparatum, ut suprema Potestas sit penes Regem, Potestas vero
Subordinata penes Populi Primores a Rege missos; tum His, tum Illi, sed cum
Discrimine obediendum. Nam (...). Regi quasi Praecellenti, (secundum vulgatam
versionem,) aut propter Ipsius Potestatem, (ut habet versio Arabica,) aut quta
omnia ei sunt, (ut habet Aethiopica,) aut propter ejus Imperium, (uti est apud
Syriacam.) Ut summatim Rem dicam, Cuivis Humanae Ordinationi, aut cuivis
Humanae Creaturae, (nam sic Apostolo (...) hic loqui placuit,) ea methodo ac
modo parendum docet Spiritus Sanctus, ut Regi in quantum Supremo Domino,
Reliquis in quantum a Rege missis, utrisque vero propter Deum, obsequii Debitum
sit persolvendum. Et inde Duo (ut modo dixi) sese offerunt explicanda; Nimirum
Ordinatio, and Subordinatio Magistratuum.

. 1. Ad primum membrum quod attinet, Argumentis fere innumeris evinci potest,
Quod Magistratus etiam civilis, aeque ac Ordo Ecclesiasticus, summo jure
censeri debet inter species (...). Caelitus scilicet oriundus, jureque Divino
constitutus. Et ut palam hoc fiat in ipso operis quasi Vestibulo, videtur mihi
nostra omnium maximopere interesse. Est enim illud vel luce clarius, and apud
omnes in confesso, quod si Populi Universi Vicarius Rex esset and Vicemgerens;
si solum Populi Minister and vindex Irae; si Potestates sublimiores a Populo
essent Ordinatae, (quod toties venditant and contendunt Hyperaspistae
Democratici,) si perverso hoc sensu humana essent Creatura, nec alio jure
fruerentur quam quod effraeni Multitudini acceptum ferunt; Actum esset illico
de Causa Regia, quam tanta animi confidentia in nos suscepimus asserendam.
Quapropter Illud ante omnia incumbit mihi evincendum, non a Populo simul
convento Ordinationis hujus Originem, (quod ipsi Notandum est, primo homines
non Dei praecepto, sed sponte adductos experimento Infirmitatis familiarum
segregum adversus violentiam, in societatem civilem coiisse, unde ortum habet
Potestas Civilis, quam ideo humanam ordinationem Petrus vocat. Grot. de Jure
Bell. and Pacis, l. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 7. page 86.
Grotio (...) errore patrio adhuc correpto humanitus contigit autumasse,) sed a
Deo constituente petendam esse.

. 2. Inprimis autem huc facit, quod Potestas hinc inde in sacris literis pro
ipsa Persona usurpatur, quae Potestatem Illam habet coelitus sibi demandatam.
Quod enim dicit Gentilis Ille, (...), (Mat. 8. 9.) perinde est ac si dixisset,
(...). Pari modo and istae phrases, Homo sum sub Potestate constitutus, (Luc.
7. 8.) Et omnis anima Potestatibus supereminentibus subjecta esto, (Romans 13.
1.) ut ut per modum abstractionis quoad sonum efferuntur, funt purae putae
Concretivae quoad significatum. Nam quos Apostolus (ad Romanos) (...) nuncupat,
Salvator noster (...) vocandos censuit. (Luc. 22. 25.) Cujusmodi metonymicam
loquendi rationem non in irrita usurpatam a spiritu sancto existimemus, sed eo
fine and proposito ut omnibus Subditis innotesceret, non duntaxat ad Personas
and nudam (...) Imperantium, verum insuper ad officium and (...) respiciendum,
quibus desuper instructi unctique sunt. Unde passim apud Homerum -- (...). Quin
and veteres Aegyptii in ea semper sententia erant, (ut Author est nobis
Diodorus,) (...). Diod Sic. l. 1.
Cui consonum est illud quod inter Placita Essenorum Porphyrius memorat, (...).

. 3. Quorsum autem Magistratus passim in vetere Instrumento per vocem Elohim
efferuntur? Exodus 22. 28.
Non propter aliquid Divinitatis ipsorum Essentiae inhaerentis, (quippe quibus
compertum est humanitus omnia evenire, aeque ac reliquis ex vulgo humani
Generis,) Sed inprimis ob rationem a Salvatore nostro exhibitam, nimirum quod
ad eos Sermo Dei factus est. (Joh. 10, 35.) vel (ut planius id exprimam, and
exegetice,) quod ad divinum illud munus ita divinitus sunt vocati, ut in eodem
obeundo ipsius Dei in Terris Vicarii sint. Ob secundam rationem a Moyse
redditam, Quia non hominis, sed 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
Dei Iudicium est; aut saltem aliquid divini admistum habet. (Deuteronomy. 1. 17.) ob
tertiam insuper rationem quam apud Psalmistam videre est, nempe quod Deus Illis
adest in Rebus Imperii Administrandis. (Psalm. 82. 1.) Unde legimus de Moyse,
quod erat in Deum Aaroni. (Exodus 4. 16.) Deusque dicitur Pharaonis ab ipso Deo
constitutus, (Exodus 7. 1.) nequaquam (...), been tamen (...), puta divinam
Auctoritatem, qua deo concedente munitus est. Psalm. 61.
Ego dixi vos Dii estis, id est (ut optime exponit Justinius Martyr, aut
Quisquis scripsit Quaestiones and Responsiones ad Orthodoxos, Justin. in qq.
and Resp. ad Orthod. q. 142. p. 378.
) Dedi vobis (...). proinde populum judicate, ac si Ego judicarem. Eodem plane
sensu and Illud dicitur (Psalm. 86. 8.) Non est similis Tui inter Deos, id est
Dei in Terris gerentes vicem, penes quos est civilis aut Ecclesiastica
Administratio. Ob quartam denique rationem, Dei nomine censentur, quia divini
sunt regalis officii Fructus, nimirum Pax, and Iustitia, ex eadem quasi Arbore
aequis passibus succrescentes.

. 4. Huc accedit quod viri principes and Psalm. 82. 6.
Filii Dei appellantur in sacra pagina. Ut cum dicuntur Filii Dei Filias
hominum deperiisse, (Genesis 6, 2,) Symmacus and Aquila (...), Filios Dei
vertendos censent. Non propter summam Sanctitatem qua Reges subditis
antecellunt, (Nam ex faece subditorum sunt Filii Dei Adoptivi,) nedum propter
Naturae prae reliquis homulis excellentiam, (nam unus Christus hoc pacto Filius
Dei est appellandus,) Sed propter Muneris Dignitatem statim a Deo
eminentissimam, qua Magistratus in Solio positi privatas omnibus anteponuntur;
vel propter Nomen Angelorum, quod cum Illis Spiritibus commune habent, qui and
Ipsi Filii Dei Iobi 1. 6. etc. 38. v. 7. 2 Samuel 14. 17. etc. 19. v. 27.
non uno loco denominantur. Et summa sane cum ratione dicuntur Angeli
Magistratus, partim quod Deus eorum opera in rebus mundi dispensandis (sive in
poenis sive in praemiis pendendis) utitur; partim quod Angelos Illos. Coelestes
perinde animi Puritate, ac splendore Majestatis refer debent. Idque ob Illam,
inter caeteras, quam Irenaeus innuit rationem; Cujus Iussu homines Nascuntur,
Iren. lib. 5.
Hujus Iussu and Reges constituuntur, apti iis qui ab ipsis regnantur.

. 5. Immo nec illud praetereundum, quod Reges non raro in Sacro Codice per
unctos Domini exprimuntur. (Id quod David de Saul dixit, 1 Samuel 24. 7.) non ob
illud duntaxat quod vulgo creditur, quia Reges Israelitici ad jura regia
promovendi, cum illa ungendi Caeremonia, jubente Deo inaugurabantur; (1 Samuel 9,
16. and cap. 15. ver. 1;) sed ea potissimum de Causa, quam Sanctus Paulus
assignavit, (ad Romans 13. 1.) quia legitima Potestas Regium munus obeundi, non
nisi coelitus and a Domino concedi queat. Cyrus enim, quantumvis Ethnicus, nec
unquam oleo delibutus, Christus tamen and unctus Domini ab ipso Domino
dicebatur. (Isa. 45. 1.) Quod manifestum Discrimen innuit inter Externam
Unctionem, qua Invasores Imperiorum perfundi possint, and Unctionem illam
Internam, qua Dynastae solum legitimi (bonae fidei possessores) non tantummodo
in Regnum, sed and in Ius regnandi admitti solent. Quod ad Priorem ungendi
rationem attinet, Haec in Unctos etiam Diaboli conferri potest, ideoque
contemptim per se habetur. Posterior autem ungendi ratio est quiddam divinitus
impertitum, and ad Unctos Domini constituendos, tum necessario requiritur, tum
sola sufficit. Nam ubi legitimus est successor, Unctione opus non est, ut recte
Iunius and Tremellius ad 2 Reg. 23. 30. Quocirca populus Israeliticus
Iehoachazum unxerunt, non ad aliquid Juris impertiendum, sed ut ejusmodi
Ceremonia testatum facerent, Regnum Armis Aegyptiorum aliquandiu intercisum,
quasi de integro Huic tradi contra Aegyptios defendendum.

. 6. Quarto loco vel inde constat de Magistratus Civilis Hierarchia; Quod,
sicut omne jus Paternum ex Iure Divino dimanavit, (idque ponitur extra omnem
controversiae aleam, siquidem Deus in Decalogo distinct jubet, ut unusquisque
Parentibus morem gerat,) I^a omne jus Regium a Paterno primitus dimanasse,
aliquanto luculentius per se videtur, quam ut in eo demonstrando prolixius
agam. Praeterquam enim quod palam constat, omne Regimen ab initio intra solius
Paterni Juris pomaeria clausum, non nisi tempore procedente in varias Formas
pullulasse; and utriusque generis (...) (Regnum scilicet and Sacerdotium) ad
Primogenitum apud Judaeos ex Dei Decreto pertinuisse; (ipsoque Judice
Aristotele, Arist. 7. Eudem. 10.
(...),) Accedit etiam illud notatu dignum, quod Rex quandoque in sacris
Literis per Patris Nomen enuntiatur. Ita enim David compellat Saulem, 1 Samuel
24, 11. Et quum Debora summa Rerum in populo Dei potita esset, non Reginam se,
aut Iudicem, sed Matrem in Israel vocandam duxit. (Jud. 5, 7.) Nec hoc in loco
reticendum, quod apud Hieron. l. 9. in Ezekiel.
Sanctum Hieronymum videre licet; nimirum Philistinos in more semper habuisse,
Reges suos ad unum omnes Abimelechi nomine compellare; quod quidem Patrem,
juxta ac Regem, felici omine consignificat. Et quandoquidem qui in Populo
Primas tenet, non magis Princeps, qu^m Pater, and Pater quidem Patriae vocari
solet, (secundum illud Xenophontaeum, Xenoph. (...). l. 8.
(...)) duplex inde Documentum and Principibus and Subditis haurire datur.
Principes scilicet admonentur, nequando secus illi in Subditos quam in liberos
animadvertant, iisque de Rerum affluentia Esa. 49. 23.
Nutriciorum instar prospiciant. Subditis insimul innuitur, eodem Tituli
compendio, ut Principes suos (quantumvis asperos) Parentum loco revereantur.

. 7. Quid, quod Populi Pastores identidem appellantur a Spiritu Sancto? Number ob
Naturae praestantiam aliquam, qua caeteris hominibus haud secus praestant, ac
homines caeteri suis Gregibus atque Armentis antecellunt? minime Gentium. Sed
multo potius quod eandem nascendi sortem perpessi, and ex eadem humo saepe
sublati, in id fastigium Majestatis ad Dei Nutum evehuntur, Deique in Terris
Thronum tenent. Augustine. de Civ. Dei. l. 5.
Eapropter Augustinus diserte docet, eundem Deum qui Majestatem Suavissimis
dedit Imperatoribus, puta utrique Vespasiano, dedisse etiam Domitiano, quamvis
Tyranno crudelissimo. Eundem Deum qui Constantino, etiam Apostatae Iuliano
Majestatem regiam commodavisse. Unde Supremis Magistratibus plane ex aequo
obediendum, sive aequis, sive iniquis, modo non sint absque Titulo, sed
exercitio solo Tyranni. Quippe caetera dispares, in hoc convenient, quod
Majestatem a Deo datam videntur ex aequo participare.

. 8. Quam reverenter denique Sancteque Majestas Regia haberi debeat, ut
Majestatis ipsius Dei sive Particula, sive Propago, vel inde licet conjectare,
immo fortiter arguere; quod ab omnibus in Theologia, Iurisque Prudentia
versatissimis, Crimen laesae Majestatis Sacrilegio proximum judicatur. Immo
crediderim esse Piaculum Sacrilegii nomine censendum, Vicarium Dei, and Unctum
Dei, and Ordinationem Dei impetere, adeoque ipsum Deum in ejus Diacono violare.
Ita enim Beatus Paulus de Potestate and Persona Regali statuit, in Epistola ad
Roma^os, capite decimo tertio; ubi quinquies de utrisque sic scriptum legimus.
(...), v. 1. (...), v. 2. (...), v. 3. (...), v. 4. (...), v. 6. usque adeo
verum est quod Sanctus Paulus asseverat, (...), ut Ipse Dominus and Salvator
ipsam Pilati (...) (siquam saltem haberet) contra seipsum etiam adstrueret.
(...) (inquit Ille) (...). (Joh. 19, 11.) Ideoque cum Samuel affatus Populum
haec verba praemisisset, 1 Samuel 18. 18.
[En Regem quem elegistis and petiistis,] Illa statim subjunxit eodem spiritus
anhelitu, [Ecce Deus posuit eum Regem super vos.] Id est, Regem deposcentibus
Deus vobis Hunc dedit. Vos elegistis, sed Deus posuit. Vos in speciem
elegistis, 1 Samuel 9. 16. etc. 10. v. 24.
cap. 12, v. 13; sed quem Deus jam dudum and in solidum elegerat, cap. 10, v.
24. Quid, Iun. Brut. Vindic. contra Tyran. Qu. 3. page 268.
quod Ipse Iunius Brutus simul fatetur and ostendit, Deum Reges instituere,
Regna Regibus dare, ipsos Reges eligere? Quibus feliciter concessis, Juris
Regii non refert, ut Electio quae Dei est suffragiis Populi comprobetur. Nec
multum videtur interesse, si Populus Reges constituere aut Regna tradere
dicatur, dummodo Deus etiam conceditur cum Regna dare, tum Reges ipsos
instituere. Quinimmo Reges a Deo non tantum eligi, ^ed and constitui, Iren. ubi
supra. Clem. Constitut. l. 7. c. 17.
Irenaeus and Clemens Authors sunt. (...) Quod Reges regnant per Deum, (...)
affirmatur ab ipso Deo, Prove. 8, 15. Neque tantum permissive, (ita enim and
Diabolus per ipsum Deum regnare dicendus est,) sed per Deum constitutive, prout
Viri oculatissimi Locum illum interpretantur. Et been regnant per Deum, qui
solum propter Deum regnare debent, Potestatisque Judiciariae Capitale
supplicium infligendi Deum solum Authorem habent. De cujus rei ratione vel inde
breviter nobis constat, Quod Nemini liceat per Dei leges mortem sibi accersere.
Nam quod sibi n^n licet contra se, Id ut aliis contra se liceat, aut sibi
contra alios, nemo potest efficere. Ratio est, quia Nemo Jus aliis confer
potest quod ipse prius in seipso conferendum non habuit; nec plus sibi adversus
Alium, quam adversus se sibi licere queat. Ergo Legem promulgare sub Paena
Capitis observandam, and Legem istam violantibus sententiam Capitis irrogare,
illud est Praerogativae quod soli Deo Magistratus acceptum ferunt. Unde and
liquido satis constat de eorundem Hierarchia.

. 9. Sed hic objiciant Misobasiles, and magni Nominis Litigatores, qu^d
aliquammultis ante seculis quam Populus Israeliticus a Deo Regem efflagitaslet,
Moses de Rege illo praedixit, Deuteronomii 17. 14, 15. Quum perveneris in
Terram quam Dominus Deus tibi possidendam dedit, in eaque habitaveris; Tu
dices, (inquit Moses) constituam Regem super me, ut caeterae Gentes quae sunt
in circuitu; tum vero eum Regem constitues quem Dominus elegerit e medio
fratrum tuorum. Unde elicitur Argumentum, qu^d licet Regis Electio ad Deum
spectet, ejusdem tamen constitutio sit penes Populum.

. 10. Huic autem objectamento, ut ut palmarium esse videtur, and quod in os
nobis obganniunt Incerti vulgi Assentatores, videtur posse multifariam, and
tamen breviter os obstrui.

Inprimis enim Regem a Deo petiit iste Populus, utpote gnarus and sibi
conscius, sui juris non esse, Regem aliquem creare. Secundo, dices Tu,
[Constituam.] Sed a Dicto ad Factum, prout a Facto ad Ius, pessime valet
argumentum. Tertio. constituam Regem (non subter, sed) super me. Ergo Populo
Universo, non tantum singulis in Populo, (fatente populo universo,) superior
audit. Dato enim, (at non concesso,) quod summa Rerum ab origin penes Populum
permansisset; si tamen Regi a se electo ita sese addixit in Servitutem, ut
totum illud quod habuerat regnandi Jus a semetipso abdicaverit, and in alium
plane transcripserit; nec amplius retinet, nec jure potest revocare, quod
sciens volensque non-suum fecit. Quarto, Moses addidit [constitues,] non omnino
imperative, sed modo prorsus indicativo. Praedixit quod de facto futurum
viderat, non praecepit quod Ipsi de Iure facerent. Aut, quinto, (...), per
vulgarem figurate loquendi modum, constituere dicuntur, Quem non-recusant, and
a Deo agnoscunt Constitutum. Sexto. non quemcunque constitues, sed quem Dominus
tuus elegerit. Et Regem sane quemcunque, modo a Domino suo ^lectum, non est
Populi reprobare, quantumvis magni; nisi forte Deus Ipse (Dominus Ille
Exercituum) qui singulis in Populo major esse non negatur, universis tamen
minor habendus sit. Septimo. dixit Populus Samueli, Praepone nobis Regem, (1 Samuel 8. 5.) Et Commate Sexto, da nobis Regem. and 1 Samuel 10. 1.
Commate 19. Rex nobis praeerit. Dixitque Samuel, (Saulem Regem allocutus,)
Unxit te Iehova in Antecessorem super suam Possessionem. quod est perinde, ac
si dixisset, Nihil aliud nunc feci, quam quod ante in mandatis ab ipso Domino
acceperam. Edixit enim Jehova, (verse 22,) Ausculta voci eorum, ut praeficias
iis Regem. Non ergo Populus sibi ipsi, sed Samuel Populo; neque Samuel sua
sponte, sed ipso Deo praecipiente, Regem Populo praeficiebat.

. 11. Et haec sufficiat praelibasse de Magistratuum Ordinatione. Quae ideo
(...), sive Humanae Creaturae censetur titulo, non quod non sit (...), planeque
divinitus oriunda, sed quod Hominum sit propria; and, quantumlibet a Deo, apud
homines tamen constituta.

. 1. Deinceps sequitur expendenda Subordinatio Quam ita nobis hoc loco
descripsit Petrus, ut satis liquido edocuerit, Quid ^uique Magistratuum, and
Quo sit ordine deferendum. Subjiciamini (inquit Ille) omni humanae creaturae,
sive ordinationi, and propter Deum subjiciamini. Non tantum Claudio Imperatori,
verum and Furio Camillo Scriboniano, aliisque etiam Caesareis in aliis
Provinciis Procuratoribus. Non tantum Regi morem gerite, sed and a Rege
Subrogatis, and Provincias particulares Regis vice administrantibus. Neque
summi duntaxat, sed imi subsellii Administris. Universis inquam and singulis
qui de Iure vobis praesunt, ac legitime praeficiuntur; sed suo ordine and loco,
suo modo atque mensura, suum cuilibet obsequium praestandum est. Nam Regi in
quantum supremo Domino, Reliquis in quantum a Rege missis. Regi soli secundum
Deum, Reliquis vero secundum Regem, licet utrisque propter Deum, Divus Petrus
hoc loco parendum vult.

. 2. Ad quam Doctrinam Apostolicam tam claram, tam facilem, tam omnium oculis
expositam, and paci publicae conservandae ab omni part necessariam, nunquam
satis mirari possum, neque Calvinum, neque Paraeum, neque Plessiacum Mornaeum,
(viros acri licet Ingenio and alioqui perspicacissimos,) eo modo quo decebat
animum suum advertisse; sed usque adeo aut caligasse ad tam divinum Scripturae
Lumen, aut data opera Caecutiisse, ut affirmare non-dubitaverint de popularibus
Magistratibus, (nempe de puris putis Subditis in Magistratu inferiore
constitutis,) eos ita ab ipso Deo Libertatis popularis Tutores fieri, uti
adversus ipsum Regem (in hac viriliter asserenda) etiam manu armata grassari
liceat.

. 3. Contra Cujusmodi Grassatores de Regum jure edisserturo, videtur mihi Res
tota inde usque ab origin, non modo quoad Naturam, verum etiam quoad Nomen,
and quoad Nominis rationem, petenda esse.

. 4. Et quia multum est Discriminis inter Subjectum and Adjunctum, de quorum
debita convenientia incumbit mihi dispiciendum; Separatim inprimis videndum
habeo, quid sit Ius quod ipsum quaeritur, deinde quid Reges de quibus
quaeritur. Ita postmodum conjunctim atque dilucide innoteseet, Quod and
Quatenus Adjunctum Subjecto competat.

. 5. Ius, pro triplici Respectu secundum quem ad Subjectum referri solet,
trifariam fere intelligitur. Si ad Personam referatur, est quidem Qualitas
moralis, personae competens, ad aliquid just vel habendum vel agendum. Si
referatur ad ipsam Rem, Justitiae scilicet materiam, Nihil aliud sane videtur
quam quod est Iustum significare, and Naturae Societatum ratione utentium non
repugnat. Si ad cujuslibet virtutis materiam spectat, eodem redit quo Ipsa Lex,
ut statuatur esse Actuum moralium Regula, non ad illud duntaxat quod Iustum
dicimus, verum etiam ad Illud quod Rectum, obligans. Jus, priori modo acceptum,
Potestas passim appellatur. Quae ita differt a Potentia, ut illa moraliter, and
de jure, haec de facto, and Physiologice, apud Authors usurpetur. Illa graece
(...), haec (...) nuncupatur. Vis qualiscunque Potentia dicitur; Potestas non
item, nisi legitime exeratur. Penes Tyrannos absque Titulo saepe summa regnandi
Potentia manet. (Cujus furfuris erat Cromwellus nostras, Humani generis
Propudium post homines natos iniquissimum.) Potestas vero non competit nisi
legitimis Magistratibus; qui utcunque exercitio Tyranni sint, cast tamen
sancteque apud Subditos quoscunque haberi debent, quippe qui numinis sunt
Vicarii optimo jure constituti. Adsit modo Possessor justus, de Personae
injustitia nulla nobis lis erit. Qui effraenem sine Titulo Potentiam habent,
Deo tantum permittente; Illis saepe resisti nequit. Sed qui legitimam
Potestatem, Deo caelitus constituente; Illis nunquam resisti debet. Eaque
propter Beatus Paulus Pontifici Maximo conviciatus per Imprudentiam, Veniam
illico aucupatur Ignorantiae suae concedendam, (Act. 25, 5.) Nesciebam (inquit)
Fratres Pontificem esse Maximum. scriptum est enim, Principi Populi tui non
maledices. Ac si dixisset, Magistratibus etiam injustis summam deberi
reverentiam; nec ex ore tantum Illam, sed and ex animo deferendam.

. 6. Quod qu^ clarius elucescat, transeamus evestigi^ ab Adjuncto ad subjectum:
A Iure sc. quod quaeritur, ad ipsum Regem de quo quaeritur.

. 7. Nomen Regis a Regendo, ut Nomen Principis a primas ferendo fluxit. Illo
Imperii Summitatem, hoc Ordinis Primatum, utroque Regis Privilegium simulque
Officium indigitante; Ita ipsa Etymologia comparatum est, ut auditis etiam
Titulis quibus per leges insigniuntur, statim and Muneris and Mercedis Memoria
Regibus refricetur. Sive enim per Caput totius corporis politici, (quemadmodum
Jud. 11. 8.
Ieptha a Gileaditis,) sive etiam per ipsum Verticem, partem Capitis
sublimiorem, (ut Tropus iste explicatur ab Expositoribus Deuteronomy. 33. 20 Esa. 3.
17.
Septuaginta,) sive per Clypeos Psalm. 47. 9.
Terrae, sive per Terrae Psalm. 82. 5.
Fundamenta, sive per Annulos sigillares, (ut Hagg. 2. 23.
Zerubbabel a Jehovah,) sive per Jer. 51. 25.
Montes, sive per Isa. 3. 7.
Medicos, sive per Populi Number. 27. 17
Pastores, sive demum per 2 Reg. 13. 5.
Salvatores, qui primas tenent in Magistratu describi solent; eorum aut
Dignitas, quoad Originem, aut Auctoritas, quoad Potentiam, aut utilitas, quoad
officium, nec obscure quidem nec invenuste Audientium animis instillantur. Rex
denique a Regendo vel ideo fluxit, quia Deo solo minor Regendi Ius habet
quicquid nomine Subditorum venire solet. Et quicquid uspiam Titulorum in Sacris
Literis ei ascribitur, videtur prorsus ex industria ad id inventum, ut solum
supra se Deum Rex habere significetur.

. 8. Liquet autem ex Iure Regni, quod in Libro Samuelis legendum prostat,
Regibus legum Violationem sine ullo apud Homines supplicio cedere. 1 Samuel 8.
10, 11, etc. ad verse. 19.
Unde crimine vacare dicuntur Reges, (Quod inter Juris nostratis placita
agnoscunt facile Juris Confulti,) non perinde ac si reapse insontes sint, sed
ex eo quod rerum a se gestaru^ rationi reddendae non sint obnoxii; atque eo
saltem sensu soluti legibus, in quantum a Causa unquam dicenda (quantumvis Rei)
liberantur. Rex vere dicitur, cui Subditi vel primarii fidem jurant, cujus
Imaginem nummus praefert, cujus legibus omnes parent a cujus Judiciis ad
neminem provocatur, penes que^ est (...) non solummodo (...), sive Iudiciaria,
verum and (...), sive Legislativa; vel (quod eodem fere redit,) Potestas (...)
(Nam Par in Parem non habet condendi leges Potestatem; ut solius sit Regis, Jus
ipsum dare, uniuscujus que vero Judicis, Jus datum dicere.) Unde and (...) Rex
(...) antiquitus vocabatur, ob hanc potissimum rationem, quod etiamsi secundum
leges imperitare teneatur, puta in foro Conscientiae, In for^ tamen humano ita
legibus absolvitur, and ipse sibi suisque in Legem cedit, ut impune quidlibet
faciendi Ius quoddam habeat. Solus Ille dicendus Rex, cui competit Majestas;
Quae ab omnibus aliis Titulis inferiori Magistratui competentibus, (utpote
(...) in se complectens,) immane quantum discriminatur. Nihil autem Majestati
tam proprium est, quam (...), (id est,) a nemine pendere, nemini esse obnoxium,
a nemine posse judicari. Been igitur Rex Otanes apud Herodotum dicebatur (...).
Been etiam Xiphilinus, (...), (aliter enim (...), id est supremus Dominatus,
nequaquam esset.) sed optime omnium Cassiodorus hanc rem expressit. Causa
Regiae potestatis supernis solis est applicanda Iudiciis; quandoquidem e Coelo
petita est, and soli Coelo debet Innocentiam. Tantum abest ut Regnum habeat qui
Potestati qualicunque rationem reddere obligatur, ut (...), apud Pausaniam
opponantur. Solus Ille Rex est (ipso fatente Iunio Bruto) cujus amplissima
censetur Potestas, aut qui Supremus est Gubernator, quemadmodum Junius and
Tremellius complusculis Locis interpretantur. Supremus autem est Gubernator,
cujus Potestas Gubernandi praecipue vertitur and versatur, in condendis
legibus, iisdemque tollendis cum opus fuerit; in foederibus faciendis, Belloque
and Pace decernendis; in vectigalibus ac Tributis ad usum Publicum exigendis;
in Magistratibus Inferioribus pro arbitratu suo creandis; in honoribus
Titulisque prout voluerit conferendis; in Conciliis and Synedriis pro imperio
indicendis; Et (quod rei est Caput) in se suisque quibuscunque, ut ut atrociter
delinquentibus, a Judiciis tamen Humanis cum visum fuerit eximendis. Ut Rex
reapse non sit, sed tantummodo (...), qui auctoritate suadendi, non jubendi
Potestate munitus est; aut cujus Actus qualescunque alterius juri substituuntur.

. 9. Cujus Rei veritatis Argumento esse potest, and fidem facit, quod apud
veteres Latinos ita Regnum distinguitur a Principatu, ut Hic ab Illo immane
quantum superetur. Caesar enim narrat de quodam Gallo, quod principatum Galliae
obtinuisset, cum Regnum solummodo affectaret. Et Suetonius de Caligula Sermonem
habens, affirmat parum abfuisse, quin speciem Principatus in Regnum
converteret. Diciturque Maroboduus (apud Velleium Paterculum) non duntaxat
Principatum, sed and ipsam vim Regiam complexus animo. Et etiamsi apud
nonnullos ista vocabula adhibeantur ac si essent (...), (Nam and Duces
Lacedaemonii, quamvis Ephoris Subjecti, Regis nomine gaudebant, plane ut
Vandali in Africa, and Gothi in Hispania, quorum Reges exauctorabantur quoties
populo displicebant, Regnum habere prae se ferebant, nimirum (...), ut modo
dixi, and plane (...)) Ita tamen Aristoteles distinguendum existimavit, inter
Regnum (...) vereque dictum, and purum putum Principatum, (qui apud Vandalos
and Gothos and Lacones obtinebat, Regnique nomen mentiebatur,) ^ti hunc inter,
and Illum, species aliquot interposuerit. Illi competit Principatus, qui sub
certis conditionibus in Dignitatem suam adsciscitur. Unde and caute
distinguendum est inter Dignitatem, and P^testatem; Patrocinium inter, and
Imperium; in fide esse, and in Ditione. Been potest esse Princeps, in cujus
fide est populus aut Patrocinio: Solus autem Rex erit, sub cujus pleno Imperio
and Ditione. Quocirca Carolus Ille Quintus, ut ut summus Imperator, and totius
fere Belgii non minus quam Hispaniae revera Rex esset, Brabantinae tamen
Provinciae non nisi Princeps and Patronus censendus erat. Quippe qui pactum cum
ea iniit, ut sibi nulla obsequii, clientelae, ac obedientiae officia a populis
deferantur, quibus Ipse praestare nolit integra quae solenni religione
sposponderit. Sub cujusmodi condition Regem suum Poloni eligunt, ut quo die
Rex ipse fidem suam non liberat, Populus illico universus a fide sua liberetur.
Illud autem est Regnum latinissim^ sic dictum, cui Tria illa competunt, quae
Thucydides Civitati quae vere sit Civitas impertivit; ut nimirum sit (...). Id
est, ut Legibus, and Iudiciis, and Magistratibus suis utatur. Unde and Sophocli
dicebatur (...), Straboni vero (...), Plutarcho denique (...).

. 10. Et quicquid uspiam de Regno, (quod subjectum est commune hujusce Juris de
quo agitur,) ex Authoribus Antiquissimis exscribi potest, eo pertinet and
collimat, ut ipsius etiam Regis (qui subjectum est proprium) Naturam explicet.
Quippe cujus est, (Plutarcho Judice,) (...) audit apud Aeschylum; and (quod
eodem plane facit) (...), Dioni dicitur. Id ni fuerit, profecto Populus Rex
Regum ubique Regnorum vocandus erit; quin and omne genus Regimina reapse erunt
Popularia. Nam Populi Liberi qui vere sit Liber, and Regis propre sic dicti,
eadem plane est ratio. Libertas autem civilis sine summo Imperio non solummodo
non constat, sed and concipi non potest. Ut Rex revera sit mancipium, sine
Imperii Summitate, quibuscunque demum Titulis per contumelias and ludibria
gaudere soleat.

. 11. Qui diligenter observarunt, quod Regibus Hebraeis verbera saepe
infligerentur, si eas Leges violassent quae de Regis officio manebant scriptae;
(qui tamen Reges quin in plerisque summo jure imperaverint, dubitari quidem
nefas magnus Grotius arbitrabatur, inquantum Populus iste Regem sibi dari
efflagitaverant, Qualem habebant vicinae Gentes, quae, quum essent Orientales,
addicte admodum Grot. de Iure Belli and Pacis, lib. 1. c. 3. Sect. 20.
regnabantur;) fatentur simul quod sua sponte, atque in signum Poenitentiae
ejusmodi verbera suscipiebant; nec a Lictore caedebantur, sed ab eo quem
vellent, eoque modo quo vellent, and sic a Paenis coactivis immunes erant. Nec
quicquam officit Majestati vel Dictatoris absolutissimi, si iis Legibus
obtemperet, quarum Ipse and Sanctor, and Vindex est; vel si ea supplicia
tulerit, quae sciens volensque Ipse sibi irrogaverat. Satis autem ostendit
Samuel, in Jure Regum describendo, adversus Regum Injurias nullam in Populo
Potestatem relictam esse. Quod recte Veteres collegerunt, ex eo quod David
affatus Deum, (etiam post alias atque alias a se illatas, non tantum
Bathshebae, and Uriae, sed and omnibus Subditis Injurias,) Soli Tibi peccavi,
dixisse dicitur, Psalm. 51. 4. Nempe ad Regum Ius summum and Illud spectat, (si
vocabuli Rigore velimus uti,) summam Subditis Injuriam infer posse, nec
iniqua tantum facere, sed facienda etiam praecipere. Ita tamen ut nomen Iuris
non ad Iustitiam Praeceptorum referri debeat, sed ad solam Praecipientis
Impunitatem. Nec ita Impunitas intelligitur, quasi Regibus supplicium omnino
nullum, sed quasi nullum nisi a Deo legitime queat irrogari. Cum omria Illis
licere dicimus, Nihil aliud intelligimus, quam omnia Illis impune cedere;
satisque ad Paenam censendum esse, quod Deum in Coelis Ultorem habent.

. 12. Incommoda autem objicientibus quae hinc sequuntur aut sequi possunt, si
ad Injurias impune inferendas Ius regium extendatur; In promptu habeo
respondendum, Nullam formam Politiae absque Incommodis apud mortales vel fingi
posse; Nullos hominum in Terris ab omni part beatos esse; Illum statum
praeferendum, non qui malis omnino nullis, sed qui minimis urgetur. Minus autem
Incommodorum constat esse sequuturum, si omnia uni licere detur, quam si ratio
actionum reddenda sit. Nam si Reges etiam in seculo pro Tribunalibus humanis
sistendi essent, nunquam Domus Regnatrices in tuto essent permansurae; Ipsa
Regna Resque Publicae mox deinde convellerentur, si iis ipsis qui subduntur Jus
regnandi subderetur cum ipso Rege. Nemo vero inficias iverit, Publicam Pacem
and Quietem quovis pretio redimendam. At neque Quies sine Armis, neque Arma
sine stipendiis, Tacit. Hist. 4.
neque stipendia sine Tributis, nec Tributa sine Regis Imperio summo, sive
(...) haberi queunt. Et qui summum Imperium habet, non potest non patere
multorum Odiis. Unde securitas Imperantis est omni modo munienda; Et summus
ubique Gubernator perinde (...) esse debet, atque (...) apud Graecos, qui etiam
in Praeliis flagrantissimis, atque ab hostibus infensissimis, ut sancte semper
haberetur in more erat.

. 13. Sed and praeterquam quod Incommoda neque solvunt Argumentum neque
conficiunt, Jus regium non ex eo quod His aut Illis videtur optimum, sed solum
ex ejus voluntate unde ipsum Jus oritur, est metiendum. Voluntas autem Dei in
verbo suo manifestatur; unde Regis Jus summum impune quid^ibet faciendi
irrefragabilibus Argumentis firmari possit. E. G. 1 Samuel 8. 11, etc. Eccles. 8.
4. Romans 13. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20, 21.

. 14. Nec quicquam in eo derogatur Divini Verbi Testimoniis, quod Ethnicorum
Coryphaei in eandem ubique sententiam eunt. Seneca Bruto errorem exprobrat,
Sen. de Benef. l. 2. c. 20.
graviterque in eum censuram agit, quod Regis Nomen extimuerit, cum optimus
status Civitatis sub Rege sit. Neque enim omnino quaeritur, An sit serviendum,
sed potius utri duorum, Regi scilicet an Plebi servire praestet; uni soli, an
Universis. Omne Tyrannidis Exercitium per se est malum, Cic. de Legibus lib. 3.
(inquit Cicero,) sed eatenus est ferendum, immo etiam and praeferendum,
quatenus Bonum quod in eo quaesitum est sine isto malo non haberemus. Et vel
Incommoda cum Commodis sunt amplectenda, vel haec cum illis mittenda sunt. Unde
Cappadoces apud Strabonem, cum oblata a Romany Libertas esset Popularis,
oblatam valde noluerunt, sub Rege vitam praeferentes. Strab. lib. 2. mihi p.
540.
(...). Ac si nulla sine Rege genuina Libertas haberi posset, quia nec ulla
sine Rege Salus existit Diuturna. Sicut autem Potestas Regia sub se reliquas
complectitur, Patriam scilicet, and Herilem, Ita in Res singulorum majus est
Dominium Regis ad Bonum commune promovendum, quam Dominorum singularium, ad
Bonum proprium; and unusquisque Reipublicae, ad usus publicos, long magis
obligatur quam Creditori; (ut habet Regula Juris-Prudentium.) Cujus Regulae
ratio est, (uti ex Ethicis Aristotelicis videtur nihi colligendum) (...) Unde
Plinius ad Trajanum, Regis est quicquid est omnium. Et Philo Judaeus (...)
explicatius aliquanto id ipsum asserit. (...).

. 15. Et si ita se Res habeat, ut quicquid pretiosi apud Subditos custoditur,
eorum qui regnant magis sit, quam Possidentium; Et in Regno recte sic dicto,
Tacit. l. 8.
Vnusimperitet nullis jam exceptionibus, non precario regnandi jure; Si de
privatis judicare ad Magistratus pertineat inferiores, de Magistratibus illis
ad Principem, de Principe vero ad solum Deum; Si qui vere Rex est non duntaxat
ex legibus, verum etiam in Leges Imperium habeat; nec aliter constet Regale
Regimen, nisi sui plane sit Juris, ipsumque (...) Ipsi maneat inviolatum;
exinde statim conficitur, (and consequentia quidem ineluctabli,) Quod
Magistratus Inferiores, ut ut in unum coeuntes, Populique Universi gerentes
vicem, and a Romano etiam Pontifice quomodolibet animati, Regem tamen non
possunt sine crimine Capitali Armis aggredi, aut per Dei saltem leges ei litem
intendere, aut quocunque demum praetextu quicquam Illi intentare.

. 16. Quod ex Praemissis Consectarium, etiamsi ex Praemissis sit usque adeo
luculentum, ut vehementer sit ignarus qui illud nescit, and deplorati plane
ingenii qui non agnoscit; Quinimmo pluribus Testimoniis e sacra Pagina
expromptis, pluribus etiam seculorum apud Histoticos exemplis, pluribus denique
Sapientum and Sanctorum Martyriis comprobetur, quam ut hodie in Dubium vocari
debeat; quia tamen hoc vitium praesentis seculi videatur, ut nihil sit tam
firmum quod non convellitur, nihil tam sanctum quod non facile violatur, nihil
denique tam certum quod non voeatur in controversiam; non solummodo non
inutilis, sed and apprime necessaria videri poterit, tam conspicui Axiomatis in
tanta Luce Elucidatio.

. 17. Quod etiamsi cum bono Deo in animo habeam effectum dare; impraesentiarum
tamen hoc facere, neque per vestram mihi licebit (Dilecti Fratres) Patientiam,
nec per Tempus huic Penso ex consuetudine praestitutum, nec per tremenda illa
mysteria quae adhuc restant percipienda. Quorum idoneae Perceptioni quo
fructuosius velificemini,

Gratia Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, Dilectio Patris, and Communicatio Spiritus
Sancti sit cum omnibus vobis in Secula Seculorum.

FINIS.
THE PURIFICATION OF OUR LADY, AND PRESENTATION OF OUR LORD.

A SERMON Preached before the KING At WHITE HALL upon Candlemas Day, 1661.

LUKE 2. 22. And when the Days of her Purification according to the Law of
Moses, were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the
Lord.
. 1. Upon the Feast of the Nativity, our Lord himself was a Present. Upon the
Feast of the Epiphanie, He was Presented. And now on the Feast of Purification,
He purposely comes to Present Himself.

He was a Gift sent at Christmas, from God to Men. At Twelftide as God, he is
said to have received Gifts of Men. And now at Candlemas, as Man, he is a
Gift unto God for the Sins of Men. At the 16 verse of this Chapter, the Rural
Votaries from the Fold did find him weeping in his Cratch. At the 21 verse we
find him bleeding in His Cradle. But in the words of this Text, we find Him
smiling (as we may guess) in his Mothers Arms. She devoutly carrying Him, and
her Devotion carrying Her, and the Law of Moses carrying Both, at once that
She may be Purified, and He presented unto the Lord.

. 2. I have desired so much the rather, in the choice of this Text, to take
advise with the Rubric, and the Gospel appointed for the Day, Because we have
hardly escaped an Age of so much ignorance in the Canons, and Disobedience to
the Commands of our English Church, that unless the old custom be now revived,
the People of England (like the Italian Priest,) will be in danger of disputing
in time to come, whether the Rubric be Fish or Flesh; and be as apt to be in
doubt, as the Man in Poggius, whether the Pentecost were a Man or a Woman.
Again I choose so much the rather, to do the work of each day on the day it
self, because the Festivals of the Church being considered in conjunction, do
comprehend the Fundamentals of Christian Faith. And so a Pertinent discourse
upon each of Them, will (when the Calendar is expired) become a Body of
Divinity.

. 3. I shall therefore make have to the due Solemnity of the Day; and by
premising its several Names, shall give a guess at some part of its Nature too.
It Is called the Feast of Purification, from the Pure Virgins being cleans'd
from her Mosaical Impurity. The word Impurity being used by such a Scriptural
Catachresis, as only to signify the yoke, or the obligation, which by the
ordinance of Moses was fastened on her. It Is called the Feast of Presentation,
from our Lords condescension to be presented unto the Lord. It might have been
called the Feast of Ransom, because no sooner was he presented and given to
God, but he was presently bought back with a Piece of Silver. 'Twas commonly
called Hypapante throughout the Churches of the East, from the Interview and
meeting betwixt our Savior and good old Simeon, (v. 28.) Candlemas it was
called, or the Feast of Lights, because of a Custom still retained in the
Church of Rome, though worthily cast off by the Church of England; for that of
old it was the Day wherein they consecrated Candles, and that in honor to the
Idol which was commonly called Februa. A Goddess feigned to be propitious to
pregnant Women in their Child-births; and therefore allowed to have the
Privilege of giving a Name to this Month, as well as the mode of Solemnizing
this very Day.

. 4. From whence (by the way) 'twill not be useless to observe, that the
purifying of Women after the Agonies of their Childbirth, is a thing common to
us of Christendom, not only with the Jews, but the Gentiles too; and may be
matter of contention to the Malice or Ignorance of a Sect, which is either so
stupid as not to know, or else so obstinate as not to acknowledge, or at least
so over peevish as not to admit of a consideration, That the very same custom
in several Places, may receive its Beginning from God and Belial; though not
observed in the same, but in a contrary manner; not with the same, but with a
contrary mind; nor at all to the same, but to a contrary end. (...) (says
Gregory Nazianzen) (...). The Jew keeps Holy Day, but according to the Letter.
(...) The Gentile keeps Holy Day, but according to the Flesh. (...), The
Christian also keeps Holy Day, but according to the Spirit.

. 5. Let us Rejoice then on This Day, because it is the Day which the Lord has
made. And again let us rejoice, even because it is the Day which has made the
Lord. I mean has made him, of a Lord, to become a Servant; has made him, of a
God, to become a Votary; has made him of a Giver become a Gift. The Lord
himself, on this Day, having been brought unto Jerusalem, to be presented unto
the Lord.

. 6. And as the Text does thus instruct us to the Solemnity of the Day; so the
double Solemnity of the Day does teach us how to divide the Text; or rather the
Text divides it self into these two Generals.

The Purification of our Lady, and the Presentation of our Lord. For each of
which compellations, we have not only Custom, but Reason too. For as Christ in
the Greek does import a Lord, so Mary in the Hebrew is known to signify a
Lady. And it is obvious to infer, That She may well be our Lady, who was the
Mother of our Lord.

In both these Generals put together, there are seven Particulars to be
observed.

First the Actions, which are expressed; (...), they brought, (...) they
presented. Next the Agents, which are implied; namely the Relations and Friends
of Christ. They brought, and They presented. Thirdly the Subject, (...), they
brought Him. Fourthly the Place; (...), to Jerusalem. Fifthly the End; (...),
to present him unto the Lord. Sixthly the Time, (...), when the days were
accomplished wherein the Mother was to be purifyed. Last of all the Obligation
and Inducement unto the whole; and that is (...), the Law of Moses.

To go no farther than the two Generals, were too little for the Text; And yet
to insist on each Particular, would be as certainly too much for the Time
allowed. And therefore I shall pitch on a Middle course; so extending the
Generals, and so contracting the Particulars, as to wind them up together into
these four Bottomes.

The Purification of the Parent, at once a Maid and a Mother too.

The presentation of her Son, at once presented unto the Lord, and the Lord
presented.

Next the Circumstances or Adjuncts of Time and Place, wherewith these Actions
were to be clothed.

Lastly the Rule of the Actions and Adjuncts too, unto which they both are to
be conformed.

. 1. I must premise, touching the first, the Purification of the Virgin, (the
first in Order, though not in Dignity, and perhaps to be preferred for giving
the Title unto the Day,) That a legal Cleansing or Purification must needs
imply and presuppose a legal Impurity and Pollution; for which the Mother being
delivered, and the Babe newly Born, Levit. c. 12. and c. 15.
did stand condemned by the Law to a kind of Excommunication, to wit an
absolute Exclusion, during the time of their uncleanness, as well from the
Touch of a private Person, as from an Interest and share in the Public
Meetings. First from the Touch of a private Person, The Mother, like her Babe,
if She brought forth a Son, was no longer excluded then until the eighth Day;
And no longer, if a Daughter, than till the fourteenth. But from the public
and solemn Meetings the prohibition was more severe; for if she brought forth a
Son, she was excluded for 40 days; if a Daughter, for seventy four. Again the
Infant, if put to Nurse, remained unclean but for a Month; but continuing with
the Mother, the legal uncleanness continued also.

. 2. Now this imputative uncleanness may seem to be an Adambration of that
(...). Philo.
Original Vitiosity, with which our Nature was corrupted by the Sin of the
first Adam, and was by consequence to be purified by the Innocence of the
second. For as the legal uncleanesse was not so nulled upon the 8 Day, as to
exempt the persons cleans'd from being purified on the 40; (...). Iamblicus.
Aristoteli vero dicitur (...).
(without which later purification they were not to enter into the Sanedrim,
and sure much less into the Temple;) we may say in like manner of original
Sin, It has taken so deep a Root in the posterity of Adam, that however it
were remitted both in the Jewish Circumcision, and Christian Baptism, yet its
Relics and Dreggs do so stick in Both, as to exclude us from the Communion
and fellow-membership with the Saints, (supposing we live to a riper Age,)
until we are purified by Repentance in the Blood of the Lamb, whereof the legal
purification was but an Emblem. And this may prompt us to give a Reason, why
at the time of Purification there was to be offered unto the Lord, either a
Lamb and a Pigeon, (that is, if the Parents were rich enough,) or else (in case
they were not,) a pair of Turtles or Pigeons without a Lamb. The one for an
Holocaust, the other for a Sinoffering. The first to signify their gratitude,
the second their Repentance. The one was to acknowledge the special Blessing of
the Delivery; and the other was to expiate the Sullage of it.

. 3. Lord! how filthy and impure is the life of man, the purest part of whose
Life, which is his Birth, can make his Mother stand in need of a Purification?
That we are sprung out of the Dust, shows the unworthiness of our Nature; but
that we derive it from our Parents, does speak its guilt too. It Is true the
Soul of man is a precious Treasure; But he has it (says St. Paul) in an
earthen Vessel; 2 Cor. 4. 7.
which is sufficiently ignoble, in regard of the matter of which 'twas made;
but in regard of the Mould wherein 'twas cast, (or of the Conduit through which
derived,) it is not only ignoble, but most unclean too. If men will glory in
their Extraction, let them first make it appear that they are born from above;
let them prove they are regenerate, and born again; Joh. 1. 13.
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God. (...), (as St. Paul speaks out of the Poet,) that indeed they are the
offspring, and Sons of God. For (...), This (says Chysoft. in Genes. Homil. 23.
Chrysostom) is the noblest kind of Genealogy. And so the Bereans were (...),
not only nobler, but better born, than the noblest Jews of Thessalonica, Act.
17. 11. Gregory Nazianzen Greg. Naz. Orat. 28.
forbids us to make a Boast of our Progeniters, unless we think it was for
nothing, that the Virgin here was purified, and Christ presented; or that our
Mothers once were Churched, and we Baptized. No, it rather becomes us (with
holy Job) that we say to Corruption, Thou art our Father; and to the Worm, thou
art our Mother. Or that we go beyond Job, Nihil aliud est homo quam sperma
foetidum, saccus st^rcorum, cibus vermium. post hominem vermis, post vermem
f^e^or sic in non bominem ver tur omnis homo. Bernardde Anima. c. 3. p. 1051.
in saying to Iniquity, Thou art our Brother; and to Uncleanness, Thou art our
Sister, For let our other Relations be what they will, we cannot possibly deny
that Sin and We were born Twins, if we take David to be Orthodox in what he
says of our shape, and Conception too; that the one was in Sin, and the other
in Iniquity.

. 4. Lord! how strange a thing it is, that any man should grow proud? And yet
how hard a thing it is, to meet with a man who is truly humble? Quid superbis
homo, attendens quod fuisti v^le semen, sanguis coagulacus in utero? unde
superbit, cujus conceptio Culpa, Nasci paena, labor vita, necesse mori? Id.
ibid.
Our understandings indeed are dark, our wills disobedient, our hearts
dec^itful, our passions eminently perverse; But, which makes us most miserable,
we are so senseless of our being so, That our special Impellents to Humiliation
are common Incentives unto our Pride. We are apt to glory in our Infirmities,
(if I may use St. Paul's words, not only without, but against his meaning,) and
to take honor unto our selves from the justest matter of mortification. It Is
not the knowledge of what we were, nor the remembrance of what we shall be;
It Is not the baseness of a Conception, nor the unloveliness of a Grave; It Is
not the gastliness of Death, nor yet the dreadfulness of Judgment, that can
subdue our exalted Thoughts to an humble sense of our unworthiness. But apt we
are to be transported, with a complacency in our selves, and a contempt of
others, although we cannot but be convinced, (at least in our lucida
Intervalla, or godly Fits,) That we are wretched, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

. 5. Clemens Romanus (I remember) in his Epistle to the Corinthians, could
think of no fitter spell, wherewith to lay, or exorcize, the Devil of
Arrogance, or Ambition, than this so seasonable a Topic from whence I argue.
Are we endangered by a (...) from the froth and vanity of our minds, which only
raises us (as it did Lucifer, and the other morning Stars,) to an higher Fall?
(...). Let us reflect (says the Father) upon the stuff which we were made of;
and (...). Clem. Romans in Ep. ad Cor. p. 50.
set the contumelies before us, through which we passed into the world. I am
truly so far of that Father's mind, that had we but patience enough to meditate
on our original, and our End; Si diligenter consideresquid per os and nares,
caererosque Corporis meatus egrediatur vilius Sterquilinium nun. quam vidis^i^*
attend, homo, quid fuisti ante ortum, quid abortu ad occasum, quid eris post
ha^c vitam. Bernardus ubi supra
from what we came, and whether it is that we are tending; would we contemplate
on our Features in that impartial Mirroir of a skeleton; and instead of a
fawning Glass, see our selves drawn unto the life in an hollow Cranion; I am
inclinable to infer we should be higher in Gods eyes, (which regarded not the
high, but the low estate of his Handmaid,) after the rate of our being viler,
and more contemptible in our own. And even by minding higher Things than now we
do, we should less be highminded than now we are. Then let us not stand at
too great a distance from the most despicable Person for whom Christ dyed; (no
not so much as from the man, who bids us stand farther off, for he is holyer
than we;) since we are equally descended from the very same Eve; and so, by
Her, from the very same Adam; and so, by Him, from the very same Earth. Suppose
a Potter of the same clay shall make a washpott, and a Basin, intending That
for the Kitchen, and This especially for the Closet; shall the Basin say to the
washpot, I am better than Thou? There may indeed be a great, but there cannot
be any intrinsic difference; as wholly depending upon the Will, and (by That)
upon the usage of Him that owns them. In this they certainly agree, that they
consist not of a different, but of the same kind of Dirt; and being broken both
in pieces, are equally cast unto the Dunghill. That all were equal in the womb,
is contended by Philo, (...). Philo.
the Learned Jew. That all were equal in the Laver of their Regeneration,
Gregory Nazianzen does argue with exprobration, as Tingebantur olim eodem
lavacro pueri, senes, divites, pauperes, viri, and mulieres; unde Greg. Nazian.
objurgat opulen^os, quos pudebat cum tenuibus simul tingi. B. Rhenanus in
Tertullian. de Coron. Mill. cap. 3.
Beatus Rhenanus does well observe. And so 'twas rationally ordained by the Law
of Moses, That both the poorest and the richest, the meanest and the most
honorable, the Virgin mother herself and her purer Babe, (however different
they might be in all the Circumstances of Life,) should be equally rated, as
well at their Births, as at their Burials. And though the Emperor Leo,
Sirnam'd Isaurus, had rather the Power than the Authority to put an excize upon
women's child Births, making every man pay for his being Born; Yet 'twas
righteously provided under the legal Dipensation, (because by commission from
God Himself,) that all the masculine children which were withal the
Firstborn, should pay the same kind of Custom at their entrance into the
world, and discharge the same Debt at their Exit too. Perhaps to teach us This
Lesson, amongst some others, that the difference of Degrees in the Sons of men,
although indeed it is of divine, yet it is not of natural, but of positive
Institution. For though God puts them asunder as far as the Zenith is from the
Nadir, fixing a King upon the Throne, and casting a Rebel into the Dungeon,
(which is enough to stop the Mouths of all our levelling Fanatics, whether the
Adamites abroad, or the Anabaptists at home,) yet all men by Nature are no less
than twice levelled; before they come into their Cradle, and when they go into
their Grave.

. 6. But though this is the Lesson which we are taught by that Law, by which
the mother after her Childbirth was to be purified in the Temple; Yet it may
easily be demanded, how the Law of purification could reach the Virgin. For was
she not chaster than the Turtles she came to offer? was she not her self a
living Temple; and very much purer than the Temple to which she went for a
Purification? Can there be any cleaner Flame, than what stream's forth from a
Virgin Taper? would we not wonder at such a Chemist, as should use his Alembick
to cleanse Elixirs? And probably laugh at that Goldsmith, who should refine his
metals beyond their Quintessence? To purify a Virgin, may seem a Soloecisme as
great, as for a man to wash Water. And to purify such a Virgin, as had been
happily impraegn'd by the Spirit of purity, is just like washing the clearest
water, as it newly glide's forth from the crystal Spring; not so much as
deflowered by the embraces of the River, much less by being mixed with the
Brackish Ocean. Its true indeed she was a Mother, but by so much the more a
Maid too. She was delivered of a Son, but of such a Son, as was the wisdom of
the Father. She lay in of an Infant, but such an Infant, as was The Word. She
encompassed a man, but such a man, as was Emanuel. She brought forth a child,
but such a strange child, as had the Government on his shoulders; A child whose
name was called wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 16. And being delivered of such an Infant, such a
child, such a manchild as This; How could That which made her pure, make her
need a Purification? Or (to give this objection its utmost strength) Admit that
Marie in her Person mightstand in need of being purified, (though not in regard
to the Babe she bare, Yet at least to the Parents of which she was born;) must
therefore the Author of her Purity submit himself to have a s^are in her
Purification? must Christ himself become the Subject, as well as the Maker of
tha^ Law? For so the greatest number of Copyes agree to have him; reading (...)
(not (...) but) (...) the days (not of her, but) of their Purification. So
reads the oldest and best of Manuscripts, which it is our happiness to possess
in our English Archives. So reads Homil. 14. and 18.
Origin out of choice, whose matchless pains in comparing Manuscripts might
make him the abler to choose aright. So reads Erasmus, and Zegerus, Laurentius,
and De Dieu. And by the stream of such strong Authority, the Judgment of Beza
is carried down; And so is the Arabic Translation, which seems to follow the
Vulgar Latin, as well in This, as in other Things. Nay so reads the Syriack,
which is in order of time before the Arabic, from which our English
Translators do seem to have rendered it in the singular. Now that Mary should
be Purified, there is a reason more obvious. Because though her self was a
Mother-Maid, in so much that a Childbirth which defiled other Women, may well
be said to have cleansed Her, (and so her real Purification was coetaneous with
her delivery;) yet we know she was the Daughter of a Conjugal Bed, and so the
subject of an Original, though not an Actual Vitiosity. Albeit the Greek
Fathers are wont to call her [(...)] the Mother of God, yet did they not make
her, by That, a Goddess; (as some in the world are bold to do, by the Rapine
and Sacrilege of their Devotion, whilst they supplicate God the Son for the
Merits of his Mother, or pray unto the Mother to lay her commands upon her
Son.) The Guilt of Adam did adhere to her righteous Soul, although it could not
mix with it; And so she wanted at least a legal, if not a literal Purification.
But how so derogating a Rite should be competent to her Son, who was not merely
a Son of Adam; may seem at least to be a Quere which should not pass unresolved.

. 7. But This was don (says Aquinas) for our Instruction; That we may carry
our selves with meekness, as we have Christ for an Example. paying Obedience
from without us to public Sanctions, where none from within us is strictly
due. Every Christian (like Christ Himself) is to be actively Obedient in many
things, though not as necessary, yet as conventent; though not for conscience,
yet for the benefit of conformity; though not for private, yet for public
satisfaction; though not to avoid Sin in Himself, yet not so much as to
occasion it in other men. But however this Reason may pass for good, methinks
'twere easy to give a better. To wit that our Savior being laden with the
Iniquity of us all, (to use the words of the Prophet Esaias) was in all our
behalfes to stand in need of a purification. Being made Sin for us, (as St.
Paul speaks to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5, 2.) and at last numbered with the
Transgressors, and so made subject to the Levitical, as well as the Moral Law
of Moses, (born as he was, of a Jewish parent, a branch sprung forth from the
Root of Iesse,) He was first to fulfill, and then to abrogate the law of Rites;
or rather to abrogate, whilst he fulfilled it. And this may help us to give a
Reason, (besides the Poverty of his Parents,) why they offered not a Lamb, but
a pair of Doves. For what needed the Type, where the Antitype was present? What
place could there be for a Lamb out of the Fold, when behold the Lamb of God
that came down from Heaven? The Lamb to expiate for our Souls, as well as the
Shepherd to direct them.

. 8. The Thought of which should s^^ve to fill us, not with Gratitude only and
Love, but even with wonder and admiration, That the Lawgiver himself would be
obedient unto the Law, thereby to free us from the Law as the strength of Sin;
and so to free us from Sin, as the sting of Death; and so to free us from
Death, as it is the Victory of Hell. That the Holy of Holies, and King of Kings,
would meekly take upon him the Form as well of a sinner as of a servant; and
become legally unclean, whereby to take away from us our great uncleanness; for
according to the Hebraisme by which the Hellenisticks are wont to speak,
nothing worse can be meant by the legal uncleanness of a Jew, than that
external obligation to the performance of a Duty, which by an arbitrary Law is
incumbent on him. And to This our blessed Savior without the least stain of
guilt did submit himself, not at all for himself, but for Us alone. For Us it
was that he descended from out the Bosom of the Father; for Us he poured out
himself, so far forth as to be empti^d of all his Glory, that we might drink of
his Fullness, Grace for Grace. For Us it was that he was cloistered in Marie's
Womb; for Us that he was folded in Marie's Arms; for Us that he was put upon
several Iournies, whilst yet he could not either (...) Ponitur pro (...). nam
adducendi verbum ponimus in eo qui pedibus eat: id quod de Christo in ea aetate
dici non p^terat. Castalio in locum.
go, or with ease be carried; To wit from Nazareth to Bethleem, and from
Bethleem to Jerusalem, and that upon more accounts than one, not only to be
purified, but presented unto the Lord.

second Action of the Day, and so deserves the second Place in the
consideration of the Text.

. 1. To give you the History of the Action from that which gave it its
Original, I must go back to take my Rise from as far as Exodus. Exodus 12.
Where after Sundry dismal miracles for the freeing of Israel out of Egypt,
the last and greatest was shown at midnight. When the sword of the Lord did cut
off all the firstborn among the Children of the Egyptians, from the firstborn
of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, Verse 29.
to the firstborn of the Captive that lay in the dungeon. But the firstborn
of Israel being miraculously preserved, Chap. 13. Verse. 15.
were immediately claimed by their preserver. who besides the common Interest
which he had in them as his Creatures, Exodus 1. 22.
did farher devote them unto Himself by a peculiar right of Redemption too.
Number. 8. 18.
And though by way of Commutation He took the Levites unto Himself, (in stead
of all the first born of the Children of Israel,) Yet were not the Levites so
full a Ransom, Number. 18. 16.
but that they were farther to be ransomed by the sum of five Shekels.

. 2. Now put all this together, and it will prove an Adumbration of the holy
Child Jesus; who, though the Lord, and the Redeemer, was yet presented unto the
Lord, and Redeemed this Day with a piece of Silver. For He was sure the
Fist-born, who is expressed so in Scripture by way of Eminence, and whom the
Firstborn of Israel were but intended to represent. He presented Himself as
our Elder Brother, (and so again the firstborn,) to redeem us from the Fury of
the Destroying Angel. He, as the Firstborn, or Psalm. 2. 8.
Heir of all things, was presented this day to receive his right of
Primogeniture, by claiming the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost
part of the earth for his possession. He again was the firstborn, who
presented Himself unto as many as would receive him, that he might give them
power to be the Sons of God. Joh. 1. 12.
To sum up all in a word, He is called the Firstborn of every Creature (Col.
1. 15.) who was begotten of the Father before all Time; And the firstborn of
his Mother, brought forth into the world in the fullness of Time. He was again
the firstborn by virtue of his office, as Mediator. The first that was born of
a pure Virgin; the first that ever was born without the least stain of Sin; the
first and last that was born both God and Man. Many ways the firstborn, he
was brought on this day to be presented unto the Lord, not as a Servant only,
or Sacrifice, but as a King, and a Priest too, on whom his Brethren depended
for Life and Fortune; so to claim his own Right, and so to communicate it to
Us, that whether Paul, or Apollo, whether Cephas, or the World, whether life or
Death, whether things present or things to come; All might be ours, as we are
Christ's, as Christ is God's.

. 3. From the whole History of the Action, (so far at least as our Lord was
concerned in it,) it will be easy enough to gather These useful Considerations.

. 4. First that the Days being accomplished, when both the Mother and her Babe
might have the freedom to go abroad; The first Journey they took, was not to
Nazareth, but Jerusalem. She brought Him to God's House before her own.
Implying this Caveat to Christian Parents, that they suffer not the Devil to
take the first Hansel of their Children; but acquaint them with God in their
very Nonage; and so present them unto Him by a Religious Education. 1 Samuel 2.
That they devote them to his Service, even as early as Hannah devoted Samuel.
That their enmity to Sin be as soon bespoken, as the Child Annorum ferme novem,
altaribus admotus, tactis Sacris jurejurando adactus ab Amilcare, se quum
primum posset, Hostem fore Populo Romano. Live. l. 21. cap. 1.
Hanibal at the Altar was bespoken by his Father to hate the Romans. That they
suffer them not to lisp in the Language of Egypt, but (as Children put to Nurse
in the Land of Goshen) make them Suck in good manners as soon as Milk. That
they permit them not to enter within the Breath of the Profane, from whose
un^avory communication (like the New-landed Spaniard,) they can many times
Swear, when they cannot speak. That they put so fit a difference betwixt
themselves and Brute-Beasts, as to become unto their children, not only carnal,
but spiritual Parents; and so beget them to God by a second Birth, as not to
afford them any reason to Curse their first. This is the Use we are to make of
our first Consideration, the Mother's seasoning of her Babe, not at Nazareth,
but Jerusalem.

. 5. Secondly let us consider, That as of all the Jewish offspring, not the
Females, but the Males were to be offered unto the Lord; (as it were intimating
unto us, that They alone may expect to be admitted into God's Presence, who
Captivate the Lusts of the effeminate Flesh, by the masculine power of a
controuling spirit;) so of all the Males too, none but the best, or the
firstborn were set a part for God's Portion. For when I say the firstborn, I
mean the Might of the Parents, Genesis 49. 3.
and the beginning of their strength, the excellency of Dignity, and the
excellency of Power, as Jacob said of his Eldest Son Reuben. They were not then
like the Parents of our last and worst Times, who when their children are
Blind, or Crooked, or (in a word) nothing worth, do fly for refuge to the
Temple, and make them Deodates. God is little beholding to such a Parent, who
when his Son is too dull for either the Shop, or the Exchange, does straight
present him unto the Lord, by devoting him to serve in his dreadful House, and
(as a Minister) to wait at his holy Table; Does give him over to the Pulpit,
because too old for the Grammar School; And if he cannot Write or Read, does
therefore teach him to Pray extempore. As if to the office of a Workman who
needs not to be ashamed, there were nothing required but lungs and Impudence.
From the beginning (I am sure) it was not so. For Kings and Princes in time of
Yore were thought most proper to be the Priests. And when the Priesthood was
Entailed on the Tribe of Levi, it was by way of Prerogative, and in reward of a
special Service. The Best by Pedigree, by Sex, by Primogeniture, They that were
every way the Best, and the Choicest Persons, were set apart in the Beginning
for the peculiar Service of the most High.

. 6. From whence it is obvious to infer, That as of the fruit of a man's Body,
so by consequence of the Fruit of his Labor too, of the fruit of his
Substance, and of the fruit of his Soul, of every thing that he calls His, He
is not to offer up to God, but the best, and choicest. We must not sacrifice to
Pleasure with the strength and Beauty of our Age, and think that God will be
content with a noisome Carcass; (like the false Votary in the Apologue, who
vowed to consecrate unto Jupiter, Half of the All that he went to find, and
presently finding a Bagg of Nuts, made no doubt but he should bravely perform
his Vow, by giving the shells unto his God, and taking the Kernels unto
Himself;) This were at best to forsake the world, because the world forsakes
Us; And only to keep our Baptismal Vow, because we know not any longer which
way to break it. Will God accept of our Presenting our selves unto him, not (as
Christ on this Day,) when newly come into the world, But (as the Clinicks of
old,) at our going out? Will he accept of our coming, when we come to him but
in a Fright? not of choice, but necessity? not at all as to our best, but
rather as to our last, and our only Refuge? Will he receive us when we shall
choose him as the (...); not as the greatest Good Thing, but the lesser Evil?
not as better and more desirable than the Enjoyments of the Earth, but as
preferrable at least to the Pains of Hell? It cannot possibly be our virtue, to
be forsaken of our Sins, or rather bereaved of our strength whereby to be
vigorously Sinful, and without which we can no longer be sturdy Sinners. So
again, (in proportion to this Discourse,) It Is not enought that we present him
with the Labor of our Lips, and that a little toward Night, to make our Time
the more supportable; (which is to make our better Actions a mere Divertisement
to our worse;) But we must Sacrifice to our God, the very best of our Day,
which is our Morning; the very best of our Years, which is our Youth; the very
best of our Body, which is our Heart; the very best of our Being, which is our
Soul. Our Body must be the Temple, our Heart the Altar, our Sincerity the
Priest, our Devotion the Fire, our blessed Savior must be the God, and our
Soul the Sacrifice.

. 7. But then withal (like a sacrifice) it must be pure, and unpolluted; pure,
as the Virgin, who was this Day Purified; And unpolluted, as the Babe, who was
presented this day in the holy Place. And yet because we cannot (other ways)
be purified as the Virgin, much less perfect as the Babe, (who yet has
commanded us to be perfect, even as our Father in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5.
ult. and to purify our selves, as Himself is pure, 1 John 3. 3.) Because, I
say, we cannot otherwise be pure and perfect, Let us do like the Virgin, (as
well this day, as from this day forwards,) Take the Babe into our Hearts, as
she now did into her Arms; And so together with our Savior, present our
selves unto the Lord. For as the Man that was condemned by the Roman Senate,
procured Love as well as Pardon, by representing the Scars in his naked Bosom,
which were the Monuments of his Sufferings for the honor and Service of his
Country; so to obtein at once our Pardon and Acceptance also at Gods Tribunal,
not only Pardon of our Sins, but Acceptance of our Persons, we must recount the
many sufferings of our Elder Brother in our behalf; Heb. 2. 17. and 3. 11.
pleading the Scars and the Bloodshed sustein'd by the Captain of our
Salvation. To such objections as may be made by an Injured Justice, we must
present an injured Jesus as our only Answer and Apology. To every Arrow
levelled at us by God's Displeasure, we have but Christ and Him Crucified for
our Shield or Helmet to intercept it. Though with our Prayers and our Tears
(our only warrantable Weapons) we humbly venture to contend with the Lord of
Hosts, hoping the Pungency of our sorrow will make him yield; (yield I mean to
his own Resentment,) yet may we not hope to prevail upon him, unless we stand
behind Christ, and (as the Virgin this Day,) hold him up as our Buckler, our
only Armor of Defense, against Himself (if need be) as our Injured Judge too.
For (that I may show by an experiment how as a Buckler he must be weilded,) be
our misdeeds never so numerous, they are no more than his Merits. Though he
will come to be our Judge, He is first our Advocate, who, before he can
censure, will plead our Cause. Are our Sins of deep die? his Blood was Crimson,
in which our sins being washed, will be as wool. Are they swelled into a
Deluge? That stream can drown them. Are they damning and mortiferous? Those
wounds can bury them. He was a Fountain, for our sakes dry; a Fountain of
water, for our sakes thirsty; a Fountain of living water, for our sakes dead.
And shall we suffer by the Sins, for which he suffered? no blessed Lord, Though
thou can not but perceive them as they lie open in our Souls, yet being hid
in his Grave thou will not see them; or though thou can not but see them with
the Eye of thine Omniscience, yet with that of thy Justice we hope thou will
not; or though thou can not but in Justice detest our sins, yet in Mercy be
thou pleased to forgive the sinners.

. 8. Thus the Feast of Presentation is to be celebrated by us throughout the
year. The holy child Jesus must still be brought into the Temple, And All he
suffered in our behalf be still presented unto the Lord. We must present him
unto God, that is to say, unto himself, even as often as we go into the House
of God; comprecating nothing, but for his sake; deprecating nothing, but for
his Merits; presenting nothing to be accepted, but in his Name and Mediation.
No nor so much as in his Name may we adventure to present him, until we are
purified by the Gospel, as Mary was under the Law. This as fitly prepares for a
cleansing week, as that week does for Lent, or that Lent for Easter. We (I say)
must be purified from all kind of filthiness of flesh and spirit, (2 Cor. 7.
1.) before our Savior (wirh effect) can be thus presented. But purified with
Mary, we cannot be, unless with Mary in the Text, we live in obedience to Laws
established, although the matter they are made of be antecedently indifferent,
and subject to diverse Exceptions too. Such as the Time, and the Place, wherein
the Duties of the Text were to be punctually performed. The Time is here
implied to be the end of the Days of their Purification; the Place is
expressed to be Jerusalem. And the Rule of Conformity, The Law of Moses. Of
which last parts of the Division of the Text, I shall speak very briefly, and
in Conjunction.

. 1. Had the Parents of this Child been of Clemente Romano tamen Judice, (...)
Clem. Romans in Ep. ad Cor. page 53.
Time and Place; but very much rather upon the Equity of a most rational
Disobedience. What? must the work of Purification be tied precisely to a Day?
Or must not the holy Child Jesus be either presented, or redeemed, until he
has punctually attained the fortieth day after his Birth? May we not stay a
little longer, until the ways and the weather are more inviting? or may we not
go a little sooner, before the Noise of a Messiah awake the Jealousy of a
sleeping, but furious Tyrant? Or may we not huddle it up at Home, to save a
very tender Mother, and her more tender Babe, at once the Hardship and the
Risque of so long a Iourny? shall we confine the Omnipresent within the Walls
of Jerusalem? or think Ubiquity it self can be pen't up within a Temple? or
believe there can be Holiness in a consecrated Fabric of Wood and Stones?
Admit Jerusalem is the greatest, yet (since the Birth of the Messiah) Bethleem
sure is not the least among the Cities of Judah. And when the Ancient of Days
becomes the Babe to be presented, It may be fitter that the Temple should come
to Him, or at least that his Presence should make a Temple. (Just as the
Presence of the King (wheresoever he is) does create a Court, whereas the
Palace of the Court cannot either lessen or raise the King.) Besides; God
regards not the Ceremony, but the mere substance of our Devotion. It matters
not so much either when, or where, as how affected we come before him. An
humble soul is the Temple that He delights in. A broken Heart the best Altar
whereon to Sacrifice. And the best Sacrifice we can bring is a contrite Spirit.
Or if this will not serve; yet may not the Ceremonies required be don at
Bethleem at the present, and repeated at Jerusalem at times of leisure and
convenience? Can a very good work be don too often? or the discharge of a Duty
begun too soon?

. 2. This had been to chop Logic just like Naaman the Syrian, in the second of
Kings, and the fifth Chapter: where commanded by Elisha to wash himself in the
River Jordan, and that precisely seven Times, whereby to be cleansed of his
Leprosy, (ver. 10.) He, instead of being thankful, began (says the Text) to
be very wroth, (ver. 11.) It seemed to Him a strange thing, that he could not
be clean, unless he would be superstitious. He expected that the Prophet should
have come out to him in Person, and calling on the name of the Lord his God,
should have struck his hand over the Place, and so have recovered him of his
Leprosy. What? (says he in the next verse) Are not Abana and Pharpar, Rivers
of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them, and
be clean? Thus did the Wisdom of Elisha seem light as Folly, whilst weighed in
the scales of that Syrian Fool. But though he presently went away, not
obedient, but in a Rage, (ver. 12.) Yet his Servants said That (ver. 13.) which
turned his Rage into Obedience. My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have don it? how much rather when he says unto
thee, wash, and be clean? whereupon he was cured, (but observe in what order,)
first of his Folly and Disobedience, and immediately after of his Disease too.

. 3. Let us now apply this to certain Sectaries here at home, who often
endeavor in their Discourses to show the fitness, the lawfulness, and many
times the moral Necessity of their being Schismatical and Disobedient. I shall
give but one Instance, because I want Time to insist on many; And in the office
of Confession, because it is amongst Christians a kind of Gospel-Purification.
The Duty of Confession from the Penitent to the Priest, has been commanded by
the Church in the purest Times of Antiquity; and however misused by the Church
of Rome, has been reformed, and not abolished by this of England. Now some
Malcontents there were, who thought our Church not clean enough, unless they
might sweep away the Pavement; And amongst many other things, their Stomachs
rose against Confession. Will not God (say they) be pleased with the
acknowledgment of the Heart, but must That of the Mouth be required also? Or
can we not make it in our Clossets, but they must have it in the Church too?
Must we power out our Souls into the Ear of the Priest? Or can he loose us from
our Sins, who is bound and manicl'd in his own? But I would say to such an
English or Scottish Naaman, no other thing than was said by the Syrian Servant.
My Brother, or my Sister; suppose our Mother the Church of England, had bid
thee do some great thing, would thou not cheerfully have don it without
Dispute? How much rather when she says, wash and be clean? That is, confess,
and be forgiven? vouchsafe to write after the Copy, which the Virgin and her
Babe in this Text have set thee. Who did not (as they might, upon better
pretensions than thou can bring,) allege the Privilege of their Purity, or
the natural Indifference of what was commanded by the Law, whereby to withhold
their obedience from it. They did not think much to present their Turtles,
because Themselves were the chaster and more innocent Pair. He who thought it
no Robbery to be equal with God, thought it also no dishonor to be equal with
Man; And would be obedient to the Law, how much soever he were above it. (...),
as (...). Clem. Romans in Ep. ad Cor. p. 53. 54.
Clemens Romanus does well observe to my purpose. The Sacrifices of God were
not any where to be offered, but precisely at Jerusalem; nor any where at
Jerusalem, but in the Temple; no nor any where in the Temple, but at the Altar;
each of which places, notwithstanding, was antecedently Indifferent; and so far
only good, as 'twas commanded, not commanded for being good. It Is in the Power
at this day of God's Vicegerents upon Earth, to limit the Time, and the Place,
yea the manner also, and measure, I say not of private, but public Duties. And
by how much a thing is the more indifferent in its use, it should the rather
cease to be so, when by legal Authority it shall be turned into a Law. Since of
Laws that are humane, the only fit Subjects are things indifferent. Nor can we
solidly object the seeming difference of Authority, in things indifferent under
the Law, and things indifferent under the Gospel; whereof the former were
commanded by God himself, the later only by his Vicegerents. For even These
under the Gospel are at least mediately commanded by God himself; as being
commanded by that Authority which God has commanded us to obey. And let us
distinguish how we can, betwixt a Divine, and a Humane Law; we must acknowledge
the Truth of this Proposition, That Disobedience to the second Table, is as bad
as Disobedience against the first. He Rebel's against God, who withholds his
Obedience from God's Vicegerent. And as there is indeed a Time, to obey God
rather than man; so is there also as fit a Time, to obey God by obeying Man.
Which if the Sons of disobedience would but unpassionately consider, they would
not make their Duties difficult, by calling them humane Impositions; nor cast
about for expedients whereby to legitimate such a Sin, as is compared by God
himself to the Sin of Witchcraft.

. 4. Then let us imitate our Savior, Dies Purificationis, id est, Dies quibus
se continuer at domi; Impuritatem simulans, ne legis Transgressionis
accusaretur. Vatablus in locum.
in that Example of his Meekness we this day Celebrate. Who rather than seem a
Nonconformist, or a contemner of the Law, (whereof the matter was but
indifferent, until established by lawful and just Authority,) Impuritatem
simulabat, (as learned Vatablus Interprets,) thought fit to counterfeit an
Impurity he could not possibly contract, and made as if he had been unclean,
(as a man born of a woman,) that he might yield unto a Law which did least
concern him; unless a Law for Purification was not impertinent to a Lamb, whose
happy Privilege it was, to be pure and spotless.

. 5. It was according to such a Law, as was not Moral, but Ceremonial, that the
Prophecy of Haggai was now accomplished; when by the Presence and Presentation
of God Incarnate, the Glory of the later Temple did far exceed that of the
former. It was according to such a Law, that the offering of the Temple which
was this day presented, was more immense than the Temple which circumscribed
him. It was according to such a Law, that the Transcendency of the Gift which
was this day given, was at once adequate to the goodness, and to the greatness
of the Receiver. To sum up all in a word, it was according to such a Law, that
our Blessed Redeemer was pleased himself to be Redeemed; The great Redeemer of
the world, to be Redeemed by a Country Maid; And the Redeemer of the world by
the dear purchase of his Blood, to be cheaply Redeemed by a Maid, for a little
Silver.

Now to Him who this Day became obedient unto the Law which was Ceremonial,
that he might free us from being Slaves to the Law of Sin by Disobedience; And
was presented unto the Lord under the Form of a Sinner, so to present us unto
himself without the least stain of sin; To the only wise God our Savior, who
came on purpose to Redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a
peculiar People; be ascribed by us, and by all the world, Blessing, and Glory,
and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this Day forwards for
evermore.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED UPON Act-Sunday-Morning AT St. MARY'S CHURCH IN OXFORD JULY
10. MDCLXIV,

Touching the Usefulness and Necessity of Humane Learning, together with its
Insufficiency without the Help of the Divine.

ACT. 2. 4. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak
with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.
. 1. IF we look upon the Text as that does look upon the Context, we shall find
in it a Fitness for the Solemnity of the Time. Not as if the Time of our Oxford
Act were also the Time of our English Pentecost, (for such we know it is not,)
But only in as much as this Hebrew Pentecost does in many things resemble our
English Act. For

. 2. All the Order of the Apostles were now assembled at Jerusalem, which in
the latitude of its Importance implies three Things; not the Monarchy only, and
Church, but University too of Israel. Psalm. 122. 4.
Thither went up the Tribes, not to the Sanedrim only, but to the Temple. Psalm.
48. 2.
There Is the Church. On the Northside lies the City of the Great King. There Is
the Monarchy. And what in the 87 Psalm we commonly render the Gates of Sion,
The (...) Psalm. 87. 2.
Targum reads the Gates of the Schools. Now the Schools of the Prophets,
whereof there were in Jerusalem not so few as four Quas Scholas fuisse
Hierosolymis, posterioribus Iudaicae Politiae Temporibus, ultra Quadringentas
Rabbini volunt. Montacut. in Origin. Eccles. Par. 1. Sect. 8. page 87.
hundred (at least as the Rabbis do make report) in the later Times of the
Jewish Polity, And the Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
(...) more than once in the Septuagint; These infer the University. There it
was that The Apostles were Altogether in an Assembly, at once to receive, and
to show their Parts; to become not only Licensed, but Gifted Preachers; to be
no longer rude Inceptors, (for they were hitherto nothing else,) but Learned
Doctors in Divinity; at once to be qualified with Ability, and to do the
Exercise for their Degree.

. 3. Never was there any Exercise so well and laudably performed. For every one
of these Inceptors was even filled with the holy Ghost. Every one spoke as the
Oracles of God. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
Every one was so great a Linguist, (not only such a Polyglot, but such a
Pantiglot in his speaking,) that Atheneus his Galen was but an Infant in
comparison. Every one was a Theopneust, and had the Privilege to speak through
a Door of Utterance, which was Divinely opened to him by the Third Person in
the Trinity. To understand how they spoke, we stand in need of the Greek to
explain the English. For they spoke (says the Text) (...), not (...), but
(...), after the measure that they were prompted by the ever blessed Paraclete,
(as well without, as within the Veil,) not to speak as other men, words of
vanity and lightness, but to speak Apophthegmes, and Cubes, as heretofore with
less reason 'twas said of Socrates.

. 4. And in proportion to their Exercise which was so eminently good, we find
their Auditorie too was extremely great. Never was there such a Concourse of
Spectators and Hearers at any Act, or Comitia, before, or after. For there were
present at this Assembly, both Jews, and Proselytes; And of these last, of
every nation under Heaven, (v. 5.) which though spoken by an Hyperbole, a very
ordinary figure amongst the Hebrews, (for no man certainly will say there were
French, or English, Scotch, or Irish, which yet at that Time were of some of
the Nations under Heaven;) Yet Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and some who
dwelt in Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, in Phrygia, and Pamphylia,
in Egypt, and Libya, (about Cyrene,) Cretes, and Arabians, and strangers of
Rome, we are certain were a part of that mighty Concourse, which flock't about
the New Doctors, and heard them speak to their Amazement in their several
Languages and Dialects, the tremendous and wonderful works of God, (v. 11.)

. 5. And yet I say these Apostles were but Inceptors in Divinity. They did all
at this Assembly no more then celebrate their Commencement. For though their
Master gave them a Call whilst he was yet upon the Earth, yet to execute their
Calling, He did not give them Qualifications till he ascended into Heaven.
(Ephesians. 4. 10. 11.) He who commissioned them to go, and to teach ^ll Nations,
(Mat. 28. 18.) did also commission them to tarry, and not depart from
Jerusalem, but with meekness there wait for the promise of the Father, (Act.
1, 4.) St. John is positive, and dogmatical, That the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. (Ioh. 7, 39.) And it is as
evident from St. Luke (Act. 1, 5,) that till this Actus Comitialis, or Solemn
Assembly at Jerusalem, they had not been baptized with the Holy Ghost. From
whence it fallows, That if they had only had an eye unto their mission, and
Commission, and taken their Journeys thereupon into the several Quarters of the
world, they had showed themselves Zealous, but Indiscreet too; And their
Preaching might have been good, but ineffectual. For all the world (except
their Countrymen) had been Barbarians unto Them, and They Barbarians to all
the world, had they only spoken Syriac, as hitherto they had don. If their
Toungs had not been cloven into all kinds of Dialect, how could their Sound
have gone out into all Lands, and their words unto the Ends of the Earth? How
many men's Souls were to be healed, by their miraculous Ability to heal their
Bodies? How could the Scholars have repeated whatsoever the Master had said unto
them, (he having not written, nor they taken Notes,) but that the Spirit was
now by miracle to bring all things to their Remembrance. (Ioh. 14, 26.) So that
besides the holy Function unto which they were admitted some weeks before,
there was an absolute Necessity they should have Qualities to discharge it.
Graces they had before, for the Sanctification of Themselves; But now it was
that they had Gifts, for the Edification also of others. They had before a kind
of Thummim, set by God upon their Hearts; But not 'till now had they the Urim,
divinely sitting upon their Heads too.

. 6. And though I know there are not wanting many Enthusiasts here at home,
(not to speak of V. Frid. Baldwin. de Cas. Cons. l. 4. c 2. Cas. 9. p. 690.
691. Excus. Francof. 1654.
Carolostadius, his Brother Gabriel, and the chief Schoolmaster of Wittenberg,
by name Thomas More, who dehorted all People from the study of Languages and
Arts, alleging that they were all to be taught of God; nor to insist on those
Franciscans, who made unlearnednesse a Profession, and did not take a little
pride in being called Fratres Ignorantiae; nor to mention those Popes of Rome,
some of which were such haters of human Learning, as to esteem the study of it
a mark of Heresy; no nor Julian the Apostate, who to destroy the Kingdom of
Christ by so much a more compendious Ruin, employed his vast Imperial power in
shutting up Academyes and Schools;) Though, Isay, besides These, whom I
discover from abroad, There are not wanting here at home, who love to argue
against the Needfulnesse of our Schools and Universities, even from this very
Scripture which lye's before us; who would blow down our Colleges with the
violence of this wind, And with the Fire of these Tongues would burn them up
too; yet by as happy a Violentum as any Logician can desire, the first does
serve but to establish, and the second to refine them. For had the Apostles
been bred at Athens, or in the Schools at Jerusalem, and got these Toungs by
Education; God had not been at the expense of so great a miracle to inspire
them. But as the miracle was used to supply the Defects of Art and Nature, And
to fill up what was wanting of Education and Industry in Christ's Apostles; So
in these later Times of the Christian Church, the Defect of that miracle is
supplied by all These; I mean by Industry, and Art, and Academical Education.
It Is true indeed, that If real miracles were as rise, and as much in fashion,
amongst the Fathers and Sons of the Church of England, as lying wonders are
wont to be amongst the Practicers of Rome, we might declare as great an Enmity
to public Nuseries of Valen. Weigel. Postill. Part. 1. p. 195. part. 2. p. 79.
learning, as Weigelius of Wittenberg, and Monsieur Pharell of Nonne Passim and
public cla^abat Pharellus, omnes humanas Dis^iplinas esse Inventa Diaboli?
Erasm: Epist 59. ad Fratres German. Infer. and Frisiae Orient. mihi p. 2127.
Geneva, (and I may add Pope Paul the second,) are truly reported to have don.
But finding That, by experience, to be but (...), (as Diodorus Siculus spoke
deridingly of Hell,) we may uphold our Universityes by the very same strength,
by which the Subtilest Enthusiasts would pull them down. It being a very cogent
Argument not only for the usefullnesse, but for the absolute Necessity of
Public Schools, (especially to as many as are to be Preachers of the Gospel,)
that the Apostles want of Breeding in such Seminaries of Learning as we enjoy,
was from Heaven to be supplied by such miraculous Endowments as here we read
of. As what we have not by Infusion, we must laboriously acquire; so what the
Apostles had not acquired, the very Wisdom of God the Father thought fit to
give them by Infusion. Nor durst they think that they had competent, much less
sufficient Qualifications, for the preaching of the Gospel throughout the the
world, until they had heard a sound from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing Wind,
which filled the House where they were sitting; Nor until there had appeared
cloven Tongues like as of Fire, which also sat upon each of them; Nor till they
all had been filled with the Holy Ghost, and been enabled to speak with other
Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

. 7. The Text perhaps might be divided into almost as many Parts, as there were
Languages and Tongues for the Subject of it. Parts, enough to entertain, if not
to tire a Congregation; enough to direct, and distract Attention. But I shall
mention only those, which will be sufficient to acquaint you with its whole
rational Importance. As

First the Persons here endowed, who were a Dozen of illiterate and obscure
Galileans, grown in the twinkling of an eye, Learned Professors of Divinity.
And so by consequence in propriety of Academical speech, we cannot say that
they were made, but created Doctors. At once the first and the greatest that
ever were in the Christian world. For

Here is secondly the Measure according to which they were endowed. They were
not seasoned only, as others, or as themselves a little before, (when their
great Master breathed upon them, and bid them receive the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20,
22;) But now (...), they were filled. And filled they were in such sort, that
we shall see by and by how they overflowed. Nor were they filled more ordess,
as their Persons or their Parts were more or less to be revered in the eyes of
men; For

Here is thirdly the Equality and Universality of its Extent; which was not
only unto Peter, who was the first of this Assembly, (as 'twere the Senior of
the Act,) no nor only to James and John, the sons of Zebedee and of Thunder,
who lately disputed between themselves, which of them should be the greatest;
But without any Partiality, either to the Qualities, or Years of men, (...),
they All were filled. Nor were they filled with a Vapor or wind of Doctrine,
which commonly comes from another spirit, (even the spirit which is now working
in all the children of Disobedience,) nor with a zeal without knowledge, or
with a knowledge which puffs up, as being apt to ferment in the minds of
men;) For

Here follows in the fourth place the excellent nature of the endowment; it was
(...), they all were filled with the Holy Ghost. Which is not so properly and
literally, as Metonymically spoken. Not exclusively of his Person, but more
especially of his Power. Nor exclusively of his Graces, but more especially of
his Gifts, (for so in distress of better English, I am contented to speak the
difference, as the Hellenisticks do, by calling them (...).)

Fifthly the Primary Effect, showing the Virtue of the Descent of the Holy
Ghost, very particularly expressed in the Gift of Tongues, (...), they began to
speak; that is, to propagate the Gospel throughout the world. They began to be
Enthusiasts in the literal sense. Mark 16, 17
For they spoke with such Tongues as they never learnt. With other Tongues,
says St. Luke; with new Tongues, says Saint Mark; with many Tongues, says
the Syriac. Where it is not Leshon ve Leshon, with a Tongue and a Tongue, (such
as Hypocrites in Religion are wont to speak with,) but In Syro est, Incipiebant
loqui (...) lingua lingua. Hebraismus admodam familiaris. Gualtperius in Lo cum.
Beleshon Leshon, with a Tongue a Tongue; which according to the Syriacism by
which it is spoken, does only signify the Dividedness, not the Doubleness of the
Tongue. And yet they were not (...), such as took it of themselves; nor did
they speak out of their Memories, much less out of their Inventions. For

Here is Sixthly the Principle (and I may also say the Prompter) from which
they spoke, because they spoke (...), as the spirit gave them utterance. Not as
utterance is opposed either to stammering, or dumnesse, as if 'twere answered
in the Greek by nothing more than (...): For

Seventhly and lastly, the Spirit gave them (...), that is, to speak the most
important and pithy Periods. To speak as Stewards of the Mysteries of the
living God. To speak as men to whose Trust was committed the word of
Reconciliation. To speak as Angels whose Lips were made conservatories of
knowledge; and who had Tongues that had been touched with a Isa. 6. 6. 7.
Coal from Gods Altar. So that here the (...) is of too rich a signification,
to be expressed by the Poverty of English words. As many Tongues as they had,
they wanted one more, to express the hid Treasures of those they had. There are
three things at least, which are secretly couched in the (...). Wisdom, Zeal,
and Elocution. for we observe in the Context, both a Wind, and a Fire, and also
(...), a multitude of cloven divided Tongues. Tongues, not in, but upon their
Heads. And truly each of these three has such a mystical signification, as
seems to have a clear prospect upon the (...). For first of all they had such a
wind, as to inspire them with Wisdom: They had secondly such a Fire, as to
inflame them with Zeal: And they had thirdly such Tongues, as to indue them
with utterance: more than which may be possibly, but less than which cannot be
meant by their miraculous way of speaking, (...), not as the Flesh, but as the
spirit gave them utterance.

. 8. Thus at last I have put an end to the tedious beginning of my Design. A
beginning made up of three preparatory Ingredients, The Accommodation, the
Explication, and the Division of the Text. The several links of that chain,
whereof the use is both to guide and to tie your Attention to my Discourse. But
the Particulars being too many to be dispatched in one Sermon, (unless that one
be as long as many,) I shall not proportion my Meditations unto the Fullness of
the Text, (from which there flow's to us a Sea of matter,) But to the scantness
of the Time which is allowed for this Service.

. 1. And first for the Persons here endowed, I must not speak of them in Thesi,
either at random, or at large; (for that is no more than may be don on any
other Piece of Scripture wherein the Apostles are barely mentioned;) But I must
handle them in Hypothesi, in as much as they relate to the Text and Context. As
they relate unto the Text, they cannot be pertinently considered, unless in one
or more of these three Notions; either as filled with the Holy Ghost, or as
speaking with other Tongues, or else as speaking after the measure that the
Spirit gave them utterance. But in reference to the Context, they may be
pertinently considered as they relate to the three emblemes the Wind, and the
Fire, and the appearance of cloven Tongues. The first referring unto their
wisdom, the second unto their Zeal, and the third to their gift of utterance.

. 2. And indeed it was but reason that their Tongues should be so many, when
both their Wisdom and their Zeal were so amazingly great. (...), they were not
only sprinkled, or overshadow'd, but rinst, and filled with the Holy Ghost. In
an immediate suit of which, their understandings were so enlightened with the
knowledge of holy mysteries, And their Affections so inflamed with a desire to
make them known, that all the Languages in the world were hardly enough for
their Interpreters. There were then Confer v. 9. 10, 11. and Genesis 27. 44. ubi
LXX. eandem vocem in eundem sensum adhibent.
sojourning at Jerusalem of every Nation under Heaven, (v. 5.) The Apostles
were but Twelve, and each of them a Eo quisque propinquior erat Gentium
Dispersioni. Gallilaei enim dicuntur (...). Joseph. l. 1. c. 4. indeque
Galilaea Gentium dicta.
Galilean, (v. 7.) And yet there were some of every Nation who heard them speak
in their native Idiom, (v. 8.) There was neither Speech nor Language, but their
voices were heard amongst them, (Psalm. 19. 3.) A thing so admirably strange,
that they who knew it by Experience could not imagine it to be True. They had
ears to hear, but not hearts to believe, much less Heads to comprehend it. For
more amazed with the volubility, than instructed with the sense, They imputed
the glibness of their Tongues to the mere giddiness of their Brains. And whilst
some in an Ecstasy began to ask what it meant, (v. 12.) others answered in a
mockery, that they were full of new Wine, (v. 13.) Whereas indeed Themselves
were drunk, though not with Wine, at least with wonder. For no sooner had St.
Peter Preached them all into Sobriety, Isa. 29. 9.
but they were pricked in their Hearts; and by Faith coupl'd with Fear, their
Heart brake forth into this earnest Erotesis, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? (v. 37.) whereupon they were instructed, and Baptized even by Thousands.
(verse 41.)

. 3. O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
insearchable are his doings, and his ways past finding out? How many years do
we toil to get a Language or two? Yea how many Suns do we outsit, and how many
Moons do we outwatch too, in learning the Rudiments but of one? At what an
expense of Time and Labor, and (I may add) of money too, what with Tutorage,
and Books, and other Instruments of Learning, in Country Schools, and
Universities, are we fain to get knowledge like Children weaned from the milk,
(to use the phrase of the Prophet Esaias,) by taking line upon line, Isa. 28. 9,
10.
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, and keeping our
Studies for this little, till we look paler than our Lamps? whilst these simple
Country Folks, who knew no more just now than their Mother Tongue, are on a
sudden started up so many orderly Babels. Our Blessed Savior sent them to
School, (Act. 1. 4.) The Holy Ghost became their Teacher, (in the words of my
Text.) And of this Teacher they were so full, that they were perfect in their
Lesson before they learnt it. As having had, not an acquired, but an infused
habit of speaking. Nor was the miracle of divided or cloven Tongues for the
confounding of the Builders, (like that at Babel,) But by a variety of
Languages to make an Unity of Hearts. It Is true indeed, these Builders of
Bethel, like those of Babel, were scattered far and wide over the face of the
earth; But for as different an end, as were the Models of their Building.
To-wit that They and their Successors might bring in the Heathen for Christ's
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his Possession. Id ibid.
St. Peter (for example) did stoutly Preach him up in Pontus, Bythinia,
Galatia, Cappadocia, and at last in Rome also. St. James in Spain. St. John at
Ephesus. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 15.
St. Paul at Antioch. And indeed in most places from Jerusalem to Illyricum. De
Regno Christi quaquaversus extenso, consule Tertul. contra Judaeos cap. 7. mihi
page 97.
St. Mark in Egypt. St. Thomas in Parthia. St. Andrew in Tartary. St. Matthias
in Colchis. Philip the Deacon (by the Eunuch) in Ethiopia Superior. Thaddaeus
in Edessa. And Joseph of Arimathea planted the Gospel here in England. Then
after the Times of the Apostles, Palladius Planted it in Scotland. St. Patrick
in Ireland. St. Augustine in Saxony. St. Severine in Austria. Meinardus in
Livonia. Pope Hadrian in Norway. And Ausuirius in Denmark.

. 4. Now had all this been don by a like number of Athenian or Roman Orators,
such as Pericles and Demosthenes, Hortensuis and Cicero, who could first stir
up Tempests in their Auditors Passions, and then allay them into a Calm too, as
if the hearts of the Hearers were in the Orators hands; And all this by the
Enchantment of a few curled Metaphors, a few glittering Rhetorications, a few
Musical (...), an insinuating Harmony of Voice and Gesture, which had wrought
their Souls into their Ears, and there had tickled them to an Assent; This
indeed had been a wonder, but not a miracle; and might have redounded unto the
Glory, not so much of the Author, as of the Instruments. Who might possibly
have ariv'd too (like that Eloquent (...), Act. 12, 23,) at the meagre
satisfaction of being admired into Destruction; of being killed by Caresses and
Commendations, of being tickled, and eaten up, both with the pleasantness, and
the pain, of Applause, and Worms.

. 5. But that Twelve despised Villagers drawn by the pencill of St. Chrysostom
in the liveliest colors of humane Baseness, a Kennell of clownish,
illiterate, ill bred Idiots, a Crew of Vagabunds in Cuerpo, without House or
Home (as we say in English,) so far from being furnished with two Coats a
piece, that all the twelve renowned Doctors were not worth one pair of shoes,
(...), Chrysostom. Ho^^il. 3. in Epist. ad Cor. and in Psalm. 46.
(So St. Chrysostom run's on in his Cariere of railing Rhetoric, at least in
the the account of a loathsome world, which thinks it worse to be a Beggar,
than in a State of Damnation;) I say, that a Dozen of such Ignaro's, eminent
only for their Ignoblenesse, and all of Galilee from whence arises no Prophet,
with a seriously-majestick Simplicity of words, and a controwling Sanctity of
Actions, should by the sound of the one open the Ears of all the world, and by
the Light of the other inform their Eyes too; That they should really be able
to turn the World upside down, (as the Jews of Thessalonica did fitly word it,
Act: 17, 6,) That they should break-down the Idols, and silence the Oracles,
and raze the Temples, and Level the Altars, and even sacrifice the Priests, and
preach down the Poets, and Dispute down the Errors, and live down the Vices,
and undeifie the Gods of the Heathen world; That they should conquer without a
force, and irresistibly winn the most peevish Natures, not only to part with
their oldest Customs and Religions, But to exchange them for a Belief, that He
was a Savior, who had been crucified; and He Immortal, who had dyed; and He a
God who had suffered; and He an Innocent who had suffered between the Vilest
Malefactors; Nay farther yet, that they should thoroughly convince the richest,
and the proudest, and the most sensual sort of men, that even the Yoke of
Christ was pleasant, his Burden strengthing, and to be hanged upon the Cross a
Degree of Honor; That their Enemies were to be loved, and Themselves hated;
That * Poverty, Disgrace, and Death itself, were not only the Lot and Portion,
Vtilitas maxim^ homini De^s asserit. Symachus ad versus Christianos apud
Prudentium.
but the Desirables and Pleasures of the very bestmen; I say that this should
be brought about by Twelve of the plainest Country People, four whereof were
clearly Fishermen, and one a Publican, and the rest in all appearance no whit
better than their Mates, every one a Galilean, and so contemptible for his
Country, as well as for his Calling; shows convincingly to the world, however
ignorant, or obdurate, that by how much the baser the means were, by so much
the greater was the miracle. The great Deformity of the Instruments was a Foil
unto the Agent. This very stumbling Block had a Virtue whereby to keep men from
falling. If our modern Lay-Preachers who do pretend to Inspiration, could show
but one of of those many Apostolical Gifts, and make us see their new Light by
letting us hear some new Tongues too, (I mean such Tongues as they never
studied,) 'Twere pity but Both our Universities should rise up to them in fear
and Reverence; And we should certainly be as ready to kiss their Feet, as now
we are to shake the Dust from off our own, Luke 9. 5.
for a Testimony against them. The Case with Them would be much the same, that
here it was with the new Apostles; the very snare and the Scandal of whose
Rusticity, showed he Divinity of the Influx by which they acted. Never did
Omnipotence appear so glorious and Triumphant, as then when it was perfected in
so much weakness. How did they thunder, with their Doctrins? and how did they
lighten, with their miracles? How did they soften men's Hearts by promises, as
by gentle showers? And how control them by Threats, as by mighty Winds? You
may see, in this Chapter, the Effects of all four; of their miracles, their
Doctrins, their Promises, and their Threats. The People marvell'd at the first,
v, 7. They were Heart-struck at the Second, v, 37. They rejoiced at the third,
v, 41. And fear came upon them at the fourth, v, 43. It could not be by a
common power, that Paul a Prisoner at the Bar, was able to fright the grim
Judge, who sat at Liberty on the Bentch: when having reasoned to him a while
concerning Temperance, and Righteousness, and Judgment to come, it presently
follows, that Faelix trembled. Who though a very stout Heathen, was yet but
one, and so not worthy to be named, whilst we are speaking of the Energie which
God had put into the preaching of these Apostles. For the Apostle St. Peter,
through the Conviction of the Spirit who opened the Ears and the Hearts of men,
did convert at one Sermon Act. 2. 41.
three thousand Souls, and Act. 4. 4.
five thousand at another.

. 6. Lord! the different Effects of Preaching in those Times and These! one
Sermon was then sufficient for the Conversion of many Thousands. But how well
were it now, if a Thousand Sermons might be effectual for the Conversion of any
One? when did you ever see an Auditorie so affected with a Sermon, as not to be
able to contein from crying out in a kind of ecstasy, (like the Disciples in
this Chapter,) Men and Brethren, what shall we do? who goes now adays to the
Casuist, for the searching and launcing and cleansing of a Conscience, which
even Gasp's for a little ease from the acute sense it has of a Sinful
Plethorie? Is it that in a Kingdom all the Consciences of men are so clear and
calm? Or that there are heardly any Consciences in a whole Kingdom to be
troubled? Is it because there are no scruples of tender Souls to be resolved?
Or rather because the Souls of men are seldom so tender as to be scrupled? let
them that commonly hear Sermons, but are not pricked in their Hearts, (like the
men in this Chapter who heard St. Peter,) be allowed to be the Judges (as well
as Parties) in the Case; whether their Consciences are so clean, as not to need
being rubbed; or else so callous, as not to feel.

. 7. If we impartially consider, that since the most of men's Devotion has been
thrust up into the Pulpit, and that they have placed their public worship, not
in their Hearts, and Knees, but in their Ears, and Elbowes; posting up and
down from one Sermon to another, (and possibly too with as much Superstition,)
as the Votaries of Rome to the several Relics of their Saints; thinking God
is best served, when they go farthest to a Sermon, (as the Pilgrims of Rome to
an holy Sepulcher;) And giving account when they come home, not of the Sermon,
but of the Man; as if their haunting of the Church were not to learn, but
censure; to take large Notes of his Look, and Gesture, not so much observing
what, as how he taught them; (perhaps offended with his memory, because too
short; perhaps with his Periods, because too long; perhaps they stumble at his
Youth, and then they say he does but prate; perhaps at his Age, and then they
listen as to a Doatard; If he is plain, he preaches slovenly: And if he is
solid, he preaches (...); If he is not plain, he is too Witty; and if not
solid, he is too light; If he is illiterate, he is not fit for so great a
calling; And if he is learned, he is as little fit for so plain a people; Is
the Sermon very excellent? then he preaches Himself; Or is it but ordinary?
they can read as good at home;) I say whoever shall but consider, that since
the Business of Religion has commonly been at this pass, the Brains of men
bave been busied, but their Lives have not been bettered; And the frequency of
Preaching has made more Preachers, not more Christians than heretofore; As he
will find a prodigious Difference, both in the Preaching and Hearing the word
of God, betwixt what it was when Christianity was in its Cradle, And what it is
at this Instant whilst it is going into its Grave, So he will find the guilty
Cause of so great a difference, to be partly in Them that do Preach the Word,
and partly in Them that do hear it Preached. So far they are from being filled
with the Holy Ghost, that all the former do not speak with other Tongues, nor
do the later all hear with other Ears than they were wont. The former do not
all speak, as the Spirit gives them utterance, nor the later all hear, as the
Spirit gives them Attention. They will both be now concerned in the
Applicatorie part of my undertaking, But the Sons of the Prophets in special
manner. Which, as it is the next Task incumbent on me to be performed, so I
purpose to perform it by seven such steps of Consideration, as will arise
without violence from the peculiar subject of my Discourse.

First then let us consider, to what measure Perfection men may possible arrive
in a state of Frailty. The Application.
The Apostles were but men, and yet were filled with the holy Ghost. And
arguing (as we may) ab Actu ad potentiam, I think we ought at least to aim at
the same perfection. I am sure St. Paul prayed for no lesser blessing on his
Ephesians, than that they might be filled with the Fullness of God; and (...)
with All the Fullness. (Ephesians. 3, 19.) which cannot signify less than being
perfected and advanced to the highest pitch of Christianity, which God in
Christ can exact of so frail a Nature. And whatsoever we may pray for, we must
endeavor to attain too. Not contenting our selves, that we are mettle good
enough for an Iron Age; that we are Christians well to pass, as the world goes
good enough to serve turn; or no worse than other men, who are without
peradventure in a savable state; or perhaps that we are better than a great
number of our Neighbors, who never dye, or are buried, but in sure and certain
hope of a Resurrection. And yet how many are thus witty, in smoothing out their
way to eternal Ruin? How many do please themselves to Hell, with a sanguin
Belief they are sure of Heaven? And live as if they were afraid, to be any whit
better than they must needs? whereas it is not only the Interest, but the
strict Duty of a Christian, to pant and press after Perfection; never to think
he is good enough, until he is as good as Grace can make him; not to cleanse
himself only from all kind of filthiness of flesh and Spirit, but withal to
perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. We must not Grow in grace
only, but we must never leave growing until we come to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. (Ephesians. 4. 17.) This is to be
filled with the holy Ghost, and inwardly to be filled with his saving Graces;
not, as They in my Text, with his outward Gifts. Those indeed we neither have,
nor are bound to hope for.

short of that other fullness, 2 Cor. 12. 13.
we have been all made to drink of the very same Spirit, in that sense also;
And to that very end was he powered out, Joel. 2, 28. Or if we have not; we must
never leave thirsting, until we have, we of the Clergy (I am sure) should have
received of his Fullness, and (...), Grace for Grace; Joh. 1. 16.
(that is to say in plainer terms) in proportion to his Goodness and mercy
toward us. For to Us it was said at our Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost.
And therefore woe be to Us, of all men living, if we make it not appear that we
have received him. Not only, as the Laity, in his Sanctifying Graces; But, in
as much as we are Teachers, in his edifying Gifts too. Not a good Living, or a
great Dignity, or a Scholasticall Degree; which are indeed a kind of Gifts, but
they do not edify. Noe, the Gifts which we must have, to prove our receiving
the Holy Ghost, (and that we were not made Priests merely to qualify us for
wealth, to hold Preferments by that Title, that is to say, by that Name,) I say
the Edifying Gifts which should distinguish us from the Laity, and show the
Divinity of our Function, are to be some of that Catalogue which Saint Paul
gave to his Corinthians. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.
If not the greatest in the Catalogue, the gift of Healing, and working
Miracles, yet at least the gift of Prophecy, that is, of Preaching and
applying the word of God. Or if not the word of Wisdom, which is the gift of
speaking Mysteries, yet at least the word of Knowledge, which is the gift of
understanding and unfolding them to others. A Gift we must have, whereby to
demonstrate that we are Gifts. For He that ascended up on high, and led
Captivity Captive, is immediately said to have given Gifts unto men. And then
it follows by way of Instance, that He gave some Apostles; some Prophets; some
Evangelists; some Pastors and Doctors. Not Doctors by an Antiphrasis, a non
docendo, (that is an ill Derivation,) much less Pastors a tondendo, (for that is
worse,) no nor Pastors a pascendo, as it is a Verb Neuter, (that is worst of
all;) But Pastors a pascendo, as it is a Verb Active. For none were then
allowed the Privilege to sheer the Sheep, who could not prove they had the
Gift, as well to feed, as to defend them. And the reason of it is rendered by
the Great Doctor of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of the
Spirit, is given to every man to profit withal; (...), to that which is of some
Benefit and Advantage to the Church. That is it by which the Spirit does
manifest himself to be in Pastors and Teachers. And therefore they that are in
Orders without a Gift, a kind of Lay-Priests, or Secular Pastors, qualified for
Sine Cures, but nothing else, As having no Gift at all, or none at least (...),
none that tend's, and is employed to the use and benefit of the Church, (like
Talents hid within the Earth,) are suspected not to come from the Spirit of God.

It was not so with our Apostles; who having Talents, did immediately negotiate
and Traffic with them. No sooner were they filled with the Holy Ghost, but (as
it follows in the Text) they began to Speak. And accordingly when it is said by
the Bishop to the Priest in his Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost, it
presently follows in the charge, Be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of
God and his holy Sacraments. Then follows a Prayer for all the Persons who are
Ordained, That the word spoken by their mouths may have such success, as that
it may never be spoken in vain. Now (not to reflect on any person in Authority,
whose time is taken up in greater, and no less necessary Employments,) what
have those men to show, for their having received the Holy Ghost, who come so
far short of the (...) in the close, as that they fail of the (...) in the
beginning of my Text? so very far from being diligent or frequent Preachers of
the Word, that (to their Amendment be it spoken) they seem to be careful
Concealers of it. Is this to Jer. 23. 28.
Preach the Word faithfully, or to 2 Timothy 2. 15
divide the Word rightly, or to deal as Ibid.
a Workman that needs not to be ashamed? Is this to press, and to be 2 Timothy
4. 2.
instant, in season, out of season, or to rebuke and exhort with all long
suffering? Is this to Verse. 5.
watch in all things, to do the work of an Evangelist, and to make full proof
of the Ministry? Is this to 1 Timothy 5. 17
labor in the Word and Doctrine, and so to be worthy of double honor? Is this
to give our selves 6 Act. 6. 4.
continually to the Ministry of the Word, to be Romans 12. 11
fervant in spirit, or to 2 Timothy 1. 6.
stir up the gift of God which is in us by the laying on of the Bishops Hands?
when the Harvest is plenteous, and the Laborers are few, The Lord of the
Harvest is to be prayed, not that He will send forth Idle Truants, but painful
Laborers into his Harvest, (Mark 9. 37, 38.) And in the Day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, it will perhaps be more tolerable for
a gifted Lay Brother, who adventures to be busy in another man's Calling; than
for a giftless Ecclesiastic, who chooses rather to enjoy, than to use his
own. When God shall call us to a reckoning, not only for our Evil, but Idle
Lives, not only for our injurious, but idle words, a strict account is to be
made of our Silence too. For the Prophet's Isa. 56. 10.
Dumb Dogs which cannot bark, are the Apostle's Dumb Teachers who cannot speak.
And they that are Dumb ones in the tenth verse, are also greedy ones in the
eleventh; whereby it is intimated unto us, that such as deserve not the least
Revenues, are hardly satisfied with the greatest. Woe to me (says the 1 Cor. 9.
16.
Apostle) if I Preach not the Gospel. And woe to me (says the Isa. 6. 5.
Prophet) because I Preach not the Law. Because I am a man of unclean Lips,
(that is, in the Judgment of Learned Grotius,) because I have not dared to
speak against the Iniquities of the Mighty. I have either been so lazy, as not
to speak in my Course, or else so cowardly, and so base, as to speak Placentia.
But the Apostles in my Text were not liable to either. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
The Love of Christ did so constrein them, (as St. Paul speaks to the
Corinthians,) that they longed to be delivered, like a Woman in Travel. (and to
that the word (...) does very properly allude.) They were not able to hold
their Peace, though Death it self lay before them with all its grim Train.

Preachers without Ability for the work; As appears by the Order wherein the
Narrative is expressed. For first they were filled with the Holy Ghost, And
then it follows in the Text, They began to speak. There are that speak whilst
they are empty, and that as well of Inspiration, as human Learning. Such
Sermons do proceed from a private spirit, and so at best they are but words,
and such words are but wind, in proportion to the Spirit that gives them
utterance. When windy Vessels give Vent, we know their Spirit cannot fill them,
unless with Wind. But These were filled with another Spirit, a Spirit proving
what he was by his miraculous Indowments. For as our Savior foretold, that he
would give them a Mouth, and Wisdom, (not a Mouth only, but Wisdom too,) and so
much wisdom in such a Mouth, as their Adversaries should not be able to resist,
(Luke 21, 15,) So here in answer to that Prophecy, They did not only begin to
speak, but they spoke with Tongues. And with such Tongues too, as were the
Instruments of Wisdom, as well as Knowledge. And yet that Knowledge is another
important Requisite to make a Professor of Divinity, (and such you know is
every Doctor,) or a public Preacher of the Gospel, (which every Doctor is
not,) may appear by the Curse of the Foolish Shepherd, Zech. 11. 17.
whose Right Eye was darkened, (that is to say, as the most learned do
Interpret,) who had not the Knowledge of human Learning; And as evident it is,
by what the Prophet Isaiah spoke, at once of himself, and our blessed Savior;
The Lord God has given me the Tongue of the Learned. And to what end has he
given it? to the end that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary. (Isa. 50, 4.) This indeed should be the end of all our eloquence
and Learning, (not the venting such things as smell of nothing but study, and
Affectation, but) The Glory of God, and the good of Men. Of the first I shall
speak in its proper place. And here observe touching the Second, That as
Isaiah, after Moses, was the most Learned and the most eloquent of all the
Prophets, so his best use of both, was to speak a word in Season to any Soul
that should want it in any kind. And this is certainly the Trade we are all to
drive, because for this end especially we were bound over unto the Muses, and
served Apprentiships in the Schools, that we might duly serve God by being
eminently useful to all our Neighbors. As by instructing the Ignorant, by
admonishing the negligent, by reproving the guilty, by counselling the
doubtful, by comforting the Afflicted, and by giving good example to each of
These; (...)
which way soever our Learning lies, and whatsoever our skill in the Tongues
may be, we must put a right Bias and Bent upon it; we must study to make it
serve, and not to rule us; And we must study to make it serve, not for
ornament, but use; And, but that there is use sometimes of Ornament, not for an
Ornament to our selves, but the use of others. In a word, if we are sharers of
any good parts, whether natural, or acquired, we must not think them good
enough, until the use and the end have made them eminently better. That is,
until they are employed, (as by God they are entrusted,) for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, (Ephesians. 4. 11.)

bringing of this about, it is not enough that we speak with Tongues, no nor
with fiery Tongues neither, nor yet with fiery cloven Tongues, unless they are
cleft and set on fire by the Spirit of Unity, and Truth. For it is many times
don by the Spirit of Error, and Division. There are Tongues that are cloven
even by him that is known by his cloven Feet. And there are Tongues set on
fire, James 3. 6.
not from Heaven, but of Hell. such is the cloven and fiery Tongue, wherewith a
man does bless God, and either Curse, or belie his Neighbor. (v. 9.) Nor is
such a Tongue bettered by skill in Arabic, or Hebrew, in Coptick, or Syriack,
in Greek or Latin; but the more it is cloven, it is still the worse; because by
so much the abler to set on fire Jam. 3. 6.
the Course of Nature. It Is never enough to be deplored, (and in this place
especially,) That since the Jesuits and their Apes have made use of their
Tongues to conceal their meanings, (which by God were intended to lay them
open,) a sadder confusion has been made of the distinctest Languages and
Tongues, than that which was given for a Defeat at the Tower of Babel. St.
James does put such a stresse upon it, as if on the Tip of a man's Tongue stood
all Religion. For let his Alms be never so great, his Fastings never so many,
his Prayers never so long, and other Actions never so specious, yet if he
bridleth not his Tongue from injurious Calumnies and falsehoods, He is a man
either of none, or a vain Religion. (Iam. 1. 26.) The reason of which is very
evident. For a lie standing singly, is Breach of Truth; and joined to witness,
is Breach of Justice; and referring to Neighbor, is Breach of Charity. And by
the Breach of all three, down goes Religion. If it is flatly contumelious, (or
but by way of obtrectation,) it is not nakedly a lie, but an arrant slander;
which, if maliciously committed, and so committed by a Person whose knowledge
is great, and his Calling sacred, makes the Top of that Ladder, whereupon so
many thousands have climbed to Ruin.

Cure of this in some, and for the Prevention of it in others, press we our
selves to an Improvement of the next observable in the Text. For the Apostles,
being filled with the holy Ghost, did not only begin to speak, and to speak
with Tongues, but (...), with other Tongues. I mean not only in the literal,
but moral sense of that word. For St. Peter who had spoken with a Tongue of
Tergiversation, by denying and forswearing his master Christ, did now at last
begin to speak with another Tongue; a Tongue that honored him, and owned him,
and preached him up to Math. 16. 15.
every Creature. This alone was the change that enrich't his mouth. Not his
wonderful Ability to speak in all sorts of Language, but his Preaching of the
Gospel in every one. Many Graceless men have Tongues wherewith they speak as
they are prompted by learned Heads, But His was prompted by an honest and
Zealous Heart too. There are that come to the University, who without either
study, or Inspiration, do learn to speak with other Tongues; Yet I cannot say
with more, much less with better, but with Tongues much worse than they did
before. Nor is there any where so sad, and so deplorable a Spectacle, as that
which sometimes appears in this House of Prayer; when in the solemnest
Assembly of all the Year, a Son of God shall be so transformed into the
absolute Guise of a Son of Belial, as to despise his own Soul, in the defiling
of Himself and the House of God, by an applauded Defamation of his Superiors;
by subjecting them to the Contumelies and Asperities of his Tongue, which is
not only the Jam. 3. 8. Ibid. v. 6.
unruliest, but in that case also, the Jam. 3. 8. Ibid. v. 6.
filthiest member of his Body. In such a place as this is, It were to be wished
that men would speak with other Tongues than those are; even with Tongues which
may demonstrate, if not that they are filled, yet at least that they are
Seasoned, and not quite void of the Holy Ghost. And here I cannot, I dare not
forbear to say, (to as many as fear God, and are afraid to fear men in this
Congregation,) That when a Cato shall have been able to keep a Zanie more in
awe on a Heathen Theater, than many Doctors now can in a Christian Church; when
under one and the same Roof, Dagon is coupl'd with the Ark, Jehovah with
Mercury, The Pulpit with the Stage, and Divinity with Profaneness; It will
become as many of us, as are not only Followers, but Ambassadors of Christ,
even to imitate his Example, who beat the Hucksters out of the Temple, by our
well meant Endeavors to whip the Scoffers out of the Church. And if He used a
Rod of Cords, well may we use one of Scorpions. Because Profaneness in a
Christian is very much worse than in a Jew; and This withal a worse
Profaneness. Such scandalous Sins as are but chargable to others, are in
reason to be punished with greater pungency in Us; In as much as being Priests,
we have received the holy Ghost; So that we Sin, when we Sin, against greater
Light, and against greater Obligations to cease from Sinning. We do the Devil
greater Service by the Impurity of our Lives, than we can possibly do God by
our purest Doctrins. When secular Jews were mutineers against the King and the
Priest, (for Moses and Aaron were nothing else,) God Almighty was so patient,
as to punish them by Degrees. But when Corah and the rest of the holy Tribe
began to speak against their Governors, the Earth could no longer endure to
bear them; The Heavens could no longer endure their sight; and Hell could no
longer sustein their Absence. Then let all of this Place, which was intended by
God and our pious Founders, for a Nursery of Virtue, as well as Learning,
addict Themselves, and prevail with others, to speak henceforward with other
Tongues than they were wont. Let them that have spoken either with wanton, or
slanderous Tongues, now speak with Tongues that are modest, and void of malice.
For if Luther, and Melancthon, Nonne Melancthon aliquando damnavit Scholas
publicas? nonne Lutherus totam Philosophiam Aristotelicam vocavit Diabolica^?
nonne idem scripsit omnes scientias speculativas esse peccata, etc. Erasm.
Epist. 59. p. 212^.
who were men of great Learning, and Academically bred, were yet provo'kt into
an Enmity to public Academies and Schools, merely in hatred to the Corruptions
continuing in them uncontrolled; How much more will They be tempted to greater
Enmity than others, who cannot distinguish the Abuse from the use of Things? we
know that many Persons of Honor do send their Sons to this place, not to learn
a little Logic with a great measure of Prophannesse, and so to go the more
Learnedly, not the less surely to destruction; not to Swear or talk loosely in
Greek and Latin, (for of that there is enough in their Mother Tongue,) But to
speak modestly, and fitly, and (without disparagement be it spoken,)
religiously too upon all occasions; to gather Siens as well as Fruit from the
Tree of knowledge, and ingraft them into the stock of the Tree of Life. The
University can make us but learned Fools, (as Petrarch word's it,) in case we
speak only with other Tongues, and not as the Spirit does give us utterance.

such things, as the Spirit can delight to assist us in. The Apostles
themselves, in their common Talk, had but an usual and common Assistance too;
which yet may be called not improperly the Assistance of the spirit. But when
the Assistance was extraordinary, Then they could speak of nothing lower, than
of the glorious and wonderful works of God, (v. 12.) That indeed should be the
subject of all our public Discourses and Undertakings. Not a pitiful
ostentation of a little unsanctified Wit, or Learning; not a deplorable Ability
to speak of things Sacred like a Buffon, to purchase the lamentable Repute of
being a Drolling Ecclesiastic, by being ingeniously Scurrilous, and very
pleasantly profane; Things expressed in Holy Writ by Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 6.
foolish Talking and Jesting, (...), which are both branded in the same style,
with Fornication, and uncleanness, and other things not to be named, by reason
of which (says the Apostle) the wrath of God comes upon the Children of
Disobedience. No, In all our solemn meetings, especially Then when we tread in
God's Courts, we ought to speak (...), so as not to disgrace, but adorn the
Gospel. We must use all our Learning, and Elocution (if we have any,) as the
Apostles here did their miraculous gift of Tongues; not to gratify the Itch of
ungracious men, but to trumpet out the wonderful works of God. That they who
cannot endure to think we can be eminently worthy, may yet be forced to
confess we are serious Christians. And since St. James is very positive, that
he who offends not in word is a perfect man, let us contend and reach forth
toward this perfection; still endeavoring to to speak with the best Tongues
we have, if not as men filled with the holy Ghost, yet at least like them that
speak as the Spirit gives them utterance. That so when other men's Tongues shall
be employed in crying out for a Drop of water, importuning the mountains to
fall upon them, (to hide them from the face of Him that sits upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,) Our Tongues may join in Consort with
the divine Choir of Angels; with the Congregation of the Firstborn whose names
are written in heaven; and with the Souls of just men made perfect; Singing
Hosannahs, and Hallelujas, to him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever more.

FINIS.
The Primitive Rule of Reformation:

Delivered in a SERMON BEFORE His MAJESTY at WHITEHALL, Feb: 1. 1662.

IN Vindication of Our CHVRCH Against the NOVELTIES of ROME.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

The Ninth Edition.

TO THE High and Mighty Monarch Charles the II. By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THat which never had been exposed unto a wittily-mistaking and crooked world,
but in a dutiful submission to Your Command; may at least for This, if for no
other reason, be justly offered to Your Protection. And this is don with a
steady, though humble confidence of success; because THE DEFENDER OF THE FAITH
Jude 3.
which was once delivered unto the Saints, cannot possibly choose but be so to
Him, who does earnestly contend for the very same, because for no other Faith
than That which was from the Beginning. If for This I have contended with as
much earnestness from the Pulpit, as The Romanists from the Press do contend
against it; I have not only the Jude 2. 3.
Exhortation and Authority of a Text, but the Exigence of the Time to excuse me
in it.

Now as the Romans in the Time of the second Punick War, could not think of a
fitter way for the driving of Hannibal out of Italy, than Scipio's marching
with an Army out of Italy into Afrique, giving Hannibal a Necessity to go from
Rome, for the raising of the Siege which was laid to Carthage; So could I not
think of a fitter Course to disappoint the Pontificians in their Attempts on
Our Church, than thus by making it their Task to view the Infirmities of their
Own. To which effect I was excited to spend my self, and to be spent, (If I may
speak in the phrase of our Great Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
) not from an arrogant Opinion of any sufficiency in my self, (who am one of
the Least among the Regular Sons of the Church of England,) But as relying on
the sufficiency of the Cause I took in hand, and especially on the Help of the
Allsufficient, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
who often loves to make use of the weakest Instruments, to effect the bringing
down of the strongest Holds. ^ Cor. 10. 4.


I suppose my Discourse, however innocent in it self, will yet be likely to
meet with many, not only learned, and subtle, but Restless enemies; Men of
pleasant Insinuations, and very plausible Snares; nay, such as are apt (where
they have Power) to Eo san^ loco Haereses sunt, ut non tam art and Industria,
quam Alexandri gladio, earum Gordius Nodus dissolvi posse, quasique Herculis
clava feriendae, quam Apollinis Lyra mitigandae videantur, Stapleton, in Epist.
Dedic. operis de Iustif. sub finem.
confute their Opponents by Fire and Faggot. But when I consider how well my
Margin does lend Protection to my Text, (for I reckon that my Citations, which
I could not with Prudence represent out of a Pulpit, are the usefullest part of
my whole Performance, because the Evidence and Warrant of all the rest;) I
cannot fearfully apprehend, what Wit or Language (or ill used Learning) can do
against it, so far forth as it is armed with Notoriety of Fact in its
Vindication; and has the published Confessions of those their Ablest
Hyperaspistae, who cannot certainly by them of their own persuasion, with
honor, or safety, be contradicted.

If they are guilty in their Writings, it is rather their own, than their
Readers Fault; Nor is it their Readers, but Their misfortune, if they are found
So to be by their own Concessions. Nor can they rationally be angry at their
Reader's Necessity to believe them; especially when they write with so becoming
a proof of Impartiality, as that by which they asperse and accuse Themselves.
If it finally shall apear, They are Luke 19. 22.
condemned out of their mouths, (as Goliah's Head was cut off by David, not
with David's, 1 Samuel 17. 51.
but with Goliah's own Sword,) and that I am not so severe in taking Notice of
their Confessions, as They have been unto Themselves in the Printing of them,
(for I cannot be said to have revealed any secrets, by merely showing before
the Sun, what They have sent into the Light,) I think, however They may have
Appetite, They cannot have Reason to complain.

I have entreated of many Subjects within the Compass* of an hour, on each of
which it would be easy to spend a year. But I have spoken most at large of the
Supremacy of the Pope; as well because it is a Point wherein the Honor and
Safety of Your Majesty's Dominions are most concerned, as because it is the
chief, if not only Hinge, (I have Etenim de qua re agitur cum de Primatu
Ponti^icis agitur? brevissime dicam, de Summ^ rei Christianae, id enim
quaeritur, debe atne Ecclesia diutius consistere, an vero dissolvi, and
concidere. Bellarm. in Praef. ad libros de Sum. Pontif. Tom* 1. p. 586. Edit.
Ingolstad. 1590.
Bellarmine's assertion for what I say,) on which does hang the whole stress of
the Papal Fabric.

If herein, as I have obeyed, I shall also be found to have served Your
Majesty, The sole discharge of my Duty will be abundantly my Reward; because I
am not more by Conscience and Obligation of Gratitude, than by the Voluntary
Bent and Inclination of my Soul,

Your Majesty's most devoted and most Dutiful Subject and Chaplain, THOMAS
PIERCE.

MATTHEW. XIX. 8. (...). But from the beginning it was not so.
THere are but very few things either so little, or so great, whether in Art,
or Nature, whether in Polity, or Religion, which are not willing to take
advantage from the mere credit of their Antiquity.

First for Art; Any part of Philosophy penned by Hermes Trismegistus, any
Script of Geography bearing the name of Anaximander, any Musical Composition
sung by Amphion to his Harp, any piece of the Mathematics said to be writ by
Zoroastres, any Relic of Carved work from in^pir'd Bezal^el, or any remnant
of Embroidery from the Theopneust A^oliab, Exodus 35. 30, 34.
would at least for the honor of being reckoned to be the first, be also
reckoned to be the best of any Antiquarie's Keimelia.

And as it is in the Things of Art, so is it also in those of Nature. How do
the Gentlemen* of Venice delight themselves in their Antiquity? and yet they
travel for their Original, no farther back then the siege of Troy. Whereas the
Arcadians derive their Pedigree even from Jupiter and Calisto, and will needs
have their Nation exceed the Moon in Seniority. Nay, though Egypt (in the
Judgment of (...). Diodo. Sic. lib. 1. p. 6. Edit. H. Ste. 1559.
Diodorus the Si^eleote) has better pretensions than any other, yet the
Barbarians as well as Greeks have still affected a Primogeniture. Nay so far
has this Ambition transported so^e, that they will needs have been begun from
before the Protoplast, as it were itching to be as old as the Julian period,
764 years before the beginning of the World. Thus Antiquity has been courted
in Art and Nature.

If in the third place we come to Polity, we shall find Customs gaining
Reverence from the sole merit of their Duration. And as a Custom by mere
Continuance does wear it self into a Law; so the more aged a Law is grown, the
less it is liable to a Repeal; by how much the more it is stricken in years, by
so much the less it is decrepit: And that for this reason, because the longer
it endures, the more it inclines to its perfection; that is to say, its
immortality.

Last of all for Religion, the Case is clear out of Tertullian. Tert^l.
adversus Marcio. l. 4. c. 5. p. 406. Edit. Pamel. 1597.
Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio. That Religion was the truest,
which was the first; and that the first, which was from the beginning.. And as
He against Marcion, so Justin Martyr against the Grecians, did prove the
Divinity of the Pentateuch from the Antiquity of its writer. The Jews enjoyed
the first Lawgiver (...). Just. Mart. (...). p. 9. Edit. Lutet. 1615.
by the Confession of the Gentiles. Moses preached the God of Abraham, whilst
Thales Milesius was yet unborn. Nor was it a thing to be imagined, that God
should suffer the Devil to have a Chapp^l in the world, before himself had any
Church. And thence Id teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus
creditum est: quod ita demum fit, si sequamur Universalitat^m, Antiquitatem,
Consensionem. Vin^. Lir. adv. Haer, c. 3. per^ot.
Vincentius Lirinensis, to prove the Truth of any Doctrine, or the Legality of
a Practice, does argue the Case from a Threefold Topic; The Universality, the
Consent, and the Antiquity of a Tradi^ion. Which Rule if we apply unto the
scope of this Text, as it stands in relation unto the Context, we shall have
more to say for it, than for most Constitutions, divine, or human. For That of
Marriage is almost as old as Nature. There was no sooner one man, but God
divided him into two; And then no sooner were there two, but he united them
into one. This is That sacred Institution which was made with Mankind in a
state of Innocence; the very Ground and Foundation of all both sacred and civil
Government. It was by sending back the Pharisees to the most venerable
Antiqui^y, Math. 5. 31, 32.
that our Lord here asserted the Law of wedlock, against the old Custom of
their Divorce. Whilst they had made themselves drunk with their muddy streams,
He directed them to the Fountain, to drink themselves into sobriety. They
insisted altogether on the Mosaical Dispensation; But He endeavored to reform
them by the most Primitive Institution. They alleged a Custom, but He a Law.
They a Permission, and that from Moses; But He a Precept, and that from God.
They did reckon from afarr off, But not, as He, from the Beginning.

In that one Question of the Pharisees, Verse 7.
Why did Moses command us to give her a writing of Divorce, and to put her
away? they put a Fallacy upon Christ, called Plurium Interrogationum. For Moses
only Permitted them to put her away; but Commanded them (if they did) to give
her a writing of Divorce. And accordingly their Fallacy is detected by Christ
in his Answer to them. Moses (did not command, but merely) Verse 8.
suffered you in your Custom of making unjustifiable Divorcements. (...), he
permitted, that is to say, he did not punish it; not allowing it as good, but
winking at it as the lesser of two great evils. He suffered it to be safe in
foro Soli; could not secure you from the Guilt, for which ye must answer in
foro Poli. And why did he suffer, what he could not Approve? Not for the
softness of your heads, which made you ignorant of your Duties; but for the
hardness of your hearts, which made you resolute not to do them: ye were so
barbarous and brutish upon every slight Cause, (or Occasion rather,) that if ye
might not put her away, ye would use her worse. Ye would many times beat, and
sometimes murder, sometimes bury her alive, by bringing another into her ^ed.
So that the Liberty of Divorce, however a poison in it self, was (through the
hardness of your hearts) permitted to you for an Antidote. But from the
beginning it was not so. And ye must put a wide difference betwixt an
Indulgence of Man, and a Law of God. To state the controversy aright, ye must
compare the first Precept with your customary Practice; not reckoning as far as
from Moses only, but as far as from Adam too; ye must not only look forwards,
from the year of the Creation 2400. but also backwards from thence, unto the
year of the Creation. The way to understand the Husband's Duty toward the
Wife, (and so to Reform, as not to Innovate,) is to consider the words of God
when he made the Wife out of the Husband. For Genesis 1. 27. Matthew. 19. 4.
He that made them at the beginning made them Male and Female, and said, Genesis
2. 24. Matthew. 19. 5.
For this cause shall a man leave Father, and Mother, and shall cleave unto his
Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh. What therefore God has joined
together, let not man put asunder. The Antecedent command was from God the
Father; the command in the sequel from God the Son. And though the Practice of
the Jews had been contrariant to them both, by a Prescription almost as old as
two thousand years; yet as old as it was, 'twas but an overgrown Innovation.
For (...), from the beginning it was not so.

Thus our Savior being sent to Reform the Jews, made known the Rule of his
Reformation. And the Lesson which it affords us is (in my poor judgment) of
great Importance For when the Doctrine or Discipline of our Church established
here in England shall be attempted by the Corruptions of Modern Romana Ecclesia
se non tam matrem exhibet al^s quam Novercam. Sedent in ea Scribae and
Pharisaei, etc. Johan. Sarisburiensis (ad Papam Hadrianum 4.) in Polycratic. l.
6. c. 24.
Pharisees, who shall assert against Us, (as these here did against our
Savior,) either their foreign Superstitions, (to say no worse,) or their
domestic Profanations, (to say no more;) we cannot better deal with Them, than
as our Savior here dealt with the ancient Pharisees; that is, we cannot better
put them to shame and silence, than by demonstrating the Novelty and base
extraction of Their Pretensions, whilst we evince at the same instant the
Sacred Antiquity of our own. When they obtrude their Revelations, or teach for
Doctrines of God the mere commandments of men, we must ask them every one, how
they read in the beginning. We may not draw out of their Ditches, be the
Currents never so long, whilst we have waters of our own of a nobler Taste,
which we ^an easily trace back to the crystal spring.

And first of all it concern's us to mark the Emphasi^, which our Ancient of
days thought fit to put on the Beginning; that no inferior Antiquity may be in
danger to deceive us. For there is hardly any Heresy or Usurpation in the
Church, which may not truly pretend to some great Antiquity, though not so old
as the Old man, much less as the Old Serpent. Epiph. Haer. 75. p. 904. Tom. 1.
Ed. Petav. August. de Haeres. Tom. 5. page 25. Edit. Basil. 1542.
The Disciplinarians may fetch theirs from as far as the Heretic Aerius; who
wanting merit to advance him from a Presbyter to a Bishop, wanted not arrogance
and envy to les^en the Bishop into a Presbyter. But His Antiquity is a Junior,
as well to that of the Anabaptists, as to that of the Socinians. For the
August. contra Donat. Tom. 7. l. 2. p. 396. Edit. Basil.
Anabaptists may boast they are as old as Agrippinus; and the Epiph. Haer. 6.
2. p. 513.
Socinians as Sabellius. The August. Tom. 6. Haer. 54 p. 25. Edit Basil 1542.
Soli^idians and Antinomians are come as far as from E^nomius. The Iren. lib.
1. cap. 24 p. 79. Excus. 1570.
Ranters from Carpocrates. The Eusebius. l. 3. c. 33. p. 80. Colon. A^l^brogum
1612.
Millenaries from Papias. The Irrespective Iren. l. 1. cap 10. p. 48* etc.
Epi^h. Haer. 66. page 617. Id. de duobus principiis page 625. 642. 676.
Reprobatarians from Simon Magus, and the Manichees. The Pontificians (like the
Mahumetans) have such a Rhapsody of Religion, a Religion so compounded of
several Errors and Corruptions, (which yet are blended with many Doctrines most
sound, and Orthodox,) that to find out the age of their several Ingredients, it
will be necessary to ^ake into several Times too.

THe great Palladium of the Conclave, the famous point of Infallibility, (which
if you take away from them, down goes their Troy, it being absolutely
impossible that the learned Members of such a Church should glibly swallow so
many Errors, unless by swallowing this first, That she cannot Err;) I say, the
point of Infallibility (which is a very old Article of their very new Creed, a
Creed not perfected by its Composers, until the Council at Trent,) we cannot
better derive than from the Scholars of Iren. Adver. Haeret. l. 1. c. 9. p. 44.
etc. Ed. Basil. p. 25.
Marcus in Irenaeus, or from the Gnostics in -- (...), Epi^h. Tom. 1. l. ^
Haer. 26. p. 91. (...). Idem ibid. Haer. 27. p. 102.
Epiphanius. They had their Purgatory from Note, That Bellarmine having boasted
(Lib. 1. de Purgatorio, c. 11. p. 1841. Edit. Ingolst ^d. A. D. 1590.) That all
the Ancients, both Greek and Latin, from the very time of the Apostles, did
constantly affirm the doctrine of Purgatory, could not give an older instance,
than in Origin, and Tertullian, c. 6. (for S. Clement, and S. De^n^^ are both
supposititious, and therefore reckoned as good as none,) but by recourse unto
the Heathens, c. 2. and 7. p. 1778. 1824.
Origin, (one of the best indeed in one kind, but in another one of the worst
of our ancient Writers; not only an Heretic, but an Haeresiarcha,) or at the
farthest from Tertullian, who had it from no better Author, than the Hoc etiam
Paracletus (i. e. Montanus) frequentissime commendavit, etc. Tert. de Anima,
cap. ult. See Bellarmine contradicted by the Romanists themselves. E. G.
Roffens. contr. Lutherum, art. 18. fol. 111. etc. Antverp. 1523. Polydor. Virg.
Inv. Rer. lib. 8. c. 1. p. 84. Edit. Basil. 15^4. Suarez in Aquin. par. 3* q.
59. art. 6. Disp. 52.. 2. Mogunt. 1604. p. 625. 1. Thomas ex Albiis
East-Saxonum de Medio Animarum statu, per totum libr. speciatim Demens. 9. p.
369, 370, 371.
Arch-Heretick Montanus. Nor does Bellarmine mend the matter, by deriving it as
far as from Virgil's Aeneid, and from Tully in his Tale of the Dream of Scipio,
and farther yet from Plato's Gorgias; unless he thinks that an Heathen is any
whit fi^ter than an Heretic, to give Advantage to a point of the Roman
Bellarm. ubi supra, p. 1840.
Faith. Their Denial of Marriage to all that enter into the Priesthood, is
dated by themselves but from Pope Liquet item, in orientali and occidentali
Ecclesia, usque ad tempus prohibitionis a Calixto factae, Sacerdotum conjugia
lici^a f^isse. Maximil. 2. apud Thuan. l. 36. p. 305, 306.
Calixtus. Their Ante Lateranense Concilium Transubstantiatio non fait dogma
Fidei. Scot. in 4. Sent. Did. 11. q. 3.
Transubstantiation is from the Lateran Council. Their Negare non possumus,
etiam in Ecclesia Latina fuisse usum utriusque speciei, and usque ad tempora S.
Thomae durasse. Vasq. in 3. Di^p. 216. c. 3. n. 38.
Half-Communion is no older than since the times of Aquinas; unless they will
own it from the Manichees, to give it the credit of more Antiquity. Their
public praying before the people in an unknown Tongue, may be fetched indeed as
far as from Gregory the Great. Their Invocation of Saints departed is no doubt
an aged Error, though not so aged as they would have it for the gaining of
honor to the Invention; because St Austin does Su^ loco and ordine homines Dei
nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat invocantur* August, de
Civitate Dei l. 22. c. 10. page 1335. Edit. Basil 1542.
deny it to have been in his days. And (not to be endless in the beginning of
such a limited Discourse, as must not presume to exceed an hour;) though in so
fruitful a field of matter, it is very difficult not to be endless;) Phocas
iratus Cyriaco Episcopo Constantinopolitano, adjudicavit Titulum Oecumenici
Pontifici Romano soli. Baronius ad A. C. 606. p. 198.
The Universal Superintendency or Supremacy of the Pope has been a visible
usurpation ever since Boniface the Third. And so our Adversaries of Rome have
more to plead for Their Errors then all the rest, because the rest were but as
Mushroms in their several times, soon starting up, and as soon cut down;
whereas the Errors of Rome do enjoy the pretense of Duration too.

But touching each of those Errors, (I mean the Errors of their Practice, as
well as Judgment,) we can say with our Savior in his present Correption of the
Pharisees, (whose Error was older and more authentic, that is, by Moses his
permission had more appearance of Authority, and more to be pleaded in its
excuse, than those we find in the Church of Rome,) that from the beginning it
was not so; and we care not whence they come, unless they come from the
Beginning.

Indeed in matters of mere Indifference which are brought into the Government
or outward Discipline of the Church, every Church has the Liberty to make her
own Constitutions; not asking leave of her Sisters, much less her Children;
only they must not be reputed as things without which there is no Salvation,
nor be obtruded upon the People amongst the Articles of their Faith. We are to
look upon nothing so, but as it comes to us from the Beginning.

And this has ever been the Rule (I mean the warrantable Rule) whereby to
improve or reform a Church. When Esdras was intent on the re-building of the
Temple, he sent not to Ephesus, much less to Rome; he did not imitate Diana's
Temple, nor enquire into the Rituals of Numa Pompilius; but had recourse for a
Temple, to that of Solomon, and for a Ritual, to that of Moses, as having both
been prescribed by God himself. And yet we know the Prophet Haggai made the
people steep their Joy in a shower of Tears, by representing how much the Copy
had fallen short of the Original. The holy Prophets in the Old Testament, showing
the way to a Reformation, advised the Princes and the people to ask after the
old paths, and walk therein, as being the only good way for the finding of rest
unto their souls, Jer. 6. 16. The Prophet Isaiah sought to regulate what was
amiss amongst the Jews, by bidding them have recourse unto the Law and the
Testimony should not a people seek unto their God? If any speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 19, 20. And
accordingly their Kings, who took a care to reform abuses, are in this solemn
style commended for it, That they walked in the ways of their Father David;
that is, reformed what was amiss by what had been from the Beginning. So St.
Paul in the New Testament, setting right what was crooked about the Supper of
the Lord in the Church of Corinth, laid his line to that Rule which he was sure
he had received from the Lord Himself, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And thus our Savior in
my Text, finding the Pharisees very fond of a vicious practice, which supported
it self by an old Tradition, and had something of Moses to give it countenance
in the world, (though indeed no more than a bare permission,) could not think
of a better way to make them sensible of their Error, (and such an Error as was
their Sin too,) than by showing them the great and important difference,
betwixt an Old, and a Primitive Custom; and that however their breach of
Wedlock had been without check from the days of yore, yet 'twas for This to be
reformed, that 'twas not so from the Beginning.

In a most dutiful conformity to which example, our Reformers here in England
(of happy memory) having disc^ver'd in every part of the Church of Rome, not
only horrible Corruptions in point of Practice, but hideous Errors in point of
Doctrine* and that in matters of Faith too, ((...) find an occasion to show
anon*) and ha^ving found by what degrees the several Errors and Corruptions
were slily brought into the Church, as well as the several times and seasons
wherein the Novelties received their birth and breeding; and presently after
taking notice, that in the Council of Trent the Roman Partisans were not afraid
to make Vide Council. Trident. Sess. 13. Can. 2, 3 Sess. 21. Can. 1, 2. 3. Sess.
22. Can. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9. Sess. 23. Can. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. Sess. 25. etc. quam
confer cum Bul^a Pii Quarti. Edit. Bin. page 444. Tom. 9.
New Articles of Faith, whilst the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, and the like, were
commanded to be embraced under pain of damnation, (as it were in contempt of
the Apostles denu^tiation, Gal. 1. 8. by which that practice of those
Conspirators made them liable to a curse;) and farther yet, that in the Canon
of the Fourth Session of that Council, the Roman Church was made to differ as
well from her ancient and purer self, as from all other Churches besides her
self, in that there were many merely human (I do not say profane) Writings, and
many unwritten Traditions also, not only decreed to be of Nec non ipsas
Traditiones, tum ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a
Christo, vel a Spiritu Sancto dictatas* pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia
suscipit ac^ veneratur (haec Sancta Synodus.) Trident. Conc. Sess. 4. sub Pa^lo
3. Bin. Tom. 9. d. 354.
equal Authority with the Scriptures, but with the addition of an Siquis libros
ipsos integros, -- pro sacris and Canonicis non susceperit, and Traditiones
praedictas sciens contempserit, Anathema sit. ib.
Anathema to all that should not so receive them: This (I say) being considered
and laid to heart by our Reformers, (by our Kings, and our Clergy* and Laiety
too, met together in their greatest both Ecclesiastical and Civil Councils,)
they did not consult with flesh and blood, or expect the Court of Rome should
become their Physician, which was indeed their great Disease; but having
recourse unto the Scriptures and Primitive Fathers of the Church, they
consulted those Oracles how things stood from the Beginning* and only
separating from Them, whom they found to have been Separatists from the
primitive Church, they Therefore made a Secession, that they might not partake
of the Roman Schism. And whilst they made a Secession for fear of Schism;
(which by no other practice could be avoided,) they studiously kept to the
Golden mean; neither destroying the Body out of hatred to the Ulcers with which
'twas spread, nor yet retaining any Ulcer in a passionate dotage upon the Body.

One remarkable Infirmity it is obvious to observe in the Popish Writers: they
ever complain we have left their Church; but never show us that Iota, as to
which we have left the Word of God, or the Apostles, or the yet-uncorrupted and
primitive Church, or the Four first General Councils. We are so zealous for
Antiquity, (provided it be but Antique Enough,) that we never have despised a
mere Tradition, which we could track by sure footsteps from as far as the times
of the purest Christians. But this is still their childish fallacy, (be it
spoken to the shame of their greatest Giants in Dispute, who still vouchsafe to
be guilty of it,) that they confidently shut up the Church in Rome, as their
Seniors the Donatists once did in Africa; and please to call it the Catholic
Church, not formally, but causally, (says Cardinal Peron,) because forsooth
That Particular does infuse universality into all other Churches besides it
self. The learned Cardinal forgetting, (which is often the effect of his very
good memory,) that the preaching of Christ was to begin at (...), etc. Theod.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 9. Council. Constantinop. apud Baronium ad A. D. 382.
suffragatur.
Jerusalem. So it was in the Prophecy, (Isa. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 2.) and so in the
completion, (Luke 24. 47.) Nor was it Rome, but Antioch, in which the Disciples
were first called Christians, (Acts 11. 26.) At (...), apud Chrysoft. ad
Populum Antiochen. Hom. 3. Tom. 6. Ed. Aeton. p. 474.
Antioch therefore there was a Church, before St Peter went thence to Rome. Nay
it is expressly affirmed by Tempore ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris absque ullo
impedimento -- radios suos indulget, id est praecepta sua Christus. Gildas in
Epist. de Excid. Brit. Sect. 6. p. 1005. Edit Basil. 1555.
Gildas, (an Author very much revered by the Romanists themselves,) that
Christianity was in Britain in the latter time of Tiberius Caesar; some while
after whose death, it is known that St Peter remained in Iewry. So that Rome
which pretends to be a Mother, can be no more (at the best) then a
Sister-Church, and not the eldest Sister neither.

Neglecting therefore the pretended Universality of the Roman (that is to say,
of a Particular) Church; let us compare her Innovations with what we find from
the Beginning. For This I take to be the fittest and the most profitable Use,
that we can make of the subject we have in hand.

And first, consider we the Supremacy, or Universal Pastorship of her Popes:
which is indeed a very old, and somewhat a prosperous Usurpation; an Usurpation
which took its rise from more than a thousand years ago. But then, besides that
it was sold by the Emperor De Phoca caelitus est dictum, (...), etc. Cedrenus,
p. 334.
Phocas, at once an (...). Idem. p. 332. Vide Testimonia Anastasii, and pauli
Diaconi, apud Baron* ad A. C. 606. p. 198.
Heretic, and a Regicide, the Devilish Murderer of Mauritius, (who was the
(...), the Royal Image or Type of our late Royal Martyr of Sacred Memory;) I
say, besides that it was sold by the most execrable Phocas, that is to say, by
the greatest Villain in the world, excepting Cromwell, and Pontius Pilate; and
besides that it was sold to ambitious Boniface the Third, whose vile compliance
with that Phocas was the bribe or price with which he bought it; and besides
that it was don, not out of reverence to the Pope, but in Phocas iratus
Cyriaco, Episcopo Constantinopolitano adjudicavit Titulum Oecumenici Pontifici
Romano. Baron Annal. ad A. Chapter 606.
displeasure to Cyriacus of Constantinople, who (from John Johannes*
Constantinopolitanus sese hi^c efferens, se ubique Oecumenicum Patriarcham
nominavit. Idem ad A. C. 595. Tom. 8. p. 83. and 84.
his Predecessor) usurpt the Title of Universal, before any Pope had pretended
to it; I say, besides, or without all this, it is sufficient for us to say,
what our Savior here said to the ancient Pharisees, That from the beginning it
was not so. For looking back to the Beginning, We find The Wall of God's City
had Twelve Foundations, and in them were the names of the Twelve Apostles of
the Lamb. (Rev. 21. 14.) Paul was equal at least to Peter, when he withstood
him to the face, and rebuked him in public for his Dissimulation. (Gal. 2. 11,
12, 13, 14.) Nay St Peter himself, (as well as James and John, who were his
Peers,) although he seemed to be a Pillar, yet perceiving the Grace that was
given to Paul, gave to Barnabas and Paul the right hand of Fellowship. (Gal. 2.
9.) And reason good: For St Peter was but One of the many Apostles of the
Jews; whereas St Paul was much more, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, to
whom the Jews were no more than as a River to an Ocean. Saint Peter was
commanded, not to fleece, but to John 21. 15, 16, 17.
feed the flock: No^ was it ever once known that he did lord it over Gods
heritage, which himself had so strictly forbid to others, 1 Pet. 5. 3. In deed
a Primacy of Order may very easily be allowed to the Sea of Rome: But for any
One Bishop to affect over his Brethren a supremacy of Power, and Jurisdiction,
is a most impudent opposition both to the Letter and to the Sense of our
Savior's precept, (Mar. 10. 42, 43. 44.) Ye know, that they who are accounted
to rule over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them, and their great ones
exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you: But whosoever
will be great among you, shall be your Minister; and whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be the servant of all.

That the Apostles were every one of equal power and authority, is the
positive saying of Cyprianus ait pari omnes inter se fuisse potestate
Apostolos; atque hoc idem fuisse alios quod* Petrus fuit. Tractat. 3. de
Simplicitate Praela. toru^ (Ed. Colon 1544) p. 135.
St Cyprian; Pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. And St Jerome
is as express, That Si Autoritas quaeritur, Orbis major est Vrbe: ubicunque
fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii,
sive Alexandriae, sive Tanii, ejusdem Meriti, ejusdem est and Sacerdotii*
Potentia Divitiarum, and Paupertatis Humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem
Episcopum non facit, Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Hier. in Epi.
ad Evagrium* (ex Edit. Basil. 1565.) p. 329. sive Ex Edit^ Paris etc.
all Bishops, in all places, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, are of the very same merit, as to the quality of
their Office, how much soever they may differ in point of Revenue or of
Endowments. Nay, by the Canons of the Two first General Councils, (Nice, and
Constantinople,) every (...)Council. Nicae. Can. 6. (...). Ibid. Can. 7. (...)
quae Antiochenae Ecclesiae servari his Canonibus praecipiuntur, eo pertinent,
(inquit Justellus,) ut Episcopus Antiochenus praeferatur Metropolitanis omnibus
in Orientali Dioecesi. Nihil Juris illi attributum in Caeteros Metropolitanos,
praeter Honorem Ordinis, non autem ut Metropolitani omnes Dioeceseos Orientis
ab eo jure singulari ordinarentur, ut Innocentii primi Epistola ad Alexandr.
Episcopum asserere videtur, contra mentem S^nodi Nicaenae, Justell. p. 7. ex
Edit. Gulielmi Voelli, A. D. 1661.
Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper Dioecese; as the
Bishop of Rome is the chief in His. And a strict (...), etc. Conci.
Constantinop. Oecumen. 2. Can. 2. Quid hic Canon sibi velit per [(...)]
Justellus explicat paulo su^erius ad Can. Conc. Nic. 6. nihil Juris nimirum
Antiocheno attribuendum in caeteros Metropolitanos, praeter Ordinem Honoris.
injunction it laid on all, (the Bishop of Rome not excepted,) that they
presume not to meddle in any Diocese but their own. And the chief Primacies of
Order were granted to Rome and to Constantinople, not for their having been the
Sees of such or such an Apostle, Confer Justinian. Nove^. Constit. 131. cap. 2.
cum Canone 3. Concilii Constant.
but for being the two Seats of the two great Empires. Witness the famous Canon
of the General Council at Chalcedon, (...). Et paulo post -- (...), etc.
Council. Chalced. Can. penult.
decreeing to the Bishop of Constantinople an equality of Privileges with the
Bishop of Rome; not for any other reason, than its having the good hap to be
one of the two Imperial Cities. Nay, no longer ago before Boniface the Third,
(who was the first Bishop of Rome that usurp^t the Title of Universal,) I say,
no longer before Him than his next immediate Predecessor Pope Gregory the
Great, (for I reckon Sabinian was but a Cipher,) the horrible Pride of
succeeding Popes was stigmatized by a Prolepsis; by way (not of Prophecy, but)
of Anticipation. For Quis est iste qui contra Statuta Evangelica, contra
Canonum Decreta, novum sibi usurpare nomen praesumit? -- Novis and profanis
vocabulis gloriantur. -- Absit a cordibus Christiano, rum nomen il. lud
Blasphemiae. Greg. Mag. 1. 3. Epist. 32. ad Mauritium Augustum. p. 734.
Gregory writing to Mauritius, the then-reigning Emperor, (and that in very
many Epistles,) touching the name of Universal, which the Bishop of
Constantinople had vainly taken unto himself, call's it a wicked and pro^ane
and blasphemous Title* a Title importing that the Sed in hac ejus superbia quid
aliud nisi propinqua jam Antichristi esse tempora designatur? Idem ad
Constantiam Augustam. Ep. 34 p. 737. confer. 1. 7. Epi. 69. Eusebio, aliisque,
p. 902.
times of Antichrist were at hand; (little thinking that Pope Boniface would
presently after his decease usurp the same, and prove the Pope to be Antichrist
by the confession of a Pope.) He farther disputed against the Title by an
Argument leading ad absurdum; Si unus Episcopus vocatur universalis, universa
Ecclesia corruit, l. 6 Ep. 24. p. 822. Et rursus -- si illud nomen in ea
Ecclesia sibi quisquam arripuit, quod apud honorum omnium judicium fuit,
Universa ergo Ecclesia (quod absi^) a statu suo corruit, quando Is qui
appellatur Universalis cadit. Idem ad Eund. Epist. 32. p. 734. Universalis
autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur, fatente Papa Pelagio secundo, apud
Gratian. Decretal. p. 1. did. 99. cap. 4. Quis autem illud pro indignitate rei
stupeat, quod novam quand^m indebitamque Potentiam tibi usurpando arrogas, etc?
Ita Papam al^oquuntur Episcopi Germanici apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 47.
That if any one Bishop were Universal, there would by consequence be a failing
of the Universal Church, upon the failing of such a Bishop. An Argument, ad
homines, not easily to be answered, whatsoever Infirmity it may labor with in
itself. And such an Argument is That, which we bring against the Pope's
pretended Headship. For if the Pope is the Head of the Catholic Church, then
the Catholic Church must be the Body of the Pope; because the Head and the
Body are the Relative and Correlative; and being such, they are convertible in
obliquo: And then it follows unavoidably, That when there is no Pope at all,
(which is very often,) the Catholic Church has then no Head; and when there
are many Popes at once, (which has been sometimes the case,) then the
Catholic Church must have at once many Heads; and when the Pope is Heretical,
(as by the confession of the Papists he now and then is,) the Catholic Church
has such an Head, as makes her deserve to be beheaded. Multi Pontifices Romani
errarunt; sicut Marcellinus, qui Idolis sacrificavit; and Liberius Papa, qui
Arianis consensit; and Anastasius secundus propter Haeresis Crimen repudiatus
fuit ab Ecclesia: and alii etiam plurimi coatra Catholicam fidem tenuerunt; ut
Joannes vi. gesimus secundus, qui asseruit, quod filius Dei sit Major Patre and
Spiritu Sancto. Didacus Stella Tom. 2. in Luc. cap. 22. verse. 31. p. 280. col.
1. Edit. Ant. verp. A. D. 1593. Ad Inquisitionis Hispaniae decreta prorsus
elimatus, and summa fide (...).
That Popes have been Heretics, and Heathens too, not only by denying the
Godhead of the Son, and by lifting him up above the other two Persons, but even
by sacrificing to Idols, and a total Apostasy from the Faith, is (a thing so
clear in the writings of Platina, and Onuphrius, that it is) the Confession of
the most zealous, and partial Asserters of their Supremacy. I know that Stella,
and those of the Spanish Inquisition, do at once confess this, and yet adhere
to their Position, Ubi supra, verbis immediate subsequentibus.
That (with his College of Cardinals) the Pope cannot err, and is the Head of
the Church. But St Hilary of Poictiers was so offended, at Pope Liberius his
espousing the Arian Heresy, that he affirmed the true Church to have been Then
only in France. Hilar. Pictav. de Synodis, p. 287. and paulo post -- Quidam ex
vobis firmissima fidei constantia intra communionem se meam continentes, se a
caeteris extra Gallias abstinuerunt. Idem ib. p. 288. Edit Basil. A. C. 1535.
Ex eo inter nos tantum Communio Dominica continetur. So ill success have they
met with, who have been Flatterers of the Pope, or the Court of Rome.

To conclude this first instance in the fewest words that I can use: Whosoever
shall read at large (what I have time only to hint) the many Liberties and
Exemptions of the Gallican Church, and the published Confessions of Popish
Writers, for more than a thousand years together, touching the Papal
Usurpations, and Right of Kings, put together by Goldastus in three great
Volumes; he will not be able to deny, (let his present persuasion be what it
will,) that the Supremacy of the Pope is but a Prosperous Usurpation, and has
This lying against it, that 'twas not so from the beginning.

Secondly It Is true, that for several Ages, the Church of Rome has pretended
to be Infallible; as well Incapable of error, as not erroneous. But from the
beginning it was not so. For, (besides that Infallibility is one of God's
peculiar and incommunicable Attributes,) where there is not Omniscience, there
must be Ignorance in part; and where Ignorance is, there may be Error. That
Heresy is Error in point of Faith, and that Novatianism is Heresy, all sides
agree: And it is agreed by the Champions of the Papacy it self, (such as Baron.
Tom. 2. An. 254. page 498. and 503, 504.
Baronius, Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41. p. 47, 48.
Pamelius, and Petav. in Epiphan. ad Haeres. 59. quae est Novatianorum, page
226.
Petavius,) that Rome it self was the Nest in which Novatianism was hatched; and
not only so, but that There it continued from Onuph. in Notis ad Plat. in vita
Corn. lii. page 26. Ed. Lovan. 1572. Vide Eusebius. l. 6. and 7.
Cornelius to Coelestine, which wants not much of two hundred years. To pass
by the Heresies of the Donatists, and the Arians, (which strangely prosper'd
for a time, and spread themselves over the world, the former over the West, the
later over the East, and as far as the Breast of the Pope himself;) one would
have thought that the Tenet of Infallibility upon Earth had been sufficiently
prevented by the Heresy Vide Bellar. Chronol. ad A. C. 132. and Eus. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 39.
of the Chiliasts, wherewith the Primitive Church her self (I mean the very
Fathers of the Primitive Church, for the two first Centuries after Christ,) was
not only deceived by Papias, who was a Disciple of St John, but (for ought I
yet learn) without the least Contradiction afforded to it. Nay the whole Church
of God (in the opinion of St. Non potest probari eum [i. e. Augustinum]
existimasse hic de Eucharisti^ non agi, cum ^am multis locis aliis probet ex
ho^ Johannis Testimonib, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque
non ut opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei and Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad refellendos
Pelagianos dicat: and paulo post -- Missam sacio Augustini and Innocentii primi
sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam
etiam Infantibus neces^ariam. Res jam ab Ecclesia, and Multorum seculorum usu,
and Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non solum neces^ariam illis non
esse, sed ne decere quidem da^i. (Sess. 21. and Can. 4.) Maldonat. (Excus.
Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719.
Austin and Pope Innocent the third, and for six hundred years together, (if
Non potest probari eum [i. e. Augustinum] existimasse hic de Eucharisti^ non
agi, cum ^am multis locis aliis probet ex ho^ Johannis Testimonib, Eucharistiam
etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque non ut opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei
and Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad refellendos Pelagianos dicat: and paulo post --
Missam sacio Augustini and Innocentii primi sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter
annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus necessariam. Res jam ab
Ecclesia, and Multorum seculorum usu, and Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata
est, non solum necessariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quidem da^i. (Sess.
21. and Can. 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p.
717, 718, 719.
Maldonate the Jesuit may be believed) thought the Sacrament of Eucharist to
have been necessary to Infants, as well as to men of the ripest Age: and yet
(as Maldonate confesses at the very same time,) it was so plain and so gross
an Error, that notwithstanding St Austin did endeavor to confute the Pelagians
by it, as by a Doctrine of Faith, and of the whole Church of God; yet the
Council of Trent was of a contrary mind, and did accordingly in a Canon declare
against it.

3. Pass we on to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which (if its Age may be
measured by the very first date of its Definition,) may be allowed to be as old
as the Lateran Cujus corpus and san^guis in Sacramento altaris sub speciebus
Panis and Vini veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis Pane in Cornus, and
Vino in sanguinem, potestate divina. Conc. Later. c. 1. In Synaxivero
Transubstantiationem definivit Ecclesia. Diu satis erat credere, sive sub Pa^^
consecrato, sive quocunque modo adesse verum Corpus Christi. Erasm. Annot. in 1
Cor. 7. p. 472. Saltem ab annis 500 dogma Transubstantiationis sub Anathemate
stabilitum, ut ait ipse Bellarminus de Eucharist. l. 3. c. 21. p. 759. Cujus
etiam confessionem videre est, l. 3. c. 23. p. 766. Ed. Par. 1586.
Council, a Council held under Pope Innocent the Third; since whom are somewhat
more then 400 years. But from the beginning it was not so. For besides that our
Savior, just as soon as he had said, This is my Blood, explained himself in
the same Breath, by calling it expressly the fruit of the Vine, and such as He
would drink new in the kingdom of God, (Mat. 26. 29. Mark 14. 15.) there needs
no more to make the Romanists even ashamed of that Doctrine, than the
Concession of Aquinas, and Bellarmine's Inference thereupon. Corpus Christi non
est ^o modo in hoc Sacramento sicut Corpus in loco, quod suis Dimensionibus
loco commensuratur; sed quodam speciali modo, qui est proprius huic Sacramento.
Unde dicimus, quod Corpus Christi est in diversis altaribus, non sicut in
diversis locis, sed sicut in Sacramento. Nullo enim modo Corpus Christi est in
hoc Sacrament^ localiter, quia si esset, divideretur a seipso* Aquin. Oper Tom.
12 Sum. part. 3. q. 75. art. 1. ad 3. p. 232. col. 2. and q. 76 art. 3. and 5.
ex Edit. Antwerp. 1612.
Aquinas so argues, as to imply it is Impossible, and imports a Contradiction,
for one body to be locally in more places than one, and in all at once. But Si
non posset esse unum Corpus lo^^l^ter in duobus locis, quia divideretur a sei
pso, profecto nec esse posset Sacramentaliter eadem ratione. Bellar. de
Eucharistia, lib. 3. c. 3. p. 511. Tom. 3. Controvers. ex Edit. Paris. A. C.
1620.
Bellarmine (at this) is so very angry, that in a kind of Revenge upon Aquinas,
(though held to be the Angelical Doctor,) he needs will infer it is as
Impossible, and equally implies a Contradiction, for any one body at once to be
so much as Sacramentally in more Places than one. And therefore it cannot now
be wondered concerning Transubstantiation, if so long ago as in the time of
Pope Nicolas the Second, either the Novelty was not forged and hammered out
into the shape in which we find it, or not at all understood by the Pope
Himself. For one of the two is very clear by the famous Coactus est Berengarius
public pro fiteri, Panem and Vinum, quae in altari ponuntur, post
co^secrationem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum Corpus and Sanguinem
Domini nostri Jesu Christi esse: and sensualiter non solum Sacramento, sed in
veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
Con^er Floriacens. Histor. fragmenta a P. Pithaeo edit. inter. Franc. Script.
(Excus. Francof. A. C. 1596) p. 86. cum Lanfranc. lib. cont. Bereng. and
Guitmund. de Sacram. l. 1. and Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19.
Submission of Berengarius, wherewith he satisfied the Sigon. de Regno Ital. l.
9. A. 1059. p. 210.
Synod then held at Rome, (and in which were 113 Bishops,) though not at all
unto a Trans, but rather a Consubstantiation. Which diverse Nisi sane intelligas
verba Berengarii, in majorem incides Haeresin, quam ipse habuit: and ideo omnia
referas ad species ipsas, nam de Christi Corpore parts non facimus. Johan.
Semeca Glossator in Gratian. de Consecrat. Did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius.
Romanists themselves have not been able not to Censure, though it was penned by
a A Cardinale, scil. Humberto Sylvae Candidae Episcopo. Guitmundusub. supra.
Cardinal, and approved of by a Council, and very glibly swallowed down by the
Pope himself.

4. It Is very true that their withholding the Cup of blessing in the Lord's
Supper from the secular part of their Communicants, has been in practice
little less then 400 years. But from the beginning it was not so. For in our
Savior's Institution we find it intended for Council. Constant. Action 13.
Can. 13. p. 880. In Ecclesia Latina 1000. amplius annis tenuit, ut tam Populo
quam Clero in celebratione Missarum post mysteriorum consecrationem seorsum
Corpus and seorsum Sanguis Domini praeberetur. Cassan. Consult. Artic. 22.
Vasq. cap. ^. Disp. 216. c. 3. n. 38. Secundum antiquam Ecclesiae
consuetudinem, omnes sicut communicabant Corpori, ita communicabant and
Sanguini, quod etiam adhuc in quibusdam Ecclesiis seruatur. Jo. 6. Aquinasin
Comment. Lectione 7. p. 42. col 1. Tom. 13.
every Guest. (...) is the word, Drink ye All of this Cup. (Mat. 26. 27.) And
S. Paul to the Corinthians (consisting most of Laymen) speaks as well of their
drinking the mystical Blood, as of their eating the Body of Christ. (1 Cor. 11.
26, 27, 28, 29.) Nay it is confessed by learned Vasquez, (as well as by Cassander,
and Aquinas Himself) to be a Truth undeniable, That the giving of both Elements
in the Roman Church it self, until the time of Aquinas; did still continue to
be in use.

5. The Church of Rome for several Ages has restrained the holy Scriptures
from the perusal of the People. But from the beginning it was not so. For
Hebrew to the Jews was the Mother Tongue, and in That 'twas read weekly before
the People. It pleased God the New Testament should be first written in Greek,
because a Tongue the most known to the Eastern world. And to the end that this
Candle might not be hid under a Bushel, it was translated by St Jerome into the
Sixth. Senens. Bibliothec. l. 4. p. 247. Ipse Hieron. in Epist. ad Sophron. Tom.
3.
Dalmatick Tongue, by Bishop Vulphilas into the Socrat Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c.
33. Niceph. Hist. Eccle. lib. 11. c. 48. Bonav. Vulcan. in Prafat. de Liturg.
and lingua Getarum.
Gothic, by St Chrysostom into Roccha in Bibliotheca Vatican. p. 155, 157.
Armenian, by Athelstan into Saxon, by Aventin. Annal. lib. 4. p. 434.
Methodius into Sclavonian, by Iacobus de Voragine into Sixth. Senens: Bibl. l.
4. p. 255. col. 1.
Italian, by Bid and Wiclef into Vide Authoces citat. apud Brerew. Inqu. c. 26.
English. And not to speak of the Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabic, Persian, and
Chaldee Versions, (which were all for the use of the common people of those
Countries,) the Confer Blond. Ital. Illustrata, in Marchia Tarbisina, and Tin.
to de la Nobilta di Verona, lib. 2. cap. 2. cum Hieronymi Temp^ribus apud
Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. p. 104.
Vulgar Latin was then the Vulgar Language of the Italians, when the Old and
New Testament were turned into it.

6. The public prayers of the Romanists have been a very long time in an
unknown Tongue, (I mean unknown to the common people,) even as long as from the
times of Pope Gregory the Great. But from the beginning it was not so. For it is
a scandalously opposite to the plain sense of Scripture, as if it were done in
a mere despite to the 14th Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
especially from the 13 to the 17. verse. Not to speak of what is said by the
(...). Origin. contra celsum (ex Edit. H^schelii, Augustae Vindelicorum, 1605.)
lib 8. p. 414.
Primitive Writers: Cum Aquinate and Lyra confer Cajetanum in 1 Cor. 14. p. 79.
sententiae nostrae suffragantem. Ed. Paris 1532.
Aquinas and Lyra do both confess upon the place, that the common Service of
the Church in the Primitive times, was in the common language too. And as the
Christians of Angelus Roccha in Bibl. Vatic. p. 157.
Dalmatia, Biblioth. Vet. ^atrum, Tom. 6. p. 654.
Habassia, Petrus Bellonius in Observe l. 3. cap. 12. and Vitriacus in Hist.
Orient. cap. 79. p. 1095. Brocardus non nullibi in sua Descriptione Terrae
Sanctae.
Armenia, Possevinus de Reb. Mosc. pl 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c. 12.
Muscovia, Bapt Palate de rat. Scrib. An. Roc^ha Biblioth. Vatic. p. 162.
Sclavonia, Possevinus de Reb. Mosc. pl 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c. 12.
Russia, and all the Reformed parts of Christendom, have the Service of God in
their vulgar Tongues, so has it been in diverse Places by Aventin. Annal. l. 4.
Aeneas Sylvius in Hist. Bohem. cap. 13. p. 128. Council. B^n: Tom. 3. p. 990.
Vide etiam Decret. l. 1. Tit 31. cap. 14. and quicquid Authorum videre est in
Brerew. Inqu. 26.
Approbation first had from the Pope himself.

7. Another instance may be given in their Prohibiting of Marriage to men in
Orders, which is derived by some from the third Nempe a Papa Calixto, qui
floruit A. D. 220. Consule Thuanum, in l. 36. p. 305.
Century after Christ; by Bishop Hall. 3. Epist. 2. Decad.
others from the eighth; and in the rigor that now it is, from Pope Gregory
the Seventh. But from the beginning it was not so. For Priests were permitted
to have wives, both in the Old and New Testament; (as Maximilian Ubi supra apud
Thuanum, p. 305. and 306.
the Second did rightly urge against the Pope:) And the blessed Apostles (many
of them) were married men: for so I gather from Eusebius l. 3. c. 13.
Eusebius out of Clemens Alexandrinus; and from the Constat Apostolos ipsos,
paucis exceptis, conjuges habuisse. Ubi supra apud Thuanum.
Letter of Maximilian, who did not want the Advice of the learned persons in
all his Empire; and from 1 Cor. 9. 5. where St Paul asserts his liberty to
carry a Wife along with him, as well as Cephas. And it is the Doctrine of that
Apostle, that a Bishop may be an Husband, although he may not be the Husband of
more then One Wife. (1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 6.) Besides, the Marriage of the
Clergy was asserted by Ibid. apud Thuanum.
Paphnutius in the Council at Nice; and even by one of those (...), Canon.
Apostol. 5. (...). Zonaras in Can. Apost. 5. p. 4. Edit. Pari. 1618.
Canons which the Romanists themselves do still avow for Apostolical. And the
forbidding men to marry (with Saturninus, and the Gnostics,) is worthily
called by God's Apostle, The Doctrine of Devils, (1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.) Nubere and
generate a Satana dicunt esse. Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 22. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom,
l. 3.


8. I shall conclude with that Instance, to which our Savior in my Text does
more peculiarly allude; I mean the Liberty of Divorce betwixt Man and Wife, for
many more Causes than the Cause of Fornication. For so I find it is Siquis
dixerit Ecclesiam err^re, cum ob multas Causas separationem inter conjuges
quoad totum, seu quoad cohab^tationem, ad certum incertum. ve tempus, fieri
posse decernit, Anathema sit. Conci. Trident. Sess. 24 Can. 8. p. 411. Edit.
By. Tom. 9. Paris.
decreed by the Church of Rome, with an Anathema to all that shall contradict
it. But from the Beginning it was not so. For it is as opposite to the will of
our Blessed Savior, revealed to us without a Parable, (in the next verse after
my Text) as if they meant nothing more, than the opening of a way to rebel
against him. For besides that in the Canon of the Council at Trent, a Divorce
quoad Torum / Torum ob multas Causas was decreed to be just in the Church of
Rome, although our Lord had twice confined it to the Sole Cause of Fornication,
(Matthew. 5. 32, and 19. 9.) And besides that the word Totum was constantly
retained in Scil. (praeter Edit. jam nominatam) Edit. Col. Agrip. Tom. 4. part.
2. p. 332. Sum. Council. Edit. Fra, Longii a Coriolano, Antverp. A. C. 1623. p.
1024. Item Council. General. Pauli Quinti Auctorit. Edit. Romae, A. C. 1628.
Tom. 4. p. 273.
four Editions, (particularly in That, which had the Care and Command of Pope
Paul the Fifth,) Let it be granted that the Council did mean no more, than a
mere Sequestration from Bed and Board, to endure for a certain or uncertain
time; and not an absolute Dissolution of the Conjugal Knot; yet in the Judgment
of Chemnitius, yea and of Maldonat Himself, (who was as learned a Jesuit as
that Society ever had,) it would be opposite (even so) to the Law of Christ.
For Si ob aliam Causam quam ob Fornicationem dimiserit, quamvis aliam non
duxerit, maechatur; quia uxorem suam moechari facit. Maldonat. (excus. Mogunt.
A. D. 1624.) in Matthew. 199 p. 392.
he who puts away his Wife for any Cause whatsoever, besides the Cause of
Fornication commits Adultery (says the Jesuit) even for this very reason,
because he makes Her commit it, whom he unduly puts away. Atqui in
Pontificia illa Separatione (nempe a Toro and Mensa, ad certum incertumve
tempus,) Vinculum Conjugii multis and variis modis solvitur and disrumoitur.
Nam ad Vinculum Matrimonii ^e^ti^ent hae sententiae. Et adhaereb^^ Uxori suae.
Faciamus ei adjutorium quod sit coram ipso. Mulier non habet potestatem sui
Corporis, sed vir. Iterum convenite, ne ten^et vos Satan propter Incontinentiam
vestram. Non sunt Duo, sed una Caro. Et ipsum Matrimonium defi^itur, Individua
vitae consuetudine. Haec vero vincula Conjugii in Po^tificia separatione, quoad
Torum and Cohabitationem, solvuntur and dirum^untur. Homines igitur, contra
Decretum Divinitatis, separant, quod Deus conjunxit. Chemn. ^n Exam. Council.
Trident. (Excus. Genev. A. D. 1634.) p. 437.
Nay, Chemnitius says farther; That the Papal Separation from Bed and Board,
is many ways a Dissolution of the Conjugal Tie. Nor does he content himself to
say, or affirm it only, but by a Confluence of Scriptures does make it good,
That against the Command of our blessed Savior (in the verse but one before my
Text,) That which God has joined together, the men of Rome do put asunder.

By these and many more Corruptions in point of Practice and Doctrine too,
which were no more then Deviations from what had been from the Beginning, and
which the learnedest Sons of the Church of Rome have been forced to confess in
their public writings, the awakened part of the Christian world were compelled
to look out for a Reformation. That there was in the Sea of Rome the most
abominable Practice to be imagined, we have the liberal Vix ullum peccatum
cogitari potest, (sola Haere si excepta) quo illa seeds turpiter maculata non
fuerit, maxim ab An^. 800. and infra. Staplet. Oper. Tom. 1. Cont. 1. q. 5.
art 3. p 597. excus. Paris. 1620.
Confession of zealous Stapleton himself; and of those that have published their
Consule Canonas Poenitentiales Romanos, Bedae, Rabani Mauri, etc. cum notis
Antonii Augustini, Arch^episcop^ Tarraconensis, Excus. Venetiis, 1584.
Penitentials. We have the published Complaints of Armachanus, and Grostead,
and Nicolas de Clemangis, John of Hus, and Jerome of Prague, Chancellor Gerson,
and Erasmus, and the Archbishop of Spalato. Ludovicus Vives, and Cassander, who
are known to have died in the same Communion, did yet impartially complain of
some Corruptions. Ludov. Vives in S. August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.
Vives of their Feasts at the Oratories of Martyrs, as being too much of kin
unto the Gentiles Parentalia, which in the judgment of Parentati^ Mortuis
species est Idololatriae, quoniam, and Idololatria Parentationis est species.
Tertul. de Spectac. c. 12.
Tertullian made up a species of Idolatry. And Ca^ander -- Ita ut ad Summam
adorationem, quae vela Paganis su^ simulacris exhiberi co^sue. vit, and ad
extre* mam vanitatem quam Ethnic^ in suis sim^lacris exornandis admiserunt, nil
a nostris reliqu^ factum esse videatur. Geo. Gassander in Consult* de Imag. and
Simulacris mihi page 175, 176.
confesses plainly, that the Peoples Adoration paid to Images and Statues, was
equal to the worst of the ancient Heathen. Thuan. l. 25. page 760, 761, etc.
So the buying and selling of Papal Indulgences and Pardons ('it is a little
thing to say o^ Preferments too) was both confessed and inveighed against by
Popish Bishops in Thuanus.

Now if with all their Corruptions in point of Practice, which alone cannot
justify a People's Separation from any Church, (though the Cathari and the
Donatists were heretofore of that opinion,) we compare their Corruptions of
Doctrine too, and that in matter of Faith, (as has been showed,) Corruptions
intrenching on Fundamentals; it will appear that That door which was opened by
Us in our first Reformers, was not at all to introduce, but to let out De
Hildebrando in haec verba sententiam ferunt Episcopi Germanici qui Conci. lio
Wormatienst intersuerunt. Dum profanis studes Novitatibus, dum magis amplo quam
bo^o nomine delect^ ris, dum i^audita Elatione di^^enderis, velut quidam
Signifer Schismatis, omnia membra Ecclesiae superba crudelitate and crud^li
superbia lacerasti: flammasque Discordiae quas in Romana Ecclesia diris
factionibus excitasti, per omnes Ecclesias Italiae, Galliae, and Hispaniae,
furiali dementia sparsisti. -- Per gloriosa tua Decreta (quod sine lachrymis
dici non potest) Christi fere nome^ periit. Imperial. Statut. a Goidasto edit,
Tom. 1. p. 47.
Schism. For the schism must needs be Theirs who give the Cause of the
Separation, not Theirs who do but separate when Cause is given. Else S. Paul
had been to blame, in that he said to his Corinthians, Come ye out from among
them, and be ye separate. (2 Cor. 6. 17.) The actual Departure indeed was Ours,
but Theirs the causal, (as our immortal Archbishop does fitly word it:) we
left them indeed when they thrust us out; (as they cannot but go whom the Devil
drives;) But in propriety of speech, we left their Errors, rather then Them. Or
if a Secession was made from Them, 'twas in the very same measure that They had
made one from Christ. Whereas They, by their Hostilities, and their
Excommunications, departed properly from us, not from any Errors detected in
us. And the woe is to Them by whom the offense comes, (Matthew. 18. 7.) not to
Them to whom it is given. If when England was in a Flame, by Fire sent out of
Italy, we did not abstein from the quenching of it, until water might be drawn
from the River Tiber; it was because our own Ocean could not only do it sooner,
but better too. That is to say (without a Figure,)

It did appear by the Concession of the most learned Popish VVriters, that
particular Nations had still a power to purge themselves from their
corruptions, as well in the Church, as in the State, without leave had from the Sea of Rome; and that 'twas commonly put in practice above a thousand years
since. Ex eo quo Willielmus Normanniae Comes Terram illam debellando sibi
subegit, Nemo in ea Episcopus, vel Abbas ante Anselmum factus est, qui non
primo fuerit Homo R^gis, ac de manu illius Episcopatus vel Abba^iae
^^vestituram per dationem Virgae Pastoralis suscepit, etc. Eadmerus Monach.
Cant. in Praef. ad Hist. Nov. page 2. Sed nec ex eosolum tem^ore mos h^c
obtinuit; Nam ante Normannorum etiam adve^^um hic (...), ut majorum Ge^tium
Antistites sacri, Episcopi nimirum and Caenobia^chae (qui saltem in Clientela
Regia) a Sacris Ecclesiarum Corportbus clecti, quin saepius etiam, spretis
om^ino Corporum Sacrorum suffragiis, in Aula defignati, Annuli and Bacu^i
Pas^oralis, sive Pedi traditione, in Dignitatis Possessionem a Regibus nostris,
jure avito nixis, mi^terentur. Joh. Seldom. in ^uis ad Eadmer. Notis and
Spicilegio, p. 142. Hujus rei exemplum videre est apud G. Malmes. buriensem de
Gest^s Regum, lib. 2 cap 8. Quin and illud aliquanto vide^^^ dignius quod hoc
in loco (...). Po^tifici Hildebrando Fid^itatis Iuramentum, a Guilielmo
Normanno, exigenti, Guliemum Regem ^espondisse -- Fidelitatem facere non volo,
quia nec ego p^omisi, nec A n^ecessores meos Antecesso^ibus tuis id fecisse
comperio. Baron. Ad An. 1076. Guilielmus Rufus allegavit, Quod nullus
Archiepiscopus aut Episcopus Regni sui, Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset.
M^tth. Paris. H^st. p. 25 Ed. t. 1094. Videsis eti^m Imperatores, and Peges
Galliarum, jura sua asseren^es, apud Othonem F^isingensem, Sigibe^tum, cosque
maxim Historicos qui Res H^nrici Quarti Imperatorts, and ejusdem nominis Primi
Regis Anglorum conscripsere. ^aprimis vero S^gonium de Reg Ital. l. 4, 9, 10,
and 11. Baron. Tom. 11. A. C. 1077. Cherubinu^ Laert. in Bullarii Tom. 1. p.
16. and 17. Bin. Council. Tom. 3. part, 2. in Urbano, Calixto, and Paschali
Secundis, Renatum Choppinum de Domanio Franciae. il. 2. tit. 1. sect. 6, etc.
Et de Sacra Politia, l. 1. tit. 7. Sect. 22, and 23. ad haec, Theodor.
Balsamon. Patriarch Antioch. in Council. Chalced* Can. 4. Joh. Naucl^^*
Chronograph. gener: 39. and H. Mutium Chron. German. 18. p. 162. etc.
It did appear that the Kings of England (at least as much as those of
Sicily,) were ever held to be (...), and that by the Romanists themselves;
until by gaining from Henry the First, the Investiture of Bishops, from Henry
the Second, an Exemption of the Clergy from Secular Courts, and from easy King
John, an unworthy Submission to foreign Power; the Popes became strong enough
to call their strength the Law of Justice. And yet their Encroachments were
still opposed, by the most pious and the most learned in every Age. Concerning
which it were easy to give a satisfactory account, if it were comely for a
Sermon to exceed the limits of an hour. In a word, it did appear from the Code
and Novels of (...). etc. Justin. Novel. Constable, 131. c. 2. Vide etiam de
mandatis Prin. cipum, Tit 4. Novel. 17. c. 7. and 11.
Justinian, from the (...) set out by the Emperor Evagr. l. 3. c. 14. in Mag.
Biblioth. Vet. Patr. Tom 6. Part. 2. p. 655.
Zeno, from the practice of Sigon. de Reg. Ital. l^. 4. ad A. C. 801. and
Eginhart. in vit. Car. Mag. and Baron. Annal. Tom. 9. ad A. C. 800 p. ^42. ad
A. C. 545. and To. 10. ad A. C. 845. p. 34. Excus. Colon. Agrip. 1609.
Charles the Great, (which may be judged by the Capitulars sent abroad in his
Name,) from the designs and Endeavors of two late Emperors, Ferdinand the
First, and Maximilian the Second, from all the commended Kings of Judah, from
the most pious Christian Emperors as far as from Constantine the Great, and
from many Kings of England in Edward the Confessor, Wi^liam 1. H. 3. Edw. ^.
Edw. 2. Edw. 3 Rich. 2. Hen. 4. H. 5. H. 6 Edw 4. Rich 3 H. 7. H. 8. for all
which at large, See Cokes Reports, par. 5. fol. 1. Caudrey's Case, or De Jure
Reg^s Ecclesiast^co. (...). Bal sam. in Conc. Carth. Can. 16.
Popish times too; that the work of Reformation belonged especially to Them in
their several Kingdoms. And this is certain; that neither Prescription on the
Pope's side, nor Discontinuance on the King's, could add a Right unto the one,
or any way lessen it in the other. For it implies a contradiction, that what is
wrong should grow right, by being prosperous for a longer, or shorter season.

Had the Pope been contented with his (...). Council. Constantinop. Occum. 2.
Cap. 3. (...). Justinian. Imp. Novel. Constable. 131. c. 2.
Primacy of Order, and not ambitiously affected a Supremacy of Power, and over
all other Churches besides his own; we never had cast off a Yoke, which had
never been put upon our Necks: And so it is plain that the Usurper did make the
Schism. If Sacrilege any where, or Rebellion, did help reform Superstition;
That was the Fault of the Reformers, not at all of the Reformation; nor of All
Reformers neither. For the most that was don by some, was to write after the
Copy which had been set them in my Text, by the Blessed Reformer of all the
World; which was so to reform, as not to innovate, and to accommodate their
Religion to what they found in the Beginning.

Nay, if I may speak an Important Truth, (which being unpassionately considerd,
and universally laid to heart, might possibly tend to the Peace of
Christendom;) seeing it was not so much the Church, as the Court of Rome, which
proudly trod upon Crowns and Scepters, and made Decrees with a Apostolica
Potestate declaramus and defiuimus, and ab omnibus, judicari debere mandamus
atque statuimus, decernentes irritum and inane, si quid secus a quoquam
quacunque Dignitate, Auctoritate, and Potestate praedito contigerit judicari,
Non obstantibus Constitutionibus and Ordinationibus Apostolicis, Al^isque in
contrarium facientibus Qui buscunque. Vide Bullam Pii quarti, Council. Bin.
Edit. Paris. Tom. 9 p. 444. Licet Ch^^stus post Caenam instituerit, and suis
Discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie Pa^is and Vini hoc venerabile
Sacramentum, tamen hoc non obstante, etc. Licet in Primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi
Sacramentum reciperetur a Fi^^libus sub utraque specie; postea a couficientibus
sub utr aque, and a laicis tantummodo sub sp^cie P^nis suscipiatur. Council.
Constant. Bin. Tom. 3. part. 2. Sels. 13. p. 880. excus. Colon. Agrippinae,
1618.
non obstante to Apostolical Constitutions, or whatsoever had been enacted by
any Authority whatsoever, (the commandments of Christ being not excepted;) we
originally departed with higher Degrees of Indignation, from the Insolent
Court, than Church of Rome. Nor protested we so much against the Church,
(though against the Church too,) as against the cruel Edict first made at
Spirae, Conventus ordinum Imperi celebratur, in quo Decretum factum est, ut
Edictum (...) observaretur co^tra Novatores, and omnia in integrum
restituantur. Contra hoc Edictum solemnis fuit Protestatio, April. 16. A. D.
1529. and hinc ortum pervulgatum illud nomen Protestantinm. Sethus Calvis. in
Chron. ad A. C. 1529. p. 831. col. 2. Edit. Francof 1620. Lutherus im^ul^t
Iohannem Saxoniae Septemvirum* aliosque Principes Germanicos, protestari contra
Decreta Ratisbonae and Spirae de Religione facta. Unde Nomen Protestantium
crevit. Q^^ de re consule Cluverium in Epitom. Hist. Mundi, ad A. C. 1529. p.
790. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1631.
Worms, and after cruelly re^inforced at Spire and Ratisbone; for the
confirming of those (1) Corruptions from which the (2) Church was to be
cleans'd. To the (1) former we declard a Vatinian Hatred; but to the (2) later
of the two we have the Charity to wish for a Reconcilement. That we who differ
upon the way in which we are walking toward Jerusalem, may so look back on the
beginning from whence at first we set out, (and from which our Accusers have
foulely swerved, (as to agree in our Arrival at the same Iourney's end.

But God forbid that our Love to the Peace without, should ever tempt us to a
loss of the Peace within us. God forbid we should return with the Dog to his
vomit, or with the Sow in the Hebrew Proverb (which is cited by St. Seter in
His Epistle,) to her wallowing in the mire. When I wish a Reconcilement, I do
not mean by Our Compliance with any the least of their Defilements, but by
their Harmony with Us in our being Clean.

On this Ab Ecclesia Romana non alio discessim^s animo, quam ut, si cor^ecta ad
Priorem Ecclesiae formam redeat, ^os quoque ad Illam reverta. mur, and
Communionem cum Illa in suis porro Coetilus habeamus. Zanch in Confess. Art.
19. de Ecclesia militante Tom. 8. p. 540. Edit. 1595.
Condition and Supposal; Our Church is open to receive the bitterest Enemies of
our Church. Our Arms are open to embrace them, with Love, and Honor. Our
Hearts and Souls are wide open in fervent Prayers and Supplications to the God
of Purity and of Peace, that (in his own good time) he will bind up the
Breaches, and wipe off the stains, and raise up the lapsed Reputation, of his
divided, defiled, disgraced Spouse; And all for the Glory, as well as Merits,
of the ever-blessed Bridegroom of all our Souls,

To whom, with the Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, be ascribed by Us, and
by all the World

Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, and VVisdome, and Thansgiving,
from this time forwards for evermore.

FINIS.
A PARAENESIS TO THE READER, Touching the SERMON Going Before, and the
DISCOURSE Which follows after of ROMES PRETENDED INFALLIBILITY.

A Paraenesis to the Reader, touching the Sermon going before, and the
Discourse which follows after of Rome's pretended Infallibility.
. 1. SInce the Time wherein this Sermon was first commanded into the light, It
has been scoff't at by some, and easily railed at by others, and by a third
sort complained of, as the Concause at least of a Persecution. But so far has
it been from being enfeebled, or refuted, that it is more than I know if it has
manfully been opposed. So that to Vindicate my Sermon, I need no more than to
Reprint it, (as I was told by an Acute and Learned Prelate,) If aequal Readers
will but have patience both to examine what I have said, and to compare it with
the All that is said against it. Which if they will not do Now, whilst the
Dispute is at the shortest, and whilst they may do it with greatest Ease; how
much less would they have patience for such a due examination, if an
Enlargement of the Contention should make their Task the more tedious? And if
they will; All the stones which certain Enemies have hurled at it in the Dark,
will (being happily laid together) make but a Monument of the Truth of that
well-meant-Sermon. That famous saying of Callimachus, (...), I have found to be
as True, as it was long ago Notorious. And when Controversies especially are
improved into Volumes both Great and Many, Men of Poverty cannot buy, and men
of Business cannot read them; and even men of most leisure cannot so grasp them
as they ought, unless their Memories are as strong as their Attentions are to
be steady, and the stock of their Patience as great as either. This the oftener
I observe, and the longer I lay to heart, the more I am fixed in my choice, to
serve and satisfy my Readers (as far at least as I am able) touching the
Business I am about, at the least expense possible of Time, and Money. For if my
Essay is Convincing, It is the better for being short; And if it is otherwise,
'twould be the worse if it were longer.

. 2. If the Citations of my Sermon, in which I was engaged by just Authority,
(by the Dean of the Kings Chapel, for the Penning, and Preaching, as well as
by the King Himself, for the Printing of it,) are but as free from all fraud as
I say they are, and as every willing Reader has been enabled by me to prove
with the least pains possible, I have attained my whole end, and my work is
don. For as my end was to discover the real Novelty of the Doctrins, and the
depravednesse of the Practices, in which our Church cannot join with the Church
of Rome, and which have made the Separation 'twixt Us, and Them; So my work was
to prove it by the Confession of Themselves; I mean of such as are their
Learned and Partial'st Writers. Who would not certainly have published the
several Dates and Introductions of the New Articles of their Vide Formulam
Professionis Fidei Catholicae a pio IV. decre^a^, apud Laertium cherubinum in
Bullario. Tom. 2. p. 129 Edit. Romans 1617. Q^am confer cum Canonibus Council.
Trident. ci^atis in Concione de qua agitur, p. 13. and cumduabus Citationibus
in ejusdem pagina 35.
Faith, much less would they have Printed the Scandalous Tenor of their Lives,
had they not thought them too clear, to be either dissembled, or denied. If
some are found to be so passionately transported, as to affirm either without,
or against their own Knowledge, that the Citations I insist on are false, or
frivolous, there needs no other vindication than my Affirming them to be True,
and Material also. And this is ready to be attested by several Witnesses of
Fact who have made exact Searches, at my Entreaty.

. 3. Indeed there is one of my Citations, (and but one that I know of,) which
though as innocent, and as exact, as any Citation ever was, does seem to stand
in some need of a Vidication. Not for the satifying or shaming a wilful Papist,
who for want of due Knowledge, or of sufficient Ingenuity, shall at any time
accuse both It, and Me; But for the sake of some weak and unwary Protestants,
whose great unkindnesse to my Person has made them Maligners of my Cause too;
And who had rather their own Religion should some way suffer, than that a
Person whom they envy should any way prosper in its Defense. The one Citation I
am to vindicate is in the Sixth Page of my Sermon, See Joh. Sarisbur. Polycrat.
Either printed at Leyden A. D. 1595. Or in Biblioth. Patr. Colon. Agrip. 1622.
p. 427. Col. 1.
and it is out of the Polycraticum of Johannes Sarisburiensis, (a learned Bishop
who did flourish almost 500 years ago,) l. 6. c. 24 p. 329. Edit, Lugd. Bat.
1595. Where though it is granted The Church of Rome was said to show Her-self a
Stepmother, and Scribes and Pharisees were also said to sit in her; Yet I am
branded with unsincere and unhansome dealing, because the words were not spoken
by the good Bishop to the Pope, as from Himself, or as his own sense and
meaning, But as received from many others, and which himself had heard spoken
in diverse Provinces. To which I answer by these degrees. First that I never did
once pretend the words were spoken by the Bishop, much less that they were
spoken as his peculiar sense and meaning. But having used the word Pharisees in
the Body of my Discourse, and applied it to the men of the Roman Church, I only
noted in the Margin, where the word might be found in the sense I gave it.
Meaning no more by it than This, That I was not the first who had so applied
it, but that I had it from the men of their own Communion, and such as used
such language long enough before Luther. Next it is clear that my Citation was
not brought by way of proof, (though 'twas a proof of my Candor in the use of
that word,) but rather by way of Accommodation. Else I had noted both how
commonly, and how loudly the word was used; it being most for my Interest, and
for the Credit of my Cause, to make it appear that it was used rather by many,
than by one; nor only in one, but in many places. So that mine Enemies should
have thank't my love of Brevity in a Margin, which would not suffer me to be
fond of my whole Advantage. For (Thirdly) had I pursued it, as very
prosperously I might, I might have added that That Censure (fixed on the Pope
and the Cardinals, and the Roman Church in general,) was not only Vox Haec
inquam Pater, loquitur Populus, etc.
Populi, (which of it self had been enough,) but too agreeable besides with his
Vereor ne mendacii vel Adulationis contraham notam, si solu^ Populo
Contradixero. p. 330. Edit. Lugd. p. 427. edit. Colon.
own opinion; as also with the opinion of Cardinal Veruntamen quia Populo
testimonium perhibet [Cardinalis] ei usquequaque Contradi^ere non praesumo,
etc. ibid.
Guido, whom the plain-hearted Bishop thought it praesumption to contradict.
And though he made a due exception of some particular good men, (which in the
worst Times and Places were never wanting,) yet, That Justice being don, and
other Civilities being premised, He told -- quia Roma Corrupta apud Deum
reperitur indigna. Tu ergo quia id habes officii, quaere, etc. -- Sed timeo ne
dum pergis quaerere quae vis, ab imprudente audias quae non vis. and caet. ubi
supra.
the Pope to his Teeth, (as Guido had don in a public Synod, in which the Pope
himself presided,) some Enormities which his Holiness both did, and winck't at.

. 4. This is all the Vindication of that whole Sermon, which I have ever
thought needful for my Protestant Readers; or have looked upon my self as
concerned to make. (For did I know any thing else at which a weak-sighted
Brother had ever Stumbl'd, I would take the like care to put the Block out of
his way.) And for such of my Readers as are not Protestant, who are Afraid of
being satisfied, and scorn Conviction, I think it most proper to say but This;
That if it is matter of any moment to be allowed the last word on any
Controverted Subject, Then Mr. Whithy's full Answer to the Attempt of Mr.
Cressy must needs be happy in its Privilege of having not met with a Reply.

. 5. And such a Privilege has been enjoyed by what I writ some years ago* in
way of Preface to Dr. Sherman, touching the Church of Rome's Pretensions to an
Infallibility. The Confutation and Discovery of which One Error, (be it never
so short, so it be plain, and perspicuous,) does make it absolutely needless to
be Voluminous on the Rest, just as the grubbing up the Root of a noxious Tree,
makes it vain and superfluous to spend a richer Treasure of Time, about the
mortifying and killing its several Branches.

. 6. For the point of Infallibility must needs be one of the two Pillars,
(whereof the Pope's pretended Headship or Universal Pastorship is the other,)
wherewith the Tromperies superstructed must stand, or fall. And as it is
skilfully contrived by the Roman Champions, to spend their strength in securing
that Saving Error, [The Church of Rome cannot Err, because it gives the the
best security to whatsoever other Errors their Church can own; and under which,
as an Asylum, the grossest Follies they can get-by do live in safety; so by
consequence it is as happily resolved by us, (upon so good an occasion given) to
show the Feebleness, and Defects, even of That which does hold up the Papal
Grandeur; and cannot choose but be acknowledged even by men of both sides, to
be their first (or their second) most Helpful Engine.

. 7. This does bring into my mind, what I was told many Years since by an
honorable Friend, Mr. Patrick Carew.
(then when newly come out of Italy, wherein from his childhood he had been
bred,) That having first been convinced by the little Treatise, which had been
penned on that point by his Brother Falkland, That his beloved Roman Church was
not-unerrable; He could not hinder his own Discovery, how very grievously she
had Erred. Nor by consequence could he hinder his own Conversion from a Church,
still pretending to a privilege of not being able to be deceived, as soon as he
found 'twas even That, which had most deceived him. And truly had I been
tempted but with a little of that leisure I once enjoyed, whereby to have
written more at large to Serenus Cressy, (who pretending to Confute, has
Escaped my Sermon, and only fought like a Parthian, by certain dexterous
Tergiversations, though unlike a Parthian in point of mischief; neither
denying, nor disproving, but still evading my Citations, and taking very great
care to obscure his own; as well by making both the Greek and the Latin Fathers
to hold their peace in Greek and Latin, and only speak in that English which He
affords them, as by concealing both the Pages and the Editions of his Authors,
for fear a Protestant should have leisure and patience too, whereby to bring
them to a strict and a speedy Trial:) I say, had I the leisure, and could think
it worth while to employ that leisure, in examining all his Book, as some have
thought fit to do, I should not enlarge on any point with greater contentment
to my Self, or greater hope of convincing both Him, and His, than that on which
he hopes most to guard his obstinacy by.

. 8. For when the Romanists contend for the Church of Rome's being Infallible,
they mean by the Roman, the whole Church Catholic; and by the whole Church
Catholic, they Father Johnson, page 350.
mean as many as own the Pope for their Sovereign Pastor. This is called (by a
plainer phrase,) Father Cressy, p. 95.
The present Visible Church, to which (for all the General Councils,) the last
Recourse is to be had. But why rather to the Present, than to the Primitive
Church? or why to the present Church Visible, rather than to the first General
Councils? Even because (says Ibid.
Mr. Cressy) Universal Experience does demonstrate it impossible, that any
Writing can end a Debate between multitudes of persons interessed, and
therefore not impartial, or indifferent. Thus still there is something, not
only fallible, but false, whereby a Romanist is to judge where to find
Infallibility; (for wheresoever That is, the last Recourse is to be made;)
Because an Experience as Universal, as that whereof Mr. Cressy speaks, does
also demonstrate it as impossible, That Any present Church Visible (much less
that His) should put an end to a Debate between multitudes of persons, whose
Interest and Bias is multifariously divided, as well as They. Men must equally
agree (which they never will) first what is to be meant by the present Visible
Church; and after That, that she is Infallible; before she can possibly put an
end to all their Dissensions in their Debates.

. 9. But what does he mean by the present Church Visible? Does he mean all the
Churches that do submit unto the Pope as their Sovereign Pastor, either IN, or
OUT of a General Council? If the first; he must mean either a written, or
speaking Council. If the former, Then he should not have distinguished it from
the present Church Visible, as here he does. Then there needed no more than
One, but That (by all means) must be a standing General Council, from the
beginning of the Church till the Day of Judgment. And then the Church was never
able to make her Members a jot the better for her Infallibility, or to prove
she had such a privilege, by being able to put an End to a Debate between
Multitudes of different Interest and Judgment in several Nations, either before
the Nicene Council, which was the first that was General, or since the Council
held at Trent, which they avow to be the last. But if he mean's only a speaking
Council, then he confesses that at present there is no such present Visible
Church, as can Infallibly put an end to the Debate above mentioned; even
because there is no such General Council. Which things being so; where is the
boasted Infallibility? How shall we find, or comprehend it? or how is any
Creature the wiser for it? And if he means (what was said in the second Branch
of my first Dilemma,) All the Churches which own the Pope as their Sovereign
Pastor, not IN, but OUT of a General Council; Then the Pope in his Conclave, or
College of Cardinals, (which, by the way, is a Conventicle, though not a
Council, not Concilium, but Counciliabulum,) must be the sole and proper
speaking Judge, who can end such a Debate as before we spoke of; so that in
Him, as in her Head, the present Visible Church does entirely lodge; at least
in respect of her Infallible Judgment; which none but the Pope (out of a
Council) can have, or utter. But thus the Romanists Absurdities will be more
notable than before. For the Pope may be an Heretic, if not an Heathen. Pope
Marcellinus was the first, and Pope Liberius the second. And there is no better
arguing, than to the Aptitude from the Act. Nay, in some of the 30 Schisms
which Onuph. in Chron. p. 50.
Onuphrius reckons up in the Church of Rome, (before the word Protestant was
ever heard of,) when two or three Popes did sit at once, 'twas even impossible
to determine, which Pope was the true, and which the false. The Councils of
Council. Constaniense praecipue congregatum extinguendi schismatis Causa, quis
esset verus Pontifex, vix agnoscebat. V. Hist. Council. a Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4.
p. 127.
Constance and Statim illud in Controversiam venit, Nam Synodus Pisana in Illos
potuerit animad^ertere, cum eorum al^^uter verus esset Pontif^^. sed interis
esse^ non co^^^aret. ib. p. seqq.
Pisa (whereof the former, by the way, was a General Council, in the Catalogue
set forth by Pope Paulus Quintus,) were utterly at a Loss in their Debates of
this matter. From whence it follows unavoidably, that Mr. Cressy must not dare
to avow this last notion of The present Visible Church; as well because it is
not That, to which he dares say the last Recourse is to be had, as because she
can too easily declare her sense in another way, than as she was ever
represented by her Pastors out of all Nations, that is to say, by a General
Council, which yet the present visible Church can never do, says Mr. Cressy,
chap. 9. p. 95. But when I say, he must not dare to avow this last notion of
the present visible Church, to which he gives the last Recourse, and to which
he ascribes Infallibility: I mean, he must not for the future, not but that for
the present he dares to do it; Because he tells us expressly, p. 97. (and as
dogmatically too, as without all proof,) That the present Superiors living and
speaking must conclude all controversies, their Interpretation of Scripture and
Fathers, their Testimony of Tradition, must more than put to silence all
contradiction of particular persons, or Churches; it must also subdue their
minds to an Assent, and this under the penalty of an Anathema, or cutting off
from the body of Christ.

. 10. This is said by M. Cressy concerning the living and speaking Judges of
his Church, Judges for the time being in every Age. Quite forgetting what he
had said not long before, p. 95. That Reason, Inspiration, and Examples of
Primitive Fathers, must jointly make up the only Guide, which He affirms to be
Infallible. For, unless they all concur, (as he had said before that, p. 93,)
together with the present visible Governors, (to whom he there gives a judging
determining power,) That which we take to be Reason, and Inspiration, and the
sense of the Primitive Church, may deceive and misguide us. Now besides that
This saying destroys the former, where no less was ascribed to the present
visible Superiors living and speaking, than here is attributed to All four
Requisites in conjunction; we know that Reason may be deceived, Inspiration be
counterfeit by some unclean spirit, (which fallible Reason must be the Judge
of,) primitive Fathers subject to Error, and present Superiors much more than
Primitive: And, many fallible Guides can never make up one Infallible, any more
than many Planets can make one Sun, or many Acts of finite knowledge one true
omniscience. For as Mr. Cressy does confess, that Infallibility and
Omniscience, are incommunicable Attributes of God Himself, (p. 98.) so he
imply's a contradiction, when he says they are communicable to any creature,
such as is his present visible Church. And another contradiction as bad, or
worse, when he says that a man, although of much Ignorance, may in a sort be
Omniscient within his sphere, (p. 99.) which is as if he should have said, That
a man may be able to have a knowledge of All things, because he may so know
them All, as to be Ignorant of Some. But then, with the help of that (...), the
meanest man is as omniscient, as is his Roman Catholic Church; because (within
his determinate sphere) he must needs have a knowledge of All he know's; and of
more than she know's the Roman Church has no knowledge. So again when he would
show how a creature may be Infallible, though he had said that God Himself is
incommunicably such, (p. 98.) he has no better a (...), than an implicit
explication of an Affirmative by a Negative. The immutable God can preserve
mutable creatures from actual mutation; [ibid.] thereby implying, that the
Immutable cannot communicate his incommunicable Attribute of Immutability to
any creature, even because he cannot possibly perfect a creature into Himself.
But from actual mutation he can preserve any Creature, as well an Ignorant
single man, as a whole Church Catholic. Thus by endeavoring to uphold, Mr.
Cressy does thoroughly Destroy his Doctrine: All he says coming to this, That
however God only is Undeceivable, yet he is able to preserve his deceivable
creatures from being actually deceived. Sed quid hoc ad Iphicli Boves? The
Question is not, Whether God can preserve a Chruch from being actually in
error, (for so he can, and often does, particular Members of his Church,) But
whether de facto he has granted an Inerrability, or an Impossibility of
erring, unto that which they call the Roman Catholic Church. Not whether the
Church is actually false in her opinions, but whether or no she is Infallible,
or exempted by God from the passive power of giving false Judgment in points of
Faith. Will Mr. Cressy so confound an Adjective in Bilis, with a Participle
derived from the passive preterperfest Tense, as either to argue a non actu ad
non potentiam, or else to pass over from the one unto the other? Will he argue
that Adam before his fall was Impeccable, because he yet was preserved from
actual sin? or, that the Church was Infallible in the Apostles own Times,
because she was not erroneous until she was? He cannot sure be so destitute
either of Logic or Grammar skill. I think it rather his skill to dissemble
both; as finding no other way to dispute a whole Chapter for such a Doctrine,
unless he either beg's, or forsakes the Question.

. 11. But now to give him more Advantage than he is mindful to give himself,
when he allows so great a privilege to the present Governors of the Church in
every Age, Ubi supra. p. 97.
whom he will have to be the living and speaking Judges, to whom (without
contradiction) all particular Churches as well as persons, must meekly yield up
their Assent; Let us allow it to be his meaning, not that These are
undeceivable, but that God does still preserve them from being actually
deceived. Was not Pope Hildebrand himself the supreme speaking Judge, when yet
the Imperial. Statut. apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 74. Conc. Constantien. A. D.
1414. Sess. 11. Edit. Bi^. To. 7. p. 1036. Notorie criminosus de homicidio,
veneficio, pertinax Hzreticus, Simoniacus, contra ^rtic^lum de Resurrectione
mortuorum dogmatizavit. Et paulo supertius, -- cum Vxore fratris sui and cum
sanctis monialibus Incestu^ commisit, page 1035.
Council at Worms did set him out as a Brand of Hell? Was not John the 23. the
supreme speaking Judge of Mr. Cressy's then present visible Church, when yet he
openly denied the Immortality of the soul, and for That (with other crimes) was
condemned by the Council then held at Constance? Were not John the 22. and
Anastasius the 2. the supreme speaking Judges in their several Times, who yet
were both stigmatized for the Crime of Heresy? Let Mr. Cressy now speak like
an honest man; Were such superiors as these, then living and speaking, to
conclude all controversies? to Interpret Scripture and the Fathers? to put to
silence all particular Churches? to subdue men's minds to an Assent? and this
under the penalty of their being cut off from the body of Christ? (Let him read
his own dictates, p. 97.) It will but little mend the matter, to say the Pope
is but One, and that He spoke of All Superiors: Because, besides that they may
All have their Byasses and Errors, as well as He, in case they are All
consulted with, (as they never are, -- In quantum est Caput Ecclesiae errare
non potest. Et tunc est caput Ecclesiae cum facit quod in se est; nempe cum
Consilio Cardinalium and doctissimorum Virorum definiendo, ubi errare non
potest. Stella in Luc. 22. 31. page. 280.
) It Is very evident that the Pope (like the Sun among the Stars) is more than
All, in all Cases. The greatest part of those Councils which they are pleased
to call General, have been indeed little better than the mere Properties of
their Popes: which that I may not seem to say, as one that loves to speak
sharply, but rather as compelled by their own Accounts of them, I shall here
give an Instance in One, or Two.

. 12. In the last Lateran Council under Julius the 2. and Leo the 10. A brief
Account of the last Lateran Council.
The Holy Scriptures (at the first Session) are humbly laid down at his
Holiness's feet; And, an Oath being administered, are formally touched by the
Officials. The Pope (in that Session) is called The Prince of all the world;
and (in the next) The Priest and the King to be adored by all the People, as
being most like to God Himself. Accordingly (in the 3d) The Kingdom of France
by Pope Julius is subjected to an Interdict, and the Mart held at Lions
transferred to Geneva. The Pragmatick Sanction is rescinded in the fourth, for
the improving of the Trade of Ecclesiastical Hucksters, the buying and selling
of Church-Preferments. The Pope is asserted as God's Lieutenant upon Earth,
though not of equal merits. (A very signal Condescension! and to be kept in
everlasting Remembrance! Ne fleveri^ Filia Sion (ut Episcopus Modrusiensis
affatur Papam) quia Ecce^venit Leo de Tribu Juda, Radix David. Ecce Tibi
suscitavit Deus Salvatorem, etc. Te, Leo Beatissime, Salvatorem, expectamus, Te
Liberatorem ventu^^^ speravimus. Council. ^a^e^ran. ult. Sess. 6. Bin. To. 9.
page 74.
God is meekly acknowledged to be superior to the Pope.) In the fifth Session,
Julius die's, (another great Condescension!) And Leo his Successor is saluted,
as no less than the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, the Savior
and Deliverer that was to come. (A pretty clintch, but a blasphemous
complement, and unworthy a Bishop's mouth.) In the eighth and ninth Sessions,
This Lion Roar's first against them that shall violate his Decrees in the
present Council, to whom he threatens such a Sentence of Excommunication, as
none but Himself could absolve them from. Next against the Emperor, Kings, and
Princes, whom he charge not to hinder such as were coming to the Council,
under the penalty of incurring God's Displeasure and his own. In the last of
those two Sessions, Divinae Majestatis tuae conspectus, rutilanti cujus fulgore
imbecilles oculi mei caligant etc. Et paulo post, In te uno legitimo Christi
and Dei Vicario, propheticum iuud debuerit rersus impleri, Adorabunt ^um omnes
Reges Terrae, omnes Gentes servient ei. Ibid. Sess. 9. p. 114, 116.
Antonius Puccius tells Leo, how his Eyes are darkened by the rutilant
Brightness of his Divine Majesty. -- in him alone as the Vicar of God and of
Christ, That saying of the Prophet ought again to have its completion, All the
Kings of the Earth shall come and Worship, All the Nations under Heaven shall
do him Service. In a word, throughout the whole Council, nothing is carried by
the counsel, or consultation of Assessors, (for Assistants I cannot call them,)
nothing by suffrages, or votes, from them that make it wear the name of a
General Council; But, the supreme present Judge (to use the phrase of Mr.
Cressy) as an Infallible Dictator, ordained All* This is constantly the Preface
to each Decree in That Council, Leo Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, approbante Concilio, etc.

. 13. So again in their last and best beloved General Council, Of the Council
at Trent.
All the Fathers do but prepare convenient matter for Decrees, whereunto the
Popes Fiat does give the life. Their two and twenty years contrivances do end
at last in a Humiliter p^timus nomine dicti Concilii Oecumenici Tridentini,
(...) Sanctitas vestra dignetur confirmare omnia and singula, etc. Edit. Bin.
Tom. 9. page 442.
meek Petition, That his Holiness will vouchsafe to confirm what they had done;
(that is,) to inform the lifeless matters they had prepared; which could not
have the nature and force of Articles, or Decrees, until the Pope had breathed
on them the Breath of Life. So a little before That, Si in his recipiendis
aliqua Difficultas oriatur, aut aliqua inciderint quae Declarationem aut
Finitionem postulent, -- confidit sancta Synodus Pontificem curaturum. -- etc.
viderit expe^dire -- etc. Si necessarium judicaverir, etc. Si ei visum fuerit,
etc. Ibid. p. 434.
The General Council does humbly hope, That if any Difficulty arise in the
receiving of the Canons, or if any things Doubtful shall require a Definition,
or Declaration, His Holiness will provide for the Necessities of the Provinces,
for the Glory of God, and the Tranquillity of the Church, either by calling a
General Council, if He shall judge it to be needful, or by committing all the
Business to such as He shall think fit, or by what way soever He shall judge
more commodious. All, upon the matter, both is, and must be, as He pleases;
and when the Council is dissolved, He is himself Tantamount to a General
Council. Indeed much more. For the Council did but propose, But He Apostolica
Auctoritate declaramus and definimus p. 444.
declares, and defines, by Apostolical Authority. He Fidem sine ulla
Dubitatione haberi mandamus atque decernimus, p. 443.
command's, and decree's, by somewhat more than Apostolical, That Faith without
the least Doubting, be had by all to his Creed; and all under the penalty of
being cut off from the Body of Christ; notwithstanding some part of his Creed
is Vide Council. Trident. Edit. Bin. excus. Genev. A. D. 1612. Tom. 9 Sess. 4.
p. 354.
This, That Apocryphal writings, and mere Traditions, concerning Faith, as well
as Manners, are by all to be received with as much Reverence and Affection, as
things proceeding from God the Holy Ghost, or from the mouth of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Now if a Council (as the Lateran) does only Read a Decree in Fieri, And a Pope
(as the Tenth Leo) by saying Placet, does make it one in Facto esse; If a
Council cannot be current, unless it be called by the Pope, and by the Pope
praesided in; yea if nothing don in it can pass for current, until the Pope
has approved of it, or until he has made it become Authentic by an Act of
his Will, or by a word of his Mouth; Mr. Cressy, and Father Johnson, who do so
earnestly contend for a subcoelestial Infallability, cannot choose but believe,
(if at all they believe, as well as plead it,) That its real Inherence is in
the Pope, and only said to be in the Church, because it does more become the
Error, and set it off to the People with better Grace. The Reason of what I say
is very cogent in it self; and that it may be so to others, I thus endeavor to
make it plain. They say that Councils are not current, unless approved of by
the Pope. Nor does he give his Approbation, until the Council is at an end. His
Approbation is after; and not before it. From whence it is natural to Infer,
That he approve's not of the Council, because Infallibly good and therefore
current; (it would not then need his Approbation:) But the Council is good and
current, because He approve's it. And why should That be said, unless because
He is Infallible with Them that say it? Thus (I say) it is to Them, not Thus in
It self. For then there would follow this other Absurdity, That if The Council
has erred, it is because the Pope has not approved it. For let him but
approve, and It has not erred, because it has every thing required to its
Infallibility. If not, let them speak; for I argue only ad homines, and (out of
very great charity) try to make them ashamed with their own Devices.

. 14. Now (to speak a gross Truth,) The Approbation of a Pope, when a Council
has don with its Consultations, cannot possibly have the virtue to effect that
such a Council shall not have erred. For if it has erred it is erroneous,
though He approve's it. If not, it is orthodox, though He rejects it. The
Emperors who called the first and truest General Councils, did either not care
for, or not expect his Approbation. Yet Those were the Councils, either not
erring at all, or at least the least erring of any other.

. 15. But let us yield Mr. Cressy yet more Advantage, and suppose him only to
mean what once he says, (for he says so many things, that he seems to have
many, and even contradictory meanings,) Chapter 9. p. 95. Sect. 7.
A Church represented by her Pastors out of All Nations, which Pastors out of
All Nations make a Concilia Generalia dicuntur ea, quibu^ interesse possunt and
debent Episcopitotius Orbis, (nisi legitime impediantur) and quibus nemo recte
praesidet nisi Summus Pontifex, aut alius ejus nomine. Inde n. dicuntur
Oecumenica, i. e. Orbis Totius Terrae Concilia. Bellarm. Controv. To. 1. l. 1.
de Council. c. 4. p. 1096.
General Council; And that This only is the Church, to which he ascribes
Infallibility. To which I answer, by two Degrees. First by observing, that he
takes for granted what is false. For there was never such a Council, as to
which All Nations did send their Pastors, and by consequence The Church was
never so Represented; and by consequence never Infallible, if She can only be
Infallible when so Represented, to wit, by the Pastors of All Nations which
have Christian Churches in them. For, the first four General Councils were not
such in That sense; And only were called Ecumenical, not for Bellarmine's
Reason, but because they consisted of all the Pastors who were sent from Those
Nations which made up all the Roman Empire, whose Emperors (by a figure) were
called the Masters of the world. (...). Council. Chal. Act. 1. Bin. To. 3. p. 50.
Beyond the limits of the Empire, None of those, or after- Councils, did ever
reach. None went thither out of Persia, India, the Inmost Arabia, and
Aethiopia, wherein the Churches were never under the Roman Empire; Nor yet out
of Britain, France, and Spain, when, being parted from the Empire, They became
the Peculiar of other Princes. And as the Empire grew scanty, so the Councils
in proportion did grow less General. Whose Greatness is to be measured, not by
the number of the Bishops, but by the multitude of the Churches, and by the
Greatness of the Regions from which they come. But since the Bishops of Rome,
with other Rights of the Roman Empire, have invaded This also, of calling and
praesiding in General Councils, they have been only called General, for being a
Confluence of Pastors out of all the Papal Empire. And therefore, according to
Mr. Cressy, They could not possibly be Infallible, because not such, as to
which All Nations did send their Pastors.

. 16. Next I answer by observing that the learned Romanists cannot agree,
about the Nature, or Number, of General Councils. For, first as to the Nature,
The General Councils of the Romanists are Quaedam sunt ab Apostolica sede
approbata, atque ab Ecclesia universa recepta; quaedam omnino reprobata;
quaedam partim reprobata, partim approbata; quaedam nec approbata, nec
reprobata; Bellarm. ubi sup. p. 1097.
thus divided by themselves; Some (say they) are approved by the Sea
Apostolical, and received by the Catholic Church. 2 Some are absolutely
reprobated. 3 Some are reprobated in part, approved. 4 Some are neither
reprobated, nor approved. Now since each of these sorts is said by Romanists to
be General, and General Councils in the general are also said by the same to be
Infallible; What else do they say, in effect and substance, but that the Church
represented in General Councils is either absolutely Infallible, (as in the
first species of General Councils,) or altogether fallible, (as in the second;)
or partly Infallible, and partly fallible, (as in the third;) or neither
fallible, nor infallible, (as in the fourth.) If General Councils cannot err,
Why then do they reprobate, or doubt any of them? If they have sufficient
reason both to reprobate some, and to doubt of others, Why do they call page
1105, 1107, 1109. Et inde constat, locutum esse Bellarminum ex sententia sua,
quia sic claudit Partitionem, Quod membrum postremum in Confiliis
particularibu^ potissimu^ locum habet. p. 1097. Ergo membra priora in
Generalibus, ut and postremum aliquatenus, etiamsi non potissimum.
Them General Councils? or, if General Councils can be doubted of at all, and
that by Them too; By what Infallible Token shall they know, either that the
Councils are truly General, and Genuine; or at least, that being such, they are
Infallible? Of Bellarmine's 18 General Councils, which are his first and best
species, he proves the Approvedness and validity by the Pope's praesiding in,
or approving of them. His General proof is but this, [They are approved of by
the Pope, and received by Papists.] And what is this but to beg the Question?
The first 8 Councils he proves to be such, by the Did. 16. Can. sancta octo.
apud Gratian. p. 60, 61.
Decree of the Pope. The Nine that follow he proves to be approved, Because the
Pope praesided in them. And the last was confirmed by Pius Quartus. So that a
Council's (...) is derived from the Pope, and depend's upon his Pleasure. But
now of those 18. there is a very great difference. For the first four only were
received and revered by Gregory the Great, as were the four Gratian. Decret.
par. 1. Did. 5. Huc spectat Epist. Vi^ilii Papae ad Eutychium, apud Council.
Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 593.
Gospels of Jesus Christ. Which Reverence would have been due to the other
fourteen, had they been of as great Authority; as they needs must have been,
had all been aequally Infallible, in their opinion who own them All. And yet
the later Councils had been more valid than the former, if it is not Absque
Romani Pontificis Authoritate Synodum a^iquibus congregare non l^cet. Ibid.
Did. 17.
lawful to call a Council, without the Authority of the Pope, as Marcellus his
Decretal affirm's it is not. Secondly for the Number of their approved General
Councils, I see not how it can be agreed. For besides that the Council. Elorent.
Sess. 5, and 6.
Greeks receive no more than the first seven, The Magdeburg. Cent. 8. c. 9. and
Cent. 9. c. 9.
Lutherans but six, The Eutychians in Africa no more than three, The Nestorians
in the East no more than two, and the Polonian Trinitarians no more than one,
(which Difference is acknowledged by Bellarmine Himself,): I say, besides This,
I wonder when Bellarmine will be ever agreed with Pope Paul the fifth; The
former rejecting the Council at Constance from the number of the Approved,
which yet the V. Council. Genesis a Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4.
Later does admit of with equal Reverence. It was reprobated indeed by a worse
than it self, to wit the Council at Florence next following after; but 'twas
only for decreeing, that a Council was above the Pope, for which it ought to
have been approved. And abating those things which consist not with the
Haughtiness (but the just Dignity) of the Popes, It is as generally received as
any other. Yet we need no better Argument to prove such a Council above a Pope,
and the gross fallibility of both together, than an Historical Account of That
one Council, as we find it set down by Pope Paul the fifth. The Third at
Constantinople, which is commonly reckoned the sixth General Council, was by
the 14th at Toledo (Can. 7.) esteemed the Fifth. Implying the former under
Vigilius, not to have been one of the General Councils, which yet with other
Councils does pass for such without Question. And so much for the Number of
general Councils, as well as for the Nature of them.

. 17. Last of all let Mr. Cressy be allowed to mean at the most Advantage, That
his General Councils are said to be Infallible, not because they cannot, but do
not err; for so he most improperly, but yet most kindly helps out himself,
chap. 9. page 98. Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. l. 1. c. 23. Niceph.
l. 8. c. 19.
But does he not think it was an Error in the first Council of Nice, (as in the
third of Constantinople) to assent to Paphnutius his (...), and patronizing the
Marriage of Priests, as both Socrates, and Sozomen, and the Roman Did. 32.
Can. Nicen. V. Council. Constantin. III. Can. 13. To. 5. p. 326. Council. Elib.
Can. 36.
Decree do alike affirm? At least the Council of Eliberis (which was
contemporary with That) Mr. Cressy will say was in an Error, for declaring it
unlawful, to paint in the windows or walls of Churches, what is the object of
Adoration. Council. Nic. 2. Act. 4. Council. Constant. quartu^ decrevit e^ndem
Imaginu^ cultum. Edit. Bin. Tom. 7. p. 1046.
And so much the rather will he believe it to be an Error, because the second
Nicene General Council decreed that Images are to be worshipped, and denounced
an Anathema to all that doubt the Truth of it. Does he not think it was an
Error in the Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalced. Act. 15. Can. 28. Qui Canon
^enuinus est, non obstante Binii subterfugio pudendo. Tom. 3. page 446.
to Decree unto the Bishop of Constantinople, even in causes Ecclesiastical, an
equality of privileges with the Bishop of Rome? Or does he not think it was an
Error in the Council. Constantinop. III. Act. 13. Tom.. 5 lib. 211. Vide Notas
in vitam Honor. Edit. Bin. Tom. 4. page 572. (...), etc. Council. Flor. definit.
Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 854.
sixth General Council, to condemn Pope Honorius as a Monothelite, and to
decree that his Name should be razed out of the Churches Diptychs; seeing
another General Council, since held at Florence, has defined the Pope to be
the High-Pri^st over all the world, the Successor of St, Peter, Christ's
Lieutenant, The Head of the Church, The Father and Teacher of all Christians,
and one to whom in St. Peter our Lord Jesus Christ did deliver a full Power, as
well to GOVERN, as to feed the Universal Church? And did accordingly
exauctorate the Council at Constance, for seating a Council above a Pope? Or is
it not thought by Mr. Cressy, that This Florentine Council was in an Error, in
Granting the Roman Church a Power of adding to the Creed, which the General
Council of Chalcedon had forbidden to be don under the Penalty of a Curse? as
was Ibid. Sess. 5. p 593.
observed and urged by Pope Vigilius Himself, to Eutychius the Patriarch of
Constantinople? Let Mr. Cressy but compare the sixth General Council (whose
famous Canons were made in Trullo,) with the Tridentine Canons, and the General
Practice of his Church, And (sure I am) he will acknowledge, that the one or
the other has foully erred. It was decreed in the sixth, (...), etc. (...),
etc. Conc. Constant. III. Can. 13. To. 5. Edit. Bin. To. 5. p. 326.
That married men without scruple should be admitted into the Priesthood, and
this without any condition of abstaining thence-forwards from cohabitation,
lest men should seem to offer Contumely unto God's holy Institution. Yea (which
is most to be observed) This was a Canon made professedly (...), etc. (...)
etc. ibid. p. 325, 326.
against the Canon of the Church of Rome, whereunto is confronted the ancient
Canon, which is there said to be of Apostolical Perfection. Here the Doctrine
and Practice of the Chruch of Rome is condemned by a Council, which is owned to
be General by the same Church of Rome. The Church of Rome is also condemned by
the same General Council (in its 55 Canon,) and commanded to conform to the 65
Canon of the Apostles (from which they had scandalously departed) under two
great Poenalties therein expressed. Ibid. p. 338.
To all which if I shall add, How the 8th General Council made a peremptory
Decree, (...). Council. Constant. IV. Act. 9. Can. 3. Edit. Bin. To. 7. p. 977.
That the Image of Christ is to be worshiped as the Gospel of God, That
whosoever adore's it not, shall never see his Face at his second coming, (never
at least by their good will,) That the Pictures of Angels and all the Saints
are in like manner to be adored, And that all who think otherwise are to be
Anathematized; I hope Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson are not such Lovers of
Idolatry and Contradiction, as not to know and to acknowledge the Fallibility
of their Church in a general Council.

. 18. I have the rather made it my choice to use the Canons and Decrees of
Popes and Councils, (especially of such as by the Romanists themselves are
accounted General,) Because for want of a better Refuge, when they are press't
with many things which cannot be justified, or denied, They have evermore
recourse to This one Catholic evasion, That they are but the sentiments of
private Doctors, whose ill opinions or mistakes are not chargable on the
Church. Now though we cannot but believe their Private Such as Bellarmin,
Baronius, Onuphri^^, Vasques, Maldonat, Stella, Ly^a, Stapleton, Pamelius,
Petavius, Vi^es, Rubanus Maurus, and others. Yea Scotus, Aquinas, Pope Gregory
the Great. The Bishops of Germany in the Council at Worms, etc.
Doctors (as they call them) when they are men of great Learning, and greater
Zeal to That Cause, and only speak as Narrators touching matters of Fact, and
such as of which they might be silent with more advantage unto themselves; Yet
I hope 'twill not be said, That the present superiors living and speaking, to
whom Chapter 9. 97.
Mr. Cressy ascribes the power of Concluding all Controversies, are no better
than private Doctors; much less will they say it of their General Councils
unto which they do Ib. p. 95.
acknowledge the last reeourse is to be had. And here if any man shall ask what
may be probably the Reason, why when the Tenet of Infallibility is so far a
Doctrine of their Church, as it is taught and maintained by their Ib. p. 93.
Present visible Governors or their present Superiors living and speaking,
Ib. p. 97.
(unto whom is ascribed the power aforesaid,) It has not yet been thought fit
to be credited by the Decree of a General Council, (nor indeed of any Council
that I am able to allege;) I know not what Reason to render of it, unless I
may say that they distinguish between their Doctrines, and their Opinions; or
between Things pretended, and Things Believed by their Superiors; As if the
Governors Themselves (whom Ubi supra. praesertim page 97.
they make Tantamount to a General Council) were not able to believe the
Infallibility they pretend to, But only thought fit that The People should. If
any other man Can give any better reason, I do earnestly desire that what I
have given may go for None.

. 19. And as, on the one side, Their steadfast Belief That She cannot err, is
enough to confirm them in all their Errors; So, to convince them on the other
side of that one Error, will make them ready both to see, and renounce the
Rest. That it may seem to be a vain, or a needless Thing, for any man to be
lavish of Time, or Labor, in a particular Ventilation of other controverted
Points, whilst This of Infallibility remain's untouched, or undecided. For if
we show them the Absurdities of Bread and Wine being transmuted into the Body
and Blood of Christ; or of being so transmuted into Human Flesh and Blood, as
to retain both the Color, Touch, and Taste, and all other Adjuncts of Bread and
Wine; or of its so beginning now to be (in the Act of Consecration) the
numerical Body of a crucified Jesus, as to have been the very same under
Pontius Pilate, as well as in the Virgins Womb; or of its beginning to be as
often, and of as many several Ages, as the Priests as their Altars shall please
to make it; or of its being the same Body, whether eaten by a Christian, or by
a Dog: They will defend themselves with This, That though it is Absurd, and
Impossible, yet it is necessarily True, because it is taught by that Church
which cannot deceive, or be deceived. Whereas, if once we can convince them
that she is able to be deceived, who had taught them to believe she is
undeceivable, (and that in matters of greatest moment,) They cannot choose but
disapprove and forsake her too, as the greatest Deceiver in all the world.

. 20. That She is Able to be deceived, cannot better be evinced than by the
Evidence that She Is. And it is evident that She Is, by her own Confession. For
she is no where more seen than in her General Councils, whereof when any one
does condemn what She asserts as no Error, or when one does contradict and
accuse another, (of which I have given sufficient Instance,) she does confess
her self Fallible, by so declaring She has been False. And accordingly Mr.
Cressy could not righteously be blamed by the Roman Partisans, for having
confessed (as he did) in his Exhomologesis, See the use which is made by Dr.
Pearson in his Preface to the Reply of the Lord Viscount Faulkland.
That this Infallibility is an unfortunate word; That he could wish it were
forgotten, or at least laid aside; That Mr. Chillingworth fought against it
with too great success; That it is not to be met with in any Council; And That
the Authority of the Church (meaning the Church undepraved) was never enlarged
by Herself to so great a wideness. And as They cannot blame him, much less can
I, for confessing a Disadvantage he could not conveniently deny. That which I
blame him for is This, (and for This he can never be blamed enough,) That
having Romans Cath. Doct. no Nov.
confessed Infallibility to be one of God's peculiar Cap. 9. Sect. 11. p. 98.
Incommunicable Attributes, and by consequence that the Church which he calls
the Roman Catholic, can no more be Infallible, than Omniscient, He has yet
been so transported with Partiality to a Church he has resolved to assert,
(whether right, or wrong,) as to Ubi supra, page 89.
communicate That to Her, which he confesses Page 98.
Incommunicable; and to affirm that That is Necessary, which he confesses to
be Impossible; and so to espouse in a Fit of Kindness, what in a Fit of
Discretion He cannot Own.

. 2. Having thus cloyed my Reader with but a Taste of Mr. Cressy, I persevere in
my purpose not to spend or loose time upon all the Rest; partly for the Reason
al^eady mentioned, beeause 'twould be as well a thanklesse, as needless
office. Partly becasue it is undertaken (without my Care or procurement) by other
men. Nor only undertaken, But elaborately don too; not only by Mr. Whitby, (and
by Him very sufficiently,) But by a Person of greater Eminence; after whom to
set about it, would at least be superfluous, if not Immodest. Partly because I
am still dissuaded both by the Virulence of mine Enemies, and by the Kindness
of my Friends, as well as by many my more peculiar and lessedispensable
Employments. Lastly because by a little Pattern of any strong or slight Stuff,
It Is both the cheapest and easiest way whereby to Judge of the whole Piece.
(...).

FINIS.
(...). OR THE LIFELESNES of LIFE On the hither side of IMMORTALITY. With a
Timely Caveat against PROCRASTINATION. Briefly expressed and applied in a
SERMON Preached at the Funeral of EDWARD PEYTO of Chesterton in Warwickshire
Esquire

-- (...)
(...).
Sophocles (...).
(...).
To my ever Honored Friend Mrs. Elizabeth Peyto of Chesterton.
MADAM,
TO speak my sense of your many Favors, with my reverent esteem of your
Approbation, and how inclinable I have been to yield obedience to your
Commands, the greatest expression that I can make, has been hitherto the least
that I think is due. And now I am sorry I can prove by no better Argument, (at
the present,) how great a deference and submission I think is due to your
Judgment, than by my having preferred it before mine own, in permitting that
Sermon to lie in Common, which I had only intended for your Enclosure. For
though the thing has been desired by several persons of Quality, besides your
self; yet the principal end of my Publication, is not to gratify their
desires, whom I could civilly deny, but to comply with your reasons, which I
cannot pardonably resist. The very piety of your Reasons having added to them
so great a power, that what was skill in Aspendius, in me would certainly be
guilt, should I (through Avarice or Envy) reserve any thing to my self, by
which your charity does 1 Cor. 13. 7.
believe I may profit others.

Indeed considering we are fallen, I do not only say, into an iron age, but
into an age whose very iron has gathered rust too, wherein the most do so
live, as if they thought they should never dye, (at least had forgotten that
they are dying, and being dead, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
must be accountable for what is don whilst they are living,) it may be labor
well spent, to trig the wheels of their sensuality; and that by thrusting into
their eyes such sad and seasonable objects, as may make them consider their
latter end. It was a custom with some of old, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
whenever they intended a sumptuous Feast, to put a deaths-head into a dish,
and serve it up unto the Table: which being meant for a significant, though
silent Orator, to plead for temperance, and sobriety, by minding the men of
their mortality, and that the end of their eating should be to live, and that
the end of their living should be to dye, and the end of their dying to live
for ever, (for even the Heathens who denied the resurrection of the body, did
yet believe the immortality of the Soul,) was looked upon by all sober and
considering guests, as the wholesomest part of their Entertainment. And since
it is true, Eccles. 7. 3.
(what is said by Solomon) that sorrow is better than laughter, for by the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made better; whereupon the Royal
Preacher concludes it better of the two, Verse 2.
for a man to go into the house of mourning; I cannot but reason within my
self, that when Verse 4.
the heart of fools is in the house of mirth, whose customary language is such
as this, [ Wisd. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Come on, let us enjoy the good things that are present, let us crown our
selves with Rosebuds before they be withered, let none of us go without his
part of voluptuousness, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every street,
let us oppress the poor man that is righteous, and let our strength be the law
of justice,] there can be nothing more friendly, or more agreeable to their
wants, than to invite such men to the house of mourning, and there to treat
them with the character of the most troublesome life of man, (which being
impartially provided, will serve as well as a Deaths-head,) during the time of
his floating in a valley of Tears.

For this is useful to teach us all, not to be amorous of a life, which is not
only so short, as that it cannot be kept long, Joh. 14. 1.
but withal so full of trouble, as that it is hardly worth keeping. Nor by
consequence to dote on a flattering world, which is so little to be enjoyed,
and its Enjoyments also so full of vexatious mixtures. Eccles. 2. 12.
Again it is useful to encourage us, not to be afraid of a man that must die,
Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28.
and whilst he lives can but kill the body. Nor to scruple at the paying that
common debt, which we owe to Religion, as well as Nature; that God may give us
an Mat. 25. 21.
acquittance, as well as nature: we having received an ensurance from the
infallible undertaker, that the way both to save, and prolong a life, Mat. 16.
25. Mark. 8. 36.
is religiously to lose it, or lay it down. Again it is useful to admonish us,
(after the measure that we are negligent,) to Mat. 25. 16. Luke 19. 15.
trade with the talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages of life
eternal; and to do all the work we can, because the night comes, Joh. 9. 4.
when we shall be able to work no more. Lastly it minds us, as to be doing,
because our Lord comes, and is at hand, so to be vigilant and watchful, Phil.
4. 5.
because we know not Mat. 24. 42.
what hour. In a word; the more transitory, and the more troublesome, the life
of men shall appear to be, by so much the better will be the uses, which we are
prompted to make of its imperfection.

And here it comes into my mind, to give you my thanks by my observance of the
seasonable counsel you lately gave me, not to lavish out my time in shaming the
adversaries of truth, (by way of answer or reply to their mere impertinencies
and slanders,) but rather to spend it in such practical and peaceable
meditations, as are likelier to forward their Reformation. And though it was
not your opinion that I could not use my time ill, in writing continual
vindications of the lately persecuted doctrines of Jesus Christ, but only that
you thought I might use it better; yet my opinion does so fully concur with
yours, that even as soon as my leisure serves me to pay my Readers what I have
promised, (that men may learn to love God, by thinking him free from their
Impieties, and may not reverence their Impieties, so far forth as they think
them the works of God,) I shall direct my whole studies, as you have charitably
advised. And indeed I am the fitter to take your Counsel, because I want a fit
enemy with whom to combat; since three or four of the ablest have quit the
field, and as it were bowed to the truth of the things in question. For though
they have lately sent out a Teazer, who (they hoped) might tempt me to loss of
time, not by disputing in any measure against a line of what I have published,
but only by opening a noisome mouth, in a very wide manner against my person,
and (which is infinitely sadder) against my He says expressly, 1. That whatever
God foresees, and does not prevent, (which is all the wickedness in the word)
he may be justly said to Cause. (p. 9.) 2. That Gods absolute will is the prime
cause, and necessarily productive of every action of the creature, p. 10. (and
so no less of our worst, then of our best actions.) 3. That God cannot be freed
from being the author of sin, by such as acknowledge his prescience, p. 9. (so
that either he cannot believe Gods prescience, or cannot but believe him the
Author of sin.) 4. That he cannot deny God to be the author of sin, or to will
the event of sin, p. 2.
God too; yet this does signify no more, than that they are stomackful in
their afflictions, and like the mettlesom Cynaegyrus in no particular but this,
that when his Hands were cut off, he pursued the enemy with his Teeth. A
Printed Pamphlet comes to me, subscribed and sent by Edward Bagshaw, (with your
pardon be it spoken, for it is not handsome in your presence, to mention the name
of so foul a thing,) which neither the gravity of my Calling, nor the price I
put upon my time, nor the reverence I bear to your advice, will permit me to
answer in more than two words. (and in these I shall imitate the most judicious
Mr. Hooker.) For whereas it amounts to these two things, to wit, his railing
against God as the P. 2. l. 19, 20 and p. 9. l. 18. to l. 22. p. 10. l. 23, 25.
to be compared with l. 32.
Author of sin, and his railing against me as a grievous sinner, (without the
offer of any proof, for the one, or the other,) To the first I say, No, to the
second, Nothing. As for his blasphemies at large, his inconsistencies with
himself, his frequent confessions that he is ignorant of what he presumes to
affirm, his impotent slanders, his most unsavory scurrilities, his pique at my
cassock and my cap, his evil eye upon my Rectory, and female Readers, (to the
honor of your sex, and shame of ours,) last of all for his impenitency and
resolutions to persevere in his crying sins,) against That person of all the
world, whom, next to God, and his Parents, he ought to have had in the greatest
reverence,) I shall leave him to the mercy of one or other of my Disciples; who
being as much his Iuniors, as he is mine, may have youth enough to excuse, if
not commend them, for cooling the courage of so prurient and bold a Writer. But
for my self, I have determined, so to profit by what I Preach in the following
Sermon, as not to leave it in the power of every petulant undertaker, to
dispose of my hours in altercation. They that look to live long before they
Psalm. 16. 10.
look upon the grave, may trifle out their time with better pretensions to an
excuse; but I who have lost so much already, and have had (as I may say) so
many Trials for my Life, (at that Bar of Mortality, the Bed of Sickness,) which
makes me consider it as a perishing, and dying life, cannot think it so much as
lawful, to dispute it away with an itching adversary; who, however insufficient
to hold up his quarrel, is yet too restless to lay it down.

But I proceed to that Subject (from which my thoughts have been kept by a long
parenthesis) of which I love to be speaking on all occasions that can be
offered, because I find so much in it, of which I cannot but speak well; and no
less to the honor of his memory, than to the profit and pleasure of his
survivers. He was certainly a person, who lived a great deal of life in a
little time; especially dating it (as he did) from the memorable point of his
renovation. When I consider him in his Childhood at the University of Oxford (I
am sure some years before you knew him) exciting others by his Example, to mind
the end of their being there; how strict and studious he appeared throughout
his course; how much farther he went before, (in point of standing and
proficiency,) then he came behind others, in point of years; how much applauded
he was by all, for his public Exercises in Lent, both as an Orator at the
Desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; how (like the brave Epaminondas) he
added honor to his degree, which yet to us (of his form) was all we were able
to attain; when I reflect upon his progress through much variety of Learning,
through every part of the Mathematics, especially through Algebra, the most
untrodden part of them; and when I compare with all this, the great sobriety of
his temper, his unaffected humility, and (after a public aberration) his
perfect return into the way, out of which (for some years) he had unhappily
been seduced; last of all when I rememember, how whilst nothing but prosperity
made some in the world to hug their error, he hated his so much the more, the
more he had prosper'd by its delusion, (which was an argument of the most
generous and Christian temper,) I think I may fitly affirm of him, what was
said by Siracides concerning Enoch, Wisd. 4. 13.
that being made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled a long time.

I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him after his decease, the less he
was able to endure it, whilst yet alive. And I conceive my self the fitter, to
speak a little in his absence of his perfections, because so long as he was
present, I only told him of his faults. (Never leaving him as a Monitor, until
I thought he left them.) For having found him my noble Friend, and (which in
honor to his memory, I think it my duty to acknowledge) my very munificent
Benefactor, I could not be so unkind a thing, as not to afford him my
reprehensions, (yet still attended with respect,) in whatsoever regard I could
think them useful. And 'twas the mark of an excellent judicious spirit, that he
valued me most for my greatest freedom in that particular. Even then when our
heads were most at enmity, (by the over great influence of his Father's
persuasion upon his own) there still remained in both our hearts a most
inviolable friendship. And yet the chiefest instance of mine, was only my often
having been angry with what I conceived to be a sin; against which (by Gods
goodness being sufficiently convinced) he grew at last to be as angry, as
Friends or Enemies could have been. He had impartially considered that sacred
Aphorism, that to refuse instruction, is to despise ones own soul. And he who
could not be thankful for being chid, was judged by him to be unworthy of any
honest man's anger. Nor can I imagine a solid reason, why he was careful in time
of health, to bespeak my presence in time of Sickness, (of which you are able
to be his witness,) unless because he did esteem me the most affectionate
person of his acquaintance, by his having still found me the most severe. To
conceal his great failing, (which was so far scandalous, as it was public, and
apt to be hurtful by the reverence which many men had to his example,) and only
to speak of the best things in him, were rather to flatter, then to commend
him. But yet as the Scripture has said of David, that he did what was right in
the eyes of the Lord, 1 King. 15. 5.
save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite, so I think I may say of your
selfdeparted, that unless it were in that one unhappiness, of engaging himself
in an ugly Cause, (which yet he seriously repented, and so was fitted for that
early, but most exemplary death, which happily opened a door to his
Immortality,) his greatest Vice was but this, that he modestly concealed too
many Virtues.

The remarkable manner of his departure did most remarkably resemble Sir
Spencer Compton's (a person so singularly qualified, by Grace, and Nature, and
Education, that however his extraction was highly Noble, I may confidently say
it was the lowest thing in him,) who dyed at Bruges about the time, wherein the
man of our desires expired at Compton. Never did I hear of a more heavenly
Valediction to all the contentments of the earth, than was given by these two
at their dissolutions. Never yet did I hear, of any two farewells so much
alike. Never were any more admired, by those that saw them whilst they were
going; or more desired, when they were gone. How your excellent Husband behaved
himself, I have but partly related in the conclusion of my Sermon. For though I
may not dissemble so great a Truth, as my strong inclinations both to think and
speak of him to his advantage; yet in my last office of friendship, I did
religiously set so strict a watch over my tongue, as that I rather came short
in many points of his commendation, than went beyond him in any one. And could
I have had the possibility to have kept him company in his sickness, which I as
earnestly endeavored as He desired it, (but his sickness was too short, and my
journey too long, for either of us either to give, or to receive that
satisfaction,) I might have perfected that account, which many witnesses
enabled me to give in part.

Having thus far spoken of him to you, I must only speak of you to others. For
such as reject what they deserve, I think it a Panegyric sufficient, to make
it known they will have none. Having dedicated my papers to a person of your
Indowments, for whom to approve, is to patronize them, I also dedicate your
person (with the hopeful particles of your self) to the peculiar protection and
grace of God. And as the Heirs of that Family, which you were pleased by
adoption to make your own, have already been Lords of that seat for more than
eighteen Generations, (which I can reckon,) so that the person whom I
commemorate may inherit also that other blessing, (as an addition to that
blessing which God has given Him in your self,) conferred in favor upon
Jonadab the son of Rechab, Jer. 35. 19.
[Not to want a man to stand before him for ever,] is no less the hope, than
the prayer, of him who thinks himself obliged, as well to be, as to Write
himself,

Your most importunate Servant at the Throne of Grace, THOMAS PIERCE.

THE LIFELESNES of LIFE on the hither side of IMMORTALITY. A SERMON Preached at
the Funeral of Mr. EDWARD PETTO.
JOB XIV. 1. Man that is born of a Woman, has but a short time to live, and is
full of Trouble.
NOw ye have listened unto the Text, Cast your Eyes upon the shrine too. For
that does verify This, by no less then an Ocular Demonstration. You see the
Relics of a Person, full of honor indeed, but not of years; he having had
his December (I may say) in June; and reaching the end of his Journey, (as
'twere) in the middle of his Course. So that if I should be silent upon the
mention only of this Text [Man that is born of a Woman has but a short time to
live,] That very Hearse would present us with a visible Sermon.

Yet something I must say, in Honor and Duty unto the Dead; and something too,
for the use and benefit of the Living; that as Death already has been to Him,
(...) it may be also to Us Advantage; That some at least who here are present,
may go from Hence (when I have done,) if not the wiser or more intelligent, yet
at least the more considerate, and the better Resolved for coming hither. I
need not be teaching my weakest Brethren, (what common Experience has taught
us All,) either the Misery, or the shortness, or the uncertainty of our Days.
But yet recounting how many Souls do perish for ever in their Impieties, not so
much by wanting Knowledge, as by abounding in the Thoughtlesness of what they
know, I shall not su^e be unexcusable (having S. Peter for my example) if I
tell you those things which you know already. 2 Per. 1. 12. 13. 15.
An Honest Remembrancer is as needful, as the most Eloquent Instructor to be
imagined, because we do less want the Knowledge, than the consideration of our
Duties. S. Peter has magnified the office no less than three times together in
that Epistle which he composed a (...). ver. 14.
little before his Dissolution. I will not (says he) be negligent to put you
always in Remembrance, though ye know these things, and be established in the
Truth. Yea I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up,
by putting you in Remembrance. Again (says he) I will endeavor that ye may be
able, after my Decease, to have these things always in Remembrance. When I
consider that these words were by 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Divine Inspiration, and that they were written for our Instruction, yea and
inculcated upon us no less than thrice in one breath; methinks they tacitly
reprove us, for having such wanton and Itching Ears, as will be satisfied with
nothing but what is New. Whereas the Thing that is to us of greatest moment, is
not the study of more Knowledge, but the making good use of the things we know.
Not the ^urnishing of our Heads with a Richer Treasure of Speculations, but the
laying them up within our Hearts, and the drawing them out into our Lives. Men
would not live as they are wont, were they sufficiently (...). Isocrat. (...).
mindful that they are men. Did they but often enough consider, how short a
time they have to live; how very 2 Cor. 11. 23.
often they are in Deaths, before they dye; how much their short time of life
is more Mat. 24. 42.
uncertain than it is short; how very shortly they are to render a strict
Account unto the Judge, (I say not of every evil work, but) even of every Mat.
12. 36.
idle word, and of each unprofitable hour; they would not make so many Demurrs
in the important work of their Reformation. Luke 21. 36.
The uncertainty of their Time would make them watchful over their ways; that
how suddenly soever they may be Caught, (by the common Pursevant of Nature) it
may not be by a surprise. That they may not die with the Fools Motto, [Non
(...). Polyb. l. 10. p. 603.
putaram] in their mouths.

Now to consider my present Text in the most useful manner that I am able, I
must bespeak your best Attention, not so much to the Dogmatical, as to the
Applicatory part of my Meditations. It being chiefly in my design, to show what
Profit we are to reap from all such melancholy Solemnities, as by many deep
Mourners are sown in Tears. What kind of Influences and Virtues, from the great
brittleness of our Lives, are to be shed upon the Practice and Conduct of them.
What kind of Consectaries and Uses should flow from the one, upon the other.

I shall not therefore wear out my little Time in any such accurate and logical
Analyzing of the words, as would but serve to divert you from the scope and
drift, for which the holy man Job did make them a part of his Preaching, and
for which I have chosen them to be the subject of mine own; but shall
immediately consider them as an entire Doctrinal Proposition, exhibiting to us
both the frailty, and frame of man, and the reason of the one implicitly rising
out of the other. Man is born of a Woman; there is his Frame. Has but a short
time to live, there is his Frailty. Has but a short time to live, because he is
born of a Woman; there is the Reason of his Frailty, from the condition of his
Frame. Nor is he attended only with vanity, but vexation of spirit. As Jacob
said unto Pharaoh, His Days are Evil, as well as Few. However empty of better
Things, yet from the Bottom to the Top, (I mean from his Birth unto his
Burial,) he is Repletus miseriis, filled full of Trouble.

And yet by way of Application, we may reflect upon the Text in a threefold
Antithesis. For

To Man as born of a Woman, we may oppose the same Man, as being Regenerate,
and born of God.

To the very short life he has by Nature, we may oppose the life Eternal he
has by Grace.

And to his fullness of misery whilst he is here in the body, we may oppose his
fullness of Bliss and Glory.

But first let Man be considered in his Hypogaeo, that is, his state of
Declination, as he is born of a Woman, and having a short time to live; and
that for this reason, because he is born of a Woman. For it is a Maxim in
Philosophy which never fails, That Generable and Corruptible are Terms
Convertible. It is demonstrably proved we must one day Dye, because we did one
day begin to Live. All that is born of a Woman is both mixed, and compounded,
after the Image of the Woman of whom it is born; not only mixed of the four
Elements, but also compounded of Matter and Form. And all things Compounded
(...). Arist. Eth. lib. 10. cap. 3.
must be dissolved, into the very same Principles of which at first they were
composed. Hence are those pangs and yernings of the flesh and the spirit, of
the Appetite and the Will, of the law in the members, and the law in the mind;
(...). Id. l. 9. c. 4.
the one inclining toward Earth, from whence 'twas taken, and the other
toward Heaven, from whence 'twas sent. The truth of this had been apparent, if
it had been only taken out of Aristotle's Lyceum; but we have it confirmed out
of Solomon's Portch too: for in the Day when man goes to his Eccles. 12. 5. 3,
4, 5, 6, 5.
long home, when the grinders cease, and the windows be darkened, and all the
Daughters of Music are brought low, when the silver cord is once loosed, and
the golden Bowl broken, so as the mourners are going about the streets; Verse. 7.
Then the Dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return
to God who gave it. When God himself was pleased to be born of a Woman, he
submitted to the conditions of Mortality, and had (we know) but a short time to
live; for He expired by Crucisixion before he was full thirty four, as his
younger Heb. 2. 17.
Brother, whom we commemorate, before he was full thirty three.

Man has a short time indeed, as he is born of a Woman, because he is born of
a Woman; for (as it presently follows in the verses immediately after my Text)
He comes forth as a (...). Homer.
flower, and (as a flower) he is cut down. He flies also is a shadow, and
continues not. And therefore Epictetus did fitly argue the very great
fickleness and frailty of worldly things, first because they were (...).
made, and therefore had their beginning; next because they are made (...)
Epict. Ench. cap. 21.
ours, and therefore must have a speedy End. For if we will be but so just, and
so Impartial to our selves, as to arraign our Bodies at the tribunal of our
Reason, they shall be found, by composition, no more than well complexion'd
Dust. Genesis 3. 19.
Dust thou art, said God to Adam. Genesis 18. 27.
Dust and Ashes I am, said Abraham to God. He knows (says the Psalm. 103. 14
Psalmist) whereof we are made, he remembers we are but Dust. Were it not that
the Eccl. 3. 21.
spirit of man goes upward, whilst the spirit of a Beast goes downward to the
earth, there would be Verse. 19.
no preeminence of the one over the other; for Verse. 20.
all go unto one place, (as to the Center of the Body,) All are of the Dust,
and all turn to Dust again: which shows the vanity and sickness of those men's
souls, who erect such strong and stately Sepulchers for their Bodies, for fear
the poor man's Dust should sully theirs; as if they did not remember, that Man
is born of a Woman, and that his very Job 4. 19.
foundation is in the dust. Well he may have the more vanity, but not the more
Psalm. 49. 12.
understanding for being in honor, and may the sooner be Ibid.
compared to the Beasts that Perish. The Protoplast was Genesis 2. 7.
formed of the Dust of the ground. And however his posterity has been
distinguished, by issuing out from that Fountain through several channels, yet
their original extraction must needs be (...). Epist. loco super cit.
equally vile; (if any thing can be vile which is of God's own making.) For All
men descended out of the very same Eve; and so, by Her, out of the very same
Adam; and so, by Him, out of the very same Earth.

The days of Man are but few then, on supposition they are as many as Nature
meant him; and that his glass is run out without being broken, unless it be by
the hand of Time. The whole duration of Time it self, is but the Nonage of
Eternity. And therefore Moses (as a Psalmist) spoke very fitly, when he
addressed his speech to God; Psalm. 90. 4.
A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past; which is
infinitely less then was yesterday when it was present. And it is the same in
effect with that expression of David, the Psalmist Royal; who said his Age was
as Psalm. 39. 5.
Nothing, in respect of Him who is All in All; And that (as great as some men
do seem to be to themselves and others,) Every man is but vanity at his Ibid.
best estate. What he is at his worst, 'twill be impossible to express, unless
we shall say with David too, that he is altogether Psalm. 62. 50.
lighter than Vanity it self. Now if a thousand years are but as yesterday, and
as yesterday when it is past too, how short a thing is the life of man in
comparison? how short, when compared with the long line of Time? how nothing,
when compared with the Circle of Eternity? Threescore and Ten are all the years
which are allowed by Psalm. 90. 10.
Moses to a Natural Man's life. And though some are so strong as to arrive at
fourscore, yet that Overplus of years is but Ibid.
labor and sorrow. (...). Moschion.
They do not live, but linger, who pass that Tropic of their Mortality. From
after Threescore years and Ten, they are but survivers to themselves; at least
they feel themselves dying; and their Bodies become their Burdens, (...).
Sophocl. (...).
if not the Ch^rnel Houses or Sepulchers, wherein their Souls as 'twere lie
Buried. The Septuagint Translators thought fit to call it, (...), and the
Vulgar Latin, Eorum Amplius, which we cannot better express in English, than if
we call it, their Surplusage of Life; when Nature in them is so strong, as to
shoot beyond her own Mark. Her Mark is Threescore and Ten, if Moses himself
has set it right. Or place it further, at fourscore; farther yet, at an
hundred; the life of man (we see) is short, though it should reach the very
utmost that Nature aims at.

But how many ways are there, whereby to frustrate the Intentions and Ends of
Nature? How many are there buried, before their Birth? How many men's Cradles
become their graves? How many rising Suns are set, almost as soon as they are
risen? and overtaken with Darkness in the very Dawning of their Days? How many
are there (like the good King Josias, like righteous Abel, and Enoch, and that
laudable Person whom now we celebrate,) who are taken away Wisd. 4. 11.
speedily from amongst the wicked, as it were in the Zenith or Vertical Point
of their strength and luster? It is in every man's power to be Master of our
Lives, who is but able to despise his own. Nay it is in every one's power who
can but wink, to turn our beauty into Darkness; and in times of Pestilence, how
many are there can look us dead, by an arrow shot out of the Eye into the
Heart? For one single way of coming into the world, how many are there to go
out of it before our Time? (I mean, before Nature is spent within us.) Many are
sent out of the world, by the Difficulties and hardships of coming in. We are
easily cut off, even by eating and drinking, the very Instruments, and Means of
Life. Not to speak of those greater slaughters, which are commonly committed by
Sword, and Famine, (which yet must both give place to surfeit,) Death may
possibly fly to us, as once to Aeschylus, in an Eagles wing. Or we may easily
swallow Death, as Anacreon did, in a Grape. We may be murdered, like Homer,
with a fit of Grief: Or fall, like Pindarus, by our Repose: we may become a
Sacrifice, as Philemon of old, to a little Jest. Or else, as Sophocles, to a
witty Sentence. We may be eaten up of worms, like mighty Herod. Or prove a
Feast for the Rats, like him of Mentz. A man may vomit out his Soul, as Sulla
did in a fit of Rage. Or else like Coma, may force it backwards. He may perish
by his strength, as did Polydamas and Milo. Or he may dye, like Thalna, by the
very excess of his Enjoyment. He may be Provender for his Horses, like
Diomedes. Or provision for his Hounds, like Actaeon and Lucian. Or else like
Tullus Hostilius, he may be burnt up quick with a flash of Lightning. Or if
there were nothing from without, which could violently break off our Thread of
Life, (and which being a slender thread is very easily cut asunder) we have a
thousand Intenstine Enemies to dispatch us speedily from within. There is
hardly any thing in the Body, but furnishes matter for a Disease. There is not
an Artery, or a Vein, but is a Room in Natures Workhouse, wherein our Humors
(as so many Cyclops's) are forging those Instruments of Mortality, which every
moment of our Lives are able to sweep us into our Graves. An ordinary
Apoplexy, or a little Impostume in the Brain, or a sudden rising of the
Lights, is enough to make a man Dye in Health; and may lodge him in Heaven or
in Hell, before he has the leisure to cry for Mercy.

Thus our Job 4. 19. Poma oculis tenus, contacta cinerescunt. Tertul. Apol. c.
40. p. 70.
Houses of Clay (as Eliphaz the Temanite did fitly call them) do seem as false,
and as frail, as the Apples of Sodom; which being specious to the Eye, did fall
to crumbles by every Touch. The frame of our building is not only so frail, but
(as some have thought) so ridiculous, that if we contemplate the body of man in
his condition of Mortality, and by reflecting upon the soul, do thereby prove
it to be Immortal, we shall be tempted to stand amazed at the inequality of the
Match, but that to wonder at our Frailty, were but to wonder that we are Men.
Yet sure if We, that is, our Souls, (for our bodies are so far from being Us,
that we can hardly call them Ours,) are not capable of corruption, our Bodies
were not intended for our Husbands, but for our Houses; whose Doors will either
be open, that we may go forth, or whose Building will be ruinous, that needs we
must; we cannot, by any means possible, make it the place of our Continuance;
for though our bodies (as says our Savior) are not so glorious as the
Lillies, yet (says Job) they are as frail. And by that time (with David) they
wax old as does a garment, how earnestly (with S. Paul) shall we groan to be
clothed upon? 2 Cor. 5. 2.
to be clothed with New apparel, whilst the old is as 'twere turning? for when
Christ shall come in the clouds with his holy Angels, at once to restore, and
reform our Nature, he shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body. But here I speak of what it is, not what it shall
be; though it shall be glorious, yet now it is vile; though it shall be
immarcescible, yet now it is fading; though it shall be a long life, it is now a
short one.

It is indeed so short, and withal so uncertain, that Psalm. 90. 9.
we bring our years to an end like as a Tale that is told. Death comes so
hastily upon us, that we never can Psalm. 89. 48.
see it, till we are blind. We cannot but know that it is short, for we Psalm.
90. 5.
fade away suddenly like the grass; And yet we know not how short it is, for we
pray that God will teach Verse. 12.
us to number our days. This we know without teaching; Wisd. 5. 13.
that even then when we were born, we began to draw toward our End. Whether
sleeping, or waking, we are always flying upon the wings of Time; And even
this Instant, whilst I am speaking, does set us well on toward our Journeys
end; whether we are worldly, and therefore study to keep Life; or
Malcontents, and therefore weary of its possession; the King of Terrors will
not fail, Job 18. 4.
either to meet, or overtake us. And whilst we all are (...). Philo Iud. (...).
Traveling to the very same Country, (I mean the Land of forgetfulness,
without considering it as an Antichamber to Heaven or Hell,) although we walk
thither in Hunc diverso tramite Mortales Omnes conantur adipisci. Boeth. de
Consol. Philos. l. 3. p. 98.
several Rodes; it is plain that he who lives longest, goes but the farthest way
about, and that he who dies soonest, goes the nearest way home.

I remember it was the humor, I know not whether of a more Cruel, or
Capricious Leo Isaurus (...).
Emperor, to put a Tax upon Child-births; to make it a thing excizable, for a
man to be born of a Woman. As if he had farmed Gods Custom-house, he made every
man fine for being a Man; a great Instance of his Cruelty, and as good an
Emblem of our frailty, our state of Pilgrimage upon Earth. For we arrive at
this World, as at a foreign and strange Country; where I am sure it is
proper, although not just, that we pay Tole for our very landing. And then
being landed, we are such transitory Inhabitants, that we do not so properly
dwell here, as Psalm. 39. 14.
sojourn. All the meat we take in, is at God's great Ordinary; and even the
breath which we drink, is not ours, but His; (which when he takes away, we
dye, and are turned again into our Dust.) Insomuch that to expire, is no more
in effect, then to be honest: to pay back a Life, which we did but borrow.

E^^ipides in Phaenissis.
(...),
(...).
And well it were, if it were no worse: for if the life of man were pleasant,
it would the less disgrace it, that it is short. A short life and (...). Eurip.
in Alcestide.
a Merry, is that which many men applaud. But as the son of a woman has but a
few days to live, so it follows in the Text, that even those few days are full
of Trouble. And indeed so they are, in whatsoever Condition a man is placed:
for if he is poor, he has the trouble of pains, to get the goods of this
world. If he is rich, he has the trouble of Care, to keep his Riches; the
trouble of Avarice, (...). Socrat. in Epist. ad Anonym. p. 8.
to increase them; the trouble of fear, to lose them; the trouble of sorrow,
when they are lost. And so his Riches can only make him the more illustriously
unhappy. If he lives as he ought, he has the trouble of selfdenyals; the
trouble of Col. 3. 5. Romans 8. 13.
mortifying the flesh, with the affections and lusts; the trouble of being in 2
Cor. 11. 23.
Deaths often; the trouble of Romans 6. 6. Gal. 6. 14.
crucifying himself, and of 1 Cor. 15. 31.
dying daily. If to avoid those Troubles, he lives in pleasure, as he ought
not, he has the trouble of being told, that he is 1 Timothy 5. 6.
dead whilst he lives; the trouble to Eccl. 41. 1.
think that he must dye; the trouble to fear (whilst he is dying) that he must
live when he is dead, that he may dye eternally. Not to speak of those troubles
which a man suffers in his Nonage, by being weaned from the breast, and by
breeding teeth; in his boyage and youth, by bearing the yoke of subjection, and
the rigid discipline of the Rod; in his manhood and riper years, by making
provision for all his Family, as servant General to the whole; Not to speak of
those Troubles which flow in upon him from every quarter, whether by Losses, or
Affronts, Contempts, or Envyings, by the anguish of some Maladies, and by the
loathsomness of others; rather than want matter of trouble, he will be most of
all troubled that he has (...). Herodo^. in Thalia. c. 43. p. 179.
nothing to vex him. In his sober Intervalls and Fits, when he considers that
he must dye, and begins to Wisd. 4. 20.
cast up the accounts of his sins, it will be some trouble to him that he is
without chastisement, whereby he knows he is a Heb. 12. 8.
Bastard, and not a Son. It will disquiet him not a little, that he lives at
rest in his possessions; and become his great Cross, that he has prosperity in
all things. Not only the sting, and the stroke, but the very Remembrance of
Death will be bitter to him; so says Jesus the Son of Sirach, chap. 41. verse.
1.

Thus (we see) the Child of man, or the man who is born of a woman is so full
of Trouble to the brim, that many times it overflows him. On one side, or
other, we all are troubled; but some are troubled on 2 Cor. 4. 8. Occidere est,
ve^are cupientem mori. Sen. in Thebaide.
every side. Insomuch that they themselves are the greatest Trouble unto
themselves; and it is a kind of death to them they cannot dye. We find King
David so sick of Life, as to fall into a wishing for the wings of a Dove, that
so his Soul might fly away from the great Impediments of his Body. Psalm. 54.
He confessed that his Days were at the longest but Psalm. 39. 5.
a Span, and yet complained they were no shorter. It seems that Span was as the
span of a withered Hand; which the farther he stretches out, the more it
grieved him. He was Psalm. 6. 6.
weary of his groaning. His Soul did Psalm. 42. 1.
pant after Heaven, and even Verse. 2.
thirsted for God. And he might once more have cried (though in another sense)
Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck, and to have mine
habitation among the Tents of Kedar! I remember that Charidemus in Dio
Chrysostom, Dio Chryso^t. Orat. 30. page 305. D.
compared man's Life to a Feast, or Banquet. And I the rather took notice of it,
because the Prophet Elijah did seem (in some sense) to have made it good. Who
after a first or second Course (as I may say) of living, as if he had surfetted
of Life, cried out in have, It is enough; and with the very same breath,
desired God to take away; for so says the Scripture, 1. Kings 19. 4. He went
into the Wilderness (a solitary place) and there he sat under a Juniper (in a
melancholy posture) and requested of God that he might dye, 1 King. 19. 4.
(in a very disconsolate and doleful manner,) even pouring forth his Soul in
these melting Accents, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am no
better than my Fathers. And if the Days of Elijah were full of trouble* how
was Job overwhelmed, and running over with his Calamity? when the Job 6. 4.
Terrors of God did set themselves in array against him, how did he Verse. 8, 9.
long for destruction? O (saith^ he) that I might have my request, that God
would grant me the thing that I long for! Even that it would please him to
destroy me, that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off. How did he Job 3.
1, 3, 4, 5, etc.
Curse the Day of his Birth, and the Night where in he was conceived? Let that
Day be darkness, let the shadow of Death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it,
let blackness terrify it. And for the Night, let it not be joined to the days
of the year. Let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark; neither let it see
the dawning of the day. And what was his reason for this unkindness to that
particular Day and Night, save that they brought upon him the trouble of being
a Man born of a Woman: for we find him complaining a little after, Verse. 11. 12.
Why died I not from the Womb! why did I not give up the ghost, when I came out
of the Belly? And then for the Life of our blessed Savior, who is called by
way of Eminence, The Son of Man; as I observed before, that it was short, so
must I here put you in mind, it was full of Trouble. He was therefore called by
way of Eminence, Vir Dolorum, Isa. 53. 3.
A Man of Sorrows. The Prophet adds, he was Ibid.
acquainted with Grief. For the whole Tenor of his Life was a continuation of
his Calamities.

The Time would fail me should I but mention the hundredth part of those men,
whose short time of life has seemed long to them, even because they have felt
it so full of Trouble. But enough has been said concerning the Doctrine of the
Text. And it lies upon us now to make some Use.

First then let us consider, The Application.
that if man (as born of a woman) has but a short time to live, It concerns us
to take up the prayer of David, Psalm. 39. 4.
that God will teach us to know our End, and the number of our Days, 2 King.
20. 6.
that we (like Hezekiah) may be fully certified how short our Time is. It
concerns us to take up the resolution of Job; All the days of our appointed
time, Job 14. 14.
incessantly waiting till our change comes. It concerns us, not to say, with
the rich man in the Parable, we will pull down our Barns and build greater,
Luke 12. 18.
and there we will bestow all our fruits and our goods: much less may we say,
with that other Worldling, Souls take your ease, Verse* 19.
eat, drink, and be merry, for ye have much goods laid up for many years: for
(alas!) how can we know, (s^lly creatures as we are,) but that this very Night,
yea this very minute, either they may be taken from us, or we from them? there
is such a fadingness on their parts, and such a fickleness on ours. But rather
it concerns us to say with Job, Job 1. 21.
Naked came we into the world, and naked shall we go out of it. Or it concerns
us rather yet to say with David, Psalm. 39. 12.
that we are strangers upon Earth, and but so many sojourners, as all our
Fathers were: for wihlst we consider we are but strangers, we shall, as 1 Pet.
2. 11.
Strangers and Pilgrims, Heb, 11. 13.
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. And so long as we
remember we are but sojourners upon earth, we shall pass the time of our
sojourning here in fear. And behaving our selves among the Gentiles, as a
chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 12.
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, we shall show forth his
praise, who has called us out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light.

Secondly let us consider, that since our Life is uncertain, as well as short,
(inasmuch as we know not how short it is) it concerns us immediately, to labor
hard in the Improvement of this our span into Eternity; to employ our very
short and uncertain time, in making a seasonable provision against them both; I
mean, its shortness, and its uncertainty. For shall we be lavish even of that,
which is so easily lost, and of which we have so very little, and every minute
of which Little does carry such a weight with it, as will be either a kind of
Pulley to help raise us up to Heaven, or else a Clogg to pull us down to the
lowest Hell? Of whatsoever we may be wastfull, we ought to be charie of our
Time, which does incontinently perish, and will eternally be reckoned on our
account. Pereunt and imputantur, the Epig^ammatist could say of his precious
hours.

Now the way to provide against the shortness of our Life, is so to live, as to
dye, to the greatest Advantage to be imagined; and so to dye, as to live for
ever. Tobit. 4. 21.
What Tobit said to Tobias, in respect of wealth, [Fear not, my son, that we
are made poor, for thou have much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all
sin, and do that which is pleasing in his ^ight.] He might have said as well in
respect of wisdom, and by consequence as well in respect of long life. Job 28.
28.
For as the fear of the Lord is solid wisdom, and to depart from Evil is
understanding; so honorable Age is, not that which stands in the length of
Time, Wisd. 4. 8, 9.
nor that is measured by number of years, but Wisdom is the gray hair unto men,
and an unspotted life is old age. To be devoted (like Anna) to the House of
God, so as to serve him night and day with fasting and prayer, Luke 2. 37.
and not to content our selves with that which is merely lawful, or barely
enough to serve turn, ( as men do commonly reason within themselves,) but to
study the things that are Romans 2. 8.
more excellent, to strein hard toward 2 Cor. ^. 1.
perfection, to forget those things that are behind, and to reach forth unto
those things that are before, pressing on toward the mark, Phil. 3. 13, 14
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, this is to amplify
our lives, and to frustrate the malice of our mortality; and as the want of
stature many times is supplied in thickness, so this is to live a great deal in
the little time of our duration.

Ampliat Aetatis spatium sibi Vir bonus, hoc est
Vivere bis, Vita posse priore frui.
As we are thus to provide against the shortness, so in like manner we must
provide against the uncertainty of our time. And the way to do that, is to
distrust the future, and to lay hold upon the present; so to live every hour,
as if we were not to live the next. Having a short time to live, our time to
repent cannot be long. And not assured of the Nemo tam Divos habuit ^aventes,
crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.
morrow, it is madness not to repent today: when we see many persons of the
most promising countenance, and the most prosperous constitution, not only
^na^ch'd by an early, but sudden death, why should we not seriously consider,
that we may be of their number, having no promise of the contrary, either
within, or without us? Cuivis potest accidere quod cuiquam potest. Publi^^.
What happens to any man, may happen to every man; every man being encompassed
with the same conditions of mortality. It Is true indeed, that we may live till
we are old; but it is as true, that we may dye whilst we are young; and
therefore the later possibility should as well prevail with us for a dispatch
of our repentance, as the former too too often prevails upon us for a delay.
Nay if we procrastinate our repentance, in hope of living till we are old, how
much rather should we precipitate it, for fear of dying whilst we are young?
(if yet it were possible to precipitate so good and necessary a work, as a
solid impartial sincere repentance.) For as to repent whilst we are young, can
never do us the least harm; so it may probably do us the greatest, to post it
off till we are old. Nay it may cost us the loss of Heaven, and a sad eternity
in Hell, if we defer our repentance (I do not say till we are old, but if we
d^^er it) being young, till one day older than now we are. And shall we defer
it beyond today, because we may do it as well to morrow? This is madness
unexpressible. For as it is true that we may, so it is as true that we may not.
Our knowledge of the ^ne, is just as little as of the other. (Or rather out
ignorance is just as much.) And shall we dare to tempt God, by presuming upon
that which we do not know? Are Heaven and Hell such trivial things, as to be
put to a bare adventure? Shall we play for salvation, as 'twere by silliping,
cross or pile? implicitly saying within our selves, if we live till the morrow,
we will repent and be saved; but if we die before night, we will die in our
sins, and be damned for ever: shall we reason within our selves, that though we
know our own death may be as sudden as other men's, yet we will put it to the
venture, and make no doubt but to fare, as well as hitherto we have done? what
is this but to dally with the day of Judgment, (...) -- Sophocl. in Trachiniis.
or to bewray our dis-belief that there is any such thing? It Is true we may
live until the morrow, and so on the morrow we may repent. But what is this to
the purpose, that it is certain enough we may, whilst it is as doubtful whether
we shall? Is it not good to make sure of happiness, by repenting seriously at
present, rather than let it lie doubtful, by not repenting until anon?
Methinks we should easily be persuaded to espouse that course, which we are
thoroughly convinced does tend the most to our Advantage.

When the rich worldling in the Parable was speaking placentia to his soul, [
Luke 12. 22.
soul take thine ease,] alleging no other reason, than his having much goods
for many years; nothing is fitter to be observed, than our Saviors words upon
that occasion, Stulte, Thou Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee; then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? However the
men of this world have quite another measure of wit, and do esteem it the
greatest prudence to take their pleasure whilst they are young, reserving the
work of mortification for times of sickness, and old age, (when 'twill be easy
to leave their pleasures, because their pleasures leave Them,) yet in the
Judgment of God the Son, (the Word and Wisdom of the Father) it is the part of a
blockhead, and a fool, to make account of more years, than he is sure of days,
or hours. He is a sot, as well as a sinner, who does adjourn and shift off the
amendment of his life, perhaps till twenty, or thirty, or forty years after
his death. It Is true indeed that Hezekiah, whilst he was yet in the confines
and skirts of death, had a 2 King. 20. 6.
lease of life granted no less than fifteen years long; but he deferred not his
repentance one day the longer. And shall we adventure to live an hour in an
impenitent estate, who have not a lease of life promised, no not so much as an
hour? shall we dare enter into our beds, and sleep securely any one night, not
thinking how we may awake, whether in Heaven, or in Hell? we know it is timely
repentance which must secure us of the one, and it is final impenitence which
gives us assurance of the other. What the Apostle of the Gentiles has said of
wrath, may be as usefully spoken of every other provoking sin, Ephesians. 4. 26.
Let not the Sun go down upon it. Let us not live in any sin until the Sun is
gone down, because we are (...). Soph. ubi supra.
far from being sure we shall live 'till Sunrising. How many Professors go to
sleep, (when the Sun is down, and the curtain of the night are drawn about
them,) in a state of drunkenness, or adultery, in a state of avarice, or
malice, in a state of sacrilege, or rebellion, in a state of deceitfulness,
and hypocrisy, without the least consideration how short a time they have to
live, and how very much shorter then they imagine? Yet unless they believe they
can dream devoutly, and truly repent when they are sleeping, they cannot but
know they are damned for ever, 1 These 5. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
if the day of the Lord shall come upon them as a thief in the night, and catch
them napping in their Impieties.

Consider this all ye that forget God, least he pluck you away, Psalm. 50. 22.
and there be none to deliver you. Consider it all ye that forget your selves.
That forget how few your days are, and how full of misery. Consider your
bodies, from whence they came; and consider your souls, whether is it that they
are going. Consider your life is in your breath, and your breath is in your
nostrils; and that in the management of a moment, (for the better, or for the
worse,) there depends either a joyful, or a sad Eternity. If our Time indeed
were certain, as well as short, (or rather if we were certain, how short it
is,) there might b^ some color, or pretense, for the posting off of our
Reformation. Mat. 24. 42, 43, 44.
But since we know not at what hour our Lord will come, this should mightily
engage us, to be hourly standing upon our Haba^. 2. 1.
watch. And this may suffice for the subject of our second consideration.

Thirdly let us consider, that if our days, which are few, are as full of
trouble, it should serve to make us less fond of living, and less devoted to
self-preservation, and less afraid of the Cross of Christ, when our Faith shall
be called to the severest Trials. Eecl. 41. 2.
O Death (says the son of Sirach) acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy,
and to him that is vexed with all things. The troubles incident to life have
made the Job 3. 20, 21.
bitter in Soul to long for Death, and to Verse. 22.
rejoice exceedingly when they have found the grave. If the Empress Cuspinianus
in vita Sigismundi, p. 498.
Barbara had been Orthodox, in believing men's Souls to be just as mortal as
their bodies, death at least would be capable of this applause and
commendation, that it puts a conclusion to all our troubles. If we did not fear
Him, Mat. 10. 27, 28.
who can cast both body and soul into Hell, we should not need to fear Them,
who can destroy the body only; because Ecclus. 41. 4
there is no Inquisition in the grave. Job 3. 17, 18, 14, 19. 18.
There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary are at rest. There
the Prisoners lie down with Kings and Counselors of the Earth. The servant
there is free from his Master. There is sleep, and still silence, nor can they
hear the voice of the Oppressor.

Mors Bona si non est, Finis tamen Illa Malorum. But we have farther to
consider the threefold Antithesis, which we ought to oppose to the three
Clauses in the Text: for as man, who is born of a woman, has but a short time
to live, and is full of trouble; so man, as regenerate, and born of God, has a
long time to live, and is full of bliss. A life so long, that it runs parallel
with eternity; and therefore (without a Catachresis) we cannot use such an
expression, as length of time. It is not a long, but an endless life; it is not
time, but eternity, which now I speak of. Nor is it a wretched eternity, of
which a man may have the privilege, as he is born of a woman; but an eternity
of bliss, which is competent to him only, as born of God. And of this bliss
there is such a fullness, that our heads are too thick to understand it. Or if
we were able to understand it, yet our hearts are two narrow to give it
entrance. Or if our hearts could hold it, yet our tongues are too stammering,
to express and utter it. Or if we were able to do that, yet our lives are too
short, to communicate and reveal it to other creatures. In a word, it is such,
as not only eye has not seen, nor ear heard, but it never has entered into the
heart of man to conceive. Incomprehensible as it is, it is such as God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

If we compare this life, with the life described in the Text, it will several
ways be useful to us; for it will moderate our joys, whilst we possess our
dear friends; and it will mitigate our sorrows, when we have lost them; for it
will mind us that they are freed from a life of misery, and that they are
happily translated to one of bliss. Nay if we are true lovers indeed, and look
not only at our Philip. 2. 4.
own interest, but at the interest of the parties to whom we vow love, we even
lose them to our advantage, because ^o theirs. Lastly it sweetens the solemn
farewell, which our souls must take of our mortal bodies; we shall desire to be
dissolved, when we can groundedly hope we shall be with Christ; we shall groan,
and groan earnestly, to be uncloathed of our bodies with which we are 2 Cor. 5.
23, 24.
burdened; if we Verse. 7.
live by this faith, that we shall shortly be clothed upon with our house from
Heaven. We shall cheerfully lay down our bodies in the dust, when it is to rest
in his peace, who will certainly raise us by his power, that we may rest and
reign with him in glory.

THus have I don with my Text, though but in the middle of my Sermon; and but
briefly considered it in its Antithesis, because not pertinent any otherwise,
then by affording unto Mourners an use of comfort. And because I am confident,
that there are many such here, (when I consider how many losses lie wrapped in
one,) not only wearers of black, but serious Mourners, whose very souls are
hung with sable, and whose unaffected sorrow do call for comfort; I shall
furnish you with matter of real joy, from the ground and occasion of all your
sorrows.

For there is yet another Text, upon which I must give you another Sermon. A
Text, I say, whose matter and form have been divided by God and Nature. (...)
Alexis in Olympiodoro.
The inward form is ascended, to him from whom it came down; but the outward
matter still lies before us. And well may that person become our Text, who was
himself a living Sermon; since the integrity of his Life was truly Doctrinal,
and the resplendent piety of his Death a very pertinent Application. I am sure
it is well known in another place, and therefore I hope it is believed in this,
that I am none of their number, who use to scatter abroad their Eulogies upon
every man's Hearse, merely as customary offerings, or things of course. Those
alone are my seasons wherein to make narratives of the dead, when it may
righteously be don for the use and benefit of the living. Ye know that Jesus
the Son of Sirach does set himself solemnly to the work: and that with an
(...), Ecclus. 44. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Let us now praise famous men. Men renowned for their power; men of knowledge
and learning; wise and eloquent in their instructions. Rich men furnished with
ability, and living peaceably in their habitations. There be of them that have
left a name behind them, that their praises might be reported. And some there
be who have no memorial, who have perished as though they had never been, and
are b^come as though they had never been born, and their children after them.
But these were merciful men, whose righteousness has not been forgotten;
(...). Eurip in He^uba.
their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore; for the
people will tell of their wisdom, and the congregation will show forth their
praise.

Our honored Brother now departed (I will not say the unhappy, but) the
now-blessed Subject of this solemnity, as he deserves a noble Eulogie, so he
needs none at all: He being one of those few of my particular acquaintance, of
whom I have seldom or never heard an ill word spoken. But in this one thing, he
had the least resemblance unto his Savior, who was hated by many, despised by
more, and basely forsaken almost by all. This is therefore no commendation, on
which our Savior proclaims a Woe* Woe be to you when all men speak well of
you. Nor do I say that this worthy Gentleman was ill spoken of by none, (he was
sure too worthy to be so befriended by the world,) I only say that I have
seldom or never heard it. James 4. 4.
And he was so much the less obnoxious to the dishonesty of the Tongue, because
(as far as his Quality would give him leave) he ever delighted in that
obscurity, which most young Gentlemen are wont to shun. For although his
extraction (we know) was noble, and his fortune extremely fair; though his
natural parts and abilities were truly great, as well as greatly improved by
Art and Industry, (he having been Master of many Languages, and (I am sure)
well versed in great variety of Learning,) yet still his modesty and his
meekness were so much greater than all the rest, that (in a perfect contrariety
to the vainglorious and hypocritical) he never turned his worst side outward.
The late retir'dness of his life made him so blameless and inoffensive, that I
suppose it has ditted the mouth of envy.

It was no doubt an effect of those two virtues, (I mean his modesty, and his
meekness,) that he so constantly observed that Apostolical Precept, (...). --
Hom. (...).
James 1. 19. For He, if any man living, was swift to hear, but slow to speak.
And when he thought it his turn to speak, it was rather much, than in many
words. As the speech of Menelaus described by Homer, so perfectly free were his
discourses, from the fault of impertinence, or superfluity.

So far was He from sitting down in the chai^ of the scornful, (as too many of
his quality are wont to do,) nay so far from walking in the counsels of the
ungodly, (from the time that he found them to be such,) that he made it his
care and chiefest caution, (in his later years more especially,) not so much as
to stand in the way of sinners.

For as much as I could judge of him, (who had the happiness to know him for
many years) he was a true Nathanael, Joh. 1. 47, 48.
an Israelite indeed; who, though he had many Imperfections, as one who was
born of a Woman; yet he had sure no guile, as being also regenerate, and born
of God. Methinks I hear him now speaking to all that knew him, 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3.
as Samuel did to all Israel; I have walked before you from my childhood to
this day. Behold here I am, witness against me before the Lord; whose Ox have
I taken; or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes
therewith, and I will restore it? To which methinks I here the Answer which was
made to Samuel in the next verse, thou have not defrauded, Verse. 4.
nor oppress^d us.

It Is this that speaks a man right honest, which is a nobler Title, than right*
honorable; though I may say very truly, that he had many due titles of honor
too. For not to speak of his Ancestors, who came in hither with the Conquest,
and that from the City Poitou in France, (from whence they derived the name of
Peyto,) I think it more for his honor, to have been many ways (...). Ch^y^^st.
Hom. (in Gen). 3.
good; to wit, a good Husband, and a good Father; a good Master, and a good
Friend; a good Neighbor, and a good Landlord; a good Christian, and a good
Man. And, which is a sign of more goodness than all the rest, he never thought
he was good enough; especially in the first, and the two last particulars.

It is an excellent ingredient in that religious composition, which he had sent
before him to bless his soul, and left behind him in memory to perfume his Name
too, that having been charged with a debt, (whether by his Fathers last will
and testament, or by the condition of the times, or by both together,) he was
ever in some pain till he had paid that debt, or at least had made provision
for it; because until he had don justice, he knew he could not so well show
works of mercy; and that was doubtless a pregnant token of walking humbly with
his God. The three grand Duties which God requires, in the sixth Chapter of
Micah, at the ninth verse.

The end of Christ's coming into the world, was to make us live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. (Tit. 2. 13.) the first implying
our whole duty toward our selves, the second toward our neighbor, the third
toward our God. That extraordinary person, of whom I speak, does seem to me,
as well as others, to have reached those ends. He was so eminently sober, that
I believe he was never known to have sinned against his own body in any kind;
so eminently righteous, that (as I said) he was in pain, till he had rendered to
every man his due. Being so sober, and so righteous, he is inferred to have
been so godly too, as to have lived in opposition to those professors of
Christianity, who having a form only of godliness, deny the power of it; for
give me leave to tell you, what is not every day considered, The most material
part of godliness, is moral honesty. Nor was there any thing more conspicuous
in the holy life of our blessed Lord. The second Table is the touchstone of our
obedience unto the first. And to apply what I say unto the honorable person of
whom I speak, we may conclude him to have lived the life of faith, Gal. 3. 11.
because we find him to have dyed the death of the righteous. Number. 23. 10.


To pass on therefore toward his death, as the fittest transition unto his
burial; I am enabled to say of him, (by such as were eye and ear witnesses,)
that he abundantly enjoyed [that (...)] that happy calmness of death, which the
Emperor Augustus was wont to pray for. I say he enjoyed it in both acceptions
of the word* For first however he was sick of a burning Fever, (which carried
him up, like Elias, in a fiery Chariot,) yet he had this rare happiness which
is the privilege but of few, that he even i^joyed his whole disease, without
the least taint of deliration. That knot of union betwixt his body and his
soul, was not violently broken, but very leasurely untied; they having parted
like two friends, not by a rude falling out, but a loving farewell. Thus was
his Euthanasia in the first acception of the word. But he had it much more, as
to the second. For

Two things there are, which are wont to make death terrible. The first is
suddenness, the second, sin. He was so armed against the first, that he did not
only take care for the setting his outward house in order, King. 20. 1.
that nothing in this world might trash his flight toward a better; but also
sent for the Divine, to imp the wings of his devotion; and farther told his
Physician, that God had sent him his summons; so well was he armed against the
first of those Phobera, and that by the help of our English Litany, which
prompts us to pray against sudden death; and which he commanded one of his
servants to assist him with upon his deathbed, bestowing upon it (when he had
don) a great deal of holy admiration.

Again, so well was he prepared against the second, that for the tenderness of
his conscience, and his deep resentment of all his sins, those of the times
more especially, in which he deplored his unhappiness that he had had a great
share (till God was pleased in much mercy to show him that error of his
judgment, by which the error of his practice was bred and cherished;) Next for
his hatred of himself in remembrance of them, (though we may say, that in
comparison with many others alive and dead, he had kept himself unspotted from
the world;) Jam. 1. 27.
Then for his steadfast resolutions of better life, of making ample satisfaction
for every ill that he had don, and so of bringing forth fruits Luke 3. 8. Act.
26. 20.
worthy of repentance, (if God should be pleased to enlarge his time;) and last
of all for his solicitude, that all his Josh. 24. 15.
family might live in the fear of God, and redeem those opportunities, which he
seemed (unto himself) to have sometimes lost, or neglected; I say, in all these
respects, he appears to me, (as well as to others,) a more than ordinary
Example.

But some may say, Object.
that sick persons are ever sorry for their sins; but it is many time a sorrow
squeezed out by sickness. And as soon as they recover, they do relaps too.

To which I say, Answ.
that though it is often so in others, yet in this exemplary Christian it could
not be so. For

First it was a mark of his sincerity, that he looked upon his failings, as
through a Microscope; which made them seem nearer, and very much greater than
they were. He warned all those who stood about his sick bed, to beware of those
sins which the world calls little; and of the n^-little sins which the world
calls none; yea from the very least 1 These. 5. 22
appearances and opportunities of sin. It was his own expression, that all the
sins of his former life did even kick in his very face; Prove. 5. 8.
yet he remembered the Mat. 20. 9.
labourer, who went late into the Vineyard, and was rewarded* He also made some
reflections upon the Cito ignoscit Dominus quia cito^ ille convertitur. A^bro^.
in Luc. 23. 43.
thief on the cross; that his faith might steer an even course, betwixt the
Scylla of despair, and the Charybdis of presumption.

Secondly, It was another good token of his sincerity, that he was not merely a
deathbed penitent, whose repentance too too often is but [a (...)] a sorrow
according to the world; but (as diverse persons can witness) he began the great
work in his time of health; so as his sickness did but declare his having been
a 2 Cor. 5. 17.
new creature by 2 Cor. 7. 9.
change of mind, and that he did not fall back, but Phil. 3. 14.
press forwards toward the mark, and persevere in so doing unto the (...).
Mat. 24. 13.
end.

Thirdly, 'Twas another mark of his sincerity, that he insisted on the nature
of true repentance, which still imports an amendment, and reformation of
life. Nor had he a willingness to recover his former health, unless to the end
he might demonstrate his ren^vation, by that carefulness, that fear, that
indignation, that vehement desire, that zeal, yea that revenge, which S. Paul
has recorded as the effects of a godly sorrow in his Corinthians. 2 Cor. 7. 11.
Abhorring and deploring those desperate notions of Repentance, which the world
is so commonly mistaken in.

Fourthly, 'Twas a comfortable token of his sincerity, that he was obstinate in
his Prayers, against the precept of his Physician; and resolved to pour out his
soul, though to the prejudice of his body. As if he were piously ambitious of
being too strong for his own infirmities; when a reverend Divine (who was
standing by) would fain have don that office for him, at least as a Deputy to
his lungs only, that he might not spend his few spirits as yet left in him; he
made him this resolute, and hasty, but pious answer, that whilst a Tongue was
in his head whereby to speak, and whilst he had breath in his body to move and
animate his Tongue, and whilst he had lungs in his breast to supply his breath,
he would show forth the goodness and the glory of God, who had been pleased to
do so great thing for him. And in a merci^^l Answer to all his Prayers, which
he continued to the amazement of all that heard him, (after some conflicts
which he had had with the ghostly enemy, to make him happier in a vict^^ious,
than he could possibly have been in an untried innocence,) God was pleased (
very signally) to reveal himself to him, to speak peace unto his Conscience, to
fill him inwardly with joy in the Holy Ghost, to give him some glimmerings and
fore-tasts of the glory to be revealed. That I may use his own words, (which,
as he came out of a Trance, he was heard to speak,) he had a ravishing glimps
of the Beatifick Vision; meaning thereby (as I interpret) that God had
refreshed his drooping spirits with his unspeakable comforts; saying unto his
soul, I am thy salvation, or this day salvation is come to thy house. So that
now being placed above the level of temptations, and exempted from the fear of
what the * red Dragon could do unto him, he cheerfully lifted up his head, and
fixed his eyes upon Jesus, the author and finisher of his faith, and for the joy
that was set before him, expected the Advent of his death, as of a very dear
friend.

Fifthly, It was another great sign that his heart was right toward God, and
therefore not treacherous to himself, that he extended his care to the souls of
others, with as true a charity, as to his own; exhorting one in particular
against the love of this world; charging another to be watchful against
intemperance, and debauch; exciting a third unto frequent and fervent prayer. I
do but mention the several subjects, on which he treated like a Divine. To all
his servants in the general, and to three of them in special, (for his words
like Exodus 16. 18.
Manna in the wilderness, and the Apostles Act. 2. 45.
doal, were discreetly proportioned to every one as he had need; so as they who
had most of his Deathbed instructions had nothing over, and they who had least
had no lack,) I say, in general, and in special, he was by his precepts, as
well as practice, (even as righteous 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Noah) a true Preacher of Repentance. Nor did his care end here. But

As it were in imitation of good old Jacob, Genesis 49.
before he was gathered to his fathers, he gave a blessing to all his children.
And farther gave it in charge to his virtuous Consort, whom he worthily
esteemed his dearer self, (and of whom he also requested pardon, if by any
cross word he had ever gr^eved her,) not to educate his children, so much to
learning and other accomplishments, as to the knowledge, and service, and fear
of God. Nor was it a little to his advantage, that he was careful to have them
seasoned with those his last Principles, which by his later experience he found
the best.

Not to be endless upon the subject, (on which it is difficult not to be long,
and yet impossible to be tedious,) he was briefly all that, which I pray God of
his mercy to make us all. That whenever he shall appear unto us, in death, or
in judgment, we may be found, like wise Mat. 25. 7, 8.
Virgins, with oil in our lamps. And that together with this our Brother,
(whose remembrance (like that of Eccl. 49. 1.
Josias) will ever be sweet unto us as music at a banquet of Wine,) we may be
joined in Consort with the quire of Angels, Heb. 12. 22, 23.
and with the general Assembly of the Firstborn which are written in Heaven,
and with the souls of just men made perfect, singing Hosanna's and
Hallelujah's, Rev. 5. 13.
to him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.

FINIS.
VIR Explorata Integritate, Gravitate morum Primaeva Annumerandus Patribus;
Scientiarum lumen omnium, Supraque scientias eminens Humilitate summa:
Innocenter doctus, and (...) EDOARDUS PEYTO De Chesterton in Agro Warwicensi
ARMIGER, Ex Antiquo PICTAVORUM stemmate oriundus, EDOARDI PEYTO Equitis Aurati
Filius Unigenitus: Uxorem duxit ELIZABETHAM GREVILLI VERNEY De Compton-Mordake
in eodem Agro Equitis Aurati Filtam Unigenitam: Lectissimam pariter and
Dilectissimam foeminam.

Compar Conjugium!

Cujus ex felici Copula
Manavit sexus utriusque Trias,
Altera Filiorum, Edoardus, Guilielmus, Franciscus,
Altera and Filiarum, Elizabetha, Catharina, Margareta,
Patris simul; and Matrus Ectypa:
Virorum and Foeminarum olim Exemplaria.
Proh Dolor!
Tantae Familiae and Virtutis Instauratorem brevem,
Primo velut in Molimine fatiscentem;
In ipso aetatis store decussum,
(...)!
Tamen Querelarum desine.
Quippe saeculi pertaesus, Maturus Coelo,
Et praepropera laborans Maturitate,
Perfectionem vitae cum Immortalitate commutavit,
Anno Aetatis supra XXXm currente Tertio,
Salutis Reparatae MDCLVIII.
VIIIo. Calendas VIIbres.
Anima, Christi appetentissima, in Christi gremium evolavit;
Coelorum, quo dudum ascenderat, tandem Incola:
Corpus reclinavit in Pulveris Dormitorium;
Sic etiam Christum in sepulchro quaeritans.
Telluris sarcina subter tellurem deposita;
Incolumes reliquiae sub Domini custodia.
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF PARTICULARS.
A
A Dam, Subjected even in Innocence to a threefold Law. Page 204. Affliction,
Necessary to all, p. 93, 94. A Mark of Gods Favor, p. 102, etc. 107. 129, etc.
They lie the heaviest on Gods own people, 134, 137, 139, 140, etc. 468.
Antiquity, Courted in Art and Nature, p. 349, 50. In Policy, and Religion, 351,
352. The pretense of most heretics, 355, 456. that to be preferred which is
nearest the beginning, ibid. proved by Instances, 360, 361. The only reason of
the Secession of the Church of England from the Church of Rome, 362, 363. etc.
Apostles, Described in their basest, and best estate, p. 314, 315. Their
aequality, 368. Authority, Divine in the profanest, p. 211, 212, 240. Not to be
censured by the People, 213. How it differs from Power, 248. To be reverenced
in the worst, as in the best of Mankind, 248, 249. Submitted to by Christ, p.
293, 294.
B
Bishops, Necessary to Monarchy, p. 18, 19, 20. Chief in their own Dioceses,
368, 369.
C
Ceremonies, Their use, and Innocence, asserted by all Protestant Churches, and
Mr. Calvin, p. 205, 206. Councils, Their dependence on the Pope, p. 412, etc.
One out of all nations never was, 418, 419. Many of them reject each other,
420, 421, etc. The Doctrines, and Practices of the Papists condemned by not a
few of them, 423, 424, etc. Clergy, Their Prosperity the Laymans Privilege, p.
17, 18. Charity, To enemies npon the Motives of generosity, p. 28, 29. Christ,
why he needed a Conformity to the law for uncleanness, p. 275, 276, etc. his
presentation, 278, etc. How to be presented by us, 286, 287. Christian, Wherein
his Bravery consists, p. 63, 64. how a disgrace to Christianity, p. 153, 154.
and how a Glory, p. 165, 166. should press after Perfection, 323, 324. Church,
The rightful Power reduced to four heads, p. 196, 197, etc. The necessity of
its Authority, 199, 200, etc. For the ending of strife, 216, 217. Conscience,
unaffectedly tender, p. 89, 90. Consideration of how great use, 451, etc.
Controversies, Their unseasonableness, 439, etc. Custom, How the same from
God, and Belial, p. 262.
D
Death, often to be thought of, p. 436, 437, etc. desirable, p. 467, etc. 478.
An Instance of an happy calmness of Death, p. 487, 488. Deliverance, Compared
to the day, p. 16, 17, etc. should be an inforcement to change of life, p. 23.
Despair, Good, and Evil, p. 88, 89, etc. Devil, How Instrumental to our Good,
p. 104, 105, etc. Divorce, Why only permitted by Moses, p. 353, 354. Allowed by
the Papists, contrary to the Law of Christ, p. 381, 382. Drollery, Its
dangerous Tendency to Profaneness, p. 335, etc. 338, 339.
E
Enemies, Not to be Ins^^ed over, p. 10, 11. but rather obliged, p. 27, 28.
England, Characters of its state before his Majesty's Restoration, p. 12, 13,
etc. p. 43, 44, etc. p. 58, 59. p. 149. The Kings thereof Absolute, 385. How by
degrees incroached on by the Pope, 386, 387.
F
Faith, How in many who think they want it, p. 90. Its Victory over our
sufferings, p. 165, 166, 167. Fortitude, Wherein it stands, p. 64, 65. Fear,
How useful, p. 83, 84, etc.
G
God, How the Author of all our sufferings, and the sole support in them, p.
161, 162, etc. To be served with the best of what we are or can, p. 281, 282,
etc. Gospel, How spread through the world, p. 315, 316, etc. Gratitude, Its
Generosity, p. 31, 32. Motives to it in England, p. 58, 59.
H
Half-Communion, Its Rise, p. 358, 376, 377. How contrary to Scripture, ibid.
Hierarchy, Twofold, Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, p. 212, and p. 233, 234,
etc. Humility, Its proper season, p. 36. Motives to it, p. 266, 270, etc.
I
Ignorance, aggravates as well as excuses, p. 37, 38. Impunity, the greatest
punishment, p. 132, 133. Impurity, Legal a Type of Original Sin, 265, 266.
Infallibility, The chief Foundation of all Popish Errors, 357, 401, 402.
Acknowledged to be Incommunicable to any Church, 429, 430. Ingratitude, Its
chief Aggravation, p. 66, 67, etc. Indifferent things, what kind of necessity
they acquire to themselves, and how, 202, 203, etc. 289, 290, etc.
K
King, His Prerogative the Peoples Privilege, p. 16, 17. His right of calling
Synods, 197, 198, etc. His presiding in, and over them, 209, 210. His Divine
Institution, and Supremacy, p. 223, 224, etc. ad p. 258.
L
Laws, Their Original Institution threefold, p. 203, 204, etc. Bind the
Conscience though of Humane Institution, p. 208. Learning, The Usefulness and
Necessity of that which is but Humane, p. 304, 305, etc. Its Insufficiency
without the help of the Divine, p. 313, 314, etc. Its right employment, p. 331,
332, 333, etc. Lite, Its shortness, p. 457, 458, 462, 463. Its uncertaint^,
459, 473. and Frailty, 461. Its vexation, 464, 465, etc. Motives to, and the
Method of Improving it, 470, 471; etc. This life compared with Eternity, p.
479, 480.
M
Magistrates, Their Ordination, p. 232, 233, etc. ad p. 244. Their
Subordination, p. 245, 246, etc. Man, Motives to his Humility from the baseness
of his Matter, p. 267, 268, etc. All equal in what respects, p. 270, 271, etc.
His twofold Original, 454, 455, etc. Marriage, Its Primitive Institution
Vindicated, p. 352, 354. When first denied to the Clergy, p. 358, 379. Contrary
to Scripture, and the practice of the Apostles, 380. Mercy, How Gods chiefest
Attribute, p. 77, 78, etc. 116, 117.
O
Oath, How it differs from Gods Word, p. 110, 111. Obedience, to Magistratee a
good work of the first rank, p. 211, 212. In things indifferent, p. 293, 294.
Obligations, cease to bind in three Cases, p. 115.
P
People, Not the Original of Government, p. 233, etc. and p. 243, 244, etc.
Persecution, Compared to the night, p. 12, 13. etc. Pestilence, How much worse
than War, p. 149, 150, 151. Tends the most to Humiliation, p. 157. Ever laid on
by an hand from Heaven, p. 162, 163. Popes, Many of them co^fessedly Heretical,
p. 371, 372, 406, 411, 412. The Original of their Supremacy, p. 359, 366, 367,
etc. Primacy of order allowed to them, 367, 369. Prayer, in an unknown Tongue,
contrary to Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive Church, p. 378, 379.
Preaching, Its Different Effects, p. 320, 321. Praecepts, Difference 'twixt
them, and a bare Permission, p. 353. Pride, How inexcusable in man, p. 268,
269. Priest, His Duty, p. 325, 326, etc. Promises, of God Conditional as his
Threats, p. 113, 114. Prosperity, Its proper use, p. 25, 26, etc. Its danger,
p. 33, 34, 35. Its proper season, p. 50, etc. Its mischief, p. 51, 52, etc. Its
dignity, p. 60, 61. Punishment, Its threefold End, p. 128, 129, etc. For the
Amendment of Offenders, p. 130, etc. For the benefit of others, p. 134, etc.
For the satisfaction of the injured, p. 139, etc. significant of the sin, which
it revengeth, p. 147, 148. Purgatory, Its Original, p. 358. Purification, of
the Virgin, p. 259, 260, etc.
R
Rebellion, A species of Sacrileg^, p. 241. Reformation, Its proper Season, and
Reasons of it, p. 31, 32, etc. 61, 62. The Moderation of ours from Rome, p.
212, 213. From the Court of Rome, p. 388. Its causes, p. 382, 383. Justified,
p. 387. Repentance, In what sense applied to God, p. 109. Even in men it works
Miracles, p. 116, 117. Not to be deferred, p. 284, 472, etc. With the danger of
deferring it ibid. ad p. 478. Five Tokens of a sincere Repentance, p. 490. 491,
492, etc. Rome, Its Church a particular Church, and younger than Jerusalem,
etc. p. 365. Confessed by its Champions to be corrupt in point of Doctrine, p.
373. And Practice, p. 382, 383, 399, 400, 406. Is in no sense Infallible, p.
403, etc. ad p. 407.
S
Schism, On whom to be charged, 384. Scripture, Translated into
Mother-tongues, p. 377, 378. Sermons, The Danger of Idolizing them, p. 321,
322. Severity, The mercy of it, p. 100, 101, etc. p. 107, 131, 132, etc. 146.
Sin, Worse than the sufferings, which it produces, p. 131, 132, etc. p. 158,
159. How vile it makes us, p. 267. 268. Subjects, Their Obligations to obey
Magistrates especially the Supreme, p. 233, 234, etc. Ad p. 258. Sufferings, How
comforts, p. 160. etc. 164. 165. Synod, Its power, and proper work, p. 173,
etc. ad p. 218.
T
Thanksgiving, Wherein it Consists, p. 24. 25. 70. Threats, In all times
needful, p. 83. 84. etc. Two sorts, under oath, and word only, p. 108. 109,
etc. Tongue, Of what Importance in Religion, p. 333. 334, etc. Tradition,
Universal the Rule for synods to make Canons by, p. 214, 215, etc.
Transubstantiation, When it began, p. 358. 374. Impossible, 375. 428.
V
Victory, The End of it is to oblige p. 11. 27. 28. 29. Virgin, How Mary could
need a Purification, p. 272. 273. 275. Universities, Their use, and abuse p.
337. 338.
W
Wit, Being Vnsanctifyed is Mischeivous, p. 338. 339.
FINIS.

