GODS PROVIDENCE to the distressed Protestants in IRELAND.

OR, The last Proceedings in the Province of MUNSTER.

Attested by two Letters sent from Robert Pickering Clerk unto Sir Simon
Harcourt, Sergeant Major of all the Horse there arrived.

The one dated at Tologh, Ian. 20. the other at Youghall, Ian. 23. 1641.

Wherein is truly related in what manner Youghall was taken by the Rebels,
Barry, O Donnell Swillian, and Sir Patrick Roach, and also in what distress
the Earl of Cork was in.

And how Youghall was taken again three days after from the Rebels, by Rich.
Viscount Dungarvall, and the Earls of Barrimore and Kildare, and others of my
Lord of Corkes Tenants, to the number of 7000. my Lord of Cork, happily
relieved, Sir Patricke Roach slain, with 900. with him, Barry the Rebel
taken, hanged and quartered, his head set upon the Castle Gate, and quarters in
other parts of the Town, By the last Post the 2. of February, 1641.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

Tallough 18. miles from Youghall, Ian. 20. 1641.
I Cannot hold on my wished story in that acceptable strain that may be
desired, if not expected at the perclose of my last Letters, by tokens too
omminous, J gave a touch that J suspected that which is now come to pass, and
indeed the stream of our success here depends upon the Fountain of the happy
harmony between King and Parliament at home, if that Fountain be either
stopped or troubled, our streams must needs run weaker and weaker, until
none at all: we want many hands, yea, and many too as will appear by the
ensuing story, but if we cannot have them from England, it will be to no boot
to expect them elsewhere, if there be any in England; that either maliciously
or traitorously hinder aid from us, our bloods be upon their own heads, for
without speedy supply, and that a very sufficient one, we cannot stand up long,
the enemies increasing, and like Hidra's heads appearing every where more and
more.

Munster where are more conspicuous plantations of English then of any other
Province, as I am certified now shakes of the yoke likewise: Youghall a fair
Town by report, and famous among those of traffic, as having a fair harbor,
is now taken by Barry, Roach, and another of the Swillians, with five thousand
in their company, none of the Town making any color of resistance against
them, although walled on the Land side, and my Lord of Cork there with 600
men, which is a sign that they were welcome unto the Town, men whatsover they
were to the Earl, my Lord had some small notice of their coming, and
therefore got in all his men into the Castle very happily, and with what
provision he could get either in the Town or about, with leave or without his
Honor, by credible report has bin at great charge in fortifying of his-Castle
which stands-upon a Rock, and is very strongly leased, but it is very greatly
to be feared that he will want Victuals before be can obtain relief, for our
parts he sent to Tallough an English plantation, where we then lay to present
Sir Denis Butler, of whom we had certain intelligence that he was coming to
burn and sack that Town, being a pretty Market Town all English, neither
were we misinformed, for he came with 3000. men all in manner well appointed,
he marched on one side the River, and we on the other, but it was our fortunes
to be on the right side of Tallough, otherwise we should hardly have bin so
patient, the River was but shallow and narrow, but our guides informed us that
there was a Bogg between him and us, after we had passed the River, it might
well be, for the Enemy seemed careless of us, and marched disorderly, seeming
to give advantage that he might indeed take, but we being on that side the
River that Tallough was of, and being certified by our guides, that if he would
or meant to come to Tallough that he must come over to us except he would fly,
and knowing that he came we were able to give him enough we the rather believed
our guides concerning the Bogg, and let Butler alone, and recovered Tallough,
standing 8. miles from Yoghall: From Tallough we sent (upon his own entreaty
or rather urgent opportunity) John Douglas Esquire, Lieutenant Colonel with
500. tall Scots unto the aid of my Lord of Cork, more we could not spare, not
knowing what course the Rebel Butler had steeted, how far of he was, what
force with him, what might come to him, Colonel Douglas desired that he and
his Countrymen might undertake the charge of relieving the Earl, who proffered
that he perfectly knew not only the common Road-way between Tallough and
Yoghall but diverse not ordinary cuts and crossings whereby he not only trusted
to endammage the Enemy, but to do the Earl good service. Sir- Simon had no
reason but to hearken unto him, we being all strangers in that place; guide he
would have none but his own footman an Irishman, whom J believe his Master
had either trusted or employed so long upon Messages, viewing, discoverings,
that at length he found away to cut his Masters throat and all his Companies,
within 3 miles of Yoghall, passing through a Volley, the one side a Wood, the
other as it appeared a Mountain having marched some htlfe a mile in it:
Butlers troops showed themselves both behind them in the Volley, charging with
his horse, and likewise from the brow of the Wood fiercely playing with shot,
Col. Douglas thought he had no other course to break as well the force of his
horse, as to avoid the annoyance of his shot then to take the Mountain as he
took it to be, but indeed a blind Bogge as they call them, which here are most
commonly Mountains, their nature is such (as our guides inform us) that if a
man be still in going he may pass clean over them, but if he stand still
never so little in one place, he sinketh in like a ship in the quick Sands, the
enemies not unlike knew well the nature of the place, making no great have to
follow them, Douglas there makes a stand, thinking to bring his men into better
order, and upon a sudden were up to the belly in water which Butler perceiving,
came upon them with his horse, they being amazed and so encumbered were every
man cut off.

From Yoghall eight miles from Tallough, January 28. 1641.
IN point of War as security may endanger great success so vigilancie and
heedfullnesse many times freeth from great and eminent perils, the Earl of
Cork seeing how the case stood with him, slept nor, and considering that as
the case stood with him, he was not able to advantage himself by strength, he
thought upon some other way, he called for one of his Footmen an Irishman:
that had served him long time, assured him upon his Honor, that if he would
venture through the Rebels and make to Limcon, where he thought he should find
his own Son, Rich. Vicount Dongarvell, and from thence to Lismor, to the
Earl of Barrimore, and Kildare, and procure speedy relief, that he would give
him an hundred pounds Sterling at his return, and an Annual Pension of
twenty Marks for his life, the Footeman desired to be let down the Castle
wall about what time the Tide had ebbed three hours, or flowed one choosing to
be let down from that part of the wall that regarded the Sea, because at that
height he knew that no watch would be kept by the Rebels on that side, so that
he might pass through (which he belike had often done in matters of lesser
weight) without being spied, or if he were, he made it a Question whether any
would venture after him, except they knew the passages of the Foord as well as
he, his project being well liked of by the Earl, and all that could judge of
it, about six or seven in the Evening the tide was Flowing as Dominick would
have it, down he went in a knotted Roape the Earl first shaking him by the
hand, and Dominick only speaking these words, I warrant you my Lord being
down he gave the Roape three shakes and away, in that still and stealing
manner, that they could not hear the water once stir, he came that Evening
about nine of the clock unto Tallough, related unto Sr. Simon the Earls
estate, how he came forth and to what end, eat something with us and away to
Lismore, eighteen long Jrish Miles, from thence to Limcon nine Miles,
Dominicke did his business so well, that on Thursday, the Earls, of Kildare
and Barimore, with Captain John Paget, Captain Herbert Nicholas a Gentleman
well experienced in the wars in the Queens time, Captain Banister, Captain
Ducke, with four thousand men, the chiefest and most being my Lords Tenants.

These marched by in good order and better resolution, vowing that they would
either quire clear my Lord their great Landlord, or that Youghall should
prove their grave, Sir Simon* himself, accompanied with these two Earls, with
300 horse, and left order with Sir Tho: Temple to follow with 200 more if
occasion should so require, whereof he would do his best to give him notice,
more force he would not join with them, because he was not nor could not be
certified of Butlers proceedings, whether he had any attempt either by himself
or with some other upon Tallough, or that he was joined with the Rebels in
Youghall, which afterward we found to be so, when this resolute crew came
within a mile and half of Youghall, the Rebels united came out stoutly in
battalia against us in number to our deeming some 6000. having the odds of us
in number somewhat, although we had it of them in Arms and men, Sir Simon did
not approve of charging them with horse at the first, because he was jealous of
the ground, hearing of so miserable a chance of the Scots not 3. days before,
but Captain Paget assured him that he knew the place perfectly, and that it
was firm and sure both for horse and man, yet Sir Simon would not charge with
horse but only flanked them, and brought up the foot in maine Battalia, very
stoutly commanding to give fire at such and such distance, the Enemy received
the first and second Volley very manfully, and answered it very resolutely, but
there was great odds in Arms, at the third Volley they began manifestly to
fail: whereupon grew a difference between Sir Simon Harcourt, and Captain
Paget crying now it is time for your horse, and Sir Simon commanding advance as
you are horse time enough, whose command was followed, for the Vanne, winged
with some 2. Hundred Horse, aside Marched up to the very beards of the Rebels,
who dropped exceeding fast, not able to endure the fierceness of our Fire-men,
which indeed were able men being a great many old Soldiers that had served in
the beginning of King James his Reign, the Rebels not longer able to endure
either our Shot or order, gave up openly, and not only retreated but plainly
took themselves to their heels, casting away their Callivers, and other
arms, to make the more speed, then cried Sr. Simon charge Cavaliers but not to
far for fear of Bogs, which being done, there was execution both by Horse and
Foot, some half a Mile, for the place is held as vile for Boggs and Marshes
as any whatsoever in the Kingdom, whereupon Sr. Simon would by no means
pursue far with his Horse, and with the Foot it was no boot the Jrish are to
hard for all the world at that, there was slain upon the Ground Sr. Patricke
Roach, second Son unto the Lord Roach, and one Macke Odonnell who was called
by them the white Knight, with 900. others, Barrie being mortally wounded, was
carried by us into Yogall, at whose Gates without confession we presently
Hanged him, and some time after struck of his Head, and pitched it upon the
Castle Gate, his Quarters likewise in diverse parts of the Town, he has bin a
notable villain and at his execution professes himself forrie that he had
tortured no more of us, my Lord of Cork met us in the midst of the Town, and
heartily congratulated us all for his keepers would wait no longer upon him,
seeing they were likely to lose both Fees and Prisoner, the truth is when the
Rebels issued out of the Town against us, they left Butler with 1500. to
assault the Castle, who gave my Lord 3 furious assaults, and at the third by
slings of Roapes and Ladders of Roapes, and other slight Wodden Ladders they
being nimble got up 15 of them to the Batlements, but were sent down in
greater have then they came thither, Butler seeing that he could do no good
upon the Castle, and knowing that all was lost abroad, left my Lord without
taking leave, and shifted for himself, Thus have we gotten Yogall again, and
hope shortly to quiet Munster, whatsoever shall become of the other Provinces.

FINIS.

