THE SAD CONDITION OF A Distracted Kingdom. Expressed, IN A FABLE OF PHILO,
THE JEW.

Exempla credntur.
Quae socci superant risum, luctumque Cothurni.
Claudian. LONDON, Printed by B. A. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ALGERNON Earl of Northumberland, PHILIP Earl of
Pembroke, and Montgomerie.
Right Honorable,
THE Author of this Fable, in his own Age, and in succeeding times, was ever
by the ripest wits esteemed learned, eloquent, and ingenious. I am confident
your Honors impartial Judgments will censure my expressions upon Philoes
invention ingenuous and harmless; these are the issue of some spare hours in
these miserable times, exposed to the world under your Honors protection; unto
whom the Author professes himself a

Most humble servant, A. RIVERS.

To the right Honorable Algernon Percie, Earl of Northumberland, etc.
MY LORD,
SO many glorious titles crown
Your Noble Stem, as easily they put down
Great Romes Aemilians, Scipio's, Fabio's, whose
One single Tribe adventured to oppose
Themselves their Cities Wall: and with their blood,
Preserve Rome from the innumerous Multitude
Of Veia^s, How often have our Ancestors
Seen, and extold like Piety of Yours?
How many Victories have the PERCIES got?
What Trophies reard of the subdued SCOT?
How many of your Martial Lineage are
In FAMES BOOK, written Thunderbolts of WAR.
Who with HEROIC Actions add new Grace,
To Charlemain's MARTELLVS, PEPINS race,
From whom you are discendants; and we know
How much GRADIVUS and the MUSES owe
To your Progenitors: and dare rehearse
Our better VOWS and SERVICES in verse.
Be Greatest FABIVS, be great ALGERNON,
And emulate your PERCIES CRESCENT MOON
Shewre down your influence: make our clouded night
By your wise Counsels, then the day more bright.
Your Honors humble Servant, A, RIVERS,

The Fable of PHILO the JEW, Amplified.
TAE ARGUMENT.
PHILO the most learned and eloquent amongst the Jews, recites a very pleasant
and witty Story: Namely, Phi. lib. de Plantations Noemi.
that God after he had with singular art and wisdom created the Universe,
commanded the Angels to tell him what they thought of the Work and workmanship:
And that one of those blessed Spirits with much freedom answered, that in his
judgment there wanted (as a complement to so exquisite an opifice) a strong
Voice very audible and penetrating, which without intermission passing from one
corner of the Earth to the other, should be the continual Trumpet of Gods
praise, and preach even to the most ignorant his supreme wisdom, and
ineffable skill in the production of the very least and most contemptible
Creatures.

This ingenious Fable of Philo is the Argument, and gave occasion to the
following Treatise. And though there are those (and not unlearned) who judge it
too much to savor of the Pedagogue, when Authors are quoted, yet we think, we
shall give authority to our lines, if we express the grounds of our invention,
and from whence we fetch, and to what direct our Allusions.

WHo gave himself existence, Genesis 1.
gave us all
The being that we have, ordered this Ball
We trample with a word, and without sweat
Gave essence, and existence to the great
And lesser Creatures, and required no more
Materials pre-existent, then a poor
Nothing, and thence with an all potent hand
First made, then perfected Fire, Air, Sea, Land.
Nor is the work by pattern, but he takes
Himself, and of his work the Idea makes.
When did God make those intellective Peers
Guardians of Mankind, The Greek Doctors hold the Angels to have bin created
before the world: the Latin D. with the World; which opinion is more probable,
though the other is not er^onious. D. Th. 1. p. q. 61. art. 3.
Guiders of the Spheres?
Lets reckon every imaginary Age
Before they undertook the Pupillage
Of Adams Orphans, or shall we agree
As parcels of large Natures Machin, he
Gave them Coevall being. How e're we will join
In this, the workmanship was most divine.
Did he suite Heaven with a more glorious Robe
Then is the garment of our Earthly Globe?
Is the stuff other then of things below?
Or an extracted Quintessence? be it so
Or what it will, we are sure with singular Art
God finished, and polisht every part.
And viewing all as in a maze he stood
And with much Complacence pronounced all is Good.
When Babels frantic Architects intend
Their Tower should as Heavens Palaces ascend, Genesis 6.

God goes in the sacred Triads Company
To view what this presumptuous work should be,
And disallowing their transcendent Pride,
He stays the work, and workmen does divide.
So many Ages past, attended by
His glorious Courtiers, he Commands them eye,
And curiously observe the worlds vast frame;
Then tell him what was wanting in the same.
For he had heard (although he let it pass)
How Momus had desired a looking glass
Should in the breast of man be placed, to show
What were his inward thoughts, that all might know
Whose ends were crooked, whose pretensions right,
Discern the just man from the Hypocrite.
A fond request, and contrary to that,
Which when man formed was God leveld at.
For he created Men with liberty
In will, and action, and if all should see
What are the deep designs at which they aim,
Both action, and invention, would be lame.
As Moses from Mount Nebo viewd the soil
Of Fertile Chanaan, Deuteronomy. 34.
which by warlike toil
The Tribes must gain, and with their weapons meet
Those Regions, which must make their warfare sweet.
So in a Moment helped with glories light,
These Angels have presented to their sight
The Universe, the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas,
And whatsoever is containd in these.
In Heaven they see an immense Amplitude,
And spacious Tabernacles for the Good
(Who imitating Angels, and by Grace
Vanquish the ill with good shall have a place)
The many Orbs are objects of their sight,
The fixed and wandering Tapers of the Night,
We Will not believe, but they both see, Cornelius a lapide, in Gonesin.
and know
What distance is 'twixt Heaven and us below.
Should I tell you, that some huge Millstone hurld
From the highest Heaven to the Center of the world
Would ask twice threescore years before it descend,
To the said Center and his journie end.
And we will allow for every hour, the while
It is in motion, at least forty mile.
Then guess what distance is 'twixt Heaven and us,
By the swift motion of this ponderous
Descendant. Spoke I so, you will laugh and say
How know you this? or who has rid the way?
How many are the stages? with the Sun
Who took post horse, and through the Zodiac run?
The Angels know this truth; yet in less time
Then one short hour, a soul that is pure can climb
To the top of the Empyrean Heavens; such force
And expedition has a virtuous course
Of life. Our Angels with amazement viewd
The flaming Sun, still burning, nere renewed;
Who by the lending of his glorious light
Or the withholding, measures day and night.
It Is strange so vast a Body every day
And every night, should travail so much way,
As from the East to West, and then return
To make another journey the next morn.
We daily see it and therefore make it light,
Because it is so daily in our sight.
Whose hand but the Almighties can sustain
Those Magazines of Snow, Pererius in Dan* esteems this out of the greatest
miracles in nature.
of Hail, of Rain
In The Ayrie Regions, that they not descend
At once, and with a deluge make an end
Of all. Who firmes the Earth, and with just lines
The East, the West, the South, the North designs?
On what substantial B^ses does it stand?
Or is it propt only by Gods right hand?
Who wrought and put on the main Seas their shrowds
And like some newborn babe wrapped 'em in Clouds
For swaddling clouts? Job. 38.
who a confining bar
Could set upon 'em, bid 'em pass so far
And pass no further? Thus the Oceans bounds
Circling not swallowing the embraced grounds,
Are a new wonder. Then amidst the waves
They hear how that unweldie Monster raves
The VVhale: and laugh at his complaints, because
They are injurious to the wholesome Laws
Of God, and nature. Let us hear his song
Then vindicate Gods providence from wrong.
Is not the whole circumference of the Maine
The Baltic Sea, the Seas of France and Spain,
The waves that glide by India, Africa,
Sufficient space for him to feed, and play
And chase the Orke. Myriads of miles at least
Are thought a prison by this Monstrous Beast,
And Nature is injurious that has put
Him in a Goal, and in a dungeon shut.
Are Londoners in prison 'cause the Line
Limits their gadding, and the^ Outworks confine
Their pleasant walks; the Ocean that surrounds
Our Island, washing all our English grounds
Speaks England but a Goal. Man's noble mind
Within this house composed of clay confinde,
Although it can in the twinkling of an eye
On wings of swift imagination fly
Thorough the Universe, transcend the sky
And comment even on Gods immensitie;
Yet is a Captive and close prisoner,
(Our mixed Elements the Goalers are)
And only death can grant a full discharge,
And with his warrant the thrald soul enlarge*
But wherefore will Leviathan complain
Who for his rendevous has all the Maine
And hundredth Seas? Because he cannot go
Into the Straits of Archipelago.
There the wise God of nature does provide,
Where ships continually and Navies ride,
Many Charihdaes, Scyllaes dangerous rocks
Facing that Isle, where fed the fleecie flocks
Of Polypheme. That for the general good
And his own safety, no Atlantic flood
Should bear this Monster: but where billows break
At great Alcides Pillars, there they speak
A Non plus ultra to the VVhale. For if
He enter should the Levant Sea, no Skif,
No vessel could be safe: nor he himself;
But every rock, and every shallow shelfe
Would menace death, and danger: to prevent
Which inconveniences, wise nature meant,
He should be barred those Deeps, his duller eye
Not able Rocks and dangerous Syrts to spy;
Which would his too unweldy body tear
Peece-meale, and he must every minute fear
Present destruction. Should he be pursu'de
By covetous man (and certainly he wou'de)
What rills of brinish water can he throw,
Into the air, able to overthrow
The largest ship, and with his massy tail,
More spread then some huge Carrike under sail,
Or'ewhelme and drown all vessels. To save these
Mischiefs, he never shall wallow in those Seas.
Now judge who is the Prisoner, who has cause
To grudge, and challenge Gods* and Natures Laws.
So frantic Man like Absolon takes joy
In that, Reg. 2. 18.
which shall his happiness destroy.
The shrub envies the Cedar, and the Oak,
When that stands firm, these feel the thundering stroke
Of angry Heaven. Poor men although despised
Are fafe, when often the Rich are sacrificed.
VVee'd sail in plenty, but our puffed up sails
Are driven as well by rough as prosperous gales;
Those promise shipwreck more then these aport,
The Cottage has less danger then the Court.
Was it not Villers Mothers Adage, she
Until a Courtier never knew misery.
And Straffords Father did advise his Son,
To run that race his Ancestors had run.
Had he obayed his prudent sire, and lead
A private life, no Troops had seen his head
Chopped off, and the inconstant Multitude
First thirsting, then triumphing in his blood.
This Canterbury, conscious of his parts,
How greedily, and with what wily arts
Got he to be a Statesman; with what sweat
And study did he labor to be great?
But whereto serves his Grace, his dignities,
But to make more deplorde the Precipice?
Yet all like Frantic Icarus will fly
Alost, although they perish in the sky.
And Phaeton will beg to guide the Sun
A day, although before that day be done
He rue his rash attempt. Such things are sweet
That are prohibited, or else not meet.
God means to give us bread not stinging scorpions,
When he raines on us blessings or afflictions.
But we divert his purpose, and misuse
His providence, The Duke of Alva observed to be erected, and magnanimous in
adversity; Insolent and insulting in prosperity.
not knowing how to use
What he intends for blessings. Many are
Like D' Alva's Duke oppressed better far
Then in prosperity. But we will run
The wild goose chase until we are undone.
If in adversity say God's unjust;
If in prosperity, follow what lust,
Spleen, avarice, and ambition dictate, look
On lately glorious London. It Is a book
Worth the perusal: nay let us trace about
The Circuit of the Kingdom, and find out
What Devil, what Enyo sowed these tares
Amongst us, and engendered all these wars,
That have destroyed out British Isle, and rent
The Kingdom, 'twixt the King and Parliament.
Who says who is faulty? He or they? The King
A God on Earth, Psalm.
a consecrated thing
Cannot transgress, and being the only source
Whence Justice, and our Laws derive their fotce
Must needs be pure. Exodus
They Iethro's Elders are,
Englands supreamest Senate, whom the care
Of the whole Kingdom chose, to cure the sick
Condition of the Body Politic.
And 'twere a fin t'imagine these should err
Their own, before the^^ public good prefer.
How then rise all these tumults, these sad jarres
The clamor of the Drum, intestine wars?
What is the Origin? where springs the cause
Of all these plagues we suffer, against the laws
Of reason, dictating that every State
Preserve it self, not set wide open a gate
To its own destruction, and as Trojans did
(Cheated by perjured Synon) fondly bid
Their foes, nay hail themselves the fatal Steed
Stuffed with Ulysses, Pyrrhw, Diomed,
Who issuing forth shall Dardans Town destroy,
With flames consume the lofty Towers of Troy.
Speak better Muses, what wronged Deity
Has brought on England so much misery?
Who has inflamde our English bloods to sheath
Their swords in English breasts, and to make Death
Ride in such triumph; where our English are
The sad attendants of his duskie Car.
When the Assyrians shall be punished, Reg. 7.
God
Fetches no hostile forces from abroad,
But skares the soldiers with a Pannick fright,
And makes Assirians with Assyrians fight:
They on themselves their spleen and malice spend,
Brother kills brother, friend his dearest friend.
Nor can they brag of Conquest, as no blade
But their own swords this bloody slaughter made.
We drink the Dutch down, and our whoring's more
Then the hot Spaniards, more hard to the poor
Then Jews we are; blaspheaming, swearing, play,
Our profanation of the Sabborn day;
Cheating our Neighbor: and we have so many
Religions with us, that we scarce have any.
These sins which gliblie we as water drink
Have filled the cup of vengeance to the brink,
Job. 15. 16.
Which God kept still, Ps. 7. 4.
and would not give command
It should be powered upon Sea and Land
By his revenging Ministers, but would
So order Justice that Egyptians should
Punish Egyptians: Apoc. 7.
hear the Prophets tale
How the deluding ruin did prevail
In wicked Iorams rain, Isai. 19.
and be bold,
To say Names, Reg. 3. 32.
changed, of Us the story told.
Heavens Gates were opend, and a Parliament
Proclaimd concerning England: thither went
The Cherubin, and Seraphin, the Peers
Whose constant care it is to volve the spheeres.
Angels, Archangels, Principalities,
The Thrones, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, these
Make the grand Senate, and the Writ Records;
There Is no Lower House, but all of them are Lords.
The Pursuivants, Informers, Goalers wait,
And are attendants; when the Kingdoms State
At Westminster Assembles, to peach those,
They vote the Commonweals, and Peaces foes.
To take 'em to their stricter Custody,
When it is thought fit by the grave Committee.
So the black fiends to their Creators Grace,
Ungrateful, though they forfeited their place
In Heaven, yet when like consultations are,
Approach the sacred Court, but stand off far,
From glories throne; and answer questions made
Touching the lives of men with whom they trade:
For did not Satan fully speak his sense,
When God demanded of Jobs innocence? lob. 1.

The Synod sat, and the Assembly filled,
(Though Heaven is always full) Jehovah wild
One of the Cherubs to relate the Cause
Of their Convokement. After some short pause
A volume is produced, which begins,
And ends with the relation of our sins.
And every page was blotted, every line,
With faults of Peter, Paul, John, James, thine, mine,
And all were true; should they have been denied,
The Devils would them all have justified.
There was alleged we drink the Dutch down, whore
More then the Spaniard, not relieve the poor;
All our dissemblings, and hypocrisies,
Thefts, cheating, swearing, cursing, blasphemies;
How we Religion out the Kingdom fright,
When for opinions, and our sects we fight.
Corruptions in the practice of our laws;
How many injust Verdicts? and the Cause
By bribes, or favor thrives. A letter can
Corrupt a Judge, undo an honest man.
The Tribe of Levi stand before the Bar,
But as their Acts in the high Commission are
Examined; some good Angels undertake
Next Parliament should with them order take.
The indictment being at last fully read out,
The Court was silent, and all lookd about;
No Advocate stood up, and if there had
Been some defendant, our Cause was so bad,
No Rhetoric could avail, God does demand
How he shall chastise this transgressing Land,
The Angels being all mercy would not speak;
When a rude multitude of Devils break
Into the Conclave, and their ready aid
Offering, advise some foreign foe invade
The Land, as had the Danes, and Saxons done,
And Bastard William the whole Kingdom won*
But others judge too slow this punishment,
Therefore think best a pestilence should be sent Pestilence*

And in a moment many thousands kill,
And hell with souls, the grave with bodies fill.
A meaguer Elve, whose thin jaws downwards fall,
His teeth appear, Famine.
his cheeks no flesh at all
But skin and bones, like some anatomy
You see in Surgeons Hall, requests that he
May be chief actour in this business, and
He would bring Egypts famine on the Land.
And this might seem their fitter punishment;
Whom wealth and plenty had made insolent.
'Midst these debates from the Abisse of hell
(Where constant horror and confusion dwell)
A fury came; who flying through the air,
With smoke and flashes, and with thunder, tare
Huge Rocks asunder; blasted the green corn,
Gave death to blossoms, killed the fruit new born.
The ruddie tincture from the Roses fled,
The purple violet hung down his head;
The Heliotrope enamored of the Sun
Fearing his love was lost, the world undone*
Dreading now only an eternal shade,
Plucked in his glorious colors and decayed.
Natures vast frame forgets the pristine state,
And all her creatures turn retrogradate.
So have I seen the boisterous blasts conspire
With angry heaven, and the Aetherean fire
By furious whirlwinds and tempestuous weather,
To damage the whole Universe together,
And as the Monster mounted on his way
Toward Heaven, the Sun forgetting it was day
Unable, or afraid to endure the fight
Puts out his glorious Taper, and made night.
The Fiend arrived at the Olympian Gates
Craved audience, and admittance of the States.
Our sins gave easy entrance, (only sin
Can make the Devil ground on mortals win)
Admitted, backward from his threatening front,
He twirld the Serpent that hung dangling on it.
And with a hideous Roar uttered these words:
" You Citizens of Sion, and blessed Lords
" Constant possessours of that Grace and room,
" Which we have lost by Heavens severest doom,
" You much deliberate; and of your Consults,
" What other benefit, but delay results?
" Have you resolved that the British Land
" Merits chastisement? Does your pleasure stand,
" It shall be punished? Leave the manner how
" And means to me; only do you allow.
" Nor sword, nor plague, nor famine, but all these
" By my invention shall bring miseries
" More then enough upon this Isle; I ask
" Commission: grant it; then be it my task
" To act the Minister of Vengeance. VVayes
" I have innumerable: since Adams days
" I have couversed with his Offspring: can
" Tell Arts, how to inveigle foolish Man,
" Make him trrnsgresse the precepts of his God;
" Violate all Laws, then whip him with a Rod
" Sharper then Scorpions: bound up by himself*
The Court amazed at what the Stygian El^e
Had boasted, bid him tell the manner how
He Would act it: they would his designs allow.
Nor should he doubt of their most firm assent
It should be voted in the Parliament.
Hell and the Devils capred at these words,
And with a hushing murmr thankt the Lords.
The Fiend erected with such ample Ieave,
Unfolds how he would his inventions weave.
" I Will strait about the Isle my progress make
" And with me for my fit associates take
" Suspicion, Anger, Hatred, Discontent,
" Murmr, dislike at present Government;
" Envy and Rancour, Fears and Iealousies,
" Open detractions, more close calumnies,
" Conspiracy, Rebellion always quaking
" For fear to be surpised: Treason still waking
" To do a mischief. Griping penury
" Dogging at the heels of prodigality.
" Ambitious hopes to raise what is decaid,
" And what Peace cannot purchase, by the blade.
" These I Will disperse through the whole Kingdom, and
" Make Sons against their Fathers, Brothers band
" Against their Brothers, when good Abell slain
" Fell down, Genesis 4*
I at the elbow stood of Cain.
" Such industries I have, I can set strife
" 'Twixt friend and dearest friend; man and his wife.
" The Nobles, Commons, Gentry, I Will inflame
" With such dire furies, that the very name
" Of Peace shall be detested. Death and blood
" To Nobles, Gentry, and the multitude
" Shall be most dear: with violence they shall break
" Open Ianus Temple, and the Drum shall speak
" In every Village war, the Rural swain
" Shall leave his tillage, Shepherds leave the plain:
" The Prentice shall forget what do you lack?
" And joy to March with iron on his back,
" The Murrion on his head. And to advance,
" The common cause, with Gun, with sword, with lance;
" The Citizen weary of rest, lay down
" The Robe of Peace, his graceful livery gown;
" Exchange security for doubtful wars,
" And deem it honor to return with scarres
" From the unnatural conflict; women shall,
" Animate their husbands by the sword to fall:
" Wives, Widows, Virgins, freely give their gold,
" And with their Jewels bloody strifes uphold.
" Though by the war no other good they reap,
" Then to make Widows, Wives, and Virgins cheap,
" Men easily numbered; Widows shall be rife,
" And no great business then to get a wife.
" Midst these combustions turmoiles, the Glebe Land,
" Shall unmanured and untilled stand.
" The plough shall be neglected, and the corn
" By th'horse hoof trampled, fade before full born
" It Is fit for sickle. Graziers sell away
" Their beasts, lest kept they prove the soldiers pray*
" Then want and griping penury shall kill
" The wretches that survive, and Churchyards fill
" With starved corpse; what war and famine leave,
" Contagious pestilence shall of life bereave.
" So war, plague, famine, in a league shall join
" To serve you, and perform what I design.
The glorious Senate of the starry Hall
Voted allowance, and confirmed all
The Fiend demanded. So the sacred Court
Dissolves, and every Burges does resort
To his happy mansion; all the furies play,
And hell triumphing keeps a holy day.
For when their Rival man suffers annoy
They have some slight, but momentary joy.
The Parliament thus ended, now begins
Our misery, and we may thank our sins,
Or rather curse 'em, that have brought these woes
On England, made our selves domestic foes
Unto our selves. No fights with France and Spain,
Though we successive warfare with those twain
Have lately wagde, issued so large a flood,
As these uncivil broils of English blood.
One only Sidney slain, in the Belgck fights,
But numbers numberless of Lords and Knights
Have perished in these Conflicts. Let us look
With gushing eyes on Linsey, Daubeny, Brook,
Northampton, Denbigh, Greenvill, Grandison,
Should we count all, when would the list be done.
Nor can the Conqueror true Trophies raise,
As mournful Cipres not triumphant baies
Become the victour, whose felicity
Is purchased, with his Countries misery.
Great Rome abhorred any triumphant Car
Should grace successes of a Civil War;
Where so much blood, as might whole Regions get
Pollutes the Chariot, and the Consuls seat.
Have we no doubts of Holland, France, and Spain?
Are the Irish quiet? No hopes to regain
The Electorall rights? Or will we not? That we
So prodigal in mutual murders be?
Our England is a shambles; our selves keep
The Butchershop: and are our selves the sheep.
And when at last we almost all are slain,
VVho'l keep us safe from Holland France and Spain?
But we will leave England weltring in its blood,
Permit Leviathan in the Ocean flood.
To range, and following our main intent,
Lift up our eyes to the spangled firmament;
Where we shall see the Angels, who survaid
By Gods command the Fabric which he made;
Having past Heaven, the Air, the Sea, the Land
At fight of the Ant, in admiration stand.
Are there not other objects to delight,
The Angels contemplation? Does the sight
Of fierce Martichora deter their view?
Dare they not eye him as he does pursue
Both Man and Beast? This horrid Monster made
By our Step mother, Nature to invade
And murder Mortals; seems a subject more
Worthy their admiration then the poor
Emmet. Ex Phile. (...) aliis. ^^ich. (...) sacra and humana.
What in his little compound can
In them breed wonder, when it does not in Man?
But whose more curious pen had yet the power
Rightly to character the Martichore
His formidable shape, strength that exceeds
The greatest Lions parched Africa breeds.
Body proportioned like that royal Beast
That awes the Forest, Monarck of the rest.
The head, and face (O strange) just like the head
And face of Man, the skin a Tinto red.
Two slambewes for the eyes, the eye lids flush
Of brisled hair resembles Moses bush
Still burning, Exodus 3
not consuming: Ears nor long,
Nor short, tide with a crisped thong
Are still erect. His mouth stands opened wide,
Three rows of Teeth, like Combs on either side*
Insinuate a new Hell, that every hour
Consume, yet always covet to devour,
Then in his brushie Tail the wondrous strength,
In magnitude a Cubit, three in length:
With which as some stored Magazine well armed
He enters battle, and with fury warmed
Assailes the Huntsmen, who pursue him; and
Disdaining to be chased* makes a stand
And as the Porcupine or Ostrich throws,
His piercing darts amongst his thickest foes.
So Roman Legions the swift Parthians dread
When as pursued, retreating they make head
Against their following foes, and dare assail
With winged shafts flying as storms of hail
'Midst the condensed Brigades. In such guise
The enraged Monster, with much fury eyes
Where he shall shoot, then with innumerous store
Of forked Iavelins, his pursuers gore.
The Tail, his Quiver, and his Bow, which he
Can manage with such rare dexterity
This way, that way, backwards and forwards bend,
On every side his dangerous arrows send,
That no side is secure; more, he will take
His very nails, and of them weapons make.
Then the bird swifter he, swifter then wind,
Who ever chased him but was left behind?
Miles nor demensions, cannot hinder him,
Come to broad Rivers he will leap over, not swim.
If any Creature would the Angels move
To wonder, here would be a Theme above
The silly Ant. Fond mortal so speak I,
But they are better furnished to descry
The artifice of the best Makers hand,
And at his workmanship amazed stand.
They see the Causes joynd with the effects,
We see the Creatures, and make them the Text*
Of some short wonder, but not mount so high
As to the Cause, one only Deity.
Who only could in his al-knowing mind
(The true Idea that shows every kind
Of Creatures) first their Natures represent
Unto himself, then being omnipotent
Existence give, store them with qualities
Which pass the ignorant, amaze the wise.
This, this eternal Mover had a will
In the small Ant to show his infinite skill.
And it shall be our better Muses charge
To speak the Angels wonderment at large.
And think the subject well deserves our Rimes
When the Oracles of Learning, and their times
Bazil? and Jerome (what a pair of men)
On the like Theme employed their sacred pen.
It Is certain there is some more extensive Art
In The Fabric of the World, then of a Part.
Yet as much skill to make a Gnat or Fly,
As to create the ninefold Hierarchy.
Why so? Cannot an Actor merit praise
In The Idiots part, as well as he that plays
The haughty Monarch, and at every strain
Expresses Pompey, or great Tamerlane.
According to the bulk we value not
The Artists skill, but truly estimate
Him perfect in his opifice, when he
Makes his expressions just as they should be.
And our great Artist in the silly Ant,
Has shown more skill then in the Elephant.
Here Is a vast body able to contain
And act all functions which he should ordain.
But in the Pismire how can every sense
Be so complete, and have their Residence?
So fit for action, mark the graceful eyes,
The taste, the smell, the feeling, nimble thighs
Always in motion. Where the Mussicles?
For spleen, gaul, liver, where receptacles?
Yet sure all these are there: the wits the arts
Contained, and practiced in those slender parts
May seem a Prodigy. What virtues crown
The Ants, with which they easily put down
Most of our Mortals* Prudence, Fortitude,
Religion, scarce known of the multitude,
Observed exactly in their Common weal
Where all are daily laborers, none feel,
Or know what is want. Worthy to have for sons,
The great Achilles frugall Myrmidons.
Lycurgus gloried that he formed a State
In Sparta where no loytring Runnagate
Was to be hired to go on Errands; were
Our Land so fortunate, we should not fear
In travel to be made the Felons prey,
At home to have our goods purloind away.
Now idleness has filled full every Goal,
Made hard necessity so far prevail
That the every must supply what labor ought;
And late repentance at the Gallows bought,
Be dearly rated. These combustions have
Planted a Nursery to make fat the Grave,
The Gibbets groan, undo a flourishing Land;
Whilst high ways echo with the thieves word, stand*
For what can be expected of such men
Bred up to spoil and rapine in the Den
Of Cacus? loosely dissipating what
By plundering, their, and pillaging was got.
But when the clamor of the Drum shall cease,
And England be made happy with a Peace
The selfsame riotous and licentious course
Begun, must be maintained with a worse.
Had not as Rome, Polib. lib. 1. At large relates the remarkable passages of
the Mercenary War. And out of him Sir Walter Raleigh in his history of the
World.
proud Carthage as great powers*
As large command at Sea, as lofty Towers;
As populous a City, VValls as strong?
In which presuming; they made war so long
With mighty Rome, in Sicilie and Spain,
And as their loss was equal, so their gain.
Yet when the wars are done and leagues are made,
By Mercinaries, Carthage is betrayed;
And their own soldiers ruin Carthage more
Then all the wars they ever waged before.
As ceasing Hippo, Tunis, Vtica,
Soliciting disgusted Africa;
They siege the City, and the world had seen
Carthage in flames, had not Hamilcar been.
Will not the cashirde soldiers imitate
Th^se stipendiaries, and undo our State?
Will not new Spendi and new Mathos rise,
And for Remattos make a sacrifice
Of glorious London? and our Civil Iarres
Conclude at last as theirs with sociall wars?
Men bred in ease, accustomed to spoil
Will make a booty of their native soil.
And conscious of the mischiefs they have done
(With Spendius from his Roman Master run)
Fearing the penal Laws and Justice course,
Secure their wicked acts by acting worse.
No such Republic amongst the Pismires is,
But every one taught what belongs to his
Duty, performs it cheerfully, and spares
No honest toil, but with much labor cares
To feed the following winter. In one day
We consume all, the next look out for prey
And so we get a booty, never look
How it is obtaind, whether by hook or crook.
They hoard up corn, but not as Farmers do
And covetous Curmudgions, that undo
The poor and country, to bring out again,
And dearly sell it in a dearth of grain.
But as good soldiers our industrious Ants
Are provident, and skillful, what sad wants
Follow a winter siege, oppress a Town
Beleaguered, in the spring go up, and down
In Summer, and in Autumn, bring in grain
And plenteous Ammunition, to maintain
Their Forts and selves besieged by rain, hail, Snowes,
Continual Frosts, (the Emmets yearly foes)
To prevent which, they always careful are
And keep themselves in a defensive war.
Nor do these little creatures always toil,
That would their bodies and continuance spoil;
But have some seasons in their Commonwealth
Ordered by nature, to preserve their health;
Wherein they celebrate their wakes, hold fares
And sequestrated from Domestic cares,
Receive each other with much charity,
Offer their vows to hospitality*
( A Deity conserving friendship) and
Did we their speech and Commerce understand,
Their friendly colloquies, kind salutations,
Free entertainment, harmless recreations;
VVee'd judge there is more true happiness, true mirth
In those Meandred Cavernes of the Earth,
Amongst these little Chits, then in the Feasts
Of mighty Potentates, where Royal Guests
Are entertaind with all magnificence;
And much contention to please every sense.
Mark Antonie, Lucullus, and Apicius;
Never as these made banquets so delicious.
Yet all the Kates which in one meal they eat,
Mounts only to some twenty corns of wheat.
Fresh River water filled in some Nutshell
Shall quench their thirst, and please 'em wondrous well:
No healths, but hearty draughts walk round about,
For they by rules of nature have found out,
Much drinking hurts the health, empties the purse:
The deadly bane of wisdom; madness, nurse,
The fruitful Mother of fantastic fits,
Broacher of quarrels, deluge of best wits.
Therefore our Ants who much respect their gain,
Love Peace, are Witty, still preserve their brain.
How else could they keep Marts, labor, have health?
How in such Peace conserve their Commonwealth?
Their Kerimas expired they retire
And rest themselves, till Titans cheerful fire
Shall warm the world. Then hating nothing more
Then sloth, in thickest Cohorts they explore
The adjacent Regions, and bring forage home:
Some laden are with wheat, with barley some,
And in the way how courteously they meet,
And their dear friends coming full laden greet?
Congratulate their labors, civilly,
Decline the path, gently let them pass by?
When as a Coachman and a Car-man chance
To meet together, both strive to advance
Though one ride empty, the other full, and all
The streets are cumbred as these Carters braule.
Nay swords sometimes are drawn, and clubs and staves;
And Constables are fetched to part the knaves,
The coached Madamoisels affrighted cry,
And skipping out take for their sanctuary
The nearest shop. Our Ants are better taught,
And empty yield the way to such who fraught,
With Ammunition travail. The pert Elves
Venture on burdens bigger then themselves,
And master 'em as forwards, backwards they
Heave at the burden, and try every way;
Nay when the single strength of one or two
Helps not, they prove what multitudes can do
Flocking together in condensed bands,
And easily conveigh through many hands
Their wished load. So have I seen in Spain
By many Ants, a well-growne Lyzard slain;
And hurried to their holes. There Is not more sport
In Paris Garden, when they set a sort
Of Mastive Dogs upon a single Bear,
And Bear and Dog shall one another tear,
Tug, weary, bite, then when these shall assail
The Lyzard; seize on sides, back, head and tail,
Here, there stop him, as if he were in nets,
And when with violent force from them he gets,
The gathered multitude trip up his heels,
Yet still he strives; but as a Drunkard reeles
Stopped by so many, nor can he get far,
So vigilant the Interlopers are*
Here he falls, there he rises, makes a stand,
(And stand he must) whilst they with their black band
Assault on all sides, and the eager hounds
Following the chase, inflict many slight wounds
Which multiplied, prove fatal: he must yield
At last, who against a Myriad fights a field.
Was it Achilles, or his Myrmidons,
That slew the first and best of Priams sons?
It Is certain Hector was the better Knight,
But what one man, can with a thousand fight?
Pharaoh is plagued with multitude of Flies,
And Caesar pricked with many bodkins dies.
The battle done, and having got the day
They busied are how to dispose the prey*
The slaughtred corpse for winter must provide,
Therefore with skill their Stations they divide.
Heave at the carcass here, there, every where;
And by degrees to their dark Cavernes bear.
So stones of ponderous weight we often see
Carried with art, and like dexterity,
To repair Paul's. And if the putrifi'd
Corpse shall annoy their Garners not well dried,
With the same skill they bring it forth again
Expose to the air, to heat, to cold, to rain,
Until at last it is seasoned and made good,
Then carry it back to make their winter food.
Of which they are so careful, that no weather,
Shall hinder them their winter crop to gather.
And shame our soldiers that go out to plunder,
And having got a petty booty, under
Some Tavern, or poor Alehouse roof devour
Their naughtily gotten prey in one short hour.
Emmets no more then men immortal are
But sometimes die, yet with more pious care
Then many men, they shall be buried,
And obsequies performed to the dead.
Unless you see Sir Richard and the Knave
His Clarke; the Sexton that shall dig the grave,
Keep your dead bodies, of them Mummie make:
No needy souls will churlish Charon take
For passengers into his leaking boat,
That are not able to defray their groat.
How many virtues in our Emmets shine?
What providence, what piety? what divine
Religion? how much charity to men?
As they dig Treasures out the Minerals, then
Hide them in holes with much solicitude,
Not avaritious but for mankinds good*
For know amongst the Northern Indians are
A race of Ants more great, more fit for war
Then these with us, yet qualified as these
With the same graces, the same industries.
These as laborious as the others spare
No Summer travail, Caufin.
but with serious care
Fill Granaries with corn, and in the spring
And Autumn daily Ammunition bring
Against the winter, nor then will they rest,
But digging in the earths bowels, where the best
Silver and gold lie hid, take out the Ore,
And in their Cells the precious mettalls store. Calepin.

And knowing how much damage gold do^s man,
Hoard up, Verb. sormic*
and hide with all the care they can
That strong supporter of uncivil ^arres
Treasons reward, that sinews of the wars;
That implement of pride and lawless pleasures
Ambitions nurse, suckled by golden treasures
What made great Walstein aim to be a King,
But golden Rivers and a silver spring:
The fomenters and hatchers of all evil, Albert. Walstone Duke of Freid land.
Ferdinand. the ^conds General, making a prey of both Imperials and the enemy,
in a short time heaped up infinite Treasures.

The best deserving vassalles of the Devil.
As Caesar's General, Villages and Towns
He plundered; Nobles, Citizens, and Clownes,
And got such sums that nothing could content
His swelling spirits, but regal government.
What has man got by all the Indian pelf,
But many talents to undo himself.
Our England, Ireland, Italy, France, Spain,
Dane, Polak, German, had sufficient gain
Before we understood what Inguts were
But when we had full Carracks of them, there
Stepped in ambition, and deep Policy
Aims at an Europian Monarchy
Encouraged and supported, by that plate
That comes from Peru, Philip of Macedon was w^n^ to say an Ass laden with
gold, would enter any City.
a most easy gate
To enter Kingdoms (did not Philips Ass
At any time through any City pass)
Where the sword could not? then the world combines
And strong against the house of Austria joins.
Why was the Spaniard rich? why did he bring
The gold from India to undo his King?
'Twas Charles the fifts wise word, wars had not been
So long in Europe, had not Christians seen
So much of Spanish gold: Monarkes defray
Out their own stock, Philip 2. Philip 4.
Rebellious soldiers pay
As Philip did, and Philips son has lost
The Netherlanders, yet was at the cost
To loose 'em. And sad war shall never cease
Either by Conquest or a happy Peace,
So long as King and States find any Coin
To maintain war. The Chieftaines shall combine
On either side: here they shall loose, gain there;
This year the States shall win, the King next year.
The pay-masters defraud the Captains, they
Cheat with false musters them; and of their pay
The soldiers, All the Mines of Potasie,
Cannot content the avarice of these three.
Else how should they maintain themselves? how keep
Their wenches, go so gallant, play, drink deep?
Mean while the Nobles, Peasants, Citizens
Fast and do penance for the soldiers sins.
But now a mighty inundation comes
Upon the Hesperean Monark, 'as his sums
Exhausted, every smaller Bird resumes
His propper feathers from the Austrian plumes.
The Pythagorean Scholars dare divine
And Monarchies, and Commonweals consigne
To some fixed space, which ended they decay,
And in their Empires others bear the sway.
Revolve the Chronicles, six vultures flow
On either side of Romulus, to show
Rome should six hundredth years like some new Moon
Be still augmenting, and those ages run;
Six hundredth years Rome daily should go down,
Until at last she lost the Imperial Crown.
Let us come nearer. Meronius Race
Shall rule two hundredth thirty eight years space,
Then Pepin, and his Martialists shall come,
And inthroniz'd accomplish the same sum.
Which made complete, nor past, they are cast down;
And Capet, Valois, Burbon wear the Crown?
Are times expired, are the moments run?
Must the Hesperean Monarchy be done,
Must other Nations in his Empire come,
Give Laws to more then half our Christendom?
Great Richelieu that Cardinal of France, Vindex revolting from Nero is
observed to roll the first stone, which thrust Nero out the Empire. Tacitus.

With Spaines destruction striving to advance
The French affairs, as Vindex roules a stone
Likely to justle Caesar out his Throne.
This haughty Prelate like the Ivy grows
About the Mother Queen, and overthrowes
The Tree which gave him strength. (So many rise
By those of whom they make a sacrifice)
(We daily see so much) preferred by her
To the King, and sworn a Privy Counselor:
As Hannibal, vows an eternal hate
Against the Spaniard, and chief Potentate
Of Germany. Can such souls that should be
The Thrones of Love, Temples of Lenity
Conceive such fires? can Churchmen who should breath
The Oracles of Peace, speak blood and death?
And make our world a new Calvaria; filled
With skuls of Gentry, and Plebeians killed.
Nay one great Monark to supply a room, The King of Swedeland.

Vouchsafes amongst the rest to have his tomb*
Say (Mary) why have thou this firebrand hurld
Amongst us to consume the wretched World? Mary Medises Queen of France, the
raiser of Cardinal Ric helieu, and by him made forsake the Kingdom.

Blood was shed fast enough. Why did thou go,
And fetch a fury from the depths below;
To make the world a shambles? But thy sins
Are well rewarded, as he first begins
With thy confusion: makes thee a Runnagate,
(...) in this Kindome, and that State.
So Agrippine will have her Nero reign,
Though as he swayes his Mother shall be slain.
Imperial Cities are solicited,
The Princes, the Electours, and the Swede,
Jews and Adolph in strong leagues shall join
To share Beme, Austria, Franconie, and Rhine.
The couquering Swede shall think it a point of State
Not to surrender the Palatinate:
(Although he had engaged his Royal word,
Such small fidelity attends the sword.)
What pen can write how many plagues invade
Afflicted Germany? Fire, Famine, Blade,
And pestilence. Ride forty leagues, and you
Shall scarce a Village or a Cottage view.
In The way lie many famished corpse, that are
The bleeding Test^ of an inhumane war.
England reflect and fear 'twill be thy fate
To be as Germany so unfortunate,
Unless the sager Councels of our King
And Parliament a mediation bring;
And make our Albion happy. Why should we
(The same blood, Language, Land) so cruel be
Unto our selves* at last when all is done,
The Son shall grieve his Father is undone:
The Father that his Son is slain; the Mother
Abhor her Son because he killed his Brother*
Saturity of Bread, long ease, much pelf,
Makes wanton England fight against it self.
What France and Spain could not, abundant store
Of gold, has made us miserably poor.
Therefore our Indian Ants in love to man
Treasure up gold, and with what art they can
Keep't from us, that the ready impliments
Of strife removed, we buy not penitence
At too dear rates. Yet all their industry,
Cannot prevent their neighbors treachery.
For when Sol mounted high on Le^'s back,
Or pressing Virgo through the Zodiak
Shall drive his steeds* and with his scorching fire,
Cause the laborious Emmets to retire
Unto their Cells: the false inhabitants
Of Darda steal the treasure of our Ants
Hid in remoter Magazins, but they
Knowing by the sent the thieves have made a prey
Of their concealed wealth, like eager hounds
Pursue the flying Felons, and with wounds
Recover the lost booty, then return
(Their gold amongst them, in much Triumph borne.)
The Conclusion.
WHen the Angels had the ample world survaid,
And here and there in much amazement staid,
" They all agreeing one sole Deity
Could of so rare a work the workman be*
" One added 'twere a Luciferian pride
" What Is wanting, what is superfluous to decide;
" Since he made all whose wisdom best could see,
" What, and how fashioned, things he made, should be.
" Yet since we have a freedom to unfold
" Our sense, had I been Counselor I would
" Have had a voice, more audible and higher
" Then of that Trump, which when a general fire
" Consumes the world, shall summon souls to come
" To judgment; and receive their latest doom.
" This every day and hour should walk the round
" Of The spacious Globe, and to the creatures sound
" The praise of their Creator; with what art
" He made the world, and polisht every part.
" How Heaven and Earth at his appointment stand,
" Supported with a finger of his hand.
" How he the watery Meteors, snowes, hailes, raines
" In The aerie Regions, with a word sustaines;
" Gives limits to the swelling Ocean: Job.
then
" Extol his works amongst the sons of men.
" His orderd providence, supreamer love,
" Even to his enemies: as from above,
" He sent his only Son to pay the price
" Of Adams debt, and be a sacrifice
" For man's transgression; with his precious blood
" Purchased for sinful man, Beatitude.
" So shall the learned and unlearned know,
" Whence, why, and how the streams of graces flow,
" And wakened by this voice, their spirits raise,
" And be the Organs of their Makers praise*
" Having spoke thus a Seraphin replies,
" If this were granted, I would then advise
" The Warlike Drum eternally should cease,
" And the world gently lul'd asleep by Peace.
" The noise of war being like the noise of hell,
" (Where constant horror and confusion dwell.) Job. 7.

" Where Echo Drums, and Guns, and Trumpets sound;
" The harmonious streines of Piety are drowned.
" We all love man, let us at Iehovah's Throne
" Petition, he would all differences atone.
" And Kings and Commonweals to union bring,
" That all may jointly Allelujahs sing
" In Heaven; where are no jarres, no wars, no strife,
" But full fruition of a blessed life.
Errata.
PAge 9. line 16. for deluding ruin, read deluding spirit. Ibid. for Iorams
reign, read Iorams ruin.

FINIS.

