TO THE Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Sir Thomas Pilkington Knight. Lord Mayor of London,
Slingsby Bethell Esquire Samuel Swinock, John Deagle, Richard Freeman, John Jakell,
John Key, and John Wickham, in behalf of themselves, and of the respective
Executors and Administrators of Sir Thomas Player Knight. deceased, Henry Cornish
Esquire deceased, Samuel Shute Esquire deceased, and of Francis Jenks deceased.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioners and the said deceased Persons were in the Year 1682, and
1683, by the Contrivance and Confederacy of Sir John Moor Knight. Sir Dudley North
Knight. Sir Peter Rich Knight. Sir Edmond Saunders Knight. late Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, and some others, prosecuted and convicted for a Riot; the Fact objected
against them being no other, in truth, than the peaceable doing their Duties as
Citizens of London and Englishmen, in Election of Sheriffs for the said City
and County of Middlesex.

That in the Proceedings upon the said pretended Riot, many Notorious
Violations of the Law were committed, and Your Petitioners denied Common
Justice, by the Combination and Confederacy of the Persons last abovenamed,
and others; insomuch that Your Petitioners, and the said deceased Defendants
were, by Judgment of the Court of Kings Bench in Trinity Term 1683,
Unreasonably Fined 4100 l. and were, by Imprisonment, and otherwise, Forced to
pay the same; which Sum of 4100 l. was long since paid into the Exchequer.

That at Your Petitioners Prosecution, the said Judgment was Reversed the last
Parliament as Erroneous, whereby Your Majesty stands by Law liable to make
Restitution of the said Sum of 4100 l. as Your Petitioners are advised.

Now forasmuch as Your Majesty's Generous Undertaking in coming into this
Kingdom, tended only for the Vindicating and Establishing our Religion, Laws
and Liberties, and for Relieving the Oppressed; and for that it is agreeable to
Equity, that such as did the Wrong should make Restitution; And Your
Petitioners hoping the Parliament now Assembled will take the whole Matter into
their Consideration, and pass a Bill for Relief of Your Petitioners out of the
Confederates Estates, and not leave them to be satisfied by Your Majesty.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly beseech Your Majesty, That the said
Confederates, the Prosecutors of Your Petitioners, and the Judges, and Others
concerned therein, may be Excepted in the Act of Grace, intended by Your
Majesty, as to All they did in Relation to the Prosecution and Judgment upon
the pretended Riot above-specified.

And Your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.

