A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT LANCASTER, On SUNDAY, March 19. 1675/6.

BY H. PIGOTT, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, for W. Cademan, at the Popes Head in the Lower
Walk of the New and Middle Exchange in the Strand, 1676.

Imprimater,

April 28th. 1676. G. JANE.

To the HONORABLE Sr. TIMOTHY LITTLETON, Knight. AND VERE BERTY, Esquire Chief
Justices of Assize for the Northern Circuit.
My Lords,
Your Lordship Candor, and the Sleightings of others, have, by a strange
Concurrence, begot and strengthened this Resolution, that this Discourse shall
appear in Public.

Be it as Those say (which yet I hope will never be true) that it is a tottering
Church which I labor to Support; so much more Cause is there, I should set to
my Shoulder, and be full as Kind to my Dear Mother, as that Ludian Prince to
his Father; let the appearance of Her Danger unty mine, and All Her true sons
Tongues to Plead for Her. Though Her foundations will, I doubt not, approve
themselves more firm than to be shaken with One Blast, however Impetuous.

For my self, I am so far a Charitable and Chatholick Christian, as to wish,
with that great Prelate, Who acquits Our Church from Criminal Schism, that Such
terms of Communion might be pitched upon, as might bring the Whole Christian
World into One. And therefore I strike not at the Tenets of any Society,
further than they direct their Style or Designs against Us. And here, if I
show that We strive as much as any, to give Glory to GOD, and to settle on
Earth, Peace and Good Will amongst Men, I hope I make it appear We have found
the Way to the True Church; And therefore Trouble none for Coming thither, or
Continuing there. And withal, that No Kingdom should be Jealous of Such a
CHVRCH within it, that gives to Each, their Due; to God, His; to Caesar, His.
Kings Prerogatives We stickle for, and amongst these, That they have a Right to
be both Fathers and Sons to the CHVRCH: For those of Bishops also, But not to
Exalt 'em Over those who are in most particular manner Gods Anointed. We would
neither lift up the Chair at Canterbury above the Throne at White Hall, putting
KINGS to Sweat for it, that they might procure a Good Archbishop, who would be
their Quiet Neighbor (a passage which our British Antiquities has sufficiently
observed): Nor would we bring in anew, those described in Lysimachus Nicanor,
to Act old Tragedies over again, in any Dress.

And if it be Agreed upon by All, that when All Estates have a Due share in the
Government, there is the Best Crasis, that suits directly with that Christian
Communion and Communication of all Church Members which we Preach; and so will,
upon Good Principles, Restrain Inferior Degrees from Enchroaching upon
Superior, and Superiors from Preying upon them.

This I know to be Your Lordships business. God bless You in your Good
Endeavors: So Prays,

My LORDS, Your Lordships most Obliged, and Faithful Servant, H. PIGOT.

ACTS 17.6. These that have Turned the World Vpside Down, are come Hither also.


A Hard Charge, if it were True! for there is Innovation and Sedition in it,
consequently would be found against the public Peace, and several
Constitutions in that case provided.

What are they then? Hear the Evidence in the next Verse, and you would
conclude 'em of the Busiest sort of Jesuists, or most phanatick 5th.
Monarchy-Men, such a Bussle they are averred to make about King JESUS.

Nor do the Prosecutors know by what Style or Titles to Endite 'em.

But if they must give in their Condition as they can; they are late of
Philippi, c. 16. v. 12. or by the same right of Galatia, Phrygia, Lystra or
Derbe. For such a Circuit had they come. And at the last place they came from,
they had been Whipped, v. 22.

Wonder not if their Accusers give in their names Indefinitely, yea as
Individua vaga, These.

Let us then see if we can sift out their Quality.

If they had their Papers about 'em, wherein one writes to their consorts at
Corinth, 1 Ep. 6. they pretend to be Judges. We have the word used or repeated
once, twice or thrice in every verse for four together.

And we find how they lay their claim, Mat. 19.28. This JESUS had made 'em a
promise to be the Twelve for all the Circuit of Israel.

But look again, Act. 16.10. or 2d. of this, and you find 'em a fort of
Preachers; so that if Judges they were, it should seem they were some
High-bearing Ecclesiastiques: for in that place of the Epistle cited, c. 6.4.
they imagine and aver that the least esteemed among 'em, is fit for a Justice
or Judge.

And as if they had a peak at the Lawyers, fore-warn all in v. 6, 7. that they
come not at 'em.

As if these two jurisdictions had ever enterfeared and emulated each other.
But that the words [Vnjust] v. 1. and [Vnbelievers] v. 6. mollify the matter.

It should seem, if their Proselites could find Lawyers that were not unjust,
or Infidels, they might address to 'em. But let us hear the Prosecutors, they
say these do (...) turn the world upside down, (...) put men into a state of
disorder or Anarchy. Whereas the great design of all the best Moralists, is, to
make men to each other, and much more to themselves, (...) untroubled and
settled.

Now if the Preachers, who should press Peace, Peace, to him that is afar off,
and to him that is near.

If these be (not accidentally) but intentionally, not for Peace, but the
Sword. If these, instead of blessing with their cup of blessing, we have blessed
you in the name of the Lord, are for Cursing, and that bitterly, Meroz because
they come not to help against the Mighty.

And if the Judges, who should see that each has his own, and thereby compel
to a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty: If these become
Evening Wolves, gnawing the bones on the Morrow, while the Prophets as light
and Treacherous persons pollute the Sanctuary, doing Violence to the Law, Zeph.
3.3, 4, 5.

If the one make their Statutes and coercive power, and the other their
Scriptures and Canons Noses of Wax, to ply to perverse purposes: It Is then time
for the Lord to do the Mornings work himself; that is, to judge instead of
them, nay, to judge them themselves first, and so from Morning to Morning, to
bring it to light.

Else, the one not judging the cause, the Cause of the Fatherless, nor the
Right of the Needy, Jer. 5.28. And the other Prophesying falsely, and getting
the rule by that means, 'twill soon come to Jeremies hard question, v. 31. Quid
fiet in no vissimo, what will they do in the end thereof?

But let us hear the Defendants: It Is true, they were ill used at Philippi, c.
16. but they parted fairly, v. 39. And not long to, you shall find a good sober
Recorder pass a fair and candid Character upon 'em, c. 19.37.

Let Us consider therefore the quality of their Accusers, that make this present
outcry; for be they Judges, or be they Preachers, they are Elders, a sort of
Reverend persons, if they abuse not their Calling; and against such an
Accusation should not be heard, nisi testium qualitate prius examinata, unless
the persons be of good note who bring it. If so, there is some good hope our
despised Apostles will be found innocent, for every word increases the hard
Character of the Accusers.

They were Jews, consequently apt to be fierce and insolent.

(...) Soon fired, and moved withal to Envy.

(...) Unbelievers* so Diametrically opposite to the Believers, who at Antioch
were first called Christians.

(...) make a Hubbub, Riot and Rout.

And break the public peace, while they tax others.

And suitable are their Confederates.

(...) Mules for knowledge, as for drudgery, lightheaded, scoffing, mercenary
Fellows.

That disturb the whole City, Invade property in the House of Jason,

Falling furiously upon him and others, when those they seek were not found,

Address to the Multitude, an unruly Beast, and carried with a hurry, and on
the sudden.

Carry on the Accusation in a way as culpable, (...) Noise shall procure
Audience, since they know that they want Justice in their cause.

Against these none are safe. They will first fight for David, and on the first
pet, if Ziglag miscarry, be for Stoning him.

Cry Hosanna to Christ, and in the next breath Crucify him.

Worship these men at Lystra, cap. 14.13 and as lightly down with them.

This to the Green Tree, to David, to Christ, and to Christ's Apostles, what
will they do in the dry?

Alas! The Best of us shall be deemed by 'em to be out of our places, (...)
They are come hither also.

Thus we have opened the Case. Let us now hear the proofs.

If these men deserve not to be answered, yet let the Accused clear themselves
to the World.

Enquire we therefore, 1. If the World be turned thus, or essayed to be so?

2dly. If this were to the World any just cause of Complaint?

3dly. If not, why those, and such like, make it?

4thly. What in such case the Accused are to resolve and do?

To the first of these.

That the World had undergone a great alteration, will appear.

1. From a Continual.

2dly. Consentient outcry or charge.

3dly. From the Defendants own Confession, though they acknowledge no guilt.

First, the clamor of many cries out upon them, and such like, as continual
troublers of all; ever since Cain disrelisht Abel, whether they were Ministers
or Magistrates that were struck at.

Lot (though by Office to Preach Righteousness) is looked upon as too much
assuming, when being scarce took in as a Freeman, he will become a Judge.

Moses and Aaron are flatly told they* take too much upon them, while they lay
the same charge to the Sons of Levi.

Elias is declared to be him that troubles Israel.

The Herds-man Amos, as so pernicious, that the Land cannot bear his words.

Jeremy as weakening Israel and siding with the Caldeans.

Christ as drawing the whole World after him, Joh. 12.9.

The substance of the charge against these in the Text.

Whose Partners were censured before for filling Jerusalem with this Doctrine,
and bringing this man's blood upon the Rulers.

After these the succeeding primitive Christians, for having almost as many
vices (as their Enemies pretended) as the other arrogated virtues.

Our Reformed Churches; for novelty in Her Doctrine, if you will hear the
Romanist; for Antichristianisme in her Discipline, if you will believe the
Schismatic.

2dly. In this charge, consent both Jew and Greek; this Doctrine being to the
one a stumbling block, and foolishness to the other: And as Egypt, Amalec, and
the Children of Lot, all set themselves against Moses, Aaron, and their
Congregation.

So did Gebal, Amalec, and an omnigathrum against the Church succeeding.

Herod and Pontius Pilate (late Enemies to each other) against Christ. Both the
same Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel against the
Apostles at their first appearing, Act. 4.27.

And some of these acknowledge that Bonds and Afflictions awaite them in every
City.

3dly. Themselves could not deny, but rather rejoice in it, that things were
much altered: They say God had so promised.

A new Heaven, and a new Earth; the old Earth being to be shook, and not that
only, but the Heaven also.

Whereas men slept securely, he had sent men with Voices like Trumpets, who
would awake 'em.

Nor might Ephraim vindicate himself upon Manasses, or he on him, or both upon
Juda.

The Lyon-like posture, averred of Juda, as his honor in his Fathers blessing,
being turned to that of the Lamb.

A man must not struggle for his own Cloak, but let the Coat go after it;
impart all his substance to his Fellow Members: And the spirits be so softened,
that a blow taken on one Cheek must exact the other to be turned to the
Striker: And if any despitefully used any of them, those they must heartily
pray for.

Old Sacrifices were Antiquated, and the liberty of Poligamy and Divorce at
pleasure, quite Abolished.

The old aestimat of points of Honor, Interest and Liberty quite altered to
another Standard.

And it to be now accounted a privilege to break Swords into Plow-shares, and
Spears into Pruning Hooks.

That the great Prince of the World, who Ruled in the dark, was by Christ the
light Ejected, Joh. 12.31.

That according to Christ's own Profession, he was become Superior to him in
all three sorts of causes, Joh. 16.8.

1. In Criminal causes in the public Judicature, he did (...) Convince that
Princes world of sin.

2. In the (...) or Equity, that himself should have a glorious reward for his
own grand undertakings, and their hard usage of him.

3. In the (...) or Trial betwixt Party and Party, that Satan was Ejected from
his Dominion, lost his Worship, and the issue would ere long be, that through
Christ's death, he should be destroyed who had the power of death, Heb. 2.14.

That Christ himself yet came not to send Peace upon the Earth, but a Sword;
and to set Relations at variance among themselves.

As this Paul did betwixt the Sadduces and Pharisees, though of the same
Synedrium.

That the Master saw cause to ask, Am I become your Enemy?

And the Apostles to complain to their Master, For thy sake we are killed all
the day long, and are accounted as the offscouring of the World.

And can we now in answer to the second enquiry, find that this was to the
World no just cause of complaint?

To Answer this, we first take it for granted, that where two charge each
other, both cannot be in the right.

Nor are all Troublers of the World, that are styled so, or that do alter the
course of it, viz. when its courses are Evil.

Ahab charge Elias, and Elias retriminates or retorts it upon him.

To determine whither was guilty, we must see who breaks the ORDER and the
UNITY which should have been established in Israel.

For he it is (be it whether it will) who makes in the Church a Schism, in
the Kingdom a Sedition.

If he depress what should be above, or exalt those that should be as the
Sediments below, whether it were persons or principles, he troubles and
turns all up side down.

Now let the Trial have been referred to Jezebels College of Priests, Elias
had been cast: But referr it to the Old Law-book of God, and to the Miracle
that vindicates the Divinity of its principles, then is Elijah justified.

And consequently Ahab the guilty person, destroying Order and Unity in his own
People.

And there by a strange and unhappy folly uncementing and disjoyning the body
with himself, as head should guide.

For as those are not a People, though a many who are not united by consent of
right, and communion of weal, so could those never be the people of God, and
for his sake, pay obedience, who were not united in such principles as God had
imparted.

The parties litigant in the Text, do mutually implead each other as disturbers
of all.

And St. Paul is so averse from the troubles of the Church, that he heartily
wishes they were even cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12.

Now if the Thessalonian Jews could prove against 'em that they changed any
harmless customs, and had no right to make such Alteration,

That through 'em they were in danger of the Romans taking away their place and
Nation;

Or that they did seditiously set up any King but Caesar.

Or destroyed property, as the Silver-Smith clamor against 'em.

Then have they from even Paul's own wish a president to cut off these
disturbers.

But, if upon deliberate advice, as it was with the Beraeans, the Scripture and
their Miracles, and Doctrine, lent light to each other;

And gave to conclude, That these came to amend, not disturb the world.

To settle order and peace, which is the calm of order. Peace betwixt Man and
Man, Man and God, a Manand himself.

If they came but to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God.

If in this, to direct men's actions, not command 'em.

If they made it clear, it was for the peoples embettering, not their own gain.

If as they promised, so they did propose a state of true Beatitude attainable.

Then may the Apostles reply with Elias, it is not we that turn the world
up-side down, but you that trouble it.

This for matter of Right on their side.

Now for matter of fact, they Answer the alleged Objections.

First, If many Accusations, or Accusers render Guilty, the best shall never be
Innocent, because the best have most Enemies in a bad World.

In the new Heaven and Earth was to dwell Righteousness. There should be no
necessity of leaving the one or the other.

The Watchmen awaked 'em for their good. What need of Lions Claws or Men's
Swords, if none should offer wrong in all God's holy Mountain?

Or where the damage, if obscene and cruel Sacrifices were turned to lifting
up clean hands and pure hearts?

Or where would the House-peace be broken, if the Wife were taught to Obey, the
Husband to Love, and both to be content with each other?

The Doctrine they delivered, teaching not to wrong Chastity by so much as an
evil Eye.

Charity by a bad word; Thou Fool or Racha.

Justice by an evil deed or thought, not so much as desiring what was another.

Nor could there be any Bait for Ambition, where the Master ordered, that he
that was the highest should be the Servant of all.

Nor Wars, where Charity taught willingly to impart all for each others needs;
and if the case required, even to be spent, as well as spend for each other,
Life as Goods.

The Devil Ejected was but an Usurper and Rebel to God, whose the World was,
and who had made Christ the Heir of All.

Whose doctrine could set none at Variance from it self, but from bad men's ill
manageing it.

As Paul made the Schism not from any evil principle, but by rubbing a sore
themselves had made, and did but palliate.

If these were Enemies, 'twas but for telling the Truth.

If Persecuted, 'twas but because the God of this World had blinded the Eyes of
Unbelievers, lest the light of the glory of the Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, should shine unto 'em, 2 Cor. 4.4.

And this their innocence considered with the charge, was that which reconciled
those Contradictions, 2 Cor. 6.8.

That they passed through honor and dishonor; through good report and evil
report; esteemed Deceivers, tho true; unknown, yet well known; dying, yet
behold they live; chastened, yet not killed; sorrowful, yet always rejoicing;
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

And if our Church be slandered by both extremes, you see where her comfort
lies, Gal. 4.29. as then the Carnal persecuted those born of the Spirit, so is
it now.

Therefore no tentation has over-taken her, save what is common to men.

She ought not to be worse accounted of for being slandered. Nay, though some
things should deserve a further amendment, much less to be scorned for being
ill entreated.

For as we let pass as a good man, him whose good parts are many, and faults
tolerable; and him for happy, not to whom no Calamity comes, but who will not
by his suffering be moved from a right mind: So may we count that a happy
state, which having flourished, feels no Tragical alteration. Nor where any
Grand improbity remarques a Judgment of God, to be more than what befalls
others.

Our Church flourished in the days of Q. Elizabeth; was by God's own hand
re-erected lately, and might stand as long as any in this transient World; did
we not either sluggishly despond, or slavishly fly with those weak-faith'd
Kings to Assyria or Egypt for aid before we need.

If then the Church give not occasion to the clamor; to the third enquiry, Why
all this Outcry?

The Answer is, beside what has been said of the quality of the Accusers,
Jews, Bigotts, Tumultuous, viz.

1. The corrupt Nature of Man.

2dly. Satan's Malice.

3dly. An inordinate love of liberty in evil, do occasion this slander.

1. Man's corrupt Nature is apt to clamor.

For Good and Evil would, as contraries, expel and subvert each other.

Though Evil cannot be but where Good is; for it is Corruptive of that which is
good; the nature wherein it settleth, being Good, and the Evil only a
Deficiency in the Nature; (which by the way is one good Evidence that the World
was Created of Nothing, and vergeth to ruin; see Aug. de civ. dei l. 12. c. 7.)

And Evil men are become Enemies to God and Good men, not by their Nature, but
Vices, which corrupt the good of Nature in them, and so prejudice themselves,
not him.

Who being Wise, Good, and Pure, Created man in a more Noble and Innocent
Estate than that whereinto he has plunged himself.

(If we be in a state of War, we are born so as we are corrupted, we were not
originally designed such by the Creator.)

And it fares with those that should be repaired, as it does with men of tender
Eyes, sickly Ears, and weak Stomachs, in respect of the Light, Music, and
Delicates, though these be grateful to sound faculties, their disorder will not
abide 'em.

Nor can Superstitious and Licentious men away with the Preaching of Truth and
Righteousness.

When men are Conscious to themselves of their own ill-deserving, they have
ever a suspicious eye upon that which is of another Interest.

The Elders of Bethel, though of the better sort of God's people, trembled at
Samuels comeing, and solicitously enquired, Come thou peaceably? And you may
observe, that even all those who are honored with an Angels appearance to 'em
must yet be cheared with a Noli timere, fear not, or else the message to 'em is
lost for lack of courage to hear it.

And all, because being Conscious of our own guilty, we are still jealous of a
Denunciation.

If so, then by how much men are more wicked, so much the apter will they be to
be troubled; for they are so much more like the Devil than others are, and
therefore jealous lest the Preacher of Righteousness torment 'em before their
time.

These are of opinion, that all Essays to cure 'em are but a trouble,

Laws, Tracts of Philosophy, and even their very Sacrifices, if they had cost
about 'em.

Their Natures were not subdued by Philosophy. And that, the nearer it came to
true Divinity, the more unwelcome was it, and worse used he that vented it, as
was Socrates

And all was naught among 'em, as Hackwell in his excellent Apology makes
manifest.

2ly. If you add the Apostles Argument, Rev. 12.12. The Devil has great wrath,
because his time is short. The Prince of Darkness must needs detest the
Messengers of Light; no wonder if his Agents clamor on 'em, that they turn all
up-side down.

He is called in the New Testament, the Devil, which title I meet not within
the Old Testament. His time to rant in bad Language, was, when he felt his
Kingdom totter.

3dly. Add the third Reason as more particular. Saravia does prudently begin
his tract of the Right to Command, and of Christian Obedience; showing, that
love of liberty is that which turns all up-side down,

Being in very deed but the proud stubbornness of an untamed mind, arising from
the high value which we set upon our selves; by which our first Parents fell
off from God, and in with Satan, when they desired to know what he hid, and to
do what he had forbidden.

It makes us resemble Brutes, of which the worst will not be tamed, the rest
become useful:

So Men, the more Brutish they are, the harder are they to be reclaimed by
doctrine, or by discipline.

And while they would serve themselves of and by all other men and living
things, yea, by the Elements and influences of the Heavens: Nay, while the very
Angels of God are Ministering Spirits, and the Son of God in shape of a Servant,
not comeing to be administered unto, but to serve; not to do his own will, but
the will of him that sent him: These alone would be free, who have most
extravagant passions, and so least fit to be left at liberty.

Let the Magistrate urge Law and Equity, as did Moses, Numb. 16.13. They twit
him as did the Princes of the Congregation, that he makes himself altogether a
Prince over them. But if the Divine urge Religion, he is either snapt up as a
Babbler, a setter forth of new Gods, or he speaks Treason.

Or at least to bring him into the peoples hate; this is he that spoils their
plenty by denying the old worship of the Queen of Heaven, Jer. 44.17, 18.

This mention of the Princes faulting against Moses, as these sordid ones in
the Text against the Apostles, does mind me of the consent of two excellent men
upon this subject.

That Sedition arises both from Great plenty, and Great want; the one
provoking by haughtiness, the other by spleen.

That the one is apt to Out rages, the other to petty Mischiefs. For Greatness
delights to show it self by effects of power and baseness to help it self with
shifts of Malice.

And both apt to affront their Guides. Indeed remarque our Prophets and
Apostles, and you shall find 'em vexed by the Great Women, Act. 13.50. whether
Devout, or whether those Careless ones that are at ease, as well as by the
Rabble in the Text.

And why should we think much, if we receive alike opposition? whilst (to urge
them forwards) we have some Jesuitical Adversaries, who value each their parts
and skill as competent to govern a whole Kingdom:

And others kept so low, as by a bare Monastique allowance, or Contribution
from private Purses.

If these share not only our Livings in imagination and hope, but the Kingdom
also, as that which they account the Pope their Masters, vere horius
deliciarum? for thither those think it should Revert, while others expect it as
a reward for their zeal, as it was in the late times of Sequestration.

Add to these Arguments the natural Sloth of the World, the tediousness of any
good which has long continued. How a flighting humor is still maintained
against those who outvie in power them that set a great value on themselves.

As did he who acknowledged the Objections against the unreformed Churches
good, but would not abide that one poor Monk should prevail in urging 'em.

All will satisfy that

1. The best designers are often worst spoken of.

2. And the greatest clamor is from them who have least cause to make it, or
receive least hurt.

We may observe the same in reference to those who administer civil affairs, as
well as to Ecclesiastiques.

Let the Rabble be up, and the Tax-gatherer Adoniram is sure to be stoned.

And for all Samuels Integrity, they will grow weary of his Government.

If in the 4th. of Hosh. 4. you find 'em striving with the Priest, look forward
but to 7.7. and they devour their Judges.

Nay this unruly Beast [the Many] is always heady and humorous.

Please 'em awhile, and what- ever the King did pleased 'em, 2 Samuel 3.36.

Raise their pet, and the time of the Greatest prosperity and plenty that ever
was is carped at. Make our heavy burden lighter, 1 King. 12.3.

Let 'em but be in tolerable fear of Tobia and Sanballat, and Nebemia may pluck
'em by the beard.

Let 'em grow half desperate, and the King himself [Zedekiah] can have nothing
after him.

Let Moses show 'em the Mount on Fire, then what ever thou say we will do.

Let him be absent awhile, and the fear over-blown, and Aaron must please 'em
with a Calf, or farewell his Priesthood.

Hear their Language to the Magistrate, the word Judge they like not; it is at
their Tongues end when they are most Angry, who made thee a Ruler or a Judge.
This Fellow came to sojourn, and will needs be a Judge.

Leave it to the Jail, or to him that holds by a force, or has broke the
close, and they would save you a labor of sitting.

Have Charity for us if Schismatique, Papist, or Atheist envy our promotions or
possessions.

Let Moses and Aaron be kind to each other, for there will never want enough to
murmur against 'em both.

The Tabernacle was pitched at Shilo, where Joshua dwelt; and the Temple founded
on one of the two tops of Sion, where the Kings House was upon the other, that
they might be ready to exchange protection and direction.

Samuel entertained Saul with an Emblematique Banquet; the Shoulder the Priests
Portion; intimating he was to have a share in Church-cares. And the very
Ronanists at a Kings Coronation mind him, quod per hanc ministerij nostri te
esse participem non ignores.

King Jehosaphat would that his Judges should know that they judged not for
man, but for the Lord.

And the design why you begin Assizes with a Sermon, and why we Preach, is that
all may know that it is from God, that you exercise a coercive power (where we
persuade but) to keep Church and State in honor and safety, and to compel to
good Morality those who else would turn all up-side down, whilst yet they
clamor upon us or you*

And this consideration brings us to answer the last enquiry, what shall be
resolved on, or done against this clamor,

We Resolve all this Advice into three short Lessons.

1. Learn Consistency of Spirit. Despond not for the noise. Good men and Great
are most abused.

An Eliab will berate a David, who will dare to do what he dares not to think
of.

You have heard that Calumny stops not at the Priest, it will reach the
Magistrate, yea, the King. Been agere and male audire Regium est. If he will
not Vnyoak the Sons of Belial, that they may do what is good in their own eyes,
he shall be censured as a trouble to 'em.

Yet as none should cease to govern, because some count it a Yoke:

So should they not make their rule precavious by truckling to unworthy terms,
whereby to confirm themfelves.

It Is indeed to be expected that Riotous persons disrelish those that run not
with them to excess; as for them that love not Truth to dislike those that
bring it to light.

But if these be the causes be why they quarrel at us, they do us that
advantage that we hereby become more like to our Great Master.

2dly. Nay learn to go on more vigorously. The more the World rages, and makes
a murmur, the greater need is there of a Reformation of it.

Those parts are soar indeed, which cause the Patient to cry out if they be but
touched. And that Physician were but an ill Friend, who would give over all
Essays to Cure, because of those blasts of breath.

3dly. Labor still to give no just cause of clamor against us.

If our principles be good, there is a good hope all will be well.

Though yet for lack of doing well, we may damn our selves while we save
others, as Brands snatched out of the Fire.

Some Divines do observe that there never yet fell Storm upon the Church, the
Vapors whereof were not first noted to arise from coldness of affection, and
backwardness in duties of Service toward God.

If so there is a probability for every Mincah that is disgorged upon us; and
if there be no smoke of a hard Character, but where there is some fire of ill
deserving, we may thank our selves if our Reputation be incommodated. The
Apostles lived innocently.

And for Doctrine, they but vindicated old Truths wrapped up in the Scriptures,
and darkened by the bad glosses of Jewish Doctors. And if any discovery was new,
their Miracles attested the Truth of the Revelation.

If you stick to your old King Edwards Laws, Magna Charta, several other good
Statutes, and the common Law:

We to our one Canon, two Testaments, three Creeds, the four first Councels,
and five first Centuries, as fixing the rule of our Religion, we satisfy our
selves, and those guided by us, and stop the mouth of those who tell us of
turning all up-side down.

we may encourage the people to their (...), if any would draw 'em off.

Soft a little (may they say) though you call it Heresy, or others Rags of
Popery, we see yet no cause but why we may continue in this way to worship the
God of our Fathers.

If any go about to force us off, are not they as obnoxious to the Rigor of
Justice, as those who do but nibble at our goods by petty Larceny or Felony?

In such a case our Apostle spoke of in the Text, though the most charitable
man alive wishes they were cut off (as we pre-alledged it.) He a Clergyman
could only wish it. Joshua goes further than a wish, and tells such plainly, c.
7.25. Why have thou troubled us, the Lord shall trouble thee; and verifies his
word by proceeding to Execution after Judgment.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle: Page 2. line 1. read Lydian.

In the Book: Page 3. read (...), p. 9. r. our Reformed Church; p. 12. r. (...)
p. 13. r. recriminates, line 11. r. whether; p. 14. l. r. which; p. 15. l. 6.
r. Smiths; p. 20. l. 3. instead of viz. a Comma after short, as indeed in many
places more, it is mis-pointed, the fault being perhaps the Authors, who never
Transcribed it, because not designed for the Press, when writ.

Sermons lately Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the
New-Exchange in the Strand.
A Warning-piece for the Unruly; in two Visitation-Sermons, Preached before the
Archbishop of YORK, by Seth Bushel, D. D.

The great Efficacy and necessity of good Examples, especially in the Clergy;
in a Visitation-Sermon Preached at Guilford, by Thomas Duncumb, D. D.

A Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall, October. 17. 1675. by Miles
Barn, Fellow at St. Peter's in Cambridge, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.


