AN IMPARTIAL INQUIRY INTO THE Nature of Sin.

In which are evidently Proved Its POSITIVE ENTITY or BEING, The true Original
of its Existence; The Essential Parts of its Composition,

By Reason, Authority, Divine, Humane, Ancient, Modern, -- Roman. Reformed.


The Adversaries Confessions and Contradictions; The Judgment of Experience
and Common sense;


Partly Extorted by Mr. Hickman's challenge, partly by the Influence which his
Error has had on the Lives of many, (especially on the Practice of our last
and worst Times,) But chiefly intended as an Amulet to prevent the like
mischiefs in time to come.

To which is added An Appendix; in vindication of Doctor HAMMOND; with the
concurrencey of Doctor SANDERSON; The Oxford Visitors impleaded; The Supreme
Authority asserted; together with diverse other Subjects, whose Heads are
gathered in the Contents.

After all A Postscript concerning some dealings of Mr. BAXTER.

By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for T. Garthwait, at the little North-door of Saint
Paul's Church, 1660.

To my Reverend Friend Mr. I. B. at his lodging in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
Sir,
THe Face of Things in our British World, which the giddy Phaetons of the Times
had lately confounded into a Chaos, does not only seem so strangely, but so
miraculously altered, since the Book I now send you was first engaged in the
Press; that had not the Stationer and the Printer put it wholly out of my
power, (before your Letter of good news was so much as written) I had laid my
Sponge upon several passages and expressions, which however they are of eternal
verity, were yet much fitter when they were Penned, than now they are come into
the Light. For then I took it to be a Time, wherein 'twas proper to engage in a
Defensive war. But now I hope it is a season, wherein the Lamb shall lie down
by the Wolf in peace, and the once-affrighted Kid commend the neighborhood of
the Leopard. Then I thought it was a Time, Isa, 11.^*
in which the enemies of God, and of his Anointed, (both King, and Church,)
were to be conquered into obedience by dint of Argument and discourse. But now
I hope the Time is coming, in which the enemies I speak of will face about, and
turn Friends. Or if they are backward to reconcilement, and will not forgive us
for having suffered, as fearing our Sufferings have been greater than they think
we are able to forgive; I think our noblest way will be, to confute their fears
with our moderation; and so to pull them in to us by cords of Love.

I know there are certain Ciniflones, who blow the Coals of Dissension with
greatest Fierceness, when they see them most likely to be extinguished. They
represent the suffering Party as men that breath nothing but vengeance, and
therefore not to be trusted with old Enjoyments, but still to continue the
suffering Party; And so because they have been injured for some years past, to
be Incapable of Justice for time to come. But if there are here and there a
few, who lose the benefit of their sufferings by their Impatience, as I am not
able to excuse them, and think them punished with their sin; so must I hold
those other men (the envious Cole-Blowers I spoke of) to be more incapable of
excuse, in that they charge on so many thousands the indiscretion perhaps of
Twenty or Thirty persons, who peradventure do only SAY that they are some of
the Kings Party. For the Rule to measure His Party by, must be the Nature of
their affections; which so far as they are differing from what they are known
to be in Him, so far themselves must be known to be none of His. And His are
Fatherly affections, as we may judge by his choice to lose the Benefit of his
Right for so long a Time, rather than force his way to it by foreign Help.

And truly (Sir,) I can say it as a very great Truth, That as when our David
was even hunted, and forced to fly into the 2 Samuel 15., 23, 28.
Wilderness, it seemed a kind of Disloyalty for us to prosper, (at least so
far, as to dwell a^ Home,) And all our comfort was even this, that we were not
guilty of being safe, (at a time when it was difficult to be safe and Innocent,
both at once; so now that we hope he is returning to his Jerusalem in peace,
and his people with joy to their ancient Loyalty and Allegiance, I am not able
even to wish, much less to use my least endeavor, that our Enemies may suffer
as heavy things as they Inflicted. I wish them deprived of nothing else, but
what will kill them if they retain it. I wish them Health, and prosperity, and
perfect Liberty of conscience, as well as of person, and of purse. But (more
then these) I wish them Loyalty from this time forward; I wish them unanimity
and uniformity in Religion; I wish them the Grace of Restitution to every
person whom they wronged; I do not wish with Saint 1 Cor. 5.5.
Paul they may be delivered up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; but
that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And so I hope I
may boldly say, I wish them no worse than I wish my self. For I earnestly wish,
and make it my prayer to God Almighty, that I never may prosper in any ill
course, either by error of Judgment, or guilt of Practice. More than this (I
thank God) I do not wish to my greatest enemies, and less I cannot wish to my
dearest Friends. I wish our David may prove the Center, for our Affections to
meet and concentre in, from the most opposite points of the whole
circumference. Whatever our Distances may have been, (and still may be as to
some opinions,) I wish at last we may unite, and be one in him; And so Remember
how we agree in Love and Loyalty to our Sovereign, as to forget how we differ
in other things. All the Revenge that I desire, is that of Joseph toward his
Brethren; who* though they had stripped him of his clothes, and cast him
cruelly into the pit, and cheaply sold him to the Ishmaelites, (Genesis 37.) yet
he requited them no worse then with food and raiment. Nay casting his Arms
about their necks, he suffered his love to run out into tears and kisses. (Genesis
45.) If we look backward, I must profess, I have been many times engaged in
such pen-combats as now I publish. But looking forward I suppose, that I shall
run with the Foremost to Love and union.

Some may otherwise conjecture, by what is said in my Appendix, at such a Time.
But it is for want of Consideration, that my whole performance was both extorted
by the Adversary, and dispatched by my self, and also committed unto the Press,
before I could hear of any Endeavors to reconcile the Pens of dissenting
Brethren, or but to make a cessation of such like Arms. Sure I am, I am as
ready as any one of my Brethren, to sacrifice any thing to Peace, excepting
righteousness, and truth, the love of God, and his glory. I shall be willingly
bound up from ever speaking, or writing, or enjoying any place in the Church of
God, (if my Superiors can but imagine how that maytend to the public good)
rather than lay the least Block in the way of unity; which now is attempting a
return to such a Babel as ours has been.

But (besides) my contention will be believed to have been such, as mine
Adversary in time will applaud me for, when he shall find my Rudest twitches
were but to snatch him from a Praecipice. As soon as Mr. Hickman shall be
convinced, that though for a sinner to hate God, and to murder men, are as
positive entities, as any actions to be imagined, yet they cannot but be
reckoned among the worst sorts of sins, and therefore cannot (without impiety)
be said to be any of God's creatures, or God himself, (which yet Mr. Hickman
has often taught,) I say as soon as he shall discern, not only how dangerous
and sinful, but how irrational and senseless his error is; he will as heartily
thank me even for this very Book, as I would thank that man who should pluck a
thorn out of my eye. Besides that my aim in what I have written, has been the
same with that of the most moderate Doctor Sanderson; For (to express it in See
his Ex. cellent long Preface before the second Edition of his first Se^mons S.
24.
his words) I have not written against the moderate, but only the
Rigid-Scotized-thorow-paced Presbyterians. Of them Mr. Hickman can be but one.
And even with him I am as ready to be upon just as good Terms, as with my
neighbor Mr. Barlee I long have been. Let him only forbear to wound me in
the Apple of my eye, nay in the tenderest part of my very soul, by dishonouring
God, and his Anointed, (long before whose restoration, (which is but hoped
whilst ^ am writing,) I had sent my Vindication of his Supremacy to the Press,
and which had certainly been as public, as now it is, though the Republicans
had prosper'd in their Cariere:) Let him, I say, but do that, and my work is
done. If I shall ever again appear, in the behalf of any one of the five
controverted points, it will be likelyest to be in Latin (as being the
Scholars Mother Tongue) and only in order to reconcilement.

Now that the God of peace and unity will make us at unity and peace within our
selves, enlightening our heads with that knowledge which is the mother of
humility, and inflaming our hearts with that zeal which is according to such a
knowledge, and thereby making up our breaches as well of judgment as of
charity, (or at least of charity, if not of judgment,) that we may all be held
together by the bond of unity in the truth; shall be as heartily the endeavor,
as it is the frequent and fervent prayer, of

Your meanest Brother and Servant in our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. THOMAS
PIERCE.
Brington, May 2. 1660.
A PARAENETICAL PREFACE Showing the purpose of the Author, with the Necessity
of the Work; Representing its usefulness in all Times, but more especially in
these; with some Praeparatory Advertisements, making the whole the more
manageable to the less Intelligent of the people.
Christian Reader,
IF thou shall ask in curiosity, why I happen to come so late to this Discharge
of my Engagement, (to which I stood by my Promise so long obliged;) Know that
my several Praeengagements with several Books of Mr. Baxter, together with
several interventions both of sickness, and journies, and other Impediments
unavoidable, do conspire to give thee the Reason of it. For these did keep me
from the thought of what I have brought to a conclusion, till somewhat after
the beginning of this last Winter. Besides that at the end of my
Autocatacrisis, (which I conceive more useful then all my Controversies
besides, and upon which I bestowed the greatest labor, that it might put a
full end to the whole Dispute) I made a promise to my Readers of what I had
purposed within my self, that if I returned to any Dispute in any kind
whatsoever, as it would fall out Cross to my Inclinations, so I resolved to do
it only at times of Leisure. That whilst my hours could be spent in my chief
employment, I might not lose too many of them in my least necessary Defenses.
For though I remember I am a Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. and chapter 34.3, 10*
Shepherd, and bound as well to defend, as to feed the Sheep; yet it cannot but
be (to me) an unpleasant Game, to tire my self in the hunting of Wolves and
Foxes.

But after the Reason of my lateness, I am to render another Reason, why I
betook my self at last to the present service. I saw the flock was endangered
by several Vermin, and partly driven out of the Fold too; Nay the great
Master-shepherd was himself assaulted by their Inventions, by whom he was
slanderously reported to be the principal cause of their going astray. See the
pages and lines cited, from Zuinglius, Calvin Barrhaeus, and D. Twisse, with
the Editions of their Books, in my first chapter of this T^eatise, Sect. 2. p. 3.4
Some I found teaching, (and that (...) in broadest Terms, That God is the
Author of Injustice, the Author of Adultery, the Author of the evil of sin, not
only the Author of the sinful work it self, but of the evil intention too;
(In a word) The Author of all th^se things, which we affirm to come to pass by
his mere permission, (and not at all by his appointment.) Deus homines ad suas
pravas Actiones incitat, seducit, jubet, indurat, trahit, deceptiones immittit,
and quae peccat^^ gravia sunt efficit. Pet. Vermil. Mart. Florent. (edit*
Tigur. 1561.) in Jud. c. 3. v. 9.10. and 11. fol. 56. page 1. lin. 7. etc.
Others I caught in the Act of teaching, That God does incite, or stir men up
to wicked actions, that He seduceth, commands, does make obdurate, draws,
sends in deceipts, and effects those things which are grievous sins. Of which I
now give an Instance from Peter Martyr in my Margin, because he was the most
famous and learned Calvinist of Florence. In so much that Doctor Whitaker did
most ingenuously confess (when he* answered Campian) that Si Calvinus aut
Martyr, aut quisquam nostrum affirmet, Deum* esse Authorem and Causam peccati,
non repugno quin simus omnes horrendae Blasphemia scelerisque rei. Whitak. in
Respons. sua ad octavam Rationem Campiani, (edit. Genev. 1610.) in Tom. 1.
operum suorum, page 33. col. lin. 34. etc.
if Calvin, or Peter Martyr, or any other of that Party, affirms God to be the
Author and cause of sin, they are all of them guil^y of the most horrid
Blasphemy and wickedness. And yet when the Florentine I spoke of had put the
Question, (in the page preceding his above cited words,) An Deus causa sit
peccati? whether God be the cause of sin? he presently called it, Quaestionem
non dissimulandam, and professedly held it in the affirmative* A third sort I
found there were who taught, That Mr. Archer^ Comfort for Believers. p. 36, 37.
God is the Author not of those actions alone, in and with which Sin is, but of
the very pravity, Ataxie, Anomie, Irregularitie, and sinfulness it self which
is in them; yea that God has more hand in men's sinfulness, then they
themselves.] These were publicly and in Print, the very words of Master
Arch^r, a Presbyterian Minister of London in Lombard street; who went over into
Holland with Thomas Goodwin, (Oliver Cromwell's Ghostly Father, and the present
usurper of the Presidentship in Magdalen College,) by which Goodwin he was
commended for Mr. Thom. Goodwin's Apologetical Narration, subscribed by Phil.
Nigh, Will. Bridge, Jer. Burrows, and Sidrach Simpson* Licensed by Charles Herle
(printed by R. Dawlman. 1643.) p. 22.
as precious a man as this earth bears any. In Holland he was Pastor of the
Church of Arnheim, as we are told by Mr. Mr, Edwards his Antapologia (edit.
1646. page 160.
Edwards, his loving Friend too. His book he was pleased to Entitle, [ Comfort
for Believers in their Sins and Sufferings,] for fear Believers should be
afflicted with the sinfulness of their sins, which God himself is the Author
of, and more the Author (in his opinion) than they can be. Yet his Book with
this Doctrine was even printed by Authority, cum Privilegio, (when
Presbyterianism was up) with the License and approbation of old Mr. Downham,
who was empowered to such things by the-world-knows-whom. It was the Doctrine of
Mr. Knox, the great Introducer of Presbyterianism in Scotland) That the wicked
are not only left by Gods suffering, but See him cited by Dr. Heylin in his
Hist. Quinquart. part. 3. chapter 16. p. 5.
compelled to sin by his power. p. 317. And again he says, we do not only
behold and know God to be the Principal cause of all things, but also the
Author appointing all things. p. 22. It is also taught in Mr, Edwards his
Antapologia (edit. 1646. page 160.
another Treatise, (at first written in French, but after published in English)
That by virtue of Gods will, all things were made, yea even those things which
are A Brief Declaration of the Table of praedestinati. on. p. 15. ibid. p. 6.
evil and execrable p. 15. Another takes upon him to Ibid. p. 6.
prove, That all evil springs out of God's Ordinance. And his Book is
Entitled [ Against a Privy Papist] as 'twere on purpose to betray the
Protestant Name into Disgrace. But now at last Mr. Hickman outgoes them All, if
they all are but capable to be outgon. For the most execrable and heinous of
all the sins to be imagined, is the Divel's hating Almighty God. Which though
Mr. Hickman does confess to be the worst of all actions, See the words in his
Book of the 2. Edition (which Edition) I use in all I cite from this Author) p.
93. lin. penult. ult.
and again essentially and intrinsecally evil, (p. 94. lin. 2.) evil ex genere
and ob^ecto, (ibid. lin. 9.) and such as no kind of Circumstance can ever make
lawful (ib. lin. 17.) yet he grossly calls it The work of God, as all other
positive things are. (p. 96. lin. 8.) will thou know (good Reader) what may
lead him to such a Blasphemy? Thou must know his principle is this Verbatim, [
It belongs to the universality of the FIRST CAUSE to PRODUCE not only EVERY
REAL BEING, but also the positive MODIFICATIONS of Beings. (95. l. ult. and p.
96. lin. 1.) And this he gives for the very Reason, why The Action of hating
God (spoken of just now) is the work of God.

Now that this is a Principle (or a Doctrine) whose every consequence is a
crime, I cannot better convince the Calvinists, than by the confession of Mr.
Calvin. For when the very same Doctrine, which I suspect to have been brewed by
the Carpocratians, was freshly broached by the Libertines, (breaking in, with
Presbytery, to help disgrace our Reformation, just as the Gnostics to the
discredit of Christianity it self,) Master Calvin called it Joh. Calvini
Tractatus Theologici etc. (edit, Genev. 1612.) in Libertinos. c. 4. p. 436.
col. 3 lin. 50. and ib^ p. 437. col. 1. lin. 14.
An Execrable Blasphemy; not only once, but again and again too. And what was
that which he declaimed so much against in that style? was it that God was said
plainly to be the Author of sin? no such matter. It was only for saying it in
aequivalence. It was for saying another thing, from whence God might be
inferred to be the Author of sin. It was only for saying, God works all
things. This was called by Mr. Calvin, An Execrable Blasphemy. And his Reason
for it is very observable. For (says he) Ex hoc Articulo, [Deum sc. omnia
operari] Tria admodum horrida consequi, quorum primum hoc est. nullum inter
Deum et Diabolum discrimen fore. ib. c. 13. p. 445. col. 2. lin. 63.
from this Article, [God works all things] Three things do follow extremely
frightfull. First that there will not be any Difference between God and the
Devil; Ipsum a se abnegari oportet, and in Di^bolum tr^nsmutari. ibid. cap. 14.
page 447. col. 2. lin. 42.
Next, that God must deny himself; Thirdly, that God must be transmuted into
the Devil.] A greater Authority than Calvin's no man living can produce against
his followers of the Presbytery (some few Episcopal Anti-remonstrants being
unjustly called Calvinists, there being a wide gulf fixed between them and
Calvin,) And I have cited him so exactly (as few or no Writers are wont to do)
that if an enemy will not believe me, he may consult Mr. Calvin with
expedition, and make his own eyes bear witness for me.

Next considering with my self, how that a lesser Blasphemy than This, is
called Railing against the Lord, (2. Chron. 32.17.) and that a Doctrine less
divelish, is broadly said by the Apostle to be the doctrine of Devils, (1 Timothy
4* 1^) That it is God blessed for ever, against whom the children of
transgression do open a wide mouth, and draw out the Tongue, (Isa. 57.4.) the
tongue which reaches unto the heavens, (Psalm. 73.9.) and whose talking is
against the most high, (v. 8.). That our common enemies of Rome do object these
things to the Reformation, as if (forsooth,) they were our Protestant and
common sins; Nay that the Lutherans themselves will rather return unto the
Papists from whom they rationally parted, than live in communion with the
Calvinians, for this one Reason, because the Calvinians seem to worship another
God, to wit, a God who is the Author and cause of sin; I say considering all
this both with the causes and the eff^cts, I confess my heart waxt hot within
me, and though for a Time I kept silence, yea even from good words, yet (as the
Psalmist goes on,) it was pain and grief to me. I often called to mind that
pertinent saying of Saint Peter, (1 Epist. c. 4. v. 14.) and then concluded
within my self, If God on their part is evil spoken of, it is the fitter that on
ours he should be glorified. If all his works are commanded to speak well of
him, in all plac^s of his Dominion, (Psalm. 103.22.) I could not have answered
it to my self, should I still have been guilty of keeping silence; much less to
Him could I have had what to say, under whom I am entrusted, and that with
souls. Since he describes a good Shepherd, by his readiness to lay down his
life for the sheep, I durst not be such a Lasche, and unfaithful servant, as
not to offer up my oil, or shed a little of my Ink, where I should think my
dearest blood were too cheap a sacrifice.

Finding therefore that Doctrine, which is so execrable and heinous as has
been showed, sucked in greedily by the Ranters in these our days, breaking in
upon the Church (which is Gods Enclosure as well as Spouse) even at that very
gap, which some had purposely made to cast out Bishops, and obedience, and
whatsoever was Christian, besides the name; I also considered who they were,
who took upon them the Tapsters office; and drawing out the very dreggs of this
deadly wine, boldly gave it instead of drink to the giddy people. Mr. Hickman
seemed to be the boldest and the busiest officer of them all; and the more
popular he was thought, I thought him the fitter to be encountered. For if his
Favorers come to think, That God is the cause and the producer of every real
being (not excepting the cursing or hating God) They have nothing to defend
them from being Libertines. Or if they come to be persuaded that sin has no
real being (but is a nonentity, that is, a nothing) they must needs be
Carneadists, for ought I am able to apprehend. And when they perfectly are
either, (to wit Carneadists or Libertines,) I know not what can secure them
from turning Atheists. It was observed by Peucerus (in his Epistle before his
Chronicon) that there are three sins especially which have a tendency to the
changing of States and Empires; (...), (...). Impiety, Injustice, unbridled
Lust. The Church is ruined by the first, the secular policy by the second, and
private families by the third. Each of these must needs reign when thought to
have nothing of Reality, or (if it has) to be God's own offspring. The late
Cromwellians and the Phanaticks were clearly transported by the latter. For
having Wisd. 2.11.
called their strength the Law of Justice, they constantly ascribed to God's
decree, and appointment, and Reader, Compare the non-se^^e with the impiety of
the expression, and mark how little they understand, what the word pr^vidence
does import.
All working providence, whatsoever vile practice they found they were able to
bring about. Their D^clarations and Petitions, their Remonstrances and news
Books, their Congratulations and Addresses, both to the old and young Tyrant,
did ever run in Mr. Hickman's and Hobbs his strain. Regicide, and Sacrilege,
and all manner of Usurpations, (being not only Real, but positive entities)
were still ascribed to the working and will of Go^.

But Mr. Hickman's true opinion must not be judged of by his word^, unless his
opinion (like his words) does often vary and shift it self to the two extreme
parts of his contradictions. Whether it is really his opinion, that that is no
sin, which is intrinsecally p. 93, and 94.
evil, because he says it is good and the p. 96.
work of good; or else that that is a sin which is God's own work, because he
says it is an p 93.94.
action, and has a p. 96.
positive being; whither it is really his opinion, That for Ammon to ravish his
sister Tamar could not possibly be a sin, because an action; 2 Samuel 13.
or that a hatred of God himself cannot possibly be a sin, because a Quality;
we can but guess by his plainest words, though the Searcher of hearts does know
his meaning. For one while he seeks to persuade his Readers, that sin is
nothing, but a privation; And he does it by producing such figurative
expressions from certain Authors, as by which it is said, that sin is p. 77.
nothing. (As 'twere on purpose to let us know what he means by a privation.)
Another while he says, that p. 96.
all things positive are good and from God, and yet that the p. 93, 94.
action of hating God is intrin^ecally evil, which notwithstanding he
confesses to be a p. 96.
positive thing. Another while he says, That the first p. 103.
sin of the Angels was a p. 103.
proud desire to be equal with God. Where sin is praedicated in recto of proud
desire; which proud desire he will not deny to be a Quality, and so to have
both a Real and a positive Being. And yet another while he says, That
whatsoever has a p. 95.
real (he does not say only a positive) being, God himself does p. 95.
produce, as the first cause of it. So that one of these two must needs be
really his opinion, (but which of the two I leave him to say) either that sin
is Gods work; and that God produced in the Angels their proud desire; Or else
that sin has no real being, but that conscience and sin are Ecclesiastical
words. By the first, he is a Libertine, by the second, a Carneadist. And
whether he who is either will not laugh at the Psalmist (in his heart at least,
or in his sleeve) for believing such a thing as a Reward for the Righteous, I
shall leave it to be judged by the considering Reader.

What should move him to assert the most contradictory things, as that sin is
something, and nothing; an action, and no action; Not a quality, yet a quality;
That the hating of God is a sin, and no sin; That God is the cause, and the
Creator, yet not the Author of every act, And yet the Author of every act which
is but positive or real; I am not able to imagine; unless he writes as he is
moved by the present necessity of his affairs, or is carried away with the
Jesuits Doctrine of probability, concerning which I shall speak in my
consideration of Mr. Baxter.

Some praeparations, for the less Intelligent of the People.
Now to fit the plainest Reader for the perusal of my Book, and to make the
positivity of the very worst sins become visible to the blind, very easy to
the unlearned, and to the obstinate, undeniable* I will supply him ( in
Antecessum) with several Hints and Mem^nto's of several forms and ways of
arguing, upon which he may enlarge as occasion serves. I. It is the property of
Qualities (Quarto modo, and so of nothing but qualities) to denominate their
subjects either like or unlike. And so those sins must needs be qualities,
which will be granted to give such a denomination II. The positive belief (in
sensu composito) that there is no God, must needs be granted (even by all) to
be a positive entity or being, But it is so wholly a sin, as that it is nothing
but a sin, to have a positive belief that there is no God; Therefore that which
is so a sin as to be nothing but a sin, must needs be granted (even by all) to
be a positive entity or being. III. Sin properly so called is a transgression
of the L^w. And so is the act of the hating of God, which yet is granted to
have a positive being. IV. A simple conversion is to be made betwixt sin, and
any action against a negative precept; for every such action must be a sin, and
every such sin must be an action. V. If something positive may be a sin, then
may a sin be something positive; but something positive may be a sin, witness
envy, pride, lust, malice. VI. To hate God is an Action, and therefore
po^sitively something. But it is a sin to hate God. Ergo. VII. God forbid's in
the Decalogue those positive acts, [coveting, stealing, bearing false witness;]
and those are sins which God forbids in the Decalogue; therefore those positive
acts are sins. VIII. In this true proposition, [It is a sin to hate God] sin is
predicated directly of a positive action; therefore that action is a species of
sin. IX. There is a numerical identity or sameness betwixt a demonstrative and
a determinate Individual; as betwixt this man, and Mr. Hickman, when pointed
out with a finger. Such an Identity there is betwixt this sin, and the Devils
hating of God, when it is the thing so pointed out. X. That very phrase, [ an
act of sin] implies sin to be a compound, which has an act, as well as an
obliqui^y. So that if sin is sinfulness, (which is the pleasure of Mr.
Hickman,) then sinfulness is a compound, and has an act. XI. The very word
peccare, to sin, imports an action, so does malefacere, to do wickedly, as much
as benefacere, to do well. And therefore this is the style of the holy
Scriptures, Ioh. 5.
They that have done evil, shall have a resurrection to damnation, and Romans 2.6.
God will render to every man according to his Deeds. V^rs. 9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil. XII. It Is false
in extremity, and nonsense in the worst degree, because it implies a
contradiction, to say the sin is the mere repugnance of the act to the law,
without the act which is repugnant. Or that the sin of hating God is a
deflection from the Precept, without that hating which is the sin. XIII. It Is
so far from being false, to call it a sin to blaspheme, (which is a positive
entity) that it is blasphemy to deny it. This is a proof from plain experience.
XIV. A part of nothing can be the thing, of which it is but a part; for then
the part would be the whole; which does imply a contradiction. And so the
formal part of sin cannot possibly be the sin; but the sin must include the
material also.

This does prompt me (Gentle Reader) to prepare thee also for those evasions,
with which the Adversaries of Truth will pretend to answer what thou shall
urge. 1. If therefore when thou provest a sin is positive, they shall only
answer concerning sin quatenus sin; Remember to tell them of their Fallacy, a
Thesi ad Hypothesin, or a dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid. 2. If
again when thou say, some sins are actions, (such as those which God forbids
us to put in being,) they shall answer that sins of omission are not; put them
in mind of that other fallacy, A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. 3.
If when thou arguest by an Induction of such particulars, as in the Instance of
hating God, they shall answer that hating is not evil in it self; and good, as
fastened upon sin; Tell them straight of their Fallacies, A recte conjunctis ad
male divisa, and (...). For the Argument is of hating, as having God for its
object; And so to answer of hating, without an object, is an Intolerable
impe^tinence, dividing the Act from the Object, which were only considered in
conjunction; much more is it impertinent to talk of hating, as it is objected
upon sin; for that i^ a tra^sition a genere ad genus. God is not sin, nor is it
a sin to hate sin, but the sin of hating God, is that to which they must speak in
a compound sense. Hold them punctually to this, and they are undone. 4* If they
take upon them to prove (acting the part of the opponent) that the formal part
of sin is a mere privation, therefore the sin is a mere privation; tell them
first of their fallacy, (...). For the Antecedent might be true, and yet the
sequel extremely false. Tell them next there is a Fallacy of Ignoratio
Elenchi; For the question is of sin, not of a portion, or part of sin. They are
past all Remedy, who, when the Question is, whether it r^ines, do only answer
that the staff does not stand in the corner. Tell them over and above, that the
formal part of some sins (as of the Devils hating God) is a positive Repugnance
to the Law of God; and so again there is the Fallacy (...), barely to say, and
not to prove the universality of the thing, can amount to no more then only
the begging of the question, Mr. Hickman must confess he is the worst of
Blasphemers, if there is but one sin that is a positive entity; because he
says that All such must be either p. 7. l. 8, 9. p. 79. lin. 5
God's creatures, or p. 7. l. 8, 9. p. 79. lin. 5
God himself.

This also prompts me to reflect upon the Mischievous effects of his sad
Dilemma. For if God is said to be the cause of that positive entity or action
[Adam's eating forbidden fruit,] And the cause of that Law, [Thou shall not eat
it,] he is said to be the Author or cause of that sin, which was his very
eating forbidden fruit. I have therefore taken the greater pains in my
following Treatise, both in Se e my whole fourth chapter, and compar^ it with
my citations from D. Go^d, and D. Hammond. p. 103.
vindicating God from being the Author of such effects, and in charging them
wholly upon the Free Will of man, See c. 5. p. 92. to p. 104.
showing how the sinful agent is alone the cause of the sinful act; to the end
I might convince and convert my Adversary even in spite of his own
perverseness, and disabuse his followers or abe^tors notwithstanding their
partiality and praepossession. That when they exert any such real and positive
actions, as the hating of God, the ravishing of virgins, the killing of Kings,
the committing of sacrilege, the coveting and seizing their neighbor's goods,
they may be forced to declare (with Coppinger and Hacket in the Star Chamber)
the works are evil, and from themselves, (unless they will take in the Devil
too) not good, and from God, as Ubi supra. and also p. 82.
Mr. Hickman no less irrationally, than blasphemously says.

That there are Exodus 20, 5. Romans 1.30.
haters of God who is Love it self, God has told us by Moses, and by Saint
Paul. And according to the importance of the original word, they are (...).
hated by God who are haters of him. How we ought to be affected toward them
that hate God, the Psalmist tells us by his example. Psalm. 139 21.
Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? yea I hate them with a perfect
hatred. Who they are that hate God (by way of eminence) our Learned Doctor
Stearn has taken the Liberty to say. I shall content my self at present to
show the place in my Ut eorum implacabilis adversus Deum inimicitia innotescat,
etc. De animi Medela. c. 17. p. 283.
Margin, and to observe, Mr. Hickman is therein intimately concerned. I do not
hate Mr. Hickman, but do love him so well, as to wish him better. Yet of the
Doctrine which he delivers, and pleads for with so much vehemence, [That
every positive thing is good, and either God, or his creature, I have
industriously discovered my perfect hatred. For the Hellish murder of Gods
Anointed (of ever Blessed and glorious Memory) was as positive a something as
any action to be produced. And all the plea of those Deicides who sought to
justify the Fact, was the use they made of this Fatal Doctrine. They ever
imputed unto God, (irresistibly willing, or unconditionally decreeing, and
effectually over-acting his peoples spirits) whatsoever unclean thing they were
Act. 13.18, and 14.16.
suffered in. What was really but the patience, they called the pleasure of the
Almighty. 1 Pet. 3.20. 2 Pet. 3.9.
His passive permission, they styled See Master JENKINS his Petition to the
Titular Parliament A. D. 1651* and compare it with the Assembly-men's
Confession of Faith, ch* 3. Artic. 1. which says that God did unchangeably o
d^in whatsoever comes to pass. From whence the Murder of the King was concluded
Gods Ordinance by them that wrought it. And Mr. Ienkins was heard to pray at
Black friars [ O Lord we know that all things come to pass by thine
APPOINTMENT.]
appointment. What he had every where forbidden, they gave him out to have
predetermin'd. What was a sin not to be expiated, They called an expiatory
sacrifice. They gave out God to be the Author of all that he sufferd them to
commit, the favorable approver, of whatsoever he Jer 5, 27.
condemned them to prosper in. In a word, they told the people, that God was
delighted in those impieties, which with much long suffering he but endured*
Romans 9.22.
And then I think I was excusable for being impatient of such a Doctrine, as
(to the Ruin of three Kingdoms) I saw reduced into practice for diverse years.

How impartial I have been in the maintaining of the Truth, I shall evince in
the following papers by my Reply to Mr. BARLOW, the Reverend Provost of Queens
College in Oxford, my very learned and loving Friend. To certain Reasonings of
his in his second Metaphysical Exercitation, (which I am careful to tell my
Readers he printed twenty years ago, that by refuting those Errors which he
asserted in his youth, when a stranger to me, I may not prejudice that
Friendship which I desire may be preserved and improved betwixt us, nor take
from the honor which is due to his Riper years,) I have replied so much the
rather for these three Reasons. First because Master Hickman is very guiltily
beholding to Mr. Barlow's Book, for the considerablest part of his own
collection. He having stolen from that treasure whatsoever has the Appearance
of strong, or handsome; (I mean as much as concerns the positivity of sin.)
Next that the Adversaries may grant, That if their Cause has miscarried under
the management and Defense of such a Person as Master BARLOW, it sure has
wanted nothing but Truth, and not ability to support it. Last of all Mr.
Barlow, (so great was his Candor, and love of Truth,) was pleased to give me
his Free Assent, that I should persecute Error where e're I found it. To
differ in judgment, Incolumi licuit semper amicitia; and therefore he is far
from falling out with himself, (much less with me,) if he very much differs at
this Time of his maturity (like Melanchtho^, and Bishop Andrews, Doctor
Sanderson, Master Hales, and almost All the great Scholars the world has
bred,) from what he was in his greener years.

And now (Good Reader) I am resolved, rather to part abruptly from thee, than
to detain thee any longer with such Praeliminary Discourses. I hope it will
appear by the following Catalogue of Authors, (at least by as many as will be
granted to be the best) both that I am far from being singular in what I own as
the greatest truth, And that in case thou have insensibly taken up a vulgar
Error, thou needs not think it a discredit to lay it down.

A note of such as are used in the following papers, for the proving, or
approving of these three things. 1. That the most and worst sins have a
positive Entity, or Being. 2. That each of these is complexum quid, and to be
taken concretive, as consisting of a material and formal part. 3. That the
whole of sin is the production (not of God, but) of men and Devils.
A
Athenagoras. A.D. 155 Athan^sius. A.D. 325 Apollinarius. A.D. 364 S.
Ambrosius. A.D. 374 Augustinus. A.D. 914 Anselmus. A.D. 1082 Alexand. Alensis.
A.D. 1240 Aquinas. A.D. 1270 Aureolus. A.D. 1303 Alv^rez A.D. 1322 A^machanus.
A.D. 1378 Amicus. Ariaga. Apologist for Tilenus. A Dola. Alstedius.
B
S. Basilius. A.D. 372 S. Bernardus. A.D. 1112 Bonaventure. A.D. 1271 Mart.
Borrhaeus. A.D. 1560 Xystus Betuleius. A.D. 1563 Beza. A.D. 1590 Bellarminus.
A.D. 1600 Bp. Bramhall. Dr. Rob. Baronius. Burgersdicius. Baxter.
C
Clemens Alexand. A.D. 204 Cyprianus A.D. 250 Cyrillus Hierosol. A.D. 365
Chrysostomus. A.D. 398 Calvinus. A.D. 1560 Cajetan. A.D. 1600 Cameracensis.
Capreolus. Casaubon. Chalom. Confessions of Advers. Bal^haz. Corderius. Cumel.
Cicero. Chemnitius.
D
Dionysius Areop. A.D. 70 Durandus. A.D. 1305 Bp. of Damascus A.D. 1611 Claud.
Devillius. A.D. 1611 Diotallevius. A.D. 1611
E
Epiphanius. A.D. 376 Episcopius. A.D. 1618
F
Fulgentius. A.D. 500 Dr. Field.
G
Gregor. Nazianz. A.D. 364 Greg. Nyssen. A.D. 374 Greg. de Valentia. A.D. 1580
H. Grotius. Dr. Goad. Io. Gerhardus Ienensis.
H
Hieronymus. A.D. 375 Hemmingius. A.D. 1580 Dr. Hammond. H^fenrefferus. A.D.
1600
I
Irenaeus. A.D. 180 Ignatius. A.D. 99 Justinius Martyr. A.D. 150 Fl. Illyricus.
A.D. 1574 Fr. Iunius* A.D. 1602 Dr. Iackson.
K
K^ckermannus A.D. 1604 Bp. of Kilmore.
L
Lactantius. A.D. 317 Lombardus. A.D. 1360 Lessius. Bp. Lesley, Cardinal de
Lugo. Polycarpus Lycerus.
M
Macarius. A.D. 330 S. Max. Martyr. A.D. 650 Melanchthon. A.D. 1540 Greg.
Martinus. A.D. 1604 P^. Marnixius sanct. Aldegongius. Medina. Fran. de Mayron.
A.D. 1310
N
Nannius.
O
Origin. A.D. 224 Ockam. A.D. 1320 Bp. of Osorie.
P
Prosper. A.D. 433 Parisiensis Magis. A.D. 1347 Petrus Vermilius Martyr. A.D.
1562 Piscator. A.D. 1620 Dr. Prideaux. The Protestant Divines in their dispute
against the Papists of Original sin.
R
Ruffinus. A.D. 390 Ioannes de Rada. Remonstrants of the low Countries. Guliel.
de Rubione. D. Reynolds.
S
S. Scripture. Salvian. A.D. 417 Stepha^us Episcopus Parisiens. D.D. A.D. 1270
Scotus. A.D. 1300 Suarez. A.D. 1613 Sohnius A Sot^. Dr. Sanderson. Dr. Stearn.
T
Theophilus Patriarcha. Antiochenus. A.D. 170 Tatianus Assyrius. A.D. 170
Ter^ullian. A.D. 203 Theophylact. A.D. 931 Timplerus. Dr. Twisse. Trent
Council.
V
C. Vorstius, A.D. 1611 Vasquez, Ger. Vossius*
Z
Huld. Zuinglius. A.D. 1520
Detestanda and abominanda opinio est, quae Deum cujusquam malae v^luntatis,
aut malae actionis credit Authorem. Augustine. in Resp. ad Artic. 10. falso sibi
impositos* p. 868.

*** Quod Talis actus non solum praecise ratione alicujus priv^tionis, sed
etiam per se aliquo modo malus sit, est communis sententia Doctorum. LESSIUS de
perfect. Divinis. l. 13. c. 26. number, 176.

The general Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I.
THe Introduction to an account of what has passed from the beginning. The
first occasion of the Dispute. The removal of a most wilful and groundless
slander. The continuation of the Account. Seventeen Arguments to prove the
positive Entity of Sin. Mr. Hick's interesting himself in an other man's
Province. His laying the foundation of perfect Libertinism and Rantism:
Occasioning 16 other Arguments for the positive Entity of sin. His Title page
impertinent to his Book. A brief and general account of his whole Book. A
Building made up of nothing, but one long Entry, and three back Doors. Mr.
Hick. turns his back upon 14. Arguments at once. Nine more at once he passes
by without Answer. His promise of justifying the Schoolmen does end in passing
them over without regard. His widest back Door of all, at which he makes a most
shameful and foul escape from the thing in question.

CHAP. II.
THe thing in Question from the beginning was Sin properly so called. How Mr.
Hick. was frighted from it, in spite of S. Paul and Dr. Reynolds. Sin a
Concrete: and so confessed by Mr. H. a little after he had denied it. The
positive Act proved to be the sin of cursing God: Mr. H. (though challenged)
not attempting to disprove it. No imaginable difference betwixt the positive
Act of lying with Bathsheba, and the Adultery which was the sin; Sin confessed
by Dr. Twisse to include a positive Act. The same is confessed by Mr. Whitfield
and Mr. Barlee, and (in lucid intervals) by Mr. H. himself: who writes against
his own knowledge: and as much against his own interest. 1. By the grosness of
his own Falsehood and Tergiversation. 2. by inferring that Virtue has no
positive Being. 3. by arming the Atheist against himself, in proving that God
has no positive Entity. 4. by putting it out of his power to deny he is a
Brute, till he renounce his Transition a Thesi ad Hypothesin. The stone at
which Mr. Hick. has not stumbled only, but fallen, past all recovery. The true
state of Sin (specified) as it differs from either part of Sin, and from
Sinfulness it self. Mr. Hick. gets nothing though we should grant him his
Reduplication, but rather loses all he gapes at. Nay proves himself a
Carneadist or Libertine. That Sin is positive and concrete may be concluded
from Bonaventure.

CHAP. III.
MR. Hick's chief strength from Mr. Barlow's youngest writings. Why first
encountered. An account of Dr. Fields Reasons for the positive Entity of sin.
The first Reason: the second Reason. The first Reason was never answered. The
second answered by Mr. Barlow in his younger years. The Answer showed to be
invalid in 5 Respects. 1. by its granting what it pretends to deny. 2. by
implying a contradiction. 3. by being offensive to pious minds. 4. by
offending against the Rules of sense. 5. by the twofold unfitness of the Simile
alleged. Gulielmus de Rubione vindicated by way of Reply to Mr. Barlows
Answer. Mr. H's answer proved vicious in 3 respects. 1. by such a gross
Fallacy, as by which he is proved no man, but either a beast or somewhat worse.
2. by such a shifting from the Question, as proves him convinced of maintaining
a gross error. 3. by Blasphemy expressed, and Contradiction employed. A third
Reason taken from H. Grotius amounting to the same with Iacobus Almain. Mr.
Barlows Answer; proved faulty in 7 respects. The words of Capreolus make for
me. Mr. Barlows plea out of Hurtadus proved faulty in 6 Respects. The Act of
Hating God now, and of sin hereafter, unduly taken to be the same Act. A Denial
of Positivity betrays its Owners to deny a Reality in Sin. A fourth Reason out
of Ioannes de Rada. Mr. Barlows answer proved invalid in 4 Respects. A 5 Reason
out of Aquinas. A Reply to the Answer of Mr. Barlow, proving it faulty in 3
Respects. Mr. Hick. contradicted by his Masters and himself too. A sixth Reason
is taken out of Franciscus de Mayron, and diverse others. Not answered by Mr.
Barlow. A Seventh Reason alleged by several Authors, partly cited by Dr.
Field. Mr. Barlows answer proved faulty in 5 Respects. An eighth Reason
gathered out of Fran. Diotallevius: confirmed by a ninth Argument, leading the
Adversary (Mr. Hick.) to the most horrid Absurdities to be imagined. A tenth
Argument or Reason out of Cardinal Cajetan. A 11th Argument collected from
Episcopius. A 12th and 13th Argument urged by Dr. Stern in his Animi Medela. A
14 Argument out of D.R. Baron his Metaph. The arguments backed by the Authority
of the most discerning: by the explicit and implicit Conf^ssions of the
Adversaries. By ten several Confessions of Mr. Hick. himself.

CHAP. IV.
MR. Hicks Distinction of the positive Act of Hating God, and its obliquity,
frees him not from making God the Author of sin. Proved first out of his mouth.
Secondly by Reason. Thirdly by Authority in conjunction with Reason.

CHAP. V.
THe Positive Entity of Sin made undeniable from Scripture. God is the fittest
to be Judge of what is properly called Sin. Confirmed by the Concurrence of
Ancient Fathers. The confession of Vossius for the greatest part of them.
Apollinarius by name, and the greatest part of the Orientals, as Jerome
witnesses. Augustine held the propagation of the soul; and Original sin to be a
positive Quality. The several ways of reconciling such Writers unto
themselves, who plainly holding the positivity of sin, do sometimes seem to
speak against it. An Accident opposed to Res simpliciter. The Manichaean
Haeresie occasioned some figurative expressions. Substantia expressed by
Natura, Aliquid, and Res. Substance called hoc aliquid by all the Followers of
Aristotle. All the Fathers grant sin to be an Act, and the work of our Will.
How unhappily some men confu^e the Manichees. How the Sinner is able to give
the whole being unto his sin. How they that deny it must submit to the
Manichees, or worse. The Concurrence of the Learned, both Ancient and Modern,
for the Affirmative, That the sinful Agent is the sole Cause of the sinful Act.
The power to Act is from God, but the vicious Action is not. Melancthon's
distinction of the first Cause susteining, but not assisting the second in
evil Actions.

CHAP. VI
AN Account of those things which Mr. Hick. calls his Artificial Arguments. Of
twelve things answered, but 4 replied to. A Rejoinder to the First: to the
Second: to the Third: to the Fourth. His second Argument Artificial. How
largely answered. His remarkable Tergiversation without the shadow of a Reply.
His offers of Reason Why all things positive are from God, or God himself, and
primarily none from Men or Devils. The Infirmities of the First. Of the Second:
by which he is proved ( out of his mouth) to be the worst of Blasphemers. Of
the Third, wherein he makes God the Fountain of the Essence of sin. Of the
Fourth, wherein he ascribes unto God, what God ascribes unto the Devil. His
third Argument Artificial. The positive Importance of (...), not considered by
Mr. Barlow. The like Importance of Peccatum, proved by Reason and Experience.
His Fourth and last Argument. A short account of those Shifts, which pretend to
be Answers to some few Arguments. Of Sins being called the works of the Devil.
His Concessions and Contradictions about the Habit of Drunken^sse His
Concessions and Contradictions about the positive filth of Sin. His Concession
and Tergiversation concerning Blasphemy and Atheism, etc. His Remarkable
Forgery of an Argument in his Adversaries name. His stupendous Impertinence
and supposal of Grace in Hell; or Some privation besides All. Of Sins working
Concupiscence. Mr. Hicks Answer absurd in 8 Respects. Of the efficient Cause of
Sin. Mr Hicks Conviction and Confession in despite of his whole Enterprise. Of
Sins being Nothing, if no Effect. Mr. H's vain attempt to prove Knavery to be
Nothing. The Cause of punishment. Mr. H's Denial of any positive Damnation,
unless he thinks it no punishment to be Damned.

The Contents of the APPENDIX.
Touching his Epistle Dedicatory.
MR. Hickman his Flattery and Condemnation of himself. His Wilful falsehood.
His Self contradiction, and Confession of having written against his
Conscience. Dr. Hammond vindicated from Mr. H. His several falsifications. His
confounding the things, which he once distinguished. The sad Effects of the
Calvinian Schism. Mr. H's sawciness and irreverence to Dr. Hammond, added to
all his wilful Forgeries. His scurrilous usage of Dr. Tailor, and its
occasion, Original sin. The dissatisfaction of Episcopal Divines. Dr. Tailors
error on the right hand, extremely better then the heresy of Presbyterians on
the left. Mr. H's preferring Calvin to the 4. Evangelists. The way to stop a
Papists mouth. Mr. H's sense of his Scurrility, with his desire never to mend.
His new sense of his Carnality. And malignity to the Episcopal Government.

Touching his Book-like Preface to the Reader.
THe first Page of his Preface proves all that follows to be but the fruits of
his Revenge. His frivolous exception to Heathen Learning. The Heathenish nature
of his own. A new Discovery of his stealths, with their aggravation. His
mistake of Justice for Drollery. The Calvinian Tenet renders all study useless.
The Kings Declaration forbidding its being preached. No good Arguing from evil
custom. The Lord Falklands judgment against Calvin's. Mr. H's Inhumane and
slanderous Insinuation. How much worse in Himself, then in any other. Its
odiousness shown by a parallel case. His Profession of Cordial Friendship, with
its effect. His Sacrilegious Eulogie bestowed on them of his way. The Doctrine
of the Church of England Vindicated, with BP. Laud, and BP. Mountague. Of Mr.
H's Impertinence, implying Presbyterians to be Idolaters. The Archbishop
cleared as to what he did against Sherfield. An Impartial Narrative of the
case. The Doctrine of St. John concerning Antichrist. Original sin assented to,
as taught in the Article of our Church. Loyalty a part of our Religion. An
account to the Reader of the Method observed in all that follows. BP. Tunstall,
and BP. Hooper out weigh Tyndal, etc. The 17th. Article 2 ways for us. So the
Liturgy, and Homilies, and Nowells Catechism, which Mr. H. produces against
himself. It was not the Church of England that put the Calvinists into
preferments. ArchbP. Bancroft an Anticalvinist. Dr. Richardson, and Dr. Overal
both public professors, and most severe to the Calvinian Doctrines. Dr.
Sanderson no less, since his change of judgment. Persecution is not a mark of
error in those that suffer it. Mr. Simpson cleared from his censors, as to
falling from Grace, and Romans 7. Barrets Recanting an arrant Fable. BP.
Mountagues vindication* Mr. H's confession. That men follow Calvin in their
younger, and Arminius in their riper years. The causes of it given by D.
Sanderson. Of Dr. Iacksons Act Questions, and Dr. Frewin's. Of K. James and BP.
Mountague. K. James his conversion from the Calvinian errors. A change of
judgment in some Divines who were sent to Dort. Mr. H's sense of the
University, and his unpardonable scurrility of the late Archbishop. Universal
Redemption, held as well by K. James, the late Primate of Armagh, and BP.
Dav^nant, as by Arminius. Mr. H. grants the whole cause, but does not know it.
His opposition to the Ass mbly men's Confession of faith. Mr. H. proved to
grant the whole caus^ at which he rails, and so to be a Calvinistical-Arminian.
Confirmed by Du Moulin, Paraeus, and Dr. Reynolds. Confirmed further by Dr.
Twisse. And by the Synod of Dort. His scurrilous usage of Dr. Heylin shows the
length of his own ears. His concluding Question childishly fallacious.

Touching the Remnant of his Book.
HIs Self condemnation, and Contradiction. The Calvinists draw their own
consequences from their Tenet of Decrees. How Mr. H. is their Accuser, and how
his own. How as an Hobbist, and an Arminian. How in striving to clear, he
condemns himself; and confesses his making God to be the Author of si^. His
own thick darkness touching the darkness in the Creation. How he makes the most
real things to be entia rationis. How he obtrudes a new Article of Faith. And
makes it a point of omnipotence to be able to do evil. He proves his own sins
to be positive entities, by ascribing his rage to his sobriety. His slanderous
charge against Mr. Tho. Barlow of Q^eens C. in Oxford. His foul Defamation of
Dr. Reynolds. His self contradiction, and blind zeal, as to Dr. Martin. The
nullity of a Priesthood sinfully given by Presbyterians. The Recantations of
some who were so Ordained. Mr. H's disappointment by Dr. Sandersons change of
judgment. A vindication of BP. Hall, BP. Morton, BP. Brownrig from Mr. H's
slanderous suggestion. The perfect Amity, and Communion of all Episcopal
Divines, for all their difference in judgment as to some controverted Doctrines.

Mr. H's confession of his Ignorance, an Incapacity to understand the points in
controversy. His confessed insufficiency to maintain the chief Articles of the
Creed. Yet his conceitedness of his parts is not the less. His way to make a
Rope of sand whereby to pull in the Puritanes. His sinful way of defending
Robbery by adding a manifold aggravation. His slandero^s insinuation against
the two houses of Parliament, to save the credit of the visitors in sinning
against their own commission. His disparagement of the visitors in his
e^deavours to assert them. The work he makes with Hypoc^ondriacal conceits.

Touching the supreme authority of the Nation.
HE adds Railing to his Robbery, and treasonably misplaceth the Supreme power
of the Nation. The two Houses vindicated from his gross Insinuation, an d the
supreme power asserted by 19. Arguments. and by very many more, for which the
Reader is en^reated to use the works of Judge Ienkins.

Touching the Visitors of Oxford.
HOw Mr. H. became one of my uncommissioned Receivers. In what sense he may be
called my Receiver and Vsufructuary. How the Assembly-Presbyterians became
Abettors of Sacrilege, and Praevaricators with the Bible. Mr H's confounding
possession and right, and making no scruple of many Robberies at once. His
wilful bitterness sadly reflecting upon the Visitors. And as much on the
Lords, and Commons, worst of all upon the King; in exclud^ng whom he beheads
the Parliament. How he and his Visitors have acted against the two Houses, and
withal against the supreme power of the Nation.

Touching Mr. H's no skill in Logic.
A Transition to the discovery of his no skill in Logic. His Insultation added
to hide or bear up his Ignorance. Concerning the subject of an Accident. Of
Subjectum ultimum and ultimatum. Of an Inseparable Accident. Of the
substantial Faculties of the soul. By whom they are held to be its essence. Of
his granting what he denies, whilst he denies it: and giving up the whole cause.

A Postscipt touching some Dealings of Mr. Baxter.
THe Synagogue of the Libertines fitly applied to Mr. Baxter. Hi^ Railing on K.
James, and BP. Bancroft, on BP. Andrews, and Dr. Sanderson, for their Justice
to the Puritans. His confession of his own wickedness again confessed by
himself; though but in part. His prodigious falsifying the Common prayer. His
denial of that confession which he confessed a little before. His Perjury and
Rebellion proved out of his own words. His playing at Fast and loose with his
integrity. His Time-serving and fawning upon his Sovereign Richard. His
rejoicing in our late miseries, etc. His charging upon God all the villainies of
the times. His Fl^tte^ing m^ntions of Old Oliver, as tenderly careful of
Christ's cause. His being Access^ry to the most Parricidial Act, the murder of
G^ds anointed. The seven ways of partaking in other men's sins. His being an
Incendiary in the war, and Encouraging many thousand to rebel, proved out of
his confessions. His denying the Supremacy of the King which yet he allowed the
two Cromwells. His confession that Rebellion is worse then Murder, Adultery,
Drunkenness, and the like; and that he may be called a Perfidious Rebel by his
consent, if the supremacy was in the King.

HIs denying the Supremacy of the King, which yet he allowed the two Cromwels.
How he is proved by his concession to be a rebel. His being a Traitor to the
two Huses which he had set up above the King, by setting Richard above them,
when they disowned him. And by owning Cromwels Iunto for a full and free
Parliament. He is evinced out of his mouth to have been perjured over and over.
His charge against the Lords and commons, and his setting aside the King, more
then the houses ever did. His most Notable contradiction about the houses
ruling without the King. His New Miscarriage against Grotius and the Episcopal
Divines. He is proved to be a Jesuit by as good Logic as he uses. The
Jesuits Doctrine of Probability. Popery common to Thomas Goodwin with some
noted Presbyterians. Mr. Baxters Puritanism as well in Life, as Doctrine. His
additional falsehood. The Original of Puritanism among prof^ssors of
Christianity. Our English Puritans characterized by Salmasius one of the
learned of the beyound Sea Protestants. Mr. Baxter declared by Gods Anointed
to be a factious, and schismatic person. His double injury to Mr. Dance.
His unparalled bitterness against Episcopacy and our Church 7. ways rebuked.
The Conclusion gives the reason of the whole procedure which Mr. Baxter.

CHAP. I.
. THat the Christian Reader may discern, with his greatest ea^e and convenience
in every kind, The Introduction ^o an Accomp^ of wh^^ has passed from the
beginning.
how the whole Case stands betwixt my Adversary, and me; and may be thereby
enabled (without the trouble of dive^ting to many pages of several Books,
unless as his patience and leisure serves him,) to pas^ an exact and a speedy
Judgment, upon the matchless Adventures of this fresh Combatant; the
unsuff^ciency of his Performance^, when he pretends to Answer; and his gross
Tergiversa^ions, when he declines it; How commonly he aim^s beside the mark,
and aff^ctedly mistakes the Thing in Question; How he is fain to tickle
himself, on purpose to get into a laugh^er; and how constantly his laughing
does prove to be in the wrong Place; How well he justifies me, and my whole
proceeding, whilst he solemnly contradicts and condemns himself; How he happens
to glory and triumph most, when his overthrows fortune to be the greatest; How
he calumni^tes the Fa^hers, in their Justification, as some in the world have
been killed in their own D^fence; How without all Cause (but what his
Principles and his Displeasu^ have shaped out to him) his poisoned Arrows have
been sho at my self, and others, which yet have lighted on his own head, and on
the heads of his Predecessors, whom he has vilified in ze^l, and exceedingly
disgraced in mere good will; (confessing that to be Blasphemy, which the m^st
eminent Presby^erians have taught expressly, and in Print, not only by
cons^quence, and in priva^e,) I say, that the Reader may be qualified to take
up all at one g^asp, at the least expense that is possible of time or m^ne^* I
shall prepare him with an Account of what has past from the beginning; and I
shall do it with as much Brevity, as I shall find will consi^t with Truth and
Clearness. Nothing shall hinder me in my Dispatch, but the Removal of a most
Desperate and Groundless slander, with which our Actor made his entrance into
the Theater, that it might lie as a block in his Readers way. And to preserve
the most heedless from stumbling at it, I think it my duty to give them warning.

. 2. I had endeavored in my Notes (which I was forced to make Public) to
prevent the danger, The first occasion of the Dispute.
by demonstrating the deadliness of certain Doctrines, which the most eminent
Presbyterians had preached to us from the Press; [to wit, That All things come
to pass by God's appointment and Decree. That men do sin by God's Impulse. That
God commands to do Maleficium ^s the word.
evil, and compels obedience to such Commands. That he makes men
Transgressors. That Adultery or Murder is the work of God the Author, etc.]
These and multitudes of the like, (which I produced ou^ of their w^itings in my
Chap. 3. p. 128. to page ^36.
Defense of the Divine Philanthropie) were not the issu^s of my Invention, or
only horrible Consequences unduely deduced out of their Doctrines, (as M.
Hickman has dared to affirm, in despite of God, and his own conscience, and
in a flat contradiction to all men's eyes,) but the words of M. Calvin, and of
a man greater than he, Hulderi^us Zuinglius, whose example in Helvetia M.
Calvin imitated in France. And how their Followers go before them, in asserting
God to be the Author of all the wickedness in the wo^ld, as I have plentifully
showed in my Autocatachrisis, so shall I show in a greater measure, if M.
Hickman shall adventure to make it needful. Even the worst of those
exp^essions are very publicly con^essed, by D. Twisse, and M. Barlee, (and
diverse others of their way) to have been written by those Great ones, on whom I
charged them. And I speak it to the praise of their ingenu^y; who rather chose
to excuse (at least a tanto) what was so g^ossly derog^tory to the glory of
God, then to deny what is ^o visible to all men's eyes.

The Rem^vilt of a most willful and ground less slander.
But the Rhapsodist adventur^s beyond all possible expectation; and dares to
tell us in effect, That when we read the p^inted works either of Zuinglius, or
Calvin, of Borrhaeus, or D. Twisse, There is not any such thing, as we clearly
see lying before us; That what we read, is not written; And that the things
which I t^anscribed from some of the Authors whom he admires, were the Epist.
Ded* page 2.
mere chimaera's of my Brain, though near an hundred years printed before I
came into the world. Had I fathered mine own fancies upon one or more of his
Predecessors, (as M. Hickman has had the confidence to Epist. Ded. page 4.
tell the Lecturers of Brackly) I should not have thought my self fit to live.
And by so much the more it becomes my Duty (as well as Inter^st) to clear the
innocence of my dealing in this particular, although I know not how to do it
without the ruin of my Accuser in point of fame* The shortest way to this end,
will be by Noteing the very lines, as well as the words, and the p^ges, and the
Editions of the Books, from whence the Reader may take a specimen, whereby to
judge of the whole Heap. Zuingl* in Sermon. de Prove. (edit. Tigur. August. 20.
1530) c. 5. fol. 364. p. 1. lin. 28 etc.
Numen ipsum AVTHOR est ejus quod nobis est INIVSTIA. -- Cum Deus Angelum
Transgresso^em facit, and hominem, Ipse tamen Transgressor non constituitur, ut
qui contra legem non veniat. ( ib. lin. 4^.) -- Ib. cap. 6. fol. 365. p. 2.
lin. 35.
Quod Deus operatur per hominem, Homini vi^io vertitur, non etiam Deo. -- Ib.
lin. 40.
unum atque Idem Facinus, p^ta Adulterium aut Homicidium, in quantum Dei
AVTHORIS, MOTORIS, ac Impulsoris OPUS est, crimen non est. -- lb. fol. 366^ p
1. lin. 11. Doct. Twisse ^efends the worst of this, vin. gra. l. 2. part 1. p.
37. col. 1. lin. 17.18. edit. Amsterd. 1632.
Mov^t Deus Latronem ad occidendum innoce^tem, etiam ac imparatum ad mortem. --
^mpellit Deus ut occideret. (ib. l. 35.) p^rmitto, Latronem coactum esse ad
pe^candum. (ib. l. 18.) Impulsore Deo trucidavit Lat^o. (ib. l. 21.) movet and
impellit usque dum ille occisus est. (ib. lin. 25.)

Calvin. Inst. (edit. Genev. 1637) lib. 1. c. 18. Sect. 3. fol. 70. p. 1. l. 10.
Satis aperte ostendi, Deum vocari eorum OMNIVM AVTHOREM, quae isti Censores
volunt otioso tantum ejus permissu contingere. Voluntas Dei rerum omnium Cansa
-- Rep^obos in obsequium c^git. (ib.. 2. fol. 69. p. 2. lin. 23.26.) Idem
Facinus Deo, Satanae, homini assigna^i, absurdum non est. (ib. l. 2. c. 4. f^l.
95. p. 2. lin. 20.) -- Lib. 3. ca^. 23. Sect. 6. fol. 324. p. 2. lin. 8, 9*
from the bottom.
frust^a de Praescientia lis movetur, ubi constat Omnia ordinatione potius and
Nutu evenire. -- Hic (i. e^ peccator) justo Illius (i. e. Dei) impulsu agit
quod sibi non licet. (l. 1. c. 18.. 4. fol 71. p. ^. lin. 24.)

Martin. Borrhaeus stuggardinus in P^oph: Esataeoracula. etc ( edit Basil.
1561.) in cap. Esa. p. 259. lin. 50.
Al^ter malorum satan, quam Deus, sive de malo quod in culpa, sive de co quod in
po^na cernitur, loquamur, AV^OR judicatu^ esse.

D Twiss vin. Gra. l. 2. part. 1. p 36. col. 2. l. 15.
Fatemur Deum non modo ipsius operis peccaminosi, sed and Inten^^onis malae
AV^HOREM esse etc.

I can and will (if r^qui^ed) produce a multitude of the like, not only out of
the same, but out of many other Writers, (as well Popish as Presbyterian) who
are Enemies ^o Us of the church of England. But this may suffice for my present
pu^pose, and ^or hundreds of the same strain, I r^ferr to my Papers already
published; wherein when all my ci^ations were to ex^ct, that ev^n an Ene^y
accus^d no more than on, (of which I proved him also a false Accuser,)
certainly nothing but M Hickman, nor M. Hic^man himself, without a conscience
s^^red with an hot 1 Timothy 4.2.
I^on, could have reported them (even in P ^nt) as the mere chimae^a's of my
brain. Which being considered and compared both with the candid Necess. Vin. c.
3 p. 13^ to p. 136 cited at large in my (...). c. 3. p. 180. etc.
Acknowledgements of M. Barlee (whom I must therefore prefer by many degrees,
as well in this, as in other points,) and with what I exhibited to the eyes, of
the most obstinate Antagonist who will but See self condemnati^n exempl^fied*
c. 3. page 140, 141, 142. etc.
look, concludes M. Hickman the worst of sinners, if such a sinner is the worst
who is the willful^st. 'Twas from the naughtiness of the Heart, not from the
windiness of the Spleen, that so unpa^allel'd a Boldnes^ must needs have risen.
Had not the Doctrine which I condemned been worse then those, which yet were
Doctrines of 1 Timothy 4.1.
Devils in the Apostle's language or had they not been written as with a Sun
beam, for clearness; and for duration, as with the point of a Diamond;
wherewith they were registre^ by their Authors in an Indelible Record) M.
Hickman had been capable of some excuse. But to deny matters of fact after the
manner that he has done, is as if Absalom should have sworn that he never
polluted his Fathers Concubines, after his having lain with them upon the top
of the house, both in the sig^t of the Sun, 2 Samuel 16.22 which compare with 2 Samuel 12.11, 12.
and in the sight of all Israel. It were easy to write a volume (and indeed it
is hard, to be so abstemious as not to write one,) in displaying the monstrous
Nature of so I^comparable a Slander, as that with which M. Hickman b^gan his
Book. Hoping to season, and to imbue his unwary Readers, with such a preju^ice
of me, and of all my writings, (in the first fou^e pages of his Epistle) as
might make them mine enemies at all adven^ure. But having he^d up this L^ntern,
whereby his weaker-eyed Brethr^n may see the dimensions of his ^hreshold, which
he had purposely erected to make them stumble into his house, I forb^ar to say
more, till occasion serves. And hoping he will be warned by this Discov^ry, to
betake himself to better courses, in whatsoever he shall publish from this time
forwards, I immediately proceed to pu^sue the ^enor of my Account.

. 3. M. Barlee, not denying, The continuation ^f the Account.
(such indeed was his ingenuity) but excusing those Doctr^ns which I had
censured* (such was his favor to his own party) alleged that Sin h^d not a
po^^tive Entity, as having no ^fficient c^^se; See his words and p^ges cited
Philan. c. 3. S. 28 and c. 4. S. 21. page Seventeen Arguments to prove the
positive Entity of sin.
so that though God is affirmed to have decreed, determi^ed, and willed ^in,
yet he is not concluded the Author of it

. 4 To this I returned a Con^utation, in my Defense of the Divine Philanthro^ie
chap. 3. 8 p. 110. to p 116. And again in the same Book, chap. 4. 21. p. 20* 21
The former consi^ting o^ seventeen Arguments drawn out at length, I gave the
Reader in Ep^tome, in the third chapter of my Au ocatachrisis. 15. p 145. to
147. The latter consisting of 7. particula^s, I shall content my self, for the
present, M Hickman's inte^^essing himself ^n another man's province.
to ref^r my Reader thereunto.

. 5. In stead of a reply, w^^^h I expected from Mr. B. I found him assisted by
Mr Hickman (whom he was fitter to assist) to hurt his cause with an assertion,
that every posit^^e thing is good. See the words and pages cited (...). chapter 3.
p. 150, 15^, etc.
And that the^e is ^ot any medium betwixt God and his creature. And (so by
cons^qu^nce*) that if sin is something po^itive, or a positive entity, (...)
must be ^ne of God's creatures, or God himself.

His laying the foundation of perfect Libertinism and Ran^ism.
6. Hence it was that I endeavored to convince Mr. H^ckman of his impiety; to
show him the blasphemies and absurdities, in which his friend and himself were
at once involved; and to ami^ote his Readers, against the venom thus laid
before them. My way to do it was by evincing, that sin is positively something;
(which is the English of positive entity) whereby it is proved that there is
something, which though positive and real, cannot be attributed to God, as the
maker of it; because he cannot be possibly the maker of sin. And it was high
time indeed, to make this matter apparent to him, when I had found a public
Preacher delivering this as the scope of the first Article of the Creed, That
God is the M^k^r of All Things Real, p. 113. (cited and confuted in my (...).
p. 167.) Insomuch that if sin is something Real, it is a part of his Note M.
H. ascribes every real Being to the first cause producing it, p. 95, 96.
^reed, to believe that God is the Maker of it. And if it is nothing but a
word, (in his opinion,) then will he say when he has sinned, (with Solom^ns
Prove. 30.20.
Who^e,) That he has done just nothing. And for nothing, it is impossible,
that God should sentence his Creatures to Fire and Brimstone.

7. Now to the Arguments afo^esaid, which were no f^wer than seventeen,
Occasioning 16 other Arguments for the positive entity of sin.

See the Arguments at large in (...). c. 3. p. 148. to p. 166.


I also added some sixteen more, whereby to illustrate, as well as prove, ^he
positive Entity of sin. As first from the words of S. James, L^st having
conceived brings forth sin, Iam. 1.15. which h^ving explained, I thence
inferred, That Sin is the p^oduction of man's own will, seduced by lust, and
consem^ng to it, and rendered evil by so consenting. Second^y from the
expressions of the eminentest Authors by him asserted, who teach that God does
effic^re peccata, and not only Will, but work Sin, and that he has a hand in
effecting sin. Those very Blasphemies implying a posi^ive entity of sin. 3.
From Cain's killing Abel, and David's ly^ng with Bathshebah, which being
actions, are positive en^ities; and yet are ^ins too, as being a murder and an
adultery. 4 From experience and the confession of the Adve^sary, that what is
privative of one thing, is also positive of another. 5. From the necessity of
its being complexum quid, confessed also by M. Hickman. 6. From the meaning of
Bonum Metaphysicum, as comprehending res, and aliquid; and as signifying no
more, then ens in ordine ad appelitum; whereas it is only the moral good,
which is opposed to the thing in Question. 7. From the positive entity of a
Lie, which is therefore verum, as much as bonum Metaphysicum, and yet has no
more of real goodness, then of real truth in it. 8. From the positive being
of Satan's pride, and of Petronius his Inventions, together with those of the
Presbyterians. 9. From the difference or distinction betwixt a negative and
positive Atheism. 10. From sins being divided into actual and habi^uall 11.
From the positive filthiness of flesh and spirit, of which a man is deprived,
when God by his grace is plea'sd to cleanse him. 12. From the Importance of the
word privative, which may be predicated of sinners, as well as of sins. 13. To
harden our own hearts, to consent unto Temptations, and to destroy our selves
by such consent, are granted by all to be positive things. 14. Sin is spoken of
as such, throughout the Scriptures. 15. It is confessed by M. Hickman, and by
the men of his way, that sin is a compound which does consist of a material
and formal part, whereof the one being granted to be a posi^ive entity, both
together cannot be less. 16. Betwixt the act of ha^ing God, and the sin of
hating God, which is the act of ha^ing God, there cannot he the least
difference, because itself cannot be different from itself: for that would
imply the very gross^st of Contradictions. But the A^t of hating God is
confessed by Master Hickman to be a positive entity. And so he yields the whole
Cause, in spite of all his endeavors to make resistance.

. 8. But yet he endeavors a Resistance, as far as a Ti^le-page can do it, M.
Hick's Title page is impertinent to hi^ Book.
which does not really belong to any book in all the world, much ^ess to tha^
which he unhappily called his. For it p^etends [a Justification of the Fa^hers
and Schoolmen from their being self cond^mned for denying the positivity of
sin. And yet it p^etends to be an Answer to so much of my (...), as does relate
to the fo^esaid opinion.] H^re are ^everall things, which prove him wilful in
his Impostures. For well he knew, I had not written against the Fathers or
Schoolmen; much less against them as self-cond^mned; much less yet for denying
the positivity of sin. I writ indeed against Himself and M. Hobbs; but they a^e
hardly so much as sons, much less Fathers of the Church. And though I writ
against others also, yet neither of them was a Schoolman, much less a Father. I
writ against them as self-condem^ed, because I proved out of their writings
that they asserted the very Doctrines, which See Introduct. p. 7. and compare
it with c. 3. p. 140.141, 142.
themselves had confessed to be blasph^mou^. So that unless our Iustificator is
thicker of sense and understanding then all men else, (which his perusal of M.
Mo^^ice forbids his Readers b^lieve) his prevaric^^ions must ne^ds be wilful.

. 9. After the promises of his portal, I find his building is nothing else, A
brief and general account of M. Hickmans whole book.
but a very long Ent y, and three Back-doors. As if the former were intended
^or the Am^sing of his Readers, whilst the latter might serve for his own
escape. His Entry has such an unseemly length, that little less than a whole
hour will serve hi^ Readers to Travel through. And if their patience will but
serve them, as far as the End of so long a passage, (in hope at last to meet
with something whereby to disprove the positivity of sin,) they will be able to
find nothing, besides the mentioned Back doors, at which the F^^^h^r e^capes
from the Thing in Question. As if he were co^scious to himself of having rashly
undertaken to prove a dangerous falsehood, (to wit) that sin has no positive
being, he spends almost his whole book upon a mul^itude of subjects b sides the
purpose; rather hudling up a Volume from whatsoever he thought pretty, and
durst purloin from some English Authors, then taking the ^ou^age to treat of
that, to which his Ti^le-page confesses he stands obliged. Observe (good
Reader) the strangest Answerer of Books, that in all thy life thou have read or
heard of.

. 10. His Volume consists of 175. pages. 65. of these are spent in an Epistle,
and Preface to all that follows, A Building made up of nothing, but one long
entry, and 3 Back doors.
wherein there is not one syllable so much as offering to disprove the
positivity of sin. Then there begins a fresh reckoning up of pages. And though
he takes upon him again, (as in his Title Page he had done) to prove that sin
has not a positive Being, yet he immediately flies out (for 48. pages
together) talking of Bishops and Presbyteries and other subjects of Evasion, (I
will not say in a phrenetick, but in a very idle manner,) before his misgiving
heart serves him to make a show of some proof of the Thing in Question. And
thus he has made an easy shift to fill up two parts of three of his Tedious
Rhapsodie, with more then an hundred such fragments and ends of stuff, as serve
to prove nothing at all, besides his fearfulness to discourse of the matter in
hand, and his gift of impertinence above the rest of mankind, and also the
lightness of his fingers to supply the heaviness of his invention. For after
113 pages (65 being of that which he calls his Preface, and 48 of that which he
calls his Book,) I find him using these words. [ Having removed the Rubbish, we
may now come at the Question.] Yet goes he not many steps farther, (in a
pretended preparation to his design) when straight he digresseth to Beshrew M.
Barlee. p. 60.
curse M. Barlee, to talk of the Calvinists, and Arminians, (by the old
assistance of M. Prin,) and to speak for Puritans by such an admirable
Impertinence, that he is fain at last to use these words -- [ The Reader will
pardon me (who can scarce pardon my self) for this excursion. Page 67.
] yet no sooner does he confess then he commits the same trespass, even by
making a new excursion to my dispute with Doctor Reynolds, to a Fable of Aesop,
and to a gross falsification of the Learned and Reverend D. Hammond, (which in
due time and place I shall demonstrate to be such in a high Degree.) At last
indeed he speaks something, les^ impertinent then before, although impertinent
also, as shall be showed. Insomuch as his Readers may well admire; how he could
venture to call his Book by so extravagant a Title, as did least of all relate
to the subject matter of his Discourse, unless he thought that his Readers
would look no farther.

. 11. But having showed his long Entry, I conceive it high time that I discover
his Back-doors, M. H. turns his back upon 14 Arguments at once.
at which he makes his foul escapes from the principal Duties Incumbent on
him. First, when it lies upon him to answer to my 17 Arguments, (of which he
confesses he took some notice, p. 100.) He talks a little to three of them,
(for I cannot say truly, he answers one,) and having hastily done that, he
escapes me thus. -- [ As to the rest of his Arguments (which were no fewer then
14.) they are partly such as I have met with before, and partly such, as others
upon whose expressions they are grounded, are more concerned in than my self.
p. 105.] This I call a Back door, at which he makes an escape which I say is
foul; because he had boasted in his Title Page, his having Answered so much, as
does relate to the opinion of sin's positive entity. And yet he sneaks from
those Arguments, by which that opinion was clearly proved; alleging no reasons
for it, but what are pretended by every sneaker. He thought it a shame for him
to say, [I have not any thing like an answer to the 14. Arguments remaining]
And therefore worded the matter thus, [ they are partly such as before I met
with, and they concern not me so much as others.]

. 12. Next when it lies upon him to answer the 16 Arguments besides, Nine more
at once he passes by without answer.
(of which I lately made mention 7.) he does not so much as make a show of
giving answer to more than seven, (of which anon I shall take due notice,) but
sneaks (without leave) from the other Nine: insomuch that his Readers might
have believed there were no more then those seven, if they had not now met with
my Information. This was therefore an evasion without a Postern.

13. But how does he justify the Schoolmen, His promise ^n justifying the
School men does end in pos^ing them over without regard.
of which his Title Page made a boast? truly much after the rate of his other
dealings. For he passes them all by, with the common shift of a Paralipsis, [I
might strengthen my opinion from the Schoolmen, p. 59.] without producing the
words of so much as one. And is not this a Backdoor, at which to make a most
shameful and foul escape? There is not a Boy in the Grammar School, but may
dispute at this rate, without the looking into such Authors, as M. Morice and
M. Prinn, from whom I thought Master Hickman had learnt more wit, than to
compile a whole Book in Tergiversation to his Title. And yet the foulest of his
dealings is that which follows in my account. For

. 14. When at last he undertakes to handle the Question under debate (after his
having been impertinent throughout one hundred and thirteen pages) he affirms
the Question to be this, Whether moral evil, as such, His widest Backdoor of
all, at which he makes a most shameful and foul escape from the thing in
Question.
be a privation. p. 48. Then (says he) we understand by the particle [as] sin
considered abstractly from that either act, habit, or faculty, in which it is,
and to which it gives denomination. page 49.

This is the widest Backdoor of all, at which he studiously shifts from the
thing in Question; in which because he makes use of as gross a falsehood as can
be named, I am sorry I cannot be less severe, than to prove him a deliberate
and willful sinner. Had there been any such Question in all my Book, (to the
least part of which he at least pretended to give an Answer, he would gladly
have cited my words and pages. And so his fault had been sufficient, if he had
only not known that I had said any such Thing; But since I can prove that he
knew the contrary, his crime is infinitely greater, and can argue no less than
a seared conscience. Here then it is, that I must show (in mine own Defense,)
how much he has written against his own light, and how much against his own
Interest; as having put it in my power, (by an argument ad hominem) to prove M.
Hickman an arrant brute Beast; rather a Hors^ or a Mule, then either a Man or a
Woman* which I shall prove so convincingly merely by using his own Logic, as
he shall not be able to deny it, without renouncing his whole cause. Again he
has written against his Interest, as having granted implicitly, what he
explicitly denies; and implicitly denying, what he had several times granted
in plainest Terms: to wit, that the Question to be discussed, is, Whether the
thing which is called sin has a positive Being, or no positive Being. Not how,
or by what means, or in respect of what, it has such a Being. Not
reduplicative, whether The sin of hating God, quatenus a sin, has a positive
Being; or whether quatenus an action; (for to hate God is confessed to be at
once a sin, and an action too,) But whether the sin of hating God (which is an
action as well as a sin) has a positive being, yea, or no. To demonstrate that
this is the Thing in Question, and ever was from the beginning of all our
Difference, And then to demonstrate the sad estate which M. Hickman has put
himself into by his Reduplication, (his foysting in the word [ as] against all
dictates of sense and reason, and the whole procedure of our Debate) will so
open his Eye^, as to stop his mouth too. And therefore this shall be the Theme
o^ a second Chapter.

CHAP. II.
The thing in Question from the beginning, was sin properly so called. See Div.
Phil. c. 3. p. 110. etc. and c. 4. p. 42, 43.
. 1. I Made it appear from the beginning of my Discourse on this subject, that
though according to the propriety of Logic speech, a sin and a sinful act do
sound as the Abstract and the Concrete, yet so far do they differ from other
Conjugates, as to admit of diffe^ent Predications. For though we cannot say, a
whited wall is whiteness, or that whiteness is a whited wall; yet we may say
very truly, that a sinful Act may be a sin, and a sin may be a sinful act. For
Cains killing Abel, was a sinful act, and therefore a sin, because a murder.
Whether we say it is a sin, or a sinful Note that D. Field calls sin of
commission an evil Act, and also says it is merely positive: as shall be showed
c. 3. Sect. 2.
act, to hate God, it matters not amongst men; and all will say it comes to
one, in the account of God, as well as in the style of his holy Penmen, with
whom there is nothing more common, then for si^full Acts to be called sins.
Hence I affirmed that sin it self is a Concrete, in respect of sinfulness,
which is its Abstra^t. Of which opinion was D. Reynolds, when he entitled one
of his Books, The sinfulness of Sin. And he had great reason for it, when he
had found S. Paul speaking, of Rom 7.13.
sins being made exceeding sinful.

. 2. But M. Hick. seeing clearly, How M. Hick. was fright^d from it, in spite
of S. Paul and D. Reynolds.
that if any sin were granted to b^ a concrete, and the same with the sinful
act, it must be also granted to have a positive Entity or being, (and prove him
guilty of that Blasphemy, That it must needs be Gods creature, or God himself,)
was so scared out of his wits, or at least out of his Conscience, as to say
that sinfulness is synonymous with sin, and that sin is so perfectly an
Abstract, that if he conceive not of it as an Abstract, he cannot co^ceive of
it as sin. p. 53, 54. without regard to S. Paul Romans 7.13. and then much less
to D. Reynolds, whom he infers to have written touching the sin of sin, or
the sinfulness of sinfulness, supposing both to be synonymous, and sin so
perfectly an abstract, as has been said. Nay without any regard to his blessed
self, when he says that sin does not siginfie abstractly. p. 100.

. 3. But though sin is an Abstract in respect of the sinner, Sin a concrete*
and so confessed by Master Hickman a little after he had denied it.
( viz. Abstractum physicum) yet in respect of sinfulness (which is abstractum
metaphysicum) all will confess it to be a concrete, (M. H. alone being excepted
in his intemperate Fits, who yet in Times of sobriety will Note, he confesses,
that the hating of God is Complexum Quid. p. 95. that it has a material an
formal part. page 94. that it is an Action, ibid.
confess what I would have him,) and such I proved it to be, by proving an
Identity, betwixt the sin, and the sinful Act. For the transgression of the
Law is confessedly an Act: and sin (by definition) is the Transgression of the
Law. Nor will the Adversary deny, that the Act of sinning is a sinful Act. For
being a Transgression, it must needs be an Act, and being such an act, it must
needs be sinful. The act of consenting to a Temptation, which is sin in its
bir^h, is punctum indivisibile, and has not any Dimensions to make it capable
of a Division; and so it must needs be the sin of consenting to the Temptation,
as well as it is the sinful act.

The positive act proved to be the sin of cursing God. Master Hickman (though
challenged) not attempting to disprove it. See (...). chap. 1. p. 11, 12.
. 4. Farther yet, when in pursuit of the Controversy, it lay upon me to show,
how the determination of a man's will to the forbidden object, was equally a
sin, and a positive being; and what an Impiety it would be to entitle God to so
foul a thing; I made a challenge to M. Hickman (as well as others,) to give an
instance in some particular, how the act and the obliqui^y might so be severed
or distinguished, as he might say which is Go^'s part, and which is Satan's.
When a man does curse God, (Lev. 24.15.) which is the Act of that sin? and
which is the sin, that is not the Act? or which is the obliquity of the act o
that sin? M. Hickman did not attempt an Answer; and sure I am he was not able.
For if the cursing of God is a whole sin, it is an act of sin, or an obliquity
of an Act, or both together, and that either separably, or inseparably. 1. if
only an Act, where then is the obliquity? 2. if only an obliquity of an Act,
where is the Act? (for all the whole sin is the cursing of God, neither more,
nor less, 3. if both together, and separably, let him make that separation. 4.
if both are inseparably together, he must confess, that sin has a positive
being, and that himself has made God to be the Author of sin.

No imaginable difference be^wixt the positive act of lying with Bathsheba, and
the Adultery which was the sin.
. 5. In a word, I made appear, what I meant by the word sin, by the instances
which I brought whereby to prove it the same with the sinful act. There being
no difference (no not so much as in imagination) between David's lying with
Bathsheba, and his Adultery, or between his Adultery, and his sin. ((...). p.
82.) His lying with Bathsheba was his action, which action was his sin, (p.
84.) And again, I discern no difference between the same evil action, and it
self; as between David's lying with Bathsheba, and his Adultery. (ibid.) Nor
indeed was it possible that I should have spoken any otherwise, when the Thing
spoken of was not half of sin, but the whole; not the formal part, (as they
phrase it) but the very complexum, as M. H. himself calls it, ( p. 95.) For
actual sin of commission cannot otherwise be sin, than as it is an act of
sinning; nor an act of sinning any otherwise, then as it is a sinful Act.

. 6. That this was meant in our Dispute, I have largely proved. And that we
ought to mean this, Sin confessed by D. Twisse to include a positive Act. Vind.
Gr. l. 2. par. 1. (...) p. 155.
I prove by the judgment of D. Twisse, who says, that Fornication denotes
sin, not only according to its Formality, as it is sin, but also according to
its materiality, as it is an Act. His words in Latin are justly these.
Fornicatio notat peccatum, non tantum secundum Formale ejus qua peccatum est,
sed and secundum materiale ejus, qua actus est. Now because M. Hickman does
boast so much of D. Twisse, as one whom none durst undertake in the Arminian
Controversies (p. 106.) I will farther insist upon his Authority, whereby to
prove the true Importance, and together with that, the positive entity of sin;
which that Doctor does assert by unavoidable Implication, whilst he says that
[ Omne peccatum definite consideratum and secundum certam speciem, duo Com.
plectitur; Actum Naturalem, -- and Actus Turpitudinem, sive cum lege Dei
Repugnantiam. E. G. Furtum Omne duo notat, viz. actum surripiendi res alienas,
and actus hujus deformitatem, quatenus lege divine nobis interdici^ur etc. Vin.
Gra. l. 2. part. 1^ p. 155.
All sin, being definitely considered, and according to its certain species,
does include two things, the natural act, and the turpitude of the Act, or its
repugnance with the Law of God. He gives his instance in the sin of theft,
which he affirms to signify, as well the A^t of taking away what is another,
as the deformity of the Act, in as much as God has said, thou shall not steal.
The like instances he gives in the sins of Murder and Adultery; which as it
slatly contradicts what is said by M. Hick. of sins being a mere abstract, and
the same with sinfulness, (page 53, 54.) so it proves ^e whole sin to have a
positive entity, by ascribing no less to a part of sin. It being impossible for
a part to have more of entity then the whole. And if M. Hickman shall dare to
say, that a Repugnance to the Law may be theft, without stealing; or that
stealing may be the sin of theft, without a repugnance to the law (so as one
part of sin may be concluded to be a sin,) I forbear to say what will follow,
that he may not accuse me of bitter Language.

. 7. Noe, it is so absolutely imp^ssible, (as implying a contradiction) that a
man should be guilty of a Repugnance to any Law, The same is confessed by M.
Whit. and M. B. and (i^ lucid Intervals) by M. Hickm. himself.
without the doing of that thing which the law forbids; And by consequence so
impossible, that that alone should be the sin, which is affirmed by D. Twisse
to be but the formal part of it; That as M. Whitfield and M. Barlee do
acknowledge a material, and ^orm^ll part, making up one and the same sin, so
M. Hickman does say as much, when the necessity of his affairs compels him to
it (p. 94, 95.) how contradictory soever to what he had said a little before
(p. 53, 54.) when brought to a distress of another Nature. And accordingly in
his Titlepage, he held us in hand that he would prove, there cannot be any
positivity of sin, (not of the formal part of sin.) Again at the end of his
long Preface, when he pretends (at least) to come to the Thing in Question, he
sets down his Thesis in these express words,

Who writes against his own knowledge. Look forwards on c. 6. Sect. 14, and 15.
That sin has not a Positive Being, page 1. No mention hitherto of any
reduplication, sin as sin, or sin abstractly considered from act, or habit. And
indeed he knew it to be impossible, to consider the sin of hateing God,
abstractly from the act or habit, since the Act of hateing God, is the sin, as
well as the Act; and the habitual hatred of God, is as well the sin, as the
habit. He confesses it an action to hate God, and an action so intrinsecally
and essentially evil, because evil antecedently to any positive Law, and evil
ex genere and objecto, that no circumstance can make it lawful. p. 94. And as
impossible as it is, to consider the same thing abstractly from it self, so
impossible it must be, to consider the sin of hateing God, abstractly from the
Act of hateing God. Thus M. Hickman has written against his own light. But
(which will grieve him most of all)

. 8. He has also written against his Interest. For first he confesses (by the
means of his prevarication) what he so stomachfully denied, And as much against
his own interest.
and vainly pretended to refute too, to wit, That sin has a positive being. I.
By the grossness of his falsehood and Tergiversation.
I say he confesses it in equivalence, and that much more to his disadvantage,
then if he had said it in downright Terms. For why should he shamefully fall
away from his first Engagement, which was to prove that sin has no positive
being, (p. 1.) but that he was inwardly convinced, he had undertaken a thing
impossible? If he did not sin for sins sake, nor think it a credit to be caught
in the Act of Falsehood, why should he publish so gross a Forgery, as he knew
would be detected by every Reader, who should but thoroughly peruse either his
book, or mine, but that he thought it would pain him less, to lie in the frying
pan, then the Fire? If sin (in his opinion) has no positive Being in any
sense, or respect, (whether as a Quality, or as an Action, or as complexum
quid, made up of a material and formal part,) why at last will he needs
consider it, as merely abstracted from Act, or habit, and not without such
abstraction? when yet it is impossible that the hating of God should be so
considered? Let him show how that sin can be abstracted from that act which is
that sin, or how it can be considered as so abstracted; or else let him
confess, he dares not dispute of the thing in Question, unless he may consider
it, as it is impossible to be considered; which is not to dispute of the thing
in Question, but by an unmanlike Tergiversation to acknowledge the prevalence
of the Truth, at the very same time that he reviles it.

II. By inferring that virtue has no positive being.
. 9. Again he has opened a wide Gate to the greatest absurdities in the world,
in proving that sin has no positive Being, because it has none as abstractly
considered from act, or habit. For according to this Logic, one may prove that
nothing has a positive Being. No virtue (we may be sure) as well as no vice.
For (to clear it by an example) as the act or habit of hating God, has no
positive being, abstracted from the act, or habit; so the act or habit of
loving God, has no posi^ive being, abstracted from the act, or habit. He
confesses it is an action, to hate God; and that the hatred of God is a
quality, he will not deny. Nor can ^e possibly say more for the positive being
of loving God, or of the love which we have of God, which can have no being at
all (neither positive nor privative) if abstracted from all either act or
habit, that is, from it self.

III* By arming the Atheist against himself, in proving that God has no
positive Entity.
. 10. If M. Hickman's method were allowable, he would strengthen the hands, as
of all evil doers, so of the Atheist in particular; who may prove to M. Hickman
(though not to any man else) That God himself has no positive entity (which is
as much as to say, there is no God,) as abstractly considered from his
Existence, or from all manner of substance, corporeal, and incorporeall. For
the sin of hating God, without the act of hating God (which is the sin) is
simply nothing in the world. And sure it cannot be a Question, whether
simply-nothing has a positive being. Yet this is the best that can be made of
M. Hickman's skill in st^ting Questions.

IV. By putting it out of his power to deny he is a Brute, till he renounce his
transition ^ These ad Hypo^hesin.
. 11. Or admit a sin can be something, abstracted from all manner of (...) or
habit: yet the Question still would be, whether such sin has a positive being,
yea, or nay, in any respect whatsoever. Not whether it has it reduplicative,
as sin; that is so wretched a Transition a Thesi ad Hypothesin, as by which I
will prove that Master Hickman is a Brute. For sure the Animal M. Hickman
cannot possibly be a man, reduplicative, as an Animal; (for then every Animal
would be a man as well as he) I say he cannot be a man, as abstractly
considered from the principle of reason; And being not a man, but yet an
Animal, he must needs be a Brute, by all confessions. But M. Hickman will say,
The Question is, whether he is a man, or no. Not, whether he is such, with the
restrictive particle [ as] joined to Animal. And I say the very same touching
the business we have in hand. The Question is, Whether sin has a positive
being (witness his own mouth, p. 1.) not with any restrictive [ as] in
conjunction with an abstraction from act or habit. If M. Hickman be granted to
be a man, it will be a new Question, how he comes by his manhood, whether from
his material or formal part, which yet (by the way) are both essentials of his
Being. And sin being granted to have a positive being, it matters not how, or
Note, it cannot be here meant, whether it has it from God or man, it being
Blasphemy to say it can be from God, which is the crime in M. H. I now oppose.
from whence it has it, whether from its material or formal part, (to use the
words of D. Twisse) which are both essentials of its Being what it is, and no
more can it exist without the one, then the other. But if the word [ as] must
needs be used, then sin as synonymous with sinful act, has been ever the
subject of my Discourse, as by all my Instances and proofs may very
sufficiently appear. And whether sin has a positive being, as sin, or as an
action, or as a quality, (for it is confessed that to hate God, is a sin, and an
action, as that the hatred of God, is a sin, and a quality,) is a thing so
easy to be determined, that it is not worthy of a Dispute. But if M. H. will
needs dispute it, let him fairly confess, it is a second Question; in the doing
of which, he must yield the first.

. 12. From all this it follows, The stone at which M. H. has not stumbled
only, but fallen, past all recovery.
That when it is said by M. Hickman, (p. 49.) my not distinguishing betwixt the
sinful act, and the sin of the act, is the stone at which I have all along
stumbled; he does but dissemble the sense he has of his unhappyness, and by
playing the Brave, make the best of so bad a matter. For he knew very exactly,
that I had proved an Identity betwixt the sin of killing Abel, which was the
act of murder, and the act of killing him, which was the sin of murder. That
the act of hating God is the sin of hating him, and ^ converso. And so I must
thank M. Hickman for whipping himself thus upon another man's back. For this
apparently is the stone, at which he has stumbled, and fallen headlong, and
bruised himself as shall be showed his making a distinction without a
difference. As, betwixt the act of hating God, which is granted to be the sin,
and the sin of that act, which is granted to be that very act of hating God.
For to hate God is 1 a sin, 2 a whole sin, and 3 nothing but a sin: to which
three clauses I challenge M. Hickman to make some Answer. That, if he thinks
there is something in hating God, which is not sin, but very good, as being one
of God's Creatures, (which he sufficiently intimates, by distinguishing the sin
of the act, from the sinful act, as if the very act of hating God were not a
sin,) the world may know him to be a Libertine, without the protection of his
disguise. Had he for^seen that challenge, to which I called for his Answer, in
my Letter to Doctor Heylin, (page 266.) I had not met with an occasion for this
last Section.

. 13. But because he seems in this place to use the word sin for sinfulness;
The true state of sin (specifi^d) as it differs from either part of sin, and
from sinfulness it self.
I will first entreat him to remember, how sin is taken in holy Scripture, by
D. Twisse, by M. Whitf. by M. Barlee, and by himself, (as I have showed in this
chapter,. 1.6.7.) Next I will help him to understand, what is the sinfulness of
sin, and wherein it lies.

It is granted (I think) by See Aquinas in particular, 1.2 quaest. 75. art. 1.
and art. 2.
all, that sin is that whole or complexum, which does consist of two parts,
material, and formal, so as neither part singly can either be, or be conceived
to be a sin. And it is granted (I think) by all, that the material Part of sin
is positive; it being an action, or quality, (and when a quality) an act, or
habit, as has been showed. The only privative Part of sin (mark the emphasis
which lies on Part) is the defection from the Rule, which yet is founded in a
positive act, of which the other is only a superadded relation, unavoidably
resulting by the positive acts application to the Rule. Thus I think we are to
speak, if we may rightfully distinguish the two parts of sin, which D. Field
will not allow, nor indeed is it possible, so to distinguish the one from the
other, as to entitle God to the one without the other; and that I suppose is
the Doctors meaning. But now for the abstract of this concretum, it is that
which resulteth from both united* For after the manner that inequality does
arise from the Relation of a Bicubitum to a cubit, so the sinfulness of a sin
(to wit of the action of hating God, or of Cain's killing Abel,) does arise by
resultance from these two things, [God's forbidding it to be done, and its
being done when thus forbidden.] so then. The positive action of hating God,
(as the material part) which carries with it a defection from the rule of
God's Law, (as the formal part) is that complexum or whole sin, which I have
proved and shall prove to have a positive being. The mere defection from the
rule, or Note, that D. Field has affirmed this very repugnance to be a
positive thing. l. 3 c. 23. p. 120. and has said that sins are positive acts
(p* 119.) not obliquities of the acts.
repugnance to it, (without the action of hating God) is not the sin, but the
formal part only. The mere action of hating God (without its defection from
the rule, which for once I will suppose, docendi gratia,) would not be the very
sin, but the material part only. But the sin (as I said) is both united, viz.
The action of hating God in a repugnance to, or defection from the rule of
God's law: whereas the sinfulness of this sin, (that is, the abstract of this
concrete) is not both parts united, (for then it would be concrete, and so
Identical with sin) but that which resulteth from both united. As the humanity
is not the man made up of a body, and a rational soul, (any more then the man
is either of the two* without the other,) but that which only resulteth from
both united, whereas the man is both united.

. 14. But now (for a while) let us admit, M. Hickman gets nothing though we
should grant him his Reduplication, but rather loses all he g^pes at.
that the Question were of moral evil, as such. It would then be comprehensive
of all moral evil. For a qua^enus ad omne valet consequentia, by his own
confession p. 85. what then mean's he by a privation, when he says that sin or
moral evil, as such, is a privation? unless he means a mere privation, and
nothing else, he speaks not against the posi^ivity of sin; which even they who
do assert, do also hold there is a want of such a rectitude as is due; but they
say there is something besides that want. As in walking to kill a neighbor,
there is something positive, besides the want of a good end, to which the
walking should be directed. And if any thing could be due to the hating of God,
to make it good, (as nothing can be) there would be an action, besides the want
of that due, as M. Hickman confesses p 94. Nay in saying that that action is
essentially evil, (ibid.) he confesses the very action to be the sin. And
taking sin in the right sense for complexum quid, (as he confesses (p. 95.) we
may allow him his own way of stating the Question to his undoing.

Nay proves himself a Carneadist or Libertine.
. 15. Again he is ruined by his preservative, as may appear by this Dilemma.
Does he think that privation is a thing real, or only nominal? something, or
nothing? If nothing, then for M. Hickman to filt^h and plunder, is but a sin,
and therefore nothing in his opinion, and so is a Carneadist. If something,
then he thinks it Gods Creature, or not his creature. If his creature, then he
thinks that God is the Author of sin; and so he must think that sin is good,
or not good; if he thinks it to be good; he will scruple to commit it. If not
good, he thinks that God can create what is peculiar to the Devil, (as Master
Calvin infers against the Libertines.) If he thinks it not Gods Creature,
though something real, then he must eat up his former saying, viz. That it
belongs to the universality of the first cause, to produce every Real Being.
page 95.

. 16. I shall conclude this Chapter with the Concession of Bonaventure; That
sin is posi^ive and concrete may be concluded from Bonaventure, in lib. 2.
sent. did. 32. quaest. 1.
that the sin of Concupiscence imports two things, to wit an appetite, and an
excess of that appetite. In which excess he confesses there seems to be a
Position, though he endeavors by a simile (which does not run upon all its
feet) to make it seem a privation rather. Which however it may infer, yet it
cannot wholly be, without implying a contradiction. And if either of the two is
something positive (the act of the appetite it self, or the excess in the act,
Concupiscentia duo dicit (secundum id quod est) Dicit enim appetitum; dicit
nihilominus in actu, appetitus excessum. etc. ^pud Voss. Pel. Hist. p. 217.
) sure that which consists of both together, (I mean concupiscence,) cannot
be less, then either of them.

CHAP. III.
. 1. HAving hitherto cleared, Mr. H.'s chief strength from Mr. Barlows youngest
writings. Why first encountered.
and (in the doing of that) accidentally proved the thing in question, I might
immediately proceed to show the littleness of the Tricks in which our Gamster
is wont to deal; but that I think it incumbent on me to effect that first which
is most material, and of which most Readers do stand in the greatest
expectation; to wit the proving by such convincing and cogent Arguments, that
sin (which is properly so called) has a positive Being, as to put a conclusion
to the whole Controversy; and that by enabling the weakest Reader, to stop the
mouth of the strongest that shall oppose him. And because I cannot but have
observed (what has also been observed by many others) that whatsoever is
thought strong in Mr. H.'s Rhapsody (by such as are partial to his Adventure)
he has taken after his manner, (that is dishonestly, without the citing his
Author so much as once, to whom he was beholding extremely often,) from an
Exercitation de natura mali, which had been penned and printed more then 20.
years ago by my very good Friend Mr. THOMAS BARLOW, who (I conceive) at that
time could be but n wly Master of Arts, (though now the learned and Reverend
Provost of Queens College,) I shall begin with that instance, of which ^ verily
believed I had been the first urger, '^^ll since I found it in Dr. Field, and
in other writers of great Repute, whom I have now consulted on this occa^^on. I
m^an that, which is drawn from the Sin of hating God, (and by consequence from
all other sins of commission, whereof this one is the fittest Instance,) to
which Mr. Hickman pretends an answer (though without the will, and consent,
yet) by the assistance of Mr. BARLOW. The insufficiency of the Answer I intend
to show by my Reply. Which being done, I shall submit it to the consideration
of Mr. Barlow; That if he approves of my Reply, he may may make me glad with
the knowledge of it; and that if he does not, he may show me the reason of his
dislike. I suppose his judgment may now be altered, from what it was in his
younger years. If not, I shall desire to discuss the matter rather with Him,
who is able to tie me the hardest kno^s, and to show me my Error in case I
err, then to contend with ^uch a Trifler as Mr. Hickman appears to be, who is
fitter to betray then maintain his Cause.

An account of Dr. Field's Reasons for the positive entity of sin. l. 3. of the
Church. chapter 23. Edit. 2. p. 119.120.
. 2. That the sin of hating God is nothing more then a sin, and that it has a
pos^^ive being, I have so often proved (mine own way) in my (...) (besides what
I have done in my Letter to Dr. Heylin, and in the sections of the foregoing
Chapter,) that I suppose it high time, to show how others have proved it, as
well as I. Both that the greatness of their Authority may help prevail with
some men to accept of reason, and that I may take an opportunity to speak mine
own sense in their Vindication.

I will the rather begin with Dr. Field, because He, Doctu^, siquls alius,
Ecclesiae nostrae scriptor Richardus Field Exer. 2. p. 71. Edit. 2.
if any other, (says Mr. BARLOW himself who does oppose him) was a learned
Writer of our own Church, which he has studiously defended against the
Papis^s. First it is his peremptory assertion, That the sin of Commission, which
is the doing of that the creature is bound not to do, is merely positive.

HIs first Reason for it is this. As the affirmative part of Gods Law is
broken, The first Reason.
by the not putting that in being, which it requires, so the negative is
violated pr^cisely, by putting that in being, which it would not have to be.

Again he says a little after, That sin of commission is an evil act; and that
there are some evil Acts, which are not evil ex fine and Circumstantiis, but ex
genere and objecto, which are therefore denominated evil (not by Note, that he
who commits such sins, i^ denominated evil in part by passive denomination,
(for that he w^ntet^ that orderly disposition which should be in himself)
though chiefly indeed by active denomination etc.
passive denomination, as if they wanted some Circumstances, that should make
them good, but) by active denomination, because no Circumstances can make them
good, and because by way of contrariety they deprive the sinner of that orderly
disposition, that should be found in him, and some other of that good, which
pertains to him. As it appears in the acts of injustice spoiling men of
that which is their own, (which Mr. Hickman cannot endure to hear of) and i^
the acts of blasphemy against God, or the hate of God, in which the sinner as
much as in him lies, by attributing to God what is contrary to his Nature, or
denying that which agrees unto the same, makes him not to be that which he
is, and hating him wishes he were not, and endeavors to hinder what he
would have done.

NOw (says the Doctor a little after) That that sin of Commission which is an
evil ex genere and objecto is not denominated evil passively, The 2. Rea^son.
from the want of rectitude due unto it, it is evident, in that no rectitude is
due to such an Act. For what rectitude is due to the specifical Act of hating
God? or what rectitude is it capable of? This he urges against Those, who
affirm the act it self, in the hating God to be very good; and the deformity of
the Act to be only evil; which deformity they fancy to be the want of a
rectitude which was due to that act. not at all considering, that there cannot
be Notandum, S. Patres interdum malitiam peccati explicare per privationem
^oni, non quod debeat inesse ipsi actui peccati, sed quod debeat inesse homini
operan^i, etc. L^ssius de perf. Div. l^ 31. cap* 16. and Corder. p. 596.
possibly any such thing, as a right hating of God, or a rectified injustice;
these things implying a contradiction in adjecto. Yet such absurdities they
will swallow, rather then confess, (what yet they find, says D. Field,) that
some sins are positive Acts. page 119. Nay the Doctor advances farther, and
certainly farther then he needed, if not farther then he ought, (I am sure much
farther then I have done) That in the si^ of commission specifically considered
there is nothing but merely positive, and the deformity that is found in it is
precisely a positive Repugnance to the Law of God: which he does not say upon
his own account only, but farther backeth it with the Authority, and
concurrent Judgments of many eminent Schoolmen, and great Divines, (many more
then M. Hickman so much as attempted to produce) whose names and words shall be
seen anon.

. 3. To the first Reason of the two, which the most learned D. Field (as the
learned M. Barlow does once more call him, The first reason was never answered.
p. 74.) was pleased to give for his asserting the positive entity of sin, M.
Barlow does not make any answer; nor does he take the least notice, that there
was any such thing; though as it is his first reason, so I conceive to be his
best too: which I shall probably show when occasion serves, especially if I
chance to be put in mind.

To the second Reason his answer is, That no rectitude is due to the hatred of
God, The second an^swer'd by Mr. Barlow in his younger years.
in as much as it is limited to such an object, to wit God. But (as he says a
little before, to which he here referrs his Reader,) Sicut Ambulatio per se
sumpta potest esse bona; Sic odium Dei per se sumptum po^est esse bonum: and
per conseuens* ipsum esse actus non erit per se malum. page 74.
The hatred of God being taken by it self may be good, and so by consequence
the being of the act shall not be evil per se. Just as walking is good of it
self, though walking to kill or commit adultery cannot be made good by any
Circumstance.

. 4. To this Answer I reply in the behalf of D. Field. first, The answer showed
to be invalid in five respects.
That it grants the very thing which it pretends to deny, and which alone
was the thing that D. Field contended for, to wit, that no Rectitude can be due
to the hatred of God, which is no longer the hatred of God, I. By its granting
what it pretends to deny.
than the hatred is limited to such an object, to wit God. So what is urged by
D. Field is exactly yielded by M. Barlow, and I appeal unto himself, whether it
is not as I have said. For the Doctors words are, [what Rectitude is due to the
specifical act of hating God?] now it cannot be the specifical act of hating
God, unless the act be limited to that very object: and when it is, it is fully
granted, that nothing of Rectitude or goodness is due unto it.

Secondly I reply, That when he says, II. By implying ^ contradiction.
the hatred of God being taken by it self, may be good, he flatly contradicts
what he had said a little before, to wit, that the hatred of God remaining, it
cannot be possibly made good by any circumstance whatsoever. And the subject of
the Dispute being the hatred of God, it must needs remain till it is taken
away; And being taken away, there is nothing of it to be disputed, no kind of
thing, either good or evil.

Thirdly, It is an uncouth sentence (to say no worse) which affirms any
goodness in hating God, III. By being offen^sive to pious minds.
let the hating God be taken in what sense it can be. For it is acknowledged by
all, to be Intrinsecally evil, evil ex genere and objecto, so as nothing to be
imagined can make it otherwise then evil. And to say that that can be good in
any notion, which is confessedly good in none, is to add impiety to
contradiction. For the hatred of nothing, excepting sin, can be morally good.
And therefore to say, that the hating God (in any sense) can be good, is to
imply that the hating God is (in some kind of sense) the hating of sin.

Fourthly. It is far from good sense, IV. By offending against the rules of
sense.
to say the hatred of God being taken by it self, that I would gladly think it
an error of the Press, if I did not find it so often used. However I am
confident his meaning was, That Hatred being taken by it self (without relation
to God) may be good. For the hatred of God cannot possibly be taken by it self,
so as hatred may stand without relating to the object to which it is joined; for
then the hatred of God, were not the hatred of God, which would be an express
contradiction. And his meaning being granted to be so different from his words,
as hatred taken without God for its object, must needs be from the expression
of hating God, I then profess it to be true, but not at all to the purpose. For
it is affirmed by D. Field, that no rectitude can be due to the hatred of God:
not that it cannot be due to hatred, eith^r considered in it self, or in
relation to any object which is not God.

Fifthly, The simile taken from walking of it self, and walking to kill or
commit adultery, V. By the twofold unfitness of the ^^mile alleged.
is very halting in two respects. For 1. walking by it self has no proportion
with the hatred of God, whatever it might have had with hatred by it self. The
hatred of God, being rather represented, by walking to kill or commit adultery.
2. The Doctor spoke of such acts, as are evil ex genere and object^, so as
nothing of circumstance can make them good; and are denominated evil by active
denomination: from which walking of it self is as wide as Heaven from North to
South.

And thus* I have vindicated the Doctor, for the love of the Cause which he
asserteth, (not from the learned M. Barlow who now is Provost of Queens in
Oxford, and I am confident does condemn the aberrations of his youth, but
rather) from M. Barlow, who was but newly Master of Arts, and Junior even to M.
Hickman, who yet has nothing any otherwise to be vouchsafed a Confutation,
than as he has thought it worth stealing out of so young a man's Essays, as M.
Barlow was when he was Metaphysick Reader: from whom, as I dissent, without the
least diminution of solid Friendship, so I have not expressed it without his
leave.

. 5. To the Argument urged by GVLIELMVS DE RVBIONE (which was the same in
effect with Doctor Fields,) M. Barlow thus answers, GVLIELM. de RVBIONE
vindicated by way of reply to M. BARLOW'S answ.
(p. 73.) That the Odium Dei est malum solum ob defectum objecti debiti, nam si
terminaretur ad peccatum, esset bonum. page 73.
hatred of God is only evil through the defect of a due object: for that
ha^red would be good, were it terminated on sin.

But I reply to this Answer, That the hatred of God, being an act determined
upon an object, can have no other object then what it has, (for if it be the
hatred of any thing else, then is it no longer the hatred of God) much less can
it be terminated on the hatred of sin; the hating God rather implying the love
of sin: if by the hatred of God he means nothing but hatred, (in which case the
word ^od must be blotted out) then it is quite beside the purpose, as has been
showed; for it is not hatred per se, much less hatred of sin, which was said to be
so evil that no circumstance advenient can make it good; but rather the
contrary, the hatred of sin is so good, as that it cannot be made evil. And
therefore the hatred of God being the term in the Argument proposed, should
also have been the term in the Answer pretended.

Whereas it is added to his answer, that the hatred of God is not taken
aggregately, or by way of connotation, when it is said it may be good by the
position of the due circumstance (p. 73.) I also add to my reply, that though
hatred can ( per se) yet hatred of God cannot be possibly so considered; for it
implies a contradiction. Hatred there being the Act, and God the object, and
both together the Aggregate: which whilst it is, it cannot be but what it is.
If by hatred of God, he means hatred of nothing, or of sin, then he must say
what he means, and not the contrary to what he means; which when he shall say,
twill prove to be nothing to the purpose.

* 6. That which follows in M. Barlow's Answer, is so fully expressed by M.
Hickman, that I will set down his words, and then discover the infirmity of
them [ The hating of God is complexum quid, and must not be spoken as of one:
The vital action of hatred is a thing positive, but the undue referring or
terminating of that act to such an object which is altogether lovely, that is
the sinfulness of the action, and not positive, but privative. p. 95. In evil
works there are two things considerable, the works themselves, and their
pravity. The works themselves (we doubt not) are positive and from God, as all
other positive things; but their pravityes add no new entities to them, etc.]

To show the Ails of this Answer, I will proceed by these degrees. M. Hickman^
answer proved vitio^s in three respects.
First it labors with the Fallacy, a been conjunctis ad male divisa, for the
sin of hating God does so inevitably import the whole complexum, viz. that very
act in conjunction with that very object, I. By such a gross Fallacy, as by
which he is proved no m^n, but either a beast, or somewhat worse.
that it cannot so much as be conceived to be the sin of hating God, when the
act is supposd to be divided from the object. To show him the fruit of his
Distinction, I will put the case into other colors. Let him prove he is a man,
by the best medium that he can use, and I will prove ( ad hominem) he can be
none; For man is complexum quid, and must not be spoken of as One: there is
something in him material, and something formal. The Animal is one thing, the
Anima rationalis is quite another. And M. Hickman being either without the
other, may be a Brute or an Angel, but not a man. And being for certain not an
Angel of light, he must (if an Angel) be one of darkness. This is every way as
pertinent, and as tolerably applied, as what is spoken by M. Hickman against
the positive being of hating God. If this Coin is not current, let him not pay
it to other men. And if it is, II. By such a shifting from the Question, as
proves him convinced of his maintaining a gross error.
let him accept it when it is paid.

Secondly, He so shamefully flies from the thing in Question, to that which he
knew neither was, nor can be, as to discover the mean opinion which he really
has of his own Tenet, and to prove his Book written, against nothing so much
as his own conscience. 1. He knew it was not the Question, whether hatred,
without relation to God as its object, is a sin, or whether any thing, without
hatred, is the sin of hating God. But he knew (by what I had said in my (...))
that the thing in Question, was the hating of God in sensu composito. For I had
said in the plainest terms, That to hate God is a sin, or a sinful act, (two
expressions for one thing.) That the sinfulness consists neither in God
without hating, (for he is purity it self) nor in hating without God, (for
hatred in it self is a thing indifferent, and apt to be good as well as evil,
God himself hating sin with a perfect hatred) but in the union and application
of that act to that object. As the nature of man consists not in a body only,
nor only in a soul, but in the union of the one with the other. (p. 13.) 2. He
knew it could not be a Question, whether hatred is a sin when taken per se,
without an object; or whether the pravity of hating God can be any thing at
all, without the act of hating God; or whether there can be possibly any act
when there is none. And yet his answer is as impertinent, as if one of these
had been the Question.

Thirdy, In saying such works, as the hating God, By Blasphemy expressed, and
contradiction employed.
are from God, which the Scripture calls the works of the Devil, he speaks
Blasphemy. And in saying, the sin of hating God is complexum quid, which must
not be considered of as One, he contradicts his other sayings, that sin and
sinfulness are the same, that is, a mere abstract, and which cannot else be
considered as sin. So that here I must ask him a second time, (and challenge
him to give me a Categorical Answer) can the hating of God be conceived to be a
sin, or can it not? when he answers, I will reply. But for his Blasphemies, and
self-contradictions, let him read my letter to Dr Heylin, p. 265. to p. 270.

. 7. Having insisted thus largely on my Reply to those Answers, which appear to
show us the very utmost, that can be pleaded in the defense of so gross an
Error; and having detected the obvious Fallacies, in which the whole force of
the answers lies; I shall study to be the briefer in all that follows, without
the least fear of being thought to be obscure by my plainest Reader. To Dr.
Field his 2. Reasons above recited,.

A Third Reason may be added from Quaedam mala sunt etiam citra legem, and
posit^ ac manente ejus obligatione, procurare ut aliquis contra L. faci^t,
naturaliter malum est, etc. Grot in Luc. 22.22.
HUGO GROTIUS who says that some things are evil without the Law; A 3 REASON
taken from H. GROTIVS amounting to the same with Jacob. Almain.
and that the Law being, and continuing to oblige, it is naturally evil to
procure any man's acting against the Law, or to make a Law to the contrary, and
therefore repugnant to the Nature of God. From whence there follow 2. things,
(1.) that some whole acts are immutably evil, and (2.) That they cannot have
any being from the Almighty. IACOBVS ALMAIN gives an instance in the hating of
God and in Adultery, and says they could not but be forbid.

To whom it is answered by Mr. Barlow, that if God did not forbid theft, it
would not be a sin, and that he may dispense with his Law, as when he said to
Abraham go kill thy son.

But I reply, 1. That he speaks not to the Instances brought by Iacobus Almain.
It had been ill to hate God, had it been possible that God had not forbid it.
Mr. Barlows Answer. p. 66.
2. Theft is not of those things which are only evil because forbidden, (as
the eating swines flesh among the Jews) but of those other things which are
only forbidden for being evil. Proved faul^y in 7. respects.
And therefore, 3. It was not possible, that God should never have forbidden
all manner of injustice, of which theft is one species. 4. God did not say to
Ab^aham, Go kill thy son, but go and offer him up; which he also did, without
killing. 5. Had he done it, he had not dispensed with his Law, which only
forbids such a killing, as ipso facto becomes a Murder; not such as ipso
facto becomes a sacrifice, else a thief could not be hanged for the fulfilling
of one Law, without the breach or dispensation of another. The prohibition of
murder comprehends not killing by commission from God, who may as lawfully take
away Isaacks life by Abraham's hand, as by a Fever. 6. If the act of stealing,
or hating God, be affirmed to be good, and so a positive entity, abstractly
considered from Gods forbidding; it must be granted to be such when it is
forbidden, I mean a positive entity, although not good, and so the Answer
destroys its end. Mr. Barlow's words are, si illud mandatum abfuisset, idem
numero actus horrendum fuisset homicidium (p. 66.) Had it been murder, it had
been sin, (for murder cannot but ^e sin) and so we have his confession, that
sin may be a positive act. But 7. It does imply a contradiction, to say the
same numerical act can be forbidden, and not forbidden, which I therefore leave
to consideration.

. 8. What Mr Barlow calls a concession in his behalf, The words o^ Capreolus
make for me*
I call an argument against him, viz. That if God could produce that act [of
hating God] in respect of the substance of the Act, then it would not be evil:
but (say I) that act is proved by me and others, (yea and confessed by Mr. H.)
to be wholly, because intrinsecally and essentially evil, evil ex genere and
objecto, and antecedently to the Law, therefore it cannot be Gods production,
for all its having a positive Enti^y. This I retort to Mr. B. his p. 66, 67.
and it pincheth Mr. H. more ways then one.

9. Whereas it is said, Mr. Barlows Plea out of Hurtadus proved faulty in 6
^espects. Answer.
(p. 67.) that if the man that hates God whilst yet in's wits, shall continue
to hate him being mad, the act remains, but not the obliquity, because the
act, to be sinful, must be rational and free.

I deny that any man can hate God or love him without the use of reason, but I
further return six things, 1. That for a man to hate God, is the greatest
madness in the world 2. That if he is not so altered, but that he continues to
hate God, he is not altered so far, but that he continues to be a sinner in
hating God. 3. Whilst he continues to be a man, he continues to have freedom
and rationality enough to sin by. 4. This Argument would prove (if it had real
force in it) that not only all infants, but some adult^ are in a state of
Impeccability. 5. It would follow from hence, that the goodness of a virtuous
act does not consist in the substance of it, because it would then become
impossible, that the substance of the act should continue without the goodness.
Whereas it is said in this Evasion, that the Act of hating God may remain in
substance, without the presence of its obliquity. But (6.) to answer yet more
expressly to his reason taken from Rational and free; I say the sinfulness of
the act is one thing, and the sinfulness of the agent is quite another. The
obliquity alone, or the sole contrariety of the act to the Law (in conjunction
with the act from which it cannot be disjoined) is enough to constitute the
sinfulness of the act. But the Liberty of will and use of Reason, are required
only to the sinfulness of the agent. Which yet again is no otherwise, then in
respect unto God imputing or punishing, according to the Equity, [or (...)] of
the second Covenant. For though otherwise considered, (without the Equity of
the Gospel) sins of ignorance are sins, and Original sin which is born with us
is our sin still.

. 10. And whereas it is added a little after, that if with the very same act
wherewith he now does hate God, The act of hating God now, and of sin
hereafter, unduly granted the same act.
a man should afterward hate sin, the same act for substan^e would be morally
good; (p. 67,) I reply that this supposes an impossibility, and confutes it
self with the contradiction which it implies. To hate God one day, and to hate
sin the next, are so far from being the same act numerically that Dr. Field
does rightly make them to be specifically distinct. And the supposing them to
be One was to me at first such an (...), that I admired how Mr. Barlow could so
impose upon him-self, until I duly considered his want of years, when he
engaged himself for so great an Error.

A denial of positivity be^ray's its owners to deny a reality also in sin.
. 11. The two arguments which follow, to prove that sin has a real being,
whereof the one is urged by FERRARIENSIS the other by GREGORY ARIMINENSIS, I
forbear to prosecute (as I might) because they do not prove the positive but
only the real being of sin; which Mr. Hickman grants, though it is denied by M.
Barlow, (p. 69.) or rather it was denied by him, when he was newly Master of
Arts. For that he should still be so much mistaken, is more then can enter into
my thoughts. And therefore unless he shall friendly invite me to it, I will not
meddle with the Infirmities of the two next pages. But only observe how the
belief, that sin has no positive, is apt to pass into a Belief, that it has
not so much as a Real being. And indeed by the same figure, that sin is called
a mere privation, it is also called a mere nothing. The reason of which I
shall show anon.

. 12. ANd so I pass to a fourth Reason, A fourth Reason out of IOANNES de RADA.
why the sin of hating God has a positive being. Because this sin is
intrinsecally evil, (as Mr. B. objects against himself out of IOANNES de RADA)
and therefore not only evil through some privation, because (says he) it is
impossible, that any privation should be intrinsecal to a positive act. And
Gulielmus de Rubione does press it thus. A positive act which is so evil, that
no kind of circumstance can make it not evil, is not evil for any defect or
privation, but pre^isely for the substance of the act. (p. 71.)

To the Argument of RADA. Mr. Barlow thus answers* That such an act is called
intrinsecally evil, Mr. BARLOW'S Answer.
not because its obliquity is of its nature and essence, but because by the law
of nature it is evil of it self, without the addition of a positive Law; or
because it is evil ex genere and objecto, and not only for the want of some
circumstance. p. 73.

But I reply. 1. It implies a contradiction, Proved invalid in 4. respects.
to affirm its being intrinsecally evil, and at once to deny it essentially
evil: for ratio formalis, and ratio intrinseca, are (...) with Philosophers;
and M. Hickman has dropped a good Confession, that the action of hating God is
essentially evil. (p. 94.) 2. That it is evil of it self, antecedently to any
positive Law, evil ex genere and objecto, is a concession whereby to prove it
essentially evil. 3. No part of this answer pretends to prove that it is not
indeed intrinsecally evil, but only quarrell's about the reason, why the act
is so called 4. It does not speak to the chief thing of all, [ that no
privation can be intrinsecall to a positive act] and so it seems by silence
to give consent.

A fifth Reason out of AQVINAS. 1. p. q. 48* art. 1.
. 13 MOral evil is proved to be a positive thing, because vice is set against
virtue, by an opposition of contrariety, (as Aristotle says, L. Cat. c. 10..
1.) for each term of such opposites must needs be positive, because they are
both predicamental species: which things are so true, that they are granted by
M. Barlow (p. 80.) who therefore endeavors to elude the Argument, by saying
the same thing, which I have often replied unto: to wit, that in respect of
their m^terial signification, virtue and vice are opposita contrary, but not
in respect of their formal signification.

To which I reply, first (as before) that this is the old fallacy a recte
conjunctis ad male divisa, A Reply to the Answer of Mr. BARLOW, proving i^
faulty in three respects.

(...). Dionys. Areop. de Div. No. c. 2* S. 2. p. 492.


and so a flat transition a thesi ad hypothesin. And if it be put into
Syllogism, there will be found to be unavoidably, an Ignoratio Elenchi. The
Question being of sin or vice in sens^s composito, and the Answer only
considering it in sens^s diviso. Secondly, Vice cannot be vice, nor be imagined
so to be, without its material, as well as formal significatum: for without the
act of hating God, the sin or vice of hating God (which is the act) cannot be
so much as supposed to be, much less to be repugnant to any law, wherein its
formality is said to consist; for that would imply a contradiction. And thus
the Answer (or rather evasion) does so far forsake, as indeed to null the thing
in Question. Thirdly, supposing the vice to be taken from the Act or habit, of
hating or hatred, (...). Idem ib. c. 4. S. 18. p. 572. look forwards on c. 5.
S. 4* number. 5
(by its having sin for its object,) it must be granted to be a virtue, and
therefore not opposed to virtue, by any kind of opposition; which M. B.
observes to be replied by Ferrariensis. To which although it is rejoyned by the
same Ferrariensis, yet the rejoinder is nothing else, but a gross return to the
old fallacy just now discovered in the Answer, and so is equally refelled by
every part of my Reply.

By the way I note one good confession, M. Hick. contradicted by his Masters*
and himself too.

Virtu^ and vi^ium si sumantur concretive sunt con^ra^ia, and species
positivae. Aquin. l. 3. contra Gent. ^. 8.


(and from the words of Aquinas) that vice as well as virtue may be taken for a
concrete; whereas M. Hickman was fain to say, that sin (or vice) is so
perfectly an abstract that he cannot conceive it to be sin, unless he conceive
it as an Abstract, and that he is to seek what vox abstracta is, if sin be not
such. (p. 54.) It may very well be, that he is to seek: for he elsewhere
confesses, that sin is complexum quid. And if he thinks that abstractum does
signify complexum, he is a small Latinist indeed, if he does not, he is a
self-contradictor.

. 14. A Sin of commission is proved to have a positive being, A sixth Reason is
taken ou^ of FRANCISCVS de MAYRON an^ diverse others.
because it necessarily requires some positive act, whereby to become a
perfect sin of commission, which as it is granted by M. Barlow, so it seems
to be also confirmed by him, p. 84. where he approves that of Suarez. (Metaph.
tom. 1. disp. 11.) Malum simpliciter est illud quod est in se malum; hoc est
caret aliquo bono sibi ipsi debito, ad modum perfectionis proprie: quale est
omne peccatum, praesertim commissionis. For if every sin of commissi on is not
simply evil only, but wholly too, (as that must needs be, which does carere
omni bono sibi debito, and though I deny the supposition, that any good thing
can be due to sin,) then the positive act (without which it cannot be) must
needs be morally and simply evil; It being the Sin of commission, which is
spoken of in both places; not any action or quality, which is no sin at all; so
as the ordinary shift, of flying from the Act of hating God, (which is the sin
of commission, and so the subject of the Discourse) to the act of hating,
without relation to any object, (which is no sin at all) or with relation only
to sin, (which makes it a high moral good) is foreseen and prevented by what I
now say.

What is said by M. Barlow of the threefold difference be^wixt a sin of
omission, and commission, Not answered by M. Barlow.
(p. 86.) concerns nothing that I know, excepting those words which he frames
to himself in his objection (p. 82.) In hoc SOLVM distinguitur peccatum
omissionis and commissionis, quia omissio dicit nudam carentiam actus: at
commissio necessario requirit actum. The word solum is very strange. And if he
found it in GULIELMUS DE RUBIONE, as it is more then I know, so I am not
concerned to make inquiry. It is sufficient for me, that my Argument, being
unanswered, needs not the help of a Reply. I hasten therefore to another way of
eviction.

. 15. THat is properly a sin, which is forbidden by the Law. A seventh Reason
alleged by several Authors, partly cited by D* Field.
But the positive act (of Adultery theft, or hating God) is forbidden by the
Law. And therefore the Act so forbidden is very properly a sin; we commonly say
it is a sin, to do this, or that, (as to hate God, and to love the world)
because God has forbid us to do the one, and the other.

To this it is answered by Mr. Barlow, (who not producing any Author for the
objection, M. B.'s Answer.
and putting in the word Formaliter, (p. 82.) may seem to have adapted the
Argument for an Answer,) That the Act precisely taken is not forbidden as a
positive Act, (as in Murder, merely to kill, is not forbidden, quoad esse
physicum; (for then it should not be lawful to kill a malefactor, who is
justly condemned to be put to death,) but as it recedeth from the Rule of right
reason, and is subjected to the privation of that rectitude which is due. page
86.

But I reply, 1. That this is the old fallacy so often mentioned; Proved
faulty in 5. respects.
for an act without reference to a negative precept of the law, is not an act
which is forbidd^n, nor pretended by any to be a sin, much less of comm ssion,
which alone was the act spoken of in the Argument; and so instead of an answer,
we have only an escape from the thing in Question. 2. It is affirmed by
Aquinas, (1.2. q. 71. Art. 6. and q. 72. art. 6. ( That Austin put two things
in the definition of sin, to wit, a material, and formal part; that is, a
positive act, and its repugnance to the Law, witness his citation p. 85.) And
what is this but to say, that sin is totum essentiale? which it cannot be,
without one of its two essentials; so that the Answer does offend against the
Answerer himself, by considering the one without relation to the other,
notwithstanding his Acquiescence in St. Austin's Definition. 3. The Answer does
not deny that the positive act is forbidden, and so a sin; but only speaks of
that thing, in respect of which it is forbidden. And to this it may easily be
replied, that as an Note, that this is spoken of such acts as are not evil
antecedently to the Law.
act is not morally evil, without relation to the Law which does forbid it; so
an act has nothing of moral goodness, without Relation to the law which does
command it, or to the Council which does commend it. And again as no act can be
a sin, without repugnance, to the Rule of right Reason; so can there be no such
repugnance, without an act. 4. It is not all killing, but killing properly
called Murder, which is forbidden by the Law, (which commands the killing of
the Murderer, and thereby makes it an act of Justice.) And therefore that
should have been the instance; for all such killing is forbidden by the Law,
and such alone does belong to the adaequate subject of our Discourse. 5. To
hate God is a sin, and a positive act, to which (it has be^n proved that) no
kind of rectitude can be due. And it had naturally been evil, though it had
never been forbidden: which yet it could not but have been, because the not
forbidding of it, had been repugnant to Gods nature. For though the act of
hating God could not be from Eternity, yet this proposition is aeternae
veritatis, and might truly have been spoken from all eternity, that it is evil
to hate God. See Dr. STEARN on this subject, in his Animi Medela, l. 2. cap.
15. p 271. ad p. 278.
Therefore this and the like acts were forbidden by the Law, even because they
were evil; and are not only evil, by being forbidden by the Law which yet
those men do presuppose who will have every thing good that has a positive
being, and nothing simply evil, but an abstracted repugnance unto the Law: not
considering the difference betwixt the breach of a positive and moral Law;
betwixt a Jews hating God, and his eating swines flesh. The latter, which was
evil because forbidden, was after the Law, for that very reason. But the
former, which was forbidden, because it was evil, was such (in order of Nature)
before the Law. The want of heed to which thing I have the rather desired to
remove, (by insisting on it a second time) because I think it is the parent of
many errors.

An 8. Reason gathered out of FRAN. DIOTALLEVIVS.
16 HAving thus done with my Reply to the several Answers of M. Barlow, I now
proceed to another Argument, which I lately gathered out of FRANCISCUS
DIOTALLEVIUS, and which is the fitter to succeed the immediate Argument going
before, because it will make for its Confirmation.

Evil works (says this Author, who for strength and accuteness gives place to
none) are Opera mala, and opera nobis a Deo vetita synonyma sunt. -- In nostra
potestate relinquitur vias no^tras ex nobis malas facere quod non contingeret,
si Deus non permitteret modo, sed efficaciter etiam faceret ut.
synonymous with works which are forbidden by God Almighty.: who has left it
in our power to make our ways evil; which yet could not be, if he did not
only permit, but efficaciously make us to faceremus quod vetet etc. Diotall.
opus^. Theol. page 83, 84.
do the thing that he forbids. Now the thing that he forbids, will be
confessed not to be this, [That when we act what he forbids us, we do not
suffer to come to pass, that formal obliquity annexed to all such acts, by the
repugnance which they have to the Law forbidden them,] But the thing forbidden
to us is this, [That we do not produce the positive being of that act, with
which the moral obliquity is inseparably annexed.] The former cannot be the
thing; because the law being given, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, we cannot
possibly hate him, without a repugnance unto the law, which by commanding our
love, forbids our hatred. The latter therefore must be the thing, which we are
forbid to put in being. And which is properly our work, though a positive
entity, because it is absolutely impossible, that God who forbids us the act of
hating him, should make that act, which he thus forbids the making of; or that
(by acting us with his power which is irresistible) he should make us to do,
what he forbids us the doing of. But (to return to Diotallevius) when it is
said, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, the meaning of it cannot be
this, [Beware, that whilst thou pro^ucest the free act of concupiscence, the
moral obliquity do not follow it, (for alas! it cannot but follow.) The meaning
therefore must needs be this, [see that thou abstain from that free act of
concupiscence, because of that obliquity which is inseparably annexed. Or
determine not thy will to that object, which makes the act become contrary to
the rule of right Reason.] And so he concludes it to be the Judgment of the
whole Quare Concilium vult, Deum permissive solum concurrere, ad liberam
Arbitrii creati determinationem ad producendam ipsam actus mali Entitatem. Id.
ib,
Council at Trent, (which in matters of this Nature must needs be of great
consideration,) That God's concurrence is only permissive to the free
determination of the created will, in producing the very being of the evil act.
And God's permission is so distinguished (both by Aug. in Enchir. c. 96.
Durand. in p. d. 46. q* 5. Aqu p. p. q. 19. art. ult. Greg. p. d. 46, and 47.
q. 1. art. 1. Scotus in 1. d. 47. q. 1. S.
Fathers and Schoolmen) from his effection or operation, as to signify no
more, then the negation of an impediment or cohibition. Scotus calls it the
negation of the divine positive act, which by consequence is not a positive
act. And it is not an action (says Diotallevius) but the negation of an
impediment, in respect of that operation, which does depend upon our free
determination. From whence it follows, that he who hates God (be he man, or
devil) is the sole cause of that act, which for that reason also is wholly sin.

. 17. THis is farther confirmed by an Argument leading ad absurdum. Confirmed
by a ninth Argument, leading the Adversary (M Hick.) to the most horrid
absurdities to be imagined.
For if God does concur to the positive act of hating God, not only
permissively, by not hindering it, but physically too, by praedetermining the
will of the Sinner to it, then he absolutely w^^leth the actual hating of
himself; which of all absurdities is the greatest. And again, when man is
forbid by God to hate him, and when God does grievously complain, and threaten
to punish with Hell fire, the man that does not obey his prohibition; It cannot
choose but follow, that if he absolutely wills the positive act which he
forbids (to wit, the sinners hating of him) he wills and nilleth the same
thing, and after the very same manner, which is a blasphemous contradiction.
And thus it is proved to Mr. Hickman, (to whom alone I am henceforth speaking)
that the sin of hating God has a positive being, because that quality or
action which has a positive being is clearly proved to be a sin. And it is
proved to be a sin, by being proved to be a Thing which is not made or
produced, but only suffered or permitted by God Almighty to come to pass. And
only made or produced by them that hate him.

A tenth Argument or Reason out of Cardinal CAJETAN. in 1.2. q. 79. art. 1. et
2,
. 18. CAIETAN proves the positive Entity of sin, because (says he) it
consists, as well of a conversion to an object contrary to the object of
virtue, as of an aversion from the law. And hence (says the Cardinal) there is
in sin a double nature of evil, the one arising from the object, the other from
the not observing of the law: the first is positive, the second privative. The
first infers the second; for it cannot be that a man should hate God, but
that in so doing he must break the law; because it is simply and intrinsecally
evil, so that to do it, is a sin. And as this is observed by D. Field in
confirmation of his Doctrine, (l. 3. c. 23. p. 120.) so I find the same
Cardinal Idem. ib. q. 18. art. 5.
elsewhere saying, that in moralibus pars subjectiva mali est malum; and est in
moralibus malum dupliciter. Implying the whole sin to be a concrete; not a
repugnance to the law without an act, which does imply a contradiction.

. 19. THe most acute EPISCOPIVS does implicitly thus argue, An eleventh
Argument collected from EPISCOPIVS. part. 1. l. 4. c. 11. p. 380 col. ^.
although by way of paralipsis. As an act commanded by the law is the virtue it
self, or ordination of the will unto the law; so the act forbidden by the law
is the vice it self, or inordination of the will against the law. And as the
act of virtue does not contain or connote any real thing positive superadded
to the act, which may be called ordination; so the act of vice does connote
nothing privative, superadded to the act, which may be called inordination.

20. DOctor STERN (a very late, A 12. and 13. Argument urged by Doctor STERN in
his Animi Medela l. 2. c. 16. p. 280, 281.
but Learned Writer) does briefly urge six Arguments, to prove that sin may
have a positive being; four of which I praetermit, because I have already showed
them, as long since urged by other men; though otherwise urged by him than
others, and perhaps in some places to more advantage. The other two I shall
mention, as not yet touched.

First (says he) a Nonentity may be morally good, and therefore an entity may
be morally evil. Non-esse, Bonum moraliter esse potest, proinde and esse
potest esse moraliter malum -- Antec. probatur; quia pura omissio actus
prohibi^i, licet fit merum non-ens est moraliter bona. page 280.
The Consequence is evident, both by the Rule of opposites, and because there
is not more repugnance betwixt Obliquity and Entity (as obliquity is taken or
mistaken by the adverse party) then betwixt goodness, and Nonentity. The
Antecedent is proved, because a mere omission of a forbidden act, although a
Nonentity, is morally good.

Again, the Schoolmen do hold a twofold punishment, Schola constituit poenam
duplicem, etc. ib. page 281.
the one of sense, the other of loss; whereof the latter is the wages of an
aversion from God, as is also the former of a conversion to the Creature; so
that if sin were nothing but mere privation, the poena sensus would be
inflicted without all justice, under the notion of Revenge for a conversion to
the creature.

. 21. AGain it may be thus argued, (and out of BARONIVS his Metaphysica
Generalis) That which has not a positive entity cannot be the cause of any
thing. But sin many ways is the cause of something. A fourteenth Argument out
of BARONIVS his Metap. Genesis Sect. 5. p. 54.
For 1. it is the cause of punishment; and (2) one sin is the cause of another.
A vicious act is the cause of a vicious habit. A vicious habit is the cause of
vicious actions. And a natural propension to evil (which Baronius calls
original sin) is said by him to be the cause of all the vicious actions o^ our
will.

It Is true, he answers this argument; but his answer may be refuted by my
Replies to Mr. Barlow; and by what Baronius grants; (of which anon*) as the
Reader will find, if he makes a trial.

The Arguments back^ by the Authority of the most discerning.
. 22. Now besides these Arguments thus largely urged, and that from many more
Authors, then Mr. Hickman has named for his opinion, I shall exhibit a larger
Catalogue (but with a lesser expense of time and paper) of such eminently
learned and knowing men, as have justified my judgment with the authority of
their own, and of whom (unawares) I have undertaken a justification. I will
begin with those Writers, with the concurrence of whose opinions Dr. Field
thought fit to credit his.

. 23. ALVAREZ says, Alvarez. l. 6. de auxiliis div. Great. disp. 44.
the sin of commission is a Breach of a negative Law, which is not broken but
by a positive Act. Aquinas also says, Aqu Quaest. 2 de malo art. 2. ad. 4.
that though in a sin of omission there is nothing but a privation, yet in the
sin of commission there is some positive thing. Idem. 22. q. 10.5. ad 1.
Nay he says more plainly (what Dr. Field does not observe) that the ratio
formalis of sin is two fold, whereof the one is according to the intention of
the sinner. 12. q. 77.6.0
And that it consists essentially in the Act of the free will. He also infers
it to be an accident, whilst he 12. q. 74.1.0.
says that every sin is in the will, as in its subject. And very often, 12 q.
71 6. c. and passi^. alibi.
that in every sin there are two things, whereof the one is a quality or
action, and so the whole sin must have a positive being. Farther yet it is
consequent to the opinion of Cajetan, ( Greg. de Valent. Tom. 2. d. 2. q 13.
punc. 3 art 5.
says Gregory de Valentia) that sin, formally as sin, is a positive thing,
which he expressly also affirms in primam. 2 dae. q. 71. art. 6. Some hold
(says Cumel dis^ var. ad primam and 1.2. p. 104.
Cumel) that the formal nature of sin consists in some positive thing, to
wit, in the manner of working freely with a positive repugnance to the rule of
Reason, and the law of God, Ockam. l. 3. sent. 12.
Ockam says further, that the very deformity in an act of Commission is
nothing else but the act it self (viz. actus elicitus) against the Divine Law.
And these are cited by Dr. Field. l. 3. c. 23. p. 120.

. 24. To these I add many more, which partly were not, and partly could not
have been observed by Dr. Field. Lessius de perfect. divinis, l. 13. cap. 26.
number. 176.
LESSIVS says that an evil act is in some sort evil even according to its
Physical Entity. Nay upon this passage of C. VORSTIVS, Omne ens qua ens bonum
est, C. Vorst. Amica Colla^io. p. 141 Sect 64.
Piscator himself has this note, (and it is a note of exception) At vitiosa
illa qualitas in nobis, unde oriuntur actu^lia peccata, bona non est. The
learned Matthew. Hafenrefferus in Loc. Theolog l. 3. Stat. 2. p. 246* 247.
Professor of Divinity in Academia Tubingensi affirms Original sin to be an
accident, as the opposite member to substantia; and calls it the accident of a
substance; and compares it to the image of God in man, which (he also says)
was not a substance, but an Accident. And that will be yielded to have a
positive being; especially if he means as Piscator did, that that accident is a
Quality. Another Doctor Prideaux in Fascicul. Controv. c. 3. p. 100, 123.126.
learned Professor in Academia Oxoniensi, by saying Concupiscence is a sin,
infers that sin to be a positive entity, which concupiscence will be granted
by all to be. And if it is with consent, it is an actual sin; if without
consent, it is an inbred Rebellion of the flesh, against the law of God. He
also takes it to be an accident, by ascribing to it subjectum quo, and
subjectum quod: because by entering at the flesh, it did infect the spirit. Dr.
GOAD in his disput. of the Necessity and contingency of events 2. Arg. for
These. 1.
Dr. GOAD, who was sent to the Synod at DORT, whilst he was speaking (in that
Tract which some do call his Retractation) against an ordinary Calvinian
distinction, which he conceived to make God the Author of sin, expressly used
these words. Might I here, without wa^dring, discourse the nature of sin, I
could prove sin it self to be an action, and confute this groundless
distinction that way. The tract is a Manuscript, but diverse have Copyes as well
as I. And sure the world must enjoy it, if not by other men's care at least by
mine.

That Great Divine Dr. IACKSON, (who was withal a great Philosopher, and
inferior to none for skill in Metaphysics,) does not content himself to say
of original sin, DR. IACKSON l. 10. p. 3024.
that it is not a mere privation, but also defines it to be a positive
Renitency of the flesh or corrupt nature of man against the spiritual law of
God, chapter 10. p. 3028.
especially against the negative Precepts, etc. And as he highly commends
Illyricus, (for an extraordinary writer,) so he vindicates his notion, by
explaining his true sense of Original sin, which if the Dr. took by the right
handle, Mr. Barlow took it by the wrong, in the latter part of his 2.
excercitation. It was the Sea ILLYRIGUS his aim made apparent by Dr. JACKSON
l. 10. c. 1 2. p. 3035, 3036.
business of Illyricus (says Dr. IACKSON) to banish all such nominal or
grammatical definitions, as have been mentioned out of the Precincts of
Theology, and to put in continual caveats against the Admission of abstracts,
or mere relations, into the definition of Original sin, or of that
unrighteousness which is inherent in the man unregenerate. The Judicious Doctor
does also tell us, (and who could tell better then he?) that Austin. and
Melanchthon, (as well as Aquinas) say as much in effect as Illyricus did. ibid.
St. Austine, Aquinas, and Melanchthon, do say in effect as much as Illyricus,
if their meanings were rightly weighed, and apprehended by their Followers. Nay
Calvin and Martyr, and many other good writers, ib. chapter 13. p. 3036.
consort so well with Illyricus in their definitions of sin in the
unregenerate, that they must all be either acquitted, or condemned together.
Illyricus himself explains his meaning, by producing the definitions of
Original sin, not only given by Calvinus and Martyr ^pud Ilyr. lib. cui
Titulus, (...) p. 140.141. ib.
Calvin and Martyr, but explained by themselves into Illyricus his sense. In so
much that Dr. Iackson, (ranking Calvin and Martyr with Illyricus) does affirm
them to p. 3037.
make original sin to be the whole nature of man, and all his faculties, so far
forth as they are corrupted. Yet still their meaning was no more then the
Scripture means, when it says, the old man, and the body of sin, thereby
expressing (most briefly) all the works of the flesh, all unhallowed desires,
and vicious habits, which are contrary to the law or spirit of God. For so I
gather from Dr. I. p. 3039. where he also gives notice: that Illyricus his book
was commended to him, upon very high terms, by the Reverend Dr. Field then
Dean of Gloucester.

. 25. Next for the Reverend DOCTOR HAMMOND (who ever occurs to my Remembrance,
when I hear or speak of judicious, Hooker, or Dr. Iackson,) he has proved, as
well as taught, D. Hammond of Fundamentals* p. 182.
that the Act of sin is not separable from the obliquity of that act, (the act
of Blasphemy from the obliquity or i^regularity of blasphemy,) the least evil
thought or word against an infinite good God being as crooked as the rule is
straight, and consequently he that predetermins (or makes) the act, must needs
predetermine (or make) the obliquity, so far is the act of sin (which is
granted by all to have a positive being) from being one of Gods Creatures, (as
Mr. Hickman fears not to say) that ^o all acts of sin says Dr. Hammond) God
does not so much as incline, ibid p. 183.
and the Devil can do So Aquinas. 1.2 q. 80. art. 1. Resp.
no more then persuade any man. For his demonstrating of these, and other
things, (as that the men of that way which Mr. Hickman walks in do unavoidably
make God the Author of sin) confu't the latter part of his 16* Chapter of
Fundamentals. And now for the Reverend Dr. SANDERSON, Dr. SANDERSON in his
Sermon on 1 Timothy 4.4.
he has abundantly inferred the positive entity of sin, even in that very
Sermon which he preached in his younger years, before he changed his judgment
as to the 5. points in cont^oversie; I mean that Sermon, which Mr. Hickman
would have wrested to serve his turn. For the Doctor there teaches (as St.
Paul does to Timo^hy, 1 Ep. c. 4. v. 4. that every creature of God is good. And
therefore to hate God, which is an action intrinsecally evil, can be none of
Gods creatures, in his opinion; though it has in the Devil a positive being
and existence: for that there is goodness in hating God, Ibid. p. 278.
is the sole opinion of Mr. Hickman and his Instructers. 2. Common reason
taught the Maniches (says Dr. S.) that from the good God could not proceed any
evil thing, no more then Darkness from the Suns Luster, or gold from the
scalding of the fire. But the pos^^ive act of hating is wholly evil, ibid. p.
279, 280.
and so a sin notwithstanding its having a positive entity. 3. God has
imprinted some steps and footings of his goodness upon the Creatures (says Dr.
S.) but in hating God there cannot be any such; therefore he hold^ it to be a
sin, ib. p. 281.
though a positive entity. 4. Look upon the workmanship, and accordingly judge
of the workman (says Dr. S.) but we cannot judge of God, by the positive being
of hating God; therefore he holds it to be a sin, although it has a positive
being, ib. p. 281.
5. Doctor S. says, we must not blame Gods creatures, or say why was this
made? or why thus? what good does this? or of what use is that? it had been
better if this or that had never been, or if it had been otherwise.] But there
are many positive entities, which we may blame; as Blasphemy, pride, hypocrisy,
hating of God; and we may very well say, why did David contrive the murder of
Uriah? and why thus treacherously? what good did that murder of so loyal a
subject? of what use is the Devils hating God? it had been better there had
been no such thing: therefore those are all sins, as well as positive entities,
in the opinion of Dr. SANDERSON.

VASQVEZ in pr. 2. disp. 95.
. 26. VASQVEZ inquiring into the formal part of sin divides his Disputation
into thirteen Chapters. The subject of the first is the opinion of Cajetan,
that the moral obliquity does consist in ratione Cajetan. in 6. art. and poste^
art. 5 q. 18.
positiva. The subject of the third is the opinion of sundry modern Writers,
that it consists of a privation and something positive besides. The subject of
the fifth, is to show how they vary and disagree among themselves, who are
against its positivity about the assigning of that privation, in which they
suppose it to consist. In the tenth he gives the judgment of subtle Scotus in
Quodlibet. 18. art. 1.
Scotus, that obliquity sometimes is positively contrary to Rectitude. Then
adds his own in these words. Ego tamen existimo, omne peccatum commissionis,
sive fiat defectu circumstantiae debitae, sive habeat circumstantiam
contrariam, semper esse peccatum ex relatione extrinseca oppositionis and
inconvenientiae, cum Natura rationali: Vtroque autem modo actus contrarius est.
In the eleventh Chapter he answers t^ the Authorities alleged for its
consisting in mere privation. In the twelfth he answers to the Reasons offered
for that opinion. In the thirteenth he considers, what was the Judgment of
Aquinas in this affair, which though at first he seemingly conceives to be
somewhat doubtful, (Aquinas speaking in diverse places as if he had been of
diverse minds too) yet he proves his true Judgment to have been this, That sin
according to its Formality has a positive being. [Affirmat malum in moralibus
esse differentiam Actus moralis, Aquinas in pr. part. 2. q. 48. art. 1. in sol.
2.
non qua ratione est privatio debiti finis, sed quatenus est entitas quaedam
and positivum, cui privatio conjungitur. Idem docuit 3. contra Gent. c. 9.
Praeterea in hac prima secundae q. 18. art. 5. ad 2. and q. 72. art. 1.
affirmat, species peccatorum non ex priva^ione, sed ex ordine ad objecta
desumi. Eo quod privatio per accidens se habeat cum peccato, objecta vero per
se. Cum igitur supra q. 19. art. 1. dixit malum and bonum esse per se
differentias actus, in ratione actus, Intelligi debet, non de malo quod in
privatione consistit, (quia privatio non potest essentialiter and per se in
actu aliquid constituere,) sed de malo positivo. Quare ex hac part aut
nostrae, aut Cajetani sententiae favet.

Our late Apologist for Tilenus (who is very much considered by knowing
Readers) has so far asserted the positivity of sin; and so baffled M. Hickman,
The learned Apologist for Tilenus in his Preface to the Calvinists Cabinet
unlocked p. 23. to the end.
even upon some of his own Grounds; that instead of some Answer, which M.
Hickman by promise had obliged himself to give, he has given no more then a
Tergiversation.

That MEDINA held sin to have a real, positive, absolute Entity; Medina in 1.2.
q. 71. art. 6. Vasquez in 1.2. q. 95. cap. 9* Timplerius apud Rob. Baron. Met.
Genesis Sect. 5. p. 60. Durand. and ADol^.
And that Vasquez would have it to be a positive Relation; M. Barlow did
acknowledge in his dissent from both, Exer. 2. p. 53, 54. Timplerus held sin to
have an efficient cause per se, and so by consequence a positive being.
Reprehending Suarez, for allowing it no more then an efficient per accidens.
Durandus and A Dola are acknowledged by Churchman, (as Mr. Hickman is conceived
to style himself in that Pasquil,) to deny Gods concurrence to sinful acts, and
by consequence to hold the positive entity of sin. Three Reverend Bishops have
praefixed their approbation of what is asserted by Doctor Stearn, in his Animi
Medela; of which I have given an account. 20. And though I have not a
convenience to examine the Truth of what is told me, Ariaga. Amicus. Cardinal
de Lugo.
yet it is told me by a person of great repute for integrity, That Ariaga,
Amicus, and Cardinal de Lugo, do ex prosesso assert the posi^ive entity of sin.
1. The Bishop of Damascus.

2. Clau* Devillius.

3. Emanuel Chalom* in approb. pr^fixis opuse Theol. Fr. Diotall.


I am sure the Bishop of Damascus, and Claudius Devillius appointed to censure
Books by the Archbishop of Lions (Claudius de Bellieure) and Emanuel Chalom,
his Vicar General, (An. Dom. 1611.) did very highly approve of what was taught
by Diotall^vius of A^iminum, concerning sins having a positive being; from
whence I groundedly conclude them to have been of that judgment. Mr Hickman
confesses he cannot deny, but that our Protestant Divines, The Protestant
Divines (indefinitely) in their Disputes against the Papists.
in their Disputes against the Papists, do make a positive as well as privative
part of original sin* (page 85.) and though he labors to salve the matter with
a distinction of positive (out of Maccovi^s) yet that appears to be a shift,
(and a shameful one too) by what I have cited from Doctor Iackson and other
Writers of greatest Note, and by what I shall cite from the Fathers also,
(Chap. 5.. 3.) as well as from some of the learnedest Moderns,) Chap. 5.. 4.

Last of all the REMONSTRANTS do say expressly, REMON. in Exam. cens. c. 7. p.
85. A.
Culpa est actus hominis, and (...). A very short, but an important Instance.

26. The case in hand is so clear, that I need no other proof, By the explicit
and implicit confessions of the Adve^saries themselves.
then the confessions of those on the other side. For sure that Truth is
irresistibly praevalent, which is submitted unto by such, as do most endeavor
to oppose it. Doctor Robert BARON was one of the learned of those men, who
were engaged (by education) to deny what they felt, and had a daily experience
of; to wit, the positive being of sin. But yet he was forced to ROB. BARON in
Met. G^n* de natura mali; p. 49, 50.

Resp. verum quidem esse illud quod afferitur in Argumento, Ipsam pos^^ivam
Entitatem vitiosae actionis esse quid non appetibile, sed fugibile. -- quia cum
ea entitate positiva inseparabiliter connex^ est quaedam Disconvenientia etc.


conf^ss it to be a very great Truth, That not only the privation annexed to
the vicious habit, but even the habit of vice it self, the very positive entity
of the habit of luxury, and the positive entity of a vicious action, is not
quid appetibile (or good) but fugible, (or evil.) An instance was given (from
the objection) in the action of lying with a beast; which very action he
confesses to be quid execrabile. And though he says that such an entity
becomes a sin, by reason of a Disconvenience which is inseparably annexed, yet
he does not (by that) deny the positive entity of the sin, but only says how
it comes to be a sin, which all men say, as well as he, who affirm the most
professedly its positive being. It being granted to be impossible for any
action to be a sin, without some kind of disconvenience, as to the rule of
right reason, and to the perfect nature and will of God. He also Ib. p. 56, and
59.
ascribes, unto the will of man, a real efficacy and production of the effect.
And farther says that Ib p. 57. Ens positiv^m est quod ponit aliquid in ea re
cui attribuitur, ib. p. 64.
sin original is a natural propension of the will to evil. Nay giving the
definition of ens positivum, he says it is that which puts something in the
thing to which it is attributed. And whether sin does not do that, I leave the
Reader to judge by his own experience. In a word he joins with Timpler, in
refuting the vulgar Error (which has imposed so much on Mr. Hickman) of sins
having only a Ib. p. 58.
deficient cause, and smartly shows the absurdities, to which it leads.

. 27. Mr. Barlow also does seem to have implicitly confessed the positive
entity of sin, Mr. Barlow exer. 2. p. 75.
by acknowledging that God (in the sin of hating God) is merely positive in
terminating the act of hatred, and does not actively excite the act. 1. If his
meaning is only this, that God is passive altogether, and the sinner alone
active, Deus Op. Max. se solum passive habet actum odii terminando; non active
eum excitando. ib*
in producing the act of hating God, then he grants the very act to be the
creature of the creature, and not of God; which he cannot grant possibly, but
by granting also, that the act it self (although positive) is wholly evil;
Because he every where says, (in terms aequivalent to these,) that God is
active in the production of every thing that is good. 2. If his meaning is
precisely, That God is only passive, (so as merely not to hinder, but to
suffer, or to permit,) whilst the sinner does determine his will to hate God;
Then he grants that Act of determining the will to a thing forbidden to be the
mere production of the Creature, and by consequence a sin, for the reason now
mentioned. And in granting that act which has a positive being to be a sin, he
must needs g^ant a sin to have a positive being. One of these two things I
suppose he must mean, (and which of the two, it matters not;) because though he
says a little before, That Deus Opt. Max. potest esse causa, vel occasio
moralis, and objectiva malitiae in actu odii ad eum terminati etc. ibid.
God may be the cause of the very pravity (or obliquity) in the act of hating
God, (which he certainly does wish he had never said) yet he explains his
meaning (of the word cause) to be nothing but a moral or obj^^tive occasion of
that obliquity: which proves his sense to be only this, That God is altogether
passive, (the conditio sine-qu^ ^on,) in the creatures determining his will to
sin, (which determining of the will is a sin also) and in producing that act,
which is intrinsecally evil, and so the sin of hating God. If I have hit his
right meaning, I have my end; But if I have not, I shall be glad to be told
another, which may agree with the context as well as this which I have given*
besides he confesses (with Hurtado de Mendoz^) that in the exercis^ of the
will there is a positive act (p. 63.) such as is the act of willing sin. And
that to will sin is sin, I know he will not deny.

By numerous confessions of Mr. Hick. himself.
. 28. But now Mr. Hickman, out of all measure confesses the thing that he
denies, I mean the positive being of sin. For 1. he confesses it a sin, to
hate God, which he also confesses to be an action, and so to have a positive
being. (p. 93, 94, 95.)

Again 2. the first sin of Angels he supposes to have been a proud desire to
be equal unto God. (p. 103.) Now that pride and desire are both in the
praedicament of Quality, and have as positive entities or beings, as any
qualities to be named, is so vulgarly known to every youngster, that Mr.
Hickman dares not sure deny it, for fear the youngsters should fall aboard him,
which he professes to fear in another place. They might well fall aboard him
for calling proud desire, an action, (p. 103. lin. 13.) as a little before he
called hatred (p. 95. l. 17.) but that it is likely they know him too well, to
think it much that a Thistle should bear no Grapes. I shall not therefore
insist upon his no skill in Logic, (whilst again and again he takes a quality
for all action, and a positive entity for a privation, unless he purposely
writes against his own enterprise in calling a proud desire a sin,) but only
pluck him by the ear, as Cynthius did Tityrus, and admonish him for the future
not to act the ultracrepid^st, by taking upon him to be a Scholar and a
School-Divine, when he was mimically ordained to be no more then a
Lay-preacher. Could any man but Mr. Hickman have entitled his Book against a
truth^ which he was forced to acknowledge, whilst he meant to deny and disown
it only?

3. He does not only acknowledge, that the act or habit of any sin has a
positive being, but further adds (beyond all example) That the privation it
self is an evil Quality, (p. 56.) even that privation, which is called by some
the formal part of sin; and is said by himself to denominate the act, or the
habit, evil. Nor will a quasi superadded serve to do him a good turn. For let
him call it an action, or any thing else, to which an Epithet may be added; he
will still imply it to have a positive being. And whilst he says [an evil
quality] he implies the privation, which he so calls, to be a concrete. Not
remembering his famous saying, that he cannot so much as conceive of si^, unless
as perfectly an abstract, (p. 54.) and that sin is synonymous with sinfulness
it self. (p. 53.) Again he seems here to speak of an external denomination, as
if he were not aware of what he was afterward to say concerning the action of
hating God, That it is intrinsecally and essentially evil, not merely through
the want of some Circumstance, (p. 94.)

Again he says, 4. That in hating God, the terminating of that act to that
object is the sinfulness of the action. (p. 95.) Now we know it is an action,
for the will to determine or fix an act upon an object, and so (according to
Mr. Hickman) sinfulness it self has a positive being, even whilst he says it
is but privative.

5. He goes but one line farther, when he says in plainest terms, that moral
goodness and evil are rather modi entium than entia. (p. 95.) whereby he yields
me as much advantage as I can wish to my whole cause. For when sin or moral
evil, is allowed as much entity, as moral goodness, and moral goodness as
little entity as sin; It must either be his Tenet, that sin has also a
positive being, or that goodness has none at all. If the first, he at once
betray's his whole cause: and withal makes God to be the Author of sin, (for
he says, He is the Author of all positive beings.) if the second, he must
needs deny God to be the author of goodness, or lose the benefit of the shift,
by which he would seem not to make him the Author of sin.

6. Again, If the evil works themselves be positive, (which he confesses p.
96.) there needs no more to be added by him. For that there is also some
privation, none is concerned to deny, whilst what is positive in sin is so
fully yielded.

7. He grants as much as a man can wish, p. 102. viz. That man is the efficient
cause of the evil of the Action. And the youngsters Argument against it, holds
as much against good, as evil actions. See his Confession, p. 103.

8. That the deficient cause is reducible to the efficient, the cause of the
action per se, of the vitiosity per concomitantiam, he confesses p. 103.

9. Farther yet he confesses, that sin in Scripture does not signify
abstractly, but that it signifies our faculties which do lust against the
working of the spirit. p. 100. much less will he deny the very lusting it self
to be a sin; which is as positive, as the faculties, to which the lusting is
ascribed.

Nay 10. he confesses that a sin is an action, if he is not unpardonably
impertinent, p. 102. for an account of which, see forward chap. 8.. 24.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. BUt Mr. H. being convicted of (what himself does acknowledge) the greatest
Blasphemy, Mr. H's distinction of the positive Act of ha^ing God and its
obliquity frees him not from making God the Author of sin.
to wit, of making God to be the Author of sin, by bluntly affirming he is the
Author of whatsoever is found to have a positive being, (by name, of that very
action of hating God p. 95.96.) hope's to lessen the odium which cannot but lie
on so foul a Doctrine, by putting his Trust in the common shift. I mean by
making such a distinction betwixt the Act and the obliquity, as to entitle God
unto the first, and the sinner only unto the second. That action of David, his
lying with Vriah's wife, (which in Scripture is called Adultery) He says is
positive and from God, and therefore one of Gods Creatures; And thus he says
over and over, look forwards on Chapter 5. S. 3.
(p. 79.82.95.96.) But the pravity, or obliquity, (which he call's the evil
quality that does denomin^te the Action) he is content to fasten upon MAN TOO,
(ibid.) Now it remains that I endeavor to make him ashamed of so lewd a
Refuge, as does but serve to encourage (by giving shelter and protection) not
at all to extenuate his great Impiety.

. 2. For first (to condemn him out of his mouth) he speaks a while after
without the Vizor of this Distinction, Proved first out of his mouth.
whilst he says ( it does belong to the universali^y of the first Cause to
PRODUCE not only EVERY REAL BEING, but also the real positive. MODIFICATIONS
OF BEINGS p. 95.] Now that the very repugnance of the Act to the ob^ect has at
least a Real (if not a positive) Being Mr. Hickman does many times
acknowledge, as when he ranks it with Moral Goodness in affirming both to be
Modos entium. p. 95. the Field of 3. c. Church l. 23. p. 120.
That profound Divine and subtle Disputant, Dr. Field, allows nothing to be in
the sin of hating God, but what is positive. The very Deformity that is found
in it is precisely (says he) a positive Repugnance to the Law of God. And his
reasons for it are such as Mr. Hickmans Teachers are puzzled at. But letting
that pass, Mr. Hick. is convicted of the crime alleged in the Indictment, if
the Repugnance has nothing more then a real Being: nor dares he say, it has
no being at all; for that were to cast the whole Adultery upon God, by
affirming Him to be the producer of all that is positive, or Real in it, (they
are every one Mr, Hickmans words) and to acquit the Adulterer from having any
share in it, whereby he also does infer him to be but Titularly such.

. 3. But secondly let us suppose, the man had never charged God in so gross a
manner, 2. By Reason.
as to entitle him to the production of all things Real; Yet his shift will
not save him from being found to make God the Author of sin. For when he says
that Action of hating God is from God, he means it is from him as the mediate,
or the immediate cause. If as the mediate, so as to move the second cause to be
immediately the cause of such an action, it follows then that the 2. Cause being
subordinate and determined by the first, to that Numerical and particular
Action, which has its specification from the influx of God, either the action
of hating God cannot possibly be a sin, or not imputed as a sin to the second
Cause (thus acted by the first, as has been said;) But whatsoever it is, must
rest upon God, as its Cause, and Author. If Mr Hick. (for an escape from this
impiety) shall rather say it is from God, as the Immediate Cause, his case will
then be so much worse, as it is worse by some odds to make God a sinner, then
only the cause of his Creatures sin. Now besides that God is said to make the
action which he forbids, (and at the Instant that he forbids it,) we know the
obliquity to the action is so inseparably annexed, that the Author of the One
must needs be the Author of the other, the inseparability is granted by
Baronius (. 5. p. 50.52.) and not denied (I think) by any. But I am truly so
much in pain, whilst Mr. Hick. makes it my duty to expose him thus to public
view, that I will only refer him to the several parts of my '(...), for the
applying of this to his Distinction, and choose to show him the Danger of it,
out of other men's writings: partly that Reason may not be slighted, for want of
Authority to commend it; and partly to show him I am no sharper, then the
necessity of the Case does make it needful: Because no sharper then other men,
who yet are famous for moderation. I will begin with Dr. Field, and the great
Divines by him alleged; and then proceeding to Dr. Goad (one of the Synodists
at Dort) to Dr. Iackson, and Diotallevius, l. 3. c. 23. p. 12^
and other valuable Writers, I will conclude with Dr. Hammond, whom nothing but
love to the truth of God, and perfect zeal to his Honor, could make to utter
the least word that looks like sharpness to a Dissenter.

. 4. This distinction (says Dr. Field) will not clear the doubt they move, 3.
By Authority in conjunction with Reason. Durand. l. 2. d. 37. q. 1.
touching Gods efficiency and working in the sinful Actions of men. Whenever
(says Durand) two thins are inseparably joined together, whosoever (knowing
them both, and that they are so inseparably joined together) chooses the one,
chooses the other also. Because though happily he would not choose it
absolutely, as being evil, (and by the way no sinner does so choose sin) yet in
as much as it is joined to that which he does will, neither can be separated
from it, it is of necessity that he must will both: The case appears in those
actions, which are voluntary and mixed; As when a man casts into the Sea those
rich commodities, to save his life, which he would not do, but in such a case.
Hence it follows that the act of hating God, and sinful deformity, being so
inseparably joined together, that the one cannot be divided from the other,
(for a man cannot hate God, but he must sin damnably) if God does will the
one, he does will the other also.

Suarez Metaphys Tom. 1. d. 22. Sect. 4. p. 522.
. 5. This of Durand is confirmed by Suarez, who says, He shall never satisfy
any man that doubts, how God may be cleared from being author of sin, if he
have an efficiency in the sinful actions of men, that shall answer, that all
that is said touching Gods efficiency and concurrence, is true in respect of
the evil motions of men's wills materially considered, and not formally, in that
they are evil and sinful. For the one of these is consequent upon the other.
For a free and Deliberate act of a created will, about such an act, and such
circumstances, cannot be produced but it must have deformity annexed to it.

^umel Disput. var. ad, primam and primam* 2. p. 104.
. 6. There are some operations or Actions (says Cumel) that are intrinsecally
evil, so that in them we cannot separate that which is material from that which
is formal; as it appears in the hate of God, and in this act when a man shall
say and Resolve, I will do evil, so that it implies a contradiction, that God
should effectually work our will to bring forth such actions, in respect of
that which is material in them, and not in respect of that which is formal.

. 7. And this seems yet more impossible (says Dr. Field) if we admit their
opinion, Dr. Field. ubi supra.
who think, that the formal nature and being of the Sin of commission,
consists in some thing that is positive, and in the manner of working freely,
so as to repugne to the rule of Reason, and L^w of God; so that it is clear in
the judgment of those great Divines, that if God has a true real efficiency
in respect of the substance of these sinful actions, he must in a sort produce
the deformity, or that which is formal in them.] And again the Dr. says, If
God does determine the will of man to work repugnantly to the Law, he must
needs move and determine it to sin; seeing to sin is nothing else, but to
repugne unto the Law, (p. 125.)

Dr. GOAD in his Disput. of the Necess. and Cont. of events, etc* 2 d. Arg. for
These. 1*
. 8. Its a hard case (says Dr. GOAD) when they have but one frivolous
distinction to keep God from Sinning. -- And then he confutes the evasion thus.
-- That which is a principal ^^use of any action, is a cause of those
concomitants which accompany that action necessarily. This Rule is most
certainly true. Therefore if God by his Decrees do force us to do those actions
which cannot be done without sin, God himself (I am afraid to rehearse it) must
needs be guilty of sin. -- He gives an Instance in Adam's eating the forbidden
fruit. And I will gratify my Reader with a Transcript of it, because the
Doctors Disputation is not commonly to be had. If God decreed that Adam should
unavoidably eat the forbidden fruit, seeing the eating of that fruit which he
had forbidden must needs be with a gr^ss obliquity, I do not see (says the
Doctor) how this Distinction will justify God. For Adam sinned because he ate
that fruit that was forbidden; But they say God decreed that he should eat that
fruit which was forbidden, necessarily and unavoidably; The Conclusion is too
blasphemous to be so often repeated. The Reader may see (as the Dr. goes on, by
which it is plain he intended his Disputation for the Press) how well that common
distinction holds water. Yea if this nicety were sound, man himself might prove
that he committed no murder although he stabbed the dead party into the heart.
For at his arraignment, he might tell the Judge, that he did indeed thrust a
dagger into his heart, but it was not that which took away his life; but the
extinction of his natural heat and vital spirits. Who sees not the wild
phrenzie of him that should make this Apology? yet this is all our Adversaries
say for God. They say his Decree was the cause that Adam took the forbidden
fruit and put it into his mouth, and eat that which he had commanded he should
not eat; yet they say he was not the cause of the transgression of the
Commandment* etc. But let us hear Dr. Iackson also. Doct^r JACK^SON in exact.
Collect. Book. 10. c. 5. p 3011 3012.


9. The Hypothesis, for whose clearer Discussion these last Theses have been
praemised, is this; [ Whether it being once granted or supposed, that the
Almighty Creator was the cause either of our mother Eves desire, or of her
actual eating of the forbidden fruit, or of her delivery of it to her husband,
or of his taking and eating it, though unawares; the same Almighty God must not
upon like necessity be acknowledged to be the Author of all the obliqui^ies
which did accompany the positive acts, or did necessarily result from them]
This is a case or Species Facti which we cannot determine by the Rule of Faith:
It must be tried by the undoubted Rules of Logic, or better Arts. These be the
only perspective Glasses which can help the eye of Reason to discover the
truth or necessity of the consequence; to wit, [whether the Almighty Creator,
being granted to be the cause of our mother Eves first longing after the
forbidden Fruit, were not the cause or Author of her sin.] Now unto any
Rational man that can use the help of the forementioned Rules of Art (which
serve as prospective Glasses unto the eye of Reason) that usual Distinction
between the Cause or Author of the Act, and the Cause or Author of the
Obliquity which necessarily ensues upon the Act, will appear at the first sight
to be False or Frivolous: yea, to imply a manifest contradiction. For Obliquity
or whatsoever other Relation, can have no cause at all, besides that which is
the Cause of the Habit, of the Act, or Quality whence it necessarily results.
And in particular, that conformity or similitude which the first man did bear
to his Almighty Creator, did necessarily result from his substance or manhood,
as it was the work of God undefaced. Nor can we search after any other true
Cause of the First man's conformity to God, or his integrity, besides him who
was the cause of his manhood, or of his existence with such qualifications as
by his creation he was endowed with. In like manner whosoever was the cause
whether of his coveting or eating of the Tree in the middle of the Garden, was
the true cause of that obliquity or crooked deviation from Gods Law, or of that
deformity or dissimilitude unto God himself which did necessarily result from
the forbidden Act or Desire. It was impossible there should be one Cause of the
Act, and another Cause of the Obliquity or Deformity whether unto Gods Laws or
unto God himself. For no Relation or Entity merely relative (such are
obliquitie and deformity) can have any other Cause, beside that which is the
cause of the (Fundamentum) or Foundation whence they immediately result. It
remains then that we acknowledge the old Serpent to have been the first Author;
and Man (whom God created male and female) to have been the true positive Cause
of that obliquity or deformity which did result by inevitable N^c^ssity from
the forbidden Act or desire, which could have no Necessary cause at all*] and
more to this purpose p. 3013. etc.

. 10. Diotallevius does also prove, that they who make God the Author of the
positive act of hati^g God, Diotall. opus^: Theol. p. 84.57 101.

Nulla ratione potest Deus efficere, ut ad entitatem. Actus intrinsece mali
libere eliciti non sequatur malitia moralis; quia implicat contradictionem, ut
Actus intrinsecemalus, v. g. actus ^dii. dei libere eliciatur and malus non
sit, seu malitiam formalem conjunctam non habe^^^ etc.


do make him the Author of the obliquity, Because (says he) God himself cannot
effect (what does imply a contradiction) that the moral obliquity of an Act
which is intrinsecally evil and freely exerted by the creature, shall not
follow (or rather attend) the positive entity of the act, which is such as has
been said, and so exerted. For it implies a contradiction, that an act
intrinsecally evil, (to wit, the act hating God) should be freely exerted, and
yet not evil, or that it should not have a moral pravity conjoined with it. 2.
They who hold all positive entities to be effected by God himself, must needs
believe him to be the cause, as much of the worst, as of the best actions in
the world; both because hating is as positive, when it is fixed upon God, as it
can possibly be, when it is fixed upon the Devil; And because an obliquity is
as unavoidable to the one, as rectit^de or conformity can be possibly to the
other. 3. If an immediate working of the formal obliquity, be required to make
an Author of another sin, then neither Man, nor Devil, (in persuading another
to do wickedly) can possibly be the Author of it: because they are not any
otherwise the causes of the obliquity, then by tempting to that act to which
the obliquity is annexed. And for the very same reason, no creature could be
the cause of any such sin within himself; because he does not produce the moral
obliquity of the act, but by producing the act to which the obliquity is
annexed. 4. When we do absolutely and simply inquire after the cause of another
man's sin, we do not inquire after the cause which immediately reaches to the
obliquity of the act, but after the inducing or moving cause, by which he is
led to such a voluntary act, whose object is repugnant to the rule of Reason.
(That is the method of Aquinas, De malo, quaest. 3. art. 1. and 3. and 1.2. q.
75. per totam) from whence it follows, that if God does induce us efficaciously
to an aversion from himself, and so to a hatred of his Divinity; it is every
whit as true, that he is the Author of our sin, as that he induces us
efficaciously to that aversion and hatred which is intrinsecally evil. And
therefore Mr. Hickman must recant the first, or contentedly smart for the
Impiety of the second.

. 11. Doctor STEARN is very severe, (and upon very just ground) to the use that
is made of the same Distinction. Dr. STEARN de Animi Medelac. 11. p. 248, 249.
For he does not content himself to say, that to be the cause of the action
from which the obliquity cannot be separate, is to be the very cause of the
obliquity it self, because the obliquity is annexed to the entity of the
Action, and that in a manner unavoidable; Nor does he only add this, That man
himself is no otherwise the author of his sin, then as he is author of that
action to which the obliquity is annexed; But he says yet farther, [ Proinde,
si Deus est sciens malitiam esse ab action Inseparabilem, and volen^, ipsam
suo concursu producat, non t^ntum non immunis erit a malitia, verum etiam
illius magis erit reus, quam ipse homo: utpote qui raro vel nunquam de malitia
annexa cogitat, etc, ib. p. 249.
That if God, well-knowing the absolute inseparability of the obliquity from
the action, does w^llingly produce that very action; he is so far from being
free from the obliquity of the action, that he is more guilty of it, then the
man himself, in whom that action is ^o produced; as who does seldom or never
think of the obliquity annexed, quam Deus nunquam non cognoscit and
animadvertit. Nay he charge the Adversaries with a higher blasphemy then
that, even with making God more guilty then the devil; which how they can
answer, let them consider whom it concern's. I shall only, for the present,
subjoyn his words. Immo, Daemones hominem ad peccandum tentantes, minori jure
Authors peccati sunt censendi, quam Causa Libera Actionis illam producens, and
non tantum sciens malitiam esse illi annexam; Nam Daemones non producunt
Actiones quibus malitia est annexa, sed tantum solicitant, etc. -- multo itaque
magis Malitiae reus est, qui sciens and volens non tentat aut solicitat, sed
actionem reipsa producit, cujus malitia (ut ab ea prorsus inseparabilis) ipsi
quam clarissime patet. What kind of Adversaries they are, whom the Doctor thus
handles, and how much Mr. Hickman becomes concerned, he gives us to know by his
two instances, in Twisse, and Zuinglius.

. 12. A whole College of Remonstrants, (men of renown for their piety and
learning too) thought fit to shame the common subterfuge by these two ways of
Argumentation. A whole society of Remonstrants in defens. Sent R^monst. circa
prim. de praed. art. p. 254* Quandocunque causa superior and omnipotens ita
inferiorem and impotentiorem movet, ae de. terminat, ut ea sic mota non possit
non peccare, tum sane jure su. per. and omnip. causae tot^ pec. cati culpa
tran. scribetur. etc.
1. Whenever a superior and omnipotent cause does so move and determine the
inferior and impotent, that it being so moved cannot choose but sin, Then must
the guilt of that sin be wholly transferred on the superior and omnipotent
cause. But according to those men, who affirm the positive acts of all the very
worst sins to be the creatures and works of God, the inferior cause is so
moved by the omnipotent and superior, as that it cannot choose but sin;
Therefore according to those men, the sin is wholly to be transferred on the
superior cause. 2. When two causes do concur to one action, (to wit the
action of hating God) whereof the one act's freely, and the other of necessity,
then must the cause which acts freely sustain the whole fault of its coming to
pass. But according to the men aforesaid, God acts freely in the producing of
such an action, (which M. Hickman reckons amongst Gods creatures) and the
inferior cause of necessity; Therefore according to those men, God sustains
the whole fault of its coming to pass. And we know in the whole fault is
included the obliquity, as well as the act.

The Apologist for Tilenus in praef. Epist.
. 13. The Apologist for Tilenus, does make this Answer to the distinction. 1.
That man does seldom or never entertain sin, or consent to it, with a design
to oppose himself to the divine Law, but to enjoy his P^easure, and satisfy
his appetites. 2. He supposes that a man should consent to sin, with such a
set purpose to oppose Gods Law. And then infers, that ( according to Mr. H.'s
Doctrine) that consent, and that purpose (being positive entities and acts of
the soul) are from God and of his production, from whence it follows, either
that man does not sin when he commits such an act; or that the fault is
imputable to God, who is (called by Mr. Hickman) the first cause of that Act. I
wonder when Mr. H. will give that Author a Reply.

Dr. Hammond* of Fundamentals chapter 16.
. 14. But after all, and above all, I commend to consideration the words of the
Reverend Dr. HAMMOND, who having showed how those Doctrines (which are commonly
called Calvinistical) are so noxious to the practice and lives of men, as to be
able to evacuate all the force of the Fundamentals of Christianity; p. 156.
(those I mean by him forementioned. p. 180.
) And coming to speak of the Distinction betwixt the act and the obliquity,
which the Assertors of those Doctrins have commonly used as an Artifice, p. 178.
for the avoiding of those consequences, by which their Doctrines are rendered
odious; at last proceeds to make it appear, [ p. 182.183.
That this is no way applicable to the freeing of God "from being the Author of
that sin, of which he is said (by those men) to predetermine the act. For 1.
Though a free power of acting good or evil, be perfectly distinct and separable
from doing evil, and therefore God, that is the Author of one, cannot thence be
inferred to be the author of the other, yet the act of sin is not separable
from the obliquity of that act, the act of blasphemy from the obliquity or
irregularity of blasphemy, the least evil thought or word against an infinite
good God being as crooked as the rule is straight, and consequently he that
predetermines the act, must needs predetermine the obliquity.

Nay 2. if there were any advantage to be made of this distinction in this
matter, it would more truly be affirmed on the contrary side, that God is the
author of the obliquity, and man of the act, for God that gives the rule, in
transgressing of which all obliquity consists, does contribute a great deal,
though not to the production of that Act, which is freely committed against
that rule, yet to the denominating it oblique; for if there were no Law, there
would be no obliquity; God that gives the law that a Jew shall be circumcised,
thereby constitutes uncircumcision an obliquity, which, had he not given that
law, had never been such; But for the act (as that differs from the powers on
one side, and the obliquity on the other) it is evident that the man is the
cause of that.]

To conclude this Chapter. It is a thing so undeniable, that the Author of the
act of hating God, must needs be the Author of the obliquity, that as the men
of the Church of England affirm man to be the Author and the sole author of
both, and God of neither, so the rigid Presbyterians (as well as Papists)
affirm God to be the Author, not only of the act, but of the obliquity of the
Act. Witness Mr. Archer (so much commended by Thomas Godwin) in his Comfort for
believers p. 36.37. Mr. Whitfield also, and Mr. Hobbs, Occham in sent. 3. q. 12
(cited by Dr, Field p. 128.) and Mr. Hickman in effect, when he says that God
is the Cause of all Beings, p. 78. and p. 95. and Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel c. 2.

CHAP. V.
. 1. THE positive entity of sin is so clear from Scripture, The positive entity
of sin made undeniable from scripture.
and from the writings of all the Fathers both Greek and Latin; that as Mr.
Hickman has not attempted to give us Scripture for his opinion, so the FATHERS
are very few, whose very figurative speeches do look that way. And their
meaning is so conspicuous, by what the same Fathers say ( before and after,)
that if he drank out of the Fo^ntaines, Psalm. 115.4. and Psalm. 135.15* Idolum
hoc loco (Inquit Beza, ad 1 Cor. 8.4.) sumitur pro simulachro ad Numen
repraesentandum afficto. (...) 1 Cor. 8.4. (...). 1 Cor. 1, 28 1 Cor 7.19.
(...). Isa. 41.24.
as I see he has done out of several Cisterns, I admire the greatness of his
delusion: His performance being no better, then mine or any man's would be, who
should prove that an Idol has not a positive being, (although the work of men's
hands, and made of Massy Gold or silver) because it is said by the Apostle, an
Idol is nothing in the world. Or that the Planters of Christianity had not
only no positive, but not so much as a Real Being, because it is said by the
same Apostle, that God has chosen the things that are not, to bring to naught
things that are. Yet this ad hominem, is a strong way of arguing; very much
stronger then Mr. Hickmans, by how much that of the Scripture is the greatest
Authority in the world. Now though it is said by the Holy Ghost, that
Circumcision is nothing, that the foreskin is nothing, that wicked men are of
nothing, that every man is but vanity, yea and altogether lighter then vanity
it self, (which will be granted by all the world to have positive beings) yet
does he not say in any one text, That sin is nothing in the world, or that
Blasphemies and Rapes have no positive being; 1 John. 3.8*
but on the contrary, sins are said to be the works of men and devils. And now
to prevent any exception to the propriety of the word,

. 2. Those are properly called sins, God is fittest to be the Judge of what is
properly called sin.
which God himself in his written word does commonly call by that name. And how
many things are there that have positive entities or beings, (by the very
confession of Mr. H. and all that are of his way,) of which wickedness and sin
are found to be predicated in scripture? As for example, For the man to lie
with the Masters wife, Joseph called a great wickedness, and a sin aginst God.
To take another man's wife, Genesis 39.9. and carefully compare it with verse. 7.
Genesis 20.9. ^ 2 King. 17.21
was called a great sin by King Abimelech. And Jeroboam, in driving Israel from
following the Lord, is said to have made them sin a great sin. David's sin is
called a deed, that is, an act or fact 2 Samuel 12* 14. If St. Paul had not
thought that some sins are actions, and that other sins are qualities, Romans
7.5. Romans 6.12.
he would not certainly have told us of the motions of sins, and the lusts of
sins. The motions of sins which were by the Law, did work in our members to
bring fruit unto death. (Romans 7.5.) So in the 7. verse of that Chapter, he
expresses sin by lust, as lusting by coveting. And yet so far is the Apostle
from ascribing those positive things to God, that speaking there of wilful sin
(in the person of a Carnal unregenerate man) the doing that which he would not
do, Romans 7.20.
he does not add (like Mr. Hickman) It is not I that DO it, but GOD that DOES
it in me. No, his words (on the contrary) are justly these, It is no more I
that do it, but SIN that dwells in me. That I may not be overlong in so clear
a case, I fain would know of Mr. Hickman; whether those works of the flesh
which are manifest (says the Apostle), and set in opposition to the fruits of
the spirit, Gal. 5^19, 26, 21.
(and by an opposition of contrariety too, Gal. 5.17.) I say I would know of
Mr. Hickman, whether those lusts of the flesh are not properly called sins* And
whether Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, have not real and positive beings. He
will not sure deny this, because he knows that these things are either
qualities or actions. Nor can he deny they are sins, because they are set in a
contrariety to the Fruits of the spirit, and because it is added presently
after, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And
(as I take it) they must be sins* for which the Doers are to suffer the loss of
heaven, which is waited on with the pains of Hell too. When Judas said, I have
sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood and Cain complained that his sin
was greater then he could bear, meaning the killing his brother Abel; who sees
not that sin is predicated in Recto of two such actions, as are granted by all
the world to have positive beings? It is but dipping into the Scripture, to
find abundance of such examples.

Confirmed by the Concurrence of Ancient Fathers.
. 3. 'Twere easy to write ^ just volume, in showing the concurrence of Ancient
F^THERS; and even the least that I can show (with a desire of Brevity) will be
more then Mr. Hickman was able to wrest to his seeming interest. I cannot
better begin, then with the great ATHANASIUS, whom several men's
misapprehensions have helped to speak for their judgment, against his own.
Athanasius (...), p. 3
First he delivers his true meaning, when he uses the expression of (...)
applied to (...). And therefore with the Apostle, he first applies it unto
Idols, which had as positive beings as those that made them: (...). Next he
sets down the reason, (...). p. 5.
why he uses that expression, (...); and his reason is, because they are not
from him who is indeed the (...), but from those free and depraved Agents, who
revolting from their maker made them Idols or Gods of their own invention:
(...). p. 4* where the lusts of the flesh (which he calls the body) are given
as Instances of the sins, to which the creature was now descended, and by much
repetition had made (...). p. 4* ibid* p. 5.
habitual. After this he asserteth the opposition of contrariety twixt vice and
virtue, thereby proving the positivity as well of the one as of the other. And
giving examples of those actions, as well as qualities, which man is able to
produce by being a voluntary Agent, (abusing the Liberty of his will to (...),
etc. page 5.
desires and lusts of his own (...), etc. page 5.
forging) he names the committing of Adultery, Murder, Rebellion, Blasphemies,
Comumelies, Perjuries, plundering, Beating, Gluttony, Drunkenness, which though
granted by all the world to be positive things, are affirmed by that Father, to
be the wickedness and sin of the soul of man; (...); p. 6. And to make it yet
more undeniable, that he opposes his (...), to the excellent Creatures of God
himself, (whom he often calls the (...)*) and not to all that has a positive
being, (...) page 5.
He sets Concupiscencies or Lusts in opposition to the Creature; that is, the
creatures of wicked men in opposition to those of God.

Then showing the power of the soul to incite the members of the body, and
(...). p 6.
of her self to excite her self, he says (in the (...). p 6.
concrete) she forms evil unto her self. And so he proceeds to show the
error of certain Graecians, who held sin to have a substance, (and not to be a
mere accident) A substance created by a God too, whom they would have to be
coeternal with the Father of Lights, and the maker of sin as a second Nature,
which from all eternity was collateral with the First. (First in Dignity,
though not in Time.) (...). p. 6. which shows Mr. Hickman the strange
Impertinence of what he cites from Athanasius, p. 76. not only quite beside,
but (as I shall show when I come thither) against his purpose. For the Father,
having proved against those heretics, (...); p. 7.
That there is one only God, and that evil is a thing temporal, not derived
from God, but from the voluntary creature endued with liberty of will, goes on
(for several whole pages) to speak as much for my purpose, as I can wish him.
He shows the folly of their distinction, who so endeavor to put a difference
betwixt the act of h^ting God, and the sin of hating God, (which they call the
obliquity of the act) as to affirm the first to be from God, and therefore
good; the other evil, and from the Creature, (...). p. 7.
whereas it is impossible (says the Father) that good and evil should be so
inseparably together. For what he (...). p. 7. Note, this is a Confirmation of
the whole 4. chapter.
says of a good and an evil God, is as true of a good and an evil act, and in
a sense as cogent as that he speaks in; for it implies a contradiction, that
one and the same should be a good and an evil act too, to wit, that the a^t of
hating God should be no less a good A^t, as being from God, then it is an evil
one, as having an obliquity which is from m^n. I say such a m^x^ure of good and
evil, in one and the same numerical act, must needs be absolutely impossible
and con^radictory, (...). And is not that an unchristian Fabric, which has no
better a Buttress whereon to lean? But I must hasten to other Fathers, before,
and after Athanasius.

DIONYSIUS the AREOPAGITE, how much soever he lived before the great
Ath^n^sius, Ad quinti seculi ultima vel sexti initia pertinent quae Dionysii
Areopagitae nomine laudantur. Dallae, us de confirmatione. p. 203
I thought the fitter in this place to follow after, the more conducible I
thought it for the finding out his right meaning; of which at first I began to
doubt, because I found him so much mistaken by so learned a person as Mr.
BARLOW, to whom Mr. Hickman is beholding page 56. Its true he uses such
expressions, as I lately showed and explained in A^hanasius, (and Master Barlow
says in what pages, though Mr. Hickman does not.) But he uses the very (...).
Dionys. Areop. de Div. Nom. c. 4. p. 574.
same of God himself in some places, whom yet I hope Mr. Hickman will not
thence conclude a mere privation, or a Nonentity. (...). Dionys. Areop. de
Div. Nom. c. 4. p. 574.
God (says Dionysius) is deprived of essence. Nay (...). Idem de mystic^
Theolog. c. 5. p. 45, 46.
He is neither a substance, nor a spirit, nor any thing of the things that are,
or exist: shall an Atheist now say, that Dionysius was of his mind, and urge
the letter of these words to bear him out? No, Mr. Hickman will tell him, the
words are spoken in a sublime and figurative way, and must be explained by the
context, to yield the Authors true meaning. The very same shall I say in the
other case, That when the Father says of sin, (...), he must be so understood,
as Aquinas understood Austin, denying the Look forwards on S. ^. number. 8.
act of sin to be anything; opposing that act (being an accident) to res
simpliciter, which is substantia. And accordingly Corderius does render (...)
by substantia, not by essentia, much less by entitas. What gave occasion to
Dionysius to speak of evil in that style, holy Maximus tells us in his Scholion
upon the place. For Dionysius having said, that that which is De Divin. Nom.
cap. 4. Sect. 18. page 570.
not does desire that which is good, [(...)] and again a few leaves before,
that there is a will in that which is not: S. Maximus in locum jam ci^. p. 617.
-- (...), etc.
Maximus tells us that the words being spoken against the Manichaeans, he must
largely explicate what is meant by (...), and why the thing that is evil is
called that which is not: of which, as I have spoken in the praecedent
paragraph, so I shall speak once for all in the 5. of this Chapter, Number 9.
But if the Question is to be carried by words and phrases, even so the very
truth will be found to rest on my side. For the (...). ib. page 618.
Antien^s (says holy Maximus) did express the same thing by the word matter,
and extreme turpitude, which is expressed also by (...), or that which is not:
and thence forwards when he speaks of things that are not, (meaning evils) he
(...), etc. ib. page 620.
explains himself presently by things material. In a word, Dionysius does give
the reason, why that which is evil is said not to be, even because it is more
remote from God, then that which is not in being. For that I conceive must be
the sense of the Greek, (what ever was thought by the Translator, who seems not
to hit the Fathers meaning.) Dionys. Are* op. de Div. nom. c. 4. p. 571, 572.
(...). Which how many several ways it makes against Mr. Hickman, the
indifferent Reader is left to judge. So clear to me is the meaning of that
figurative Writer, that he says of the sinner (not only of the sin) that he
is (...). ib. p. 575.
not in being, so far forth as he is a sinner, and desires nothing that is. Had
Mr. Hickman prepared himself for the Reading of the book (if at least he ever
read so much as a page or line of it) by reading the general observations
prefixed to it by Corderius, in particular, Baltha. Cord. observe. Genesis 8. p. 21.

Baltha. Cord. observe. Genesis 8. p. 21.


that of his making God to be the position and Baltha. Cord. observe. Genesis 8. p.
21.

Baltha. Cord. observe. Genesis 8. p. 21.


privation of all things, [(...)] I think he could not have swallowed so great
an error. That something is positive, as well as privative in sin, Note his
Implying the activity of sin, whilst he says, (...), p. 317.
Dion^sius (or whoever is the Author of that book, which is thought unduly to
wear his name) has sufficiently inferred by his answer given to this Question,
(...); to which he answers, (...) (page 580.) and again, (...). (p. 584.)

But I have dwelt so long upon these two Fathers, that I must study to be brief
in those that follow: and that by satisfying my self with one or two instances
out of each. The force of which I shall not show, (as I have hitherto done) but
modestly leave to my Readers judgment. I shall only propose to consideration,
whether those qualities or actions are not worthily called sins, of which the
word sin is wont to be praedicated in recto. And whether that which is granted,
to be a true proposition, (by all the world,) can possibly lose of its Truth,
by the attempts of so gross a Fallacy, as a dicto simpliciter ad Dictum
secundum Quid.

CLEMENS ALEX. strom. (...). edit. Commel. page 219. and edit. Paris. p. 511.
-- (...) (...). Here to sin is by such an action to pollute the Title of man,
and is said to be placed (or to consist) in the action or operation, not
substance, or essence; and this is the ground, why it is not the work of God.
So afterward sin not brought to repentance is defined (...). 5. p. 281. And
though elsewhere he calls sin a variation from right reason, yet there is added
a Idem (...). p. 39. l. 39.
positive entity of each, (...). (But I am ready to break my promise, almost as
soon as I have made it.)

CYRILLVS HIEROS. (...). edit morell. p. 30. (...).

HIERONYM. in Malach. c. 3. p. 284. A. Nequaquam levia putemus esse peccata,
perjurium, calumniari viduam, and opprimere alienigenam, quae male sicio and
veneficiis and adulterio comparantur.

BASIL. in Hex. Homil. 2. p. 19. (...).

CHRYSOSTOM. in 1. ep. ad Cor. c. 6. Hom. 16. p. 167. (...);

ATHENAGORAS in Legate. pro Christianis. p. 35. c. (...).

ANSELMVS super 2. ad Hebr. Peccatum est vel facere vetita, vel non facere
jussa.

JUSTIN. MART. Q. and Resp. ad Orth. p. 419. (...). (...).

Sanct. THEOPHILUS ad Autolychum lib. 3. p. 125. (...).

TERTULLIAN. de Poenit. p. 375. Porro peccatum, nisi MALVM FACTVM, dici non
meretur. Nec quisquam benefaciendo delinquit* -- Ibid. p. 376.
Cum Deum grande quid Boni constet esse, utique Bono nisi Malum non
displiceret, quod inter CONTRARIA sibi nulla Amicitia est.

MACARIVS in Hom. 15. p. 100. c. (...)* (having spoken before of Adam's
disobedience.)

Hom. 24. p. 137. (...).

Hom. 38. p. 204. (...), etc. (...) -- And long before (Hom. 3. p. 15. A.)
(...);

LACTANTIVS in Instit. l. 2. c. 7. p. 102. Dupliciratione peccatur ab
insipientibus; primum quod Dei opera Deo praeferunt; deinde quod elementorum
ipsorum figuras humana specie comprehensas colunt.

-- l. 5. c. 18. p. 315*
Haec facere, peccatum est. -- ib. c. 19. p. 316. ib. l. 6. c. 10. p. 349.
Nesciunt quantum sit nefas, adorare aliud, praeter Deum.

Si libido appetit thorum alienum, licet sit mediocris, vitium tamen maximum
est. -- ib. c. 17. p. 364.
Cupiditas inter vitia numeratur, si haec quae terrena sunt concupiscat, etc.

-- ib. c. 20. p. 371.
Recens natos oblidere, maxima Impietas, exponere and necare, duplex scelus.
See much more l. 5. c. 9. p. 299. especially c. 20. p. 319. So whilst the
Blasphemy of Marcus the Magician, and his Followers, or their positive speaking
against the honor of Gods essence, is called an Impiety by IRENAEVS adv hares*
l. 1. c. 13. p. 94. ^*
IRENAEVS, and (...) above all Impiety, he unavoidably imply's the positive
being of Impiety, which (I hope) M. Hickman will not affirm to be good; or say
impiety is one thing, and sin another.

AMBROS. de Cain and Abel. lib. 2. cap. 9. fol. 260. Quanto gravius pec^ato
ipso, ad Deum refer Quod f^ceris? There the positive fact is said to be a
sin, though the ascribing it to God (which is done by Mr. Hickman) is said to
be worse then the sin it self; that is to say, ^ greater sin.

CYPRIAN. de Eleemosyna, 1. Sermon. p. 179. Coarctati eramus, etc. nisi iterum
pieta^ Divina subveniens, -- viam quandam tuendae salutis aperuisset, ut Sordes
postmodum quascunque contrahimus Eleemosynis abluamus. compare this with Daniel
4.27.

-- ib. p. 452.
Quia voluntas non erat in culpa, providit Deus generali Damnationi remedium,
and suae sententiam Justitiae temperavit, haereditarium ONVS a sobole removens,
and misericorditer ablutione and unctione medicinali corruptionis primitivae
Fermentum expurgans.

ORIGIN. ad Joan. 2. in Cat. pat. Gr. p. 77. (...) -- ib. p. 95.
(...).

AUGUSTINVS Confess. c. 11. Talis motus (nimirum voluntatis) Delictum atque
peccatum est. -- Id de lib. Arb. l. 2. c. 10. apud Author. Anim. med. p. 258.
Metus ille Aversionis, quod fatemur esse peccatum, vide quo pertineat, etc.

SALVIAN. l. 4. p. 128. Furtum in omni quidem est homine malum Facinus; sed
damnabilius ab que dubio, si Senator furatur aliquando. Cunctis Fornicatio
interdicitur, sed Gravius multo est, si de Clero aliquis, quam si de populo
fornicetur. Ita and nos qui Christiani Catholici esse dicimur, si simile
aliquid Barbarorum Impuritatibus facimus, Gravius erramus. Atrocius enim sub
sancti nominis professione peccamus -- quanto minori peccato illi per Daemonia
pejerant, Ib. p. 237.
quam nos per Christum? Quanto minoris Res Criminis est, Jovis nomen, quam
Christi etc. The force of this last testimony may be learnt by Mr. H. from Dr.
Field. [It must not be said, that God is the original cause, that man has any
such action of will as is evil ex objecto, for if he should Originally and out
of himself will any such act, he must be the author of sin, seeing such an a^t
is intrinsecally evil, so that it cannot be separated from deformity. p. 125,
126.] after this let Salvian speak -- Nil ad Deum pertinens Leve ducendum est;
Idem l. 6 p. 207.
quia etiam quod videtur exiguum esse Culpa, Grande hoc faciebat Divinitatis
In^uria.

EPIPHANIVS adv. Haer. l. 1. Tom. 3. p. 265. (...), ib. p. 671. ib. p. 585.
(...), etc. -- (...), ib. p. 587. p.
(...), etc. -- (...), -- (...), ib. p. 588.
(...). More instances may be seen p. 281.548, 549. And [to sin] is expressed
at every turn, by (...), and by (...), for (...). All importing the positivity
of sin.

BERNARDUS de modo been vivend. Sermon 37 p. 1281. Superbia est R^^ix omnium
malorum. Superbia and Cupiditas in tantum est unum malum, ut nec superbia sine
cupidita^e, nec cupiditas sine superbia esse possit. -- Quid est omne peccatum,
nisi Dei Contemptus, quo ejus praecepta contemnimus? -- Idem in Sermon de vervis
s^p^entiae, p. 1702.
Luxuria flagitium est, Avaritia spiritualis nequiti^, unde illud vitium
corporis, istud Animae, viz. quia nullum est peccatum, quod ita inquinet
corpus, sicut Luxuria, -- similiter super omne peccatum, avaritia inquinat
Animam; unde and Idolorum servitus dicitur.

Nor do I see how BASIL* Homil. 1. in Psalm. HIERONYM. l. 2. adv. Pelag. ATHAN.
Orat. con. Gent. and de eti* Chris^i incar p. 58. AUGUST. confess l. 8 c. 5
CHEM. ALEX. Paedag. c. 3. p. 162 D. ib. l. 2. c. 1. p. 143. THEOPHYLACT. in
Romans 1.13.
those Fathers, who say that an habit of sin is gotten, by the custom of such
acts as are avoidable of themselves, can be imaginable not to hold the
positivity of sin; or to hold that such acts can be impu^able to God, which
they affirm the Creature might have avoided. Evitabilium Actuum consuetudine
censent generari in homine habitum vitiosum, so Ger. VOSSIVS in Hist. Pelag p.
215.

(...).

GREGORY. NAZIAN* Orat. 40. page 13.
(...) so he calls Idolatry (...) Orat. 38. p. 620.

TATIANVS Assyrius in Orat. cont. Graecos. p. 164.
(...).

PROSPER de vi^a Contemp l. 3. c. 2 p. 254.
Initium omnis peccati superbia -- non solum peccatum est ipsa, sed nullum
peccatum fieri potuit, potest, aut poterit fine ipsa, siquidem nihil aliud omne
peccatum, nisi Dei contemptus est, quo ejus praecepta calcantur; which compare
with Ecclus. 10.13.

FULGENTIUS ad Monim. l. 1. p. 275. so also p. 302 Si initium peccati
requiritur, nihil aliud nisi superbia invenitur, -- quae tum initium sumpsit,
cum Angelus adversus Deum elatus, per concupiscentiam (quae est radix omnium
malorum) volens usurpare etc. -- mala opera, hoc est, Peccata, praescisse
tantum; non etiam praedestinasse: quia ibi non opus Dei esse dicitur; ib. p.
311.
sed judicium. Ideo in peccato opus Dei non est -- sine operante Deo malus
operatur.

LOMBARDUS l. 2. d. 2. Did. 40. c. Opera ipsa peccata sunt, ut furta, stupra,
Blasphemiae, -- sunt nonnulli actus, qui peccata sunt -- and mala per se --
quaerimus quis Actus peccatum sit, -- dignosces quis Actus sit Peccatum,

The Confession of VOSSIVS for the greatest part of them.
In lieu of producing more Antiquity in words at length (which would increase my
Readers trouble) I shall insert the confession of Learned VOSSIUS, Plerique
Veterum ita loquun^ur. quast peccatum originale censeant esse aliquid
positivum, sive habitum, sive alium Qualitatem. Histor. Pelag. l. 2. par. 3 209.
That the greatest part of the Amients do so speak, as if they thought Original
sin to be som^thing positive, (to wit,) either a Habit, or some other Quality.
I call it the confession of GERARD VOSSIUS, because I find it is none of his
own opinions, that Original sin is something positive, whatever he speaks of
actual sins. And I think his confession to be of the greater consideration,
because of his being so very conversant in Ancient writers, and because or his
ability to understand their true meaning, and lastly of his unwillingness to
understand them against himself. Nay when he speaks of those Ancients, who were
otherwise minded, he takes their meaning to have been, (not so much that this
sin was a mere defect of Original Righteousness, Potius habi^ualem a Deo
aversionem etc. ibid. p. 210. Aliqui, uti corpus a corpore formatur ita animam
st^tuunt ab anima accendi etc. p. 211.
as) that it was rather an habitual aversion from God, proceeding from the
defect of Original righteousness.

They that held it to be a quality, could not otherwise hold it (in his
opinion) then by holding also that the soul was begotten with the body, and sin
begotten with the soul; or that the spirit being created was at least infected
by the flesh, some thought that the soul was as it were kindled by the soul in
generation; and that the Leprosy of sin in childrens souls, was by infection
from the leprosy with which their parents* had been infected. Of which Opinion
was TERTVLLIAN, APOLLINARIVS by name, and the greatest part of the Orientals,
as IEROM witnesses.

RVFFINVS and AUGUST. apud eundem Voss ibid.


APOLLINARIVS, and the greatest part of the Eastern Fathers. [Quomodo corpus ex
corpore, sic animam nasci ex anima, TERTVL. Apoll. and maxima pars Orientalium
autumavit, uti scribit Hieronymus ad Marcellinum and Anapsychiam, Epist. 45.]
RUFFINUS also and AUGUSTINE are cited for it. But because of the latter it is said
by VOSSIUS, that he durst not publicly avow, what was privately his opinion;
His words are the worthier to be observed.

For thus he writes to OPTATVS, se neque legendo, neque orando, neque
ratiocinando, invenire potuisse, AUGUST. Epist. 157. held the ^raduction of the
soul; and original sin to be a positive quality.

Affectio quaedam mala qualitatis, and morbidus affectus Carnis, AVG. dicitus
l. de. Nupt. c. 31.

Adversus Julian. lib. 5. cap. 3. see him also c^ted by Aquinas for making
Original sin an H^bi^. 1.2 q. 82. art* 1 He also calls sin malam qualitatem, l.
6. contra I^l. c. 7.


quomodo cum animarum Creatione peccatum Originis defendatur. And for more to
this purpose the Reader is referred to other places, as Epist. 28. ad
Hieronymum, Lib. 10. in Genes. ad lit. cap: 23. and lib. 1 Retract. c. 1. Nay
even then when he is doubtful of the souls extraction, (whether created or
begotten,) he still adheres to his opinion, that it is infected by the flesh
with some positive Quality, as wine grows sour by being put in a sour vessel.
And VOSSIVS himself does so explain him. Haec enim men's est verborum Augustini,
[ profecto aut utrumque vitiatum and exhomine trahitur, aut alterum in altero,
tanquam in vase vitiato corrumpitur, ubi occulta justiti^ divinae legis
includitur. Quid autem horum sit verum, libentius disco, quam dico, ne audeam
dicere quod nescio.] It seems he doubted whether the soul were ex traduce, or
not; although, unless it were ex traduce, he knew not how to defend Original
sin. But that he concluded it had a positive entity, appears as by all that
has been spoken, De peccat. mer. and Remiss. l. ^. c. 16. in Julian. l. 4. c.
vlt.

Georgius SOHNIVS tom. 11. loc. de p^cc. Orig. and Philip. MARNIXIVS Sanct.
ALDEGONDIVS.

Ger. Voss. ubi. supra. p. 214.215.216.


so by the motus bestialis, and bestialis Libido by which he expresses the sin
of Adam.

. 4. As the most of the Ancients, so the most eminent of the MODERNS, have held
the soul to be ex traduce, and Original sin a positive entity, two of which
number are commended by learned Vossius (but just now cited) for men of
Excellency and Renown. And Vossius himself, in diverse places, does sufficiently
ass^rt the positivity of sin: not so much when he says of Original sin, that
it inclines the mind to vicious acts, so that it may, and is wont to be called
a Habit; as when he says of its effects, (which ar^ Actual sins) that they are
grown over the soul as a spiritual Rust* that carnal Concupiscence is wholly
vicious, as being a deflextion of the appetite from the Law of its Creation,
from whence arises a disposit^on and propensity to R^bellion; that Morally
vicious Acts are freely drawn out from that propensity; that by the custom of
such a^ts there is ingendered in the sinner a vicious Habit. Cum affectus sic
effraenis lascivit, ut rationis imperium antevertat, plurimum adversus rationem
insurgat, ac (nisi diligenter a ratione valletur) facile aurigam rationem curru
excutiat: In graviori tentatione semper sit superior nisi ratio speciali
juvetur Dei Judicio.

2. And as they who affirm the propagation of the soul so also they, who deny
that God does concur to the act of sin, do eo ipso hold sin to have a positive
being: such as LOMBARD, BONAVENTVRE, ALEXANDER ALENSIS, ASOTO, DVRAND,
AVREOLVS, the learned ARMACHANVS, and others cited by Dr. STEARN in his Animi
Medela, p. 256, 257. And though the Master of the sentences does seem to some
not to define which is truest, (the negative or the affirmative of G^ds
concurrence to acts of sin, but leaves the Reader to judge of both tenets, (to
Did. 37.) yet he is cited by CAMERACENSIS (l. 1. q. 14.) for the defense of
the Negative. Because according to his opinion, God does only permit those
evils which are sin, (as says our learned Dr. FIELD, p. 128.

3. HEMMINGIVS (the Scholar of Melanehthon and known to be of his mind)
defines sin, in general, Nicol. HEMMINGIVS i^ opusc. Theol. Cl^ss. 1. c. 8. de
peccato. p. 355* 356.
by disobedience against God, and affirms Disobedience to import four things
in holy writ, Defect, corruption, inclination, and action. Original sin he
defines to be a propagated corruption of humane nature, in which there is a
material and formal part. The Material (says he) contains, Duo sunt
observanda in peccato originali, materi^le and formale, materiale est in mente
defectus, -- In cord concupiscentia, p. 356.
both a defect in the intellect, and a concupiscence in the heart. In the fall
of Adam there was a concurrence of these 8. sins 1. A doubting the truth of
Gods word. 2. A loss of faith, or incredulity. 3. Curiosity. 4. Pride. 5.
Contempt of God, 6. Apostasy. 7. Ingratitude. 8. A murdering of himself, and
his posterity. And is expressed in Scripture by diverse names: Concupiscence,
Flesh, the old man, the Law of sin, sin dwelling in us, Rebellion, the law of
the members, and sometimes sin without any epith^t. De actuali peccato dicendum
est, quod recte definitur esse cogitalum, dict^m, factum, omissum, pug. nans
cum lege Dei. Se^, peccatum actuale est omnis actio pugnans cum lege Dei, cum
in mente, tum in voluntate, and cord, tum in membris externis. p. 358.
Actual sin he defines to be something done, omitted, said, or thought,
fighting with the law of God. (Or as he puts it in other terms) Actual sin is
every action committed against the Law, both in the Intellect and the will and
in the heart, and the outward members. Thus that Regius Professor, famous for
learning and moderation.

4. GREGORY MARTIN of Silesia, GREGOR. MARTINI apud K^ckermannum in si^^. log.
part. 2. p. 653, 654*
stating the sin of our first parents, Lapsus accipitur pro actu hominis, qui
vi^iosus si^, and quo aliquid male agit, aut in alterum commit^i^. --
aquipollent lapsus primorum parentum, and peccatum, aut Reatu^ etc. -- Nos
priori modo sumimus peccatum, prout est actio, ut patebit p. 654.
begins to expound the word Lapsus, which he says imports a vicious act,
with which a man does any thing ill, and is the same with peccatum. Then coming
to speak of the term original sin, he professes to take the word for the
positive act of eating the fruit which was forbidden. And so the expression of
Original sin (he faith) does also include an actual. From the importance of the
word, he comes to speak of the thing signified. Which first he consider's as to
its Genus, which he says is Action. Its genus rem^tum is actio hominis. Its
immediate genus, is actio vitiosa, and privativa. Mark good Reader; he does not
say it is a mere privation, but a privative action. Positive in one respect, as
it is an action; though privative in another, as destroying the Agent from
whence it is. Take that excellent Logician in his own expressions of himself.
-- Vidimus nomen, Genus secundo loco considerandum est, quod vel remotum, actio
hominis; Propinquum actio hominis vitiosa; proximum Actio vitiosa, destr^ens
ipsum agens, seu privativa. upon this I lay the greater weight, because the
judgment and approbation of another great Methodist and Logician, even
KECKERMAN of Dantzick, adds credit to that of this wise Silesian.

FRANCO BURGERSDI^IVS in Institut Meta. l. 1. c. 20. p. 122 123, 124. Hine
sequitur, malum bono potius esse contrarium, saltem quoad proprias forma^, qu^m
privative op^oni.
5. A late professor of Philosophy in the University of Leyden, and a great
Aristotelian, says, that evil includes ens, and adds a real relation to it,
after the manner that Good does. And this he affirms of every evil. [Malum
ergo omne, simili modo quo bonum, includit Ens and Enti addit Relationem
realem, qua, quod malum dicitur, ita se habet ad aliud, ut illi inconveniens
atque adversum sit.] To which he adds, that those relations are contrary, and
have contrary affections; from whence it fallows, (as he goes on.) that good
and evil are opposed, rather contrary, than privative, and that according to
their proper forms too. Convenientia and inconvenientia, being no less
contrary, than equality and inequality. His reason is, because a thing is not
said to be evil to any one, for being only not convenient, but in as much as it
is adverse, or affirmate inconveniens (p. 123.) To the objection which he
foresees, he answers thus. This is the nature of immediate contrariety, that
one extreme is inferred from the negation of the other. And he means, by
Inconvenient, whatsoever is positively adverse to that which is convenient. --
licet inconveniens, and adversum sit positive quicquid non est conveniens, etc.
-- All which does strengthen my Reply to Master BARLOW'S Answer to Aquinas.
(for which look back on chap. 3.. 13.) He concludes with a caterum, actiones
sunt malae per se; Habitus, quatenus ex hujusmodi actionibus orti sunt, quae
rationem culpae habent. p. 126. If BETVLEIVS had not been of the same opinion,
he would not have used that proposition, wherein sin is praedicated of that
which will be granted by all to be a positive entity. Racha fratri imprecari,
peccatum est. ( Betuleius in Lactant. l. 6. c. 16.)

6. I forgot (till just now) to note the Doctrine of Mr. CALVIN, CALVIN,
Instit. l. 2. c. 1. S. 8. fol. 75. opera in nobis profert, quae Scriptura vocat
opera carnis, quali^ sunt Adulteria, furta, etc. quicquid in homine est, aut ut
brevius absolvatur, totum hominem non aliud ex seipso esse, quam
concupiscen^iam.
who says that sin original does bring forth in us those works of the flesh,
Gal, 5.19.) which he also calls sins, though positive entities. Nay he says our
whole nature is quoddam peccati semen; that sin has a force and an operation;
that the whole man of himself is nothing else but concupiscence.

7. It is observed by ALSTED, that as the Hebrews call original Jezer hara,
plasma malum; so peccare, Johan. Henr. ALSTED. in Lex. Theol. c. 8 Cicero. in
3. paradox. peccare, est tan. quam limits transilire, Iunius in l. de pec.
Adami primo, q. 1. c. 2. p. 92. Bellarminus apud Alsted. ubi supra.
to sin, does signify nothing but an action; not omission, or absence, or mere
privation. And as Cicero define's it, by leaping over the hedge which the law
does set us; so accordingly by Iunius, it is derived from * pecucare; because a
sinner, like a stray sheep, does leap over mounds. And Bellarmine says, that
evil surpasses good in this respect, that it abounds more in expressions;
for to signify an Action, we have peccatum, crimen, delictum, scelus, facinus,
flagitium, culpa, erratum. And after all we have vitium, which peculiarly
signifies an habit; whereas to signify an action, or an habit of virtue, we
only use the word virtue.

8. CHEMNITIVS speaking of the sin against the holy Ghost, CHEMNITIVS in Harm.
Evang. c. 59. p. 792. Gerhard, in Har. Ev. p. 70.
reckons up six Ingredients in it, whereof the most if not all, have a positive
being. And GERHARD does the like by the sin of Peter, who abjured his Savior
no less by his works, then by his words; adding perjury to cursing; and both,
to lying. Whence he notes the fruitfullness of sin, for which it is called the
Devils net, Prove. 5.22.

If I shall now add GROTIUS, who is instar multorum (although but one, GROTIVS
de Ver. Chr. Relig. edit. Lugd. 1633 p. 27, 28*
) no knowing Reader will look for more. He, in setting forth the verity of
Christian Religion, to all the nations of the world which have a praejudice to
the Gospel, takes special care to let them know, that when God is said to be
the universal cause, or the cause of all things, it is only meant of those
things that are good, or of all those things which are endued with a
subsistence, and are commonly known by the name of substance; Nihil enim
prohibet, quo minus ipsa, quae subfistunt, deinde causae sint accidentium,
quales sunt actiones. This is the judgment also of Prosper and Austin. lib.
sent. ex August. page 444.
which substances are the causes of certain accidents, such as are actions; And
therefore God is thus freed from being the original cause of sin. So that it is
clearly his opinion, that sins of commission at least are Accidents, even
because they are actions, which will be granted by all to have a positive being.

. 9. And this does prompt me to show the way of reconciling the words unto the
meaning, The several ways of RECONCILEING such Writers unto themselves, who
plainly holding the positivity of sin, do sometimes seem to speak against it.
and of proving undeniably what must be the true meaning of certain Writers,
whom some men's prejudices and praepossessions have unhappily tempted them to
mistake.

1. When they say that all entities are good, they only speak of all those,
which are the works of Gods creation, or unavoidably produced by natural
Agents, so as the origin of their being is duly imputable unto God; which all
our voluntary actions cannot possibly be. For

2. When it is said in the common Axiom, That the cause of the cause, is the
cause of the ^ffect, it is meant of causes which are physically and essentially
subordinate. (as says the Learned BISHOP OF DERRY in his Reply to Mr. Hobbs.)
It is meant of such effects; Bish. BRAM. HAL'S Reply mihi p. 105.
as do follow their cause by an antecedent necessitation. But the case is quite
otherwise when the effects do not follow by a necessity of nature, but by the
intervention of humane liberty. (for which I have the suffrage of Dr. Stearn.)
Again 3. it is meant of such effects, Anim. Medel. p. 270.
as proceed from such second causes, as transgress not the order they ought to
have upon the first. (and for this I have Aquinas 1.2. q. 79. art. 3. When God
is said to work all things, (Ephesians. 1.11.) it is meant in the same restrained
sense, in which it is said by S. James, that every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, (Iam. 1.17.) Implying
the contrary to be from below, as coming up from the Father of Lies. And
therefore

4. When it is said, In what sense God is said to be Almighty, see LOMBARD l.
1. did. 42. F, G.
That God is the Maker of all things visible, and invisible, (in the Nicene
Creed) it is explained in the COLLECT for Evening Service, [O God from whom all
holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed etc.] It is not
set thus, (as Mr. Hickman, and the Libertines, it seems, would have it) O God
from whom are all desires, holy and unholy; or from whom are all counsels, good
and evil; or from whom are all works, just and unjust. I say Mr. Hickman would
have it thus, because he says, the very work of hating God is from God, page
95, 96. nay he says that every positive entity is either God, or from God (p.
75.) and from him as his Creature, (p. 79.) Nay that every real Being is
produced by the first cause, that is by God, (p. 95.) Now it is granted by all
the world, That all thoughts, words, and actions, all desires, counsels, and
works, have either a positive, or a real, (and indeed a positive) being. Which
being is not diminished by any addition of good, or evil. For to hate God, is
as real, and as positive a thing, as to hate the Devil.

5. When it is said of God, that he can do every thing, (Job. 42.2.) and that
to him all things are possible, (Mat. 19.26.) it must needs be meant with a
Restriction of all things that are good: because there are Texts which say the
contrary, to wit, that he cannot do every thing; as that he cannot deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. and that all things are not possible to him; as that it
is impossible for God to lie. Tit. 1.2. In a word, It is no truer, that God can
do all things, (meaning things that are good,) then that he can do nothing,
which argues uncleanness or imperfection. I may say to Mr. Hickman, as the
ancient Fathers were wont to do unto the Heretics, See correct copy. p. 22,
23. (...).
( Austin to Faustus, and Origin to Celsus, and Isidore to the Sceptick, God
can do all things, that is, all things that become him; yet cannot do any thing
that is evil, because he cannot not be God. (...). Or as the Reverend Bishop
Bramhall to Mr. Hobs, (p. 93.) God is said to harden the heart, not causally,
but occasionally; that is, by Gods doing good the sinner takes an occasion of
doing evil. And as this is a good consequence, [ such a thing is from God,
therefore it is righteous;] so this consequence is as good, [ such a thing is
unrighteous, therefore it cannot proceed from God.] We must not therefore thus
argue, A Lie is no real thing, because it is Impossible for God to cause it;
but rather thus, because it is impossible for God to cause it, therefore all
things real are not from God. And therefore

6. When it is said of sin, that it is nothing, (...). Dionys. Areop. Peccatum
est nihil* Aug. de lib. Arb. l. 1.
or not in being, that it has no essence, or is not amongst the things that
are, (as Dionysius the Areopagite, and others speak,) me thinks the very
extremity of the literal falsehood, should have convinced Mr. Hickman that they
are figurative expressions. And no more to the support of his sinking cause,
then it would be to that Atheist's, who should dispute against the veri^y,
because against the wisdom and power of God, by citing the words of our
Apostle, [The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men. 1 Corinthians. 1.25.] how many blasphemies might be broached
from the many (...) or seeming contradictions of holy Scripture, if by rational
distinctions we might not be suffe^'d to reconcile them? As it is said by Saint
Paul, Romans 1.20*
that the invisible things of God are clearly seen, (and being so are very
visible;) and as it is said by the Comedian, hoc aliquid Nihil est; so I may
say with great reason, hoc nihil est Aliquid. This nothingness of sin is
something positive. And I will prove that Mr. H. himself is nothing, at least
as well as he prove's that sin is nihil positivum, nothing positive. For M.
Hickman is a man, who thinks himself something. And St. Paul has said it, [If
a man think himself something, when he is (...)* Being nothing, he deceives
himself. Gal. 6.3.
nothing, he deceives himself, Gal. 6.3.] Mr. Hickman cannot be ignorant, that
generation and corruption are two species of motion; whereof the first is
defined to be motus a Non esse, ad esse; the second to be motus ab esse, ad Non
esse. But would he not be thought a prodigious Disputant, who should write a
Book of ten sheets, to prove that Generation is a creation out of nothing, and
so that the Generant is a God? or that to dye, is to be annihilated, and so
that there is not a Resurrection? Yet those two definitions will bear him out
to M. Hickman, however ridiculous he would be to all men else. But as the
meaning is, that corruption est motus ab esse tali, ad non esse Tale; so
something positive, simpliciter, may be said to be nothing secundum Quid. And
in this very sense those words are spoken by the Psalmist, Mine age is nothing
in respect of thee, Psalm. 39.5. But to make it yet more apparent,

7. By whom can the writings of the FATHERS be better explained then by
themselves? If then the very same Father who says at one time, that Peccatum
nihil est, inquit Bernard. in annum. B. Mar. S^rm. 1. p. 123.
sin is nothing, does also say at another, that Quid est omne peccatum, nisi
Dei con^emptus, quo eju^ praecepta con^emnimus (...) l. de mo: (...) viv. Sir.
37. p. 1281
Sin is no other thing then a contempt of God, (an example of which is in my
Margin) it is plain that the former proposition must be explained by the latter*
the like example I showed out of Scripture, and out of the writings of
ATHANASIUS, in the first and third Sec^ion of this present Chapter, and the
like may be showed of all the rest, by the several citations of the third and
fourth Sections. So what is said by AQUINAS and his Followers amongst the
SCHOOLMEN, must of necessity be explained by such conspicuous assertions as
these that follow* -- AQVIN. in 1.2. qu^st. 75. art. 1.
omne quod fit, habet Causam, sed peccatum fit: est enim dictum, vel factum,
vel concupitum, contra legem Dei -- ibid.
Dicendum, quod peccatum est Actus quidam inordinatus: and ex part actus
potest habere per se causam. -- ibid. ad 1.
Peccatum non solum significat ipsam privationem Boni, quae est Inordinatio;
sed significat actum sub tali privatione etc. -- ibid. ad 3.
nihil habet rationem mali, antequam applicetur ad Actum. -- ib. art. 2.
Ipse voluntatis actus, praemissis suppositis, jam est quodd^m peccatum. -- ib.
ad 2.
Pe^catum consistit principaliter in actu voluntatis. -- Peccatum nominat ens
and actionem cum quodam defectu. Thus frequently and plainly does Aquinas
assert the positive e^tity of sin, and therefore by this we must explain him,
and reconcile him unto himself, whenever he seems to say the contrary; or at
least accuse him of contradictions. So he says of original sin that it is
Sicut aegri^udo corporalis -- ali. quid habet positivum* Ita etiam peccatum
originale -- non est privatio pura, sed est quidam corruptus Habi^us. Idem.
1.2. q. 82. ar^. 1. ad. 1^
not a mere privation, but a corrupt Habit, comparing it to a bodily disease,
which has something Sicut aegri^udo corporalis -- ali. quid habet positivum.
Ita etiam peccatum originale -- non est privatio pura, sed est quidam corruptus
Habi^us. Idem. 1.2. q. 82. (...). 1. ad. 1^
positive, as well as privative.

8. It must be carefully observed in ANCIENT WRITERS, An accident opposed to
Res simpliciter. Se^ Prosper's sent. ex Aug p. 444.
that because an accident cannot exist without the subject of Inhaesion which
is substantia; and because substantia is ens per se subsistens; they do often
take res to signify a substance, and express an accident by nihil, or non
existens; meaning, non per se subsistens. Which as I have hinted by some
examples already given, so now I will make it undeniable by one taken out of
Saint AUSTIN. Who Augustine de persect. Justitiae non long a pri. lib. in resp.
Ratiocin. 4. to 7.
says of the very act of sin, (which is acknowledged by all to have a positive
being) that it is not any thing. Actus peccati non est Res aliqua. To which
Aquinas makes Answer, AUGUST. nominat ibi Rem id quod est Res simpliciter, sc.
substantiam sic enim actus peccati non est Res. AQV. in 1.2. q. 79. Art. 2. ad.
1. GREG. NYSS. Hom. 5. in Ecclesiasten, p. 417. opposes (...) to (...), as
that is explained by substan^ia, (...).
that by res he means substantia, which is res simpliciter; not intending to
deny, that it is an Accident, which (with Aquinas) is res secundum quid. And
therefore GROTIVS (in imitation of the Ancients) opposes such accidents as
actions are, to things which have a true subsistence. Cum diximus, Deum omnium
esse causam, addidimus, eorum, quae ve^e subsistunt. Nihil enim prohibet, etc
(ut superius paulo cit.) so (...) is opposed to (...), by Maxim. on Dionys. p.
317.

9. Again it must always be carried in mind, that all those expressions of the
Nonentity of sin were taken up in opposition to SCYTHIANVS, and MARCION, The
MANICHAEAN heresy occasioned some figurative expressions.
and the following crew of the MANICHAEANS, who ascribed to evil a being of it
self, and by it self, and that eternal, no less then God. TERTVL. advers. Mar.
l. 1. c. 1. and 23. and 26. HIERON in N^hum. c. 3. (...)
Nay duos Deos adfert (says Tertul. of Marcion) tanqnam duas symplegadas
naufragii s^i. Scythianus (before Manes) composed four books, in which he
asserted two distinct, and coequal principles of (...). EPIPHANIUS l. 2 tom. 2.
Haer^s. 45. seu 55. page 619. B. D.
things, to wit, of white and black, of moist, and dry, of body and soul, of
heaven and earth, of just and un^ust, of good and evil. Now however this
Heresy is very worthily exploded by all true Christians, yet right may be done
upon a very wrong ground. And so it is, if all the ground be the Nonentity of
sin, which yet the Fathers did only use (by a Ex omnibus Physico^um, sive
Metaphysicorum terminls obseuris, nulli explicatu digniores, quam (...) duo,
(...), and (...). Meric. Casaub. de verb. usu. p. 134.

Manichaus having expressed Substantia by Natura, Aliquid and Res.


catechresis) in opposition to that substance, or self-subsistence, which that
many-headed-sect ascribed to evil. And this I say in Justification of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, from those mistakes of their meaning, by which the
mistakers would make them fall from a great error into a greater. It being
worse (of the two) to think that sin has no being, or that God is the Author,
(if it has any) than to think that good and evil did proceed from two
fountains, and both eternal.

10. I am exceedingly confirmed in what I say touching the Fathers, and their
acception of the word nature, res, and aliquid, by what I find to be the
judgment of learned VASQVEZ, whose words I think wo^thy to be inserted
somewhat at large. [ Observandum est (inquit) Patres fere omnes, VASQUEZ. Disp.
95. c. xi.
Doctrinam Manichaei, obiter, aut ex professo, refutare voluisse, qui ass^rebat
substantiam aliquam in se and ex se malam esse; omnem autem substan^iam naturam
appellabat, and aliquid, and rem. (sicut Aristoteles in Categor. c. de
substantia, omnem substantiam dixit esse hoc aliquid. As Aristotle himself by
Hoc aliquid.
) Quare nomine Naturae quoties S. Patres disputant cum Manichaeo de hac re, non
com^le^tuntur operationem and accidentia, (quae- aliquam habea^t naturam,) sed
solam substantiam, secuti sententiam Aris^otelis, Whom the Ancients followed in
their expressions. Not including Accidents in the word nature. But granting ^in
to be an act, and the work of our will.
(2, phys. c. 1. and* 5. Metaph. c. 4.) qui solum materiam and formam naturam,
appellat* Immo ex his proprie solum formam, materiam autem mataphori^e tantum.
Contendunt igitur Patres, nullam esse naturam substantiae malam, quatenus
substan^ia and natura est; De actu vero non loquuntur. Concedunt enim malum
esse opus arbitrii nostri, and actum. Sicut Augustinus l. de perfect. iustit.
qui ratiocinatione 4. quaerit, quid sit peccatum, Actusne, an Res. Quia ^i res
est (inquit) habeat Auctorem; and si Auctorem habet, jam alter erit auctor,
quam Deus, alicujus rei. Quod si hoc impium est, necesse est dicere, peccatum
esse actum, non rem. An example taken out of S. AUSTIN.
-- Patres non tam curarunt propriam rationem vitii and peccati in genere moris
exprimere, quam per aliquid conjunctum nobis magis notum eam desc^ibere. Quare
cum per boni privationem peccatum definierunt, non sunt ita intelligendi, quasi
sit ipsa essentia and ratio formalis peccati, sed quia est necessario peccato
conjuncta, and Christianis maxim nota. Multo enim facilius per negationem
intelligimus.

11. To this let me add (what does just now occurr to my present purpose) That
substantia with many FATHERS, as well as with GROTIUS and other MODERNS, Why ens
many times is used only for substantia.
has often carried away the name of ens; because ens is Analogum, (as every
smatterer in logic know's, though Masters in it sometimes forget,) and the
common Rule is here verified, Analogum per se positum pro famosiori stare
praesumitur. Whosoever therefore is found to say, Peccatum est non ens, must be
known to mean that it is not substantia, unless he be one who dares add, that
it is not an accident. And so if any is found to say, that every finite en^ity
is produced by God, he must be charitably concluded to understand every
substance, unless he shall dare to add also, That God produces as well the
worst, as the best of actions. It being granted by all the world, that the
former are accidents, no whit less then the latter.

12. Some perhaps, in good earnest, How unhappily some men confute the
MA^NICHEES.
do think the best way to confute the Manichees, is by saying that sin is
nothing real, Because, denying it such a being as Manes gave it, and yet
allowing it a being, (although not that) it must needs have a being either from
God, or some Creature. If they shall dare to say from God, they sadly fall into
the Blasphemy, which Manes (or rather Scythianus) devised his principle to
avoid. If they say from some creature, they make that creature a kind of
Creator, in making it able to give a being, where God himself does give none.

How the sinner is able to give the whole being unto his sin.
But (omitting that this last were the safest error, if it were any) these men
do not consider, that God was able to make a creature with such a light of
understanding, and such a liberty of will; as to be fitly left Ecclus. 15.14
in the hand of his own counsel; and to be a self-determiner, to this or that
object which lies before him; And so to be an Artificer of such unclean works,
(by abusing the liberty of his will,) as could not by any possibility have been
produced by his Creator. God made man upright, but he has Eccles. 7.29.
found out many inventions. And if it be in the power of man, to give being
unto any thing, most easily may he be thought to give Being unto s^n; sin it
self being no more, then what is displeasing to God Almighty; and no where else
to be imagined, much less to be, but in the voluntary actings of created
Agents, in contrariety to the law which they receive to act by. That so it is,
is very evident, by the negative precepts of the Almighty, whereby he forbids
us to give a being to this, or that, which he tells us he hates the being of.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, is as much as to say, thou shall not
put such a concupiscence in being. And yet to covet another man's wife, is as
positively something, as to covet his own; and more positively something, than
not to covet another man's; though that is the vice, and this the virtue.

13. They indeed who deny this natural freedom of the will, How they that deny
it, must submit to the MANICHEES, or worse.
must either yield to the Manichees, or else do worse, as has been showed. But
this being granted, there needs no new principle (as the Manichees dreamed) for
the production of what is evil. For he that may do good (by ma^king use of that
Talent which God has given him) has eo ipso the power to do the contrary,
unless he is irresistibly and unavoidably good, which no man is, on this side
heaven. Now since both the habits and acts of sin, are as positive as the
habits and acts of virtue, (and equally reducible to the species of Quality,
and that there needs no other power for the production of the former, then what
is given us, whilst it is given us to be truly free agents; It will be fit to
make it appear, that I have not only my private, but public reason also for
what I teach.

. 6. DIONYSIVS the AREOPAGITE, The concurrence of the Learned, both ANCIENT and
MODERN, for the Affi^mative, That the sinful Agent is the sole cause of the
sinful Act.

DIONYS. AREOP. de Coelest* Hiera^. c. 1. p. 1.2.


who refell's the two principles in the Manichaean sense, does set them up, and
assert them in the sense of the Scripture. Affirming God to be the principle of
every thing that is good, and the Devil on the contrary of every thing that is
evil: to wit, the evil of sin, which is evil properly so called. He asserts the
first in these word^ of Saint Paul, (Romans 11.36.) (...). which he explains by
the Restriction thought fit to be added by Saint James, (c. 1. v. 17.) (...)
etc. he affirms the second in these terms -- De Div. Nom c. 4. sect. 18. p.
570. cum qua confer. p. 571.
(...). Yet (3.) the (...). ibid. p. 574.
power to sin (though not the act of sin it self) he rightly affirm's to be
from God; which power is innocent, as in Adam and the Angels before their Fall*
who could never have sinned, if before they actually sinned, they had not had
the power to sin. But for the exertion of that power into act, that being evil
(...) etc. page 577* and page 578.
cannot possibly proceed from so good a fountain.

IGNATIUS in ep. ad Magnes. p. 53. (...).

JUSTIN. MARTYR. in Apolog. 1. pro Christ. p. 35. (...). see him especially in
Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod. p. 396. and 436.

TERTVL. contra Marcion. Lib. 2. cap. 5, 6. Suae po. testatis invenio hominem a
Deo constitutum lapsumque hominis non Deo, sed Libero ejus Arbitrio deputandum.

ATHANASIVS (de anima humana loquens) in orat contra Gent. p. 5. -- (...), ib.
p. 7.
-- (...) Neque ullam ej^s substantiam esse, Petrus Nannius interpretatur p. 8.
(...) And very much more to this purpose p. 9.37. and (...).
de Incar. verbi dei p. 57, 58.

-- (...) p. 58.

AVGVSTIN. Retract. l. c. 9. per totum. Malum non exortum nisi ex libero
voluntatis Arbitrio, -- Quid opus est queri unde iste motus existat, quo
voluntas avertitur ab incommutabili bono ad commutabile bonum, Deu^ non est
causa ejus, quod homo sit deterior. Idem apud Aqu. 1.2. q. 79. Art. 3.
cum eum non nisi animi and voluntarium, and ob hoc culpabile esse fateamur,
etc.

Quae tandem esse poterit ante voluntatem Causa voluntatis? Aut igitur voluntas
est prima causa peccandi, aut nullum peccatum est prima Causa peccandi.

Non ergo est cui recte imputetur peccatum, nisi voluntati, voluntas est qua
and peccatur and recte vivitur.

NAZIANZ. orat. 40. p. 671. apud. D. Barl. p. 52. (...).

(...) vide D. D. Hammondi, Annot. in 1 Cor. 8.4.

FVLGENTIVS apud Aqu. 1.2. q. 79. art 3. Deus non est ultor istius rei, cujus
est Actor.

PROSPER* in senten. ex Aug. p. 444. Iniquitas per ipsum facta non est, quia
Iniquitas nulla substantia ^st. Mark h^s Reason, and the two things which it
implies. 1 That iniquity is an Accident, and 2. Such, as is not from God; and
therefore elsewhere he says, Idem in lib. de ingratis. p. 573.
that the sole cause of evil deeds is the liberty of the will -- ad quam solam
male gesta recurrunt.

CLEM. ALEX. (...). p. 167. (...), ib. p. 169.
(...). And so in the place above cited (. 3) he says all substances have
their production from God, but not all Actions or operations, unless when they
are good. The Original of the evil he (...). Idem (...). p. 219.
im^putes to free will. And thus he disputes against them, who feigned another
cr^ator even of substances, beside the only true God. (...).

CYRILLUS HIERO. (...). p. 30. (...), citing that Text Eccles. 7.30. And that
of the Apostle Ephesians. 2.10. (...). And after in the same page, (...), and a
little after, p. 34. speaking of the Devil, and applying to him that of Ezekiel.
28.12. (...), ib. p. 34.
he adds, it was very well said (...).

AMBROSIVS de Cain and Abel. l. 2. c. 9. fol. 260. H. Qui peccatum suum ad
quandam (uti Gentiles asserunt) Decreti aut operis sui Necessitatem referunt,
Divina arguere videntur, quasi ipsorum vis Causa Peccati sit. -- sed quanto
gravius Peccato ipso, ad Deum refer quod Feceris, and Reatus tui invidiam
transsundere in Authorem, non Criminis, sed Innocentiae?

EPIPHANIUS l. 1. To. 3. Haeres. 36. p. 266, 267, 268. (...). Nothing can be
without God except sin -- (...). (...). Idem l. 2. tom. 1. Haer. 64. p. 587.
and more to this purpose p. 265.588. yet (says he) God does not hinder men
from sinning (by violence or force upon their wills) (...), p. 671.

AUGUSTINE. de civit. Dei, l. 5. c. 9. Malae voluntates a Deo non sunt, quia
contra naturam sunt, quae ab illo est. -- Sicut omnium Creaturarum Creator est,
ita omnium potestatum dator, non Mala voluntas Peccatum dicitur metonymice, se^
Lombard. l. 4* did. 50. A.
voluntatum: where by the will, he means the action of the will.

. 7. That God gives only the power to act what he forbids, and that no more
is meant by those Fathers, The power to act is from God, but the vicious action
is not.
who say that all things in some sort do come from God, (still implying the act
it self to be solely from the creature when it is wholly against God, as the
act of hating God is confessed to be,) I have already made apparent by diverse
instances recited. And Doctor Stearn has don it by diverse others, ( An. med.
l. 2. p. 256, 257.) of which I shall mark but three or four.

ANSELMVS de concord. Praed. and Praesc. Nulla Res habet potentiam ullam
volendi aut faciendi nisi illo Dante.

AVREOLVS in 2. D. 37. Neque ego video quod dicunt, omnis actus est a Deo (dato
quod sit positivus) nisi forte conservando potentiam quae elicit, and naturam
actus elicitivam.

ALEXANDER ALENSIS part. 2. q. 100. Adjuvat ipsum ad actionem in qua est malum;
quia dat Potentiae, sive Libero Arbitrio, quod possit operari.

RICHARD. ARMACHANVS l. 17. Quaest. Armen. c. 3. Nec Deus attingit hoc modo
actiones immediate ad actum, seu effectum productum, sed ad agens immediatum
ipsius effectus; puta intellectum, aut voluntatem. -- Si quis poterit ex sacris
Scripturis probare hanc cooperationem divinam, cum omni agente creato; erit
mihi mirandus, and libenter probationem illam acciperem; quoniam hoc facere me
nescire fateor.

LESSIVS de Perf. Div. l. 11. c. 3. Hac ratione, Creaturae possunt dici
instrumenta respectu Dei, and Deus omnia per illas operari; omnia (inquam)
bona, non mala, quae Deus non intendit, neque ex perfectione virtutis a D^o
insertae, sed ex defectu Creaturae sequuntur.

DVRANDVS 2. D. 37. Action^s non procedunt a Deo, nisi secundum indifferentiam
ad bonum and malum. Deus enim non est causa actionum liberi arbitr^i, nisi quia
liberum arbitrium ab ipso and est, and conservatur; sed liberum arbitrium in
esse cons^rvatum, adhuc est indifferens ad eligendum Actum bonum v l malum, nec
determinatio ejus ad malum, est a Deo. Actus enim malus naturam bonam sed
imperfecte bonam (cujus Author Deus est) non necessario sed libere sequitur.
Naturae itaque imperfecte bonae, non De^ (qui Deus est non volens iniquitatem)
imputandus est. (vide Anim. Med. l. 2. p. 270.)

FVLGENTIVS de Praedest. ad mon. l. 1. p. 251. Sicut ergo peccatum in eo non
est: ita peccatum ex eo non est. Quod autem ex eo non est, opus ejus utique non
est. Quod autem nunquam est in opere ejus; nunquam fuit in Praedestinatione
ejus. -- Peccatum, homo, non ex praedestinatione Divina; sed ex voluntate sua,
male concupiscendo, coepit, and male operando, perfecit. But I return from this
Ancient, p. 302.
to other Writers more modern.

MELANCHTHON, de cau. pec. p. 48. Diabolus pater: id est, primus fons, and
causa mendacii. Discernit autem Christus mendacium a substantia: quasi dicat,
substantiam quidem habet Diabolus aliunde acceptam. -- Habet autem proprium
quiddam Diabolus, non a Deo acceptum, videlicet mendacium: id est, peccatum,
quod libera voluntas Diaboli peperit. Neque haec inter se pugnant, --
substantiam a Deo conditam esse and sustentati, and tamen voluntatem Diaboli
and voluntatem hominis causas esse peccati. Quia voluntas abuti liberate sua
potuit, seque a Deo avertere. -- Primus Author peccati est Diabolus. ib. p. 49,
-- Haec mala non sunt res conditae a Deo, sed horribilis destruction humanae
naturae. ib. p. 50.
-- Voluntas libera Evae proprie and vere erat causa suae actionis, ac sponte
se avertit a Deo. -- Quia peccatum ortum est a voluntate Diaboli and hominis,
nec factum est Deo volente, sic erant conditae voluntates, ut possent non
peccare. Est autem causa contingentiae nostrarum actionum Libertas voluntatis.
(p. 51.) -- Imo Ecclesia Dei, ib. p. 53.
cum sciat Deum vere, serio and horribiliter odisse libidines Neronis,
nequaquam dicet eas aut necessario accidisse, aut volente Deo accidisse. --
Deus est essentia -- volens justa, casta, non volens pugnantia cum sua mente,
injustam crudelitatem, incestas libidines, etc. ib. p. 55, 56. MELANCHTHONS
Distinction of the first cause sustaining, but not assisting the second, in
evil actions.
-- Deus adest Creaturis, non ut Stoicus Deus, alligatus causis secundis, ut
moveat simpliciter, sicut movent secundae: sed ut agens liberrimum, susten^ans
naturam, and suo consilio aliter agens in aliis. -- Sic agit Deus cum
voluntate, sustentans and juvans ordine agentem: Sed non juvans ruentem contra
ordinem, etsi eam sustentat. Sic enim condidit voluntatem Evae, ut esset
liberum agens, quod posset tueri ordinem, aut deficere. Sit igitur haec crassa
solutio: secunda causa non agit sine prima, scilicet sustentante. Hoc
universaliter verum est: sed non semper adjuvante. Non enim adjuvat prima
effectum, quem non vult. Est igitur voluntas Evae immediata causa sui actus,
cum avertit se a Deo. And again, Sed Christianis necesse est discernere bona
and mala. Secunda non agit sine prima, scilicet sustentante: sed multa facit
prima causa praeter secundas, quia est agens liberum. Et secunda, libera: ut
voluntas Evae vitiose agit sine prima adjuvante, quia talis facultas est
libertas. And again, Adest Deus suo operi, non ut Stoicus Deus, sed vere ut
liberum agens, sustentans creaturam, and multa moderans. This shows the meaning
of MELANCHTHON, when he says in one place (in compliance with the vulgar) that
original sin i^ nihil privativum, which according to the Rule of aequipollence
in Logic, must needs be tantamount to aliquid positivum. And this he shows to
be his meaning, by saying it is that which requires a subject; that it is an
Vitium originis est ipsarum partium hominis inquinatio and confusio (ib. p.
49.) accedunt motus -- qui sunt res positiv^, etsi sunt motus errantes, and
quaedam ordinis Confusio etc. p. 50.
Inquination and confusion of the man; which confusion he explains by wandering
Vitium originis est ipsarum partium hominis inquinatio and confusio (ib. p.
49.) accedunt motus -- qui sunt res positiv^, etsi sunt motus errantes, and
quaedam ordinis Confusio etc. p. 50.
motions, which he also says are things positive. And he illustrates it
farther by a ship that is tossed with wind and tempest, as well as desti^ute
of sails and oars. By the former confusion he means original; and actual sin by
the latter: giving his instance in Nero's 53. He also says (in collat.
Wormat.) Peccatum vel est defectus, vel inclinatio, vel actio pugnans cum lege
Dei.
lusts, which he denies to have been by the will of God, they having been
sins, though positive entities. By which Mr. H. may understand his
misapprehensions of Melanchthon p. 68. besides his forgetfulness of the proper
task he has set himself, which is not to prove that some sins are privative,
but that no sin is more then a mere privation.

Defens. sent. Rem* circa 1. de praed. art. p. 250.
The REMONSTRANTS call it a blasphemy, to say that no creature can either do
more good, or f^wer evil acts, then now he does. And yet that this is the
sequel of Master Hickmans Doctrine, the Apologist for Tilenus has well evinced.

M. BAXTER of Judgment. p. 151, 152.
Mr. BAXTER himself (it just now comes into my memory) does frequently ascribe a
self-determining power to the Free will of man, however Biased by habits. And
though himself has printed as blasphemously as the most, in charging God with
the causing of evil, (which, two lines after, he calls a truth,) yet he
trounceth some of his brethren, for holding God the determiner of the will in
every sin, as the first efficient immediate physical cause. And also says of
Freewill, that it is a high self-determining principle, the great spring of our
actions. (of Judgment. page 152.) But Mr. B. (as many others) is produced by
me in no f^^ place; I not observing any order either of dignity or of time, but
giving to every one a place, as he meets my memory, or my eye.

The words of GROTIUS deserve great heed, GROT. de ver. Chr. Rel. p. 27, 28.
whilst he says that the liberty of a man's will is not vicious, but able by
its own force to produce a thing that is vicious; that is an action; meaning
that a vicious action (as the action of hating God) is merely from the sinner
(man or Devil) and not without impiety to be ascribed unto God, either as a
mediate, or immediate cause. And though I cited some part of his words before,
yet (not to fail of his inten^) I shall entreat my Reader to weigh the whole.
Neque ab eo, quod diximus, dimovere nos debet, quod mala multa evenire
cernimus, quorum videtur origo Deo adscribi non posse, ut qui perfectissime,
sicut ante dictum est, bonus sit. Nam cum diximus, Deum omnium esse Causam,
addidimus, eorum quae vere subsistunt. Nihil enim prohibet, quominus ipsa, quae
subsistunt, deinde causae sint Accidentium quorundam, quales sunt actiones.
Deus hominem and mentes sublimiores homine, creavit cum agendi liberate, quae
agendi libertas vitiosa non est, sed potest sua vialiquid vitiosum producere.
Et hujus quidem generis malis, quae moraliter mala dicuntur, omnino Deum
adscribere auctorem nefas est. p. 27, 28.

LYCERUS vindicating God from the very same calumny, POLYCAR. LYCERVS in Harm.
Evang c. 103. p. 1460.
with which Mr. Hickman has not feared to ^sperse him, says that the Devil
did pecc^re ex semetipso, (according to our Savior Ioh. 8.44.) that he alone
is pater and fons malorum, (...), the first inventor of evil things: to which
he accommodates that of Austin, Quomodo Deus pater genuit filium veritatem, sic
Diabolus lapsus genuit quasi filium mendacium.

God is said to be omnipotent, not because he can do all things (says LOMBARD
out of Augustine) but because he can do whatsoever he will; PET. LOMBARDVS l. 1.
did. 42. p. 248* D. E. F. Omnipotens est, ^o^ quod possit omnia facere, sed
q^ia potest efficere quicquid vult. etc. vide August. Enc^i^* cap. 96. in fine
tom. 3.
who cannot will to do any thing, but what is good. But there are some things
(says he) which God cannot do, v. Ar^ic. condem. and excomm. a Stephan^ Paris.
Epis^. and per Magistros Parisienses. ad calcem Lomb. p. 953, 967, 969.
to wit, those things which are unjust, sunt alia quaedam quae Deus nullatenus
facere potest, ut p^ccata. (p. 247.) Non potest Deus facere injusta p. 248.
These following Doctrines, [quod voluntas hominis ex necessitate vult and
eligit, and quod liberum Arbitrium est potentia passiva -- and quod necessitate
movetur ab Appetibili, -- item quod dignitas esset in causis superioribus posse
facere peccata, Item quod al^quis faciat aliquid omnino, ut Deus vult ipsum
facere volu^tate Beneplaciti quod talis peccet, etc.] were condemned with an
Anathema, by the Bp. of Paris and all the Professors of Divinity in that
university A. D. 1270. and 1341. together with the Blasphemies of Ioannes de
Mercurio of the Cistercian order, that God is in some sort the cause of the
sinful act; ibid. p. 971. col. 1, and 2.
And that whatever is caused by the will of the Creature, is so caused by
virtue of the first cause. And that God is the cause of every mode of the act,
and of every Circumstance that is produced. All which are the Blasphemies
asserted as Necessary truths by Mr. p. 79, 95.96. etc.
Hickman, and accordingly do call for a condemnation.

Bp. BRAMHALL shows it to be his judgment, whilst he censures Mr. Hobbs for
saying, Bp. BRAMHAL in a reply to T. H. Animadv. p. 94.95
that God wills and effects, by the second causes, all their actions, good and
bad; and says it implies a contradiction, that God should willingly do what he
professes he does suffer. Act. 13.18. and Act. 14.16. Then he thus states the
matter. God causes all good, id. ib. p. 97.
permits all evil, disposes all things both good and evil. -- The general
power to act is from God, (in him we live move and have our being,) this is
Good. But the specification and Determination of this general power to the
doing of any evil, is from our selves, and proceeds from the free will of man
-- it is a good consequence; ib. p. 101.
This thing is unrighteous, therefore it cannot proceed from God.

Diotallevius in Opusc. Theol p. 103. p. 2. q. 80 (...)* 1. ad 3.
Thus Aquinas and others are also expounded by Diotallevius, not to mean that
God is any cause of the evil act, but that he does not withdraw his necessary
support from the will, which abuses its liberty in determining it self to the
evil act, and so that God is only the condition without which we cannot do
evil, not the cause by which we do it. And so says Greg in 2. d. 34. and 37.
q. 1 art. 3. ad 8. and 12. C^preol* ib. q. 1. art. 3. Scotus in 2. d 37. q. 2
Suarez in opusc. l 2. de concursu Del ad actus malos. c. 3.
Aquinas, Licet Deus sit universale principium omnis intentionis motus humani
quod tamen determinetur voluntas humana ad malum consilium, hoc non esse a Deo,
sed ab ipsa, again he says, non a motione divina sed a disp^sitione humanae
voluntatis oriri, ut malae potius action^s quam bo^ae sequantur. He also Greg
in 2. d. 34. and 37. q. 1 art. 3. ad 8. and 12. C^preol* ib. q. 1. art. 3.
Scotus in 2. d 37. q. 2 Suarez in opusc. l 2. de concursu Del ad actus malos.
c. 3.
cites for his opinion what I have cast into the Margin; and of which the
result is this, D^termi^ation^m ad produc^ndam hu^^s actus en^itatem esse a
voluntate humana, non autem a Deo, and Deum ita nolle anteceden^er, ut haec
entitas sit; ut eam e^iam esse patiatur, suum concursum non subtrahendo: si
conditio id exigat ex Creaturae liberate opposita. p. 92.93.94. mark how it is
expressed by Dr. GO AD.

God made Adam able to be willing to sin, but he made him not to will sin, --
that he chose death, Dr. GO AD at the end of his Dispt. Ms.
it was by the strength of his will given him by God, but God did not bind him
to chose death, for that were (a contradiction) a necessitated choice -- if the
Nature of a voluntary Agent be well observed, this point will be most evident.]
And now the judicious Dr. Hammond will be the fittest to shut up all.

He that first gives the Law, and then pre^etermines the Act of transgressing
(the disobedience, Dr. HAMMOND of Fundamentals chapter 16. p. 183, 184.
the doing contrary to) that law, that first forbids eating of the tree of
knowledge, and then predetermines Adams will to choose and eat what was
forbidden, is by his decree guilty of the Commission of the act, and by his Law
the cause of its being an obliquity: And indeed if the obliquity, which renders
the act a sinful act, be it self any thing, it must necessarily follow, that
either God does not predetermine all things, or that he predetermines the
obliquity; and Regularity bearing the same p^oportion of Relation to any act of
Duty, as obliquity does to sin, it cannot be imagined that the Author of the
sinful Act, should not be the Author of the obliquity, as well as the Author of
the pious Act is by the disputers acknowledged to be the Author of the
regularity of it.

To conclude this Chapter in the words of Dr Reynolds, Dr. ED. REYNOLDS of the
sinfulness of sin. p. 212. in 4to.
Let not any man resolve sins into any other original, then his own Lusts.

CHA P. VI.
An account of those things which Mr. H. calls his Artificial Arguments.
. 1. HAving bestowed so much paper on what is thought of most moment, I shall
need spend but little in the dispatching of those flies, to which Mr. H. gives
the name of Arguments Artificial p. 69. The first he confesses was Mr.
Barlees. [If sin as sin be a positive entity, then it is a thing in it self
good. For it was added by Mr. B. but now subtracted by Mr. H.) every positive
thing is good.

Sect. 2. To this I answered '(...). chapter 3. p. 10. ^o p. 153.
many things (of which Mr. H. replyeth only to a few,) As 1. That if sin is a
thing positive, he seeks to prove (by this Argument) that sin is good. 2. That
I had proved sin a thing positive, in my two last sections; which continuing
firm and not disproved, evinceth the force of his Argument to serve for
nothing, but only to prove that sin is good. 3. That a thing which is privative
in one respect, is also positive in another. As that which is privative of life
and sight, must needs be positive of Death, and blindness. 4. That Mr. B.
himself did grant as much, in confessing the efficient cause of sin, and
saying, there may be something of positive in a privation. 5. That in saying sin
is privative, he confesses it is not a mere privation, because a privation is
but the abstract of privative; and what is most positive in one case, may be
privative in another. 6. That sin is not conceivable, unless as a concrete,
(which has something positive as well as privative) there being no kind of
difference betwixt David's lying with Bathshebah, and hi^ Adultery with
B^thshebah, at the time of her being Vriahs wife. 7. That bonum Metaphysicum
has quite another signification, then bonum morale, to which alone we oppose
sin, or malum morale, 8. That a Libertine, a Ranter or a Carneadist will be
glad to introduce an opinion that sin is good, by calling it bonum
Met^physicum, and confounding that with bonum morale. 9. That the subject of
Metaphysics is ens quatenus ens, reale illud, not omnimodo positivum quatenus
positivum, and so (in one sens^) it comprehends Res and aliquid. 10. That
bonum metaphysicum does not signify good in English, as Canis astronomicus
does not signify a dog in our english streets and apprehensions. 11. That Dr.
Twisse was betrayed into one of his worst errour^ [ that it is better to be
tortured to all eternity, then not to have a real being] by not considering
this very thing. 12. That a lie is verum, as much as sin is bonum Metaphysicum;
because it has a positive being, which proved the Argument to be impertinent
at the best.

. 3. Now Reader observe, what an incomparable confuter I have to deal with. Of
12. things answered bu^ 4. replied to.
There are but four things of twelve, on which his courage would serve him to
try his teeth; which finding also to be too hard, he does as lepidly nibble at
them, as the tame creature did at the Thistles, which made Philemon so full of
laughter. For to the first he thus replies. The design of the argument is to
fright Mr. P. out of his sad opinion concerning the positivity of sin, by
bringing him to the grand Absurdity, of saying sin is good p. 70.

But I rejoyn. 1. A rejoynde^ to the first.
That my answer was designed to fright Mr. Hick. from his opinion concerning
Gods being the Author of all things positive, nay of all things See his page*
95, lin. ult,
real too, (neither Blasphemy, nor Buggery, nor hating God, being excepted,) by
bringing him to the grand Absurdities, of saying God is the Author of the
greatest wickedness in the world, and withal of saying, the greatest
wickedness is good, 2. He cannot bring me to saying that sin is good, but
only he can say he designed to bring me; which shows the folly of his design
too. For. (3.) as I said that Bonum amongst the Heathen Metaphysicians, did not
signify good in our English acception of the word, any more then malum which is
latin for an apple, can signify evil in a Translation, (though malum is
latin for evil too,) so I shall make it undeniable by appealing even to them
who are partial to him; whether we can properly say in English, That it is good
to hate God, or good for Mr. Hickman to lie with a beast,
because they are actions which have positive entities, and therefore are Bona
Metaphysica in Mr. Hickmans Dialect. Nay in very broad English Mr. H. will tell
us that they are Good, and from God, if he dares say twice, what he has said
too often, by saying, once (to wit, in his pages 95, 96*) 4. I told him
Aristotl^'s phrase [of every entity being good] should rather have been
rejected as unsound and unsafe, (and so returned to that Heathen from whence it
came) then have been used by a Christian to prove it good to hate God. And
accordingly Dr. Stearn does somewhere deny that metaphysical Axiom to be of
universal truth; for when it was urged that the Act of hating God must be good,
because ens and bonum convertuntur, he called it the begging of the question,
as well he might. 5. Mr. H. says theMaxime is, ens and bonum convertuntur,
(not quatenus positivum) and so ascribes an equal goodness to the formal
obliquity, (which is ens) as to the Act it self to which the obliquity it
annexed. 6. Twere easy to prove to Mr. H. that the greatest Lie is as true, as
the truth it self because it is Aristotle's Maxim, and as generally received
as that he urged, ens and verum convertuntur. 7. I had told him whilst it was
time, that if by good, he means bonum morale, (as to be pertinent he must) he
must also prove parricide, incest, witchcraft, or Rebellion, (a thing neither
better nor worse then witchcraft,) either mere privations of being, or moral
good things. For according to his dreaming, they must be nothing, or 2. no
sins, or 3. moral virtues, or 4. sins and moral virtues too.

To the 2^.
. 4. He replies to the third, by a full Concession p. 70.71. But conceiving it
a disgrace to stick at nothing, he wholly passes by my answer, and only
quarrels my Illustration, which yet in one sense he does approve too. That
sense was mine; and as pertinent it was, as whatsoever similitude he has stolen
from Mr. Morice, what I said of darkness, he confesses to be a truth, and
with a [ But it is very vulgar.] p. 71. As if the Sun were the worse, for being
an every day spectacle. He thought his axiom the better, for being vulgar; and
gave it this commendation, that it is commonly received, p. 70. when he
impertinently says that darkness cannot be felt (p. 72.) he should have
excepted the Egyptian, and that of his own apprehension, which is now so
palpable to every Reader. 2. I gave an instance in the transgression of the
Law, which I said was sin, and yet a thing positive, as well as privative, to
wit, privative of virtue, and positive of vice. To this Mr. H. was deeply
silent; and so has yielded my answer, without the offer of a reply, that what
is privative in one case, is also positive in another.

. 5. He replies to the 8t. Mr. P. has deserved his humble thanks who bestows a
positive entity on sin. p. 72. To the 3 d.
] For this crude speech, I first referr him to the third and fourth part of my
Rejoinder to the first part of his Reply,. 3. I only add for his Instruction
(of which he proves his present want) that Carneades spoke in a moral sense,
when he took away the difference 'twixt right and wrong. And Mr. Hickman has
done the same. For if God is the Author of that positive act, [the Divel's
hating God] as Mr. Hickman affirms him to be, (p. 96.) then the Devil does
nothing but what is right, as all must be which God himself is the Author of.

. 6. His Reply to the ninth, has been already spoken to, in the third and
fourth part of. 1. of this Chapter. To the 4 th.
I only add, that if the positive action of hating God is so intrinsecally,
essentially, and wholly evil, as he has liberally confessed (p. 94.) It will
be hard for him to show, where lies its goodness in any sense; much less in
theirs, who when they describe metaphysicall goodness, per ordinem ad
appetitum, understand it primarily with relation to the Divine will; yet so
they do says Mr. Hickman p. 74. Could the man have contrived a greater
unhappiness to himself? He confesses a little after, that a thing is not good,
because desired; therefore sin may be desired, and yet not good: when he add's,
it is desired, because it is good, he should have said, because it seems so.
And yet the Devil desires evil, because it is evil. Or if it seems good to
him, it does but s^em so; odisse Deum est fugibile secundum se totum; and Mr.
Hickm^n must say, how it bonificates a subject in which it is, who affirms it
to be good and the work of God; not I, who confute him for so affirming.

Sect. 7. His second Argument (he tells us) was in his Letter to Mr. Barlee to
this effe^t. His second Argument artificial.
If sin be a positive entity, then it is either God, or from God. p. 75.] mark,
Reader; he does not say, it was in these words, (he is it seems ashamed of
them) But to this effect only. Whereas in Mr. Barlee the account is thus given
See the place cited in my (...). c. 3. p. 154. and examined till as far as P*
1^6*
, [ If sin is a positive entity, it is God. For (as a learned friend of mine
wrote to me not long since) what ever positive thing is not from God, is God.]
But how does [he mean, it is from God? He tells us plainly (p. 79.) It is from
God, as his creature; for so he explains what he meant by that other passage,
There is no medium betwixt Deus and creatura.; whereby he is so far from
understanding, That the action of hating God is the creature of the sinful
depraved creature, (man, or Devil) that he often scoffs at it, as a ridiculous
conceit. And expressly says of all such actions, as have a positive being,
(though never so intrinsecally and essentially evil, as that of lying with a
beast, of hating, blaspheming, and cursing God.) That they are FROM GOD, as
well as the CREATVRE. p. 82.] speaking of the creature, by whom such villainies
are committed.

. 8. To show him the state of his affairs by this so* desperate adventure, How
largely answered.
I spent no less than twelve pages. And first I objected the Devils pride, or
proud desire to be equal with God, (which Mr. Hickman supposes to have been
the first sin, p 103.) which will be granted by all the world, (Mr. Hickman not
excepted) to have a positive being. And yet it being the very fil^hiness of the
fil^hiest spirit, All the world will also grant, that it was none of God's
creatures. And if not so, then Mr. Hickman will have it God; which is as
horrible a blasphemy, as the wit of Hell could have invented. It would be
tedious to the Reader, should I here Epitomize what I opposed to this Argument.
And therefore I must referr him unto the place before cited.

. 9. How now does Mr. Hickman defend himself? His remarkable Tergiversation,
without the shadow of a reply.
Does he deny the Devils pride to have a positive being? no such matter. Does
he deny it to be God, by calling it one of Gods creatures? no, not a syllable
comes from him touching the one or the other. Does he take the third course,
and deny it to be his creature, by asserting it to be Him? no, that is too
intolerable, to be expected from the evil one. What then does he resolve on, to
help himself at this pinch? Does he confess he was hasty, and inconsiderate,
and so crave pardon from God, and men? No, it seems he is too stomachfull, and
too rigid a Presbyterian. But what at last does he say then, if he does neither
accuse, nor excuse himself? Truly he says never a word, but sleeps-over the
Business, hoping that few or no Readers would see that part of my (...), or
examine what answer he might attempt to make to it. For the better amusing of
his Readers, he begins with a fault which he finds in Ca^etan, (though he does
not say where,) then he steals a witty passage (word for word) from Mr.
Goodwin, as far from the purpose as it was possible, (and though the passage is
not, yet the impertinence is his own;) Next he skips to the Trichot^mie, which
I had told him he was to know, for the distinguishing of God, and God's works,
from the works of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3.8. To which his Reply is briefly this, [
If I must, there is no remedy, (p. 76.) And yet, against this, he will give me
his Reasons, and says he will do it without fear; whether not without wit too,
it now comes to be examined.

10. His first Reason is, His offers of Reason, why all things positive are
either from God, or God himself, and primarily none from men or devils.
Because he finds that those who had to do with the Manichees and heathen
Philosophers, building their Argument upon this Basis, Omne ens est vel primum,
vel a primo; and that malum is therefore not caused by God, because it is not
ens, but non ens, as they commonly call that which is but a privation* p. 76.]
to which he adds five passages for example, p. 77, 78.

The infirmities of the first*
First for his Ignorance of the Fathers, and his gross mistake of their meaning,
and what Absurdities he incurrs by such mistaking, I have abundantly showed in
the former Chapter; where I was willing to consider it once for all, that I
might not repeat one thing too often, whereby to delay, and distract the
Reader. I shall only here add, 1 that it is apparent by the confession of Mr.
Hickman that if his Testimonies are valid, as to their literal importance, they
serve to prove the Nonentity (that is, the nullity) of sin; which Mr. Hickman
(with ^ bare forehead) has not hitherto asserted, whatever he has done by way
of equivalence and consecution. And if they are figuratively spoken, when they
say that sin is nothing (which is but nonens in English) why not figuratively
spoken, when they say, that sin is a privation? especially when there are
testimonies out of the very same Writers, not only for the reality, but
positivity also of sin? 2. The little Greek he produces, has so very many
faults in so very few lines, (not observed in his Errata) that I conceive he
did he knew not what, with an implicit Faith in the skill of others, from whom
he borrowed at second hand; which I believe so much the rather, because I find
his own Authorities do overthrow the very error for which he b^ings them.
Witness the (...). Athan. contra Gentes. mihi p. 6. c.
words of A^hanasius, which prove that sin has no substance, in opposition to
those Greeks, who contended that sin had a subsistence of it self; whereas to
the having a positivity, there is nothing more required then that it be some
kind of Accident. Witness also those other words, affirming no evil thing
(positive or privative) to proceed from God, who being the (...), gives
occasion to the expression of (...); which evil things may be called, as not
derived from him, who is (...), and (...). So when it is said by St. Austin, ex
uno Deo esse omnia quae sunt, he explains his meaning to be of all good things,
and of none besides, because he presently adds, and tamen non esse peccatorum
auctorem Deum. And if, when Austin does elsewhere say, Peccatum nihil est, he
means according to the letter, that sin is nothing in very deed, first it is a
gross contradiction to what he says in other places: and secondly, it is the
worst of his many Errors. 3. The meaning of Aquinas I have Look b^ck on chapter 5.
^. 5. number. 7.
elsewhere showed. And yet if I say (with Dr. Iackson) that Aquinas and his
followers have sometim^s spoken u^excusably concerning God, I shall but speak
to the dishonor of Popish Writers, by whom the rigid Presbyterians have been
unhappily corrupted in these affairs. Lastly whereas he says, that hea^h^n
Philosophers did see this, (giving an instance in Salustius, and no one else,)
a man that shall affirm the eternity of the world, may urge Aristotle for it,
and say the Heathens themselves discernd this truth. Thus I say a man may
argue, who can find in his heart to argue no better then Mr. Hickman. But be it
that a heathen is of the Presbyterian judgment, the Christian Fathers and
Schoolmen are still of mine, unless when they speak in such a manner against
me, as to speak as much against themselves too.

. 11. His second Reason is, because he knows no other way of defining what ens
primum is, but this, Of the second.
that it is such a Being, which is not from any other being, and which is the
cause of all the Beings that are p. 78.

First I observe from these words, that the Libertine advances more and more
to a clear discovery of it self. By which he is proved (out of his mouth) to be
the worst of Blasphemers.
For if he thinks that any sin (as hating, cursing, blaspheming God) has any
being in the world, he professes to believe that God himself is the cause of
it. And the cause is the Author of any being. And so he is caught in the act of
that very crime, which himself had confessed to be the worst of all
blasphemies, and which is the Quintessence of all blasphemy, says Theophilus
p. 171.
Churchman, which is thought to signify three men, of which number Master
Hickman himself is one, in the rational conjectures of all I meet with. If he
thinks that sin has no being, and by consequence that it is nothing, then his
words are most impertinent, and prove him besides a mere Carneadist. Secondly,
In saying God is the cause of all beings, merely because he is the first, he
seems to think there is but one way of priority, whereas a Freshman in Logic
could have told him there are five. Is it not enough that God is the first of
all Beings, and was from eternity without beginning, whereas all things else
began to be, and so was before the being of sin (and of all things else) in
four respects, but he must also be before it as the ^ause of its being?
Thirdly, It may suffice to the defining of ens primum, to say it is that, which
alone did never begin to be, or that, than which there is nihil prius, and
which praecedeth all others, as much as eternity praecedeth time. Or if the
word cause must needs be added, let it be said he is the cause of all good
things that have a being, whether naturally and necessarily, or voluntarily
acting. But not the cause of those acts or actions, which cannot but argue in
the causer either wickedness and guilt, or imperfection.

Of the third. Wherein he makes God the Fountain of the Essence of sin,
. 12. His third Reason in effect is but the same with the second, as the second
is the same with what he called his second Argument p. 77. And so I referr it
for its answer both to the Section before going, and to what I have said in my
whole fifth Chapter, especially to. 5 an^ 6. Only I add my observation, that
whilst God is by him affirmed to be the fountain of all essences, (p 79.) who
yet ascribes one essence unto sin, whilst he says* the action of hating God
is essentially evil (p. 94.) he affirms God to be the fountain of all the sins
in the world, and that not only of the act, but of the very essence of sin it
self. And because he seems to stumble most at the common axiom in Philosophy,
Mr. Barlow in his exercit. 2. de natura m^li, p. 45.72
which is found urged by Mr. Barlow, several times upon one account, [to wit,
that the cause of the cause, is the cause of the effect] I will first send him
back to what I have said in Answer to it, chap. 5.. 5. number. 2. Next I will set
him down (at large) Aquinas his Answer unto the same. Aquinas 1.2. q. 79. Art.
1. ad 3.
[ effectus causae secundae procedens ab ea, secundum quod subditur causae
primae, reducitur etiam in causam primam. Sed si procedat a causa media,
secundum quod exit ordinem causae primae, non reducitur in causam primam. Sicut
si minister faciat aliquid contra mandatum Domini, hoc non reducitur in
dominum, sicut in causam. Et similiter peccatum quod liberum arbitrium
committit contra praeceptum Dei, non reducitur in Deum, sicut in causam.

. 12. His fourth pretended reason is most ridiculously pretended; He believes
no medium, because (forsooth! Of the fourth* Wherein he ascribes unto God,
what God ascribes unto the Devil. 1 Ioh. 3.8*
) Mr. P. has not been able to find any; for whereas I told him the works of
the Devil are a medium, (he says) I could not sure but think he would
distinguish in blasphemy, lying, etc, betwixt the vital act and its deficiency
etc. p. 79.] The folly of this being discovered throughout my whole fourth
chapter, and in the beginning of this sixth, (and I may say throughout my fifth
too) but most expressly in my third chapter. 6. (which is too long to be here
repeated) I shall only here observe two things. 1, His affirming the act of
Blasphemy to be from God, (as he does expressly lin. 13, 14.) Next, his denying
those things to be the works of the Devil, to which the Scripture has given
that Name. He denies it here partly, and partly page 96. what yet the Scripture
asserteth plainly 1 Ioh. 3.8. But more of this Reason in the following Section*
For

13. After five pages of impertinence, His third Argument artificial*
he argues thus. If a thing be therefore sinful because it wants some
perfection that it ought to have, and cease to be sinful when it has all the
perfection which it ought to have, then is sin a privation; but a thing is
therefore sinful, etc. Ergo, page 84.]

As this is also taken from Mr. Barlow (but no more acknowledged by the Taker,
then all the rest, Look back on c. 3. S. 2.^ 3, 4, 5, and 7*
) so an Answer to it is given in my Reply to Mr. Barlow, in vindication of Dr.
Field: who having proved that there are acts, to which no rectitude can be due
to make them perfect, (as the act of hating God) had such an answer from Master
Barlow, as I showed to be invalid in five respects. And in each of them Mr.
Hickman is equally concerned. But yet I add, 1. that this makes against those
sins only, which are only sins because forbidden, not at all against those,
which are only forbidden for being sins. (of which I have spoken chapter 3.. 6.)
That something may be evil (...), is affirmed by Saint Basil, as he confesses.
And that the action of hating God is intrinsecally evil, we have his word, p.
94. But 2. This only proves that some sins are privative, not that sin is a
(...) privation. And what is privative of one thing, is also positive of
another; (as has been showed. 1. and 4.) 3. Doctor Field and others have often
told him, of a positive repugnance to the Law of God. And when it was said by
himself (page 79.) he could derive the irregularity from corruption, and the
Devils Temptation, he did not say, it was not positive, unless nothing can be
so, that is from corrup^ion and the Devil. A man may thus make him confute
himself, of the vital acts, speaking, and Blasphemy, or lying, he says the
former is from God, the latter from the Devil; and yet the Blasphemy is as
positive as speaking can be, because it is speaking to Gods dishonor: and so
at once in opposition, and yet according to Mr. Hickman (who is often Antipus
to himself) there are some things positive* which are neither God, nor from
God, but from corruption and the Devils temptation,

. 14. What he is wi^ling to infer from the word (...), (p. 85.) which he saw
urged by Mr. Barlow in no less then The positive importance of (...), not
considered by Master Barlow, Ex^r. 2. page 39* 51.65.
three places, I shall show to be faulty in six respects. 1. He seems not to
have known (what Mr. Barlow well knew, but considered not) that [(...)] in
composition has a threefold importance, and thence is called by three names,
(...), And that the Law is transgressed, by him who adds to it, or goes beyond
it. Qui (...) (...) dicit, qui scortationem, qui fur^tum dicit, duo semper
dicit, materiale and formale. Alsted. Lex. Theol* c. 8. p. 233.
2. By this way of arguing, he might endeavor to prove God to be merely
privative, because he is said to be (...), Infinite; that is, without any
bounds, or terms of being. (...) dicta ex (...), and (...), ut observat. Alst
ex Fran. Iu^io.
And Dionysius the Areopagite delights to tell us what he is, by telling us
what he is not. (as has been showed chap. 5.) 3. What St. John has expressed
by (...), others commonly do express by (...), and (...), and (...), each of
which I now see in the same page of Athanasius, who also puts (...) as an
instance of (...). (contra Gentes page 4.) 4. There is nothing commoner in the
N. T. then for words compounded with [a] to have a positive signification in
one respect, as well as a privative in another. As Romans 1.30.31* we find (...)
to import Rebellious; (...), covenant-breakers; (...), implacable; (...),
cruel; (...) is foolish; but so as foolish signifies unreasonable actions; as
(...) does malice and mischief against Christ, Luke 6.11. and (...), those that
were guilty of brutish practices. Tit. 3.3. (v. D. H. in locum.) so (...) in
Damascene is positively liberal, and used as an Epithet of God. (...),
positively confident; (...), a positive sorrow. The word (...) Romans 1.28. does
not only denote a man, who goes without a reward, but that is positively
opposite to every thing that is good, as Doctor Ham. observes upon the place (
Noteh.) 5. (...) in aequivalence is the same with (...), Vocabulum (...) quo
hic utitur Johannes significat quicquid fit contra legem. Hemm. de via vitae.
p. 554.
which with the learnedest Remonstrants is actus hominis: (as has been showed
chapter 3.. 25.) And so it is with Hemmingius, who says the word [(...),
unrighteousness,] which is used by Saint John, does signify (in concreto)
whatsoever thing is done in a contrariety to the Law. And accordingly I observe
in the most Judicious Doctor Hammond, that he takes the D. H. Ham. in Fundamen.
c. 16. p. 183.
Transgressing of the Rule to be a positive thing, a doing contrary to Gods
commandment, from whence arises the obliquity of any act. 6. Nay Mr. Hick.
implies as much, in the simplicity at least of his understanding, (which one
Mr. Bagsh^w was so ignorant, ^s to believe he had expressed by a simplicity of
heart) whilst he confesses that pravitas, malitia, (...), See the positive
instances of (...) Romans 1.29.30* 31.^
(...), import the same with peccatum. p. 54.

The like Importance of peccatum, proved by reason and experience.
. 15. And that peccatum does import ( concretively) both a positive Act, and an
obliquity (or inordination) may be made undeniable from the origin of the word,
as well as from the Authors by whom it is used, 1. Pecco is a verb active,
peccare, an action, (just as much as malefacere.) Peccatum clearly comes from
the passive voice of that verb; even as much as benefactum from the passive
voice of benefacio; Peccare significat Actionem tantum non etiam omissionem.
Alsted ubi Supra.
multa peccantur, legitur apud Cic. 1. Off. And peccare is a Transi^ive, Plant.
Bacch'd. 8.29. And peccatum is sometimes a passive participle, Terent. in prol.
Eunuch. 27. And accordingly it is said by all kind of writers, (as well by our
Enemies, as our Friends,) that sin connoteth two things, whereof the one is
materia^, the other formal. Not Aquinas only, and all his followers, but Dr.
Twisse, and all his; do affirm Omne. peccatum DUO connotat. Dr. Twisse. Vin.
Gra. l. 2. part. 1. p. 155. Matthaeus vero and Marcus monstrant, quod materia
Peccati in Sp. Sanctum sit contemptus Christi and Evangelii Hemming. ubi supra.
p. 554*
all sin to import 2 things, sins of Om^ssion not excepted. And Hemmingius
says that the matter of the sin against the holy Ghost, is a contempt of
Christ and h^s Gospel; which he also says is demonstrated both by St. Matthew
and St. Mark I hope Mr. H, will not say, that the contempt of the Gospel being
positive, is very good and from God; which yet he must, or he must sing his
Recantation. In a word, It can no more be proved that sin* is a privation and
nothing else, from the saying of St. John, that sin is (...), or the
Transgression of the Law (1 John 3.4.) then that Christ himself is not
positive, from the tropical saying of St. Paul, that Christ was made sin (2.
Cor. 5.21.) or that darkness is as positive as iron, because the Angels were
delivered* to chains of darkness 2 Pet. 2.4. And whether it is not indeed a
sin (without any such figure, or catachrestical way of speaking) to ravish
Virgins, and lie with beasts, to hate God, and to love the Devil, (which are
confessedly as positive, as any actions that can be named) I appeal to the
usage of the word Sin, in the common experience of all mankind.

His 4th. or last Argument
. 16. His last argument (as he calls it) is very rare. Original sin is not
positive, ergo sin as sin is not positive; p. 8^] First for the manifold
Absurdities (as well as guilt into which he falls by his reduplication [sin as
sin] I briefly refer to every part of my second chapter, especially. 8, 9, 10,
11, 12* etc. Next for what he says of Original sin, I refer to all I have
produced from the Ancient Fathers, and learned modern Divines, (who held it to
be a posi^ive quality) in the third and fourth Sections of the fifth Chapter of
this Book, and also in the 3. Chapter 23. But (thirdly) as I never yet said, so
neither a^ I concerned to say, that all sins are positive, It is enough that
some are, and those the worst to be imagined. Nay Mr. H, must be concluded a
strange kind of Blasphemer, in saying all things positive are either Gods
Creatures, or God himself, although there were but one sin that had a positive
being, such as was the Angels pride, and the Devils hatred of God Almighty or
the lusts of the Devil Joh. 8.44. Yet now to speak more of Original sin, as
that does signify the proneness of the will to evil, after the image of Adams
will, (from after the time of his Depravation) it must needs be also positive,
to wit, a conversion to the creature. And why might not Adam acquire (by his
sin) the image of Satan unto himself and offspring too, as well as p. 88.
sin-away the Image of God? Belle dicunt Scholastici in omni Peccato
considerari terminum a quo, and ^d quem. Omne namque peccatum est defectio a
Creatore ad Creaturam. Als^ed lex. Theol. c. 8. p. 232.
But this is not that, upon which I am obliged to lay a stresse. Nor shall this
be the subject of new disputes, whether a man does beget a man, as much as a
Horse begets a Horse. It may be argued for ever on either side; but I believe,
with greatest force, for that part of the question to which St. Austin was most
inclined, and all that is said by Mr. H. does but help to disprove Original
sin, for which Pelagians and Socinians may chance to thank him. I know St. Paul
held that the whole of man does consist of three things; Body, Soul and Spirit;
concerning which Dr. Hammond has a most profitable Discourse, with a Reference
to which I will shut up this Section. A short account of those shif^s, which
pretend to be Answers to some few Arguments.
(see his Annotation upon 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.)

17. Having seen his Reasons, let us see what he says to some few of mine; or
rather how guiltily he sneaks from the whole duty of a respondent p. 90. For
though he knew what I had said (...). chapter 3. p. 156. Mic. 6.16. Gal. 5.19. Col.
1.21. Ephesians. 5 11. Heb 9.14. 1 John 3.8. Rev. 9.20.

Of sins being called the works of the Devil.


to wit, that Sins in Scripture are called works, (works of Darkness, works of
the flesh, works of men's hands, and works of the Devil,) as it were on purpose
to show that they are positive things; yet he passes by that, (as if the word
works had been of no consideration) and only nibbles at my saying, That that
was positive that Christ came to destroy, concealing also from his Reader, what
I had cited from St. John, of Christ's being manifested in the flesh, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.8. nor taking notice of what I
said about vacuum vacui implying locatum, as the privation of a privation
implies position by all confessions. I showed it implies a contradiction, to
say an habit is a privation, because it is called by a Catachresis, the
privation of a privation, when after a loss it is recovered; from hence I
argued, that if the works of the Devil (which are also called the Lusts of the
Devil Joh. 8.44.) had been mere privations, the destruction of them could have
been none. But Mr. H's very weakness does serve him here instead of strength,
for not considering that Death is said to be capable of destruction (1 Cor.
15.16.) by the same catachrestical way of speaking, whereby it is said in other
places to have a body, and a sting, (and so I might prove it, at least to him,
to have a positive entity) he urges his ignorance for a proof, that of a mere
privation there may be properly a privation. How much better might I prove that
death it self has a positivity, from Rev. 21.8. where to be burning in a lake
of fire and Brimstone is expressed by the name of the second death. But the
work of the Devil is (...) properly so called, and therefore positive. The
words of St. John are even literally true, (...) 1 John 3.4. and lusts are
qualities, John 8.44.

His Concessions and contradictions about the habit of Drunkenness
. 18. To the Argument which I urged from sins habitual, or habits of sin, (such
as Drunkenness in a man who is seldom sober,) it seems he knew so exactly
that no good answer was to be given, as to resolve to supply it with mere
scurrility, and impertinence p. 91. He is fain to say that I intended a
Sori^es, or rather seemed to intend it, that he might seem to have something at
which to nibble. But no such thing as a Sorites was any more in my thoughts,
then in my mention. And therefore this is so vile a practice, as may be used by
any Atheist, who has a mind to calumn^ate any passage of any writer. It i an
easy thing to say, that such an Author makes a face as if he intended this, or
that, which we have reason to believe he could not possibly intend. But what
says the Rhapsodist to my Argument, Autocatac^* chapter ^ p. 161.
that vices are habits as well as virtues, and therefore positive Qualities, as
well as Virtues? He does not deny that some sorts of vices indeed are Habits,
for he cannot think, that an act of Drunkenn^ss is a vice, and that an habit of
Drunkennenss is none at all, nor can he think it impossible to be habitu^lly
drunk,) and that an habit is a thing positive, he is so far from denying, that
he affirms it, he pr^fesseth not to doubt of it (p 92.) so that now there is
no question, whether Drunkenness, when an habit, is positive or not. But
whether or no it is a sin, or whether it is not from God, in Mr. Hickman's
judgment: one of the two (we are assured by himself) is his opinion, he having
taught expressly, that all things positive are either from God, or God himself.
Nay he plainly enough affirms the habit of drunkenness; as he professes not
to doubt the positivity of the habit. And he does both within the compass of
7. or 8. lines. p. 94.
But he denies that this habit is a fit instance of habitus in post
praedicamentis, yet that is a Quality, and so is this; as I will make him to
confess by putting the case in another color* for he confesses it is an
action for the Devil to hate God. And that an action implies a quality, he will
be hi^s'd by the youngsters, if he denies; (this being one of the 4. things,
which are required to every action.) And as the habit of hateing God is as much
a sin as the habit of drunkenness can be, so it serves as f^^ly to evince the
thing that I am proving. If he means vice by vitios^^y, (as sin by sinfulness
(p. 53.) then he doubts whether that is positive which he says he doubts not
to be an habit; and being an habit, he as little doubts of its positivity. If
he means that vitiosity is the abstract of vice, he contradicts what he had
said, p. 53 unless he thinks he may distinguish betwixt the vice and the sin
of Drunkenness. If he makes a separation of the habit of drunkenness (which
he will have to be from God, as being positively something) from the obliquity
of the habit, which he expresses by vitiosity, then he incurs the several
dangers, which my whole second Chapter does warn him of. So great and many are
the distresses into which this Medler betrays himself.

. 19. I had said (in my (...), p. 163.) 1. There must be something positive to
make a man positively foul, His Concessions and contradictions about the
p^sitive filth of sin
2. Which foulness suffers a privation, when the man is cleansed of his filth.]
The truth of the first Mr. H. confesses in words at length. p. 93. and the
truth of the second he does not question; for he does not speak a word to it.
What then does he do for an answer to me? Why, it goes for an answer, to call
me Rector; and for a jest, to add Ridiculous. The text which I cited from Rev.
22.11. ( let him that will be filthy be filthy still) he found misprinted, Romans
22.11. on which he fastens, as an occasion to show his deep knowledge, that
there are not so many Chapters in that Epistle. (Nor did the Printers
Apprentice suppose there were.) He says I did not offer at any other proof,
when yet he knows I also added the words of God to the people Israel, I have
purged thee, Ezekiel. 23.13.
and thou wast not purged, therefore shall thou not be purged from thy
filthiness any more. p. 262. from whence I made this observation, that (as the
filth of sin is many times so ingrained, that after Gods own cleansings the
habitual sinner remains unclean so) the fil^h which is positive is man's own
Creature, whereas the cleansing which is privative is Gods own work. To this
Mr. H. does not answer one syllable, but falls to his old trade of begging,
(what he was sure to be denied) the thing in Question. And yet he is somewhat
more bashful then at his ordinary times. Only saying what may be said, not what
he dares affirm for truth [ we may make the spiritual filth to consist in the
want of that Nitor Gratiae, which either was, or should be in the soul. p. 93.]
But 1. he contradicts what he had said a little before, unless he will deny
that they are positively foul, who are not purged, though God does purge them,
because they are grown so inveterately and habitually foul, that as soon may
the Ethiope change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, Ier. 13.23.
as they do good, who are accustomed to do evil. 2. He makes God (if not the
only, yet) by far the chiefest cause of the greatest filthiness to be named in
men or devils, whilst he makes it to consist in a mere want of grace, which
it is impossible for us to want, but as God does withhold or withdraw it from
us. 3. He makes not any the least difference, betwixt not-blessing (which is
one kind of filthiness) and cursing God (which is another.) betwixt Ammon's not
loving, and his ravishing and his hating his sister Tamar. 4. To hate God, is
an Action, by his acknowledgement; which however it be attended with, yet it is
also somewhat more, then a want of Grace. which although there are men who do
wholly want, yet the Devils are more filthy, in whom the hatred of God is more
habitual. And even of those very men, in whom is wanting a Nitor gratiae, their
filthiness is the greatest, who draw iniquity with Isa. 5.18*
cords, and sin as with a cartrope. 5. Whilst he speaks [of a want of Grace,
which either was, or should have been in the soul,] he implicitly makes God the
sole delinquent, in the latter part of his disjunctive; as if he thought there
were a case, wherein God did not do, what he should have done; unless there
can be grace, and not of God. But 6. It is not so much the want, or absence, as
the resisting of grace when it is present, by which the filthiness of a sinner
becomes exceedingly more filthy. The Jews were Mat. 11.41.
filthier then the Ninevites, not because they more wanted, but more abused the
grace of God; because they sinned against greater light, and against more means
of grace, to abstain from sinning. The Mat* 25.30*
unprofitable servant was to be cast into outer darkness, not for having no
talent, but for wrapping it in a napkin. All which M. H. is now to take into
consideration.

. 20. To what I argued from actual sins, such as lying, His concession, and
tergiversation concerning blasphemy, and Atheism, etc.
blaspheming, and positive believing there is no God; etc. he returns just
nothing, besides his back. Hostibus hic tergo, non forti pectore notus. And yet
as if he were proud of such an unmanlike tergiversation, he steals a passage
from M. Morice, that he may glory in his shame with the better Grace. And
though he had found me often urging that divelish sin of hating God, yet he
talks of supposing my I^stance to be made in the very worst, and most
intrinsecally evil of all actions, even that of hating God. p. 93. hoping his
Readers would believe, he had given my Argument some advantage. But how many
Blasphemies, contradictions, and other absurdities of remarque, this piteous
cre^ture has committed in what he says of this subject, I have sufficiently
discovered in my printed letter to Dr. Heylin, (p. 265* 266. to p. 271.) To
which I have added diverse things in several parts of my present enterprise
which as I must not repeat, (without a reason to excuse me for so unnecessary a
labor,) so it is every whit as needless, as it is easy to add more. I have
enough in his concession, that to hate God is an action, and such an action as
is essentially and intrinsecally evil, evil ex genere and objecto, and
antecedently to the Law; I say, in this I have enough, wher^by to prove him
most clearly his own Refuter. And yet I add, that if the undue referring of
hatred to God be not positive, but privative, (as he unskilfully says p. 95.)
then hatred, being positive, does cease to be posi^ive by being fastened upon
God, (as Mr. Hickman must needs infer, unless he denies the hatred of God to
be a sin,) and yet the fastening it on God is as positive, as the fastening it
on the Devil.

Hi^ r^markable forgerie of an Argument in his Adversaries name.
. 21. After this, having itch to steal a discourse from Mr. Barlow, concerning
several grounds of Difference betwixt the sins of omission and commission; And
knowing not how to bring it in (either by head or by shoulders) by way of
answer to any argument which he had seen in my writings; thought fit to forge
such a syllogism, as might be suitable to his purpose, and (setting a bold face
upon it) to tell the Reader that it was mine. (page, 97.) I stood amazed, for
some time, at his resolution; especially when I saw him making as good as a
profession of such impiety. For although he had directly laid his child at my
door, and pronounced me the father without Reserve, yet few lines after he
confesses in effect that it is his own. For he confesses he does but suppose,
that if my words were reduced to mood and figure, they would appear in such a
Form as he has now represented, (p. 97.) But least his Readers should see my
words concerning sins of omission and commission, by being directed to the page
where I had spoken of that subject, he straight creates an ignis fatuus,
whereby to lead them out of their way. For he says my words are p. 167.
wher^as in all that page there are not only no such words, but no occasion or
hint for so lewd a Fiction. The only place (for ought I know) wherein I used
any such terms, as sins of omission and commis^ion, (but without any likeness
to what he forgeth) was page 146* And there my words were precisely these. If
sins of omission (as not praying and not giving alms, etc.) had but a deficient
cause, yet sins of commission (as cursing and Sacrilege, etc.) have a cause
efficient with a witness. Its true I said in another place, (p. 162.) that
whilst M. Hickman denies sin to be something positive, he seems to make no
difference betwixt a simple negative, and a privative properly so called. And
again, confounds a privation properly so called, with a thing called privative
secundum quid. He makes no difference betwixt not blessing, and cursing God.
etc, where first I say not, he makes no difference, but that he seems to make
none; meaning none, as to the point of its positivity. And as to the force of
my Accusation, he has not uttered one word in his own defense. Nay he has
proved his gross mistake of a simple negative, for a privative properly so
called. And so he proves I had used him with two much candor.

. 22. Of all the Texts which I had brought, His stupendous impertinence, and
supposal of Grace in Hell; or some privation besides All.
for the proving of sins being something positive, ((...), p. 163.) He wilfully
passes by the rest, and shows his impertinence upon one, in which the force of
my Argument did least consist, unless as it relates to the next text after, of
which M. Hickman would take no notice. My A^gument was, that as we read of
great and little sins in comparison, so we read (in proportion) of greater and
l^ss^r damnation. Mat. 23.14. Luke 12.48. Now it is so evident in it self, and
so acknowledged a thing amongst the men of all parties, that all the Damned
souls in hell are wholly destitute of Grace, and that of those who have a
total privation of it, some shall have few^r, and some more stripes, some a
lesser, and some a greater damnation; that I thought Mr. Hickman could not
choose but understand me; but being convinced of the truth, which yet he
resolved to abjure, sought to hide his conviction by this incomparable
Impertinence; [That he would answer if he could guess where the vein of proof
did lie; and if he may guess, it lies in this, that there can be no degrees in
a privation. p. 99.] In which words, '^is hard to say, how many ways he is
unhappy. 1. He cannot guess wherein the force of the proof does lie, and yet he
will answer for all his ignorance. But 2. he will not answer neither, unless he
may have leave to forge the thing, to which he conceives he can give an answer;
if he may make a man of clo^ts, he will adventure (on that condition) to strike
at it; when he has done. 3. He either thinks there are degrees even of total
privations, of which some are privations of no more then all grace, but others
of all and some too; or else 4. of those that are damned in hell, he thinks
that some have more grace, some less, or some none at all, some less then none
at all. Because some have a greater, some a lesser damnation. For my Inference
is this; That of those that are wholly deprived of grace, some are greater
sinners then others, and more tormented. Whose sin by consequence must be
something, besides a whole privation of grace. It was indeed for want of Grace,
or by resisting Grace given, that Ammon lusted after first, 2 Samuel 13, 14.
and secondly loathed his sister Tamar; But besides that want or privation of
Grace, there were some positive effects which were damning sins. 1. He lusted
after, 2. He dissembled with, 3. He violently defiled, 4. He hated his injured
sister. It is not through a want of Grace, but abundance of wilfulness, that
some do Act. 7.51.
resist the holy Ghost, and depart from grace given. And sure besides the
privation of Grace, there is that in some sinners by which they are (...), Romans
1.30. Matthew. 10.15. Luke 10.14, and 24.
inventors of evil things. In a word, there is some thing p^sitiv^ (above the
total privation of Grace) by which it shall be more tolerable in the day of
judgment for one reprobate, then another. So Mr. H. aims purposely beside the
mark, unless he thinks there is Grace in hell.

Sect. 23. I having argued that sin is s^id to work in the Sinner all manner of
concupiscence, Of sins working Concupiscence. Mr. Hickmans Answer absurd in 8.
respects.
(Romans 7.8.) and perfectius est agere, quam esse; Mr. H. says, that in such
speeches sin signifies not abstractly and formally, but it signifies our nature
and its faculties, as under corruption, etc. p. 100] Here is work for a volume,
if I could think it not below me to pursue Mr. H. in all his follies. First I
note his Confession, that sin does signify something positive, concretively
and materially, and that in Scripture. Next his self-contradiction, in that he
had said (p. 54.) sin is so perfectly an abstract, that if we conceive not of
it as an abstract, we cannot conceive of it as sin. 3. His vertual denial, that
sin and sinfulness are synonymous, (which yet he affirmed p. 53.) unless he
thinks our very nature may be said to be sinfulness it self, or that our
nature and our faculties are mere privations, which yet he cannot say soberly,
because he absolutely denies, that sin does signify abstractly. 4. Dr* Hammond
(who knew best the true importance of the Text) thought fit to paraphrase it to
us, by customary sins, not by nature and faculties, as Mr. Hickman. 5. By this
he justifies Dr. Iackson and Flaccius Illyricus, whom before at (adventure) he
did so liberally condemn. 6. In saying that the faculties by reason of
privations, do l^st against the working of the spirit, (ibid) he implies that
lusting to be a sin (without a figure) and yet implies it (as much) to be
something positive. 7. If he quarrels with me and others, for expressing the
hatred of God by sin, which is positive, but not good; how has he railed in
effect at the blessed Apostle, for expressing that by sin, which he confesses
to be good, as well as positive, and therefore good because positive? 8. Let
sin be taken for nature and its faculties, (as he desires) yet concupiscence is
not, which sin is said to bring forth. And that concupiscence as it is
positive, so our selfe-contradictor will hardly deny it to be a sin.

Sect. 24. To prove the efficient cause of sin, I argued thus in the first
place. Of the efficient cause of sin. Mr. H.'s conviction, and confession in
despite of his whole Enterprise
If man is the cause of sin, and not efficient, he is the material, formal, or
final cause; if the deficient is none of these, (as none will say it is) it is
no cause at all. If sin has no cause, it has no real being, much less can it
be the cause of punishment: and so God is inferred to punish men without cause,
(...), p. 145.] Now comes the Answer of Mr. H. as much for my interest as I
could wish. [ Rather then we will seem to be too much frighted, we will say,
that man is the material or subjective cause of the Action: such a material or
subjective cause, as evil can have. p. 102.

To which I reply, 1. That Mr* H. did either intend to speak to the purpose, or
else (for fear of that) he speaks industriously beside it.) if the first, he
fully grants that sin is an action, and so a positive being, if the second, he
is convinced of sinning against his own Light; and effectually confesses he
cannot answer: when the Question is of the cause of sin, why does he answer
touching the cause of the Action, if he does not believe it to be a sin? and if
he believes it to be a sin, why undertook he in his Titlepage to prove that sin
is a mere privation? Here I leave him to be hist by the Colledge-boyes, for
having written, as if he had written, on purpose to make himself the object of
scorn and laughter. Nor is it fit it should go better with such as write
against God, as the cause of all sins, because of all actions, acts, and
habits. 2. That here by action he means sin, one would believe by what he says
in his second clause, as an explication of his first, -- cause of the Action,
such a material cause as evil can have, if he means, it can have none, why did
he yield a material caus^? if he means it can have any m^terial cause, ex qua
or in qua, then he confesses it has a cause, which is not merely deficient,
if ex qua, it is a concrete; if in qua, an accident, if either, positive. It
has besides materiam circa quam, and so a threefold subject, constituens,
recipiens, occupans subjectum. As for his confession (which next ensues) of the
efficient cause of sin,) which must needs be meant by the evil of the action)
and how again he falls into the youngsters hands, I have long since showed,
Chap. 3. Sect. 28. number. 7. so ill he prospers with stolen goods out of Robert
Baronius, which he would certainly have cited Baronius for, had he so well
understood it, as I hope he now does. For how he builds up my cause upon the
Ruins of his own, by what he says of the first sin, a proud desire to be equal
with God (p. 103.) I have largely showed chapter 3. Sect. 28. Number. 1.

25. To my 2. Argument, that where there is no efficient, there is no effect,
that is, there is nothing; Of sins being nothing, if no effect. Mr. H^ckmans
vain attempt to prove knavery to be nothing.
and so (according to mine Antagonist) men are either not damned, or damned for
nothing ((...) p. 145.) He is so far from the courage to frame an answer, that
he dares not be so honest as to repeat my words fairly; but tells his Readers
of my inference, without a syllable of of my prem^ses from whence my inference
was drawn; for fear his Readers should discern, how conscious he is of his
disability, and how resolutely bent on Tergiversation, which he had nothing to
keep from being seen, but an easy boast, so that still I am to ask, 1. How
that is an effect, which has no efficient; and 2. How that can be something,
which is effected by nothing; and 3. How nothing can be the cause of a man's
damnation. To these 3. things he should have answered, had he been able: but
nemo tenetur ad impossible, and so he thinks he has a privilege to be
impertinent what is meant by nihil, applied to sin (in one case) and to
substance it self (in another) I have abundantly informed him throughout my
fifth Chapter, especially. 1.3. and 5. number. 6. etc. But since he shows himself
a se^ker, he shall not fail to find my meaning. My meaning is, that (p. 104.)
God will punish impenitent sinners with damnation, both for not having in their
faculties, Habits, and Actions, what should be in them; And also for having
that, which should not be in them. He will not therefore damn infants, for
their merely not-having original righteousness in the root; (for he accepts
according to what a man 2. Cor. 8.12.
has, not according to what he has not,) but he will damn those adulti, who
work unrighteousness, and continue such working unto the end. To this I add 2.
things. 1. That no wilful sinner, who is liable to wrath can so omit that
which is good, as not to commit that which is evil. 2. That God will punish
such sinners, not only for having something in their actions and habits which
they should not have, but for having such habits, and for exerting such
actions; or for putting those things in being, which God would not have, and
forbid^ to be. 3. There is a positive abnegation of God, Tit. 1.16 and so Mr.
Hickman does deny him. So did they also, who forsook God, and followed Baalim.
1 King. 18.18. And therefore that passage, which Mr. Hickman took from Dr.
Robert Baron, without so much as saying, by your leave Sir, (as an Anonymous
writer is known to say) cannot stand him in any stead. For a man cannot not pay
the money which he owe's, without detaining or keeping back the money which he
should pay. And however non payment is a negative thing, (not a privative, as
Mr. Hickman heedlesly supposes) yet the knavery and deceitfulness, which is
the cause of non-payment will be granted by all to be something positive. And
so Mr. Hickman says very well, I could well enough bear his being punished, for
not paying me my arrears, (and bear it I will when that day comes) and for
(...). Hesiod*
usurping a Possession, to which he has not a better right, than Ahab had to
Naboths vineyard; as I shall usefully demonstrate, when I come to that subject.
Let non-payment be what it will, yet usurpation, and violence, obduration, and
obstinacy, resolving to be rich, and hastening to it by any means, are positive
entities with a witness. And now we see how his principles are run out into his
practice. For whilst he pleads against amendment and restitution, by saying
that non-payment is no positive entity, and that I know not how to place it in
any praedicament of beings, does he not wipe his mouth (with the lewd woman in
the Proverbs) and confidently say, he has done no wickedness? Prove. 30.2^.
Let the shopkeepers beware how they lend to such a Logician, lest he tell
them, non-payment is no positive entity, nor in any praedicament of beings, and
therefore not to repay, is a thing of nothing. But then they may serve him in
such a manner, as Zeno served his saucy man, (whose Satis perspicue
intelligent, nequaquam Stoicas opiniones in Ecclesiam invehendas esse. --
Zenonis servus dicebat se injust^ plecti, quia fato coactus esset peccare,
Melanch^hon. in loc. com. page, 54
like opinion debauched his practice) even keep him in Bocardo, (or some such
prison) and tell him that non-releasement is no positive entity, nor does he
know how to place it in any praedicament of beings. So much for his
impertinence page 104. by which he has made it very pertinent for me, even to
speak out of order concerning that, to which I have designed a peculiar place.

. 26. I had said that sin is the cause of punishment, The cause of punishment.
Mr. H. denial of any positive damnation, unless he thinks it no punishment to
be damned.
and therefore positive, because the cause cannot have a lesser being then the
effect.] In stead of this, Mr. Hickman obtrudes these words upon me. Sin is a
punishment, but punishment is a positive entity, ergo, p. 105.] Had he spoken
my words, he would probably have cited my pages also. A thing, which he seldom
thinks safe for him to do. And yet he says of the punishment of sense, ('it is
well he speaks of it at all, although he gives no reason for it) that it is not
positive, if we consider that in which the evil of that punishment formally
consisteth] It seems the man is of opinion; that because he takes sin to be a
mere nonentity, the punishment of it can be nothing, but a privation of life,
added to the loss of the joys of heaven; and what is said of those torments
which are inflicted upon the Reprobates, (made to be firebrands of hell) he
conceives (with some of the Heathen, Diodorus Siculus, and his peers,) to be
but [Hypothesin (...)] a fabulous Mormo, or Bugg, whereby to fright such silly
babes, as we Praelatists and Arminians are thought to be, for being so simple
as to suffer the loss of all in this world, rather then hazard a greater
suffering of somewhat more then a loss in the world to come. This (I say) is
his opinion, for ought I can guess at his opinion, by his expressions if he did
steadfastly believe, there is an infinite pain in Hell, besides the total
privation of bliss and glory; why would he say it is not positive? if he
thought the very evil of that unspeakable punishment does not consist in that
infinite pain; why did he not tell us what it is, wherein he supposes it does
consist? If (besides the mere absence or want of pleasure) the pains of hell
are not positive, and the worst evil of punishment to be imagined; I will say
to Mr. Hickman (as Bishop Bramhall to Mr. Hobs,) Reddat mihi mimam Diogenes.
And had I not See D* SANDERSONS 4. Reasons for his rejecting the way of Doct.
Twisse, in Doctor Hammond's (...). p. 12, 13.
reason to withstand Dr. Twisse, in his withstanding our Blessed Savior, by
asserting it to be better, to be eternally damned, then reduced to nothing? Yet
Mr, Hickman is very angry with my resisting that Doctor, in whose behalf he
railes at me, but nothing else. p. 106. At least he makes as if he were angry,
that so he may take that occasion to slip the neck of his Credit out of the
very same collar, in which he has sense enough to see that his cause is
strangled.

An Appendix.
. 1. HAving done with the main subject, upon which Mr. Hickman should have
spent his whole Book, but upon which he was careful to speak the least, (as if
he were conscious to himself of speaking sinfully of sin, whilst he saw he was
to speak, as either a Libertine on the one side, or a Carneadist on the other,)
I must now, in a large Appendix, review his Book from the Beginning, and show
him the wickedness or the folly in many particulars of the whole, of which he
has not been yet admonished. And I must do it so much the rather, that he may
not say I have only stuck upon his sick and sore parts, of which he worthily
p. 108.
complains in the Tail of the Body of his Discourse.

. 2. I begin with his Epistle to the Lecturers of Brackley; Mr. H. his flattery
and condemnation of himself.
wherein having premised by a significant implication, That he, and such as he
is, are some of the worthiest men alive, page 1. and yet implicitly too
confessing, They are not worthy to live, p. 2. (I having proved out of their
writings, that they are guilty of such a whole, the half of which (says Mr.
Hickman) makes them worthy of death,) he proceeds from his self-flattery, and
from his self-condemnation, to do me the honor of being slandered in the same
breath with Doctor Hammond, who must not look for better usage than God
himself, from such an Advocate and Patron of all impiety, as teaches the
action of hating Good, to be God's own creature, or God himself.

. 3. To begin (in his order) with his calumniating my self, he first tells his
Brethren, His willful falsehood.
that what I charged his Masters with were the mere Chimaera's of my brain. But
how much to the shame both of him, and them too; I have already made apparent
in the beginning of my Bo^k. By which I leave it to be judged (and even by them
of his own Sect) whether it is not as willful and as malicious, as it was an
^noccasioned and groundless slander. If he examined my citations, I have proved
to his own, and his Readers eyes, that he is guilty of a studied and a
deliberate wickedness. But if he examined them not at all then it appears that
he was resolute to write as bitterly as he was able, without resolving to
consider whether his writing would be found to be right, or wrong.

. 4. Nor does he content himself with this, but adds a cast of his virulence
(though not more impious, His self-contradiction, and confession of having
written against his conscience.
yet) much more obvious to the discovery of the Reader; to wit, That God's
being the Author of sin does necessarily follow on an opinion which I maintain,
p. 3. But does he o^fer at any proof, or at any thing else to supply it is
place? no, nor so much as tells his Brethren, what opinion he means of my
maintaining. Nay he afterward confesses He thinks it no way consistent with
the ingenuity of a Scholar, or of a man, to charge me with Blasphemy: nay that
he cannot, without perfect affront to his conscience, return me Blasphemer for
Blasphemer. (Book p. 4.) If this is reconcilable with what he says of me in
his Epistle, Then whatever I have said against Calvin and the rest, must be
affirmed by this Rhapsodist to be no accusing them of Blasphemy. But who is a
Blasphemer, i^ he is not, who maintains an opinion from which the wo^st of
all Blasphemie^ (Reader, they are his own words) does unavoidably follow? we
see the greatest of all memories is exceedingly too l^ttle for a man of his
Trade. For not remembering in his Epistle, what he had written in his Book, he
has railed it out against me, to no better purpose, then to his own
self-condemnation. For if in his Book p. 4. he had any truth in him, or
ingenuity, he must needs confess he had none at all whilst he was writing to
the Brackleians, and boldly committing that very crime which he had called a
perfect affront to his conscience, and inconsistent with the ingenuity both of
a Scholar and of a man. It now appears (to do him right) that all hi^ Rhapsodie
was not stolen; for his self-contradictions are all his own.

. 5. His next irreverence is the more, Dr. Hammond. vindicated from Mr. H. his
several Falsifications.
for being showed to the most learned and truly Reverend Dr. Hammond, from
whom he pretends a Citation, which has no truth in it, but is injurious in
4* Respects, for the better elu^cidating of which, I shall first transcribe Mr.
Hickmans words. [ The privativenesse of moral evil is not a monster h^tched
under the wings of a few Disciplinarian Zelots; not a perfect p^antasy, a mere
Scholastical Notion, as Dr. Hammond is pleased to call it, Fundam. p. 178.]
First it is to be observed, that all these words (from monster, to notion) are
printed in the some letter, which does discriminate Citations from Mr. Hickmans
own text; so a^ no one Reader who looks no further, and is not fore-armed with
that distrust, with which the writings of such a Gamester are of necessity to
be read, can escape the error of apprehending that all that passage is Dr.
Hammonds, and withal to be met with, in the page there cited; whereas in all
his public works, in which I hope I am as perfect as any man of my memory
(which I confess is none of the greatest) is like to be, there is not any such
word, as Monster hatched under the wings of a few disciplinarian Zelots. Nay I
am certified by the Doctor, (in his answer to my request, that he would search
his own Memory,) that no such expression has ever passed from his tongue* much
less from his Pen, on any occasion whatsoever, much less on this. But on this I
lay no weight, because it is no other then an implicit Falsification. His 2.
fault is more gross, whilst he cites the page, and misreporteth the words of
that Reverend Doctor. In lieu of [ School-notion] Mr. Hickman forgeth him to
have written [ a mere Scholastical Notion] where it is plain the word [ mere] is
a mere interpolation; whereby to intimate an enmity betwixt the Doctor and the
Fathers, of which there had else been no appearance. For a Father may say that,
which is withal a School-notion, though not a mere Scholastical notion. But
neither should I have mentioned this, which in a man of his practice is to be
reckoned a Peccadillo, if it had not stood betwixt me, and his third
misrepresentation, which seems to me of greater weight and yet to receive some
increase by those additions. I say it is his third injury, that he groundlesly
fastens the Doctors censure to the abovesaid privativenesse of moral evil.
Upon which it was so far from having been fastened* by the Doctor, that he
neither used any such words, nor any other which can bear any Analogy with
such; unless the privativenesse of sin does import no more with Mr. Hickman,
then does the nonentity, or nothingnesse of it; which as it will prove him a
Carneadist, so it is the most that he can plead, to that with which I now
charge him. That Reverend Doctor having but mentioned the perfect Fantasy of
some, that sin is a Nonentity, (that is) a nothing. So that now (good Reader)
thou know the meaning of Mr. Hickman, whenever he asserts the privativity
of sin. He means it is Nothing, or a Nonentity, or else he wilfully
prevaricates, as well with thee, as with Dr. Hammond.

His confounding the things which he once distinguished.
. 6. I thought the man had made a difference, betwixt a simple negative, and a
Privative; especially when the l^tter is not a want of all being, but only of
a Rectitude or conformity to a rule: else why did he distinguish (when it was
suitable to his need) betwixt a negative, and a privative Nothing? Besides,
privativenesse being but a word of relation, referring to somewhat that it had,
but lost, or should have had, but mist of having, (that I may gratify him for
once with this distinction) And Relation being but an Accident Adveniens enti
in actu existenti, It follows that that which is privative in relation to
something of which it is so, may have a positive being praeexistent to that
privation, in order of nature if not of time. Thus in every Transmutation, and
in corruption more especially, there is a privation of a form, but not of all;
for as one goes out, another enters. Night succeeds Day, as Satan's image does
Gods. And what if the last be a privation in respect of that which was before?
can it possibly argue no entity of the action, by which the Image was
introduced, or of the Image it self abstractly taken? I wish Mr. Hickman would
mind his Grammar, and know that privo is a verb active, as much as pono; as
privare, no less then ponere, is an action properly so called; and by
consequence privatio, just as much as positio is. Thus the killing an innocent
Christ (which was we know, the sin of murder) however it was a privation (in one
respect) was yet as positive an action, as the most lawful execution of the
blaspheming thief, which (in one respect) was a privation also: yet the
murdering of Christ was neither a nullity, nor was it produced by God himself,
as Mr. Hickman has said that every real being is.

. 7. But there remains a fourth thing, The s^d effects of the Calvinian Scheme.
of which our Rhapsodist is to be told, to wit, that the error on which
Reverend Dr. Ham. affixt that Character [a perfect fantasy and School notion]
was not simply and merely this, [that sin is nothing or a non entity, but
together with this addition ^ so that all things may be predetermined by God
and yet not sin. Fundam. p. 178, lin. 23. where showing the tricks of those
men, by which they would hide the ill consequences of the Doctrine which they
teach, (to wit, that all manner of things were predetermined by the Almighty,)
he mentioned this as the first, [That sin is but a nonentity, a nothing;] so
that all things (forsooth!) might be eternally predetermined, and yet not sin.
Thus they are Libertines, or Carn^adists, or both by turns, (do what they can,)
so long as they adhere to the Calvinian Scheme. But Mr. H. omitted what he
found of most weight. Mr. H^'s sa^ciness and irreverence to Dr. Ham* added to
all his wilful forg^^ies*


. 8. Whilst I am on this subject, I mean the clearing of Dr. Hammond, from this
Falsificator, I shall annex to his Epistle, a parallel passage out of his Book,
where speaking of the positivenesse of sins of omission, he says [ it is so
STRANGE, that they also should be positive, that he knows not whether ever it
were asserted by any, but Cerberus, alias Champneys, Mr. Dukes the keeper of
the great Ordinary at Hell in Westminster, Mr. P. and (whom he would not join
with such company) the Reverend and learned Dr. Hammond. p. 69. Here, for
brevities sake, I shall but make these demands, 1. With what color of excuse
this can be said of Dr. Hammond (or indeed of Mr. P.) who never spoke of this
matter by word or writing, more then what has been showed in my former
sections? whereas sins of Omission have not been specified, so if they had, it
had not followed, that either I, or Dr. Hammond, had ascribed to such a
positivity. 2. Why the man should invent such ugly names, as Cerberus
(importing the Dog of Hell) and next to that, the keeper of Hell, to join with
a Doctor of so much eminence in the world, not more for his Learning, then for
the holiness of his life, 3. Whether calling him the Reverend and Learned Dr.
and expressing to him a seeming tenderness, is not a bitterness o^ Jeere, and
so a horrible aggravation both of the falsehood and the sauciness, which I have
noted in my first and second Quere? yet this is the meek spirited man, who
complains that he is used with too much sharpness, and exhorts his Brethren
very demurely, to let their moderation be known unto all men.

His scurrilous usage of Dr. Tailor and its occasion, Original sin.
. 9. Having done with Dr. H. He begins afresh to ease himself on Dr Tailor.
Whom having taught in what manner he should have Entitled his Book, (Not Deus,
but) Pelagius, or Socinus justificatus, (p. 4*) He immediately lets fly (in as
known a falsehood as could be spoken*) That the Dr. would bear us in hand, he
only quarrelleth with the Presbyterian Notion of original sin] whereas it is
clear that Dr. Tailor in his Deus justificatus, extends his Quarrel (though
very civilly) even to those whom he owns as his Friends and Brethren, sons
(with himself) of the very same mother* the Church of England. Let Mr. Hickman
read, and hold from blushing if he is able, whilst he beholds the Transition
the Doctor makes in solemn manner (p. 54.) from his Presbyterian, to his
Episcopal Opponents, whom he worthily calls his Dearest brethren. That he
denies Original sin, he very plentifully denies, and says he cannot but
confess that to be, which he feels and groans under, and by which all the
world is made miserable. p. 12. But now suppose him a flat denyer of that
Catholic Doctrine, which is taught by our Church, of Original sin. And let us
consider what it was which made him err in this point: whether it was not his
contemplation of the horrible consequences and Tenants, which Presbyterians are
accustomed to superstruct on that Doctrine. As (for example) that all being
dead in Adam, there was yet no remedy for the far greater part, no not in the
sufferings and satisfaction of Christ, see how rightly the Doctor gathers the
odious consequential Blasphemies, in the former part of his enterprise, (as
far as p. 54.) from what is taught by the Presbyterians. Of he also confesses
his Brethrens Opinions to be free, and such as (if they were all agreed) he
would not move a stone to disturb. p. 56. The Presbyterians therefore are to be
blamed, for whatsoever error he may have published in this particular; And not
at all the Church of England; which by liberally allowing, that Christ has
dyed even for all who were dead in Adam, directs the only both pious and
unquestionable way, of making good the Ancient Doctrine of Original sin.

. 9. Had Dr. Tailor indeed affirmed (what is but forged by Mr. Hick-man, The
Diss^^isfaction of Episcopal Divines.
too unintelligent a thing to pass a judgment in such affairs,) that he was
not opposed but by Presbyterians, his own letters would have confuted him (as
now they do Mr. Hickman) which he directed to the Right Reverend, my Lord of
Rochester. But as it is, the result is this. That Doctor Tailor in one point is
of a singular opinion, or way of speaking, in which the other sons of the
Church of England do avow their sorrow and dissatisfaction* who are the only
men that can lay sure grounds, whereon to plead with Dr. Tailor to good
advantage.

Dr. Taylor's error on the right hand, extremely better then the heresy of
Presbyteri^ns on the left.
. 10. I am one of the meanest (though not I hope the least obedient) of all her
children. And though I am well enough qualified, for the clearing this learned
Doctor from the calumny and falsehood of his Reviler; yet am I too much a
Junior, to undertake his conviction, as to that which I conceive he has said
amiss. But (with a Praefiscine be it spoken to so acute and eminent an Author,
who I conceive has only erred for fear of erring,) I think it better to
insist upon the end of Christ's Death, then to define what would have been, had
he never died. Concerning the wisdom of God's economy in the disposal of All
things, I think the best way to judge, is to judge as God judges, and is
revealed to have done in his written Word. We are assured by revelation, that
Christ was given for all in Adam, or for all who are born from Adam: which had
he not decreed to have done as he has revealed, we have no measure of judging,
what should have been the just consequence of Adam's sin; or whether, any
besid^s Adam, should have been concerned in it. We cannot know God's counsels,
but by words or deeds revealed to us. Had Christ been given, but not for all,
in particular not for Heathen infants, I think we can as little gue^s, what
should become of those Infants, as what the other world had been; if God, in
stead of This, had created That.

By this I am willing to make it known to Mr. Hickm^n and his Abettors, both
how much I dissent from the Doctor's error on the right hand, and how much
more I join with him, against their Heresies on the left.

M.H.'s preferring Calvin to the 4. Evan^elists.
. 11. The man of scorn goes on to teach us, how unfit he is for a Divine, or to
be so much as a lay-Preacher, were he in terra Corteriali^, where no-ordaining
is to be had. For speaking of us, and the Presbyterians, in relation to our
Ten^ts of God's Decrees, he says we befriend them in giving the people
occasion to think, that they only are the men, who would contend for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, p. 5.] See how little he understands that easy
Text in St. Jude. If Calvin's Doctrine in point of Decrees, is the faith
delivered to the Saints, of which Saint Jude spoke, then it must not only be
truth, but the whole divine Truth delivered to us as we are Christians. And so
farewell (by this Logic) to the four Evangelists, who have nothing of the
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints; But welcome John Calvin, who has
it all. For the whole Doctrine of the Gospel is meant by (...), Jude 2. And
unless Mr. Hickman did take it too in that sense, how does the affixing the
assertions upon Calvin and his following Presbyterians (p. 3. and 4.) give any
occasion to the people, to think that they are the ONLY MEN? It is no wonder,
if Bishop Hooper (one of the first of our holy Martyrs, who suffered from the
Papists for our Religion, as others have done from the Presbyterians,) did
express these men by the name of See the Quinquar^icularian History, part. 3.
c. 16* p. 2.
Gospellers, as having found out another Gospel, then what had been written by
the four Evangelists, (to use the words of Sir Edwin Sandys.) Our Gospellers
(said Bishop Hooper) are better learned then the holy Ghost. -- over every
mischief that is done, they say it is Gods will. And what prodigious stuff it
is, which Mr. Hickman calls the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, I
leave to be judged by the words, and lines, and pages, which I h^ve showed from
Mr Calvin and other Writers. Had an Angel from heaven taught such a Gospel,
Saint Paul had set him packing with an Anathema Maranatha.

. 12. Bishop Carleton saying, The way to sto^ a papist's mouth.
[ some take it for a sign of such as are looking toward Popery, etc. p. 5.]
gives leave to others, to take it otherwise. When a thing has two handles, one
may take it by the right, as well as another by the left. As I, and my Betters
are wont to take it; Our disclaiming the Doctrines of Presbyterians is the way
to stop a Papist's mouth; who has nothing to accuse the Protestants of, but
what the Presbyterians have introduced; and that in a perfect opposition to the
true Protestant religion.

Mr. H.'s sense of his s^urrility, with his desire never to mend.
13. In the eighth page of his Epistle (for the sixth and the seventh are
filled with one large Transcript, verbatim taken from Mr. Prin, without
acknowledging the Author from whence he took it,) he appears to be conscious of
his scurrility, by which he supposes he has departed from that meekness of
spirit, which is required in a Minister. But he desires his Brethren to think
it as lawful as they may (as if he were acting zeal of the land in his Address
to Rabbi Buisy) to put some vinegar into his ink, and so to continue in his
departure from Ch^istian meekness, (supposing he cannot fall totally, much less
finally from Grace,) or else in meekness of spirit, to call me Bolsec, and
Fevardentius, and what he plea^eth. But here I arrest him with one mild
Question whilst he is furious. Was my saying that their speeches could be no
less then Blasphemous, who said that God was the Author and cause of sin, A
making their Graves amongst Blasphemers? or a proving by their pages, lines and
words, where they had made their own Graves? Perhaps they thought their
speeches innocent. And thence I censu^'d their speeches, not the thoughts they
had of them. Suppose the Author of a Dispensatory shall put a Receipt into his
Book, which I know has poisoned some, and is as likely to poison others; will
my giving a timely warning to beware of that medicine, be censured as the
making that Author's Grave among murderers? It will it seems by Mr. Hickman,
but who can help it? I plainly proved to Doctor Reynolds, That for all I said
of Blasphemous Doctrines, I had not only Doctor Whitakers, but Mr. C^lvins
good leave. And so Mr. Hickman (unawares) has railed it out against both. But
if Bolsec is reformed, I hope he will do the less hurt. And that he is so in
earnest, Bathyllus tells us.

. 14. He falls again to confession, p. 9. that it is hard for him not to exceed
his bounds; His new sense of his carnality.
whereupon he prays his Brethren, to give him a call unto repentance. And
compares them to the old Puritanes, as to the exercise of their patience. But
who were the old Puritanes? were they such as took upon them to ordain
Ministers at Brackley? or such as took joyfully their neighbors goods? if so,
he said ill, That the world was not worthy of such inhabitants. The Apostle
applying the words to them, who suffered the spoiling of their own.

. 15. The malignity which he concludes with against Episcopal Government, And
malignlty to the Episcopal Government.
which yet he holds to be better than none at all, (and none at all has been
the Government which they have hitherto set up) does only serve to put us in
mind, in how many respects they have been perjured, as well in swearing, as
forswearing their Scottish Covenant. They may be said to be Reformers of
Episcopal Government, (and if they please, of Regal too) as the Heretic Marcus
was said (by many women, and few men) The (...), etc. Iren. l. 1. c. 8. p. 68.
Reformer of all that had gone before him. But what kind of Ministers he
ordained, and after what an enormous manner, and how he Reformed the women's
Purses to fill his own, would be tedious to tell upon this occasion. They that
will, may consult Epiphanius, Haeres. 34. And especially Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap.
9. My observation is chiefly this, That he was reckoned a great Reformer.

An Appendix for Master Hickman touching his Preface to the READER.
. 16. Having gone over the main of Mr. Hickmans Dedicatory Epistle, I now
proceed to his Praeface, his tedious Praeface to the Reader. On which I shall
make the shortest strictures that I am able, until I meet with such things as
do call for length. And because Doctor Heylin has unanswerably spoken to the
Historical part, both in his Certamen Epistolare, (wherein he Refutes it ex
professo) and in his Quinquarticular History, (wherein he vertually Refutes it,
though not by name,) I shall not therefore say more to that, than is omitted by
Doctor Heylin, or at least omitted for ought I am able to remember.

The first page of his Preface proves all that follows to be but the fruits of
his revenge.
17. He tells his Reader in the beginning, 1. how much he had been taken with
(I know not what) rich vein of Rhetoric, which (he says) he saw running
through all my writings which he had seen. 2. That he has not mentioned my
name without those prefaces of Respect which are due to a Scholar. 3. That
notwithstanding his being debased to the Dunghill of Doltisme, he is not so much
as tempted, to detract from my Credit and Reputation, etc. p. 1.] If this has
any Truth in it, then there is no truth at all in the far greatest part of his
whole performance. For Mr. Baxter himself, in all his Kiderminster-stuff, is a
puny Railer in comparison. Not only all the ill language which he was able to
invent, but even all that he was able to filch from others, he has made it his
business to throw upon me; and all for no better Reason, then my asserting Gods
honor, to the disgrace of those men who have rai^'d against him.) I am so
ignorant in his eyes, p. 72. And he espi^s such a darkness upon the face of my
understanding, p. 71. that from thence you may discover how he respects me as a
Scholar. And rather then detract from my Reputation, he only charge me with
downright impudence, p. 47. with ridiculousness, and malice, and a Treatise
dirty enough to justify all the ugly brats of the Wild^st Sectaries, that G.
C. has midwiv'd into the world. p. 13, 14.

But (not to transcribe a great part of Master Hickman's Rhapsodie, by giving
in a full Catalogue of all his calumnies and railings) It shall suffice me to
observe, how all the rest of his pages do run Antipodes to his first. And how
big of rancor, he must confess himself to have been, when nothing could ease
him but the delivery of such an unnatural revenge, as could not be whelp't
without the torment of such a self-contradiction. For first to profess so much
respect, and so much tenderness of my Credit, (as has been showed;) and to
profess himself farther, Pref. p. 6.
A cordial friend to my person; nay (after that) to declare, that he Book p 1.
disliked the sharpness of Mr. Barlees style; And yet after all, (nay in the
midst of all this,) to behave himself in such noysomwise, as if he had licked
up the Sea Epist. before Hist. Qui^quar. p. 6.
Vomits of all his Brethren, on purpose to cast them up again, and all at Me;
(for what he do^s to the Church of England and to her persecuted Children, I
take as done unto my self, and with a greater indignation, then if it were done
to my self alone,) this is so very much his misery, as well as it is his
Misdemeanour, that to discover it as I have done, is all the punishment I
intend him.

. 18. To what he says of my Reputation, His frivolous exception to Heathen
learning.
acquired amongst the young Gallants, by putting the good Greek and latin of
the old Philosophers into as Good English in my Practicals, (p. 2.) I only
answer four things.

1. That the Prophets and the Apostles were no Heathen Philosophers, from whom
my practical Divinity has been derived. 2. But after my reasonings out of
Scripture, I reason also out of the Heathen, to serve the turn of such See my
reasons for the use I make of the Heathens in my sinner impleaded, par. 1. chapter
1. Sect. 5.
Professors, as Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Hickman, who live undaunted and shameless
in some kinds of sin, at which a wellbred Heathen would Blush, or tremble. And
I would make them strive to be better then they are, by their scorning to be
worse then their inferiors. 3. My use of Heathen learning is no more then may
be justified by the practice of Dr. Reynolds, who has translated more of them
then I have done, and this I speak to his honor, because the more he abounds
in his Humane learning, the liker h^ is to immortal Grotius. Nay the great
Apostle St. Paul in his Sermon at Athens, See Bp. Andrews his d^fence of using
the Heathens in our writings; in his Sermon of Imaginations. p. 31.
cites Aratus (a Heathen) in matter of Doctrine. Acts 17.28. And in matter of
life, he cites Menander, a Note, Reader, that Menander^ Comoedie is of Thais
the famous Harlot, out of which St. Paul ha^h cited that saying to the
Corinthians. See Grot vot. pro, Pa. p. 116.
Comoedian, 1 Cor. 15.33. And so in matter of report, he urges the words of
Epim^nides, or Callimachus, Tit. 1.12. The names of Iannes and Iambres he is
concluded to allege from the Jewish Talmud, 2 Timothy 3.8. Besides, Heathen
learning is pleaded for by Ancient Fathers of the Church, as by Clemens
Alexandrinus Strom. 7, By St. Basil in a set Treatise, how the heathens, are to
be read. By Gregory Nyssen in the life of Moses, (who by the way, was well
skilled in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. that is to say, in
Heathen learning.) And so again by St. Austin, de Doctrina Christiana, 2.40.
All which Mr. Hickman might have learned from Bp. Andrews; to whom I send him
so much the rather, because from thence he may learn the Presbyterian
imaginations, and because being in English he will be the surer to understand
it. I could else have showed him in Justin. Martyr. (...) ex edit Sylburg.
1593. p. 7. ad p. 29.
Justin Martyrs own words, How he elaboratly pleads for Christianity it self,
out of the Heathen Philosophers and Poe^s too; and how he fetches a kind of
Gospel (as St. Augustine, after him, has also done) out of the Sybillian
Oracles. I could tell him how Clemens of Alexandria did (...). Clem. Alex.
s^rom. 7. p. 669. B.
professedly defer the use of Scripture, till he had fitted his Readers for its
reception. And that the very best parts of the Fathers writings (both of the
Eastern and Western Church) are those that are fullest of Heathen Learning.

But I procced to my fourth Answer; that my sinner Impleaded is fuller of
Scripture, then humane learning. That my chiefest use of this latter, is in my
very first Chap. That Mr. Hickman bewrayes the depth of his Ignorance in Greek,
whilst he thinks I translate whatsoever he sees in my Margin, which for the
far greatest part, I only accommodate, and apply. And what I really Translate,
I ever own the Translating of; directing my readers by my Margin, where the
Original is to be found. Nor can I possibly be blamed, (unless Mr, Hickman has
any Peers) if I make some Philosophers to speak as good English, as Greek, and
Latin.

. 18. It Is true indeed that Mr. Hickman has given no proof of his Humane
learning, The Heathenish Nature of his own.
but only of stealing other men's, which is inhumane. I cannot find him
translating, and honestly citing the Philosophers Greek or Latin; But chiefly
trading in English Writers, out of whom he compiles what he thinks is most
Pretty, (in both senses of the word, as Dr. Heylin has observed in his See it
prefixed to his Hist. Quinquar. A. 3.
Epistle to the Reader) Which having done he makes public, without a fear that
his Larcin's will come to light. Had the man been a Fox, he would have preyed
afar off, in Greece or Latium; not where every one may snap him who has the
skill to read English. But if he thinks it no sin to steal, (like the Heathens
in Polyb. l. 4. p. 285.
Polybius) because to steal is an action, and so a positive entity; which he
professes to think no sin can be; yet methinks he should esteem it a great
unhappiness to be Caught; For fear his Auditors should suspect, if he shall
Preach against stealing, that he steals the very Sermon rebuking stealth.

. 19. How, and whence he has borrowed (without a thought of Restitution)
whatsoever can ^e thought to be smart, or hansome, I have already set out in
order, A new Discovery of his stealth.
by way of Leter to Dr. Heylin, when having promised to discover from whom he
stole his little all on the thing in Question, (I mean, against the positive
entity of sin,) I am content in this place to be as good as my word. His
strength is taken chiefly from my learned Friend Mr. BARLOW, but partly too
from Dr. Robert Baron, a learned Scot, Neither is cited (so much as once) for
any one syllable of the whole. But how they ought to have been cited, if Mr.
Hickman had not desired to pass for a kind of Metaphysician, let it be judged
by this parallel, which is as short as I can contrive it.

Mr. Hickman. M. Barlow. The privative nature of sin may be thus -- evicted. If
a thing be therefore sinful, because it wants some perfection that it ought to
have, and cease to be sinful when it has all the perfection which it ought to
have* than is sin a privation; but a thing is therefore sinful, etc. Ergo, etc.
Book. 2. Edit. Arg. 3. p. 84. l. 16. etc. Malum esse privativum rationibus
evinco, -- si res quaevis, quae est mala, sit ideo praecise mala, quia caret
aliquo bono sibi debito; and ideo non sit mala, quia non caret aliquo bono sibi
debito; tum malitia formaliter erit in carentia seu privatione boni. At ideo
res est mala, etc, Et per consequens, etc. Ratio 2. p. 42. l. 5. a fin, etc. If
sin, as sin, be a positive entity, then it is a thing in it self good. The
consequence -- Ens and bonum convertuntur. Arg. 1. p. 70. l. 4. etc. Si malitia
aliqua esset ens positivum, -- tum est bonum, -- Ratio est, quia bonitas est
passio entis reciproca. p. 44. l. 21. etc. Ratio 5* This positive being of sin,
is it a finite and participate being? If not, etc. p. 78. l. ult. etc.
Impossible est, ut sit entitas aliqua finita, and creata, etc. Ratio 3. p. 55.
l. 5. a fin. etc. ad 10. lineas. vid. and p. 54. l. 19. etc. Ratio 3. and p.
56. l. 23, etc. If sin be a positive entity, then it is either God, or from
God, etc. Arg. 2. p. 75. l. 4, etc. Si -- ipsa malitia esset ens -- positivum,
tum -- vel erit, etc. Ratio 6. p. 45. l. 9. etc. ad 16. lineas. vid. and p. 73.
l. 2. etc. If original sin be a thing positive, it is either the soul it self,
or some of its faculties, or some accident or adjunct agreeing, etc. -- but
none of all these, Ergo, etc. Arg. 4. p. 87. l. 18. etc. for 20. lines. Si
praeter privationem --, entitas aliqua esset malo originali intrinseca, tum
entitas illa vel erit ipsa natura vel ejus adjunctum aliquod accidentale. At ex
his nullum -- dici possit. Ergo, etc. ita porro ad 4. lineas. Ratio 1. p. 58.
l. 23. etc. Vid. and p. 59. l. 7. etc. ad 19. lineas. Vide etiam p. 90. l. 6.
etc. Such actions are called intrinsecally evil, both because they are evil
antecedently to any positive Law, and because they are evil ex genere and
objecto, and not merely through the want of some circumstance: for a Scholar to
walk, etc. so on for 7. lines. p. 94. l. 6. etc. Actus illi dicuntur intrinsece
mali, quod talis malitia ipsis inest ablata omni lege positiva* -- non solum
sunt mali ex defectu circumstantiae alicujus, sed ex genere and objecto, -- ut
ambulare, etc. Sic deinceps ad 5. lineas. Exer. Metap. 2. Edit. 2. p. 73. l.
12. etc. Sins of omission and commission are sufficiently distinguished,
notwithstanding --: omission will be the transgression of an affirmative
precept, commission the transgression of a negative precept. Secondly, they
differ in respect of their immediate foundation, the fundamentum proximum of a
sin of commission is some act or habit: but these are not the fundamenta
proxima of a sin of omission. Answ. p. 98. l. 1 etc. Differunt [malum
omissionis and commissionis] tamen. 1. Quod omissio omnis sit legis
affirmativae violatio, commissio praecepti negativi. 2. Differunt, quia malum
omissionis in ipsa anima rationali, etc. immediate fundatur, non in actu aliquo
aut habitu. -- (l. 20.) Malum autem commissionis -- in actu aliquo aut habitu,
in quo tanquam fundamento proximo and immediato consistit. Sol. p. 83. l. 11.
etc. Vid. and p. 64. l. 22, etc. Because covetousness is a privation of
liberality, as it puts a man upon honest spending, prodigality is a privation
of liberality as it does incline a man to avoid superfluous spending. Answ. p.
99. lin. 3. etc. Avaritia dicit privationem liberalitatis, in quantum
liberalitas inclinat ad sumptus necessarios, prodigalitas vero dicit
privationem liberalitatis, in quantum a superfluis sumptibus liberat. Sol. p.
82. l. 13. etc. vid. and p. 81. l. 5. a fin. etc. That there can be no degrees
in a privation, -- is a mere mistake. Among privations some are greater, some
less, with relation to that form unto which they are opposed: -- that may
Physically be accounted the greater privation which removes more degrees of the
form --: if we reckon morally then we may also calculate the degrees of
privation, etc. on for 3. lines. Ans. p. 99. l. 4. a fin. etc. Dico quod
privatio potest habere magis and minus -- Ratione termini privati; boni sc.
quod tollit. Sic ut illam -- majorem dicimus, quae majorem subjecti
perfectionem tollit; sic in naturalibusilla caecitas, etc. Et in moralibus
illud vitium est majus quod bonum morale majus tollit. Sol. p. 79. l. 16. etc.
There is a punishment of loss, which scarce ever any man said was positive.
There is a punishment of sense, and this -- is no other way an evil --, than as
it does deprive us of some perfection of which we are capable. So on for five
lines farther. Answ. 105. l. 3. etc. Hoc [poena damni] (nullo quod sciam
dissentiente) est solum privatio -- ( p. 50. l. 6.) -- poena sensus est s^lum
homini malum in quantum private hominem perfectione debita. Sol. p. 47. l. 19.
etc. Vid. and p. 50. l. 15. etc. and p. 78. l. 23. ad 5. lineas, The hating of
God is complexum quid, etc. on for 6, lines. Ans. p. 95. l. 14, etc. Vide p.
73. l. 4. a fin. etc. [Tis not] a relatio rationis, which is affirmed by
Vasquez but against all good reasons, etc. Page 83. l. 5. a fin. etc. See p.
95. l. 3. a fin. Quod non sit relatio rationis, -- quod velle videtur Vasquez
in 1.2. q. 95. cap. 9. etc. p. 53. l. 4. etc. Dionysius Areopagita's testimony,
p. 56. l. 13. etc. see in p. 40. l. 12, etc. The testimonies of Dionys's. two
Greek Scholiasts Maximus, and Pachymera, ib. l. 22. etc. and l. pen. etc. See
in page 40. l. 22, etc. and l. 29. etc. Gregory Nyssen's testimony, p. 57. l.
5. etc. See in p. 41. l. 13, etc. Athanasius's testimony, p. 76. l. 4. a fin.
etc. See in p. 55. l. 9. etc. Greg. Arimin. a noble Schoolman. p. 85. l. 10.
etc. compare p. 58. l. 5. a fin. etc. with Gregor. Arimin. nobilior
Scholasticus. p. 19. and 124. p. 53. l. ult. and p. 30. l. 14, etc. Mr.
Hickman. Rob. Baronius in Metaphysica Generali. How many men have been
imprisoned for not paying sums of money which they did owe? p. 104. l. 19.
etc. Apud homines debtor incarceratur ob non solutam summam pecuniae, quod
negativum quid est.. 5. p. 54. l. 5. etc. Suppose the first sin of Angels, to
have been a proud desire to be equal unto God: the cause of this proud desire
was the will of the Angel. But it was of the vitiosity of the Action -- only
the cause per accidens, and per concomitantiam. Nor does the vitiosity of the
effect allways suppose a vitiosity in the cause; though it always presuppose an
imperfection in the cause. And where the cause it self is vicious, its
vitiosity is not the cause of the vitiosity of the effect: for vitiosity of it
self neither can effect, nor be effected: but the vicious cause, taking
together the being, and the supervenient privation, is the cause of the vicious
effect, taking it in like manner for the being, and the superadded privation.
p. 103. l. 9. to l. 20. Supponamus primum malum culpae in Angelis fuisse
vitiosam volitionem aequalitatis cum Deo, causa efficiens hujus vitiosae
volitioni^ fuit -- ipsa voluntas Angelica. Verum -- per accidens and per
concomitantiam quandam producta est ea vitiositas. -- vitiositatem effect^ non
semper praesupponere vitiositatem in causa. ( p. 59. l. 4. etc.) Non -- ergo
volumus vitiositatem causae per se efficere vitiositatem effecti: quia
vitiositas causae per se nihil operari potest; vitiositas vero effecti per se
produci non Potest; sed tantum asserimus Causam vitiosam, prout includit ens
and privationem enti superadditam producere effectum vitiosum, sumendo
similiter nomen effectus vitiosi, prout includit ens aliquod and privationem
enti superadditam p. 61. l. 12. etc.

Had Mr, Hickman been Heir apparent to Dr. BARON and Mr. BARLOW, With their
Aggravation
(as sure I am he is to neither) he should have waited for the Decease as well
of the second, as of the first. Nulla fides pietasque viris qui Castra
sequun^ur. Lucan.
For how liberally soever a man intends toward his child, he seldom puts off
his shoes, till he goes to bed. Nor will any, but such Vermin as are Followers
of a Camp, (not at all to fight, but to prey and plunder) strip a man of his
clothes, before the breath is out of his body. Dr. ROBERT BARON indeed is
dead, and knows not what is done to him. But I hope Mr. BARLOW is both alive,
and live-like; and so it is too soon for Mr. Hickman, to Note the Rule in the
civil Law, that he who steals or purloynes another man's writings, or bonds, or
the like, is liable to an action of theft etc. Digest. 47.2.27. and. 32. cited
by Dr. Zouch in his C^ses of civil law. p. 95.
take his goods into possession. If Mr. Hickman shall deny, what is become so
proverbial for Notoreity, and excuse himself by an older proverb, that many
times good wits do Iump, (which being true when Mr. H. does knock his head
against a post, can have no truth here, even for that very Reason,) A man may
fitly say to him, as I have heard Sr. Thomas More once said to Gallus in a
Tetrastick; (Although what Gallus had done in verse, as Mr. H. has done in
prose, was many centuries of years, before Sr. Thomas was yet in being.)

Vatibus idem animusque, and vere spiritus idem,
Qui fuit Antiquis, est modo (Galle) tibi.
Carmina namque eadem, versusque frequenter eosdem
Quos fecere illi, Tu quoque (Galle) facis.
Now because that great and good man was no Philosopher of the Heathens, Mr.
Hickman will not be angry at it, if I try to put his good Latin into almost as
good English.

Thou ( Gallus) have the same both spirit and mind,
With them that writ in time of yore.
For when thou writest Verses, often I find
Thou writ'st the same they writ before.
His mistake of Justice for Drollerie.
. 20. Whereas Mr^ Hickman adds further, (p. 2.) that I abused Mr. Barlee with
Drollerie, as hansome as ever dropped from the pen of of Ben Johnson in his
polemicals,] I thank him as much as if I did, but I do not accept of his
Commendation, of which how ambitious Himself has been, we see by other men's
Drollery, to which he has put his own name. Vindicative Justice is such a
necessary Virtue, as without which it is impossible for humane society to
subsist. Which if Mr. Hickman will needs call Drollery, I must needs assure him
he shows his ignorance of the word. My doing of justice on some offenders, in
vindication of God and Man, I own as a Duty incumbent on me. And in particular
this last which I have done upon this Compiler, I take to be such, as could not
safely have been omitted. For Diagoras turned Atheist, upon his seeing a
Plagiarie escape unpunisht.

. 21. He says, he reckons me unfortunate in choosing the tremendous mystery of
reprobation for my first public essay. The Calvinian Tenet renders all study
useless.
p. 2.] Not that he thinks me to be unfortunate indeed, but because his fingers
itch^ to be stealing a passage from Mr. Hales (on 2 Note that that Sermon was
long since Printed, before reprinted in the Remains. of Mr. HALES.
Pet. 3.16. concerning Eccius his saying, that he chose to speak of Reprobation
as an Idoneous subject, in quo juveniles aestus exerceret, which Mr. H. knew
not how to introduce with any fitness, unless he might say I was unfortunate
in making choice of that subject. But was not the Refuting of irrespective
reprobation, (and of the horrible Blasphemies deduced from it by its Assertors)
a subject fit for my (...), or first ende^vours when if that Tenet is once
swallowed down, all further study is rendered useless, (that I may not say
pernicious too?) And when no more then common Reason, improved a little by
Philosophy, is required to refute it upon the principles supposed? And when in
the principles I speak of, all who have read our Church Catechism are very
sufficiently instructed? Whether so, or not so, let it be judged by them, who
have read me at least as they were running, and not by him, who will not read
me. As Mr. H. professes he neither has, nor will (p 3.) though he professes
the contrary in other places. For which and other Contradictions, I leave him
wholly to their lash, who bid him go forth and be a Preacher, though not a
Priest, especially for his saying I was unfortunate in any thing; because by
using that word, he hints the falsehood of his own and his Brethrens Doctrine,
That whatsoever comes to pass was fore-determined by an absolute unconditional
decree, importing the Necessity of all events. Which doctrine must needs be
false, if I was unfortunate in my choice; and as false, if I was fortunate. But
if he will have the Doctrine true, then it was clearly the will of God (even
according to his own and his Brethrens Doctrine) that I should make it my first
endeavor, to comfute their doctrine of Reprobation.

22. What he says next of Bp. Montagues visitation. The Kings declaration
forbidding its being preached.
(p 3.) and of his Majesty's Declaration, which was not intended as a two edged
sword (p. 4.) is many ways to my Advantage. For 1. the end of that Bishops
inquiry in his Episcopal visitation, was to silence the Doctrine of
irrespective Decrees. And the same was the end of my public Notes.. Next that
ought to have been the end both of the one, and the other, because Mr Hickman
does now confess that even that was the end of the Kings Majesti^s
Declaration, to which we thought it our Duty to yield Obedience 3. The two
edged sword is strangely joined by Mr. Hickman, with a charitable design to
settle peace, or stop mouths. 4. Whilst he says it was designed to stop the
mouths of the Orthodox, he means by Orthodox, those men, who taught (as since
the Assembly men have done) that all things are ordained by God; and so the
murdering of the innocent, as well as the punishing of the guilty. And why
(forsooth!) were they Orthodox, but because Authority had designed to stop
their mouths? How much rather may Independents bestow on themselves the name
of Orthodox, whose mouths were designed to be stopped by the Presbyterians? 5.
The very truth of it is this: That Declaration was intended to stop Discourses
on eitherside, any farther then our Church had given a Rule whereby to teach,
both in her Catechism, Liturgy, Homilies, and Articles, whose contrariety
indeed to the way of Calvin had very good reason to put a muzz^l upon his
follow^rs mouths, whenever they were opened to Gods dishonor. And this I am
able to make apparent by an eminent Person now living from whom I had the
following story, that when a Preacher came to Court, and had put in his Text to
the Clerk of the closet then Bp. of Hereford, [why will ye dye O house of
Israel?] One of the Chaplains (now a Bishop) was sent to give him a timely
warning, not to have any thing in his Sermon against the Kings Declaration. And
he undertaking that he had not, was permitted to preach before his Majesty.

No good Arguing from evil custom.
* 23. What he says of the Lord Falkland his speech in Parliament, speaking in
favor of his party in one respect, but quite against them in another, (p. 5.)
has no other force in it, then that he either thought what he spoke, and so
that he had not yet seen his error, or that at least by his displeasure to
some of the Bishops then in power, he was induced to declaim in General Terms,
without the addition of any proof, or of any thing else to supply its room. And
so I could tell of another Lord, who would have ( proved I cannot say, but)
persuaded only that the Oath in the Canon against Popery and innovations (of
which Presbyterianism was not the least) was someway against the King's
Supremacy. But wise men knew what these things meant, as well as what the words
signify. And let it be noted by Mr. H. that the Doctrine which he opposes was
then confessed by the Lord Falkland (in the very same speech) not to be
contrary to Law, and had nothing but custom to plead against it. (Not proving
whether the Custom, were good or evil.) And of what importance it is in
RELIGION, to draw an Argument only from Custom let it be sadly weighed by
Them, who do at any time press for a Reformation. Down goes Presbytery (if
yet I may imply it was ever up) as far as the speech of that Lord has any
force or strength in it.

. 24. But now that the Reader may be informed of the disinteressed Judgment,
The Lord Falklands judgment against Calvin's
which that most learned and noble Lord professed to have of those points, I
will lead him to his Reply to the Romanists Answer, in vindication of what he
had written against the pretended infallibility of the Church of Rome. My Lord
(in his pages 108, 109.) speaking of the great controversy betwixt the
Dominicans and the Jesuits, which was debated and heard before Pope Clement,
and of the many days spent in examining what St. Austin thought, his Lordship
adds these words concerning Austin and his Ancestors. And for Austin, [He
thought so variously concerning it, that he scarce knew himself which: whereas
all the Ancients that I could ever meet with (as his Lordship goes on) were
with the Jesuits with an unanimous consent.] Whatever that Lord might think, or
say, in any other time, or place, here he shows us his most avowed, (and I have
reason to believe) his ripest judgment.

Mr Hickmans inhumane and slanderous insinuation.
. 25. Now comes the practice of an arrant Bigot in Presbyterianisme, who says
that [ If whilst I have been throwing stones (that is writing controversy) my
children have wanted their bread, or have been fain to take it divided to them
by a more unskilful hand th^n mine own; Then have I put something upon my
Doomesday Book, which he wishes, I may have Time to take off by Repentance. p.
5, and 6.] Here he intimates to his Reader with a barbarous [If] a thing as
false, as it is malicious. And I will punish him only by saying, what is a
great and known truth. That I have been as constant a we^kly Preacher (and
sometimes more then w^ekly too) since I writ what I have published, and all the
time that I was writing, as any Presbyterian within my knowledge; and more then
some whom I could name. When indeed I have been vehemently sick (for it is not
all sickness that has excused me) my flock has been fed by some other
shepherd. When I have sometimes been Absent, I have seldom preached the less
for that, but sometimes the more, and somewhere always where need has been. If
to avoid shifting tu^ns with neighbour-Minist^rs (the cheap and lazy trick of
the Presbyterians) I have been at the charge to maintain a Br^ther for my
Assistance, (that whether sick or absent, I may not be wanting to my Flock)
what hurt have I done to such covetous worldlings, as (rather then be at that
cost for their peoples good) will make a scandalous shift, and put their money
into their Pockets? I think 'twere happy we had a Law, whereby to compel them
to use Assistants, who spread out half their matter thinly, and call it a
Sermon in the morning, the other half being reserved to be spread as thinly,
and so to be called a second Sermon after noon. So mine Host in Livie brancht
out his Porket, that his Gu^sts might not grumble for want of a second, and
third course. And children are pleased with a couple of sixpences, when they
will not be content with a single shilling. Alas, the difference is as great (I
mean in one and the same man) betwixt Sermon, and Sermon, as betwixt Gold in
the ingot, and in the leaf. Nothing is commoner with Preachers, then to thrust
up many Sermons into one, or to beat out one into many. And whereas it is
hinted by Mr. Hickman that I have fed my flock by a hand unskilfuller than mine
own; Let it suffice that I am not so self-conceited, as to flatter my self with
his opinion. My Assistant was very much fitter to teach the people their
Christian duty, than Mr. Hickman or his peers can be in have. Fitter (I say)
from after the time of his conversion, whatever he might have been whilst he
was yet a Presbyterian. But he has long since left the world; and well it had
been for Mr. Hickman, if he had not thus rake'd in an honest man's Grave; But
that he had rather looked inward, and laid to heart the common Rule, [ Qui
alterum incusat probri, etc.]

For if it is true, How much wo^se in himself, then in any other.
wh^t I have heard from many men of good credi^, (and what I have partly read
in print too) that Mr. Hickman at the same time possessed three Livings at
once, (and had not any right to either) to wit an excellent Fellowship in Mag.
Coll. besides the Parsonage of St. Towles, Therefore thou art inexcusable O
man; -- for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self: for thou
that judge do the same things. Romans 2.1. Its odiousness sh^wn by a parallel
case.
as its vulgarly called (enough to keep a worthy man who has wife and children)
and also the Vicaridge of Brackley, (where his neglects of his children are
most notori^us (if I may call them his, which by another kind of Plagium he
seized upon,) then is he of all others, the unfittest creature in the world, to
tell his Readers-(by intimation) of my omissions toward my Flock, which are
very well known to have been none.

Nor will it advantage him now to plead, that he spoke with an [if,] and that
his inference is true, upon his bare Hypothesis, or supposal. For then without
offense to him, I may also bespeak my Readers thus, [That if Mr. Hickman is
very ordinarily drunk, and if he is given to swear fearfully by fits, and if he
is a great- striker when intoxicated with rage; Then has he put something on
his Doomesday book, which I wish he may have time to take off by Repentance.]
^his I speak with an [if] and my supposal being granted, my Inference cannot
but be true. But I abominate these courses, and have only showed him, (as I
have done his brother Baxter) that their Trade is as easy, as it is inhumane.

. 26. In his next ensuing words, (p. 6.) he does distinguish my opinion, His
profession of cordial friendship, with its effect.
(to which he is an enemy) from my person, (to which he says he is a cordial
friend.) And yet in the next words to those, he does not equally distinguish
betwixt the persons and opinions of those Beyond Sea Divines, of whose opinions
(I hope) I may use as hard speeches, as Mr. Hickman has used of mine, and yet
be no less their cordial friend. We have seen Mr. Hickman his cordial
friendship toward me. But I was never so unmanlike, as to exercise the like
upon his Divines; whose pages and very lines I have laid together with their
words; whilst heaven and earth are called to witness, what they have said
against God, as well as what (in that case) I have duly said against them.

His sacrilegi^us Eulogie bestowed on them of his way.
. 27. In that he adds of his precious Divines, that they are scarce to be
equalled by any now alive, or to be excelled by those in any Calendar, ibid.]
he has spoken most unhappily, (to say no worse.) For 1. he knows in some
Calendars, Mr. Fox his Martyrs are recorded. And was it not much more excellent
to dye for Christ; then to write for irrespective decrees of sin, and
damnation? Besides, 2. He either knows, or ought to know, that all the saints
are in the Calendar, November. 1. so is Michael the Archangel, and (as our
Collect understands it) All the the Angels of heaven, on September 29. John
Baptist, the Virgin Mary, (who is no less then (...), or Mother of God, in the
expression of the Greek Fathers) Nay Christ himself, and the holy Ghost, and
the Father too upon Trinity Sunday, are either by name, or in equivalence, at
least in some Calendars. Thus he committ* a spiritual whoredom, by Idolizing
Mr. Calvin, and other men of his sect, yet has the heart (more then once) to
accuse another of partiality.

. 28. Whilst he talks how he will show, The Doctrine of the Church of England
vindicated, with Bp Laud and Bp. Montague.
not that the Remonstrant but the contra-Remonstrant opinion has been the
Doctrine of the Reformed Church of England (p 8.) he talks unskilfully enough
for a man of his own Breeding, for 1. The Remonstrants and their Opponents are
much too young, to denominate the Doctrine our Church espouseth; to that here
he speaks as a parach^onizer. But 2. I do not pretend that in every point, the
Remonstrants agree with the Church of England; our Church having avoided to
define in some things. 3. That they agree in some things, is as manifest as the
Sun, by what our Article says of the death of Christ, and the falling away of
the Regenerate. And if in every other point they do not speak the same thing,
yet they are infinitely liker to one another, then either can be to their
common Enemies. And 4. I am sure, Our Church is favorable in nothing to the
contra-Remonstrants against the Remonstrants. But 5. If the Remonstrants in
some things do adhere too much unto Arminius, wherein the Calvinists and
Arminius do but too much agree, as I have elsewhere showed of some points and
am able to show of others also,) it is no wonder if our Church does stand at a
distance from both together. And so it is a very gross Fallacy (whether by
ignorance or craft, it comes to pass, I do not say,) To make the Doctrine of
our Church, and the Doctrine of the Remonstrants (though the most Orthodox men
of the Belgic Churches) to be (...), or Aequivalents, in our Account. I can
manifest a difference, whoever else will say he cannot. And holding fast mine
Antagonist to the precedent limits of my Discourse, or of the Terms I use in
it, I shall proceed to answer his next assertion, first, by denying his
prooflesse and helpless saying, [that the countenancing of Arminianisme (as
that is a Nickname for the doctrine which we embrace with the Church of
England) is no older then Bishop Laud and Bishop Montague] and for a proof of
my Denial, I refer him to Dr. H.'s Certamen Epistolare, but more especially to
his Quinquarticular History. 2. By affirming, that if Bp. Laud and Bp.
Mountague did more eminently then others, give great Encouragement and
Countenance to what has been commonly called Arminian, the meaning of it is
only this; that they would not suffer those Doctrines which were exceedingly
remote from what was owned by our Church, and in some things contrary to what
our Church had defined, to pass with freedom for the Doctrines of the Church of
England, when they were nothing but the mistakes of particular men in the
English Church.

Of Mr. H.'s Impertinence implying Presbyterians* to be Idolaters.
. 29, But what has Arminianisme to do with the words of the Homily against the
Peril of Idolatry (p. 9) that Mr. H. should be so giddy, as to make that an
Argument for his position? does he think that Arminius and the Remonstrants
were as really Idolaters, as the same Arminius and his Followers are very well
known to be Presbyterians? As Presbyterians they might be such, if we believe
Bp. Andrews, and Dr Iackson; but as Anti-Calvinians, they could not be so.

The Archbishop cleared as to what he did against Sherfield.
And as little force has that Homily, to prove that Archbishop L^ud was no
obedient son of the Church of Enland, (unless because he was a Father) in that
he put Mr. Sherfield to so much cost, and a disgraceful acknowledgement of ^is
fault, and caused him to be bound to his good Behavior, ibid] For Sherfields
fault was no less then a public Riot, even breaking of Church-windows in a
private Caprice; such as in which (if he had pleased) he might have broken the
Bishops head too. To disallow of pictures, is one thing; and to break them, is
quite another. It was decreed at Frankford, by no less then 300 Bishops at
once, that images are neither to be broken nor worshipped. And Dr. Hammond
himself (who is least liable to the suspicion of showing any favor to what is
Popish) says in his Treatise concerning heresy, See Dr. Ham. of Heresy p.
126.
[ that we indeed in this matter approve of the Doctrine of the Frankford
decrees, as that is summed up in * those few words.] It is so generally known
that the I^onomachi were Heretics, who fell to work in the days of old
(almost 1000. years ago) as Mr. Sherfield has lately don, That I thought Mr.
Hickman might at least have heard of it. And pity it is that any Christian
should so far imitate, and gratify, both the Mahumetans, and the Jews. I have
taken some care to inform my self rightly of Sherfield's business, and of the
windows at Sarum of which he would needs be a Reformer. And by the favor of a
Friend (having no acquaintance there my self) I have an account from such a
person, as cannot easily be deceived in that particular, and cannot possibly
design to deceive another. The truth of the Story is briefly this.

. 30. In a Parochial Church of that City, An Impartial narrative of the case.
there was painted in a window the history of the Creation. And in each days
work there was added the figure of an old man. The glass might be of the
colors mentioned by Master Hickman (from Mr. Prin.) the proportions were
small, and so obscurely described, that very difficult it was to discern the
History. Few did ever observe, or appear to take any notice of it; so far it
was from giving scandal to weaker persons. Many old Bibles have the like in the
two first chapters of Genesis. Nay the like may be seen in an Impression at
Geneva. (let Mr. Hickman mark that) It was a calumny raised against the
excellent Archbishop, that he justified the picturing of God the Father, by
that of the Ancient of days in Daniel, (which Mr. Hickman perhaps invented,
and pretends no more for it, then a simple Hearsay.) when he only chastized
the presumption of Sherfield; not knowing what mischiefs to Church and State
such public riots might one day end in, if private persons of their own heads
might be suffered to Reform in such a manner. It Is true the vision in Daniel
might be described agreeably to Daniels Narrative, that is, by the shape of an
old man. What is presented to the mind, and ear, by words and letters, may also
by pictures be represented to the eye. But to picture an old man in the History
of the Creation (wherein there is not the least mention of any such thing) is
to falsify the History; And I profess (for my part) to abhor it, as much as
Mr. Sherfield can be imagined to have done. Yet would I not take his riotous
course, whereby to testify my resentment; but humbly complain to just
Authority, and so amend one fault, without the making of another. Concerning
the wisdom and Piety of Archbishop Land: I cannot better convince a Hickman,
then by the words of Bishop White; who (if a Bishop at least can be) is thought
a very good man by the Presbyterians. Bishop White in his Epistle Ded. before
his Treatise of the Sabbath. p. 22, 23.
This Bishop speaking of a great scandal, withdrawing many from conformity,
Your Grace (says he) in your Metropolitical visitation, has begun a good
work, in taking this into your religious consideration, and you have
endeavored a Reformation. God Almighty vouchsafe to give a blessing, and good
success to your pious intention, and that by your Graces Authority, this
scandal before mentioned may be removed out of the Church.

The Doctrine of S. John concerning A^tichrist.
. 31. After one or two more of his empty hearsayes of Bishop Lindsey and his
Chaplain, (too contemptible to be named) he inveigh's against them who do not
think the Pope Antichrist (p. 11.) how ill soever, they think and say of him
besides. That some indeed of our Church have thought and taught him to be
Antichrist, is very certain. But it does not thence follow, that it is the
Doctrine of the Church. They that Attribute it rather to Simon Magus and the
Gnostics, have no less then S. John for their Authority. Saint John saying
plainly, that Antichrist (when he was writing) was already in the world, 1 John
4.3. which compare with what is said, 1 John 2.18. and 22. What is said in the
Act for the subsidy, of the Clergy, as I have not convenience to examine, so
should I be sorry to find it in contradiction to Saint John. And if the matter
were to be carried by the votes of men who are greatly learned, I know not what
can be greater, then Hugo Grotius, and Dr. Hammond.

Original sin assented to, as taught in the Article of our Church.
. 32. What he add's against Dr. Tailor (page 12.) Dr. Tailor alone is concerned
in, unless he thinks that That Doctor is the whole Church of England. Let it
suffice Master Hickman, that the Doctrine of original sin in the ninth Article
of our Church, is without any scruple assented too; not only by my self, (who
have given a public proof of it,) but by every other man of my particular
acquaintance. What he says of the Religion, which was sealed by the blood of
our English Martyrs, (ib.) should suffice to conjure up the very blood of his
Feet into his forehead. The best of our Martyrs having been Bishops; and such
as partly composed, or partly admired our English Liturgy; and such as taught
the very Doctrines, which now are nicknam'd Arminian, and such as never would
put asunder, what the Holy Ghost has joined in the very same Text, (1 Pet.
2.17.) Fear God, Honor the King. And I will hold Mr. Hickman so wise for once,
as to think a word sufficient for him. But when he adds that his Religion has
been defended (or fought for) by the swords of soldiers (ibid.) I shall tell
him too in one word more, Loyalty a part of our Religion.
That those are very unfit weapons for the defending of a Religion, where God
himself allows nothing but Prayers and Tears to guard it with. The Church of
England teaches none to call their strength the law of Justice; or to fight
for Religion with breach of Loyalty. We leave such practice to three sorts of
men; the Turkish, Popish, and Presbyterian. Our English Martyrs were none of
that number.

. 33. Christian Reader, I am now arrived at that part of. Mr. Hickmans Preface,
An account to the Reader of the Method observed in all that follows.
(p. 13.) wherein Doctor Heylin has ex professo taken him up. See his Certamen
Epistolare, part 2. page 150.. 26. from which place forwards, he has so fully
and effectually performed his enterprise, as to have given a supersedeas to
what I had otherwise detained thee with, and am in some measure prepared for in
my Adversaria. And therefore partly not to weary thee with that enormity of
Length, into which I foresee I shall infallibly grow, if I pursue a Fugitive
(...), (as I have hitherto done) and partly not to do what is done already, and
by one of the exactest Historical hands, and especially because I am no way
concerned in a very great part of the tedious Preface, as well as because that
I alone am left to speak, to the remaining parts of the Book it self; I shall
resolve to say no more then thou do probably expect, and have reserved a
patience for. But if I here and there add, what is not observed, (at least not
said) by Dr Heylin; I hope the fault will be such, as will deserve its own
pardon.

Bp. Tunstal and Bp. Hooper outweigh Tyndal, etc.
. 34. If that were true which he says of Tyndal, etc. (p. 13.) yet besides the
five things which are returned by Dr. Heylin, (p* 152, 153.) I can requite him
with Bishop Tunstal in King Henry the eight's days, and Bishop Hooper a little
after, who both abhorred that Doctrine, which Frith and Tyndal are urged for;
and wrote against it to better purpose, then these were able to write for it.
The seventeenth Article which he urges (p. 15.) is proved two ways to make
apparently for us* The seventeenth Article two ways for us.
1. By the phrase of God's choosing in Christ. 2. By the care which is
enjoined, that we receive God's promises as they be generally set forth to us
in holy Scripture; which why did Master Hickman so very fraudently conceal in
his recital, but because his heart told him 'twas quite against the whole Frame
of Calvinistical Decrees? See Dr. Hammond's Fundamentals, p. 146.

So the Liturgy and Homilies, and Nowells Catechism, which Mr. H. produces
against himself.
. 35. It Is very remarkable (p. 16.) that he pretends the Common Prayer and
Homilies are for his turn, but is not able to cite a word. And Dr. Heylin makes
it appear (as Bishop Overal long ago) that all is destructive to his
pretensions. What a rare Argument has he urged, p. 18? From Doctor Nowel being
Prolocutor in Queen Elizabeth's time; He concludes the Articles of the Church
to be Calvinistical. And then to manifest how ignorant he is in these points,
he cites a passage from Nowels Catechism, which he hopes is for his interest,
though it is as visibly against it, as can be wished. For whereas it is said, [
They that be steadfast and constant in this Faith, were chosen and appointed,
and (as we term it) predestined to this so great felicity, p. 19.] It is
inferred unavoidably, That God did choose or predestinate to life eternal the
steadfast, stable, and constant in the Faith. Which is as much as Arminius did
ever desire to have granted, whereby to prove the Decree to have been
respective, to wit, respective of that stedfastness and constancy in the Faith,
(which imports perseverance unto the end) without which it is confessed, God
chooses none. It being impossible for God (even because he is perfect) to
predestinate or choose a person so qualified (as is expressed by Doctor Nowell)
with out respect to the qualification. So that Nowell was an A^minian, or
Arminius a kind of Nowellist, (no matter which,) and Master Hickman understands
not what it is really to be either. H^ could not else so often write (after the
manner that he does) either quite beside, or against his purpose.

. 36. To his Question, (page 19.) how came the Church of England to dispose of
her places of greatest influence and Trust to such as were of a contrary
persuasion, It was not ^he Church of England that put the Calvinists into
preferments
if she consented to the opinions commonly called Arminian?] Doctor Heylin's
answer is most sufficient, p. 170. etc. But yet I add five things. 1. Our
Church in all things was not one way, or other, (there lies a fallacy in
Arminian, which we disown,) and so she was not (in particular) for irrespective
decrees. 2. The Church taken collectively (as when we say the Church of
England) or used to signify the Doctrine, never disposed of preferments. But
they were ever disposed of (to the better, or to the worse,) as men corrupted
with interest and evil principles have been more or less prevalent with those
in power, (as of late the Independents disposed of all from the Presbyterians,
witness the Deanarie of Christ-Church from which Doctor Reynolds was ejected,
and the Conscience-stretcher of England (if the song speaks truly) preferred
before him. And yet whilst I am writing, it is vice versa a like case. Qui color
albus erat etc. does it follow they were both in the right by turns? no, the
wisest men say, they were both Vsurp^rs.) 3. They could not be Arminians, who
lived before Arminius was alive. 4. If Calvin's Doctrine was that of our
National Church, whilst his Followers prevailed in point of Number, and for
that very reason, (as Mr. H. now argues) then the contrary to that was her
Doctrine too, when the Nicknamed Arminians did as much prevail, by his own
confession (p. 4.) The absurdity of which will make Mr. H. renounce his Logic.
5. Since he boasts of his number, I shall probably name ten of worth and
eminence on this side, for every single man of Note, which he names on that,
not that I favor such ways of arguing, but merely because I would convince
him, by that which he chooses to make his own. I shall publish (if it be
needflul) an ample Catalogue of the Orthodox, on whom such places have been
conferred in the Church of England, as will be granted to have been (ever) of
greatest influence and trust. But I abstain (whilst it is needless) out of
that reverence which I bear unto peace, and prudence.

Arch-Bp. Bancroft an Anti-Calvinist.
. 37. If Archbishop Bancroft had hated that which is called Arminianisme as
the shadow of Death, (which Mr. H, pretends p. 20. he would not have showed
such a hatred to Mr. Calvin and his Followers. Nor would he have published the
confessions both of Coppinger and Wigginton, touching their publishing their
Pamphlet of Predestination, to prepare the way to their intended murder and
Rebellion; Bancrof^s Dang. Pos. l. 4. chapter 10. p* 161, 162.
even by laying the blame of their lewd attempts upon the absolute decree of
the Almighty, which is inferred by that desperate Doctrine to give a fatal
necessity to all events, and I therefore call it a desperate Doctrine, because
it was called so expressly by Bp. Bancroft himself, in the famous Conference at
Hampton Court.

Dr. RICHARDSON and Dr OVERAL both public Professors and most severe to the
Calvinian Doctrins.
. 38. Whilst he says that in Cambridge there was one Dr. Overall, who was
suspected a little to Arminianize ibid.] He is unhappy in 2. respects. For 1.
If he means one, as opposed to more, (and not by way of contempt, as some have
taken it) then he must know that Dr. Richardson was one of the Divinity
Professors in Cambridge, a very eminent Anti-Calvinist, and commonly called by
those men, the ^at Arminian. For he lay very heavy on all such men, as
Calvinized in Disputation. Dr. Sibbs in particular was so baffled by him, that
he thereupon preached on (...) to the Clergy. 2. So far was Dr. Overal from
being coldly, or but a little, what Mr. H. calls Arminian, that it is hard to
name any, more averse to the Calvinists in point of Doctrine, as well as
Discipline. For not to speak of his Exposition of the Genuine mind of the
Church of England in the 5. Controverted points, (which is as cross to the
Calvinists as can be wished,) his large Epistle to Hugo Grotius does so inveigh
against the Tenent of unconditionate Decrees (as well of saving as damning men)
that he reckons it one of those opinions, Sententiae quae exaltera part sic
aftr^unt Decretum Dei absolutum, gratiamque efficacem, ut tollant voluntatem
salutis conditionatam and gratiam sufficientem, nullo modo in Ecclesia Dei
^^rendae sunt aut tolerandae ut quae pugnent cum bonitate Dei and
Philanthropia; cum natura hominis aut modo actionis humanae; cum verbo revelato
t^m in lege quam in Evangelio, Deoque aut simulationem and mendacium, aut
malitiam and Iniquitatem, aut crudelitatem and Injustitia^ affingant;
Hominibusque aut securitatem carnalem, aut desperationem adferant, multaque
similia Absurda and inconvenientia secum attrahant. IO. OVERALLVS ad Hug. Gro.
Maii. 16, 1613. p. 279, 280.
which is by no means to be endured in the Church of God, as not consisting
with the Goodness and love of God to mankind, with the nature of man, and
with the nature of humane Actions, with the revealed word of God both in the
law and in the Gospel; in a word, it is an opinion, (as the Dr. goes on) which
does not only lead men to carnal security and despair, and carries along with
it many other the like absurdities. But it [affixeth or forces on God himself
either counterfeiting and lying, or malice and iniquity, or cr^elty and
injustice.] such an Anti-Calvinian was the most learned Dr. Overal; with whom
our late Primate of Armagh did most happily profess his full concurrence.

. 39. But I am challenged to name any one Doctor of the chair who was placed
in Oxford, Dr. SANDERSON no less, since his change of Judgment.
and not a Calvinist ibid.] And I am ready to name one who was instar omnium,
equal to all that went before, if not superior in all respects; even the
eminently moderate and most learned Dr. Sanderson, who though he was not before
the time of the late Archbishop, yet he is more to be considered then all that
were; because for many years together he had ever See Dr. Sandersons letter
accorded with by Dr. Hammond. p. 10. and 11.
acquiesced in the sublapsarian way, and yet upon great and mature
deliberation, having all his 5. schemes in his eyes at once and comparing them
duly with one another, He soon discerned a Necessity of quitting the
sublapsarian way, (in which till then, he did acquiesce) as well as the
supralapsarian, which he could never fancy, so that the whole of Mr. Calvin, as
a sub, and supralapsarian, (for he is both by fits, as Dr. Sanderson observes,
and Dr. Twisse confesses,) was rejected by him when he was ripest and most
impartial which though I knew a good while since, by a letter received from
himself, (that I might not doubt of my intelligence,) yet had I not spoken of
it here (how much soever for the honor and interest of my cause) had not his
change been made public by his consent.

Persecution is not a mark of Error in those that suffer it.
. 40. He says, As many as trod the Arminian path, were wont to be suppressed
and censured, so soon as they began to discover themselves, p. 21.] First, if
this were true, it were a very impertinent and pitiful way of arguing. For we
know there was a time, when the Eastern Churches were overspread with the
prosperous heresy of the Arrians, as the Western were in great measure with
that other Heresy of the Donatists, whilst the Orthodox were suppressed by
those* and these. And what objection can it be to the Spouse of Christ, or her
children, that in adherence to his Gospel they have borne his Cross too? But 2.
It is false, which he so confidently affirms, and that without exception too.
For did not Mr. Harsenet Discover himself at Paul's Cross (as may appear by
his Printed Sermon, after which he was preferred from one Dignity to another,
first to the Mastership of Pembrook-Hall, and after that to the Archbishopric
of York? Let Mr. H. reflect upon what I told him (. 36.) and retract the
rashness of his expression.

Sect. 41, Mr Simpson cleared from his Censors as to Falling from Grace, and
Romans 7.
Of Mr. Barret and Mr. Simpson I shall the rather speak in particular, because
Dr. Heylin does refer them to his General Answer (p, 175.) And 1. I observe in
Mr. Hickman, that he does not name Mr. Barrets Doctrines, for which the censure
was passed on him* perhaps he was ashamed to name them. For if they were such
as Mr. Simpsons, that the commission of a great sin does extinguish Grace for a
time; It Is plain the Censurers themselves were much more worthy of public
Censure. For when our Article says expressly, that the child of God may fall
away, by what sin may he fall, if not by a great one? (But of this I have
spoken in My whole third Chapter to Mr. Baxter,) And then for what he spoke of
Romans 7. It must be meant in all reason of committing great sins too, (in
consent with that which he spoke before,) and so they came not home to the
business, who understood it only of a regenerate man according to St. Austin
in his Retractations. For there that Father is of opinion, that St. Paul in
that Chap. did not speak of great sins, but only sins of infirmity, which that
it really was an error, and a gross error too, and what betrayed that Father to
it, Mr. Hickman may see though he look no further, then Dr. Hammonds Review of
his Annotations; especially p. 131. compared with p. 127. where he says (what
does carry sufficient evidence of its truth in the forehead of it) that this
indeed is all the difference to be assigned betwixt a regenerate and an
unregenerate man, that in the one the Spirit, in the other the Flesh is
victorious, that is, the will of the one is led by the spirit, and the will of
the other by carnal Dictates.

Sect. 42. Now concerning the Recantation supposed to be made by Mr. Barret,
Barrets Recanting, an arrant fable
besides what is said by Hist. Quinquar. p. 3. chapter 19. p. 72.73.
Dr. Heylin to show its improbability, and the Letter (by him produced) to Dr.
Goad; I have another letter of Barrets, copied out from his own hand and
directed to Mr. Chatterton, the Master (at that time) of Emanuel College,
wherein he says expressly, that he would not perform the Retractation required
of him. And he gives such reasons, as are too long to be here inserted; which I
therefore deferr till some other season, when I may fitly publish that, with
some other things not hitherto extant. I have also been informed of some
ejected Masters of Colleges, that having diligently sought, they could not find
any such thing. So that for ought I yet see, that Recantation is but a Fable.
Nor can I wonder at such inventions of a Puritan faction, when I consider their
Forgeries concerning Hampton-^ourt Conference, 'till Doctor Barlow had put them
to shame and silence.

Bp. MONTAGVE'S vindication.
43. To his following Impertinencies I shall speak very bri^fly because they
are extremely such, p. 23. etc.] 1. As Bishop Montague's Adversaries did indeed
object (against him) his Dissent from the Doctrine of the Church of England, so
to their shame (if they had any) he freed himself from that charge. Master
P^m's Report to the House of Commons, is no proof at all, that he was censured
by the Parliament. And the Order of that House in the behalf of the Articles,
was not hurtful to him who opposed them not, but understood them better, and
declared as much for them, as the Commoners could do.

Mr. Hickman's confession, That men follow C^lvin in their younger, and
Arminius in their riper years.
. 44. To Mr. Hickmans rare Question p. 28. [ How comes it to pass, that those
who now follow Arminius, did heretofore follow Mr. Calvin?] I thank him for the
occasion to make this Answer, That the older men gr^w, they grow the wiser and
more impartial. To what end do men study both men and books, but to discover
the mistakes of their giddy youth? Is it not fit that the aged Bishop of
Winchester, should understand things better then young Mr. Andrews? But he was
a Bishop, and one who lived at such a Time, when it was safe to leave Calvin,
as King James (his Great Master) had also done.

And therefore to satisfy Mr. Hickman, Let the Question be put of Dr.
Sanderson; The causes of it given by Dr. SANDERSON.
whose change of judgment was never published, until the last and worst
times, whilst yet the Followers of Calvin had power to See Inquifitio
Anglicana, and other accounts given of the Trie^s at Westminster
persecute their opponents: why did he follow the way of Calvin in point of
Doctrine (I mean his sublapsarian way) before he considered and compared it
with other ways, and at last forsook it after such consideration? The very
Question suggests the Answer which in all reason is to be made; And may suffice
for a general answer to the far greatest part of Mr. Hickman's long Preface.
Observe (Good Reader) the most Ingenuous Confession of that so eminently
learned and holy man. [ See Doctor Hammond's Pacifick Discourse of Gods Grace
and decrees, p. 10.
Giving himself to the study of practical Divinity, (he says) he took up most
other things upon trust.] And this he did so much the rather, because Calvin
(at that time) was not so wholesomely suspected, as (blessed be God) he since
has been. But (to express it in the words of the Judicious Doctor Sanderson)
ibid p. 9.
The honor of Calvin's name gave Reputation to his very errors. And if so
great a Scholar as he did take up opinions upon trust, and was carried down the
stream of the common errors, his weaker brethren could not choose but be swept
away with so strong a Torrent.

. 45. But they were far from being such, whose Questions in the Act Mr.
Hickman recites from Mr. Prin, Of Doctor IACKSON'S Act Questions and Doctor
Frewein's.
as he has done the greatest part of his tedious Preface. For Doctor Iackson
might well acknowledge all lost in Adam, when he supposed a Recovery of all in
Christ. And here it is observable, that Mr. Hickman has not stolen fairly. For
Mr. Prin expressed very honestly, what his juggling Transcriber thought it his
Interest to conceal. It was the very first of the Doctors three Questions, An
Peccatum originale contineat in se aliquid positivi. And this was held in the
affirmative. The other Act-questions were Doctor Frewin's, the now-Right
Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, whom I am never able to name, without a preface of honor and
veneration: Who if he did once Calvinizare, (as Bishop Andrews, and King James
before the times of their conversion,) let it suffice that his latter judgment
is much preferrable to his former. It is no more to the disparagement of Doctor
Goad, and Master Hales, and Daniel ^ilenus (the Synodist at Dort) and Doctor
Potter, and Doctor Godwin, and Melanchthon himself, and the late Primate, that
as soon as they saw, they forsook their errors; then it could be to Saint
Paul, that though as long as (in comparison) he was a child, he spoke as a
child, 1 Cor. 13.11.
understood as a child, and thought as a child, yet when he grew to a perfect
man, he put away childish things. And hence Mr. Hickman may take the reason,
why I parted with those opinions I first embraced, which now he reproacheth me
withal (p. 29.) though more to my honor then he imagined. But he must know
that by the first of the three last Questions, [ An praedestinatio ad salutem
sit propter praevisam fidem.] he seems to be ignorant of the difference betwixt
the foresight of Faith, and Faith foreseen; as betwixt ex, and propter; a
condition, and a cause; secundum praescientiam Fidei, and propter fidem
praescitam. And so he is like the vain Ianglers of whom Saint Paul speaks to
Timothy, that they desired to be Teachers, understanding neither what they
said, nor whereof they affirmed. 1 Timothy 1.6, 7.


. 46. Of Lambeth Articles, that they were caused to be suppressed by Queen
Elizabeth, Of K. JAMES and Bp. Montague.
See Doctor Heylin his Examen Historicum p. 164. That King James before he dyed
was an Anti-Calvinist, appears by the Conference at Hampton Court, and by his
great approbation of all that was preached by Bishop Andrews, which was as
opposite to Calvin, as light to darkness, and by his high esteem of Bishop
OVERALL, who was wont to call the Calvinists, The Zenonian Sect, and by his
singular favor to Bishop Montague, whom he employed in composing his Apparatus
and (...), and whose Appeal he adorned with his Royal Patronage and Protection.
(which yet he could not have done, if he had not been that which they call
Arminian.) That Bishop Montague was encouraged by the special Direction of King
JAMES, to Dedicate that Book to his Royal self, is most apparent to every man,
who will but read his own words in his Dedication.

If any Reader can yet be ignorant of King James his deliverance from that
captivity, King James his conversion from the Calvinian errors.
into which he had been l^dd by his first and worst Teachers, let him peruse
that Epistle with which the learned Tilenus Senior did dedicate his Book to
that learned King; even his Vid. Epist. Ded. praefix. No^is seu Animadvers.
Danielis Tile^i in Canon. Syn. Dord.
Book of Animadversions upon the Synod of Dorts Canon. There the Reader will be
informed, how Tilenus his Paraenesis had pleased that King; who gave a proof of
his special liking by his special command to have it Printed. How a little
after that, the King invited him by a Letter, to come over into England, and
here to try the effects of his Royal Favor. How his Majesty took care, that
care might be taken by other men, Not to blaspheme with the Puritanes in making
God the Author of sin. How he assented to Tilenus, whilst he inveighed against
the Error of irrespective decrees, especially that of Reprobation. A more
impious error then which, he said a -- S^ coacto immundorum spirituum
concilio, eorum princeps Diabolus a paredris suis Angelis, sive singulatim,
sive per satyram rogatis sententiis, quonam commento odium hominum adversus
Deum vehementius incendi, atque intendi queat, etc. --
Synod of Devils was not able to invent. Thence he styled it the Horrendum
illud Calvini decretum; and professed to see nothing throughout the whole
Calvinian Scheme, which did not either flow out of Zeno's porch, or from the
Tables of the Destinies, or from the stinking Mephitis of the Manichees. By all
which it is apparent, that Mr. Hickman is unexcusable as far as his 38. page;
where he grows less guilty, though guilty still.

. 47. That some of our Divines did change their judgment, A change of
judgment in some Divines who were se^^ to Dort.
notwithstanding their employment at the Synod of Dort, will not (I think) be
denied by any, who has not the forehead of a Hickman. For Mr. HALES his
conversion is known to most, (as Tilenus his to all,) and Dr. GOAD'S to very
many. That Bp. DAVENANT was at last for Universal Redemption, I have long since
(...). chapter 3. p. 103.104.
proved, and more then once, what has been said by Bp. Hall against the tenent
of absolute or irrespective reprobation, I have elsewhere at large informed my
Readers. Div. pur. Def. chapter 4 p.^29.
That Dr. WARD and Bp. DAVENANT were of opinion, that all Infants by Baptism
are freed from the guilt of Original sin, and in a state of Salvation,
(implying some to fall totally and finally too, because there are some, who die
Impenitents being men, notwithstanding being Infants they were Baptized,) Mr
Gataker has assured us by divulging of their Epistles. If I would pass over
to France, I could tell him of Famous Moulin, who had an interest in the Synod,
(although not there,) and yet was exactly an Arminian, as to the point of
Reprobation; and accused as such, by Dr Twisse, so was Camero, Amyrald,
Testard, and D^ille, as well accused by Spanhemius, as by other followers of
Calvin, for passing over to the Arminians in the point of General Redemption:
but to speak of such as these, is to pay Mr. H. in more then full measure.

Mr. H.'s sense of the University, and his unpardonable scurrility to the late
Arch-Bp.
. 48. To Mr. H.'s two Questions proposed in one breath, [what thinks Mr. P. of
the University of Oxon? did not she know the Opinions of the Church of England?
p. 46.] I briefly answer; First, that whilst she had the privilege of enjoying
a Real University, (which she enjoyed until the year 1648.) I think as well of
the University as when she burnt the Book, and condemned the Doctrine of the
great Calvinist Paraeus, who sowed those Presbyterian seeds of the late
prosperous Rebellion, of which such fellows as our Compiler enjoy the harvest.
To the 2. I answer by way of Interrogation, Did not the Church of England so
much as know her own mind, when she commanded Erasmus his learned Paraphrase
to be had in such honor throughout the Nation, as to any Piece of Calvin was
never given? how came the prayers of Erasmus to have a place in our public
Liturgy, from King Henry the 8. days unto these our own, if all our Church was
fermented with Calvin's Leven? The University of Oxford knew well her Doctrins,
especially then when she was most of all knowing, which was in the time of the
late Archbishop; in the vilifying of whom, Mr Hickman has shamed his own dear
Faction. For whilst he calls him an evil instrument (p. 48.) he makes himself
an example of Puritanical Petulancy and passion, whereby the men of his Faction
will grow more vile. And whilst he says they were never well, till they had
N^te the breeding of a lay-preacher ordained at Bra^kly, toward the Primate of
all England, whom Chamier allows to have been a prince.
spewed out his Grace as an evil instrument (ibid.) he implies his Faction was
deadly Drunk: so indeed were the Jews, when they were sick of Christ, and
thought they could not recover till they had spewed him out of the earth. But
as Titus Vespasian came about 40. years after and cured those Jews of all
Diseases; so if our Pharisees will be patient but half that time, they may
perhaps meet with that, that will stop their spewing.

. 49* Now I come to the objection, which Mr. H. confesses does lie against
him, Universal Redemption, held as well by K. James, the late Primate of
Armagh, and Bp. Davenant, as by Arminius.
[ the Church of England is for Universal Redemption; The Calvinists that are
Anti-Arminian are against it. p. 48, 49.] To which he answers two ways, First,
by a confession, that King James gave it in charge to the Divines sent to Dort,
Not to deny that Christ died for all; and that this was affirmed by Bp. Vsh^r,
(for so he calls the late Primate,) who also said, That he gave in his own
judgment to Dr. Davenant for universal Redemption; and accordingly it was one
of Bp. Davenants conclusions, Mors sive Passio Christi, ut universalis causa
salutis humanae Deum patrem ipso facto oblationis eatenus reddit pacatum and
Reconciliatum Humano Generi, ut vere nun^ dicatur paratus quemvis hominem
recipere in gratiam, simul ac in Ch^istum crediderit. Neminem tamen, saltem ex
adultis, praedicta Christi mors in statum gratiae actualis, Reconciliationis
sive salutis, antequam credat. These the words of Bp, Davenant, by Mr. H.'s
confession praef. p. 50.
that the death or Passion of Christ as the Universal cause of man's salvation,
does so far appease and reconcile God the Father to Mankind, by the very fact
of his Oblation, that he is truly now said to be ready to receive every man
into Favor, as soon as he will believe in Christ, notwithstanding the
aforesaid death of Christ restores no man (no man at least who is come to
ripeness) into a state of actual favor, Reconciliation, or salvation, until
he actually believes.] No man (says the Bishop) no not any of the elect,
before he is qualified by faith; meaning that faith which works by love, an
Universal obedience to the commandments of Christ. But by the offering of
himself upon the Cross, the Bp. says that he made God appeased and reconciled
(observe the word) not only to the Elect, but indefinitely to all Mankind;
and that as an Universal cause, not only of salvability, but (says the Bp.)
of salvation. Arminius never said more, no nor ever so much, for ought I am
able to remember. Nor was ever so much said by the Church of England, as that
Christ reconciled his Father to Mankind, ipso facto by the oblation of
himself, [ut Vniversalis causa Salutis Humanae,] as the Universal cause of
mankind's salvation. but I suppose by Salvation, he only meant Salvability, or
no more by cause then meritorious. And then indeed he does no more then
Arminianize with the Church of England, (as Mr. Hickman is wont to phrase it.)
It being the Doctrine of our Church, In the COMMUNION BOOK, after the act of
Consecrat^on.
that Christ by his own oblation of himself once offered made a full, perfect
and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world. And again more fully, In the 31. ARTICLE of the 39. See Mr. Clerk's
Martyrologie, part 2. in the life of Dr. Preston, p. 129. to p. 134. for a
partial account of the dispute between Dr. Preston, Dr. White, and Mr. Montague
that the offering of Christ once made is that perfect r^demption,
propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world both
Original and Actual. So exactly opposite to the Calvinists is the Church of
England in her belief.

This does prompt me to tell the Reader (if he knows it not, or has forgot it)
that at a conference held about the Books of Bp. Montague, One of the Lords
made it his motion, that the Doctrine of the Dort Synod (as to the points we
speak of) might be received into the Articles of the Church of England. But
this was opposed by Bp. White, and even for this very reason, because our
Church in her public Catechism, does teach her children to believe, (what is
denied by the Synod of Dort) Christ died for us and for all mankind. Why Bp.
Chapel (before Bp.) did refuse an excellent place in Ireland, because he would
not subscribe to Dam man, (alluding merrily to Damman, who had the office of
Scribe in the Synod of Dort) And how at last he became one of the Bishops of
that Church, by the advantage of that Canon, (procured by the power of
Archbishop Land in Intuition of Bishop Chapel) That a man was qualified for
preferment in the Church of Ireland, without subscribing the Irish, if he would
but subscribe the English Articles, is so very well known to many men, that
Master Hickman himself perhaps has heard it.

. 50. Master Hickman's second Answer is by a proofless affirmation, and even in
that his heart fails him; Mr. H. grants the whole cause but does no^ know it.
His opposi^ion to the Assemblymen's confession of FAITH.
so as he clogs it with an [ almost a word which saves many a lie, (as the
proverb is amongst country people.) Reader, take notice, that these are all
his own words, [I am almost as confident, that to grant him universal
Redemption, is to grant him ^ust nothing at all] Thus what he forged of Dr.
Heylin he fully verifies in himself, (if he is really the meaning of Theophilus
Churchman.) For he is an unhappy Writer, and marr's every thing he meddles
with, p. 1.] To grant me that which was denied, by Mr. Calvin, and his
followers, to grant me that which the Remonstrants were even persecuted for by
those of Dort; To grant me that for which Spanhemius accused Amyrald as an
Arminian; and for which the notorious Triers have deprived so many of their
rights; is to grant me just nothing, says our Automachus. But what now will he
say to save the credit of his Assembly men, whom he can never reconcile to the
Lord Prima^e, or Bishop Davenant, or to himself? Let him read and be ashamed of
the public conf^ssion of their faith, chap. 8. Art. 5. and 8. especially the
last. Where Redemption is so far from being held to be univers^l, that it is
extended only to them, to whom it is certainly and effectually applied, and
who are effectually persuaded by the Spirit of Christ, to believe and obey,
etc. Now can it be thought by Mr. Hickman that all mankind has Christ
effectually applied, as is there expressed? if so he is (it seems) for
universal salvation, of which the Arminians never dreamed; they were never so
vo^d of sense and reason. If not so, it is evident, how ill he thinks of his
Assemblers, and how little he can comply with their Novel Creed, unless he is a
kind of Gnostick, and so can side with all by turns.

Mr. H. proved to grant the whole cause at which he rails, and so to be a
Calvinisticall Arminian.
. 51. His Answer is not so ridiculous, but that his reason is somewhat more.
Take it too in his own words [ For what though Christ did so far dye for all
as to procure a salvation for all, upon the conditions of Faith and Repentance?
what is this to the absoluteness of Go^'s Decrees? etc. page 49.] But that the
world hereby is made my witness, that the man is indeed a mere Compiler and a
Rhapsodist, and is excessively ignorant of these affairs, I would permit my
inclinations to follow their bent upon this occasion. Had the Reverend Dr.
Reynolds said such a thing, I should gladly have spent a little Volume in his
Conviction. But no such words could have proceeded from so intelligent an
Adversary. Such as he cannot but know, how See Doctor SANDERSON'S two Reasons,
why his soul so much abhorred, and why he was forced to forsake the
Sublapsarians. (...). p. 14, 15.
inconsistent this is with irrespective decrees, that Christ should dye for all
mankind, and so as to procure their salvability; or so as to make satisfaction
for all the sins of all the world, as well actual, as original; or so as to
make God appeased and reconciled to all mankind. How, I say, can this be,
(which yet is granted by the Lord Primate, and Bishop Davenant,) if God decreed
from all eternity to reject or reprobate the greatest part of mankind, either
without respect to their very creation (as Doctor Twisse) or to their fall in
Adam's loins, (as the common Supralapsarians) or to any the least of their
Actual sins? (as the Sublapsarians do hold and teach.) They that were
absolutely reprobated cannot possibly be saved, or have a salvability procured
for them. And so they imply a contradiction, who holding the absolute decree of
Reprobation, do also hold that Christ procured a capability of salvation to all
mankind. (But of this I have In the Append^x to (...). Confi^med by the
conf^ssions of Du Moulin, Paraus, and Dr. Reynolds.
spoken to Dr. Bernard, p. 159.)

Besides, I will prove by three as great men, as Mr. Hickman probably can name
of the Anti-Arminians (for so at least they are called by their Disciples and
themselves) That Mr. Hickman has now granted, what Dr. Twisse does call the
Arminian Cause. For it is confessed by Du Moulin, in the letter which he sent to
the Synod of Dort, and by Paraeus the Professor of Theology at Heidleburgh,
(whose judgment was much regarded by the Synod of Dort too) and by Doctor
Edward Reynolds by unavoidable implication, That if Christ dyed for all, so
far as to procure salvation for all upon condition, then God decreed he should
procure it upon condition for all. ( without which condition he did not procure
it for any one.) Peter Moulin's words are these. Act. Synod. D^rdr. part. sess.
143. p. 339
Non est dubium, quin ob quam causam Deus damnat, ob eandem damnare decreverit.
Damnat autem reprobos ob peccata actu commissa. Luunt enim poenas in Inferno,
non solum peccati Originalis, sed and actualium omnium. Unde and inaequalitas
poenarum. Ergo and Deus eos damnare decrevit ob eadem peccata. Nihil enim
obstat quo minus Deus considerans hominem jacentem in corruptione and pravitate
naturali, eundem quoque consideret pollutum iis peccatis quae per istam
pravitatem naturalem est commissurus. And again. Ib. p. 340.
Deum quenquam destinasse ad poenam aeternam sine confideratione Impoenitentiae
aut incredulitatis, nec dicimus, nec sentimus. -- Impoenitentia antecedit
ordine Reprobationem. Now this is downright Vin. Gra. lib. 1. part. 1. sect. 4.
Digr. 6. cap. 1 page 92. who yet confesses as much as makes himself Arminian
too. lib. 1. p^rt. 1. page 77. See P^ilan. cap. 3. page 124.
Arminianisme, says Doctor Vin. Gra. lib. 1. part. 1. sect. 4. Digr. 6. cap. 1
page 92. who yet confesses as much as makes himself Arminian too. lib. 1. p^rt.
1. page 77. See P^ilan. cap. 3. page 124.
Twisse, who could better judge of Arminianism, then young Bathyllus. Confirmed
fu^ther by Dr. Twisse.
Now let Paraeus his words be weighed, that we may see if he does not also
conspire professedly with the Arminians; (as Dr. Twisse expressly affirms of
Moulin)

Paraeus in Explic. Dubior. c. 9 ad Romans p. 880.
Justus Judex non aliam decernendae sententiae, aliam exequendae causam habet,
sed unam utriusque, nempe capitale sl^gitium. And again he says, Ib. 82. col.
2.
Deum posse uti jure suo absoluto in Reprobis ad interitum ordinandis,
abstinuisse tamen. And yet again. Ib. p. 887. Col. 1.
Propter quod Deus in tempore aliquos reprobat a gloria, propter id etiam
Reprobare a Gloria olim decrevit. And accordingly In proof to the corrept. cor.
Doctor Reynolds thought fit to prove (as well he might) that God decreed from
eternity to permit sin in time, because in time he does permit it. And so by
consequence he must grant, that God decreed to reprobate in respect or
intuition of actual sins, because he reprobates in that respect and intuition.
So farewell to Master Calvin, and the Synod of Dort. And by the Synod of Dort.
Welcome the men that are called Arminians. And if we allow Doctor Twisse to
have known the Doctrine of Arminius, Then the Synod of Dort was unawares
Arminian too. For they decreed to Peter Moulin the Statutum est, pro
accuratissimo eo judicio and consensu in Doctrina gratias esse agendas. Sess.
144. page 348.
solemn thanks of the Synod, for his most accurate judgment and consent in
Doctrine. And how the very same Doctrine which he presented to the Synod has
been affirmed by Doctor Twisse to be Iesuitical and Arminian, I have largely
showed in See Divine Philanthropie defended, chapter 3 p. 124, 125. His scurrilous
usage of D. Hey^in shows the length of his own ^a^s.
another Treatise. Now then let Mr. Hickman himself be Judge, who has
contended with his own shadow; and what a shame it is for him, to have railed
so much at Arminian Doctrines, to which (when he has done) he is fain to yield.

. 52. To his slanderous insinuation concerning a Book of Doctor Heylin's, which
he affirms to have been burnt by the hand of the common Hangman, as (he says)
he is informed, (p. 53.) Doctor Heylin himself has made his own Answer. I
only here observe, what shift is made by this zelot to revile an aged and
Reverend Divine, without the least fear of the execution which the Bears made
upon the Boys, who made a mockery of Elisha his Reverend Baldness. But what
they did was less unexcusable. For they were little young Bo^es who wanted
teaching. But this great Boy is a Boy of years too; and professes (with the
Gnostics) to be a teacher of others, a guide of the blind, and an instructor
of the foolish (Romans 2.19, 20.) Those children in years reproached the Prophet
with what they saw, and were sure of, to wit, his bald head. But this child in
manners and understanding makes use of a slander to show his virulence. And
has no more to excuse him, then that he Heard it, which is possibly as false
as the Fact it self. But be it so that he heard it; what would become of such
creatures, as Mr. Hickman and Mr. Baxter, if other men should put in print
whatsoever they hear of their misdemeanors? the best of it is, he has gotten
no more by his printed hearsay, then only to make the world know how much his
ears are too long. Nor do I wish him his deserts; for then I am sure, they
would be shorter.

. 53. To his concluding Question (p. 54.) I briefly answer three things. 1.
Dolus versatur in generalibus. His concluding Question childishly fallacious.
2. There is the fallacy plurium interrogationum: some are true, and some
false. And by those that are true, no advantage accrues to the Calvinian cause.
3. Some learned men there will ever be, of both the opposite persuasions. And
therefore the Doctrine of our Church is to be judged of by her Liturgy,
Homilies, and thirty nine Articles. In which, as very many things are clearly
for, so there is nothing that I can meet with against the Doctrines which I
assert,

. 54. Having done with his Preface, His self-condemnation and contradiction.
I come to the Remnants of his Book. Where setting out with his dislike of Mr.
Barlee's sharp style, (as if the privilege of railing had been bequeathed to
Mr. Hickman by the proprietarie in chief,) and presently falling on Mr. Goodwin
in such a sharpness of style, as he dislikes in Mr. Barlee, his elder brother,
(for which I see See his Preface to his Tract of Justification.
Mr. Goodwin has long since made him an example, (he next arrives at a
profession, [ that he never had perused my Defense of the Divine Philanthropie,
nor ever would he pursue it, except he could find some hours, which belong
neither to night nor day. p. 3] yet besides his Pref. p. 1,
Profession of having been conversant in my writings, and the use he makes of
my expressions as his own, he frequently cites the words and pages even of that
very Book, and farther avows he has read it over, (p. 101.) Next he quarrels
with Mr. B. for printing part of his private letter; which if it had not been
done by his own consent, he might have told me of it in time, either by word or
by epistle; or have conve^ghed it to me by them, in whose common acquaintance
he says we meet. He is a dull Malefactor, who is not provided of some excuse,
and therefore such as Mr. Hickman may find out many. But how his wit will hold
out to reconcile the contradiction betwixt ^he fourth page of his Book, and the
second of his Bookish Preface, I am not qualified to guess at so great a
distance.

The Calvinists draw their own consequences from their tenet of Decrees.
. 55. At last he falls upon a point, which had been very material, had it not
failed in one Circumstance, I mean the truth. For telling a story of the
Lutherans (which he had read in Bp. H^ll) he misapplyes it by saying, This is
the case of the Calvinists. They hold an absolute decree of reprobation, hence
it follows, says Mr. P.) That God is the author of sin (p. 5.) No hence it
follows (say the Calvinists faithfully cited by Mr. P. as to their words and
pages and very lines,) that God is the author and c^use of sin. It was not I
who drew the consequence, (though I might rationally have done it, as well as
they*) But it was I who observed by whom it was drawn. Even by them who have
contended for their fanciful decrees. I have made this so clear, in all my
papers and particularly in this, (Chapter 1.. 2. p.) that I wonder with what
forehead Mr. H. can say I find a forehead, tosay the Calvinists m^ke God the
authorof sin. Indeed when they h^ve said it in plainest terms, they sometimes
say they never said it; and thence I condemned them for so much
self-condemnation. This the Reader may witness for me, as by viewing other
parts of my Autoca^risis; so particularly the preface, or Introduction, p. 7.8.
And Ch 3. p. 140.141, 142. Now that I am railed at, by such a mouth as Mr.
Hickmans, upon no other ground, then my reproving him and others, for their
often railing at God himself is a great addition to my contentments; 2 Chronicles.
32.17.
And whilst Mr. H. continues either to be what he has been or to say what he
has said concerning God, I hope I shall not be so unhappy, as ever to have his
good word.

Sect. 56. Had I met with such Blasphemies in any writings of Bp. Abbot, or
other men of our Church, How Mr. H. is their accuser.
I should have taken that course which the Rhapsodist tells me had been the
wisest (p. 6) But having met with none such, methinks the man should excuse me
for my innocent desires to do no wrong. Such English writers as I found guilty,
I very liberally named, and as impartially condemned. But our Divines at Dort,
as well as those that are named by Mr. H. were for an Index expurgatorius; and
so have justified me, in my severity to the Doctrines which they condemned, Mr.
H. is therefore a very strange Person, in advising me to pass by the guilt of
some beyond the sea, and to charge it on some at home, who (for any thing I
know) have ever been clear from that offense: or if he means no more then
this, that some of our English Anti-Arminians have blasphemed as much as foreign
Calvinists have done let the Reader take notice that Master Hickman himself is
their Accuser.

. 57. That argument of his, [ if sin is a positive entity, either God is the
Author of it, or it is God, And how is own.
] He now confesses to be his own; but only adds, that the Jesuits do use it
as well as he p. 7.] I have often noted the affinity betwixt the Jesuits and
Presbyterians. But why Mr. H. should help my parallel, I cannot guess. Nor do
I think that that Argument was ever used by any Jesuit, unless Mr. H. himself
is one; or unless it weredone to debauch the Presbyterians, as well in that, as
in other points, whereby to lay a new odium upon the Protestant name.

58. What he says of my Agreement, in one particular at least, how an Hobbist,
and an Arminian.
with Mr. Hobbs (p. 8.) he might as easily have said of Dr. Iack^on, or Dr.
Hammond, or Dr. Field, or any other, who holds that the Author of the obliquity
or sinful act must needs be the Author of the sin, and of the obliquity; and by
consequence that our Adversaries who hold him the author of the one, conclude
him so of the other also. And I have made it undeniable that there cannot be
any difference betwixt the act of hating God, and the sin of hating God;
because that act is that sin. Mr. H.'s device may be thus retorted. He agrees
with Mr. Hobbs in the Stoical Doctrine of Decrees, in which he knows I dissent
from both, would the Reader think that I am a Hobbist for dissenting from Mr.
Hobbs., and Mr. H. an Anti-Hobbist for agreeing with him? so Arminius holds God
to be the Author of the act, when the act is sinful. Mr. H. agrees with
Arminius, as much as I differ and dissent which of us two is the Arminian, let
others judge. And how many things more one might prove Mr. Hickman, at such a
Presbyterian rate of arguing.

How in striving to clear he condemns himself, confesses his m king God to be
the Author of sin.
. 59. It was not (as he pretends p 9) for his mere oversight in Metaphysics,
that I made him an example of Autocatacrisis; but for holding forth a Doctrine,
which Himself had confessed to be Blasphemous: was not that to condemn him
self? what I said of a man in Print, who obtruded this sense upon an Article of
the Creed, [that God is the m^ker of all things real] he knows I meant of an
other, in whom I read the words printed, yet I might very well have said it of
Mr. Hickman himself, who also has printed his own belief, that it belongs to
God to produce ev^ry real being p. 95. And hence he plainly now confesses,
that posi^ive and real are not all one. (p. 10.) he must confess he makes God
to be the author of sin, though sin should be but a mere privation if it is but
something real. And yet that it is more then a mere privation, himself has
also confessed, by confessing that it is privative, (page 95.) if he knows the
difference between the two conjugates, and thinks the concrete to be more then
the abstract. Thus he is every way guilty, and self-condemned too. He bears
witness against himself with every whit as much truth, as with calumny and
Falsehood against his neighbor.

. 59. He says the darkness in the creation ( Genesis 1.2.) was such, as no wise
man will call positive, His own thick darkness touching the darkness in the
creation.
yet all will say that it was real. p. 10.] If he thinks that darkness a mere
privation, then first he confesses that a mere privation is a thing real; and
so that God is inferred to be the Author of sin, although supposed to be no
more then a mere privation. Next he contradicts the text, by which it appears
there was a darkness antecedent to the light. When the light was created, it
was divided from the darkness, (verse. 3.) so as the night and the day were
reciprocally privative of one another. But thirdly, be it so, that that
darkness was a privation, (though not of that light, which was not yet in facto
esse) It is sufficient for me, that what is privative of light must needs be
positive of darkness, whatever that darkness be said to be. Which if it was not
created by God Almighty, Mr. Hickman should tell us how it came to have a being
(Genesis 1.2.) if he does not think it was eternally of it self, and run the
hazard of being thought as mad as Manes.

. 60. Having said that Privations are real things, he presently adds, that
they are ranked among Entia rationis; How he makes the most real things en^ia
rationis.
And why so? not because they do not antecedere operationem intellectus: but
because they are conceived of otherwise then they be. p. 10.] First by this he
ranks God amongst his entia rationis, when He is (more then any Creature)
conceived of otherwise then he is. 2. He supposes Reason to be here a false
Judge. 3. He intimates a confession, that if Reason judges rightly, and not
otherwise of the thing then indeed it is, to wit, that privation is privation,
(not positive Blackness) it shall then be no longer ens rationis, but ens
reale. And by necessary consequence, that it is but an error to think it
otherwise. Thus he clearly makes God to be the Au^hor of all things real, and
so of all sins, which he confesses to be real, even whilst he denies that he
ever said it.

. 61. But he asks, why this is called an obtruding a new Article on the Church?
How he ob^rudes a new Article of Faith.
page 11.] To which I answer two things. First, that his B^other with whom I
dealt, as with a person of his conspiracy, did thus expound the first Article
of the Nicene Creed; 2. He who argues in such a manner, as to conclude the
Gainsayer either an Atheist, or somewhat worse, (and even so does Master
Hickman, who says that sin, if it is positive, is either Go^'s creature, or
God himself,) does implicitly make a new Article of Belief.

And makes it a point of omnipotence to be able to do evil.
. 62. The profession which he makes before the Register within him, to which he
pretends to owe more reverence, then to aff^ont it with a wilful lie. (p.
11.) he seems to make for no other end, then to Comp^re his words p. 11. with
corr. copy, p. 1.
steal those words out of my Notes, and to use them ambitiously as his own. For
why should the privativeness of sin be fittest to reconcile Gods purity and
omnipotence? Why will not the way of Saint Austin and Lombard do it as well? Or
rather why should God's purity be thus nefariously employed to stand in need of
a reconcilement with his Omnipotence? Let it be granted that God is able to do
whatsoever is pure and perfect; as well as unable to do the least, that is
contrary to both; And all is well upon every side. What need he be able to
contradict himself? Or have power to do that, which is contra^y to power as
well as to purity and perfection? yet such would be the power to produce a
sinful or wicked action, such as the action of hating God.

H^ proves his own sins to be positive entities, by ascribing his rage ^o his
s^briety.
63. He reckons up some phrases out of my Autocatacrisis, which though softer
then he deserved, were severer it seems then he could patiently endure* And to
excuse his fit of Rage, into which he proves he was cast through that
temptation, he says I used him so severely not only upon a small, but upon no
reason at all. p. 14.] As if his making a neighbor guilty of sin's (...), and
his making God himself the principal cause of all wickedness, were not any the
least reason for a Deportment as I had shown. Thus Vedelius did nothing to
provoke the anger of the Remonstrants, how much soever he had sweated to prove
them Atheists. And Mr. Hickman is such a gentle inoffensive Creature, that
though he calls them the ugly brats of the wildest sectaries which G. C. has
midwiv'd into the world (p. 14.) he has injured no man, provoked no man. He
professes, in the same breath, He utters not the words of passion, but
sobriety, p. 14. And thus the tame Creature has meekly proved, That All his
sins are positive entities, what ever he says of other men's. For sobriety is a
virtue, whose positive entity he allows. And notwithstanding the sad character
which is fixed upon railing in 1 Timothy 6.4. 2 Pet. 2.11.
holy Writ, Mr Hickman tells us it is his sobriety: whereby his Readers are left
to guess, what scurrility he had used in a fit of passion, whose very words,
of sobriety are so outrageous. As for his virulence toward my self, I pass it
over for this reason, That he may know my severity is but the executing of
Justice, not for his bitterness to me, but to God himself; whom he has charged
as the cause of all the villainies in the world, which do fall under the Genus
of Quality or Action. Whereas the worst he has said of me, is even infinitely
better. And though I must paradigmatize him for his blaspheming the God of
heaven, yet I must do it so clearly in that behalf, as not to return him
railing for railing. 1 Pet. 3.9.


Sect. 64. From his volley of bitter words discharged at once against me, His
slanderous charge against Mr. Tho. BAR^LOW of ^ in Oxford.
he proceeds to calumniate Mr. BARLOW, the Reverend Provost of Queens College,
(p. 16.) whom he forgeth at least to have used this Argument, [If sin has a
positive or real being, and is not caused by God, it is God himself.] that is
to say, If sin is not nothing, it must be God, or Gods creature. But when and
where did Mr. Barlow thus argue? not in private betwixt him and Mr. Hickman;
for I was told by Mr. Barlow, what makes me know it to be impossible. Not
publicly and in print; For I cannot find it in his exercita^ions. It is
therefore a very enormous thing, to steal abundance from Mr. Barlow without the
citing of any page where the matters really are to be found; And yet to cite
him thus by Name, for that which never fell from him, by word or writing. Hence
the Reader may judge of this man's Religion. His commendation of Mr. Barlow, (i^
such it can be, whilst he bestows it,) I very readily grant him to my
advantage. For Mr. Barlow has a better opinion of me, then I have of my self.
And I can yield him a greater deference, then he can think is due to him. Nor
will he assert his own Judgment, without a submission to other men's, (Doctor
IACKSON, and Doctor FIELD, to name no more) who are more his Seniors, then he
is mine. Sure I am, that my Lea^ned Friend can never be pleased with a
Commendation, which is ush^^'d into the world with so foul a calumny.

His foul defamation of Dr. REYNOLDS.
. 65. And as little can Doctor REYNOLDS take any pleasure in the mockery, which
Master Hickman does mix with his vindication. I did but make it a Question,
whether he were not in judgment an Episcopal Divine, how much soever accounted
a Presbyterian, (the reason of which Question I shall allege in due time) and
yet I am said by Master Hickman to have branded Doctor Reynolds with the
suspicion of being an Hypocrite, and that he could not be in earnest of that
Party, whom he has owned in praying, in preaching, in covenanting. p. 17, 18.]
to which I answer by these degrees. 1. In all my writings, there are not found
any such words; Had there been, Mr. Hickman would not have feared a citation.
2. Time was when Doctor REYNOLDS did own the King and the Bishops, both in his
Praying and Preaching too; as may appear by two of his printed sermons, for
obedience and conformity to those that were Rulers at that time, both
Ecclesiastical, and Civil. So that in judgment he is now, what he was twenty
years ago, unless he has turned with the times, and with those that turned
them. But of this he is accused by Mr. Hickman, who makes him one of the
Covenanters; whether truly, or falsely, I cannot tell. If truly, he disgraceth
that learned man. If falsely, he wrongs and defiles himself. 'Twere very strange
that Doctor Reynolds, who had taken the oaths of allege^nce and supremacy,
subscribed the thirty nine Articles, sworn obedience unto his Ordinary, lived
conformably in the Church, and preached for it from Press and Pulpit, should
swear to extirpate those very things, which he had sworn to assert. It is much
more likely that Mr. Hickman owed him a spite, and could not hold from giving
it vent, though he had nothing to excuse him for such Impertinence. He might
have written against the positivity of six, without reviling Dr. Reynolds, as a
person that had sworn so lewd a Covenant. A thing the less credible, because he
has declared to diverse Friends* (whom I can name if need require) That the
order of Bishops in his judgment, was of Divine Institution. And if the
Question shall yet be asked, I dare adventure a Discretion he will readily say,
yes. But Mr. Hickman it seems is careless, whom he calumniates in his passion;
And therefore Doctor Reynolds may the more easily forgive him.

66. To his blind and bitter zeal against the Licencing of a Book, His
self-contrad^ction, and blind zeal, as to Dr. Martin.
which is Intitl'd [ An Historical Narration etc.] p. 18.19. I am able to
return him this gentle Remedy. The Learned and Reverend Doctor Martin did avow
and justify (in the House of Lords) his licensing that worthy and useful Book.
And Master Maynard much urging that 'twas Arminian, on which he insisted before
the Lords, The Doctor told them he thought it strange, that That should be
called an Arminian Book, wherein there was not one person either named, or
concerned, who had not been dead before Arminius was alive. Whereupon his
Accuser was as much disappointed, as Mr. Hickman must needs be when he reads
the story of that affair. But his self-contradiction is most prodigious.
Because in one and the same page, and at few lines distance, he says the book
was unlicensed, which yet he confesses to have been licensed by Mr. Martin Bp.
Lauds Chaplain. And what credit can be due to his following proof^ess
affirmations, who calls learned Champneys by the name of Cerberus? Or what
shall we think of his tongue and conscience, who calls Tilenus an Ethiopian, a
scribler, impudent, and a poor fellow? (p. 21.) If he treats his superiors and
betters thus, I wonder how his equals can endure to come within his Breath.
yet in the very next page, he commends himself for Candor and moderation, and
his cordial affections to Episcopal Divines, for never vilifying the parts and
pains of any Pr^latist, because such. And then to show us his skill in books,
he says he had rather be the Author of Calvin's one book of insti^utions, then
of all that ever were made by Grotius (p. 23.) whereby he owns Mr. Calvin in
the worst of those things I cited from him; and gives me reason to believe,
that he never read the Books of Grotius, but takes up his anger upon trust, as
he has done the materials which fill his volume.

The nullity of a Priesthood sinfully given by Presbyterians.
. 67. He next resolves to spend some pages in another way of Impertinence, and
Tergiversation. It seems not caring what course he takes, whereby to patch up
a little volumn; and yet to stave off his Readers from what he took upon him to
prove, to wit, that sin has no positive being. His little project is briefly
this; first, to say how much he has read in Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Hammond; and
secondly to add upon that occasion, (so dexterous he is at the contriving of a
transition) that if Presbytery be a crime, he must needs say he has learnt it
from Episcopal men. p. 23. etc.] will you know his Reasons? The first is this;
The Primate and Dr. Holland were of opinion, that a Presbyter and a Bp. differ
in degree only; not in order. But neither does he attempt a proof, that this
could make him a Presbyterian, Or that the Primate and the Dr. did ever think
any such thing, much less that they said it either in earnest or in ^est. I am
sure the L. Primate thought our Presbyters unexcusable, for taking upon them
the Bishops office to ordain. But he had mercy for the French Protestants,
because he thought it neces^ity, not choice, which kept them from Episcopal
order, see the Letter of Peter du Moulin the son sent to a Scotchman of the
Covenant, who proves his Father to be clearly for the order of Bishops. Chamier
affirms them to be (of right) elected Princes. Their Church would have Bps.
but are not suff^red. The second reason is that Bp. Andrews ordained a
Scotchman Bishop, never made Priest but by Presbyters, which he would not have
done, had ordination by Presbyters been unto him a Nullity p. 23.24] But 1. he
brings not any proof that there was ever any such fact. 2. From Fact to Right
no good Argument can be drawn 3. Bp. Andrew^ might be ignorant that the
Scotchman had received any such mock-Ordination 4. Or he might think the man
had invincible Necessity to help excuse him, which yet I take to be most
improbable; much less that he could fancy the common Rule had place here* Quod
fieri non debet factum valet. And therefore (5) my chiefest answer to it is
this, that the story proves nothing (supposing truth to have been in it) but
what is against Mr. Hickmans interest, for it only proves that such a man who
had been sinfully dubbed into a Titular Priesth^od* and was therefore no real
Priest, in the opinion of Bp. Andrews, might yet per saltum be made a Bishop.
Because in his being made a Bp. he is ipso facto made a Priest. And so it is
granted as well of Timothy and Titus, and the rest in their time, that they
were consecrated Bishops, without the receiving of previous orders* Others
having first been D^acon^, were immediately assumed into the order of Bishops.
So Linus, who was St. Paul's Deacon as Anacletus and Clemens, who were St*
Peter's, succeeded both those Apostles in the Bishopric of Rome. The
recantations of ^ome who were so ordained.


Having thus satisfied Mr. H* as to the case of his Scotch^an ordained per
saltum by Bp. Andrews, I shall tell him that there are Diverse, who having been
dubbed by Presbyterians (for without an abusive way of speaking they durst not
say they had been ordained) were so sensible of the crimes of Schism and
sacrilege in the thing, that they made their Recantations to several Bishops
within my knowledge; and solemnly renounced such Ordinations; and after that,
have been ordained by the Bishops themselves. I am unwilling to name the men,
that I may not occasion their persecution. But Bishop Morton is out of their
Reach, and so I am free to make it known what he has done in this kind. The
reader may judge by this Taste, whether Episcopal men could ever teach Mr. H.
his Presbyterianisme.

68. He produces a passage from one of the first Printed Sermons of the
learned and Reverend Dr. SANDERSON, Mr. H*'s Disappointment by Dr. SANDERSONS
change of judgment*
concerning Gods concurrence with subordinate Agents (p. 29.) which he hoped
some shallow Readers would think conducing to his end, of making the people to
believe, that God himself is the Cause of the wickedest actions in the world,
because the wickedest actions have not only a real, but a positive being. But
besides that that passage of Gods concurrence (to the sustentation of the
Creature) is nothing at all in it self to Mr. Hickmans purpose, I have the
leave and consent of that most learned and pious person, to communicate as much
of his Letters to me on this occasion, as I conceive may tend to his
vindication, and with all to the advantage of peace and truth.

Doctor Sanderson's Letters, etc.
1. As to the passage in the fifth Sermon ad Populum, p. 278 -- 9. the Doctor
says, That as he did as well at the time when that Sermon was preached, as at
all other times before and since, utterly detest; so the thing principally
intended and purposely insisted upon in that whole passage was to root out of
men's minds the seeds of that horrid Blasphemous opinion, that God was the
Author, or efficient cause of sin.

2. He says, That the occasion which led him to that discourse being the
handling of that 1 Timothy iv. 4. Every Creature of God is good: the I^ference
thence was natural and obvious, That therefore whatsoever was evil could be no
creature of God, was none of his making, nor could he (in any tolerable sense)
be said to be the Author or cause thereof.

3. He says, That if in the Explication, or prosecution of that Inference he
should perhaps have let fall some such improper, incommodious, or ambiguous
phrase or expression, as a caviller might wrest to a worse construction then
was meant (a thing not always to be avoided in popular discourses, especially
where the matter trea^ed of is of great nicety, or of a mixed consideration
between Metaphysical and Moral:) it had yet been the part of an ingenuous
Reader, to have made the main scope of the discourse the measure whereby to
interpret such phrases and expressions, rather then by a malign interpretation
to extract such a sense out of the words, as it is certain the Author (unless
he would contradict himself) could not mean.

4. He says, That upon as district a review of every period and clause in that
whole passage, as seemed requisite for his concernment in the present debate,
he has not observed any phrase or expression, which is not consonant to his
main scope therein, or whereof Master Hickman (without injury and violence to
his true meaning) could serve himself in any of those three points: wherein (as
far as he can judge, having never seen Mr. Hickmans Book) he conceives the
difference betwixt Master Pierce and his adversaries to lie. viz. 1. Gods
predetermining of men's wills and actions. 2. The positive entity of sin. 3.
Gods concurrence to the sinful actions of men.

Note that this Section shows his meaning in the seventh.
5. For the first of which, the Doctor says, That he is so far from
believing, that God predetermineth the will to evil actions, that he dares not
(without farther assurance then he can yet find warranty for) affirm
positively, that God at all physically determines any man's will either to good
or evil. It being hard (to his seeming) to suppose such a determination
without destroying the nature and liberty of the will. Nor does he find himself
obliged to say or believe; That God has predetermined or eternally decreed all
actions, events, and things; if any more be understood thereby then this, viz.
That God ab aeterno knowing all both future and possible things, has eternally
decreed to permit the creature to act (that is, not to withold from it the
concurrence of that his power without which it could not act,) in such sort, as
that the event, which he foresaw future should certainly come to pass; and the
event foreseen as possible but not future, should certainly not come to pass.

6. For the second (the positive entity of sin) although taking a real entity
as opposite to mere nothing, even sins of omission also may be said to have a
real entity, as all privations and other Entia rationis have: yet the chief
contest being about sins of commission (as appears, both by the distinction,
so frequently used in this controversy, between the act and the obliquity; and
by the particular instances, the hating of God, the murdering of an innocent,
the ravishing of a woman, etc.) the sins of omission set a side as less
pertinent to the present debate, he says he wondreth with what pretense, or by
what subtility of distinction, any man,
that acknowledges a sin of commission so to consist of an act as the
material part, and the obliquity of the said Act as the formal part, that if
either of both be wanting it cannot be a sin (for without supposal of an act
there can be no obliquity, and an act without obliquity is no sin; and
acknowledges withal the one part ( viz. the material) to be a positive
entity; can deny the totum compositum to be a positive entity. It seems to be
all one, as if a man should deny Socrates, consisting of a body and a soul to
be ens quantum, because his soul (his formal part) is not ens quantum. For no
more can the accession of the obliquity to the presupposed Act whereunto it
adhereth, make that act cease to be a positive entity, then the infusion of the
soul into a body that has dimensions can make that body cease to be a
quantita^ive entity. The Doctor acknowledges that in a sinful action the act
may be Metaphysically abstracted (abstractione praecisionis, and per primam
operationem intellectus) from the obliquity; that is to say, it may be
considered precisely as it is a motion of the creature, or an exercise of that
natural power wherewith God has endued the creature, without considering at
the same time the object about which it is conversant, the end whereunto it is
directed, or the circumstances appending: And that the Act so abstractedly
considered, has a distinct essence of its own, whereby it essentially
differs from them, (otherwise the act and the object, should be the same
thing.) But yet for as much as no such act can de facto (in regard of actual
existence extra intellectum) be really abstracted from those things, without
which (though extrinsecal to its essence) it cannot exist, and by the occasion
whereof it first becomes morally good or evil, (for no act is morally evil in
its own abstracted essence, nor otherwise a sin, then as is vitiated by the
co-existence of some undue object, end, or circumstance:) it must necessarily
follow, that the totum compositum, the vitiated act and that is the Note that
the Concrete, or vitiated Act, is here denominated the sin. And the sin said to
be a compound, consisting of two parts, act and obliquity; not separately, but
jointly.
sin, act and obliquity jointly together) is a positive real ^ntity, and
morally evil. A positive real entity, from the existence of the act: and
morally evil, from the co-existence of those aforesaid vitiating relations,
which are accidental to the act, as to the essence of it, but by adhering to
it make it formally a sin.

7. For the third point (Gods concurrence to a sinful action) the Doctor
thinks that what he has now last said, will sufficiently clear from
misconstruction, not only that phrase of actuating the power (p. 279.) if Mr.
Hickman have hoped for any advantage to his cause therefrom; but that other
short passage also (page 29.) wherein is acknowledged the effectual concurrence
of Gods will and power with subordinate agents in every, and therefore even in
sinful actions also. Especially if the two Texts of Scripture quoted in the
margin (viz. Act. xvii.28. and Esa. x.12.) be withal taken into consideration.
For it is manifest, that by the concurrence signally grounded upon those two
Texts there cannot rationally be understood any other concurrence, then such as
is according to the importance of those texts, which from Act. 17. is briefly
this. As whilst we have any being, we have it by virtue of that his
concurrence, which if he should withdraw or withhold from us, we should cease
to be; and so long as we live, we live by virtue of that his concurrence, which
if he should withdraw or withhold from us, we could not live: so, as often as we
act and move a hand or a foot or a thought, we act and move by virtue of that
his concurrrence, which if he should withdraw or withold from us, we could
not act or move hand, foo^, or thought. That is to say, we cannot actually
exercise any of those natural powers God has endowed us withal, without that
generalis Note the distinction of Mel^nch^hon, The will does act, Deo
sustentante, non adjuvante God sustaining the facul^y, but not assisting the
choice.
concursus causae universalis (as the Schoolmen call it) which has such an
influence upon all the motions of inferior subordinate agents and second
causes; that if God be pleased at any time to withold from them that
concurrence, although the natural power remain, the same it was still, yet can
they not exsert or actually exercise that power to the producing of any effect.
As when God withheld from the fire Dan. iii. his concurrence, it could not put
forth that natural power it had of burning, so as to have any operation upon
the bodies of the 3. young men, that were cast thereinto. If an ungratious son
should be so wickedly disposed as to cut his own fathers throat, he could not
take the knife into his hand, nor move his arm to do that foul deed, if God
should withhold his concurrence thereunto, and not suffer him to exercise his
natural power of reaching out his arm to cut. In which horrible and sinful act
all the concurrence, imputable to God at the most is, but the affording (that
is to say, Note his exposition of the word affording, by not withholding, and
the word general added to influx and the locomotiv^ faculty, which is common to
us with Beasts, as distinguished from the will, which is common to us with
Angels.
the not withholding of) that his Note his exposition of the word affording,
by not withholding, and the word general added to influx and the locomotive
faculty, which is common to us with Beasts, as distinguished from the will,
which is common to us with Angels.
general influx into the loco-motive faculty of his creature, without which he
could not exercise that faculty so far as to stretch out his hand to cut, which
act so far forth only considered, and no farther, doubtless is no sin, for
then every stretching out of the arm to cut any thing should be a sin,
according to the old Logical axiom, Quicquid convenit quatenus ipsum, convenit
omni. But the applying of such an act to an undue object, referring it to an
undue end performing it in an undue manner, or with undue circumstances, (by
any of which obliquities it becomes a sin) proceeds wholly and solely from
the corrupt will of the inferior agent, and not at all from God, which, as it
lays the whole guilt of the sin, or moral act upon the actor, so it clearly
acquitteth God, (such his concurrence to the natural act or motion of his
creature as aforesaid notwithstanding) from the least degree of any agency or
efficiency therein.

8. He says, That what he has here declared concerning these two last points,
as it is axactly agreeable to what his judgment then was, when the two
Sermons, wherein the passages quoted by Mr. Hickman are found, were preached:
so it is his present opinion still, which he has therefore somewhat the longer
insisted upon; not only for that it seems to be the consentient tenet of the
best Schoolmen, grounded upon discourse of reason, and the Authority of St.
Augustine, and other of the ancient Fathers, and no way (in his apprehension)
derogatory to the holiness, goodness, wisdom, or majesty of God: But also
because the due consideration of it might prove (if it were by some able hand
distinctly, clearly, and intelligibly set down) a probable expedient toward the
reconciling of some differences among Divines held at a greater distance then
perhaps they needed to have been, for want of a right understanding between the
dissenting parties. For the Doctor professes himself, (and he well hops he
is in most things not much further from the truth for so doing,) as on the one
side extremely jealous of extreme opinions, till they have undergone a severe
trial; so on the other side very inclinable to embrace middle and reconciling
opinions, where there appears not pregnant evidence of reason to the contrary.

9. Lastly to conclude this whole business, so far as he apprehends himself
concerned; he says, he is not unwilling the world should know, that having
from his younger years (as his Genius led him) addicted himself mostly to the
study of the moral and practical part of Divinity; but especially having (for
fear of approaching too near to the Ark of Gods secret counsels) kept a loof
off from meddling (more then needs must) with those more nice and intricate
disputes concerning Gods eternal decrees, the cooperation of Gods free Grace,
and man's free will, etc. He contented himself for sundry years to follow on (as
most others did) by a kind of implicit credulity, in the Sublapsarian way, as
the then most trodden path; until having a just occasion, (A.D. 1628.) to make a
little farther inquiry after the truth in those questions, upon due search he
saw a necessity of receding from that way in some things: a more particular
account whereof is given in a narrative lately printed with his consent, which
if well considered, ought (he thinks) in reason and charity to excuse him
from the necessity of justifying every syllable or phrase that might slip from
his tongue or pen, in any thing by him spoken or written before that year, and
whilst he was very little (or rather nothing at all) versed in the study of
those Questions.

Now since I have proved undeniably, that the question was from the beginning
(betwixt my adversaries and me) whether any kind of sins (plainly meaning
whole sins, not the formal part of sin, which cannot possibly be the sin of
which it is but the formal part) have a positive being; And since it is said by
Dr. SANDERSON, that the positive acts above mentioned, [ murdering and
ravishing of men, women,] are (so in the concrete) horrid sins; nay in the
plainest terms to be imagined, that a sin of commission does consist of two
things, an act and an obliquity; and since it is said by Mr Hickman, that it
belongs to the universality of the first cause to produce (not only every
positive, but every real being, and (not only so, but also) the positive
modifications of beings, (p. 95. It is apparent that Doctor SANDERSON is as
much for my cause, and as much aagainst Mr. Hickmans, as either my heart can
wish, or my cause require. For though he conceives that the act may be
considered, without considering the object about which it is conversant, (in
which case it cannot possibly be considered as a sin,) yet he declares that the
Act of sin cannot possibly exist without the obliquity, any more then the
obliquity without the Act. And farther yet, he does affirm (toward the end of
his sixth paragraph) both that the vitiated Act is the very sin; and that the
sin which is the vitiated act, is not only a real, but a positive entity. I
have published this happy concurrence with me, not only in his sense, but
(according to his desire) in his own manner of expression. A vindication of Bp.
HALL, Bp. MORTON, and Bp. BROWNRIG from Mr. H.'s slanderous suggestion


. 69. I now go on to discover his wilful Calumny, not so much against me, as
against Bp. HALL, Bp. MORTON, and Bp. BROWNRIG; whom though he knew to be
Bishops of the Church of England, yet he reckons them them with the men of the
Kirk, or Consistory, or their Adherents here in England, (whom I had charged
with swearing the Scottish Covenant, and making God the Author of sin) who had
done dishonours unto the Protestant name. p. 31, 32.] For if the Reader will
consult my Au^ocatacrisis, chap. 2. p. 61, 62. he will see I only spoke
against the Papists and Presbyterians, (in words at length, and by name,) and
that upon no lesser motive or provocation, then their making God the Author of
sin. So that now Mr. Hickman must either prove, that those excellent Prelates
were Presbyterians, or Papists, or such at least of their adherents, as have
been known to make God the Author of sin; Or if he cannot prove this, (as I
know he cannot) he must make some amends for so foul a slander.

. 70. The request he puts up to the Episcopal Divines, who close with such as
he is, in the present contest, The perfect ^mi^y and communion of all Episcopal
Divines, for all their difference in judgment as to some controverted
Doctrines.
(p. 31.) renders him yet more criminal in two respects. First because there
are none of the Episcopal Divines, who ever closed with the Hickmanians, in
saying that sin, if it is positive, is either God's creature, or God himself;
or that our English Presbyterians have any power to make Priests. (For this,
and that, (he must confess) is the present subject of our contest) Next because
he calls their Brethren, Arminian Ardelio's, by whom they must expect to be
last devoured. By which he would intimate to his Readers, (if I am able to
understand him) That we design the Doctrines they call Arminian as the
condition of our Brethrens Communion with us: which as it has ever been far
from us, (we most joyfully communicating with all the Fathers and sons of the
Church of England, how much soever in some points they may differ from us) so
of all men living Mr. Hickman's party should least accuse us, whilst Quis
tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?
themselves are as guilty, as we are Innocent in this respect. For they are
known to be the men, who fasten the character of See the Rd. D. GAVDEN his
Hi^ra Dacrua, chapter 29. p. 384.
sanctified to their opinions, and have made them the test by which they admit,
(or reject) their Betters, to any places of trust in the English Church.
Witness all the partialities and inquisitions of the Triers. Whereas the men
whom they call Arminians have never required any more then the subscription of
the Articles, which are called by Mr. Rogers, our English Creed. And which, as
they have not, in particular, defined all that is debated on either side, so
they do not (like the late Triers) ^i^t and winnow such persons as come before
them; But together with truth, do provide for unity and peace too. In a word.
Our Prelates and Prelatists, how much soever Anti Calvinian, do not cast out of
their communion, any Calvinist that desires it, upon the account of his being a
Calvinist. But the Calvinists in Holland are very well known to have made a
schism; plainly dividing from the Remonstrants, and setting up schismatical
Congregations. Now to communicate with such is a different thing, from our
receiving to our communion such as differ in those points. Concerning that
Schism, Master HALES his LETTERS have told us somewhat; And his Treatise of
that sin has told us more. And more then that I could give account of, if this
were a season for such prolixity.

Mr. Hickmans confession of his ignorance and incapacity to understand the
points in controversy.
71. He next proceeds to tell the world (without any color of Coherence, or
the least Formula Introducendi) That he has spent more Time in reading Authors
pro and con about these points, then ever he intended to d^, ^. 32. And reason
good. For he confesses his gross Ignorance and Insufficiency, after all the
reading of which he tells us. It Is strange he should meddle in the Doctrine of
Gods Decrees, and the manner of the Spirits working Grace in the hearts of the
Elect, since in the midst of all his meddling, he professes them to be matters
so very mysterious, and his understanding to be so dark, that he can scarce
hope ever in the world to be freed from all scruples about them, p. 33. It
seems he is not over-confident, that the Decrees of Election and Reprobation
are Absolute; or that Grace in the Elect is irresistibly wrought; for all his
railing at the Arminians, and his partial adhering to the Calvinians. Let him
talk what he will of his holding this, or that Tenet; and let him render what
reasons he think^ most specious; we will believe his own confession, that he is
Skeptical and Scrupulous, and finds his understanding too dark to reach them.

. 72. His confessed insufficiency to maintain the chief Articles of the Creed.
Again he confesses his inward conviction of his own insufficiency to do the
work of a Divine, whilst he says of those Articles of the Christian faith [The
Trinity of the persons, and the hypostatical union of the two Natures,] that he
never thought himself able to vindicate those Mysteries from all the subtle
Arguments and Niceties of unbelieving Sophisters. ibid.] 'Twould be a sad time
for Christianity, if it had no better champions and propugnators then
UNBELIEVERS are able to baffle, and put to silence, and so to shame. Yet this
is the man, who by a schismatic ordination takes upon him to be a Preacher,
nay a Pastor of Christ's flock, (even denying our very Bishops to be of an
order higher then he, much less such Priests as the Bishops have lawfully
ordained,) who yet confesses he is not able to defend the Flock from Wolves,
or Foxes, no not the Articles of our Creed from the attempts of unbelievers.

. 73. Nor may we think his two confessions are the effects of modesty or
meekness. Yet his conceitedness of his parts is not the less.
For (to secure himself from that suspicion) He first premiseth his opinion of
the former points, That the greatest Scholars will never be able fully to
satisfy their own, or other men's reasons about them, p. 52.] Hence it appears
that Mr. Hickman may verily think himself one of the greatest Scholars in the
world, (I do not say that he does) notwithstanding the confession which he has
made of his Disability. Nay it is probable that he does too; because he inferrs
(with a monstrous arrogance) the greatest Scholars are not able, from the
sensible Non-ability which he discovers in himself. As if Mr. Hickman's
understanding were the measure of what may be understood, by the learnedest of
mortals on this side heaven. If he is not past cure, and will but seek for a
Remedy, let him read the Full Accordance betwixt Dr. Sanderson and Dr.
Hammond, wherein he will find how those Doctors have fully satisfied
themselves; And then he may learn from common fame, that they have fully
satisfied others also.

His way to make a rope of sand, whereby to pull in the Puritanes.
. 74. There is nothing worth notice in his next two Stories, besides his form
of bringing them in. For having told us that he hopes by the free Grace of God
to be acqui^ted at the last day, he immediately adds (to introduce a new
Section) That to this end he will relate two Historical passages. p. 34. And
then to lengthen his Rope of Sand, he adds a saying of Doctor Sanderson
concerning See (concerning Antichrist) Bishop Montague's Appeal chapter 5. p. 140.
and Examen. Hist. p. 253, 254.
Antichrist, Another of King James against the Arminiars in the Low Countries,
(for they were all Presbyterians, and displeasing unto the King;) Another of
Viscount Falkland against some Bishops (without a Name) and my Lord of
Strafford; A fourth of Bishop Carleton against the Puritanes, as Disquieters of
the Church about their conceived Discipline. These are called by Master Hickman
The honest Puritanes, (p. 41.) as if he consented to the Distinction which had
been made by King James, betwixt the Puritan Knaves, and the Knaves Puritanes.
If there were any such Idle-sots as were seen to stagger in the streets, they
were as loathsome in my opinion, though not so dangerous to the public, as
that first sort of Puritanes of which I spoke. And yet that Puritan is a sot
too, who being dry in respect of wine, is Ebrius sacrilegio qui resipuit a
vino* apud Authorem nescio quem.
Drunk with sacrilege. Which, as it minds me to referr him to what I have said
on this subject to Mr. Baxter, so it affords me a fit Transition to the
following subject of his Digression. For

. 75. So far is this Rhapsodist from thinking it needful to repent of his
crying sin, His sinful way of defending Robbery by adding a manifold
Aggra^vation.
or else from thinking that Restitution is any necessary part of a true
Repentance; that he adds Railing to his Robbery, and slander to his Railing,
and Treason too unto his slander. Which I shall show in that Order, in which I
find them committed, and brought to light too.

First, whereas I had complained, His Slanderous insinuation against the two
Houses of Parliament, to save the credit of the Visitors in sinning against
their own Commission.
and (Dr. Reynolds is my witness I did it justly, in so much that himself has
joined with me in the complaint,) that I suffered the loss of my best
possession, (not for any the least crime of which I had any way been guilty,
but) for being secretly suggested to be the Author of some Books, which (to
this very day) I could never hear named; and though I earnestly desired to hear
my self accused, that I might know for what I suffered, and if not my Accuser
at least my Accusation, and be heard speak for my self, yet Dr. Reynolds
professed to me in private he could not obtain that justice for me; Mr Hickman
expresses this just complaint (which I am able to prove just, to any competent
Judges who will but hear me,) by my throwing I know not what fiery darts not
only at him, but at the far greater part of heads and Fellows of Colleges in
Oxon; at the Visitors, and at the two Houses of Parliament (p. 44.) Now that
his Readers may clearly see how great a violence he has offered to truth, and
Candor, and how he has blurred the two houses with a most scurrilous
suggestion, I shall furnish them very briefly with a perfect Narrative of the
Case. I was permitted to appear no more then once before the Visitors, when
they only entertained me with this one question, [Whether I could submit to
their Visitation, or acknowledge they were my rightful Visitors? My Answer was
not Categorical, either one way^ or other. But as I really wanted, so I
modestly besought them to give me time, wherein to consider that weighty
question; that so my answer might be rational, which it could not be, if it
were rash. For being then newly returned out of France, I had not studied the
matter of right. And as I would not be perjured for fear of Ruin, so would I
not rashly incur my ruin by such a fear of being perjured, as was not very
well grounded. They did not deny what I desired, and that I thought was to
yield it to me. But they met a little after, to pass a sentence of
condemnation (by a most absolute decree) upon me and others; and proclaiming my
banishment, before I was summoned to give my answer, (for which I concluded
they gave me time) they used the violence of the Soldiers, to put their decree
into execution. Now is it likely that the two Houses would Authorize them to
destroy me without a cause? not only unconvicted, but unaccused, and unheard?
(for that they suspected me the Author of I know-not-what-books which were
never named, I was privately informed by Dr. Reynolds, who was not able to tell
me what Books they meant.) Could the two Houses Authorize them to break the Law
of the Land in Magna Charta, and to act in contradiction to the Petition of
Right? I rather think that the Visitors did sin against the very r^le, to which
the two Houses had tied them up in their commission. A Nicodemus was able to
ask, [ does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does?
John 7.51.] And as Festus said unto King Agrippa, It is not the manner of the
Romans to deliver any man to die, Acts 25.16.
before that he which is accused have the Accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him; so with
greater force of reason (since the Romans then were Heathens, which we are
not,) I may say to Mr. Hickman from Magna Charta, and the Petition of right; It
is not the manner of the English, See the New Discoverer discovered chapter 6. p.
131.132.
in the two Houses of Parliament, to dispossess any man, of whatsoever estate
or condition, of his land, or Tenement, his freehold, or liberties or free
Customs, without his being brought to answer by due process of Law, and by
the Lawful judgment of his P^eres.] And this may serve as well for theirs, as
for mine own Vindication.

Next for the far greater part of Heads and Fellows of Colleges in Oxon, His
disparagement of the Visitors in his endeavors to assert them.
against whom he accuses me to have thrown some darts, (ibid.) He knows I
never made mention of them. And if he means that my case was also the case of
all others who suffered with me, he wrongs the Visitors extremely, by
concluding them worse then indeed they were. For they did not cast out the
greatest part of Heads, and Fellows out of their rights, until they had given
their final answer. I hardly know any (besides my self) who were deprived of
their places for being so circumspect only and modest, as to desire a little
respit before they answered, that so their answer might be unpassionate, and
after a due deliberation. I know the sufferings of all the rest were illegally
inflicted, as well as mine, (as may appear by the case of the University, which
was sent in a letter to Mr. SELDOM, and of which I may give account toward the
end of this subject*) but what I speak against the Visitors was in reference to
the case, of which I had a peculiar knowledge.

Thirdly he plays upon himself by telling some stories of d^straction, and
Hypocondriacal conceits, The work he makes with Hypochondriacal conceits.
as if he were willing that his Readers should suspect me infected with his
Disease; And talk as odly of me, as they do commonly of him. But he is
strangely unfortunate in this adventure. For he discovers himself afresh to be
a second hand-Historian, in citing an Author he never read. He would else have
known (had he consulted Laurentius, as well as named him,) that there are
Mel^ncholiae differentias triplici discrimine assignant Authors: prima proprio
cerebri vitio obtingit; secunda per consensum totius corporis cujus universa
temperies totusque humor est melancholicus; ultima ex hypochondriis ^uscitatur.
i. e a visceribus in ipsis contentis, potissin^um ab E^ate, Liene and
Mesen^erio. etc. Vide Laurent. de Melancholia Differentiis cap. 4.
three sorts of melancholy, where of the first does happen by the mere
distemper of the Brain; The 2. by a consent of the whole body; the third is
raised up from the Hypochondres, that is, from the entrals contained in them
especially from the liver, the spleen, and the Mesen^erie. The first is simply
called Melancholy; the last with an addition of the Epithet Hypochondriacal.
The first exagitates the patient without intermission, the last affords him
some times of truce. The three instances produced do all belong unto the first,
not at all unto the last, to which alone Mr. Hickman had the unskilfulness to
apply them, p. 46. And Laurentius (besides) does add no less then fourteen, of
which there is not so much as one referred to Flatus Hypochondriacus, which by
the Greeks is called (...); but are widely different in two respects, to wit,
in respect of the Original seat, and of the manner of the delirium which is
produced. So that poor Mr. H. at once has laid himself bare, and put a rod
into my hand for his due correction. Did he think that Hypochondria were things
residing in the brain? or was he as sick as the Italian Footboy, and fancied
the brain was in the bowels? His own conceit was more likely to be
Hypochondriacal then mine, when he reproached me with a distemper, from the
very suspicion of which I was ever free; and with which if my Body had ever
been affected in any measure, (as I bless God for it, it never was,) Mr.
Hickman should not have been so barbarous, as to have sported his Readers with
my disease, which had been honest and helpless too, had it ever invaded my
Hypochondres, as much as Fame has affirmed it to have had dominion over his
own. I never was so inhumane, as to upbraid my greatest enemy with any such
bodily indisposition; and have rather afforded my utmost help. But since Mr.
Hickman (unprovoked) could not abstain from objecting a sickness to me, and
such a sickness as I have ever (by the blessing of God) been exempted from; it
is his own fault only (though my misfortune) that I am forced to expose him in
this point also. And for the future I do beseech him, not to meddle in matters
of which he has not any knowledge; nor to have so little mercy upon himself,
as to scourge his guilty self upon an innocent man's back; but rather to conceal
his great infirmities, or only reveal them to his Physician, and apply himself
to the means of cure. I might (in favor and mercy to him) have prompted his
Readers to believe, that it was but his spleenative Conceit, which made him say
in his Epistle (wherewith he dedicates his collection) that the Doctrines
printed before my birth, were the mere chimaera's of my brain. For which
prodigious Adventure he is not capable of excuse, unless his flatulent
Hypocondres made him a kind of Pythagorean, so as to fancy a transmigration of
Calvin's soul into my body. I am sure Pythagoras is reported to have thought
himself to be Aethalides, the son of Mercury; and that Aethalides being dead,
he became Euphorbus; and that Euphorbus being departed, he passed also into
Hermotimus; and that Hermotimus dying, he lived in Pyrrhus the Fisherman; And
after Pyrrhus his decease, he again survived in Pythagoras. Sure 'twere better
for Mr. Hickman to think that my soul was once in Calvin, or Zuinglius, or Dr.
Twisse then to call their writings the mere chimaera's of my brain, or wilfully
to deny what has been read by thousands, and may be seen in those Writers by
all Mankind who can but read them. The former (I say) were so much better then
the later, by how much better it is, to be sick, then sinful. And so 'twere
charity to imagine (if that were possible to be done) that this was one of Mr.
Hickman's Hypochondriacal conceits.

. 76. It may be taken for one at least, He adds railing to his robbery, and
tre^sonably misplaceth the Supreme power of the nation.
that he should charge me with Impudence against the Supreme Authority of the
Nation. p. 45. For if he deals syncerely, as well as simply, he hence inferr's
the Oxford Visitors (Mr. Cheynel, and Mr. Wilkinson, and such like things,) to
have had the Supremacy, in his opinion. They alone being the men, by whom I
complaind I had been injured, in their Transgressing the Prescriptions of those
that sent them. And loosers (by a Proverb) have still had liberty to complain.
I did but modestly hope, Mr. Hickman would pay me my Arrears, when again and
again he tells his Readers I am impudent, p. 45. and 47. so impudent I am as to
own my Right; though not so simple, as to expect it. And it is strange that Mr.
Hickman should thus revile me, for only presuming to hope well of him, or for
refusing to dissemble what was so visibly my due. So when the owner in the
Parable sent for fruits of his Vineyard, the Husbandmen abused his several
Messengers, M^r. 12.23.
as well as sent them away empty. I will not say of Mr. Hickman that he is
impudent, because his manners are none of mine, but I must needs admire the
strange nature of his modesty, when he denied a matter of Look back on c. 1. S.
2.
Fact, however attested by all men's eyes.

Sect. 77. If he means the two Houses by the Supreme Authority of the Nation,
The two Houses vindicated from his gross insinuation, and the Supreme Power
asserted by 19. Arguments.
(as he seems to do* page 47.) he contradicts the fundamental Laws of the Land,
the Canons of the Church, the Oaths of Allegeanc^ and Supremacy, and
implicitly censures all the Members of the House of Commons (by whom the
Visitors were sent, in the year 1648.) as guilty of willful perjury, when they
See M. Prin his true and perfect Narra^ive. p. 46.
took those oaths before they sat, or could sit, as members in the House of
Commons. 1. The members of Parliament did even sw^ar, in taking the Oath of
Supremacy, [That the Kings Highn^ss is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other his Dominions, and Countries, as well in all Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal.] 2. The King was ever
acknowledged in the Prayers of the Clergy before their Se^mons, to be the
Supreme Head and Governor, in all Causes, and over all Persons,
Ecclesiastical, and Civil. Nor may we think that the Clergy were either
taught o^ commanded to lie to God in their Public prayers. Nay, 3. he was
utt^rly testified, and in conscience declared, as well by the members of
Parliament, as by other subjects upon oath, to be not only the Supreme, (which
shows that none can be above him) but Solus Supremus Moderator, (as Dr.
Sanderson observes) the Sole and Only Supreme Head and Governor* which shows
that none can be so besides him, or that none can be equal to him. 4. In the
general judgment of knowing men, and of Dr. Supremam hanc Potestatem* quam
Majestatem, vel (...) dicim^s, etc. D^ obl^gat. cons^ient. Praelect. 7. ^.
258.260,
Sanderson in particular, The Kings Supremacy is imported by the style of Dread
Sovereign, and Sovereign Lord, and that of Majesty; expressions used by the two
Houses of the late long Parliament, in their h^mble Petitions and addresses
unto the King; (nor need I here tell my Reader, what an humble Petition is set
to signify) and as well in the most solemn establishment of Laws, as in
actions and forms of Jurisdiction. 5. Magna Charta was first granted (in effect
by King John, and confirmed (with that Title) by Henry the third, 9, Hen 3. See
D^. L^gbain's Review of ^he Covenant. p. 88* etc.
of his mere free will; and so the liberties of the subject cannot with reason
be presumed to lessen the King of his Supremacy. 6. Other Statutes which have
the force of Acts of Parliament are known to be directed as private Writs, with
a Test Meipso; And the common style of most others is found to run in this
strain, [ The King with the advice of the Lords at the humble Petition of the
Commons, wills this, or that*] so the form of passing Bills is still observed
to be this, L^ Ro^ le veult, The King will have it. And s^it faict comme il est
desire, Let it be done as it is desired; plainly speaking by way of Grant, to
something sought or petitioned for. (From whence by some it has been gathered,
that the R^ga^ion of Laws does rightly belong to the two Houses; but the
Legislation unto the King; That their Act is Prepar^tive, his only Iussive.)
7. That Supremacy of Power which the Law has invested the King withal, is not
only over all particular persons, but also 1. Eliz. c* 1.
over all states; which all the subjects of this Realm, and the Members of
Parliament in particular, are bound by oa^h both to acknowledge, and to
maintain. And which they grant to be his Due, when they desire him Exact. col.
p. 5. and p. 738.
to protect them in their privileges, and call him always in their Acts Their
only Sovereign Lord, or their Royal Sovereign. 8. The Kings Prerogative (as
well as Magna Charta) is proved (by Judge Lex Terrae. p. 5 (bound up with his
work^.
Ienkins) to be a principal part of the common Law; and Royal Government a Law
fundamental. Nay, 9. It is proved, (by the same most learned and pious Judge)
Ibid. p. 8.7. Ed. ^. S^at. ^t large, f. 42,
That the Supreme power even in time of Parliament, was declared by both Houses
to belong unto the King. 10. The Kings Supremacy has been proved by so many
Arguments out of Bracton, (as may be seen in Dudley Diggs, The Reasons of the
University of Oxford, Judge Ienkins, and the like,) that I shall only
translate some few short passages into English. Bracton. l. 4* c. 24. Sect. 1.
The King (says he) has power and Jurisdiction over all who are within his
Kingdom, and none but He. Ibid. Sect. 5.
Every one is under the King, and he under God only. He has no Peer (or
equal) with his Kingdom, much less is inferior unto his subjects. Ib. l. 3.
c. 7. l. 5. c. 3. sect. 3* de Defal^is.
God alone is his superior, and to God alone is he accomptable. In a word, Ib.
l. 2. c. 24. sect. 1.
The things that concern Jurisdiction and Peace, or are annexed to peace and
Justice, do belong to none but to the Crown, and the Kingly Dignity; nor can
they be separated from the Crown, for as much as the Crown consists in them.
11. The Kings supremacy is evinced from the Nature of all his subjects Tenures,
See M. Dudley Diggs of the unl^wfulness of taking up Arms etc* p. 80, 81.
they holding their Lands of him in Fee. Which though it gives a perpe^ual
Estate, yet is it not absolute but conditional; as depending on the
acknowledgement of superiority, and as being forfeitable upon the
nonperformance of some duties, on which supposition it still returns unto the
King. For the breach of Fidelity is loss of Fee. In short, it is agreed among
the most learned in the Law, ^, That the King alone has such a property in all
his Lands, as Lawyers are wont to call Ala^dium, because he does hold in his
own full Right, without any service, or payment of Rent, because from God
only. 2. That subjects of all Degrees do hold their Lands ut Feuda, in the
nature of Fee, which implies Fealty to a Superior. 12. The Oath of Allegiance
has the force of another Oath of Supremacy. For Legiancy is defined to be an
Ibid. p. 82.
obligation upon all subjects to take part with their Liege Lord against all
men living, to aid and assist him with their bodies and minds, with their
advise and power, not to lift up their arms against him, nor to support in any
way those that oppose him. Now as no Du^renus in Comment d^ Cons^ed. Feudorum
c. 4. n. 3. apud eundem.
Liege Lord can acknowledge any Superior, and though bound to some duties, is
not bound under pain of Forfeiture; so subjects on the other side are Homines
Ligii, all Liege-men, owing him Faith and Allegiance as their Superior; Which
Faith if they violate* He is enabled by the Law (as being the Fountain of
Jurisdiction, says Master Diggs,) to seiz upon their Goods and Lands, and to
destroy their persons too. Whereas if He fail in the discharge of his duty, he
is not subject to any Forfeiture by any Law of the Land I could ever hear of;
and Mr. Diggs has challenged all the world to name any. Doctor Sanderson also
affirms, That if a King who is Supreme should do the things that are proposed
1 Samuel 8. and Rule as a Tyrant, by no other Law then his own hearts lust, Etsi
non esset (...), nec peccato careret apud Deum; esset tamen (...), nec deberet
a populo coerceri; dicique propterea mereretur, abusus quidem ille potestate
su^, sed tamen sua. De Leg. Hum. Cause. effic. Prael. 7. p. 260.
he would yet be unaccountable on this side Heaven, however liable to the wrath
of the Sovereign Judge of all the World. For however such a Tyrant may abuse
his power, yet the power is His which he abuses; and who shall say unto the
King, what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. (a Text produced by the late King, of most
blessed Memory, against his own most unnatural and Blood Triers.) 13. There is
an ancient Monument (says Mr. Diggs, p. 83.) which shows the manner of holding
a Parliament before the conquest. [The King is the head, the beginning, and the
end of the Parliament, and so he has not any equal in his Degree.] This I cite
to anticipate Mr. Hi^kman's possible objection. 14. The King by Law has just
power, 33. H. 8. c. 21.
to pass acts of Parliament by his great Seal; to grant out Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer for the holding of Assisses; 28. Ed. 1. c. 8,
to adjourn the Term to whatsoever place he pleases; 27 H. 8. c. 24.
To make Justices of Peace, which wholly depends on his will and pleasure; 27.
H. 8. c. 24. Confessed also Ex. Col. p. 270.715.90^
To pardon Delinquents and Malefactors, (a privilege, by law, estated solely
in the King,) To choose his Officers, to protect all persons, to coin money, to
make leagues with foreign Princes, to dispose the Militia, to call and dissolve
Parliaments, And to be (in one word) Le dernier Resort de la Justice. 15. In
the thirty seventh Article of the Church of England, The King (or Queen) is
declared to have the chief Power in this Realm of England, etc. to whom the
chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical
or Civil, in all Causes, does appertain And this called the Prerogative which
has always been given to all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself,
that they shall rule all Estates, and all Degrees -- Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil sword, the stubborn and evil Doers. 16.
And accordingly in the Canons by law established in the Church, A Supreme Power
is declared to be given by God in Scripture to the sacred order of Kings, which
is there also declared to be of Divine Right. And that for any person or
persons to set up, maintain, or avow, in any their said Realms respectively,
under any pretense whatsoever, any Independent co-active power, either Papal,
or popular, (whether directly, or indirectly) is to undermine their great Royal
office, and cunningly to overthrow that most sacred ordinance, which God
himself has established; and so is treasonable against God, as well as against
the King. (This I earnestly recommend to Mr. Hickman his consideration, and
that which follows in the Canon, viz.) That for subjects to bear Arms against
their Kings, offensive, or defensive, upon any pretense whatsoever, is at the
least to resist the powers, which are ordained of God: And though they do not
invade* but only resist; 17. Saint Paul tells them plainly, They shall receive
to themselves damnation. The most excellent Recognition which was made by both
Houses in the first year of King James, is so worthy to be written in Letters
of Gold, and so needful to be rivetted in the hearts and memories of the
people, who desire to have a conscience void of offense toward God, and men,
that I think I shall deserve many an honest man's thanks, (who has either
never known, or has forgot what once he knew) by inserting some part upon this
occasion.

The King is our only rightful and lawful Liege Lord and Sovereign, 1. Jac.
c. 1. 9. Ed. 4. fol. 8.
we do upon the knees of our heart adnize constant Faith, Loyalty, and
Obedience to the King and his Royal Progeny, in this high Court of Parliament;
where all the body of the Realm is either in Person, or by representation: we
do acknowledge that the true and sincere Religion of the Church is continued
and established by the King. And do recognize, as we are bound by the law of
God and man, the Realm of England, and the Imperial Crown thereof does belong
to him by inherent birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession, and submit
our selves and our posterities for ever, until the last drop of blood be
spent, to his rule, and beseech the King to accept the same as the first fruits
of our Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his posterity for ever; and for
that this Act is not complete nor perfect without his Majesty's assent, the
same is humbly desired.

This proves (says Judge Ienkins) 1. See his works, p. 23, 24.
That the Houses are not above the King; 2. That Kings have not their titles to
the Crown by the two Houses, but 3. by inherent birthright, and 4. That there
can be no Statute without his express assent; and so 5. It destroys the
Chimaera of the Kings virtuall being in the Houses.

18. The Kings Proclamations heretofore to several purposes were of no less
force then Acts of Parliament. 31. H. 8. c 8. and 34. H. 8. c* 23.
And the ground of it was, that the Sea the Preface to that Act. 31. H. 8.
supremitie of the Regal power is given by God. And however that Act was indeed
repealed by the meek concession of King Edward the sixth, yet the Reason of the
Repeal is recorded to have been this; 1. Ed, 6. c. 12.
A willingness in the King to gratify his people, upon trust that they would
not abuse the same, but* rather be encouraged with more faithfulness and
diligence to serve his Highness. So when Charles the First passed a Bill for
the continuance of the long Parliament indefinitely, it was upon their promise,
Exact. Coll. p. 203.
that the gracious favor of his Majesty expressed in that Bill should not
encourage them to do any thing, which otherwise had not been sit to be done.
And so good is the Rule in the Civil Law, Cessante causa, cessat Lex, That the
Lords and Commons even of that very Parliament did Ib. p. 876.
d^clare it to hold good in Acts of Parliament.

19. When 'twas declared by 1. Ed* 5. ^. 2.
all the Judges and Sergeants of Law, [that it cannot be said the King does
wrong] it was by a Periphrasis, A Declaration of his Sup^emacy. For the meaning
of it must be, (say the greatest Lawyers) That what the King does, in point of
Jurisdiction, he does by his Judges who are sworn to deal legally between the
King and his people. So as the Judges may be questioned for violation of Law,
but the King is unaccountable, and on his person or power no Reflection is to
be made.

* 78. Thus I have given such an account of the proper subject of Supremacy,
And by very many more, for which the Reader is entreated to use the works of
Judge Ienkins.
as my Notes of Observation suggest unto me at this time. I gathered my Notes
more especially (for my private use and information, that I might know what
Party I ought to own, in these times of Trial and Temptation,) partly out of
the Papers which passed betwixt the King, and both Houses of Parliament; partly
from the writings of Mr. Prin, Mr. Diggs, Judge Ienkins, and Dr. Langbane;
partly out of the Book of Statutes, though I have not time to consult them
much. Many more Arguments I could urge out of the works of Judge Ienkins, but
that I find them too many to be transcribed in this Appendix; and withal I
consider, that book is cheap, and little, and (I hope) easily to be had which
makes me choose to referr my Readers to his whole Lex Terrae, from page 8. to
page 63. I have been so convinced by all put together which has been said, as
I cannot but conclude with the most Learned and moderate Doctor Sanderson, Apud
nos Anglos saltem quid potest aut certius constare, aut liquidius, (nisi siqui
in sole meridiano caecutire malint, quam uti oculis,) quam ad unam serenissimam
Majestatem Regiam Supremam trium istorum Regnorum Potestatem pertinere? ubi
supr^, page 260.
That at least, amongst us here in England, there can be nothing more certain
or conspicuous, (unless we will not use our eyes, but rather choose to be blind
at noon, by stoutly winking against the Sun,) then that the power of these
Three Kingdoms does only belong to his Serene and Supreme Royal Majesty. This
is said by that great and judicious Casuist, in his stating the obligation and
efficient cause of humane Laws. After which, if Mr. Hickman shall yet contend,
that the Oxford Visitors were commissioned by the Supreme Authority of the
Nation, though by the two Houses only, (not only without, but against the
pleasure of the King) I will only referr him to certain Notes on the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, in a late-Printed Book which is thus ^ntitled. [The
Resurrection of Loyalty and Obedience, out of the Grave of Rebellion]

. 80. How Mr. H. became one of my uncommissioned Receivers.
But I printed (says Mr. Hickman) as if I had right to two Fellowships; and
asks, how else he is but one of my receivers? p 46.] To which I answer, 1. That
for any thing I know, Mr. Hickman succeeded him that succeeded me. And my words
of him were these, that for ought I know, he may be in possession of mine own
fellowship, etc. Or 2. If he did not succeed my successor, but that his Robbery
is immediate, not once removed; I will give him an Answer to chew upon out of
the Digests. Digest. 47.2.21* Sect. 4. for which s^e D^. Z^uch his Cases and
Questions* p. 92.
[When a number of men do jo^^ their strength to steal a piece of Timber, (or
any thing else which is another,) which none of them singly could have carried
away; Vlpian says, that each of them severally, as well as all of them
jointly, is liable to an action for the double value of the thing.] And so when
the right of a Society is invaded by a Society, (which was our case in Magd.
College, when almost all were at once bereaved by men of violence,) all may
require their right of all, and every man from every man. For every man by
partnership is an Accessory to all that have done the wrong, as well as
principal in part, and indefinitely; and so responsible to all who receive the
wrong, or do require a reparation. I could prove to Mr. Hickman, that he is
guilty of the Visitor's sin, by accepting the spoils of their injustice. But I
am ready to pardon, though not to dissemble my being injured.

. 81. I had but said by such a figure as is allowable in Scripture, In what
sense he may be called my Receiver and Vsufructuarie.
[ It seems the Visitors made him one of my Receivers and Vsu-fructuaries] when
taking my words by the wrong handle, he pretends that His is the usus-fructus.
p. 46.] But 1. he knows I there added, That my legitimate Successor they could
not make him, which is a proof that what I spoke, was of what they did, not
ought to do; And a Facto ad Ius no good Argument is to be drawn. The Visitors
made him my Receiver, as they made their Wisd. 2.
strength the law of justice; Or as Lambert made Cromwell the Kings Receiver.
It Is easy for one man to be m^de an other man's Receiver, and yet (by a
Proverb) to be as bad as the thief that made him. The sons of violence and
rapine made one another what they pleased, as opportunity and power was in
their hands. So it was said by Doctor Heylin, that Mr. Hickman had made a Book;
But he presently added, [As unhappy Boys do make Knives, when in very deed
they do but steal them.] 2. Had he been made my Receiver by my consent, he must
have given me an Account, as the person to whom his Receipts were due. 3. He
confesses An usufructuary does want the Title, and cannot pretend he has Ius
ad Rem. So that now in the same sense, in which he pretends to the
Usus-fructus, he does implicitly confess I am proprietary in chief; and I may
very well summon so saw^y an officer to a Reckoning. When Doctor Heylin said of
Mr, Cheynel, that he was the Vsufructuary of the rich Parsonage of Petworth,
the English of it was usurper, Exam. Hist. p. 130.
and nothing else. For it is a Rule (as I remember) in the Civil Law, Potest
proprietas esse Maevii, Vsus-fructus Titii, and tamen usus Sempronii. And even
where the usus-fructus is duly settled (as most unduely in Mr. Hickman,) it is
but jus in re, by his confession. And usus-fructus is defined by Ius Alienis
Rebus utendi fruendi, salva rerum substantia. So the Propriety is mine who have
jus ad rem. The Visitors could not, by doing wrong, either take away my Right,
or conferr upon another what they could never take from me. To be out of
possession is so far from being a prejudice to my Right, That God's Anointed
himself has been as long out of his; How the Assembly Presbyterians became
Abettors of sacrilege, and prevaricators with the Bible.
whose Right has yet been always greater (at least by one Title) then any
subject's.

. 82. But Mr. Hickman is well satisfied that he wants nothing at all, but a
Right and Title to his possession. page 46. And the taking that for a small
defect, may very probably be the reason why the Assembly Annotators on the
English Bible did seem to think it no sin, to be God's and the Churches
Vusufructuaries, in such a figurative sense as in which Mr. Hickman may be
called mine. For it is observed by Dr. Gauden (and many others) that in See his
Hiera Dacrua chapter 21. l. 3. p. 333. 334. and weigh the passage with the
professions of these men.
every place through the Bible, where the word and Spirit of God signally
commands them to brand the sin of sacrilege with a black mark, as one of the
Devils hindmost Herd, the Presbyterian Expositors do so slily and slightly pass
it over, as if they had neither seen nor smelt that foul beast; as if there
were no gall in their pens, no Reproof in their mouths, no courage in their
Hearts against this sin; they scarce ever touch it, never state it, make no
perstrictive or invective stroke against it; which could not be (says the
Observator) their Ignorance, or inadvertency, but the cowardice, cunning, and
Parasitism of the Times; in which they were content, for some Presbyterian
ends, to connive at sacrilege in those good Lords and Masters, whose charity
they hoped (yea Doctor Gauden professes he heard of them profess they
expected) would turn all that stream, which Bishops, Deans, and Chapters
enjoyed, to drive the Presbyterian Mills, to keep up the honor of Ruling and
teaching Elders. -- These soft fingered Censors (says the Reverend Doctor a
little after) very gently touch that rough Satyr of sacrilege, where it is
expressly put in the balance with Idolatry, and overweighs it, as more enormous.
Thus far that Learned and moderate man, whom perhaps the Annotators may charge
with impudence (as Mr. Hickman does me) and that against the two Houses too, on
whom they probably will bestow the Supreme Authority of the Nation; It being a
Grace which Mr. Hickman was pleased to grant them. M. Hickman's confounding
possession and right, and making no scruple of many Robberies at once.


. 83. Whereas he says that my being married does evacuate and nullify my
Title to all Academical Enjoyments, (page 46, 47.) first I must tell him that I
was single, when I was cast out of my Fellowship (which was my Freehold) and
some years after did so continue, even till after I was presented to the
Rectorie of Brington, my injoym^nt of which he seems to envy* (ibid.) And so I
hope he will acknowledge my Arrears are due to me till then; Nor can he with
any Truth, that I ever pretended to any more. 2. I am not sure my being married
can null my Title, until Doctor Oliver and the true Fellows shall so declare
it; and wise men have thought, that by their good leave I am Fellow still, till
by a lawful Election they put another into my place. For Thomas Goodwin (we
know) is a most scandalous usurper, so as the Rhapsodist himself can be hardly
worse. And so my modus habendi may still be optimus, as Mr. Hickma^'s is
pessimus in the very worst sense too. For I have an Academical enjoyment by
Right, Mr. Hickman only by usurpation* I am warranted by Vlpian to say I have
it, though many years together I have not held it. Nam and eum Habere dicimus
qui Rei Dominus est, aeque ac eum qui Rem Tenet. 3. And it was strange that Mr.
Hickman could think me incapable of my own (at Magdalen College) by my having
enjoyed a single Parsonage, whilst (at the very same time) he thought himself
capable of things which were none of his, even a Fellowship in the College, a
Vicarage of Bra^kly, and a Parsonage at Saint Towles too, and all by no other
title, then what the wickedness of the Times could bestow upon him. So Mr.
Tombs the Arch-Anabaptist could be qualified by the Times to be Mr. Baxter of
Infants Church Mem. p. 202, 203.
Parson of Rosse, and Vicar of Lempster, and Preacher of Bewdly, and Master of
the Hospital at Ledbury; All which he was somewhat fitter for, then Mr.
Hickman, if but capable of something, by being lawfully ordained. Whereas Mr.
Hickman having been only made a Minister, (not a Priest, or a Deacon, as Exam.
Hist. part. 1. p. 158, 159.
Doctor Heylin does well distinguish) and made a Minister no otherwise, then as
the Fria^'s Pork was made Pickerill, cannot be capable of the least, much less
of two or three Livings. And perhaps in time he may say as much, if he will
read Doctor Hammond upon the Ordinance of the two Houses for the ordination of
Ministers Pro Tempore, Printed at Oxford 1644. For which that Great Author was
never yet accused of being impudent, though what he writ was against the two
Houses.

. 84. Because he know's I never said, His willful bi^^erness sadly reflecting
upon the Visitors.
I was s^spected by the Visitors to be the Author of a Libel, (which words the
man was resolved to use) he tells his Reader that my words might look l^ke such
an Affirmation* p. 47.] whereas before he confessed my words were no other,
then that I was secretly suggested to be the Author of some books, which to
this very day I could never hear named. (p. 44.) were all things Libells which
were written for the cause of the King and of the Church, or were any way
displeasing to those men's Palates who came to V^sit? Or is it lawful to ruin
men upon bare suspicion? Was this for the credit of the Visitors, or them that
sent them? Be it so that I was suspected, (as any other man might be,) I was as
innocent as the morning, in which I was told by Dr. R^y^olds of such suspicion.
And that he told me as a secret, not according to the vote of his guilty
Brethren, who never charged me with ought, no not so much as a suspicion. Much
less did they dare to let me know my Accuser, for fear I should prove him a
false Accuser, and spoil the trade they then were driving. Much less yet would
they endure that I should have the least trial, (fair, or foul;) because they
were conscious of the nothing, that they were abl^ to say against me. Their
dealing with me, in that affair, puts me in mind of what I read in an English
book, See Mr. Howell's sober inspections on the long Parliament. p. 156.
[There was nothing so common in those Times, as a charge without a^ Accuser, a
sentence without a Judge, and a condemnation without a hearing.] But I was
condemned without a charge too; And it seems by no Judge that will own the
Judg^ment. For

. 85. Mr. Hickman is fain to say, that I was turned out of my Fellowship, not
by the Visitors, And as much on the Lords and Commons.
but by the Committee of Lords and Commons, for non-submission to the Authority
of Parliament, in visiting the University. p. 47.] To which I answer, 1. That
my Answer to the Visitors was judged rational and modest by Doctor Reynolds,
who therefore told me it was impossible I should be banished only for that;
but rather for being at least suspected to have written some Books; but what
books they were* or why I was suspected the Author of them, he either could
not, or would not tell me. 2. Mr. Hickman lays the whole fault on the Lords
and Commons, which I ascribe unto the Visitors, transgressing the Commission by
which they sat. For would the Lords and Commons undo an Orphan for being
modest, and conscientiously desirous to gain some time, to the end he might not
answer but upon due consideration? This would justify Philanglus in the book
above mentioned, when he said Vbisupra.
That many were outed their Free-holds, Liberty, and Livelyhoods, before any
examination, much less conviction; and that the order of a Committee was
commonly made to controlle the fundamental Laws of the Land. I rather think
that the Visitors did return a false answer, and so abused the Lords and
Commons, then that persons of so much honor would be the authors of such a
fact, as Doctor Reynolds (although a Visitor) so much abhorred, and never would
give his consent unto. But Mr. Hickman does acknowledge that the two Houses may
do amiss; for he dares not undertake in all things to acquit them. p. 48.

Worst of all upon the King; in excluding whom, he beheads the Parliament.
. 86. But why does he call it the Authority of Parliament, which he confesses
at other Times to be no more then two Houses? A Parliament without a King (much
more against him) is a contradiction in adjecto. Well said Judge Ienkins, [ See
his works. p. 49.
The legs, Arms, and Trunck of the body, cannot be above the Head, nor have
life without it.] So that supposing the King to be but one of the 3. States of
which a Parliament does consist, He is a part, and that the highest. But in
truth (says the Id. ibid.
learned Judge) The King is none of the three estates, but COOK, their Oracle,
in his Chap. of Parliam. fol. 1. apud eundem.
above them all. The three estates are the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal,
and the Commons. And so Mr. Hickman is unexcusable in beheading the Parliament,
by excl^ding the King from his Royal Birthright.

. 87. Again Mr. Hickman proceeds to ask, How he and his Visitors have acted
against the two Houses and withal against the supreme Power of the Na^ion.
[ Is it not Impudence to say, that the Visitors authorized by the two Houses,
under the broad Seal of England, could not make me his legitimate successor? p.
47.] To which I answer, 1. that the Visitors were never authorized by the two
Houses to condemn me without some little hearing, or to huddle up their
sentence and Execution, without Accuser, or witness, or accusation, face to
face. 2. The two Houses could only make an Ordinance, not an Act of
Parliament, which is a Law) as the Houses themselves have often confessed. And
Ibid. p. 195, 197.
Laws are the things which bind the people. Nay 3. If any statute shall be made
against Magna Charta, (and so against Bishops provided for by Magna Charta, and
confirmed by thirty two Acts of Parliament; or against any man's right without
a trial according to Law; Ib. p. 62.
It is by Law declared null. 42. Ed. 3. chapter 1. But it seems Mr. Hickman is like
Oliver Cromwell, whose foul-mouthed byword was wont to be, See M. Prins
Perfect Narrative, p. 58.
Magna Charta, Magna Farta. Nay 4. It is resolved in Plowden. f. 388, 389.
Cook. 8* Reports. f. 118. Hobards Reports. p. 85, 86, 87. apud eundem. p. 34.
Law Books, that if an Act of Parliament referr to, or confirm a thing which is
not, (as for a man to be a Judge or witness in his own case,) or a thing that
is misrecited, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, there the common
Law shall control, and adjudge such an Act to be merely void. Now we who were
of the Dispersion through the Avarice and Revenge of the cruel Visitors, did
find those Visitors in very great part, at once our Judges, our Iuries, our
Executioners, and our Heirs. Had they dealt sincerely with us, and bid us
plainly leave our Fellowships, because they had Sons, and Nephews, or other
good friends to be cared for, (as the Fox was sincere, when he bid the Cock
come down from the Tree, alleging this reason, that he was hungry,) I should
not have used them as now I do, though I use them better then they did me. But
their pretending to Reformation, and Justice too, did make their sin exceeding
sinful. 5. The Broad Seal which he speaks of is called by Judge Ienkins, p 35.
a Counterfeit Seal. And the Counterfeiting of that he p 37-and 45.
proves High Treason. Last of all I will add, that we were taught in our
Catechism, by our common mother the Church of England, that we are bound by God
in the fifth Commandment, to honor and obey (not the two Houses, but) the
King, not the two Houses and the King, but the King and his ministers. Saint
Peter accordingly commanding us to Submit our selves to every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, instructs us to do it to the King as 1 Pet. 2.31.
Supreme, and unto Governors as sent by him. Now were the Visitors really sent
by him? Or were they not flatly sent against Him? Whether so, or so, Let it be
judged by the Case of the University; the most material part of which shall
now become my next Section.

. 88. The only question which is by these men proposed to every single person
in the University, The case of the University of Oxford A.D. 1648. and The sad
Dilemma all its members were put to, either to be perjured, or destroyed.
is, Whether we will submit to their Visitation, or to the power of Parliament
(as they call it) in this Visitation.

That without the Personal Consent of the King to this Commission, (as far as
it respects the University in General, and us as members thereof) we cannot now
submit to any Visitation, without incurring the guilt of manifold perjuries* In
reference to our University oaths, we have long since given an Account by way
of Plea to these men: That our particular Local, or Collegiate Statutes,
(which define us particular Visitors in our particular Colleges) bind us
(under the same most evident perjury) to submit to no other Visitation, but
that which the Statutes of each have defined, has been also the Plea of the
Heads of our Colleges, in the name of their several Societies. And for this,
and nothing but this, that is, (in plain words) because they have (with all
civility to the two Houses, and to the persons sent by them) refused to incur
that damning sin of perjury, (which has already helped to bring such heavy
judgments upon this Nation) the Governors of the University are displaced,
and some imprisoned, and Master Reynolds a V^si or put into the office of
Vice Chancellor, and into the D^anary of Christ Church,) two places of the
greatest dignit^, and power) one of the greatest profit in the University. And
in like manner the Heads of the Colleges, and the Prebendaries of
Ch^ist-church have many of them already fallen under the same punishments, (and
the rest expect their turns) and several of the Visitors also are put into
their pl^ces. And now the slaughter hastens to the door of every of the
ancientest, or youngest Student, Fellow, Scholar, Commoner, or other member of
the whole University, and the speed is so great, the pursuit so vehement, that
four whole Colleges have been in one day summoned to ^ppear before them,
without any delay, to give positive Answer to this one Question, Whethey will
submit, or n^. By this it is apparent to us, that as the state of things now
stands, we have an easy, though unhappy choice proposed to us, viz. Whether we
will prefer the preservation of our Estates, or of our Souls by admitting
perjury or ruin. (And in the making of the choice God has given the whole
University such an uniform constancy, and contempt of the world, that we hear
not of above three men that have considered their profit so much, as to yield
this submission) And that it may be also apparent to all others, that this is
the choice, I shall give you the plain words of our Oaths, by which we are
withheld from submitting, that the Honorable Houses may judge, if they please,
whether it be probable that conscience has by us been hypocritically pretended
to destroy our selves, as it has sometimes been made use of by others for
their visible advantages. Thi^ I shall set down first as far as our obligation
is founded in our Oaths to the University, and then to our several Colleges.

The Oath of the University to every man is this. It Is jurabis te observaturum
omnia Statuta, Libertates, Privilegia, and Co^suetudines istius universitatis.
Thou shall Swear to observe all the Statutes, Liberties, Privileges, and
customs of this University. The Scholar answers, Iuro, I swear, and this he
renews, and repeats as often as he takes any degree in the University. From
hence we conclude, that for any man wilfully to betray any one of the
Privil^dges, or Liberties (as well as to break the Statutes or customs of the
University) can never be excused from the guilt and charge of downright
Perjury; for which we must be banished the University, if ever we be called to
account for it by any just power. And that one of our Privileges is, that we
be visited by none but the King, or those that are sent by Him, as we are
verily persuaded, so have we never heard ^f any other title, or pretension of
any (which is thought even by our enemies to have any show of Ground in our
Charters, or Customs against our Plea) save only that of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Metropolitan; to which our Answer is so clear, and punctual, (
viz. that in the vacancy of the Archbishops Sea, all power that can be thought
to belong to him, must needs be acknowledged to devolve to the King the
fountain of his power, and so the Archbishop having been long dead, this power
of Visiting us (if any such belong to the Archbishop) must now needs be only
in the King) that we profess never to have heard of any word of satisfaction
that has been offered to this enforcement of our Plea, but are rather told
that the Commission for this Visitation coming under the name of our Sovereign
Lord Charles, etc. is a Commission issued out by the King; which as it seems to
us an acknowledgement of the truth of all our pretensions; so is it the
imposing upon us the belief of that which we know to be otherwise, having
certain knowledge that the King never consented to the issuing of this
Commission, and so having no excuse of ignorance, in case we should yield
submission to that Visitation (as proceeding from him) which is acknowledged by
all to involve us in Perjury, if it come not from him. To this we may add one
obligation more, that as it is one of the Universities Privileges to be exempt
(without al controversy as long as the Archbishops Sea is vacant) from all
power but that of the King, so it is one of the Kings Privileges and
preeminencies to have this full, and (at this time) sole power over us. And
then that branch of the Oath of Supremacy that obliges all Subjects in these
express words, [ to assist, and defend to our power all Privileges, and
Preeminencies, and Authorities granted, and belonging to the Kings Majesty, or
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdome] does certainly bind us to
defend this, as far as it is in our power to do it.

For the obligations of College Statutes which name us particular Visitors,
and exclude all others from that employment, I shall shorten your trouble, and
yet not fail in giving you, and all men a perfect satisfaction, by setting down
a few plain words out of some of them. In the Statutes of New Coll. Magdalen
Coll. Corpus Christi, and St. John's (in each of these without any considerable
alteration) these are the words; Statuimus, ordinamus, and volumus, ut liceat
Duo Episc: Winton: Dioc: qui pro tempore fuerit, and nulli alii, nec aliis,
etc. per se, vel suum Commissarium specialem, quem duxerit deputandum
(praeterquam per Cancellarium Vniversitatis, seu ejus Commissarium generalem,
seu procuratores Univers. Oxon. etc. ac praeterquam Custodem, aut aliquam
personam nostri Collegii, aut alios quoscunque in Vniversitate per unam
quind^nam anno proximo cum visitationem praecedente Students, etc. per quos,
aut ipsorum aliquem haec nolumus qu^m^dolibet exerceri) ad Collegii hujus
visitationem libere accedere, and Custodem ac alios singulos socios, etc.
nostri Collegii in Sacellum ejusdem convocare.

From whence these few things are distinctly concluded by the Statu^es of those
Colleges. 1. That the Bishop of Winchester by himself, or some body deputed by
him is the only lawful Visitour of those Colleges; and all other person or
persons in direct words ( nec alii nec aliis, and praeterea nemini) are
excluded by the Statutes. 2. That it is not lawful for the Bishop himself to
depute any of those persons which are there excepted, viz. the Chancellor or
Vice Chancellor, or Proctours of the University, the Warden or President, or
any person of the said Colleges, or any S^udent in the University, that has
been commorant there fifteen days in the year preceding the Visitation; by
which exception all th^se men, which have lately been the only actors in this
business (having now resided ('it is to be supposed studied) here for some time,
and now one named, and by them reputed to be Vice chancellor, others to be
Gov^rnours of particular Colleges) are made utterly incapable of that
employment. I shall not need to mention any more, it being clear that these men
are not deputed by that Bishop, and as clear, that if they were deputed by him,
they are not qualified according to the Statutes, but expressly excluded by
them. Now what is thus ordained by those statutes, every member admitted into
those Colleges, is by Oath obliged to observe, and not only involved in
perjury if he do not, but where other penalties are not named (as in this
matter there are not) is liable to the pain of perjury, that is, deprivation of
all benefits of his College; which is now become the punishment of none but
those who will observe them.

Besides these Oaths which particularly and directly look to the grand ma^ter
of the Visitation, There be many other branches of our Oaths Academicall, and
Collegiate, which are most nearly concerned in the present transactions. The
Statutes of the University, to the observing of which our oaths distinctly bind
us, prescribe the manner of Election of Proctours, (of calling and meeting in
Convocations, etc.) And therefore whenever Proctours have been removed by the
KING, the University Statutes have taken place in appointing the Successors;
and those (as the Vice Chancellor also) are obliged to take Oaths, for the
discharge of their places according to statute. But all is now done directly
cont^ary to all this. And therefore herein no sworn member of the University
can think fit, without professing despite to Conscience or reputation, to join
with them. And so in particular Colleges, the Statutes are punctual, that
after the departure or a motion of any Governor, the Fellows must proceed
within such a time to the election of a new, and he and none but he shall be
reputed Warden, President, etc. who shall be chosen by a major part of the
Electours. And then he that is chosen must take several Oaths particularly to
govern according to Statute, before any of the muniments of the College may be
delivered up to him, or before he enter upon the Government, to act any thing
in it. And this is established by several positive statutes, to the observing
of which, all members of Colleges are precisely sworn. And it is evident and
acknowledged that no man can be made Dean or Prebendary of Christ's Church (nor
ever was since the foundation of the Church) but by the KINGS personal consent,
and nomination under the Privy Seal, and Broad Seal, by which he is installed;
And to him that is thus possessed of that Deanary, every Student of that Church
is by plain words of the Oath of his admission, bound to perform due obedience
etc. All which being now most clearly violated by not only Sequestring, but
removing the former, and putting in new Governors by force, without Election,
or taking of Oaths to the Colleges, it follows that no sworn member of any
College can acknowledge any such Governors without wilful un-execusable
Perjury. The only thing that has yet been offered to us to answer the Force,
and urgence of all this Plea (and at the presence of which, all mention of our
Oaths must vanish presently) is the pretended Sovereign power of the two Houses
to make and abolish Laws and Obligations; which having interposed here, is
consequently said to quit us of all these engagements, which formerly lay upon
us. But this is so far from removing our scruples, that it is it self a scruple
much more hard to us to digest, then the former. For by our having taken the
Oath of Supremacy, we have acknowledged that to be only in the KING; and by
our education in this Kingdom, have been brought up in a firm belief (grounded
on the known Laws and Customs thereof) that the power of enacting, and
repealing of Laws belongs not to the two Houses exclusively, but to the KING'
with the consent of the two Houses; and we do now profess, never to have heard
any thing to the contrary, before these times: nor since these times,
sufficient to alter our judgments in this particular. And therefore whatsoever
question be made of this truth by other men, yet we, whose hearts assure us,
that we make no question of it (and consequently acknowledge, that we do not
yet conceive our selves to be freed from any one branch of any of these Oaths)
cannot imagine what color it is possible for the Tempter to put upon this
required submission, by which to persuade us, that it might be reconcilable
with a good Conscience now, or with any degree of excuse to God or men, or of
quiet and tranquillity within our own breasts at the hour of death, in case we
should, on such terms as these, submit to this Visitation. And as I think I
might safely appeal to any Divine in the world as to a Confessor, or Casuist
for the stating of this Question, Whether it were lawful for us to submit,
supposing our many Oaths confestly bound us to the contrary, and that we are
verily persuaded, that those Oaths are in full force upon us, and as confident
that the two Houses could not dispense with them, nor take off the obligingness
of them; So would I likewise appeal to any man living that ever pretended to
assert either the Liberty of Conscience, or p^opriety of goods, Whether we
ought in this case to be turned out of our free hold, to the utter undoing of
so great a multitude for no other crime but this of not submitting, when that
is nothing else but the following the dictates of our Consciences informed and
regulated by the known Laws of the Land. Having given you this short view of
our state, which (as it is told us assuredly by the Visitours) is suddenly to
bring a perfect vastation on this University, I cannot but think it my duty to
the public (which is now so disabled from meeting in a body, that it cannot
make any formal address to you) to lay this representation before you, and to
desire by your assistance it may yet be resumed into consideration, Whether it
will be for the honor of Christian Religion, or of the Protestant Profession,
that our bare demurring or refusing to submit our selves to the grossest and
most unquestioned perjuries, should be voted by your Committee to be an high
contempt of Authority of Parliament, and such punishments assigned thereto,
which if inflicted impartially, must necessarily leave no one Scholar of what
quality soever in this University (which is of age to have taken Oaths of
admission to the University, or to any particular College) which shall not
appear to all men avowedly and confestly per^ur'd and liable to all the shame
and penalty, that by Law belongs to that crime, whenever any man shall be
willing to prosecute it against him. We hope this representation may produce
some other counsels; if not, we shall most cheerfully perish in our integrity.

To conclude. 1. That as many Earls and Barons as could stand about the Kings
Throne, at his Coronation, did lay their hands on the Crown on his Royal Head,
protesting to spend their blood to maintain it to Him and his l^wful Heirs. 2.
That those Lords were cast out of their House by the Commons, as they had
joined with the Commons to cast out the King; 3. That the Bishops were
acknowledged to be one of the Three States, even by those very Houses which
cast them out; 4. That Both the houses, without the King, had but a disputable
Authority, even with some of their own Minions; 5. That the Oxford Visitation,
was null and void; Doctor Heylin has proved to Master Fuller in his Examen
Historicum, page 203.251.264.265. etc.

. 89. Having now dismissed those weighty subjects, A transition to the
descovery of his no skill in Logic.
in which it concerns every person to be sufficiently instructed, I am arrived
at that part of the Filcher's Volume, wherein he comes to the Quaestion,
concerning the positive Entity of sin. Of which whatsoever the man has said,
(whether out of Mr. Barlow, or Doctor Baron,) I have considered at large in the
6. Chapters of my Book, to which I have added this long Appendix. Yet because
there are still some things remaining, which though not to the purpose, may yet
be usefully discovered, I will discover them as fully as shall be needful, and
in as few words as can be shish'd.

His insultation added to hide or bear up his ignorance.
90. I had said then an Accident is not the subject of an Accident, And that
some Accidents are not separable from their subjects of Inhaesion, as
Risibility from a man. Then which there are not two greater Truths, either more
ordinarily known, or more generally granted amongst Logicians. But so profound
was the Ignorance of Mr. Hickman, or so implacable his Rancour, and so
incomparable his boldness, that he summond all those who had any respect for
Mag. Coll. to blush at my Ignorance in those particulars, which commonly
Freshmen are wont to know, (page 51.) If here he spoke against his conscience
(which is the likeliest of the two) I wonder how he durst do it, unless he hope
that no Scholars would read his Book. But if it was his mere ignorance, which
is not so likely, though it is possible, he then was destitute of skill even in
Logic, which he last came from, as well as in Divinity, at which he is not yet
arrived. And so it is hard for me to judge, whether the sinner or the Sciolist
has the greater share in him. For mark the Judgment of Aristotle, as well as
that of the Complutenses, and all the Thomists.

Concerning the subject of an Accident. Collegium Compl. in Aristot. Dialect.
Disp. 12. de substan. quaest. 5 p. 419, 420.
Haec est expressa Doctrina Aristotelis. (4 Metaphy^. Text. 14.) Accidenti non
est accidens, nisi quia Ambo eidem accidunt. Estque receptissima inter
Thomistas. Pro qua videri possunt Ca^etan. 2. p q. 77. art. 2. A Soto in 4.
did. 10. quaest. 2. art. 2. Mas. Sanch. l. 5. quaest. 11. Bergom. in
Concordantiis D. Thomae. dub. 20. and alii.

Fundamentum est, quia omne Accidens definitur per proprium and immediatum
subjectum cu^ inhaeret. Sed semper definitur per substantiam* ut ex Aristotele
patet. Ergo semper substantia pertinet ad proprium and immediatum subjectum
Accidentis.

Confirmatur primo: quia quaelibet forma, seu actus immediate attingit propriam
materiam, seu potentiam, ut patet inductione: sed in propria materia, seu
potentia a^cidentium semper includitur substantia, ergo semper accidentia
immediate attingunt substantiam. Probatur Minor: quia accidens dat propriae
materiae esse secundum quid, ergo requirit, and supponit in illa esse
simpliciter.

Confirmatur secundo: quia ideo in sententia D. Thomae materia prima non est
integrum and immediatum subjectum quantitatis, aut alterius accidentis (and
idem est de formis materialibus) quia non habet propriam subsistentiam: sed
nullum accidens habet propriam subsistentiam, ut patet; ergo nullum accidens
potest esse subjectum integrum and immediatum alterius. Yet in a flat
contradiction to all this Authority and Reason too, Master Hickman tells us
that an Accident may be the immediate subject of Inhaesion to an Accident. (p.
51.) As if he had never so much as tasted of Aristotle's Well, or hardly dipped
into a system. For even thence he might have learned, that it is the propriety
of substantia Quarto modo, to be the subject of Accidents.

. 91. Nay as if he had studied to talk exactly like an Idiot, Of subjectum
ultimum, ^t ultimatum.
he presently adds that only substance can be the ultimate subject of an
Accident (ibid.) whereas on the contrary it is held by all the world to be
subjectum ultimum, not ultimatum, which an Accident may be by my good leave. So
that either he was ignorant, how ultimum differs from ultimatum; or else he
conceived that substance signifies an Accident; or else he was wholly of my
opinion, even whilst he so much railed against it. When I said that an Accident
is not subjectum Accidentis, I meant ultimum, (as all the world has ever
meant) not ultimatum, (as Master Hickman;) but mentioned neither, because 'twas
needless. And so Master Hickman has no excuse for disgracing himself in this
public manner. Of one hundred Authors, I will convince him but with one, whom
he pretends to admire, but (I am confident) never read.

Crak^nth^rp de Accidente p. 33.
Subjectum ultimum cui accidentia omnia inhaerent, quodque accidentia sustentat,
est vel substantia illa quae est summum genus, vel aliqua species, aut
individuum illius. Differentiae quidem substantiales, etiam and unum accidens
potest esse alterius subjectum, sedut Logici vocant, ultimatum. (therefore Mr.
Hickman is no Logician) Nunquam autem sunt accidentia aut esse possunt ultima
accidentium subjecta, etc.

Nay there are who are of opinion, (and Hurtadus de Mendoz^ Phys. Disp. 6.
subs. 2. Greg. de Valent. 2. did. 12. q. 2. art. 1. Marsilius 4. q. 9. art. 2.
ibid.
men of renown) that Accidens is neither subjectum quod, nor quo; not ultimum,
nor ultimatum. That Quantity is no way receptive of Qualities, sed in materia
esse unam potentiam ad quantitatem, aliam vero distinctam ad qualitatem; in qua
potentia, and non in quantitate, Capreolus subjicit qualitates, says Hurtadus;
who professes he is driven to this opinion:

. 92. To his denial that Risibility is an Inseparable Accident, Of an
Inseparable Accident.
(which if a Freshman should deny, he would be hist out of the Schools) I shall
not need say any more then this, That it is a quality and so an Accident; that
it is Accidens proprium, and so it is accidens; That it is proprium quarto modo,
and so inseparable. For omni, soli, semper and convertibiliter subjecto
convenit. Master Hickman denies it to be an Accident Inseparable, because
forsooth it is a propriety. As if he should say, it is not, because it is, and
cannot possibly be otherwise. The cause of his miscarriage must needs be this,
that he know's not the difference betwixt a praedicable and a praedicament.
Because Accidens and Proprium do make two praedicables, he thinks that that
which is proprium, (as Risibility) cannot therefore be Accidens; forgetting
that accidens is divided into proprium, and commune, and so does make a twofold
praedicable. Now let the Visitors consider what Reformation they have made,
when a titular Fellow of a College and a titular Master of Arts is found not
fit to be a tolerable Pupil, whilst he stands in need of such Logic Lectures.
Is not Cicero a name, because it is a proper name? Or is not Mr. Hickman so
much as a man, because he is not a learned man? no nor an animal, (by his
reasoning) because not Animal irrationale. The blackness of a Crow he will
grant to be an Inseparable accident, but not the Crow's crocitation; because
the later is not less, but more inseparable than the former. I will not say,
blush, but pity him all ye, that have any respect for Magdalen College.

. 93. He goes to prove that an Accident may be the subject of Inhaesion to an
Accident, Of the substantial faculties of the Soul.
because fides is either in Intellectu or in voluntate. (p. 51.) And thus he
takes it for granted that these are accidents, which are known by all Scholars
to be substantial faculties. Aristotle calls the Intellect a part of the soul.
A part I say, not as if it had quantity, but secundum rationem, as he explains
his own words. (...), Aristot. (...). mihi p. 1416
(...).

Ochamus, Gregorius Ariminensis, Gabriel Biel, By whom they are held to be its
very essence.
Thomas Garbiu^, Bonaventura, Parisienses, and complures alii, (inquit
Berigardus. Circulo quinto de anima facult. sive potentiis.
Berigardus,) dicunt animae facultates esse ipsummet ejus essentiam, quae prout
variis in organis obit varia munera, ipsa quoque diversis ^acultatum
appellationibus nuncupatur.

Ostendi, inquit Hurtadus, Hurtadus de Mendoza de Anima Disput. 4. Sect. 4.
Gratiam imitari Conceptus Naturae, ac propterea esse in substan^ia animae.
Fides est in Intellectu, id est, in Anima, ad efficiendos actus intelligendi:
sub quo conceptu Anima est Intellectus. This comes home to Mr. Hickman's
Instance. Nay Hurtadus is of opinion, that no vital faculty is accidental. Sed
esse adaequate idem vel cum anima, si est spiritualis, vel cum toto composito,
si materialis. Ita Greg. Arimin. Henr. Gandavensis, Gab. Biel, and universa
Nominum schola quibuscum consentiunt Pat. Conimbricense^ 2. de Anima c. 3. q. 4
artic. 1. Durandu^ 2. did. 3. quaest 5.
non pauci.

Saint August. lib. de sp. and anima. c* 2. and 8.
Austin says, that those Faculties are the Soul it self as existing in several
parts of the body. And again, Anima est intellectus, Anima est m^moria, and
Anima est voluntas. And again, Tom. 9. Tr. 15. in Joh. apud Hu^t. ubi supra.
Intellectus non est aliquid aliud quam Anima; sed aliquid animae est
Intellectus, quomodo non aliquid aliud quam caro est oculus, sed aliquid carnis
est oculus, etc.

Bernardus in sermon. 11. supra cantica apud eund. Stahlius reg. Philos. Tit. 16
de Regulis subjecti and accidentis.
In anima Tria intueor, Rationem, Memoriam and Voluntatem, and haec Tria eandem
esse animam.

N^c dissentit Scotus cum sua schola, quem adducit Pat. Valentia pro eadem
sententia, (inquit Hurtadus.)

Videtur ea sententia, quod facultates animae sint secundum Rem ipsa substantia
Animae, altera long proba^ilior.

It Is true that some Confuted men are of another mind, but they Hurt. de Mend.
ubi supra.
confess that their opinion cannot easily be proved and (as I said before) they
are Hurt. de Mend. ubi supra.
confuted. However, for their sakes, (though it is likely Mr. Hickman does not
know with whom he err's) I hold our Malefactor the more excusable.

. 94. But he is utterly unexcusable, when he says that sin is not acknowledged
by any to be Complexum Quid, Of his granting what he denies whilst he denies
it, and giving up the whole cause.
except by Complexum, we mean Complexum ex genere and Differentia. p. 53.] For
first that '^is complexum quid, is so acknowledged by all, (by Doctor Sanderson
in particular who is himself a great many) that 'till I heard of one Mr.
Hickman, I heard of no man, that e're denied it. Next he affirms what he
denies, by saying it is complexum ex genere and differentia; more than which,
he could not possibly have said for my advantage. For first Mr. Hickman is but
Animal rationale, if we grant him the most that he can desire. And what is
Animal Rationale, but only genus and differentia? Next he clearly here
confesses the positive entity of sin; (though 'twas more then he knew, until I
told him,) For every good Definition must be ex genere and Differentia. And
every thing must be considered as under some species when so defined. And
'twill be granted by all the world, that all the species in the world must
needs imply their individuals to be positive Entities. Which whenever we say
of sins, we must needs understand it of Individuals. Such as Murder, Adultery,
Pride, and Filching. And, any otherwise understood, then as an Individual man,
Mr. Hickman himself has no positive entity. And yet he is not a sin, but only
a very great sinner.

O the praevalence of Truth over the Advocate of Error! For as (...). Philo
Judaeus page 499-
Balaam was overruled to bless that people, against which he intended to pour
out Curses; so whilst our Rhapsodist endeavors to plead for error, the
Compare this Section with his Ten Conf^ssions. For which look back on chapter 3.
Sect. 28. p. 52, 53, 54.
truth drops out at his Fingers ends.

A POSTSCRIPT Touching some late Dealings OF Master Baxter.

A POSTSCRIPT Touching Mr. Baxter, condemned out of his own Works, and proved
excellently scandalous in Life and Doctrine.
1. HAving concluded with Mr. Hickman, The Synagogue of the Libertines
I should gladly have ended my Readers Trouble, but that I find Mr. Baxter
has dealt with Me, and my Writings, as the Synagogue of the Libertines once
dealt with Stephen, and his Oration; when having nothing to Answer in the
Defense of their Rebellion, or for their Murder of Gods Anointed which Acts.
6.9.
Stephen had laid unto their charge, they were so Acts 7* 54.
cut to the heart, (as S. Luke tells us the story) that they gnashed upon him
with their Teeth. But finding him still to use the Liberty of his Tongue, they
were transported with greater Fury; and so impatient of his words, that Verse
57.
that they stopped their ears, and ran upon him with open mouth: and (with
violent hands) disputing him out of the City, they flung their arguments at
his head; Arguments as hard as the hardest Verse 58.
stones, that He might not fail of a Confutation.

2. That Mr. Baxter is near of kin unto the Synagogue of the Libertines, Fitly
applied to Mr. Baxter.
I have See the New Discoverer Discoverd. Chapter 3. Sect. 1. p. 61, 62, 63, 64.
where Mr. Baxters words and pages are set at large.
evinced out of his writings in my New Discoverer Discovered. Where I have
showed in what degree he has strengthened the hands of Evil Doers, and
encouraged the people in all the Villainies to be named; even by striving to
persuade them (with all the Artifice he could use) that if a man be once
Regenerate, Sanctified, or Godly, it is not Murder, or Adultery, or
Drunkenness, or Incest, or Idolatry, or Perjury, or the denying of Christ
himself, that can make him otherwise then a sanctified and Godly man. Now Mr.
Baxter (it seems) resolving not to Answer my Book, and yet not able to let it
alone, has rather chosen (once or twice) to gnash upon me with his teeth, and
to show he was cut unto the heart, and to fling some stones (Railing and
Calumny) at my Head, than to be thought by his Disciples to have offended, or
so little stomachful as to Repent.

His railing on K James and Bp. Bancroft.
3. For first in his Pamphlet of Self-denial, (a (...) is derived from (...)
and (...). And is used by Atheneus [ lib. 18.] for an Incendiary, a Boute-few,
a setter of things into combustion.
Pamphlet properly so called) he says [a Rogers, a Stubb, a Pierce,] not for
any other end (that I am able to conceive) then to give himself Ease by a
little vent. To express a sharp Writer (...), by [a Rogers, a Stubb, a Pierce]
can amount to no more then the bare showing of his Teeth, when besides his own
Lip, there is nothing Bitten. From this he could not abstein in his very
Dedicatory Epistle, (p. 11.) Nor waded he farther into his Praeface then p. 17.
when another sharp pang did thus inspire him. [ If Fits-Simon, and other
Jesuits, and Bp. Bancroft, and Dr. Peter Heylin, Mr. Thomas Pierce, and other
such among us are to be believed, what an abominable odious sort of people are
they (the Puritans) and especially the Presbyterians, who are (the greatest
part of them) intolerable, hypocritical, bloody men.] Now to what purpose was
all this, (not so much against Me, whom he ranked with Bishop Bancroft, as
against that excellent Archbishop, whom he ranked with the Jesuits) but to
discover to all the world whereabouts his shoe wring'd him? Archbishop
Bancroft was a most wise, and a most pious Metropolitan; whose learned Books
have been rayld at but never answered. Certainly He, and Dr. Heylin are as
eminent for the Truth of their several Narratives, as any humane Historians
that ever writ. I have vindicated the Former, beyond the power of a Baxter to
contradict me. The Later has vindicated Himself in his Certamen Epistolare; by
which Mr. Baxter was too much baffled, to think of making a Reply. Fitz-Simons
was a Jesuit, with whom Mr. Baxter does too much cotton. Nor does he answer
one word to my New Discov. Discov. chapter 5. p. 98, 99.
Allegations. Concerning the Puritans I spent a whole Chapter, (not a Line of
which has ever been answered by Mr. Baxter) wherein I showed they were as
Odious to King James, and Bp. Andrews, Dr. Sanderson, and the like, as to
Arch-Bp. Bancroft, or Mr. Pierce. And whatsoever he says of Me, for speaking
severely of the Puritans, does plainly reflect upon the King, and upon all the
greatest Persons, both for piety and learning, Archbishops and Bishops, and
Reverend Judges of the Land, whose pungent Characters of the Puritans I fairly
Ibid. from p. 1^3. ^^ p. 117.
cited.

4. But suppose Bp. Bancroft, and Dr. Heylin, On Bp Andrews and Dr. Sande^son
for their Justice to the Puritans.
and Mr. Pierce are three Jesuits, (or as little deserving to be believed, yet
Dr. Sanderson is confessed by Mr. Baxter himself, to be both a Moderate and
learned Protestant. And He has so preached against the Puritans (as well from
the Press, as from the Pulpit, that I cannot think of any person (unless King
James, or Bp. Andrews, See that Preface of Dr. Sanderson, Sect. 17, and 18.
) who has branded that Faction with deeper marks. Not only in his Preface to
the Second Edition of his Sermons, where he places us in the middle betwixt
the two extremes, Papists and Puritans and shows how the Puritans have
extremely promoted the Popish Interests, nay how See the Reverend Dr. Hammond
his pacifick Discourse, etc. p. 8. l. ult.
Libertinism it self had overspread the whole Face of the Land, by the means of
Fiery Turbulent Presbyterians; But in the latest of all his writings, (set out
indeed by Dr. Hammond, yet with his own special likeing and Approbation,) He
sharply speaks of some books against the Liturgy and Ceremonies, by giving them
the Name of Puritanical Pamphlets with a juster Epithete than which he could
not easily stigmatize them: And the most Learned King James (in his Meditations
on the Lords Prayer) does piously give a special caveat, that we do not make
God the Author of sin, as certain Cavendum ne cum Pur^tanis ^uibusdam Deum
faciamus Autorem pecca^i. vid. epis^. Ded. Dan. Tilen. pref. Notis su^s in
Canon. Synod Dordr.
Puritans are wont to do. Of this his Majesty was minded by that Acute and
Learned Frenchman Daniel Tilenus in his excellent Epistle to that wise King,
after their happy valediction to the Calvinian Doctrines. Those I hope were no
Jesuits Fellows, and may deserve to be Believed, if they affirmed of the
Puritans (which Mr. Baxter happily confesses to have been mostly
Presbyterians,) that they were Hypocritical and Bloody men. Only here Mr.
Baxter must be taught to distinguish of Presbyterians. For with them that are
Moderate I have ever had communion and very affectionate commerce, (as many of
them can witness for me) But I am ready to consent to what I find said by Dr.
Sanderson, [ See the last page of the most learned Dr. Sandersons most
incomparable preface.
Such is the Obstinacy and Madness of the Rigid, Scotized, through-paced
Presbyterians, that it is vain to think of doing any good upon them by
Arguments, till it shall please God to make them of more humble and Teachable
Spirits.] These are pungent but very True, yea very Necessary expressions. They
could not else have proceeded from that Exemplary Divine, whom hardly any has
ever excelled (if we behold him in his latest and ^ipest years) for Piety,
Meekness, and Moderation. Had Baxter railed at Me alone for my impartiality to
the Puritans, I might have passed it over in peace and silence. But since it is
apparent he wreaks his malice upon the Reverend Dr. Sanderson and the Right
Reverend Bp. Andrews, and all the other great persons whose words I used,
(striking really at Them, although through Me, as Darius (in Horodotus) was bid
to run at Patizitham (...). Herodot. in Thalia. c 78. p. 194.
through Gobrias sides) I could not in Conscience let him escape without some
useful Animadversions.

5. He adds in the Margin of the same page, [That I had answered his
Expectation, His Confession of his own wickedness again confessed by himself*
though but in p^rt.
and from his own Confession, (not knowing him my self) had drawn his picture,
that he is proud, lazy, false, an Hypocrite, unjust, etc.] But why for this am
I called Bolsec, in the words nex^ after, since I was only his Echo, and did
but resound his own Confessions? Not his Auricular confessions, (for he had
made none to me,) but his Confessions even in print, and in words at length.
Mr. Owen had framed a charge against him, that he was proud, selfish, and
Hypocritical; Mr. Baxter sub dio (in open Court) pleaded Guilty to the
indictment. It was not certainly my Fault, that I cited his Pages as well as
Words, that all his favorers might find I had neverwrong'd him. Nor could I
possibly know him better, then by an abundance of his Own both words and works.
Of which how faithful an account I have given the Reader, I leave to be judged
of by them, who will compare my citations, as well as read them. Never should I
have taxt him either with pride, selfishness and Hypocrisy; but when he had
owned all three, I had nothing to do to contradict him* I could never have
thought him lazy, (whom I found a Polypragmatick) nor so faulty in the
discharge of his pastoral Office as he professed himself to be, if he had not
avowed it in very plain English, both in his sheet against the Quakers, and in
his Saints everlasting Rest. From both I cited his words and pages. And lastly
for his injustice, in usurping the Right of Mr. Dance, I never so much as heard
of it, until he told me. Nor was it without his own entreaty, that I
demonstrated to him his great Injustice. Let his Followers but consider my
whole Chapter of Sequestrations, and I shall hope they will be wary how they
are led by his example. Nay in his Postscript to his True Catholic, he makes
an open Confession of one part of his Confession, though not of All. He says
He is aware of Hypocrisy within him. p. 315. And Hypocrysy (as I take it) must
needs denominate an Hypocrite, after the measure that Hypocrisy does dwell
within him. His prodigious falsifying of Common Prayers.


6. But he Postscrip. at the end of his True Catholic p* 315.
says, he may have my own Consent to tell the world, that there is no truth in
me. ibid.] See the desperate wickedness of this Pretender to Reformation,
without so much as any color of Common Honesty. For when, and where did I
consent that he should tell the world so gross a Falsehood? And yet he says, he
does perceive he may have my consent to rayl and slander. But how does he
perceive it? Is it by any thing he has read in all my writings? Or by any
kind of Message which I had sent him? No, he contents himself to say, [ It is
my ordinary Confession in the Book of Common prayer, ibid.] Does this Professor
believe there is a God, or a Devil? A Heaven, or a Hell? Or (believing all
four) does he conclude he is Regenerate, and cannot cease to be such by any Sin
to be imagined? Were it not for This or That he could not wilfully publish so
le^d a Fiction. For first, in all the Common prayer there are not any such
words. Next, I might use the Common prayer, and yet not All. Thirdly, the words
that are likest to it, are expressly taken out of S. John, and are only
Hypothetical. If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there is
no Truth in us. (1 John 1.8. Insomuch that Mr. Baxter is just as bad as that
Fellow, (of whom King James does somewhere speak in his Basilicon Doron) who
sought to prove out of the Psalmist, There is no God, because it is said by the
Prophet David, The fool has said in his heart there is no God. Nay fourthly,
we are only commanded to use some One of those many Sentences in the Beginning
of the Liturgy; which a man may do for many years, without so much as once
repeating what Mr. Baxter does seem to allude unto. And it is more then he knows,
if ever I once used it in all my Life. But fifthly, let us suppose there were
indeed such a Confession categorically made in the Common prayer. Mr. Baxter is
old enough to have known (what Mr. Hooker and others might have taught him,
having not read it in S. Jerome, a Latin Father,) That the Priest, in public
prayer, is the Mouth of the people unto God; as he is, in public preaching,
Gods Mouth unto the people^ And so Confession is to be made in such General
Terms, as may well become the Congregation. To which as the Priest does address
himself with a [ Dearly beloved Brethren] so does he beseech them (in the
Conclusion) to keep him Company in the Devotion, saying after him what he
speaks, with a pure heart, and humble voice. But it seems Mr. Baxter cares not
what he Jude 13.
foams out, although it be his own shame, if he may ease himself for a time by
aspersing the person with whom he deals.

7. Having confessed again in print his printed Confession of his Hypocrisy,
His denial of that Confession which h^ confessed a little before.
(p. 315.) He yet professes he is so far from proclaiming himself an
Hypocrite, that he will imitate Job in holding fast his integrity. p. 318.] 1.
It seems he either understands not the rule of Conjugates, and believes he has
the privilege to keep his Hypocrisy, without the danger of being an Hypocrite;
or else when he came to p. 318. he forgot what he had said, p. 315. or else he
thinks, that to publish his Sins in print, is nothing near so much as to
proclaim them; or else he is desperate, and careless, what becomes of his
reputation; or else he thinks it no Disrepute, to print such shameful
Self-Contradictions. 2. After public Convictions of his Pride and
Selfishnesse, Hypocrisy and Impatience, (for he somewhere also confesses he
is of a pettish Disposition, as I have somewhere showed in my New Discoverer
Discovered,) He talks of imitating Job in holding fast his Integrity. Mr. Dance
his Living cannot be called his Intrgrity, which yet alone is the Thing that he
has ever held fast since first he held it. As for Loyalty, and Obedience,
Professions, and Principles, Oaths, and Covenants, Those are things he has
played with at Fast and Loose. Which I proceed to make apparent by these
following Degrees.

8. First he has printed a Confession. His perjury and Rebellion proved out of
his own words. See his holy Comm^nweal^^ Pr^f. p* ^*
[ That our old Constitution was King, Lords, and Commons, which we were Sworn,
and Sworn, and Sworn again to be faithful to, and to defend.] These are all his
own words in his Praeface directed to the Army, 1659.

Next he has printed a Confession, That after several changes of Government,
Ibid. p. 10.
[ we had a Protector governing according to an Instrument, made by God knows
who. After this we had a Protector governing to the humble petition and Advice,
and sworn to both.]

Thirdly, he printed a Confession, that his Protectors came not in till after
these four changes, (which I pray the Reader to observe, that thou may see
in the Conclusion how the Hocus of Kiderminster has jugled with God, and his
own Conscience, and how his Iugling is brought to Light by his own Discovery.)
Ibid. p. 9. and 10.
1. The King withdrawing, (mark his words) the Lords and Commons ruled alone. 2.
Next this, we had the minor part of the House of Commons in the exercise of the
Sovereign power, -Regality and a House of Lords being cast off. 3. Next this we
had nothing visible but a General and an Army. 4. Next this, we had All the
whole Constitution and Liberties of the Commonwealth at once subverted:
Certain men being called by the NAME of a Parliament, and the Sovereign power
pretended to be given them, and exercised by them, that never were chosen by
the people, but by we know not whom. Such a fact (he confesses) as never King
was guilty of since Parliaments were known. 5. and 6. There came a Protector,
and a Protector, of whom I noted his Confession in my second Observation.

His playing at fast and loose with his Integrity.
Having praemised these Confessions, which prove the Titular Protectors to have
been the greatest of all VSVRPERS and so the guiltiest Malefactors in all the
Kingdom; Let us consider Mr. Baxter in the holding fast of his Integrity of
which he boasts. Let us observe how he defended, and was faithful to the
King, Lords and Commons, to which he was Sworn, and Sworn, and Sworn again, by
his Confession. Alluding I suppose to those three Oaths; that of Allegiance,
that of Supremacy, that of the Scottish and English Covenant. Wherein He Swore
to be faithful and obedient to his Majesty's person and posterity, to assert
and defend them with the utmost of his power, that is to say, with Life and
Fortune. He swore the two first with one hand upon the Bible, the third with
hands lifted up to the most high God. After which I cannot tell whether he
entered into the Engagement to be true and Faithful to that which followed
without the King and house of Lords; but that he did as bad or worse, I shall
prove out of his writings by what now follows.

10. First he dedicates a book to Protector Richard, wherein he plays the
Parasitaster in a most loathsome manner. The style in which he directs his
Flattery, His tim^ se^ving and fawring upon his Sovereign Richard.
is To his Highness Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland. After which he begins to cogg with the man in these
words. Five Dispu^. of Church Gov. and worship Epist. Dedic. per totam.
These papers are Ambitious of Accompanying those against popery into your
Highness presence, for the tender of their service. -- I observe the Nation
generally rejoices in your peaceable entrance upon the Government. -- Many are
persuaded you have been strangely kept from participating in any of our late
bloody contentions, that God might make you an Healer of our Breaches, and
employ you in that Temple-work, which David himself might not be honored with.
-- This would be the way to lift you highest in the esteem and love of all your
People, and make them see that you are Ma^k how this suits with the Assemblies
Confess. of faith that all things whatsoever are ordained by God.
appointed by God to be an Healer and Restorer, and to glory in you, and to
bless God for you as the instrument of our chiefest good. -- My earnest
prayers for your Highness shall be, -- that you may rule us as one that is
Ruled by God. That you may always remember you are Christ's, and your Peoples,
and not your own. Your zeal for God will kindle in your Subjects a zeal for
you. Compare this with his Confession, that was no Parliament, which yet had a
better pretenc^ then Richard.
Parliaments, Ministers will heartily pray for you, and praise the Lord for his
mercies by you, and Teach all the people to love, honor and obey you. I crave
your Highness favorable acceptance of the tendered service of a Faithful
Subject to your Highness -- Richard Baxter.

In another Epistle to the same Richard, to whom he dedicates another book, Hi^
rejoicing in our late miseries etc.
he fawns and waggs the tail, and catches at favor by these expressions. Key
for C^tholick^ Epist. De. per totam.
You have your government, and we our lives, because the Papists are not strong
enough. Pope Pius V. in his Bull against our Queen Elizabeth, says, we will
and command that the Subjects take up Arms against that Haereticall and
Excommunicated Queen. Whether such Note the Presbyterian agreement with the
Pope in excommunicating Kings K. Charl^s might be faught against, but Mr.
Richard must not.
Opinions as these should by us be uncontradicted, or by you be suffered to be
taught your Subjects, is easy to discern. -- We desire you that you would not
advance us to temporal honors, or dignities, or power, nor make us Lord
Bishops, nor to abound with the Riches of this World: these things agree not
with our calling. -- Give not leave to every Seducer to do his worst to damn
men's Souls, when you will not tolerate every Tratior to draw your Armies or
People into Rebellion. If you ask who it is that presumes thus to be your
Monitor, It is one that Rejoices in the present happiness of England, and
earnestly wishes that it were but as well with the rest of the world: and that
honors all the Note his cha^ging upon God all the Villainies of the times.
providence of God by which we have been brought to what we are, and he is one
that concurring in the common hopes of greater blessings yet to these Nations
under your Government, was en^ouraged to do what you daily allow your preachers
to do, and to concur with the Rest in the Tenders (and some performance) of
his service. -- That God will make you a healer and preserver of his Churches
here at home, and a succesfull helper to his Churches abroad, is the Earnest
prayers of your Highness faithful Subject Richard Baxter. His Flattering
mentions of old Oliver, as ten^erly careful of Christ's c^u^e.


After this in a Third Epistle, directed to the Army, He calls the powers that
were last laid by (meaning either Richard, or the Corrupt minority of the
Garbled House, but I rather suppose the Former) Ded^c. epist. or pref. before
his Holy Commonwealth p. 6
The best governnours in all the world that have the supremacy, whom to resist
or depose is forbidden to Subjects on pain of Damnation. In what respect he
affirms those powers the best, he explains by ibid.
Wisdom and holiness conjunct. And of the same he says, ibid. p. 8.
shall the best of Governors, the greatest of mercies seem intolerable? O how
happy would the best of the Nations under heaven be, if they had the Rulers
that our Ingratitude has cast off! ib. p. 25.
Again he tells them, his book was written, whilst the Lord Protector,
prudently, piously, faithfully, to his immortal honor, did exercise the
Government. Nay (speaking, I am sure, either of Richard or the Rump, but I
think of Richard) he says ib p. 484.
he is bound to submit to the present Government, as set over us by God, and to
obey, for conscience and to behave himself as a loyal Subject toward them.
Nay his Reason for this is yet more monstrous; first partially to Richard, he
says [ ibid.
A Full and Free Parliament has owned it, and so there is notoriously the
Consent of the People, which is the Evidence that some Princes had to justify
the best Titles.] Next maliciously to the King, his only rightful Sovereign
Lord, he says, [ bid.
That they who plead Inheritance and Law must fetch the Original from Consent.]
Lastly that nothing might be wanting to speak him a Time-server in grain, He
said to Richard concerning Oliver (the bloodiest Tyrant in all the World)
Epist. Ded. (before his Key for Cath) p. 8.
That the Serious endeavors of his Renowned Father for the Protestants of
Savoy had won him more esteem in the hearts of many that fear the Lord, then
all his Victories in themselves considered.] To which he added [ We pray that
you may INHERIT a tender Care of the Cause of Christ] plainly implying the
Tyrant Oliver to have been Tenderly careful of the Cause of Christ, and so
becoming by such Cajolrie a most eminent partaker in all his villainies* Yet
this is the man that stands near ibid. b. 17.
Aeternity, (as he boasts of himself and therefore unfaithful Man-pleasing
would be to him a double crime.

11. His b^ing Accessory to the most parr^cidial act* the murde^ of Gods
A^ointed.
Having praemised his fearful daubing with the Titularie Protectors, whom he
confessed to have Governed according to an instrument made by God knows who;
and according to the humble petition and advice (made by all the world knows
whom, to wit a most illegal and Criminal sort of Traitors, nicknamed a
Parliament;) And with that having compared (though not so fully as I intend)
his malicious disowning the Lords Anointed, whom he had sworn and sworn and
sworn again to be faithful unto and to defend, (against all such usurpers as
Oliver See the preface to the Essa^ for the good Ol^ Cause.
Ale-seller, and Richard were known to be) I shall now observe in how many
respects, Mr. Baxter comes to be 1 Timothy 5.22. Re^el 18.4.
partaker of other men's sins, besides the hideous and frightful nature of his
Own. I mean the sins of both the nominal Protectors, and of that sort of men
who had set them up. To which end it will be useful, briefly to reckon the
several ways, whereby a man may be Accessory, when another is Principal in a
transgression.

1. By Consent and Approbation, so Saul was guilty of Stephens death Act. 8.1.
So the Gnostics were guilty of sins committed by other men, The s^ven ways of
partaking in other men's sins:
because they had pleasure in those that did them. Romans 1.32.

2. By Counsel and advise, so Achitophel was guilty of Absolons Incest and
Rebellion, 2. Sam. 16.23. So also Caiphas had a hand in the blood of Christ,
Ioh. 11.49.

3. By Appointment and Command, so Pharaoh and Herod are said to have slain the
little children they never touched. Exodus 1. and Matthew. 2. So David is said to
have slain Vriah the Hittite, though with the hand, as well as the Sword of the
Children of Ammon. 2. Sam. 12.9.

4. By Comm^nding, Defending, or Excusing the Fact or the Malefactor. Woe be to
you that call evil Good, that put darkness for light, and bitter for sweet,
Esa. 5.20. Woe be to them that sow pillows to all Armeholes, and make Kerchiefs
upon the head of every stature to hunt souls. Ezekiel. 13.18.

Such were Mr. Baxters Pri^^es Oliver and R^chard.
5. By any kind of participation of any illgotten Goods, whether gotten by
Rapine, or kept by fraud, and unjust Title. Of this says the Psalmist, when
thou saw a Thief thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with
Adulterers. Psalm. 50.18. Thy s Princes are Rebellious and Companions of
Thieves; every one loves gifts and follows after Rewards. Isa. 1.23.

6. By too much Lenity and Connivence, which harden's a sinner by Impunity. And
therefore Ahab was threatened, for the unjust Mercy he showed to Benhadad, with
a sentence of Death without Mercy; Because thou have let go out of thy hand a
Man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his
life, and thy people for his people. 1. Kings 20.42. This was the sin that
brake Eli's Neck. 1. Sam. 3.13. and 4.18. The Magistrate is made to be Gods
Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. And he ought not to bear
the sword in vain. Romans 13.4.

7. By unseasonable silence and Neglect of the Christian duty of reprehension.
For this is a sin against those precepts, Levit. 19.17. Isa. 58. 1. Ezekiel. 3.17.
and 33.7.

Now by how many of these ways Mr. Baxter has been Accessarie to the Murder
of One King, and to the exclusion of another, and to the debauching the peoples
souls by his scandalous writings and example, I leave to be pronounced by the
Intelligent Readers. Who, that they may judge the more exactly, shall do well
to compare his signal Confessions above recited, both with his flattering and
blessing the Old and Young Cromwell, And with his other Confessions which now
ensue.

. 12. H^s being an incendiary in the W^rr, and incou^aging many thousands ^^
rebel proved out of his confessions.
He confesses he was moved to engage himself in the Parliament War (Holy
Commonwealth, p. 456.) And yet 2. That the Disorders which on both sides were
unexcusable, were no just cause to cast the Nation into a War. (p. 474.) Nay,
3. That he would have engaged as he did, (which was against his natural King
and Liege Lord) if he had known the Parliament (he means the 2. Houses) had
been the beginners, and in most fault. p. 480. Nay 4. that the war was not to
procure a change of the constitution, to take down Royalty and the house of
Lords, but clean contrary. p. 482. (why then did he fawn upon both the
Cromwels?) 5. That all of them did rush too eagerly into the heat of Divisions
and war, and none of them did so much as they should have done to prevent it.
And that himself in particular did speak much to Though here he conf^sseth he
was a Cokblower and encouraged thousands to Rebel, yet he da^es not ^epent, p.
486.
blow the coals, for which he says he daily begs forgiveness of the Lord. (p.
485.) Nay 6. That he encouraged many thousands to engage against the Kings
Army: And is under a Mark the tenderness of his Conscien e first he sought
against his King, and then considered if lawfully.
self-suspicion whether that engagement was lawful, or not, yea that he will
continue this self suspicion, (p. 486.) Nay 7. he confesses what he is, by
solemnly making this Declaration, That if any of us can prove he was guilty of
hurt to the person of the King, or destruction of the Kings power, or changing
the Fundamental Constitution of the Commonwealth, taking down the house of
Lords without consent of Note that by one of the 3. estates he must mean the
King or the Bishops
all three States, that had a part in the Sovereignty, etc. He will never
gainsay us if we call him a most perfidious Rebel, and tell him he is guilty
of far greater sin than Murder, Whoredom, Drunkenness, or such like. Or if we
can solidly confute his grounds, he will thank us, and confess his sin to all
the World. p. 490. Here then I challenge him to make good his promise. For I
have proved him as guilty, as any Rebel can be imagined, in diverse parts of
this Postscript. And his grounds I have confuted in my Appendix for Mr.
Hickman. 78, 79. If he thinks not solidly, let him answer it if he is able.

His Denying the supremacy of the King, which yet he allowed the two
Cromwells, vv^^reby he is proved by his Confession to be a R^bell.
. 13. What his chief Ground is upon which he goes (whilst he speaks of the
King as of a Rebel to the two Houses) I easily gather from these words, which
I find in his Praeface Note that by one of the 3. estates he must mean the
King or the Bishops
to the same book. To this question [ did not you resist the King?] His answer
is Verbatim, thus Pref. p. 23.
Prove that the King was the highest power in the time of divisions, and that
he had power to make that war which he made, and I will offer my Head to
Justice as a Rebel.] He here implicitly confesses, the King was once the
highest power and implies he lost it by the Divisions. But that he never could
loose it, and that demonstrably he had it, I have made it most evident in the
Appendix of this book, which concerns Mr. Baxter as much as Mr. Hickman, at
least as far as I have proved the Supremacy of the King ( 78.) which both the
Houses of that Parliment, did swear to acknowledge and to assert. However, if
his Supremacy had been a Disputable thing, yet whilst the most learned of the
Land, both Judges and Divines did assert it in books which were never answered,
Mr. Baxter should have staid for the decision of that dispute, before he
resisted that power, for the resisting of which (for ought he knew) he might be
damned, Romans 13.4. Besides when he knew 'twas no sin to abstain from fighting
against the King, and that fighting against him was a damning sin, (if it was
any) in the judgment of such persons as BP. Hall, BP. Morton, BP. Davenant, BP.
Brownrigg, D. Sanderson, D. Oldsworth, and thousands more, he should have taken
the safest course, and rather have strained at a Gnat, then have swallowed a
Camel. In a word, That the war was begun by the two Houses, and only followed
by the King in his most Necessary Defense, has been proved too often to be
excusably denied. And that our Law does declare it to be high Treason, to seize
the Kings Ports, Forts, Magazine of war, to remove Counselors by Arms, to Levy
War, to alter the Law, to counterfeit the broad Seal, to adhere to any state
within the Kingdom but the Kings Majesty, to imprison the King until he agree
to certain Demands. Unanswerably proved by the most excellent Judge Ienkins,
from page 37. as far as page 77. That the power of the Militia and of making
war is by Law in the King, yea that All Authority and Jurisdiction Spiritual
and Temporal is derived from the King, therefore none from the Houses, The same
Judge has evinced p. 20. and 8. and 13. I exhort Mr. Baxter to read the works
of that Learned person, and either to baffle all that Law, and to confute that
mighty Lawyer, or else to declare he has been worse then either a Drunkard, or
an Adulterer, and offer his head as a Rebel, according to his present promise.
I would not exhort him to the later, but that I think it the way to obtein his
pardon

. 14. Whilst he says that his Protector was set over us by God, and owned also
by a full and free Parliament (ibid. p. 484. lin. 2.) he does not only falsify
against a known matter of fact, His being a Traitor to the Houses which he had
set above the King, by setting Richard above them when they disowned him.
(All the considerable persons in the Land having been utterly against him) but
he grossly gives the lie to the Secluded Members, (whom he had called the first
s^rt of the best Governors in the Land,) and to both the Houses of that very
Parliament with whom he engaged against the King. In stead of proving this at
large (which is not fit for this Postscript) I will referr him to the perusal
of Mr. Pryns True and perfect Narrative. And to The True State of the Secluded
Members Case, in Vindication of themselves. From thence he may see how he has
Trespassed against them. Besides that a Parliament cannot be full, without the
King (who is the Head) and House of Lords (who are the shoulders) never was any
full Body made up of legs with an Addition of some other Inferior Members.
And for owning Cromwells Iu^to for a full and free parliment.
But Squire Cromwell was not the King, nor was the pack of Mechanics an House
of Lords, nor is it less then high Treason, to set up either with those
pretentions, yet this was done by Mr. Baxter; let him deny it if he is able.
Again a Parliament cannot be Free, unless the Common^rs are chosen by all the
people who are qualified by law to give their suffrage. Whereas no loyal Man
was allowd by Cromwell to give a voice at those Elections; and no honest Man
could safely do it. For besides the danger of provoking a proud Usurper, Squire
Cromwell had no more right to send out Writs for an Election of Parliament Men,
then any Porter or Scavinger in all the Kingdom, Nay he had less rather than
more, by being Son to so guilty and foul a Tyrant. Richards Issuing out of
writs was a most Treasonable Fact; And could that make a Parliament full or
free, for which the maker by Law might be hanged at Tiburn? Let Mr. Baxter now
consider in how many respects he is obnoxious; both to the wrath of God, for
all his Perjuries and Time-serving; to the wrath of God's Anointed, (whose
Restoration is not impossible, though somewhat remote from the eye of flesh)
for all his Treasons, and Note his ungodly Resolution to take that for granted,
which was visibly false, (viz. that the King would have ruined the
Representatives of the Nation, and its whole security (Holy Com. wealth, page
480. section 19.)
slanders; To the wrath of the two Houses (before they were Garbled by the Army
and Oliver Cromwell) by setting up, to their destruction, a pack of flattering
Cromwellians, and affording them the name of a Full and Free Parliament. Lord!
to what times are we reserved, when such a Creature may pass for a godly
brother, and be entrusted with peoples souls?

. 16. Whilst he says [ The old Constitution was King, He is evinced out of his
mouth to have been perjured over and over*
Lords, and Commons, which we were sworn, and sworn, and sworn again to be
faithful to, and to defend, Praef. p. 9. he either implies there was since a
new Constitution, and then he must show by whose Authority it was made, or else
he must confess he spoke and acted against his conscience, when he clawed the
Cromwells and their Abettors, as has been showed. And he must name by what
power he could be absolved from his three oaths, or else acknowledge to all the
world, he is a perjured, perjured, perjured person. For where was his
Faithfulness to the King, (to which he was sworn, and sworn, and sworn,) when
he confesses he encouraged so many thousands to fight against him? and when he
acknowledged Mr. Cromwell to be his Sovereign; And set over him by God too, who
did but suffer and permit (that is, not hinder,) the Prince of Darkness to set
him over us. (Is Mr. Baxter qualified for the Priesthood, being not able to
distinguish betwixt Permission and approbation, sufferance and appoin^ment, or
betwixt Gods patience, and the Activity of Satan?) How again did he defend the
Lords and Commons of the Long Parliament (in conjunction with the King, or
divided from him,) when he asserted Cromwels Iuncto to be a full and free
Parliament? yet he knows what it was, which he was sworn to defend.

His charge against the Lords and Commons, and his setting aside the King more
then the houses ever did.
. 17. Whilst he says [ The King withdrawing, the Lords and Commons ruled
alone, ibid,] he first gives the lie to the Lords and Commons; who in their
Addresses and Declarations did own the King to be their Sovereign, and called
themselves his humble subjects, (Mr. Baxter himself could say no more to Mr.
Cromwell) They protested against the thought of ever changing the Government, or
lessening his Majesty's just Prerogative, but their Intention was to make him
the greatest Prince in Christendom; They confessed that without him they might
not Rule, and therefore used His Name to give countenance to their Actions. I
could write a volume on this occasion, were it not fitter to referr unto
several volumes already written. Let Mr. Baxter write less till he has read
more, and let him read the writings of the most learned Doctor Hammond, both
against the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for abolishing the Liturgy, and
against taking up of Arms under color of Religion against the lawful
Magistrate. Let him read Judge Ienkins against Master Prin's first writings,
and let him read the latter writings of Mr. Prin against himself; Let him read
Mr. Diggs, and Doctor Langbane, The Regal Apology, the excellent observations
upon Aristotle's Politiques, and many more such books, then do occurr to my
memory whilst I am writing. Next in saying the King withdrew, he does
unreasonably imply the King's withdrawing from the Government; why else does he
add, the Lords and Commons ruled alone? which, as it is a most senseless and a
most traitorous insinuation, so it seems to be the Reason why the man makes so
ill use of Grotius, whom he does either not understand, (as indeed Mr. Baxter
is a very small Latinist, and not a small, but rather no Grecian,) or wilfully
mistake, and most unpardonably misapply. As the Heretics have ever abused
Scripture, not only beside, but against its meaning.

. 18. Whilst he adds of the Lords and Commons, His most Notable contradiction
about the Houses ruling without the King.
[ That though they ruled alone, They attempted not the change of the species
of Government, ibid.] first he implies a contradiction; for he con^essed the
Constitution to have been King, Lords and Commons, which species of Government
must needs be changed, if the two later do Rule alone or without the Former.
Does Mr. Baxter think there is a Monarchy without a Monarch? Or, that the two
Houses can make a Monarchy without a single person to Form and Head them? Or
that it is no contradiction, to Rule alone, and not alone? Or does he mean that
the Lords and commons did only intend to depose the King, and set up some
other ( Richard or Oliver,) in his stead, that so the species of Government
might still remain? Or does he not know what species signifies? One of these
five things must needs be the reason of his miscarriage; But which of the five,
let him determine.

. 19. Whereas I had showed him his guilt, and folly, His new Miscarriage
against Grotius and the Episcopal Divines
in accusing (not only Grotius, but) in general Terms our Episcopal Divines,
and in particular Doctor Tailor, nay Bishop Pierce, and Bishop Wren, whereof
not one (for ought he knows) is of Grotius his mind; He now so juggles with
his Readers, as to alleviate the matter in two points, and grossly to falsify
in a third, 1. He says he did intimate, what he knows he expressed in broadest
wise. 2. He says he did intimate they were addicted to Popery* when he cannot
but know he had called them Papists. 3. He says he only spoke this of
Grotius, and all that are of his mind, when he knows he spoke it of a
multitude, whose minds he knows not. Nay I told him (what he confesses) That
the Prelatists are not agreeable to Grotius, in that for which he was most
suspected; to wit, his thinking that the Bull of Pius Quintus may (for peace)
be subscribed in a commodious sense. Yet could not Grotius have turned Papist,
for all those Reasons which I rendered in my Defense of Grotius, to which Master
Baxter does here turn Tail* Neither acknowledging his guilt, (of which I am
sure he is convinced) nor making a show that he is Innocent, unless he thinks
it sufficient to beg the Question. To my great Number of Arguments, he has not
so much as brought one answer; to my great number of Answers (against his old
Arguments) he has not given so much as the least Reply; And lastly for his
Forgeries or Falsifications of the Text, or his false translating* the words of
Grotius, (whether weakly or wilfully let others judge) the man is left
destitute of all Apology or Excuse.

He is proved to be a Jesuit by as good Logic as he uses.
. 20. But because he relents only by halves, and continues stomachfull in
affirming, that (if we are not quite given up to Popery) we are too much
inclined, and addicted to it; I will a little be pleasant with him, and prove
himself to be a papist (yea a Jesuit if he will, See my Appendix to New Disc.
Disc. sect, 5. p. 170. to 174.
) by adding now a fifteenth Argument (to the number of fourteen which I had
plied him with before; whereof not one is answered by him,) which at least ad
hominem will prove to be of sufficient force. He that espouseth and puts in
practice the Jesuits Doctrine of Probability, must needs be a Jesuit (and so
a Papist) by Mr. Baxter's way of Argumentation; But Mr. Baxter has done the
former, for o^ght I am able to apprehend) and therefore he cannot but be the
later, by his own way of Argumentation. The I^suits Doctrine of Probability is
most briefly expressed in these four Rules. I will set them down in my Autho^rs
own words.

1. Lors qu'ily a differentes opinions probables sur quelque point, The
Jesuits Doctrine of Probability. chez les provinciales. p. 73, 74.
Toutes les deux opinions sont egalement seures en conscience. Quamcunque
duarum viarum primo diversarum homines inierint, recta tendunt ad superos.
Escobar. Theol. moral. Tom. 1. in prael. cap. 3.

2. Il est permis de choisir l'opinion la m^ins probable and la moins seure.

3. Une opinion est probable, lors qu'elle est appuyee d'une raison ou d'une
autorite considerable and iln'est pa^ necessaire, que ces deux conditions
soient jointes ensemble, l'une ou l'autre suffi^ant. (Note that the former they
call an Intrinsecall, the later an extrinsecal probability.)

4. Selon le sentiment general des Casuists, une opinion est probable, and peut
estre communement suivi sans crainte, lors qu'elle est soustenue pa^ quatre
Auteurs graves. Mais pleusiers enseignent que l'Autorite d'un seul suffit.

Now if Mr. Baxter did not believe, That an opinion is probable, when it is
supported by a Reason without Authority, or by an Authority without a Reason;
And that he may with a good conscience choose to follow which he pleases of
two opinions, or both by turns, or (if he please) ^he less probable of the two;
what could move him to publish so many con^radictory Doctrines, as I have
showed out of his writings? Or how could he hope for any pardon for so many
contradictory actions, as I have cited out of his Life, and public practice? I
will leave him to be examined by my New Discoverer Discovered, by several
things in this Postscript, compared with the Rules above recited. If he shall
say he was not guided by the Jesuits Doctrine, he will be found to be by so
much the more Incapable of Excuse. For the more willful a sinner is, he cannot
choose but be the worse. And how extravagantly he argues that I am Popishly
affected, because I have evidently proved that Grotius never turned Papist, Let
him read (and ^lush) in my Appendix directed to him.. 4. p, 167, 168.

I am sure some of his Brethren are more lik^ Popish then any Grotius, Popery
common to Thom. Goodwin with some noted Presbyterians
or any English Prelatist within my knowledge. For Thomas Goodwin anointed a
sick Gentlewoman with oyie. And in the Church at Arnh^im (where Mr. Archer
himself was a kind of Pastor) Anointi^g the sick with oil was a standing
ordi^ance for the Church members. And upon the propounding with what ^yle the
unction was to be made, o^le of oliv^s was resolved to be the fittest for that
use. All this is said by one of the Brotherhood, See his Antapologia, p. 29.
Mr. Edwards; who also tells us of a Gentleman in that Church, (president
Lawrence is thought to have been the man.) who propounded (says my Author)
that singing of Hymns was an ordinance, which is, that any person of the
congregation, exercising his own gifts, should sing an Hymn in the
Congregation, the rest being silent. But it was more like Popery, that See Dr.
Roger Drakes letter to M. Love p. 7.
Doctor Drake should desire Mr. Love to pray for him, (not whilst on earth,
but) when in heaven. And when Mr. Iackson (the Presbyterian Minister) had
confessed a thing from which he afterward recoiled, (affirming it was true,
but refusing to swear it as a witness, the Lord Pres. -- (as they called him)
said openly in the Court, -- well* Jesuits and Priests, they say, you are
none, but you are their Brethren [pag. 52. Loves Trial.] Nor do I really think
that Mr. Baxter is a Jesuit, though I have proved him to be such, according to
the Logic in which he deals. I also proved he was an * Heathen, by an Argument
ad hominem beyond exception; of which, it is well he is so cunning as not to
make the least mention.

Mr. Baxter's Puritanism as well in life as Doctrine.
. 21. He concludes his postscript (as I shall mine) with the odious part of the
puritanism of his Life, of which (he says) he hears little from me, but his
own confessions, and his possessing a sequestration, (for he was loath to call
it another man's Living,) concerning which, he answe^s nothing, (not any one
word to all my Chapter) but only says he might answer, if the love of Mr.
Dance restrained him not. p. 329] In which parcel of Expressions there are
observable particulars, to which I shall return these following things.

1. Though I insisted pretty largely on many points of his practical
Puritanism, His additional Falsehood,
as all will say who will but read my New Discoverer Discovered, (and therefore
this is one of his many falsehoods,) yet now I hope in this Postscript he will
find a supply of my former merciful defect, at which he must not be angry,
because he has made it thus needful for me.

2. The first and worst Puritanes (at least in Christendom) were the Followers
of Marcus, The original of Puritanism among Professors of Christianity.
that monstrous Heretic. And Mr. Baxter (as near as any) has written after
that Copy. Those Ancient Haereticks made Account they were so pure and (...).
--
perfect* and under such an Incapacity to fall from Grace and Gods favor, that
they might live in any course of the greatest sin, without the least fear,
because without the least danger of being damned. -- (...). etc. Iren. advers.
Haer. l. 1. c. 9. p. 72.
For by the Benefit of Redemption they had a privilege of Impunity for all
their sins, which was not indulged to other Mortals; And in the midst of all
their villainies they were protected with such an Helmet, as they had read of in
Homers Iliads, And by that (as by a ^kreen) they were made invisible to the
Judge. Now whether Mr. Baxter does hope to hide himself from God; (as Pallas in
Homer^ Il. 5. (...). Irenaeus ubi supra.
Homer from the discovery of Mars, or as Gyges went invisible by the privilege
of his Ring,) or is carried away by the vehement strength of his opinion, That
being once godly he must be always unavoidably, and though God cannot but see,
yet can he not punish his impieties with pains eternal; whether he sticks to
his famous Doctrine, That a man must be a See the pages exactly cited with the
word^, in my new Dis. Disc. c. 3. sect. 1. p. 61, 62, 63. etc.
greater sinner then David was in his Murder and Adultery, Peter in his perjury
and denial of Christ, Lot in his Drunkenness and Incest, and Solomon in his
Idolatry, before he can be said to be notoriously ungodly; sure I am I have
evinced, he is as scandalous in his life, as in his Doctrine; Because I have
proved the Kings Supremacy, and that in respect of the two Houses, even of
that very Parliament under which Mr Bax^er does seek for shelter. And having
proved him to have been a See his Confession in his Holy Common weal^h. page
490* lin* 9, 10.
perfidious Rebel (Reader it is his own expression) by having proved the very
thing upon which he confesses he must be such, and gives the world He has
promised neve* to gainsay it, on the hypothesis spoken of.
leave to say, He is worse then a Murderer, an Adulterer,, a Drunkard, and the
like, (still I speak his own words,) I think I need not add more concerning his
Puritanism of Life.

Before I leave this subject, (which yet I will never leave finally, Our
English Puritanes caracterized by Salmasius, one of the learnedest of the
Beyond Sea Protestants.
whil^t Mr Baxter shall be so dareing as to continue a public Advocate for the
worst of Hypocrites, whose Rebellions, Murders, Schism, Sacrilege, have evinced
them to be such by many an ocular demonstration,) I will add the character
which Salmasius has given of our Puritanes, who yet was a friend and Patron to
them, until he was converted by seeing their usage of the King. Defens. Reg.
c. 10.
Belli isti sane Puritani sub Regno Elizabethae prodire e Tenebris ORCI, and
Ecclesiam inde turbare primum coeperunt. -- persuadent sibi, se posse
cujuslibet sceleris es^e Affines, and tamen sanctitatem in medio sceleris Actu
retinere. (In English thus) Those goodly Puritanes did first come forth from
the dark pit of Hell under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, And thence began to
disturb the Church. -- How nearly this touches Mr. Baxter, see the whole third
Chapter of my New Disc. Disc.
They persuade themselves, that (being once sanctified) they may engage in any
villainy, and yet, in the very act, retain their sanctity.

Mr. Baxter declared by God's Anointed to be a factious and schismatical person.
3. It were Puritanism enough, if he had only invaded his Neighbors goods, and
Entitled God's service to his Impiety. If he shall say he is established by any
Ordinance of the two Houses, (which without the King cannot possibly be a legal
and Rightful Parliament) I shall first referr him for satisfaction to my whole
Chapter upon the subject, (against which he has not off^rd one word of
Answer.) Next I shall tell him that the two Houses were bound to keep Magna
Charta, and not to break it; And so they were told by his Sacred Majesty, in
his Printed Proclamation against the opp^ession of the Clergy by the
Insurrection of Factious and Schismatic persons into their cures, etc.
wherein he said 1. That by the great Charter of England, no Ecclesiastical
Possession may be sequestered but by the Ordinary. 2. That what ever was
pretended, men of learning and piety were dispossessed for their Loyalty* 3.
That he straightly charged and commanded all his Quaere, whether M. Baxter was
not the Kings subject, as much as ^romwell's.
subjects, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, not to presume to intermeddle in
that affair, -- notwithstanding any sequestration, or pretended orders, or
ordinances, or other command whatsoever, of one or Quaere, whether the King,
and his learned Judges with him, did not know his Right, as well as Mr. Baxter.
His double injury to Master Dance.
both Houses of Parliament. 4. That if any should presume to transgress this
command, he did hereby declare them to infringe the good old Law of the Land,
and to assist Quaere, whether the King, and his learned Judges with him, did
not know his Right, as well as Mr. Baxter. His double injury to Master Dance.
a Rebellion against himself. Let Mr. Baxter mark that, and read the whole
Proclamation, to be seen in Bibliotheca Regia. 3. p. 324.

4. By saying he could say I know-not-what-of Master Dance, if love did not
restrain him, he does maliciously imply that Mr. Dance is as scandalous as
himself, or at least somewhat near it. Whether a drunkard, or a swearer, he
leaves the Reader to suspect. There is no worse slandering an Innocent man,
than by such a Paralypsis as here is used. Was it not enough, for Mr. Baxter to
seize on his neighbors goods, but he must slur his good name too? 'Twas ill
done of Antinous, to eat Ulysses his meat, and to beat him too into the
bargain, -- (...),
(...). Homer: Odyf. 17.
--
But Mr. Baxter ought to chew upon Ulysses his Answer thereupon, and if he can
digest it, 'twill do him good. (...),
(...).


. 22. I should here have concluded with Mr. Baxter, His unparalled bitterness
against Episcopacy and our Church seven ways rebuked.
but that in casting back my eye upon his p. 299. I find him railing at others,
somewhat more then at my self. He says that commonly the whole Kennels of
swearers and drunkards, and scorners at godliness (so he ever calls hypocrisy)
and such like, were continued in the communion of the Prelaticall Church; to
which he adds (page 300.) The scandalous Rabble are eager for prelacy, and
their mode of Government and w^rship.] To which I answer 7. things. 1. what he
says is but gratis dictum; as proofless, as it is false; and yet no falser of
the He means (^y that word) the constant sons of the Church of England.
Prelatical, then true of the Presbyterian party. 2. If it were true, (as it is
not) it would hold an obj^ction against our Savior, for admitting Judas to his
Sacrament, as Publicans and Sinners to his converse. 3. Neither drunkenness,
nor swearing, no nor murder, nor adultery, (if Mr Baxter himself may be
believed) is so bad as Rebellion. And he may fitly consider, what men are
admitted to his Communion. 4. That his way of Government and worship has been
followed by swearers, and per^ur'd persons, yea incestuous and murderous, and
parricid^al, I have proved undeniably in my Discovere^ Discovered. 5. He
forgets the foul fact with which he had charged the Presbyterian Assembly of
Divines, when he said, Key for Catholics* page 416.
[That The Assembly had put down Prelacy, for which a Convocation had form^d an
oath to be imposed on all Ministers but a little before.] Nothing can put down
the right of that, which is of divine Institution. No Note, that in the 42 of
Edw. 3. the first chapter does enact, that if any sta^ute be made to the
contrary, it shall be holden for null. And see Judge Ienk. p. 62.
not a full and free Parliament, much less the two Houses without the King;
much less the Assembly against the King. O wonder of wickedness! what a company
of inferior and obnoxious Ministers put down the Order of their Superiors? It
was treason for them to sit, after his Majesty's Consult Biblio^heca Regia for
it, sect. 3. p. 328.
Proclamation, [Inhibiting the Assembly of Divines and others, summoned to
Westminster by an ordinance of both houses of Parliament; what a dismal
character the King did fasten upon that Ordinance, and upon the Divines then
Assembled, as men of no Reputation or Learning, and Preachers of Rebellion,
etc. I wish that all men would read by having recourse to the Proclamation. 6.
He passes by the sin of Sacrilege, (which the Sea his Majesty's Concessions at
the ^sle of Wight. ib. p. ^57.
King proved to reign in the Presbyterians, and so he falls, with his Assembly
men, under the lash of Dr Gauden. [ As See Doctor Gauden's Hiera Dacrua, c. ^1.
p. 334.
if they were Chaplains, at once serving the Lord, their Bellies, and the
Times, as partaking of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils; They
rather cherish than crush this Cockaetrice; fearing to seem but lukewarm
Reformers, if they damped some of their good Masters zeal, by justly damning
this darling and damnable sin of Sacrilege; which puts on the form not only of
godliness and Reformation, but of thrift and good husbandry, to save the
public purse the necessary expenses of a Civil war; which in some men's
desires, as I believe it had never been begun, but only to destroy the
Government of the Church, and confiscate those Revenues, so (all things
computed) I no less believe that the secular purse has had but a dear
pennyworth of those Church Lands, at so vast a charge as has attended the
war, first commenced by Presbytery against Episcopacy*] 7. All the prime of
the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, the King himself, and his Ancestors, all
former Parliaments, and Magna Charta, are very eager for Prelacy. Are these a
scandalous rabble with Mr. Baxter? No, the Rabble was such, by which Prelacy
was decryed, though the Gates of Hell shall not finally prevail against it.

I will add no more of those men (the sons of violence and Rapine) then what
was said by Ulysses concerning the ill natu^'d Antinous, who took possession of
his house, Hom. Odyss, 17.
laid siege unto his wife, forbid him to enter his own doors, added Railing to
Robbery, and Blows to Railing, (...).


23. Christian Reader, The Conclusion.
I am sensible of being tedious by my prolixity. And therefore will end with an
Account of my vindicative Justice to Master Baxter, however some of his Fautors
may call it cruel.

As Mr. Baxter is a man, I truly love him, though I spare him not at all as a
Malefactor. It Is plain I love him, because I labor for his conversion. For I
could wish him no greater punishment, then to be still what he is. But to spare
the Malefactor, were a twofold Cruelty; as well to himself, as his weaker
brethren. It were a cruelty to himself, because as long as he prospers, he
Eccles. 8.11.
will not mend. It were a cruelty to his Brethren, who live indulgently in sin
by his Example. To make him Contemptible unto such, as do bless themselves in
their Rebellions, through the Authority they ascribe to his books and Practice,
I take it to be as good (I mean as charitable) a work, as I can set my Heart or
my Hand unto. For he confessed he blowed the coals of all our National
Combustions; And those I may call the Divel's bonfires. It was the very worst
thing in Jeroboam himself, that he made Israel to sin. It is for this very
Reason, that the Devil himself is called Satan. And so Mr. Baxter has been
avowedly an Epidemicall Disease to his native Country; For, he professes to
have encouraged many thousands to engage their force against their Sovereign.
And that (in the judgment of Ad quartum actum, and ultra, in hoe Dramate
desultando, f^igultientes Presbyteriani spectati sunt, -- Quinam alii merito
R^gis Occi^i crimine notari magis debuere, quam qui viam ad eum occidendum
munierunt? Illi sunt, qui nefariam illam securim cervicibus ejus inflixerunt,
non alii. Salmas. Defens. Reg. c. 10.
Salmasius himself) was to have the highest hand in the blackest murder of the
best King. Now the fewer Admirers this man shall have, (by the blessing of God
upon my endeavors,) the fewer men's sins he will be answerable for. And let him
kick whilst he will, my charity bids me consult his cure. No sinner can be more
scandalous, than a sinner in Print. That Mr. Baxter has been such, in a
greater measure than Paraeus, (whose Book was burnt by the Hangman ^t the
command of King James, and again (at the appointment of the whole Praevidit eas
quas nunc Britania sentit, Calamitates inde orituras. G^ot. vot. pro pace. p.
49.
Oxford University,) I have evinced in my former and later papers upon the
subject. Saint Paul himself thought it a duty, to 2 These. 3.14.
shame such Sinners for their Amendment; And by him I was persuaded to think it
mine. When a man has taken pains to let me know that he is blind, I hold it a
duty to make him see, or at least to make him see that he sees just nothing;
for fear he run against the wall, and break his forehead, or from a praecipice,
and break his neck. There is nothing so dangerous as for a Baiard to be Bold,
upon a fansifull presumption of being quick sighted.

I very well know that Master Baxter, if he is not converted, will be
embittered against me by what I say. But I leave it to the Prudentialists to be
deterred with such Mormo's, who dare be lazy and afraid to serve their God,
and their Generation; And even censure their Brethren who dare not fear to
serve both. Besides, I am armed by that of Seneca, Quosdam esse Tales, ut
pulchrius sit ab His vituperari, quam laudari. And when I consider that Mr.
Baxter has licked up the spittle of the Cromwells, and preached them up unto
the skies, thereby becoming a partaker of their very worst sins, whilst he has
railed (on the contrary) as well at the King as at the Bishop^, and at all that
is really Great or Sacred; I think it my Happiness and my Glory, not to have my
Name slurr'd with his commendations.

FINIS.
The Typographical Errata the candid Reader will be pleased either to pardon or
to Correct.
In Praef. p. 2. l. 5. in marg. r. Borrhaeus. p. 7. l. 22. for good, r. God. p.
14. l. ult. r. needst.

Page 3. l. 18. r. Injustitia. p. 4. l. 6. in marg. after cap. r. 28. p. 5. l.
13. in marg. after, page r. 20, 21. p. 7. l. 5. r. appetitum. ib. l. 26. r. be.
p. 11. l. 1. in marg after promise, r. of. p. 13. l. ult, in marg, r. and. p.
22. l. 24. after so. r. he. ib. p. 9. after will r. not. p. 26. l. 26. after
conceive r. it. ibid. l. ult. in marg. r. consequens. p. 27. l. 35. after is r.
so. p. 37. l. 24. dele and. p, 40. l. 22. r. forbidding. ibid. l. 34 in marg.
r. vetat. p. 44. l. ult in marg. after 12, r. 4. p. 45 (l. ult. in marg. after
3024. r. chap. 9. p. 47. l. 30. after hating r. God. p. 49. l. 3. in marg.
after sol. r. 2. p. 54. l. ult. r. c. 6. p. 56. l. 1. in. marg. after of, r.
the. ibid. l. 2. in marg. after. l r. 3. ib. l* 3. in marg. r. c. 23. p. 57. l.
22 r. thing. p. 76. l. 1. in marg. r. p. 137. p. 77. l. 4. in marg. r. verbis.
ib. l. ult. in marg. r. p. 671. p. 78. l. 34. in marg. r. aliam. ib. l. 3. r.
of. p. 8. l. 5. r. 2. did. p. 83. l. 30. after original r. sin. p. 84. l. 1.
after an r. evil. p. 85. l. 19. r. unto. p. 88. l. 4. in marg. r. annum. p. 90.
l. 7. r. Catachresis. p. 104. l. penult. r. p. 150. p. 106. l. 18. r. is p.
137. l. 18. after of, r. which. p. 144. l. 21. r. sybilline. p. 145. l. ult. in
marg. r. stealths. p. 146. col. 2. l. 30. d. ad 10. lineas, and id genus
reliqua. p. 149. col. 2, l. 31. r. q. 9. p. 153. l. 8. r. endeavor. p. 159. l.
7. r. so. p. 178. l. 4. r. such. p. 203. l. 29. r. p. 32.

Errata in the Postscript to Mr. Baxter.
Page 2. l. 4. in marg r. (...). ib. l. 11. in. marg r. Boutefeu. p. 4. l. 29.
r. Patizitha. p. 5. l. 14. for and r. or. p. 8. l. 4. for. tor. by. ib. l. 8.
for the r. thee. p. 9. l. 21. in marg. after that, r. that. p. 10. l. 15. r.
Traitor. p. 15. l. 30. after Demands, r. i^.


