EPSYON NEKPON OR The Lifelesness of Life on the hither side of IMMORTALITY.
WITH (A Timely Caveat against Procrastination.) Briefly expressed and applied
in A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Edward Peyto of Chesterton in
Warwickshire Esquire.

By Thomas Pierce Rector of Brington.

-- -- (...)
(...)
Sophocles (...). (...).
Eurip. in Alcest. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, and are to be sold at the
Angel in Ivie-lane. M. DC. LIX.

To my ever Honored Friend Mris. Elizabeth Peyto of Chesterton.
Madam,
TO speak my sense of your many Favors, with my reverent esteem of your
Approbation, and how inclinable I have been to yield obedience to your
Commands, the greatest expression that I can make, has been hitherto the least
that I think is due. And now I am sorry I can prove by no better Argument, (at
the present,) how great a deference and submission I think is due to your
Judgment, than by my having preferred it before mine own, in permitting that
Sermon to lie in common, which I had only intended for your enclosure. For
though the thing has been desired by several persons of Quality, besides your
self; yet the principal end of my Publication, is not to gratify their
desires, whom I could civilly deny, but to comply with your reasons, which I
cannot pardonably resist. The very piety of your Reasons having added to them
so great a power, that what was skill in Aspendius, in me would certainly be
guilt, should I (through Avarice or Envy) reserve any thing to my self, by
which your charity does 1 Cor. 13. 7.
believe I may profit others.

Indeed considering we are fallen, I do not only say, into an iron age, but
into an age whose very iron has gathered rust too, wherein the most do so
live, as if they verily thought they should never dye, (at least had forgotten
that they are dying, and being dead must be accountable 2 Cor. 5. 10.
for what is done whilst they are living,) it may be labor well spent, to trig
the wheels of their sensuality; and that by thrusting into their eyes such sad
and seasonable objects, as may make them consider their latter end. It was a
custom Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
with some of old, (or else my memory is a deceiver,) whenever they intended
a sumptuous Feast, to put a death's head into a dish, and serve it up unto the
table: which being meant for a significant, though silent Orator, to plead for
temperance and sobriety, by minding the men of their mortality, and that the
end of their eating should be to live, that the end of their living should be
to dye, and the end of their dying to live for ever, (for even the Heathens who
denied the resurrection of the body, did yet believe the immortality of the
soul,) was looked upon by all sober and considering guests, as the wholesomest
part of their entertainment. And since it is true (what is said by Solomon)
that sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance
Eccles. 7. 3.
the heart is made better; whereupon the Royal Preacher concludes it better of
the two, for a man to go into the house of mourning; I cannot but reason within
my Verse. 2.
self, that when Verse. 4.
the heart of fools is in the house of mirth, whose customary language is such
as this, [ Come Wisd. 2 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
on, let us enjoy the good things that are present, let us crown our selves
with Rose-buds before they be withered, let none of us go without his part of
voluptuousness, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every street, let us
oppress the poor man that is righteous, and let our strength be the law of
justice,] there can be nothing more friendly, or more agreeable to their wants,
than to invite such men to the house of mourning, and there to treat them with
the character of the life of man (which being impartially provided will serve
as well as a deaths-head) during the time of his floating in a valley of Tears.

For this is useful to teach us all, not to be amorous of a life, which is not
only so short, as that it cannot be kept long, but withal so full of trouble,
as that it is hardly Ioh 14. 1.
worth keeping. Nor by consequence to dote on a flattering world, which is so
little to be enjoyed, and its enjoyment so very full of vexatious mixtures.
Again it is useful to encourage Eccles. 2. 12.
us, not to be afraid of a man that must die, and Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28.
whilst he lives, can but kill the body. Nor to scruple at the paying that
common debt, which we owe to religion, as well as nature; that God may give us
an Mat. 25. 2^.
acquittance, as well as nature: we having received an ensurance from the
infallible undertaker, that the way to save and prolong a life, Mat. 16. 25.
Mar. 8. 36.
is religiously to lose it, or lay it down. Again it is useful to admonish us,
(after the measure that we are negligent) to Mat. 25. 16. Luke 19, 15.
trade with the talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages of life
eternal; and to be doing all the work we can, because the night comes, when
we shall not be able Ioh. 9. 4.
to work more. Lastly it minds us, as to be doing, because Phil. 4. 5.
our Lord comes, and is at hand, so to be vigilant and watchful, because we
know not Mat. 24. 42.
what hour. In a word, the more transitory, and the more troublesome, the life
of men shall appear to be, by so much the better will be the uses, which we are
prompted to make of its imperfection.

And here it comes into my mind, to give you my thanks by my observance of the
seasonable counsel you lately gave me, not to lavish out my time in shaming
the adversaries of truth, (by way of answer or reply to their mere
impertinencies and slanders,) but rather to spend it in such practical and
peaceable meditations, as are likelyer to forward their reformation. And though
it was not your opinion that I could use my time ill, in writing continual
vindications of the lately persecuted doctrines of Jesus Christ, but only that
you thought I might use it better; yet my opinion does so fully concur with
yours, that even as soon as my leisure serv's me to pay my Readers what I have
promised, (that men may learn to love God, by thinking him free from their
impieties, and may not reverence their impieties, so far forth as they think
them the works of God,) I shall direct my whole studies, as you have charitably
advised. And indeed I am the fitter to take your Counsel, because I want a fit
enemy with whom to combat, since three or four of the ablest have quit the
Field, and as it were bowed to the truth of the things in question. For though
they have lately sent out a Teazer, who (they hoped) might tempt me to loss of
time, not by disputing in any measure against a line of what I have published,
but only by opening a noisome mouth in a very wide manner against my person,
and (which is infinitely sadder) against my He says expressly, 1. that whatever
God foresees, and does not prevent, (which is all the wickedness in the world)
he may be justly said to Cause. (p. 9) 2. That Gods absolute will is the prime
cause, and necessarily productive of every action of the creature, p. 10. (and
so no less of our worst, then of our best actions 3. That God cannot be freed
from being the author of sin, by such as acknowledge his prescience, p. 9. (so
that either he cannot believe Gods prescience, or cannot but believe him the
Author of sin (...). That he cannot deny God to be the author of sin, or to
will the event of sin, p
God too; yet this does signify no more, then that they are stomackfull in
their afflictions, and like the metalsome Cynaegyrus in no particular but this,
that when his hands were out off, he pursued the enemy with his teeth. A
printed Pamphlet comes to me, subscribed and sent by Edward Bagshaw, (with your
pardon be it spoken, for it is not handsome in your presence to mention the name
of so foul a thing) which neither the gravity of my Calling, nor the price I
put upon my time, nor the reverence I bear to your advice, will permit me to
answer in more then two words. For whereas it amounted to these two things, to
wit, his railing against God as the * Author of sin, and his railing against me
as a grievous sinner, (without the P 2. l. (...) to be compared with l, 2.
offer of any proof, (...) the one, or the other,) To the first I say, No, to
the second, Nothing. As for his blasphemies at large, his inconsistencies with
himself, his frequent confessions that he is ignorant of what he presumes to
affirm, his impotent slanders, his most unsavory scurrilities, his pique at my
cassock and my cap, his evil eye upon my Rectory, and female Readers, (to the
honor of your sex, and shame of ours,) last of all for his impenitency and
resolutions to persevere in his crying sins (against that person of all the
world, whom, next to God, and his parents, he ought to have had in the greatest
reverence,) I shall leave him to the mercy of one or other of my Disciples; who
being as much his Iuniors, as he is mine, may have youth enough to excuse, if
not commend them, for cooling the courage of so prurient and bold a writer. But
for my self, I have determined, so to profit by what I preach in the following
Sermon, as not to leave it in the power of every petulant undertaker, to
dispose of my hours in altercation. They that look to live long before they
Psalm. 16. 10.
look upon the grave, may trifle out their time with better pretensions to an
excuse; but I who have lost so much already, and have also had (as I may say)
so many trials for my life, (at that bar of mortality, the bed of sickness,)
which makes me consider it as a perishing and dying life, cannot think it so
much as lawful, to dispute it away with an itching adversary; who, however
insufficient to hold up his quarrel, is yet too restless to lay it down.

But I proceed to that subject (from which my thoughts have been kept by a long
parenthesis) of which I love to be speaking on all occasions that can be
offered, because I find so much in it, of which I cannot but speak well; and no
less to the honor of his memory, then to the profit and pleasure of his
survivers. He was certainly a person, who lived a great deal of life in a
little time; especially dating it (as he did) from the memorable point of his
renovation. When I consider him in his child^ood at the university of Oxford (I
am sure some years before you knew him) exciting others by his example, to mind
the end of their being there; how strict and studious he appeared throughout
his course; how much farther he went before, (in point of standing and
proficiency,) then he came behind others, in point of years; how much applauded
he was by all, for his public exercises in Lent, both as an Orator at the
desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; how (like the brave Epaminondas) he
added honor to his degree, which yet to us (of his form) was all we were able
to attain; when I reflect upon his progress through much variety of Learning,
through every part of the Mathematics, especially through Algebra, the most
untrodden part of them; and when I compare with all this, the great sobriety of
his temper, his unaffected humility, and (after a public aberration) his
perfect return into the way, out of which (for some years) he had unhappily
been seduced; last of all when I remember, how whilst nothing but prosperity
made some in the world to hug their error, he hated his so much the more, the
more he had prosper'd by its delusion, (which was an argument of the most
generous and christian temper,) I think I may fitly affirm of him, what was
said by Siracides concerning Enoch, that being made perfect in a short time, he
fulfilled a Wisd. 4. 13.
long time.

I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him after his decease, the less he
was able to endure it, whilst yet alive. And I conceit my self the fitter, to
speak a little in his absence of his perfections, because so long as he was
present, I only told him of his faults. (Never leaving him as a Monitor,
until I thought he left them.) For having found him my noble Friend, and
(which in honor to his memory, I think it my duty to acknowledge) my very
munificent Benefactor, I could not be so unkind a thing, as not to afford him
my reprehensions, (yet still attended with respect) in whatsoever regard I
could think them useful. And 'twas the mark of an excellent judicious spirit,
that he valued me most for my greatest freedom in that particular. Even then
when our heads were most at enmity, (by the over great influence of his Fathers
persuasion upon his own) there still remained in both our hearts a most
inviolable friendship. And yet the chiefest instance of mine, was only my
often having been angry with what I conceived to be a sin; against which (by
Gods goodness being sufficiently convinced) he grew at last to be as angry, as
friends or enemies could have been. He had impartially considered that sacred
Aphorism, that to refuse instruction, is to despise one's own soul. And he who
could not be thankful for being chid, was judged by him to be unworthy of any
honest man's anger. Nor can I imagine a solid reason, why he was careful in
time of health, to be speak my presence in time of sickness, (of which you are
able to be his witness) unless because he did esteem me the most affectionate
person of his acquaintance, by his having still found me the most severe. To
conceal his great failing, (which was so far scandalous, as it was public, and
apt to be hurtful by the reverence which many men had to his example,) and only
to speak of the best things in him, were rather to flatter, then to commend
him. But yet as the Scripture has said of David, that he did what was right in
the eyes of the Lord, save only in the 1 King. 15. 5.
matter of Uriah the Hittite, so I think I may say of your self-departed, that
unless it were in that one unhappiness, of ingageing himself in an ugly Cause,
(which yet be seriously repented, and so was fitted for that early, but most
exemplary death, which happily opened a door to his immortality,) his greatest
vice was but this, that he modestly concealed too many virtues.

The remarkable manner of his departure did most remarkably resemble Sir
Spencer Compton's, (a person so singularly qualified by grace and nature and
education, that however his extraction was highly noble, I may confidently say
it was the lowest thing in him,) who dyed at Bruges about the time, wherein the
man of our desires expired at Compton. Never did I hear of a more heavenly
valediction to all the contentments of the earth, then was given by these two
at their dissolutions. Never yet did I hear, of any two farewells so much
alike. Never were any more admired, by those that saw them whilst they were
going, or more desired, when they were gone. How your excellent husband behaved
himself, I have but partly related in the conclusion of my Sermon. For though I
may not dissemble so great a truth, as my strong inclinations both to think and
speak of him to his advantage; yet in my last office of friendship, I did
religiously set so strict a watch over my tongue, as that I rather came short
in many points of his commendation, then went beyond him in any one. And could
I have had the possibility to have kept him company in his sickness, which I as
earnestly endeavored as he desired it, (but his sickness was too short, and my
journey too long, for either of us either to give, or to receive that
satisfaction,) I might have perfected that account, which many witnesses
enabled me to give in part.

Having thus far spoken of him to you, I must only speak of you to others. For
such as reject what they deserve, I think it a Panegyric sufficient, to make
it known they will have none. Having dedicated my papers to a person of your
endowments, for whom to approve, is to patronize them, I also dedicate your
person (with the hopeful particles of your self) to the peculiar protection
and grace of God. And as the heirs of that Family, which you were pleased by
adoption to make your own, have already been Lords of that seat for more then
eighteen Generations, (which I can reckon,) so that the person whom I
commemorate may inherit also that other blessing (as an addition to that
blessing which God has given him in your self) conserred in favor upon
Jonadab the son of Rechab, [Not to want a man to stand before him for ever,] is
no less the hope, then the prayer of him Ier. 35. 19.
who think's himself obliged, as well to be, as to write himself

Your most importunate servant at the throne of Grace THOMAS PIERCE.

THE LIFELESNES of LIFE on the hither side of IMMORTALITY.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of M. EDWARD PEYTO.
JOB XIV. I. Man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live, and is
full of Trouble.
NOw you have listened unto the Text, Cast your Eyes upon the shrine too. For
That does verify This, by no less then an Ocular Demonstration. You see the
Relics of a Person full of honor indeed, but not of years; he having had his
December (I may say) in June; and reaching the end of his Journey, (as 'twere)
in the middle of his Course. So that if I should be silent upon the mention
only of this Text [Man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live,]
That very Hearse would present you with a kind of visible Sermon.

Yet something I must say, in honor and Duty unto the Dead; and something too,
for the use and benefit of the Living; that as Death already has been to Him,
so it may be also to us Advantage; That some at least who are here present, may
go from Hence (when I have done,) if not the wiser or more intelligent, yet at
least the more considerate, and the better Resolved for coming hither. I need
not be teaching my weakest Brethren, (what common Experience has taught us
All) either the Misery, or the shortness, or the uncertainty of our Days. But
yet recounting how many Souls do perish for ever in their Impieties, not so
much by wanting Knowledge, as by abounding in the Thoughtlessness of what they
know, I shall not sure be unexcusable (having 2 Pet. 1. 12. 13. 15.
S. Peter for my example) if I tell you those things which you know already. An
Honest Remembrancer is as needful, as the most Eloquent Instructor to be
imagined, because we do less want the Knowledge, than the consideration of our
Duties. Saint Peter has magnified the office no less than three times
together, in that Epistle which he composed a (...) v. 14.
little before his Dissolution. I will not (says he) be negligent to put you
always in Remembrance, though ye know these things, and be established in the
Truth. Yea I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up,
by putting you in Remembrance. Again (says he) I will endeavor, that you may
be able, after my Decease, to have these things always in Remembrance. When I
consider that these words were by 2 Timothy 3. 16.
divine inspiration, and that they were written for our Instruction, yea and
inculcated upon us no less than thrice in one Breath; methinks they tacitly
reprove us, for having such wanton and Itching Ears, as will be satisfied with
nothing, but what is New. Whereas the Thing that is to us of greatest moment,
is not the study of more Knowledge, but the making good use of the things we
know. Not the furnishing of our Heads with a Richer Treasure of Speculations,
but the laying them up within our Hearts, and the drawing them out into our
Lives. Men would not live as they are wont, were they sufficiently (...).
Isocrat. (...).
mindful that they are men. Did they but often enough consider, how short a
time they have to live; how very 2 Cor. 11. 23
often they are in Deaths, before they dye; how much their short time of life
is more Mat. 24. 42.
uncertain than it is short; how very shortly they are to render a strict
Account unto The Judge, (I say not of every evil work, but) even of every Mat.
12. 36.
idle word, and of each unprofitable hour; they would not make so many Demurrs
in the important work of their Reformation. Luk 21. 36.
The uncertainty of their Time would make them watchful over their ways; that
how suddenly soever they may be caught (by the common Pursevant of Nature) yet
it may not be by a surprise. That they may not die with the Fool's motto [Non
(...). Polyb. l. 10. p. 603.
putaram] in their mouths.

Now to consider my present Text in the most useful manner that I am able, I
must bespeak your best Attention, not so much to the dogmaticall, as to the
Applicatory part of my Meditations. It being chiefly in my design, to show what
Profit we are to reap from all such melancholy Solemnities, as by many deep
Mourners are sown in Tears. What kind of Influences and Virtues, from the great
brittleness of our Lives, are to be shed upon the Practice and Conduct of them.
What kind of Consectaries and Uses should flow from the one, upon the other.

I shall not therefore wear out my little Time, in any such accurate and
logical Analyzing of the words, as would but serve to divert you from the
scope and drift, for which the holy man Job did make them a part of his
Preaching, and for which I have chosen them to be the subject of mine own; but
shall immediately consider them as an entire Doctrinall Proposition, exhibiting
to us both the frailty, and frame of man, and the reason of the one implicitly
rising out of the other. Man is born of a woman; there is his Frame. He has but
a short time to live, there is his Frailty. He has but a short time to live,
because he is born of a Woman; there is the reason of his Frailty from the
condition of his Frame. Nor is He attended only with vanity, but vexation of
spirit. As Jacob said unto Pharaoh, His Days are evil, as well as Few. However
empty of better Things, yet from the Bottom to the Top, (I mean from his Birth
unto his Burial) he is Repletus miseriis, filled full of Trouble.

And yet by way of Application, we may reflect upon the Text in a threefold
Antithesis. For

To Man as born of a woman, we may oppose the same Man, as being Regenerate,
and born of God.

To the very short life he has by Nature, we may oppose the life eternal he
has by Grace.

And to his fullness of misery whilst he is here in the body, we may oppose his
Fullness of Bliss and Glory.

But first let Man be considered in his Hypogaeo, that is, his state of
Declination, as he is born of a woman, and having a short time to live; and
that for this reason, because he is born of a woman. For it is a Maxim in
Philosophy which never fails, That Generable and Corruptible are Terms
convertible. It is demonstrably proved that we must one day Dye, because we did
one day begin to live. All that is born of a woman is both mixed and compounded
after the Image of the woman, of whom it is born; not only mixed of the four
Elements, but also compounded of Matter and Form. And all things Compounded
(...). Arist. E^h. l. 10. c. 3.
must be dissolved into the very same principles of which at first they were
composed. Hence are those pangs and yernings of the flesh and the spirit, of
the Appetite and the Will, of the law in the members, and the law in the mind;
(...). Id. l. 9. c. 4.
the one Inclining toward Earth, from whence 'twas taken, and the other
toward Heaven, from whence 'twas sent. The truth of this had been apparent, if
it had only been taken out of Aristotle's Lyceum; but we have it confirmed out
of Solomon's Portch too: for in the Day when man goes to his Eccles. 12. 5. 3.
4. 6. 5.
long home, when the grinders cease, and the windows be darkened, and all the
Daughters of Music are brought low, when the silver cord is once loosed, and
the golden Bowl broken, so as the mourners are going about the streets; Verse. 7.
Then the Dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return
to God who gave it. When God himself was pleased to be born of a woman, he
submitted to the conditions of our Mortality, and had (we know) but a short
time to live; for He expired by Crucifixion before he was full thirty four, as
his younger Heb. 2. 17.
Brother, whom we commemorate, before he was full thirty three.

Man has a short time indeed, as he is born of a woman, because he is born of
a woman; for (as it presently follows in the verses immediately after my Text)
He comes forth as a (...). Homer.
Flower, and (as a flower) he is cut down. He flies also as a shadow, and
continues not. And therefore Epictetus did fitly argue the very great
fickleness and frailty of worldly things, first because they were (...).
made, and therefore had their beginning; (...) Mark is Threescore and Ten, if
Moses himself has set it right. Or place it further, at fourscore; farther
yet, at an hundred; the life of man (we see) is short, though it should reach
the very utmost that Nature aims at.

But how many ways are there, whereby to frustrate the Intentions and Ends of
Nature? How many are there buried before their Birth? How many men's Cradles
become their Graves? How many rising Suns are set, almost as soon as they are
risen? and overtaken with Darkness in the very Dawning of their Days? How many
are there (like the good King Josias, like righteous Abel, and Enoch, and that
laudable Person whom now we celebrate,) who are taken away wisd. 4. 11.
speedily from amongst the wicked, as it were in the Zenith or Vertical point
of their strength, and luster? It is in every man's power to be Master of our
Lives, who is but able to despise his own. Nay it is in every one's power who
can but wink, to turn our beauty into Darkness; and in times of Pestilence, how
many are there can look us Dead, by an arrow shot out of the Eye into the
Heart? For one single way of coming into the world, how many are there to go
out of it before our Time? (I mean, before Nature is spent within us.) Many are
sent out of the world, by the Difficulties and hardships of coming in. We are
easily cut off, even by eating and drinking, the very Instruments, and Means of
Life. Not to speak of those greater slaughters, which are commonly committed by
Sword, and Famine, (which yet must both give place to surfeit,) Death may
possibly fly to us, as once to Aeschylus, in an Eagle's wing. Or we may easily
swallow Death, as Anacreon did, in a Grape. We may be murdered, like Homer with
a fit of Grief: Or fall, like Pindarus, by our Repose: we may become a
Sacrifice, as Philemon of old, to a little Jest. Or else, as Sophocles, to a
witty Sentence. We may be eaten up of worms, like mighty Herod. Or prove a
Feast for the Rats, like him of Mentz. A man may vomit out his Soul, as Sulla
did in a fit of Rage. Or else like Coma, may force it backwards. He may perish
by his strength, as did Polydamas and Milo. Or he may dye, like Thalna, by the
very excess of his Enjoyment. He may be Provender for his Horses, like
Diomedes. Or provision for his Hounds, like Actaeon and Lucian. Or else like
Tullu^ Hostilius, he may be burnt up quick with a flash of Lightning. Or if
there were nothing from without, which could violently break off our Thread of
Life, (and which by being a slender thread is very easily cut asunder) we have
a thousand Intesline Enemies to dispatch us speedily from within. There is
hardly any thing in the Body, but furnishes matter for a Disease. there is not
an Artery, or a Vein, but is a room in Natures workhouse, wherein our Humors
(as so many Cyclops's) are forging those Instruments of Mortality, which every
moment of our Lives are able to sweep us into our Graves. An ordinary
Apoplexy, or a little Impostume in the Brain, or a sudding rising of the
Lights, is enough to make a man Dye in Health; and may lodge him in Heaven or
in Hell, before he has the leisure to cry for Mercy.

Thus our Job 4. 19. Poma oculis tenus, contacta cinerescunt. Tertull. Apol. c.
40. p. 70.
Houses of Clay (as Eliphaz the Temanite did fitly call them) do seem as false,
and as frail, as the Apples of Sodom; which being specious to the Eye, did fall
to crumbles by every Touch. The frame of our building is not only so frail,
but (as some have thought) so ridiculous, that if we contemplate the body of
man in his condition of Mortality, and by reflecting upon the soul do thereby
prove it to be Immortal, we shall be tempted to stand amazed at the inequality
of the Match, but that to wonder at our Frailty, were but to wonder that we are
Men. Yet sure if We, that is, our souls (for our bodies are so far from being
Us, that we can hardly call them Ours,) are not capable of corruption, our
Bodies were not intended for our Husbands, but for our Houses; whose Doors will
either be open that we may go forth, or whose Building will be ruinous, that
needs we must; we cannot, by any means possible, make it the place of our
Continuance; for though our bodies (as says our Savior) are not so glorious
as the Lillies, yet (says Job) they are as frail. And by that time (with
David) they wax old as does a garment, how earnestly (with S. Paul) shall we
groan to be clothed upon? to be 2 Cor. 5. 2.
clothed with New apparel, whilst that the old is turning? for when Christ
shall come in the clouds with his holy Angels, at once to restore, and to
reform our Nature, he shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body. But here I speak of what it is, not what it shall
be; though it shall be glorious, yet now it is vile; though it shall be
immarcescible, yet now it is fading; though it shall be a long life, it is now a
short one.

It is indeed so short, and withal so uncertain, that Psalm. 90. 9.
we bring our years to an end like as a Tale that is told. Death come's so
hastily upon us, that we never can Psalm. 89. 48.
see it, till we are blind. We cannot but know that it is short, for we Psalm.
90. 5.
fade away suddenly like the grass; And yet we know not how short it is, for we
pray that God will Verse. 12.
teach us to number our Days. This we know without teaching; Wisd. 5. 13.
that even then when we were born, we began to draw toward our End. Whether
sleeping, or waking, we are always flying upon the wings of Time; And even
this very Instant, whilst I am speaking, does set us well on toward our
Journey's end; Job 18. 4.
whether we are worldly, and therefore study to keep Life; or Malcontents,
and therefore are weary of its possession; the King of Terrors will not fail,
either to meet, or overtake us. And whilst we all are (...).
Traveling to the very same Country, (I mean the Land of forgetfulness,
without considering it as an Antichamber to Heaven or Hell,) although we walk
thither in Hunc diverso tramite Mortales Omnes conantur adipisci. Boethde
Consol Philos l. 3 p. 98.
several Rodes; it is plain that he who lives longest, goes but the farthest
way about, and that he who dies soonest, goes the nearest way home.

I remember it was the humor, I know not whether of a more Cruel, or
Capricious Leo Isaurus (...).
Emperor, to put a Tax upon child-births; to make it a thing excizeable, for a
man to be born of a woman. As if he had farmed Gods Custom-house, he made every
man fine for being a Man; which as it was a great Instance of his Cruelty, so
'twas as good an Emblem of our frailty., our state of Pilgrimage upon Earth.
For we arrive at this World, as at a foreign and strange Country; where I am
sure it is proper, although not just, that we pay Tole for our very landing.
And then being landed, we are such transitory Inhabitants, that we do not so
properly dwell here, as Psalm. 39. ^4.
sojourn. All the meat we take in, is at God's great Ordinary; and even the
breath which we drink, is not our own, but His; (which when he takes away, we
dye, and are turned again into our Dust.) Insomuch that to expire, is no more
in effect, then to be honest: it is to restore a Life, which we did but borrow.

Euripides in Ph^nissis.
(...)
(...).
And well it were, if it were no worse: for if the life of man were pleasant,
it would the less disgrace it, that it is short. A short life and a (...).
Euripin Alcestide.
Merry, is that which many men applaud. But as the son of a woman has but a
few days to live, so it follows in the Text, that even those few days are
full of Trouble. And indeed so they are, in whatsoever Condition a man is
placed: for if he is poor, he has the trouble of pains, to get the goods of
this World. If he is rich, he has the (...). So. rat. in epist. ad Anonym. p.
8.
trouble of Care, to keep his Riches; the trouble of Avarice, to increase them;
the trouble of fear, to lose them; the trouble of sorrow, when they are lost.
And so his Riches can only make him the more. illustriously unhappy. If he
lives as he ought, he has the trouble of self-denyalls; the trouble of Col. 3.
5. Romans 8. 13.
mortifying the flesh, with the affections and lusts; the trouble of being in 2
Cor. 11. 23
Deaths often; the trouble of Romans 6. 6. Gal. 6. 14.
crucifying himself, and of 1 Cor. 15. 31
dying daily. If to avoid those Troubles, he lives in pleasure, as he ought
not, he has the trouble of being told, that he is 1 Timothy 5. 6.
dead whilst he lives; the trouble to Eccles. 41. 1.
think that he must dye; the trouble to fear (whilst he is dying) that he must
live when he is dead, that he may dye eternally. Not to speak of those troubles
which a man suffers in his Nonage, by being weaned from the breast, and by
breeding teeth; in his boyage and youth, by bearing the yoke of subjection, and
the rigid discipline of the Rod; in his manhood and riper years, by making
provision for all his Family, as servant-Generall to the whole; Nor to speak of
those Troubles which flow in upon him from every quarter, whether by Losses, or
Affronts, Contempts, or Envyings, by the anguish of some Maladies, and by the
loathsomness of others; rather then want matter of trouble, he will be most of
all troubled that he has (...). Herodot. in Thalia. c. 43. p. 179.
nothing to vex him. In his sober Intervalls and Fits, when he considers that
he must dye, and begins to Wild. 4. 20.
cast up the accounts of his sins, it will be some trouble to him that he is
without chaslisement, whereby he knows he is a Heb. 12. 8.
Bastard and not a son. It will disquiet him not a little, that he lives at
rest in his possessions; and become his great Cross, that he has prosperity in
all things. Not only the sting, and the stroke, but the very Remembrance of
Death will be bitter to him; so says Jesus the son of Sirach chap. 41. verse. 1.

Thus (we see) the child of man, or the man who is born of a woman is so full
of Trouble to the brim, that many times it overflow's him. On one side, or
other, we all are troubled; but some are troubled on 2 Cor. 4. 8. Occidere est;
vetare cupientem mori. Sen in Thebaide.
every side. Insomuch that they themselves are the greatest Trouble unto
themselves; and it is a kind of death to them, that they cannot dye. We find
King David so sick of Life, as to fall a wishing for the wings of a Dove, that
so his soul might fly away from the great Impediments of his Body. He confessed
Psalm. 54.
his Days were at the longest but a Psalm 39. 5.
span, and yet he complained they were no shorter. It seems that Span was as
the span of a withered Hand; which the farther he stretched out, the more it
grieved him. He was Psalm. 6. 6.
weary of his groaning. His soul did Psalm. 42. 1.
pant after Heaven, and even Verse. 2.
thirsted for God. And he might once more have cried (though in another sense)
Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck, and to have mine
habitation among the Tents of Kedar! I remember that Charidemus, in Dio
Chrysoslom, compared man's Dio Chrysostom. orat. 30. page 305. D.
Life unto a Feast or Banquet. And I the rather took notice of it, because the
Prophet Elijah did seem (in some sense) to have made it good. Who after a first
or second Course (as I may say) of living, as if he had surfetted of Life,
cried out in have, It is enough; and with the very same breath, desired God to
take away; for so faith the Scripture, 1 Kings 19. 4. He went into the
Wilderness (a solitary place) and there be sat under a Juniper (in a
melancholy posture) and 1 King. 19. 4.
requested of God that he might dye (in a very disconsolate and doleful
manner,) even pouring forth his soul in these melting Accents, It is enough
now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am no better then my Fa^hers. And if the
Days of Elijah were full of trouble, how was Job overwhelmed, and running over
with his Calamity? when the Job 6. 4.
Terrors of God did set themselves in array against him, how did he Verse 8, 9.
long for destruction? O (says he) that I might have my request, that God
would grant me the thing that I long for! Even that it would please him to
destroy me, that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off. How did he Job 3.
1, 3, 4, 5, etc.
Curse the Day of his Birth, and the Night wherein he was conceived? Let that
Day be darkness; let the shadow of Death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it;
let blackness terrify it. And for the Night, let it not be joined unto the
days of the year. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; neither let
it s^e the dawning of the day. And what was his reason for this unkindness to
that particular Day and Night, save that they brought upon him trouble of being
a Man borne of a woman: for we find him complaining a little after, Verse. 11,
12.
why dyed I not from the Womb! why did I not give up the ghost when I came out
of the Belly? And then for the Life of our blessed Savior, who is called by
way of Eminence, The Son of Man; as I observed before that it was short, so
must I here put you in mind that it was full of Trouble. He was therefore
called by way of Eminence, Vir Dolorum, Isa. 53 ^.
A Man of sorrows. The Prophet adds, he was Ibid.
acquainted with Grief. For the whole Tenor of his Life was a continuation of
his Calamities.

The Time would fail me, should I but mention the hundredth part of those men,
whose short Time of life has seemed long to them, even because they have felt
it so full of Trouble. But enough has been said concerning the Doctrine of the
Text. And it lies upon us to make some use.

First then let us consider, that if man (as born of The Application.
a woman) has but a short time to live, It concerns us to take up the prayer
of David, that God will Psalm. 39. 4.
teach us to know our End, and the number of our Days, that we (like 2 King.
20. 6.
Hezechiah) may be fully certified how short our Time is. It concerns us to
take up the Resolution Job 14. 14.
of Job; All the Days of our appointed time, incessantly waiting till our
change comes. It concerns us, not to say, with the rich man in the parable, we
will pull down our Barns and build greater, and there we will Luke 12. 18.
bestow all our fruits' and our goods: much less may we say, with that other
Worldling, Souls take your Ease, eat drink and be merry, for you have much
goods laid up Verse. 1^.
for many years: for (alas!) how can we know, (silly creatures as we are,) but
that this very Night, nay this very minute, either they may be taken from us,
or we from them? there is such a fadeingness on their parts, and such a
fickleness on ours. But it concerns us rather to say with Job, Naked came we
into the world, Job 1. 21.
and naked shall we go out of it. Or it concerns us rather to say with David,
that we are strangers upon Earth, Psalm. 38. 12.
and but so many sojourners, as all our Fathers were: for whilst we consider
we are but strangers, we shall as 1 Pet. 2. 11. Heb. 11. 13.
Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul.
And so long as we remember we are but sojourners upon earth, we shall pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear. And behaving our selves among the
Gentiles, as a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 12.
an holy Nation, a peculiar People, we shall show forth his praise, who has
called us out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light.

Secondly let us consider, that since our Life is uncertain, as well as short,
(inasmuch as we know not how short it is) it concerns us immediately, to labor
hard in the Improvement of this our span into Eternity; to employ our very
short and uncertain Time, in making a seasonable provision against them both; I
mean, it is shortness, and its uncertainty. For shall we be lavish even of that,
which is so easily lost, and of which we have so very little, and every minute
of which Little does carry so great a weight with it, as will be either a kind
of Pulley to help raise us up to Heaven, or else a Clogg to pull us down to the
lowest Hell? Of whatsoever we may be wastefull, we ought to be charie of our
Time, which does incontinently perish, and will eternally be reckoned on our
account. Per^unt and imputantur, the Epigrammatist could say of his precious
Hours.

Now the way to provide against the shortness of our Life, is so to live, as to
dye, to the greatest Advantage to be imagined; and so to dye as to live for
ever. What Tobit said to Tobias, in respect of wealth, Tobit 4. 21.
[ Fear not, my son, that we are made poor, for thou have much wealth, if thou
fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is pleasing in his sight.]
He might have said as well in respect of wisdom, and by consequence as well in
respect of long life. For as the Job 28. 28.
fear of the Lord is solid wisdom, and to depart from Evil is understanding; so
Honorable Age is not that which stands in the length of Time, nor that is
measured by Wisd. 4 8, 9.
number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life
is old age. To be devoted (like Anna) to the House of God, so as to serve him
night Luke 2. 37.
and day with fasting and prayers, and not to content our selves with that
which is merely lawful, or barely enough to serve turn, (as men do commonly
reason within themselves,) but to study the things that are Romans 2. 8.
more excellent, to streine hard toward 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfection, to forget those things that are behind, and to reach forth unto
those things that are before, pressing on toward the Phil. 3. 13, 14.
mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, this is to
amplisie our lives, and to frustrate the malice of our mortality; and as the
want of stature many times is supplied in thickness, so this is to live a great
deal in the little time of our duration.

Ampliat Aetatis spa^ium sibi Vir bonus, hoc est
Vivere bis, Vita posse priore srui.
As we are thus to provide against the shortness, so in like manner we must
provide against the uncertainty of our time. And the way to do that, is to
distrust the future, and to lay hold upon the present; so to live every hour,
as if we were not to live the next. Having a short time to live, our time to
repent cannot be long. And not assured of the Nemo tam Divos habuit faventes,
crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.
morrow, it is madness not to repent today: when we see many persons of the
most promising countenance, and the most prosperous constitution, not only
snatched by an early, but sudden death, why should we not seriously consider,
that we may be of their number, having no promise of the contrary, either
within, or without us? Cuivis potest accidere quod cuiquam potest. Publius.
What happens to any man, may happen to every man; every man being encompassed
with the same conditions of mortality. It Is true indeed, that we may live till
we are old; but it is as true, that we may dye whilst we are young; and
therefore the later possibility should as well prevail with us for a dispatch
of our repentance, as the former too too often prevails upon us for a delay.
Nay if we procrastinate our repentance, in hope of living till we are old, how
much rather should we precipitate it, for fear of dying whilst we are young?
(if yet it were possible to precipitate so good and necessary a work, as a
solid impartial sincere repentance.) For as to repent whilst we are young, can
never do us the least harm; so it may probably do us the greatest, to post it
off till we are old. Nay it may cost us the loss of heaven, and a sad eternity
in hell, if we deferr our repentance (I do not say till we are old, but if we
deferr it) being young, till we are one day older then now we are. And shall we
deferr it beyond today, because we may do it as well tomorrow? This is
madness unexpressible. For as it is true that we may, so it is as true that we
may not. Our knowledge of the one, is just as little as of the other. (Or
rather our ignorance is just as much.) And shall we dare to tempt God, by
presuming upon that which we do not know? Are heaven and hell such trivial
things, as to be put to a bare adventure? shall we play for salvation, as it
were by filliping cross or pile? implicitly saying within our selves, if we
live till the morrow, we will repent and be saved; but if we dye before night,
we will dye in our sins and be damned for ever? shall we reason within our
selves, that though we know our own death may be as sudden as other men's, yet
we will put it to the venture, and make no doubt but to fare, as well as
hitherto we have done? what is this but to dally with the day of judgment, or
to bewray our disbelief (...) -- S^phoc. in Ira. chintis.
that there is any such thing? Its true we may live until the morrow, and so
on the morrow we may repent. But what is this to the purpose, that it is certain
we may, whilst it is as doubtful whether we shall? Is it not good to make sure
of happiness, by repenting seriously at present, rather then let it lie
doubtful, by not repenting until anon? Methinks we should easily be persuaded
to espouse that course, which we are thoroughly convinced does tend the most to
our Advantage.

When the rich worldling in the Parable was speaking placentia to his soul, [
Luke 12 20.
soul take thine ease,] alleging no other reason, than his having much goods
for many years; nothing is fitter to be observed, then our Savior's words upon
that occasion, Stulte, Thou Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee; then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? However the
men of this world have quite another measure (...), and do esteem it the
greatest prudence to take (...) pleasure whilst they are young, reserving the
work (...) mortification for times of sickness and old age, (when 'twill be
easy to leave their pleasures, because their pleasures will leave them,) yet
in the judgment of God the Son, (the word and wisdom of the Father) it is the
part of a blockhead and a fool, to make account of more years, then he is sure
of days or hours. He is a sot, as well as a sinner, who does adjourn and shift
off the amendment of his life, perhaps till twenty, or thirty, or forty years
after his death. It Is true indeed that Hezekiah, whilst he was yet in the
confines and skirts of death, had a 2 King. 20. 6.
lease of life granted no less than fifteen years long; but he deferred not his
repentance one day the longer. And shall we adventure to live an hour in an
impenitent estate, who have not a lease of life promised, no not so much as for
an hour? shall we dare enter into our beds, and sleep securely any one night,
not thinking how we may awake, whether in heaven or in hell? we know it is
timely repentance which must secure us of the one, and it is final impenitence
which gives us assurance of the other. What the Apostle of the Gentiles has
said of wrath, may be as usefully spoken of every other provoking sin, Ephesians 4
26
Let not the Sun go down upon it. Let us not live in any sin until the Sun is
gone down, because we are -- (...) S^ph. ubi supra.
far from being sure that we shall live till Sun rising. How many Professors go
to sleep, (when the Sun is down, and the curtains of the night are drawn about
them,) in a state of drunkenness or adultery, in a state of avarice or malice,
in a state of sacrilege or rebellion, in a state of deceitfulness and
hypocrisy, without the least consideration how short a time they have to live,
and how very much shorter then they imagine? Yet unless they believe they can
dream devoutly, and truly repent when they are sleeping, they cannot but know
they are damned for ever, if the day of the Lord shall come upon them as a 1
These. 5. 2, 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
thief in the night, and catch them napping in their impieties.

Consider this all ye that forget God, least he pluck you away, Psalm. 50. 2^.
and there be none to deliver you. Consider it all ye that forget your selves.
That forget how few your days are, and how full of misery. Consider your
bodies, from whence they came; and consider your souls, whether it is that they
are going. Consider your life is in your breath, and your breath is in your
nostrils; and that in the management of a moment, (for the better, or for the
worse,) there depends either a joyful or a sad eternity. If our Time were
certain as well as short, (or rather if we were certain how short it is, there
might be some color or pretense, for the posting off of our Reformation. But
since we Mat. 24. 42* 43, 44.
know not at what hour our Lord will come, this should mightily engage us to be
hourly standing upon our Hab^k. 2* 1.
watch. And this may suffice for the subject of our second Consideration.

Thirdly let us consider, that if our days, which are few, are as full of
trouble, it should serve to make us less fond of living, and less devoted to
self-preservation, and less afraid of the cross of Christ, when our Faith shall
be called to the severest Trialls. Ecclus. 41* 2
O death (says the son of Sirach) acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy,
and to him that is vexed with all things. The troubles incident to life have
made the Job 3. 20* 21.
bitter in soul to long for death, and to Verse. 22.
rejoice exceedingly when they have found the grave. If the Empress Cuspinianus
in vita Sigismundi. p. 498.
Barbara had been orthodox, in believing men's souls to be just as mortal as
their bodies, death at least would be capable of this applause and
commendation, that it puts a conclusion to all our troubles. If we did not fear
him, who can cast both body and soul Mat. 10. 27, 28.
into hell, we should not need fear them, who can destroy the body only;
because Ecclus. 41. 4.
there is no inquisition in the grave. Job 3 17. 18, 14, 19, 18.
There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary are at rest. There
the Prisoners lie down with Kings and counselors of the earth. The servant
there is free from his master. There is sleep, and still silence, nor can they
hear the voice of the oppressor.

Mors Bona si non est, Finis tamen Illa Malorum. But we have farther to
consider the threefold Antithesis, which we ought to oppose to the three
Clauses in the Text: for as man, who is born of a woman, has but a short time
to live, and is full of trouble; so man, as regenerate and born of God, has a
long time to live, and is full of bliss. A life so long, that it runs parallel
with eternity; and therefore (without a Catachresis) we cannot use such an
expression, as length of time. It is not a long, but an endless life; it is not
time, but eternity, which now I speak of. Nor is it a wretched eternity, of
which a man may have the privilege as he is born of a woman; but an eternity
of bliss, which is competent to him as born of God. And of this bliss there is
such a fullness, that our Heads are too thick, to understand it. Or if we were
able to understand it, yet our hearts are too narrow, to give it entrance. Or
if our hearts could hold it, yet our tongues are too stammering, to express and
utter it. Or if we were able to do that, yet our lives are too short; to
communicate and reveal it to other creatures. In a word, it is such, as not
only eye has not seen, nor ear heard, but it never has entered into the heart
of man to conceive. Incomprehensible as it is, it is such as God has prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

If we compare this life, with the life described in the Text, it will several
ways be useful to us; for it will moderate our joys, whilst we possess our
dear friends; and it will mitigate our sorrows, when we have lost them; for it
will mind us that they are freed from a life of misery, and that they are
happily translated to one of bliss. Nay if we are true lovers indeed, and look
not only at our Philip. 2* 4.
own interest, but at the interest of the parties to whom we vow love, we even
lose them to our advantage, because to theirs. Lastly it sweetens the solemn
farewell, which our souls must take of our mortal bodies; we shall desire to
be dissolved, when we can groundedly hope we shall be with Christ; we shall
groan, and groan earnestly, to be uncloathed of our bodies with which we are 2
Cor. 5. 23. 4.
burdened, if we Verse. 7.
live by this faith, that we shall be clothed upon with our house from heaven;
we shall cheerfully lay down our bodies in the dust, when it is to rest in his
peace, who will certainly raise us by his power, that we may rest and reign
with him in glory.

THus have I done with my Text, though but in the middle of my Sermon; and but
briefly considered it in its Antithesis, because it is not pertinent any
otherwise, then by affording to such as are Mourners, a use of comfort. And
because I am confident, that there are many such here, (when I consider how
many losses lie wrapped in one) not only wearers of black, but serious Mourners,
whose very souls and insides are hung with sable, and whose unaffected sorrows
do call for comfort; I shall raise you matter of real joy, from the ground and
occasion of all your sorrows.

For there is yet another Text, upon which I must give you another Sermon. A
Text, I say, whose matter and form have been divided by God and Nature. The
(...). (...). Alexis in Olympiodoro.
inward form is ascended, to him from whom it came down; but the outward matter
still lies before us. And well may that person become our Text, who was himself
a living Sermon; since the integrity of his life was truly doctrinal, and the
resplendent piety of his death a very pertinent application. I am sure it is
well known in another place, and therefore I hope it is believed in this, that I
am none of their number, who use to scatter abroad their Eulogies upon every
man's Hearse, merely as customary offerings, or things of course. No, those
alone are my seasons wherein to make narratives of the dead, when it may
righteously be done for the use and benefit of the living. You know that Jesus
the son of Sirach does set himself solemnly to the work: and that with an (...)
Let us now praise famous men. Men Ecclus. 44. 1, 2 ^. etc.
renowned for their power; men of knowledge and learning; wise and eloquent in
their instructions. Rich men furnished with ability, and living peaceably in
their habitations. There be of them that have left a name behind them, if their
praises might be reported. And some there be who have no memorial, who have
perished as though they had never been, and are become as though they had never
been born, and their children after them. But these were merciful men, whose
righteousness has not been forgotten, (...). Eurip. in (...).
their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore; for the
people will tell of their wisdom, and the congregation will show forth their
praise.

Our honored Brother now departed (I will not say the unhappy, but) the
now-blessed occasion of this solemnity, as he deserves a noble Eulogie, so he
needs none at all: He being one of those few of my particular acquaintance, of
whom I have seldom, or never heard an ill word spoken. But in this one thing,
he had the least resemblance unto his Savior, who was hated by many, despised
by more, and basely forsaken almost by all. This is therefore no commendation,
on which our Savior proclaims a Woe. Woe be to you when all men speak well of
you. Nor do I say that this worthy Gentleman was ill spoken of by none, (he was
sure too worthy to be so befriended by the world) I only say that I have
seldom or never heard it. And James 4. 4.
he was so much the less obnoxious to the dishonesty of the Tongue, because (as
far as his Quality would give him leave) he ever delighted in that obscurity,
which most young Gentlemen are wont to shun. For although his extraction (we
know) was noble, and his fortune extremely fair, though his natural parts and
abilities were truly great, as well as greatly improved by art and industry,
(he having been Master of many Languages, and (I am sure) well versed in great
variety of Learning) yet still his modesty and his meekness were so much
greater then all the rest, that (in a perfect contrariety to the vainglorious
and hypocritical) he ever turned his worst side outward. The late retir'dness
of his life made him so blameless and inoffensive, that I suppose it has
ditted the mouth of envy.

It was no doubt an effect of those two virtues, (I mean his modesty and his
meekness) that he so constantly observed that Apostolical Precept, James 1.
19. For he, if any man living, was swift to hear, but slow (...). -- Hom. (...).
to speak. And when he thought it his turn to speak, it was rather much, than
in many words. As the speech of Menelaus described by Homer, so perfectly free
were his discourses, from the fault of impertinence, or superfluity.

So far was he from sitting down in the chair of the scornful, (as too many of
his quality are wont to do) nay so far from walking in the counsels of the
ungodly (from the time that he found them to be such,) that he made it his care
and chiefest caution, (in his later years more especially,) not so much as to
stand in the way of sinners.

For as much as I could judge of him, (who had the happiness to know him for
many years) he was a true Nathanael, Ioh. 1. 47* 48.
an Israelite indeed; who, though he had many Imperfections, as one who was
born of a woman; yet he had sure no guile, as being also regenerate, and born
of God. Methinks I hear him now speaking to all that knew him, as Samuel did to
all Israel; I have 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3.
walked before you from my childhood to this day. Behold here I am, witness
against me before the Lord; whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken?
or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it? To
which methinks I hear the Answer which was made to Samuel in the next verse,
thou Verse 4.
have not defrauded nor oppressed us.

It Is this that speaks a man right honest; which is a nobler title then right
honorable, though I may say very truly, that he had many due titles of honor
too. For not to speak of his Ancestors, who came in hither with the Conquest,
and that from the city Poitou in France, (from whence they derived the name of
Peyto) I think it more for his honor, to have been many ways (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. (in Gen.) 23.
good; to wit, a good husband and a good father; a good master and a good
friend; a good neighbor and a good landlord; a good christian and a good man.
And, which is a sign of more goodness then all the rest, he never thought he
was good enough; especially in the first, and the two last particulars.

It is an excellent ingredient in that religious composition, which he had sent
before him to bless his soul, and left behind him in memory to perfume his name
too, that having been charged with a debt, (whether by his Father's last will
and testament, or by the condition of the times, or by both together,) he was
ever in some pain till he had paid that debt, or at least had made provision
for it; because until he had done justice, he knew he could not so well show
works of mercy; and that was doubtless a pregnant token of walking humbly with
his God. The three grand Duties which God requires, in the sixth chapter of
Micah, at the ninth verse.

The end of Christ's coming into the world, was to make us live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. (Tit. 2. 13.) the first implying
our whole duty toward our selves, the second toward our neighbor, the third
toward our God. That extraordinary person, of whom I speak, does seem to me,
as well as others, to have reached those ends. He was so eminently sober, that
I believe he was never known to have sinned against his own body in any kind;
so eminently righteous, that (as I said) he was in pain, till he had rendered to
every man his due. Being so sober, and so righteous, he is inferred to have
been so godly too, as to have lived in opposition to those bare professors of
Christianity, who having a form of godliness deny the power of it; for give me
leave to tell you, what is not every day considered, that the most material
part of godliness is moral honesty. Nor was there any thing more conspicuous
in the holy life of our blessed Lord. The second Table is the touchstone of our
obedience unto the first. And to apply what I say unto the honorable person of
whom I speak, we may conclude him to have lived the life of faith, because we
find him to Gal. 3. 11. Number. 23. 10.
have dyed the death of the righteous.

To pass on therefore toward his death, as the fittest transition unto his
burial; I am enabled to say of him, (by such as were eye and ear witnesses,)
that he abundantly enjoyed [that (...)] that happy calmness of death, which the
Emperor Augustus was wont to pray for. I say he enjoyed it in both acceptions
of the word. For first however he was sick of a burning Fever, (which carried
him up like Elias in a fiery Chariot) yet he had this rare happiness which is
the privilege of a few, that he even enjoyed his whole disease without the
least taint of deliration. That knot of union betwixt his body and his soul,
was not violently broken, but very leasurely untyed; they having parted like
two friends, not by a rude falling-out, but a loving farewell. Thus was his
Euthanasia in the first acception of the word. But he had it much more, as to
the second. For

Two things there are, which are wont to make death terrible. The first is
suddenness, and the second is sin. He was so armed against the first, that he
did not only take care for the setting his outward house in 2 Kin. 20. 1.
order, to the end that nothing in this world might trash his flight toward a
better; but he also sent for the Divine, to imp the wings of his devotion; and
farther told his Physician, that God had sent him his summons; so well was he
armed against the first of those Phobera, and that by the help of our English
Litanie, which prompt's us to pray against sudden Death; and which he commanded
one of his servants to assist him with upon his death bed, bestowing upon it
(when he had done) a great deal of holy admiration.

Again, so well was he prepared against the second, that for the tenderness of
his conscience, and his deep resentment of all his sins, those of the times
more especially, in which he deplored his unhappiness that he had had a great
share, (till God was pleased in much mercy to show him that error of his
judgment, by which the error of his practice was bred and cherished,) Next
for his hatred of himself in the remembrance of them, (though we may say, that
in comparison with many others alive and dead, he had kept himself unspotted
from the world,) then for his steadfast resolutions Iam. 1. 27.
of better life, of making ample satisfaction for every ill that he had done,
and so of bringing forth fruits Luke 3. 8. Act. 26. 20.
worthy of repentance, (if God should be pleased to enlarge his time;) and last
of all for his solicitude, that all his Josh. 24. 15.
family might live in the fear of God, and redeem those opportunities which he
seemed (at least unto himself) to have sometimes lost, or neglected; I say, in
all these respects, he appears to me, (as well as to others) a more then
ordinary Example.

But some may say, that sick persons are ever sorry Object.
for their sins; but it is many times a sorrow squeezed out by sickness. And as
soon as they recover, they do relapse too.

To which I answer, that though it is often so in others, Answ.
yet in this exemplary Christian it could not be so. For

First, it was a mark of his sincerity, that he looked upon his failings, as
through a Macroscope; which made them seem nearer, and very much greater then
they were. He warned all those who stood about his sick bed, to beware of those
sins which the world call's little; and of the no-little sins which the world
calls none; yea from the least 1 These. 5. 22.
appearances and opportunities of sin. It was his own expression, that all the
sins of his former life did even kick in his very face; yet Prove. 5. 8.
he remembered the Mat. 20. 9.
labourer, who went late into the Vineyard, and was rewarded. He also made some
reflections upon the Cito igno scit Dominus, quia cito ille convertitur. Ambros.
in Luc. 23. 43.
thief on the cross; that his faith might steer an even course, betwixt the
Scylla of despair, and the Charybdis of presumption.

Secondly, it was another good token of his sincerity, that he was not merely a
deathbed penitent, whose repentance too too often is but [a (...)] a sorrow
according to the world; but, (as diverse persons can well witness) he began the
great work in his time of health; so as his sickness did but declare his having
been a 2 Cor. 5. 17.
new creature by 2 Cor. 7. 9.
change of mind, and that he did not fall back, but Philip. 3. 14
press forward toward the mark, and persevere in so doing unto the (...). Mat.
24. 13.
end.

Thirdly, it was another mark of his sincerity, that he insisted on the nature
of true repentance, which still imports an amendment and reformation of life.
Nor had he a willingness to recover his former health, unless to the end he
might demonstrate his renovation, by that carefullness, that fear, that
indignation, that vehement desire, that zeal, yea that revenge, which S. Paul 2
Cor. 7* 11.
has recorded as the effects of a godly sorrow in his Corinthians. Abhorring
and deploring those desperate notions of repentance, which the world is so
commonly mistaken in.

Fourthly, it was a comfortable token of his sincerity, that he was obstinate
in his Prayers, against the precept of his Physician, and resolved to pour out
his soul, though to the prejudice of his body. As if he were piously ambitious
of being too strong for his own infirmities; when a reverend Divine (who was
standing by) would fain have done that office for him, at least as a Deputy to
his lungs only, that he might not spend his few spirits as yet left in him; he
made him this resolute and hasty, but pious answer, that whilst a tongue was in
his head whereby to speak, and whilst he had breath in his body to move and
animate his tongue, and whilst he had lungs in his breast to supply his breath,
he would show forth the goodness and the glory of God, who had been pleased to
do so great things for him. And in a merciful Answer to all his Prayers, which
he continued to the amazement of all that heard him, (after some conflicts
which he had had with the ghostly enemy, that so he might be happier in a
victorious, then he could possibly have been in an untempted innocence,) God
was pleased ( very signally) to reveal himself to him, to speak peace unto his
conscience, to fill him inwardly with joy in the holy Ghost, to give him some
glimmerings and fore-tasts of the glory to be revealed. That I may use his own
words, (which, as he came out of a trance, he was observed to speak,) he had a
ravishing glimps of the Beatifick vision; meaning thereby (as I interpret) that
God had refreshed his drooping soul with his unspeakable comforts; saying unto
his soul, I am thy salvation, or this day salvation is come to thy Psalm. 35 3.
Luk 19 9.
house. So that now being plac^d above the level of temptations, and exempted
from the fear of what the Rev. 12. 3.
red dragon could do unto him, he cheerfully lifted up his head, and first his
eyes upon Jesus the author and finisher of his faith, and for the joy that was
set before him, Heb. 12. 2.
expected the Advent of death, as of a very dear friend.

Fifthly, it was another great sign that his heart was right toward God, and
therefore not treacherous to himself, that he extended his care to the souls of
others, with as true a charity, as to his own; exhorting one in particular
against the love of this world; charging another to be watchful against
intemperance and debauch; exciting a third unto frequent and servent prayer. I
do but mention the several subjects, on which he treated like a Divine. To all
his servants in the general, and to three of them in special (for his words
like Exodus 16. 18.
Manna in the wilderness, and the Apostles Act. 2. 45.
doal, were discreetly proportioned to every one as he had need; so as they who
had most of his instruction had nothing over, and they who had least had no
lack.) I say, in general, and in special, he was by his precepts, as well as
practice, (even as righteous 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Noah) a true preacher of repentance. Nor did his care end here. But

As it were in imitation of good old Jacob, before he was gathered to his
fathers, he gave a blessing to all his Genesis 49.
children. And farther gave it in charge to his ^irtuous consort, whom he
worthily esteemed his dearer self, (and of whom he also requested pardon, if by
any cross word he had ever grieved her,) not to educate his children, so much
to learning and other accomplishments, as to the knowledge, and service, and
fear of God. Nor was it a little to his advantage, that he was careful to have
them seasoned with those his last principles, which by his later experience he
found the best.

Not to be endless upon the subject, (on which it is difficult not to be long,
and yet impossible to be tedious,) he was briefly all that, which I pray God of
his mercy to make us all. That whenever he shall appear unto us, in death, or
in judgment, we may be found, like Mat. 25. 7, 8
wise virgins, with oil in our lamps. And that together with this our brother,
(whose remembrance (like that of Ecclus. 49. 1
Josias) will ever be sweet unto us as music at a banquet of wine,) we may be
joined in consort with the quire of Angels, and with the general Heb. 12. 22,
23
assembly of the first born which are written in heaven, and with the souls of
just men made perfect, singing Hosanna's Rev. 5. 13.
and Hallelujah's, to him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore.

THE END.
VIR
Explorata Integritate,
Gravitate morum Primaeva
Annumerandus Patribus;
Scientiarum lumen omnium,
Supraque scientias eminens
Humilitate summa:
Innocenter doctus, and
(...)
EDOARDUS PEYTO De Chesterton in Agro Warwicensi Armiger,

Ex Antiquo PICTAVORUM stemmate oriundus, EDOARDI PEYTO Equitis Aurati

Filius Unigenitus:

Uxorem duxit ELIZABETHAM GREVILLI VERNEY De Compton-Mordake in eodem Agro
Equitis Aurati

Filiam Unigenitam: Lectissimam pariter and Dilectissimam foeminam.

Compar Conjugium!

Cujus ex foelici Copula

Manavit sexus utriusque Trias,

Altera Filiorum, Edoardus, Guilielmus, Franciscus,

Altera and Filiarum, Elizabetha, Catharina, Margareta,

Patris simul, and Matris Ectypa:

Virorum and Foeminarum olim Exemplaria.

Proh Dolor!

Tantae Familiae and Virtutis Instauratorem brevem,

Primo velut in Molimine fatiscentem;

In ipso aetatis flore decussum,

(...)!

Tamen Querelarum desine.

Quippe saeculi pertaesus, Maturus Coelo,

Et praepropera laborans Maturitate,

Perfectionem vitae cum Immortalitate commutavit,

Anno Aetatis supra XXXm currente Tertio,

Salutis Reparatae M D CL V III.

VIIIo. Calendas VIIbres.

Anima, Christi appetentissima, in Christi gremium evolavit;

Coelorum, quo dudum ascenderat, tandem Incola:

Corpus reclinavit in Pulveris Dormitorium;

Sic etiam Christum in sepulchro quaeritans.

Telluris sarcina subter tellurem deposita;

Incolumes reliquia sub Domini custodia.

FINIS.

