PHILALLLIA. OR, THE Grand Characteristick WHEREBY A MAN MAY BE KNOWN TO BE
CHRIST'S DISCIPLE.

Delivered in a SERMON at St. Paul's, before the Gentlemen of Wilts. Nov. 10.
1658. It being the day of their Yearly Feast.

By THOMAS PIERCE, Rector of Brington.

Philo Iudaeus (...). p. 557. (...).

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for R. Royston, and are to be sold by John Courtney
Bookseller in Salisbury. 1658.

To all my very much Honored Friends and Countrymen, The respective Natives of
the County of WILTS. More especially, To those of the late Solemn-Meeting. And
in particular, To the worthy Stewards of the Feast.
My Dear Countrymen,
I Here present you with a Discourse, which by a threefold Title you may
properly call Yours. There having been nothing but your Entreaty, (which with
me shall ever obtain the force of a Command) in a just conformity to which, it
was both penned, and preached, and is now committed to the Press too. Next to
the reverence which I bear to the work it self, (I mean, The 1 These. 1. 3.
labor of Love, and the Mat. 5. 9. (...).
beatifick office of making peace,) which cannot choose but carry with it its
own Reward, I was chiefly encouraged to the enterprise in which you were
pleased to engage me, by your being so much at unity amongst your selves, and
so Religiously intent on the good of others. For in how many things soever
there may be a (...), etc. Iam. 1. 26.
seemingness of Religion, I am sure its (...), Iam. 1. 27.
Purity consists in these two; The Relief of the needy in their afflictions,
and the keeping of ones self unspotted from the world. For the taking of both
into possession, I think I cannot direct to a better course, (either for
brevity, or clearness,) then that we measure and deal out our Love to others,
by that natural proportion we commonly bear unto our selves. This being the
scope of that (...). Jam. 2. 8.
Royal Law, to which as many as are Christians must needs be subject. I say
they must, so much the rather, because Gal. 6, 7.
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. And with what measure we Mat. 7.
2.
mete, it shall be measured to us again. As it is the mercy of good men, which is
said to (...). Jam. 2* 13.
triumph over Gods Judgment, so there is judgment Ibid. and Mat. 6. 14, 15.
without mercy for them that show little or none.

This I desire may be considered by a peculiar sort of professors, who hate and
persecute their Neighbors under color of Devotion and zeal to God. As if it
were not sufficient, simply to break Gods Commandments, unless they be broken
against each other. For if the same God that says, [ Thou shall not worship a
graven Image] does also say in the same instant, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self,] Then sure to persecute a Neighbor, in pretense of affection and
love to God, is to take up the second Table in anger, and to dash it in pieces
against the first. And what is that (in effect) but to make the Law its own
Transgressor? Such men are told by an Apostle, That they (...), Iam. 1. 26.
deceive their own hearts, and feed themselves with such hopes as will but
nourish them to destruction, whilst they imagine that (...). Ibid.
such Religion will ever stand them in any stead. And to show them the
thickness of that Fallacy, which (by the Sophistry of the Flesh) they are made
to impose upon themselves, was not the least of those ends, at which I levelled
my Meditations. For no sooner was I invited to entertain my dear Countrymen,
with the first and chiefest Course in a Feast of Love, but straight I reflected
upon the Character which Christ had given to his Disciples, just in the Close
of his Farewell Joh. 13. 1, 2.
Supper, (which was indeed a Verse 4, 5. 14, 15.
Love-Feast) by which they might certainly be known to be truly His. I knew the
Character of a Christian was to be sought* most fitly from Christ Himself; And
that Love was that Character, which Christ had left upon Record. Not such a
Love of one another, as was the (...). Luke 11. 39.
Ravenous Love of the Scribes and Pharisees, wherewith they loved the Widows
Houses, so far forth as to devour them, and (...). Luke 23. 14.
eat them up. Nor such a Prove. 12. 10.
cruel kind of Love, as was that of the (...). Herodot. in Melpom. cap. 26. p.
233. Confer ejusdem. Lib. 1. c. 73. p. 30. etc. 119. p. 51.
Canibals in Herodotus, who glutted themselves with the flesh of men, because
they loved it as well as Ven'son. For when professors are transported with such
an unnatural kind of Love, as gives them an Appetite to (...), Ephesians. 5. 15.
bite and (...), Ephesians. 5. 15.
devour each other, (as the Apostle speaks to the Ephesians) or to eat up Gods
people as if they would eat Bread, (as the Psalm. 53. 5.
Royal Prophet thought fit to phrase it,) It has a tendency to nothing, but
mutual Ruin.

Whereas the Note of distinction, whereby to know a sincere and a solid
Christian, is such a divine kind of Love as tends to unity and peace, and so
(by a consequence unavoidable) to mutual safety and preservation. If we are
(...). Ephesians. 3. 17.
rooted and grounded in such a Love to one another, as was the Love of Christ
unto us all, we shall be known by the Mat. 7. 16, 17
fruit web ear, to have been Romans 11. 19.
grafted into Him, who is indeed the Joh. 15. 1.
true Vine. We shall not only do to Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris.
no man, what we would that no man should do to us, (which was the motto a
Heathen Prince would needs have carved in all his Plate) But (...). Mat. 7. 12.
Luke 6. 43.
what we wish that All men would do to us, we shall earnestly endeavor to do
to all men. We shall love them for Gods sake, whom, for their own sakes, we
cannot love. If we are merely weak Brethren, we shall manifest (by our
meekness) that we are not wilful. And if strong, we shall Romans 15. 1.
bear the Infirmities of the weak. We shall walk in (...). Colos. 4, 5.
wisdom toward them that are without, (I mean the enemies of Christ, both
Jews and Gentiles.) That we may neither be in danger of being corrupted by
their secular and sensual bairs, nor heighten their prejudice to the Gospel,
by any matter of scandal in our Converse.

I shall never forget what I was told (about eight years ago) by a Philo
(...). p. 539. (...).
learned Jew, That Godliness and Honesty, or the Love of God and the love of
men, are a kind of Twin-Sisters, which every Creature is to espouse, who is not
so wedded to the world, as to admit of a Isa 50. 1.
Divorce from the Caelestiall Luke 5. 34, 35.
Bridegroom. It was never allowed unto the Jews, to Deuteronomy. 23. 7.
abhor an Edomite, or an Egyptian; or to reckon any man as an Enemy,
(although he were Philo (...). p. 548.
scaling the City-Walls) until he had absolutely refused their solemn offers of
Reconcilement. And I do now the rather take this occasion to recount the things
which I have learnt, both as an Instructor of the Ignorant, and as an humble 2
Pet. 1. 12.
Remembrancer to men of more knowledge, (not only to You of mine own Countr^y,
to whom I make this Dedication, but to as many as shall not disdain to read me,
let their Place and their Principles be what they will,) if peradventure by any
means, I may Romans 11. 14.
provoke to Emulation, them that are mine own Flesh, (as the Apostle spoke in
another case, which yet was of kin to the case in hand,) and become
instrumental to (...), etc. Ibid. (...). Jam. 5. 20.
save some of them.

If in any thing I have spoken, I seem to have spoken somewhat Austerely, I
here declare my self free from all particular Reflections, upon any man's
person, alive or dead. My Propositions are universal, as well as true; and my
severities to sin lie all in common. As many as find themselves guilty may make
particular Application of my Reproofs, so as they have it in their Remembrance,
that I have made none at all.

I have one thing to beg (as from all my Readers in general, so) in particular
from you, Sirs, for whose particular satisfaction my work is done; even that
you will labor to be the better for all that is offered to your acceptance.
That, 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire; taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, you may be able to Wisd. 5. 1.
stand and to appear with great boldness; as wearing his Livery, which is Love,
and as owned thereby to be his Disciples. To the sure protection of whose
Providence, and to the wise direction of whose Grace, you all are heartily
commended (without any Ceremony or Complement) by

Your affectionate Countreyman in all the services of Love and Friendship, THO.
PIERCE.

(...). OR The Grand Characteristick, by which a man may be known to be
Christ's Disciple.
JOHN 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another.
AS the Text is part of our Savior's last words, his Farewell Sermon to his
Disciples; so I may say it is a part of his last Will and Testament; and shows
the worth of that Legacy, which he was pleased to bequeath them at his
departure. The ever blessed Heb. 9. 16.
Testator (as the Author to the Hebrews does fitly call him) being now to take
his last leave, and having prepared them with an assurance that the time of his
leaving was at hand, (that so they might ponder what he was speaking, and lay
it up as the speech of a Joh. 13. 33.
Dying man,) And being resolved not to leave them without some Legacy, some
special Token of his Solicitude, both for their present Fortification, and
future Bliss,

Chap. 14. v. 27.
Peace (says he) I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the World
gives, a few good words in civility, or at the most, a kind wish; And
therefore let not your heart be troubled at the sudden departure of my person;
for as a supplement of that, I leave you my cordial and solid Peace.

But knowing well, that His peace could never quietly rest with them, in case
of War and Division amongst themselves, and being not able to indeare them
with a greater expression of His love, then by obliging them strictly to the
constant loving of one another, He therefore bequeathed this Jam. 2. 8.
Royal Precept (as a previous part of their Patrimony, whereby to fit them for
all the rest,) That their reciprocal kindness should be like His, that they
should all be so affected, as they had Him for an Joh. 13. 15.
Example, that just as He had been to All, they should be All to one another;
for such are the words of the will, in the verse immediately before my Text,

(...) etc. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, even
as I have loved you.

But then to gain their Acceptance of his Bequeast, and their religious
Execution of what he commanded them to observe, He showed them the value of
such a Legacy, as did obligingly tie them to such a Love.

(...), etc. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another.

In which words of our Savior, there are two things supposed, and a third is
taught.

First of all it is supposed, that All to whom the words are spoken, either
are, or ought to be, Christ's Disciples. And that not only in profession, but in
singleness of heart; not only verbally, and by name, but very really such. This
is easily collected from three words in the Text, (...), Ye are my Disciples.

In the second place it is supposed, that such as are really Christ's Disciples,
(not in show, but in substance, not in hypocrisy, but in deed) ought to
endeavor to make it known to all THE WORLD, that they are such. Their light
must shine before men, by their Procope and Growth in the SCHOOL of Christ.
This is apparent from two words more, (...), All men shall know it. And were it
not so in good earnest, their Master would never have directed them (as here he
does) to the infallible means of its attainment. For

Mark attentively in the third place, the most important Lesson which here is
taught, (and which is now of all Lessons the most worth learning, especially if
we reflect on the Original Occasion of this solemnity,) by what certain (...),
or way of proof, ye may make men know ye are Christ's Disciples. This is
delivered in the first and the last words of the Text, (...), they shall know
it even by this, (...), If ye bear love to one another.

From these three parts there are just as many Propositions, into which the
Text is very naturally dissolved.

Auditors of Christ, or all to whom he is revealed, do stand obliged by that
means, to be very really his Disciples.

eminent and exemplary, so far forth as to be known, and taken notice of by All.

Testimony and proof of sincere Discipleship under Christ, and the principal
Instance or effect wherein its eminence does consist, And that which by Christ
is here pronounced as an unerrable mark or Criterion of it, is this Divine
Qualification of mutual Love.

And this indeed is the proposition, upon which I have fastened my Meditations,
because it is that which suites best with the principal end of our present
meeting, and that wherein is swallowed up the prime Importance of the Text. Not
only the prime, but the whole rational. Importance. And I verily think you will
say as much, if you duly compare the Proposition, with the fourfold Emphasis
which is to be put upon the words.

For first our Savior does not say, Men shall guess or conjecture that ye are
mine, but (...), they shall know it. Nor 2ly does he say, Your Discipleship
shall be known as a special Secret to very few, but as the Sun in his
Meridian, (...), All men shall know it. Nor thirdly does he say, All men shall
know that ye seem to be by a Disguise, but (...), that ye are my Disciples
without a fiction. Last of all, he does not say, Your Discipleship shall be
known by such deceiveable Tokens, as your Assembling your selves in the House
of Prayer, your crying out Mat. 7. 22, 23.
Lord Lord, your doing Chrysostom. Hom. 71. in Joh.
wonders in my name, your being Orthodox in Judgment, and jumping together in
Opinions; but by This it shall be known, as by a Token which never fails,
(...), If ye have Love for one another.

I must therefore begin with That Proposition, which is last in Order, but
first in Dignity. And which being as the Heart of the whole Body of
Christianity, deserves to be (like the Heart in the body of man) (...), Aristot.
The first thing that lives, and the last that dies in our consideration. For
can there be any thing in the world of greater consequence then this, which
gives us a Token whereby to know we have an Interest in Christ? and such a sure
token too, as cannot possibly deceive us? yet even such is that Love, with
which I am now to entertain you, and which if you take into your hearts, as
well as into your outward ears, will (I doubt not) carry with it that peace of
Conscience, which is to all that feed on it, a continual Prove. 15. 15.
Feast.

But because there is hardly any word that is more equivocal than this, I must
needs Anticipate an Objection, by showing what Love it is which our Savior
meant, when he appointed it for the measure, by which his Scholars are to be
scanned.

And to show you the better what it is, I must first show you what it is not.
For all sorts of men pretend to Love; not only Christians, but the professed
Enemies of Christ; and as well the nominall, as real Christians. Nay in one
kind, or other, they all have Love in their possession; and many times the
worst men in the greatest measure. For greater Love then this (our Joh. 15. 13.
Savior tells us) there is none, that a man lay down his life for his friend.
And plentiful store of this Love we commonly find (in our reading) amongst the
Heathen. Their great (...). Arist. Eth. l. 9. c. 8. p. 887.
Philosophers did prescribe it, and not a few of their people obeyed the
Precept.

To save a Friend ready to perish, we find Episthenes (in Xenophon) Xenoph. in
exp. Cyri. l. 7. p. 319.
ready to lay down his life. And such was the love of Artapates to Cyrus
Junior, that he perfectly Idem ib. l. 1. p. 209.
hated his own life, as soon as Cyrus had lost His. Nor Val. Max. l. 4. c. 7.
p. 128.
would Lucius Petronius outlive his friend. Id. ib. p. 127.
Pomponius and Laetorius dyed a couple of Martyrs for Caius Gracchus. And Titus
Id. b.
Voluminous followed Lucullus into his grave. Ib. p. 129.
Terentius preferred the life of Brutus by many degrees before his own. And
Lib. 7. c. 8.
Valerius tells us of diverse servants, who to preserve their masters, destroyed
themselves. What transcendent lovers of one another were Q. Curt. l. 7. p. 211.
Menedemus and Hipsides, Xenoph. (...) l. 5. p. 446.
Cleonymus and Archidamus, In exp. Cyri. l. 5. p. 304. 305.
Agasias and Xenophon, Diod. Sicul. l. 16. p. 448.
Bagoas and Mentor, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8. p. 34.
Hippoclides and Polystratus, Tacit. Annal. l. 16. p. 331.
Asclepiodotus and Soranus? 'Twere easy to name as many Ex Polyb. l. 10. p.
582. Tacit. Hist. l. 4. p. 491. Diodor. Sic. l. 17. p. 518. Q* Curt. l. 10.
316. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 9. p. 283. Aristot. eth. l. 9. c. 11. p. 912. Homer,
Il. l. 13. p. 250. and l. 6. p. 109. Odyss. d. p. 44.
more, as would make you weary to hear them named. Nor do I speak only of
Couples, but of whole Societies and Sects; whose astonishing Love to one
another has raised them Monuments in story, which will endure as long as the
Sun and Moon. Such as the Val. Max. 1. 2. c. 6. p. 50.
Cimbri and Celtiberians in Valerius Maximus; The Xen. exp. Cy. l. 1. p. 212.
friends of Cyrus in Xenophon; The Thucyd. l. 2. p. 124. 125.
Athenians in Thucydides; The Polyb. l. 2. p. 147.
Megal^politans in Polybius; The men of Val. Max. l. 6. c. 6. Live. l 21 c. 14.
l. 23. c. 20.
Saguntum and Petellia; The many Solduni apud Aquitanos. Societas Hunnorum.
Sodales Antonini. Tauri apud Scythas. Fratres Arwale: (...) Apud Aegyptios.
Alex. ab Alex* Dier. Genial* l. 1. c. 26. p. 74. 75.
Societies reckoned up by Alexander ab Alexandro, who had all things in common
of every kind, and as well their sufferings, as their enjoyments. Insomuch that
if one did lose a limb by any accident, all the rest were to cut off theirs,
that in every Circumstance of Adversity, they might all be equal and alike.

Thus there were multitudes of men who loved each other unto the Death; And
some beyond it, as far as Diodor. Sic. l. 4. p. 266. Talis etiam Roboaldus,
occidentalis Fris^ae Rex ultimus, a Carolo magno profligatus.
Hell. Yet very far were those Pagans from being known by such love, to have
been either the Disciples of Christ or Moses. 'Twas little better than the love
of King Perus his Elephant, and other generous beasts, which have exposed their
own lives to save their Riders. There is a Homer. Odyss. r. p. 251. 256. (...).
Id. Iliad.r. p. 322. (...). Vid. Plin. l. 8. c. 42. Solin. c. 47. Virgil. l.
11. Tranquillum in vita Caesaris. Aelian. de Animal. l. 10. c. 17.
natural kindness and Generosity, which is common to men with the meanest
Creatures; and so has nothing of affinity with what is intended in the Text.

Nay if we reflect upon our selves, upon whom the name of Christ is called, we
must not imagine we have attained unto that excellent Love which is here
required, because we find (upon inquiry) that we are loving to our friends; or
because we have our Isa. 1. 13.
solemn meetings; or stand Sariaster adversus patrem cruenta conspiratione
faedus fecit. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 11. p. 287.
fast to one another as drivers on of a design. For as there are many sorts of
Love which are not rational, and pure, as not proceeding from a right
principle; so there are many things too which are but the Counterfeits of love,
and yet are called by that Name, because they look extremely like it. The
Devils themselves have their combination, they are still at Luke 11. 18.
agreement among themselves, so as Satan is never divided against Satan; but
it is from a principle of Policy, and not of Love. Even Rebels and Schismatics
(the greatest enemies of Church and state) are wont to Psalm. 56. 6.
hold altogether and keep themselves close; but from a principle of Faction,
and not of Love. We read of Luke 23. 12.
Pilate, and Herod, that they were solemnly made friends; but from a principle
of Hatred to an innocent Christ, not of love to one another.

The world is full of such Merchants, as keep a good correspondence, and are
punctual Dealers with one another; but from a principle of Traffic, and not
of true Love. The friends of Ceres and Bacchus, Vide Philonem (...) p. 693.
have their times of Feasting and Good-fellowship, their times of enjoying the
Creature Comforts; but from a principle of looseness, and not of Love. Many
love the merry meeting, but not the men whom they meet. Or if they are Lovers
of the men, it is far from being Luke 6. 33. Mat. 5. 46.
thank-worthy. For even the Publicans and Sinners do love those that love them;
but from a principle of Nature, and not of Grace. It being a mere self-Love,
which makes them so to love others. Nay farther yet, A man may do the very
things which are the principal offices and works of Love, for which (not his
Love, but) only his vanity is to be thankt. He may bestow his whole substance
to feed the poor, and yet may perish for want of Love. He may dare to dye a
pretended Martyr by giving his body to be burnt, And yet he may be frozen for
want of Love. So I collect from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

It concerns us therefore to know, what love this is, (having seen what it is
not,) by which a man may be known to be Christ's Disciple. And the shortest way
to know this, is to reflect a while on the Love of Christ. For such as was his
Love to us, such must ours be to Him and to one another. We have his own word
for it in the verse immediately before my Text, and c. 15. v. 10, 12. If ye keep
my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love. (v. 10.) And this is my
Commandment, that ye love one another, even as I have loved you. (v. 12.) Now
we know the Love of Christ was both extrensively, and intensively great; and
proposed (in both respects) not more to our wonder, than imitation. First it
was so extensively* Great, as that it reached to All in general, (1 Timothy 4.
10.) to every man in particular, ( Heb. 2. 9.) not to a world of men only, as
that may signify a part, but to all the whole world without exception, (1 Ioh.
2. 2.) without exception of the ungodly, (Romans 5. 6.) without exception of
enemies, (Romans 5. 10.) without exception of them that perish, (2 Pet. 2. 1.)
And so intensively great was the Love of Christ, that it made him empty himself
of glory, and become of Phil. 2. 7.
no reputation; Isa. 53. 3.
it made him a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; indeed an intimate
Acquaintance of the most heartbreaking grief, that ever was suffered on this
side Hell. It put him upon the vassallage of Joh. 13. 5.
washing and wiping his servants feet; It made him Phil. 2. 8.
obedient unto the Death, and to seek the lives of his Enemies, whilst his
enemies sought his; He in order to their safety, as they in order to his Ruin.
It made him once our Priest after the order of Aaron, and our Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck. For us he descended into Hell; for us he
ascended into Heaven; for us he makes intercession at the right hand of God,
Romans 8. 34.

Thus Christ, as our Master, has set us a Copy of His Love, to the end that
we, as his Disciples, might do our utmost to take it out. Our Love must be so
extensive, that it must reach even to All; not only to all our fellow-
Disciples, but to all men living upon the Earth; it must reach unto our
Enemies, and of them to all sorts too; not only to those without the pale of
the Church, (who do us little or no hurt) even Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
Heretics, for whom we pray once a year in our English Liturgy; But to our
Crueller Enemies within the Church, our particular Persecutors and Slanderers,
for whom we pray in our Liturgy three times a week.

Indeed the Hypocrites of the Synagogue did constrain the word Neighbor to
signify nothing but a Friend; Mat. 5. 43.
esteeming it Godliness, and Zeal, to hate an Enemy. And some there are even
in Christendom, who feigning God from all Eternity to have hated more then he
loved, think they acquit themselves fairly (and look upon it in themselves as a
God-like property) if they are much less inclinable to love then Hatred. They
know they need not love more, then the Savior of the world was pleased to dye
for; And easily taking it for granted, that he dyed only for some, they think
they need not exhibit their love to all.

Such men must be taught, that even our Enemies are to be treated as one sort
of friends, and that the Scripture-word Neighbor extend's to both; 'twas so
extended even by Exodus 23. 4, 5. Lev. 19. 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 23. 7.
Moses; and so by Prove. 25. 21, 22. Vide Philonem (...). p. 550. 551.
Solomon; if by Moses and Solomon, much more by Christ; who having first
commanded us to love our Enemies, to bless them that curse us, to oblige them
that hate us, and to pray for them that are spiteful to us, give's us his
reason in these words, because Luke 6. 35. (...). Hieroc. (...). p. 70.
God also is kind to the unthankful and to the evil. Which is as much as to
say, that in the extension of our kindness, we must be imitators of God. For
so he tells us in the very next words, Verse 36.
be ye merciful as your Father in Heaven is merciful. And when a Jew asked the
Question, Luke 10. 20.
Who is my Neighbor? Our Savior answered him by a Parable of a Jew and a
Samaritan, not of a Jew and a Jew. Whereby we are given to understand, that all
are our Neighbors who stand in Need. Let that need be what it will, A need of
our Pardon or our Purse, we must not only forgive them in case they reduce us
to want of Bread, but we must give them our Rom 12. 20
Bread too, in case they want it. We must pray for them, and pity them, and
endeavor to melt them to reconcilement; we must do them all the good offices
within our power, excepting such as are apt to hurt them; we must show them
such favors as may help to raise them out of the Pit, not such as may sink
them the faster in; we must not be so rudely civil, so discourteously
complaisant, as to Lev. 19. 17.
suffer their sins to be upon them without disturbance, but must rather oblige
them with our Ibid.
rebukes; lest for want of such favors they go down quietly to destruction.
For so run's the precept, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, (on the
contrary) thou shall in any wise rebuke thy brother, and shall not suffer Sin
upon him. Although a man be so scandalous as to be shut out of our 2 These. 3.
14.
company by the direction of the Apostle, yet the same Apostle tells us, we
must not count him as an Enemy, but admonish him as a brother, 2 These. 3. 15.

And from hence we are to argue a minori ad majus. For if our Love must thus
extend to Enemies, how much more to such as are friends? friends to our
persons, and to our God too? The love of Christ had degrees, and so must ours.
As the Apostle tells concerning Christ, he is the Savior of all, but
especially of them that believe (1 Timothy 4. 10.) so the same Apostle does also
tell us of our selves, we must do good unto All men, but especially to them who
are of the household of faith (Gal. 6. 10.) And even of those that are
faithful, a primary care is to be taken for them that are of our own Country.
(...) etc. ^^em. Romans in ep. ad. Cor. p. 70.
It was not only for Gods sake that David was kind unto Jerusalem, but for his
Brethren and Companions sake he prayed to God for her, and did his utmost to do
her good, (Psalm. 122. 8.) Our Savior being himself an Israelite, did M^t. 15.
24, 26.
prefer the lost sheep of the House of Israel. How kind was Moses to His
Countrymen, when he became for their sakes extremely cruel unto Himself? Lord
(says he) if thou will, forgive their Sin; and if not, blot me I pray thee out
of the book which thou have written, Exodus 32. 32. As if salvation it self
could hardly please him, unless his Countrymen might have it, as well as He.
Nor was the passion of St. Paul inferior to it, who for the love he bare unto
His Countrymen, whom he calls his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh,
was ready to wish himself accursed, and utterly cut off from the body of
Christ. (Romans 9. 2*) As if he cared not what became of him, so that his
Countrymen might be saved.

But many times our nearest Countrymen may become our worst Neighbors; and, in
respect of their Religion, dwell farthest off too. To a man that is born in
Judea, A good Samaritan ought to be dearer, then a cruel Jew. 2 Cor. 11. 26.
St. Paul, and the Christians These. 2. 14.
of Thessalonica, were never used with more rigor, then by the men of their
own Country. And our Saviors words are very remarkable, that except it be in*
his own Country, a Prophet is never without honor, (Mat. 13. 57.) But let him
be in his own Country and he has no honor at all, (John 4. 44*) Christ
himself had least there; and there he did the fewest Miracles; but that he did
not more there then in other places, the only Cause was their unkindness.

This is therefore the firmest Bond whereby to hold us together in peace and
love, not that we are of one Country, but that we are of one Quan^^ dig^^^
Fratres and dicuntur and habentur, qui unum patrem Deum agnoverunt, qui de uno
utero ignorantiae ejusdem ad unam lucem expiverint veritatis? Tert. Apol. c. 39.
Christ; And can say of our selves, with better reason, then it was anciently
said of the Lomnini, That in all our bodies there is no more then one soul; or
(to express it with St. Paul) that we have all but one Faith, one Baptism, one
Spirit, one Lord, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all,
and in us all. (Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.) If we will manifest to the world, and prove
convincingly to our selves, that we are really the Followers and Friends of
Christ, It must be by a burning and shining Love. A love of men, and not of God
only. And a Love of men it must be, in which the true Love of God is not
excluded, but presupposed. Not a love of our selves only, (condemned so much by
the 2 Timothy 3. 2.
Apostle) but a Love of others as our selves; if not as much, yet as well; if
not in that measure, yet in the very same manner, in which we are obliged to
love our selves. And it must be Dilectio Amoebaea, a mutual Love; a giving and
taking of affections. Indeed rather then fail, we must pledge them in Love, who
do begin to us in hatred. But to make (...) (...), or Love-Feast indeed, (such
as ^ith which the blessed Apostles did once adorn both the Doctrine and the
Discipleship of Christ,) It must be (...), Love interchanged with one another.

The chiefest requisites of our Love must be Sincerity and Fervor. As St. Paul
speaks to the Romans, we must be kindly affectioned one toward another, so as
our lov^ may be brotherly, and without dissimulation. (Romans 12. 9, 10.) we must
not be (...), double-sould men, (Jam. 1. 8.) but must carry our meaning in our
foreheads, and hold our hearts in our hands. Not love in word, neither in
Tongue, but in deed and in Truth. (1 John 3. 18.) we must not look every man at
his own things only, but every man at the things of others, (Phil. 2. 4.) If we
are owners of such a love, as is a Testimony and proof of our real
Discipleship under Christ, The same mind will be in us which was in Christ
Jesus (Phil. 2. 5.) And if so, we shall be ready to stoop (as he Joh. 13. 5.
did) to the meanest offices of love, even to wash, and to wipe the very feet
of our Inferiors, we shall willingly bear one another burdens, (Gal. 6. 2.) by
love serving one another. (Gal. 5. 13.) And in honor preferring one another,
(Romans 12. 10.) Nay, if the same mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus, (as
the Apostle tells us it ought to be) our love will be so intensive, as to make
us lay down our lives for the Brethren. And so St. John tells us we ought to
do, 1 John 3. 16.

If no diviner love of one another were meant by our Savior in my Text, then
what was so frequently exacted under the paedagogie of Moses, our Savior would
certainly have said, An old Commandment I give unto you, it having been said
to them of old, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Levit. 19. 18. But
here he calls it a new Commandment; which we cannot imagine he would have
done, had there been nothing in its subject but what was old. No, he might very
well call it a New Commandment, not only for that reason, (which I find given
by St. Novum mandatum appellatur, quia exuto vetere i^duit nos hominem novum.
Austin) because it prescribes us such a love, as by which we cast off the old
man, and put on the new; but because it prescribes us such a love, as never was
thought upon before, much less delivered under precept, to any Sect or Society
of Jews, Aug. Tract. 64. in Io. in ^i. Tom. 9. and Tract. 6. in Io. in in^^^o
Tom. 9.
or Gentiles. Had his Commandment been no more, then that we love one another,
it had been old with a witness; no doubt I may say, as old as Adam. But because
he added [a Sicut Ego] that we must love one another, even as he has loved us,
(which was with such a new Love, as till he came into the world, was never
heard of,) he had reason to call it a New Commandment. For although St. John
says, Brethren, I write 1 John 2. 7. and 2 John 5.
no New Commandment, but an old Commandment which ye had from the beginning,
yet he means no more by that word, then the first beginning of Christianity,
which was with the preaching of the Gospel by Jesus Christ. Remember therefore
(I beseech you) what Love this is, which is the Badge and Cognizance of our
profession; the mark of difference betwixt the Sheep and the Goats, and which
is not exacted from Men as Men, but from Christians as they are Christians. We
must not love as They do, who Psalm. 73 8. Non sicut se diligunt qui corrumpunt;
nec sicut se diligunt homines, quia homines sunt; sed sicut se diligunt qui Dei
sunt and filii altissimi, etc. August. loco sepra cit.
corrupt one another (as S* Austin speaks) with a merely seditious or
schismatic Love; nor must we love as They do, who only love one another for
filthy Lucre; much less as They do, who love one another for filthy Lust; Nor
must we love as They do, whose love consists only in this, that they agree in
the hatred of some third Party; Nor must we only love as They do, who love one
another as they are Men only, that is, as they are sociable and civil
Creatures. But we must love one anothher as benig Lovers of God, and as being
such whom God loves; as being Luke 6. 35.
Children of the Highest, and Sic mutuo fatres vocamus, ut unius Dei Parents
omnes, ut consortes Fidei, ut spei Cohaeredes. Minut. Faelix. (...). Philo
(...). p 554.
younger Brothers of our Redeemer, as being all made Consorts of the very same
Hope, and all Coheirs of the very same Kingdom. Our Love must imitate the
manner and the Degree of Christ's Love. For we must venture our Lives for the
good of others, and even in spite of all Dangers which may happen to the Body,
we must own, and propagate, and defend the Doctrines of the Gospel, which is
the most we can do for the good of other men's Souls; and that which makes us
most like a Savior. The Gospel (I may say) is the Christian Scool, thither it
is we go to learn, Christ is the Master of it in chief; All Christians are
Schoolfellows, or Condisciples. The Love I have hitherto described is the
highest Lesson which there is taught. Those Titular Christians who do not
attain to this Love, are so many Dunces and Truants, fit to be turned out of
the School. It is indeed a hard Lesson, for us to love one another even as
Christ has loved us; a Lesson only to be found in the School of Christ. But
yet how Difficult soever, it is not impossible to be learned. For God is
faithful, and expects not to reap, but after the measure that he has sown; He
will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able. If there is in us a
willing mind, He accepts according to what we have, and not according to what
we have not. The Grace of Christ is sufficient for us. And we can do all things
through him that strengthens us. And therefore let us not despair of getting
the Mastery over our Lesson; For we are all 1 These. 4. 9.
(...), (as St. Paul speaks to the Thessalonians) immediately taught it by God
himself.

Now the more largely I have discovered, both what it is not, and what it is to
love one another, as Christ requires, the fewer words will suffice to make it
as clear as the Sun at Noon, that by this we must be known to be Christ's
Disciples. For such a Love as This is, is the fulfilling of the Law. So says
the Lawgiver Mat. 7. 12.
himself, Luke 10. 27.
Mat. 22. 40. and so his principal Apostle, Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. where he speaks
of Love in a Christian, as Demosthenes did of Pronunciation in an Orator. As if
it were not only the first Thing, but also the second, and the third, and so
indeed the (...), the All in All of a Christian. For mark the words of that
Apostle, whom we cannot accuse of vain, or needless Repition. He that loves
another has fulfilled the Law (v. 8.) All the Commandments of the Law are
comprehended even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self (v. 9.)
Love works no evil to his Neighbor, therefore Love is the fulfilling of the
Law (v. 10.) Three times in a breath, without so much as a Parenthesis, love is
reckoned to be the Pandect of all things requisite to make a Saint.

Nor let any man say within himself, How can this be? Since Gods word tells us,
that so it is. And yet I think it is easy to show you How too; For the whole
Body of the Law moral does consist of ten Members, which are called the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments of the Law. The Lord Jesus has reduced those
Ten to these Two, Thou shall love thy God with all thy Heart, And thy Neighbor
as thy self. On those two Hinges the very Door of Salvation does seem to turn.
For on those two Precep-s hang all the Law and the Prophets, (Mat. 22. 40.) But
St. Paul has reduced them all to One. For thus he speaks to the Galatians,
Gal. 5. 14.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. The reason is, because the Love of our Neighbor (in the
high Degree I here speak of) does carry along with it, the Love of God: Either
of them (says Been intelligentibus utrumque invenitur in singulis. Nam and qui
diligit Deum, non eum potest contemnere praecipientem ut diligat proximum; and
qui superne ac spiritualiter diligit proximum, quid in eo diligit nisi Deum?
August. Tract. 65. in Joh. a med. Tom. 9.
Austin) is inferred by either; for if we really love God, we shall obey him
when he commands us to love our Neighbor, and if we really love our Neighbor,
it is for the Love which we bear to God. Observe the Logic, by which St. John
argues both backward and foreward. By this we know we love the Children of God,
when we love God, and keep his Commandments, 1 Jo. 5. 2. There he argues from
the first Table to the second. Now observe how he argues from the second to the
first, and that two ways, both in the Negative and the Affirmative. In the
Negative thus; He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? 1 Jo, 4. 10. He that shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from his brother, how dwells the Love of God in him? 1 Jo. 3. 17.
Again he argues it in the Affirmative. We know that we have passed from death
unto life, if we love the brethren, 1 Jo. 3. 14. Hereby we know wear of the
Truth, and have Confidence toward God, if we keep his Commandments: And this
is his Commandment, that we love one another (v. 19. to v. 23.)

Hence you see it is evident, There is not a clearer Demonstration of our
loving God with all our hearts, then the loving our Neighbor as our selves.
From whence it follows, that every sin must needs argue some want of Love. For
if against the first Table, it is through a want of some love to God. And if
against the second, it must needs be for want of some love to Men. Again, it
follows on the contrary, that where Love is perfect and entire, no Commandment
can be broken. For, loving God with all our hearts, we shall keep the first
Table; and loving our Neighbor as our selves, we shall not fail to keep the
second.

What I have showed in the Great, I can easily show in the Retail too, to wit,
that Love is the fulfilling of the Law. For if we love God as we ought no God
but Him. we worship a Graven Image. We Nor shall we fail keep holy his Holy
Days. And if we love our Neighbor as Christ requires, we shall be sure to
render to every man his Due. And so by consequence we shall honor all our
Parents and Superiors, public, or private, Ecclesiastical, or Civil. Then
for the Neighbor who is equal, or in any degree inferior to us, we shall be
sure not to injure him in any kind. From whence it follows, we shall not kill;
(for that were to injure him in his Life.) Nor commit Adultry; (for injure him
in his Wife.) Nor steal) for that were to injure him in his Goods.) Nor bear
false Witness; (for that were to injure him in his good Name.) And as we Deed,
or in Word, so if we love him as our selves, or as Christ loved us, we shall
not do him any injury, no not so much as in our Thoughts; we shall not covet,
or be desirous of any thing that is our Neighbors. Romans 13. 9.
other Precept besides these Ten, they all are briefly comprehended in this one
word, Thou shall love, thy Neighbor as thy self.

And so I hope by this time, we are all of one mind, as touching ths Grand
Characteristick by which we are to be known to be Christ's Disciples; The
peculiar Note of Distinction, by which we are taken from out the world, as it
were severed and set apart, from all other societies and sorts of men, whether
their Ringleaders and Masters are Jews or Gentiles. First for the Gentiles, ye
may know the Disciples of Zoroastres, by their belief of two gods, and their
incestuous wedlocks. Ye may know the Disciples of the Brachmans, by their
unparall'd self-denials in food and raiment. Ye may know the Disciples of
Pythagoras, by their Reverence to the numbers of four and seven. And the
Disciples of Plato, by their fancifull Idaea's in the concave of the Moon. And
the Disciples of Zeno, by their Dreams of Apathie and Fate. And the Disciples
of Mahomet, as well by the filthiness of their paradise, as by their desperate
Tenet of God's Decrees. And then for the Jews, ye may know the Disciples of the
Scribes, by their Traditional corruptions and their expositions of the Law. Ye
may know the Disciples of the Pharisees, by their Form of godliness, and their
Matthew. 23. 28.
appearing righteous unto men. Ye may know the Disciples of the Sadducees, by
their denial of Providence and their dis-belief of the Resurrection. Ye may
know the Disciples of the Esseni, by their overstrict Sabbatizing. And the
Disciples of the Nazarites, by their abstinence from the flesh of all living
creatures. And the Disciples of the Hemerobaptists, by their every day washings
from Top to Toe. Ye may know the Disciples of John the Baptist, by their
remarkable Fastings, and other Austerities of Life. But by this shall all men
know that ye are all the Disciples of Jesus Christ, If ye love one another,
even as Christ has loved you.

Whilst I am thinking what proper Uses are to be made of this Scripture, the
words of St. Paul which he writ to Timothy do straight occur to my remembrance;
All Scripture (says he) is by divine Inspiration, and is profitable for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be furn^shed unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Were there no other
Scripture, then that with which I have entertained you, I should think it very
profitable for each of those ends, and esteem the preacher well furnished for
every good work.

First, it is profitable for Doctrine, because it teaches such as are
ignorant, the true importance of Christianity, which does not consist (as some
would have it) in our being born of godly Parents, believing the History of the
Gospel, making profession of zeal to Christ, posting up and down from Sermon to
Sermon, making many and long prayers, or whatsoever is comprehended under the
Form of Godliness, that is, the Image, the Picture, the Counterfeit of
Devotion, (as the word in the (...), 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Original does very naturally import, 2 Timothy 3. 5.) For many profess to know
God, who in their works deny him Tit. 1. 16.
. And let a man's profession be what it will, yet if he act in contradiction to
the Commandments of Christ, that very acting is nothing better, than a Denial
of the Faith. And so it is called by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Christianity does
not consist then in such a sanguin presumption, as some call Faith; in such a
carnal security, as some call Hope; in such a parcel of Jam. 2. 16.
fair words, as some call Charity; in such a 2 Cor. 7. 10. (...).
worldly sorrow, as some call Repentance: But it consist's in such a Faith, as
Gal. 5, 6.
works by Love; in such a Hope, as does 1 John 3. 3.
cleanse and purify; in such a Charity, as works no ill to his neighbor;
but is (on the contrary) the Romans 13 10
fulfilling of the Law; and in such a Repentance, as shows it self by
amendment, and change of life, bringing forth Mat. 3. 8.
fruits meet for Repentance. Whatever some Mockers are wont to say; we find by
the Tenor of the Gospel, that a material part of Godliness is moral honesty.
The chief ingredients in a Christians life, are acts of Justice, and works of
Mercy; than which there was nothing more conspicuous in the life of Christ. The
second Table is the touchstone of our obedience unto the first. Our chiefest
duty toward God, is our duty toward our Neighbor. God will have Justice and
Mercy to be performed to one another, before he accept's of any sacrifice which
can be offered unto himself. For what says our Savior? If thou bring thy gift
to the Altar, Mat. 5. 23, 24.
and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. As if he should have said, Get thee gone, and be
Honest, before thou talk of being Godly. Now together with this, compare St.
John's way of reckoning 1 John 3. 10
. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil,
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother Ve^s. 14.
. And we know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the
Brethren. Nor does our Savior say (in my Text) By this shall all men know that
ye are my Disciples, if they see ye love God, But by this they shall know it,
if ye love one another. Because our love of one another does presuppose we love
God; which it is 1 John 4. 20
impossible we should do, in case we love not one another. For he that hates
his Brother is a Murderer, and abides in Death, 1 John 3. 14, 15.

Thus ye see how this Scripture is profitable for Doctrine.

And as for Doctrine, so also for Reproof. Because it serves to convince us of
the small proportion of Christianity, which is to be found among'st men who are
commonly called Christians. How much there is of the word, and how little of
the thing. When the son of man comes shall he find Faith on the Earth? Luk 18.
8.
Yes, store of that Faith, which will ever be common to men with Jim. 2. 19.
Devils. But when the Son of man comes, shall he find Justice, shall he find
Mercy, shall he find Love upon the Earth? shall he find that Faith which
works by Love? and which works by such a Love, as is the mother of
Obedience? and the mother of such obedience, as is impartially due to the Law
of Christ? Alas! how frequent a thing is it, for Christians to persecute their
Fellow Christians, and then to reckon it as the character of their Discipleship
under Christ? As if they read the Text backwards, Joh. 16. 2.
or understood it by an Antiphrasis, supposing Christ had meant thus, By this
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye Hate one another. Will it
not be a very sad, and a shameful thing, if Jews and Gentiles shall rise in
judgment against a great part of Christendom, whilst Christendom shall
justify both Jews and Gentiles? First for the Jews, they are so much at
unity amongst themselves, that however covetous in their particulars, and
however cruel to us Christians; yet, they are kind to one another, and full of
good works too. They suffer not the needy to go without his relief, nor the
Captive without his ransom. Nay the Joseph. Antiq. 18. 2. Philo Iud. in lib^o
cui Titulus, (...), p. 678. 680.
Esseni (amongst the Jews) had all things in common; and, living Virgins
themselves, bestowed their cost and their care in breeding other folks
children. Then, secondly, for the Gentiles, Iliad. p. 109.
Homer describes the love of Enemies; The Hierocl. in (...) p. 65, 66, 70.
Pythagoreans gave it in precept; and Val. Max. l. 7. c. 8. p. 193, 194.
Antius Restio's brave servant reduced the Doctrine into practice. Whilst some
of the Heathens do love their Enemies, were it not well if some Christians
would love their Friends? What a scandal is it (at this day) to the Disciples
of Mahomet (that grand Impostor) that the Spirit of Division should seem to
reign, more amongst Christians then amongst them? Nay are there not many great
Potentates, who profess to be the followers and friends of Christ, and yet are
ready (at any rate) to buy peace of the Turk, to the end that they may break it
with one another? Or (not to go so far from home) how little is there of
Christianity, except the syllables and the sound, even in that part of
Christendom, where Christ is most talked of? Amongst the many who are followers
of the name of Christ, how few are followers of his Example? Mar 10 21.
how far are they from giving all to the poor, who Isa. 3. 15. and 47. 2.
grind their faces as it were meal, and eat them up as it were Psalm. 14. 4. and
53. 4.
Bread? how unlikely are they to iudure the bearing of the Cross, who lay it
so heavily upon other men's shoulders? how do they leave all and follow Christ,
Mar. 10. 20.
who take away all from them that follow him? How do they wrestle against
powers and principalities, Ephesians. 6. 12.
who flatter and syncretize with every thing that is mightiest? How do they
abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
who have nothing of good but in appearance? Where are those pieces of
Christianity, which are the grand characteristicks whereby a Christian should
be distinguished from Jew and Gentile? I fear the places are very few (though
God be thanked some there are) where Christ may be known, by solid Love, to
have real Disciples upon the earth.

Thus you see how this Scripture does furnish matter for Reproof.

And as for Reproof, so withal for correction and instruction in
righteousness. Because it serves to Consule virum consummatissimum, D. D. H.
in 2 Timothy 3. 16.
reduce such as are wandering out of the way, and to build up such as have
begun, or, as it were, set out in the way of righteousness. Whereby it brings
me nearer and nearer to the more special end of our present meeting; which we
are not only to celebrate, as a people born in the very same County, but as a
people brought up too in the very same School; and deservedly dear to one
another, not so much by being Contrymen as Condisciples. Not Disciples under
the Law, which was a rigid Gal. 3. 24.
School master to drive us on unto Christ; but Disciples under Christ, who was
a gracious Schoolmaster to lead us on unto God.

You know when I entered upon my Text, I told you it was a part of our Savior's
last will. And I must tell you, before I leave it, that the will was made for
the behoof, as well of us, and of our children (upon whom the ends of the world
are come) as for that dozen of Disciples to whom 'twas given by parole, 1 Cor.
10, 11.
and with whom the Depositum was left in trust. They were the Witnesses,
Overseers, and Executors in chief; But we the remotest of the Legataries have
equal right with the most immediate. For this Testament (like the Sun) is so
communicated to All, that every Christian in particular has a full right unto
the whole. Will ye know the reason? it is briefly this. The true intent of the
Testator was to make us 1 Timothy 6. 18.
rich in good works, rich toward God, and to one another. But I may say of
Right in such a Legacy, what Aristotle says of the soul of man, that the whole
is in the whole, and the whole in every part too. Nor is it left (as other
Legacies) to be accepted, or refused, without offense. For what is allowed to
be our privilege, is also enjoined to be our duty. In such a Legacy as this,
we are not only permitted, but strictly obliged to claim our portions. For so
run the words, A new commandment give I unto you. His command of our
Acceptance was one part of the Gift; and made his Testament of force, not only
Heb. 9. 17.
after but before his death.

Thus we see our obligation to fulfill the intent of the Testator. And to the
end we might see it, the will is registered by St. John in this indelible
Record. It lies upon us, this day, to give a proof unto the world of our
Discipleship under Christ. As much as in us lies, through the grace of our God
which is working in us, we must make this an imitable and an exemplary meeting.
Every man must endeavor (as St. Paul exhorts his son Titus) to show himself a
pattern of good works, Tit. 2. 7. Our love, as well as our moderation, Phil. 4,
5.
must be know unto all men. Our light of love (like the Sun) must cast a glory
round about it, though not to this end, that men may see us, and glorify us,
yet at least to this end, that men may see our Mat. 5. 16.
good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Or as it is expressed
in my Text, that all men may know we are Christ's Disciples. Let us not walk
after them, who open their meeting with a Sermon, and shut it up with a Surfeit.
But as we have happily begun with some Acts of sacrifice, so let us end more
happily in works of mercy; for we are not invited to a Feast, like that of
Herod, and the Israelites, who sat down (like Brutes) to eat and drink, and
then (like wantons) rose up to play, (Exodus 32. 6.) This is not (...), a
Grecian Feast of good fellowship; but a Christian (...), or Feast of love.

If you will know what that means, you must consult the second Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles; where you will find, in the conclusion, Act. 2. 46.
that they did not only continue daily in the Temple, but they did also break
bread from house to house. They did enjoy their merry meetings of love and
charity; for so it follows in the Text, Ibid.
They did eat their meat with gladness, as well as with singleness of heart.
From whence I take out this Lesson, That Christianity is not a sullen thing,
making every man's life a continual Lent, as the Heretic Illi tres in anno
faciunt quadragesimas, quasi tres passi s^at salvato^^s. Hieron. in ep. ^d Ma
cellam. ^ol. 406.
Montanus would fain have had it. There is a difference very sufficient betwixt
the Church of a Christian, and a Stoick's Porch. But withal let us ruminate on
the two Verses going before, where they had all things in common, the rich
distributing to the poor, (to every man his proportion) just according as they
had need. Verse 44, 45.


Neither was it upon a sudden, that charity grew to that coldness in which we
find it. For Quia animo animaque miscemur, nihil derei communicatione
dubitamus. Omnia indiscreta apud nos sunt, praeter uxores. Tertull. in Apol.
cap 39.
Tertullian tells us, that (in his days) they had all things in common, except
their wives.

I do not press you to an equality, (for I think the Age will not bear it) I
only plead for a similitude with what we find was the practice of better times.
I do not urge you to be liberal beyond your power (like the Primitive
Christians of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8. 3.) nor to part with your Riches in exchange
for deep Poverty, that through your poverty the poor may grow Rich, (as St.
Paul speaks of our Savior, v. 9.) For when the Age is Iron, I cannot hope I am
speaking to such a gold^n flock of Hearers, as will endure to be preached into
so much purity.

All I exhort you to, is this, That ye will be but as ingenuous as the Heathen
Emperor Severus, that is, that ye will do as ye would be done by, and at least
be liberal 2 Cor. 8 3.
to your power; and that ye will so show mercy, as ye hope to find it. Ye
cannot call it a Feast of Love, where some are drunk, whilst some are hungry,
(as it seems at 1 Cor. 11. 21.
Corinth some such there were.) A true Feast of Love must be for all comers, as
well for the poor, as for the rich, or rather for the poor before the rich. For
mark the words of our Savior to one who invited him to a Feast, Luke 14. from
v. 12. to v. 15. where first he advises in the Negative; Luke 14. 12.
When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, least they also bid thee again,
and so recompense be made thee. From whence we learn this Lesson, That it is
true (...), Aristot. Eth. l. 8. p. 816.
Courtesy indeed, to be afraid of a Requital. He is a Mercenary Feaster,
whose Guests are all Entertainers as apt and able as himself. For one rich man
to invite another, is no more in effect, than to make an exchange of good
Cheer; to commute a Dinner for a Supper; and what is that to be esteemed, but a
more Gentlemanly Barter? A buying and and selling of Entertainments? Our
Savior therefore goes on to the positive part of his Advise. Verse. 13.
When thou make a Feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind,
adding this for a reason, because they cannot recompense thee again. Verse. 14.
Which is as much as to say, that the noblest motive to our Beneficence should
be the poverty of the object on which it is fastened, and the greatest
impossibility of the least Requital upon earth. It is always Acts 20. 35.
more blessed to give than to receive, (as our Saviors words are recorded in
the Nazarene Gospel) but then especially, when we give with an assurance, that
(on this side heaven) we shall not receive. Yet even in this case also, the
merciful man is a projector, and driving on his own interest; bestowing a
little here on earth, for a large Recompense in Heaven. For so says our
Savior in the next words of that Verse, (giving the reason of that reason he
gave before) Verse. 14.
Thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Dead.

Say then, my Brethren. When God professes to be our Prove. 19. 17.
Debtor for all we give unto the poor, and gives us his word for a Ibid.
Repayment, and when Christ becomes our security, Mat. 19. 29.
that all we lend shall be returned a hundred fold into our Bosoms; Luke 6. 38.
what kind of reason can be imagined why one Rich man will lend his money unto
another, for six pounds in the hundred, or lay it out in some Trade (at most)
for twenty in the hundred, rather than Prove. 19. 17.
lend it unto the Lord (by having pity upon the poor) or Mat. 13. 45, ^6.
lay it out upon life eternal, whereby he shall not only receive six or twenty
in the hundred, but exceedingly more, then a hundredfold the very Principal?
If you inquire into the reason, I am afraid you will find it to be but this,
that they cannot easily trust God, or believe the Scripture, or accept of
Christ for their security. Let me therefore say to as many of you as are
superlatively Rich, That if ever you do expect to be Luke 16. 22.
carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, you must think your selves obliged
to take Lazarus into your own. And let me say to as many of you as are
comparatively poor, that rather than fail of being merciful, ye must Ephesians. 4.
28.
work with your hands the thing that is good, that ye may have to give to him
that needs. St. Paul's own hands did administer to his necessities; and not
only to his, but to theirs also that were with him, Act. 20. 43. The strong
ought by their labor to (...), Philo (...). p. 557.
support the weak, (v. 35.) Rather then any man should want, who is not able to
earn his Bread, He has a right to eat it in the sweat of our Brows. For there
is one sort of poor, who are an Honorable Order and Rank of men, as being Iure
Divine, of God's immediate Deuteronomy. 15. 11. 1 Samuel 2. 7.
institution. And our Lord himself, that Mal. 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness, when he was here in his Hypogae^, was pleased to make
himself free of that Company; He became the head of that Order. For whilst he
lived, he lived upon Alms, (Luke 8. 3.) the Foxes were not so poor, for they
had holes; the Fowls of the Air were not so destitute, for they had nests; but
the Son of man (said the Son of man himself) had not where to lay his head.
(Mat. 8. 20.) And then when he was dead, He was fain to be buried upon other
folks charges. (Luke 23. 53. 56.) Ye must not therefore neg^ect the poor,
unless you dare Prove. 14. 31.
reproach your Maker; or, unless ye dare despise that, which Christ himself in
his person was pleased to honor. The Infidels provided as well for those of
their own Country, as for those of their own House. And St. Paul implies by
the word [ 1 Timothy 5. 8.
especially] that Christians ought to provide for both, unless they dare be
worse than Infidels. From all which it is evident, that they who are of your
Country, yet not admitted to your Feast, and that for no other (...). Philo.
(...). p. 544.
fault than their being poor, must have such provision made for them, that they
may fare the better for being Hungry.

But yet I am not at an end of my Exhortation. For in vain do rich men
conspire, to refresh the Bowels of the poor, Philem. 7.
whilst by envy, or Animosity, or by vexatious Suits at Law, they do
impoverish the Rich too. It is not true Charity they show to others, if they
nourish Contention amongst themselves. Men may be liberal to their Vanities,
and bestow a great deal of Riches in Ostentation to the poor, and yet be still
strangers to Christian charity, if they will not let fall a Quarrel, or Suit
at Law, until they are utterly disenabled to hold it up. The wise Disciples of
(...). Hierocl. (...). p. 61.
Pythagoras would rather quit their own right in matter of Riches, or Honor,
or worldly greatness, then run the hazard of breaking peace in any such carnal
considerations.

And therefore (my Brethren) let me conjure you, not so much by that common,
but civil Interest, which you have in one Country, as by that common, and
sacred Interest, which you have in one Christ, that all your Contentions (from
this day forward) may be swallowed up in this one, who shall show the greatest
Zeal, and who shall use the best endeavors, to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4. 3.
That however your Feast is but once a jear, yet your peace and your unity may
be all the year long. Remember the saying of St. James, That to love one
another, as you love your own selves, is to fulfill the Royal Law, Jam. 2. 8.
If Jesus Christ is a Royal Savior, and if his Law is a Royal Law, then all
true Christians must needs be Royalists; that is, obedient to the Precepts of
Christ their King. Remember the saying of 1 Cor. 12. 13.
St. Paul, That by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body; whether Jews,
or Gentiles, bound or free, of different Countries, or of the same, we have
been all made to drink into one Spirit Verse. 27.
Ye are the Body of Christ, and members in particular. Verse. 25. Phil. 4. 8
Let there be no Schism in the Body. But whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, Chap. 2. v. 1.
if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, Think on these things. And
the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly; that the (...).
whole of you, both body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
soul, and spirit, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now unto him who is able to keep us from falling, Jude 24.
and to raise us when we are down, and to present us being risen, before the
presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, To the only wise God our Savior,
even to God the Father, who has created us in love by his mighty power, to God
the Son, who has redeemed us in love by his precious Blood, and to God the
Holy Ghost, who has prepared us in love by his sanctifying Grace, and thereby
given us a Pledge of our future Glory, to the holy, individual, and Glorious
Trinity, three Persons and one God, be ascribed by us, and by all the world,

Blessing, Rev. 5. 12, 13.
and Glory, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this day
forward, and for evermore.

THE END.
Books written by the same Author, and lately published, Viz.
1 THE Sinner impleaded in his own Court; wherein are represented, the great
discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from sin it self, etc.
80.

2. The Christians Rescue from the Grand Error of the Heathen, touching the
fatal necessity of all Events, and the Dismal consequences thereof which have
slily crept into the Church. 40.

Sold by Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane.


