PHYSICAL DIRECTIONS IN TIME OF PLAGVE.

Printed by Command from the Lords of the COUNCIL.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

PHYSICAL DIRECTIONS in time of Plague.
DWelling-houses are to be kept clean, Preservation.
free from filth, and ill smells, the Windows near infected houses kept close
with Glass, or oyled, waxed paper, that light, but no infected air, may come
in. In houses farther from infection, windows open sometimes, toward wholesome
air and wind.

Fires to be made in houses infected, and the neighbouting houses, and in
Churches, at times of public Prayers and Preaching, and at all public
meetings, not in Chimnies only, but in moveable pannes; the fires made with dry
wood, Oak, Ash, Beech, dry Vinebranches, Willow, Baytree, Rosemary sticks,
etc. Juniper, Rosemary dried, Bayleaves, Angelica, Lavender, Sage, Hysope,
Marioram, Thyme, Mints, Balm, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentine, frankincense;
some of these cast on the coals, to perfume the house.

Richer persons may have fuming candles or cakes, made with Benzoin, Storax,
Musk, etc. For which order shall be given by the Physicians, if any please to
have them, and be not otherwise provided. Oak boughs, Ash, Willow,
Bayleaves, Hysope, Marioram, Thyme, Lavander, Mints, Rosemary, Fennel, Sage,
Wormwood, Meadsweet etc. may be laid in the Chimnies and Windows.

Sometimes the fume of Vinegar, Rose Water, and Rosemary, and Cloves, over the
fire.

Wearing clothes perfumed with Juniper, red Sanders, or Rosemary burned.

Going abroad, or talking with any, it is good to hold in the Mouth, a clove or
two, a piece of Nutmeg, Zedoary, Angelica, Gentian, Tormentill, or Enulacampana
root; in the hand a Sponge dipped in Vinegar and Rose water, wherein Rosemary,
Sage, Angelica, or Rue have bin infused, or a toast of brown bread dipped
therein, tied up in a linen cloth, or the Sponge in a Juniper or Ivory box
with holes. For persons of better rank, Pomanders made of Ladanum, Benzoin,
red and white Sanders, Storax, Myrrh, Saffron, Amber, Camphyre, Musk, etc.

Go not forth early in the Morning, nor fasting; eat not much, Sage and
butter, a Potched Egg with Vinegar, or such like will suffice, be not late
abroad at night. In the Morning wash the Mouth with water wherein Sage has
been boiled or infused, and rub the teeth with the leaves.

Take a spoon full of quick wine vinegar, Cordialls.
wherein wormwood chopped has bin infused. Take Figs good and clean
thirty, Wallnut kernells pilled twenty, (if to be had) green Rue picked a good
handful, Salt one spoonful, stamp them, and incorporate them together, take
the quantity of a Prune a child as much as a Hasell nut. More pleasing;
conserve of Wood-sorrell, Borage, Sage, of each one ounce, Hartshorn a dragme,
Bole-Armeniake two drams, yellow Sanders half a dram, Saffron the weight of
3d, syrup of Wood-sorrell, as much as will make it into a moist electuary;
take as much as a good Nutmeg, twice or thrice a day. London treacle the weight
of 8d, first in the morning with conserve of Roses, fasting one hour after it;
treacle-water two spoonfulls, with one dram of Mithridate, Confectio
liberans, or Electuary de Ovo. Diet meats of easy digestion, Diet.
sauce sower, sharp, sorrel, Lemon, Vinegar, Verjuyce, etc. Forbear Milky
meats, Custard, etc. Fish slimy as Eeles, etc. raw fruits, and strong Wines;
excess in meat or drink is dangerous. Fasting, or much emptiness is bad.

If there be fulness of blood, Bleeding.
letting blood is fit, but not much, rather repeated.

If the body be bound, Purging.
a Suppository with honey and salt. If fullness of putrid humors, Aloes the
weight of 6d in the pap of a roasted apple; or pills of Ruffus a dram once a
Week. For persons of quality, other proper purges, as the present condition
shall require, Issue.
potion, etc. and an ^ssue or fontanell, in Arm or Leg, if there be cause;
and vomites proper if need be. Vomites easy to be had; sallet-oyle three
spoonfulls, juice of radish-root one spoonful, or oxymell of squilles too
spoonfulls, oil and posset drink. Exercise moderate.

Signs of infection appearing, Infection.
viz. fainting, swooning, vomiting, or pronenesse thereto, heaviness,
weariness without cause, loss of appetite, much thirst, diverse of these
concurring, let blood or purge, or both, as cause requires the first or second
day, no botch or sore appearing. Then defend the heart with Cordialls formerly
prescribed. Let the party sweat with Carduus, or Marigold posset-drinke, London
treacle two drammes, or with wood sorrel water five spoonfulls, treacle water
one spoonful, and London treacle a dram and half.

If a tumor, Botche.
botch or sore appear, let the inside of the arm, thigh, or calfe of the
leg be blistered with Cantharides powder two drammes, with vinegar and
leaven. Take a great Onyon, hollow it, put into it Venice-treacle one dram, a
fig and a little Rue cut small, roast it soft, close stopped, in a wet paper
under the Embers, apply it hot to the Tumor, let one lie three hours. Or a
pultesse of Mallows two handfulls, two lilly roots cut and bruised, twelve
figs sliced, boil all well in water, stamp them, put to it three spoonfulls
of oil of Lillies, apply it, and shift it thrice a day. When it is broken,
take the yolke of an Egg, honey of Roses one ounce, Turpentine half an ounce,
London-treacle, or Venice, and Methridate, and St John's wort oil, each one
dram, a little meal flower, mix all together, lay it to the sore, upon
leather, changing it twice a day. Or a hot loaf out of the Oven. Or three
Lilly roots roasted, beaten and applied; burn the plasters, etc. taken off
the body.

Those that escape, are to be purged before they go abroad; those that dye,
are to be buried in remote places, and deep in the ground.

FINIS.

