AN Effectual Prescription Against the ANGUISH of all DISEASES, And Against ALL
OTHER AFFLICTIONS To which the Nature of Man is Subject.

Penned, and Published, and Approved, from the AUTHOR's Experience of it: But
more especially from the Experience of very many much Greater and Better Men,
the Latchet of whose Shoes He is not worthy to untie.

PSALM. XCIV. v. 12. Blessed is the Man whom Thou Chastenest, O Lord, and
Teach him in thy Law. PSALM. XXX. v. 12, 13. Thou have turned my Heaviness
into Joy: Thou have put off my Sackcloth, and girded me with Gladness.

O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for Samuel Clark, Bookseller. An. Dom.
1691.

AN Effectual Prescription AGAINST The Anguish of all Diseases, etc.
SECT. I.
AFTER my Threefold Exhortation, grounded upon the Exhortations as well of our
Savior, Luke 18. 1.
as of St. Paul, that Men will Pray Always, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
and without Ceasing; I cannot better proceed in mine own poor Opinion, than to
this other Exhortation of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, that they who pray
without ceasing, Ver. 16.
will Rejoice evermore: Ver. 18.
And not only so, but will in every thing give Thanks too. For very close is
the Connection between these Paradoxes, and Duties, as I shall meet with an
Occasion to show anon. But at present it is my desire, to consider and insist on
the strangest Exhortative of our Apostle, Rejoice evermore; and to take it in
such a manner for my Text at this time of my being Bedrid, and in pain, as not
utterly to exclude its due Relations unto the Context: Namely Pray without
ceasing, and in every thing give thanks.

. II.
And if These last are hard Sayings, (as Carnal Professors may here object,)
How much harder is the Exhortative, that we Rejoice evermore? How can a
Christian so wholly learn as to put in practice this Lesson, in a Fit of the
Strangury, or of the Stone? in a most tormenting Paroxysin of an Iliaca passio,
or of the Gout? Can Men Rejoice evermore, when Hell upon Earth is broken loose
in the times of such Barbarians as Antiochus Epiphanes was to the Jews, or
Dioclesian and Maximinus, and Maxentius to the Christians, and other Tyrants of
equal Cruelty too foul and many to be here named? Can they Rejoice evermore,
whilst they are suffering under the Tortures of their being Sawn asunder, and
tormented with an (...) or Excoriation of the Skin, as some of the Martyrs we
read have been? Yet such more especially were the Times, to which our Apostle
does here allude, in his Scriptural Exhortation, that as Followers and
Disciples of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, we will Rejoice evermore, and in all
Conditions.

. III.
Now whether these words, Rejoice evermore, which are confessedly Apostolical,
contain a Precept, or an Advice; they prove it possible and lawful, for a
Follower of CHRIST to be still Rejoicing. For were it impossible to be done,
St. Paul would be so far from commanding the practice of it, that he would not
so much as commend it to us: and were the practice of it unlawful, he would
neither commend nor recommend it, but severely stigmatize, and forbid it
rather. It follows then that we can, and that we may Rejoice always in all
Conditions; that is, with such a true joy as St. Paul alludes to, which is not
Carnal, but Spiritual; not an Outward, and Superficial, but an Internal and
solid Joy: Not the Joy of a Worldling, or of Riotous Debauchee, which stands in
temporary Fits of sport and laughter; (For a vicious Man may laugh with an
heavy Heart;) But the never-failing Joy of a sincerely pious Man, which arises
from a clean and a quiet Conscience. Sen. Ep. 13.
Creed mihi (says Seneca) res severa est verum Gaudium. Permanent Joy, which
alone is real, is nothing else but the serenity and satisfaction of a Man's
mind; ever at peace within it self, because it does nil conscire sibi, has no
false dealing, or Unsincerity to disturb it, Acts 24. 16.
as being void of all offense toward God and Man. This alone is True Joy; Joy
which will be True to us; on all occasion stick by us; and dwell inseparably
with us, when other Joys vanish away, like the Morning Dew.

. IV.
To this it is St. Paul exhorts his Philippians, and that with an earnest,
and most affectionate ingemination. Rejoice in the Lord, (c. 3. v. 1.) yea
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice, (c. 4. v. 4.) which
Excitation to rejoice, and to rejoice without ceasing, and to rejoice in the
Lord, cannot possibly be meant of a common Joy, which like the Wisdom of this
world, is ever earthy and sensual, and sometimes Devilish, such as of which our
Savior says, Luke 6. 25.
Woe be to you that laugh now, for ye shall weep. But it is necessarily meant of
a Ghostly Joy, Rom 14. 17.
or a Joy in the Holy Ghost; a Joy incessant, and without End or Interruption,
especially at a time of the greatest secular Distresses, when Carnal Professors
of no Integrity know not which way to turn, unless from the suffering to the
persecuting side. For then it was that St. Paul exhorted his Converts to
Rejoice, and to rejoice evermore, when they were under the Persecutions of Jews
and Gnostics. Then it was when he exhorted them to Rejoice in the Lord. Not in
things of this World, wherein he saw there was no true Rejoicing. So said he
touching himself, in the 10. Verse of that Chapter, But I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly. He rejoiced in the Lord with a Christian Joy; with a Joy, whereof the
Lord CHRIST was the only Author, and so he rejoiced through the Lord, as well
as for the Lord's sake: which lessens any Man's wonder to find him rejoicing in
his sufferings, there being nothing more rational, than that he should fill up
what was (...), Coloss. 1. 24.
behind of the sufferings of Christ with exceeding Joy, because he could not
but rejoice in his being made perfect, who was to be perfected through
sufferings, Hebr. 2. 10.
as the Captain of his Salvation had been before him.

. V.
It Is the Perfection of a True Christian, and it is his Reward in this World,
(as well as Duty,) thus to be able (with St. Paul) to Rejoice evermore in the
worst of times; Phil. 4. 11.
in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content: to be as free from
perturbation in the midst of all hardships and tribulations, as the Prophet
Jonah was in a time of shipwreck; never fuller of tranquillity, than in the
most stormy wind and tempest; nor at any time safer, than in the Belly of the
Leviathan. And though there are who have written Books, whereby to teach Men the
Art of Rejoicing always, the Art of attaining to this Perfection, not only in
CHRIST's, but in the Stoics School also; yet it is no where attainable by human
Means, without the Cooperation of the Assisting Grace of God, where the Grace
of God Preventing has gone before it. Epictetus, and Arrian, Plato, and
Plotinus, Hierocles, and Seneea, are no contemptible Instructors, even in this
Divine Art of Framing an Heaven upon Earth. And St. Paul might have profited in
that sort of Learning by some of them, having been conversant in the Writings
of Epimenides, and Menander, and in all probability of Plato also; of whose Sub
Phaedonis initium apud Aug. Mascard. Diss. 2. p. 22, 23, 24. Et in suo
Charidemo Prolusio Ethic. 3. p. 4. 6.
Apologue I am minded, by the subject I am upon. For when Volupia and Angerona,
those Heathen Goddesses of Joy and Sorrow which he derided, were still at odds,
and impatient of an Agreement, God (says the Mythologist) tied them together by
the Necks; that if they would not be friends, they might be forced to be
Companions. A Fable I should not here mention, but for the Pertinent Moral of
it; That God is able to reconcile the greatest Opposites in Nature; Pain and
Pleasure, Joy and Sorrow, Prosperity and Affliction, in the Soul of any Prudent
and Pious Man. And accordingly, when 'twas said by the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 94.
19.
That in the multitude of the sorrows which he had in his heart, the comforts
of God did refresh his soul; he spoke and acted as Inspired by the Holy Ghost
the Comforter. Comforts he had in the midst a multitude of sorrows; and in the
midst of those sorrows which he had in his Heart too: wherein the Comforter
from above did not only Refresh, but Delight his Soul, (for so our New
Translation has it.) And even the Carnal Man will grant, that the Pleasure of
the Soul is the Soul of Pleasure. I say, St. Paul might have profited by some
of those Heathen Writers whom he professes to have perused: But 'twas by
Christ, Phil. 4. 11, 12.
and Christ alone, by whom he grew perfect in his Lesson, to be content in all
Cases. A Lesson he had learned (he tells us plainly) and been thoroughly
Instructed in; It was not got without Study, nor yet without going to School to
his Master Christ; who did not only enrich him with Light and Knowledge of all
his Duties, but (which no other Master could do) gave him Ability to perform
them. For having told us what he had learned, and how far he had been
instructed, every where, and in all things both to be full, and to be hungry,
both to abound, and to suffer need; He immediately added, that all his
sufficiencies were of Christ; not of Pythagoras, or of Zeno, or of any other
Teacher, or of himself: But, says he, Phil. 4. 13.
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. As our Rejoicing
must be in him, so by him and his strength, showing it self in our Weakness;
through him and his wisdom, showing it self in our Folly; with his Power and
All-sufficience, showing it self in our Wants and Imperfections; we can rejoice
evermore, and in all conditions.

. VI.
But now however the glorious Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST is very sufficient
of it self to make us perfect in St. Paul's Lesson, to be abased, and to
abound, and in all stations to be content; and will never be wanting unto us,
but when we are wanting unto it, and when we are wanting unto our selves; Yet
he expects and requires, that we negociate with the Talents entrusted to us,
the Talent of Reason, as well as Grace. He expects that we work out our own
Salvation; Phil. 2. 12, 13.
he expects that we stir up his Grace within us; 2 Timothy 1. 6.
that we labor and cooperate, 2 Cor. 6. 1.
and work together with him, (whilst he works in us both to will and to do,)
that we receive not his Grace in vain. The Art of Contentment and Rejoicing
does not cease to be an Art, by being a Divine and a Christian Art. Nor are the
Rules of it the worse, for being taught in the School of Reason. And so it is
pertinent to consider, how far the Rule of Epictetus may conduce to our
Proficiency, whilst we con St. Paul's Lesson. (...). Our troubles do not arise
from things themselves, but from our opinions of them. Let us rectify our
opinions, concerning those things which are within our own Power, and those
other things which are quite without it; and then instead of labor in vain to
bring our condition to our minds, (which most Men do, tho it is impossible to be
done) we shall employ our selves entirely in bringing our minds to our
condition. At which pitch if we arrive, we are qualified with our Apostle to
Rejoice evermore. Whereas for want of this Attainment, no such thing as True
Joy is to be had, or so much as hoped for, whilst we are in this uncertain and
fickle World.

. VII.
The very Basis and Foundation of all our Contentments upon Earth, is either
the Clearness of our Knowledge, or rather the Rectitude of our Faith, as it is
the Ratio formalis, the Soul and Life of our Religion. A firm Belief that God
is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: Heb. 11. 6.
A firm Belief without wavering, that God who was the Creator, is still the
Preserver of all the World; and as the Preserver, so the Governor, the
Director, the Methodizer, and Disposer, of all things in it. A firm Belief
without doubting, that nothing does or can happen without his Will; his Will to
effect, or his Will to suffer it; his Will to do, or not to hinder its being
done: and that in all the Will of God there is perfect Wisdom: whether his Will
is Absolute, or only Respective, and Conditional; Romans 7. 12.
still it is infinitely Holy, Just and Good. All which imports an Infinite, and
Perfect Wisdom.

. VIII.
This Belief being settled and fixed within us, makes us wait on God's
Providence; Acquiesce in his Will, and Adore his Wisdom. So as in all Events to
say, (and that from the Heart, and not only from the Teeth outward,) God's Will
be done. The worth of this Acquiescence in the Good Will of God, was clearly
seen by blind Homer, in comparison with whom Titular Christians are in the
Dark, who think that God cannot see, or at least that he will not punish their
Dissatisfactions in his Oeconomie. (...), was Homer's saying, and 'twas a good
one. God's Will was done in this, or that which is come to pass. But they said
better, who said in their Submission to God's Appointment touching Saint Paul
and his sufferings, foretold by the Prophet Agabus, Acts. 21. 14.
(...), The Will of the Lord be done. But much better yet said the Man Christ
Jesus, who said in the Agony of his Soul, when it was sorrowful even to death,
Mat. 26. 38.
(...). Not as I, but as thou will; or not my Will, but thy Will be done. He
had prayed as a Man, the Bitter Cup might pass from him; but when he considered
that he must drink it, and for the Health of Mankind too, he deprecated his
Prayer, not at all his Persecution; He prayed his Prayer might not be heard;
and that he might not have his own Will, according to his Humane Nature: But
(said he to God the Father, v. 42.) (...). Thy Will be done. Now he who can say
with Good old Eli in all afflictions, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good; 1 Samuel 3. 11. 18.
and with King Hezekiah, when Death it self is denounced to him, Good is the
word of the Lord, 2 Kings 20. 19.
which thou have spoken; and with Job embracing a Dunghill, when reduced from
all his Riches unto his Pot-sherd and his Boyles by God's Permission, Though he
kill me, Job 13. 15.
yet will I trust in him, though he deprive me of all I have, I will bless his
Name. Lastly, he who can say with Christ Himself in sincerity, when as
brim-full of pain as his heart can hold, Father, not my Will, but thy will be
done; he who thus is enabled not only to embrace, but to choose the Will of
God, and even then whenit crosses His, he, I may say in some sense, is (...) a
Mortal God, (as the old Pythagoreans were wont to phrase it,) that is a mere
Man, with the Image and Superscription of God upon him; a Man in God's
Likeness, wherein his first Parents were first created. To sum up all in a
word, He who wills what God wills, (be it taken by the right handle, and
understood with a grain of Salt,) does make God's Will become his own. He
carves an happiness to himself, by that conformity of his Will to the Will of
God. And his Conversation being incessantly in Heaven, (as St. Paul speaks to
his Philippians,) he does in truth and without a figure, enjoy an Heaven upon
Earth too, in antecessum. And this I think, in proper speaking, is to Rejoice
evermore.

. IX.
Thus I take my self to have proved St. Paul's Exhortative to be Rational,
which some sensual Apolausticks would gladly have to be Ridiculous. It Is an
Exhortative to nothing but what is possible, and lawful, and highly laudable in
its Attainment. A Christian Duty recommended, if not commanded to be done, and
in the Doing of which there is great Reward.

. X.
In the scope of this Text being thus explained, our Apostle's three Generals
may be particularly applied to our Rejoicing (...), always, or evermore, (...)
in every thing, and (...), without cessation, or intermission. This is to
Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8. which is there also said to be full
of glory; because the Joy of a sedate and a quiet Conscience, if it be in us,
is not only unexpressible by our selves, but also unvaluable by others, as the
most Learned Dr. Hammond does well explain it. So that here we may apply that
Epiphonema of St. 2 Cor. 9. 15.
Paul, Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift. However spoken by St. Paul
in another Case, namely that of Almsgiving, which is indeed the Gift of God,
however expressed by and conveyed by the Hands of Men. And with a greater force
of Reason may we apply it to our selves, in case we are blessed with the
Charisma of Rejoicing evermore, in all conditions and events, which either do
or shall befall us whilst we are Sojourners here on Earth. For an Ability to
rejoice evermore in this Sense, must needs be one of those good and perfect
Gifts, which are said by St. James to be of a most Divine Extraction: James. 1.
17.
It is a Gift from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights. And he may
very well say, who has arrived at this Ability, to Rejoice evermore, in all
conditions and events, (...) always, (...)in every thing, and (...), without
cessation, or interruption; Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gift.

. XI.
Saint James in his first Chapter to the Jewish Christians of the Dispersion,
has several Instances of Inducement to our Rejoicing evermore, and that
especially in our afflictions: My brethren, count it all Joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations, (v. 2.) of which the best of Annotators does make this
Paraphrase, Look upon it as the most blessed of all conditions that can befall
you, (as the joyfullest thing imaginable,) that ye meet with afflictions, and
those of many sorts and kinds, in your Christian course. So the ninth and tenth
Verses (says the most Learned Dr. Hammond) cannot be better interpreted
according to the sense, than thus: As glad as a poor man would be of being made
rich, so glad let the rich man be of his being brought low. Let him be as well
pleased, and thank God as heartily, for his being reduced to this low estate,
as any poor creature is apt to be of any great Dignity or Preferment. Let the
rich man look with joy on all the injuries and crosses that can befall him. All
which is imported by St. James in these words, Let the rich man rejoice in his
being made low; still it is rejoicing in afflictions, (not at all in
prosperity,) to which St. James does well excite us in all that passage of his
first Chapter, from the second to the tenth Verse. (See Dr. Hammond's Note on
Matthew. 9. d.

. XII.
But to anticipate and frustrate such Objections of the Flesh, as will be
naturally made by the Carnal-minded, we must still carry in mind, (what I have
already hinted in the beginning of my Discourse,) that the Joy we take in
suffering for having done any thing well, or in a cheerful submission to God's
Economy, in his Government of the World as he sees fit, is not to be a merely
humane, but Christian Joy; It must be a Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
(as St. Paul fitly calls it,) or to express it with St. Peter, a Joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. For it is a poor Expression of Merriment which
only flows from the Spleen and Midriff; and only makes a Man look, as if he
were bitten with a Tarantula; and many times is no more than Sardonick
Laughter, which being no deeper than the Face, is consistent with a weeping or
heavy Heart: whereas the Rejoicing of a Christian which has its warrant from
Christ himself, and its Festival from the Inside of Soul of Man, is a solid,
and a severe, and a serious thing; a thing that is permanent and fixed. It keeps
a Man Company in his solitude; and yields him Comfort in his Afflictions; and
reconciles his very pain with a secret Pleasure. The Prophet Jeremy enjoyed it
in Ionathan's Dungeon; and Daniel in the Lions Den. It stuck to St. Peter upon
his Cross; and forsook not St. Paul in all his Sufferings, whereof he gives a
kind of Inventory, in the Eleventh Chapter of his Second Epistle to the
Corinthians. In his labors more abundant, in his stripes above measure, in his
very frequent Prisons, in Deaths often, in perils of Waters, in perils of
Robbers, in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils
in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils by Sea, in perils among
false Brethren, (which were the worse perils of all) in Weariness and
painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings often, in
Cold and Nakedness: In these and all other distresses, of every kind, and in
all degrees, his Inward Joy did not forsake him; his Peace of Conscience stuck
closer to him, than his Skin to his Flesh, or his Flesh to his Bones; for these
his several Lictors had the power to take from him. Five times was he scourged
by the Lictors of the Jews, and that without Mercy, or Mitigation; and with a
Rod of three branches, whereof each was of twisted whip-cord, (as Maimonides
has informed us,) and so inflicted three stripes at every stroke. He was thrice
beaten with Rods, that is, with switches or wands, by the Lictors of the
Gentiles; once he was stone without a Process, by a tumultuous Rabble of
Zealots; and tho not unto Death, yet (which is worse) he was left for dead. (
Acts 14. 19.) Three times at least he suffered Shipwreck. A night and a day he
was in the Deep, that is, in a Prison of the Propontis, which was a most noisome
and filthy pit, which for its depth under ground was called (...), that is, the
bottom of the Sea: like that at Athens, called (...), or that at Syracuse
called The Mineral. In every one of these cases the Joy of St. Paul never
forsook him; but he prayed without ceasing, he rejoiced evermore, and in every
thing gave thanks. Nor is it a wonder that he rejoiced in the things, wherein
he said he took pleasure: For that he did so is plain, 2 Cor. 12. 10. where
when he said that he took pleasure in Infirmities, he explained what he meant
in the very next words, by Reproaches, by Necessities, by Persecutions, by
Distresses, for Christ's sake. These expressly were the things in which he said
he took pleasure; yea, these were the things in which he boasted, and in which
he gloried, (v. 9.) most gladly (says he) will I glory in mine infirmities,
that the power of Christ may rest upon me. 'Twas his (...) and delight, to bear
about in his body the dying of the Lord Jesus. In comparison with whom, Phil.
3. 8.
he reckoned all things but Dung, and rejoiced to be reckoned himself as Dung,
as the Off-scowrings of the Earth, for the sake of CHRIST. He was glad to be
thought worthy to suffer Shame for CHRIST'S sake.

. XIII.
This is called with great Fitness The Rejoicing of a Man's hope, (Heb. 3. 6.)
because the Hope we have in God, and our Relyance upon Him for the performance
of his Promises in the most unlikely Times, when all things round about us are
most improsperous and adverse, is the Ground and Foundation of all a Christian
Man's Rejoicing; and that as at all times so above all in Times of Trial. To
which St. Paul does give witness in the fifth Chap. to the Romans, from the
second to the sixth Verse. We rejoice (says he) in Hope of the Glory of God;
(v. 2.) and not only so, But we glory in Tribulations; (v. 3.) we are
infinitely pleased with our present sufferings; though not reduplicative for
sufferings sake; but as knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope, (v. 4.) and Hope makes not ashamed (v. 5.)
But on the contrary, thus hoping for the glory of God to be revealed, (...) we
boast, we glory, we rejoice with exceeding Joy, and that because the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the same Holy Ghost which is given unto
us, (v. 5.) Which is as if he should have said, That however our afflictions
are in their own nature tedious, yet they exercise many Virtues, as Faith, and
Patience, and Perseverance, which are all required of us, and are deservedly to
be shown in the Cause of CHRIST. Besides that Patience under Afflictions is
absolutely necessary for the Trial of our Sincerity, of which we cannot well
judge without a Trial, nor can we by Consequence, without it, have a safe
Ground of Hope; which being rightly grounded upon a Trial and Proof of our
Sincerity, (in our adherence to JESUS CHRIST,) and rightly objected on his
Promises revealed to us in the Gospel, can never prove a false or deceitful
Hope; nor can we possibly miscarry, in our Dependence upon CHRIST for a full
Performance. For it is not without sufficient Reason, that God is called The God
of Hope; and that he is said to fill the Hearts of True Believers, with all Joy
and peace in their Believing; and that by the power of God the Holy Ghost, Romans
15. 13.

. XIV.
This I take to be the meaning of that seeming Paradox, (as it is a Paradox more
than seeming to the Natural Man as Man) (...), we boast, we glory, we
exceedingly rejoice in our Tribulations, and are wonderfully pleased with our
present Sufferings, (as Dr. Hammond words it expressly,) and that for the Reason
before recited in the Fifth to the Romans, at the third, fourth and fifth
Verses.

. XV.
There is a parallel place in the 12th. Chapter to the Romans, at the 12th.
Verse, both with That I now cited, and with This of my Text to the
Thessalonians; where Rejoicing in hope is immediately followed with being
Patient in Tribulation, and continuing instant in Prayer. Implying, that That
Religious Hope which makes us purify our selves, (as St. John describes it,)
and is the Second of the Third Theological Graces, 1 John 3. 3.
which is inseparably connected with Faith, and Charity; is not only the Ground
of Patience, and Prayer to God with Perseverance, but even of Joy, and
Exultation, in all the Crosses and Afflictions which can befall us; and so is a
Proof of our Ability, (whilst this Divine Hope is in us,) to obey the
Exhortation, and to perform the Christian Duty incumbent on us in my Text,
which is to Rejoice evermore, and in every thing to be thankful.

. XVI.
This is briefly That Joy, which takes up its Residence in a Man's Heart, and
there is established by his Conscience, a Conscience as quiet, as it is clean;
a Conscience void of Offense toward God and Man. And this is that Peace of
Conscience, which Solomon calls A continual Feast. Vicious Men may abound in a
transient Iollity, but are capable of no true Joy: their Laughing and Quaffing
is in good earnest but their Disease, which has a sting in the tail, when there
is Honey in the Mouth. They may have Intervals and Truces, but no true Peace.
They may indeed have a Callousness, or a Searedness of Conscience, but Peace of
Conscience they have not, they cannot have. There is no Peace, says my God, to
the wicked. Esaiah 57. 20.

. XVII.
He who is blessed with this Ability to Rejoice evermore, will by consequence
obey the two Exhortatives annexed; He will pray without ceasing, and will in
every thing give thanks. He will not only give thanks for his State of Grace,
and his being Gods Servant, or the Servant of Righteousness; but also for his
having been the Servant of Sin. For so he is taught by St. Paul to say, as he
said unto the Christians who dwelt at Rome; God be thanked, that ye were the
Servants of Sin; (Romans 6. 17.) Where it is to be noted, in prevention of a
Mistake in the weaker sort, (who may be bold to sin the more, that Grace may
abound, and that he may have the more occasion to give God thanks, and may love
him the more, the more he has to be forgiven him,) St. Paul did not say, God
be thanked that ye are, but that ye Romans 6. 17.
were the Servants of Sin: which is as if he should have said, God be thanked
that ye are not the Servants of Sin, though once ye were: For it follows in the
next words, But ye have obeyed, and obeyed from the heart, (not above board,
and in open Show only,) that form of Doctrine which was delivered unto you; and
for that, God be thanked.

. XVIII.
This Rejoicing evermore, and giving of Thanks in all Conditions, especially in
the most Adverse, (whether Appointed, or Permitted, by the good Providence of
God,) A world of Confessors and Martyrs have been convinced of being possible,
Compare Heb. xi. with Acts. 9. 31.
by plain experience; and Experience is the Great Mistress, which will instruct
the most stupid, and convince the most stubborn of her Disciples. The
Experience I speak of is plainly this; that by the perpetual Blessing of God
whereby the worst of all Evenements work together for good to them that love
God. Romans 8. 28.
There is nothing adds more to a Man's Happiness upon Earth, than to be injured
for this Well-doing; and Envied for his being Blameless; and bitterly hated by
such as God hates; and for receiving much evil, for his Good offices, or his
Good will. For to suffer such things, as those with Faith, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20.
and Patience, and Thanksgiving, is said by St. Peter to be Thankworthy, and a
thing Acceptable with God. Whereas to suffer for Evil-doing, or to be commended
for doing well, can never be said to be Thankworthy, and much less to be
Meritorious.

. XIX.
If Transitory Comforters could make us happy, it would be then a kind of
Happiness to abound with Flatterers and Parasites, the greatest Comforters for
a time this World can yield us; who yet are worthily esteemed the greatest
Plagues too, because they are Comforters but for a time. And for this very
reason, the goodliest possessions upon Earth, considered simply in themselves,
are but glittering Plagues; because they are Flatterers and Parasites, which
comfort us only for a time; and by ceasing at last to comfort, must needs
torment us. But now the Holy Spirit of God, who is called The Comforter in the
Gospel, is quite a contrary Comforter to all the Comforters I speak of. For
when the Secular Comforters forsake us, He takes us up. His Comforts commonly
begin, when all the rest are perished with us. He is (...), that Friendly
Comforter indeed, who will abide with us for ever, if we will but afford him an
Entertainment, and not resist him at his Coming, nor Grieve him away when he is
entered.

. XX.
Consider the Promise our Savior made to his First Disciples, that He would
pray the Father who would give them another Comforter, Joh. 14. 16.
even the Spirit of Truth, who should abide with them for ever. And mark how
well he performed his Promise: For when they were Persecuted and Beaten for
having preached up CHRIST, they were so Inwardly strengthened by the Holy Ghost
the Comforter, that what was cruelly intended to make them sorry, was
miraculously made to increase their Ioys: And their Rejoicing was even in This,
that they were counted worthy to suffer; and to suffer the public Shame, as
well as the Torments of being Beaten, Acts. 5. 40, 41.
for their adhaerence unto the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Vicious
Pretenders to Religion, who are a Disgrace to Christianity, are not worthy to
suffer for it. But those persecuted Apostles were of such wonderful great
Worth, that the Comforter from Heaven was not only with them, but within their
Hearts also. The nearest to them that was possible, when all the Comforts of
the World stood farthest off; and who was able to make them able, not only to
support, but even to smile on their Afflictions: Not only to endure, but over
and above to enjoy their Sufferings. So we read of the Thessalonians, that they
had received the Word of God in much Affliction and Joy of the Holy Ghost: 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
The Holy Ghost being their Comforter, reconciled their Joy with their
Afflictions. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
It was by the Holy Spirit of God that they Rejoiced with Joy unspeakable: And
therefore Joy is worthily reckoned among the Fruits of the Spirit in special
manner. Gal. 5.
The Fruits of the Spirit are very many; but Love and Joy are the two First,
because he is eminently the Spirit of Love, and Comfort.

. XXI.
And now I have Answered the whole Objection of the most Sensual Apolausticks:
proved it the possible, and the lawful, and laudable Practice of a true
Christian, in the most terrible Cross of CHRIST, to be still Rejoicing. I have
showed that God Alone is the Paraclete, or Comforter (...). That He is the
Wonderful Reconciler of Joy and Sorrow. That Joy is one of those Fruits of the
Blessed Spirit, deeply Rooted in the Heart of a True Believer, that nothing can
be more Orthodox than this Paradox of the Worldling; that it is the Duty, and
the Reward, and the high Privilege of a True Christian, (when all the rest of
Mankind are Swallowed up in the Deepest Mourning,) to rejoice evermore, and in
all Conditions.

Which God the Father of his Goodness give us 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Ability to perform, for the Merits of God the Son, and by the Powerful
Operation of God the Holy Ghost, Unto which Blessed and Glorious Trinity, One
Individual, Invisible, and Indivisible Lord God, be All Honor and Adoration,
both now, and for ever.

FINIS.

