The Primitive Rule of Reformation. Delivered in a SERMON BEFORE His MAJESTY at
WHITE HALL, Feb. 1. 1662. IN Vindication of Our CHVRCH. Against the NOVELTIES
of ROME. BY Tho: Pierce, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and
President of Magdalen College in OXON.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

The Sixth Edition, more Correct then the London Impressions: by the consent of
the Author.

OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Ric. Royston Bookseller to His Sacred Majesty,
and Ric. Davis in Oxon. 1663.

TO THE High and Mighty Monarch Charles the IId: By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THat which never had been exposed unto a wittily-mistaking and crooked world,
but in a dutiful submission to Your Command; may at least for This, if for no
other reason, be justly offered to Your Protection. And this is done with a
steady, though humble confidence of success; because THE DEFENDER OF THE FAITH
Iud 3.
which was once delivered unto the Saints, cannot possibly choose but be so to
him, who does earnestly contend for the very same, because for no other Faith
then That which was from the Beginning. Matthew 19. 8.
If for This I have contended with as much earnestness from the Pulpit, as The
Romanists from the Press do contend against it; I have not only the Jude. 2, 3.
Exhortation and Authority of a Text, but the Exigence of the Time to excuse me
in it.

Now as the Romans in the Time of the second Punick War, could not think of a
fitter way for the driving of Hanibal out of Italy, then Scipio's marching with
an Army out of Italy into Afrique, giving Hanibal a Necessity to go from Rome,
for the raising of the Siege which was laid to Carthage; So could I not think
of a fitter Course to disappoint the Pontificians in their Attempts on Our
Church, then thus by making it their Task to view the Infirmities of their own.
To which effect I was excited to spend my self, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
and to be spent, (if I may speak in the phrase of our Great Apostle,) not from
an arrogant Opinion of any sufficiency in my self, (who am one of the least
among the Regular Sons of the Church of England;) But as relying on the
sufficiency of the Cause I took in hand, and especially on the Help of the
All-sufficient, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
who often loves to make use of the weakest Instruments, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
to effect the bringing down of the strongest Holds.

I suppose my Discourse, however innocent in it self, will yet be likely to
meet with many, not only learned and subtle, but restless enemies; Men of
pleasant Insinuations, and very plausible* Snares; nay, such as are apt (where
they have Power) to Eo sane loco Haereses sunt, ut non tan^ art and Industria,
quam Alexandri glad^o, earum Gordius Nodus dissoivi posse, quas^que Herculis
clava feriendae, quam Apoll^nis Lyra m^tigandae videantur, Sta^l. ton. in
Epist. Dedic. operis de Iuslis. sub fia^m.
confute their Opponents by Fire and Faggot. But when I consider how well my
Margin does lend Protection on to my Text, (for I reckon that my Citations,
which I could not with Prudence represent out of a Pulpit, are the usefullest
part of my whole Performance, because the Evidence and VVarrant of all the
rest;) I cannot fearfully apprehend, what Wit or Language (or ill used
Learning) can do against it, so far forth as it is armed with Notoriety of Fact
in its Vindication; and has the published Confessions of those their Ablest
Hyperaspistae, who cannot certainly by them of their own persuasion, with
honor, or safety, be contradicted.

If they are guilty in their Writings, it is rather their own, then their
Readers Fault; Nor is it their Readers, but Their misfortune, if they are found
So to be by their own Concessions. Nor can they rationally be angry at their
Reader's Necessity to believe them; especially when they write with so becoming
a proof of Impartiality, as that by which they asperse and accuse Themselves.
If it finally shall appear, They are Luke 19. 22.
condemned out of their mouths, (as Goliah's Head was cut off by David, 1 Samuel
17. 51.
not with David's, but with Goliah's own Sword,) and that I am not so severe in
taking Notice of their Confessions, as They have been unto Themselves in the
Printing of them, (for I cannot be said to have revealed any secrets, by merely
showing before the Sun, what They have sent into the Light,) I think, however
They may have Appetite, They cannot have Reason to complain.

I have entreated of many Subjects within the Compass of an hour, on each of
which it would be easy to spend a year. But I have spoken most at large of the
Supremacy of the Pope; as well because it is a Point wherein the Honor and
Safety of Your Majesty's Dominions are most concerned, as because it is the
chief, if not only Hinge, (I have Etenim de qua re agitur cum de Primatu
Pontificis agitur? brevissime dicam, de Summa rei Christianae, id enim
quaeritur, debeatne Ecclesia diutius consistere, an vero dissolvi, and
concidere. Bellarm. in Praes. ad libros de Romans Pontif.
Bellarmines assertion for what I say,) on which does hang the whole stress of
the Papal Fabric.

If herein, as I have obeyed, I shall also be found to have served Your
Majesty, The sole Discharge of my Duty will be abundantly my Reward; because I
am not more by Conscience and Obligations of Gratitude, then by the Voluntary
Bent and Inclinations of my Soul,

Your Majesty's most devoted and most Dutiful Subject and Chaplain, THOMAS
PIERCE.

MATTHEW. XIX. 8. (...).

But from the beginning it was not so.


THere are but very few things either so little, or so great, whether in Art,
or Nature, whether in Polity, or Religion, which are not willing to take
advantage from the mere credit of their An^iquity.

First for Art; Any part of Philosophy penned by Hermes Trismegistus, any
Script of Geography bearing the name of Anaximander, any Musical Composition
sung by Amphion to his Harp, any piece of the Mathematics said to be writ by
Zoroastres, any Relic of Carved work from inspired Bezaleel, Exodus 35. 30,
34.
or any remnant of Embroidery from the Theopneust Aholiab, would at least for
the honor of being reckoned to be the first, be also reckoned to be the best of
any Antiquarie's Keimelia.

And as it is in the Things of Art, so is it also in those of Nature. How do
the Gentlemen of Venice delight themselves in their Antiquity? and yet they
travel for their O^iginal no farther back then the siege of Troy: whereas the
Arcadians derive their Pedigree even from Jupiter and Calisto, and will needs
have their Nation exceed the Moon in Seniority. Nay, though Egypt (in the
Judgment of.(...) Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. p. 9.
Diodorus the Siceleote) has better pretensions then any other, yet the
Barbarians as well as Greeks have still affected a Primogeniture. Nay so far
has this Ambition transported some, that they will needs have been begun from
before the Protoplast, as it were itching to be as old as the Julian period,
764 years before the beginning of the World. Thus Antiquity has been courted
in Art and Nature.

If in the third place we come to Polity, we shall find Customs gaining
Reverence from the sole merit of their Duration. And as a Custom by mere
Continuance does wear it self into a Law; so the more aged a Law is grown, the
less it is liable to a Repeal; by how much the more it is stricken in years, by
so much the less it is decrepit: And that for this reason, because the longer
it endures, the more it inclines to its perfection; that is to say, its
immortality.

Last of all for Religion, the Case is clear out of Tertullian. Tertul.
adversus Marcion. l. 4. c. 5.
Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio. That Religion was the truest,
which was the first; and that the first, which was from the beginning. And as
He against Marcion, so Justin Martyr against the Grecians, did prove the
Divinity of the Pentateuch from the Antiquity of its Writer. The Jews enjoyed
the first Lawgiver (...). Justin. Mart. (...). p. 7.
by the Confession of the Gentiles. Moses preached the God of Abraham, whilst
Thales Milesius was yet unborn. Nor was it a thing to be imagined, that God
should suffer the Devil to have a Chapel in the world, before himself had any
Church. And thence Id teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus
creditum est: quod ita demum fit, si sequamur Universalitatem, Antiquitatem,
Consensionem. Vinc. Lir. adv. Haer. c 3.
Vincentius Lirin^nsis, to prove the Truth of any Doctrine, or the L^gality of
a Practice, does argue the Case from a Threefold Topic; The Universality, the
Consent, and the Antiquity of a Tradition.

Which Rule if we apply unto the scope of this Text, as it stands in relation
unto the Context, we shall have more to say for it then for most Constitutions,
divine, or humane: For That of Marriage is almost as old as Nature. There was no
sooner one man, but God divided him into two; And then no sooner were there
two, but he united them into one. This is That sacred Institution which was
made with Mankind in a state of Innocence; the very Ground and Foundation of
all both sacred and civil Government. It was by sending back the Pharisees to
the most venerable Antiquity, Matthew. 5. 31, 32.
that our Lord here asserted the Law of wedlock, against the old Custom of
their Divorce. Whilst they had made themselves drunk with their muddy streams,
He directed them to the Fountain, to drink themselves into sobriety. They
insisted altogether on the Mosaical Dispensation; But He endeavored to reform
them by the most Primitive Institution. They alleged a Custom, b^t He a Law.
They a Permission, and that from Moses; But He a Precept, and that from God.
They did reckon from afar off; But not, as He, from the Beginning.

In that one Question of the Pharisees, Verse 7.
Why did Moses command us to give her a writing of Divorce, and to put her
away? they put a Fallacy upon Christ, called Plurium Interrogationum. For Moses
only permitted them to put her away; but commanded the^ (if they did) to give
her a writing of Divorce. And accordingly their Fallacy is detected by Christ
in his Answer to them. Moses (did not command, but merely) Verse 8.
suffered you in your custom of making unjustifiable Divorcements. (...), he
permitted, that is to say, he did not punish it; not allowing it as good, but
winking at it as the lesser of two great evils. He suffered it to be safe in
foro Soli; could not secure you from the Guilt, for which you must answer in
foro Poli. And why did he suffer what he could not approve? Not for the
softness of your heads, which made you ignorant of your Duties; but for the
hardness of your hearts, which made you resolute not to do them: you were so
barbarous and brutish upon every slight Cause, (or Occasion rather,) that if
you might not put her away, you would use her worse. You would many times beat,
and sometimes murder, sometimes bury her alive, by bringing another into her
Bed. So that the Liberty of Divorce, however a poison in it self, was (through
the hardness of your hearts) permitted to you for an Antidote: But from the
Beginning it was not so. And you must put a wide difference betwixt an
Indulgence of Man, and a Law of God. To state the controversy aright, you must
compare the first Precept with your customary Practice; not reckoning as far as
from Moses only, but as far as from Adam too; you must not only look forward
from the year of the Creation 2400. but backward from thence unto the year of
the Creation. The way to understand the Husband's Duty toward the Wife, (and
so to reform, as not to innovate,) is to consider the words of God when he made
the Wife out of the Husband. For Genesis 1. 27. Matthew. 19. 4.
He that made them at the beginning made them Male and Female, and said Genesis 2.
24. Matthew. 19. 5.
For this cause, shall a man leave Father, and Mother, and shall cleave unto
his Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh. What therefore God has joined
together, let not man put asunder. The Antecedent Command was from God the
Father; the Command in the sequel from God the Son. And though the Practice of
the Jews had been contrariant to them both, by a Prescription almost as old as
two thousand years; yet as old as it was, 'twas but an overgrown Innovation.
For (...), from the beginning it was not so.

Thus our Savior, being sent to Reform the Jews, made known the Rule of his
Reformation. And the Lesson which it affords us is (in my poor judgment) of
great Importance. For when the Doctrine or Discipline of our Church established
here in England shall be attempted by the Corruptions of Modern Romana
Ecclesia se non tam matrem exhibet aliis quam Novercam. Sedent in ea Scribae
and Pharis^i, etc. Johan. Sarisburiensis (ad Papam Hadrianum 4.) in Polycratic.
l. 6. c. 24.
Pharisees, who shall assert against us (as these here did against our Savior)
either their foreign Superstitions, (to say no worse) or their domestic
Profanations, (to, say no more;) we cannot better deal with them, then as our
Savior here dealt with the ancient Pharisees; that is, we cannot better put
them to shame and silence, then by demonstrating the Novelty and base
extraction of their Pretensions, whilst we evince at the same instant the
Sacred Antiquity of our own. When they obtrude their Revelations, or teach for
Doctrines of God the mere commandments of Men, we must ask them every one, how
they read in the beginning. We may not draw out of their Ditches, be the
Currents never so long, whilst we have waters of our own of a nobler Taste,
which we can easily trace back to the crystal spring.

And first of all it concerns us to mark the Emphasis, which our Ancient of
days thought fit to put on the Beginning, that no inferior Antiquity may be in
danger to deceive us. For there is hardly any Heresy or Usurpation in the
Church, which may not truly pretend to some great Antiquity, though not so old
as the Old man, much less as the Old Serpent. Epiph. Haer. 75. p 904. Tom. 1.
Ed. P^tav.
The Disciplinarians may fetch theirs from as far as the Heretic ^^rius; who
wanting merit to advance him from a Presbyter to a Bishop, wanted not arrogance
and envy to lessen the Bishop into a Presbyter. But His Antiquity is a Junior,
as well to that of the Anabaptists, as to that of the Socinians. For the
August. contra Donat. Tom. 7. lib. 2. p. 396. Edit. Basil.
Anabaptists may boast they are as old as Agrippinus, and the Epiph. Haer. 62.
p. 513.
Socinians as Sabellius. The August. Tom. 6. Haer. 54. p. 25.
Solifidians and Antinomians are come as far as from Eunomius. The Iren. lib.
1. c. 24. p 79. Excus. 1570.
Ranters from Carpocrates. The Eusebius. l. 3. c. 33. p. 80. Colon. Allobr^gum
1612.
Millenaries from Papias. The Irrespective Iren. l. 1. c. 10. page 48, etc.
Epiph. Haer. 66. page 617.
Reprobatarians from Simon Magus and the Manichees. The Pontificians (like the
Mahumetans) have such a Rhapsody of Religion, a Religion so compounded of
several Errors and Corruptions, (which yet are blended with many Doctrines most
sound and Orthodox,) that to find out the age of their several Ingredients, it
will be necessary to rake into several times too.

THe great Palladium of the Conclave, the famous point of Infallibility (which
if you take away from them, down goes their Troy, it being absolutely
impossible that the learned Members of such a Church should glibly ^wallow so
many Errors, unless by swallowing this first, That she cannot err;) I say, the
point of Infallibility (which is a very old Article of their very new Creed, a
Creed not perfected by its Composers until the Council at Trent,) we cannot
better derive then from the Scholars of Iren. Advers. Haeret. l. 1. c. 9. p.
44. etc.
Marcus in ^renaeus, or from the Gnostics in -- (...), Epiph. Tom. 1 l. 1.
Haer. 26. p. 9^ (...) Idem. ibid. Haer. 27. ^ 102.
Epiphanius. They had their Purgatory from Note, That Bellarmine having
boasted, (Lib. 1. de Pargatoria, cap. 15.) That all the A^tie^s, both Greek and
Latin, from the very time of the Apostles, did constantly affirm the doctrine
of Purgatory, could not give an older instance, then in Origin and Tertullian,
(Ibid. cap. 2. and 7. and 10.) but by recourse unto the Heathen. (Ibid. cap.
11.)
Origin, (one of the best indeed in one kind, but in another one of the worst
of our ancient Writers, not only an Heretic, but an Haeresiarcha,) or at the
farthest from Tertullian, who had it from no better Author then the Hoc etiam
Paracletus (i e. Montanus) frequentissime commendavit, etc. Tert. de Anim^,
cap. ult.

See Bellarmine contradicted by the Romanists themselves, E. G. Roffens. contr.
Lutherum, Art. 18. Polydor. Virg. Inv. Rer. lib. 8. c. 1. p. 84. Edit. Basil.
1521. Suarez in Aquin. par. 3. q. 59. art. 6. sect. 1. p. 1159.

Thomas ex Albiis East-Saxonum de Me. dio Animarum statu, per totum libr.
speciatim Demens. 9 p. 369, 370, 371.


Arch-Heretick Montanus. Nor does Bellarmine mend the matter, by deriving it as
far as from Virgil's Aeneid, and from Tully in his Tale of the Dream of Scipio,
and farther yet from Plato's Gorgias; unless he thinks that an Heathen is any
whit fitter then an Heretic, to give Advantage to a point of the Roman Faith.
Their Denial of Marriage to all that enter into the Priesthood, is dated by
themselves but from Pope Liquet item, in orientali and occidentali Ecclesia,
usqu^ ad tempus prohibitionis a Calixto factae, Sacerdotum conjugia licita
suisse. Maximil. 2, apud Thu. an. l. 36. p. 305, 306.
Calixtus. Their An^e Lateranense Coacilium Transubstaatiatio non suit dogma
Fidei. Scot. in 4. Sent. Did. 11. q. 3.
Transubstantiation is from the Lateran Council. Their N^gare non possumus,
etiam in ^cclesia Lati^d suisse usum u. tri^sq^^sp^ciei, and usque ad tempora
S. Thomae durasse. Vasq. in 3. Disput. 216. c. 3. n. 38.
Half-Communion is no older then since the times of Aquinas; unless they will
own it from the Manichees, to give it the credit of more Antiquity. Their
public praying before the people in an unknown Tongue, may be fetched indeed as
far as from Gregory the Great. Their Invocation of Saints departed is no doubt
an aged Error, though not so aged as they would have it for the gaining of
honor to the Invention; because St. Austin does Suo loco and ordine Homines
Dei nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat invocantur* August. de
Civitate Dei lib. 22. cap. 10. page 1155.
deny it to have been in his days. And (not to be endless in the beginning of
such a limited Discourse, as must not presume to exceed an hour; though in so
fruitful a field of matter, it is very difficult not to be endless;) Pho^ as
iratus Cyriaco Episcopo Constantinopolitano, adjudicavit Titulum Oecumenici
Pontifici Romano soli. Baronius ad A. C. 606.
The Universal Superintendency or Supremacy of the Pope has been a visible
usurpation ever since Boniface the Third. And so our Adversaries of Rome have
more to plead for Their Errors then all the rest, because the rest were but as
Mushroms in their several times, soon starting up, and as soon cut down;
whereas the Errors of Rome do enjoy the pretense of Duration too.

But touching each of those Errors, (I mean the Errors of their Practice, as
well as Judgment,) we can say with our Savior in his present Correption of the
Pharisees, (whose Error was older and more authentic, that is, by Moses his
permission had more appearance of Authority, and more to be pleaded in its
excuse, then those we find in the Church of Rome,) that fro^n the beginning it
was not so; and we care not whence they come, unless they come from the
Beginning.

Indeed in matters of mere Indifference which are brought into the Government
or outward Discipline of the Church, every Church has the Liberty to make her
own Constitutions, not asking leave of her Sisters, much less her Children;
only they must not be reputed as things without which there is no Salvation,
nor be obtruded upon the People amongst the Articles of their Faith. We are to
look upon nothing so, but as it comes to us from the Beginning.

And this has ever been the Rule (I mean the warrantable Rule) whereby to
improve or reform a Church. When Esdras was intent on the re-building of the
Temple, he sent not to Ephesus, much less to Rome; he did not imitate Diana's
Temple, nor enquire into the Rituals of Numa Pompilius; but had recourse for a
Temple, to that of Solomon, and for a Ritual, to that of Moses, as having both
been prescribed by God himself. And yet we know the Prophet Haggai made the
people steep their Joy in a shower of Tears, by representing how much the Copy
had fallen short of the Original. The holy Prophets in the Old Testament, showing
the way to a Reformation, advised the Princes and the People to ask after the
old paths, and walk therein, as being the only good way for the finding of
rest unto their souls, Jer. 6. 16. The Prophet Isaiah sought to regulate what
was amiss amongst the Jews, by bidding them have recourse unto the Law and
the Testimony: should not a people ^eek unto their God? If any speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 19 20.
And accordingly their Kings, who took a care to reform abuses, are in this
solemn style commended for it, That they walked in the ways of their Father
David; that is, reformed what was amiss by what had been from the Beginning.
So St. Paul in the New Testament, setting right what was crooked about the
Supper of the Lord in the Church of Corinth, laid his line to that Rule which
he was sure he had received from the Lord Himself, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And thus our
Savior in my Text, finding the Pharisees very fond of a vicious practice,
which supported it self by an old Tradition, and had something of Moses to give
it countenance in the world, (though indeed no more then a bare permission,)
could not think of a better way to make them sensible of their Error, (and such
an Error as was their Sin too,) then by showing them the great and important
difference betwixt an old, and a primitive Custom; and that however their
breach of Wedlock had been without check from the days of yore, yet 'twas for
this to be reformed, that 'twas not so from the Beginning.

In a most dutiful Conformity to which example, our Reformers here in England
(of happy memory) having discovered in every part of the Church of Rome, not
only horrible Corruptions in point of Practice, but hideous Errors in point of
Doctrine, and that in matters of Faith too, (as I shall find an occasion to
show anon;) and having found by what degrees the several Errors and
Corruptions were slily brought into the Church, as well as the several times
and seasons wherein the Novelties received their birth and breeding; and
presently after taking notice, that in the Council of Trent the Roman Partisans
were not afraid to make Vide Council. Trident. Sess. 13. Can. 2, 3. Sess. 21.
Can. 1, 2, 3. Sess. 22. Can. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9 Sess. 23. Can. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9.
Sess. 25. etc. quam conser cum Bulla Pii Quarti. Edit. Bin. p. 444. Tom. 9.
New Articles of Faith, whilst the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, and the like, were
commanded to be embraced under pain of damnation, (as it were in contempt of
the Apostle's denuntiation, Gal. 1. 8. by which that practice of those
Conspirators made them liaable to a curse;) and farther yet, that in the Canon
of the Fourth Session of that Council, the Roman Church was made to differ as
well from her ancient and purer self, as from all other Churches besides her
self, in that there were many merely humane (I do not say profane) VVritings,
and many unwritten Traditions also, not only decreed to be of Nec non ipsas
Traditiones, ^um ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel a Spiritu
Sancto diciatas, pari pictatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit ac veneratur
(haec Sancta Synodus.) Trident. Conc. Sess. 4. sub. Paulo 3. Bin. Tom. 9. p.
354.
equal Authority with the Scriptures, but with the addition of an Siquis libros
ipsos integros, -- pro sacris and Canonicis non suscep. rit, and Traditiones
praedictas sciens contempserit, Anathema sit. ibid.
Anathema to all that should not so receive them: This (I say) being considered
and laid to heart by our Reformers, (by our Kings, and our Clergy, and Laiety
too, met together in their greatest both Ecclesiastical and Civil Councils,)
they did not consult with flesh and blood, or expect the Court of Rome should
become their Physician, which was indeed their great Disease; but having
recourse unto the Scriptures and Primitive Fathers of the Church, they
consulted those Oracles how things stood from the Beginning: And only
separating from Them, whom they found to have been Separatists from the
primitive Church, they therefore made a Secession, that they might not partake
of the Roman Schism. And whilst they made a Secession for fear of Schism;
(which by no other practice could be avoided,) they studiously kept to the
Golden mean; neither destroying the Body out of hatred to the Ulcers with which
'twas spread, nor yet retaining any Ulcer in a passionate dotage upon the Body.

One remarkable Infirmity it is obvious to observe in the Popish Writers: they
ever complain we have left their Church; but never show us that Iota, as to
which we have left the Word of God, or the Apostles, or the yet uncorrupted and
primitive Church, or the Four first General Councils. We are so zealous for
Antiquity, (provided it be but antique enough,) that we never have despised a
mere Tradition, which we could track by sure footsteps from as far as the times
of the purest Christians. But this is still their childish fallacy, (be it
spoken to the shame of their greatest Giants in Dispute, who still vouchsafe to
be guilty of it,) that they confidently shut up the Church in Rome, as their
Seniors the Donatists once did in Africa; and please to call it the Catholic
Church, not formally, but causally, (says Cardinal Peron,) because forsooth
that particular does infuse universality into all other Churches besides it
self: The learned Cardinal forgetting, (which is often the effect of his very
good memory,) that the preaching of Christ was to begin at (...), etc. Theod.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 9. Council. Constantinop. apud Baronium ad A. D. 382.
suffragatur.
Jerusalem. So it was in the Prophecy, (Isa. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 2.) and so in the
completion, (Luke 24. 47.) Nor was it Rome, but Antioch, in which the Disciples
were first called Christians, (Act. 11. 26.) At (...), apud Chrysostom. ad
Populum Antiochen. Hom. 3.
Antioch therefore there was a Church, before St. Peter went thence to Rome.
Nay it is expressly affirmed by Tempore, ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris al^sque
ullo impedimen. to -- radios suos primum indulget, id est pr^^cepta sua,
Christus^ G^ldas in Epist. de Excid. Brit. Sect. 6.
Gildas, (an Author very much revered by the Romanists themselves,) that
Christianity was in Britain in the latter time of Tiberius Caesar; some while
after whose death, it is known that St. Peter remained in Iewry. So that Rome
which pretends to be a Mother, can be no more at the best then a Sister-Church,
and not the eldest Sister neither.

Neglecting therefore the pretended Universality of the Roman (that is to say,
of a particular) Church; let us compare her Innovations with what we find from
the Beginning. For this I take to be the fittest and the most profitable Use,
that we can make of the subject we have in hand.

And first, consider we the Supremacy or Universal Pastorship of her Popes:
which is indeed a very old, and somewhat a prosperous Usurpation; an Usurpation
which took its rise from more then a thousand years ago. But then, besides that
it was sold by the Emperor De Phoca coeli^^s est dictum, (...), etc. Cedrenus,
p. 334.
Phocas, at once an (...). Idem. p. 332.
Heretic and a Regicide, the Devilish Murderer of Mauritius, (who was the
(...), the Royal Image or Type of our late Royal Martyr of Sacred Memory;) I
say, besides that it was sold by the most execrable Phocas, that is to say, by
the greatest Villain in the world, excepting Cromwell and Pontius Pilate; and
besides that it was sold to ambitious Boniface the Third, whose vile compliance
with that Phocas was the bribe or price with which he bought it: and besides
that it was done, not out of reverence to the Pope, but in Phocas iratus
Cyriaco, Episcopo Constantinopolitano adjudicavit Titulum Oecumenici Pontifici
Romano. Baron. Annal. ad A. Chapter 606.
displeasure to Cyriacus of Constantinople, who (from John Johannes
Constantinopolitanus sese hinc efferens, se ubique Oecumenicum Patriarcham
nominavit. Idem ad A. C. 595.
his Predecessor) usurpt the Title of Universal before any Pope had pretended
to it: I say, besides, or without all this, it is sufficient for us to say,
what our Savior here said to the ancient Pharisees, That from the beginning it
was not so. For looking back to the Beginning, we find The Wall of God's City
had Twelve Foundations, and in them were the names of the Twelve Apostles of
the Lamb. (Rev. 21. 14) Paul was equal at least to Peter, when he withstood him
to the face, and rebuked him in public for his Dissimulation. (Gal. 2. 11, 12,
13, 14) Nay St. Peter himself, (as well as James and John, who were his Peers,)
although he seemed to be a Pillar, yet perceiving the Grace that was given to
Paul, gave to Barnabas and Paul the right hand of Fellowship (Gal. 2. 9.) And
reason good: For S. Peter was but one of the many Apostles of the Jews;
whereas St. Paul was much more, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, to whom the
Jews were no more then as a River to an Ocean. Saint Peter was commanded not
to fleece, but to John 21. 15, 16, 17.
feed the flock: Nor was it ever once known that he did lord it over God's
heritage, which himself had so strictly forbid to others, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Indeed a
primacy of Order may very easily be allowed to the Sea of Rome: But for any one
Bishop to affect over his Brethren a supremacy of Power and Jurisdiction, is a
most impudent opposition both to the Letter and the Sense of our Savior's
precept, (Mark 10. 42, 43, 44.) Ye know, that they who are accounted to rule
over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them, and their greaton^s exercise
authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you: But whosoever will be
great among you, shall be your Minister; and whosoever of you will be the
chiefest, shall be the servant of all.

That the Apostles were every one of equal power and authority, is the positive
saying of Cyprianus ait pari omnes inter se su^sse potestate Apostolos; atque
hoc idem suisse alios quod Petrus fuit. Tractat. 3. de S^mplicitate
Praelatorum, (Edit, Colon. 1544.) p. 135.
St. Cyprian, Pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. And St.
Jerome is as express, That Si Autoritas quaeritur, Orbis major est Urbe,
ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli,
sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanii, ejusdem Meriti, cjusdem est and
Sacerdotii. Potentia Divitiarum and Paupertatis Humilitas vel subsimiorem v^l
inserio^em Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt.
Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium, (ex Edit. Basil. 156,.) p. 329. ^ive ex Edit.
Paris. 1533 Tom 2. p. 117.
all Bishops, in all places, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, are of the very same merit, as to the quality of
their Office; how much soever they may differ in point of Revenue or of
Endowments. Nay, by the Canons of the Two first General Councils, (Nice, and
Constantinople,) every (...). Council. Nicae. Can. 6. (...). Ibid. Can. 7. (...)
quae Antioche^^ Ecclesiae servari his Canonibus praecipiu^tur, ^o pertinent,
(inquit Justellus) ut Episcopus Antiochenus praeferatur Metro^litanis omnibus
in Orientali Dioecesi. Nihil Juris illi attributum in Caetero^ Metropolitanos,
praeter Honorem Ordinis, non autem ut Metropolitani omnes D^oeces^os Orientis
^b ^o jure singulari ordinarentur, ut Innocentii primi Epis^ola ad Alexandr.
Episcopum asserere videtur, contra mentem Synodi Nicaenae. Justell. p. 7. ex
Edit. Gulielmi Voelli, A. D. 1661.
Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper Diocese; as the
Bishop of Rome is the chief in His: And a strict (...), etc. Council.
Constantinop. Oecumen. 2. Can. 2. Quid hic Canon sibi velit per [(...)]
Justellus explicat paulo superius ad Can. Conc. Nic. 6. nihil Juris nimirum
Antiocheno attribuendum in caeteros Metropolitanos, praeter Ordinem Honoris.
Injunction is laid on all, (the Bishop of Rome not excepted,) that they
presume not to meddle in any Diocese but their own. And the chief Primacies of
Order were granted to Rome and to Constantinople, not for their having been the
Sees of such or such an Apostle, Confer Justinian. Novel. Constit. 131. cap. 2.
cum Canone 3. Concilii Constant.
but for being the two Seats of the two great Empires. Witness the famous Canon
of the General Council at Chalcedon, (...)Et paulo post (...), etc Council.
Chalced. Can. penult.
decreeing to the Bishop of Constantinople an equality of Privileges with the
Bishop of Rome; not for any other reason, then its having the good hap to be
one of the two Imperial Cities. Nay, no longer ago before Boniface the Third,
(who was the first Bishop of Rome that usurpt the Title of Universal,) I say,
no longer before Him then his next immediate Predecessor Pope Gregory the
Great, (for I reckon Sabinian was but a Cipher,) the horrible Pride of
succeeding Popes was stigmatized by a Prolepsis; by way (not of Prophecy, but)
of Anticipation. For Quis est isle qui contra Statuta Evangelica, contra
Canonum Decreta, novum sibi usurpare nomen proesumit? -- Novis and profanis
vocabulis gloriaatur.

-- Absi^ a cordibus Christianorum nomen illud Blasphemiae. Greg. Mag. Epist.
32. ad Mauritium Augustum.


Gregory writing to Mauritius the then reigning Emperor (and that in very many
Epistles,) touching the name of Universal, which the Bishop of Constantinople
had vainly taken unto himself, calls it a wicked and profane and blasphemous
Title; a Title importing, that the Sed in hac ejus superbia quid aliud nis^
propinqua jam Antichristi esse tempora designatur? Idem ad eundem in Epist. 34.
times of Antichrist were at hand; (little thinking that Pope Boniface would
presently after his decease usurp the same, and prove the Pope to be Antichrist
by the Confession of a Pope.) He farther disputed against the Title by an
Argument leading ad absurdum; Si illud nomen in Ecclesia sibi quisquam
arripuit, quod apud honorum omnium judicium fuit, Universa ergo Ecclesia (quod
absit) a statu suo corruit, quando ^s qui appellatur Universalis cadit. Idem.
ad Eund. Epist 32.

Universalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur, fatente Papa Pelagio
fecundo, apud Gratian Decretal. p. 1. did. 99. cap. 4.

Quis aute^ illud pro indignitate rei stupeat, quod novam quandam indebitamque
Potentiam tibi usurpando arrogas, etc? Ita Papam allo ^uuntur Episcopi
Germanici apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p 47.


That if any one Bishop were Universal, there would by consequence be a failing
of the Universal Church, upon the failing of such a Bishop. An Argument; ad
homines, not easily to be answered, whatsoever Infirmity it may labor with in
it self. And such an Argument is That, which we bring against the Pope's
pretended Headship. For if the Pope is the Head of the Catholic Church, then
the Catholic Church must be the Body of the Pope; because the Head and the
Body are the Relative and Correlative; and being such, they are convertible in
obliquo: And then it follows unavoidably, That when there is no Pope at all,
(which is very often,) the Catholic Church has then no Head; and when there
are many Popes at once, (which has been sometimes the case,) then the
Catholic Church must have at once many Heads; and when the Pope is Heretical,
(as by the confession of the Papists he now and then is,) the Catholic Church
has such a Head as makes her deserve to be beheaded. Multi Pontifices Romani
errarunt; sicut Marcellinus, qui Idolis sacrificavit; et Liberius Papa, qui
Arianis consensit; and Anastasius secundus propter Haeresis Crimen repudiatus
suit ab Ecclesia: and alii etiam plurimi contra Catholicam fidem tenuerun^; ut
Joannes vigesimus secundus, qui asseruit, quod filius Dei sit Major Patre and
Spiritu Sancto. Didacus Stella in Luc. cap. 22. verse. 31. p. 280. col. 1. Edit.
Antverp. A. D. 1593. Ad Inquisitionis Hispaniae decreta ^rorsus elimatus, et
summa fide repurgatus.
That Popes have been Heretics and Heathens too, not only by denying the
Godhead of the Son, and by lifting him up above the other two Persons, but even
by sacrificing to Idols, and a total Apostasy from the Faith, is (a thing so
clear in the writings of Platina and Onuphrius, that it is) the Confession of
the most zealous and partial Asserters of their Supremacy. I know that Stella,
and those of the Spanish Inquisition, do at once confess this, and yet adhere
to their Position, Ubi supra, verbis immediate subsequentibus.
That (with his College of Cardinals) the Pope cannot err, and is the Head of
the Church. But St. Hilary of Poictiers was so offended at Pope Liberius his
espousing the Arian Heresy, that he affirmed the true Church to have been then
only in France. Hilar. Pictav. de Synodis, p 287. and paulo post -- Quidam ex
vobis firmissima fidei constantia intra communionem se meam continentes, se a
caeteris extra Gallias abstinuerunt. Idem. ib. 288.
Ex eo inter nos tantum Communio Dominica continetur. So ill success have they
met withal, who have been Flatterers of the Pope or the Court of Rome.

To conclude this first Instance in the fewest words that I can use: Whosoever
shall read at large (what I have time only to hint) the many Liberties and
Exemptions of the Gallican Church, and the published Confessions of Popish
writers, for more then a thousand years together, touching the Papal
Usurpations, and Right of Kings, put together by Goldastus in three great
Volumes; he will not be able to deny, (let his present persuasion be what it
will,) that the Supremacy of the Pope is but a Prosperous Usurpation, and has
this lying against it, that 'twas not so from the beginning.

Secondly It Is true that for several Ages, the Church of Rome has pretended
to be infallible; as well incapable of error, as not erroneous. But from the
beginning it was not so. For, (besides that Infallibility is one of God's
peculiar and incommunicable Attributes,) where there is not Omniscience, there
must be Ignorance in p^rt; and where Ignorance is, there may be Error. That
Heresy is Error in point of Faith, and that Novatianism is Heresy, all sides
agree: And it is agreed by the Champions of the Papacy it self, (such as Baron.
Tom. 2. An. 254. page 498, 499. and seq.
Baronius, Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41. and 73.
Pamelius, and Petav. in Epiphan. ad Haeres. 59 quae est Novatianorum, page 226.
Petavius,) that Rome it self was the Nest in which Novatianism was hatched; and
not only so, but that there it continued from Onuph. in Notis ad Plat. in v^ta
Cornelii. page 29. Col. 2. Vide Eusebius. l. 6. and 7.
Cornelius to Caelestine, which wants not much of two hundred years. To pass
by the Heresies of the Donatists and the Arians, (which strangely prosper'd for
a time, and spread themselves over the world, the former over the West, the
later over the East, and as far as the Breast of the Pope himself;) one would
have thought that the Tenet of Infallibility upon Earth had been sufficiently
prevented by the Heresy Vide Bellar. Chronolog. ad ^. C. 132. and Eusebius. H^st.
Eccles. l. 3. c 39.
of the Chiliasts, wherewith the Primitive Church her self (I mean the very
Fathers of the Primitive Church, for the two first Centuries after Christ,) was
not only deceived by Papias, who was a Disciple of St. John, but (for ought I
yet learn) without the least Contradiction afforded to it. Nay the whole Church
of God (in the opinion of St. Non potest proba^i ^um [i. e. Augustinum]
existimasse hic de Eucharistia non agi, cum tam multis locis aliis probet ex
hoc Johannis Testimonio, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque
non ut opinionem suam sed ut Fidei and Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad res^llendos
Pelagianos dicat: and paulo post -- Missam facio Augustini and Innocentii primi
sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam
etiam Infantibus necessariam. Res jam ab Ecclesia, and Mul^orum seculorum usu,
and Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non so^um necessariam illis non
esse, sed ne decere quid^m dari. (Sess. 21 c. and Can 4.) Maldonat. (Excus.
Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719.
Austin and Pope Innocent the third,) and for six hundred years together, (if
Non potest proba^i ^um [i. e. Augustinum] existimasse hic de Eucharistia non
agi, cum tam multis locis aliis probet ex hoc Johannis Testimonio, Eucharistiam
etiam Infantibus esse Necessariam; idque non ut opinionem suam sed ut Fidei and
Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad res^llendos Pelagianos dicat: and paulo post --
Missam facio Augustini and Innocentii primi sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter
annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus necessariam. Res jam ab
Ecclesia, and Mul^orum seculorum usu, and Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata
est, non so^um necessariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quid^m dari. (Sess. 21
c. and Can 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p.
717, 718, 719.
Maldonate the Jesuit may be believed) thought the Sacrament of Eucharist to
have been necessary to Infants, as well as to men of the ripest Age: and yet
(as Maldonate confesses at the very same time,) it was so plain and so gross
an Error, that notwithstanding St. Austin did endeavor to confute the
Pelagians by it, as by a Doctrine of Faith, and of the whole Church of God; yet
the Council of Trent was of a contrary mind, and did accordingly in a Canon
declare against it.

3. Pass we on to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which (if its Age may be
measured by the very first date of its Definition,) may be allowed to be as old
as the Lateran Cujus corpus and san^guis in Sacramento altaris sub speciebus
P^nis and Vini veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis Pane in Corpus, and
Vino in sanguinem, potestate divina. Conc. Later. c. 1. In Synaxi sero
Transubstantiationem definivit Ecclesia. Diu sa^is erat credere, sive sub Pane
consecrato, sive quocunque modo adesse verum Corpus Christi. Erasm. Annot. in
1. Cor. 7. Saltem ab annis 500 dogma Transubstantiationis sub Anathemate
stabilitum, ut ait ipse Bellarminus de Eucharist. l. 3. c. 21. Cujus etiam
confessionem videre est, l. 3. c. 23.
Council, a Council held under Pope Innocent the Third; since whom are somewhat
more then 400 years: But from the beginning it was not so. For besides that our
Savior, just as soon as he had said, This is my Blood, explained himself in
the same Breath, by calling it expressly the fruit of the Vine, and such as He
would drink new in the Kingdom of God, (Mat. 26. 29. Mark 14. 15.) there needs
no more to make the Romanists even ashamed of that Doctrine, then the
Concession of Aquinas, and Bellarmine's Inference thereupon. Corpus Christi non
est co modo in ^oc Sacramento sicut Corpus in loco, quod suis Dimensionibus
loco commensuratur; sed quodam special^ modo, qui est proprius huic Sacramento.
Unde dicimus, quod Corpus Christi est in diversis altaribus, non sicut in
diversis locis, sed sicut in Sacramento. Nullo enim ^odo Corpus Christi est in
hoc Sacramento localiter, quia si ^sset, divideretur a scipso. Aquin. Oper.
Tom. 12. S^m. part. 3. q. 75. art. 1. ad 3. p. 23 2. col. 2. et q. 76. art. 3
et 5. ex. Edit. Antwerp. 1612.
Aquinas so argues, as to imply it is Impossible, and imports a Contradiction,
for one body to be locally in more places then one, and in all at once. But Si
non posset esse unum Corpus local^ter in duobus locis, quia di^ideretur a
^eipso, profecto nec esse posset Sacramentaliter eadem ratione. Bellar. de
Eucharistia, lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 511. Tom. 3, Controvers* ex Edit. Paris. A. C.
1620.
Bellarmine (at this) is so very angry, that in a kind of Revenge upon Aquinas,
(though held to be the Ang^lical Doctor,) he needs will inf^r it is as
Impossible, and equally implies a Contradiction, for any one body at once to be
so much as Sacramentally in more Places then one. And therefore it cannot now
be wondered concerning Transubstantiation, if so long ago as in the time of
Pope Nicolas the Second, either the Novelty was not forged and hammered out
into the shape in which we find it, or not at all understood by the Pope
Himself. For one of the two is very clear by the famous Coactus es^ Berengarius
public profi^eri, Panem and Vinum, quae in altari ponuntur, post
consecrationem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum Corpus and Sanguinem
Domini nostri Jesu Christi esse: and sensualiter non solum Sacramento, sed in
veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri,
Confer Floriacens. Histor. fragmenta a P. Pichaeo edit. inter Franc. Script.
(Excus. Francof. A. C. 1596.) p. 86. cum Lanfranc. lib. cont. Berengar. and
Guitmund. de Sacram. l. 1. and Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19.
Submission of Berengarius, wherewith he satisfied the Sigon. de Regno Ital. l.
9. A. 1509.
Synod then held at Rome, (and in which were 113. Bishops,) though not at all
unto a Trans, but rather a Consubstantiation. Which diverse Nisi sane intelligas
verba Berengarii, in majorem incides Haeresin, quam ipse habuit: and ideo omnia
referas ad species ipsas, nam de Christi Corpore parts non facimus. Johan.
Semeca Glossator in Gratian. de Consecrat. Did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius.
Romanists themselves have not been able not to Censure, though it was penned by
a A Cardinale, scil. Humber^e^to Sylvae Candidae Episcopo. Guitmundus ubi supra.
Cardinal, and approved of by a Council, and very glibly swallowed down by the
Pope himself.

4. It Is very true that their withholding the Cup of blessing in the Lord's
Supper from the secular part of their Communicants, has been in practice
little less then 400 years. But from the beginning it was not so. For in our
Savior's Institution we find it intended for Council. Constant. Can. 13. p.
88^. In Ecclesia Latina 1000. amplius annis ten^it, ut tam Populo quam Clero in
celebratione Massarum post mysteriorum consecrationem scorsum Corpus and
seorsum Sanguis Domiai praeberetur. Cassan. Consult. 22. Vasque. cap. 3. Disp.
216. c. 3. n 38. Secundum antiquam Ecclesi^e co^su^fudinem, omnes sicut
communicabant Corpori, it a communicabant and Sanguini, q^od etiam adh^c in
quibusdam Eccles^is servat^^. Aquinas in Comment. in Joh. 6.
every Guest. (...) is the word, Drink ye all of this Cup. (Mat. 26. 27.) And
S. Paul to the Corinthians (consisting most of Laymen) speaks as well of their
drinking the mystical blood, as of their ^ating the Body of Christ. (^ Cor. 11.
26, 27, 28, 29.) Nay it is confessed by learned Vasquez (as well as by Cassander,
and Aquinas Himself, to be a Truth undeniable, That the giving of both Elements
in the Roman Church it self, until the time of Aquinas, did still continue to
be in use.

5. The Church of Rome for several Ages has restrained the Holy Scriptures
from the perusal of the People. But from the beginning it was not so. For
Hebrew to the Jews was the Mother Tongue, and in that 'twas read weekly before
the People. It pleased God the New Testament should be first written in Greek,
because a Tongue the most known to the Eastern world. And to the end that this
Candle might not be hid under a Bushel, it was translated by St. Jerome into
the Sixth. Senens. Bibliothec. l. 4. Ipse Hieron. in Epist. ad Sophron. Tom. 3.
Dalmatick Tongue, by Bishop Vulphilas into the Socrat. Hist Eccles. lib. 4. c.
17. Niceph. Hist. Eccles. l. b. 11. c. 48. Bonav. Vulcan. in Praefat. d^
Liturg. and lingua Getarum.
Gothic, by St. Chrysostom into Roccha in Biblio. theca Vatican. p. 155, 157.
Armenian, by Athelstan into Saxon, by Aventin. Annal. lib. 4.
Methodius into Sclavonian, by Iacobus de Voragine into Sixth. Senens. Bibl. ^*
4.
Italian, by Bid and VVicl^f into Vide Authors citat. apud Brerew. Inqu. c.
26. p. 192.
English. And not to speak of the Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabic, Persian, and
Chaldee Versions, (which were all for the use of the common people of those
Countries,) the Confer. Blond. Ital. Illustrata, in Marchia Trivisana, and
Tinto de la Nobilta di Verona, lib. 2. cap. 2. cum Hieronymi Temporibus apud
Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. p. 104.
Vulgar Latin was then the Vulgar Language of the Italians, when the Old and
New Testament were turned into it.

6. The public Prayers of the Romanists have been a very long time in an
unknown Tongue, (I mean unknown to the common People,) even as long as from the
times of Pope Gregory the Great. But from the beginning it was not so. For it is
as scandalously opposite to the plain sense of Scripture, as if it were done in
a mere despite to the 14th Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
especially from the 13. to the 17. ver. Not to speak of what is said by the
(...). Origin. contra Celsum (ex Edit. Ho^schelii, Augus^ae Vindelicorum, 1605.
^lib. 8. p. 414.
Primitive Writers: Cum Aquinate and Ly^a confer Cajetanum in 1 Cor. 14.
sententiae nostrae suffragantem.
Aquinas and Lyra do both confess upon the place, That the common Service of
the Church in the Primitive times, was in the common language too. And as the
Christians of Angelus Roccha in Bibl. Vatic. p. 157.
Dalmatia, Biblioth. Vet. Patrum, Tom 6. p. 55.
Habassia, Bellonius in Observe. l. 3. c. 12. and Vitriacus in H^st. Orient.
cap. 79. Broca^dus non ^ullibi in su^ Descriptione Terrae Sanctae.
Armenia, Pos^ev^nus de Reb. Mose p 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c 12.
Muscovia, Bapt. Palate. de rat. Scrib. Ang. Roccha B^blioth. Vatic p. 162.
Sclavonia, Pos^ev^nus de Reb. Mose p 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c 12.
Russia, and all the Reformed parts of Christendom, have the Service of God in
their vulgar Tongues, so has it been in diverse Places by Aventin. Annal. 1. 4.
Aeneas Sylvius in Hist. Bohem. cap. 1 ^. Council Bin. Tem. 3. ^. 9^0. Vide e^iam
Decret. l. 1. Tit. 31. cap. 14. et quicquid Authorum videre est in (...). laq^.
c. 26.
Approbation first had from the Pope himself.

7. Another Instance may be gi^en in their Prohibiting of Marriage to men in
Orders, which is derived by some from the third Nempe a Papi Calixto, qui.
floruit A* D. 2^0. Consule Thuanum. in^^. 36. p. 305.
Century after Christ; by Bishop Hall, 3. Epist. 2. Decad.
others from the eighth; and in the rigor that now it is, from Pope Gregory
the Seventh. But from the beginning it was not so. For Priests were permitted
to have wives, both in the Old and New Testament; (as Maximilian Ubi supra apud
Thuanum, p. 305. and 306.
the Second did rightly urge against the Pope:) And the blessed Apostles (many
of them) were married men: for so I gather from Eusebius. l. 3 c. 13.
Eusebius out of Clemens Alexandrinus: and from the Constat Apostolos ipsos,
paucis exceptis, co^juges habuisse. Ubi supra apud Thuanum.
Letter of Maximilian, who did not want the Advice of the learned persons in
all his Empire; and from 1 Cor. 9. 5. where St Paul asserts his liberty to
carry a Wife along with him, as well as Cephas. And it is the Doctrine of that
Apostle, that a Bishop may be an Husband, although he may not be the Husband of
more then one Wife. (1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 6.) Besides, the Marriage of the
Clergy was asserted by Ibid. apud Thuanum.
P^phnutius in the Council at Nice; and even by one of those (...), Canon.
Apostol. 5. (...). Zonaras in Can. Apost. 5. p. 4. Edit. Pari. 1618.
Canons which the Romanists themselves do still avow for Apostolical. And the
forbidding men to marry (with Saturninus, and the Gnostics,) is worthicall'd
by God's Apostle, The Doctrine of Devils. (1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.) Irenaeus, l. 1. c.
22. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3.


8. I shall conclude with that Instance to which our Savior in my Text does
more peculiarly allude; I mean the Liberty of Divorce betwixt Man and Wife, for
many more Causes then the Cause of Fornication. For so I find it is Siquis
dixerit Ecclesiam errare, cum ob multas Causas separationem inter conjuges
quoad totum, seu quoad cohabitationem, ad certum incertumve tempus, fieri ^osse
decernit, Anathema sit. Council. Trident. Sess. 24. Can 8. p. 411. Edit. Bin.
Tom. 9. Paris.
decreed by the Church of Rome, with an Anathema to all that shall contradict
it. But from the Beginning it was not so. For it is as opposite to the will of
our Blessed Savior revealed to us without a Parable, (in the next verse after
my Text) as if they meant nothing more, then the opening of a way to rebel
against him. For besides that in the Canon of the Council at Trent, a Divorce
quoad Torum / Totum ob multas Causas was decreed to be just in the Church of
Rome, although our Lord had twice confined it to the Sole Cause of Fornication,
(Matthew. 5. 32. and 19. 9.) And besides that the word Totu^n was constantly
retained. in Scil. (praeter Edit. jam nomiuatam) Edit. Col. Ag^^p. Tom 4. part
2. p. 332. Sum. Council. Edit. Franc. Longii a Coriolano, Antverp. A. C. 1623.
p. 1024. Item Council. General. Pauii Quinti Auctorit. Edit. Romae, A. C. 1628.
Tom 4. p. 273.
four Editions, (particula^ly in That, which had the Care and Command of Pope
Paul the Fifth,) Let it be granted that the Council did mean no more, then a
mere Sequestration from Bed and Board, to endure for a certain or uncertain
time; and not an absolute Dissolution of the Conjugal Knot; yet in the Judgment
of Chemnitius, yea and of Maldonat Himself, (who was as learned a Jesuit as
that Society ever had,) it would be opposite (even so) to the Law of Christ.
For he Si ob aliam Causam quam ob Fornicationem dimiserit, quamvis aliam non
duxerit, moechatur; quia uxorem suam moechari facit. Maldonat. (excus* Mogunt.
A. D. 1624.) in Matthew. 19. 9. p. 392.
who puts away his Wife for any Cause whatsoever, besides the Cause of
Fornication, commits Adultery (says the Jesuit) even for this very reason,
because he makes Her commit it, whom he unduly puts away. Atqui in
Ponti^icid illa Separatione (nempe a Toro and Mensa, ad certum ince^tumve*
tempus,) Vinculum Conjugii mul^is and variis modis solvitur and disrumpitur.
Nam ad Vinculum Matrimonii pertinent hae sententae.

Et adhaerebit Uxori suae. Faciamus ei adjutorium quod sit coram ipso. Mulier
non habet potestatem sui Corporis, sed vir. Iterum convenite, ne tentet vos
Satan, propter Incontinentiam vestram. Non sunt Duo, sed una Caro. Et ipsum
Matrimonium d ^initu^, Individua vit^ Consuetudine. Haec v^ro vincula Co^jugii
in Pontisicia separatione, quoad Tor^^ et Cohabitationem, solvuntur et
dirumpuntur. Homines igitur, contra Decretum Div^nitatis. separant, quod Deus
conju^xit. Chemn^t. in Exam. Council. Tr^dent. (Excus. Genev. A. D. 16* 4*) p.
437.


Nay, Chemnitius says farther; That the Papal Separation from Bed and Board,
is many ways a Dissolution of the Conjugal Tie. Nor does he content himself to
say, or affirm it only, but by a Confluence of Scriptures does make it good,
That against the Command of our blessed Savior (in the verse but one before my
Text,) That which God has joined together, the men of Rome do put asunder.

By these and many more Corruptions in point of Practice and Doctrine too,
which were no more then Deviations from what had been from the Beginning, and
which the learned Sons of the Church of Rome have been forced to confess in
their public writings; the awakened part of the Christian world were compelled
to look out for a Reformation. That there was in the Sea of Rome the most
abominable Practice to be imagined, we have the liberal Vix ull^m peccatum
cogitari potest, (sola Haeresi excepta) quo illa seeds turpiter maculata non
fuerit, maxim ab Ann: 800. Staplet. Oper. Tom. 1. Cont. 1. q. 5. art. 3. page
597. excus. Paris. 1620.
Confesson of zealous Stapleton himself; and of those that have published their
Consule Canonas Poenitentiales Romanas, Bedae, Rabani Mauri, etc. cum notis
Antonii Augustini; Archiepiscopi Tarraconensis, Excus. Venetiis, 1584.
Penitentials. We have the published Complaints of Armachanus, and Grostead,
and Nicolas de Clemangis, John of Hus, and Jerome of Prague, Chancellor Gerson,
and Erasmus, and the Archbishop of Spalato. Ludovicus Vives, and Cassander, who
are known to have died in the same Communion, did yet impartially complain of
some Corruptions. Ludov. Vives in St. August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.
Vives of their Feasts at the Oratories of Martyrs, as being too much of kin
unto the Gentiles Parentalia, which in the judgment of Parentatio Mo^tuis
species est Idololatri^, quoniam and Idololatria Parentationis est species.
Tertul. de Specta^. cap. 12.
Tertullian made up a species of Idolatry. And Cassander -- Ita ut ad Summam
adorationem, quae vel a Paganis ^uis simulacris exhiberi consuevit, and ad
extremam vanitatem quam Ethnici in suis simulacris exornan ^is admiserunt, nil
a nostris reliqui factum esse ^ideatur. Geo. Cassander in Consult de Imag. and
Simulacris m^hi page 175, 176.
confesses plainly, that the Peoples Adoration paid to Images and Statues, was
equal to the worst of the ancient Heathen. Thuan. l. 25. page 760, etc.
So the buying and selling of Papal Indulgences and Pardons ('it is a little
thing to say of Preferments too) was both confessed and inveighed against by
Popish Bishops in Thuanus.

Now if with all their Corruptions in point of Practice, which alone cannot
justify a People's Separation from any Church, (though the Cathari and the
Donatists were heretofore of that opinion,) we compare their Corruptions of
Doctrine too, and that in matter of Faith, (as has been showed,) Corruptions
intrenching on Fundamentals; it will appear that That door which was opened by
Us in our first Reformers, was not at all to introduce, but to let out De
Hildebrando in haec verba sententiam ^erunt Episcopi Germanici qui Concilio
Wormatiensi inter^uerunt. Dum profanis studes Novitatibus, dum magis amplo qu^m
bono nomine delectaris, dum inaudita Elatione distenderis, velut quidam
Signifer Schismatis, om^ia membra Eccl^sia superba crudelitate and crudeli
superbia lacerasti: flammasque Discordiae quas in Romana Ecclesia diris
factionibus excitasti, per omnes Ecclesias Italiae, Galliae, and Hispaniae,
furiali dementia sparsisti. -- Per gloriosa tua Decreta (quod sine lachrymis
dici non potest) Christi sere nomen per^it. Imperial. Statut. a Goldasto edit.
Tom. 1. p. 47.
Schism. For the schism must needs be Theirs who give the Cause of the
Separation, not Theirs who do but separate when Cause is given. Else S. Paul
had been to blame, in that he said to his Corinthians, Come ye out from among
them, and be ye separate. (2 Cor. 6. 17.) The actual Departure indeed was
Ours, but Theirs the causal; (as our immortal Archbishop does fitly word it:)
we left them indeed when they thrust us out; (as they cannot but go whom the
Devil drives;) But in propriety of speech, we left their Errors, rather then
Them. Or if a Secession was made from them, 'twas in (...) very same measure
that they had made one from Christ. (Whereas they, by their Hostilities and
their Excommunications, departed properly from us, not from any Errors detected
in us. And the woe is to them by whom the offense comes, (Matthew. 18. 7.) not to
them to whom it is given. If when England was in a Flame by Fire sent out of
Italy, we did not abstein from the quenching of it, until water might be drawn
from the River Tiber; it was because our own Ocean, could not only do it
sooner, but better too; that is to say (without a Figure,)

It did appear by the Concession of the most learned Popish Writers, that
particular Nations had still a power to purge themselves from their
corruptions, as well in the Church, as in the State, without leave had from the Sea of Rome; and that 'twas commonly put in practice above a thousand years
since. Ex co quo Willielmus No^manaiae Comes Terram illam debella^do sibi
subegi^, N^mo in ^d Episcopus vel Abbas ante Ans^lmum f^ctus est, qui non primo
suerit Homo Reg^s, ac de manu ill^us E^iscopatus vel Abbatiae Investituram per
dationem Virgae Pastoralis suscepit, etc. Eadmerus Monach. Cant^in Praef. ad
Hist. Nov. page 2.

Sed nec ex co solum t^mpore mos hic obtinuit; Nem ante Norma^no um etiam
adventum hic ^sitatissimus, ut majorum Gentium Antis^ites sacri, Episco^i
nimirum and Coenobiarchae (qui sal. tem in (...) Regia) a Sacris Eccl^siarum
Co^oribus ^lecti, quin saepius etiam, spretis omnino Corporum Sacrorum
suffragiis, in Aula designati, Annuli and Bac^^ Pastoral^s, ^ive Pedi
traditione, in Dignitatis Possessionem a Regibus nostris, (...) av^^o nixis,
(...). Joh. Seldom. in suis ad Eadmer. Notis et Spicilegio, p. 142. Hujus rei
exemplum vider^ est apud G Malmesburiensem de Gest^s Regum, lib 2. cap 8. Quin
et illud aliquando vid^tur dignius quod hoc in loco notetur. Pontifici
Hilde^rando Fidelitatis Iuramentum, a Guilielmo No^manno, exigenti, Guil elmum
Regem respondisse -- Fi^elitatem facere non volo, quin nec ego promisi, nec
Antecessores meos Antecessoribus tuis id fecisse ^omperio. Baron. Ad An. 10^6.
Guilielmus Rufus pros^ssus est, Quod nullus Arch. episcopus aut ^piscopus Regni
sui, Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset. Matthew Paris. Hist An. 1094. Videsis
etiam, ^^peratores, et Reges Galliarum, jura sua asser^ntes, apud Othonem
Frisingensem, S^gibertum, cosque (...) Historicos qui Res H^nrici Quarti
Imperatoris, et ejusdem nominis Primi R^gis Anglorum con^ipsere. Inprimis vero
Sigon^um de Reg Ital. l. 4, 9, 10, et 11. Baron. Tom. 11. A C. 1077. Cherubi^m
de Nar^ia in Bul^arii Tom. 1. p. 16. et 17. Bin Council. Tom. 3. part. 2. in
U^bano, Calixto, et ^schall Secundis. Renatum Choppinum de Domanio Franciae, l.
2. tit. 1 sect. 6, etc. Et de Sacra ^^tia, l 1. tit. 7. Sect. 22, ^t 23. ad
haec, Theodor Balsamon Patriarch. Antioch. in Council. Chalced. ^n. 4. Joh.
Naucler. Chronograph. Generat. 39. et H. Mutium Chron. German. l. 18.


It did appear that the Kings of England (at least as much as those of Sicily,)
were ever held to be (...), and that by the Romanists themselves; until by
gaining from Henry the First, the Investiture of Bishops; from Henry the
Second, an Exemption of the Clergy from Secular Courts, and from easy King
John, an unworthy Submission to foreign Power; the Popes became strong enough
to call their strength the Law of Justice* And yet their Encroachments were
still opposed, by the most pious and the most learned in every Age. Concerning
which it were easy to give a satisfactory account, if it were comely for a
Sermon to exceed the limits of an hour. In a word, it did appear from the Code
and Novels of (...). etc. Justin, Novel Constable. 131. cap. 2. Vide etiam de
mandatis Principum, Tit. 4. Novel. 17. c. 7 and 11.
Justinian, from the (...) set out by the Emperor Evagr. l. 3. c. 14. in Mag.
Biblioth. Vet. Patr. Tom. 6. Part. 2. p. 655.
Zeno, from the practice of Sigon de Reg. Ital. li. 4. ad A. C. 801. and
Eginhard in vit. Car. Mag. and Baron. Annal. Tom 9. ad A. C. So^ p. 542. ad
545. and Tom. 10. ad A. C. 845. p. 34. Excus. Colon. Agrip. 1609.
Charles the Great, (which may be judged by the Capitulars sent abroad in his
Name,) from the designs and endeavors of two late Emperors, Ferdinand the
First, and Maximilian the Second, from all the commended Kings of Judah, from
the most pious Christian Emperors as far as from Constantine the Great, and
from many Kings of England in Edward the co^fessor, William 1. H. 1. H 3. Edw.
1. Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. H^n. 4. H. 5. H. 6. Edw. 4. Rich. 3. Hen 7. H. 8.
for all which at (...), See Coke's Reports, par. 5. fol. 1. Caudre^'s Case, or
De Ju^e Regis Ecclesiastico. (...). Balsam. in Conc. Ca^th. Can. 16.
Popish times too; that the work of Reformation belonged especially to them in
their several Kingdoms. And this is certain; that neither Prescription on the
Pope's side, nor Discontinuance on the Kings, could add a Right unto the one,
or any way lessen it in the other. For it implies a contradiction, that what is
wrong should grow right, by being prosperous for a longer or shorter season.

Had the Pope been contented with his (...). Council. Constantinop. Oecu^. (...)
Can. 3. (...). Justinian. Imp. Novel. Constable. 131. c. 2*
Primacy of Order, and not ambitiously affected a Supremacy of Power, and over
all other Churches besides his own; we never had cast off a Yoke which had
never been put upon our Necks: And so it is plain that the Usurper did make the
Schism If Sacrilege anywhere, or Rebellion, did help reform Superstition; That
was the Fault of the Reformers, not at all of the Reformation; not of all
Reformers neither. For the most that was done by some, was to write after the
Copy which had been set them in my Text, by the Blessed Reformer of all the
World; which was so to reform, as not to innovate, and to accommodate their
Religion to what they found in the Beginning.

Nay, if I may speak an Important Truth, (which being unpassionately
considered, and universally laid to heart, might possibly tend to the Peace of
Christendom;) seeing it was not so much the Church as the Court of Rome, which
proudly t^od upon Crowns and Scepters, and made Decrees with a Apostolica
Potestate declaramus and definimus, et ab omnibus judicari d^bere mandamus
atque statuimus, decernentes irritum et (...), fi quid secus a quoquam
quacunque Dignitate, Auctoritate, (...) Potestate praedito co^tig^r^^ iudicari,
Non obstantibus Constitut. onibus et Ordinationibus Apostol^cis, A^isque in
^word facicutibus Qui^useunque. Vule I^ullam Piiquarti, Council. Bin. Edit.
Par^^ Tom 9 p. 444. (...) Christus post C^nam instituerit, et suis Discip^lis
administraveri^ sub u^raque speci^ (...) et Vini ^oc (...) Sacrementum, (...)
hoc non obstante, etc. Licet in Primiti^a Ecclesia (...) s^odi Sacramentum
reciperctur a Fidelibus sub (...) sp^^ie; (...) a confici^^^ibus sub (...), et
a laicis tantummodo sub specie Panis suscipi^tur. Council. Constant. Bin. Tom.
3. Part. 2. Sess. 13. p. 880. excus. Colon. Ag^ippinae, 1618.
non obstante to Apostolical Constitutions, or whatsoever had been enacted by
any Authority whatsoever, (the Commandments of Christ being not excepted;) we
originally departed with higher Degrees of Indignation, from the Insolent
Court, then Church of Rome. Nor protested we so much against the Church,
(though against the Church too,) as against the Cruel Edict first made at Ibi (
i. e. Spirae, ubi erat Conventus ordinum Imperii;) Decretum factum est, ut
Edictum Wormatiense observaretur contra Novatores, ut omnia in ^ategrum
restituantur. Contra hoc Edictum solen^is fait Protestat. o, April: 16. A. D.
1529. and hinc ortum pervulgatum illud nomen Protestantium. Sethus Calvis. in
Chron. ad A. C. 1529.

Lutherus impulit Iohannem Saxo^iae Sep^emvirum, aliosque Principes Germanicos,
protestaricont^a Decreta Ratisbonae and Spirae de Religione ^acta. U^de Nomen
Protestantium crevit. Cluverius ad A. C. 1529. p. 705.


Worms, and after cruelly reinforced at Spire and Ratisbone, for the
confirming of those 1 Corruptions from which the 2 Church was to be cleans'd.
To the 1 former we declared a Vatinian Hatred; but to the 2 latter of the two,
we have the Charity to wish for a Reconcilement. That we who differ upon the
way in which we are walking toward Jerusalem, may so look back on the
Beginning from whence at first we set out, (and from which our Accusers have
foulely swerved,) as to agree in our Arrival at the same Iourney's end.

But God forbid that our Love to the Peace without, should ever tempt us to a
loss of the Peace within us. God forbid we should return with the Dog to his
vomit, or with the Sow in the Hebrew Proverb (which is cited by S. Peter in his
Epistle, 2. Pet. 2. 22.
) to her wallowing in the mire. When I wish for a Reconcilement, I do not mean
by our Compliance with any the least of their Defilements, but by their Harmony
with us in our being Clean.

On this Ab Ecclesia Romana non alio discessimus animo, quam ut, si correcta ad
Priorem Ecclesiae sormam redeat, nos quoque ad Illam rev^rtamur, and
Communionem cum Illa in suis porro Coetibus habeamus. Apud Grot: D^scuss. p.
14* and apud ipsum Zanch. in Confess. Art. 19. p. 157.
Condition and Supposal; Our Church is open to receive the bitterest Enemies of
our Church. Our Arms are open to embrace them, with Love, and Honor. Our
Hearts and Souls are wide open in fervent Prayers and Supplications to the God
of Purity and of Peace, that (in his own good time) he will bind up ^he
Breaches, and wipe off the stains, and raise ^p the lapsed Reputation, of his
divided, defiled, ^^sgraced Spouse; And all for the Glory, as well ^s Merits,
of the ever-blessed Bridegroom of all ^ur Souls,

To whom, with the Father, in the Unity of ^he Spirit, be ascribed by us, and
by all the World.

Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from
this time ^orwards for evermore.

FINIS.

