THE Plague Checked; OR, PIETY will either Prevent OR Alter the Property of the
PLAGVE. HELD FORTH, Together with sundry other Things in a Letter, Written by a
Friend, to sundry of his godly Friends and Acquaintance, Pouring out himself
thereby into their Bosoms, and opening his Heart unto them; Partly in a
Paraeneticall and Perswasory way; Partly in a Corroborating and Consolatory
way, with respect to the Present Times and Providence; Wherein the Great and
Terrible God, has appeared in some what a Dreadful manner, both by Land and
Sea; and by Terrible Things in Righteousness, has manifested and made himself
known to the sons of Men, as the Lord of Hosts, and the God that is Holy, who
will be Exalted in Judgment, and Sanctified in Righteousness.

London, Printed by T. M. for the Authors Friends, 1665.

A Friend of the Authors to the READER.
MY Friend, if so thou art to whom these come,
Acknowledge God, the Author of what is done;
The Instrument his servant in his hand,
Has showed himself to be at his Command;
And thereunto Obedient in that he
Has thus prepared, what is so good for thee;
I say prepared for thee, and it is a price
Put in thy Hand, beware and be not nice:
Here by thou may be helped, Virtue to nourish;
But Vice it checks, even in its greatest flourish:
Where e're he finds it, like a man of God,
He makes due Application of the Rod,
Unto the Back, which most deserves the blow:
But if it be not minded, know, yea know,
This as another Witness will come in,
And be an aggravation of thy sin;
Not that it was intended for that end,
No, no, it aimed at this, that such might mend,
And knowing their own evils might return
To God that smites, and makes his anger burn:
That he may please to spare, and eke to pity
The miserable state of this poor City;
And would not let out all his Wrath,
Till us consumed quite he has.
But in his Mercy he may give
Some an escape that they may live,
And be for Monuments of Praise,
To his most holy Name always.
Amen.
London's Lamentation
Made mostly in the language of Jeremies Lamentations, occasioned by the
present Plague with which she is now visited, Anno 1665.
Her Case.
HOw does the City solitary sit I. am.

Of People it was full now few in it: 1. 1.

She weepeth sore in the Night, and so appears 2.

With mournful Face, with Cheeks bedewed with Tears
The ways of her Assemblies do lament, 3.

Because that few or none do them frequent:
Her Priests do sigh, yea, they for fear do fly;
Her Virgins grieve, she takes all bitterly;
Her beauty which was great, it now is gone;
Solemnities she had, now there are none:
Her Princes and her great Ones, like the Heart, 6.

Pursued by Plague, strengthlesse from her depart;
Distressed she is, her*Bowels troubled are;
Her Heart is turned in her, thus does it fare 20.

Abroad the Sword bereaves, at home there is death,
Both young and old bereaved are of Breath:
Her miseries are yet without restraint;
Her Sighs are many, and her Heart is faint. 22.

The Cause.
cap. 1. 8.
She has Rebelled and Sinned grievously,
Therefore she is removed and made to fly:
cap. 3. 42. 9.
Her Filth is in her skirts, so may she find
Her latter end, full little did she mind;
cap. 2. 14.
Zion of old had Prophets which did see
Vain things, and foolish were they found to be:
Sin did not they discover, no not they,
So as to turn Callamity away:
False Burdens they did see, and Visions vent,
Causes of dreadful Plague and Punishment;
God's fiercest Wrath they sorely did provoke,
And so they fell under his heavy stroke;
For sins of Prophets, and of Priests that shed:
The blood of the just in her; and had not fed
cap. 4. 13.
The Souls of those committed to their care,
But rather mischief did for them prepare:
Gods anger did break out, and it was his mind
16.
Them to divide, no favor should they find.
Let London in this Glass her Face behold,
Least still there dye and dye both young and old,
If she with Scripture, as Gods Heifer plow
Sho'le read the Riddle and the cause she will know.
The Course to be taken in Order to Cure.
WIll she turn queritant? That's not the way Cap. 3. 39. 40.

To appease the wrath of God, the Plague to stay,
Nay rather, let her search her ways and turn
Unto the Lord, Least that his anger burn,
And not be quenched; nor from her turn away,
But still devour, and waste from day to day:
Unto the Heavens let her lift her hands, 41.

Her Heart to God, who has her in his Bands:
And say that she transgrest, Rebelled has, 42.

And therefore God has Plagued her in his wrath.
That he is Righteous, in what e*re he does,
Sinned she has, and he is justly wroth;
Cause she has none to plain its punishment:
For Sin she bears; it is for that she is shent,
Let her submit: keep silence unto God, 28,
29.

Put mouth in dust, quietly bear the Rod: 19.

Remembering misery Wormwood eke and Gall, Levit. 26 41 Isaias 26. 9.

And being kindly humbled under all:
Such Recollection made, let her express
Acceptance of her punishment learn Righteousness, 1 Kin. 8. 38.

Knowing withal her spiritual Plague and Sore:
Let her return to God and Sin no more, Joh. 5 14.

Least worse things come unto her when she shall Ps. 85 8.

Back-slide, return to Folly, from God fall:
Then let her Hope, and in that Hope confess, Lam. 3. 21.

It is of Gods rich Mercy that there is less
Then utter desolation on her brought;
22,
She not consumed, wholly brought to naught:
23.
Let her acknowledge, Gods compassions are,
Such as do never fail, he does prepare
Them every morning fresh, and so makes known
His faithfulness, full great unto his own;
Let her make God her Portion, and then say
24,
In him my hope shall be both now and aye:
Let her improve the experience she has found,
For others good, and loudly let her sound
25,
To the Honor of Gods Name, that they that seek
And wait for him, with lowly Hearts and meek,
Shall find its good, because its duty, and
26.
For them his goodness he will still command.
Let London take this course, be sure God will
Return in Mercy, make her flourish still.
The after Carriage of such, as are Preserved from, or recovered of the Plague.
LOrd thou have greatly been provoked,
By City, Countries all:
Psalm. 80. 4.
Thine anger has broke out and smoak't,
And we been made to fall.
Psalm. 66* 5.
Terrible have thy appearings been,
Thy Hand eke lifted up:
Psalm. 75. 8.
In it our Eyes have also seen
Of Wrath a deadly Cup.
Deuteronomy. 32. 41.
Thy glittering Sword, thou whetted have,
Thy Bow, eke thou have bent;
Psa. 7. 13, 14
Thine Arrows on thy string were placed,
On every side they went.
On Judgment thou have taken hold, Deuteronomy. 32. 41

Thy Vengeance thou have made
To seize on such as have been bold,
And not at all afraid,
Thee to provoke unto thy Face,
Against thee to Rebel:
Thy Pestilence it did them chase,
And into Graves they fell;
Thousands on our right hand did fall,
Thousands eke on our left; Ps. 91.

But thou have not consumed us all:
A Remnant thou have kept,
Who trembling stood to see thy Wrath,
Thus to break forth and burn,
Not knowing but into the same path
With others they may turn.
But some from stroke of Pestilence
Wholly preserved were:
Others who of thy stroke had sense,
From Grave, thy Hand did rear;
Let such thus say, with thankful hearts,
Thy Fire Lord have we felt,
From being consumed are set apart,
Us let it try and melt.
It Is meet for us to say to God
Chastisement we have bore, Job 34. 31

And having sinned, have felt the rod,
Now we will sin no more.
What yet we know not teach us Lord, 32.

And having sinned before,
To this we gladly will accord;
Hence forth to sin no more.
Psalm. 116. 3
Thou Lord have us delivered,
From Death and deadly thrall;
Our moistened Eyes from Tears we shed,
Our slyding Feet from fall;
Psalm. 94. 18
When we did say, our foot did slide,
We now are like to fall;
Thy goodness Lord, did so provide,
To stay us up with all;
Except thou Lord had been our aid,
17.
Deaths darkness to dispell;
Our Life and Soul had now been laid
Almost as low as Hell,
Psalm. 116. 7
And now our Souls since you are safe,
Return unto your Rest,
For largely lo, the Lord to you
His bounty has expressed.
9.
Before the Lord, we in the Land
Of Life, will hence forth walk,
Submitting to his ruling hand;
His Laws we will not balk:
Psalm. 6. 4.
Among the Dead, none does, none can,
Remember him one whit,
5.
To sing his Praise, there is not a man in the Infernal Pit.
Isaiah 38. 19 20.
The living, yea, the living shall
Him praise, and eke his Truth:
The Fathers to their Children all,
Shall show with Heart and Mouth
The Lord was ready us to save,
And we our Songs will Sing:
And to his House, being kept from Grave,
Our Offerings we will bring.
Amen.
To the Reader.
THE Author of this Letter, has expressed in one part of it, that that which
does more specially concern the Families and Persons under the Pestilential
stroke might be extracted, and by one means or other transmitted to them, and
so coming in conjunction with Mr. Baxters papers, might through the
cooperation of divine Grace, contribute somewhat to the promoting of their
Spiritual and Eternal welfare: We to whom the Letter was principally intended,
have judged it worthy, in the whole, to appear in Public; hoping it will have
the same blessed effect upon others, as upon our selves: For the Author
himself, he is at a point, not passing for man's day, knowing that he who
judges him is the Lord: If the Letter had been circumscribed within the
compass of that number to which it was principally intended, it would have
pleased him well enough; as for others, who probably will frown upon it, and
lade it with their censures; as he makes account they will Con him little
thanks for it, so he is not so low brought, as to think himself beholding to
them for their thanks; And so if it must out, out let it go, and that's all he
has to say.

C. B. S. H, etc.

Amos 3. 8. THe Lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy? Micha. 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and
the man of wisdom shall see thy Name: Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed
it. Prove. 11. 19* As righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues evil,
pursues it to his own death. Numb. 32. 14. Behold you are risen up in your
fathers stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of
the Lord toward Israel. Numb. 32, 20, to 23. If ye will do according to that
which the Lord has commanded, this land shall be your possession, before the
Lord; but if ye will not do so ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure
your sin will find you out. Levit. 26. 23* 24, 25. If ye will not be
reformed by these things, but will walk contrary to me, then will I also walk
contrary to you, and will punish you yet seven times for yours sins; And I
will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant, and
when ye are gathered together within your Cities, I will send the Pestilence
among you. Read further, verse. 40, 41, 42. Esaias 27. 4, 5. Fury is not in me,
who would set the Briars and Thorns against me in battle; I will go through
them: I will burn them together, or let him take hold of my strength, that he
may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Heb. 10. 31. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Psalm. 116. 15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. Jerem. 15. 15, 16. Take me not away in thy long suffering: Know that for
thy sake, I have suffered rebuke; thy words were sound, and I did eat them,
and thy word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. The Plague Checked:
OR, Piety will either Prevent, Or alter the Property of the PLAGUE. Held forth
together with Sundry other things in a Letter Written by a Friend, to a
Friend, pouring out himself into his Bosom, and opening his heart unto him
concerning the present Times and Providence, etc.
SOlomon tells us, Prove. 19. v. 22. That the desire of a man is his kindness,
and that a poor man is better then a liar. A poor man that has a real and
cordial desire, to express his love and to show kindness to another, but has
not power in his hand so to do, is better then a rich man that does perform
according to the power that is in his hand, somewhat that is beneficial to
another, but it is not from an inward affection and desire; the actings of his
hand are not from the enlarged desires and affections of his heart, such a one
is a liar. Give me leave to accomodate this to my self, I am one of the poor
men of Anathoth, that have but little in mine hand, two Mites or so to cast
into the Treasury; but have an enlarged heart and a lively desire to contribute
to the Promoting of the Good and Welfare of all: Why should not this be
reckoned to me as my kindness and my self and actings in this way be accepted
of you and others of my ancient and dear Friends, to whom I apply my self now
in this Epistolary way, according to what I have, and not according to what I
have not: I do not now present you with a curious and finely composed Sermon,
nor with an elaborate Treatise, the World is full of such; Oh! that there were
better use made of them, more and better fruit springing up from them then
appears at this day; but this is a Lamentation, and well may it be for a
Lamentation that there is price upon price put into the hand of Fools, and they
have no heart unto them; and we may reckon upon it, that the many precious
Sermons and Treatises which are abroad will come up in judgment against the
men of this Generation and condemn them, for that such blessed light has been,
as by Preaching, so by Books and Sermons Preached and published, being conveyed
into the world, and especially into this Land and Nation; and the community of
people love darkness rather then light; for my own part, I have been a poor
Prophet of Anathoth, a Preacher of the Gospel, partly in the Country, partly in
and about the City of London, between Forty and Fifty years; most of my time
even to above Forty years, I have spent in and about London, continuing in the
City all the time of the great PLAGUE, Anno 1625. and from that time, having
obtained help from God, I have continued my relation and the exercise of my
Ministry ever since in one place, till an Act of Parliament put a stop:
endeavoring by plain and profitable Preaching, by quiet and peaceable living,
to show and set forth the glorious Gospel of the Great God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whose Death and Resurrection, death and darkness and Mortality,
which the first Adam by sin had let into the World, and opened a door unto, is
swallowed up in Victory, and Life, and Immortality is brought to Light, and is
performing glorious Tryumphs, in and by the Lord Jesus. I have reduced the Main
of my Preaching to the Apostle Paul's Dichotomy, Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; yet not baulking other Doctriner that are
superstructory and necessary to be built on these Foundations, as in particular
obedience to Kings and Magistrates, and that for Conscience Sake; persuading
and provoking people to pray for Kings and all in Authority under him, that we
may live under them a peaceable and quiet life in all Godliness and honesty: So
that I bless the living God, I have no regret in my Conscience, for having
first or last driven in a way of Preaching or Praying any, either Treasonable
or Disloyal designs; nor am I Conscious to my self, that any thing has been
performed by me to the imbassing of the Spirits of his Majesty's Subjects or
debauching them, or drawing them from their Duty and Allegience, knowing how my
Commission runs, and what of the Counsel of the most high God is held forth in,
Prove. 24. 21. Romans 13. v. 1. 2. Titus 2. v. 1. 1 Pet. 2. v. 17. But Knowing
withal, that it concerns Magistrates and Rulers, that they Rule in the Fear
of God as King David acknowledged they ought to do, 2 Samuel v. 23. And that they
be not a terrrur to good works, but to evil works. Romans 13. That they set
themselves to punish evil doers, and to be for the praise of them that do
well: and truly it is sad, when such as are be trusted with Magistratical Power
show more severity against such as are Judiciously Conscientious, and out of a
Judicious and well-informed Conscience are a little crossing the Magistratical
Impositions and Injunctions, then against men of Grosest Immoralities, openly
Flagitious, Profligate, and Naught; and run to all excess of Wickedness. It
were to be wished, that in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Drunkards, and
Swearers, and Whormongers, and Sabboath-breakers, and unjust Dealers, with all
other of that black and ragged Regiment, which is headed by the Devil the
Prince of Darkness, might feel the sharpest of the Magistrates Severity; while
Sober, Judicious, and Conscientious Christians, partake of the benign
influencies of Magistratical Power and Goverments, and sit quietly under their
own Vines and Fig Trees, and drink the Waters of their own Cystern: They the
mean while setting themselves to studdy their Duty, and in Faithfulness to
perform it.

There are the Duties of particular relations, wherein and in the due
management whereof, the Beauty and the Power of Godliness does very much
discover it self, as in the Relation between the Husband and the Wife, between
the Parents and their Children, between the Master and the Servant, between the
Pastor and the People; so are there between the Magistrate and the Subject: The
well answering of which will conduce very much unto the more comfortable
enjoyment both of one and other; and as it is much to be wished, that Kings and
Magistrates may have the Honor and Obedience performed to them which is their
due; So it is likewise much to le desired, that the Subjects under their
Government, may have the Ease, Freedom, and Refreshment which is justly to be
expected by them. I live in the comfortable Hope, and joyful Expectation of a
Time, wherein the Church and People of God, shall have a more Free and
Comfortable Enjoyment of themselves, then ever yet; not Oppressions,
Persecutions, Oppositions, hard Usages as all along, almost ever since the fall
of Adam: Surely the Godly shall not always be under Hatches and Harrows, and
Wicked and Profane Men, that neither Fear God, nor Reverence Men; Ruffle and
Rant it, and pour out Scorn and Derision upon others that are as good as they,
yea, it may be far their betters in worldly respects, but be sure their
betters in Grace and Godlyness, such shall not always behave themselves in such
a manner: Surely the wicked shall not always lift up their Horn on high, and
push at the Godly with side and shoulder, but the Lord will (and we have his
Faithful Word and Promise for it) lift up the Horn of his People, keep the
Feet of his Saints, when the Wicked shall be silent in Darkness, he will exalt
the Horn of his Anointed, whether Godly Kings or Godly People, 1 Samuel chap. 2.
Kings have in a civil way their anointing with material Oil which the Subjects
partake not with them in, and in that respect they are peculiarly the anointed
Ones; but such as are really Religious and Godly have a spiritual anointing,
the Scripture speaks much of it, 2 Cor. c. 1. 1 John 2. ad fine, You have an
unction faith the Apostle from the holy One, which unction, as it is a teaching
unction, and conduces much to the accomplishing of the Saints as they are
Prophets, as there the Apostle expresses, for faith he, You have an unction
from the holy One, and ye know all things, v. 20. And again, v. 27. The
anointing Teachers, so is it a priviledging unction, and conduces very much to
the promoting of their Spiritual and Corporal Ease and Freedom from sore
Burdens and Oppressions, and accomplishes them for the Kingly Dignity
(understand it in the Mystery, not in the Letter) which the Lord Jesus has by
his blood purchased for them, and has raised them up unto us. Rev. 1. v. 6. He
has loved us, and washed us in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God our Father: This ease and freedom from what is Oppressive,
whether Imprisonment, Impoverishment, Banishment, Scorns, Reproaches,
Persecution, etc. The Anointing promotes according to what the holy Prophet
speaks, Isa. 10. v. 27. And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden
shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing. This apprehension and
oppinion concerning a more flourishing State of the Church and Saints then ever
the World yet saw, such as wherein there shall be Righteousness and Peace, and
wherein the Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, and none shall hurt in all the
holy Mountain of God; but Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, Zions King
appearing in his Beauty, the Bride the Lambs Wife in her bravery clad in clean
Linen pure and white, which is the Righteousness of the Saints, Revel. 19.
Zions solemnities performed in a most perfect and complete manner, the glorious
Lord being to his Saints and people, as a place of broad Rivers where no Gallie
with Oars shall pass, no Funeral solemnities performed, yea no sickness seazing
upon them; for the Inhabitants shall say, I am not sick, the People that are
therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; all or most of which expressions you
find in Is. 33. This apprehension, I say the Scripture seems strongly to favor
as that in the 37. Psalm, which is a Psalm of providence, penned on purpose to
quiet, and calm, to support and sweeten the spirits of the Godly under all the
Persecutions, Oppositions and hard Usages which they are subject to meet
withal; and by means whereof, they are too apt to fall into Frees and
Under-discomposures, to be put out of possession of their Souls by Impatience;
it is said there, that the meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace; and as I take it, our Savior referrs to
the Scripture alleged before in Matthew 5. where among other Beatitudes, he
pronounces a blessedness upon the Meek, such as carry Patiently, Calmely, and
Quietly, and with a composed spirit, under all the Hardships the^ are put to
undergo by the Men of the Earth, that these meek ones shall inherit the earth:
And by the way let me tell you, that this meekness and calmness of Spirit, is
that which intitles to most precious Promises and Privileges, as a meek and
quiet Spirit either in men or Women, is a thing very pleasing with God and he
values it as a thing of great price, 1 Pet. 3. So is it also very beneficial
and profitable to us, they that are beautified with it God will beautify with
Salvation, Psalm 149, when God arises to Judgment, he has always a special
respect to the meek of the Earth, Psalm. 76. The meek of the earth that set
themselves to seek and show forth, and be expressive of meekness, of all others
are the likeliest to be hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zepha. 2. v 3. Moses
was the meekest man in all the earth, as it is testified of him in Numbers 12.
and when Aaron and Miriam spoke against him, and dealt in a querulous manner
with him concerning the Ethiopian woman, he was quiet and meek, and carried as
one that heard not, and as one in whose mouth were no reproofs, as David speaks
of himself, Psalm. 38. v. 13, 14. But does the Lord suffer this to pass without
checks and control? no I Will warrant you, God will plead the Cause of his meek
ones; God speaks quick and short, and to speak with a holy Reverence cutted to
Aaron and Miriam, calls them out sharply, reproves them, and says unto them,
How, were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses: this meekness of
Spirit my dear friends, I have seriously considered of, and weighed with my
self*

First, In reference to my self.

Nextly, In reference to others, both Godly Ministers and professors too, for
I must tell you, as I principally study God, Christ, the Mysteries of Godliness
and my self; So do I study men and observe what spirits and carriages they are
of, both preachers and professors, persons of several persuasions, and where I
find them to be of Meek, Humble, Lowly Spirits and Carriages; notwithstanding
the circumstantial differences between them, I can, I do Cordially own and
embrace one and another, but where either of them discover an elated spirit and
bear up above their brethren, and keep at a distance from them upon the account
of greater gifts and parts; and because their names are blown up, and they
swim upon a full sea of popularity, when others of their brethren, that it may
be have as much soundness of Judgment, as much Grace as they, love Christ as
much as they, are as Cordial to the cause of Godliness as they, are yet upon
the account of meaner parts and not being in that esteem, have little or no
respect from them; (I am abundantly satisfied in my self, that there is
sufficient cause thus to animadvert, if any be offended, so let them:) For
such, I wish they would study better, what it is to be of a true Gospel spirit,
which they may learn from their Lord and Master the great Apostle and high
Priest of their holy profession, who is (...), who is (...), who is (...), the
good shepherd, the great shepherd, the chief shepherd, who was meek and lowly,
and requires of them that are his under shepherds and all his Disciples, that
they learn of him who was the Lord of all, yet because a servant to all. The
example also of Paul who does take special knowledge of his Masters meekness,
and is strongly argumentative from it as in the 2d. of the Corinthians chap.
10. v. 1. where he presses from the meekness and gentleness of Christ; his
example I say contributes much to such a purpose; who though he was not behind
the chiefest Apostles, yet acknowledges himself not worthy to be called an
Apostle, and though he knew his gifts and parts, that he spoke with tongues
more then they all, and had labored more then they all; yet professes himself
to be less then the least of all the Saints, a very nothing, and in his
Doctrine teaches, that there should not be a minding of high things, but a
condescending to men of low degree; and I must profess for my own part, till I
see more of this meekness of spirit in Preachers and Professors, I cannot
think that ever we shall see the performance of these things, which we profess
to live in the joyful expectation of; surely we must all be better spirited,
of a more Humble, Heavenly, Spiritual, Self-denying frame of Spirit before all
be well with us. I am expressing as before my comfortable confidence concerning
a better condition that the Church and Saints shall be brought into, before the
final consummation the Prophet Isaiah 60. gives ground for, such a hope to be
built upon, it is a precious scripture, and I think it referrs to the state of
the Church in this world; Officers shall be peace, exactors, righteousness, and
very much to that purpose, the whole chapter is full of marrow and fatness, it
drops like the dropping of a honey comb, the 21. and 22. Chapters of the
Revelations also speak at a very high rate and tell us of new Jerusalem,
coming down from heaven as a bride made ready for her husband; Of a City that
shall be of a glorious constitution, and that all things shall be made new, and
very much to this purpose, which I conceive does as the other passages before
mentioned, referr to a state in this life; I cannot but mention the second of
Peter. chap. 3. We according to his promise look for a new heaven, and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness and scripture which* I have cause to
remember with a most thankful acknowledgment of a merciful providence ordered
out to my self. When I had preached over the whole Chapter to that Verse, and
had engaged to the verse and preached one Sermon upon it, and had a more
numerous multitude of Auditors, Ministers and others then ordinary, upon the
account of the Argument, which the Text led me unto: After I had preached that
Sermon, which was at seven of the clock in the morning of the Lord's Day,
according to my ordinary course that very day there was some disturbance in the
City, and it is known what was performed by them, and what after proceeding
there was on the part of the Powers then in being; engaged I then was to the
prosecution of the Text the next Lords day: it was apprehended that it was no
way safe for me to proceed in the discourse, but that it was my wisest course,
either wholly to wave it, or at least to intermitt the prosecution of it for a
time. I disputed the matter within my self, commended my cause to God in a way
of Prayer, and thereupon I judged thus; that if I should baulke my Text which I
had handled in part, and was falln upon in course, having preached upon the
whole foregoing part of the Chapter; I should do great disservice to my Lord
and Master, and cast the whole Congregation under disappointment, which would
expect to hear what I had further to say upon the point, and it would turn to
my prejudice so to do. I brake, by the help of grace, the force of the
temptation, proceeded in my course, gave some tolerable satisfaction to my
Auditors, had some good approbation of my Labor, and all was well, very well,
I had peace, the people profit; but this by way of digression.

For the apprehension and opinion concerning a more glorious State of the
Church here on earth, I own it and conceive, that the Scriptures alleged with
multitudes more, give abundant ground for it: For the opinion concerning the
Thousand Years, and the personal reign of Christ, I know it has great
patronage from learned and godly men: Others are of a different apprehension
and judge it to be more proper to interpret the fore alleged Scriptures of a
glorious estate in the world to come, In the heaven of glory I mean. Whatever
the difference between them be, and however the interpretation proceeds, I wish
there may be no litigant spirit among the learned and godly concerning it,
knowing that it is Melius dubitare de occultis quam litigare de incertis, as
was the speech of Austin of old, and whatever our expectations be, whether of a
more glorious estate here on earth, or of a perfect estate of glory in heaven,
let you and me set our hearts to make the best preparation we can for the
appearance of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and that we may appear with
some suteableness to the future productions of former predictions; for may we
not think there will be occasion to say with respect to the performan ce of
these things which are purposed concerning the Church of God in a way of mercy
and grace* and to cry out as Balaam did with respect unto dreadful productions
in a way of judgment and severity, as in Numbers 22, 23. alas! who shall live
when God does this? and what will it avail us to see new Jerusalem coming down
from heaven as a bride in her beauty and bravery, and our selves found in a
state of deformity, and beggary, in rotten rags; to have New Jerusalems L^ght
and Glory breaking out, and have neither eye to see it, nor shoulders to bear
up under the weight of it; to have all things made new, and nothing of newness
of heart: to have the marriage of the Lamb kept, and we no wedding garments to
be found on us.

There is a letter lately come forth to public view bearing the Earl of
Marleboroughs name, which I had an account of by a manuscript, I hear it is now
in Print, whether with any variations and amplification I cannot say, what I
heard I judged, Primo auditu, to be Verbum, Scriptum, viro nobili dignum; he
therein asserting, pleading the reallity, substantiality of Religion and
Godliness, which many, too many at this day most impudently, insolently,
audaciously, in suam perniciem give judgment upon as a mere fancy and humane
device, as if that Athistical spirit had a stamp of truth upon it; Primus in
orb Deos fecit timor, fear and fancy have given the first being to God and
Religion, and so they slight it, disgust it, decry it, making nothing of it.

O! Monsters of men, in quibus ne mica sanae mentis, ne granum salis, men of
corrupt minds reprobate concerning the faith as Paul speaks, is it not my
friends a time for God to work when men make void his Law, Psalm. 119. and not
only his Law, his Institutions and appointments, but himself and his very
being too: Is it not time for God to appear and awake to Judgment? after a long
time of silence and his seeming to be a sleep, to vindicate and plead his Name,
his Cause, his World, his Worships, as now he has begun to do; no wonder that
at this day he answer us out of the Whirl-winde (as he did his servant Job, who
had made a little too bold with God) that now he has drawn his Sword, and bent
his Bow, put his Arrows upon the string and let them fly on every side, and
what would we have him to do? tell me my friends, for I would be willing to
know, what entertainment this Letter of the Earls finds, how it takes on one
side or other, especially on the part of the Grandees and Gentry, what judgment
they make of it, and whether it be a Ludibrium or a Documentum, a matter of
scorn or a Scholiast by which they are willing to be animadverted upon both as
to their persons and manners, whether they slight it and set light by it as
stramineu^ quid stercorcum quid, the issue of a fanatic friendlike brain, or
to be solid and judicious, of a profitable improvement, and such as has a
tendencie to move and provoke men to consider more seriously of Religion and
the things of Eternity, and so the Letter turn to a good account: This I desire
to know, He tell you upon what occasion, I was told a very few days ago by a
sober person, that there are many and many of such a Spirit, so debauched as
that if any thing, whether Sermon, Treatise or ought else comes out in Print
that discovers a friendliness to Religion and the ways of Holiness, and gives a
check though with much prudence and gentleness to the lusts of men and their
sinful exorbitances and exuberancies, any thing that casts a friendly aspect
upon the matters of God and Christ, especially if it bears the name of such as
are counted Fanatics, though otherwise Learned, Sober, Peaceable men that are
devoted to the fearing of God and honoring of the King; and are as Cordially
and Conscientiously set to promote subjection to Magistrates higher or lower,
and against whom no thing in the world can be objected but this, that they are
not conforming, they either rise up in strongest opposition to it and explode
it, or disparage it and lay it by as not worthy to be meddled with, but rather
buried with scorn and contempt in silence, adjudging it to perpetual darkness
never to see the light: Such a spirit of profaneness the Earl in his letter
according to my apprehension and interpretation of it, seems to be either fore
apprehensive of, or actually discovering; if he were not, I know that both he
and we all have cause to reckon upon and be in expectation of it; that men of
such a spirit of profaneness should come, both St. Peter (2 Epistle of Peter 2.)
and St. Jude in his Epistle by a prophetical spirit and by divine inspirment
foretold, that in the last days should come Scoffers and Mockers walking after
their own Lusts and saying, where is the promise of his coming, such and so
spirited from hell and the devil, that they neither regard God, his Precepts,
Promises, or threatenings, nor his judical actings and proceedings, when his
hand is lifted up, they will not see nor mind it; the works of the Lord, and
the opperation of his hands they will not have regard unto, so is it prophesied
and so is it, and must it be fulfilled necessarily, and that because it is so
foretold and prophesied, and I may say upon this occasion as our Savior
speaks, Woe unto the world because of offenses; it is neceessary that offenses
come, but woe be to them by whom they come; so it is necessary that prophesies
be fulfilled, but woe be to them by whom such kind of prophesies are fulfilled;
for as much as while they not thinking of it fulfill what is foretold in a
prophetical way, they run quite cross to what is held forth in a preceptive
way, and so run themselves upon eternal ruin; as to such whoever, wherever
they be, I shall take the boldness to say to them, are you absolute and
independent, being not at all depending upon God, has he nothing to do with
you? have you nothing to do with him? will you say as they said in Jeremiahs
time, Jeremiah the second, We are Lords we will not come to thee, or as
Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that we should obey him? are you at a point whether
you be saved or damned, whether you go to heaven or hell, or do you count these
things mere fancies that have no reality in them? is it nothing to you at once
to loose God and Christ, your souls, and that to all eternity? Is it nothing to
you, and of no signification with you to be for ever shut out of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and to be tumbled into Hell, with the guilt of all your iniquities upon
your Consciences, when your iniquities shall be upon your bones, as Ezekiel
phraseth it, and while others shall be Timber for the Building, you shall be
fuel for the burning and be sweltering for ever under the unsupportable weight
of Gods wrath, and endure the gnawing of the worm that shall never dye, and the
furius flames of a fire that shall never be quenched; in a word, how will your
hearts endure, and your hands be strong; as Ezekiel expresses himself: When the
Lord Jesus shall appear with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, as the Judge
before whom you must be summoned and cited to appear, and have the judgment of
eternal Condemnation pass upon you, by him who came at first clothed with
garments of Salvation, with a Golden Scepter of Grace in his hand, holding
forth a pardon, a Free-pardon to all, that all might have the benefit of it,
that would take hold of it. Are you resolved within your selves, that neither
God, nor Christ, nor Spirit, nor Angels, nor Ministers, nor Scripture Promises,
nor Scripture Threatenings, nor life, nor death, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature; none of which will
separate the Saints from God in Christ Jesus, and from his love, shall separate
you from your lusts, and the Devil; but you will live and die, and damn with
them; If it be thus with you, and that this is the Spirit you do, and are
resolved to walk in, and that you scorn to be checked and controlled by any man
whatsoever: neither by word or writing, you will do what is good in your own
eyes, be it never so evil in the eyes of God or man: Then let me propound to
your consideration, or rather to the consideration of others (for if you be so
spirited, as I have already expressed, there is little hope that you will
consider) what the Lord by the Prophet speaks, Isa. 28. v. 14. and so forward:
Hear the word of the Lord ye scornful men, because ye have said, we have made
a Covenant with Death and Hell; are we at an agreement, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through it shall not come to us; for we have made lies our
refuge, and under falsehood we have hid our selves: therefore judgment also
will I lay to the line and righteousness to the plummet, and the hail shall
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the water shall overthrow the hiding place.
And your Covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell
shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall
be trodden down by it. From the time that it goes forth, it shall take you,
for morning by morning shall it passover, by day and by night it shall be a
vexation only to understand the report. For the bed is shorter then that a man
can stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower then that he can wrap
himself in it, for the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be
wroth as in the Valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work
and bring to pass his act, his strange act: Now therefore be not ye mockers,
least your bands be made strong, for I have heard from the Lord God of Hosts a
Consumption determined upon the whole earth. And is this matter for you to
scorn at? Let me further tell you, that please your selves in a scornful
spirit, and in the out-going of it, that delight your selves in your scorning
and will not turn at Gods reproof, by his Word, and by his judgments; by both
which he loudly calls, but ye refuse to answer; he stretches out his hand, but
you will not regard, but set at naught all his counsels, and will none of his
reproofs; He also will laugh at your calamity and mock when your fear comes,
Prove. 1. 24. and so forward, and know as the Lord speaks by his Prophet Ezekiel
chap. 7. These things have a reality in them, and are not as an echo the
sounding again of the mountains.

While I am declaiming against such a Generation of men, as is before
mentioned; I see cause to be under such a sad seizure as was holy David, who
gives us this account of himself, Psalm 55. Psalm. 119. Fearfulness and
trembling did come upon him, that horror had taken hold of him and overwhelmed
him, and wherefore all this? what was it that troubled him: he tells us, it was
because of the wicked that had forsaken Gods Law. By the way, observe what a
contrary spirit most men, yea men professing Godliness, are possessed with,
(and acted by,) that can see and hear the abominable impieties committed in the
Land, and not be moved at all, and is it not almost grown quite out of fashion
to lay to heart other men's sins and high horrid provocations, they think its
well if they take any notice of their own; but this is it I drive at; It may
well raise up wonder and astonishment, to consider, that any such persons
should be found in this Nation, after such a time of Gospel Light and Grace,
and plentiful means of Salvation, which one might think would have levened the
land all over, and Sainted the whole Kingdom; and as after such means, so under
such dispensations as at this day are ordered out, that should bear so high,
and drive so desperately, so furiously, as many do in City and Country carring
as if they would dare God to his face, make a challenge to him, and as its said
in Job. 15. 20. They stretch out their hands against God, and strengthen
themselves against the Almighty, they run upon him, even on his neck, upon the
thick bosses of his bucklers, such are men of high dareing spirits. I should
think it would do well for them to take up a little, and when they are in their
fullest career, to make a stop and pause somewhat of consideration and
moderation would not do amiss; nor would I ever wish a man to provoke the Lord,
unless he first be sure of this, that he is stronger then he, for so the
Apostle Paul argues, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we
stronger then he? I would wish such kind of persons to consider o^ Pharoachs
case, and Gods expostulation with him* Exodus 9. 17. As yet exaltest thou thyself
against my people, -- I will smite thee and thy people with pestilence, etc. If
any shall reply and say, but wha^ occasion is there thus to speak? I answer, it
well known, and observed what cruel actings there are at this day on the part
of under-officer against their fellow subjects, such as perhaps hi^ Majesty and
the Parliament would not so well like of; as being supra statutum, and that to
a high degree.

But what is the day and dispensations of it that w^ speak of?

I answer, It is not the day of Judgment, the Doctrine whereof is the terror
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. Concerning which, I have often thought, that arming our
selves with that and other weapons of our spiritual Warfare, which are not
Carnal but Mighty through God, we may be bold to encounter and graple with the
proudest and stoutest of the sons of men upon the earth: This Terror of the
Lord, is that which where it comes in the power of it upon a defiled
Conscience, will make a man to be a Magor Missa bib, (i. e.) a terror to
himself, as Jeremiah speak Chap.. This day of Judgment we all ought to be
persuaded of, and to be in a daily expectation of, and preparation for; But
though this present day be not (the day of Judgment,) yet it is a day of
Judgment? and many Preludiums there are both in Scripture and in the course of
Providence which we may look upon, as anticipations of that Great and Terrible
day. We have something signified to such a purpose in Psalm. 50. 3, 4, 5. verses.
Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestious round about him. He shall call to the
heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people. Gather my
Saints together unto me: those that have made a Covenant with me, by Sacrifice.
Where the Lord calls upon the sons of men from one end of the earth to the
other, and makes a general citation of them to gather themselves together, he
himself being upon a solemn appearance with devouring fire. As for the present
day I call it a day of Judgment, the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and whose
furnace is in Jerusalem, Esai. 31. 9. has kindled his fire, and is heating his
Furnace in -- England and London; its good for us to strike while the Iron is
hot, we may be guided so to strike, as that our Iron may be turned into Gold,
and by means of this fiery furnace well improved, many rusty Vessels may come
forth as Vessels for the finer, and fitted for the masters use.

We have these latter years had an account of many terrible Apparitions and
Prodigies, and other stupendous acts of providence which have caused much
amazment and amuzment for the present; But the impression of them are almost
quite worn out, the remembrance of them is past and gone, and we are yet to
seek as to a genuine interpretation of them. There is Mystery Christ, Mystery
Gospel, Mystery Zion, Mystery Godliness, Mystery Sin, Mystery Babylon, so is th
Mystery Providence; that God that has his way in the Sanctuary, has his way
in the Sea, and his paths in the great Deeps, and his footsteps are not known,
Psalm 77. the scriptures have their (...), that is, things hard to be
understood; so has the book of Providence; there are Misterious Texts in it,
the holy Prophet found it so, Psalm 73. It was, dolor in Oculis, in the study
of which, his eyes were made to water his head and heart to ache again.

And perceiving how apt he was to run upon dangerous mistakes, he calls himself
a Behemoth, a foul beast and acknowledging his Ignorance and folly, recovers
himself and sees it to be his best course to draw near to God, and so he did,
and found the benefit and comfort of it to his dying day. The sword of War
has lately been drawn and has done great Execution, much Protestant blood
has been shed, when it will be quiet and fall a sleep again, after its
awakening who can tell? The terrible sword of Pestilence is also now awakened,
and it is acting its part according to the Commission granted unto it; how high
this may rise, how far it may reach, how long it may continue, and what may
succeed and come after it, who can tell? These things are laid up in store with
God and sealed among his Treasures to whom Vengance and Recompenses belong, who
will make the feet of his Enemies slide in due time, for the day of their
Calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste, t.
32. v. 34, 35. As touching the Pestilential Contagion now amongst us, it has a
very formidable aspect, and begins to open its mouth wide and to devour on
every side; many are possessed with fear and trembling, to think what will
become of them, and are ready to cry out with Balaam, Woe and alas, who shall
live when God does this? and well may sinners in Zion be afraid and
fearfullness surprise the hypocrite in heart, Esai. 33. And such as are of
guilty consciences as not being able to dwell with devouring fire and with
everlasting burnings. Its a becoming thing for such to let fall their spirits,
to come down from their grandeur, to turn in upon their own hearts and humble
themselves under the mighty hand of God, who though fury be not in him, yet if
any will set himself against him, he will be sure to find that God is more
then his match, and will be as a devouring flame to a bush of dry thorns and
stubble, and will in a moment burn them up; Its their wisest course to make
peace with God and take hold of his strength, and they shall make peace with
him as the Prophet speaks, Esai. 27. 4, 5. Its not for any to turn Quiritants
and Plaintiffs against God, who is sufficiently able to show cause for what he
does, and give a reason of all his actings though he be not bound to do it. Nor
is it fit to say unto him (what do thou,) its proper for us all to put our
mouths in the dust; and now that his hand is lifted up to see it, submitt to it
and learn righteousness by it, knowing that they that will not see it shall
see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people, Esai. 26.

And that they that will not fear with a fear of duty, shall fear with a fear
of punishment in a judicial way, and if men will deal proudly against God, he
will be found to be above them, yea in the very things wherein they do deal
proudly against him. Its holy Counsel and never more proper for men to take
then at this day, which Jeremiah gives us in the 3. of his Lamentations 40,
etc. Wherefore does the living man complain; a man for the punishment of his
sin every word has its weight, and is emphatically argumentative; Its man and
not God, and shall man complain against God, its a living man and that speaks
Gods patience and forbearance; he might have struck him dead and sent him to
hell, but he lives, and is it fitting that he should complain, and not rather
magnify Gods patience and goodness, and say its of the Lords mercies that we
are not utterly consumed. Its a man for the punishment of his sin, that which
he suffers under and complains of, is of his own procuring, he eats the bread
of his own bakeing, drinks the drink of his own brewing, reaps the harvest of
his own seed; nay, nay, it is not for the living man to complain, but as the
counsel is there given to search and try his ways and turn to the Lord his God*
to be humbly inquiring into the Reason, into the very Reason why God is fallen
out with England and London, that have been good friends so long? Why he has
taken his Rod into his hand and gives us such heavy blows, that he fetches
blood from us and strikes us dead? And indeed let this be our business at this
day, to know and find out the Proper Reason of this present Plague. To find out
the causes of a Disease we count has a great tendency to the Cure, but who and
where is the wise man that may understand this? and who is it to whom the mouth
of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it for what the Land is Plagued
and in a way to perish, and to become as a wilderness that none passes
through, they are Jeremiah's words, Jer. 9. verse 12.

If such a course be not taken and vigerously prosecuted without partiality,
and an ingenuous acknowledgment made, that to all other our sins we have added
these or these till we find out the Jonah that makes the seas tempestuous, the
Achan that troubles the ^and, the Sheba son of Biory which makes the
disturbance and so must be beheaded, and his head cast over the wall. Till this
be done it will not be well with us, but we may even call for the mourning
women as it follows in that place, To take up a wailing and to make bitter
Lamentation, for death is come into our windows and is entered into our palaces
to cut off the children from without, and the young men from the streets. I
hear that diverse of our Preachers have been performing something to such a
purpose, improving the Scriptures, and giving account from them what particular
sins have formerly provoked God to send the Plague upon a people, this is
something to the purpose: But what if there be some or other abomination
committed in the Land, which lies heavy on it, and the cry of it is heard in
the ears of the Lord of Hosts, that till it be found ou^ the mouth of it
stopped and it self removed; some or other sin which the Scripture does not so
clearly and in terms make mention of; for I suppose it may be so, that sins may
be committed that have scarce ever been heard of before, as God sometimes
brings to light strange punishments, and arms himself with weapons of his
Indignation, which he has not formerly made use of, as we have it in Job 31.
v. 3. Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers
of iniquity? So there may be uncooth unheard of sins. Now this I drive till
this or that particular evil be found out, Confessed, Repented, and Reformed,
till the proper vein be opened, and the singer laid upon the very sore; we may
pine away and perish in our iniquity, and the Land become desolate without
Inhabitant. Nathan said unto David thou art the man, David said of himself I am
the man, this is my sin, I have mad^ some observation in my daily Course of
reading Scriptures, of that passage in Eze. 15. 8. I will make the land
desolate, because they have committed a trespass, and the like you find in
chap. 20. v. 27. Now had they committed but one trespass, yea they had
multiplied their trespasses; But we may understand it, either as if all their
trespasses were run into one, or there was a Master a Monster trespass one or
other trespass of such notoriety that God would not pardon, but take vengance
and do execution with furious rebukes. Whatever the cause is, a cause there is
why the Plague is broken out among us and begins to rage and beat down on every
side; And to be sure in the general, Sin is the cause, but happy we if we had
an interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto us our unrighteousness, and
the unrighteousness in special, which testifies and pleads against us and has
procured this sore Judgment of the Pestilence, which is as a sword sharpened
and furbished, and for ought we know is sharpened and furbished to make a sore
slaughter. And should we then make mirth? what if it contemn our Rod, our
Srength, our Riches, Honor and Beauty of our Ornaments, as it did of old; the
Rod, the Strength, and Beautiful Ornaments of Israel, and of Judah, when it
proved the Sword of the great men which were slain; the sword entering into
their privy Chambers, and the point of it set against their gates, that their
hearts might be faint, and their ruins be multiplied with terror of Princes
and people. Ye find that thus it was threatened and done to Jerusalem, and
Judah, Ezekiel. 21. 8, 9. And as it is further expressed, Ezekiel 7. 8, 9. 10. Now will
I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and
I will judge thee according to thy ways, and* will recomponce thee for all
thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I
will recompense thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations that are in
the midst of thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smites. Behold
the day, behold the day is come, the morning is gone forth, the rod has
blossomed, pride has budded. With revenging re-compenses God comes upon the
Back of them, yea, to their faces he tells them, he would not spare nor have
pity; Utinam non sic Nobiscum, but behold the day is come, behold it is come,
the Rod is gone forth, the Rod is Blossomed, Pride is Budded, Violence is risen
up into a Rod of Wickedness, and Wickedness is risen up into a Rod of Judgment
and Destruction. And let us know and be assured, that he whose life is in his
Iniquity, Cujus vivere est peccare so our Translators express, Ezekel 7. verse
13. That he shall not strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life. And for
such as make iniquity the iniquity of their hearts, (that is) set their hearts
upon their iniquity, they shall find that when the iniquity of their heels
shall compass them about which is the Psalmists phrase in the 49 Psalm; their
wickedness will prove bitter, yea bitterer then gall and wormwood, it will reach
to the heart and make them cry out as in Jer. 4. v. 18, 19. My bowels, my
bowels I am pained at the very heart. Insuch a day as this is, which is a day
of sharp Rebuke from God, as it has been of latter times a day of sharp Rebuke
from Majestrates and men in Authority to some of us: Its fit for us all to
humble our selves and reckon upon it that God calls to Mourning and Weeping;
Jeremiahs Commission empowered him to say to the King and the Queen: Jerem. 13.
Humble your selves sit down in the dust; And I know no reason to the contrary,
but if Kings and Queens, Princes and Nobles, and Grandees of the World sin as
others do, they should humble themselves, Repent and Abase themselves before
God as others ought to do and some do: If ever they will find that mercy with
God, which others in the way of Repentance hope to find. God and godliness are
no respecters of persons, there is not one way for Kings, and another way for
Subjects; one way for Princes and Nobles, and another way for Pezants and
Plebeiants; one for Rich, and another for Poor to be saved in. The same truths
are to be believed, the same, yea the severest duties are indespensable,
required, and to be performed and practiced by one and other: If any man, yea
any man be he who be will, will be Christ's Disciple, he must deny himself take
up his Cross and follow him: Religion is too noble and generous a thing to
stoop to any man's humor in the World. He that will not be saved upon Gods
terms, may and shall go without Gods Salvation; God will abate nothing of his
price, nor be beholding to any man to come to heaven, he that likes not the
terms upon which heaven and salvation is propounded may let it alone, if one
will not deal for it others will. As to a due comportment with present times
and providence besides what I have already said; I say further, that it is for
every man to study the Plague of his own heart, the sore of his own soul, they
are scripture expressions, 1 King. 8. 2 Chronicles. 6.

We are to reckon the Lord calls to weeping and mourning, and to sigh and cry
for all the abominations that have been committed in the Land; to smite with
the hand and stamp with the foot and say as Ezekiel expresses it. Alas! alas!
to do as the Ninivites did, when Jonah had delivered his message, judgment was
but in denounciation as to them, its in actual execution upon us; they believed
God and proclaimed a Fast, put on sackcloth from the greatest of them even to
the least of them; the King himself arose from his throne and laid his Robe
from him and covered himself with sackcloth and sat in ashes, and he caused it
to be proclaimed and published by the decree of the King and his Nobles; That
neither Man, nor Beast, Herd, nor Flock should taste any thing, nor feed, nor
drink water, but that Man and Beast should be covered with sackcloath, and cry
mightily unto God, and turn every one from the evil of his ways, and from the
violence that is in their hands, and all this upon a probability, nay a
possibility, a paradventure, a who knows, who can tell whether God will not
Return, and Repent and Turn from his fierce anger that we perish not. A most
eminently exemplary ^at^ern and president worthy the imitation of all (...)
Cities and Countries in England and the ^^ole World; Now fie upon it and shame
to us all, that we should be so shy, so proud and I know not what, as not to
follow such examples better: But the men of Ninivie shall rise up in Judgment
against the men of this Generation and condemn it, for they repented at the
preaching of Jonah, and at his once preaching; I know not that ever he preached
a second time, God had much a do to bring him to that once. We have had
preaching upon preaching, precept upon precept, line upon line, and all our
preaching little avails, and many of those that have been upon this work are
silenced, secluded, and set aside, and in the rome of them there are others
come up, of some of which setting aside their Conformity; I know, and others
know better then I, that there is little or nothing to commend them; they have
gotten their Benefices and spiritual promotions double treble, quadruble and
very jolly they are as men now of a higher elevation, I grudge none of them
their Preferments, I am sure I do not, only I wish they would be better, do
better, walk more worthy of the Magistrates bounty and the rich provision that
is made for them. As for my self, I have been a Minister and Preacher toward
Fifty Years, and this I say, that being now deprived, together with the liberty
of my Ministry, which is more to me then all the world beside; of my Salery of
Forty pounds Per Annum which was the top of my preferment, though I have not
been without offers of better maintenance, which for Conscience sake I have
refused. I have been as well pleased with the courteous respects that I have
met withal as I have passed along in the streets, as I could have been with
the best preferments that could have been cast upon me in England. And if I
could in the way of my Ministry serve my God, my King my Country without check
and control for the few days that I have to live in the world, I care not if
I went clad in Canvas, and labored all the week long for my bread, only
reserving time for my study, faring hard, enduring much, for I hope I can say
to me, to live is Christ, and if so, I am sure then to dye will be Gain. I have
said somewhat already as to a suitableness of carriage and deportment in such a
day of Calamity; this I say moreover to you my Friends or Others, If the Lord
should spare you, as I hope he will many of you, for the Judge of all the World
will do Right, and I am not without hope that he will, reserving to himself his
absolute soverainty as its fit he should showing some proof of it, will make a
difference between them that fear him and them that fear him not. Be ye that
shall escape as the Doves of the Valeys, every one of you mourning for his
iniquity. If any of you should say to me, do you charge us with iniquities and
put us upon mourning for them; I would say plainly to you and ten thousands
more, not excepting my self; grant it that we are not Iniqui, yet we have
Iniquitates Nostras, that is, though we be not wicked, yet we may have, nay we
have our wickedness: Grant that you are not proud in the abstract, as the
expression is in the 50. of Jeremiah and the 31. verse concerning Babylon,
Behold I am against thee, oh thou most proud, in the Hebr^w, (...) pro (...),
Superbia pro vir Superbiae, a man of pride as the Septugint reads it, (...), if
you be not covetousness in the abstract, not so covetous as to be denominated
by it; yet there may be much of it found in you and so of all other sins, of
all which we have too too much in us: The Prince of this World came and found
nothing in Christ, but alas he comes and finds much in us for his purpose to
advantage his designs against us, upon which account we have and shall have
cause to go mourning to our graves. Happy we, that we have an Advocate, a
merciful High Priestin Heaven, at the Fathers right hand who pittieth us, and
appears before God on purpose that he might plead for us, and procure
acceptance for our persons and services, which in themselve, are worthy of
Abdication, Rejection, and Reprobation with greatest scorn. Mourn we then for
our own Iniquities, and the Iniquities of others, and for the bitter Fruits and
Effects and Productions of them; and while we take comfort in this that we have
Premitius Spiritus, yet keep we humble in this respect, that they are but
Primitiae, but the first fruits of the Spirit, and that there are Reliquiae
Carnis, foul silthy deforming and defiling relics of the flesh and that to so
great a Proportion. Mourn we I say, but not as men without hope, concerning our
Souls and the following Eternity; yea bear up comfortably in respect of the
Body and our Obnoxiousnesse to the Present PLAGUE, which by divine appointment
has invaded us, and is now Vndi qua que pessundans: Consider in whose hand it
is to order and direct. I would wish you seriously to confider and weigh well
the condition and qualifications propounded in the 91. Psalm, and what account
you can give of them, and of your selves concerning them: are you such as make
the most high your habitation, dwelling in his secret place, are you such as
set your hearts to know his name? Have you set your intirest and most intensive
love upon him, place your trust and confidence in him; have you said of the
Lord, He is my Refuge and my Fortress, my God in whom will I trust: know then
that you are a secured people, the promisory part of the Psalm smiles upon you,
speaks most comfortably to you, presents you with Milk and Butter, with Oil
and Honey, with Marrow and Fatness, as in a lordly dish; and fear you not that
a Hammer and a Nail will be your second Service. Promises that are made there,
are great and precious, rich and plenteous; they are promises that are not made
in vain, but must and shall be performed. But how? In the very Letter of them,
why not? But to all that are godly and answer the qualifications; I say, and
query thus: First, did you ever hear of any man that did actually bear upon
them; and that did imbark himself in them, accommodate them, put them in suit,
and plead them, and confidently without hesitancy and fluctuating of Spirit
believe them; Did you ever know any man do this and dye of the Plague? But you
will ask me, may it not be so? I answer, I dare not say, but so it may be* The
question was agitated Forty years ago, and by some held in the Negative, that
godly persons acting a particular Faith upon a particular Promise cannot; I am
not altogether of their persuasion: I question whether the Promises there made,
that the Plague shall not come nigh the dwellings of such will give so clear
ground and footing for such a fullness of Belief and Confidence; all temporal
Promises have their limitations and exceptions, and God reserves a liberty to
chasten his childrens delinquencies, to try and exercise their graces, and he
will be known to be of absolute Sovereignty. As I said before, be will do that
that shall be for his people bests, his promises one and another shall be
performed, one way or other, either in the letter or by equivalency: This I
would say to you, and my self on this occasion: Let us do our utmost
endeavor, that we may be, and be found persons so spirited and qualified, as
the Psalmist expresses, and let God do with us what he will, we need not be
solicitous, but possess our souls in sweetest peace and security; and if the
Plagne should come and seize upon us, the property of it shall be altered, and
as other sickness shall be useful to bring us home to our own Country and to
our Fathers house, where we shall be as well as heart can wish; where we shall
never know sin nor sickness, Plague nor Poverty, nor Persecution; and the time
is at hand when death its self and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire,
Revel. 20. Its a high expression* I pray you mind it. I would have added one
word to the point, I touched before in a Cautionary way.

Let them that hold the question, Whether a godly man in the actual exercise of
his Faith, and Faith upon such promises, as we spoke of before, may dye of the
Plague, yea, or no? In the Negative; Look to it, least intheir own persons, and
their own dying that kind of death, they prove not the affirmative.

For you and me Brethren, let us be true to God and godliness, and be bold to
trust him with all your concernments. Let our hearts be fixed trusting in the
Lord, and then fear nothing, neither Plague, nor Famine, nor Sword, nor wrath
of men; this wrath shall praise him, and the remainder thereof shall he
restrain. Its a time wherein many are grown worse and worse, according to
Revel. 22. Let him that is filthy be filthy still; which is spoken, Non optando
imperando, approbando, sed prophetando, and judicialiter pronunciando*

Let us grow better and better, the same Text requires* That they that are holy
be boly still; and to be sure that is spoken imperando approbando: Let us watch
and keep our garments close to us, and clean about us, manifesting and making
out that difference, which our God by his calling has made between us and
others, by a difference of disposition and conversation: Let us look to it that
Christ be in us, the principle of spiritual life, and be assured he will be in
us the hope of eternal glory: Let us not rest in a form of godliness, but
press after the power of it: You know the Scripture insists much upon Power,
there is the power of Christ, the power of the Spirit, the power of the Gospel,
the power of the Resurrection, the power of the Kingdom, the power of
Godliness, the power of an endless life, the power of the world to come; all
this should make us mind Power. On take heed of a powerless profession, a
powerless godliness; rest not satisfied with a mere effigies, a dead image,
such as many carnal professors, set up to themselves and fall down to worship*
Statues which themselves becoms like unto; having eyes but they see not, ears
but hear not, etc. Poor souls who seed upon ashes, a deceived heart turns them
aside, they compass God with lies, and run away with a lie in their right
hand; let us look to this that we have a Union with Christ our Mystical head,
and be careful to hold that head, Colossians ^^ 19. Study the Mystery of that
expression and reduce it to daily practice; think it not enough to be in a good
way, but be good in the way. It is not, Blessed are they that are in an
undefiled way, but blessed are the undefiled in the way, Psalm* 119. ^. 1. We
may be in a true and Gospel Worship, and not be right and true in that Worship.
What then, when the way of the Lord shall be found strength to the upright,
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity, Prove. 10 v. 29. Yea though in
the way, yea the rather, the sooner; the very way will throw them out, it will
tire and founder them, while the upright shall Mutare vires, youths shall
faint, young men shall fall, but they that wait on the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall run and not be weary, walk and not faint, Esaiah 40. Hosea
14. and the last verse speaks to the same purpose. The ways of the Lord are
right, the just shall walk in them, transgressors shall fallin them. Be ye very
studious of learning the truth as it is and lies in Jesus; let it appear that
you are good proficients in that learning, by your putting off the Old man. The
Apostle Ephesians. 4. uses a metaphor taken from a Garment, such is the Old Man, a
Rotten, Ragged, Motheaten, Corrupt, Musty, Greasy Garment, its all filthiness
and corruption; nay let me tell you, the Plague is in it, verily it is, Oh then
off with it and throw it upon some hedge or into some ditch, and put on the New
Man that will make you comely and trim in the eyes of God, Angels and men: Its
the new creature in Christ that is the availing thing, Circumcision,
Uncircumcision, outward Baptismes, Knowledge, Gifts, Parts, Privileges, all
these and all other externals without the New Creature will avail nothing,
signifies nothing with God; therefore be ye careful of this, and that you
answer the New Creature with a New Carriage and suitableness of Conversation,
escaping the polutions of the world, not only by the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior as Hypocrites may do, and afterward come to be entangled again and
overcome, and so their latter end prove worse then their beginning, as its
expressed in the second of Peter, but let it be through the righteousness of
God, and by the means of the great and precious promises, and by a
participation of the Divine Nature, that your escapes from the polutions of the
world and the contammination thereof is brought about, and then all will prove
well at last. But while I persuade you to put on the New Man, and to be in a
sanctified state; I must needs mind you of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ in
his Merit and Righteousness by Faith for free Justification, and then you will
have the change of Raiment, spoken of in the 3. of Zechariah and the 4. verse;
And so putting on Christ, keeping him on never putting him off again, walk up
and down in him, rise up and lie down in him, and to vary the metaphor, as the
Scripture does, feed upon him daily, for he is as clothing, so meat and drink
to us; Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you, if you do, you have eternal life, you have it already, its
begun; and so indeed it must be begun in this world, for it is the same eternal
life that the Saints live here and in heaven* the same for nature and kind,
though there are differences in degrees; they that begin not their eternal life
here, shall never go to heaven to begin it there; ye must have heaven come down
from God out of heaven here in grace and holiness, or else you shall never come
into heaven after you go out of this World. Wicked men and unbelievers begin
their hell here in the sinful part of it, and hereafter they shall have their
hell completed, in the suffering and tormenting part of it; so on the other
hand, godly persons begins their heaven here in the gracious part of it* and
then the glorious part is superadded hereafter, and it is but the parting with
a little breath, and the sending out that, its but the knocking down of a weak
mud wall, and the impenitent sinner (oh miserable he) will have his hell
completed: The godly believer (oh blessed he) will have his heaven completed
and both one and other be in a standing condition, such as shall never know nor
admit of changes to all eternity; there is no such (...) between heaven and
earth, but that there may be an intercourse and converse now; but there is a
vast gulf between heaven and hell, Luke 16. and whereas I speak of eternal life
begun here, I say it is by the means of eating the flesh and drinking the blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which must be understood spiritually, and spiritually
performed, not in the Letter but in the Mystery: We must not here, Terrenum
concipere, its the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: I am of
this belief and persuasion, that if a man that was present at the Crucifying
the Lord of Life had gotten a piece of his holy flesh and eaten it, and caught
some of his blood and drunk it down, it would have profited him nothing, as to
his Souls condition and the concernments thereof, but that by the way. I have
been and am persuading to look to the main, to mind and make after real and
substantial godliness, and to be cordial to it, I press it still; deal not
complementally with it and in the way of Courtship; make it your main business
and not as a (...) a matter by the by, and be sure that it be commander in
chief, and so it must and will be, or it will be nothing, its of too noble and
generous a nature to be an underling to any man or to any man's lusts in the
world, be he who he will; and while I urge and press godliness I would have old
godliness considered of and owned; I mean Abels godliness, and Enocks
godliness, and Abraham's godliness, which was as good godliness as ever was in
the world; let us think it no scorn to be commanded by their examples to write
after their copy. Let us not be sloathfull but followers of the holy
Patriarchs, that by Faith and Patience inherit the promises; Concordet vita mea
cum Patriarchis maneat in Eternum anima mea Compatriarchis, only look
diligently with all possible care to this, that we be not mistaken about
godliness, for its a much mistaken thing in the world, and the mistakes about
it, though very common, yet are they of most dangerous consequence, and will be
found so to be ere it be long, let you and I walk before God as Enock and
Abraham did, in the humility and integrity of our hearts, and keep close to him
while others study sinful and unwarrantable latitudes and walk at a loss: Be
we careful that whatever the times be, we never be the worse for them, nor
they the worse for us, that it may not be said of us, as of Judah of old, Hosea
11. verse 12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit: but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.
This is the way to bring a blessing upon us, and let times and providence be
what they will, it shall go well with us, if greater storms and tempests arise
upon us then ever yet our eyes beheld in respect of man's actings, we shall have
a weathershoare, a shelter, a hiding place, a refuge, a chamber of retirement,
let Gods appearances be never so formidable and dreadful: God will be the hope
of his people, and Godliness and a good conscience will befriend them to
purpose, and make them sing like birds of Paradise, when others shall houle and
lament for the misery that will come upon them, being cast under a certain
fearful expectation of judgment and fiery indignation that shall devour the
adversary. And to the honor of godliness be it spoken, the beauty and benefit
of it is never more seen and found then in times of public Calamity and days
of Vengeance; Consider what our Savior speaks in Luke 21. 25. And there shall
be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth
distress of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, Men's
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth; For the powers of heaven shall be shaken, etc. When these
things begin to come to pass, what then? then, even then look you up and lift
up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. The acceptable year of the Lord,
and the day of Vengeance of our God are joined together, Esai. 61. When
Vengeance comes upon the Wicked, then is God in suo been placito, then is he in
his fullest complacency The Psalmist tells us, Psalm 58 The Righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance, Esa. 66. 5. Your brethren that hated you,
that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified: but for
what I marvel, what for hating their Brethren and casting them out? O bona
causa; But what follows, he shall appear for your joy and they shall be
ashamed, my servants says the Lord shall eat and ye shall be hungry, my
servants shall drink but ye shall be thirsty, my servants shall rejoice but ye
shall be ashamed, my servants shall sing for joy of heart but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of spirit chap. 65. verse 13.
When was it that those Caelicolae, the much people in heaven voiced out their
Hallelujahs, and the sour and twenty Elders consorted with them and said, Amen
Hallelujah; but when the smoke of Babylon and her Torments ascended for ever
and ever, and upon the beholding of which, the Kings and Merchants of the
earth; Cry out, alas! alas! that Great City Babylon that mighty City, for
in one hour is thy judgment come. It is as I hinted to you before a day of
Judgment and terrible appearance of God amongst us in the way of Pestilence,
and what would we have God to do, would we have him always to be silent and sit
still in heaven, as one that takes no Cognizance of what is done on earth, and
not sensible in the least of all the provocations wherewith he has been
provoked to his face from day to day; such apprehensions and athiestical
conceits have possessed the minds of others of old, Ezekiel. 8 verse 12. for they
say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth; The like we have
in Psalm 94. verse 6. 7. They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict
thy herritage, Yet they say, the Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it. Would ye have the Mighty and most holy Jehovah so to un*God
himself (with Reverence be it spoken) and so to carry as if he had cast off the
Government of the World, and regarded not which end went forward, or as if he
were now grown old and impotent disabled for mannaging affairs as formerly, or
such a God as Elijah, in way of holy Sarcasm and Scoffingly propounds Baal to
be 1 King. 18. v. 27. Cry aloud for he is a God either he is talking, or he is
pursuing, or he is in a Journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be
awaked; surely there is no gracious spirit in the World can endure, that the
most blessed God should be under such reproach and scorn, but rather that he
should awake up, and show himself in a way of vindication of his own name and
glory, which is better then all the Angels and men in the world. The Church of
old has made lively discovery of an excellent spirit to such a purpose, Psalm
94. verse 1. O Lord God to whom Vengeance belongs, O God to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self. Esai. 60. verse 1, 2. Ob that thou would rent the
heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at
thy presence, As when the melting fire burns, the fire causes the waters to
boil, and wherefore all this? mark what follows, to make thy name known to
thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence. And let God
alone to plead his own cause, be sure he will look to his name and glory* mark
what he speaks by the prophet, Psalm 50. v. 21. These things have thou done,
and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. So
likewise the Prophet Isaiah chap. 4^. ver. 13, 14. The Lord shall go forth as a
mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of War: he shall cry, yea,
roar, he shall prevail against his enemies. I have long time holden my peace, I
have been still, and refrained myself: Now will I cry like a traveling woman,
I will destroy and devour at once. So that a man shall say, verily there is a
reward for the righteous, he that sees cause so to say, shall see a like cause
to say, as verily, there is a reward for the wicked, even as verily as there is
a God that judges the Earth, Psalm 58. 11. We have somewhat of Justification
hereof at this day, among our selves the sword of Pestilence (as I said
before,) is wakened, and the terrible God is causing his terror to manifest it
self: the great men of the earth do reckon it to their honor to appear very
formidable and dreadful, and to raise up and cause their terror to be known
in their Dominions, and to those that are under their Government. We find in
Ezekiel chap. 32. That five or six times in few verses, it is thus expressed,
Such and such caused their terror in the Land of the living, but at last
themselves were brought to the pit, and slain with the Sword, uncircumcised as
they were, and while they had their swords under their heads they had their
iniquities upon their bones, verse 27. and then this account is given of them,
the terrible God who sometimes manifests himself terrible to Kings and Princes
and Nations, he comes in speaking thus, verse 32. I have caused my terror, as
if he had said, they have taken their times and turns to show themselves
terrible, and I will take my time with them and make it appear, that I can
cause as much terror as any of them. God can carry and act as men do,
excepting their sinful actings; as in the 18. Psalm, With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with the upright thou will show thy self upright,
with the pure thou will show thy self pure, with the meek thou will show thy
self meek, with the humble thou will show thy self humble; But with the froward
thou will show thy self froward, and with the terrible thou will show thy self
terrible. The Lord carries at this day as if he had seen and heard something; I
referr to that expression in Zechariah chap. 9. v. 8. when the Lord speaks by
the Prophet thus, I will encamp about my house, etc. for now have I seen with
mine eyes. Surely God has seen somewhat that is not very grateful to him, for
it is now more then the burden of the word of the Lord; no, Its the burden of
the wrath and judgment of the Lord, not in the denunciation of it, but in the
execution of it: I have signified in part already, what is the proper work for
us all in such a day, and I am now turned upon the same point again; And what if
it be as of old, according to what the Prophet Esaiah speaks* Precept upon
precept, line upon line, here a little and there a little. You my dear Friends
and others with you will not be offended, and as for others be they who they
will that are curious, captious, and critical, if any such should come to the
view hereof. If they be not pleased I pass not nor shall I be displeased; I am
at a point, I Will trouble them as little as I can, and it may be never more in
this kind: If you and the rest to whom this is intended, accept and reap any
benefit by what I have performed for your sake in a paraenetical and perswasory
way, it is enough for me, I have my aim. Our common work besides other is to
pray, but for what? That God would remove his heavy stroke, true; but with
all, that he would sanctify it, and do us much good by it, knowing that
Covenant affliction and Judgments sanctified, are better much better then
common mercies: Pray that God would purge away our Dross, and take away our
Tinn, what there is of dross in point of Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, and
Morals; and in our own hearts, that he would purge all this away: Pray that the
Plaster may lie on till in some measure it has eaten out proud excrescences:
Fruit of Judgments is better then freedom from them. There are it seems some
hopes at the present, while I am Writing, that the strength of the storm is
over; that there will be a great abatement this week, and so for the future:
And its said, that our busy Astrologers, who I wish do not make too bold with
God encourage this hope. I would say as Jeremiah speaks concerning the vessels
of the Temple, when Hananiah the son of Azur the Prophet which was in Gibeon,
spoke unto him in the house of the Lord, in the presence of all 'the people
saying; I have broken the yoke of the King of Babylon, and in two fall years
will I bring again to this place all the vessels of the Lords house that
Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to
Babylon etc. Jeremiah said to Hananiah in the presence of the Priests and in
the presence of all the people, even the Prophet Jeremiah said, Amen, the Lord
do so, the Lord perform the word which thou have prophesied, Jer. 27. So would
I say upon such suggestions concerning an abatement and Cessation of the
judgment upon us, even so Amen, the Lord perform this word. But see well to it,
how, and upon what terms we and the Plague part, it may prove maxima Dei ira
the greatest wrath of God, for God not to be angry, that is, not to make
manifest his anger. God punishes most severely when he refuses to punish, as
in Hosea 4. I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whordom, Medicus
cum definit curare desperate, its an argument that the Physician has little or
no hope of the Patient when he gives over the Cure, it may prove the greatest
Judgment to have a Judgment removed; and let us be wise and take our Saviors
counsel given to the diseased man, John 5. Sin no more least a worse thing come
unto thee, Judgment and punishments of the second or third edition, or of a
second or third prola^ion, may prove seven times more pressingly burdensome;
pray we then that God and we may be friends before we and his Judgments part,
by occasion of the sad stroke under which we lie. There is a monthly Fast
appointed by His Majesty's Authority, and it is well that such a course is
taken, in order to the removal of the Judgment which is now incumbent upon us.
Fasting and Praying is a proper expedient for such a purpose of Gods
appointing, and therefore it should be of man's, because of Gods; but let us
take heed that our fasting be such as God requires, not a fasting for Strife
and Debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. Is it such a Fast says
the Lord, that I have chosen a day for a man to afflict his soul, is it to bow
down his head as a Bulrush, will thou call this a fast, an acceptable day to
the Lord. Let there be a putting our selves in a due posture and know that it
well becomes us to appear before God, with earth upon our heads, with ropes
about our necks, with sackcloath upon our Loins, and so to lie in the dust
before him. And for the public Preachers in whose hands is the management of
the work, I would beseech them to look to two or three things; First, that they
would cry aloud and not spare; that they would lift up their Voices like
Trumpets and show the 'Inhabitants of England their transgressions, and wherein
they have exceeded; that they would drive impartially, sparing none; that they
would lift up a Standard against that Athiesme which threatens to invade the
Nation as a Flood; That they would not give stones instead of bread; that they
would not fall upon that falacie in Logic, to put Non causam pro causa,
touching the Pestilence; That they would not be like the Prophets of Old, who
saw vain and foolish things for the people, not discovering their Iniquity to
turn away their Captivity, but seeking for them false burdens, and causes of
Banishment and of Destruction and of desolation as the Prophet speaks, Lam. 2.
v. 14. But that they would make it their main design to promote the power of
Godliness and a real Reformation, according to the word of God and example of
the best reformed Churches, and that Primitive Discipline, which as the Common
Prayer Book expresses, it were much to be wished that it were Restored, might
come in Power. The Long Parliament were driving something to that purpose, but
could not bring about their design. Oh that now Magistrates and Ministers would
unanimously set themselves, to see if they can perform better then they did, So
as that the people of the Nation may be brought to worship God Vnohumero, with
one shoulder, then shall we not need to be forced by Acts of Parliament to come
to Church* Those whom they call Phanaticks, will then flee as Doves to their
windows, flock as sheep to their foulds, come by shoals (that to be sure) you
will not be able to keep them out. The Apostle tells us, that the great God
calls upon all men every where to Repent; Oh that that might be our work, and
that we might second our Humiliation with a real Reformation, that we may put
away the Iniquity of our hearts and hands, that we may spit out the sweet
morsels which we have rolled so long under our tongue, and held so fast between
our teeth, that we would each of us study our own iniquity and quit it; and let
the Preachers themselves look to it, that they be lively examples thereof, then
may we Fast and Pray with hope and confidence, that God will hear and answer,
and appear for our help. And would not those who are looked upon as Fanatics,
would not they comply with others in this cause. There are of them that though
they have not felt the Lashing of the Scorpions, have not had the sowerest
looks, the severest frowns, and sharpest rebukes, yet have had none of the
friendliest aspects; yet even those are free in their spirits to comply with
the Cause of Humiliation; and I hope that the people of the Nation will not
think that they have wished evil to them, or desired the woeful day. Jeremiah
was forbidden to pray for the people of his time, and he was sometimes in deep
and dreadful imprecations against them, whether out of passion and
perturbation of spirit by means of deep provocations from them, or prompeed
thereunto by divine instinct, I dispute not, but these can and do deprecate
with others the present Judgments; and can say with Samuel, God forbid that we
should sin in ceasing to pray for you. We are and count it our duty to be
deeply sensible as of Gods dishonor, so of the Nations present Calamity and
Sufferings.

We are fellow Countrymen, we are fellow Subjects, in the Nations Peace, we
have had Peace; but may we not question, whether other of our brethren desire
or care for our Prayers, but hope to do the work themselves without our help;
even so say we, So there be but found a Moses to stand in the Gap, an Aaron
with his Censer in his hand to stand between the living and the dead it matters
not, so there be a man to turn away the wrath of God, let him be who he will we
will rejoice.

My dear Friends I purposed a shorter come off then thus, not to draw out a
Line to this length, but so it proves and I make proof of your patience; and if
your patience be not quite spent, I will add some few words more, and we will
close up all. I told you before of the Earl of Marleboroughs letter, I have yet
further to signify to you, that I lately met with another paper bearing Mr.
Richard Baxters name, a large sheet woven by him not to be a winding sheet for
men's bodies, but rather a spiritual winding sheet for their souls, to wind them
into God and into heaven, if you will you may reckon it to be a Penitential
sheet, woven and wrought to wind poor souls into Faith and Repentance, and so
to Glory: Since that sheet I have met with other papers of his, which referr
partly to the Godly, partly to the wicked, to one and other principally, with
respect unto this Contagious Pestilence; in all which he expresses much of the
good will of him that dwelt in the bush: Good man of a Piously public spirit,
wishing well to all, hurt to none if he could help it, would have none to
Perish but all to come to Repentance and so to Glory, having it seems a strong
confidence (as well he may) be the numbers never so great, of Persons that get
the Possession of the Kingdom before himself, he shall not be prejudiced in
the least, as to his own interest therein; and I must ingeniously confess thus
much to you, that those sweet and savory Papers of his, which like so many
Boxes of Precious Ointment broken open, have filled the City and Country with
such an Odoriferous and Fragrant smell, as has much refresht the nostrills of
many, gave me the occasion to appear in this way, and with him to prosecute the
same design of promoting some benefit, refreshment, and comfort, especially to
Persons Visited with the Pestilence; yet withal having an eye to others that
they might be prepared for it, and corroborated against the fears of it,
rolling themselves upon God in the way of a holy confidence; and this is that
which with your patience I would apply my self unto: First of all, I would
persuade you, and all my Christian Brethren and Friends, not to be over-fearful
of the Plague; it is good to have an awe upon our spirits, and a trembling
frame of heart in the Presence of our Father, when the Rod is in his hand, and
he exercising his severity upon those that are in his great Family; but be not
too much of a dispondent spirit, as too many are who fear and fly: I shall not
now dispute the case concerning removing into the Country, how far it may be
lawful, how far not; who may be allowed to provide for their safety that way
who not; others have performed that, and for my part I have favorable and
friendly thoughts concerning such as do, only I would have them to consider,
that there is no flying from God; so David, Psalm. 139. verse 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whether shall I fly from thy presence;
if I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold
thou art there; if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts in the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me; if I say, surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me. We are further to know that these Arrows of Pestilence are
guided by a divine hand, and are not sent out at a venture at random as the
Syrians were and Jehus, which were directed to Ahabs breast, and Jehorams back;
they are levelled in wisdom and judgment, according to the Counsel of God, he
smites whom he pleases, he spares whom he pleases, and both the Numerus
numerans and the Numeras numeratus are with him; It is good therefore to roll
our selves upon God, and to trust him with our lives, and souls, and all our
concernments, not fearing the fear of wicked men, but sanctifying the Lord God
in our hearts, and making him our fear. As touching the Plague, it is in it
self and in the nature of it a formidable disease, as might be manifested in
sundry respects, as I said, but it is ordered by a divine hand, you may be
infected with it, it may be not; if it be so you may recover, its not necessary
you should die, it proves not mortal to all; its thought by many of the learned,
that King Hezekiah was sick of that Disease, and yet he recovered and lived
many years after, and we have proof of it at this very day, by means used;
diverse are kept from the Grave and raised up again* (...) whom God is pleased
to make use of as instruments in his hand to such a purpose* though they be but
few* blessed of God be our worthy Doctor Oaks, who is eminently active; (...)
the hazard of himself and Family, for the good and benefit of such as are
seized with the Disease, having a freeness of spirit, ^o apply himself as much
to the Poor, as to those of a higher rank; and blessed be God not without
success, as is well known to many of us at this day: but grant it that the
Disease prove Mor^^l, and we should fall by the hand of it; if all be well
between God and our own souls, if we be a pardoned people, justified by the
blood of the everlasting covenant, it shall be well with us to all eternity;
and what if you go to heaven in a storm the Mariner thinks not the worse of the
hav^n because a tempest hurled him into it; heaven will be never the worse nor
less acceptable to us, not we the less welcome to it, though we come thither
by the means of the Plague: As for such whose Families are now Visited, whether
Rich or Poor, Young, or Old, One or Other; I would in more special manner make
my Application to them. Worthy Mr. Baxter has prevented me and performed
worthily, and he has given ou^ wholesome Advice and Directions, Methodizing
matters that do more especially concern persons in that condition; I would
second him in a more General way, and what I shall now in the closing up of my
Letter offer out, with respect unto Visited Families and Persons; I could
heartily wish that it might be abstracted from the rest of my Letter, and
transmitted to the said Families and Persons; and why might not some well
affected persons that have a larger Portion of the World then others of their
neighbors, be at so much cost to procure, together with Mr. Baxters Papers,
that which now I second them with, and transmit them unto such Families and
Persons. I have observed, that our Mountebanks can issue out their Papers, and
scatter them up and down, that there may be a general cognizance taken of such
and such Sovereign* Antidotes and Medicaments, as may be beneficial to persons,
to whom such Medicaments are most proper, and may prove most beneficial and
this which now I have to express, is the extract which I wish might be made; I
would commission such a paper to say, Peace be unto this House, and be sure if
the Son or Daughter of Peace be there, the Peace shall rest upon it,
notwithstanding the Plague be in it; and whether it come as a trial or as a
punishment, I would advise them to bid it welcome, accept it, kiss the Rod,
and the hand that holds it, drink the cup, which though it may be bitter, yet
may prove wholesome and not poisonous in the least; hear the Rod, and who has
appointed it, quarrel not with it, but fall under it, study you to please God
in what you do or suffer, and that God may please you in what he orders out,
and all will be well. I would ask you concerning your Souls, and Spiritual
Conditions; have you not minded God hitherto, nor acquainted yourselves with
him, and the Mysteries of his Will, things that concern your Eternal Peace,
have you not yet believed, repented; set to it now, and make it your business,
you may have but a little time to spend in the world, improve it to as good
purpose as you can, let not a minute run out to waste; the nearer you are to
your journeys end, make the more haste that your work may not be to do, when
you have no time left to do it in; knowing that there is no Believing,
Repenting, self-Humbling, and making peace with God* No, such Work in the Grave
whither you are going, be deeply humbled for your neglect of Hearing, Reading,
Praying, and other Duties of Godliness, and now cry mightily, urge God with
his Attributes, and plead thus; Lord thou art styled a Father of Lights, and
will thou not send light into my dark soul; thou art the God of all Grace, and
shall I dye in a graceless condition; thou gave Christ, and that of thine
own free accord, when there was no moveing of thee in the least to such a
purpose, and he has shed his blood pacified thy wrath, satisfied thy justice,
brought in everlasting righteousness, and is now at the right hand to make
Intercession for poor sinners and shall I that now cry for him, fly to him, be
never the better for him, not one drop of his blood to purge my conscience;
only by the way let me Animadvert upon that which is the common apprehension
and expression of men, that one drop of Christ's Blood was sufficient to save a
world; for my part I am not clear in that it must be heart blood, life blood
that must be shed by him to make an Attonment; but to direct your proceed in
the way of your Plea, Lord thou have given me a natural life and breath, and
will thou not give me spiritual life and breath; I have the natural senses of
hearing, seeing, tasting, feeling, and so forth; and Lord shall I be wholly a
stranger to spiritual senses, these things am not I able to perform in my own
behalf, by my own power; Oh put forth thine, make me such as thou would have
me to be, and I shall be such; it is said of Abraham, thou foundst him
faithful, and of David, thou foundst him a man after thine own heart, thou
would never have found them so, if thou had not made them so, make me such
and thou shall find me such; thy grace is as sufficient to pardon, and
sanctify and renew me, as ever it was for any poor sinner in the World; If I
dye, and damn, and perish, there is no profit in my blood, the dead praise
thee not, the damned will not nor can; If I perish I shall never love thee and
honor thee; If thou will save me, I shall be a lasting Monument of freest love
and richest Grace and Mercy. Oh then Magnify thy Mercy upon me, and let me not
be Fuel for the burning, but Timber for the building; yet let me further drive
and deal with you, and use my uttermost to fasten my nails in you; you are
humane creatures, oh see that you be new creatures, you are a part of the first
Creation that is woefully degenerated and defaced, see that you be a part of the
second Creation which is performed in Christ Jesus, in whom all Gods acts of
Grace are performed; you have natural understandings, pray that God would give
you spiritual understandings; David fetched an argument from this
consideration, that Gods hand had made him, fashioned him, and urged in the
strength thereof: Oh give me understanding that I may keep thy Testimonies,
Psalm. 119. You have bodies, but do you not consider that you have souls that
are infinitely more to be valued then your bodies, the loss whereof, the whole
world will not countervail; you live a natural life, but do not you know that
there is a spiritual life which is infinitely better, look to live that life;
you eat and drink daily for the body, there is a spiritual meat and drink
provided, which your souls have as much need of, as your bodies have of the
Perishing food, oh make out after that; You are careful to cloth your bodies,
and shall your fouls be naked; You prize and study to keep and maintain your
outward liberty, spiritual liberty is far better, and will you please your
selves in spiritual bondage to sin and the Devil, oh make out after this
spiritual liberty, knowing that if the Son shall make you free, you shall be
free indeed; You are careful to maintain your bodily health, and is it good
that you should have sick souls; let me ask you, will you love darkness
rather then light, sickness rather then health, bondage rather then liberty,
death rather then life, your disease better then your Cure, your Plague better
then your plaster, will you chose rather to be in the hand of a wounding,
killing Devil, then in the hand of a healing, recovering, curing Christ; will
you choose rather to be damned and go to Hell, then to be eternally saved and
put into the possession of eternal Mansion above; you are subject to a bodily
Plague which may seize you, and it may be has, know you not there is a worse
Plague, the Plague of the heart, you must dye how soon you know not; oh look
after an interest in Christ which is the best interest, look for Faith and free
Justification, Repentance and Renovation, seconded with Real and Universal
Reformation; get the blood of Christ which is the blood of sprinkling upon your
Consciences, which will purge away your Guilt, bring in Peace, and kill the
Worm, which if not killed, will killingly gnaw on you to all Eternity; I say
again, you must dye once, take heed of dying twice; there is a second death and
that is the most formidable, you must die, but look to this, that death do not
kill you, do you kill sin, and you will kill death too; you must dye, but let
it be your seeing of death as it is said of Simeon, Luke 2. Let not death see
you with a Mortifferous killing sight; you must dye, let it be but a tasting of
death as the Scripture phraseth it, let it not devouringly feed on you as it
shall upon some, Psalm 49. Once more you must dye, I beseech you for Gods sake,
for dear Jesus sake, for your souls sake, let this be your greatest care, oh
that it may be mine as well as yours, see to it that you live before you dye,
that you live the life of Grace, before you dye the death of Nature, and then
it matters not when, where, how, by what Disease you dye; you shall not dye to
dye, but dye to live again, and live to dye no more, but live in the
un-interrupted Vision and interminable fruition of him who is the King Eternal,
Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, the Resurrection and the Life, the I
am, the infinite Being, the All in All. Oh my Friends, let Master Bakters
Counsel and this of mine seconding his, let it be acceptable to you and be not
so cruel to your own souls as to neglect such a God, such a Christ, such a
Gospel, such a Govenant, and such an Inheritance as is laid up in store for the
Saints in Light; who but fools would live without God, without Christ, without
Faith and Fear, and forgo him and his Christ to all Eternity, and be eternally
miserable with Devils and Damned souls. After you are dead you must have the
searchers to view your bodies, be you who you will; be you searchers to your
selves and your own Souls, and see to it that there be no spiritual Fever
Spots, or Plague Spots upon you; If any spots, look to it that they be no other
then the spots of Gods Children; and if you have spots, look to it that you be
not spots, such as Jude speaks of; And if the Marks of the Lord Jesus be upon
your souls, and not the Mark of the Beast and Dragon, whatever Marks and Spots
may be found on your Bodies, they may prove M^rk^ of death, but shall never
prove the Marks of Hell and Damnation. For my part while I am continued o^ this
side the Grave, and in Praying work, my earnest Prayer for you all shall be;
that though you may be judged according to men in the Flesh, yet you may live
according to God in the Spirit; and that though your outward* Man perish, that
your inward Man may be renewed daily; that though there be a destroying of the
outward Man, your Souls may be saved in the day of out Lord Jesus.

I have now promised to pray for you, and it is my daily work; but be sure you
pray for your selves, and make use of Christ's name in your prayers, only take
heed of resting in a meet Form as commonly men do, that have learned to say,
for Jesus Christ's sake* do thus and thus; when as (poor souls) in the mean
time, they know nothing of Christ, never closed with him in a believing way,
never knew any need of him, never had any sense of the burdens of fin pressing
heavily on their souls, and so made to cry out after that ease and rest, which
he is so willing to afford to poor, burdened and heavy laded souls, Mat* 11.
^8. Such poor ignorant ones, Christ may say to them, upon what account do you
make use of my name, what has passed between you and me? you and I are yet to
begin our acquaintance together, you know not me, nor I you, what have you then
to do to take my name into your lips? This then is that which I would persuade
and press you to, acquaint your selves with Christ and be at peace, as was the
counsel given to Job, chap. 22. The Father is angry, and there is no coming at
him but by the the son, Oh kiss the son least he be angry, as is advised,
Psalm. 2. Kiss him with a kiss of Faith, a kiss of Love, a kiss of ^eal and
Cordial Subjection. Oh do in a spiritual way, as the poor woman the sinner did
in a bodily way, but with her heart too, Luke 7. Get to the feet of Christ and
pray, that if you may not have the kisses of his mouth, you may have the kisses
of his feet, hang fast about him, and touch him with a touch of faith. Mary
Magdalen was bid not to touch him, and Christ gave the reason, For (says he) I
am not aseended. She doted too much upon his bodily presence, but now he is
ascended, touch him and spare not: get you an interest in Christ's person, and
then use his name and improve it to the utmost, you have his warrant for it,
John. 16* 24. and you may be bold upon it, and this encouragement you have,
That what you ask in his name, the Father will give it. It is, as a precious,
so a prevailing name: The case may so stand with a people, or person, that
though Noah, Daniel, and Job; though Moses and Samuel who were Gods Favorites,
very potent, and prevalent with him, yet could not Gods heart be toward such a
people or person, nor should they prevail, Jeremiah 15. 1. Ezekiel 14. 14. And it
did appear in Saul's case, on whose behalf Samuel did very passionately
intercede but could not prevail, 1 Samuel 16. 1. But it was never said by God,
nor never shall; though Jesus my Son should stand up and plead in the behalf of
such or such a sinner, he should not prevail with me.

This Paper of mine, either in the whole complex, or in the extract, which
principally I have wished to you may come, and knock at your doors, and may
find them shut upon you, and you shut up within them, that Friends cannot come
to you; If it come, take it in, entertain it friendly; what know you, but
Christ who stands at the door and knocks, may come along with it? Oh, let him
be entertained into your Houses, into your Hearts; you will have cause to
bless God to eternity, that ever such a guest came under your Roofes* And so
that your hora ^ovissima, prove but hora salutifera saluifica, your last hour
may prove an hour of salvation: I wish you no more, no better. And now, my
Brethren, I had down, but, that one only thing more is to be done. If this
paper should be published, as happily it may (but if so, it shall be your act, as
much as, if not more then mine: It will be perhaps animadverted upon, and
Objected against. I would therefore willingly animadvert upon it my self, and
anticipate, prevent what Objections may be made against it.

It may be said first, That for all my time past, I have been quiet, and
appeared little in a way of Printing; How comes it to pass that now I appear?

I Answer, Its true, I have appeared little, very ittle in this way; two or
three things have passed in my Name and under my Hand, poor inconsiderable
things; yet found good acceptance and encouragement, for such minutula: They
take up little room, and are had on easy terms, less then Twelve pence, I
think, will buy them all.

Why may I not appear, when the occasion is so pressing, the Arguments so
material, and momentous? The Lion has roared, who will not tremble? The Lord
has spoken, who can Prophecy? Besides let my maine design I drive plead for
me, which is, Non ad captundam sed ad exprimendam benevolentiam promovendam
fidem and resipiscentiam; not to catch at man's respect and esteem, others know
how little I deserve it; and I know it as well as they. My Reverend Brethren
can give me my price, and so can I of myself: its low by agreement on all
hands; only I have this to say for my self, I am of a self-discouraging Spirit
and disposition; and cannot put forth my self amongst my betters, as some can;
I think I have been a little disadvantaged upon that accounts but it matters
not: And if I be a fool in thus expressing my self; I say, as Paul, Bear with
me a little in my folly: and indeed, bear with me. It may be further said, that
I prefix a Title, which the following discourse Answers not* till toward the
last: other matters are agitated first, and that that suites the Title, comes
up in the rear? To that I say, it is true, but most of the matters held forth,
refer to the present sad Providence, and have a tendency, to promote a due
improving, and a happy removing of the Plague; Besides, the Title Page
signifies that there are sundry other things held forth, besides a Check given
to the Plague. One thing more, in Nature (as we say in Schools) that which is
Primum in intention, is Vltimum in executione; that which is first in
intention and purpose prove last in execution and performance; why not so here?
Again, it may be, you seem to discover a male-contented spirit, with respect to
the present Times and administrations? To that, I say, I am better known, then
to be ill affected to Magistratical Government; I have all along pleaded and
pressed submission to Kings and Magistrates, and such as are in Authority over
us, and that for Conscience sake: only wish that the greatest severity might
not proceed against such as desiring to act according to a judicious and well
informed Conscience, cannot, and that merely out of tenderness, come up in all
circumstantials to answer magistratical impositions* I meddle not at all with
the Laws and Statutes, but touch with gentleness upon the executive part, and
those who are betrusted therewith; who possibly may not act from that culmnesse
and composedness of Spirit, and with that gentleness and tenderness that were
to be wished; especially toward such as would be glad with all their hearts to
come up to the most full and complete subjection that is required, and have
otherwise learned Christ, then to allow themselves, in any turbulency or
Seditiousnesse of Spirit, any immoriterousnesse, and refractorinesse contrary
to the word of God, and inconsistent with a good conscience* ^f it be said,
that I take upon me to deal with persons in the public Ministry, and others
also, and to advise and counsel them; and am I not too busily meddling this way,
too much assuming? I say, I have been a public Preacher as well as they, and I
could give account what approbation I have found from such as have been of
highest rank in their way, and of their persuasion, but I forbear. And though I
am far, very far short of their Parts and Abilities, yet I may compare with
them for years, being now an aged man, and why may I not be permitted to
suggest somewhat to them in a way of Counsel and Advise. Job would not despise
the Counsel of a Servant; If it be said I plead the cause of meekness, and
earnestly press it, but discover a sharp and tart Spirit, etc. I say, that
meekness and sharpness as the occasion may be are not, (...), but may very
well consist together: Moses and Paul were Eminent and most Exemplary for their
Meekness, but yet could be hot and quick, and did as the Cause required, show
themselves men of mettle, full of zeal. And who would not be zealous, very
zealous, when Athiesme and Profaneness do so Impetuously break in upon us as a
Flood? When there is so much dishonor done to God, such indignities offered to
Christ and his Grace, such a spirit of Malignity and desperate Opposition, made
and manifested against the power of Godliness. Once more it may be said, I
appear too friendly to Fanatics; I say, there are, that are so called, that
are not so indeed: I would the definition of such a one, were genuinly and
properly draw up and given out according to truth, and let them wear the Coat,
that it best fits; Let me ever be a Cordial friend to such as fear God, honor
the King, mind real godliness, and study to express the power of it, walk
circumspectly; labor to keep Faith and a good Conscience, and their Garments
of holy Profession, close about them, clean upon them, not being spotted by the
world* that make it their daily care, to walk with God as Enoch and Abraham
did, to approve themselves to Christ, to keep clear of sin, and closs to the
ways of holiness; making it their design when others shall be found to shame
and dishonor, they may be found to praise and glory, in the appearing and
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; and such as these the world will hate,
Malign, Persecute, and judge the scum offscouring of men, so Paul and his
companions were accounted, 1 Cor. 4. 13. We are made the (...), the
Purganienta, the Excrementa, as Erasmus renders the Word. Thus I say the World
will count them, and it cannot do no otherwise, blind, besotted World as it
is. But it matters not, God will love them, Christ will own them and honor
them, their Consciences will befriend them, and if God love, it matters not who
hate; if Christ be for us, it matters not who be against us; if the Scriptures
be on our side, it matters not who rise up in opposition; if Conscience be a
friend, we need not pass, though the World be our enemy, and all the devils of
hell too, as to be sure they will. They are in the saddest condition, that have
God, and Christ, and Conscience, and Scriptures against them. I have often
thought and said, it were better for a man to have an Army of Ten Thousand men
in Battle array against him, then to have one Text of Scripture against him,
and so might I say of a Saints Prayer. My Brethren and Friends I have Done, it is
a poor Do, such as it is accept; I told you in the beginning, ^he desire of a
man is his kindness; If I have done anything tending to the glory of my dearest
God, my Sweetest and most Precious Jesus, any thing that may conduce to the
promoting any benefit to your Souls or any other, its enough: Now to him that
is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the
presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy to the only wise God our Savior; be
Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, now and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

