A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROVINCE OF NEW ALBION. And a Direction for Adventurers
with small stock to get two for one, and good land freely: And for Gentlemen,
and all Servants, Laborers, and Artificers to live plentifully. And a former
Description reprinted of the healthiest, pleasantest, and richest Plantation
of New Albion in North Virginia, proved by thirteen witnesses. TOGETHER WITH A
Letter from Master Robert Evelin, that lived there many years, showing the
particularities, and excellency thereof. With a brief of the charge of
victual, and necessaries, to transport and buy stock for each Planter, or
Labourer, there to get his Master 50 l. per Annum, or more in twelve trades,
and at 10 l. charges only a man.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Order, Medall, and Riban of the Albion Knights, of the Conversion of 23
Kings, their support.
Non arma nec Indi feroces

Non Immensi Tremor Oceani

DOCEBO INIQVOS VIAS TVAS ET IMPII AD TE CONVERTENTVR



EDMVNDVS COMES PALATINVS ET GVBER N ALBION


SIC SVOS VIRTUES BEAT



Ploydens Arms.
True virtue mounted aloft on Honor high,
In a Serene Conscience as clear as sky.
Albions Arms.
All power on life and death, the Sword and Crown,
On Gospels Truth shines Honor and Renown.
This Epistle and Preface shows Catoes best rules for a Plantation.

To the Right Honorable and mighty Lord Edmund by Divine Providence Lord
Proprieter, Earl Palatine, Governor and Captain General of the Province of
New Albion, and to the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount Monson of Castlemain,
the Lord Sherard Baron of Letrim: and to all other the Vicounts, Barons,
Baronets, Knights, Gentlemen, Merchants, Adventurers, and Planters of the
hopeful Company of New Albion, in all 44 undertakers and subscribers, bound by
Indenture to bring and settle 3000 able trained men in our said several
Plantations in the said Province. Beauchamp Plantagenet of Belvil in New Albion
Esquire, one of the Company, wishes all health, happiness, and heavenly
blessings.
May it please your good Lordships and fellow Adventurers,
HAving been blasted with the whirlwind of this late, unnatural and civil
English war, seeing the Storm more likely to increase then to calm, I
recollected my former Journall and Manual notes of my Travails by Land and Sea
forty years since in Italy, France, Germany, Poland, and Belgia, and finding
Omne solum forti patria, ut piscibus aequor; I perused all the books of any
English Colonies, and by often conferences of the traders and resident
planters, of the present state, condition, numbers, enemies, bad neighbors,
air, health government, fortification and saftety, religion, quietness,
profit, and returns, shipping for supply and vent of the growing commodities;
I conferred with my fellow patients, 7 Knights and Gentlemen, my kindred and
neighbors, and reporting the true state of all our Colonies; and whiles thus
musing I stood at a maze unresolved, the storm grew far more tempestuous with
thunder and lightning, black and terrible gusts, and spouts, that made the
rivers rise, and my friends to hide: for the roaring Cannon beat down their
walls and houses, the Musketeers, Dragoons* and Pistold horsemen swept all
Cattle and their goods before them; the Pikemen in their enclosures and
retreats, left them no beds, pots or pans; their silver plate was turned into
earthen dishes: New names, and terms, like an unknown language, and like to
strange people unheard of in all the Globe as far as our Antipodes, called
Cavalleers, Presbyters, Independents, Roundheads, and Malignants, like the
Goths, Huns, and Vandalls, and Alans, that invaded and conquered Italy,
Spain, and France; and like the Saxons, Jutes, and Angles, that conquered
Britanny. These having plundered, and put upon us new Laws and Ordinances,
called Contribution, Excise, Quartering, and Sequestrations, my friends were
now and rightly by Gods Providence made light, and not troubled or encumbered
with much stuff to travel with, nor Farms, Tenements, or Copyholds, and for
our sins our pride abated, our hearts humbled: our afflictions made us pray
heartily, and call to God to direct us to infuse contrition and true sorrow,
and purpose of amendment to follow his calling. We found this storm and heavy
judgment had likewise afflicted Scotland, Ireland, Man, Jarsey, and Garasey
Isles. Then perusing my old evidences, I found my Auncestor Sir Richard
Plantagenes had Chawton, Blendworth, Clanfield, and Catrington in Hampshire.
But in those Civil-wars in Henry the sixth time, much like these or that of the
Guelfs and Gibellines in Italy, all was lost. I resolved to be a Newter in this
quarrel, not to kill English men and Christians, but with Christ to fly into
Egypt, and like the Apostle Paul to fly out of one City into another, and get
out of the fire: At last my seven Knights and Gentlemen employed me the oldest
and boldest Traveller to see all English Plantations, by warrant to buy land in
the healthiest and best for us eight, and for a hundred servants, and twenty of
our old tenants and families. But in my private instructions, I was on a full
and deliberate counsel directed to follow old Catoes rules in seating of the
Roman Colonies, begun to be seated to save charge of Garrisons in new
Conquests. First, to seat in a healthy pure air: else after all the hazard,
charge and building past, their people die, and their posterity extinguish, and
their children inherit ficknes and weakness. Secondly, to sit down in a fresh
navigable river for trade and supply, where there was stone near to build, and
not to build on wood subject to firing of enemies, negligence of servants, or
treachery of slaves and apprentices; for this reason I on my view of Virginia,
disliked Virginia, most of it being seated scatteringly in wooden clove board
houses, where many by fire were undone, and by two massacres in an instant
fired, without any forts there, or retreats of safety in time of danger, and
seated amongst Saltmarches and Creeks, where thrice worse then Essex, and
Tenet, and Kent for agues and diseases, brackish water to drink and use; and a
flat Country, and standing waters in woods bred a double corrupt air, so the
elements corrupted, no wonder as the old Virginians affirm, the sickness there
the first thirty years to have killed 100000 men. And then generally five of
six imported died, and now in June, July and August chiefly, one in nine die
imported, absent a year and returning: though much land more now is cleared and
victual and cattle mendeth the diet. Thirdly, Catoes and the third Roman
rule was to seat in rich land so that the richness of the place and neernesse
of husbandry may continue the Colony with plenty and safety: this also Virginia
for the most part wants, they living in salts, and most of their lands after
two crops is a light hot earth, which kills barley with the hot ground and Sun
in May.

Thus instructed I viewed Barbados and Saint Christophers, Bermudoes, New
England, and Virginia, and Maryland; Saint Christophers I find worn out, two
parts full of French aliens subject to blast it, and winds blowing away Cotton,
wanting victuals, and no store of land; Barbados has some rich men, having
Sugar mils, Indico, Ginger, Suckets of Oranges and Lemmons, and bad Tobacco;
but their usual bread is of Cassada roots, whose juice is poison, so the
negligence of a servant or slave in the right making of it may cost the whole
family a poisoning; the servants usual food is some Pease, Potatoes, Roots,
and those boiled make their drink called Mobby and Plantana roots; some rich
have Poultry, and Hogs, and Cows tied up to trees, for there are few Raunges
and Enclosures. These two last years the plague as I am informed killed 10000
brave people, and there are many hundred Rebel Negro flaves in the woods; here
was no store of land for our 120 men and their families, here wants the English
man's grass, and so the English man's Beef, Mutton, Milk, Butter and Cheese, and
they want rivers to turn their Sugar mils, so that New England sends Horses,
and Virginia Oxen, to turn them at excessive rates, and their keeping is there
chargeable, and at Barbados they buy much Beef and Meal, and Pease, and Fish
from New England, and other places, yet this Isle is full of gallant people,
very civil and well governed, and now no fear of the Spaniard being so
populous. Then I touched at Bermudoes, an Isle twenty miles long, and two miles
over; and in some places more guarded with Rocks and Isles, difficult in
access, full of Figs, Oranges, Lemmons, Pomcitrons, Potatoes, and Plantans,
Mays wheat for bread, excellent Fish, Tobacco and Pease; healthy it is and
quiet in government; But this Isle being but a pretty prison, was not for my
Companies use. Thence I sailed to New England, where I found three months snow,
hard winter, but lean land, in general all along the Sea coast well peopled
Towns, the people very thristy, industrious, and temperate; their fish carried
to Bilbao, and Saint Sebastans, their Pipe-staves to the Isles and Spain, and
the corn of the floated river of Connectacute is transported, and the Beaver
trade is their best subsistence. Still hoping for a richer and more temperat
soil, I went to Virginia, passing 310 miles along the shoars and Isles of New
Albion, by Manhatas Isle, by Long Isle, Cape May, and the two Capes of Deleware
Bay, by the lesser and southermost, being by our Sea-mens observations just in
38 degrees, and 40 minutes, and so by Chingotto, and Fe^z Isles in Maryland to
Virginia, to Newports News, where receiving kind entertainment at Captain
Matthews, at Master Fantleroys, and free quarter in all places, finding the
Indian war ended, first by the valor, courage, and hot charge of Captain
Marshall, and valiant Stilwel, and finished by the personal and resolute March
and Victory of Sir William Berkley Governor, there taking the old King Open
Chankino prisoner, I wandered all over, finding no place for the reasons
aforesaid fit for our Company: I went to Chicacoen, the North part of Virginia
on Pawtomeck river, dividing it and Maryland, which I found healthier and
better then Virginia, but then it was in war both with the Sasquehannocks, and
all the Eastern Bay Indians, and a Civil war between some revolters
protestants, assisted by 50 plundered Virginians, by whom M. Leonard Calvert
Governor under his brother the Lord Baltamore, was taken prisoner and
expelled: and the Isle of Kent taken from him also by Captain Clayborn of
Virginia; yet I viewed Kent Isle, too wet, and plashy, having bad water, but
there and at Chicacoen, and at Accomack in Virginia, and chiefly in New
England, they related of the excellent temper, and pure air, fertility of
soil, of hills that sheltered off the North-west winds, and blasts, valleys of
grapes, rich mines, and millions of Elkes, Stags, Deer, Turkeys, Fowl, Fish,
Cotton, rare fruits, Timber, and fair plains, and clear fields, which other
Plantations want, this excelling all others: and finding it lay just midway
between Virginia, too hot and aguish in the blasted plains on one side, and the
cold New England on the other, and in the same elevation of Naples, the Garden
of Europe, after one hunting voyage and view 60 miles on one side of Albion,
and 310 miles on the other side, and Long Isle, finding the countries better
and pleasanter then related, I made my addresses to the Lord Governor of
Albion, and having obtained under the Province Seal my grant of my Manor of
Belvill containing 10000 acres, on a navigable river, having in it and near,
Alablaster, Terras for plaster of Paris, Building and Slatstone, store of
Timber, clear Fields, Meads and Woods, and no Indians near, and Vines, I
resolved to return to Holland, and to transport my friends, where most happily
the second time meeting his Lordship, and perusing by his noble favor, all his
Lordships Cards, and Seamens draughts, 17 journall books of discoveries,
voiages, huntings, tradings, and several depositions under seal of the great
Bever, and fur trade, rich mines, and many secrets and rarities. In fourteen
days having with the two former books printed of Albion 1637, and 1642. made a
full abstract and collection, agreeing with my own view and in the Depositions,
and M. Evelins, and other the traders of Virginia and New England, I thought it
most necessary for the good of all the Company, and many Volunteers in Holland,
distressed in England, and noble Knights, Gentlemen, that with a little stock
may gain fair and rich possessions, and live in peace and quiet, to print and
publish this my labor under all your Lordships Protections, most humbly
craving your Lordships gentle acceptance.

And because it conduces much for a General and a Leader, to be known of his
Commanders and Soldiers, his abilities, and virtues, and excellent parts
drawing more men of honor and valor to follow him; it contenting much men of
honor and dignity to be led and commanded by a better and more honorable, and
more sufficient then themselves, and not their inferior: the meaner and poorer
sort expecting all encouragement, justice and protection, and all the Company,
the Adventures, and strangers to us all, may more freely and cheerfully go on,
and set out their men, and expect the more and better returns and contentment,
under his government, in whom Pietic, Religion, Honor, Justice, Learning,
Valor, Judgment, Temperance, and Policy shines; hope without offense or
imputation of flattery, to affirm his virtues more then the gems of the Coronet
of this our Earl Palatine, do adorn his noble parts.

Since to me conscientiamea mill restes, I have had the honor to be admitted
as his familiar, have marched, lodged, and cabbined together, amongst the
Indians and in Holland, have seen so many of his Manuscript Books, and most
excellent Rules and Observations of Law, Justice, Policy, I found his
conversation as sweet and winning, as grave and sober, adorned with much
Learning, enriched with six Languages, most grounded and experienced in forain
matters of State policy, and government, trade and sea voiages, by 4 years
travel in Germany, France, Italy and Belgium, by 5 years living an Officer in
Ireland, and this last 7 years in America, his study and suits at home and
abroad enabling his impartial and infallible judgment of Judicature, and
certainly his perfect knowledge of his 23 Indian Kings, under the command of
this our Lord Royal, as of his good and bad neighbors, their power, wealth
and weakness, English Aliens and Indians appears by his notes and books, where
none of their treacheries, plots, conspiracies, haltings and villainies, their
Antagonists, their numbers and abilities, the advantage of our arms and
fights, and stratagerns are as Greek phalanges and they as Roman Manuples and
enemies to side with; and how to quiet and regain, kill, or surprise them, is
not expressed. What Port, Bay and soundings, Creek, river, rock, quarries of
stone, slat, Iron mines, Gum-Dragoon, Lead, Gold, and Silver, Alablaster,
Terras Bolarmack, red soap earth, Terra-lemnia, Diers ware, Herbs and Plants,
and their use, Ocar, Rudle, Cinnaber for quicksilver, and Vermilion, is not in
particular, Cards by compass, and scale in books, with the trials and
witnesses recorded.

What land and sea profit, fishing, place for salt, Potas Dies, Fruits Herbs
and Plants, clear Fields, great Plains, fine and thick Grass, Marshes, necks
of land, rich, black, molded countries for Tobacco, Flax, Rice, choice Trees,
and Timber for Shipping, and Pipestaves, Masts, Yards, Pitch, Tar, sheltred
places for Grapes and Fruits; Cotton in Cotton river, invincible places by
nature, others by a little charge and fort to be made impregnable, is not in
this huge and waste Province, being 1000 mile compass delineated; and what Law
or Policy, and summary Justice, Courts of Law, Equity, Appeals, Awards, or
references, fit to compose differences, reconcile debates, to unite hearts, to
settle the factious and seditious in any other English Colonies or Countries,
and fit for our Justice, is not explained.

Therefore my good Lords and Adventurers, since I speak of knowledge by view,
and certain reports of wise and knowing men, I shall joy and congratulate with
you all, in so able, sufficient, and honorable a Governor, happily to rule,
to defend, and do us justice; a tried and seasoned man, and excellent Pilot in
all this Land and Seas, not afeard in person as a true Captain General by Land
and Sea, to lead and settle us by Boat, Horse or Foot, as able and willing as
any of the meanest; and therefore I think at first it most material to express
the Law, Statutes, and Judgments, and Acts of Parliament of Counts, and Count
Palatines, and County Palatines, and of our Province and County Palatine,
Liberties, and the ancient family 1200 year from the Saxons in England, of our
Earl Palatine, his pedigree and alliance.

And since according as other Palatines, as he of Chester and Duresme, made
their Barons and Knights, as therein many are yet living, you my Lord have
begun to honor first your own children, I tender my best respects unto your
Lps son and heir apparent Francis Lord Ployden, Baron of Mount Royal, D.
Governor, and to Thomas Lord Ployden, Baron of Roymont, High Admiral: and to
the Lady Winefrid Baroness of Vvedale, the pattern of mildness and modesty;
and to the Lady Barbara, Baroness of Ritchneck, the mirror of wit and beauty,
and to the Lady Katherine Baroness of Princeport, that pretty babe of grace,
whose fair hands I kiss, hoping on your Lordships invitation C. C. T. and your
two Baronets L. and M. to get them as they promised to go with us. I hope to
get your Knights and 200 Planters on this side ready. And thus with tender of
my service to your Lordships, and all the Company, I rest

Your humblest servant, BEAUCHAMP PLANTAGENET.
Middleboro this 5 of December. 1648.
THE CONTENTS OF THE several Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF Counts or Earls created, and County Palatines, and of our Province
and County Palatine, Liberties, and the ancient Family 1200 years of our Earl
Palatine from the Saxons in England, his pedigree and alliance. Chapter 2. His
Majesty, and his Ancestors just title, and actual possession of these
Countries, of some Aliens and Pirates in landing and disinheriting the English
Crown, and of bad English and Fugitives to them adhering; the just cause and
excuse to expel them. Chapter 3. The Description of Master Robert Evelin and 13
witnesses, printed 7 years since, and now reprinted. Chapter 4. The more large and
exact Description and Declaration of many things these last seven years, the
bounds of all to it adjoining of Virginia, Maryland, New England; and Answer to
Objections of bounds. The number of the present inhabitants, and their Cattle
in this Province, 1000 miles compass; the number of Indians. Chapter 5. What
Cargason is necessary to transport for the Lord of a Manor, or to trade or
truck with the Indians. Chapter 6. Our present staple commodities, how often a man
transported and stockt to make of his 100 acres 50 or 70 per annum.
CHAP. I.
FOr the first creation of Earls in the Saxons time, and since by the Norman
Kings in England, I refer you to that learned Antiquary Master Seldom his Book,
who writes at large in his Book of Titles and Honors, as well of this as of
forain Nations. But there you shall find Records cited, and Earls made both by
Privy Signet and Privy Seal, without the Great Seal. And they were not then
merely titulary, and nominall, without Interest, Power and Judicature, as now
they are commonly all, except the Earl of Arundell, who still is a local
feodall Earl, by possession of the Castle, and of some Rapes or Liberties; for
the Lord Lumley not long since for some years being possessed thereof, was for
such time Earl of Arundell, and that Earldom is confirmed, and so adjudged
with his honor and precedence, by the house of Peers entered both in the
Parliament, and Court of Honor Rols: and the Royal Grant was, Do tibi
Comitatum and tertiam partem profitucrum, unde Comes est. And he made the
Sheriff, or his Vicount, or Deputy: and the County Court was his, and it was
an honor and office, both with the County and assignable, the assignee
enjoying the County, honor and office, as in Master Seldens Book is cited in
their Patents, and was not so many large words for his Title and Peerage as is
now used.

But in the Reports 9 Iacobi of Sir John Davis in the case of the County
Palatine, and in the Fourth Part of the Institutes of Sir Edward Coke, of
Jurisdiction of Courts, of the three County Palatines, yet in England you may
see Acts of Parliament, Judgments and full matter, showing, That there Sir Io.
Davis fol. 59.
were Comites Palatini of the first and higher rank, which had in their
Territories absolute command in Martial, civil and criminal matters, with
all Royalties and Regalities which the second order of titulary or nominall
Earls had not, both in the Saxons and Normans time, long before the title of
Duke, Marquess, or Vicount were here granted. Secondly, Comes Palatinus was
Comes Palatii, being a chief fol. 60.
Council and Companion to the Emperor or King, Comes Curarum Par extans Curis,
solo diademate dispar. That in Chester, Durham, Lancaster and Pembroke, were
made Earl Palatines, and County Palatines: and in Ireland in Lemster, Earl
Strongbows Sir Hugh de Lacy in Meth, to Sir Hugh de Lacy the younger in Vister.
That William Marshall marying Earl Strongbows daughter, had by her five
daughters: So as the Province of Lemster descending to them, it was divided
into five Counties, to each of them one County Palatine. That Bracton fol. 62.
the ancientest of Lawyers, averres Earl Palatines have regal power in all
things saving Liegance to the King; Hugh Lupus by the Conqueror was made Earl
Palatine of the County of Chester, as free to the sword, as the King to the
Crown, and the Palatine of Chester made Barons, the Baron of Haulton, the Baron
of Malbanck, the Baron Malpas, the Baron of Kinderton, and in Lancaster, the
Baron of Walton in Durham, the Baron of Hilton, and in Meth, Magnates and
Barons; Baron de Streene, Baron de Nuven, Baron de Baltrim, Baron de la Narrow,
Baron de Rheban in Kildare; the Baron Idrone in Caterlogh, the Baron of
Burn-Church in Kilkenny, Baron of Nevill in Wexford, Baron of Loughmo in
Tiperary, Baron Misset, and Baron Savage in Vlster. That these Earls Palatines
had Parliaments, made tenures in Capite, and fol. 67.
grand Serjancy, and the tenants sued out License of Alienations, and all Writs
and Pleas, Officers, Chancelours, Judges, and that none of the Kings Officers
could enter there, or that the Kings Writs, neither at Law or Chancery, did lie
or run there, and that the County Sir E. Coke fol. 211.
Palatine was thereby absolutely severed from the Crown. That the County
Palatine of Lancaster was created by that of Chester: and to Chester was
annexed his conquered small County of Flint in Wales, and made besides the four
above, four other fol 21^.
Barons: Vernon of Saybrook, Hammond de Massi Baron of Durham, and the Barons of
Hawardin and Stockport, and in other Antiquities, Cornwall Baron of Burford in
Shropshire.

That any Manors or Lands lying out of the County Palatine if held thereof, and
the pleas of the inhabitants there arising shall be tried within the County
Palatine.

Thomas and Hugh Count Palatines both, and both Bishops pleaded and returned to
the Kings Writs: I am a Lord Royal here, the Kings fol. 221.
Writs do not run here.

The eldest sisters son by descent after her mother was Earl Palatine of
Pembroke; And the Law, Reports, and Abridgements, show they made Knights, and
as Knights were to be impleaded; Diverse statutes show Durham and the Earl
Palatines, Mints, Durham pence yet extant. The Earl Palatines had in their
Counties Iura Regalia, as the King fol. 204.
had in his Palace, etc.

Sir Io. Davis fol. 60.
In the Lord Lovels Case, the name or title of a Baron is no name of dignity or
addition, 8 H. 6. 10. but Earl is parcel of his name, and of the substance of
his name, and if it be left out of the Writ, the Writ shall abate, 39 E. 3. 35.
the case of Gilbert Vmfrevill Earl of Angus; and 14 E. 3. Brief 278. the case
of Hugh de Audley Earl of Gloucester; yet note Master Burlacy, for not calling
the Lord Mohun Lord, but Mohun, was committed to prison; and note in a
Star Chamber Bill, the Lord Verulam, his widow marrying Sir John Underhill, was
called and charged as my Lady Underhill* the late wife of Vicount Verulam, and
not being called Vicountesse, the Bill was cast out, and a Fine for dishonor
imposed.

Now there be four other Lord Proprietors that have Palatine jurisdiction
granted, and Provinces in the West India Isles, Florida and Maryland, and as
free as the Bishop of Durham had, but none have a special creation of an Earl
Palatine, but ours of New Albion: nor have they the words with such Additions,
Titles, Dignities, and Privileges, as either Durham or any other had, nor any
special grant to coin money; in that of Maryland special Resort or Sovereign
Dominion, which is a Court of Appeal, as in the case of King E. the third, and
his son E. in Aquitany, with free fishing, and wood for houses, and to set up
fishing stages, is reserved; Else all the Lord Proprietors have all the like
Royalties and Regalities, and Sir E. Coke fol. 216.
all these 11 H. 6. in a long Roll particularly expressed, are confirmed by
Parliament to the Bishop of Durham, and so thereby to all the Lord Proprietors.
And all of them have a special clause to give to the well deserving
inhabitants in those Provinces, Titles, Honor and Dignities, so as they be not
the same used in England. Now though some question is made whether the other
four Lord Proprietors can make Barons or any Knights in their Provinces,
because such Honors and Titles of Barons and Knights, are used here; but there
is no question or doubt in the Province of New Albion, our Lord being an Earl
Palatine 16 years standing, as free as Chester and Pembroke; or Lacy, OF
Strongbow in Ireland, by that second power according to the judged cases in Law
and in Parliament, may make Provincial, local and fewdall Barons, as the 19
above named, and make Knight Batchelours, though here used, and to have
precedence, as others have had heretofore, though his intended order of Knights
of the Conversion of Albion is more proper. And for our Earl Palatines Honor
and Peerage in Ireland, and to make his Proxy in his absence in that House of
Peers there* with all suh Honor and Titles, and Precedence to him, his
Countess, and children, in all places* as an Irish Earl, the special Decree
and Clauses in the Charter does fully warrant it. All the Civilians, Pleaders
in the Court of Honor, and two Sergeants of the Coife at Law, nine in number,
have certified it, and enrolled on record, and is exemplified under the seal;
the Baronets of Nova Scotia being President for the like case. And note both
the King of France, and this our King, have made Barons and Knights,
Hollanders, that have precedence there before other the subjects there.

But to answer an Objection of some not truly informed and mistaken, conceiving
that our Earl Palatine might in his Country only and no where else, have his
Honor, Title and Precedence. I answer, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles*
as Emperor of England, under his Privy Signet, signed with his Royal hand, so
granted and created him, which alone had been sufficient, as others have been
made, in Master Seldens Book, Records and Presidents mentioned; but being
farther with special Clauses and Decree, and special Creation, so made and
particularly granted, that both by Tenure and Dependency, and that this
Province shall be of the Liegance of Ireland, and all there born to be free
Denizens thereof, and under his Majesty's Great Seal, there is no doubt or
question thereof; For he is no Alien Earl made by an Alien King, as Copply by
the French King, Duke Dudley, and Count Arundell by the Emperor, but by our
own King the fountain of Honor; For an Earl by his Charter carries his Honor
with him in all places, and that is his true name as above is adjudged, and is
not to be sued or sue, is adjudged, without it; and so the nine learned
Civilians and Sergeants have certified; and Nova Scotia is so annexed to
Scotland, Adam de Valentia, and Marshall, Earl Palatines of Pembroke by
Conquest in the kingdom or Principality of Wales, then out of England, was a
Peer to the English Parliament, and so the three Irish Conquerours Palatines
recited; and how absurd a conceit it is that our Earl Palatine in Albion, and
he of Pembroke in Wales, and the rest having all Regalities and Powers,
Lordship, Honor and Titles, and power to give Honors and make Barons coming
out of their Countries into England, should here be un-Lorded and debased unto
Esquires without Lordship, Honor or Precedence. And note all these, and Earl
Fitz Allen in his local Earldome of Arundel by Writ being called to
Parliament, is not there by an Earl; for to be called by Writ, is only to be a
Lord or Baron, and so the Earl of Arundels Title and Precedence was adjudged
him after long debate by Parliament. To conclude, the Earl Palatines of Chester
and Pembroke, and Montgomery, or de Belesmo in Shropshire, were the greatest
Princes* of England; and by their Conquests, and so in Ireland* by their Hazard
and Conquests that kingdom and Wales is gotten to this Crown: And so the now
Lord five Proprietors that now conquer on Indians, and convert Pagans, and
civilize them, and bring them to the obedience of our Sovereign, and at their
own charges have made an entrance and sure way with the other Colonies of
America to make our Sovereign an Emperor of America, having now near two
hundred thousand to defend his Empire; and therefore deserve all Honor and
Encouragement; amongst which our Earl Palatine having adventured in person
seven years, with so much hazard and charges, is chiefly to be advanced and
honored according to his worth.

Now for the pedigree and ancient Family of our Earl Palatine of 1200 years
descent, being in England and borders of Wales: I find only a letter in the
name changed, in each Age, and Conquest or change of Nation; for in Henry of
Huntingdon, and William of Malmsbury, his Chronicles of all the Saxon Princes,
that here arrived, and seated, and conquered the Britains; this family
descending of a daughter, came with those Princes into Britany; and I find that
in lower Saxony near Hamboro, and Holstein a member of the Empire, and in all
Maps there is still in that harsh language Ployen a walled City by a lake, and
Plowen a walled Castle of Count Plowen, a Count of the sacred Empire, in
Grimstons and other Histories mentioned; Now the Welsh make and turn the vowel
u into i or y, as from Brutus to Britons, so Plowden to Ployden* as all Maps
write it. In Deeds, and the Bishop of Herefords Records I find Anno Domini 904.
an Exchange pro december manlis vocat Ploydanes place super quas Episcopus
aedificaturus est Castrum, called Bishops Castle, in which Town the Ploydens
have much lands and tenements, having Ployden Manor, Ployden Hall, Longvili
Castle, and thirteen Towns about it to this day, and at the coming in of H.
the seventh were Commanders of that country, and Constables, or Chastellains of
that Fort of Bishops Castle; now Ployden and Ployden is all one, Forest of
Danes for Denc, the Norman pronuntiation, which name of Ployden signifies kill
Dane, or wound Dane: and Pleyden by Ry in Sussex was of this house, and
signifies in French hurt Dane, and this Pleyden sent his sons and conquered in
Normandy, where are five families yet: and the heir of Pleyden wanting issue,
made it an Hospital, now held by the Earl of Thanet, Lord Toston; So Plowen,
Ployen, Ploydane, Ployden, Plowden and Pleyden is all one, for the change of
time, and several Nations pronunciation, Saxons, Danes, English, Welsh and
Normans. And note, to this day an Esquire in France of 300 years standing of
Coat Armor shall take place and precedence of any Earl, Vicount or Baron,
which is not so ancient of Coat Armor, they not allowing the King by new
creations to bar their inheritance and precedence. And for their greatness and
pedigree, I find Ployden married the daughter of John de Monte Gomerico, (now
called Mount Gomery) Earl of Salopshire, in William the Conquerours reign, and
in Edward the thirds time married the daughter of that great and rich Knight
Burley Conqueror in France: Humphrey Ployden in H. the sevenths time married
the daughter and heir Stury of Stury Hall, daughter of Corbet, of Morton
Corbet, by whom the Lacons, Laytons, Bromlees, Purcelswollascot, of Wollascot,
and the two Baronets Lee and Corbet Knights for the County of Salop to this
Parliament, are of his kindred. And of the daughters of John Ployden, Lord
Blany of Ireland, and of the other daughter married to Hardwick, grandmother to
that great Thin of Clause Castle; the third daughter married to Walcot of Walcot
Close to Ployden, yet men of great possessions, the Countess of Bristoll being
a Walcot, and so her sons, the Lord Digby and Sir Lewis Dives, and Vicountesse
Chichester, or Belfast, and the other Ladies her daughters are descended, and
are his kindred. Our Earl Palatines mother being sister of Sir Richard Fermor
of Somerton, and cosen of Sir George and Sir Hatton Fermor, descended of the
Knightlies, and so the Lord Vicount Say and Seal, the Countess of Thomond a
Fermor, and her children, and Vicount Wenman marying Sir Hatton Fermors
children: the Baroness of Aborgenny, and her sister married to Baronet Gage are
his Neeces; his mother the Lady Penel^pe, daughter to the Lord Darcy, Vicount
Colchester, Earl River^; but his branches for three last descents are so many,
and at least fifty Baronets Knights, Esquires, of 1000 l. per annum at least,
and their numerous issue; but for heirs males of the name his first is Ployden
of Wansteed, Ployden of Shipplacke, Ployden of Askon, Ployden of Ployden, and
Ployden of Lee, and Doctor Ployden late of Lambeth. And for his now wife
Countess Palatine, daughter and heir to two worthy families, Niece of Sir
George and Sir Hambden Paulet deceased, in that pedigree 300 from the Marquess
of Winchester, Lord high Treasurer of England are allied. All which I have more
fully published, that all of his kindred may, any ways poor or oppressed, the
sooner be preferred, advanced and transplanted to this most rich and pleasant
Province, and to great possessions and honors there, as great Strongbow did
1200 of his to Wexford and Lemster in Ireland.

CHAP. II.
NOW for the full and ample satisfaction of the Reader of his Majesty's just
title, and power to grant, enjoy, and possess these countries, as well against
Aliens as Indians which this forty years has not been by print declared, You
may read at large Master Hacluits Voyages and Discoveries* Master Purchase and
Captain Smiths: for when the Spaniard and Portugal discovered and possessed 140
years since the East Indies, Brasill, the South part of America, the Charibees
and Antell Isles, and seated Saint John de porto Rico Hispanicla, Iamaica and
Cuba, and the Fort and Port of Havanah, against the Gulf and Current, Batuana
Isles, and point of Florida; then that most powerful and richest King of
Europe, King Henry the seventh of England sent out an English man born in
Bristoll called Cabot, granted under his Great Seal to him all places and
countries by him to be discovered and possessed, who then beginning at Cape
Florida discovered, entered on, took possession, set up crosses, and procured
atturnment and acknowledgement of the Indian Kings to his then Majesty, as
Head, Lord and Emperor of the South-west America, all along that coast both in
Florida from 20 degrees to 35, where old Virginia in 35 and 30 minutes, 65
years since was seated by 5 several Colonies about Croatan Cape, Haloraske,
and Rawleys Isle, by Sir Walter Rawley, who had from Queen Elizabeth that
place, and two hundred leagues from it in all places adjoining; Sir Richard
Greenfield, Sir Ralph Lane, and Master White his partners s^ating and
fortifying there; the said Cabot farther taking possession in 37 of that part
called Virginia and Chisapeack Bay being now his Majesty's Demesne Colony of
Virginia, and of the next great Bay in or near 39, called now by the Dutch Cape
Henlopen, the south river, and by us Cape James and Delaware Bay of the Baron
of Delawares name, being then Governor of Virginia, who by Sir Thomas Dale and
Sir Samuel Argoll, 40 years since took possession and atturnment of the Indian
Kings, and 60 years since Sir Walter Rawley seated and left 30 men and four
pieces of Ordnance at the Creek near Cape James, by the Dutch called Horekill,
by us Ro^mont, and by the Indians Cui Achomoca; and so the next river by us
called Hudsons river, of the name of Hudson an English man, the discoverer
thirty five years since, who sold his discovery, plots and cards to the Dutch;
and so Cabot discovered several rivers and countries all along the coast
North-East, now called New England, and divided in nine several Governments,
and further discovered Port Royal, and that part called New Scotland, and set
up Crosses, where you may see in the French Book called New France, the French
found an old Cross all mossy in an eminent place at the head of that Bay and
Port, and discovered all that coast and New Foundland, and that called Terra
de Laborador, or New Britain, as far as the frozen strait of Davis; Shortly
after one Master Hoar in the Reign of King Henry the 8^^, renewed this actual
possession, atturnment of the Indian Kings, brought home diverse of the chief
Indian Kings to England, who gave their Homage and Oath of fidelity for these
countries to King Henry the eight in person sitting on his Throne in State in
his Palace Hall at Westminster. Then Virginia being granted, settled, and all
that part now called Maryland, New Albion, and New Scotland, being part of
Virginia, Sir Thomas Dale, and Sir Samuel Argoll, Captains and Counselors of
Virginia, hearing of diverse Aliens and Intruders, and Traders without license,
with a Vessel and forty soldiers landed at a place called Mount Desert in Nova
Scotia near S. John's river, or Twede, possessed by the French, there killed some
French, took away their Guns and dismantled the Fort, and in their return
landed at Manhatas Isle in Hudsons river, where they found four houses built,
and a pretended Dutch Governor, under the West India Company of Amsterdam
share or part; who kept trading boats and trucking with the Indians; but the
said Knights told him their Commission was to expel him and all Aliens
Intruders on his Majesty's Dominion and Territories, this being part of
Virginia, and this river an English discovery of Hudson and English man, the
Dutch man contented them for their charge and voyage, and by his Letter sent to
Virginia and recorded, submitted himself, Company and Plantation to his
Majesty, and to the Governor and government of Virginia; but the next
pretended Dutch Governor in Maps and printed Cards, calling this part New
Netherland, failing in paying of customs, at his return to Plymouth in
England, was there with his Bever goods and person, attached to his damage of
1500 l. whereupon at the suit of the Governor and Council of Virginia, his
now Majesty by his Ambassador in Holland, co^plaining of the said Aliens
intrusion on such his Territories and Dominions, the said Lords, the States of
Holland by their public instrument declared, That they did not avow, nor
would protect them, being a private party of the Amsterdam West India Company,
but left them to his Majestics will and mercy: whereupon three several Orders
from the Council Table, and Commissions have been granted for the expelling
and removing them thence, of which they taking notice, and knowing their
weakness and want of victuals, have offered to sell the same for 2500 l. And
lastly, taking advantage of our present war and distractions, now ask 7000 l.
and have lately offered many affronts and damages to his Majestis subjects in
New England: and in general endanger all his Majesty's adjoining Countries,
most wickedly, feloniously, and traitorously, contrary to the Marine and
Admiral Laws of all Christians, sell by whole sale guns, powder, shot and
ammunition to the Indians, instructing them in the use of our fights and arms;
insomuch as 2000 Indians by them armed, Mohacks, Raritans, and some of Long
Isle with their own guns so sold them, fall into war with the Dutch, destroyed
all their scattering Farms and Boors, in forcing them all to retire to their Up
fort 40 leagues up that river, and to Manhatas, for all or most retreating to
Manhatas, it is now a pretty town of trade having more English then Dutch: and
it is very considerable that three years since Stuy their Governor put out his
Declaration, confessing that the neighbor English might well be offended with
their selling Indians arms and ammunition, but being but a few and so
scattered, they could not live else there, or trade, the Indians refusing to
trade or suffer the Dutch to plow without they would sell them guns. The like
folly they committed, and inconvenience to themselves, and all English, for
eight years since, in their West India Fleet, battered by the Spanish Armado,
they brought home forty Swedish poor soldiers; and hearing that Captain Young
and Master Evelin had given over their Fort begun at Eriwemeck within Delaware
Bay, there half starved and tottered they left them, who learning the Indian
language and finding much talk and trials of a gold mine there, though in truth
fifty shillings charges produced of that light sand but nine shillings in gold
and therefore was of Captain Young that tried it slighted; yet one Bogot under
the Swedes name and Commission, there traded to cross the Dutch of Manhatas,
and to undersell them, and left and seated there eighteen Swedes, who
proclaiming a gold mine drew more to them, and have gotten a great trade; and
now this last Summer fifteen Swedes and fifteen Dutch had a skirmish; the
Swedes pulled down a Dutch trading house, and do both undersell them, and
spoiled much their and English trading with the Indians, both striving to
please and side with the Indians, both entertaining and refusing to return all
English fugitives and servants. The Swedes hiring out three of their soldiers
to the Sasquehannock^, have taught them the use of our arms and fights, and
marching with them into the Kings own Colony of Virginia, have carried thence
the King of Pawtomeck prisoner, and expelled his and eight other Indian Nations
in Maryland civilized and subject to the English Crown. Now if a Proclamation
of open war be set out against the Dutch and Swedes for this their villainy, and
all English forbid to trade, victual or relieve them, they must both vanish,
especially if those bad English that live, adhere and obey these Aliens in
these his Majesty's countries be warned of the statute of King James of famous
memory, in these words: That all Subjects giving any obedience or
acknowledgement to any forain Prince, State, Pope, or Potentate, within his
Majesty's Territories and Dominions in England or beyond the sea, is a traitor,
and shall forseit and suffer as a traitor. And certainly all English, and
chiefly those of New England being ready in twenty four hours will join to
expel them both to regain their own trade, to get their seats, and to be rid
of the danger of armed gunning Indians.

CHAP. II.
Whereas that part of America, or North Virginia, lying about 39 degrees at
Delaware Bay called the Province of new Albion, is situate in the best and
same temper, and as Italy, between too cold Germany, and too hot Barbary: so
this lying just midway between New England 200 miles North, and Virginia 150
miles South, where now are settled 800000 English, and 140 ships in trade, is
freed from the extreme cold and barrenness of the one and heat and aguish
Marshes of the other and is like Lumbardy, and a rich fat soil, plain, and
having 34 rivers on the main land, 17 great Isles, and partaketh of the
healthiest air and most excellent commodities of Europe, and replenished with
the goodliest woods of Oaks and all Timber for ships and Masts, Mulberries for
silk, sweet Cypress, Cedars, Pines and Firres, 4 sorts of Grapes for wine, and
Raisins, and with the greatest variety of choice fruits, fish and fowl, stored
with all sons of corn, yielding 5, 7 and 10 quarters an acre: Silkgras, salt,
good Mines and Diers ware, 5 sorts of Deer, Buffes, and huge Elks to plow and
work, all bringing 3 young at once. The Uplands covered many months with
berries, roots, chestnuts, walnuts, Beech and Oak Mast to feed them, Hogs and
Turkeys, 500 in a flock, and having near the Colony of Manteses 400000 acres of
plain mead land, and mere level, to be flowed and fludded by that river for
corn, rice, rapes, flax and hemp. After 17 years trading and discovery there
and trial made, is begun to be planted and stored by the Governor and Company
of New Albion, consisting of forty four Lords, Baronets, Knights and Merchants,
who for the true informing of themselves, their friends, Adventurers and
Partners by Residents and Traders there four several years out of their
Journall Books, namely, by Captain Brown a Ship-master, and Master Stafford
his Mate, and by Captain Claybourn 14 years there trading, and Constantine his
Indian there born and bred, and by Master Robert Evelin 4 years there; yet by
eight of their hands subscribed and enrolled do testify this to be the true
state of the Country, of the Land, and Delaware Bay or Charles River, which is
further witnessed by Captain Smith and other books of Virginia and by New
Englands Prospect, new Canaan, Captain Powels Map, and other descriptions of
New England and Virginia.

Captain Brown. Captain Clayborn. Robert Evelin. Stafford. Constantine.
Stratton. Thomas White. Richard Buckham. Christoph. Thomas. Edward Monmouth.
Tenis Palee. Edward Rhodes. Peter Rixford.
Master Evelins Letter.
Good Madam:
SIr. Edmund our noble Governor and Lord Earl Palatine, persisting still in
his noble purpose to go on with his plantation in Delaware or Charles river,
just midway between New England and Virginia, where with my Uncle Young I
several years resided, has often informed himself both of me and Master
S^rat^on, as I perceive by the hands subscribed of Edward Monmouth, Tenis
Palce, and as Master Buckham, Master White, and other Ship-masters, and
Saylors, whose hands I know, and it to be true, that there lived and traded
with me, and is sufficiently instructed of the state of the country, and people
there, and I should very gladly according to his desire have waited on you into
Hamshire to have informed your Honor in person, had not I next week been
passing to Virginia. But nevertheless to satisfy you of the truth, I thought
good to write unto you my knowledge, and first to describe you from the North
side of Delaware unto Hudsons river, in Sir Edmunds Patent, called new Albion,
which lies just between New England and Maryland, and that Ocean sea, I take
it to be about 160 miles. I find some broken land, Isles and Inlets, and many
small Isles at Egbay: But going to Delaware Bay, by Cape May, which is 24 miles
at most, and is as I understand very well set out, and printed in Captain
Powels Map of New England, done as is told me by a draught I gave to M. Daniel
the plot-maker, which Sir Edmund says you have at home, on that North side
about five miles within a port, or rode for any ships called the Nook, and
within it lies the King of Kechemeches, having as I suppose about 50 men, and
12 leagues higher a little above the Bay and Bar is the river of Manteses,
which has 20 miles on Charles river, and 30 miles running up a fair navigable
deep river all a flat level of rich and fat black Marsh mould* which I think
to be 300000 acres: In this Sir Edmund intends as he says to settle, and
there the King of Manteses has about 100 Bow-men, next above about 6 leagues
higher is a fair deep river 12 miles navigable, where is Freestone, and there
over against is the King of Sikonesses, and next is Asomo^ches river and King
with an hundred men, and next is Eriwoneck a King of forty men where we sat
down, and five miles above is the King of Ramcock with a hundred men, and four
miles higher the King of Axion with two hundred men, and next to him ten
leagues overland an inland King of Calcesar, with an hundred and fifty men* and
then there is in the middle of Charles river two fair woody Isles, very pleasant
and fit for Parks, the one of a thousand acres, the other of fourteen hundred,
or thereabout. And six leagues higher near a Creek called Mosilian, the King
having two hundred men. And then we come to the False, made by a rock of
limestone* as I suppose it is, about sixty and five leagues from the sea, near
to which is an Isle fit for a City, all materials there to build; and above,
the river fair and navigable, as the Indians inform me, for I went but ten
miles higher. I do account all the Indians to be eight hundred, and are in
several factions and war against the Sasquehannocks, and are all extreme
fearful of a gun, naked and unarmed against our shot, swords, and pikes. I had
some bickering with some of them, and they are of so little esteem, as I durst
with fifteen men sit down, or trade in despite of them, and since my return
eighteen Swedes are settled there, and so sometime six Dutch do in a boat
trade without fear of them.

I saw there an infinite quantity of Bustards, Swans, Geese and Fowl, covering
the shoares as within the like multitude of Pigeons* and store of Turkies, of
which I tried one to weigh forty and six pounds. There is much variety and
plenty of delicate fresh and seafish, and shellfish, and Whales or Grampus:
Elks, Dear that bring three young at a time and the woods bestrewed many
months with Chest-nuts, Wall-nuts, Mast of several sorts to feed them, and
Hogs, that would increase exceedingly. There the barren grounds have four
kinds of Grapes and many Mulberries with Ash, Elms, and the tallest and
greatest Pines and Pitch-trees that I have seen. There are Cedars, Cypress,
and Saffafras, with wild fruits, pears, wild cherries, pine-apples, and the
dainty Parsemenas. And there is no question but Almonds, and other fruits of
Spain will prosper, as in Virginia. And (which is a good comfort) in four and
twenty hours you may send or go by sea to New England or Virginia, with a
fair wind, you may have cattle, and from the Indians two thousand barrels of
corn, at twelve pence a bushel in truck, so as victuals are there cheaper and
better, then to be transported: Neither do I conceive any great need of a Fort
or Charge where there is no enemy.

If my Lord Palatine will bring with him three hundred men or more* there is no
doubt but that he may do very well and grow rich, for it is a most pure
healthful air, and such pure wholesome springs, rivers, and waters, as are
delightful, of a Desert, as can be seen, with so many varieties of several
flowers, trees, and forests for swine. So many fair risings and prospects, all
green and verdant: and Maryland a good friend and neighbor, in four and twenty
hours ready to comfort and supply.

And truly I believe, my Lord of Baltamore will be glad of my Lord Palatines
Plantation and assistance against any enemy or bad neighbor. And if my Lord
Palatine employ some men to sow flax, hemp and rapes in those rich Marshes,
or build ships and make pipe-staves, and load some ships with these wares, or
fish from the Northward, he may have any money, ware, or company brought him by
his own ships, or the ships of Virginia or New England all the year.

And because your Honor is of the noble house of the Pawlets, and as I am
informed, desire to lead many of your friends and kindred thither, whom as I
honor, I desire to serve, I shall entreat you to believe me as* a Gentleman
and Christian, I write you nothing but the truth, and hope there to take
opportunity in due season to visit you, and do all the good offices in
Virginia, my place or friends can serve you in. And thus tendering my service, I
rest

Madam, Your Honors most humble faithful servant Robert Evelin.

CHAP. IV.
NOw since Master Elmes letter and seven years discoveries of the Lord
Governor in person, and by honest traders with the Indians, we find beside
the Indian Kings by him known and printed, in this Province there is in all
twenty three Indian Kings or chief Commanders, and besides the number of 800 by
him named, there is at least 1200 under the two Raritan Kings on the North side
next to Hudsons river, and those come down to the Ocean about little Egbay and
Sandy Barnogate, and about the South cape two small Kings of forty men a piece,
called Tirans and Tiascons, and a third reduced to fourteen men at Roymont, the
Sasquehannocks are not now of the Naturals left above 110, though with their
forced Auxiliaries the Ihon a Does, and Wicomeses they can make 250: these
together are counted valiant and terrible to other cowardly dull Indians, which
they beat with the sight of guns only; but in truth meeting with English, are
the basest cowards of all, though cunning and subtle to entrap and surprise on
all straits, coverts, reeds, and ambushes, for at the last Maryland March
against them, these 250 having surprised in the reeds, and killed five English
men with the loss of one of theirs, Captain Cornwallis that noble, right
valiant, and politic soldier, losing but one man more, killed with fifty five
of his, and but raw and tired Marylanders, twenty nine Indians as they
confessed, though compassed round with two hundred and fifty: and Summer was
twelve month, Captain Lewis of Maryland at the Coves drawing but twenty men
out of his wind bound Sloupes, and in two small Cocke-boates much distant,
finding twenty four Canoes, and therein an hundred and forty Sasquehannocks,
reduced by these three Swedes into a half moon, with intent to encompasse the
first small boat before the second could reach the former, at the first volley
of ten sho^, and loss of one Indian, they run all away; for note generally
twelve English with five foot Calivers, shoot thirty pellets, or dagge shot,
and fifty yards distance, and the naked Indian shoots but one arrow, and but
thirty yards distance, so as his Lordship knows well with such a squadron of
twelve or thirteen mark-men, to encounter three hundred, and to bring by the
lock the proudest Sagamoore, to be ransomed for any Trespass: and not to
suffer any Indian or trader without his Lordships badge or stamped livery worn,
to come within twenty miles of his Plantation, or ten miles of their Cattle, as
in all the out-skirts of Virginia is used, but to kill them. Insomuch as the
Emperor Nicotowance saying was, my countrymen tell me I am a lier, when I tell
them the English men will kill you if you go into their bounds; but valiant
Captain Freeman made him no lier, when lately he killed three Indians so
without badge incroaching. And therefore fair and far off is best with Heathen
Indians; and fit it is to reduce all their trading to five Ports or Pallisadoed
trucking houses, and to kill all straglers and such spies without ransom. Then
shall christians and their cattle be safe and quiet, and severely putting to
death all that sell the Indians guns arms and ammunition, then Indians are
sooner ruled, civilized and subjected, as in New England is daily seen. In Long
Isle are about four Kings, and eight hundred Bow-men, most of them two hundred
miles off his Lps seat of Watcessit in Charles river, these of Long Isle are
well civilized* living within ten miles, and in sight of eight thousand English
in that part of New England being* and the five towns in Connectacute river,
and New Haven town being populous, discourageth any hostility: but chiefly his
Lordships six good free-holding towns in Long Isle, is a bridle to check and
contain them; for Southhampton, Hempsteed, Flushing, Gravesand and Ainsford are
placed like distinct Garrisons to command them. Then between the two South Capes
there are two petty Kings called Aquats and little Matankin, having both an
hundred Bow-men, and above Watcessit South-west, are the black and white Mincos
near three hundred men, being special friends to Watcessit, and enemies to the
Sasquehannocks. Now for choice seats for English, Watcessit first, where were
seventy English, as Master Miles deposes, he swearing the officers there to
his Majesty's allegiance, and to obedience to your Lordship as Governor, being
twenty one leagues up Delaware Bay in Charles river, to which any ship may
come, and about it Manteses plain, which Master Evelin avoucheth to be twenty
miles broad, and thirty long* and 50 miles washed by two fair navigable rivers,
and is 300000 acres fit to plow and sow all Corn, Tobacco, and Flax, and Rice,
the four staples of Albion. The second seat is three miles off to Watcessit
adjoining to Charles and Cotton river, so named of six hundred l. of Cotton
wild on trees growing: and is called Ritchneck, being twenty four miles
compass, one wood, huge Timber trees, and two foot black mould, much desired
of the Virginians to plant Tobacco, they alleging each plant there dried and
cured, will bring a pound, whereas wom land five and six to a pound, and these
large leaves in the new land, and freshes, serve to lap up all the bad S.
Christophers, and Barbados rolled Tobacco, and makes it fire sooner: of the
three upper leaves they make Varinas and Spanish. The Dutch give for this
double price, and the English double for sweet sented: and though Charles river
is 120 miles North of James river in Virginia, yet having a more far constant
and tempered growing heat, Tobacco three years together tried, is riper, and
sooner struck by wet seasons by full three weeks, then in Virginia, and has
yielded double the price: and no doubt Cotton will grow as in Millain, being
three degrees more Northward, though as there it dies yearly by frost, is
re-planted by the seed as a Rosebush gives a full cod.

The third seat is at Roymont a strong, rich and fit place for a Fort. Sir
Walter Rawley left there thirty men, and four guns, the Dutch seated there
fifteen men and a Fort, both to plant in that rich five miles neck to Roymont
river (which runs down into Chisapoack Bay) choice Tobacco, and thereby to
prejudice and undersell Virginia, as to set up a fishing Stage for Whales,
these proved but Grampus, and they killing basely an Indian refusing quarter or
ransom, were by the Indians killed and expelled twenty years since. This place
is close to the In-south Cape, having a Creek of six foot water only, and two
furlongs of the grand Delaware Bay: on one side is an Isthmos or Penisle, nine
miles compass, fit for pasturage, and Hogs and Goats: and on the other side is
a second Isthmos, four miles compass, easily fenced, and is but sixty miles
over land to the Northermost and nearest part of Virginia, to drive cattle by
land, and have supplies by horse and foot: and here is never ice or frost:
seafish, all oysters, and shellfish, and fowl, all winter Cod to lade ships
three months after December fit for salt and trade: and there is a poor Indian
of fourteen men only, and weak to hinder any, all the soil is under a brick
earth, stone slat hard by, and timber to build.

The fourth seat is Vvedale under Websneck, and is a valley six miles long,
sheltred by hills from the North-west winds: below it is six miles a thicket
of four sorts of excellent great Vines running on Mulberry and Sassafras trees;
there are four sorts of Grapes, the first is the Toulouse Muscat, sweet sented,
the second the great fox and thick Grape, after five months reaped being
boiled and salted, and well fined, it is a strong red Xeres; the third a right
Claret, the fourth a white Grape creeps on the land, makes a pure gold color
white wine: Tenis Pale the French man of these four made eight sorts of
excellent wine, and of the Muscat acute boiled that the second draught will fox
a reasonable pate four months old: and here may be gathered and made two
hundred tun in the Vintage month, and re-planted will amend; two other valleys
there are of the same Grapes and large, above Vvedale, the hill is called
Websneck, environed with three rivers round, one of sixteen foot water
navigable, all but a neck, a caliver shot over, easily imparked, being 9000
acres, the cliffes all of rich black mould, with huge timber trees, most fit
for Tobacco and Corn not far off are rich lead mines, containing silver tried,
and iron stone, and by it waters, and falls to drive them in an inhabited
desert, no Christians or Indians near it, where Elkes, Stagges and Deer are
most quiet, most fat, and not disturbed, so as five men in three or four days
kill and salt sixty Deer, or an hundred twenty sides for Summers food: four or
five hundred Turkeyes in a flock, Swans, Hoopers, Geese, Ducks Teles, and other
Fowls, a mile square, and seven mile together on the shores, for here is all
Ches-nuts Wall-nuts and Mast berries, and March feeds, wild Oats, and Vetches
to feed them. Near hand is also in August Custard apples, and Papawes to make
the best Perry English for 100 tun in a place, and all Plums, Hurtleberries,
Black Cherries, wild Anniseed, Perfimenas, and other dainty fruits, and roots
are had, as in all the huge long Meads and Marshes, sweet seg roots ground
nuts, Tucaho and Cuttinamon roots for Hogs and whole Warrens, and berries of
sweet Muskerats, and here black Bears and Lions feeding on sweet foods, are
killed and eaten In the head of Chisepeack river by Tomkins and Walton, was
seen a Camel Mare brown black, seven foot high, of which 300 mile Westward
are store, their skins brought and sold by the Indians confirm it.

The fifth seat is Brents fort, a steep rock, invincible and not to be
battered, having an Isthmos of low hard ground like a Tongue below it environed
with fresh water, and under it a Cove close to hide two ships or galleys, ships
of 500 tun may come up to it, and hard by is good Mead and rich land, and Woods
to plant; and in this desert is best living, stored as before with all game and
their food to maintain them.

The sixth is an I Will called Palmers I Will, containing 300 acres, half meade, half
wood; in it is a rock forty foot high, like a Towr, fit to be built on for a
trading house for all the Indians of Chisepeack Gulf: it lies a mile from
each shore in Sasquehannocks river mouth, and there four Sakers will command
that river, and renew the old trade that was; it lies in forty degrees and
twelve minutes, it is most healthy, but cold near the hills, and full as all the
seventeen rivers there of eleven sorts of excellent fresh fish; the Indians in
stead of salt do barbecado or dry and smoke fish, to each house a reek or
great pile, and another of Sun dried on the rocks, Strawberries, Mulberries,
Symnels, Maycocks and Horns like Cucumbers.

The seventh is five mile off it, called Mount Royal or Bolalmanack hill, and
more properly Belveder, for thence you may see 100 miles off high hills, above
the clouds like sugar-loaves that shelter and bear off the North-west winds;
here is a clear Indian field six miles long to plant and plow rich land, and
as well stored as the rest, and under it is Elk river, having many branches
navigable, in all these the Tide of fresh sweet water ebbes and flows, and
has three fathom deep, the mouth of it is like a fort with fit Isthmos and
necks, and runs up seven leagues to a street, but eleven miles over land
into Charles river, and Delaware Bay, this neck is a rare work of God, for it
is 450 miles compass to go by sea and water, from one side to the other of
this eleven miles street, and Vvedale is on one of these branches.

The eight seat is Kildorpy, near the falls of Charles river, near 200 miles up
from the Ocean, it has clear fields to plant and sow, and near it is sweet
large meads of clover or honysuckle, no where else in America to be seen,
unless transported from Europe, a ship of 140 tuns may come up to these falls
which is the best seat for health, and a trading house to be built on the
rocks, and ten leagues higher are lead mines in stony hills.

The ninth is called Mount Ployden, the seat of the Raritan King on the North
side of this Province twenty miles from Sandhay sea, and ninety from the Ocean,
next to Amara hill, the retired Paradise of the children of the Ethiopian
Emperor, a wonder, for it is a square rock, two miles compass, 150 foot high,
a wall-like precipice, a strait entrance, easily made invincible, where he
keeps two hundred for his guard, and under it a flat valley, all plain to plant
and sow.

The Sasquehannocks new Town is also a rare, healthy and rich place, with it a
Crystal broad river, but some falls below hinder navigation, and the Hook hill
on the Ocean with its clear fields near Hudsons river on one side, and a ten
leagues flowing river on the southside is much commended for health and fish,
were it not so Northerly.

The bounds is a thousand miles compass, of this most temperate, rich
Province, for our South bound is Maryland North bounds, and begins at Aquats
or the Southermost or first Cape of Delaware Bay in thirty eight and forty
minutes, and so runs by, or through, or including Kent Isle, through
Chisapeack Bay to Pascatway; including the falls of Pawtomecke river to the head
or Northermost branch of that river, being three hundred miles due West, and
thence Northward to the head of Hudsons river fifty leagues, and so down
Hudsons river to the Ocean, sixty leagues, and thence by the Ocean and Isles a
cross Delaware Bay to the South Cape fifty leagues; in all seven hundred and
eighty miles. Then all Hudsons river, Isles, Long Isle, or Pamunke, and all
Isles within ten leagues of the said Province being; and note Long Isle alone
is twenty broad, and one hundred and eighty miles long, so that alone is four
hundred miles compass. Now I have examined all former Patents, some being
surrendered, and some adjudged void, as gotten on false suggestions, as that at
the Council Table was at Master Gonges suit, of Matachusets, and as Captain
Clayborn heretofore Secretary, and now Treasurer of Virginia, in dispute with
Master Leonard Calvert alleges; that of Maryland is likewise void in part as
gotten on false suggestions: for as Cap: Clayborn shows the Maryland Patent
in the first part declares the Kings intention to be to grant a land therea
fter described, altogether dishabited and unplanted, though possessed with
Indians. Now Kent Isle was with many households of English by C. Clayborn before
seated, and because his Majesty by his privy signet shortly after declared it
was not his intention to grant any lands before seated and habited: and for
that it lies by the Maryland printed Card, clean Northward within Albion, and
not in Maryland, and not only late Seamen, but old Depositions in Claybornes
hand, show it so to be out of Maryland, and for that Albions Privy signet is
elder, and before Maryland Patent, Clayborn by force entered, and thrust out
Master Calvert out of Kent; Next Maryland Patent coming to the Ocean, says
along by the Ocean unto Delaware Bay; That is the first Cape of the two most
plain in view, and expressed in all late English and Dutch Cards; and note unto
Delaware Bay is not into the Bay, nor farther then that Cape heading the Bay,
being in thirty eight and forty, or at most by seven Observations I have seen,
thirty eight and fifty minutes: So as undoubtedly, that is the true intended
and ground bound, and line, and no farther, for the words following, are not
words of Grant, but words of Declaration; that is, Which Delaware Bay lies in
forty degrees where New England ends; these are both untrue, and so being
declarative is a false suggestion, is void, for no part of Delaware Bay lies
in forty. Now if there were but the least doubt of this true bounds, I should
wish by consent or commission, a perambulation and boundary, not but there is
land enough for all, and I hold Kent Isle having lately but twenty men in it,
and the Mill and Fort pulled down, and in war with all the Indians near it, not
worth the keeping.

But it is material to give a touch of Religion and Government, to satisfy
the curious and well-minded Adventurer. For Religion it being in England yet
unsettled, several Translations of Bibles, and those expounded to each man's
fancy, breeds new Sects, I conceive the Holland way now practiced best to
content all parties: first, by Act of Parliament or Grand Assembly, to settle
and establish all the Fundamentals necessary to salvation, as the three Creeds,
the Ten Commandments, Preaching on the Lords day, and great days, and
Catechizing in the afternoon, the Sacrament of the Altar and Baptism; But no
persecution to any dissenting, and to all such as to the Walloons, free
Chapels; and to punish all as seditious, and for contempt, as bitterly rail and
condemn others of the contrary; for this argument or persuasion of Religion,
Ceremonies, or Church Discipline, should be acted in mildness, love and
charity, and gentle language, not to disturb the peace or quiet of the
Inhabitants, but therein to obey the Civil Magistrate.

For the Politic and Civil Government, and Justice, Virginia and New England
is our president: First, the Lord head Governor, a Deputy Governor, Secretary
of Estate, or Seal keeper, and twelve of the Council of State or upper House:
and these or five of them is also a Chancery Court. Next out of Counties and
Towns, at a free election and day prefixed, thirty Burgesses or Commons. Once
yearly the tenth of November these meet, as at a Parliament or Grand Assembly,
and make Laws, or repeal, alter, explain, and set taxes and rates for common
defense, and without full consent of Lord, upper and lower House nothing is
done: Appeals are here also tried, all criminal cases for life, above only by
two Juries, or actions at Law, a Jury on either side may be called, and by them
tried: and any before judgment, may stop the Law, and be tried in Equity; The
two months Courts may try before four Justices of Peace, any action not
exceeding 10 l. or 1500 l. of Tobacco, at 4 s. charge only, and plead without
Attorney; an Appeal lies thence to each quarter, or Chancery first Court
above, and from thence an Appeal to the Grand Assembly: any matter under 40 s.
value, or 200 l. of Tobacco, to be ended by the next Justice at 1 s. charge, no
deposition to be taken but before two Justices, whereof one of the Quorum, or
in Court, or before a Council, or of Estate: and here is no Jeofails, nor
Demurrers, but a Summary hearing, and a Sheriff, and Clerk of Court, with
small fees ends all for the most part in a few words.

Last of all* how plentifully may a quiet industrious man live here, having
rich Corn Land, Mead and Pasture, and Timbers, and Woods covered, many months
with Ches-nuts and four other nuts, and mast for Deer, Hogs and Turkeys, Fish,
Fowl, Venison, Wine and Fruits gratis? Our chief Staples are Tobacco, then
Flax and Rice, of which in floated lands you have infinite increase, and
without floating you may have, and all the winter Ship-plankes, Clove board and
Pipe-staves, these lade home ships twice a year hence, and for them bring you
any English servants or English or Dutch wares, cloths, stuffes* drams* wines
or what you bespeak: but surely we may easily grow rich if we will, and buy no
clothes, for a good Weaver brought hither, will make us of our own Flax nine
sorts of Linnens, tufted Hollands, Velures, Velvets, Tuftaffetaes, and Plushes;
and for Winter a good Glover with allome only of our own Elk-skins, makes the
best Buffe-coats, our own Stag and Deer skins make best gentile and soldiers
clothes, fittest for our Woods: a Doe-skin breeches with the fur inside in our
short Winter, is better then two broad clothes and warmer, so we need no
English clothing; Cattle in Virginia, and all Grain in New England brought to
our doors cheaper then here; Indian Corn, or Pease, or Beans at twelve pence a
bushel by truck with the Indians, and Rye Meal, a third, with the white and dry
Mayz Meal, which is all together but twenty pence, a bushel of Meal makes
the best bread, and we have more choice drinks then here, for sweet Stalk and
Pumpion drink hopped, is good beer, and ale we have and malt as you; and in
the hot Summer rock cold water, with an eighth of Peach Vinegar is the best
Beaverage: Peaches better then Apricocks by some do feed Hogs, one man has
ten thousand trees, all Apples, Pears, Cherries, and other fruits grow here in
half the time as in your cold and blasty Region, and so do all Hops and Roots,
Herbs and Garden stuff. Our days in Summer 2 hours shorter, and in Winter
more comfortable two hours longer, and a warmer Sun and bigger fires, and no
rent to my Landlord, makes us merry. He that is lazy and will not work, needs
not fear starving, but may live as an Indian, sometimes Oysters, Cockles,
Wilkes* Glams, Scollons two months together; sometimes wild Pease and
Vetches, and Long Oats, sometimes Tuckaho, Cuttenoman ground, Nuts, Marhonions,
sometime small nuts, Fillbirds, Wall-nuts, Pokikerries, ten sorts of Berries,
Eggs of Fowl, small fish in Cove, at low water will teach him to live idly.

CHAP. V.
EAch Adventurer of twenty or fifty men must provide household necessaries, as
irons and chains for a drawbridge, two Mares or Horses to breed or ride on,
Pots, Pans, Dishes, Iron for a Cart and Plow, Chains, Sithes, and Sickles,
Nets, Lines and Hooks. A sail for a fishing Shallop of three tun, and Hemp to
employ his people in making them, as with hair, and canvas for quilts, as well
on shipboard as demurring at the sea port, as with locks, keys, bolts, and
glass casements for his house. And generally fit Implements for the work or
trade he intends.

For trade with the Indians, buy Dutch or Welsh rugged cloth, seven quarters
broad, a violet blew or red* at four or five shillings a yard, small hooks, and
fishing lines, Morris bells, Jewes-harps, Combs, trading knives, Hatchets,
Axes, Hoes, they will bring you Venison, Turkeys, and Fowls, Flesh, 4t for a
pennyworth of corn at twelve pence a bushel.

Provisions for each man, and the charge from London.
1. Canvas, or linen clothes, Shoes, Hats, etc. costing here four pound for
two men to buy Cows, Goats, and Hogs in Virginia, which there yields six
pound, and will buy one Cow, and Ox, two Goats, two Sowes, which for each man
comes to 2 l. 0. 0. 2. Freight for a Passenger, and his half Tun of provisions
and Tools. 1 l. 10. 0. 3. Victuals till his own stock and crop maintain him
for seven months. That is, Pease, Oatmeal and Aquavite, 7 s. five bushels of
Meal, of which two to be baked into Biskets, and five bushels of Malt, some
must be ground and brewed for the voyage, both 1 l. 10 s. a hundred of Beef,
and Pork, 1 l. 2 s. two bushels of roots, 2 s. salt fish, 2 s. Cask to carry
provision 5 s. five pound of Butter 2 s. 3 l. 10. 0. 4. One Hogshead of ears
of Corn. Garden seeds, Hemp, and linseed with Cask, and some Rice from
Virginia. 0. 16. 0. 5. Arms (viz.) a Sword, Calliver five foot long, or long
Pistol, Pikehead: six pound of powder, ten pound of shot, half an old slight
Armor, that is, two to one Armor. 0. 19 s. 0. 6. Tools a Spade, Axe and
Shovell, 5 s, Iron and Steel to make and mend more, and two hundred of nails, 5
s. 0. 10. 0. 7. Guns and Powder for the Fort, that is, to every fifty four
Murderers, 8 l. a barrel of powder 4 l. 10 s. that is, to each man 5 s. Bed
and Sheets of Canvas, to be filled with huls, each man a Rug 15 s. Sum total,
10 l 5. 0.
CHAP. VI.
1. HEre by bringing good Laborers, and Tradesmen, the provident planters may
do well by giving shares or double wages, when each man may earn his five, nay
six shillings a day in Tobacco, Flax, Rice.

2. For here the Ship-carpenters ten men a day will build a tun of shipping as
in England, which with masts and yards there taken is here, and there worth 3
l. a tun, and yet here, and there is built at 1 l. a tun wages, which is 6 s. 2
days work, having the Timber without money.

3. Here in 14 days they make a thousand of Pipe-staves, worth here four
pound, and at the Canaries twenty pound a thousand, and so get six shillings a
days work.

4. Here in making Iron they save 5 l. a tun in the price of wood, and 3 l.
more in digging the Iron mine, and saving land carriage of it, and of the
charcole, for mine is taken on the Sea beach, and wood floated down the Rivers,
and so each man earns 5 s. 10 d. a day, Iron valued at 12 l. per tun.

5. Here the constant trade of 350 ships, and 7000 men a fishing begin to
leave cold Newfoundland small fish, and late taken, when this is before theirs
two months at the market, 100 fish here yields four quintales, there scarce
one, and here is fish all the year, there but only in the four warm months, so
as for nine weeks work each man above his diet, passage, and return, gets
twenty pound, and twelve pound a man, and herein dried Base, in Sturgeon, in
pressed Mackrell, Herrings, and Pilchers, is got as well as well as in
Cod-fish, six shil. and eight shil. a day. And this returns ready French and
Spanish coin.

6. Here the glorious ripening Sun as warm as Italy or Spain, will bring
rare fruits, wines, and such store of Anniseed and Licoras, as well as
Bay Salt, made without boiling, only in pans with the Sun, that each labourer
may make 6 bushels a day, worth in these three 12 s. a day, And this maiden
soil, so comforted with the Suns glittering beams, and being dug, and set
with the Indian Wheat, and their Beans and Pease, with 40 s. charge in 40 days
work with seed, yields 10 quarters an acre, the same Wheat being ten times as
big and as weighty as ours, besides Potatoes, Woad, Madder, Roots, and many
Plants, and Tobacco, will yield half a tun of Flax, and a tun of Hemp, worth 12
l. an acre, and 6 s. a days work.

7. Here as in Province in France, Walnut-Milk, or Oil ground and pressed,
will yield the gatherer ten gallons, and 10 s. a days work.

8. Here the Land lies covered seven months with Beech, and Oak Mast,
Wallnuts and Chestnuts, and three months with Groundnuts, Seg and other roots,
and wild Pease, and Fetches yearly, so as forty Hogs for one, and ninety
Turkeys, Partridges, Heathpoults, and tame Poultry, eating their fill, for one
is ordinary increased.

9. Here the Soap and Potashes men paying in England 12 d. a bushel, and 4 d.
carriage for ashes, and 20 l. a tun for Potashes, may make them for a quarter
and less: and get 8 s. a days work, by cutting, reeking, and burning whole
plains of Fern, Brambles, and wild Vines, being thrice as strong as Wood-ashes.

10. Here a ship may go, and return in five months laded, and comfortably see
their friends, making two voyages a year, in a healthy air, free from Enemies
and Turks, and get two for one each voyage: that is, four for one of that
stock, and proceed in a year.

11. Here the kind Gentleman that in England does not live without debts,
mortgages, suretiship, lawsuits and troubles, may here settle, and avoid bad
company, and tempting occasions, and live in plenty, and variety of all sports,
hunting Dear, hawking Fowl, fishing, and many more sports, and sorts of game,
as with dainty fruits; and lay up his spare rents.

12. Here the Soldier, and Gentlemen wanting employment, and not bred to labor,
without going to war to kill Christians for 5 s. a week in the mouth of the
roaring Cannon, or in a Siege threatened with famine, and pestilence: and but
ten together against a few naked salvages, may like a devout Apostolic
soldier with sword, and the word to civilize, and convert them to be his
Majesty's Lieges, and by trading with them for furs, get his ten shillings a
day, and at home intermixing sport and pleasure, with profit, store his Parks
with Elks and (...)


