THE PLAGVES Approved PHYSICIAN. Showing the natural causes of the Infection
of the Air, and of the Plague. With diverse observations to be used,
preserving from the Plague, And signs to know the Insected therewith. Also
many True and Approved Medicines for the perfect cure thereof.

Chiefly, a Godly and Penitent PRAYER unto Almighty GOD, for our Preservation,
and Deliverance therefrom.

Printed at London, by R. Raworth.

THE PLAGVES Approved Physician.
Of the Natural causes of the infection of the Air, and of the Plague.
OF all the diseases whereunto the body of man is subject, the Plague or
Pestilence is the most terrible and fearful, and most contagious; therefore
we must seek all means, both Natural and Artificial, to preserve our
selves and Families from it: Therefore first we will speak of the Natural
causes of this infection.

There be two special causes of the Pestilence.

The first is, An infected, corrupted and putrified Air.

The second is, Evil and corrupt humors ingendered in the body.

The air is corrupted and infected diverse ways as Astronomers say, by the
influences, aspects, conjunctions, and opposition of ill planets, the Eclipse
of the Sun and Moon, through the immoderate heat of the Air, where the
temperature of the air is turned from his natural state to excessive heat
and moisture, which is the worst temperament of the Air, vapors being drawn
up by the heat of the Sun, remaining unconsumed, do rot, putrify, and
corrupt, an so with the venom, the Air becomes corrupted and infected.

Also the air is often corrupted by the evaporation of dead carcasses lying
unburied, as it often chances in the wars, as also by the evaporation of
Pooles, Fennes, Marshes, stinking and noisome sinkes and kenells.

A man falls into the Pestilence by disordering of himself, either in diet,
or with other exercises.

Therefore, during the time of this contagious sickness, he must have a
special regard, to keep himself from all outrages, and surfets (to wit) from
all excess of meat, drink, sweating, bathes, letehery, and all other things
that open the pores of the body, and causes the bad airs to enter, which
entering, invenome the lively spirits of man, and infect, and endanger the whole
body.

And seeing it is evident, that the Plague or Pestilence is not caused, but
through the breathing in of pestilent and corrupt Air; there cannot be a more
safe and present remedy to preserve one, then by flying from that corrupt Air,
there is no other means to avoid the pestilent Air, because, whether we will
or no, we must draw in such Air, unless we get us away into some other
place where the air is not corrupted nor infected, but pure and good, neither
must you return home again from that place oversoone.

Observations to be used, preserving from the Plague.
But if upon urgent occasion of business you may not fly: then have a
special care that the house in which you must tarry, be cept clean and
sweet, without all kind of stink, filthiness, or sluttishnesse, let the
windows be kept close, and shut especially in clowdy and rainy weather, that
the pestilent air enter not in, but if you will open them, do it about
midday.

You must come abroad as seldom as you can, and not (if you may) except the
element be clear and bright, but before you come abroad you must take some
medicine, which is able to preserve you from infection, as the root of
Angelica, Pimpernell, etc. chewed in the mouth.

Also you must make fires daily in your houses, that thereby the corrupt air
that is in the house, may be the better purged and amended; for there is a
marvelous great virtue and strength in fire, to purge, correct and amend the
rottenness and corruption of the air.

Also if you burn Juniper, Tamariscus, Bay Leaves, Rosemary, and such like are
very good to purge the house of all ill aires, and to sweeten: or take a
Chafindish of coals, and strew upon it the powder of Rosemary, Sage, Rue,
Betonie, Wormwood, Majoram, Origaen, Juniper Berries, Mirrh, Frankincence and
Masticke, Cipresse-barkes, Angelica the root or leaves, Lavander, wood of
Aloes, Gallia Muschata, Cloves, or any one of all these are very good to air
your house withal.

It is best in hoar weather to correct and purify the air with cold things,
as with Roses, Violetts, Water Lillies, Vine-leaves, and branches of Willowes,
etc. and to sprinkle the floor with cold water mixed with Viniger, Roses, or
Sorrel, etc.

It is very good when one goes abroad, to have something in their hands to
smell too, the better to avoid those noisome stinkes, and filthy savors which
are in every corner, therefore it is very good to carry in the hand a branch of
Rue, Rosemary, Roses, or Camphire; and the smell of Viniger is very good, or a
Pomander something like this.

Take of Lapdanum, three drachmes. Take of Storax calamintae, two drachmes.
Take of Cinomon, of each a drachme. Take of Cloves, of each a drachme. Take of
Nutmegs, of each a drachme. Take of Wood of Aloes, a scruple. Take of Spiknard,
half a scruple. Take of Mirh, of each half a drach. Take of Mastik, of each
half a drach. Take of Frankencense, of each half a drach. Take of Musk, of
each three grains. Take of Amber, of each three grains.
Make them to powder and searce them, and take Majoram-water, and Rose-viniger,
wherein gum Arabike is disolved, and so make it up in a Pomander.

Seeing also, that gluttony, excess, and drunkenness, is at all times to be
shunned, so at this time of infection is most dangerous, breeding the humors,
and corrupting the body: Therefore they that love their health, let them use
temperance in their diet and choose such meats as engender good blood, and be
not ready to putrify and rot, but be of easy digestion, and eat with them
sharp Sauces, as Viniger, or the juyces of sharp things, as verjuyce, juice
of Citrons, Lemonds, Oringes, etc.

Also use for pot herbs, Sage, or otherwise, Parcely, Marjoram, Balm, Hysope,
Buglose, Endive, Succorie, and Lettuce.

Also he must refrain from eating of much fruit, for it does breed corrupt
blood and if he eat any it must be sour.

Also he must eat little garlike, Onions, or Leeks, for these cause unkind
heat.

Also suffer not thirst greatly, and when thou do thirst drink but
measurably, and that but small and thin drink, or barley water, or clarified
whey sod with cool herbs.

Another special regard must be had in exercises, vbi quomodo and quando. The
place where, must be in a wholesome and pure air, and he must use them
temperately, and moderately, and must eschew all violent exercises, as dancing,
running, leaping: and whatsoever such like kind of exercise that causes often
breathing in of Air, he must refrain in the extreme heat of the day, and
in places where is much concourse of people

As for his sleep and watchings, let them be mean and moderate, only his
sleep must be sufficient to suffice Nature, and in a close Chamber, well
stopped, and the windows and doors close shut, left the ill air enter into
it, and he must have regard that his sheets be clean and sweet, well ayred
by the fire, if perfumed or sweetened they be the better. Therefore that use is
good of Rose-cakes and sweet bags in chests where they keep linen.

It is good also at night before you go to bed to air the chamber with a good
fire, or with a chasing dish of coals, wherein it were good to strew some
powder of Rue, Sage, Betonie, or of Juniper and such like.

When you walk in the morning, first empty the body of all superfluities and
excrements, and take heed: and beware the body, be not to costive at any time.
Therefore, if of thy self naturally at any time thou can not void out
excrements, thou shall take either a potion of pills, or else a Glyster or
suppositary of pills, take pilulae rufi, or pestilentiales or Communes: or else

Take of Aloes epatick, two parts, Take of Amoniacum, of each one part. Take of
Mirrh. of each one part.
With white wine or with the Water of Seabious make pills of them, which
Minister daily, if you will one scruple at a time.

These pills do most resist putrefaction, and have a very great virtue against
the infecting of the pestilent air.

Blood-letting also is very wholesome for young folk, and such as have great
store of blood, for it does much cool the state of the body, and brings it
to a moderate heat, and lets out the corrupt humors, which do make the
body more subject to infection: blood letting is very necessary in the time of
infection, and does much profit, and preserve health.

Also it is very ill to be too passionate or melancholy: for the passions of
sadness, Anger, hatred, fear, great cares, and heavy thoughts and sighing,
do much distemper the body and make it more unfit to withstand the infection:
but on the contrary it is very good to use joy and mirth with temperance.

Signs to know the infected.
HAving before showed the natural and original causes of the plague and
pestilence, with the best means for the preservation of a man's self from it,
we will proceed and show, first the signs whereby a man may best judge of
himself, whether he be already infected, or not, and the means to cure the
sick.

As concerning the signs that declare one to be already infected, they are
many.

First when the outward members are cold, and the inward parts burning hot,
when there is a pain and heaviness of the head, and a great inclination to
sleep. A weariness, heaviness, and difficulty in breathing. A sadness and
carfulness of the mind: a change of countenance, with a frowning look of
the eyes: loss of stomach and appetite: immoderate thirst and often vomiting:
a bitterness and dryness of the mouth: The pulse frequent, small and deep,
the Urine troublous, thick, and stinking like beasts urine.

The surest token of all to know the infected of the plague, is, if there do
arise and engender botches behind the ears, or under the arm holes, or about
the share: or also if Carbuncles do arise in any member suddenly, for when
they do appear they betoken strength of Nature: Which being strong and
mighty, does labor to drive the poison out of the body, but if botches do not
appear, it is more perilous and dangerous: for it betokens that nature is
weak and feeble, and not able to expel and drive out the venomous humors, and
then you must have respect to the signs before rehearsed.

Also these botches which do appear, they do declare which members of the
the body be infected above any other, and do thrust out venomous humors from
them.

The infection of the plague enters into a man in this sort.

In a man are three principal parts (that is) the heart, liver, and arms, and
each of these has his cleansing place: Therefore if they do appear in the
neck, they do show the brains to be chiefly vexed: if under the arme-holes,
the heart, but if they appear in the share, the Liver is most infected.

For a man having taken some venom, it is mingled with the blood, and runs
to the heart, which is the chief part of man: and the heart by kind puts
the venom to his clensing place which is the arme-holes: and it being stopped,
puts to the next principal part, that is the Liver, and it passes it to
his cleansing place, which is the Thigh-holes or share: Likewise they being
stopped, pass it to the next principal place (that is) the arms, and to their
clensing places which are under the ears, or under the throat, and they being
stopped, suffer it not to pass out, then it is moved 12, hours before it
rest in any place, and if it be not let out within the space of four and
twenty hours by bleeding it casts a man into an ague, and makes a botch in
one of the three places, or near them.

The Cure of the infected of the Plague.
THe best way to cure the Plague is this when thou find thy self to be
infected, and feel the blood flickering, bleed in the first hour or within
six hours after drink not, and tarry not above 12. hours from bleeding, for
when thy blood is so flickering, the venom is then moving and not yet settled,
and after it is too late: those that are fat may be let blood, or else not.

If the matter be gathered under the arme-holes, it comes from the heart by the
vein Cardiall, then bleed on the same side: on the innermost vein of the arm
commonly called Basollica: but bleed not on both sides, except it be in both
armeholes for that is dangerous, and loss of good blood.

And if the botch does appear behind the ears, or above the chinne, or in any
other part of the face, or neck, you must let blood out of vein Cephalica, on
the same side: let blood with cupping-glasses for that is the best, or a
horse-leach, or horse hair.

But if the botch appear in the share, you must then bleed in the Ancle of the
same side, and then in any case bleed not in the Arm, for it will draw up the
matter again.

But if there appear no botch outwardly, you must then draw blood out of the
same side where is felt the greatest pain and heaviness, and out of which
vein the pain and grief of the members afflicted will declare.

For if the members above the breast be most grieved and afflicted, cut the
Cephalica vein. But if the parts about the neck be most grieved bleed in the
Basillica, or middle vein.

And if the nether parts be most grieved and vexed, bleed in the hamme or
ankles. And if nature be strong, and other things not letting, draw out blood
abundantly.

But if through age or for other causes you may not use blood letting, then you
must fasten cupping glasses and use them.

And if you perceive the pestilence to infect or invade you at meat, or upon a
full stomach, then vomit straiteway, and when the body and stomach is empty,
then take some medicine that can resist poison, as Methrydate, or Triacle.

When the patient has taken some medicines that will expel the venom, lay him
in a warmed bed, being made with soft sheets, and well covered with clothes,
that there he may sweat well, for the space of four or 5. hours, or more
according to his strength. But if by this means you can scarsely provoke him
to sweat, you may use some other means, as by the heating of tiles, and
laying them hot to the feet of the patient, or with stone bottles filled with
hot water, and being close stopped with cork, that the water spill not, and so
put into the bed to the sick, they will by their heat provoke him readily to
sweat. And all the time the sick does sweat, you must take heed that he
neither sleep, eat, nor drink.

And after he has sweat, you must wipe diligently off the sweat, with very
clean and fine linen clothes. Then afterward let the sick rise from his bed,
if he either will or can: But let him not come into the open air, but eschew
it as much as may be: Also let the Air of the Chamber in the which the sick
does lie, be corrected and amended and purified with odoriferous things, and
with sweet smelling perfumes, such as are before declared.

Lastly, the principal and whole body being cleansed by bleeding, or cupping
and sweating, the patient must be very wary, and measurable in his diet, for in
the Fever Acute which is accidental to this sickness; it is good to eat no
flesh but little chickins sod with fresh water, but it is best to give unto him
the broth of a chicken two or three hours after he has sweat, and often,
according to his strength, for the sick and weak must be norished and
refreshed by little and little: If the broth have in it the juice of lemons,
Oranges, veriuice, or viniger, it is the better.

Preservatiues against the Plague, and Pestilence.
TAke Wormwood and Rue, of each a little, and lay them in a little Vinegar,
then take a sponge and wet it therein, and this you may carry about you in a
box or any thing else, to smell thereon, and this will preserve you from the
infected.

Another.
ALso take Angelica root, and hold in your mouth, for it is excellent good to
keep your body that no corrupted air come therein: Likewise Sytron pills is
very good to hold in your mouth, or Cloves.

Another.
IT is good to keep the head and stomach clean purged, and not to overlay it
with eating and drinking, nor to eat gross meats but to abstain from all
manner of slimie and gross meats, and to purge your self as often as you can
with some gentle purge, as Cassia pills, or such like.

Another excellent Preservative.
TAke a Fig or a Walnut, and in a morning fasting, take a little Rue, and a
corn of bay salt, and eat them together, and this will preserve you, that you
neeed not fear the infection.

Another preservative by purging the Blood.
TAke in you pottage, Buglase, Burrige, Suckory, Lettyse, and such like herbs:
It shall be also very good at your meat to eat the inside of a Cytteron, with
a little sugar, at morning, at noone, and at night when you go to bed: and it
would be very good to wash your hands, and to b^^^e your temples and your
pulses with Viniger Rosset, and it would be good to perfume your houses with
Vinegar and Rue upon a tile-stone being heated in the fire: it is very good to
hold your head over it; it is excellent good to keep your body that no
infected air enter therein.

A prooved remedy for the Plague.
TAke an Oinon, and cut him overthwart, or asunder then make a little hole in
each piece, the which ye shall fill with fine Treakle, and set the pieces
together again, then wrap them in a wet linen cloth, putting it as you would
a warden, and so roaste him in the embers, seeing it be covered with embers,
and when it is roasted enough, strain out all the juice thereof, and give the
patient a spoonefull thereof to drink, and it will heal him by the grace of
God.

Take Sorrel, and lay it in steep in Vinegar a day, and then still it, and
when the patient feels himself ill, give him a draught thereof, and if he
brook it, two or three hours after give him more thereof to drink, and by the
grace of God he shall be healed.

Another for those that feel themselves Infected.
TAke Cardus Benedictus, the leaf, and dry it, then beat it to powder, and
give the patient to drink of it, and then let him sweat, and it will heal
him by the grace of God.

A Preservative.
TAke London Treakle, which you shall have, at diverse Apoticaries shopps, in
London, which do make it themselves, and in a morning fasting. Take as much
thereof as a hazell-nut, and drink a little after it, and this will keep your
body that no venomed air enter therein, and if you feel your self ill at
any time, take a little thereof and sweat upon it, and this will help you.

Also it is good to take some when you go to bed-ward at evening, and in the
morning fasting: You may have it for two pence the ounce, and it is excellent
good to have it always in a readiness, Approved.

If there do a botch appear.
TAke a Pigeon, and pluck the feathers off her tail, very bare, and set her
tail to the sore, and she will draw out the venom till she die; then take
another and set too likewise, continving so till all the venom be drawn out,
which you shall see by the Pigeons, for they will die with the venom as long
as there is any in it: also a chicken or a hen is very good.

FINIS.
A Godly PRAYER, to be used in the time of any common Plague or Sickness.
JOEL. 2. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the LORD your
GOD, because He is gentle and merciful, He is patient, and of much mercy, and
such a one that is sorry for your afflictions.


O Almighty God, we do confess and acknowledge, that by many and diverse
sins, we have often and grievously offended thee, and therefore deserve most
heavy Plagues and punishments. We have all declined and gone out of the way,
like vile wretches, we have fallen from thy Word, and are become unprofitable
servants: we nor our forefathers have not kept thy Commandments and
Ordinances. Notwithstanding which transgressions, we beseech the with a
contrite and broken heart, of thine infinite mercy, for JESUS Christ's sake,
thine only beloved Son, not to punish us according to our offenses, but to
have mercy upon us, according to thy great goodness and long sufferance. O
Lord we are not unmindfull of the many and great deliverances from time to
time, even from the jaws of death and destruction, for which above all
Nations, we are bound to offer our selves, our souls and bodies which thou
have delivered, to be a living sacrifice unto thee, always praising and
magnifying thy mercies in the midst of the Congregation; And seeing (O Lord)
that our sins have provoked thee daily to deliver us up to our selves, to the
noisome pestilence, to all plagues and punishments, yet we know that there is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, in which confidence, we fly unto
thee, the true Physician of soul and body, beseeching thee for thy Sons sake,
to bless all means which thou in mercy have ordained for the preservation and
cure of soul or body. Finally heavenly Father, keep us in the faith of thy
beloved Son Jesus Christ, who is the everlasting, perpetual, and daily
reconciliation, the pure and perfect oblation, and the sweet and accepted
sacrifice for our sins. Amen.

FINIS.

