A PROPER LOOKING GLASS FOR THE DAVGHTERS OF SION OR St. AUGUSTINES LIFE
ABBRIDGED, AND reduced into points of Meditation. WITH MEDITATIONS for a
spiritual exercise at Clothings and Professions. By THOMAS CARRE their
Confessor.

printer's device of Gabriel Targa, featuring a sun POST NV^ PI^^^


AT PARIS, M. DC. LXV.

THE I. MEDITATION. HOW HE VVANDERED from his heavenly Fathers house, and by
what degrees
I. POINT.

CONSIDER how their was a time when this great Saint. (himself confessing it)
being transported by the heat of youth wandered out of his. Fathers house even
into a land of extreme disproportion, and that by no other stepps or degrees,
but first by idleness the sourse of all evils: hear his own words: when I
grevv idle at home with my parents, the brambles of unchaste desires grevv
even over my head. (Weigh in particular the evils you may have fallen into by
it) secondly by ill compaignie which moves us, says he, often to do that
which we should never do alone, but whensoever it is said, let us go, and
let us do this or that, we are ashamed, and blush, if we do not show our
selves to be past shame.

AFFECTION. ah! how true it is, o friendship, that we experience thee, often
times, too too unfriendly, nay even a cruel seducer of our souls, for that
which the Devil by himself cannot, by the means of a friend he is able to
effect. That dear name of loving and being beloved carries us quite away to
perdition. And idleness serves for nothing but only to invent, and suggest
fuel to this consuming fire. Say my soul, is it no so indeed?

RESOLVTION. Never will I more then intertayne such or such a thing for ever. I
renounce you o vain and frutelesse thoughts! I abjure you o frivolous and
detestable remembrances: I forsake you for ever unfaithful and disloyal
frindships, miserable and lost services, misspent gratifications, displeasing
and indeed paynefull pleasures.

II. POINT. Consider that the third step to Augustines ruin, was his neglect
of his Mothers counsel which seemed to him but like old wives fables, which,
as he says, he was ashamed to follow. Ponder how it is even thus that all our
miseries do increase and ripen. we first waxetepide and idle in Gods service;
we spend time in imbraceing a mass of vain thoughts and extrauagances; we
then meet with a companion of the same mould, whose equal folly does feed,
and increase our fancy, and by little and little we are hurried on to a
precipice of mischeife: Parents and friends counsels are employed to prevent
our future woe, but are rejected: we are gone for ever, unless Gods special
grace do recalle us!

AFFECTION. Yes it is even thus, o my soul, that we run to ruin. the fancies
of idle hours do truly feed and increase our miseries: and what does the
communication of such fancies to others, but still more and more impoyson and
ripen the desease of our mynds? and even confirm our hearts against that
sovereign remedy, the good Counsel of superiors and friends.

RESOLVTION. Against idleness, I will still have in memory, that upon the good
or bad use of the moments of time which we now have, a happy or accursed
eternity does depend: and that a time will come that a moment of time shall
not be left to repent in. Against bad company, I will remember, that he who
touches pitch shall be defiled with it: and that with the good we shall be
good; and with the perverse we shall be perverted. Against the neglect of
good counsel (which is a thing of so dangerous a consequence, that the
proverb assures (past counsel past grace) I will have these sacred lessons
deeply imprinted in my mind. Want and ignominy shall be his share who
forsakes discipline: but glory to him who gives ear to one who does
counsel and correct. Proverbs c. 13. and Prou. 29. Soudaine destruction shall
overtake, or fall upon that man who with a stiff neck contemnes him who
does reprehend him. And these of S. Augustine.

I thought it was only she who spoke (meaning Saint Monica) but her words
were indeed thine (o God) and in her person, thou vvast contemned by me. I
being old, and a Bishop, am ready to be taught by a child. Petition, Say with
Solomon. Give me o Lord a Docile heart, a heart myld and supple, and ready to
take the good tincture of wholesome counsel.

THE II. MEDITATION. Whither he vva^dred, and what miseries he met vvithall
in his wandering pilgrimage
I. POINT.

COnsider that he followed the stepps of the prodigal child, and with him
arrived in a foraine Land, whither sin ledd him, and putt him into so great a
distance from Gods helping hand, that he fell into the hands of thieves: my
enemies, says he, did with me what ever they pleased; they beat me, they
stripped me naked, they defiled, corrupted, wounded, and even killed me, and all
this, because I departed from thee, and because I became a very nothing
without thee.

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. Woe be to that audacious soul, who by leaving thee (o
Dear Lord) dares presume to hope to find out any thing else in heaven or in
Earth not only better then thee, or like to thee, but even any thing tolerable
without thee! Thou have made us to and for thy self; thou have endowed our
souls with a capaciousnes capable of thy self, and our hearts must needs be
unquiet, till they return to thee, and repose in thee. Be they forsaken for
ever o Lord, who forsake thee, may their names be written upon the grownd, that
they have abandoned thee, the vein of liueing water.

II. POINT. Consider that those enemies of our good, having maimed us, leave us
not so; but observing that none comes in, to our succor they vilify and
contemn us, they make their way over our bellies; they tread us under feet,
and with the filth of sin defile Gods holy Temple, and leave us gasping upon
the ground, full of desolation, and worn out with sorrow.

AFFEC. and RESOL. This sad truth Blessed Augustine feared not to publish in
the ears of all the world; and we frequently fail not to experience in own
particulars, if we make reflection, and yet alas, we endeavor not in good
earnest to fly from the face of so cruel a foe, but even without wit or
fear, we trudge after them, being blind and naked and laden with the chains
of our sins. They vvounded me and I grieved not: they haled and trayled me
after them, and I was not sensible of it!

III. POINT. Consider that Augustins and our miseries find yet no periode; but
grow up to a higher excess. We do not only by our flight from God fall into
the power of our deadely foes, are stripped, and wounded by them, (while yet we
follow them without fear, and grow senseless) but we even fall in love with
our misery, misfortune, and servitude. I was slave and yet loved my slavery:
blind and yet desired my blindness. In a word, to me bitter scemed svveet, and
svveet bitter.

AFFEC. and RESOLVT. A pitiful case! and yet this is the most common and
dangerous desease, of the banished sons of Eve. For who knows not the eye
which scandaliseth, and inticeth us to sin, and yet who has the courage to
pull it out: Who sees not the hand which leads us to iniquity, and yet who
resolves to cut it off indeed, I mean the companions and occasions of evil;
nay we embrace and hug them, and seem to have our heart sliced in pieces if
we be divided from them. O how strangly perverse, and senselesly mad is the
heart of man? Make a firm Resolution of a contrary proceeding.

THE III. MEDITATION A CONTINVATION OF the same subject
I. POINT.

COnsider that we are not senseless of our evil only, and fall in love with
our misery, but from the peruersenes of the same love grows lust; by often
yealding to lust we make a custom; and by not opposing to this custom (which
is a certain law of sin) we grow subject to a kind of necessity, vvberby
the mind of man (even not vvilling) is drawn and held as in chains, in
bitter servitude.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Thus far was our Augustine gone, being carried down
by those stepps, even to the very bottom of Hell. And hither do we also but
too often find our selves borne down by the force of the stream. But oh what
a labor had he, and have we, to row back again? how did he turn and wind
himself to break his chains, and yet was still deteyned, and was suspended
betwixt a dying to death, and a living to life: whilst he so feared least he
should be delivered from all impediments, as he ought to have feared the being
hindered by them: whilst begging for chastity, he was affrayd to be heard,
least he should have been instantly delivered from the desease of
concupiscence. Whilst the violent custom of sin shook the garment of his
soul made of flesh and blood, and spoke softly to him in this sort. Is it
possible that thou can thus dismiss us? And from this instant shall we never
more be with thee? And from this instant shall it never more be lawful for
thee, to do this, or that, any more for ever?

II. POINT. Consider that while the violence of bad custom kept him captive in
sins Jail, he met with nothing but extreme misery, want, and famine. His
noble and vaste understanding was afforded nothing but husks of swine to feed
upon, (and yet was barred to be satisfied even with such trash) that is idle
persuasions of God and godly things, empty fancies, glorious fictions, which
were served up deuoyde of that truth which alone is able to saciate it.

AFFECTION and RESOI. Alas how often do we hope to feed and fill our selves
with such like trash, in lieu of solid and saciating truth, and we are thereby
only puffed up and swelled with the wind and smoke of vanity: which happens
as often as we desire rather to appear knowing then well doing; or aspire to
high things above us, with the neglect of the more profitable knowledge of our
selves. Let me know thee, o thou, who know me, let me know thee, and know my
self and let all other knowledges which lead not to these, vanish like smoke.

III. POINT. Consider that as his understanding discovered no true light while
he lived amidst that servile darkness, but was ouerwrought with the inquiry of
Truth without attayning to the knowledge thereof, so did his will rack it self
to meet with and inioye Good, and yet could only light on unrest and
disquiete. My soul has turned and tossed it self up and down, upon the
back, upon the sides, and upon the breast, and it has found all things hard.
For when I grew to obtain my unchaste desires, in the midst of my iollitie, I
was tied by miserable chains, that so I might be beaten with the burning rodds
of iealousies, suspicions, fears, angers, brawles, etc.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. And o God how good thou were to him, and how good thou
art to us in so doing, while being mercifully cruel, thou sprinklest all our
unlawful pleasures with extreme disgusts, (that so we may be drawn to the
desire of secking true pleasures which have no mixture of disgusts) so that we
can find no permanent rest even in the most prosperous delights the world can
boast. What mean we then still to travail and trudge on through these hard
and paynefull ways, where by one torment we purchase another: for we see and
feel that the burden of sin does certainly and heavily oppress us. We will
therefore return into our own hearts, and be reconciled and united to him that
made us; we will stand with him that we may stand fast; and repose in him, that
we may be truly at rest.

THE IV. MEDITATION. How he returned to his heavenly Fathers house, and by
what stepps
I. POINT.

COnsider that if Idleness, bad compagnie, and neglect of good counsel, did
unfortunately lead our B. Saint from his Fathers house; he returned as happily
back again by the quite contrary stepps. Run but over in your mind the
innumerable Treatises and volumes which he wrote, and you will be so far from
co^ceiuing he could be idle, that you will much wonder when he could find time
(the actions necessary to his function, as preaching praying, etc. and the
time spent in acco^modating neighbour-iarrs being considered) even, in a
manner, to write them over, if you did not understand by himself, that he was
forced to steal it from his rest. I drove two works at once, says he, the
one by day, the other by night time, when other employments crouding in upon me
on all sides, did even permit me so to do.

AFFECTION, etc. See my soul, see, how now no moment is misspent, but
contrarily by the good employment of time, he redeemes lost time. The day is
not enough to pay the malice of his lost days, but the night must contribute
to it too. He takes the business of the whole world upon his shoulders. He
espouseth the solicitude of all the Churches with Saint Paul. and all his time
is spent in putting a helping hand to their aggreeuances.

II. POINT. Consider that as he employed an admirable good husbanding of time
to recover time lost, so does he fly to good company and counsel for a
remedy against the infection of the badd company, and the neglect of good
counsel which he had used. To Saint Ambrose first, who plentifully dispensed
antidotes or counterpoysons against the infections of bad company and
counsel. or rather starued him with empty husks: Saint Ambrose fedd and
filled him with the flovver of Gods wheat which does fatten: Whereas that made
him stubborn and stiff necked: S. Ambrose brought him to be supple and
tractable, with the smoothnes of Gods oil. Whereas that, with vennimous cupps
did intoxicate him. Saint Ambrose with the sober delight of Gods wine
begetteing virgins, does engage his heart and regayne him. Next to Simplicianus,
Saint Ambrose his Father, and to Potitianus, who recounting to him Saint
Anthonies life which did so touch him at the heart, that he forceably cried out.
The unlearned men of the world do tear heaven out of our hands, and we with
our great knowledge, without brains or courrage, are still content to wallow
in flesh and blood.

AFFECTION. And why do not we, my soul, observing in our selves the same
errors, make use of the same remedies? why do we not fly the occasions of
evil, and speedily lay hold upon the occasions of good compagnie, and good
counsel? If in the one we meet with a moment of false delight, experience
assures us it is paid with hours, and days and years of discomfort and
remorse of conscience; whereas in that other we might even here below have some
participation of heaven, and be left with our thoughts full of a solid and
permanent delight,

MEDITATION V. WHAT BEFELL HIM soon after his perfect conversion to God. To
wit a change wrought by the hand of the highest.
I. POINT.

COnsider a soudaine and strange change of the hand of the highest, which
happens to all who absolutely convert themselves to God. It became sweet to me,
says he, to be deprived of the sweetness of wordly toys. What formerly I
feared to loose, I now departed from with joy: For thou did cast them from
me, thou o Lord, who art my true and prime sweetness. Thou three west them out, I
say, and in lieu of them did thy self enter, who art sweeter then all
delights (though not to flesh and blood) more sublime and high then all
honor, but not to those who are high in their own conceit.

AFFECTION. Take courrage then, o my soul, take courrage, God is not Augustins
God alone, but ours also: the bowels of his fatherly mercy lies open even to
us too. His love is not lessened, his arm is not shortened, Lets but in good
earnest convert our selves unto him, and his goodness cannot auert himself from
us. Be converted to me, and I will be converted to you says our Lord. Let Us
but absolutely dispossess our selves of the world and worldly toys, and he
will infalliby inhabit our hearts, possess them of heavenly joys, and make us
experience a dear and delightful change.

II. POINT. Consider secondly, that he was restored to the liberty which by
the flauerie of sin he had lost. Now, says he, was my mind freed from the
biting cares, both of honor and riches, as also from procuring to welter in
carnal sins, and provoking the heat of lust.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Oh what a change is this from that wherein he formerly
found himself engaged, when he said, now all the arguments which I was wont
to bring, were solued, and their remained only a speachles trembling: and it
(his soul) feared even as death it self, to be restrained from the course and
flux it had long taken toward sin, whereby it was daily pining away, and
growing nearer to destruction. And again I turned and winded my self in my
chain, till such time as that little which held me, might be broken; but still
it held me. I was saying I would do it, and even almost did it, yet indeed I
did it not, but remained breathing near the place, where I should have been.
We often my soul find the same wrestling with flesh and blood, but lets be
faithful to Gods inspirations, and we shall also be restored to the same
liberty.

III. POINT. Consider thirdly, that as he is more and more removed from the
troubles and cares of the world, he approaches nearer and nearer to the dear
delights of heaven, and inioying the true liberty of the sons of God, I
conuersed, says he, in a familiar and tender manner, with thee, who art my
beauty, my riches, my salvation, my Lord and my God.

AFF. and RESOL. Mark o my soul the delightful degrees of this heavenly
change We are first touched and excited by grace being fallen; we are carried
on by delight being risen; accompayned by delight we are lead to liberty,
which affords us wings of holy desire to fly up and repose in the bosom of
our dearly beloved, and shelter and solace our selves betwixt those sacred
breasts of consolation, to which I will cling and nothing shall be able to
separate me.

THE VI. MEDITATION How absolutely he betook himself to a good life
I. POINT.

COnsider that no sooner was he restored to this blessed liberty; and had he
received the Sacraments at Saint Ambrose his hands, but he began to lay the
fundation of a holy life, by bidding a most absolute Adieu, from the very bo
tom of his heart, (as says Possidius) to all worldly pretentions, nether now
desireing a wife nor sons of his body, nor riches, nor worldly honors; but made
a firm purpose to give himself wholly to Gods service, fasting, prayer and
good works, meditating day and night in the law of our Lord. says Possidius.

AFFECTIONS and RESOL. O my soul lets us take the same resolution, and humbly
confidently and perseuerantly make use of the same means, and we shall not
fail happily to be restored to Gods favor. He who made us without us, will
not save us without our consent and cooperation. we must work then, not we
alone, but Gods grace with us.

II. POINT. Consider that this resolution being taken in general, he found no
better way to set upon it in particular, then by selling what he had, and
giving it to the poor to follow Christ: take his own word for it. I (says
he Epis. 89.) Who write these things, did vehemently love that perfection,
whereof our Lord spoke when he said to the rich young man in the Gospel. Go
etc. and I embraced it, not by mine own strength, but by the assistance of his
grace.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Behold o my soul how thy holy Patron springs on in the
ways of Gods counsels. Their is now no more cold cras crases to morrow and to
morrow heard, but fourthwith he setts upon it. No more half wills whereof the
one serves to destroy the other; but he resolutely, and vehemenly loves it. No
more irresolution, as fearing into what hands he might putt himself, or that
he might loose by the bargain, but he sells and gives all that he has. If we
find our selves thus affected, how good reason have we to rejoice in our Lord,
but if contrarily, we be delaying, cold, irresolute, in what we have
undertaken, how good reason have we to spur our selves on by his example. I
will therefore etc.

III. POINT. Consider that he did not build wood, hay, or stubble, that is
terreane preferments or respects of flesh and blood upon these holy fundations,
but even gold, silver, and precious stones, (says Possidius) that is, the most
choice christian virtues: to wit a fervent love of God, intimated by gold; the
love of the neighbor signified by silver, and all the rest of the virtues,
imported by precious stones.

AFF. and RESOL. This is the pattern which our holy Patron left us, let us
examine how well we take it out. Is it thus indeed o my soul that we build? Or
rather do we not heap negligences, tepidities, vanities, and impurities of
intention upon the good fundation we have laid? Are we not in very deed cold
and slow in the love of God, and there upon, as careless of our neighbor, as
though the care of him, had not at all been commended to us? Let us therefore in
imitation of our good Patron say with him. Give me, o Lord, to love thee, as
much as I desire, and as much as I ought: and my neighbor for thee and in
thee, etc.

THE VII. MEDITATION. How he behaved himself in Faith
I. POINT.

COnsider that he putt down with Saint Paul, whose best scholar he was, that
Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, an argument of things not
appearing. or, as he says in another place, it is the fundation of all good
things, the very beginning of man's salvation. It is an illustration of the
mind, by which it is illuminated by the Prime Light, to discern spiritual
things.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Do we o my soul, aim at the true knowledge of
spiritual things? do we desire our salvation, or hope we for those eternal
waights of glory, those ineffable things which appear not to the eye; sound
not to the ear, nor enter into the heart of man, which God has prepared for
those that love him? know then that it is by the benefit of the heavenly light
of Faith. That is the illumination, that, the fundation, that, the very
substance and sum of all.

II. POINT. Consider that he putt down for his second ground, with the same
Apostle, that without Faith it is impossible to please God. I says he, none
shall be admitted into the number of the sons of God without it, None without
it shall obtain justifying grace in this world, nor possess eternal life in
the next, which is given to the love of God alone. Nor can any love, whom he
knows not, nor does any know God, but he to whom it is revealed by the Father,
through faith in his only son Christ Jesus.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If without Faith we know not, without knowledge we love
not, without love we remain in the jaws of death; if in death there be no
grace, nor without grace any hope of glory: If we have no right to the
denomination of sons, nor consequently just Title, of Heirs. Oh of what
con-consideration ought faith to be with us, how constantly ought we to embrace
it, how carefully to conserve it? For alas, if we miss to be numbered amongst
the sons of God, we shall not miss to be counted amongst the flaues of the
Devil.

III. POINT. Consider further with him, that the beginning of our faith is from
Christ, from whom, by whom and in whom are all things. It is not bought by
our riches; procured by our industries, or given to our merits; but is a pure
and free gift of Gods mercy to which he is nether necessitated, nor induced,
save only by the abundance of his own uncompelled goodness.

AFF. and RES. Blessed be thy goodness for ever, o my Lord God, who daynedst me
with this great gift, whilst I nether deserved, nor desired, nor even thought
of it. Far be it from me to extolle my self, to arrogate it to my self, as
though I had had it of my self. Nay contrarily upon the thought of that
singular goodness, I fall down prostrate before thy Majesty pronunceing in all
humility, that he who does glory should glory in our Lord.

THE VIII. MEDITAT. A CONTINVATION OF the same subject
I. POINT.

COnsider that though the beginning of our faith be from God purely, and cannot
be merited by us, yet is the increase of it, (Gods grace being always
presupposed) left in our hands to be procured, by care and cultiuating, and by
continually accompaigning it with good works. We are not, to be as it were
secure in faith, but we are to accompaignie a right faith with a right life.
The Apostles, saih he, had not left all, contemning the hopes of the world, had
they not had some faith: nor would they have said, Increase our faith, had it
already been perfect.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Blessed be our good God, who does not only prevent us
with his benedictions, before we deserve, or yet think of them; but also gives
us power by concurring with his grace, to multiply his good gifts, yea he has
even charged us to negotiate upon them till he come. Lets us not therefore be
wanting to our selves, since the increase is left in our own hands.

II. POINT. Consider that though it be our part to make good use of the good
Talent which Gods grace freely bestowed upon us, and by that good use to
multiply it, yet are we to know with our Saint, that as no man is sufficient
of himself to begin or perfect any good work; so is none of himself able to
begin or perfect faith. But the increase and perfection of it ought to be
procured by our fervent and frequent prayers to the good Giver, saying.

AFFBCTION and RESOLV. I beeseech thee, and in a most suppliant manner I
implore thy mercy (o God who are the fountain and sourse of all good things,
the giver and conseruer of all virtues) increase in me holy, right, and
immaculate Faith. And make me perform works suitable to it, least a good faith
may be defiled by unclean works, and least I may deny thee, by a bad life,
whom I confess by a good belief. I believe, o Lord, Yet help my incredulity.

III. POINT. Consider further with your holy Fa. that for want of good works
and fervent and frequent prayers, our Faith, in lieu of increasing, falls into
a deficiencie; it sleeps, waxes week and sickly, yea dies. Jesus some times
sleeps in us, (as he slept in the ship) that is, our faith which is from
Jesus sleeps in us, and then the winds and waves of temptation toss us too and
fro. We must therefore awake Jesus, and the tempest shall be allayed, that is,
we must recollect our faith, and call it to practlse.

AFFECTION and RESOL. we perish o Lord we perish, have mercy upon us. For
alas why does our faith sleep, but for want of being excited and stirred up by
fervent prayers? whence is it week and sickly, but for want of the
nourishement of good works? whence is it dead but that it is not quickened by
charity? We will therefore Pray, work, endeavor to love God above all things,
and our neighbor as our self, etc. and when all is done, we will ascribe all,
not to our own strength, but to Gods grace.

THE IX. MEDITATION. With what modesty and humility he looked upon matters
of Faith. And how high a rate he putts upon it
I. POINT.

COnsider that he adventures not to diue into the knowledge of high mysteries
with heretical pride and presumption, as though wit were able to make way to
all; but by a truly Catholic submission and modesty, upon many occasions, he
makes open profession of his ignorance; acknowledges the difficulty to be
great; knocks hard to have help from heaven; putts down for a caveat, to all,
that it is better to be ignorant with safety, then knowing with danger; And,
that unless we believe humbly, we shall not see clearly.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Let us beware, my soul, of bearing our heads too high,
and of being proudely wise, let us be wise with so brietie, it is to the simple
and humble little ones that God gives grace, and reueales mysteries shutt up
from the wise of the world, who vanish in their own sense, and reputing
themselves wise, are indeed fools: It is the simplicity of believing, not the
viuacitie of understanding, which saues the troops of Christians. Low laid
then, o Lord, in my poor nothing, humbly will I expect from thee, the
knowledge of such truths, as thy wisdom may see necessary for thy glory,
and my eternal good. This is all I need, and all I desire.

II. POINT. Gonsider the excellences and fruits of Faith, whereof the first is,
that it makes the humble and simple man, see the most hidden mysteries, though
with an obscure light, perfectly and infallibly, without disputation hesitation
or doubt at all, Faith has indeed eyes, says he, yea eyes both greater,
stronger, and more powerful: eyes which never deceived any; eyes which are
always fixed upon our Lord: eyes finally which in some sort sees that to be
true which as yet she sees not: and whereby she most certainly sees, that she
does not yet see what she believes.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Who are not content with these eyes, have, deservedly,
eyes, and see not, yea with open eyes run to their destruction, and descend
into Hell alive, because they would prefer their wit before the infallible
guidance of Faith, which was the proper guide given us by God to direct our
stepps in Christianity. O most blessed light, who art not seen, save only by
most purifyed eyes, purify these eyes of mine, that flying vanity, they may
dwell upon VERITY, and in thy light see light indeed.

III. POINT. Consider that a second excellence of faith is, that it is the
just man's food, or his justice: because if he believes, he uses precaution;
if he use precaution, he also begins to use endeavor: and God knows his
endeavor, and looks into his will, and observes his combat with the flesh:
exhorts him to fight, helps him to overcome, expects him struggling, supports
him falling, crowns him ouercoming. O how excellent a fruit of Faith is this!

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. Grant, o Lord, that this Faith, which is the just man's
food and life, may always be found in me so vigourous and lively, that by a
wise precaution or foresight, I may look over temporal, and fix upon
eternal things. For those, use my best endeavors; upon the purchase of those,
to spend my substance, for the attayning of those, to fight lawfully in his
sight, who, after that good combat, and conservation of faith, will bestow upon
me that crown of justice which (the same faith assuring) is laid up for me,
and such as love his coming.

THE X. MEDITATION. A continuation of the fruits and excellencies of Faith
I. POINT.

COnsider, as a third excellency of Faith, that their are no greater riches,
no greater treasures, no honors no substance of this world greater then the
Catholic faith, which saues sinners, inlighte^s the blind, cures the infirm
baptiseth the Cathecumenes, iustifies the faithful, repaires the penitent,
increases the just, crowns Martirs, conserueth Virgins, widows, wives in
purity, orders clerks, consecrates Priests, prepars us to the Kingdom of
heaven, and makes us partake with the Angels in that eternal inheritance.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. See then my soul, how when we think to have left all,
we possess all: nay while we think to have lost all by persequution we enjoy
all more happily, while our Faith, which is the greatest riches, honor,
substance of this world, is not impaired but increased by it. They may rob us
of our riches, yet while our faith is firm they touch not that aurum optimum,
which is Charity; They may deprive us of wordly honors, but not of that noble
title of being the sons of God; They may order our substance to new Masters,
but they cannot quelle our expectation, and hope of a better and permanent
substance.

II. POINT. Consider yet further that it is Christian faith, which does raise
our thoughts, and conduct us to the very highth or topp of WISDOM AND TRVTH,
the fruition vvherof is no other thing, then blessed life or BEATITVDE which
is never found save only in the discipline of our Catholic Mother.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If Beatitude be that which all men incessantly seek for,
and not finding can never rest; if it can never be found save by the benefit of
Faith alone, and faith can noe way be procured but by Gods free gift. What
millions of praises do we owe to that infinite Goodness, who freely bestowed
this incomparable great gift of Faith upon us, which inables us to see all good
things? O how many! how many would have wished to have seen what we have
seen, and have not seen it, etc. Benedicam Domino in omni tempore semper laus
eius in ore meo.

III. POINT. Consider for the last fruit or excellency, that though this
Catholic faith Eagle-like is able to fly right up and fix those strong and
vndazeled eyes of hers upon the sun it self, and even gaze upon Majesty;
without being oppressed by glory, yet does she graciously accommodate her
self to every capacity, be they little, be they great, be they weak be they
strong, she has food wherewith to nourish them, to saciate them.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Yes heavenly father, because so it was pleasing in thy
sight. These things thou did hide from the prudent and wise of the world, and
have revealed them to the little ones, to those little ones who seek thee in
simplicity and humility of heart. The wisest (if they be wise indeed, and
walk not in wonders above them selves, and so vanish in their own
presumption) must be forced to make their reason stoop in obedience to Faith,
humbly pronouncing Credo, I believe what I am not able by wit to discover. And
the least and simplest of the children of God, does no less. o divine faith
how excellent a Mistrisse thou art who in a moment can persuade us more
wholesome truths then all the Aristotle's in an Age.

THE XI. MEDITATION. How he behaved himself in Hope, and what motives he had
to embrace it
I. POINT.

COnsider with Saint Augustine, that Faith indeed shows us fair things, and
such as are worthy of all labor to obtain them; Yet had we no Hope at all,
whereby we might be enabled, as well to obtain them, as to know them, we should
either not at all, or at least, very weakly love the things, which by faith
we discover to be so beautiful. His faith was therefore acco^paigned with hope,
which is no other thing, then that, vvherby a man is encourraged to arrive at
that which he believes.

AFFECT. and RESOLVT. Blessed be our good God, who does not alone freely and
without obligation or debt bestow a power upon us, by Faith to see all good
things a far off, but by Hope makes them in a manner present, and as
certain as though already possessed. Thou do not only give us a sight, and
by that sight begetst in us an appetite of a most excellent GOOD, but do
possess us also with a certain expectation, of that future BEATITVDE,
grounded upon thy grace, and our own merits by the aid there of.

II. POINT. Consider with the same saint how our Hope is to be grounded and
confirmed in us, and you will find that it is to be done by a good conscience.
Let him, says he, who hopes for the Kingdom of heaven, have a good
conscience, and to have a good conscience, let him believe and work.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Let us not then, o my soul, remain secure in the
certain knowledge we have of God by Faith; nor in the strong confidence we
have to obtain it by the help of Hope; but let us, further, in good earnest,
putt our hand to the work, least a good Faith and Hope, turn our adversaries
and confound us, while we produce no actions proportionable to the infallible
light, and certain expectation which we had, by Gods gifts, which were not to
be buried.

III. POINT. Consider whereupon we are to fix our Hope, and he will tell us,
that it is not to be placed, in present things, for they post on to pass by;
nor in adversity, a kind of death, nor in prosperity, for that is
deceiptfully fawning; not in the whole earth, since we see that is turned
topsie turuey, and is in a perpetual agitation; not in man, nor consequently
in ones self, since we are but men. Where then, Transcende thy self, and put
thy self in his hands who made thee.

AFFEC. and RESOL. Alas no, our hopes are not fixed, but tossed while they are
placed upon sublunarie and transitory things, which are subject to a
perpetual vicissitude and change, and therefore that which is placed upon them,
must needs be subject to the same motion and alteration. Where are the delights
upon which yesterday we placed our Hopes? I say not where will they be when the
world is past with its concupiscence; but where are they even now, one moment
after the possession? Where are they? Yesterday is turned out of doors by this
day present; this present moment is pushed away by a succeeding one, and with
it, that is snacht from us whereon our dearest hopes were fixed, wherewith we
thought to have fedd, but indeed famished, our deceived heart. In thee therefore,
o Lord, from henceforth, will I repose my whole confidence, and I will not be
confounded for ever; Thou art that unchangeable GOOD, which is abundantly
satisfactorie and yet art subject to no change. Thou art that Truth, which can
nether deceive nor be deceived.

THE XII. MEDITATION What Christians are to hope for in this world
I. POINT.

COnsider that if we be true Christians indeed, we ought to expect for nothing
in this world but pressures and persequutions without hope of better times,
being assured, by the Gospel, that in the latter days many evils, scandalls,
pressures, and iniquities shall abound. This is the condition of our present
state and vocation, that thereby being wayned from the love of this world, our
hopes might be wholly set upon a better.

AFF. and RESL. What we suffer then, is no surprise made upon us, how strangly
soever we look upon it. It is but the ignorance, or not reflection, of what we
are, or ought to be, which makes us impatient of our present condition. We are
Christians, my soul, we were admitted upon no other condition, then to be
followers of Christ. If they persequuted him they will persequute us too. The
servant is not greater then the Master. Truth deceived us not when he foretold
us, and willed us to remember that he had foretold us so; that for his sake,
the world should hate us, that for his name we should be lead before Kings,
etc. Nor can he deceive us when he says. Blessed be they that suffer
persequution, etc. because theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

II. POINT. Consider that if in the midst of these tribulations and pressures we
lodge our confidence in the bosom of Gods providence, or in the wounds of our
Saviors side, not man nor devil will be able to hurt us; Nether the one nor
the other does any thing but what God permitts them; nor does he permit them
to attempt any thing against us but for our advantage.

AFFECTION and RESOL. In thee, o Lord, will I hope, and I will not be
confounded for ever. I will logde, as in an impregnable Castle, in the sacred
holes of thy side, there will I repose without fear, there will I securely
sleep. If the wicked make war against me, in this I hope. If the flesh make
head against me, to this will I fly: If the Devil bark and bale before my
heart, by these holes will I have recourse to the heart of my Savior; he will be
with us in the midst of our tribulations, because we call upon him, he will
deliver us and glorify us, replenish us with the length of days, and show us
his salvation.

III. POINT. Hence let consider, and even put down, and print in a Christian
heart for a prime and infallible truth, that we Christians were not made for the
world; nor for the goods of the time present, nor for that bewitching felicity
which makes men forgett God: but for a certain happiness, which God promises
for the present, but man is not now capable of: because of it is said. Nether
eye has seen etc.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Alas no my heart, nether are these momentarie Goods which
we see our true Goods: nor these evils which we suffer our evils indeed. No:
for of these goods we see the wicked most plentifully possessed: with these
evils we see the just most powerfully oppressed. Our Good indeed is the chief
Good, that only, we are to hope for, that to love alone: and our evil too is
the souueraigne evil, that alone we are to fear and fly. Whence we are warned
not to fear them that can only kill the body, and can reach no further, but
to fear him, who can cast both body and soul into eternal fire.

THE XIII. MEDITAT. What motives he took to confirm Hope
I. POINT.

COnsider that the first motive of our Hope, yea even the sourse of all our
motives, is the infinite goodness and Charity of God, whereby he was moved to
converse amongst us. We ought not to be without Hope, but rather to presume in
Christ with a great confidence; because if through charity he is with us in
earth, by the same charity we are with him in heaven, according to that of the
Apostle, Your life is hidden with Christ in God. Therefore he is yet below: we
are already above: He below by the compassion of Charity; we above by the
hope of Charity.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Had we Christians yet reason to doubt with Solomon,
whether God did dvvell amongst men, we might also fall into that deficiencie
of Truth, that he walks about the Poles of Heaven, and considers not our
things: but being assured by Faith, that he left heaven to take up his delights
amongst the sons of men, we cannot fear but he is full of goodness for us,
through that goodness loves us, and for that loues-sake would have us to love
him again, and to be confident in him. I will therefore with the holy
Patriarche hope even against hope; and with the good Job, hope in him Though he
should kill me: because sure I am, what ever sense may seem to suggest, he
does not love and forsake.

II. POINT. Consider that his second motive was, not that he conuersed with us
only, but even became one of us. What has man to do for whom God became man
taking our humane nature upon him? This is my whole Hope and entire confidence;
for by this sacred union, every one of us has a part or portion in Jesus
Christ, to wit flesh and blood.

AFFECTIONS and RESOL. Let us then say with your holy Father, where a part of
me reigns, their will I apprehend I reign; where my flesh is glorified their
I know I am glorious Though I am a sinner, I cannot be diffident in this
communion of graces for what my sins prohibit, my substance exacts. He cannot
forgett man which he bears about with him, and for our love took upon him. In
him, we have already ascended the heavens; in him we are set at the right
hand of his heavenly father. O comfortable, and admirable, and ineffable motive
of man's hope, and confidence in so sweet a Savior!

II. POINT. Consider that his third moriue of hope, was, not so much that he
conuersed among us, or was one of us, as that he daigned to dye for our Love.
Be confident thou shall attain to his life, of glory, who have his death for
a pledge of it.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Let then the Devil rage; the flesh reuoult; the world
wax madd against me. Let me hear nothing from them, but where is now thy
God? as though I were quite forsaken by him: yet will I live and dye in this
confidence, that since he delights to be with the sons of man, he cannot
delight to abandonne him to the rage of his enemy, any further then he
discouers it for his advantage. That since for the love of man, he became man,
he loves not man so little as to loose him. That finally since he dyed for him,
while he was yet an enemy, he will not now, since he endeavors to be a servant
and a friend, leave him a pray to his enemy. In hac spe dormiam and
requiescam.

THE XIV. MEDITAT. How he behaved him self in Charity shevving first that
without Charity all serves for nothing
I. POINT.

COnsider that though Faith show us the good things, which nether eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, etc. and Hope gives us a comfortable confidence
that we shall attain unto them; yet shall we never walk home indeed, unless
Charity give us feet. Thy Charity is thy feet; with that thou art carried,
where so ever thou art carried: Thy two feet are the two precepts, of the love
of God and thy neighbor. Run to God with these feet, draw close to him: for
he himself exhorts thee to run, and to that end enlightened thee with Faith,
incourraged thee by Hope etc.

AFF. and RESOL. I plainly see what ever Faith shows me, and Hope assures me
of, it is love alone can make me happy. Without that, like the sick man of
the passie, I lie uncomfortably, unprofitably, I advance not at all: unless
thy love make me walk I stir not. Grant me therefore to love thee, as much as
I desire, and as much as I ought. Let me be wholly inflamed with the fire of thy
Charity, that I may love thee with all my heart, yea with the very marrow of
my heart strings; that thou may always, and in all places, be in my heart, in
my mouth, and before my eyes, till at length I may see thee for ever, face to
face, in thy heavenly Sion.

II. POINT. Consider that without true Charity, all our works are of no
value, seem they never so specious in the eye of the world. Charity makes the
distinction betwixt the sons of God and the sons of the Devil. Let them sign
themselves with the sign of the Cross. Let them all answer, Amen. Let them
all singe Alleluya. Let them all be baptized. Let them all enter into the
Church; and build up the walls of the Church; by Charity only are the sons of
God discerned from the sons of the Devil.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Let us not deceive our selves with the fair outsides of
things. All that is without love, is without life. Whether we believe, or we
hope, what the Catholic Church believes and hops; and live within the walls
of the same Church, and with joy say Amen to all that is said to it. Whether we
watch, or fast, or preach or pray, it will not all avail us to eternal life,
unless all be both commanded and ordered by charity. Without this one
necessary thing all the rest are lost. Diligam te Domine fortitudo mea, and
refugium meum, and liberator meus, etc.

III. POINT. Consider that as having Faith, and Hope, together with all the
specious works imaginable, without Charity we have nothing: so having
Charity, we want nothing. Where Charity is what can be wanting, says he, and
where it is not, what can profit us? The Devil believes, and yet loves not:
but none loves but he believes. One who loves not, may, though without effect,
hope for pardon: but none that loves can despair. where love is therefore,
Faith and Hope also necessarily are. Let us then keep this precept of our
Lord, and let us but love one another, and we shall not fail to perform what
ever he commands besides. For in this we have what ever other thing there is.

AFF. and RESOL. O God how true it was that Solomon said, when he professed,
that together with wisdom all good things came unto him: for what is wisdom,
but a sauourie knowledge, a true relish of heavenly things, which is noe other
thing then Charity? This makes us believe as we ought, hope as we ought, work
as we ought. This is one and all; upon the purchase of which if a man imploye
all his substance, he shall repute it all, as nothing at all. Upon this then
will I settle my whole intention; upon this spend all my meditation, and
thoughts, etc.

THE XV. MEDITAT. WHAT CHARITY IS
I. POINT.

COnsider what Charity is, and you will receive from Saint Augustine, that it
is a love of the chief Good! or, Charity is a virtue whereby we desire to see
God, and to inioye him. Or yet more fully, Charity is a motion of the soul to
inioye God for his own sake, and ones self and his neighbor for God. So that
Charity is a love which looks only upon God, or for God.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Good God how sublime and noble an object! How worthy of a
man's whole thoughts! Nay rather how far is it above man, and who did imbolden
him to take so high a flight? Ah! It was even the same souueraigne Good which
would have it so. O Lord, what art thou to me, or what am I to thee, that thou
should command me to love thee? Yea and be angry, and threaten to lay huge
punishments upon me if I love the not? Ah! is it not of it self agreat, and
even the worst of miseries, if I love thee not?

II. POINT. Consider that as Faith and Hope are not fruits of this base soil,
so nor Charity as by our endeavors, and substa^ces we are not able to purchase
them, so nor this; but it is sent down from he auen as the most excellent of
Gods gifts, says he, (according to that of the Apostle, Charity is diffused
in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given to us.) To wayne our hearts from
earth, and carry them up to heaven with her.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O divine and heavenly Charity! Thy extraction is from
Heaven; thy whole aim or object is Heaven; thy whole employment in earth is to
raise our hearts to Heaven; and, of earthly which we are, to make us become
heavenly. O my soul let us not love our selves so little, as not to employ our
selves wholly upon this sacred love. O love which always burnest, and art never
extinguished, o Charity which art my God, let me be wholly burnt with thy fire,
that I may love thee with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength,
with all my aims and intentions, etc.

III. POINT. Consider that though holy charity, be a fruit originally of
Paradise, yet being planted in our hearts, by the finger of the holy Ghost, we
are to husband, water, and increase it. For, says S. August. is Charity
entirely perfect as soon as it is produced? No, but it is produced that it may
be perfected. To wit, being produced it is nourished, by nourishment
strengthened, by strength perfected.

AFF. and RESOL. O let us carefully watch this holy fire, that we may never be
so unhappy as have it dye out for want of the oil of our works: let all our
thoughts be employed upon the husbandry of this seed of Heaven: let it be
watered with the plentiful tears of a contrite and humble heart. Dear God
smite my heart with the dart of thy love, that my soul may say to thee, I am
wounded with thy charity, and out of that Loue-sore, a floode of tears may
stream day and night.

THE XVI. MEDITAT. How Charity is increased
I. POINT.

COnsider how admirable Charities commerce is, which quite contrary to wordly
riches, increases by being imparted, and bestowed upon our neighbors. Bestow
your charity bountifully and it increases abundantly. communicate not this
sacred fire to your neighbor, and it decreases, languisheth, and dies out.
Money, says he, and Charity are not bestowed alike: that by being bestowed is
diminished; this, is increased. Yea more, it increases in his hands who
renders it, and by how much more amply he repays it, by so much more
plentifully he retaynes it. It increases in his hands.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O blessed tradinge! easy, and wishfull and gaynefull
traffike! By giving away apace, we speedily wax rich. By endeavoring to make
others happy, we fail not our selves to become happy indeed. We will therefore
dilate the bowels of charity, and strive to do good to all. One we will
help with counsel, another with comfort; or what other ways we may be able
to assiste him in.

II. POINT. Consider how exceeding easy, our good God has made the increase
of charity: It is not necessary that we have either a great power, a great
purse, or use any great industry. For is there any thing more common, or more
within every man's power then a cupp of cold water? give that only for Gods
sake, and charity is increased, and a reward is promised. Who, says he, is
able to bring any excuse, since God promises a revvard, even for a cupp of cold
water. And again, such is the nature of holy love and true charity, that by
imparting it increases.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O God how good thou art, who, while we have nothing but
by thy free gift, enables us by the good use of what thou have formely given,
to increase holy love, and thereby draw a number of new blissings upon us. There
is nothing less then a cupp of cold water, nothing greater then love; and yet
even by that, this is increased.

III. POINT. Consider further with your holy father, that it is not only by
your purse, power, or by the gift of a cupp of cold water, that charity is
increased, but even by a good look, a good wish, a myld answer. Despise no
suppliant, if thou be able to give, give. If not, show thy affability. God
crowns our good wishes, where he finds no wealth. Let none therefore say, I had
not wherwithall, charity comes not out of our coffers only. He who has a
heart full of charity, never wants what to give.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O dear God how exceeding easy thou have made this
Queen of virtues, which is indeed alone better then all the rest together! Let
us never be so wanting to our selves, as to send any away without an Alms,
since a good word, a look, a wish is able to do it, and by so doing our love
is increased, and our title to the Kingdom of heaven enlarged.

THE XVII. MEDITAT. THE EXCELLENCIES of Charity
I. POINT.

COnsider with him, that there is nothing better, more precious, more
profitable, more lightsome, more strong, more secure then charity.

AFFECTION and RESOL. What is it we look for? or whether is it, that with
pains we run to seek it? Nothing can possibly be found better then the best,
nor more precious, then what is most precious, etc. and all that, we may
possess in charity alone. Nothing can better enlighten our blindness,
strengthen our weakness, or secure us against the manifold dangers of this
malignant world.

II. POINT. Consider that Charity possesses us of the presence and sight of
God, so that we need not run out into the streets to look whom our heart
loves, since the eyes of Faith discouers already in our own heart whom we
love. Why do we send him who has charity a far of to see God. Let him
observe his own conscience, and there he sees God: for if Charity inhabites
there, there also inhabits God. Would we happily see him in heaven? Lets have
charity, and he is in our heart as in Heaven.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O the bliss, and glory, and Majesty of a loving heart!
O humane heart, not so much now a heart, as a Heaven or Paradise, since thou art
made a Mansion for the God of glory. Do not, do not my heart gadd abroad, and
by a degenerous conversation forgett with whose presence thou art honored, thou
have by love got Deus tuus and omnia. Contemn for his love all other things
saying. Dilectus meus mihi and ego illi.

III. POINT. Consider, whether a greater commendations could be putt upon
Charity then by saying God is Charity. A short praise, and yet a great
praise. Short in speech, great in understanding. Yes, it is quickly said, God
is charity; but good God, whether are our thoughts carried by that word? God
is Charity? By possessing Charity then we possess God, but God is all good
things, therefore by possessing Charity, we possess all that good is in Heaven
and in Earth.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O short and great commendation indeed, since so great, as
nothing can be added. Since greater or better then God nothing can be imagined
by men or Angels. Nor is it a humane persuasion we have for it, but an
assurance of faith, that God is Charity, and who remaynes in Charity
remaynes in God, and God in him. O my soul what an honor and comfort is this
amidst all the calumnies and afflictions of the world, that by love thou art
able to become Gods Mansion, and he thine! And if thy beloved be thine, and
thou his, what can be wanting to a well borne heart?

THE XVIII. MEDITAT. A continuation of the excellences of Charity
I. POINT.

COnsider that Charity alone is not vexed at another felicity, because she
knows no emulation. She alone is not transported with her own felicity,
because she swells not with pride. She only is not stung with a bad
conscience; because she wrongs no body. Amidst contumelies she is secure:
amongst hatreds friendly: amongst braules pleasant: amidst deceipts, innocent:
lamenting at iniquities, and resuming heart upon the discovery of Truth.

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. Who is then so happy as one inioying Charity? What
has the world which can give so solid and sure a content? Yea what has it
that is not brimme full of discontent? Whereas the charitable man meets with no
vexation, no emulation, no swelling; but contrarily, joy, peace, patience under
the shelter of a good conscience, are that happy man's share. O divine Charity
how thou fillest the hearts which thou do possess, with delight, sweetness and
tranquillity! Ah! they seem even to enter into the joy of their Lord.

II. POINT. Consider that it is Charity which makes all the good Angels, and
all Gods servants compagnions in the bond of sanctity, and it ioynes us and
them together amongst our selves, and subjects us to him.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. See how it leagues heaven and earth together, and putts
us in mind what title we have to it, makes Angels and men fellow servants, and
even in a manner equal in honor, and chains them together in linkes of holy
love, which is true sanctity, o wishfull and dear bonds! See what a sweet
order it establishes betwixt man and man making each one love and honor, and
defer to an other, without forgetting their due subjection to God, to whom
incomparably above all, love honor and glory is due.

III. POINT. Consider what a huge great good, Charity is, which without our
labor, makes what is good in others our own. Hence it was that the Psalmist
holily glories, that he is made partaker of all that love God, and keep his
commandments.

AFFEDTION and RESOLV. Ah my soul if thou have but charity, alls thine own.
There is no good work done in heaven or in earth but thou have a share of it.
Heaven and earth makes but one great Christian common wealth, whereof Charity is
the Queen, and lodges in thy heart What ever prayers, fastings, austerities,
almsdeeds sufferances are exercised within the compase of the Catholic
Church are partly thine, while thou art rooted in Charity.

THE XIX. MEDITAT. OF SOME MOTIVES of the love of God
I. POINT.

COnsider that S. Augustins first motive of the love of God was that he first
loved him. The love whereby God loves us cannot be comprehended nor changed, for
he loved us not only since the time we were reconciled to him by the blood of
his son, but he even loved us before the world was made, that we together with
his only begotten son, might be his sons, before we were yet any thing at all.

AFFECT. and RESOLVT. While I yet was not, and so was nothing, my infinitely
good God had thoughts of goodness for me, to raise me out of that abisse of
nothing; and make me that something which now I am; being made, he fell in love
with his own work, merely out of the abundance of his own goodness, without
any need he had of it at all; and made us sons, sons and heirs of the heavenly
Kingdom we had no title too. Ah my soul, if we will not begin to love, at
least being thus graciously prevented, let us not stick to pay love for love.
The heart is too hard, which, (though it will not freely give) will not at least
render what it owes!

II. POINT. Consider that his second motive was, the excessive greatness of Gods
love to us, such as we were, which went so far that he spared not his own
only son, but delivered him to death, and the death of the Cross for all of
us, us, who where wicked sinners. Remember how much he loved, that we may not
despair; whom, or what kind of creatures he loved, that we wax not proud. A
son for a servant, an that a most wicked one: delivered up to death, and that a
most ignominious one!

AFFECTION and RESOLV. O God I cannot look upon that great price, that
infinitely great price, the precious blood of a son spent for the redemption of
a servant; but of a son, who was a first begotten, an only begotten, and an
only beloved one, one to thine own heart, in whom thou were entirely pleased,
one, in a word, in every thing equal to thy self. I cannot, I say, look upon
it, but with much love and confidence: Nor can I reflect upon the servant, the
poor miserable and sinful servant upon which it was spent, but with much
confusion. O God what is man that thou should so putt thy heart upon him: but
o man what is God to thee? And yet thy heart departs so easily from him?

III. POINT. Consider that his third motive was, not that he loved us first,
and most, but eue^ prepared no other reward for our love then himself. What
then, says he, shall our worshipe of God have noe reward? Ah yes, but noe
other then the very God himself whom we worshipe: Seek nothing of him,
without him, he himself will suffice thee.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah! that heart is convinced to be intolerably greedy and
insatiable, whom God suffices not: At least Augustins noble heart finds all
plenty, mere want to him, which is not his very God: And therefore he
petitions for nothing else. Render me thy self; give me thy self: for thee I
vvish, thee I seek, thee I hope for; to thee has my heart said, I have sought
thy countenance o Lord! And therefore, what ever my Lord God is disposed to
bestow on me, let him take it all away, and let him give me himself.

THE XX. MEDITAT. In what manner and measure God is to be loved
I. POINT.

COnsider that the best, manner of loving God, is to love him chastely, that is,
with purity of intention; with as little of our own respects and interest as
may be, but because he is God, that is, infinitlie good, or infinite goodness.
Let us love him so as that we love no other thing besides himself. I, that we
may be made worthy of his heavenly imbraceme^ts, let us discharge our selves of
the care of all earthly things, and lets adheare to him alone gratis.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Too little he loves thee, o Lord, who loves any thing,
besides thee, yea even with thee, which he loves not for thee: for alas the
innocent lamb who was slaughtered for us, is worthy to receive glory, and
honor, and benediction: nor that, in respect of his good gifts only, but even
because in himself, he is infinitely wise, infinitely powerful, infinitely
beautiful, infinitely good, containing in him self, in a most eminent manner;
all the respects of good by which a reasonable man can be drawn to love. Let
us love him therefore, let us love him even for his self sake, and for no other
reason, as far as we are able.

II. POINT. Consider that the best measure of loving God, is, to imitate his
love to us, and love him without measure: for since the object of our love is
infinite, should not our love also, if it were possible, be infinite? Thou art
immense, o Lord, and without measure ought thou to be loved and praised by
those whom thou have redeemed with thine own precious blood.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Come lets love him, lets love him, he deserves all love,
yea more then all; for he has loved us to make us, he has loved us being
made: he has loved us first and most: he loved us so far as to give his son,
and to be ready to give himself, if we love again. Ah! let us blush and be
ashamed, if after all this, we find our selves slow to love.

MEDITATIONS FOR SEVEN DAYS. TO BE USED BY THE Canonesses Regulars of the
Order of Saint Augustine, in the Monastery of SION. Established at Paris. A.
1634. As well before their clothings and Professions os otherwise.

I will lead her into the wilderness: and I will speak to her heart. Osee
2. printer's device of Gabriel Targa, featuring a sun POST NV^ PI^^^


AT PARIS, By GABRIEL TARGA, M. DC. LXV.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST DAY.
The preparatorie prayer shall be the Hymn Veni Creator. with the prayer Deus
qui corda.
THE FIRST POINT. Of Gods Benefits to man in his Creation
CONISDER that God who is infinitely great, and infinitely, and eternally happy
in himself, seeinge things which are not, as things that are, out of his
mere Goodness, without any need of us, being neither prevented by any
merits of ours, nor provoked by hopes of returns, raised us out of nothing to
his own likeness; presented us with the whole world; made us absolute Lords
over it, and over all the great variety of things comprised in it, for our
use. Finally he endowed us with a reasonable soul; capable of himself, to
enjoy him for ever.

AFFECTION. Where were we, where were we (so long, or so long ago) my
soul? where were we, and all that we glory in, while we yet were not? Ah
while we slept in our nothing, he who watches over Israel slept not. But
loved us with a perpetual love. he made a world for us; not us for the world:
he made us Lords over it, not slaves to it. He gave us all things to use, not
to enjoy: to solace our pilgrimage, not to stay us from our contry. Heaven, my
soul, is our contry: the King of Heaven our possession, which we are made to
enjoy. Be it far from us to love the benefits, more then the bountiful
benefactor: or to glory in our selves; or any thing; while we and they are
Equally his free gifts:

THE SECOND POINT. Of man's regeneration
Consider that though the benefit of creation be great, yet that of
regeneration far exceeds it, whereby we are borne to a new and better life;
life everlasting. By that, we were made, and called men: by this, we were
made, and called by Christ his own name, Christians, or men of Christ. By
that, he gave us power to live and reign over all the creatures: by this, to
be little less then the Angels, yea to be like to our creator in justice, and
sanctity. We were borne dead, but by pure grace, we were revived in baptism,
made domestikes of his house the Catholic Church, strengthened by
confirmation, fedd and fatned by his holy word, and even his own precious body
and blood. Whereby we are not only called his servants, but are indeed his
friends, nor his friends only, but his sonns, nor his sonns alone but his
spouses.

AFFECTION. If all, my soul, that we are, be due to God for our creation, by
which we are all, that we either are, or have in the order of nature, what
will be due for our better beeinge by our regeneration, which makes us citizens
of the Saints, and Gods own domestikes, his friends his sonns, his spouses? O
what heart is able to conceive the highth of the dignity, to be made, by grace,
of sonns of the earth, the sonns of God: of disloyal subjects, the spouses of
Christ? and yet, my soul, such we are which was not granted to all; such we
are by his free goodness, and mercy. If therefore, all that we have in the
order of nature, or grace, we had absolutely, from his free gift, let all be
employed, and heartily referred, to his honor.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Of the obligations which we contract in
Baptism
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that as the benefit of regeneration, in Baptism is a benefit of
preference, and of singular excellency, since of slaves of the Devil, it
renders us childeren of God, and reintitles us to our right in the Kingdom of
Heaven: so it bringes with it great obligations to which we are all
indispensably subject. We solemnly promessed therein, in the face of the
Church. First to renounce the devil and all his pompes, wiles, and
allurementes (whereby he endeavors incessantly to work our eternal ruin.)
That is, to detest and fly the concupiscence of the flesh; the concupiscence
of the eyes; and pride of life which are the Devils baits, wher-in he
insnares the whole world, and inslaues it to his accursed dominion.

These renounciations, o my soul, are the promesses we solemnly made in our
Baptism. These are the christian duties to which we are all absolutely
oblidged; be we religious persons, or be we secular: according to these we
shall be judged at the last day. It highly behoues us then, to run over our
life past in the bitterness of our hearts, and observe whether our holy
professions have been seconded by answerable practices: and whether due
performances followed our solemn promises. Have we indeed, my soul,
renounced the Devil and all his pompes? Or rather, have we not left Christ,
and followed his wicked allurements? Upon what follies have we not feasted our
eyes? To what highth has not our thoughts aspired? Of what impurities, and
disloyalties, have not our hearts, at least, been brimme full. Observe and
lament our miseries.

THE II. POINT. Of the second obligation which we contracte in Baptism
Consider that the second obligation which we co^tracte in Baptism, is, to be
listed among the soldiers of Jesus Christ, to fight under the banner of the
Cross, and openly to profess his law. That Sweet law of love which
conteynes all Christian duty: the love of God incomparably above all other
things, as being infinitely lovely, and comprisinge in himself all the
motives and obligations of love: and the love of our neighbor as our selves;
that is, in order to God, in God, and for God. All the love we can afford to
the rest of the creatures, is but only for solaces to our necessities and
pouerties: as provisions for the way of our pilgrimage: to be used, not to be
inioyed, not to have our hates fixed upon, which are wholly due to God and our
neighbor.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah, my soul, had we been to have made choice of what
law we our selves had most desired (not to have received it from the hand of
our almighty maker, who had full power to impose what law he pleased upon the
works of his hands) what other law would we have wished, but that which we
have? A law by which we are not permitted only, but even commanded, to love
our King, the King of Kings the King of glory. What more honorable? To
love him wholly, from whose love and bounty we have all that we have. What more
reasonable? To love him from whose liberality we expect all that we yet want;
the possession of his heavenly Kingdom; the inioyment of himself for all
eternity. What more profitable? And as to the other part of the law, what
poor lives should we not lead; nay what deaths, and Hells should we not
suffer, did we in lieu of love to our neighbor, afford him only neglect,
scorn, and hatred. Let me love thee then, o my dear Lord, and my neighbor in
thee, and for thee, for ever.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SECOND DAY. Of the third obligation contracted in
Baptism
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that the third obligation that we contracted in Baptism, was, that
we are bound to live the life of Christ: according to that of S. Paul: I live,
not now I, but Jesus Christ lives in me: for we are buried togeither with
him by Baptism: and ought also to rise with him, and walk after him, in
newness of life: because he left us an example, and his will is, that we
should follow his foostepps: that is that we should walk in the lowly paths
of humility, poverty, and abiection, as he did from his very first step
into this world in labors, hunger and thirst from his youth: in suffering
reproaches, contumelies, and outrageous conte^pts, all his life long: in being
abandonned at his death by his Apostles, and even by his heavenly Father: my
God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me?

AFFECTION and RESOL. The life of Christ, my soul, is our pattern; the
imitation of it, is our obligation; and the lively expression of it is our
perfection. Let us seek noe other, nor other way, then by humbly following his
footestepps. To that he calls, us: learn of me who am mylde and humble in
heart: not to high speculations, with are more apt to fill us with vanity,
then feed us with solid food. Caluarie was left us for the imitation of his
virtues, Thabor only to admire his Majesty: He is our Alpha, and Omega our
beginning and our end. Let all our applications be to him, and our dependences
of him. Let all our conuersations be with him; our desires follow him; our
discourses of him; our continual cries to him. O my dearest Lord and savior,
thou, my love; thou, my life. Let this covenant be made betwixt us. Let me
wholly dye to my self, that thou alone may live in me: Let my passions be
wholly silenced; that thou alone may be heard in me. Let all my sollicitous
cares, which are fruitless without thee, wholly cease, that thou only may
work in me.

THE II. POINT.
Consider that notwithstanding all those former benefits, and obligatio^s
contracted thereby, we have been so ungrateful, and neglectfull of our own
good, as little to mind them. Nay like true Prodigalls we have dissipated and
spent, all those gracious, and Godlike talents, and forgetting our promesses
and obligations, we have returned back into the slavery of the Devil. And
here it was indeed that our good God magnified his mercyes toward us. We run
from him into a foraigne land, and he leaves the ninety nine to seek us. We
strike at him by sin, and even crucify him again, and he supportes us with
patience. We step down to hell, and he brings us back. He frequently
knockes at our hearts, by his holy word preached to our ears; by his internal
voice inculcated to our hearts; by wholesome tribulations multiplied upon us;
and breaks through our deafness. And having himself wrought all this in us,
he crowns his own mercyes by takeinge us again into his familiarity? and he,
and all his court rejoices at our conversion.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O thou God of mercy! to what a length have thou extended
thy patience with me? It was I, that ran from thee into a Land of disproportion
I, that forsook thee, the fountain of liueinge water, and made to my self
cisternes, broken cisterns which could hold noe water. I, that turned the use
of thine own gifts to abuse, by loueinge them more then thy self (in such or
such an occasion) I that stepped down into Hell (at such or such a time; so, or
so often) and thou the while ceasedst not to redouble thy cries: Why vvilt
thou perish o thou house of Israel; Why do thou love vanity, and seek a
lie? loose thy chains from thy neck o thou captive daughter of Sion. At least
after all thy disloyaltyes, call me but Father. Ah, my soul, be noe longer
deaf to all these gracious inuitations: but run, though alas but too late, to
that Father of mercyes, and say, with a contrite and humbled heart: Father I
have offended against heaven, and against thee, and I am noe longer worthy to
be called thy Son: deal with me only as with one of the hyrelings of thy
house.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SECOND DAY. The greeuousnesse of sin
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider what sin is, and your holy father S. Augustine will teach you that
it is noe substance at all, but a miserable and accursed nothing. Yet such a
nothing it is, that man becomes nothing thereby (nihil fiunt bomines cum
peccant) yea worse then nothing, since it is the very death of the soul
(peccatum mors est animae.) Or take it from him with the whole Catholic
Church, in more ample and expressiue terms. Sin is a word a thought, a
deed against the eternal law, or prime reason, which is God himself. What
do we then, when we sin, but speak, think or do, against Gods eternal
Law, or God himself?

AFFECTION and RESOL. Ah my soul, my soul, it is too hard for thee to kick
against the prick; which by how much more we assault it, by so much more we
are wounded by it. It is against God himself that sin ryseth up; against
that great, dreadful all-mightie, reuengfull God, whom were it in its power,
it would destroy: since the sinner, as such, would neither have God wise to
know, nor just and powerful to punish his iniquity. Alas, what advantage can
worms, and pismires expect by wrasling with Elephants? Our strength is like to
a spiders web; how dare we then strugle with omnipotency whose will none
resistes? In wrasling we shall only meet with our own ruin. In disputing
never find repose, nor be able to answer one for a thousand: for, to conclude
with S. Paul, o man who art thou that do answer God?

THE II. POINT. Of the lamentable effects of sin
Consider what grievous domages the poor soul receives by mortal Sin. It
depriues of grace and ban^isheth the holy ghost out of the heart which it did
inhabit. It breaks the league of freindshippe which was betwixt God and us,
and leaves us his enemies, and slaves of the Devil, his and our worst enemy:
It robbs us of the right we had to possess God for ever, leaueinge only Hell
for our inheritance. It wounds, makes hideous, and even Kills that otherwise
im^ortall soul of ours: in a word, it makes us crucify Jesus Christ again,
and in effect tread the sacred blood of Jesus under our feet.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. Oh accursed fruits of Sin! O says God himself by
the mouth of Jeremy, Know and see how evil and bitter a thing it is for thee
to have left the Lord thy God. Ah my soul, these are not dreams imaginations,
or rethoricall amplifications, but even Christian truths which none dare deny,
how do we then dare to dally with danger, to seek occasions, to drink down
sin like water? If therefore the world, the flesh, or the Devil tell of I
Know not what delights, let us have this generouse replye still before our
eyes, but they are too dearly bought, with the loss of the holy ghost and all
his gifts, Gods freindshippe, and his eternal inheritance, and become the
obiecte of his hate. This moment of false liberty is not worth being aslaue
to the Devil for ever. This honor looks fawningly upon me: but it were
madness to purchase it with eternal disgrace. This gold glitters agreeably,
yet it is not worth the having: since it will serve only to buy Hell.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE THIRD DAY. Sin is detestable to God
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider in what horror and detestation we should have it, since wisdom it
self does so abhor and detest it. The Almighty eternal God, whose
goodness cannot be questioned without impiety; nor his justice be impeched
without blasphemy; nor his mercy be exacted without presumption: he being
indeed, not so much good as even essentially goodness it self, nor so much
just as justice it self, nor so much merciful as mercy it self; for one
sin of pride throws down the third part of the Angels into hell,
irrecouerably, without any further hope of mercy.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. If, my soul, this be not less a truth, which all the
Christian world willingly embraces, then the former; how comes it to pass that
man's folly dare be so damnably aduenturous as to fall in love with Sin,
which wisdom so highly detests? How, how, I say, dare we live in league with
it, and be willinge to meet with it at every turn? If it have made Angels
Devils, what privilege have men not to dread the like effects? not for one
or a few, but even for thousands of sins; (every man makeinge reflection in
himself of the multitude of his sins) down then, my soul, down; place thy
mouth in the dust, and whilst thou can not penetrate the rigor of Gods
justice to the Angels, turn thy self more earnestly to admire his
incomparable mercy to thee, humbly confessinge, that otherwise Hell had been
long since thy habitation: makeinge a firm resolution to singe his mercyes
eternally.

THE II. POINT. Adam by sin turned out of Paradise
Consider how the same God who is equally goodness, mercy and justice, for one
act of disobedience, throws Adam out of the happy state wherein he had placed
him, and subjects him and all his posterity, to multitudes of miseries of body
and mind (such as we all daily expeperience) to heat, cold, calamities,
innumerable sorts of sicknesses, and even to death it self; and that too, not
only to the dearh of his body, but even to a second death, the death of the
soul: so that there was not any salvation left for all the sonns of men, at
any less rate then the death and blood, of a Godman Jesus Christ.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O my soul, if this truth be taught us by faith; if we
feel it by a sadd and universal experience; if it be made manifest to us by
the death of a God: let it printe in our hearts, an absolute horror, and
detestation of sin, which is so horrible, and detestable in the sight of God;
and which his justice punishes so rigourously. And let us noe less adore that
stern justice of his, then extolle, and dearly embrace his mylde mercy; who to
expiate the sin of an vngracicus disloyal servant, sacry ficeth the blood of
a dearly beloved, and dearly loving, and wholly obedient, and only child. Be
that Justice always admired, and dreaded; and be that mercy magnified, and
loved, by men.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Sin putt a God to death
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that our sweet Saviors pains (the dear price of our redemption)
are universal; noe part of his body passes without its particular punishment.
His head is tormented with pullinge of the hair, with blows with thorns; His
face with foul spittings and boxes. His tongue with thirst veneger and gale.
His torn shoulders with the heavy load of the Cross. His arms with rude
extentio^s and rackinge. His hands and feet with cruel nails. His whole body
all over with stripes. His Sinews with conuulsions. His arteries and veins
with witherednesse. His vital parts with an incredible effusion of his
precious blood: so that what the prophet foretold was fully verified: from
the sole of his foot, to the crown of his head, there was noe soundness. See
then whether there be any sorrow like his sorrow.

AFFECTION. Alas? it is but too evident, my dearest Lord, thy sorrows pass all
our sorrows and yet my soul, it is majesty that is thus smitten: it is
innocence which thus suffers. It Is indeed the God of Gods, whose immensitie
cannot be comprehended; whose perfections and excellencies cannot be numbered;
whose goodness is boundless, whose mercyes cannot be matched. Alas my
deformed, hidden, crucified Lord? whither has mercy, goodness, love to
miserable man ledd thee? was it thought fittinge to this goodness, that thy
wounds should be without number, as are thy perfectio^s, and mercyes to man?
so to make an absolute demonstration, that as there is noe love, so are there
noe sorrows like to thine. Let me not live but to love thee, and suffer for
thy sake.

THE II. POINT.
Consider further that he sufferd in all his senses, by the presence of all the
objects of sorrow, He saw his choysen Apostles sleeping, while he was sweating
blood. He saw the Trayter, whom he had newly fedd with his own blessed body
and blood, come in the head of a barbarous band to apprehend him. He saw the
execrable cruelty of an ungrateful nation, which he had always oblidged and
loved by preference. Finally, his ears were full of blaspheemies scoffs and
scorns: and his eyes and heart of the sorrows, tears, and blood of a God
dying.

AFFECTION, And yet, my soul, it is the very natural son of God that
suffers all this? He is the splendor of his fathers glory, and the figure of
his substance. And shall we his poor sonns, taken in by adoption only, see
with dry eyes, his, full of tears and blood? or shall we, after this sad
sight, permit them any more to be filled with vanity? Shall our ears lie
open to destractions, adulations, and found rumors, which hurt our souls,
while his, for our sake, are filled with contumelies, and blasphemies? Shall we
Christians pamper the rest of our senses, with sweetes and delicacies, while
our Christ's so hugely suffers in them all? Ah! be it ever far from us; to pay
his love with such intolerable ingratitude!

THE III. POINT. He suffers in his soul
But if his body universally and all his senses, be engaged in the sufference,
is his soul at least free? Ah noe, its sadd to death; its replenished with
evil or sorrow, the bitter waters of tribulations have broken in upon it. The
horror of death, the ingratitude of me^, the scorn of Nations, Pilates
injustice, Herod's mockery: Annas and Cayphas blasphemy, the Scribes and
Pharisees circumuentions, the Ministers and Soldiers cruelty, the peoples
preference of Barabbas and their tumultuous and unjust Crucifige. See then
whether there be any sorrovv like to his sorrovv.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O man of dolours, and accustomed to sufferances from thy
youth! Were not thy sorrows, and, in them, thy love to man, sufficiently
expressed, in abandonning that innocent, chaste, and tender virginal body of
thine, to the cruel persecutours wills, unless thou did withal permit the
bitter floods of tribulation, and deadly sadness, enter into, and take
possession of thy blessed soul? Consider: my soul, and see whether their be
any sorrow like to this sorrow, or any love like to his love who gave up his
soul to such sorrows for thy sake? If the horror of death invade thee, thy
Master went before thee, and waded through to death it self. Prove friends
ungrateful? so they were to thy Lord. Are others, of less worth preferred
before thee? but so was Barrabas before thy Master Christ. Remember, remember,
my soul, that the servant is not greater then his master etc.

THE IV. POINT. He suffers without a comforter
Consider his body's tormented, his senses offended, his soul afflicted and
oppressed. Is none left to comfort him? Noe none, relictus est solus, he is
abandoned. left all alone, to wrestle with all the legions of sorrows. Non est
qui consoletur eum. There is none left to comfort him. Was there ever so
pittious a spectacle? His Apostles are fled; Peter follows a far of and
swears he knows him not. The dolorous mother stands near the Cross, indeed,
but her presence affords so small solace, that her sorrows serve to redouble
his. The Angels come not near. His heavenly father abandonns him: nay yet
more (Heavens stand amaysed at it) he is even forsaken by himself, while he
stopps the influence of his divinity, that it flow not upon his humanity,
leaving it to suffer all alone without all comfort. See then vnhether there be
any sorrovv like to his sorrovv!

AFFECTION and RESOL. O, my soul, look upon the face of thy Christ. Admire
his his un wearied suffering love. Heartily acknowledge that there is noe sorrow
like his sorrow. Imprint in thy heart at what a dear rate thou wast bought. Ah
my soul! it was not with gold and silver, and such corruptible things: but
with the sorrows, and tears, and blood, and death, of a God-man, our Savior
Jesus. With sorrows, which spredd themselves so universally over body, senses,
and soul: with tears, and blood, so plentifully and freely powered out: with
death so ignominious, so deuoyd of all comfort, so abandonned, that it forced
from the mouth of a most obedient and dearest child: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me. Resolve firmly then, that neither sorrows, nor bloodshed,
nor abandonments, nor death it self, shall separate us from the love of that
dearest Lord.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE FOVRTH DAY. Of Death
THE FIRST POINT. Nothing more certain then death, less certain then the
time thereof
COnsider, and strive to imprint in our hearts, that which we all know, yet
seem not to know it; that which we all believe, and yet as it were, believe it
not: to wit, that as there is nothing so certain as death, so is there
nothing so uncertain as the hour thereof. Consult our own Knowledge upon
these truths, and we Know, that neither Salomons wit, nor Samsons strength,
nor Absolons beauty were found proof against it. They were, and now are not,
mortui sunt, is certain. Consult the word of truth, and we shall find that we
are bound to believe what we otherwise Know. Consult our selves again upon
the uncertainty of it; and we find that we have Known, many taken away, when
they and their friends least feared it; some by violent, some by natural
deaths, some in their childhoode, before they well knew what it was to live:
some in their flourishinge spring, when vigourous youth promised them they
could not dye. Some in the decline of their age, while death threatened, and yet
was not feared: so certain it is, that the hour of death is uncertain to
all; as Christ himself makes it sure to faith. Watch says he, because you
neither know the day, nor the hour.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Dye then we must, my soul, thereis nothing so
certain; depart we must out of this cottage of clay; Gods justice has
pronounced the sentence. Remember man that thou art dust, and in-to dust thou
shall return. But when must this sentence be put in execution? that is noe
less uncertain our youth may deceive us, as it has done many. our manhood
or middle age, is not privileged: our old age cannot last long. What then
must we do, but with S. Augustine, quitt the uncertain, and forthwith fix
upon the certain means, a good and penitential life, to prevent the danger
of that which cannot otherwise be avoided by mortal man.

THE SECOND POINT. Nothing more certain for the thing, nothing less
certain, as to the manner
Consider that as we are most certain that dye we must, and as uncertain
when; so are we noe less ignorant, where, and how this irreuocable sentence
is to be executed. Shall it be in France or in England? at Paris or in the
Country; at home or abroad, in our cha^bers, or in the Church or Garden? Shall
it be by a violent, accidental, or natural death? Shall we be found dead in
our beds, as we have seen some, and heard of many? Or else, be wrought down
by a loge and lingeringe disease in the presence of many? Shall we finally have
the benefit of the Sacraments, which we now have with so much ease, yea want
not without blame? To all this, the wisest among men is not able to answer.
That dye we must is appointed by a reproachlesse justice; but when, but where,
but how: mercy, says S. Augustine, has concealed, that we might expect,
attend, and provide for it, in all times, places, and occurrences.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If certainly we must dye, my soul, and yet neither Know
when, where, nor how; and if upon that certain uncertain hour an eternity
of bliss or woe depends, what a necessity is put upon us, (if we will not for
moments loose eternities) to be ready in all times and places. We Know not, my
soul, we Know not when, where, or how death may surprise us; only this we
Know, that we have yet an hour left us to rise out to four slumber, and it is
now his present hour. Now then without further delay, will we, by Gods grace
dye (to that, that, and that, etc.) that death findinge us already dead, may
not be able to hurt us, but only translate us to a life which Knows nor
fears not death.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Nothing more dreadful to the obstinate
sinner, then death
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that as death contaynes the greatest certainty, and withal, the
greatest uncertainty imaginable, so it bringes alonge with it, the greatest
dread, and the greatest comfort possible. That, to the obstinate sinner;
this, to the humble penitent. The sinner upon the approach of death, has all
the sins of his whole life placed before his eyes, which he still placed
behind his back; and would neither see them, nor sorrow for them: which now
the vile Tempter aggrauates, and makes appear in their uttermost inorminitie.
And hence the sinner begins, before hand, to suffer the torments, which he
always believed (tho fruitlessely, through his obstinacy) to be due to his
crimes. And thus Knowing his guilt, and the punishment most justly due to the
same, he deeply apprehends it a thing full of horror to fall into the hands
of a living God. Thence he rages, and despaires, seeing himself upon the very
brinke of endless perdition; and ready to be delivered up into the hands of
his cruel Tormenteres for all eternity.

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. O horror which has nothing equal to it! To
apprehend ones self to be upon the very brinke of eternal perdition. O
daunting dread, incomparably surpassing all that ought to be dreaded! To be
within a moment of falling into the hands of that everliving Majesty, which
is able to throw both the body and soul into Hell fire. What riches, honors,
pleasures, (were they never so opulent, superlatiue, and prosperous, and
remained they too till that moment, in their full possession, whereas indeed
they all are vanished away like nightly dreams) were able to conteruayle so
daunting and damning a disaster? O my soul, those accursed wretches, shall
then say with in themselves; repenting, and sighing (too late) for anguish of
spirit. What has pride profited us? Or what advantage has the vaunting of
riches brought us? Or what comfort has the most prosperous pleasure of our
whole life now left us. Alas, alas none at all, but contrarily a comfortless,
fruitless, endless peniteri.

THE II. POINT. Nothing more confortable to the humble penitent
Consideration. But when the innocent and just soul, or the poor humble
penitent, perceiues death to creep upon her, she lifts up her long dejected
head with joy, because her redemption is even at hand. She had used her best
endeavors, mournfully to purge her sins in the blood of the lamb who was
slaughtered for us, and thence she co^ceiues an humble confidence to meet with
mercy, and to be joyfully admitted in, to that celestial marriage of his. In
fine, she eyes death as the immediate object of her joy; since it alone has
power to deliver her out of her loathed prison of flesh; and to deliver her up
into the dear hands, and divine embraces of her dearest spouse whom she loves
alone.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Sit down seriously, my (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) soul, and count to what a high degree of consolation it will
then amounte, to hear those heavenly inuitations of the heavenly spouse
saying: come, come, my spouse thou shall be Crowned. Crowned, I say, with
that crown of justice which is laid up for, and by a just Judge shall be
rendered, to them that love his coming. The shewers of repenta^t tears, are
now blown over: the sharp winter of temptations, tribulations, vexations, and
crosses, which we willingly endured for the love of God, are quite gone: rise
up my friend and come. O what excess of dear delight, shall that happy soul
inioye at that hour?

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE FIFTH DAY. Of Judgment
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that dye we must; that is, this so much neglected soul of ours,
must be turned out of the body, which was pampered, caressed, and too carefully
looked to by us, and presently after death, Judgment (says the great Apostle)
we must all of us be brought, and be made manifest before Christ's Tribunal,
that every one bear away according to his woorks. We have left the world
unwillingly while willingly the world leaves us; the dearest friend that ever
we had will not go alonge with our abandoned soul, nor even permit the body
which they loved, to ly four and twenty hours in the Room with them. They
that offended with us, will not answer for us, but leave us alas, to answer all
alone.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Aye me upon what is it that we fix our hopes? is it
upon our selves; bus alas these muddie walls fall, and the immortal
inhabitant is turned out, Upon the friends that we have purchased by sin, or
other wise! but they have left us, our body is thrown into the earth, and our
poor soul is left alone to be judged. Ah how much better were it says S.
Augustine, to choose him for our friend, above all our friends, who when all
forsake us will be sure to make good his trust, at the day of our death, who
when all depart from us, will not leave us, but will defend us, and conduct
us by a country where we have yet noe acquaintance. Thou art my Jesus and noe
other, be thou therefore my choice in time and in eternity.

THE II. POINT.
Consider in what a dauntinge anxiety, and dreadful expectation the poor
soul must needs be, findinge herself all alone, to be sentenced by a Judge
who is all knowinge: all things lyinge open, and naked before his Eyes. All
powerful, for who resists his will? all holy, and souerainly hates Sin.
Justice it self which can neither be corrupted by bribes, nor moved by prays.
And to behold, this knowledge; this power; this sanctity; this justice;
armed with implacable wroth, and inflexable zeal against the sinner!

AFFECTION and RESOL. Alas and woe, my soul, whither shall we run for shelter?
To his mercy? but her time is past, she leaves the place to justice. To his
sanctity? But our sins are quite opposite to the holiness of that thrice
Holy. To his Justice? But alas our iniquity stopps our mouths. Shall we call
upon the mountains and rocks to hide us? But his power is a hammer bruising
the rocks in sunder; his knowledge penetrates the mountains; and his zeal
and fury spares none. Such certainly, my soul, and infinitely more dreadful
then we can imagine it, will that dismale day be found. Howbeit, we are yet in
a time of mercy, we can yet safely fly from Christ to Christ; from his
justice to his mercy; from his power to his impotencie, in his cradle etc.
From the zeal and wroth of Majesty; to the sweetness and myldnesse of the
Lamb, who comes to take away the sins of the world. Finally we have yet the
means to hide our selves in the holes of the the saueing rock, and to save
our selves.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. Of Hell
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that as mercy and justice are equal in God, or even God himself;
so, by the law of contraryes, they will be followed with equal effects. If
God out of his mercy then, have possessed the blessed of the collection of all
good things, under his heavenly reign, which is beatitude: he will throw the
accursed into the possession of a collection of all evil, under the tyranie of
the Devil, which is damnation. Let us therefore imagine all that we are able
of horror, of hope turned unto despair; of the love of God, and all we ever
had dear, into hatred, and detestation: let us add worms, which never dye,
weepinge, wailing, gnashinge of teeth, brimstone, and floods of fire, and yet
we must conclude, that it is not that which the damned suffer, which will
indeed, be that, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. Aim my soul, into what a vast sea of misery,
disaster, and despair, does sin cast down poor man? we imagine all that
ever we can of terror, of horror, and torment; of im^ortall worms; fire and
brimstone, and yet we fall short. We add the collection of all evils, and yet
we cannot reach to it. What is it alas? what is it, that lulles us asleep, and
makes us senseless, of things so sensible? O that we could descend into Hell
alive, and consider, who amongst us, were able to live in the midest of
deuouringe flames? And yet into such is the sinner thrown by the doom of
eternal Truth: Go you accursed into eternal fire.

THE II. POINT.
Consider yet more particularly, that as the accursed had misused all that God
had given them for his service, to offend him; as body, soul, and senses, so
shall they all meet with their several tortures. The body and soul, become
fuel for deuouringe flames. All the senses are replenished with objects of
horror: the eyes are full of dreedfull and ghastly Ghosts: the ears of
howlinges, roareings, execrable maledictions, and blasphemies: the smell of the
stinckinge odours issuinge from the bodies of the damned: the taste is glutted
with what can be imagined most bitter, and abbominably loathsome. Finaly, the
sense of touching meets with nothing but floods of tormentinge flames.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. O horror, consternation, and despair? O lamentation
of lamentations, and woe, woe, woe? woe to the corruptible body which waighed
down the poor soul? woe to the soul that quickened that fleshly lump, and
gave way to its badd inclinations. Woe to the eyes and ears which lay open to
vanities, and frantic madness, and conveyed poison into the heart. Woe to
all the rest of the senses and members, which conspired to the seducinge of the
soul, and to bring it, and themselves, to lie tormented in this flame.

THE II. POINT.
Consider that if the miserable state of the damned be most unhappy by the
continual presence of the whole collection of all evil: What an infinite
addition is made, to it by the privation of all good, and that for an
eternity? To be for an Eternity, separated from all the blessed, were they
never so dear unto us, while they lived with us? for an eternity to be
deprived of the peerless beauty of the Queen of Heaven, and the society of
all the Quires of Angels! For an eternity to be exiled from the glorious face
of God, which is man and Angels essential beatitude; and to detest, curse, and
blaspheame it for ever? Neuor to have one moment of ease; consolation or rest,
or even the least hope of any for all eternity!

AFFECTION and RESOL. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) O God of
mercy, now turned the Lord of revenge, what heart has assurance ennough, not to
endure, but even to behold this calamitous condition of the damned?
overwhelmed with all sorts of torments; removed from all hopes, or even
desires of comfort: not for some millions of millions of years, but for an
eternity! O eternity! eternity! how long thou art! Noe number of years are
able to express thee; the sands of the sea cannot equalize thee; after all,
thou still remainest what thou art, Eternity. Ah my soul let us use a timely
prevention, and not make our selves away to eternall' torments for light and
short delights (such or such etc.) nor yet for the auoydinge of, such or such
small crosses, afflictions, or temporal losses. Let us courageously pluck out
the Eye, and cut of the hand, which scandalises, and hazards our eternal
loss: and conclude with holy S. Augustine: Let me here be burnt, let me here
be cut in pieces. so that I may not perish eternally.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SIXTH DAY. Of Heaven
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider what this Kingdom is, which is prepared for the Blessed and which
they are called to possess (come possess the Kingdom prepared for you) and
this, at least, we shall find, that whateuer this possession may be, it is
greater then we have any capacity to comprehend. Let us look upon all the
beauties, and magnificencies that ever our eyes beheld, and they are not it.
Lets make reflection of all that ever we have heard, of honors, riches,
pleasures, and all of them are not it. Let us by help of imagination, put all
togeither that we have either seen or heard; and even add to them millions of
millions more, and yet we are not arrived at it. Noe, for S. Paul assures us:
that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it entered into the
mind of man, what God has prepared for those that love him.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O my most bountiful Lord and Master. Has thy good-nesse
made me capable of a Kingdom, which thy wisdom has not enabled me at present
to comprehend! O too too happy we, could we truly understand our own
happiness! But o more then most unhappy we, if we permit sin to rob us
of it; or that we otherwise make it a way for a mess of potage; or the bitter
Mandragores of mixed moments of painful pleasures: for such inconsiderable
toys (I mean) as are daily objects to meanest eyes, and fill every ear. Nay
even for the greatest things our hearts can conceive, since in a small time
they vanish away like dreams, and leave nothing in our hands. Alas! were it
not a strange misery, and madness, to make away such inconceiuable permane^t
possessions, for such known transitory toys?

THE II. POINT. What heaven is
Consider, again, what this Kingdom, or possession prepared for us may be;
and we find it is a state of life perfectly accomplished with the whole
collection of all good things. Not a passage, but a state, a permanencie,
without change, without end, without irkesommesse. Perfectly accomplished: not
by halues, and peecemeales. With the whole collection of all good things. Not
with a few, as here below, and those, good and ill; pains and pleasures mixed
togeither, but with the whole collection of all good things: so that what ever
we desire, shall be present: and all thar we desire not shall be absent
eternally.

AFFECTION and RESOL. We have Gods word for it, my soul, and it cannot fail
us, that he will show us all good; that is, all that is aduantagious,
gaynefull, and rich, in steed of the transitory riches of this world: all
that is beseeming, honorable, and illustrious; in lieu of the vain and vadinge
honors here below: all that conteynes in it self any cause of joy, and
jubilee, and and all that is dear and delightful (to wit, that ineffable,
unmeasurable, eternal weight of glory, according to S. Paul) in place of
those short, light, deluding, and even painful pleasures (as Solomon and S.
Augustine experienced them) for which poor man looses himself. Thus, my
soul, does faith assure us: let not then folly persuade us the contrary.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 6. DAY. Of Heaven again
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider, the kingdom prepared for us, is Beatitude: come o you blessed: and
Beatitude is noe other thing, then to know what is best, and to enjoy the
same. And whereas none but God himself is our summum bonum, or optimum, our
chief good, or our best: it follows, that God himself, the father, son,
and holy Ghost, is our Beatitude, or the Kingdom prepared for us: according
to that: I my self will be thy exceeding great reward. Him we shall see
face to face, and in that sight our understanding meets with all truth: him we
shall see, and in seeing him, our will meets with all good. Hence the
understanding having noe more to seek, and the will noe more to love, they
fall, as it were, into a blessed necessity, of truly seeing what they love,
and loving what they see for all eternity.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Forgett not then, o man, thy dignity! By Gods mercy, and
the merits of Christ, thou art made the son of God, coheire with Christ, to
share in his heavenly inheritance, to possess the same Kingdom with him: that
is, to know the prime truth, and love the chief good for ever and ever. Let
not then the fables, fictions and vain lies of the world, take up thine
understanding made to know so great and divine a Truth: nor the vain love of
creatures engage thy will, made to love so souueraigne a Good. But cry
incessantly here below with holy S. Augustine: Let me know thee, o Lord, and
know my self; and let me love thee as much as I desire, and as much as I
ought. Thus, my soul, may we in some measure, while we live amidst our
miseries, begin, before hand, to possess our Beatitude, which consists in
knovving, loving, and inioying our chief Good, which is God himself.

THE II. POINT. How Heaven is to be purchased
Consider out of the Gospel, that the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence; and
the violent bear it away. Yes, but we must learn of S. Ambrose how we are to
make this violence. We are to assault it, not with swords, with clubbe, or
stone; but with myldnesse, with good works, with chastity. These are the
arms which our faith makes use of, in that onsett. But yet to make a right use
thereof, we must first of all, make force against our own flesh and blood, that
so gayning dominion over our selves, we may imploye all our abilities to force
Heaven, as it were, out of the strong hands of the Almighty. We are not to
hope, says S. Gregory, to come to great honors, but by great labors and
pains. We must mortify our members, and all the mutinous people of our
hearts, our unruly passions, and badd inclinations. So did all the saints of
God scale and win his Kingdom. So did that great Doctor of the Gentiles
bear it away: I chastise my body and bring it into servitude. So did the
saint of saints enter into his own Kingdom. He suffered and so entered into
his own Kingdom.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Let us not hope, my soul, that we who are but younger,
and adoptiue children, should find any other safe way to heaven, then that
which the natural son of God, and all his saints, were to pass: That is,
through tribulations, contumelies, and contempts. If we suffer with him we
shall reign with him. Noe, noe, the pure wheat reserved for the heavenly
granaries must be winnowed: the gold found worthy to have course in that
celestial Kingdom, must pass through the hotest fires. Sweet S. Augustine
putts it at the lowest rate; that ever it can be expected: and yet according to
him it will cost us noe less then all we are. The Kingdom of heaven, says
that excellent Saint, is vvorth as much as thou art: give thy self and thou
shall have it. Do not stand barganing, my soul, and grudging at the price.
The natural son of God, purchaced it at noe less a rate for himself, and
thee.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 7. DAY. A serious reflection to be made, as well
of Gods gracious gifts bestovved upon us: as minaces pronounced against us
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider (by way of a serious reflection of all the former Meditations) that
since God has been so gracious to us, and we so ungrateful to him, as greatly
and frequently to have offended his divine Majesty. Since he so souuerainly
hates sin wher-of we stand guilty. Since death is so uncertain: judgment
so dreadful. Hell so intolerable; and the joys of Heaven prepared for us, so
ineffablely great; consider, I say, what a necessity is put upon us (if our
hearts be touched, either with dread of unspeakable torments, or love of
Beatitude.) To make a good use of the time, which by Gods mercy, we yet have,
to redeem time lost: to make hay while the sun shines: and to treasure up
the celestial Manna before the sun set.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Noe my soul, we will dare noe longer to be so
audaciously aduenterous as to triffle out precious time with cold cras crasses.
But even at this very moment I will strive to conclude an eternal peace with
God. It is dreadful to come too late; to hear, verily verily I know you not,
and to find the door shutt. My conversation therefore shall henceforth be in
heaven, and heavenly things. I will descend into Hell alive, to observe the
horride torments of that ghastly den. I will expect death at all hours, since
none knows the hour indeed in which it may surprise me. I will judge my
self without flattery, that I may not be more rigourously judged. I will
endeavor in earnest and with my whole heart to hate sin, which God so
soueraignely hates. And the residue of my life shall be spent, that by true and
hearty penance (the only true refuge after sin) I may take revenge of my
self, according to S. Paul, for having offended, so gracious a Benefactour,
and so dreadful a Majesty.

THE SECOND POINT. How we are to return to God by penance according to S.
Augustine
Consider that the way to return to God by penance prescribed by S.
Augustine, is: First (as to the time) to return speedily, and without all
delay: because he who promised pardon to the repentant sinner; promised noe
certain time for him to repent in, but willed him not to delay his conversion.
Secondly, (as to the manner) mournfully and with confusion. Every one ought to
lament over himself, as over a dead corpse: and express huge groans upon his
dead soul. Thirdly, in quality of Judge: Mount into the Tribunal of your
own heart, prove your own Judge, and exercise justice upon your self. And in
the first place, take your self from behind you, where you endeavored to hide
your faults, and not to be seen, and stand araigned before your self. Let
fear torture you, till a true confession burst out from an humbled heart: and
say to God; I acknovvledge mine iniquity, and my sins are continually before
mine eyes.

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. My soul, having thus, speedily, mournefully, and with
the justice and rigor of an impartial Judge, discussed our selves, let us,
presently, humbly, and confidently have recourse to God for the rest. We have
an unhappy power in our selves to commit sin. Thy perdition is from thy
self, o Israel: but our salvation is from God alone. To his mercy therefore,
which is above all his works, let us betake our selves, saying in the
bitterness of our heart: Grant mercy o Lord to that miserable wretch, whom
thou so long sparedst in his crimes. O immense piety, take compassion upon a
confessing cryminall. O public mercy, look upon him with the eye of pity who
has proved cruel against his own soul, ah. I should apprehend my case, in a
manner, desparate, did I not bewail it in the sight of an infinite goodness;
and conceive my wounds incurable, had I not recourse to an allsouueraigne
Physician. Let me perceive the effects of thy myldnesse, having so long
mercifully suspended the sword of revenge, and let the multitudes of my
miseries, be drunk up in the multitudes of thy drainelesse mercyes.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY. How we are to return to God by the
example of the Prodigal child
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that the poor prodigal having consumed all his substance, and
rising (by Gods preventing grace) out of the sleep of sin where he had long
laid, he said in himself: how many hyrelings are there in my fathers house,
who have bread in abundance, while I lie staruing here with hunger? I will
therefore go to my father, and say unto him, Father I have offended against
heaven, and against thee: nor am I worthy to be called thy son: treat me
only as one of thy hyrelings. This was all the rhetoric he used: to wit a
true acknowledgment of his own misery and offenses: and the plenty which was
found in his fathers house. And so took a pious resolution, with the heart of
a contrite, and humbled child, to return to a gracious father, and confess
his fault, willing for his punishment, to loose the title of a son, for that
of a poor hirelinge.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Thus it is, my soul, that we ought to enter into our
selves, by comparing the honor and plenty which we inioyed in our fathers
house, where a quiet conscience, heavenly comforts, benedictio^s and graces
do abound; with the disasters, disgrace, and abandonments which experience
made us find and feel, when like fugitives we wandered abroad, and were reduced
at length, to that excess of misery, as to feed with swine. Thus it is that
we are to return home again, by an humble confession of our faults to God,
and his Ministers: heartily acknowledging that we are noe longer worthy of that
noble Title of domestikes of God, sonns of God, coheires, and spouses of
Christ, but only of poor hirelings, which we willingly embrace. Thus do my
soul, and we shall infallibly be received into the open bosom of a tender
father, whose bowels are more prone to mercy, then our miserable hearts ready
to crave it as we ought.

THE II. POINT. How we are to return to God, by the example of B. Marie
Magdalene.
Consider that that mirour of true penitents returned to God in the best manner
imaginable, that is, with humility and love mixed with tears, etc. Vt
cognouit, says the Evangelist, as soon as she knevv that Jesus was set
down, to table in the Pharisees house etc. she entered with a pious impudence,
where she was not invited and placed her self, behind him at his feet, she
began to water his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head, and kissed them etc. She delayed not; to wit, the grace of the holy
Ghost knovves noe sluggish delay. She blushed not: because the confusion which
she felt within, persuaded her, that outward shame was not to be valued. She
spoke not, where she knew that the language of a contrite heart was better
heard, and her tears, the while, more effectually spoke her errand. So that
she wrought her wrothfull Judge, to turn her pious Advocate, and to pronounce
a favorable sentence for her. Thy sins are forgiven thee.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. These indeed, my soul, are the blissed dispositions,
which lead us to a perfect reco^cilement with God. But alas! who is so
impertine^tly proud as to presume to have them without his gift who commands
them, assuring us by S. John, that without him, we can do nothing Say
there-for; give o Lord, I humbly beseech thee, what thou command, that I may
love thee, as much as I desire, and as much as duty obliges me to. Give
humility, that inseparable companion of Charity, and sure Guardien of
virginity. Give, finally fountains of tears, that day and night I may
bewail my offenses: give them, I say, because without thee we are able to do
nothing. Noe: for if with B. Magdalene we come to Christ, it is because his
heavenly Father draws us. If the deep inward sense of our crimes make us
insensible (with her) of all outward confusion which they bring with them; it
is the sorrovv which is according to God, and from God, that works it in our
hearts. If we was he his feet with tears; it is God who powers down that
heavenly dew. If we love him, it is because he loved us first. And yet, (o
ineffable goodness and benignity!) by these his own gifts he draws us to
him, and then crowns the same by his free pardon, saying: thy sins are
forgiven thee.

A Prayer.
Grant, o Lord, we beseech thee, that the work of thy mercy may direct our
hearts; because with out thee; we are not able to please thee, per Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Other Prayers.
O almighty and eternal Father, daigne, by the merits of the life and passion
of thy only beloved son, deeply to imprinte in our hearts, true sorrow to
have offended thee, merely out of the motives of love: for alas, if we avoid
sin only out of fear of Hell fire, we fear not to offend, but to burn:
nor are we justified thereby, since it is not fear of punishment, but love of
justice; which makes us just in thy sight, o Lord.

Grant me also, dear Lord, a perfect detestation of sin, and a firm
resolution to avoid it here-after (especially in such and such things which I
am most subject to, and stand most guilty of in thy sight.) even purely for
thine own goodness sake, who art infinitely worthy of the love of all thy
creatures.

Grant me finally, a true contempt of the world, and a willing flight from it,
and all its pompes and vanities (which are the devils weapons to destroy us)
and thereby faithfully acquitt my self of the solemn promises made in my
baptism. Amen.

FINIS.
A SPIRITVALL EXERCISE before profession.
THE FIRST MEDITAT. The Preparitorie prayer. Veni Creator. and Deus qui corda
etc
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that since now the year of your nouishippe, or trial, is come to an
end; and that by Gods special grace and assistance, (to his honor and glory,
and the good of your soul) you have conceived a generous resolution, to set
upon the building of the Evangelical Tower, you are highly concerned maturely
to examine how it is to be done. Nor can you proceed more securely then by
taking it from the mouth of Prime Truth, saying: which of you mynding to build
a tower, does not first sit down and reckon the charges that are necessaire
whether he have to finish it, least that after he has laid the foundation, and
is not able to finish it, all that see it begin to mock him, saying: this man
began to build, and he could not finish it. You ought therefore to consider the
strength of your body: the bent of your mind; the motives which brought you
hither: that so you may discover, whether your body be not in truth too
infirm: your mind too weak and wavering: your motives too light, and
inco^siderate; out of some disgust, rather then a disinterrested choice: out of
confidence of your own ability and strength rather then Gods inspirations and
dependence of his grace.

AFFECTION. Let this be done, my soul, in sincerity and truth; with gravity
and care; still taking your counsels with God, and from God. It is not a
child's play you are going about but the work of a perfect man. Your choice is
not for a day, but for life. The consequence of it not for a term of some
few years, but for eternity, eternity, my soul. In things, in a manner,
indifferent, the choice is indifferent. In such things of small importance, it
little importes whether this, or that be done: so either of them be done to Gods
glory, God is pleased, and we merit. If we should stand a waighing Doubles,
says B. Sales, trading would prove too troublesome, Marry, goes on the same,
the choice of ones vocation: the proposition of a matter of great consequence:
a work of much difficulty etc. deserve a serious ponderation, that Gods will
(which is our duty happiness and perfection) may be discerned therein.

And let our firm resolutions be made accordingly.

THE II. POINT.
Consider with what it is that this Evangelical Tower, or spiritual building
ought to be built, and S. Augustine will teach you, that it is to be done with
noe other treasure, then the forsaking of all, and follovving of Christ, which
he takes from Truth it self, saying: Every one of you that does not renounce
all that he has can not be my Disciple. And the same Truth expresses what he
means by renounceing of all, in these words; If any man come to me, and hates
not his Father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters,
yea and his own life besides, he cannot be my Disciple.

AFFECTION. This, my soul, is the condition of the obligation into which we
are to enter, for the building of this spiritual Tower. This must be performed
by us, and even by all Christians in general (at least in preparation of
mind) or else in vain do we pretend to be the Disciples, or servants of
Christ. Give all, and gain all. At any less cost, this spiritual Tower will
not be finished: at any less rate the Evangelical pearl will not be
purchaced. Unless all this be performed, says Christ himself, You cannot be
my Disciples: you cannot be true Religious, and true followers of Christ.
Unless this generous resolution be absolutley undertaken: let our design be
absolutely forsaken. To serve God by halues, will prove unprosperous tovs, God
desires the heart which was made by himself, and for himself, and he will have
it whole. The virgins whole thoughts, and sollicitudes ought to be employed
upon the things which pertain to our Lord: that she may be holy both in body
and in spirit. Remember that it was S. Paul who said it.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST DAY. Of the solid and sure fundation of this
spiritual building
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider what fundation ought to be laid to supporte this weighty, and most
important building; and your holy Father will tell you again, that it ought to
be noe other then humility. Do you, says he, pretend to erecte a fabrike of
a huge highth? Think first of the foundation, humility. And by how much
higher we intend to raise the building, and to charge more weight upon it, by
so much deeper we must dig the fundation. Now, unto what a vaste highth is
the top of our Euangelliall Tower to reach? Certes even into the sight of
God, that great God, that immense and dreadful Majesty. How vastly deep then
ought our foundation to be dug?

AFFECTION and RESOL. Yes my soul: it is even into the sight of this dreadful
Majesty, that we intend that the top of our Tower should reach. That
majesty, which the Angels praise, the Dominations adore, the Powers tremble
at; the Cherubins and Seraphins with dread singe to. Holy, Holy, Holy, for
ever. Let us not hazard so hugely important a piece upon unsound groundworkes
which will prove at length but ruins. Nay, contrarily, let us dig quite
through, this loose earth of which we are made, exinanite exinanite vsque ad
fundamentum in ea. Let us never leave digging till we meet with our own
nothing; till we know it certainly; till we confess it ingenuously: that, is
our safest ground to build upon. where we may justly hope that God will put a
hand too, and raise the work; since his custom is, to trade upon nothing and
to work wonders upon it. Ah my soul, may we be so truly nothing in our own
eyes, that he who is potent, may look upon our abiectnesse, and do great
things in us.

THE II. POINT. What this foundation (humility) is
Consider what humility truly is; and you will receive from your holy Father,
that it is a voluntary stooping, or lovving of the mind, out of a serious
consideration of what our almighty maker is, and what we are in relation to
him. Or again; humility is a virtue vvherby a man waxes vile in his own
sight, by the true Knowledge he has of his own misery. Or else from S.
Bernard: Humility is verity; that is the truth of what God is, and what is
man; which being well known and pondered, it is impossible but that our hearts
should bow down to the very ground, and keep us there with our mouths in
the dust whereof we were made.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. Now, my soul, if humility be nothing else but a
stooping of the heart upon the knowledge we have, of what God is, and what we
are, let our consideration be continually fixed upon those two things, as the
sure, solid, and true ground thereof; saying with the humble S. Francis. O my
God, Who art thou, and who am I? Who art thou, but an immense, inaccessible,
ineffable, incomprehensible Majesty? And who am I, but a miserable,
inconsiderable, contemptible abisse of misery? Who art thou, but an infinite
rich Master, who can need nothing that is mine? And who am I, but a poor,
needy, beggarly servant, who am constrained to beg bread at thy door every
day? Who art thou, but a permanent, independent, eternal essence or being? And
who am I, as the scriptures teach, but a vapor, a morning dew, a dream, a
fantome, a fading flovver, a pure vanity, a blast of vvinde, a shadovve, in
aword, a thing, which neither has any other thing, more miserably poor, or
morevainely proud then it self. Dust and ashes, then, why art thou proud?

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE SECOND DAY. Of whom we ought to learn humility
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider of whom you ought to learn humility, and S. Augustine will tell
you, that he sends you not to publicans and harlots, who yet will be preferred
before the proud person in the Kingdom of heaven, but to the King of heaven
himself, who cries out as it were in a public auditorie of all mankind: come
unto me, and learn of me. But tell me, I beseech thee, says he, o thou son
of God, what must I learn of thee, by coming to thee? that I am mylde, and
humble in heart. Are then all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge which are
hidd in thee, reduced to this, that we must learn this of thee, as some great
matter of importance, that thou art mylde and humble in heart? Is it so great a
thing to become little, that unless we learn it of thee, who art so great, we
shall never be able to learn it? Yes truly, says he, even so it is: for the
peace and repose of the soul can be noe otherwise attained to, then by
dissipating that unruly swelling, which makes a man seem great in his own
eyes, while he appears unsound in thine, o Lord.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. We are here called to Christ's school, my soul, to
learn a a lesson which the world was never acquainted with before. The great
Rabbys of the Law looked over it, to find the first places in the synagogue.
The learned Philosophers understood it not, and thence vanished in their own
wisdom. The great Potentates of the earth looked upon it with scorn, and
thence they were thrown down from their seats. But the wisdom of heaven
made himself the Master of it, and will have us to learn of him: not to
create new worlds; not to make visible and invisible things; not to work
miracles, and raise the dead etc. which we should have judged a strange, since
an impossible command, but this only, short, sweet and easy lesson;
myldnesse and humility of heart. For alas, without it, what would it profit
us to be able to say, as some shall say to God: did we not prophecy in thy
name? did we not cast our Devils? did we not work many wonders? What would it
profit us, I say since we should only hear with them: I know you not; be
gone from me, o you workers of iniquity.

THE II. POINT.
Consider that it is noe wonder that the teaching of humility, was one of his
greatest sermons to all mankind in earth, since, as it may seem, one of his
wisdoms chief designs in coming down from heaven, was to teach the sons
of earth that necessary way to heaven according to that none ascends but he
who descends. To wit he had seen one of the brightest of his stars with
huge multitudes of his accursed crew rushe down to Hell, by their proud
ambition of ascending: and therefore he would teach the earth by descending to
ascend above the Heavens. They lost their right to Heaven by aspiring above
their places, to more then they were; and man was to be taught to cure
contraries by contraries, and to reintitle himself to heaven, by humbly
staying in his place, and by remaining what he was, by dwelling in his poor
naked nothing; which alone (were it anything) he might properly term his own.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If the very brightest starrsfall from Heaven, where
pride can get noe safe footing; what ought we poor worms to do in earth but
fear, and keep our selves within the compass of what we are? If they fell to
Hell by aspiringe to be like to the highest; let our firm resolution and whole
strife be, to ascend to heaven, by affecting to be equal to, or even less
then the lowest: since Thruth has said it, nor can he deceive us: that he who
exaltes himself shall be humbled, and be that humhleth himself shall be
exalted. Nay, my soul, since the same Truth comes to teach us this lesson in
his sacred passion, let us not prove so much contrary to his blessed design,
and our own advantage, as not to endeavor to learn it, with the whole strife
of our hearts. Howbeit, since he is as well the teacher, as giver of it, let us
often say with S. Augustine: thou command humility, o Lord, give what thou
command, and command what thou vvilt.

THE II. MEDITATION. FOR THE 2. DAY.
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that hence it was, that the divine wisdom, or Word of God, which was
in the beginning with God; nay, was God (and therefore could think it noe stealth
to be coequall, coeternall, consubstantiall with God the Father) exinanited, or
powered himself out, and became flesh, Et Verbum caro factum est, taking upon
him the shape of a servant. Earth is at a loss, upon this abismall
humiliation, little kowing, as says S. Augustine, what to say to it, or what
conceit to make of it. Nay the heavenly powers stand amaysed, to sea the king
of Angels, become less then the Angels: ye just like to one of us (in all
things save sin) nay one of us indeed: flesh of our flesh: bones of our
bones, poor man. Unless we should yet say further, less then man: Nouissimus
virorum, the least and last of men: a worm and not a man, with the royal
Prophet.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. Ah my poor soul; if the gracious inuitations, and
mylde lessons of Wisdom cannot prevail to pluck down our proud heart; let
at least the abismall example of our humanised God, the eternal Word made
flesh put before our eyes, dissipate, and cure that pernicious tumor. It is
thy very God that lies humbled at thy feet my soul; it is divinity it
self, which lies, as it were, infirm before thee, that so thy swelling being
worn down, thou might deiect thy self, and cast thy self prostrate, upon
that great God, Deus Deorum, now, for thy example, become the last and least of
men.

THE II. POINT.
Consider that if this heavenly design, and resolution be truly admirable;
far, far above the reach of men and Angels, and the execution of it,
ineffably gracious, and even rauishinge (as speaking more sweetness, and
heavenly delights to humane hearts, then they are any way capable to
comprehend; so that they do not so much entice, as enforce the said hearts to
humility, if there be any sense of man left in man) so the admirable
circumstances which accompaignie it, do powerfully preach the same lessons to
the eyes of the world. If then it has pleased him, to build himself a cottage
of the same claye whereof he made us; he will also have all the rest suited to
it. This most humble, Love, metamorfised-kinge, will have an humble mother
Queen, a poor handmayde of our Lord, An humble putatiue father, Joseph a
carpenter. An humble Palace, a poor. Rock or cave. An humble chair of
state, a manger. Humble attendants, an ox and an Ass, with a fevve silly
shephardes: and after that, all his life long, poor, tude, simple fishermen.

AFFECTION and RESOL. What, my soul, will be ever able to decrye pride, if
this do not? And what will be able to imprinte humility deep in the very
bottomes of our hearts, if this prove not effectual? His poor, abject, and
despicable condition, in the very first step he made into this world began
to publish it: His lowly, obscure, and hidden life, all the time of his
infancy, declared it: in his riper years he continually preached it: the
course of his whole life, confirmed it: and at his death, he signed it with his
precious, blood, humbling himself to death, and the death of the cross, the
most infamous of all deaths. O my soul, let us then, being forced by all
these pressing, and even oppressing arguments, either humble our selves to the
ground in all occasions of humiliation; or at least, confess to our confusion,
that we are the most unworthy, and unsuitable servants, to a divine Master, who
was, in all things so incomparably humble.

THE I. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Of the Benefit of a religious vocation
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that it seemed not enough to that King of glory, First to have made
you a reasonable creature, after his own likeness, and all the other
creatures for your use. 2. to have regenerated you to a new and better life by
the holy Sacrament of Baptism. 3. to have given you the knowledge of the
Catholic faith, having culled you out of multitudes that daily perish: but
his gracious benevolence went yet further on with you, and by this holy
vocation to Religion, called you to be his peculiar friend and servant and
Favorite, to have a more near and dear conversation with him, and to make it
your business in earth, to singe his praises, and mercyes, as the Blessed
shall do for ever and ever in Heaven.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O the infinite goodness of my dear Lord who goes still
on, in my behalf, heaping benefit upon benefit, and favors upon favors; yea
favors of singular preference, tender love, and greatest assurance; toward
the attayning of Beatitude, that can be met with upon this perilous sea.
Favors not granted to all, nay scarce to a few, among multitudes who daily
suffer shipwreck; while thy free grace, dear God, not my merits, has guided
my doubtful navigations to a safe harbor. Where (witness S. Bernard who
experienced the same) one lives more purely, falls more rarely, rises more
quickly, walks more cautiously, receives grace more frequently, reposeth more
securely, dies more confidently, and is rewarded more abundantly.

THE II. POINT. That this vocation leads to a certain state
Consider that Gods goodness, by means of this holy vocation, leads you not
to a certain indifferency of serving him, or not serving him, at your own
pleasure and election; but he bringes you thereby to a settled and permanent
state, wherein your body is tied to stabilitie in a certain place; and all your
actions are marked out, and limited by Rule and constitutions, and all these
confirmed by the three essential vows of Religion, Poverty, chastity and
obedience, according to S. Augustins Rule. Which vows are noe other things
then sacred and solemn promises freely, deliberatly, and with out constrainte,
made to God in the face of the holy Church, of things which are better, as S.
Thomas of Aquine teaches.

AFFECTION and RESOL. This, my soul, was Gods singular goodness to us, to
win our hearts by our own free choice, to renounce that dangerous liberty,
which might happly have proved our ruin, to embrace the true liberty of the
children of God, which is never so free, or even truly free indeed, but under
the servitude of that most pious King of glory, according to that of S.
Augustine; Liberty is never greater then under a pious King, whom to serve,
is indeed to reign: and happy is that blessed necessity which compells us
to the better. Our false liberty then is turned into a necessity, but it is
to be truly free: to have nothing common with the world: not to be tortured
with the greedy desire of vain toys! to have noe commerce with wickedness:
to pass our time in innocence. Our fortunes are noe more ours: noe, but they
are gaynfully spent upon the purchase of the riches of Heaven. The disposition
of our body is not in our own hands: true, but it is to imitate the Angels.
The goods of our mind, our very will is at another dispose. Yes, but it is,
that by wanting it for a time, we may enjoy it for an eternity.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD DAY. Of the vow of poverty
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that if humility be the basis and fundation, which secures all that
is built upon it, poverty must be at the charges to raise the walls. But with
what treasure will poverty perform this work? Marry with noe other, as S.
Augustine has told us, but with relinquishing of all we either have or can
hope for. So is the top and perfection of our spiritual building to be
attained to; as wisdom it self assures us, saying: if thou will be perfect,
go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and take up thy
cross and come and follovv me.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. O glorious and rich poverty, which alone art able to
undertake and accomplish so great a work. The riches of a kingdom are
scarcely sufficient to finish one princely Louure: and yet the poverty of one
poor free giving heart, is able to raise a stately Tower reaching into the
sight of God, and to possess it self of his kingdom. O gaynfull co^merce! o
diuinely-rich trading! Ingenious poverty is able to improve her small talent,
to an hundredfold advantage: and to the sure possession of life everlasting.
He says it, whom we dare not misbeleeue: every one that has left house, or
lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess
life everlasting.

THE II. POINT. That Evangelical poverty ought to be learnt of Christ
Consider that though diverse Philosophers both praised, and in some sort
practiced poverty, as not reputing him worthy of God who did not contemn
riches: yea and some among them qualified it laeta paupertas, joyful poverty.
Yet hardly should we either have tasted the joy of it, or have put our selves
to the practice thereof, had we not had a better Master to have proposed it to
us by way of counsel; preached it to us with a blissing upon it; and practiced
it in his own sacred person all his life long: who being rich became poor to
enrich us by his own poverty. He was poor in his nativity; being borne in a
poor cave or stable; wrapped up in poor clothes; laid on a poor lock of
hay, lodged in a poor manger, accompaigned with a poor ox and ass. All the
course of his life was spent in poverty and want: never having any possession,
noe not so much as a place to shrude his head, and at his death he was stripped
naked upon the cross.

AFFECTION. and RESOLVT. And yet, was he not eternal providence, and foresawe
all this? Was he not eternal wisdom. and so could have prevented it all? Was
he not the riches of heaven, and our God, who could stand in want of nothing
that is ours? Conclude then my soul, with much joy and consolation; either are
we making a good choice of this poor life we intend to lead; or else the
wisdom of heaven may seem to have mist in his choice. But wisdom could not
deceive, nor be deceived: rejoice then, my soul, to have made so sure, so
happy, so Christlike a choice. And let us never cease to use our uttermost
endeavors, to imitate his extreme poverty in his nativity, in his life, and
at his death.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 4. DAY. To what this vow of poverty does
absolutely bind us
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that the poverty to which you oblidge your self, is according to
S. Augustins Rule. That is, not to mendicitie, not to penury, or extreme want
of necessaries in meat drink or clothes etc. But to possess what you
possess in common, according to that Apostolical and primitive Christian
proceeding in the fourth of the Acts: All things were common unto them and
neither was there any needy among them and and to every one was divided,
according as every one had need. From these blessed first fruits of
Christianity, did your holy father, as himself declares, take the model of
your life. So that, as you can have nothing of your own, nor even the power to
call it so: so on the other side, you have right to your share in the common
distribution of the whole.

AFFECTION and RESOL. How happy are we, my soul, to have fixed upon so happy
a proceeding; where we are neither to have nor want riches: to wit we neither
suffer the danger of having them; not the incommoditie of wanting them. Happy
condition, which frees us from the peril of riches, which makes the way of
heaven almost impossible: and yet subjects us not to the incommoditie, of the
want of them, whereby life becomes loathsome, and necessity compells to
unworthy and base things. This golden mean, was certainly the production of
the holy Ghost in those boylinge primitive hearts, whence it was derived down
to us; and whereby we can joyfully pronounce with the Apostle: we have
nothing, and yet we possess all things, by the harmless use which we are
permitted to make of the^.

THE II. POINT. What poverty a true Religious ought indeed to aim at
Consider that though the possessing of nothing in proper, or want of
propriety. be all that you canonically promise or are bound to; yet your
aims indeed, are the contempt of riches, and of the very desire of them. It
is not gold and silver that the Apostle terms the root of all evil, but the
inordinate coveting of them. Nor are rich persons alone subject to danger, but
those also that covet to be rich, who, says he, fall into snares, and
temptations. The poverty which our savior preaches with a benedictio^ upon
it, is spiritual poverty, or poverty of the d'isinterrest mind which
neither has them, nor cares for them, nor seeks the commodities and pleasures
they bring with them, further then a mere necessary liuelyhoode, as we see
in our B. Saviors example, which is our pattern indeed.

AFFECTION and RESOL. The actual want of riches, my soul, and the banishing
of those contentious words mine and thine, is a good step to beatitude: since
thereby innumerable occasions of contentions and quarrels are cut off. Yet
alas, that is not all that the spouses of Christ should aim at who in their
poverty ought to express the poverty of Christ, who neither had them, nor
desired them, nor the commodities and delights which accompany them. It
profits us not at all, says S. Caesarius, to abandonne riches outwardly,
unless we root out withal the inward desire of them, which stick close to
our hearts. It is not too much, my soul, for poor naked man, to follow poor
and naked Christ.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 4. DAY. Of the vow of chastity
COnsider, that if humility has placed the foundation, and poverty raised
the walls, chastity would be at the cost to adorn it within: for it is indeed
Virginity that is the beginning of spiritual beauty and ornament. All the
beauty and glory of the Kings daugher is within. Yea says S. Bernarde,
virginity is the best, and most wishfull furniture, and such as might even
prove a kind of envy to the Angels themselves, which though otherwise
Virgins too; yet are they not virgins environed with flesh and blood: whereas
to live in flesh and not according to flesh, is not an earthly, but a heavenly
life, says S. Hierome.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. With what other ornament, my soul, then virginal
purity, was that royal Hall, or earthly Paradise, to be adorned, which was to
receive the purity of heaven, which came down to espouse man's nature? If
virginal purity then was to give intertaynement to the son of God in earth,
noe wonder, that purity too must adorn the spiritual building which we are
raising up into the sight of God in heaven. Let us not fayl, my soul, to put
an inestimable price upon this angelical virtue, which heaven so highly
values. It being indeed the iuery Throne which the heavenly solomon built for
himself. And let us never esteem it safe but only upon its sure foundation
humility.

THE SECOND POINT. That by the vow of chastity you are truly married to God
Consider to what a highth of dignity you are admitted by this heavenly vow:
certes to noe less then an absolute marriage with God. So were we taught by
Tertullian 14. hundred years ago; speaking to a virgin: thou art married to
Christ: to him did thou deliver up thy body: to him thon did betrouth thy
maturitie. Walk on then, according to thy spouse his will and pleasure.
Whence the Church of God till this day, appoints these words to be said at your
receiving of the veyle: receive this sacred veyle, vvherby you may be known
to have contemned the world; and to have subjected or espoused your self for
ever to Christ the spouse of virgins.

AFFECTION and RESOL.

O admirable dignity of the Virgin, where the humble handmayde is raised to
the honor of a Bride to Christ himself, the Bridegroom! whom when she loves,
she is chaste: whom when she touches, she is pure: whom when she takes in
marriage, she is a virgin! O supercelestiall marriage! from whence fidelity,
and fertility are expected, as well as in other marriages: because such as
break the first faith, have damnation, says the Apostle. Yea, the happy
state of virgins, assures S. Augustine, is more fruitful and fertile; not by
having great bellies, but great minds: not by having breasts full of milk,
but hearts full of candor: and in lieu of binging forth earth out of their
bowels, by bringing forth heaven by their prayers. Hence issues a noble
progeny; purity, justice, patience, myldnesse, charity attended by all her
noble train of virtues; the holy virgins heavenly issue.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 5. DAY. Of the vow of obedience
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that notwithstanding that in humility, the ground work, is sure:
that rich poverty has raised the walls, and angelical purity has adorned
the work interiourly, Yet must transcendante obedience secure all, or nothing
will prove stable. All is sure in obedience, all without it is in danger.
Obedience, says your holy Father, is, as it were, the mother, and keeper of
all: she continually watches that noe part of our spiritual building may be
liable to any danger. And this so necessary virtue of obedience, is nothing
else but a voluntary and rational sacryfice of our own will to the will of
another, which S. John Climacus terms, the death or grave of our own will.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If then, my soul, our greatest assurance be found in
obedience, let our greatest care be employed to purchase, conserve, and
practice it. By obeying our Superiors, it is (says S. Gregory) that God is
obedient to our prayers. And your holy Father, dares affirm; that one prayer
of an obedient person is sooner heard, thet ten thousand of one disobedient. It
is obedience which makes us secure: obedience which frees us from care and
solicitude: Obedience which renders our meat, drink, and play, meritorious.
By obedience we equally advance our journey toward heaven in standing still, as
walking on; in sleeping as wakinge. O admirable advantages of obedience! O how
happy and secure is the condition of an obedient soul, of whom the wiseman
pronounces that she shall singe victories.

THE II. POINT. That obedience is the most important of the three vows
Consider that though the vows of poverty and chastity, contribute much to
the happy state of a religious life, yet does that of obedience far excelle
them, and in some sort conteynes them all, according to the sense of the
Angelical Doctor. For whereas Religion is a sacrifice, wherein poverty offers
all her goods of Fortune; and chastity all those of the body: obedience goes
yet further, and sacryficeth all those of the mind, as self-will,
selfe-iudgement, and even the whole man, which certainly is incomparably more
excellent then all the rest.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Poverty, and chastity, says S. Bernard, are the two
wings by which obedience mounts aloft. Yet it is she indeed, not they that
fly. A douzen such wings would not be able to raise proud disobedience one
inch to heauen-wards. It is neither our goods of fortune, nor those of our
body, which will prove a pleasing sacryfice in the sight of God, unless they
be accompayned with obedience, the humble submission of the will, and
judgment. Banishe out of your heart, this pleases, and this displeases,
says your brother a Kempis, and nothing shall trouble you. and S. Bernarde,
take away the will, and there shall be noe hell.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 5. DAY. Of the extont of obedience
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider, that as to make obedience absolutely blind, were to deprive man of
man that is, of reason whereby he is differenced from a beast, and to oppose
that of the Apostle; let your observance be reasonable: so to leave it wholly to
the guidance, and appointment of reason, were rather to make a man a
Philosopher, then either a good religious person, or even a good Christian. It
must so far see, as to be able to discern Gods part, because the Decree is
without exception, that we ought rather to obey God then men. But where we
do not manifestly see, that Gods right is trenched upon, or violated, we ought
absolutely to obey a superiors command in all things without reserve, wherein
he is superior. And this kind of obedience falls under your vow, and is
absolutely necessary.

AFFECTION and RESOLV. O my soul, if our own reason were made the Rule of our
obedience, with what confusions, and endless wranglings would not Monasteries
be replenished? They would not so much be found sacred and silent solitudes, as
cententious Academies. It is at the death of our rebellious wills (that
postilent source of man's misery and mortal poison of a sprituall life) that
obedience aims, which is not effected by proud disputes, but by humble
submissions; having continually in mind that all power is from God, and he
who resists power resists Gods ordonnance. Let us then, my soul, humbly and
promptly obey God in our superiors person, standing always in a blissed in
differencie with S. Paul, to hear him by their mouths, and to obey him, in
their persons, saying: What is thy holy will I should do?

THE II. POINT. Of the diverse degrees of it
Consider that tho necessary obedience to which you are tied by vow, consists
in obeying Superiors commands, according to Rule and Constitutio^s, or what
conduces to the due observance thereof. Yet are not the pious spouses of Christ
to stop there, but to be still striving to emulate the better gifts, and to
render themselves wholly agreeable to their divine spouse. Be perfect, as your
heavenly father is perfect says our savior, by endeavoring still to obey in
the most perfect manner, which that great servant of God Ruisbrochius putts
down as follows. In the first place it must be prudent and discreet. 2.
simple. 3. cheerful. 4. prompt. 5. courageous. 6. devout. 7. humble.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O what a blessed life is ledd where all these conditions
meet! O what a Heaven appears in earth where earthly Angels thus live Let
this be our chief endeavor, my soul, as it is the happiness, security, and
ornament of a religious life. Let us with prudence and discretion discern Gods
will by our superiors mouth, and whether we be commanded to watch, to fast, to
pray or work, etc. or else upon occasions, at their pleasure, to leave them
off, let it be done simply, and with assurance, that by how much more simply,
by so much the more fruitfully and excellently its done. Let that discreet
simplicity be seco^ded with quick and cheesfull execution: for God loves a
free and merrie-harted giver. If the thing commanded appear hard, yet embrace
it with a manly courage, heaven is worth more, and he who gave the command can
give strength to perform it. Finally, let all this be done with humility and
devotion, not so much to please men, as that our heavenly father may be
glorified.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 6. DAY. Of the excellencies of Obedience
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider with devout Ruisbrochius, that obedience is a virtue of so great
excellency, that the very least work, be it of what kind it will, being
done by virtue thereof, is much better, and more acceptable to God, then even
other geate works done without it; as for example, hearing of Mass, reading,
praying, contemplating, or any other work you can think of. Which lesson we
are yet taught by a greater Master: Kings 1. 15. Will our Lord have Holocausts
and victimes, and not rather that his voice should be obeyed? For better is
obedience then victimes: and to harken rather, then to offer the fatt of
rams. Because etc. it is as it were the wickedness of Idolatry to refuse
to obey.

AFFECT. and RESO. It is not so much the greatness of the thing then, my
soul, we ought to look upon, as the greatness of the obedience with which we
are to perform it. Commandes of great and herociall actions rarely occur,
whereas obedience may be daily exercised, and merit increased in a number of
small matters. Nor is it easily to be conceived, what riches are to be
treasured up for heaven thereby. Devout obedience knows how to render the
poor widows myte a gratfull offering. Industrious obedience negotiates upon
trifles, and yet like the honiebee stores her hyue with huge riches. Many other
virtues, daughters of Charity, gather maine heaps of treasure togeither, yet
obedience so far outstripps them all, that she makes her self more grateful
to God then a sacryfice.

THE II. POINT. Of whom we ought to learn Obedience
Consider that we ought to learn this best of moral virtues of the best of
Masters of morality Jesus Chapter Who is as well the Master, as the Disciple, of
it. He was the Master of it: at his coming into the world; while he lived in
it; and at his departure out of it. At his coming, S. Paul tells us in his
person: in the head of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will: then said I: behold I come that I may do thy will o God. His whole
life was spent in the doing the will of his heavenly father who sent him, and
in obeying his mother, S. Joseph, and even all creatures for his sake. At his
departure, he was obedient even unto death, and the death of the Cross. And
he was the Disciple of it too; since, as S. Paul affirms, though he were
the son of God, he learnt obedience by the things which he suffered; and
was made the cause of eternal salvation to all that obey him.

AFFECTION and RESOL. O what an excellent lesson of obedience has the son of
God, left for the sons of men to imitate! He, who, as God, could be obedient
to none, being God-man, be comes obedient to all men for his heavenly fathers
sake. All his life was a continued obedience, till by his painful death he
consummated the great work of man's redemption, for which he was sent. Father I
have consummated the work vvhih thou gave me to do, says that entirely
obedient son. The work which we are to do, my soul, (which is as it were
our whole business) is, to obey God in our superiors commandes, and by such
submission, and their care, to secure our blessed eternity. By their eyes we
best discern: By their judgments we most wisely judge: by their directions,
and orders, we most surely walk to man's beatitude.

THE II. MEDITATION FOR THE 6. DAY. That Charity must be the roof of this
spiritual building
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider, that be the foundationes never so deeply dug: be the walls never
so firm, and confirmed; and the interior parts never so fairly adorned: yet
if the roof be not suitable to the rest, and be not established above the rest,
it lies but vselessely open to receive winds and shewres; and is unfit for the
use of man: being indeed noe perfect buildinge, but only the materials or
ruins thereof; upon which passers by look with derision, and say: this man
began to build, but could not finish the same.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. It is the end, my soul, that every wise man acts for,
without which his work is imperfect, nor can he repose. Poverty indeed
seems more then humane. Pure nature knows noe such production. Virginity is
truly Angelical and divine; and is a fruit which is only found in the bosom
of the Catholic Church. None but a virgin mother brings out virgins.
Obedience directs all, secures all, confirms all: and makes a fit tabernacle
for God in the heart of man; by banishing thence self judgment and self
will. But heavenly charity; as a glorious mother, far outstrips them all,
gives them all their beginning, increase, and perfection. For why indeed, my
soul, did we first enterprise this holy work, but because we love? What could
be able to rob us of all we have, but love? What did wowe us to virginal
chastity, but the love of a virgin spouse? What could move men to deprive
them selves of beloved liberty, and to live at the dispose of another will,
but the love of him alone, who chused rather to dye, the^ not to accomplish the
will of his heavenly Father? Love then, says your holy Father, and do what
thou vvilt.

THE II. POINT. That without charity nothing is done to secure our happy
eternity
Consider that if humility put the foundation of your spiritual Tower, it was
by charities guidance and order: for as humility goes not without charity, so
charity never leaves humility. If poverty raised the walls, it was with the
treasure wherewith charity furnished her. If chastity adorned it within: it
was with the pure burning gold which she had of charity. Finally if obedience
confirmed and secured the whole work; it was by the force she received of
charity, which is as strong as death. In a word all is from charity, and
all is for charity.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. He (S. Paul) knew this truth, my soul, as certainly,
as he affirms it undauntedly: to wit; that not only the foresaid virtues
profit us nothing without charity, but even that tho we should have all
faith, so that we could remove mountains: though we should distribute all
our goods to be meat for the poor: finally, though we should deliver our
bodies to burn, and yet want charity, it profits us nothing. Charity; says
holy S. Augustine, is that which discernes the sonns of God from the sonns of
the Devil. Charity is that one necessary thing, which alone suffices.
Charity, in a word, is that Evangelical gemme, for which if a man should give
all his substance, he shall repute it as nothing. Come the^, o come then, o
thou holy spirit, Deus Charitas, and replenish the hearts of thy faithful, and
inflame them with the fire of thy love.

THE FIRST MEDITAT. FOR THE 7. DAY. That all the virtues are love
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that so true it is that nothing is done without charity, that your
holy Father makes noe difficulty to teach you, that without charity the rest
of the virtues are not indeed reputed virtues: nay further, that the rest of
the virtues are but indeed love and charity, so, or so qualified. For what is
humility but charity stooping, and reputing her self nothing? What is
poverty, but charity contemning all, and stripping herself of all: What is
chastity but love preserving corruptible man from corruption of body and
mind? What finally obedience, but love freely and reasonably sacrifycing up
the will of man, and making it supple and inclinable to every creature.

AFFECTION and RESOL. Charity then, my soul, is that transcendant heavenly
virtue without which there is noe true virtue at all. It is she which gouernes
as Queen, gives life, vigor and worth to all the other virtues. He who loves
not remaynes in death. It is she who perfumes them all with the odor and
sweeenesse of holy love: since we do not merely embrace them, because they
are virtues, but rather in quality of things that are desired, embraced, and
beloved by God: (To discover a man truly virtuous, we use not to inquire what
he believes or what he hopes for, but what he loves. If earth h'es earthly: if
Heaven, he is heavenly; if God, he is Godlike.) for as such they become all
desirable, loving, and lovely. Let me love thee, then, o Lord, let me love
thee, and love all other things which I love and practice, for thee, and in
thee: that my beloved may be mine, and I wholly his.

THE II. POINT. That we ought incessantly to desire, and breath after charity
Consider that if, as we have seen, Charity be all in all, our thoughts
ought to be set upon the continual desire of it. For what oughr we, or do we
indeed desire, but what every one proposes to himself for his end? and the
end of the law is love. What ought any Christian to desire but the
accomplishment of the law of God; and the fullness of the law is charity.
Nor fares it in those heavenly desires, as in vain worldly wishes: a million
of them puts not one penny into our purses. Whereas by the very desire of the
love of God, we begin to love God indeed: and still the more we desire it, the
more we love. Yea, when this desire waxes strong and hearty, the desire is
turned into fire, and inflames the covering heart. He that desires God with
his whole heart has already him whom he loves says S. Gregory. And S.
Augustine: a holy desire, is the whole life of a good Christian.

AFFECTION and RESOL. But alas, my poor soul, tho we clearly discern this
desire to be most just, aduantagious, and most worthy of a christian heart: yet
we somtymes perceive our selves not to be so happy, as even to have this
desire. Let us then at least say with the Prophet: my soul has desired,
earnestly to desire thy iustifications at all times. Let us not fail to have
this desire of desiring, continually in our heart; saying with S. Au. Give me
thy self, restore me thy self: for what is not thy very self, is very
nothing to me. and it will happen with us, as it did with the holy Prophet,
that in these holy thoughts and desirs fire will flashe out; and so thoroughly
in flame our soul, that as the stagge thirsts after the fountains of fresh
water, so shall we vehemently covet, and thirst after our good God, that
drainlesse fountain of living water, which flows into life euerlastnig.

THE II. MEDITATION Of whom we are to learn Charity, toward one another
THE FIRST POINT.
COnsider that we ought to learn this most important lesson, this one
necessary thing, of him, who does as well teach it, as give it, our Savior
Jesus; who brought down this sacred fire into earth and his will was it
should burn the hearts of men. And indeed, never did he seem so peculiarly
to make himself the Master of any thing, as of this virtue and humility.
This is my precept, said that dear master of ours, that you love one another.
My little children. I give you a new precept, that you love one another. In this
all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to another.
Holy Father, I pray etc. that they may be one as we also are one, I in them,
and thou in me.

AFFECTION and RESOL. This is the great commandment, indeed, my soul, this
Christ's special precept: Love one another this the badge by which he will have
all his servants to be known. If they love one another. If we come without
this wedding garment, we shall be repulsed. If we knock, not having this oil
of charity in our Lamps, (whereby we may be known to men to be Gods
Disciples) God will not know us; the door will be shut. What thing more
wishfull, could we have desired to have heard, the^ by affording mutual love
and assistance to one another, (which we have all such need of) to secure our
salvation? And yet, the most loving, and beloved Apostle assures us: It is the
precept of our sovereign Lord, and Master: do this says he and it suffices.
Bear one another burden, and so you shall accomplish the law of Christ.

THE SECOND POINT. How we ought to exercise Charity to one another
Consider that this ought to be done by his example, who gave the command of
it, and afterward came graciously down to teach it by his own practice. Thus
we are taught by the great Apostle. Receive, help, comfort, support, and love
one another as Christ received, assisted, supported and loved us. But how did
Christ love us etc? Marry, he loved us first, with a free, and disinterested
love, which looked upon noe preceedant merits. 2. With a right love, not to
receive any thing from us, but to discharge the ouer-flowing riches of his
merciful breasts upon our poverty. 3. With a perseuerant love: for loving
his who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 4. With a strong love;
even as strong as death it self: he loved us, and delivered himself for us:
for us men, and for our salvation.

AFFECTION and RESOL. If then my soul, we hope for any consolation in Christ;
if any solace of Charity; if any society of spirit, if any bowels of
commiseration, let us endeavor to fulfill the B. Apostles joy, by being of one
meaning (having the same charity) of one mind, agreeing in one. That nothing
be done by contention, nor by vain glory: but in humility; each counting
others better then themselves. In a word, let us receive, comfort, support and
love our poor brethren: and that too, as Christ gave us the example, with a
pure and disinterrested love, because it is his blessed pleasure that so it
should be. With a right love, not seeking that which is profitable, in
particular, to our selves, but that which is profitable to many. With a
perseuerant love, which is not to end but with the end of our lives. Finally,
with a strong love, ready to wrestle with obuious difficulties, and even with
death it self, for the good of our brother, as our dear Lord gave us an
example.

THE THIRD POINT. What assurance this fraternall Charity gives that we are
in happy estate
Consider with S. Augustine, that God out of his infinite goodness, that man
might have noe excuse left if he learned not to love him, pleased to consummate
and abridge his holy word or Law. He made it short, that none might be wearied
with reading of it: and clear withal, least any might have said, I could not
understand it. And what is this short and clear word? Take it from S. Paul:
he that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the Law. Hence S. John affirms
confidently: that we know we are translated from death to life, because we
love our brethren. We know. What do we know, says your divine Father? that
we are translated from death to life. But how do we know it, demandes he
again? Because we love our brethren, concludes he with the great Evangelist.

AFFECTION and RESOLVT. O the great goodness of God, to reduce his whole law
to love! O easy fulfilling of the said Law, which consists only in loving of
our neighbor! O happy assurance, received from the penmen of the holy Ghost!
O blessefull knowledge, which makes us know that we are gotten out of the
possession of death, into the Kingdom of life! And all this at so easy a
rate: because we love our brethren. Let us not then be sollicitous, o my
soul, nor run to others to know our present state: return to our own hearts,
and if we meet with brotherly charity therein, lets rests secure, says your
B. Father, that we are translated from death to life: like as, not finding it
there, we have an accursed assurance that we are in death's possession: he that
loves not remaynes in death. Let me love thee then, my ever dear loving Lord,
and my neighbors in thee, and for thee. If I ever forgett thee or them, or
this Covenant of love, let my right hand be forgotten: and let my tongue stick
to my jaws if I remember thee not, and place thee not, in the head of my
dearest delights. For I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmayde redeemed with a great price. Thou have broken my chains in sunder;
the chains of my sins: the chains of ill custom; the chains of the
malignante world; that by a happy escape from it, I might be chayned to thee
in the golden chains of Charity. And therefore I will sacryfice to thee a
sacryfice of praise, of all that I have or hope for, and all that I am, my
life, liberty, and all: and willingly, joyfully and without constraint, I
will render my vows to thee, in the sight of all thy people. Amen.

FINIS.

