THE SPIRITUAL SACRIFICE: OR, A TREATISE, Wherein several weighty Questions and
Cases, concerning the Saints communion with GOD in Prayer, are propounded, and
practically improved.

By Mr. Alexander Pitcarne, Minister of the Gospel at Dron in Strath-Ern.

PART 1. Concerning the qualifications 2. Concerning cases belonging to the
practice 3. Concerning the return and answer
of Prayer.

Jam. 5.16. -- The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.
Joh. 14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, etc.
Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and a^^ to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Sun, on the north side of the Street, over against the Cross.

TO The right honorable LADY, The VISCOUNTESSE of STORMONT.
MADAM,
FRom the beginning, it has been one of the great designs of hell, (for
promoving of which, the old Serpent and his seed, from time to time, have
employed all their wit and might) to raise slanders and cast reproaches upon
holiness, circumspection, tenderness and zeal for God, as if these were opposite
unto generosity, magnanimity, society, ease, joy, delight, satisfaction,
profit, promotion, and to what not? And the enemy of all righteousness has so
far prevailed, by this subtle stratagem, with poor, foolish, vain, blind men,
as to make them judge light to be darkness, and their happiness to be their
shame and misery. What age might not join with the famous Salvian wrote about
the year, 460.
Salvian, in his complaint concerning his time? That the Noble and great ones
were forced to be evil, lest they should be (1) accounted vile; and to become
Satan's slaves, lest they should lose the honor of their Nobility. Yea, have
not mere Moralists observed, and how pathetically do Cicero lived after Caesar
came to the Empire.
Cicero, Seneca was Nero's Master.
Seneca, Juvenal wrote his Satyrs about the year, 90.
Juvenal and others lament this folly and madness, and have left it on record,
as the blemish and reproach of the age in which they lived? That virtue (2) was
envyed, and all was filled with treachery and deceit; that there was no place
left for shame, honesty and goodness; that the wicked were accounted
honorable, and the vilest men were promoted, while the good and virtuous were
despised as base, singular, humourous, and (says Seneca) as (3) foolish,
useless and selfish creatures. Ah! what an evidence is this of Satan's See here
Part 1. ch 9. page 352.
power, to lead 2 Timothy 2.26.
captive at his will, those who are once catched in his snare? And did not sad
experience convince us, hardly could we imagine, that they in whom are any
relicts of reason and discretion, (I need not add conscience and religion, that
god of this world having blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4.) could be thus fascinated and so far
bewitched? Ah! is it credible, (were it not that 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
unbelievers are unreasonable) that those who Lnk. 16.8.
are so wise in their generation, such State-politicians, and so active in
proclaiming their own knowledge, prudence and parts, yet should be such
strangers unto, and ignorant of, that which flows so manifestly from the
first principles of reason, and which nature it self teaches and so
convincingly holds forth to all men: I do not say, that that dark lantern is
able fully to discover the right way, yet it may serve to confute the madness
of such a prejudice against true virtue and holiness. Time would fail me, if I
should endeavor to transcribe what Plato, Euripides, Cato, Cicero, Juvenal,
Plutarch, and many other Heathens have written to this purpose; nay, the whole
Works of Plato and Seneca may well bear this inscription, An Apology for Piety
and Virtue. And what is the scope of Juvenal and Perseus their Satyrs, but to
declaim against the vices of their time? We shall then only from those rich
Gardens, collect and gather some few Flowers, containing some known principles
of moral Philosophy, in opposition to the former calumnies which are so easily
believed, and to the course which is so generally followed by blind Atheists.
Ah! (says the Satyrist) virtue and goodness is the only true Nobility; he
deserves no praise, whose praise is only from his Ancestors; since (as Seneca
(5) observes) the womb and the grave are two great levellers, all being alike
as to their birth and death; and therefore none can be more noble or
magnanimous then another, but he who has the most generous spirit, and who is
most eminent in virtue and goodness; and he (as Plato says) must be most base
and miserable, who is most wicked and flagitious. And accordingly, Euripides
(6) well concludes, that it is a great abuse to call profane, godless
wretches, noble and excellent, albeit they had never so many followers and
great possessions: And hence the old Romans did so situat (7) the temples of
virtue and honor, that there was no access to that of honor, but by the other
of virtue; and thus also, honor from the great (8) Philosopher and great (9)
Orator, is commonly described the reward of virtue.

And as thus the good and virtuous are the only honorable and noble, So they
are (according to Cicero) the only rich and happy: (10) true wealth consists
not in movables, what can be lost or taken from us, is (says he) neither mine
nor thine: and virtue is that only treasure that cannot be removed; he who
drives that trade needs not fear storms or pirates by Sea, nor robbers and
perils by Land; nay, (as Euripides says) death cannot take away its (11)
praise or reward, but that will follow us when we must leave all earthly
pleasures, honors and enjoyments.

Ah! Madam, is it not lamentable to consider, how many great ones do bury all
their Honor, Nobility, Parts, Riches and Possessions in the grave of infamy
and reproach; and leave no other Trophies behind them, but the stinking savor
of their debauchery and profanity? upon whose Tombs there can truly be put no
other ingraving, but that here lies such a one, who was the discredit of his
holy profession, and the shame (12) of an ancient and noble family. How few be
they, who, by their practice, do not verify the Poe^s sad verdict? Greatness
(13) and goodness do seldom meet together: and should I not rather have said
that word of truth, not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. What will the worlds Gallants be able
to say in the day of accounts, for their opposing the way of piety and virtue
which has gotten such a testimony from Pagans? And therefore do we now offer
this brief lecture of Divinity from these Moralists, that it might appear, that
none can forsake and oppose the way of righteousness and holiness, but he who
has cast off both reason and humanity, and who does become a brute, lest he
should be a Saint. Ah! how 1 Cor. 1.20.
foolish and Hence Seneca infers, that we should rather pity the wicked as
so many fanatics, and contemn their contempt, then be angry with them, or take
pains to convince and confute them; for (says he) why do ye bear the madness
and frenzy of one in a distemper, but because he knows not what he does? So,
etc.
mad is the wisdom of this world, the world it self being judge? (14) If the
Word of God had only born record, that the Saints are the excellent in the
earth, Ps. 16.3. and the only worthies, of whom the world is not worthy, Heb.
11.38. that godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. and the only true treasure
that cannot corrupt or be taken away, Luke 12.33. etc. If (I say) these divine
Truths were only held forth in the Scriptures of truth, scoffing Atheists who
have cast off the fear of God, might be the more secure; but while
short-sighted nature, by it is dark candle, has discovered, and moral reason
attested the same, and so convincingly condemned the way and course of those
desperate misers, they must either renounce their understanding and discretion,
and take with their brutishness and stupidity, or confess themselves to be
self-condemned; and (15) that contrary no less to their own knowledge and
light, then to religion and duty, they maintain a war against the heavens, and
abase their noble soul to serve their lusts, becoming swinish Epicureans, led
by sense and their carnal appetite, in making their pleasures their idols, and
the world and their belly their god.

But such (happily) will say, well then, we enjoy our pleasures, and lead a merry
jovial life, while they who are accounted Saints are sad, dumpish, sullen and
brokenhearted creatures. Ans. This is an old slander raised on the way of
life, by such as are strangers to true joy, peace, satisfaction and
contentment, and has proven a great stumbling block in all ages; and this was
one of the great topics which Satan did mainly urge about the time of
reformation from Popery, when his kingdom began to totter and shake; and the
popish Factors then frequently inculcated, that the Calvinian spirit was a
melancholic spirit. But, ah! wherefore should they be sad 2 Samuel 13: 4.
who are Kings sons, and heirs of an immortal Crown? joy is their portion and
allowance, and it is their privilege to rejoice always; their joy and peace
is secured to them, devils and men cannot rob them of it, Their ways are ways
of pleasantness, and all their paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. Phil. 4.4. Joh.
14.27. Joh. 16.22.24. etc. But, alas! how can they rejoice who are destroying
their own souls, and rushing headlong upon everlasting woes and misery, who
ere it be long will cry (but in vain) to the mountains and rocks to fall on
them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. But we may not insist, only let us hear what
the Pagan Moralists have said to this purpose; The wicked, (16) notwithstanding
all their outward and seeming mirth, joy and delight, have (says Juvenal) a
judge, witness and tormenter within, whose lashes and strokes are more grievous
and terrible, then any punishment invented on inflicted by Caeditius or
Rhadamantus, and the most strict justiciaries and cruel executioners: there is
(says Cicero) no punishment comparable to that which accompanies sin, either
for greatness or continuance; (17) for not only shall the wicked be eternally
vexed in hell with the infernal furies, but also here they have their domestic
fiends always to attend, and their own guilty consciences to tear them, and
the sense of a deity night and day to distract them as with madness; no
solitariness nor society, no might nor wealth, no eminency nor greatness can
bring ease or relief: and though there be some difficulty in walking in the
narrow way, yet the conscience and remembrance of a well ^ed life is (says he)
(18) most sweet and full of delight. Hence the Emperor Albert 1. his Symbol
was, What is best (19) and most virtuous, is most pleasant and full of joy s
where the gloss from Corinficinus has this paraphrase, The best kind of life
is to be chosen, (20) which custom and use will render most easy and pleasant.
But, ah! the flagitious by custom in sin, have so hardened their heart, and
filled it with such prejudices against the way of righteousness, that they go
unwillingly to work; and no wonder though holiness appear difficult and a
grievous burden to them; for (as the Comedian says) (21) there is nothing so
easy, but it will become heard and unpleasant to him who undertaketh it
unwillingly.

Ah! Madam, what matter of lamentation is it, that so many who are called and
would be accounted Christians, should come so far short of Heathens, as to
oppose that for which they have so zealously pleaded, and by their practice,
destroy what they with so much industry have built? I am confident your
Ladyship will join in this sad complaint, and that such a warning and
testimony, against those who are concerned therein, will be very acceptable.
But I will not now take upon me to hold out any directions or persuasions to
your Honor; nay, though you had importuned me to that effect, the bounds of
this short Epistle would excuse my silence: but I could wish that excellent
Epistle written some hundred years since by that zealous Ancient Jerome l^ved in
the 5. century.
Jerome, to the noble Lady Celantia upon her earnest desire, were translated,
that it might become a directory to all Ladies, who account it their greatest
honor and happiness, that they are (as the Apostle John calls that Lady to
whom he wrote) elect, beloved in the truth, and of all them that have known the
truth. I will not transcribe what is there held forth at length, but among
these many grave and profitable directions, this eminent Minister of Christ
obtesteth that pious Lady, not to boast of that (22) nobility she has from her
Ancestors, but rather to rejoice in this, that she is of a royal and heavenly
descent, (which will appear to be the only true nobility in that Mal. 3.17, 18.
day the Lord makes up his Jewels, and puts a perpetual difference between the
precious and the vile) that she is born of God, and an heir of the immortal
crown of glory; and that she is freed from the base slavery of hell and sin,
and has chosen such a Master, whom to serve is to reign. (23) O! Madam, we
have an honorable, but not a hard Master; our very work and employment is our
honor and happiness; his Mat. 11.30.
yoke is easy, his burden is light, and his 1 John 5.3.
commands are not grievous; but our Joh 1 12. Rev 1.6. etc.
privileges are great and many, and our Ps. 19.11. Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Cor. 2.9.
reward far exceeds all that we can desire or conceive: and what is our great
work, but to maintain a communion with himself, and in Phil 4.6.
every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, to make our
requests known unto him? Which singular privilege (rather then duty or task)
being the subject of this Treatise, I humbly offer to your Ladyship the
practical Volumn thereof, divided into three Parts, which (as having the same
scope, and being of the same nature) we would not separat in the dedication,
but rather beg pardon for bringing so small a Present (as to my pains therein)
to your Honor. But, Madam, here you have a sovereign remedy for all diseases,
a Gatholleon and never failing medicine, brought from the paradise of God, and
a branch plucked off that tree, Rev. 22.2.
the leaves whereof are for the healing of the nations: when all Physicians
become of no value and can do no good, this will work the cure; and all other
Medicines without this, will in the issue prove corrosives, and fuel to feed a
worse disease, and a Mal. 2.2. compared with 2 Timothy 3.4, 5.
curse in stead of a blessing. I am not ignorant, that not only Poets of old
(24) have fancied, but also several Chimical Physicians, and of late the
learned Dr. Van Helmont and Osuala Grembs have seriously asserted and labored
to prove, that there is a Panacea and general remedy which may suffice for
expelling and curing all diseases; and when I first read in that great Orator
and Philosopher Dr. Helmont, his general remedy for all Fevers, and saw the
Ingredients specified under such names, as the most judicious Physicians whom I
consulted, either professed they understood not what he meant, or were not able
to convince me that they hit right in their conjectures, I was so anxious, that
had I not known that work to have been opus post-humum, I verily think, that in
the vacancy of the College, I might have undertaken a voyage of purpose to
have seen that great Symmist of natur's mysteries, and heard his mind and
learned from himself: but though I had obtained my aim, how poor a purchase had
I made? how uncertain are the conjectures of the most able and experienced
Artists? and how unsuccessfull often are the proper remedies of best known
diseases? and how short a while did Paracelsus himself live, who yet could
speak of a remedy and diet that might perperuat the life of man? and yet, for a
little knowledge of this nature, what diligence and pains will men undergo? But,
here is brought to your Ladyships hands, a complete and perfect Panacea, not
for one kind of disease, but for every malady; ye have the receipt sent from
heaven, Is any afflicted? let him pray, Jam. 5.13. and ye have the word of the
great Physician to assure you of it is success, and himself undertaking the cure
and recommending the use of it, Ps. 50 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee; here a remedy not only for bodily, but also for
soul-diseases; in every season and occasion, in every state and condition, this
has place; we may use it in the time of health and prosperity, as well as in
sickness and adversity; as here it will remove, so there it will prevent, and
hold off the rod and the curse; it will purge and sanctify mercies, and
purify and prepare the heart to receive, enjoy and improve them aright, 1 Timothy
4.4, 5. It is profitable for all things and at all times; it will not, like
other Medicines, lose it is virtue by frequent using, but will prove as
successful to morrow as to day, we can never use it in vain, Isa. 45.19. Here
a subject well worthy of our meditation, diligence and inquiry; concerning
which, I hold forth no other lesson, then what I desire daily to be learning
and practicing, and to mourn for my dullness and negligence in following this
heavenly trade, and that my heart has not been more enlarged in writing and
preaching such heavenly, necessary, sweet and soul-establishing Truths.

And now, Madam, I presume to offer to your Ladyship, my mean labors in this
fruitful field, not that I might take occasion to proclaim your honor,
knowledge, etc. (as your Ladyship would not allow nor permit, so neither were
it very suitable for me to undertake such a task) but that I might entreat your
honorable patrociny and favorable acceptance, and might make a public
acknowledgement of what I owe (but am not able otherwise to pay) to your
Ladyship; and that I might, as a Minister of Christ, exhort and excite your
honor to abound more and more in the practice of this spiritual and
soul-enriching work; thus your Nobility, Possessions, great Parts, etc. will
prove great blessings indeed, and you blessed in the use of them, and when all
creature-enjoyments will take wings and fly away; which is the earnest desire,
and shall be the prayer of him, who has laid hold on this opportunity, to
testify that he is,

MADAM, Your Honors much obliged and humble Servant, Mr. Alexander Pitcarne.
Dron, 20. Jan. 1664.
(1) Mali coguntur esse, ne viles habeantur -- Si quis ex nobilitate converti
ad Deum caeperit, statim honorem nobilitatis amittit, etc. Salv. lib. 4. de
guber. Dei.

(2) Est huijus saeculi labes quaedam, and macula virtuti invidere, etc. Cicer.
pro Corn. Balbo jam pudori, probitati, virtuti, rectis studiis, bonis artibus
nihil est loci, Cic. Titio sam. 5. fraudis atque insidiarium, and perfidiae
plena sunt omnia, Cic. de petit. consol. hoc tempore obsequium amicos, veritas
odium parit, Cic. in Lael. Ad multorum amicitiam faciliorem aditum haebet
nequitia and audacia, quam cujusquam virtus and integritas, Cic. 3. art. in
ver. a multis ipsa virtus contemuitur, and venditatio quaedam, atque ostentatio
esse dicitur, Cic. Phil. 13.

(3) -- Boni inepti atque inertes vocantur: mihi contingat (inquit Seneca) iste
derisus; aequo animo audienda sunt ista imperitorum convitia, and ad honesta
vadendi contemnendus est iste contemptus.

Rari quippe boni, numero vix sunt totidem, quot
Thebarum porta vel divitis ostia Nili.
Juven. sat. 13. (4) Stemmata quid faciunt? quid prodest? etc. --
Tota licet veteres exornent undique cera
Atria; nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.
Juven. sat. 8. -- Cui vita labat perit omnis in illo.
Nobilitas cujus laus est in origin sola.
-- Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc qui
Indignus genere, and praeclaro nomine tantum
I^ signis?
Juven. sat. 8.

(5) Eadem omnibus principia, eademque origo. Et alibi aequat omnes (inquit
Seneca) cinis; pares nascimur, pares morimur; -- nemo igitur altero nobilior,
nisi cui rectius ingenium, etc.

D. Plato ex Siculo quodam, vocat prophanos dementes and miserrimos, tom. 2.
Georg. vel de Rhetor. page (mihi) 161.

(6) (...), etc. Euripid. in Alexand.

(7) Alphonsus amico -- respondisse dicitur, non temere a Romany, illis quidem
saepientioribus, honoris templ^ virtutis templum conjunctum esse, in quod nisi
per virtutis templum intr^ire nemini liceret: ut intelligerent mortales, ad
honoris fastigium non voluptatum via, sed virtutis, illa quidem aspera and
salebrosa, enitendum esse, Panorm. lib. 1. de reb. gest. Alphons.

(8) Vid. Aristotelem, 1. Ethic. cap. 5.

(9) Vid. Ciceron. de clar. orator. ad Brutum, and 10. fam. ad Plancum, and
alibi passim; ex quibus a P^colomineo grad. 8. cap. 34. recte describitur
honor, praemium virtutis, a congruente ejus judice tributum viro probo, ut ejus
virtus refulgeat, caeterique ejus exemplo ad virtutem in vitentur.

(10) Nihil meum est, neque cujusquam quod auferri, quod eripi, quod amitti
potest, etc. paradox. 4. Quanti est estimanda virtus? quae noc eripi, nec
surripi potest unquam; nec incendio, nec naufragio amittitur; nec tempestate,
nec temporis permutatione mutatur; qua praediti qui sunt, soli sunt divites;
soli enim possident res and fructuosas and sempiternas, solique (quod est
proprium divitiarum) con^enti sunt rebus snis, Cic. paradox. ult. in fin.

(11) (...):
(...), etc.
Euripid. in Teme^o.

(12) Indignus genere, and praeolaro nomine tantum
Insignis.
Juv. loc. cit.

(13) -- Exeat aula
Qui volet esse pius; virtus and summa potestas
Non cocunt.
Lucan. lib. 8.

(14) Quare fers agrirabiem, and phrenetici verba? nempe quia videntur nescire
quid faciunt: quid interest quo quisque vitio fiat imprudens? etc. Sen. de ira,
lib. 3. cap. 20.

(15) The wicked are self-condemned, and may say with that mad woman,

Meant alind suadet, video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor --
Ovid. Metam. lib. 7. Nihil est aliua gigantum more pugnaxe oum diis, quam
naturae repugnare, ( Cicer. Cat. ma.) nos naturam sequamur, and ab omni quod
abhorret ap ipsa ocul^r^m auriumque comprobatione fugiamus, Cir. 1. affic.

(16) -- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur --
Paena autem vehemens, ac multo saevior illis
Quas and Caeditius graves inuenit and Rhadamantus.
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
Juven. sat. 13.

(17) Peccati dolor and maximus, and aeternus est, Cicer. ad Attic. 11. Sua
quemque fraus, and suus error maxim vexat; suum quemque scelus agitat,
amentiaque afficit. suae malae cogitationes conscientiaeque animi terrent. Hae
sunt impiis assiduae domesticaeque furiae quae dies noctesque paenas a
sceleratissimis repetunt. Cic. pro Rosc. Amer. Impiis apud inferos sunt pae^ae
praeparatae, Cic. 2. de invent. Si qui satis opibus hominum contra conscientiam
septi esse and muniti videntur, deorum tamen numen horrent, easque ipsas
solicitudines, quibus eorum animi noctesque, diesque exeduntur, a diis
immortalibus supplicii causa importari putant, Cicer. 1. de finib.

(18) Conscientia been actae vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio est
jucundissima, Cic. Cat. ma. vacare culpa maximum est solacium, Cic. M. Mario
fam. 7.

(19) [Quod optimum idem jucundissimum.] Symbol- Albert. primi: ubi Goltzius ex
Corinficio ad Herenniu^,

(20) [Eligenda est optima vitae ratio, hanc consuetud^ reddet suavissimam.]
Symb. Caes. Romans Germ. part. 3. sym. 28. Consuetudinis enim (ut monet Cicero,
2. Tuscul.) magna est vis, pernoctant venatores in nive, in montibus mise
patiu^tur; -- cons^^tud^ laborum, p^rpessione^ d^ior^^ officit facilior^m; nam
fort^ labor^m, contemner^ ^uluus, cons^etudo doc^t.

(21) Nulla est tam facilis res, quin difficilis fiet
Qu^^ in^i^ns f^^i^ -- Terent. Heauton^.
Act 4. Scaen. 6.

(22) Nulli to unquam de generis nobilitate praeponas -- nam frustra sibi
aliquis de nobilitate generis appiaudis -- etigis enim Deus ignobilia and
cont^^ptibilia bujus ma^di; -- and u^iversi parsi honoris, and ejusd^^ apud
Deum protiisunt qui uno Christi sanguine sunt redempti. -- Sola apud Deum
libertas est non servire peccatis; summa apud Deum nobilitas est clarum esse
virtutibus, etc. Hieronom. epist. fam. lib. 2. op. 20. ad C^lantiam.

(23) Dc^ servire regnare est.

A summary account of the principal purposes, questions, and cases spoken to in
this Treatise.
Prayer a means of procuring and conveighing all good to the Saints. Page. 2
Several effects and fruits of prayer Page. 4 PART I. Of the nature of prayer
CHAP. I. Prayer considered, gift; 2. as a grace; duty; 4. as a means. CHAP. I.
Several Scriptures seem to hold forth prayer either as a very difficult, or
easy work) paralleled, for the comfort of tender Christians, and terror of
formal professors. Page 12 CHAP. III. The Christian must pray, else be cannot
live. Page 16 Damafcen his description of prayer. page 17 Prayer sometimes put
for the whole worship of God. page 17 Some of Aquinas his needless
speculations, the popish devotion a mocking of God. ibid. Prayer described, and
the parts of the definition propounded 18 Whether, 1. confession of sin; 2.
thanksgiving, belongto prayer as its parts? Page. 19
CHAP. IV. Lip-labor no prayer; though the voice be required, and should
concur with the heart. Page 20 Prayer is not an act of the mind and
understanding, but of the will; yet all the faculties of the soul must
contribute their assistance. Page 21 Our desires need not an interpreter: every
desire (though spiritual) is not prayer, unless it be offered up, and directed
to God. Page. 23 The will does not by a new act reflect upon, order, direct,
and offer up ^ts desires to God. Page. 24 Arguments proving prayer directly and
formally to consist in an act of the will. Page. 26
CHAP. V. Who should, and who may not pray? Page. 28 Sect. I. The holy Ghost
does not formally pray; and how he is said to interceed for the Saints, Romans
8.26, 27. and to be their advocat ((...)) Joh. 14.16. Joh. 16.7. Page. 29
Gerhard his gloss confuted. ibid. Christ's advocation compared with the spirits.
Page. 33 Of Christ's intercession, from page 34 to page Page. 76 The
intercession of Christ for his people clearly held forth in the Scriptures.
Page. 34 Why Papists deny that we may improve this sweet point? Page. 34 We may
pray to Christ to pray for us. Page. 35 Nine steps of Christ's intercession.
ibid. Whether Christ interceeds for us as he is God, as he is man, or as (...)?
Page. 37 There are no theandrick actions of Christ: our Divines interpreted.
ibid. How, and after what manner, does Christ now in the heavens interceed for
us? wherein does his intercession formally consist? whether he utters words,
etc. answered in six assertions Page. 40 What here are the main and prime
grounds of consolation. Page. 45 An objection against Christ's vocal
intercession, answered. Page. 46 Christ's intercession practically improven, for
the comfort of believers, notwithstanding all their fears and doubts. Page. 47
Three grounds of Christ's intercession, viz. his office, his love and his
sympathy with us. Page. 53 Whether the Jewish Church were at a disadvantage
upon this account? Page. 56 Christ did not interceed before his incarnation.
ibid. Objections answered. Page. 57 What his sympathy then did import? Page. 58
How he was then the Angel of the covenant? Page. 60 How the persons of the
Trinity are said to appear visibly, and to manifest themselves by some sensible
symbols? Page. 61 Whether Mr. Goodwin ascribes too much to Christ's interssion,
while he prefers it to his death, and affirms that we may rest upon it
alone? Page. 62 Whether Christ interceeds as a common person representing us?
Page. 66 What the Jews enjoyed? and what is our privilege? Page. 67 The Text,
Joh. 16.26. vindicated: Christ does not there deny, etc. Page. 68 Christ
always heard, yea, then while he prayed that the cup might pass from him; with
a large commentary on these words. Page. 70 Whether all Christ's prayers were
mediatory? Page. 75 Whether Christ, Luke 23.34. prayed for all those who had a
hand in his death? Page. 75 The popish Schoolmen argue against Christ's formal
and proper intercession, from Matthew. 28.18. ibid. Their objection answered.
Page. 76 How, and why the heavens, earth, etc. are invited to praise God. ibid.
Sect. II. Whether the holy Angels and the Saints departed do pray, and for
what? Page. 78 The souls in hell cannot pray; and why? Page. 81 Devils neither
will, nor may pray; though Satan may ask leave to tempt Job, Page. 83 Who may,
and ought to pray? Page. 85 The duty of the unconverted vindicated from
Antinomian cavils. Page. 86 The obligation and ability of those who are not in
the state of grace, held forth in some few assertions. Page. 88 How the prayers
and performances of unbelievers may be said to please God? Page. 94 Several
arguments showing, that the most wicked wretch is obliged to pray to God. Page.
96 Whether they may ask in faith? Page. 99 Whether the wicked have a promise to
be heard? Page. 100

CHAP. VI. To whom should we pray? Page. 103 Whether we should pray to Christ
as Mediator? Page. 104 We may not pray to Angels or the Saints in glory. Page.
106 Papists have made many new gods; nay, herein they have exceeded their
patrons, those Pagans from whom they borrowed and learned this new point of
divinity. Page. 107 By what steps this Pagan doctrine crept into the Church?
Page. 109 The Jewish Chruch in her worst times did not fall into this error;
nor the Christian for the space of some hundred years. Page. 109 Who were the
first authors and abetters of this platonic dream? Page. 111 When was it
generally received? Page. 115 Bellarmin his impudence. Page. 118 Of the glass
of the Trinity. Page. 120 Erasmus his sarcasme. Page. 122 Whether Papists
maintain that the Pater noster should be said to the Saints? Page. 125 Whether
he can be a Mediator of intercession, who is not also a Mediator of redemption?
Page. 129 Many abominable blasphemies in Mary her Psalter. Page. 130 Papists
make Saint-merit the ground of Saint-invocation. Page. 131 Cassander's
confession, with Vives his regrate. Page. 132 Popish self-conviction. Page. 135
There is a difference between praying the Saints to pray for us, and praying to
the Saints that they may pray for us. Page. 137 The popish argument from
miracles, answered. ibid. What honor we owe to the Saints in glory? Page. 138
A word of application. ibid.
CHAP. VII. Of the matter and object of prayer. Page. 140 Sect. I. We must have
a warrant to come to the throne of grace, and what to ask. Page. 141 The will
of God, the sole rule of prayer; but not his purposes and decrees, though
revealed and made known to us. Page. 142 Three things must concur for
consttiuting the rule of prayer. Page. 147 What kind of promulgation is
necessary? Page. 148 The practice and example of others, not a sufficient
warrant. Page. 150 The promise alone a sufficient ground of prayer. Page. 152
Objections answered. Page. 154 Providence is not our rule. Page. 158 How far it
may declare the will of God, and our duty. Page. 160 Whether, and how far we
may make use of the dispensations of providence in our personal cases, which
are not particularly determined in the Word? answered in several conclusions.
Page. 165 Whether we may go to the Scriptures, and make use of that passage
which first occurreth, if pertinent to our case? Page. 175 How far providence
may be directive and helpful for constituting us in any place, ^tate or
relation. Page. 176
Sect. II. For what things, and in what order should we pray? Page. 179 We may
safely go as far as the promise, and ask every thing that is good. Page. 180
The Messalians, denying that we may ask temporals, confuted. Page. 182
Objections answered. Page. 185 Socinians, Jesuits and Arminians cannot tell
what they ask from God, while they pray for temporal mercies. Page. 187 Our
motives should be rational and spiritual, while we pray for temporals. Page.
189 Whether smaller mercies may be particularized, and expressly asked? Page. 190
We must not pray peremptorily for any temporal mercy, though more earnestly for
some then for others. Page. 191 Our prayers for temporals are not in that sense
conditional, in which a logical enunciation. Page. 194 Under what condition
should temporals be asked? and whether at all times we should reflect upon that
condition? Page. 196 We should not only ask the use and possession of, but also
aright unto, and the blessing with, our mercies. Page. 198 The difference
between the Saints and the wicked, as to the right unto, and enjoying of,
outward mercies. Page. 198 Whether we may pray that such a mercy may become a
blessing, that we may get and receive it? Page. 196 Motives to pray for
temporals. Page. 200 Spirituals must have the precedence, else we loss both
spirituals and temporals, and will receive neither the one nor the other, in
answer to our prayers. Page. 204 The promises of grace, distinguished from the
promises to grace. Page. 208 Whether such as are yet under the spirit of
bondage may plead the absolute promises. Page. 209 None can absolutely and in
faith, pray for grace, as to it is nature and being, but upon a mistake of their
condition: but we may, and should thus pray for the measure and a further
degree of grace. Page. 211 An evasion confuted. Page. 214 Another evasion.
Page. 215 What an absolute promise does import. Page. 216 What it is to pray
absolutely. Page. 217 How the promise is the rule of prayer. Page. 218 Whether
those prayers, that have for their object a further perfection and measure of
grace, be always answered. Page. 220 It is difficult to judge concerning the
measure of grace. Page. 221 Why we must not pray for the measure of grace after
that manner we pray for temporals. Page. 222 A third evasion confuted. Page. 223
Whether grace may be abused and become a snare? ibid. And yet the adequat cause
why temporals should not be asked absolutely, is not because they may do us hurt
and become snares. Page. 225 As to spirituals, we may ask the thing and the
condition, though we may not ask conditionally. Page. 226 Whether we should
submit and be content with a small measure of grace? Page. 227 We are not
straightened in the promise, but in our own bowels. Page. 230 How we should desire
spiritual, and how temporal mercies? Page. 231
Sect. III. For whom should we pray? Page. 232 Why we should pray for others?
ibid. We should not pray for the dead: the popish Doctrine confuted. Page. 233
The blasphemy against the holy Ghost unpardonable; the Rhemists confuted. Page.
240 Whether we may pray for such as have thus sinned unto death? Page. 239 249
Whether we may pray for reprobats as such? Page. 241 Whether in our prayers for
others we may add this proviso, if they belong to the election of God? Page.
242 268 Whether in praying for the salvation of others, we may add this clause,
especially for believers? Page. 244 If the decree of reprobation were made
known to us, whether we might pray for such as we knew to be included in it?
Page. 246 Whether the reprobat, upon supposition that they knew the Lords
decree and purpose never to show mercy unto them, were notwithstanding obliged
to pray for themselves, and to use the means? Page. 247 Whether a prohibition
added to a known decree, should lay a restraint upon us? Page. 249 There is a
great difference (as to the object of our prayers) between those who are
already cast into hell, and such as are yet in the land of the living, and
under the means, though they be reprobat. Page. 254 Whether we may pray for
such in faith? Page. 255 Some distinctions for preventing objections; with a
brief recapitulation. Page. 257 Whether we may love those whom the Lord hates?
Page. 259 Ve must pray for all men. Page. 260 Distinctions, brought by some
Divines, examined and rejected. ibid. Some arguments for this conclusion, with
an answer to objections. Page. 262 We know not but the Lord may show mercy to
all this generation. Page. 264 272 How the care of all the Churches lies upon
every Saint. Page. 264 Whether we may pray for incorrigible enemies. Page. 268
Objections answered. Page. 269 Whether the holy Spirit will dictat a prayer for
a reprobat? and whether Christ, while on earth, prayed for such? Page. 269
Whether we may ask any mercy in Christ's name, for those for whom Christ died
not? Page. 271 An exhortation to pray for enemies. Page. 272 We are in a
special manner obliged to pray for our relations, for the Church of Christ,
for Kings and Rulers for the Kingdom and place of our abode, for and with our
families: Page. 274 Especially for such of those as are of the household of
faith. Page. 277 As Pastors must pray for their flocks, so they for Pastors:
and because too few do mind their duty, it is pressed by several motives.
Page. 279 The general point, with it is several branches pressed by way of
exhortation. Page. 286 The Saints prayers the Church-treasury. Page. 295 If
thou pray not for thy self, the prayers of others will not profit thee. Page.
296
CHAP. VIII. We must pray in Christ's name. Page. 298 We lie under a twofold
incapacity of drawing nigh to God; and Christ has removed both. Page. 299
Three grounds of the prevalency of prayer. Page. 300 Though we must pray in the
holy Ghost, yet not in the name of the holy Ghost, but only in Christ's. Page.
301 What it is to ask in Christ's name. ibid. Why we must ask in Christ's name?
Page. 304 How Gospel mysteries were known to the Jews? Page. 308 A confused
knowledge is a medium between ignorance and perfect knowledge. Page. 309 What
was the least measure of saving knowledge which was then necessary? Page. 310
The Gentiles not left without a testimony concerning the Messiah. Page. 312 The
consent of the Popish Schoolmen. Page. 313 Of their blind and implicit faith,
with four degrees of explicit faith from Suarez. ibid. De necessitate praecepti
and medii. Page. 315 Whether any obtain for Christ's sake, who do not know his
name, nor ask for his sake? Page. 316 Whether the Jews did tender up their
prayers in Christ's name? Page. 318 Whether the Disciples did expressly pray in
Christ's name before his death? Page. 320 Whether we may be said to ask in his
name, in respect of the habitual intention of the heart? Page. 321 Whether
temporals must be asked in his name? ibid. A word of exhortation and reproof:
Christ our Altar and Priest: his work constant and equal. Page. 329
CHAP. IX. Of the help of the Spirit. Page. 328 Prayer the ladder that reaches
the heavens. Page. 329 The necessity of the help of the Spirit. Page. 330
Whether those, who are not led by the spirit of Christ dwelling in them, ( viz.
such as are yet but under some legal preparations, and on the way to
conversion) may meet with acceptance? Page. 332 How the Spirit helps us to
pray. Page. 333 Mr. Baxter interpreted. Page. 336 The actual assistance of the
Spirit, is, 1. to actuat, 2. to strengthen, 3. to direct, 4. to encourage.
Page. 337 There be many impediments both from within and without. Page. 338 The
Spirit helps, 1. to make choice of fit objects, 2. to propose right ends, 3.
to pray aright as to the manner, etc. Page. 340 Our confidence and boldness
admits a latitude: between the full assurance of faith and a probable
expectation, there is a middle hope. Page. 345 A word of rebuke, 1. to the
presuming Justitiary, 2. to the blasphemous Atheist. Page. 346 A word, 1. of
encouragement, 2. of exhortation to the Saints. Page. 348 Whether Satan
works immediately, or only mediatly on the mind and will? Page. 351 Arguments
for an immediate impression. Page. 352 How Satan represents objects to the
mind? Page. 353 Whether Satan knows the secrets of the heart, or has power
over it to bow and turn it? Page. 355 What is that vail the Lord has drawn
over the heart? Page. 356 Satan's immediate access to the heart needs not
discourage the Saints. Page. 360 We are not enough sensible of the Lords bounty
and tender care toward us in keeping this roaring Lion in iron-chains. ibid.
Yet Satan's power and malice must not be made a cloack to excuse, or extenuat
our sins. Page. 361 Whether all sins flow from Satan's temptation? Page. 362
And whether all good proceeds from the suggestion of good Angels? Page. 367
The consideration of Satan's power and malice should make us, first, humble;
secondly, sober and watchful; thirdly to live in a continual dependence upon
God; fourthly, frequent in prayer; fifthly, thankful. Page. 564 It is not our
fault that Satan tempts us, but that we comply with his temptations. Page.
365 Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light, may stir us up to do
what is upon the matter good. Page. 369 Some think that Satan cannot assume the
perfect shape of a man; which certainly holds proportionably in his spiritual
transformation. ibid. Four crooked designs of his in-moving to what is good.
ibid. His motions to good differenced from the motions of the holy Spirit, in
respect of, first, the matter; secondly, the end; thirdly, the manner;
fourthly, the rule; fifthly the time; and, sixthly, the effects. Page. 373 A
word of use. Page. 380 Some characters whereby divine motions may be
distinguished from natural and moral motions. Page. 381 Whether the unconverted
may taste the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6.4,
5, Page 388 A word of application. Page. 394

PART. II. Of the qualifications of prayer. The spiritual Priesthood is
perpetual. Page. 397 It is a mark of a false and hypocritical Church to plead
for the work done, however it be done. ibid. We would take heed what prayers we
offer up to God. Page. 398, 401. The scope of this part, with its division.
Page. 399
CHAP. I. Some previous qualifications and pre-requisits; as, first, the state
and condition of the person, (which in dispensing of favors is a most
considerable circumstance.) Page. 401 Secondly, our walk and conversation must
be regular, and answerable to our profession, engagements and relation. Page.
407 Thirdly, (and more directly) we would maintain a spiritual and praying
disposition. Page. 409 Fourthly, we should actually prepare for the work;
Pagans would prepare before they, etc. Page. 410 Here, 1. exercise and
frequency; 2. watching; 3. meditation are required. Page. 411 Fifthly, we must
propound a right end. Page. 415 There is a fourfold end, viz. 1. sinful; 2.
natural; 3. moral; 4. spiritual. Page. 417 The creature may be made a
subordinat end. Page. 418 How we may know when the creature is idolized, and
made our ultimat end? Page. 419 421 Whether we should always actually mind the
glory of God? Page. 423 A word of use. Page. 425
CHAP. II. Some concomitant qualifications of prayer. Page. 426 Sect. I. First,
attention, Papists deny its necessity, pleading for a virtual attention, which
rather belongs to the purpose and intention of the heart. Page. 427 The popish
tergiversation. Page. 429 Their self-conviction. Page. 431 Secondly, reverence
and godly fear; what kind of fear here required, and what its object? Page 425
Thirdly, humility. Page 436 The popish arrogance; their abominable doctrine
concerning merit; their confessions, and mocking of God. Page 419, 437 What this
humility imports? Page 439 It is not inconsistent with, but rather the
foundation of confidence and filial boldness. Page 440 Some evidences of the
want of humility, as to any considerable measure. Page 441 Fourthly, truth and
sincerity, and what it imports? ibid. Fifthly, importunity, fervency and
zeal. Page 442 A fervent supplicant will not be driven away from the throne of
grace, by, first, delays; secondly, threatenings, thirdly, commands; or,
fourthly, reproaches. Page 447 We should (says a reverend Divine) pray
desperately; and why? ibid. Why the Angels are called Seraphims? Page 446 The
Christians motto, nil obiter. Page 450 Whether we should pray importunatly for
temporal mercies? Page. 452 Witches say the Lords Prayer backwards, and too
many titular Christians imitat them herein. ibid. Sixthly, watchfulness. Page.
453 Seventhly, constancy and frequency. Page. 454 The beggar must wait till an
alms com, and not give over. Page. 456 Its one thing to be weary of, another to
weary in, prayer. Page. 457
Sect. II. Eighthly, faith. Page. 459 The excellency, necessity and noble
effects of faith. Page. 460 What to pray in faith imports. Page. 461 There is
a peculiar and special (as it were) kind of faith here required: and what it is
not? Page. 462 What positively it is. Page. 464, 471 Divines usually insist
rather upon its pre-requisits, then on that which properly imports. Page. 464
What orthodox Divines in their disputes with the Papists, plead for? Page. 465
Five reasons to prove the main assertion. Page. 466 Whether faith can assure
the supplicant that he shall get the particular in kind? Page. 470 What good
comes by prayer in answer to our particular desire; when we obtain not what
was ask't? Page. 472 Whether we must doubt of the promise, when we doubt of the
success of our prayers? Page. 469 Seven fruits of prayer from Bellarmin, that
patron of lip-devotion. Page. 473 Prayer will bring in for the present
something suitable to our exigence, need and present condition. Page. 475 The
Lord always gives either the mercy in kind, or what is better for us. Page.
477 Eight arguments for confirming this certain (though little belived) point.
ibid. If we had gotten many of our desires, we had been undone. Page. 481 Its
for our advantage, that the promise of audience has the condition of
expediency annexed: and now the promise is more full, sweet and comfortable,
then if it were absolute and universal, Page. 483 Three cases which would
appear not to fall under the condition of non-expediency; first, when we pray
against sin; secondly, when we pray for spiritual mercies; and, thirdly, for
the Church and public mercies. Page. 484 An answer to the first. ibid. An
answer to the second and third. Page. 486 Whether faith in the object be no
less required then faith in the subject? and whether we have any ground to
expect an answer to the prayers that are put up for unbelievers? ibid. What
kind of faith should we act in praying for others? and what is its object?
Page. 489 Objections answered; 1. I fear lest I be not in the state of grace;
and upon what ground then may I be confident that my prayers shall be heard?
Page. 494 2. Obj. Its hard for weak believers to know the meaning and extent of
the promises. Page. 497 3. Obj. The promises (as Divines usually affirm) are to
be understood with the exception of the cross. Page. 498 Some grounds for
strengthening and supporting our faith; as, first, the Lords infinite mercy and
tender bowels. Page. 500 Secondly, his truth and fidelity. Page. 503 Medina his
impious gloss, or rather his blasphemous denying and calling in question the
Lords fidelity. ibid. How we may know whether we doubt of the promise, or of
our own state and condition, whether we be in the faith or not? Page. 505
Thirdly, his infinite power. Page. 508 Whether the Lord now works any
miracles, or the equivalent? ibid. Fourthly, That name and title the Lord takes
to himself; the hearer of prayer. Page. 510 Fifthly, the consideration of such
persons, and prayers as have met with success. Page. 511 Sixthly, the
experience of all Saints; who only are fit judges, and have a right to the
promise of audience. Page. 513 Seventhly, The many and binding relations, under
which the Lord stands toward the Saints: the tender bowels of all the persons
of the Trinity, their proper work and engagement herein. Page. 515 Some
directions. Page. 518 Marks of the prayer of faith, as, first, negatively, if
we walk not as children, we cannot call God, Father. Page. 519 Secondly,
positively, 1. enlargement in prayer; 2. frequency; 3. calmness and composure
of spirit after prayer; 4. watching for an answer; 5. thankfulness though the
particular be not given; 6. some intimation of love made to the heart. Page.
521 We have reason to be humbled for our unbelief. Page. 529 What faith did
Adam in the state of innocence act in prayer? and whether he then knew the
mystery of incarnation? Page. 530 If we suppose the Saints in glory to pray,
whether may they be said to pray in faith? Page. 531 Whether the unbelief of
the promises, or of the threatenings, be the greater sin? Page. 533

CHAP. III. Some consequent conditions of prayer; first, after prayer we must
wait, and look up to God for an answer. Page. 535 Secondly, we must watch and
look in to our selves. Page. 539 Thirdly, we must renew our requests, and
continue instant at the throne of grace, adding prayer to prayer. Page. 541
Fourthly, we must use the means for obtaining what we ask from God; our prayers
ought not be pretended as a cloak for idleness. ibid. Fifthly, when the Lord
answers our prayers, we must return the sacrifice of praise. Page. 544 What our
praise and thanksgiving imports? Page. 545 Whether all these qualifications
which should go before, accompany and follow our prayers, be essentially
necessary to its acceptance and audience? and what be more, what less
necessary? Page. 547 Some grounds of encouragement to weak Saints; with the
concurring testimony of some practical Divines. Page. 549
PART. III. Some practical cases. What cases belong to this place? Page. 552
CHAP. I. How we should in prayer conceive of God, and of the persons of the
glorious Trinity? Page. 553 Sect. I. How we should conceive of God when we draw
nigh to him? Page. 553 Humility and reverence necessary here. ibid. Concl. 1.
Beware of mental idols for representing Gods infinite nature. Page. 555 Concl.
2. Its no small part of our knowledge to know what God is not. ibid. Concl. 3.
Yet he calls us to behold his positive perfections. Page. 556 Concl. 4. In
prayer we may select and make choice of such divine attributes and perfections
as are most suitable to our condition. Page. 557 Concl. 5. We may not draw nigh
to God but in Christ's name. Page. 558 Concl. 6. But in Christ we may draw nigh
with confidence as children to a father, able, and ready to hear and answer.
Page. 559 Its not presumption, but a duty, to call God, Father. ibid. What if
we be not assured of our adoption? Page. 560 Is it not a mocking of God to call
him, Father, when he is not, and while we are not in the state of adoption?
Page. 562 Some evidences of adoption. ibid. Though we be children, yet if we
know not our state, whether may we in truth, and without a a lie, call God,
Father? Page. 564 Five bonds whereby a child of light, walking in darkness, may
lay hold upon God as a Father. ibid.
Sect. II. After what manner and order should we direct our prayers to the
persons of the glorious Trinity? Page. 566 The Trinity a great mystery, yet
clearly revealed, as to the thing it self, though not as to the manner. Page.
567 Concl. 1. There is a natural order among the persons of the Trinity. Page.
568 Concl. 2. There are not three first causes and principal agents, but one.
Page. 569 Concl. 3. There is an appropriation of works and attributes, but not
exclusive. ibid. Only in the work of redemption there be something peculiar to
the Son. Page. 571 Concl. 4. We must not so direct our prayers to any one
person, as to exclude the other two. Page. 572 Concl. 5. Yet we may so direct
our prayers to one, as not actually to meditate on the other two. Page. 573
Concl. 6. In singling out any one of those glorious persons, we may reflect
upon, and improve the appropriation of works and attributes. ibid. Concl. 7.
Yet we are not so limited thereto, as that upon occasion fix upon any one.
ibid. Whether as we may put up several petitions to several persons, So also
one and the same petition to several persons? Page. 574 Concl. 8. Yet usually
Christians address themselves to the Father. Page. 575 Concl. 9. That noble way
of conveighing all good to the Sants, [from the Father, through the Son, and by
the holy Ghost] does not by any natural result flow from that original order
that is among those glorious persons. Page. 577 A voluntary covenant the ground
of this dispensation. Page. 578 The School-distinction of mission not full, it
wants the most useful member. Page. 581 Concl. 10. We are not so obliged to
conceive of God under these personal relations, that we may not worship him
absolutely as the alone Jehovah. ibid. A word of warning; caution and
exhortation. Page. 582

CHAP. II. Of the withdrawing of the Spirit, deadness, wandering thoughts,
etc. Page. 586 Sect. I. Of the withdrawing of the Spirit. Page. 587 How far
the Spirit may withdraw from the Saints. ibid. Whether the Spirit always
works, as to the conservation of grace, so also to it is operations, increase
and growth? Page. 588 There may be a total suspension of gracious influences as
to prayer, and other particular performances. Page. 589 This suspension may
fall under a twofold consideration; 1. as our trial; 2. as our correction and
punishment. Page. 589 The Lord does not always withdraw for sin, but
sometimes for, etc. Page. 590 And thus the suspension of grace is either, 1.
medicinal; or. 2. monitory; or, 3. probatory; or, 4. castigatory. Page. 591 Yet
it is always our duty to examine our hearts and ways, lest, etc. Page. 592 We
would distinguish between the comforting, and the quickening or assisting
presence of the Spirit. Page. 593 The Spirit may be provoked to depart either
more directly and immediately, or more mediatly and indirectly. ibid. How the
Scriptures express the more direct affronts and indignities offered to the
Spirit. Page. 594 The Spirit may be said to be quenched, either positively or
negatively, by commission or omission. ibid. Negatively, 1. by not yielding to
his motions; 2. by not welcoming him nor prising his presence; 3. by a decay of
love, respect, reverence, etc. Page. 594 Positively, 1. when we prostitute his
gifts to our carnal ends; 2. when we undervalue and entertain base, low
thoughts of them; 3. when we contemn his Authority, and obey Satan and welcome
his temptations, notwithstanding the contrary motions and warnings of the
Spirit; 4. so much of illumination and light, so much of conviction and
conscience as is choked, so far the Spirit is dishonored and provoked. Page.
566 How the Spirit is provoked by every reigning sin? Page. 597 A word of
exhortation. Page. 598 The Saints danger when the Spirit with-draweth. Page.
599 How we may know when the Spirit with-draweth his help from supplicants?
Page. 600
Sect. II. A twofold deadness and indisposition; one privative, by the
departure of the quickening and strengthening influence of the Spirit; another
positive, into which we are casten by the opiat of sin. Page. 602 Diverse kinds
of causes of this evil. Page. 603 Among externals, Satan is the chief. Page.
604 But the root of the matter is within us; hereditary sin a mother sin. Page.
605 To which, some gross pollution, or conscience-wasting sin, being
super-added, the heart must be very much straightened in it is approaches to God.
Page. 606 What are these sins against which the Saints should especially guard.
Page. 607 What be these sins which more formally and efficiently straiten the
heart, and occasion deadness and wandering thoughts? Page. 607 1.
Earthly-mindedness; 2. irreverence and want of fear; 3. hypocrisy; 4. want of
feeling; 5. distrust and unbelief; 6. excess and surfeiting, either bodily or
spiritual; 7. wantonness and a spirit of lust; 8. discontent with our
condition, family-contention, and whatsoever distemper of the passions, anger,
grief, etc. 9. not watching the heart; 10. nor guarding the outward senses; 11.
taking unseasonable times for performing these duties; 12. disuse, omission and
want of frequency; 13. a giving way to a slight and superficial way of
performance; 14. ill company. ibid. Positive directions and remedies, 1.
strengthen and fortify the heart with the cordial of love; 2. let us rouse up
and awaken our sleepy hearts; 3. let us beg the quickening presence of the
Spirit of Christ, bewailing more the want thereof, then the want of his
consolations; 4. let us diligently mark and observe when the Spirit draws
nigh, and when he with-draweth; 5. when we set upon any duty, let us renew our
resolutions to hold our hearts fixed at the work; 6. in the intervals of
prayer, let us give our selves unto holiness; [ 1. do not stint thy self to
such a measure of holiness; 2. imitat the best examples; 3. converse much with
the Saints; 4. frequent the Ordinances diligently; and, 5. be diligent in thy
particular calling.] 7. arrest thy heart at the present exercise and work; 8.
remember, 1. the greatness and excellency, 2. the goodness and bounty, 3. the
presence and all seeing eye; and, 4. the holiness, justice and terrors of him
with whom we have to do; 9. use such a gesture as may be most helpful to raise
the heart; 10. thou may, while indisposed, have recourse to a set form; and
then, 11. let frequency supply the want of continuance and enlargement; 12.
whatever success thou meetest with, yet leave not off, but still follow on to
seek the Lord in his Ordinances till thou find him; do not faint nor weary,
for, etc. Page. 620
Sect. III. Whether our deadness and indisposition will excuse our negligence
and omission of duty? Page. 637 Six or seven reasons for the negative. ibid.
Our deadness should rather send us to, then hold us from, the throne of grace.
Page. 640 Motives to stir us up to shake off our laziness, indisposition,
negligence, etc. Page. 640 What copy should we set before our eyes, as to our
diligence and activity, for eternal life? Page. 643 When, and what wandering
thoughts do nullify our prayers and hinder their success? Page. 644 The
testimony of some Divines. Page. 645 Deadness and wandering thoughts a
grievous burden to the Saints. Page. 646 Whether we may be too much enlarged in
prayer or meditation. Page. 648 Of the Popish mystical Theology, Enthusiasme,
etc. ibid. Whether the Saints be always precisely limited to the present work
in which they are employed? Page. 650 Whether sincere supplicants use to be be
more enlarged in private or public? ibid. Whether it be a mercy to have our
prayers answered when we are cold and formal? Page. 651
CHAP. III. Whether we may pray for any evil either of sin or suffering? Page.
652 Some distinctions. Page. 653 We may not pray for any evil, either
absolutely or relatively. ibid. Five arguments. Page. 654 Objections answered.
Page. 657 Far less may we pray and wish evil to our brethren. Page. 663 A word
concerning the evil of sin. ibid.
CHAP. IV. Whether it be lawful to imprecat? the question propounded and
limited. Page. 664 It is certain we may, 1. pray against the sins; and, 2.
against the plots of the wicked, and, 3. that we may complain of their cruelty;
and, 4. that we may pray the Lord to break their snare of success and
prosperity; and, 5. that justice may be executed upon malefactors. ibid. But we
must not curse, 1. without a cause; nor, 2. for our own cause; nor, 3. our
relations. Page. 665 The question answered negatively, and objections obviated.
Page. 666
CHAP. V. What it is to pray always. Page. 668 The Euchits confuted. Page. 669
Whether Pelagians taught, that it was needless to pray? Page. 670 Six
conjectures rejected. Page. 671 The exhortation to pray always and without
ceasing, supposes a spiritual disposition. Page. 674 It answers the
question, when should we pray? ibid. It imports assiduity and frequency.
ibid. It requires, 1. constancy, and, 2. universality; 1. in respect of the
object; 2. in respect of the seasons, time and opportunities, whether set or
occasional. Page. 676 An omission cannot be imputed to us, unless we be called
and obliged to do. Page. 677 The least that can be allowed for a set course of
prayer, is twice a day. Page. 678 What time of the day fittest? Page. 679
Scripture-instances with some variety. Page. 680 How we may discern the
occasional season of prayer. Page. 681 What is done in it is season (whether set
or occasional) is said in Scripture to be done always. Page. 683 There ought
also to be an universality, in respect of the subject. Page. 684 Lastly, it
imports perseverance. Page. 684 How much time should be spent, and how long
should we continue at prayer. Page. 685 Whether it be lawful to use
repetitions, and what repetitions in prayer. Page. 687 A word concerning
ejaculatory prayer. Page, 691 The Saints have continued for a considerable time
at prayer. Page, 692 An exhoration to frequency. Page, 693 A word of caution,
take heed lest custom and frequency make us customary and superficial in
prayer. Page, 695

PART IV. Of the return of prayer. CHAP. I. Of the success of prayer. Page, 695
Sect. I. The Christian is the only worthy and invincible man. Page, 696 Prayers
and tears the arms of the Church. Page, 697 How the holy Spirit expresses the
power and prevalency of prayer? Page, 698
Sect. II. The Atheists great objection, all things come alike to all,
answered. Page, 701 What the Lords hearing of prayer imports? Page, 703 Hence
several arguments proving that the wicked receive nothing in answer to their
prayers. Page, 704 Why then does the Lord bestow mercies upon them? Ans. Page,
706 Four ways of the Lords hearing the prayers of his servants. Page, 710 A
delay to give, or denial of the particular asked, may be a gracious answer of
prayer. Page, 711 How our prayers for temporals ought to be resolved? Page, 712
Wha^ (...) only conditionally and relatively asked, when the end and condition
fails, is not asked. Page. 713 The Lord always hears his Saints, if not
according to their desire, yet for their profit. Page. 716 Though all things
come alike to all, yet these are not alike to all. Page. 717 It is brutish
folly to fret because of the prosperity of the wicked, or the afflictions of
the Saints. Why we must pray for temporals, though we may not be anxious about
them? Page. 719 Whether the Lord always answers, when he hears the prayers
of his children? Page. 720 The wicked receive nothing as a fruit of prayer.
Page. 721
Sect. III. Rules for discerning when our prayers are heard, Page. 723 Rules
for knowing when our prayers are heard, though the particular be withheld.
Page. 724 How we may know whether our mercies are dispensed to us by a common
providence, or in return to our prayers. Page. 725 Some cautions for improving
aright the foregoing rules. Page. 728 Whether those mercies, that are given to
the Saints when they are cold and formal in prayer, be given in mercy, and in
answer to such prayers? Page. 729
Sect. IV. Why the Lord will not always grant our desires, but will rather
give some other thing in lieu and consideration of what was asked? Page. 734 Why
the Lord delayeth to give what he purposes at length to give? Page. 736 CHAP.
II. When, and whose prayer, the Lord will not hear? Page. 738 Sect. I. What be
those sins that in a special manner obstruct the Saints prayers. ibid. Albeit a
pardoned sin cannot obstruct the acceptance of prayer, yet it may obstruct the
giving of several temporal mercies. Page. 742
Sect. II. Who are they whose prayers the Lord will never hear or answer. Page.
743 When do the wicked come to such a state, as prayer will be no more a mean
for their good? Ans. Page. 744 Ten characters of such wretches; 1. such as do
not profit under a powerful ministry, page, 745. 2. hypocritical professors,
ibid. 3. old gray-haired sinners, p. 746. 4. such as have abused many and great
talents, p. 747. 5. those who have often resisted the holy Ghost, and the
checks of their own conscience, p. 748 6. such as were once near the kingdom of
God, but are now fallen back, p. 749. 7. stubborn and presumptuous sinners, p.
751. 8. heretics, both speculative and practical, (where are instanced three
too common and damnable practical heresies) p. 752. 9. earthly-minded covetous
worldlings, p. 761. 10. mockers of piety, haters of God and of his servants,
and who revile their faithful monitors. Page. 762 Obj. Who loves not God?
Ans. Page. 763 A word of application. Page. 766 Few of those who are called,
are chosen and shall be saved. p. 777 (but should be. Page. 767) A word to the
convinced and trembling sinner, 1. by way of warning and caution; 2. by way of
counsel and direction; and, 3. by way of encouragment. Page. 780 The place,
Prove. 1.26 etc. considered; it does not exclude any mourning and sincere
penitent from pardon. Page. 787 A word of caution for preventing the Saints
stumbling, and misapplying the former threatenings to themselves. Page. 789

CHAP. III. An exhortation to continue instant in prayer, with an answer to
objections. Page. 791 Sect I. Several motives to stir us up to the constant and
serious practice of this duty. Page. 792 Sect. II. Several objections
propounded. Page. 815 Neither the decrees, free promises, or love of God, do
give a discharge from this duty, but rather are notable encouragements to
continue constant therein. Page. 816 Whether our prayers may be said to move
God? the common answer not satisfactory, eight considerations for clearing the
question. Page. 822 A word of exhortation by way of conclusion. Page. 828






THE SPIRITUAL SACRIFICE: OR, A TREATISE, Wherein several weighty Questions and
Cases, concerning the Saints communion with GOD in Prayer, are propounded, and
practically improved.

BY Mr. Alexander Pitcarne, Minister of the Gospel at Dron in Strath-Ern.

PART I. Of the nature of Prayer.

1 Pet. 2.5. Ye -- are -- an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Edinburgh, Printed for Robert
Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the north
side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.

TO THE READER.
I Am not very anxious, nor shall I now spend many words for satisfying those,
who (knowing how the most part of my time has been employed) have told me,
they did not expect to see me first appear upon such a subject. But, for thy
satisfaction, Christian Reader, I shall briefly show the occasion of writing,
and now publishing this Treatise; forbea^ing, at this time, to give an account
of my former Studies, and whether or not any Genesis 38.29, 30.
Zarah has drawn back his hand, while this Pharez has broken forth. Having
(not long after the Lord called me to the Ministry) made choice of our blessed
Lords farewell Sermon, Joh. 14. etc. (that sweet and excellent portion of
Scripture) to be the ground and subject of that Doctrine I was to preach to
this people every Lords day in the fore-noon, (reserving for the afternoon some
word of warning, exhortation, reproof, etc. as the Lord would direct me, and
their need and the occasion did require) when I came to the 13. and 14. verses
of that 14. Chapter, which contain such an ample and full promise concerning
the success and return of prayer, (as a most powerful motive to the serious
and constant practice of that duty, and as a reviving cordial and notable
encouragement under all our trials and afflictions) I resolved to stay a while
on that excellent and useful Theme, making choice of suitable Texts for
unfolding the several particulars which belong to that head; not having then
the least thought to publish these Sermons; especially considering, that so
many able Divines had already labored in that field: but when I observed my
Meditations to pitch on those things I had not met with in those Authors, I
looked upon that as an invitation to prosecute that work, and to write at
length what I purposed to deliver, and not to mark only some brief notes (as my
custom for the most part is) of what I was to enlarge in the Pulpit. And having
brought that work to some close, though I was conscious of my own weakness, and
not ignorant how critical this luxuriant age is; yet I did at last give way to
the publishing of it, when I considered, that the times call for such a Piece,
(though performed with greater dexterity) having also met with some invitation
and encouragement from some who occasionally heard, and others who had seen
some of these Sheets.

So much briefly concerning the rise and design; and having in the subsequent
Preface, spoken a little of the excellency, necessity, usefullness, singular
advantages, success and fruit of Prayer, which is the subject; I shall now only
offer some few advertisements concerning the Treatise it self. And, 1. since
few or none (whom I had seen or could hear of) have handled, at any length,
those questions that belong to the nature of Prayer, I have insisted on these
the more largely, (not leaving them without some practical application) Part
first; and as to the rest of the Tractat, I have but briefly touched such
particulars as have been more fully prosecuted by others. And thus, 2. since a
great part of Mr. Cobbets discourse of Prayer, is spent upon the qualifications
of that spiritual Sacrifice, I have, Part second, only in a word, named those
be insisteth on, adding some few, with a more full explication of that faith,
required Jam. 1.6. since I conceived not only him, but others who had spoken to
that case, not to insist on that which is the main importance thereof. 3. As to
the cases propounded, Part third, these are but few, and I have only insisted
on the first two, as being most useful and material; and the third (I might
also add the second, as belonging to this head, yea and the first also, except
what the learned Mr. Cobbet has offered for clearing of it) has scarcely been
named by any practical Divine I have perused. As to the kinds of Prayer, such
as ejaculatory and more continued, closet Prayer and public, extraordinary and
ordinary, set-forms and extempore, etc. I have not descended to these; as for
other reasons, so because the judicious Mr. Curnal in his Christian Armor,
Part 3. has lately handled these (except the last we named) very accuratly.

As to the fourth Part, concerning the success and answer of Prayer, the first
Table will give thee an account of the particulars there handled: but what
these two great Divines, Mr. Gee and Mr. Goodwin, have at so great length
delivered in two complete Treatises, the one Concerning the return of Prayer;
the other Concerning the reasons of Gods hiding himself from his peoples
prayers, grounded on his promises; and of his seeming, by his providence, to
answer the prayers which are contrary thereunto, I have in few words summed up;
propounding the chief heads of their large Discourse, with some additional
observations, in six or seven Pages, it is then far from my thoughts to render
the labors of others who have written before me, on this excellent and most
comprehensive head, useless; but their Works will be necessary to supply my
defects and weakness; yet I have not altogether omitted any thing I conceived
necessarily to belong to the present Subject.

If it be asked, whether I now offer these Sermons as they were preached? Ans.
There will be found no considerable alteration, as to the practical part,
except that I did then enlarge some particulars and insist longer upon them,
when I conceived the need of this people so to require; but that defect is here
supplied with addition of several polemick Questions (especially Part 1.) and
Citations, which had not been pertinent for such an Auditory, nor from such a
place; however useful School-debates may be to the learned and judicious, yet
to the multitude they prove but a beating of the air; and therefore, though
they may invite and delight an intelligent Reader, (and the unlearned may pass
them over and go to that which is more profitable) yet the Preacher would mind
all his hearers, especially the most rude and ignorant, (for others might
better provide for themselves) that when he is to give an account of his
stewardship, he may be able to say, with the Apostle, That his preaching was
not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit
and of power, 1 Cor. 2.4. and, That in the Church, he did rather speak five
words to the capacity of his hearers, then ten thousand they did not
understand, 1 Cor. 14.19.

As to the errors in printing, these I observed by a cursory view, are so many,
that I dare not under take to give a perfect catalogue; but let me entreat
thee, before thou read, to correct with thy pen these which I have here set
down, as being most material; especially that blasphemy in the Preface, Page 2.
where in stead of justice, thou will find injustice ascribed to the holy One of
Israel. As to to the marginal citations, I had not time to compare them with
the Authors; and I did the rather forbear that task, because there be several
Authors I perused in writing, which I have not now beside me (for this small
Treatise has lain in the Press these two years almost, the Printer having met
with some diversions) therefore I have only corrected some few errors, (or,
shall I say, nonsense) in the matter: but as to the places cited, thou will
find one and the same passage made use of (some few pages only interjected)
with a diverse citation, and the Authors names sometimes so mangled, that hardly
will thou be able to conjecture who they be, as Pet. art. 8. Jos de, for Pet. a
S. Jos. i would. habet for Bernard. Aug. just. for August. Calv. for Clavius,
Ramerius for Rainerius; thou will also find some imperfect citations, the
Author named, but no place designed, or the Book, but not the chapter or
question: sometimes also there is no letter in the page to direct thee to the
citation in the margin, and at other times it points out the wrong place;
which the judicious Reader will easily perceive, and may correct. As to the
numberal figures on the several pages, there are so many mistakes, that it were
not easy to sum them all up; but the most observable is, that from page, 544.
to page 649. there is an hundred less then the just number; but to prevent
confusion, I have in the tables supplied what was wanting, and have followed
the number wherewith the page ought to have been marked. Thou will also now and
then find some mistake in the inscription of the pages, and that the
designation of the Part, Chapter and Section is wanting, and that in the page
the several purposes are not distinguished with their proper paragraphs. Thou will moreover often find least for lest, and in the first seven or eight sheets
the particle to, once and again, superfluously added, in which the Printer made
use of that copy (having two) I did not write nor revise. As for literal
mistakes, wrong pointing, etc. the Horat. de art. poet.
Poets apology may have place:

Sunt delicta tamen quibus ignovisse velimus:
Nam neque chorda sonum reddit, quem vult manus and men's,
Poscentique gravem persaepe remittit acutum:
Nec semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus.
ERRATA.
PAge 1 Line 23 thus o, read, this O: page 2 line 36 injustice, read, justice.
page 9 line 15 the last particular is made the penult. page 15 line 25 Joh.
read. Jon. p. 29 l. 8 Joh. 26. r. Joh. 16. p. 45 l. 25 dele here: p. 46 l. 25
this is the fourth ground of consolation, these words were put, and should have
been left on the margin, p. 64 l. 27 ver. 7. r. ver. 17. p. 67 l. 19 Rev. 83.
r. Rev. 13. p. 80 l. 11, Rev. 13.14. r. Rev. 14.13. p. 84 l. 11, Mark 10.26. r.
Mark 10.49. p. 105 l. 21, also, r. all, p. 116 l. 18, it is, r. is, p. 127 l.
27, are, r. were: p. 117 l. 28, cannot, r. can, p. 190. marg. l. 17, gain, r.
game: p. 203 l. 33, the work, r. our work: p. 225 l. 2, spiritual, r. temporal:
p. 259 l. 24, judicious and, r. and judicious: p, 291 l. 12, de le yet: p. 303
l. 2, for, r forth: p. 304 l. 4. dele their: p. 336 l. 5, so that, r. and: p.
308 l. 15, probale, r. probable: p 311 marg. l. 5, Heb. r. lib. p. 312. l. 13,
strong, r. strange: p. 313 l. 35, blinded, r. blind: p. 321 l. 4, notum, r.
novum. p, 322 l. 15, by, r. and by: p. 330 l. 30, Cor. r. 1 Cor. p. 341 l. 33,
to the length. r. the length: p. 342 marg. l. 4, Ephesians. 10. r. Ephesians. 2.10. p, 340
l. 31, Heb. 10.21. r. Heb. 10.22. p, 345 l. 31, and argumentative, r.
argumentative and. ibid. l, 36, witness to, r. witness with. p, 348 l. 10, not
Spirit, r. not the Spirit. p, 351 l. 33, resist, r. to resist. p, 352 l. 4,
maerial, r. material: p. 356 l, 24, then, r, them: p, 360 marg. l, 12, hominum,
r, hominem. p, 361 l, 36, marg. ostendere, r, pretendere. p, 364 l, 7, objects,
r, abjects: p, 375 l, 28, dele ver. 43. p, 377 l, 8, of offending, r, by
offending: p, 393 l, 21, his to hand, r, to his hand: p, 399 l, 26, be from, r,
come from: p, 401 l, 28, Jam. 1. r, Jam. 5. p, 406 marg. l, 5, ghib r, chil. p.
420 l, 28, no, r, do: p, 423 marg. l, 16, very, r, vere: p, 424 l, 24 prayers,
r, hearts. p. 427 l, 28, virtual intention r, virtual attention: p, 428 marg.
l, 14, robatione, r, probatione: ibid. l, 29, quartam, r. quartum: p, 429 l, 27
marg. attend, r, attendere: p, 433 l, 6, to diverted, r, to be diverted: p,
435 l. ult. stistance, r, distance: p, 438 l, 17, objects, r, abjects: p, 448
l, 2, contract, r, counter-act: p, 454 l, 28, till the end, r, till we obtain
the end: p, 465 marg. l, 36, terminatum, r, determinatum: p. 473 marg. l, 46,
obtinebii, r, obtinebit: p, 477 marg. l, ult. (...), r, (...): p, 481 marg. l,
20, utilitatem, r, voluntatem: p, 483 marg. l, 37, dele their: p, 486 l, 32,
qui, r, quae: p, 488 l, 17, therefore, r, wherefore: p, 500 marg. l, 30, habet,
r, Bernard: p, 501 l, 12, Exodus, 3. r, Exodus 34. p, 520 l, 13, and groundless,
r, and a groundless: p, 543 marg. l, 3, (...), r, (...): p, 545 marg. l, 19,
benefici, r, beneficii: ibid, l, 27, ar, r, jur: ibid. l, 38, sed, r. non est
laus sed, ibid. l, 42, ingratitudine, r, ingratitudini: p, 548 l, 21, and, r,
an: p, 549 marg. l, 8, four, r, five: p, 550 marg l, 19, studens, r, student.
p, 554 l, 23, thus much, r, this much: p, 562 l, 17, Mat. r, Mal. p, 563 l, 3,
me, add Isa. 49.14, 15. p, 566 l, 5, aed, r, and: p, 575 l, 19, dele as, ibid.
l, 29, to time, r, time to, ibid marg. l, 40, the Son, r, excluding the Son: p,
577 l, 2, as the, r, as to the: p, 578 marg. l, 27, permissionem, r,
permissionem: p, 604 marg. l, 12, fire, add, etc. p, 607 l, 10, of duties, r,
in duties: p, 608 marg. l, 2, Calv. r, Clav. ibid. l, 14, peccaro, r, perraro:
p, 611 l, 17, no such, r, such: p, 612 l, 2, disquiet, r, disquieting: p, 6^5
l, 8, languishd, r, languid: p, 6 6 marg, l, 23, and this decay of grace
usually, r, there is a decay of grace which usually: p, 621 l, 23, thou findst
thy heart, r, we find our heart: p, 623 l, 17, are, r, as: p, 626 l, 13, add in
marg. minime bonus est (ut inquit Bern.) qui melior fieri non vult: p, 632 l,
33, as act, r, as they act. p, 635 marg. l, 31, intentio, r, intensio: p, 642
marg. l, 2, Petrum, r, Petram: p, 643 l, 13, their heavenly, r, the heavenly:
p, 660 l, 22, Christ, r, of Christ: p, 664 l, 2, against, r, against the
wicked, ibid. l, 8, Deborah, add Judge. ibid, l. 27, wants not, r, was not: p,
671 l, 2^, to the, r, on the: ibid. marg. l, 26, tentendunt, r, contendunt:
ibid, l, 40, hinc, r, huic: p, 674 l, 20, dele 1. p, 675 marg. l, 1, (...): p.
677 marg. l, 29, the Greek -- and the Hebrew -- r, the Greek(...), and the
Hebrew(...) p, 687 marg. l, 30, dele loc. p, 691 l, 22. digressed a little to
its use, r, digressed a little to speak to its nature: p, 696 l, 3, their, r,
the: p, 697 l, 5, their, r, these: p, 702 l, ult his, r, this: p, 704 l, 16,
Jam. 1. r, Jam. 5. p, 708 marg. l, 16. Aug. just. r: August: p, 7^9 l, 26,
prayers, r, prayer: p, 735 l, 4, denied to give, dele to give: p, 743 l, 30,
which from, r, which flow from: p, 744 l, 13, Psa. 3.62, r, Psa. 32.6. ibid. l,
16, constituted, r, continued: p, 745 l, 16, judgment, r, judgments, ibid. l,
18, few, r, few sins: p, 751 l, 24, hereafter, r, will be their portion for
ever: p, 761 l, 19, watch, r, wait, ibid. marg. l, 11. concerning which, r,
concurring with: p, 762 marg. l. ^6. magna, r, magica: p. 763 l, 8, Psa. 27. r,
Psa 21: p, 784 l, 13, dele them: p: 789 marg. l, 31, dele at: p, 792 l, 22
homage, r, hoc age: p, 793 l, 15, help, r, keep: p. 799 marg. l, 16, dele and:
p, 800, l, 4, new a, r, a new: p, 806 l, 22 justice and, r, justice, unless
thou submit, and present thy supplications to the provoked Majesty: p, 808
marg. l, 3, Psalms, r, Psalm: p, 822 l, 31, mercy, r, mercies: p, 823 marg. l,
13, God, r, Gods: p, 827 marg, l, 30, ipse, r, ipsi: ibid. l, 34, aut ea, r,
antea: p, 828 marg. l. 6, illo, r, illa.

The Table of Questions and Cases that should have been placed in the beginning
of the first Volumn, will be found at the beginning of the second.

THE PREFACE.
THe Christians Charter is most comprehensive and broad: Charta vere magna; He
is a great Heir though he has little in hand. All the creatures, yea and all
the works and various dispensations of providence, are for our use and
employment; they are our talents which we may improve for the honor of our
Master and our own advantage. And thus we have not only jus ad omnia, but also
(if our sloth and negligence did not hinder) jus in omnibus; and having
nothing, we may thus possess all things, 2. Cor. 6. ver. 10. All are thus put
under the Christians feet, and may be subservient to us, and become, as it
were, a staff in our hand while we are walking with God, and toward the
promised Land, omnia vestra sunt (says Cajet. in 1. Cor. 3. ver. 21.) h.e.
Propter vos and ordinaia ad vestram utilitatem.
All are his, 1. Cor. 3. verse. 21, 22. the world, the whole world is his; Yea,
what is not yet known or discovered. Could Alexander, Caesar, or he who was the
greatest Monarch and Potentate, lay claim to so much? Sea and Land, with all
it is furniture, all it is beauty, glory, and riches is too mean a portion for
him who is 1. Joh. 3.9.
born of God: The Heavens are his, and (may I not say) Hell also; though he
shall never see that place of torment, yet it is his talent which he may
improve to advantage. And yet all these great and excellent things are not all,
nor the main, they are little, they are as nothing, they are not worthy once to
be named in respect of those things which eye has not seen nor ear heard, 1.
Cor. 2. verse. 9. in respect of that Crown of life and glory, 1. Pet. 5. verse.
4. Jam. 1. verse. 12. and that incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that
fades not away, reserved for him in the Heavens, 1. Cor. 9. v. 25. 1. Pet. 1.
v. 14. Thus, O! ye despised and disconsolated Saints, this is your allowance
and great portion; and these other things are but for our provision while we
are in the wilderness, and a torch to let us see our way, and a staff in our
hand while we are going home: Thus the children of God are great Heirs indeed;
they are Kings, Rev. 1. verse. 6. All the Honors, Riches and Pleasures under
the Sun, all corruptible Crowns wrapped up in one are but as a Cipher, and amount
to nothing in respect of this one thing: They are verily happy and blessed who
are thus happy; and yet the prime of all their happiness and (...) consists
in this, that they have 1. John 3. verse. 9.
fellowship with the Father and His Son Jesus Christ.

The Lord himself is our great all; in Him alone we eminently enjoy all; qui
habet habentem omnia, habet omnia. He who can with David ( Psalm. 16. verse. 5,
6.) say, The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and cup, has reason with
him also to conclude, I have a goodly heritage. This was the marrow of Abraham's
blessing when called to sojourn in a strange Land, that the Lord himself should
be his portion and exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. verse. 1. Ah! would the men
of this world have said, is this all our portion and allowance? Is this all the
recompense we may expect? O! How would they have slighted such an offer? They
could not exstract any consolation from it; O! but says the Lord to Abraham,
What think thou of thy condition? View thy portion and allowance; I am thy
Shield, and will thou fear? I am thy Reward, and have thou proven an ill
Merchant? Do thou rue thy bargain, now thou have the full Ocean for leaving
the empty Cisterns; I who am thy inheritance am the Almighty God; or as others
(but to the same purpose) translate the words, I am God all-sufficient; there
is in me, not only an infinite self-sufficiency, but also enough to satisfy
the vast capacity of the reasonable creature which cannot be filled with any
finite object; My sufficiency shall be for thy satisfaction, I am thy Reward;
and although thou must be an expectant for a while, as to the full fruition of
thy inheritance, yet thou shall have something in hand, I will not be as a
stranger to thee in this thy Pilgrimage, I will visit thee, and all my
Attributes shall be employed for thy good, my Mercy and loving Kindness shall
follow thee, my Beauty and Excellency thou may behold, my Power shall uphold
thee, and my Fury and (...) justice shall pursue thine enemies.

O! But may some with her ( John 4. verse. 11.) say, the well is deep, and we
have nothing to draw with. Ans. It is true, of our selves we have neither a
vessel to hold nor a hand to draw, but He who opens the fountain and invites
us to drink, does offer both to us. He of His free love has dug the well:
the Promises which hold out to us these living waters, and Faith, which is the
hand, are His free Gifts, and unless He pour out upon us the Spirit of Prayer
and Supplication, (that being, as it were, the bucket wherewith we draw) we
know not what to ask; so that albeit the Lord honor us in calling for our help
and in employing us in His work, yet all must come from Himself, and when He
rewards our work He Deus coronat sua dona, non tuamerita. August. de gr. and
lib. cap. 7. and hom. 14. in 50. hom. cum ab illo habeamue quicquid illi
offerimus, and ex illo si^ quicquid boni sumus, Sermon. 1. in Psalm. 32. (nobis
33.) verse. 4. inter pontificios, vid. Durand. in 2. Sent. did. 27. quest. 2.
crowns His own Gift.

But thus, though we have nothing to offer to Him but His own, (as David and
that people truly said, concerning outward things and temporals, 1. Chr. 29.
verse. 14. but we far rather and upon another account, as to our Spiritual
sacrifices) yet He calls for our offering; though we have nothing wherewith to
draw, yet He calls for our bucket that He may fill it; He will have us to pray,
and He will perform our desires; He will give to His honest Supplicants, not
some few things, but whatsoever they shall ask, Joh. 14. verse. 13. and chap.
16. verse. 23. He is God all-sufficient; all that can make for the creatures
happiness is eminently to be found in Him, and efficiently from Him; and all
this good, these great and excellent things which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, must be conveyed unto us by Prayer, and given in return to our
Supplications. That key wherewith Jam. 5. verse. 17. 2 Chr 6. v. 26 and chap. 7.
verse. 13.
Elias did open and shut the doors of heaven, must unlock all our Fathers
cabins, and the praying soul may choose what Jewel he will, he may lay hold on
eternal life, and the immortal crown, the hidden Rev. 2. verse. 17.
manna and the white stone, in which is engraven the new name which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.

2. There is a fullness in Christ, Job. 1. verse. 16. in Him are treasures, all
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; but ah! they are (...)
hid, Col. 2. verse. 3. Though the treasure be full yet it is locked, and where
shall we find a key to open it? Its hid, and how shall the ignorant foolish
sinner fall upon it? Nay, but why complainest thou poor indigent and witless
creature? The owner Rev. 3. verse. 18. Is. 55. verse. ^, 2.
invits thee to come, he points out thy way and discovers the door, and thou
have the There is no door so fast shut that Prayer will not get entrance, vid.
part 4. chapter 1.
keys, as it were, hanging at thy belt; for if thou will knock, it shall be
opened unto thee; if thou will seek thou shall find; and if thou ask it shall
be given thee, Math. 7. verse. 7. There is a well furnished table set before
thee, and it is left to thy choice to cut and carve what thou will, and so if
thou starve thou may know who should bear the blame.

O! (says an Gerbard cont. barm. cap. 179. utilitas orationis tanta est, ut
nemo eam, etc.
eminent and judicious Divine) who is able to enumerat all the excellencies and
advantages of Prayer; What the heart is to the living creature; What rest to
the weary; What joy to the sad; What gold to the indigent; What strength to the
feeble; What nerves to the body; What spirits and blood to the life; Prayer is
all that to the afflicted soul. It is as the Sun in the Firmament (or rather
the Glass by which light is communicate) it is medicine to the sick, a refuge to
the oppressed, a sword against the devil, and a shield to ward off his fiery
darts; It Is eye salve to the blind, it begets hope and confidence; it
inflameth the heart with love, it works humility and filial fear, it elevats
the mind above the creature, and sets the affections on things that are above;
it brings a taste of the hidden manna, and sets the Supplicant before the
Throne to behold the King in his glory, and leads him into the Song. 7. verse. 6.
Galleries where he may familiarly converse with his Lord and Sovereign. This
is that golden chain which will hold the Almighty until He bless thee; it is
Jacobs ladder whereon thou may mount up to Heaven; It is that Jaw Bone
wherewith Sampson smote the Philistines; This is Noah his dove, which always
returns with an Olive leaf of comfort to the disconsolate; This is David's stone
wherewith he smote Goliath, and his Harp wherewith he drove away the evil
spirit from Saul; This is that Pillar of fire and cloud which directs the
Saints, and blindfolds their enemies; This was that Bow (the Promises being the
Arrow and Faith the Hand) whereby these Worthies ( Heb. 11.) of whom the world
was not worthy, waxing valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the
Aliens, quenched the violence of the fire, escaped the edge of the Sword,
subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, etc. O! Who is able to enumerat
all the noble and admirable Vide infra pare. 4. chap ult.
effects of Prayer? What desolations it has made in the earth; what
revolutions in the world, and what astonishing deliverances it has brought to
the Saints.

O! That He who gave wisdom to Exodus 31. verse. 6.11.
Bezaleel and Aholiah for making the Tabernacle according to the Pattern, would
teach us the heavenly art of sacrificing to our God in spirit and in truth. The
material Tabernacle and Temple, where are they now? Yet we must still bring our
offering; the Christian oblation must never cease; we are Priests, Rev. 1.
verse. 6. and we have an Altar, Heb. 13. verse. 10, 12, 15. But alas! may we with
Isaac ( Genesis 22. verse. 7.) say, where as the Lamb for a burnt offering? we have
nothing to offer unless the Lord provide a Ram and instruct us how we should
offer it up. Romans 8. verse. 26. It is thought one of the most tolerable and easy
tasks to pray; and every one (as they think) is able and sit enough for such an
employment, and are busy enough in carrying on that trade, and they were not
worthy to live (will such say) who do not call upon God: But ah! Who are they
that are acquainted with the mystery of Prayer? Liplabour is indeed an easy
work; the Popish devotion, the whiting the outside of the Sepulcher, is no
difficult task, but it is not so easy to give life to the loathsome carcass
within; thou may draw nigh the Throne and prattle some few words before the
Lord, and yet never put to one finger to the work, if thou do not put out thy
strength to draw up thy dead lumpish heart; if thou find not a burden pressing
thee and it down, and call not to heaven for help and for fire to kindle and
enlive thy sacrifice. Every key will not open the doors of Heaven; every knock
will not obtain an entrance, nor every cry prevail: Let us then look up to Him
who can only give us that wisdom which is from above; who can discover, bring
to our hands, and help us to use that admirable piece of work, that it may not
only prove a key to open the Fountain, the Storehouse door and all our fathers
Cabins, but also for opening of our hearts, and an hammer to break the hard
rocks of corruption and the stone there. Ah! But who is sufficient for such a
task? A word spoken on such a subject can never be unseasonable; and though
many have put in their Sickle here, yet much of the harvest is un cut down: But
more has been said then rightly improven; though the Lord has stirred up so
many of His Messengers to point out the way to the Throne, and how to carry on
a safe trade with Heaven; yet, who has believed their report? And we shall not
think our labor lost in bearing testimony against this sinning and prayerlesse
Generation; nor shall we stand upon an Apology for making choice of such a
Theme. Alas! How often have Is. 37. verse. 4, 5.
the children come to the birth and have stuck there for want of Prayers That I
may so speak with some eminent Divines, Mr. Good-wine, Mr. Gurnall, etc.
Midwifry. The Promise many times is big with child, and is come to it is full
reckoning, and has no longer to go with the desired Mercy, then till thou run
to the Throne of Grace and plead for it is deliverance; it only waits for the
obstetrication of the prayer of Faith, that the Man-child may be brought forth.
The Lord deals not sparingly with us, He has many blessings to bestow: None of
His children need with Genesis 27. verse. 38.
Esau complain, that he has not one to bestow on him: But alas! we are like a
Kings Son in the cradle who knows not that he is Heir of a Crown, and thus
neither regards nor improves his Dignity and Privilege: Or like a Traveller,
who having many Bills of Exchange, yet will not be at the pains to read them,
but undervalues them as so much un-written paper, and will rather starve than
bring them to the Exchanger, and plead for the sums to which they give him a
right. Ah! Who would pity such a fool in his misery? And yet, who does lay to
heart that he is the man, and that this is his own case and condition; while we
are in the 2 Cor. 5. verse. 1.
earthly house of this Tabernacle we are Pilgrims and Strangers, Heb. 11. verse.
13. We are far from home but our father is not unmindfull of us, He lets us not
want Bonds and Bills of Exchange under the broad Seal of Heaven, and so cannot
be lost; they are registered in the sacred Volume, and we may have an extract
when we will. We have the credit and fidelity of the great King morgaged (as it
were) for our security; and that He who gives (which is singular) will also
answer these credential Letters; only they are as so many black Bonds, and thou
can lay no claim to them till thy name be inserted. And our kind Father, from
time to time, does warn us, entreating that we would fill up the blank; that we
would become willing and content to be happy and rich; that we would pray for
an heart to prize the heavenly Treasure, and for an hand to write-in our name
in these evidences; to write it with a pen of Iron and the point of a Diamond,
there to abide for ever: And then that we would ask a tongue wherewith we may
plead at the mercy seat the performance of these promises, and that God would
answer his own bills.

And thus Prayer is that Manna on which the true Israelite can live and use it
for all kind of food. The Rabbis imagine that whatsoever kind of meat the
Jews desired and longed for, their Manna while they did eat it, did perfectly
relish the same. Certainly this our Manna will suite with, can answer and
satisfy all sorts of appetits; nay it will serve not only for meat but also
for medicine; in every case and condition, for every bussines and in all things
Prayer is useful, Phil. 4. ver. 6. It is that true money far more excellent
and profitable then what the preacher speaks of, Eccles. 10. ver. 19. That
only answers all things vendible, and can purchase the commodities for this
work, and help for every purpose. What is said of the whole of holiness in
general, 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. may fitly be applied to Prayer in particular; it
is profitable for all things, it is that faithful and happy messenger which
always returns with an answer of peace.

But that we may stay no longer in the porch in handling this most weighty
point (which may be called the marrow and sum of practical divinity) we
purpose in the Lords strength to follow this method. 1. We will enquire after
the nature of Prayer and endeavor to show what it is. 2. We will name the
qualifications and requisits of an acceptable and prevailing Prayer: where we
will more fully speak of that faith which is so necessary to the audience and
acceptance, but little minded in the performance of this duty. 3. We will
propone some cases and questions which may occur concerning the practice of
Prayer. 4. We will proceed to the return of Prayer and enquire after the
several ways God observes in answering our P^ayers, and of the certainty of
success notwithstanding of the many atheistical cavills of Prayerlesse souls,
closing all with a word of exhortation, containing diverse motives to stir us
up to the diligent and constant practice of this promising exercise with an
answer to objections.

PART 1. Of the Nature of Prayer.
IN opening the nature of Prayer, we will, 1. speak of the diverse notions and
considerations under which Prayer may fall. 2. Of the Names given to it in the
Word. 3. We will describe it. 4. We will enquire to what faculty of the soul it
belongs, and in what act it consists. 5. We will speak to its subject and of
the Persons on whom this duty does ly. 6. Of its object, and to whom we should
direct our Prayers. 7. Of the matter of Prayer, for whom, and for what it
should be poured out; where we will take a view of the ground, warrant and
foundation of Prayer, and inquire after the meaning and extent of the promises.
8. Of the author of Prayer, and the help of the spirit. 9. Of the altar whereon
this sacrifice must be offered.

CHAP. I. Prayer considered under diverse respects; as a Gift, as a Grace, as a
Duty, and as a Mean.
Psalm. 12.5. For the sighing of the needy now will I arise (says the Lord)
Mic. 3.4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them. Hos.
7.14. And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they houled upon
their beds.
THere be too many theaters in the world, who with their counterfeit money
deceive the simple, yet there are more who with such coin would carry on a trade
with heaven; and who dare offer to him, from whose eyes nothing is hid, such
trash and refuse: but he cannot be mocked, he will not own or accept what has
not the stamp of his spirit. Carnal desires, though vehement and fervent, must
not be called Prayers; they deserve not the name of crying unto him, and though
they flow from the heart, and carry along with them some kind of performance
of duty, yet they shall not prevail: he who pities the sighs and broken words
of his honest supplicants, and will arise for their help, will not regard the
tears and cries of these hypocrites: and its no small part of our task to find
out a touchstone whereby we may try the money wherewith we traffic for
eternity; Mal. 1.8.14.
and to discover the halt and the lame, that we may not dare to offer such
corrupt things to the great King, whose name is dreadful in all the earth,
least he spread upon our faces the dung of our sacrifices. Mal. 2.2, 3.


And now in the entrance we would observe, that Prayer may fall under a
fourfold notion and consideration. 1. As a Gift. 2. As a Grace. 3. As a Duty.
4. As a mean appointed of God for obtaining the good things he has promised.

1. Wicked men as they may be eminent for parts and other gifts; so also, as to
the gift of Prayer, they may tender up an excellent supplication, both for
matter and expression, to the delight and edification of the hearers, and to
the emolument and good of those who join with them, but with another heart:
Gifts abused, though they profit not the receiver (but exceedingly aggravate
his guiltiness) yet they may tend to the spiritual advantage of others; why
might not these workmen who built an ark for Noah and his family, perish in
the deluge?

But, 2. As many graceless souls may have the gift of Prayer, So many precious
ones may want that gift as to any eminent measure and degree; they may pour
out their souls before the Lord with much affection and tenderness, who being
of small parts, have not this gift, for the edification, refreshing and
stirring up the affections of others; yet I have known not a few, who as for
natural parts, have been reputed weak and simple, and who have had no great
dexterity in worldly affairs, yet have been eminent, not only for grace, but
also in the gift of Prayer, the Spirit (according to the Word Romans 8.26.)
helping their infirmities, and enabling them to pray as they ought; not only by
enlarging their hearts with holy desires: but also ordering these desires, and
supplying fit and pertinent words for expressing of them, to the admiration of
the hearers; yet it is too evident, that many of the saints want this Gift as
to any considerable measure; who albeit upon this account they may be humbled,
and with submisson complain to God because of this infirmity, yet need not be
too much discouraged, though the Lord has not bestowed on them such a measure
of knowledge and utterance as upon some others, yet he has not withheld from
them the Spirit of grace and supplication. What though thou can but sigh with
the needy ( Psalm. 12.5.) and groan with the Prisoners? Psalm. 102.20. What
though thou can but chatter as a cran, and mourn as a dove? Is. 38.14.5. The
Lord can read and understand that hand-writting, he knows the meaning of abrupt
and broken words proceeding from a broken and contrite spirit, and will perform
the desire of such disconsolat ones.

As for the two latter considerations, there is an usual mistake on both
hands, carnal hearts, who make little conscience of duty, look on Prayer as a
mean; and the Saints, who dar not omit their duty, too often, forget the
reward: these who ask amiss and cannot lay claim to the promise, yet will use
Prayer as a charm and spel, they fear no evil because they say their Prayers
every day, and the true Israelits who may draw nigh to God as a father in
confidence to be heard, so trade with heaven as if a storm did always follow
them when they went to sea, and as if their vessel could not escape the
Pirates: and thus though they will not be idle, but must hazard and send many
Packs to sea, yet they expect not ever to hear of them again; and though the
Lord pity such, and will not deal with them according to their fears, yet
often he hides his face for a while, and makes them meet with many contrair
blasts, because of their diffidence; that though their Ship come safe to shore
at length, yet the voyage proves uncomfortable and dangerous, and a
considerable time may interveen before they hear of their return.

Thus we may speak of Prayer under all these four respects; But O! if the Lord
would be pleased so to bless these weak endeavors, that they may prove
helpful for preventing a divorce, where the Lord requires an union, that all
of us may have such a measure of the spirit of grace poured out upon us, and
may, 2. be furnished with such gifts and abilities for ordering and expressing
our desires. And may, 3. be so enabled to make conscience of our duty; As that
4. We may go about the performance of it with cheerfulness and confidence,
knowing that we shall not seek his face in vain; that thus grace may sanctify
our gifts, and success may accompany our work; that albeit to our apprehension
there must still be a distinction; yet there may be no more a separation, but
that in all our supplications these may join hand in hand, and may be really
united; so that we shall not need to prosecute the difference any further, only
as occasion shall offer, we will add a word, by way of remedy, for curing or
preventing what may be found wanting or amiss in our Prayers as to any of
these respects and considerations, looking up to Him, who only can Romans 8.26.27.
help our infirmities and teach us to Pray as we ought, and according to the
will of God.

CHAP. II. Prayer held forth under several Scripture expressions. Paralleled
for preventing mistakes
Math. 7.7, 8. Ask, and etc. for every one that asks, receives; and he that
seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened, Jam. 1.6. Ask
in faith, nothing wavering; And, 5.16, The eff^ctuall fervent Prayer of a
righteous man avails much. Ephesians. 6.18, Praying always and watching thereunto
with all perseverance, etc.
Diverse names and expressions (if the difference be not merely literal and
grammatical) must contribute not a little for clearing of the nature of the
thing it self; it will not then be impertinent for us here to ponder a little
the different ways whereby the subject of our present enquiry is expressed in
Scripture, especially since such a view in the porch (some brief observations
for explication being intermixed) may help to prevent a double mistake, the one
of carnal hearts, who because they find Prayer some times held forth under
words that seem to import no great difficulty, seriousness and diligence, as to
ask, seek, call, cry, knock, etc. are ready to apprehend that it is an easy
task to pray, and that they need no further trouble themselves, if they can
utter some few words in a formal way: and on the other hand, the Godly hearing
of such importunity in Prayer, such fervency, watchfulness, perseverance,
wrestling, weeping, etc. are in hazard to draw hard conclusions against
themselves, as if they never had yet prayed acceptably.

Albeit now we may not speak at any length to these material cases, it being
one of the main designs of the practical part of this treatise to give some
clearing to these; yet, for the present, we may set before both the presuming
Atheist and the tender Christian, what, through the blessing of God, may prove
a remedy to both, if they will be at the pains to compare these Scriptures
together; and thus seek after the sense. Carnal men may see that there is
difficulty in the work, and that lip-labor is no Prayer; and the Godly, who
offer up the desire of their heart to God, need not be discouraged, though at
all times they have not such enlarged affections, zeal and continuance, as some
of Gods children upon special occasions have had. And as this parallel, may
now be helpful to that purpose; So it may give some light, when we come to
speak of these cases more fully in the qualifications of Prayer, and to what we
are to say concerning the nature of it here, Chap. 4.

1. We will begin with such expressions as seem to import no great difficulty.
And thus to pray, 1. Is but to ask, Mat. 7.7. O! but stay a little fond
atheist, and remember, not every one who says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, except he be a doer of the will of God, v. 21. Thou
must then be a doer as well as an asker, and thou must ask in faith, nothing
wavering, and with an honest and single mind, Ja. 1.6, 8. And thy end must be
pure and holy, for many ask, and receive not, because they ask amiss, Ja. 4.3.

2. To pray is but to seek, Mat. 7.7. O! but if thou would find, thou must
seek with all thy heart and with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4.29. Thou must seek God
diligently, Heb. 11.6. Thou must first seek the Glory of God and prefer
holiness to the world, Mat. 6.33. otherwise, though thou would seek God
daily, thou would not meet with success, Is. 58.2.3. If thou choose not
the fear of the Lord, though thouseek him early, thou shall not find him, Prove.
1.28, 29. And therefore we are commanded to add wrestling and striving to our
seeking, that we may prevail, Romans 15.30.

3. If we will but knock or cry, it will be opened to us, Mat, 7.8. O? but it
is the cry of such as fear him that he will hear, Ps. 145, 19. If we harken not
to God while he calls and cries to us in his word, we may cry, howl and
complain as much as we will, and he laugh at our calamity, and mock when our
fear comes, Prove, 1.24, 26, 28. Hos. 7.14. Its true our Prayers and praises,
are the fruit of the lips, Heb. 13.15. Our tongue must be employed in honoring
our God, and the lips that are thus employed, must not be feigned, Ps. 17.1.
They must follow the heart and express what it enditeth, Ps. 45.1. Thy words
must be the fruit of meditation, Ps. 5.1. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their cry; but the face of the Lord is
against them that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth, Ps.
34.16, 17, And then if thou would have the door opened unto thee while thou
knockest, thou must open to Christ while he stands at thy door and knocks, Rev.
3.20. Otherwise, though thou were his spouse he will withdraw for a while and
shut the door upon thee, Cant. 5.2, 6.

4. To Pray, is but to desire: for, the Lord will satisfy the desire of every
living thing. Ps. 145, 16. O! but whatever the Lord, out of his general bounty
does for satisfying the natural desires of bruits and brutish men, yet as a
father, he will not bestow covenanted mercies upon any who are not his
children, he will thus only satisfy the desire of them that fear him, v. 19.
and of such as walk humbly before him, Ps. 10, 17.

5. We need do no more but look unto God, and he will save and deliver us, Is.
45.22. O! but thou must look unto him with the eye of faith and with a mourning
eye; thou must in bitterness look upon him whom thou have peirced, Zech.
12.10. He that looks to God for good things, must shut his eyes from seeing
evil, Is. 33.15, 16, 17. Otherwise thou may till thine eyes grow dim,
look for peace, but no good will come; and for a time of health, and behold
trouble, Jere. 8.15, 14.

6. If we draw nigh to him, he will draw near to us with mercies, Ja. 4, 8. O!
but we must draw near to him with the heart and not with the mouth only: the
Lord is nigh only to such as are of a broken heart, and will only save such as
be of a contrite spirit, Ps. 34.18. But woe to them that draw nigh to God, with
their mouth and honor him with their lips, and remove their heart far from
him; he will draw nigh to such but in wrath, and judgment. Is. 29, 13* 14. If
such open their mouth, he will lift up his Hand against them. O! but if thou
hearken to what proceeds from the mouth of God, and walk not in the lust of
thine own heart, then open thy mouth as wide as thou will, and God will fill
it, Ps. 81, 10, 11.

7. If we will but lift up our hands unto him, we will be satisfied, Ps. 63.4,
5. O! but first we must lift up our soul, Ps. 25.1. and then lift up holy hands
without wrath and doubting. 1. Tim. 2.8. We must wash and make our selves
clean, otherwise the Lord will hide his eyes when we spread forth our hands,
Is. 1.15, 16, etc.

As to the second sort of expressions, the Scripture shows how the Saints
should be enlarged in Prayer, and that often they have Is. 40.31.
mounted up with wings as Eagles when they look toward the Throne, and that
they have run without fainting and weariness, that they should cry The pagan
King could preach this point of Divinity.
mightily unto the Lord, Joh. 3.8. and pour out their heart like water before
his face, Lam. 2.19. and pray night and day exceedingly, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. and
make their bed to swim, and water their couch with their tears, Ps. 6.6. and
always labor fervently in prayers, Col. 4.12. and (...), A Metaphor from the
Grecian Games and Combats; in which as the Poet, says; Multa tulit fecitque
puer, sudavit and alsit, vid. Scap. lex. 1(...) and D. Hamm^nd on 1 Thessalonians 2.8.
strive and wrestle as in an agony, Romans 15.30. and pray always, watching
thereunto with all perserverance, ^ph. 6.18. and never faint in praying, Luk
18.1. and seek God diligently, and with the whole heart and soul, Heb. 11.6.
Deuteronomy. 4.29. never hold their peace day nor night and keep no silence, Is. 62.6.
Ps. 22.2. and ask in faith, nothing wavering, Jam. 1.6. and still wrestle with
tears and supplications until they prevail, Genesis 32.24, 26. Hos. 12.4. etc.

Thus the Saints should be, and have been enlarged upon special occasions,
trials and temptations, while the Lord has poured out upoh them the spirit of
supplication, and has filled their sails with a more then ordinary gale: and
if thou have not met with such trials, praise him who has condescended to thy
weakness; but make not what should be a mark and scope at which thou should
aim, a mark and rule whereby to judge of thy state and condition, or of Gods
accepting of thy performances and oblations.

CHAP. III. Prayer described.
1. Pet. 2.5. Ye are an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
WHat Bias the Philosopher, from an heroic moral Principle could say, when his
Country Priena, was spoiled, that enemies could not spoil him, his baggage was
light and could easily be transported; for, said he, I always Omnia mea, mecum
porto. Quaemea sunt, virtus dat, and ars: baec omnia mecum Porto. Reus. ad
Symb. Fl. Pl. Valent. Imp.
carry all mine about with me: this may every true Israelite more truly say and
upon better grounds. There be two lessons, 1. That of self denial, Mat. 16.24.
2. Of true contentment, Phil. 4.11, 12. which cannot be learned in all the
pagan Academies in the world. It is the honest Christians incommunicable
propriety to know (with him, Phil. 4.12.) how to want and how to abound: but
though he can well bear the want of so many things, yet he cannot, while in the
field surrounded with enemies, while in this wilderness and exposed to the
violence of so many robbers, want his armor, and having his quiver so full of
The Promises are these arrows which the bow of Prayer discharges.
arrows, he cannot want his bow: give me children else I die, said she in her
impatience, Genesis 30.1. O! But may the Christian well say, let me pray or I
cannot live. What can the poor Pilgrim do, if he have no provision? Prayer is
our money that answers all things; what though we be far from home? yet the
treasure follows us, it is within a cry, and Prayer can bring from thence what
we can stand in need; ask whatsoever ye will, it shall be given unto you, Joh.
16.23. etc. Ah! How should a Christian live without his God and without his
Savior? and how shall he live without his life? that is impossible. O! but our
life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. And can there then be a distance and
separation of him from God? Nay, pray he must, he must look up (...) God and
lift up his soul to the Throne. And thus some of the Veteres cum Damaesceno de
Fid. orth. lib. 3. cap. 24. definiunt precationem, (...).
ancient Doctors have defined Prayer, a lifting up of the soul to God: Unto
thee, O Lord, (says the Psalmist, while he is presenting his supplication to
God, Ps. 25.1.) do I lift up my soul. O! but the distance is great, and where
shall this holy man find a ladder to reach the Heavens? O! but he was well
acquainted with such a voyage; and how quickly, as with wings, does he mount up
and approach the Throne? and close with the King, wrestle with him, and at
length prevail, v. 2. etc. v. 15. etc.

And as Prayer is thus so necessary and useful for us, so it is well pleasing
and acceptable to God; it is his delight, Prove. 15.8. Yea, sometimes it is put
for the whole worship of God, (one particular, because of it is excellency in
place of the general) as Genesis 4.26. Is. 64.7. Mat. 21.13. O! How should we then
blush at the impudence of the Roman Clergy; who with their Patron, Thom. 2.2.
quast. 83. art. 2. and 3. Less. and Swar. loc. citand and alii Sholastici ad
locum.
Thomas Aquinas, will question and dispute for and against in these points that
are so certain and undeniable? As, 1. If it be convenient to pray. 2. If Prayer
be a Religious act, and begin their disputes with a videtur quod non, as if
their trifling objections could render the negative any ways probable, or to
have the least appearance of truth: Yet, herein they carry themselves suteably
to their own principles. For upon good ground it may be inquired, if the Popish
Devotion be convenient? and if their lip-labor and moving of the tongue,
without attention and affection, (as we shall Set part 2. chap.
hear themselves confess) yea, and without understanding (while they pray in an
unknown language) be a Religious act, and deserve the name of divine Worship?
and we may confidently affirm, that to dally thus in Gods service, and to teach
others to do so, is a notable injury against the infinite Majesty of God, an
impious and blasphemous mockrie of the Omni-scient and holy One, who must be
worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.23. and with the whole heart, as too
little to offer unto Him (if we had more to give) and too naughty to be
employed in His worship: Nay, this does not only savor of the pagan and
heathenish delusion* that much babbling is acceptable to God, Mat. 6.7. but also
of the Satanicall superstition of Witches and Charmers, who are well acquainted
with such sort of prayers, as fit engines for accomplishing their hellish
designs; that kind of prayer, being, as it were, the Devils A. B. C. which he
first teaches his scholars, which he will indeed answer, because they are
abominable to God; and that thus he may delude and allure these miserable
wretches and keep them in his snare: What kind of teachers then must these be,
that dare affirm that God will hear and accept such Prayers? These must be the
seducing spirits (of whom the Apostle warns us, whose lot has fallen in the
latter times, to beware, 1. Tim. 4, 1.) who teach the doctrine of Devils,
having their conscience seared with a hot iron.

O! but you will then say, what is the Prayer that God will hear and accept?
For answer, we might bring many emphatick sentences and expressions of the
ancient Doctors of the Church, (who in their meditations have rather been
taken up with its excellency, sweetness and usefulness, then its nature and
theorie) which though they may suffice for stopping the foul mouths of Popish
Casuists and Schoolmen, yet they are rather Rethoricall commendations then
descriptions of this great duty; but of late, since learning became more
polished, every one (almost) who has spoken to this point, has given, as it
were, a new definition; and it were no difficult task in us to do the like. But
since all the diversity is rather in words and phrases then in the matter, we
could wish that all would rest on that which does most fully and clearly
explain the thing; and thus (as we conceive) in our Catechism, Prayer is
excellently well Joining together what is said both in the larger and shorter
Catechism
described an offering up of our desires to God for things agreeable to his
will, in the name of Christ by the help of his spirit, with confession of our
sins, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies. Here, 1. we have the act it
self specified. 2. The subject. 3. The matter and object whereabout it is
employed. 4. The rule. 5. The object to which it it directed. 6. The incense
that perfumes our duty, and makes it acceptable. And. 7. our help and
assistance in this great work; or thus, In this our christian sacrifice we
have, 1. the oblation it self. 2. The priest that offers it. 3. The thing we
sacrifice and offer up. 4. The person to whom we present this oblation. 5. The
manner how, and the rule whereby we are directed to make choice of what we
should offer. 6. The altar. And. 7. our guide, leader and assistant. Of these
severally, as the Lord shall enable, purposing to add a word concerning the end
and scope we should aim at in this performance, in the qualifications, part 2.
Chap, 1.

As to that which follows in the last words of this description concerning,
1. Confession of sin. 2. The return of praise for mercies: Its certain these
must be joined and intermixed with our petitions. We must confess and then beg
pardon, and thankfully remember mercies already received, that they may be
blessed to us in the use, and that by our ingratitude we obstruct not the
bestowing of future and desired mercies. And thus they belong to the
completing and (as Per ^^ulationem intellig i^ Apostolus, 1. Tim. 2.1.
orationem prepriissimesum ptam pro petitione, quia vero omues, ( i. e.
quatuorgenera orationum ibi enumerata) debe ^^ conjungi petitioni ut perfecta
and efficax sit; ideo etiam cense^tur quasi quatuor parts complentes and
constituentes integrum officium orandi, Fran. Swarez ad 2.2. a quaest. 81. ad
100. de Stat. Rel. Tom. 2. Tract. 4. lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 4.8. Licet oration
plurium virtutum actus includa^, omnes tamen ad petitionem ordinantur, ut
melius fiat, and inde orationis nomen participant, ibid. in primo cap. lib. 2.
vid. lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 8, 9.
Swarez speaks) integration of Prayer, and so ought not have been omitted in
its definition: yet, since they make us two distinct heads of practical
divinity, and here fall in only as accessories of this duty, we will refer
them to their proper place, purposing now only to speak of Prayer, according to
its proper acception; And thus it is contra-distinguished from confession,
thanksgiving, meditation, etc. and does import Et in hoc sensu definiente
Damasceno, loc. cit. est petitio decentium a Deo.
asking or petition. And thus says Swarez, loc. cit. sect. 8. Ipsa ergo
petitio propriissimo and speciali modo oration dicitur, atque ita censent. D.
Thom. Bon. and omnes qui de oratione scribunt.
(Swarez) when mention is made of Prayer for any person or thing in the
Scriptures, it is always taken in this sense, and the fathers and Schoolmen,
and whosoever (says he) have written of Prayer, have spoken of it in this
signification; and the word Prayer, in our language, cannot, without great
impropriety, be applied to signify any other thing.

CHAP. IV. In what act of the Soul prayer does principally consist.
Psalm. 27.8. When thou saidest, seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy
face, Lord, will I seek.
COncerning that which we meet with in the Quod locum generis occupat.
first words of the desinition, while Prayer is said to be an offering up of
our desires, etc. we may inquire, In what act of the Soul does Prayer directly,
formally and principally consist? By which question, we do not exclude the
voice, as if it might not concur in the performance of this duty: Wherefore is
the tongue called our glory? Ps. 57.8. and 108.1. and 30.12. if it should not
be employed in glorifying its Maker, in praising of, and praying unto Him; but
though it must join in the work, yet, it cannot give life and being unto it;
that must flow from another fountain, after which we now enquire: and therefore
while Prayer is divided in Mental and Vocal, the last trust include and suppose
the former, else it deserves not the name. Lip labor is not Prayer. But you
will say, we cannot petition and ask but by the voice, and therefore the first
must also include the last. Ans. Amongst men there can be no society, no asking
nor granting, unless there be some expression by the voice or outward gestures;
but we may converse with the father of Spirits and pray to Him, (who 1. Chr.
28.9.
understands all the imaginations of our thoughts, and espieth them Ps. 139.2.
afar off, before they have any being or can be known to our selves) without an
interpreter. This Estque haec significatio communis mentali and vocali
orationi, quia utroque mode petitio fieri potest a Deo, Swar. loc. cit. lib. 1.
cap. 1. sect. 8.
Swarez grants, and I think none of the Papists (these Patrons of Lip
devotion) will deny.

In answer to the Queree, the Roman Casuists and Scholemen following their
Patron, Thom. 22 quaest. 83. art. 1.
Thomas, affirm, that Prayer is an act of the Understanding and not of the
Will. Their grounds are frivolous, and not worthy to be considered, unless to
show the folly of these luxuriant wits. 1. It belongs (says Loc. cit. in Corp.
Thomas) to the understanding, as to command; so also to Ita se habet oration ad
superiorem, sicut imperium ad inferiorem.
petition and ask. Ans. Whatever might be said concerning the faculty of the
Soul, that commands and sets a work the rest; yet, we cannot be said to ask any
thing of God unless the Heart present it is desire, and so the Will must draw up
the supplication and offer it to the King. But we may far more probably lay
down the contradictory supposition* and say, that it belongs not to the
understanding (as elsewhere we may have occasion to show at greater length) but
to the will, as the Mistress and Superior, to command the rest of the
faculties. O! But, 2. (says Lessius de Just. and Jur. lib. 2. cap. 37. dub. 2.
Greg. Nyss. Or. 1. de Or. Dom. Chrysostom. lib. de Orand. Deum, dicuut orationem
esse colloquium cum Deo.
Lessius) Prayer is Locution and a kind of Speech: Thus the Fathers have
defined Prayer, a conference with God, but nothing within us, except the
understanding can entertain that conference. Ans. Its true in Prayer we enjoy a
sweet communion with God, we speak to him and pour out (...) complaints unto
him, but its a spiritual conference, in which the heart, the will and the
affictions are principally employed. That Is the first thing which God requires
and especially regards, My son, give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. And therefore
whenever the Psalmist drew nigh to God, either to pray or praise, he looked
mainly to his heart, knowing, that if it was not prepared to speak to God,
there was no other speaker that would get a hearing; and he thinks it not
enough to have his heart set a work, unless the whole heart were employed, Ps.
9.1. Ps. 111.1. Ps. 119.145. Ps. 138.1. Ps. 86.12, etc, and only that man to
him, i^ the blessed man, that seek God (whether in Prayer or any other point of
Worship) with the whole heart, Ps. 119.2. The heart has a voice which God well
understands, and will hear when all other Messengers are sent away empty: we
have a sweet, though short, dialogue, Ps. 27.8. The Lord begins and draws on
the discourse with a kindly invitation to seek his face, but who makes answer?
O! Say these learned Rabbis, the heart and will cannot speak; nay, but says
the Prophet David, I acknowledge no such axiom, my heart must make the reply,
my (...)
heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord, will I seek.

Amongst our Divines I find not this question moved; but I know Only Dan. Til.
once ours, then Arminian; and afterward I know not what, in his Syntagdisp. de
precseeme^b to join with the Schoolmen.
none of them who will not join with D. Oration est voluntatis nostrae religiosa
representatio coram Deo, Ames. Med. Theol. cap. 9. and de cas. cons. lib. 4.
cap. 14.
Ames, while he describes Prayer a religious presenting of our wills before
God; which, upon the matter, differs not from what we propounded from our
Catechism, where Prayer is said to be an offering up of our desires to God:
For, though there may be carnal and selfish desires in the inferior and
sensitive appetite, (which is common to us with the bruits) yet, spiritual
desires (which are the only fit materials of an acceptable Prayer) are proper
to the will and rational faculty: It is true, we may pray for our daily bread,
but our motives and ends (which specify and denominat our desires) must be
heavenly and spiritual; and we must ask from God, which is beyond the sphere of
the material appetite, which cannot look up so high, it being limited to
sensitive objects upon suitable principles and motives: And therefore, it must
be proper to the will to 1. Pet. 2.5.
spiritualize our sacrifices, that they may become acceptable to God.

To the Question propounded, Then we Ans. That albeit in Prayer we should
employ and stir up all that is within us, to look toward God, and to
contribute it is assistance and help, as that holy Man, who was well acquainted
with this exercise, while he goes to praise and bless God, calls to his soul
and all that is within him, to join in the work, Ps. 103.1. 1. The mind and
understanding should bring in provision and matter for enflaming the heart with
holy Desires. 2. Our memories should present these Items and Bills of receipt
from, and Debts owing to God; it should offer to the meditation a perfect list
and catalogue of Sins and Mercies. 3. The sensitive appetite should give in a
Bond of Peace, that it shall not disturb and raise tumults, nor frame and give
in a treacherous Old Adam, a vile Protester; the sensitive appetite, his factor
and agent, and the will biased to his party and faction.
Libel and Remonstrance against such holy motions, as the heart does travel
with, and is in the way to endite and breath out before the Lord. 4. The
outward senses should covenant, not to offer to the affections such baits and
allurements, nor to cast in their way such golden apples, as may interrupt and
impede them in their motion toward the Throne, and may call them back from
heaven to earth. 5. The will it self, the main agent and leader, must be set a
work by spiritual aims and intentions; if the end and scope be base and
naught, the motion is lost, though never so swift and vigorous; and both will
and understanding should be most serious in their attention, 1. To the matter
of their petitions. 2. To the object to which they are to present them, (as
having to do with Him, who is the searcher of hearts.) 3. To the frame of the
Soul, the spring and rise of it is actings, their fervency, vigor and zeal,
etc. But though thus we should call to all that is within us, to help us a
lift, while we are to rouse and draw up our dead lumpish and rocky hearts with
us to the Mo^^^t, yet only the will draws ^igh to the King, and presents it is
Bills of complaint, our supplications and requests. The heart is that vessel of
honor, 2. Tim. 2.21. fitted (if sanctified and seasoned with grace) and
prepared for the Masters use. It is the best room of the soul, reserved to
welcome and entertain it is King and Lord; and while He makes His abode there,
His host becomes a great minion: Now he has the Kings ear, and may ask what he
will, it shall be given him. And thus, whatever attendants be employed to wait
upon and serve t^^^ King, yet the Host is master of the feast; and whatever
befalls the rest, his Bills must be satisfied, his Suit dispatched, and his
Requests granted.

And thus Prayer does formally and primarily consist in an act of the will; and
it is an offering up of our desires to God; it is not the simple act of
desiring: For, then to desire and to pray were all one; and carnal voluptuous,
ambitious and avaritious men, who have said to the Lord, (with these
miscreants, Job 21.14.) depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? even those men who
are so great strangers and enemies to Prayer, are big with desires, having as
many desire as lusts. Every desire then is not a Prayer, but a desire so and so
qualified; a desire directed and offered up to God.

But we must not imagine, that our heart stands in need of a messenger, to
carry and present its desires before the Throne; it has a tongue to speak for
it self, Ps. 27.8. And God understands and hearkens to its voice, and will give
a return, Ps. 145.19. Ps. 10.17. Nay but (says Thom. 2.2 quaest. 83. art. 2.
ad 1. petitio (quae ad rationem pertinet) est quodammodo desiderii interpres.
Pet. a S. Joseph, Id. Theo. Mor. lIb 4. cap. 2. depsecatio ordinationem quandam
denotat: ordinatio autem and (ut loquitur Tho) dispositio ad rationem pertinet.
Aquinas) our desires need an interpreter who must order and present them to
God, and that must be the mind and understanding; and thus Prayer, directly
importing this ordering and offering up of our desires, must be an act of the
intellective fa^^^y. Ans. With Scot. in 2. did. 6. quaest. 1. and did. 38.
quaest. 1. sic loquitur, utendo nutem, sive ordinando far unum ^mabile ad
aliud est v^luntatis: sicut enim voluntas est reflexiva, quia immateriali^^ ita
and coll^tiva,
Scotus, that it does no less agree to the will, to order and dispose the
means for the end, then to the mind to deliberate about the means; yea Thom. 1.
quast. 107. art. 1. in corp. per voluntatem conceptus mentis ordinatur ad
alterum, puta vel ad agendum, vel ad manifestandum alteri, etc. vid. loc*
Thomas himself, speaking of the locution of Angels, grants that it belongs to
the will to present, order Ibid. ad 1.
and referr; yea and to express, and manifest the thoughts of the heart, for
he Sic Cajet. ad loc. cit. and alii non pauci, Thomistae praeceptorem suum
interpretantur.
will have the speech of angels, to consist in this directing, and willing
their thoughts to be known to others; and yet ^ere he will have the will to be
blind, and full of confusion as if it were sharp sighted, when it looked
abroad, but otherwise did see nothing at home and within doors. But that we
may not insist on such speculations, I would ask, to what purpose shall the
heart call for such an Interpreter? For, 1. is not the heart well enough
Nolumus jam examini subjicire figmentum Philosophorum, qui statuunt
voluntatemesse caecam, and non nisi oculis (risum teneatis amici) alienis videre
acquaint with its own desires? if it be a stranger to its own actings, who
will make their acquaintance? Or, 2. Does the Lord stand in need of a
trenchman? shall he who searches the heart and tries the reins; he who
knows what is in man, and needs not that any should testify of man, ( Jer.
17.10.) go to another, and ask, what are the purposes and desires of the heart?

Though then we deny not the concurrence of the understanding, but wish, that
all that is within us may join, and were employed in this spiritual and solemn
exercise; yet, all the faculties of the soul, are as so many attendants to wait
upon the heart, till it draw nigh, direct it is desires, and present it is
supplications to the great King.

But, let none mistake, as if we thought, that the will, by a new act did
reflect upon it is desires, and thereby did order and offer them to God. 1. Such
a reflection, will be found contrary to experience; if any will descend into his
own heart, and look back upon his own actings, he will not find it there, or
that he stood in need of any such new act. And, 2. it will be hard to show what
such a reflex act did import, and to what kind of volition it should be
referred. The will then, by one and the same act, and in the same instant of
time desires, and desires from God: as one and the same act is, 1. the desire
of the soul; and, 2. the desire of such an object; So, 3. from such an hand and
fountain; Yea, some, with Scal. exercit. 317. desiderium, quasi de sideribus,
quod res desiderata expectetur de caelo.
Scaliger, (for which he is unjustly reprehended by Theop. Raynand. mor.
discip. did. 3. quaest. 2. art. 3. 183.
Raynandus) do think this last respect to have occasioned the word; so that,
according to the Etymon of it, a desire, is that which is expected from the
stars (which Pagans did think to be and worshipped as Gods: from which
conceit, as some think, did also arise the greek word (...)) Thus one and the
same act of the will, is extended (of necessity; for, it must have some matter
about which it must converse) 1. To its object. 2. Directed to God. And, 3.
referred to such and such an end. And only to our apprehension, and for
distinctions sake, these several respects and formalities, are differenced as
to Prayer, where they should be really united in one and the same act; but yet,
there is ground for such a distinction and precision, since every desire is not
directed toward God, nor does aim at a right end. And thus, for explications
sake, we may affirm, that in Prayer there is a kind of no immaterial thing
(such as the will and its actings) is capable of any proper and quantitative
dimension and extension.
Extension and enlarging of desires 1. to the right fountain, for a supply;
and, 2. to the right end and mark. And, 3. to the right rule, for bounding and
limiting of it, both as to matter and manner; so that Prayer formally, and as
such, does import not the desire it self, (which is, as it were, the materiale,
and in it self considered, is indifferent and determinable otherwise) but this
Offering and directing of our desires to God; for thereby desires acted and
powered out by way of Prayer, are distinguished from all other desires, which
want this qualification, and deserve not the name of Prayer. But always it
would be remembered, that this Christian sacrifice, is not like the material and
Leviticall oblations: for, every one, (as being a priest to God, Rev. 1.6.) may
offer up his own sacrifice. Christ indeed must be our Altar and high Priest,
and the holy Spirit, must bring fire and incense; but the heart it self, must
offer up its own desires; it needs not run to another Priest, nor employ the
mind and understanding to take its offering, and present it to God.

These things being premised for explication, let us now collect from
Scripture, some few reasons, not so much to stop the mouths of subtle
disputers, as to convince negligent worshipers of their sin, and to mind them
of that which is the life and main ingredient of this solemn performance.

Reas. 1. That which God does especially require, and look for in these that
draw nigh unto Him, that must be the chief and principal part of Prayer;
(whereby, in a special manner, we approach to Him) But it is the heart that God
mainly requires and looks after in all those, Jer. 12.2. Ps. 34.18. Prove. 23.26.

Is. 29.13. Matthew. 15.8.

Hos. 7.14. If our heart be not right, God will not value our requests, Ps.
66.18.

Ps. 27.8.

Ps. 10.17. and, 145.19.

Genesis 32.24.26.
with Him, and will not let him go till He bless us; But it is the heart and
affections that especially do unite and knit us to God: He regards not other
bonds, if these be wanting: the distance still continues, so long as the heart
is removed from Him. Mark 7.6. Matthew. 15.8.

measure of knowledge of the promises, and a great dexterity to plead them
with much eloquence; and yet, nothing of the life of Prayer; nothing but the
carcass, or rather the picture and shadow of Prayer, which God will not regard,
more then the cry of these foolish virgins, who very pathetically, and in much
anguish of spirit, said, Lord, Lord, open to us, not having had their hearts
prepared to meet him, while he came unto them, Mat. 25.11, 12, 8. And on the
other hand, if the heart of a needy simple one, can but sigh or groan, if it
can but chatter as a cran, and mourn as a dove, the Lord will incline his ear,
he will hearken and give an answer of peace, Ps. 12.5, Is.. 38.5.14.

Amen, as it does express our confidence, so also the desire of the heart; It
is an adverb of wishing, and has the same sense, (says Edw. Leigh, Cri. sac.
nov. Test. verb. (...) dictum per modum orationis seu precis Pagu. in rad. (...)
Leigh) with utinam fiat, Mat. 6.13. Rev. 22.20, 21. And by us it is
indifferently used for, and has, the same signification with So be it. And
therefore, since the abrigement and close of Prayer, does thus import the
wishing and desire of the heart, we must judge the same of the whole, unless
we will make Prayer become like that monster, described by the Horatius de art
Poet. humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam, etc.
Poet, whose members were so disproportioned, unlike and dissimilar, that they
could not (except it were by Poets and Painters, who have liberty to feign and
devise what they will) be joined together.

Paul his exegesis and exposition, Romans 10.1. If by Prayer we understand the
same thing which he did, we must affirm that the hearts desire and Prayer are
as synonyma, holding out one and the same thing; or I would rather think, that
these words contain a description of Prayer, that it is the hearts desire
[poured out] to God.

But what need we disput while the Lord Himself so clearly and in terminis
resolves the question, and tells us what he (who well knows how to give things
their right names) calls and will acknowledge to be Prayer, Jer. 29.12, 13.
Then shall ye call unto me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you, and ye shall seek me and find me when (and never till then)
ye shall search for me with all your heart. O! then take heed when thou
approachest the Throne, that thy heart be not to seek, that it be not gadding
abroad after this or that trifle, while thou art speaking to the King: if thou
bring not thy heart with thee, thou have not a tongue, thou can not speak, if
the heart be absent; if it be silent, there can be no voice that He will hear
and answer: and therefore, as at all times, so specially when thou art praying,
thou should keep thy heart with all diligence, that what comes out of it, may
prove the issues of life, Prove. 4.23.

CHAP. V. Of the subject of Prayer.
Who should and who may not pray.
Jam 1.6. If any of you lack, -- let him ask of God, who gives to all men,
etc. Is. 45.22. look with the eye of faith with tears in your eyes and your
eyes and your supplications in your hand.
Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth.
THis question may be extended to three ranks of persons, 1. To these who are
altogether incapable of this exercise. 2. To these who once were capable, but
now are not. And, 3. to those who now are, but e're it belong, shall no more be
called to the performance of this duty. And accordingly this Chapter may be
divided in three parts.

Sect. 1. Who may not be said to Pray.
How Heb. 7.25.
Christ and the holy Romans 8.26.
Spirit are said to interceed for us.
Each of these three members, may be sub-divided into other two. As to the
first, one may be said to be incapable of this exercise, either because it is
below him, or because it is above him; thus it is below God to pray, and it is
above the reach and sphere of unreasonable creatures to pray.

1. Then, it were not worth the while to confute the foolish Figmentum anile
Turcarum and Judaeorum, qui nugantur Deum certas habere precum formulas, quas
certis horis singulis diebu^ recitet, Gerhard, har cap. 179. page (mihi) 1116.
damnamus Thalmudistas and Mahumedanes, qui affirmant Deum ipsum quotidie orare,
Tilen. disp. 49. These. 52.
conceit of those dreamers, who imagined that God had set forms of Prayer,
which he rehearsed so often every day. But I would ask, to whom and for what
should God pray? has He any Superior or equal whom He should supplicat? and
can He be said to want any thing, Himself being the only fountain of all good
and happiness? But here it may be objected, that the holy Ghost does pray and
interceed for the saints, Romans 8.26.27. And thus he is called their Advocat (
Which, while applied to Christ, 1. Ioh. 2.^. is rendered Advocat, and why not
also here?
(...)) Ioh. 14.16. And Ioh. 26.7. Ans. The learned Gerhard, having called it a
ridiculous fancy to imagine that God does pray, harm. Evang. Cap. 179. yet Cap.
176. affirms, that the holy Ghost (whom he acknowledges to be God, equal with
the Father) does interceed and pray for us; yea with groans Postulare Gerh:
harm. Evang. cap. 176 page (mihi) 930.
and gemitus suos pro nobis interponere; albeit we cannot think, that he would
so far mistake, as properly and truly to ascribe to the Spirit, groans and
sighs; (that were blasphemous) yet, he does so fully and plainly express
himself, as to the praying and intercession of the Spirit, that there is no
ground left for doubting of his judgment in that particular. But, 1. I would
ask whether that intercession be an act of worship or not? It were blasphemous
to imagine, that one person of the blessed Trinity, does worship another; and
yet it cannot well be conceived, how this intercession can be performed without
a religious adoration. 2. If the Spirit interceed for us, it must be by some
act of his blessed will; he must offer some according to the definition of
Prayer, Chapter 3.
desire to the Father: and thus since there is one will and the same acts of
the will in the Father, Son and holy Ghost, that intercession may as truly be
ascribed to the Father as to the Spirit; and so the Father must pray to
himself. 3. If the Spirit be a supplicant, he cannot be said to hear and grant,
there must be a difference between the asker and the giver: can one be said to
ask from himself? 4. If the holy Ghost does interceed for us, then he must be
first pacified and reconciled with us, he must be more compassionate and tender
hearted then the Father, and he must be willing and not that prayer can change
him who is in one mind; Job. 23 13. yet it is something previous ( a mean for
obtaining a grant) to Gods hearing, and answering* which is some actual
emanation and result of Gods eternal purpose. See conclusion of this Tract.
desirous we should have, before the Father yield; there must be some bowels
and tenderness, some more readiness, yielding and condescension in him then
in the Father that he interceeds and deals with the Father, that he may come
that length. 5. There is but one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.5.

As to the places objected: To the 1. Chrysostom, and Theophylact think that by
the Spirit ( Romans 8.26.27.) is meant the miraculous gift of Prayer, then poured
out not only upon the Apostles, but on others whom God occasionally called to
be the mouth of, and to speak in, their Christian meetings: But that gift
being, 1. temporary, continuing only with the Christian Church in her infancy;
And, 2. being peculiar only to some, and at certain times, when they were
assembled with others; And. 3, not agreeing with the context; And, 4. the word
not being found in that sense in any other place, (For the Spirit of grace and
supplication promised, Zech. 12.10. was to be poured out upon all the saints,
and converts of the house of David and amongst the inhabitants of Jerusalem) we
cannot approve this interpretation. 2. Ambrose by Spirit there understands the
new nature, and regenerat part; So the word is frequently used in Scripture;
and we can see no inconvenience that can follow upon this interpretation; yet
when we compare this with other places which seem to be parallel with, and
exegetick of it, we think the third and most common interpretation should
rather be embraced, that the Spirit there is said to make intercession for us
not properly, as if the holy Ghost did pour out a Prayer for us, but
effectively; because he helps and enables us to interceed and pour out
acceptable Prayers; thus the Spirit is said to be sent in our hearts Clamat
dupliciter tum quia fiduciam filialem intus in cordibus excitat, tum quia foris
ore clamare facit, Paraeus in Gal. 4.6.
crying (that is making us to know that God is, and inabling us to call him)
Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15. And we may observe how the one place explains
the other, and the text in the objection for (...), the spirit crying, Gal. 4.
is (...), the spirit whereby we cry, Romans 8. and the Spirit of your father,
speaking in you, Math. 10.20.

And thus we may see that the Spirit interceeding, must be nothing else, but
the Spirit whereby we are enabled to interceed; if we must thus interpret the
Spirit crying, why not also the Spirit interceeding? Is there any greater
inpropriety in the one phrase then in the other? especially since they are
parallel, both holding out one and the same thing, the work of the Spirit on
our heart inabling us to cry and pray.

Yea, though we made no comparison, and did not reflect on other Scriptures,
the words themselves carry in their bosom a clear confutation of that fond
gloss in the objection, and point out the true sense and meaning. For. 1. has
the Spirit a tongue to cry, And. 2. to whom would he cry Abba Father? whose Cur
urus filius sit, and alius non sit filius, de patre est filius, de patre est
Spiritus sanctus, sed ille genitus est, iste procedens: Non omne quod procedit
nas^itur, quamvis omne precedat quod nascitur, etc. August. cont. Max. Arrian.
lib. 3. cap. 14.
Son is the spirit? As to the other, if the Spirit does truly interceed for us,
then whose are those Spiritus non gemit, sed docendo and efficiendo ut n^s
gemamus, etc. Camer. praet. de Eccl. page (mihi) 221.
groans that cannot be uttered? 3. What force is there in that reason added to
show that the Spirit helps our infirmities, and teaches us how and what to
ask, if his intercession be not causall by helping and inabling us to pray; and
while he does thus inspire and breath-in Prayers and supplications in us, by
these as his own work, he may be said to interceed for us; our Non autem
Spiritus sanctus in seipso, seu secundum (eipsum orat aut postulat, sed quod in
nobis habitans secundum actus nostros postulat, postulantes nos facit,
postulationem nobis inspirat Cajetan. in locum.
intercession being the effect and result of his assistance, enlargement and
manifestations, and so may denominat him, and be called his, as the cause,
though not properly, and as the subject. And thus unless we will divide what
are conjoined, and pluck out this one word intercession from what goes before
and follows after, there is no occasion offered from this place to Gerhards
mistake, in which he goes alone, having none either popish or protestant
Divine, (except one whom Camer. loc. cit.
Camero calls If that doctissimus Interpres be the learned Beza, (as Would
appear from his Annot on Joh. 14.16.) though he pleads that the Spirit in
some sense may be called our Advocat. (which we do not deny,) yet he is far
from thinking that the Spirit does formally interceed, but imputes such an
assertion to the Arrians Vid. Annot in Romans 8.26.
doctissimum Interpretem) who joyneth with him of these we have perused: But
all the (...), all the Arrians, Macedonians, Acatians these fighters against
the Godhead of the holy Ghost may run to this Gloss as their city of refuge.
And of late Mr. John See this impudent man judiciously refuted by Mat. Pool in
his (...).
Bidle, though he professes that he does not deny the Deity of Christ, yet he
taks much pains in arguing against the Deity of holy the Ghost, and Gerhard his
Though he does assert, yet neither he nor any other, I have seen, do debate the
point concerning the Spirits intercession, and therefore briefly we offered
some reasons for refuting that conceit.
gloss of this text, is one of his main pillars.

As to the other Scripture, Joh. 14.16. We answer that the word (...) is well
rendered Comforter in our translation; it comes from (...), which has diverse
significations, and according to the subject matter, may be Vid. Seap. Pasor.
Leigh Crit: sac. in verb.
rendered to comfort (as it should be in the place cited) to exhort, to plead,
or to pray. But, 2. granting that the word there, and as applied to the holy
Ghost might be rendered advocat; yet that place can (to little purpose) be made
use of for proving the conclusion there laid down: For, he is a poor Advocat,
or he must have a weak cause who leaves off to plead, and begins to supplicat
for his client. The word when rendered Advocat (as D. Hammond on Joh. 16.8.
D. Hammond observes) is taken from, and must be so interpreted as it agrees
with the custom of pleading causes among the Jews (none of which was to
supplicat or pray for the plaintiff) to which customs he applies the Spirits
pleading Christ's cause against the world in the three partticulars mentioned,
Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. And Camero tells us, that the word both in Greek and
Latin, properly signifies Cujus consilium requiritur in re difficili. Came.
loc. cit. vid Vlpian. apud Gerh. loc. cit. Paracletus (inquit Vlp.) est qui
alicui suo patrocinio succurrit.
one who is counsel is asked in any difficult case; and the Came. ubi supra and in
Math. 19.3. p. 179.
word (...) (though barbarous, yet usual enough among the Jews after their
dispersion, and retained by the Syrian interpreter, Joh. 14.26.) is, by the
Targum on Job 16.20. and 33.23. made use of to render the Hebrew word (...)
which does signify one who speaks distinctly, pertinently, and comfortably;
and so the Greek (...) is well translated Comforter or Instructor; and
accordingly our Savior having applied this epithet to the holy Spirit, fitly
subjoyneth, Joh. 14.26, he shall teach you all things etc. and this Gerhard
cannot deny; and we may close with his interpretation of the word, (except in
the controverted particular too rashly added by him) as being most full and
pertinent for clearing what is meant by the word in that place, while, Geth.
ubi sup.
says he, the spirit is called(...), thereby is employed, that we receive from
him comfort, instruction, firmness and stabilitie, government and counsel,
quickening, correction, strength, defense and preservation.

You Will say the same word is applied to Christ. 1. Joh. 2.3. to hold out his
intercession for us; Ans. the subject matter there, does show that the word
holds out Christ's pleading, and interceeding for us, and that he is our
advocat; but must this ambiguous word signify the same thing while applied to
the holy Spirit? and while the context and parallel places do exclude such a
signification. Christ is our Advocat with the Father, to plead the pardon for
sinners which He has purchased with his own blood; [and thus (says Beza in
loc. personam quodammodo deprecatoris sustinet -- tota^ hoc munus usque adeo
uni Christo proprium, etc.
Beza) none in heaven or earth, yea not the holy Ghost can without gross
impiety, be called our Advocat.] Though upon other respects the Spirit also may
be called our Advocat.

1. Then Christ is our Advocat in heaven, the Spirit our Advocat on earth. 2.
Christ is our Advocat with the Father to plead for us, the Spirit is our
Advocat against Satan and the world, to vindicat our name and cause from the
calumnies and aspersions of Satan and his instruments, and to defend and
protect us against the power and tyranny of old Adam, of the lusts of our
hearts within, and of temptations from without. 3. Christ is our Advocat at the
throne of Grace, the Spirit is our Advocat within us, informing, directing,
strengthening, persuading and comforting us. 4. Christ pleads for an acquittance
and discharge to us, because, as our Cautioner, He has paid the debt; the
Spirit pleads with us to run to Christ, and to lay hold on Him for our
Cautioner. 5. Christ makes intercession for us, the Spirit helps us to
interceed for our selves, by stirring up holy affections in us, and putting
words in our mouth. 6. Christ interceeds by His blood, (it has a voice and can
speak, Heb. 12.24.) the holy Spirit interceeds by His work whereby he helps and
assists us to pray, according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27 He interceeds
by our prayers, which being His work is therefore called His intercession.

And thus we do not deny, nor in the least diminish, the gracious
administration of the Spirit, according to that voluntary economy He has
undertaken for the Saints. We desire to admire with thankfulness, this His
wonderful condescension, and to say with the Ps. 113.5, 6.
Psalmist, while he pondered thesteps of providence, Who is like unto the Lord?
who thus humbles Himself; but it were a poor requittal for such bounty, to
ascribe to His infinite Majesty, any work or dispensation that does (as Prayer
and Intercession) import imperfection, inferiority, subjection or dependence;
though what only imports power, efficiency and influence, should be ascribed
to Him, as the cause and author; and must denominat the Saints as the subject
in which it is terminat. So much for the intercession of the Spirit.

Now we come to speak to that sweet and excellent point, the intercession of
our blessed Head for His members on earth. You will say, is He not equal with
the Father and Spirit? P^il. 2.6. Is it not then below such a glorious Person
to humble Himself to plead and make intercession? Ans. We shall remove this
difficulty when we come to show how Christ does interceed, whether as God or as
man: But that He does interceed for His people is certain, and cannot be denied
by any who acknowledge the Scriptures: See Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34. 1 John 2.1.
etc.

But let us here take notice of the policy of Papists, who, that they may lay a
foundation for the worshipping and invocating of Saints and Angels, maintain,
that we may not improve Christ's intercession by making it the object of any
petition in our prayers; yea, some of them do so speak, as if indeed they
denied that he did interceed for us, albeit they would seem to be tender of His
honor while they thus plead. [This form of Prayer (says Barrad. Harm. Evang.
Tom. 4. lib. 5. cap 12.
one of them) as not agreeing to the excellency of Christ, was never heard in
the Church, Christ Jesus, or a pro nobis, Christ Jesus, pray for us.] [The
Catholics (says Salm^r. Tom. 15 disp. 8. in 1 Timothy 2. page* 476 Vid. Lindan in
concl. disc. page 143.
another) do not pray to Christ to pray for them, lest they should seem, with
the Nestorians, to place two persons in Christ, the one of the Son of God, the
other of the Son of Mary.] Thus they would cloak the matter while they make way
for their idolatry, and provide a plea for their invocation of Saints, as
Mediators to interceed for them, since they Swarez speaks more cautiously and
modestly then others; For, (says he) Regulariter and public non oramus
Christum ut pro nobis intercedat ad vitandum scandalum, and ne videamur ad*
Illum tanquam ad purum hominem ora^e, Swarez de Virt. and Stat. Rel. Tom. 2.
lib. 1. de or. cap. 10. 16, 18. He does not deny this kind of Prayer to be of
it self lawful, but only because of the bazard of scandal, which may be
guarded against as he grants; Non est per se and intrinsece malum hoc modo ad
Christum orare, si recta fide and intention fiat; id est non dividendo
personas sed naturas, Swar. loc. cit. and Tom. 1. in 3. And for this he cites
Cajet. Cordub. Canisius.
may not put up a prayer to Christ for that effect: But it may seem strange
that our learned Dr. Invocatio illa nonest legittima; and inductiva est in
Haeresin, vel Arianam, vel Nestorianam, etc. D. Forbel. Instr. Hist. Theol.
lib. 7. cap. 3. Sect. 13.
Forbesse should join with them in this their assertion, being far from
complying with them in their design, which he abominateth, and has elsewhere
judiciously confuted: as for his reasons, they only prove that such a form of
petition may be abused; and we do not deny that there is here great need of
circumspection, least we confound the natures in the blessed Mediator, and
ascribe to the divine that which is proper to the humane Nature: And here some
cautions might be set down to good purpose; but the judicious and learned
Divine Mr. Mr. Durham on Revel. chap. 1. page 15, 16,
Durham, has liberat us of that task, having propounded this case in a
practical way, to the satisfaction of such who will be at the pains to peruse
what he has said to that point.

But that lawfully, and to good purpose, we may, and need not scruple, to
supplicat the glorious Mediator to interceed for us, may appear, 1. Because,
what Christ will certainly do, and has promised to do for us, that we may
supplicat Him to do, (the promise being (as shall Chapter 7. Sect. 1.
appear) a sufficient ground and warrant of Prayer) but Christ has promised to
pray for us, Joh. 14.16. and that He does pray for us the holy Spirit does
testify, Heb. 7.25. etc. 2. For what we are bound to return praise, that we
may ask and petition; but the Saints are obliged to praise Christ for
interceeding for them, and pleading their cause: Ergo.

What we are now to speak concerning Christ's intercession may be referred to
these heads. 1. We shall consider how the Scripture expresses that point. 2.
We will show according to what nature it is performed. 3. After what manner. 4.
We will draw some consolatory inferences. 5. We will point out the grounds of
this intercession. And, 6. We will move some questions, and obviat objections.

For the first, if we compare those Scriptures which most expressly hold out
this point, we may observe these several steps and (as it were) degrees of
Christ's intercession. And, 1. in the general, He is said to appear in the
presence of God for us; not determining the manner how, nor the consideration
under which, nor upon what account, Heb. 9.24. But, 2. we have His office
designed, He (while now in the heavens) appears there as a Mediator between
God and man, ready to tryst and interpose for their reconciliation, 1 Timothy 2.5.
but not as a neutral, and as one not concerned in the matter. But, 3.2 our
friend on our side, and a tryster and factor for us, Heb. 6.20. Yea, 4 as
engaged by office to plead for us, He appears as our Priest to deal and
interceed for us, His people, Heb. 7.24, 25, Heb. 6.20. Yea, 5. as being yet
more tender toward us, and more nearly concerned in us: He appears there as
our Surety and Cautioner to pay our ransom, and to offer what Law and Justice
can claim for the prisoners liberty; and that He may become, not only our
redemption and atonement, and to satisfy for debt already contracted; but also
to become Surety for our future carriage, and to become our righteousness,
wisdom and sanctification, Heb. 7.22. Romans 5.11. 1. Cor. 1.30. And then, 6. He
appears as our Advocat, not like the Levitical Priests only to plead mercy, but
as an Advocat in point of Law and justice, to plead, that the Captive, whose
ransom He has paid, may be set at liberty, 1 John 2.1. He will not only, as an
agent, request and sollist, (though thus always He interceedeth for us, Heb.
7.25.) but also in a legal and judicial way, as our Advocat, He will plead our
cause upon the account of full satisfaction to justice: Though all be of mere
mercy, as to us who had nothing to pay, yet, our Surety did pay to the utmost
farthing what justice did require: and thus, having pleaded our right, and
obtained a sentence in our favors, reconciliation being made, and we
pronounced just and righteous, as being washed from our sins in His blood, Rev.
1.5. Then, 7. He prepares a room for us in heaven, and makes all ready for
our welcome and entertainment; And thus He is in heaven as our Harbinger, He is
gone before to provide and speak for our lodging: No less do the words import,
Joh. 14.2, 3. And knowing that we are exposed to many dangers by the way, 8. He
purchases the protection of heaven, and a guard to convey us, and to defend us
from enemies lying in wait to make a prey of us, Romans 8.34. And, 9. (that which
comprehends all) He appears before the Throne as an Ambassador and public
person, in our room and stead, to act for us, Heb. 6.20. Or rather (that this
His condescension be not mistaken) 1. As our head, Col. 1.18. and will He not
then care for the body? 2. As our Lord and King, Act. 10.36. Rev. 19.16. and
will He not be mindful of His subjects and servants? 3. As our husband, 2.
Cor. 11.2. and will He have no bowels to wards His spouse, panting in this
wilderness after her beloved? 4. As a Father, Is. 9.6. and will He not pity His
children? 5. As our elder brother, Heb. 2.11. and will not our Joseph deal
kindly with us? will He not speak and interceed with the King? etc.

As to the 2. it may be asked, how Christ does intereced for us, Whether as he
is God? Or, 2. as he is man? Or, 3. as he is (...) God-man? Ans. 1. Not as God:
here the four first reasons brought against the formal intercession of the
holy Ghost have place; which we need not resume. I do not deny that some of the
ancient Doctors, as Chrysostom and Ambrose, and amongst the modern, Gerhard,
Tilen and others, do seem to be of that opinion, that Christ, as (...), does
make intercession.
Neither, 2. does he interceed as both God and man upon the same grounds; for
the concurrence of the humane Nature cannot remove any of the absurdities that
would follow upon the performance thereof by His Godhead alone.

You will say our Divines usually affirm that Christ as Mediator does make
intercession for us; and as He is Mediator He is both God and man. Ans. We know
Vid. Chamier. panstr. tom. 2. lib. 7.
not under what consideration Christ can be said to appear and make
intercession for us, if not as our Mediator and Head: and our Divines have
justly condemned the doctrine of those Papists, who with Lombard and Thomas
these grand misleaders, do maintain that Christ only, as man is Mediator; yet
we deny that there are any (...), Dionys. Areop. epist. 4. ad Ganim. med. vid.
Thom. 3. part. quaest. 19. art. 1. and Dion. Carthus. in 3. did. 17. quaest. 1.
Theandrick actions, which do flow from, and denominat both the divine and
humane Nature, as the proper and immediate fountain: for, as both Natures
continue distinct as to their being and existence; (though personally united in
the Mediator) So also their operations and properties must not be confounded.
There be some actions that only agree to the humane, and others only to the
divine Nature; whatsoever is beyond the reach of the creature, and does not
import inferiority and subjection, that must be ascribed to the Godhead; but
all Christ's sufferings, and what belongs to the state of His humiliation, that
was proper to the humane Nature; yet so, as that in another kind of causality,
the divine Nature might have some influence, and concur in such a manner as was
suitable to his infinite Majesty, for completing, and perfecting these actions,
and sufferings of the humane Nature: for, from the divine Nature did flow the
value and worth of these; therefore they were meritorious and satisfactory,
because they were performed by Him, Who was Godman, albeit as man.

And thus speaking to the particular concerning Christ's intercession, Doctor
Gisb. Voet sell. disp. par. 1. dis. 30. an Christus qua Mediator, page 536. est
actio Christi Mediatoris, qua Mediatoris agenda se. secundum naturam humanam,
quae est immediatum precationis subjectum.
Voet does in a word (and in the by only) clear the question: [Christs
intercession (says he) is an action of the Mediator, as He is Mediator; but to
be performed by the humane Nature, which is the only subject of that action,]
and we would distinguish and clear the ambiguity of the phrase, which may give
occasion to mistake; while any action is said to be performed by Christ as
Mediator, the meaning is not that it is performed by, and does belong unto both
Natures, as its immediate subject; (though both those Natures, must necessarily
be united in one person in the Mediator, and though both these Natures, may
concur in a way suitable unto them for completing these actions, as to their
moral value and estimation) but the meaning is, that such an action belongs to
His mediatory Office; and He as our Surety performs it for us; albeit it does
flow from, as it is proper cause, and is terminated in, as it is immediate
Subject, one of the natures only.

But you will say, did not both the divine and humane Nature concur in these
miraculous works which were wrought by Him, while He was on earth? Ans. Both
did concur, but by two distinct operations; the one humane, the other divine.
Thus (says Athan. orat. 4. contra Arrian. (...).
Athanasius) as man, He stretched out His hand, but, as God, He did rebuke and
cure the disease. And thus, we deny not that some of Christ's actions were
Theandrick, that the divine and humane actions did, in their own way, concur
for perfecting the work; But take any one simple action, and thus, as to it is
original, it is either divine or humane. It was the Godhead that did assume
our nature, that raised it from the dead, that is present with the Church to
the end of the world, that preservs and governs His Church, that pardons sin,
that is worshipped, etc. And it is His Manhead that was born, was crucified,
rose again, ascended into heaven, prayed, wept, etc. Albeit we deny not that
even, as to these humane actions and sufferings, the Deity of Christ did
morally concur, adding worth, and making them to be of infinite value, and
satisfactory to divine justice in that they were performed by Him who was
(...), God man, though as man; (that is, though the Man-head only did concur as
their proper physical cause and immediate Subject) not that we deny that the
Deity did support the Humanity, and did concur with, and give a being unto, all
it is actions and operations; but that there was, as to this, any thing peculiar
(albeit there was a more ultimat and mysterious union) to Christ: For thus, all
of us live, move, and have our being from God, and from all the persons of the
blessed Trinity, (...), Basil. mag. lib. 5. adversus Eunom. Vnitatem naturae,
voiuntaris and operationis confitemur, Ambros. in Symb. Apost. cap. 3.
all of them working by one and the same power. And thus the actions of all men
might be called Theandrick, and all creature motions Divine, Act. 17.28. Joh.
5.17, 19. etc. And thus we do not, with Papists, deny, that Christ is Mediator
according to both natures; yea, we do not exclude His divine nature from His
Intercession; for, from it does flow it is worth and excellency; So that it must
prevail with God and obtain a grant: And according to this sense, we will not
condemn Gerhard (though we like not the phrase) while he Gerh. harm. cap. 180.
page 1145. Christus ut noster Mediator and Sacerdos, and (...), orat.
says that Christ, as Mediator and God-man, does pray, the Godhead indeed does
concur in a suitable manner, adding virtue to that sacrifice. But this moral
influence is not sufficient to cause the action, which of it self imports
inferiority and subjection, to denominat the divine nature. Thus also,
according to some impropriety of speech, we may say, that God did pray
according to that Per communicationem (...),
communication of properties, whereby that which is proper to the one nature,
may not only Communicatio proprietatum alia est verbalis, alia realis, cum Deus
dicitur propriosanguine redemisse Ecclesiam de persona Christi hoc dicitur in
concreto realiter, at vero verbaliter de natura a qua persona denominatur, viz.
Divina. Maccov. distinct and reg. cap 11. sect. 6.
denominat the person, but the other nature: and thus, as it is said, Act.
20.28. that God purchased the Church with His own blood; so He may be said to
pray and interceed for the Church. But while we are enquiring after the sense
of words, we must not (...) Symb. Athanas. vid etiam Symb, Antioch. and Theoph.
in Heb. 7.
confound the divine and humane Nature, but must ascribe to each of them, their
own properties and actions: and here we might show the consent of the christian
Church from the beginning, all of them Non potest per eandem naturam adorare
quasi servus and adorari quasi Dominus, Ambros. lib. 5. de side cap. 2. quomodo
non Patrem rogat ut homo qui cum Patre exaudit ut Deus, August. lib. 3. contra
Maxim. cap. 14.
agreeing in this, that Christus, ut Deus, adoratur cum Patre, ut homo orat
Patrem) that Christ, as God, is worshipped with the Father, and that as man, He
prays to the Father.

As to the 3. Though the thing it self be certain and clearly revealed, yet the
way and manner of performance is somewhat mysterious and hidden; concerning
which we shall offer some few assertions; The first whereof shall be negative.
Ass. 1. It seems not to agree with that state of glory, to which our blessed
Lord is exalted, that He should Hanc Intercessionem carnali sensu ne metiamur
non enim cogitandus est supplex flexis genibus manibus expansis Patrem
deprecari Calv. in Rom, 8.34.
prostrate Himself before the Father, as He did, while on earth, in the days
of His humiliation, when He offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong
crying and tears, Heb. 5.7.

2. And positively, we need not scruple to say, that Christ now does interceed
by His death and sufferings. If Abel's blood, after it was shed, could speak
and cry for judgment to be poured on the murderer, shall not the blood of
Christ call and cry for mercy to them for whom it was shed, Heb. 12.24.
Christ's merit and satisfaction does cry and plead for a discharge of the debt,
the ransom He has paid does appear before the Throne, and say, Ah! shall not
the Genesis 18.25. Apparet ipse assidue cum morte and satisfactione sua quae vice
sunt aeternae Intercessionis, and vivae orationis efficaciam habent, Calv. loc.
cit.
Judge of all the earth do right; shall not the ransomed Captive be set at
liberty? But, this being no distinct part of His mediatory Office from His
death and suffering, it cannot be that Intercession, which the Scripture holds
out as a new ground of encouragement from His ascension and now being in the
heavens; and then, though Abel's blood did cry, yet, it is not said that Abel
cried, but Christ Himself is said to interceed; and therefore there must be
some other thing intimated then the merit of His suffering by His Intercession.

But, 3. While some would explain Christ's Intercession by His Quae
interpellatio non est humilis supplicatio, sed gloriosa praesentatio corporis
Sui, quo in his terris sanguine Suo, peccata nostra expiavit, Paraeus in Heb.
9.24. and in cap. 7, 25. Diodan. on Romans 8.34. Burges on Joh. 17.1.
representing His sufferings and obedience to the Father, I would know what
that presenting did import beyond His being once dead, and now living for ever
in the heavens; to which, as another thing, His Intercession is superadded,
Heb. 7.17, 25. And I would think, that they who confound His Sacrifice with His
Intercession, these two distinct parts of His priestly Office, do, in effect,
deny his Non dicis ut offerat, ^am hoc semel fecis, sed super est altera
sacerdotii pars nim. interpellatio, etc. Beza in Heb cap. 7.25. vid. Martyr.
loc. com. class. 3. loc. 13.
Intercession: for, the other they cannot deny, to wit, that He once offered up
Himself a sacrifice to satisfy divine justice; and that they do not, cannot
hold out the full meaning of that Scripture that holds out Christ to be a
priest for ever, after the order of Molchisedeck. See Hob. 7. and compare v.
24. with, 25. But if by this presenting of his death and sufferings be meant
any kind of expression or pleading upon the account of his merit and
satisfaction, the difficulty will remain; for, the question is, how he does
plead and interceed for us?

4. While Quaris quid agat Christus in coelo? Resp. appares, interpollat pro
nobis, apparente autem Christo pro nobis, peccata nostra, in Dei conspectum
atque memoriam nunquam venient, D. Par. in Heb. 9.24.
other would explain Christ's Intercession, by his appearing before the Throne,
in our name, and as our Cautioner and Advocat, they say little or nothing for
clearing the question. For, it is certain, that, 1. Christ is in heaven; And
that, 2. He is the head and Savior of His people, and does appear for them,
and in their name: but still it remains to be shawen, what now he does for
them, and in their name.

5. Therefore, supposing these things as previous and prerequisite to Christ's
intercession, we think that these express it best, who will have it to consist
in his earnest and serious Quae interpellatio est constans voluntas, ut Pater
(...) suum acceptet, sitque propter illud prepitius, etc. Par. loc. cit. and
cap. 7.25. and in Romans cap. 8.34. Diodat. on Romans 8.34. Burges on Ioh. 17.1.
willing and desiring, that his chosen ones, through his blood, should partake
of the several benefits they stand in need of, and that they should have a
return to such and such Prayers put up in His name. And that this willing and
desiring, may be called Prayer, may appear from what has been said, Chap. 4.
For since Christ does will such and such good things to be given to His
servants; from whom does he desire? is it not from God? and does he not direct
all his desires to God? and what is that else but to pray to God? But you will
say, how does Christ will and desire good things to us? Ans. Certainly not in a
superficial formal way, he does most seriously, tenderly and compassionatly
will our good; he makes intercession for us, says Diodat. loc. cit.
Diodate by fervently desiring our salvation. Ye may take a view of his willing
from the copy he left on earth, every step of his life was a demonstration of
his most earnest and fervent desiring the salvation of his people. But not to
stay on particulars, let us survey that last model of his Prayer, solemnly put
up for his people, Joh, 17. O! How many evidences of love and care will that
one text afford, and there we will find his willing to be reckoned by him as a
part of that Prayer, Father, I will that those whom thou have given me be with
me, etc. v. 24. Father, I will, that, is, as if he had said, Father, I pray;
and if his willing on earth did deserve the name of Prayer, why may not also
his willing in heaven? it is not less serious, earnest and fervent then it
was: distance has not diminished His affections to His people, but rather, as
a tender Father and Husband, He does the more remember, pity and compassionat
his children and spouse, wandering, as it were, in a wilderness, and who can
take no rest till they see his face.

6. Albeit In docta ignorantia non minus mentis quietatio quaerenda est quam in
scientia, Voet. disp, de atheis. page 126.
silence may often be called the best eloquence, and ignorance the best
knowledge, of things not revealed, yet, we may modestly enquire, whether or not
Christ does some times express His desires? albeit He does not now bow the
knee and extend the hand (as Calv. in Romans 8.34.
Calvin speaks) yet, why should it seem to be inconsistent with His glory to
interpose words in behalf of His aflicted members? I do not think that in
heaven there will be no use of the Vid. Paraeum in locum.
tongue; the Scripture seems to imply the contrary, Rev. 15.3. and 14.3. and
7.9, 10. and 5.9. etc. Not that with Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.18. I did
think that the Cajetan in 2. Tim. 2.18. Si novissemus istos sicut neverat illos
Timotheus intelligeremus de qua secta Paulus loquitur; yet, it seems certain,
that they denied any further resurrection.
resurrection is past already, or, that the spirits of just men, made Heb.
12.23.
perfect, had tongues and bodily organs wherewith they praise God, or that
these things were not represented to John in a vision: but because that form of
representation, does import, 1. That the Angels and Saints in heaven do rejoice
when it goes well with the Church. And, 2. that they express their joy by
praising God in that way and manner that agrees and is suitable to their nature
and condition; which though it be performed by the will and understanding, yet
well deserves the name of a Hence, in the Schools this kind of expression is
called a Speech: vide Scholasticos de loquela Angelorum.
Song: for, God stands not in need of words and outward symbols: Yea, and 3. in
that mention is made of singing, speaking, yea, and crying, and that with a
loud voice, it would appear, that thereby is insinuated, that if these blessed
spirits had tongues, they would employ them in praising of God, and that after
the resurrection, both soul and body, in their own way and capacity, shall join
and be employed in that blessed work: and if our exalted Savior, in any case,
employ His tongue to speak, will He not? can we imagine that He will not bestow
one word for His afflicted members? that for those whom He so dearly loves, as
to Rev. 1.5.
wash them in his own blood, He shall not once open His mouth? I think none
will scruple to say, that Christ, as man, does truly and formally praise God,
(and though they do not make mention of His words, yet, they do not deny or
exclude them) and I know no reason either why we should scruple to say, that He
does as truly and formally (though not in such a (...) etc. Nazianz. orat. 2.
de filic.
servil way as while He was on earth) pray. Amongst the reformed Divines I have
perused, D. Hammond on Romans 8.26, 34.
D. Hamond, and M. Neuton, and M. Goodwin, have expressed themselves most
clearly in this point; the first affirming [that Christ does really pray for
us, and join His Prayers with ours, etc.] but, Mr. Neuton more fully, [we have
(says this M. Newton on Ioh. 17.10. page 268.
reverend Author) an Advocat in Court, who continually hears, at hand on all
occasions, to Postulat tum factomon. strando signa passionis, tum merito
offerendo pietatem qua passus est, Cajetan. in Heb. 7.25.
show his father all his wounds and all his scars, all the prints and all the
marks of his bitter, bloody sufferings: ah? Father, may he say, (when there is
any thing in agitation for his people) remember what I have endured for them in
this flesh of mine, what I have suffered for them in this body here before
thee, look upon these wounds and scars, and for my sake be gracious to them, do
not deny them their petitions, do not reject them for their un-allowed and
bewailed imperfections.] And Mr. M. T. Goodwin, triumph of faith, from Sect. 5.
chap. 6. Inter pontistcios, vid. Valent. in 3. q. 21. p. 1. as. 3. Swarez Tom.
4. de incar. disp. 45. sect. 2. and de statu rel: tract. 4. lib. 1. de or. cap.
10. Sect. 15. Tolet. and Maldon. in 16. Ioh.
Goodwin. says, [that Christ's Intercession is most properly and truly such]
But, you will say when does He thus pray for His servants? we cannot imagine
that our blessed Lord does always pour out vocal Prayers; and though that
were granted, yet, He having so many servants exercised with so many trials,
and standing in need of so many mercies, what ground (may such a supplicant
say) have I to believe, that my Savior is now saying to the Father, Lord; be
gracious to such a poor one? Ans. 1. Such as will thus object, do seem to lay
too much weight upon that which we only propounded in a problematick way:
Albeit some weak Saints, who are much affected with sensible demonstrations of
Christ's love and care, may draw some comfort from His words; yet, it is a
gross mistake to think, that mental prayer does not as well prevail with God,
or that our Savior would be less mindful of, and compassionat toward, His
people, though He did not pour out words in their behalf. There is no question
amongst the godly and orthodox concerning Christ's bowels and care, nor
concerning the acceptance and success of Christ's Intercession, however it be
performed; but only concerning the manner and way that is most suitable to His
glory and exaltation; and as to that there is some diversity of opinions. Yet,
2. this objection will also have place against Christ's willing and desiring
(which I think should not be questioned) as well as against His words and the
expressing of those desires: for, though the mind and will be more active and
comprehensive, then that the tongue can follow and express all the thoughts
and purposes that are there; yet, Christ's humane will being of a finite
capacity (though advanced to the greatest height of Glory and Majesty that the
creature is capable of) it cannot at once, by so many distinct and particular
acts, be conversant about all the several cases of the Saints on earth, and so
cannot offer up a particular desire for every Saint in every condition. And
thus, for completing the comfort of believers under their several trials and
exigences, we must look up to the divine Nature, and rest Ps. 57 1.
securely under the shadow of our blessed Mediator, who is God and man: and in
this D. Tilen. synt. part. 2. disp. 10. sect. 16. omnium hominum preces audire
( addit ille and offerre) divinae in pontlfice nostro naturae opem desiderat
passim tamen and hac ipsa thesi no tatadocet Christum, ut (...), pro nobis
interpellare, vid. these 12. and 20 and disp. 12. these. 34. -- and System Opis.
disp. 20.
D. Tilen has hit right, when he says, [that it requires the help of the
divine Nature, at once, to hear the Prayers of all the Saints on earth] but in
that, he affirms the divine Nature to interceed for us and to present our
Prayers, we cannot join with him for the reasons brought against the holy
Spirits intercession. Can Prayer be separated from religious adoration? and can
Vid. Thom. 2 2. quaest. 81. art. 3. ad. 1. and quaest. 84. art. 1. ad, 3.
one person of the blessed Trinity invocat, or be invocated, without the other
two? (...), says Greg. Nazianzen, Orat. 37. And to whom shall the second
person of the blessed Trinity present our prayers, if not to Himself? and with
whom shall He interceed, if not with himself? which were gross once to
imagine, and to what purpose who can show? Its true, Christ, as man, does adore
and invocat the whole Trinity, and as God, He does as truly as the Father and
holy Ghost Ex hoc enim rogat quo minor est patre quo vero ej aequalis est,
exaudit cum patre, August. lib, 1. de Trinitat. cap, 10.
hear and Unless we say with Franciscus, a S. Clara, in his exposition of the
English Confession [that the Godhead and not the persons, formally and as
such, but only as they are identified with the Godhead are the proper and
formal object of worship] doctores (inquitille loc. cit.) communiter ipsis
personis divinis praecise sumptis sub ratione formali constitutiva personaru^,
quae est relatio negant subesse terminum formalem adorationis, sed hoc deitati
s^lum primo compesit relationibus autem prout identificantur cum essentia etc.
answer, the distinction and infinite distance of Natures in the Mediator, being
a sufficient plea against all the cavils that carnal reason can suggest to the
contrary.

But, (that we may speak to the objection) the infinite knowledge of the divine
Nature in the Redeemer is a sweet ground of consolation to all that come unto
Him; for, thus our blessed Mediator must know all our wants, whereupon must
follow an unconceivable communication and manifestation thereof to the humane
Nature, to which the divine is personally united. So that though the
man-Christ, be not omniscient (as some Lutheran Divines do imagine) yet He is
multiscient; and albeit the glass of the Trinity, in which the Saints in glory
do see here what is done on earth, be a popish dream, yet, the humane Nature of
Christ, being personally united to the Godhead, does from thence, by real
communication, receive, and always has a perfect knowledge of the conditions
of his members, and of their particular needs and straits: for, as man, He is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, ( Heb. 4.15.) and so He must know
them; yea, while on earth, and in the state of His humiliation, he had such an
measure of knowledge, that none needed to testify to Him of man; for He knew
all men, and what was in man, Joh. 2.24, 25. But yet, the main pillar of our
confidence must be, 1. His divine and infinite omniscience. 2. The price he has
paid, His satisfying the justice of God. And thus, 3. the cry of His blood,
which does answer every case and condition of all the Saints: there is not a
petition thou can put up, but Christ's blood does (and thus himself may be
said to) join with thee, and say, Lord, hearken to that poor soul, for whose
sake my blood was shed; deny not to it what I have purchased for it. And though
this voice and intercession be metaphorical, yet, it is real and most
prevailing; though thus rather the Sacrifice then the Priest does interceed,
yet, it is the basis and ground, it is the foundation and the meritorious cause
of the prevalency of the other, that proper and formal intercession. And thus,
Christ always, in all cases, and for every one of his servants, does cry, and
God always hearkneth and does answer that cry. The Lord did hear the cry of
Abels blood from the ground, Genesis 4.10.11. He heard the cry of blood; Of, 1. a
mear man, 2. Of a sinner, (though evangelically righteous) 3. From the ground.
4. Pleading for vengenance against the murderer; And shall he not hear the cry
of his blood, who was, 1. His Zech. 13.7.
fellow; who, 2. knew no sin; and which, 3. is now in heaven; and which, 4.
pleads for mercy (in which the Lord so much delights) and that upon the
account of satisfied justice? The cry of blood is very loud, though it were the
blood of a slave, how much more the blood of the only begotten Son of God?

And thus, 4. This is the fourth ground of consolation, His appearing in
heaven, and following the cry of his blood shed on earth; His appearing before
the judge in that body, that was killed: and thus Sic Gerhard and alii quos
citat Harm. de resur. Cap. 9. sic Cajet in Romans 8.3. facto (inquit) monstrando
signa passiouis, etc.
some do think that the scars of his wounds do now and shall for ever remain,
and that these are no blemishes nor imperfections, but triumphant monuments of
His vi^tory over the devil, of his unconceivable love toward lost man; and so
many witnesses and Advocats, to plead for his aflicted members. O! (says
Cicatrices Christi sunt lucidiores and pulchriores solis radiis, Chrysostom. apud
Gerh. loc. cit.
Chrysostom) the prints of his wounds are more beautiful, and resplendent then
the beams of the Sun.

And as to his proper and formal, yea and vocal, intercession, as while on
earth, he did pray for his followers, and Joh. 1.^4.16.
promises to pray for them in some particular cases, and special exigencies,
and for some particular mercy, to some particular Luke 22 32.
persons, so while in heaven, he may upon such and such occasions interpose for
his people. Though we cannot exactly discover, nor particularly and
peremptorily determine what Christ says and does in heaven for us; yet, by
reflecting on the copy and samplar of his intercession, which is registrat in
the word, we may conjecture what he does there; and though we should only say,
that Christ in the general did interceed by a verbal and outward expression
of his desire for his people, (though there be no ground for such a limitation,
but much to the contrary) yet were not this very comfortable? albeit in his
solemn farewell Prayer Joh. 17. He did not put up any particular petition for
any one of the disciples, but in the general did interceed for all the eleven,
yea, and for all these who, to the end of the world, were to believe through
the gospel, they were to preach, v. 20. Yet, the disciples were no less
refreshed and benefited thereby then if severally he had prayed for every one
of them. The Lord well knows the meaning of Christ's Prayers, and will, in
return to them, make an application to every one as their need requires, and
he will no less hear, and answer Christ, Praying for all his members, then if
he only prayed for one of them.

O! then lift up your heads, and shout for joy all you disconsolated ones;
Joseph, your brother lives, Genesis 47.1. Joh. 14.2. Genesis 41.40, 42. Mat. 28.18.
he has moyen in court, ye shall not starve, he will provide for you the best
of the land, the good land of Goshen; he will interceed for you, the king can
refuse him nothing, he has taken off his ring, and put it on Joseph's hand, and
has set him over his house, that according to his word all the people may be
ruled, Joh. 5.22. Ephesians. 1.22. Mat. 28.18. What need you fear, though your
condition be as sad as Jobs was, if with him ( Job. 19.25.) ye will remember
that your Redeemer lives, and for this very end and purpose that he may make
intercession for you? his trade and employment in heaven is to plead for you,
Heb. 7.25. The (a) smoke of his incense ascends up before God for ever, he will
not cast thee out of his Prayers, Rev. 8.4
he will not forget thee nor suffer thy cause to miscarry, he ever lives to
make intercession for thee. What though thou can but sigh and groan, though
thou can but chatter like a crane, and mourn l^ke a dove; what though thou
can not speak, when thou come before the king: O! but thy Advocat knows
well what to say in thy behalf; he is eloquent and well acquaint with the
language of Canaan, he can draw up thy bill and order thy cause aright, there
is no imperfection or defect, no inequality in his intercession; and the judge
will pass over thy ro^ving and distempers, he will not take advantage of thy
distracting thoughts, of thy deadness, and bewailed imperfections, he will
hearken to what thy Advocat says for thy cause, and accordingly will pronounce
a favorable sentence, 1. Joh. 2.1, 2. Joh. 11.42. And now thou may answer
Solomon's question, Prove. 20.6. and say thou have found a faithful one whom
thou may safely trust, he will not betray thy cause, Heb. 2.17. He is not so
taken up with the multitude of clients and causes as to forget thee, he never
lost a cause wherewith he was entrusted, Joh. O. 37.39. and he cannot die, and
thou be forced to employ another who knows not well where to begin; he ever
lives, Heb. 7.25.

Ah! (you will say) but who will plead the cause of a money-lesse man, I have
not so much as some few tears to offer unto him. Ans. He will for 2 King.
19.34. and, ^0.6.
his own sake appear for those who have Heb. 6.18.
fled for refuge to lay hold on him, he cannot refuse his honest supplicants,
He has not an heart to reject them, he will in no ways upon no terms put
them off, Job. 6.37. His name is (the poor and destituts friend) Isa. 61.1, 2.
Mat. 11.5. He is our friend and near kinsman, he will do it freely, he is not
so near to Angels, he took not on him their nature, Heb. 2.16. they are not
called his brethren; but this is our privilege, Heb. 2.11. yea he is yet
nearer unto us, he is our Father, Is. 9.6. yea we are members of his body, of
his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. What need we then fear to come unto Him?

Ah! (but will the doubting sinner say) may not the Advocat play His part and
plead well, and yet lose His cause, I am such a wretched sinner, what can be
said in my behalf? Ans. though he undertake thy cause, yet he will plead in his
own name, he has moyen with the judge, he is one with him, Joh. 10.30 Though
he be the Son of man, yet he is also the Son of God; and will the Father then
reject his suit? he desires him to ask and promises to give, Ps. 2.7, 8. and
w^ll he not keep his word? And the Son professes that he is always heard,
Joh. 11.42. And will thou doubt any more of the success of his intercession?
Ah! shall the Is. 7.^4. and, 9, 6.
wonderful Counselor, the Prince of peace, he who is Immanuel, God with us,
interpose between God and us, and shall he not prevail and make peace? And, O!
what matter of consolation may it be to all those who have fled in unto him,
that we have an Advocat so nigh to God, and so nigh to us? He is our Ioh. 20.17.
brother, and Gods Zech. 13 7. Phil. 2 6.
fellow and equal; That we have, 1. such a kind and compassionat, 2. such a
great and powerful Advocat, 3. such a trusty and faithful Advocat, what need
we then fear? 1. If money be required, behold our Surety with our ransom in his
hand, that inestimable price of his blood, 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 2. If
power and authority, behold our king sitting at the right hand of God, highly
exalted above all principalities and powers, to whom is committed all power in
heaven and earth, Phil. 2.9. Mat. 28.18. 3. If requests, favor and entreaties,
(which prove very effectual with the ingenuous) behold our intercessor to
supplicat and entreat for us, Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34. If justice complain, behold
a ransom and satisfaction to the outmost: if mercy must also be acknowledged
and dealt with in a suitable way to its soveraignity and freeness, behold
entreaties and supplications; behold a friend thus to interpose for us, so that
we may here apply that word, Heb. 7.25. he is able to save to the outmost, or
all manner of ways (for so the (...), id est, perfect, ita viz ut nihil ad
eam salutem possit amplius desiderari, Beza in locum.
words may also be rendered) by all means he will have our happiness and
salvation promoved and secured to us: Yea, and here we may take in a third, he
is not only able to save to the outmost, that is, perfectly and completely,
and, as it were, every bit and crumb. And, 2. by all manner of ways and means:
but also, 3. at all Salvare in perpetuum, Theophyl. in locum; to perpetuity,
Ham. in loc.
times and for ever. He was the Savior of the Jews as well as of us Gentiles,
and he will save for ever. His salvation shall never be lost, his ransomed ones
shall never perish; and all of Christ, his divine and humane nature, do concur
for our salvation, and all his life was employed for us. 1. His birth; for unto
us a child is born, Unto us a son is given, Is. 9.6. 2. His death, he dyed for
us, 1 These. 5.10. 3. His rising again, and living for ever, Romans 4.25. Heb.
7.25. Thus all of Christ, his life first and last, and every period of it, laid
out for us, he is wholly for us. And, ah! will not we be for him wholly? Ah!
remember ye are no more your own, he has bought you at a dear price, 1 Cor.
6.19, 20. O! view the several st^ps of your salvation, what a mystery of
wisdom, love, care and condescension may appear in it. Is it not well 2 Samuel
23.5.
ordered and sure in all things? And now, what can hell and Satan say? what
can thy conscience allege? yea, what can the holy law and justice of God
object against thee who trusts in his name? Its true, hell can never be
satisfied, thou have principalities and powers to wrestle with, though thou be
justified through faith in his blood, his ransom and intercession make hell to
rage, the Math. 12.29.
strong man must be disquieted when he sees his house spoiled, and the captive
set at liberty; he will pursue, but he shall not overtake, he shall not be able
to bring back (though he may vex and molest) the prisoner: And our blessed Lord
shall bruise him under thy feet shortly, Romans 16.20. And in the mean time, all
the calumnies and reproaches, all the lybells and challenges which this Rev.
12.10.
accuser of the brethren can bring against thee, shall be cast over the bar; he
has no moyen at court, he will get no hearing: and therefore, the Apostle had
reason to break out in that triumphing exultation, and say, who (either in hell
or earth, for in heaven there is none) shall lay any thing to the charge of
justified sinners? who is the devil or man, dar challenge them? Is not Christ
at the right hand of God, appearing there for us, to go betwixt us and all the
accusations can be brought against us? If any can object against the worth of
his blood, the sufficiency of the price he has paid and the grounds of his
intercession, let him speak, but otherwise the sinner is secure, Romans 8.3, 34.
1 John 2.1. Oh! but you will say, I know it is so of a truth, devils and men
cannot wrong me; but, can I not wrong my self? may I not through my folly ask
a serpent in stead of a fish, nay and take it into my bosom, till it sting me
to death? Ans. Thy Advocat will not undertake a wrong cause, he will not wrong
thee, though thou would wrong thy self; he will appear for thee, and against
thy foolish suit, and he will say, Lord, pity that poor deluded creature for
whom I have shed my blood, Ps. 140 8.
grant not his fool^sh desire, further not his wicked device against himself;
but though he has asked a Luke 11.11.
scorpion, let him have an egg. And the Mat. ^.11.
father will say, let it be so, let him have a corrosive, as most profitable
rather then a cordial to feed his disease; let him him have a bitter potion
for his health (will the great Physician say) rather then that delicious cup of
poison which he desires; he will give what is good but he will suffer no evil
to touch him, Ps. 84.11. Ps. 121.7. And if at any time for thy trial, he
suffer thee to fall, he will raise thee up again; thou shall not for ever be
left in the snare, thou can not Ps. 37.2^
utterly perish, none is able (neither Satan nor thy lusts) to pluck the out
of Christ's hands, and he will not quite his grips for one that is weaker then
himself, he will never part with thee, Joh. 10.28.

But you will yet say, O! but as we are thus ready to mistake; so also to
forget, or not mind our condition, our wants and necessities, and we are
exposed to so many trials, temptations and hazards, that we cannot foresee
them Ans. But yet our Redeemer and Head discerns them all alar off; he did
forsee Peter's fall; and prayed for his recovery, and thus provided a remedy
before the patient knew of his disease, Luke 22.31, 32. He will not wait till
we employ him, he will do as our need requires, though we be not sensible, and
do not know what we stand in need of.

O! but you will reply, if I did stand in need of some few things only, this
were some door of hope; but my wants are so many that I cannot expect a supply
of them all; What, shall I have so many helps and so much provision for my
journey? shall Manna daily be rained down on my tent, while I am in this
wilderness, and the immortal crown of glory put on my head so soon as I enter
into the promised land? If I were a Moses, Daniel or Job, it were not so much;
but, how can I believe that such a vile and wretched sinner as I shall be thus
dealt with? Ans. O! but behold thy Advocat with a price in his hand, to lay out
for all thy debts, and to purchase all thy mercies: if the cry of his blood do
not outcry thy sins, if his merits be not greater then the mercies thou
desire, thou may fear; but since his treasures can never be exhausted,
since they are indeed such as the Sparish ambassador (alluding to the golden
mines in Jndia) said; his Masters were without a bottom. O then! let your joy
be full, the father will look over all thy imperfections and blemishes, all thy
sins and provocations, though never so great and many; and he will look to him
who stands at his right hand, who has made a mends for all the wrongs thou
have done; and who is the 1 John 2.2.
propitiation for all thy sins, and he will say, I pity this ungrate wretch, I
freely pardon all his offenses for thy sake, since he has come unto thee and
given thee his employment; since he has entrusted his cause to thee, it shall
not miscarry; I can deny thee nothing, let him have his desire, ask what he
will he shall have it, Mat. 7.7. etc. And our blessed Advocat will turn to thee
and say, I have dispatched your business, ask and spare not, and whatsoever ye
shall ask, be it never so great, if good for you, I will give you my word
(which is surer then all the bonds ye can imagine) ye shall receive it, that
your joy may be full, Joh. 16.23, 24. Joh. 14.13, 14. etc. Oh! will you ponder
these strong supports of faith, these sure grounds of consolation; and ye who
did never yet fully believe, nor could be comforted by that great word of
Though it be set down by way of narration.
promise, Romans 8.28. I did indeed (will you say) think that God did bestow many
good things on his honest servants here, and that all should be well with them
hereafter; but, that all things, all the crosses and losses, all the trials
and various dispensations of providence that befall them here in their
pilgrimage, should contribute and work together for their good. I never could
be persuaded to believe, I did not imagine that such a thing was possible,
especially since sense and reason, and the daily complaints of the Saints did
step in, as so many evidences and witnesses, to depone, that it was not so. O!
ye jealous and suspicious ones, ye who walk too much by sense, and are so Luke
24.25.
slow of heart to believe this word of truth; O! thou who do not prize thy
privilege, and art not thankful for thy mercies, which thou will not know or
acknowledge, remember who Christ is, and what he is to thee, what he has done
and suffered for thee, and what now is his work and business; what desires he
See Catech. quest. 44. Christ executes the office of a priest in making
continual intercession for his people.
continually puts up for thee; and be no more jealous of him, but rebuke thine
own unbelief. O! thou child of Light, who hitherto have Is 50.10.
walled in darkness, cast off thy sables and mourning attire, and run to the
full breasts of Christ's Intercession, and suck from thence matter of all joy
and consolation. O! remember your Redeemer lives, and that he lives for (...)
semper vivens ad hoc ut interpellet Eras. transl: semper vivit ad supplicandum
Castal. transl.
ever to make intercession; his (...), his great work and business in heaven,
is to plead for and procure what he desired to his servants while he was on
earth, viz, the fullness of their joy, that his Ioh. 15.11.
joy may remain in us, and that our joy may be full. As for the grounds of
this intercession, and the reasons why our blessed Savior does undergo such a
work and employment for us, we shall only name three. 1. The office he has
undertaken, he is the high Priest of our profession, Heb. 3.1. And he will be a
faithful high Priest to make reconciliation, Heb. 2.17. he is a priest for
ever, Heb. 6.2. and therefore he will for ever Yea Swarez does not only think,
that Christ now makes continual intercession; but he reprehends Clichtovaeus
for affirming, that Christ, while on earth, did not always pray: for (says
he) his ministry and sufferings, did not divert his godly mind from divine
contemplations and praises, etc. yea his steep, (which seems a strange
paradox) did not hinder him, albeit some times, in a special manner, he be
said in the Scripture to pray, as going about that exercise in a humane way, by
dependence and reflection upon the imagination applicando intellectum, ut
indigentem Phantasmatibus Swar. loc, cit. lib. 1 cap. 1. Sect 7.
make intercession for the people, Heb. 7.26. He cannot offer up a sacrifice,
he is in glory and cannot now die; but he is still a priest and must be doing,
and therefore he will interceed; he lived on earth to execute the one part of
his priestly office, to offer up himself for the sins of his people; though he
did preach and pray, yet his sacrifice was the (...) of his life on earth; and
now he lives in heaven, and his main work there, is to make intercession for
us; he still executes his kingly and prophetical office, he still rules and
defends us as our king, he yet stands at the door and knocks, he is the great
prophet and instructor of his people; and, what are we? it is our honor that we
are his underlings, his ministers and servants: and therefore he will also be a
priest for ever; and since there is no other part of that office remaining now
to be executed, no other part that can sit his condition and beseem his glory,
he must interceed, and thereby answer the type. When our high priest goes in
to the holy of holies, he must bear the tribes on his heart, their names must
be engraven there, and appear for them and in their name. He will not be called
a titular priest, he will not have an empty style, if he be a priest for ever
he will ever be acting as a priest; he will not keep the name for what is
already past, there must be some present office (and that not idle and without
work) and employment, some thing to answer the word, else he would disdain it;
and thus he having while he was on earth purchased a pardon for us, our peace
and reconciliation with God, all the mercies we stand in need of, and the
immortal crown to be put on our head when we have finished our course, he will
now in heaven plead and maintain our right, and see us put in possession of
these things he has purchased to us.

2. His love, that mysterious and unconceivable love (whose Ephesians. 3.18, 19, 20.
dimensions we cannot fathom) will set him a work to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we can think or ask; he who spared not his own blood for us,
will spare no pains for promoving our happiness, his glory will not make him
forget his spouse in her rags, he must still be acting for us, he must have an
hand in every step of our happiness; as he is the author, so he must be the
finisher of it, Heb. 12.2. As he was the author to purchase, so he will be the
finisher to effect, and to plead for the accomplishment of our salvation; as he
is a faithful, so he is a merciful, high priest; he will leave no means
unessayed for procuring our reconciliation and promoving our comfort and
felicity, Heb. 2.17.

3. His sympathy, his fellow-feeling, the head in heaven is sensible, and does
complain of the pain his members on earth do suffer, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
griefs, Is. 53.3. He is, 1. a man, and as our brother he is affected with our
troubles and afflictions. But, 2. he is a man of sorrows, which he did bear for
us; he was wounded for our transgressions, and will he not be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities? v. 4, 5. And, 3. he was acquainted with grief, and
that not only, that thereby he might purchase our joy and comfort, that his
grief might be a plaster to heal all our wounds, v. 5. But also, that by that
experience, he might learn the more to sympathize and be touched with the
feeling of our sores, and might be the more fit and able to pity the tempted
and afflicted, Heb. 2.18. and, 4.15, 16. O! how does his bowels yearn toward
us in the day of our trouble? he pitieth us and cannot forbear; he must help,
he must plead and interceed for us; Yea, not only, 1. when we are following
duty, and meet with crosses in our way; But, 2. also when we are out of the
way, and are eating the fruit of our evil doings, and smarting because of our
sins: Yea and, 3. he pitieth us when we are grieving him; not only our crosses,
but also our sins do move him to compassion, and stir up his tender bowels; he
not only sympathizeth with us, while we are in the furnace, but also while we
are 2 Pet. 2.22.
wallowing in the mire. O! what a strange inference and connection must there be
between our sining and grieving of him, and his sympathizing with us and
pleading for us? and yet, the Scripture holds out, not only a connection and
compatibility of these together, but also some kind of inference and illation,
as if our sins did move and prevail with our compassionat Savior to interceed
for us; If any man sin, we have an Advocat with the Father, 1 John 2.1. Ah!
should it not rather have been said, if any man sin not, Christ will be his
Advocat, but if he sin, he who came to 1 John 3.8.
destroy the works of the devil, will not own such a one who does the devils
work? But yet, for thy comfort, O mourning sinner, its written, If any man sin,
etc. Its true, it is written that thou should not sin; these things write I
unto you that you sin not, says the Apostle, by way of preface, and to ward
off a mistake that we should not sin, is the end and design of all our rods
and mercies, of all the Scriptures and of Gods works toward us, of Christ's
death, intercession, etc. But yet, if any man sin out of ignorance, frailty,
etc. Christ pitieth them, he will not desert their cause, he will not justify
them in that, nor plead for a liberty for them to sin; but he will plead for a
pardon, and that they may be preserved from sin there after. Ah then beware
thou abuse not this mercy and rare privilege, say not we will sin that Christ
may pity us, and plead for us: its a sure sign of a graceless soul to say,
let us add sin to sin, that grace may abound: how does the Apostle abominat
such a vile inference? Romans 6.1. Though the Lord, to magnify the riches of his
free grace, may make grace abound where sin has abounded, Romans 5.20. yet if
thou will cause sin abound, because grace has abounded, it is an evidence that
grace has not, and (if thou continue in that desperate resolution) never shall
abound to thee; and though Christ will plead for sinners, yet if thou dare sin
that he may plead for thee, thou have reason to fear that thou art none of
those for whom he does, or will plead.

But you will say, if Christ's intercession be such a sure and exquisite ground
of consolation and confidence, the people of the Jews must then have been in a
sad condition, they being destitute thereof. Ans. There be two extremes which
we should here shun; the one making it begin too early; the other making it
too necessary, and laying too much weight upon it. As to the 1. Some imagine
that Christ before his incarnation did interceed, and thus as God [for then he
was not man] he must appear, and pray for his people: We will not repeat what
has been already said against that opinion, only now let us briefly view the
arguments already brought, or which we conceive may be made use of for that
strange (as it appears to us) assertion.

1. It may be objected, that we have the Mediators reverend interposing
represented to us in that parable of vine-dressers interceeding with the
master, Luke 13. beside what is holden forth by the typical services pointing
out Christ's intercession. Ans. We need not now run to that acknowledged rule,
Theologia symbolica non est argumentativa.
Symbolick Theology is not argumentative. We must not extend a parable beyond
it is scope: and it is certain, the Sea Diodati, English Divines, Dr. Hammond,
etc.
intent of this parable was nothing else but to hold out the Lords
long-suffering and patience toward that people, and the inevitable ruin of
all those who notwithstanding would continue in their unbelief and
disobedience. And as for the vine-dresser, who interceeds that the fig tree
might be spared, Quisque suae vineae cultor, Theoph. in loc.
Theophylact thinks that every man is the dresser of his own vine. Cajet. in
loc.
Cajetan will have Michael, the Archangel (who, says he, was set over the
Jews to be their Guardian) to be this vine-dresser. Others (as Cultor vinea
suus cujusque Angelus custos, Theoph. ibid.
Theophylact in his second conjecture) will have every man's proper tutelar
Angel to be this vine-dresser and intercessor; the English Divines do think the
faithful Ministers to be their vine-dressers: for, they, like 1 Cor. 3.6.
Exodus 32.31. 1 Samuel 12.23. Amos 7.2, 5.
Paul and Apollo, do plant and water the vineyard; and, l^ke Moses, Samuel and
Amos, do interceed for the people committed to their charge.

And Christ, as Cajetan thinks, is rather the Lord then the dresser of the
vineyard: But, though we would yield Christ's Intercession to be here
adumbrated, as certainly it was in several types; yet, that is so far from
concluding the point, for which it is alleged, that it does sufficiently
confute the same: For, what is typified, is not as yet exhibited; and therefore
these shadows, as useless, must evanish when we may behold the substance and
truth.

2. Object. Sympathy is a main ground of intercession: but there was sympathy
flowing from a covenant relation before the incarnation: Is. 63.9. In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, in his love, and in his pity he saved them. Ergo.
Ans. These words are spoken of the Father, the Angel of whose presence is said
to save them, and whose Spirit is said to be vexed, v. 10. as usually in
Scripture the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of the Father, so by the Angel of
Gods presence there, judicious Interpreters do understand the Mediator, the
eternal Son of God; so that the former words cannot be meant of him, according
to that appropriation of works and attributes which is frequent in the
Scriptures; albeit it be certain, that as to the thing it self, which is here
spoken of, none of the persons of the blessed Trinity must be excluded: And
therefore we Answer, 2. That this is a metaphorical and borrowed kind of
Speech, taken from the manner of men, as the Jewish Doctors (cited by the Sea
the English Divines and Dio. dati on the place.
English Divines) well observe; like unto that kind of expression in Deuteronomy.
32.10. Psalm. 17.8. Zech. 2.8. etc. And therefore sympathy in the Lord Jehovah
(as a A rev^rend late Divine whose memory is precious in this Church (whose
arguments may be abused, and drawn a greater length then they will go, or were
(a^ we may conceive) intended by the Author) does grant what we have here
alleged from him, and which of it self is most certain; and by that concession
gives us ground to interpret his assertion, as spoken rather of a symbolick
and typical, then proper and personal intercession; as may also further appear
from the several replies here made to what is objected from him, and therefore
do we now mention that judicious Divine, not that we might confute, but that we
might thus essay to vindicat his assertion.
judicious Divine, speaking to this purpose, says) does only import, 1. That
he knows the afflictions of his people. 2. That he minds help to them; and
so this kind of sympathy cannot infer intercession: otherwise all the persons
of the Trinity must be said to interceed for us. But that sympathy, which we
made the proper and immediate ground of Intercession, was that real humane and
proper Sympathy which is in the humane nature of Christ, whereby he is said to
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15.

As for Christ's delight in the habitable parts of the earth, Prove. 8.31. and
his good will to his people before the incarnation; which from that learned
Author may be alleged as a branch of the former Objection. We answer, Those
who have known this judicious man, or are but a little acquainted with his
Writings, will say, that such as would allege from him such grounds for that
assertion, do wrong themselves and their cause. For, in them is no other thing
h^ld forth, but Christ's love toward lost man, his purpose to procure their
reconciliation with God, and his readiness in due time to take on their nature,
and in it to suffer and do what may contribute for their happiness; but they
hold out no ground for his Intercession, more nor for his suffering before the
incarnation. But as he is said to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, so his blood may be said then to cry; which must be the Intercession
there meant by that Author, as may further appear from the following Objection.

3. Object. He was our Mediator before the incarnation: He was King, Priest and
Prophet; and as a Priest he must have then his judicial appearances for his
people. Ans. He was Mediator by virtue of that satisfactory sacrifice he was to
offer up for his people: God accepted his bond and set the captive at l^berty
before the term of payment came. And he was then King and Prophet, because of
that which he was once to do and suffer as a Priest: Neither did it import any
thing not beseem^ng his infinite and glorious Majesty to govern his Church as a
King, and by hi^ Word and Spirit, as a Prophet, to reveal to them the way to
salvation; but he could neither suffer nor interceed (which are the p^rte of
his pri^s^ly Office) till he was m^n. So much for v^n^^^^tion of (...)
judicious Divine, and for clearing what may be object^d ^^om him.

But, 3. and more pungently, it may be objected, that the Father says to the
Son before he assumed our nature, ask ^f me and I shall give thee, etc. Psalm.
2.8. and therefore he must either be disobedient to his Father, for he must ask
before he took Heb. 2.16.
on him the seed of Ahraham. Ans. These words are relative to Christ's ascending
into heaven. O (...) (s^^th M. Tho-Goodwin, tri. of faith from Christ's
intercession, sect. 5. chapter 8. Sic and Hilar. Theoph. Antioch. Eusebius. Amb^os.
Chrysostom. and alii (quos citat and sequitur, And. Rivet in loc.) the English
Divines Diodat.
an eminent practical Divine) So full of joy was the Fathers heart, that he had
his Son in heaven with him Whom he had begotten from everlasting; who was
lately dead, and, in a manner lost; and therefore (as it were) new begotten: I
know you will a^k me now for all you have died for, and this I promise you
before hard, before you speak a word and make any request to me, you shall ask
nothing but it shall ^e gr^^ted. Yea, the Apostle, Act. 13.33. applies the
preceding words, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. (Which may be
made use of as an objection against this interpretation) unto the time of
Christ's resurrection. For, by his resurrection from the dead he was declared to
be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4. And in Scripture things are often said
to be done when they are manifested and declared to be, according to the rule
of the Res tum demum dicuntur ficri quum manifestae sunt.
orthodox Fathers against the Arians. Yea, in one and the same verse we have
(as Rivet in loc.
Rivet well observes) both the eternal and natural generation of Christ in
these words, Thou art my Son; and the temporal manifestation of that which was
from eternity, this day (pointing out the time of his resurrection and
ascension) have I begotten thee. That is, now is it manifest (to those who have
seen and believed the manifold demonstrations of thy divine Power) that thou
art my Son whom I have begotten from all eternity, and now thou being risen
from the dead and ascended into heaven, ask what thou will and it shall be
given unto thee.

And as thus the series of the words, and the infallible interpretation of the
Apostle, do show, that this invitation, to ask, does relate to the time of his
ascension, and so to the humane nature which only died, rose, and ascended; so
also the matter of the petition: For, the heathen Gentiles which there are
promised to be given to him upon his asking, were not brought unto Christ till
after his incarnation and ministry; yea not (as to any considerable part and
number) till after his ascension; and therefore we must either say, that Christ
did ask and was not heard, or else that he did not ask till he took on him our
nature, and in it did interceed and prevail.

5. Obj. Christ was the Angel or Messenger of the covenant before he was man,
Mal. 3.1. and Joshua, his standing before this Angel while Satan did stand at
his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3.1, 2. does imply his appearing and
pleading for Joshua, this was that Angel that was sent before the people of
Israel to keep them in their way, Exodus 14.19. and, 23.20, 21. Act. 7.38. 1
Cor. 10.9. Heb. 12.25, 26. He was that Angel of the Lord that pleaded for
Jerusalem, Zech, 1.12. He it was that appeared unto Hagar, and promised to
multiply her seed, Genesis 16.7, 10, 13. He was one of the three See English
Divines Annot. on the place
Angels, which assuming an humane shape as the other two, did appear unto
Abraham, and with whom Abraham pleaded; Genesis 18. Thus we see his condescension
and appearing to his Servants, yea to Hagar that rebellious bondwoman, and did
he not then appear for them? Ans. we may not now digress to speak to that
school-debate De missione personarum divinarum and. quaestionibus annexis. Vide
Lombard. 1. sent. did. 14.15. Scotum in loc. Thom. 1. part. quaest. 43. and
scholast ad loc. imprimis Bannez ibid. and Becannur theol. Scholast. Part 1.
tract. 2. Cap. 9.
concerning the mission or sending of the persons of the blessed Trinity, their
appearing and manifesting themselves, and the appropriation of attributes and
actions to each of these inseparably united persons; only for clearing the
present case we would offer some few particulars, 1. When any one of the
persons of the glorious Trinity is said to be sent, or to appear to act, speak,
or do by any visible symbol or representation, or by a vision, or spiritual
manifestation, and that either in a transient way as to the prophets of old, or
by an habitual and permanent work, as when the Spirit does renew the heart
after its first pattern. 1. We must not imagine any separation of these
essentially united persons, that one can be present where the other two are
not; or that one can act and do what the other two does not; for they have one
nature and so the same presence, they have one power and so the same work; and
therefore that work and symbol whether sensible or spiritual, whereby one of
the persons of the Trinity does in some particular manner appear and manifest
himself, must be the effect and product of all the three, albeit for this end
and purpose that it may in some special manner and upon some particular account
represent, and have a peculiar relation unto some one of those blessed persons,
and not to the other two.

Neither, 2. must we imagine, that what is said or done in a As that in the
objection Zech. 3.
vision, or by sensible As that God did speak, walk, etc.
symbols and representations, is personally and really acted by those glorious
persons; but thereby is held forth, 1. that natural order and distinction of
the persons of the Trinity; an order in subsisting and working, but no
inequality or subjection of one person to another, sed ut personarum (says
Syntag. part. 1. Disp. 22. Sect. 11.
Tilen) sic actionum personalium ordo ac distinctio hoc pacto de signatur. 2.
Thereby is signified that Neque per missionem spiritus imperium aliquod
servile, vel ipsius personae nullis locorum spatiis circumscriptae motus
localis, sed (...) duntaxat extraordinaria effecta, aut peculiare aliquod
presentiae ipsius symbolum intelligendum est: Tilen. ibid. Sect. 10. aliud est
jus naturae, aliud (...) vo untaria disp. 21.2, Sect. 27. Sed quae subiicit
deobedientia and honor Patri a Christo exhibito, intelligenda sunt de natura
humana, quamvis fatendum sit (...) exhac dispensatione gloriam suam ad tempus
occultasse, nunquam tamen abdicasse, vel alteri dedisse: (x) of which
appropriation we purpose to speak at some greater length, part. 3. Chap, 1.
appropriation of attributes and works, which is founded upon that natural
order, and does flow from the voluntary economy and dispensation in their way
of acting and conveighing the good things in the Gospel-offer to the sons of
men.

And thus, 3. What is said of Christ his appearing and being present by some
sensible symbol, or of his intercession represented to the prophets in some
vision, does not import that for that time he did personally appear, and did
then interceed for his people, but that according to that eternal transaction
and covenant amongst the persons of the Trinity, he was in time to take on him
our nature, and in it really to act what then was represented: and thus even
then he was the Angel of the Covenant by virtue of that eternal transaction;
and accordingly his dispensations did, from time to time, answer, and in some
manner represent that paction and agreement, and adumbrat what, in due time, he
would personally do and suffer for the Elect; as his appearing, conducting and
comforting the ancient people by some sensible signs of his presence, until
the Gal. 4.4.
fullness of time came, and then he appeared in our nature personally united to
the divine, and in it did really perform what had been formerly only shaddowed
forth and typified: then he did execute the office of a Priest in all it is
parts, offering up himself in a sacrifice on earth, and then ascending into
heaven there to appear and interceed for us for ever: And thus we grant that
Christ did typically and symbolically interceed and appear under the Old
Testament, though not properly and personally. So much for discovering the
first rock.

As for the second, the judicious Thom. Goodwin, tr. of faith from Christ's
Intercession.
Mr. Goodwin seems to ascribe too much to Christ's intercession, as it is
contra distinguished from his sacrifice: we will only offer these few
particulars from that elaborat Treatise of the triumph of faith from Christ's
intercession.

1. This was (says he) so necessary a part of his priesthood, that without it
he had not been a complete Priest: for, he had then left his Office imperfect,
and had done it but by halfes, seeing the other part of it, the work of
intercession, lay still upon him to be acted in heaven. sect. 5. chap. 2. page
Edit Land. an. 1661.
(mihi) 72.

2. Yea, this part of his priesthood is, of the two, the more eminent, yea, the
top, the height of his priesthood, ibid. page 79.

3. Yea, all his priesthood would have been in-effectual if he had not acted
the part of a Priest in heavenby intercession; for, by his death he did but
begin the execution of his Office, in heaven he ends it; and if he had not
fulfilled his Office in both, the work of our salvation had not been fully
perfected; it was therefore as necessary as oblation it self, ibid. page 81.

4. Yea, so prevalent of it self it is, that we might build upon it alone, even
as much as upon his death. ibid. chap. 5. page 100.

5. The whole application of his redemption, both in justifying and saving us
first and last, has a special dependence upon this his intercession; this all
Divines do attribute unto it, calling his death medium impetrationis; that is,
the means of procurement and obtaining it for us: But his intercession medium
applicationis, the means of applying all to us. Christ purchases salvation to
us by the one, but possesses us of it by the other; the end of his death is
adeptio juris, purchasing a right unto salvation; but of intercession
procuratio ipsius salutis, the very saving us actually and putting us in
possession of heaven. ibid. chap. 3. page 85. and chap. 4. page 93.

6. Although his being a Surety holds true of all parts of his office; yet it
does in a more special way refer unto his intercession, ibid. page 96.

There be some other expressions to the same purpose here and there intermixed
all along that Treatise; but, these are the most material on which he most
insisteth. We do not condemn, but most heartily comply with, this great Divine
in his design, which was to demonstrat the prevalency of Christ's intercession,
and to hold that out as a sweet cordial to believers in all their fainting
fits, and a sovereign Catholicon to which they may recur for removing and
preventing every distemper they are subject to. O! for a heart to prize, and a
tongue to express that mystery of love, care and tenderness of our glorified
Redeemer toward his poor servants, wrestling with many trials and difficulties
in this their pugrimage. O! what bowels of sympathy and compassion are
discovered by his continual intercession for us: and all the texts cited by
this Author, and the several reasons drawn from thence, do only prove, 1. That
Christ does truly and properly interceed for us, that his intercession is
distinct from his oblation and sacrifice. 2. That his intercession must
prevail, that the Father can deny him nothing.

And therefore we shall not need to make a particular answer to the several
mis-applications of these Scriptures, for making out what they do not bear. The
intelligent reader may, at the first view, discern this to be the scope they
aim at, and that they cannot reach the length to which they are drawn by this
accurat Disputer. We shall only then in a word propound some few
considerations, which may help to discover the fallacy of his inferences.

1. Albeit there be so many grounds and reasons for the success and prevalency
of Christ's intercession, yet all of them suppose his suffering and satisfying
the justice of God, without which there was an Whether this impossibility was
moral only and hypothetical, or, absolute and physical, flowing from the nature
of God, his justice, holiness, etc. we will not now dispute.
impossibility lying in the way of the salvation and acceptance of sinners.
Christ, as our Surety, could not plead and interceed for us till he had paid a
price sufficient; till the bond was cancelled, he could not plead for the
liberty of the captive. Hence,

2. To say that we may build upon his intercession alone, seems to be
directly contrary to that word; Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood there is
no remission of sin. We will not enquire what the Lord, out of his sovereignty,
might have done, or whether or no he in his infinite wisdom (which is a depth we
cannot fathom) could have found out another way: but, supposing the eternal
appointment to save lost man by a Mediator, I cannot see how our Surety could
interpose upon another account then the satisfaction of justice, or, how
justice should be satisfied, and that just threatening accomplished, In the day
thou eatest thou shall die, Genesis 2.7. If Adam must not Both the first and
second death, and especially the last, as the most proper wages of sin, must be
here meant.
die either legally or personally, either he or his Surety in his room; and
therefore we will find our redemption and salvation so frequently ascribed to
his death and blood, that we need not name any one place; amongst many, only
look on these few, Act. 20.28. Romans 3.25. and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14, 20.
Heb. 10.19. 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Rev. 1.5. and 5.9. etc. But I know not any
one place in which our redemption is ascribed to his intercession; though it be
a most effectual mean for conveighing and putting us in possession of these
blessings which he has purchased to us by his death.

Yea, 2. To affirm that his intercession alone is sufficient, is to make
(though I know this Author will abominat such an Though it may be drawn as a
conclusion from the premises he laith down.
assertion) Christ to have died in vain. Was Christ so prodigal of his precious
blood as to lavish it out for that which some few words might have effectuated?
We must not then rob him of the honor of his death, that thereby we may extol
him in his intercession.

And then, 3. If he were not a complete Priest without it, the condition of
believers under the old Testament must have been most sad and deplorable; and
the popish Limbus patrum, that Prison, not heard of till many years after the
captives had made their escape, must have been a desirable paradise to them who
had not a complete Priest, to go between them and the devouring flames, and to
Rev. 19.15
tread the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of the Almighty God. And as
for the time of their misery, the popish Doctors must have hit right; for,
since he did not appear in heaven to interceed for us till he ascended, and if
he was not a complete Priest without this intercession, the time of his
ascension must be the And thus the popish Doctors must only have misreckoned
some few days, they ascribing this liberty to Christ's descending (as they
suppose) to hell, which was not obtained till his ascension into heaven.
day of their liberty, and enjoying that happiness which was suspended till
then.

3. We do not deny that Christ's intercession is medium applicationis, a most
effectual and always prevailing mean for obtaining to us, and putting us in
possession of all the good things he has purchased for us by his blood; but
yet, without this believers were saved of old, and he was a complete Priest
able to make their peace and reconciliation: and therefore, though his
intercession be most comfortable to us, yet, it is not of such absolute
necessity, that without it his blood would have been shed in vain; the judge of
the whole earth could not deal unjustly, he would not have kept the captives in
prison after their Though Christ, by his blood that was to be shed, and the
satisfaction he had undertaken to make, might well purchase and procure the
salvation of believers under the old Testament; yet, he cannot be said to have
interceeded for them who were saved before he assumed our nature and was in a
capacity to interceed. Intercession cannot have a thing already done and past
for its object.
ransom was paid; although he who laid down the money had not taken upon him
the person of an Advocat to plead, and of an Intercessor to request, that
justice might be done to him: but yet, it is very comfortable that our Surety
does always appear for us before the Throne; and that he lives for ever to
make intercession.

4. We cannot go along with this learned Author while he says, that Christ
was not a common person representing others in this his last work of
intercession, more nor in the first of incarnation, ibid. chap. 4. page 97.
For, if he interceed for us as our Surety, Mediator, etc. (which he grants)
then certainly as a common and public person. Neither do I see any solid
reason why we may be said to die, rise and ascend with him, (which he
affirms) and not also to interceed with him: It is true, there is some
peculiar reason why in his death, in some special manner, he may be said to
stand under the relation of our Surety, and so of a public person; because
thereby he paid our debt and satisfied divine justice, which we had wronged:
but as to the other particulars he instanceth, I can see no difference between
them and his Intercession, as to the present case; and the difference he
alleges is naught: For, (says he) this last work, viz. of Intercession, lay
not upon us to do. What, is it not our duty to interceed and pray for our
selves? but of this enough. Only I think it somewhat strange, that this Author
knowing the point of Christ's proper and Viz. As it is distinct from the cry of
his blood.
formal Intercession, to be so problematically spoken of by eminent Divines,
(though I see no reason why it should be questioned) should notwithstanding
make it so necessary a part of his Priesthood, that without it he had not been
a complete Priest, etc.

But, let none imagine, that by this our endeavor to vindicat the sufficiency
and efficacy of Christ's death, (that complete ransom for our sins, abstracting
from all other grounds of faith and consolation, which our compassionat
Savior, out of his tender bowels, has been pleased to super-add, that our joy
may be full and stable) we did purpose to call in question the truth, or to
diminish the worth and prevalency of Christ's Intercession; which is such a
sufficient abundary (as that Ibid. chapter 9. page 124.
Author speaks) of consolation to poor believers, a Ibid. chapter 5. page 89.
daily preservative and continual plaster to heal all their sins. Oh! let us
abominat such a cursed design, and thankfully prize and improve this great
privilege, that we have such a noble Advocat and Intercessor appearing in
heaven for us. O! let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that
we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

Having premised these things for guarding against extremes, and for
discovering, 1. That the Jews enjoyed not the privilege of Christ's
intercession. 2. Yet, notwithstanding they wanted nothing absolutely necessary
for their salvation and happiness; we come now to give a positive and direct
answer to the question, viz. That the believing Jews were under the same
covenant of grace which we are under, that they had the same promises, the same
crown proposed to them, and the same way to life and felicity; so that they
wanted nothing essentially requisite to their happiness; for as now there is
not, so neither was there then any other name given among men whereby they must
be saved but the name of Jesus Christ; neither now is there, or ever was there
salvation to be found any other way, Act. 4.12. He is the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, Rev. 83.8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day
and for ever, Heb. 13.8. He is the Lord which is, which was, and which is to
come, Rev. 1.8. God was (says the Apostle speaking of the time past, and of
the Jewish Church, 2 Cor. 5.19) in Christ reconciling the world unto himself.
The promise then was made and ordained in the hand of a This Media^^r was not
Moses, as some think, but he who was that rock that followed the Israelites in
the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.4. vid. Calv. in locum. albeit we dissent not from
Diodati who will have this spoken of Moses as atype of Christ, for that gloss
comes home to our point.
Mediator; Gal. 3.19. Yea in some sense they had the benefit of his
intercession; for he being then slain in the irrevocable and infallible decree
and foreknowledge of God, his blood then, though not actually shed, did cry,
and as properly as Abels after it was shed: but this (as has been shown) was
no proper intercession, and rather the cry of the sacrifice then of the Priest.
But, 2. Though Christ was a complete Priest and Savior of the Jews, yet great,
and many are the privileges of the Christian Church beyond the Jewish, in
which respect judicious Interpreters do think that the least in the kingdom of
heaven (that is to say they, under the full discovery of the Gospel mysteries)
is said to be greater then he who was one of the greatest of them that were
born of women, Mat. 11.11. and Heb. 7.22. Christ is said to be made a Surety of
a better Testament, and Heb. 8.6. to be the Mediator of a better Covenant: and
upon this special account, and by way of excellency (...) he is called the
Mediator of the new Testament, Heb. 9.15. and 12.24. And that not only because
Gospel Ordinances, are now more clear, full and spiritual, but also because of
Christ's ascension into heaven, his appearing there in our name as Gods
remembrancer for us, and (as M. Goodwin loc. cit. Chapter 3. page 88.
one speaks) the rainbow about the throne, that when the Lord looks on it,
he may Genesis 913.15.
remember (though he cannot forget) his Covenant, and Ps 78.38.
turn away his anger, and not stir up all his wrath; that our high Priest
having taken on him our nature, is touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
and therefore makes continual intercession for us. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Happy was thou, O Israel: what Nation was like unto thee who had such a
Savior; but more happy are we who have this Savior now appearing in Heaven
for us, and pleading our cause.

Obj. Christ told his Disciples, Joh. 16.26. That he would not pray for them.
And if he would not pray for his Disciples, for whom will he pray? Ans. Such a
gloss is directly contrary to his promise, Chapter 14.16. And to his practice, Chapter
17. And were it not blasphemous once to imagine, that our blessed Lord would
thus at For these Chapters, viz. the 14.15, 16, 17. hold out a continued
discourse.
one breath so palpably contradict himself? As for the sense of these words,
Joh. 16.26. Some with This is not Gerhards interpretation (...) but may be
collected from his words.
Gerhard do answer, That Christ does not simply deny that he will pray for his
Disciples, but only in some respect; he would not pray for them as enemies, and
strangers. 2. As to some particular petition, he will not now pray for their
reconciliation, and the acceptance of their persons, they being already in the
state of grace. And, 3. as to some particular end, that they may be beloved of
the Father, since the Father already loved them, not only, 1. with that eternal
love of Election; but This is rather an extension, fruit and effect of the love
of election, then a new love or new act of Gods will; for how can it be called
new to him according to whose eternal purpose and appointment it comes to
pass? all the change then is in the Object and in Gods work, and no ways in
the immutable will of God.
also, with the, 2. love of actual reconciliation, and. 3. complacency in
them. 2. Cajet* in loc.
Cajetan Ans. That Christ does not deny, that he will pray for them, but he
suppresseth that, (having already promised it) and would' not now mention it,
but would speak to another ground of their consolation, viz. the Fathers love.

3. M. Goodwin loc. cit. Chapter 9. page 119.
M. Goodwin Ans. [ that these words are the highest intimation that can be,
that he will and does pray for us: when men would most strongly intimat their
purpose of kindness they mean to do for one, they use to say, I do not say
that I love you, or that I will do this or that for you, which is as much as to
say I will surely do it, and do it to purpose.]

We will not stay to multiply Which to the number of 13. ye may read in
Gerhard. cont. Harm. Evan. Cap. 179. page 1127.
interpretations; But that with which we close (al^eit these we have brought
may also serve for clearing the words) is that of the learned Toletus in loc.
non dico vobis necesse esse etc. vid. loc.
Tolet, [ I do not say I will pray, that is, (says he) I need not to pray for
you, not that I will not pray, but that my formal intercession is not
necessary, for the love of the Father is such to you, and my death and
satisfaction such a real pleasing Sacrifice, that he will refuse you nothing ye
will ask in my name, ye must not think that my intercession is of such absolut
necessity as my suffering] Which interpretation, as it seems to be most
agreeable to the scope of the words, and for clearing what has been lately
said by In oppo^^tion to M. Goodwin.
us; so also with the like phrase upon a contrary occasion, Joh. 5.45. Do not
think that I will accuse you to the Father Ubi n^^^ simpliciter (...) gat sed
tantu^^ significat, n^n esse opus Gerhard* ubi supra
that is, I shall not need to do it, Moses and his Law will be enough to
condemn you, and though ye had never heard of me, his writtings will
sufficiently serve for your damnation; and yet elsewhere he tells them, that
this shall be their condemnation, that light is come into the world, and that
if he had not spoken unto them they had had no sin, ( viz. in comparison of
their aggravated guiltiness) and that upon this account it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment then for them, Joh. 3.19.
and 15.22. Mat. 11.22. So that not only Moses and his writings, but also Christ
and his Gospel shall accuse them; So, though I did not pray (says he) yet you
would no less then your Fathers who lived before my incarnation come speed,
though for your greater comfort, I will also interceed for you.

But you will say, what grounds of consolation can Christ's intercession afford
to us, since while he prayed for himself he was not heard? He thrice prayed
that the cup of his sufferings might pass from him; yet notwithstanding, he
was made to Rev. 19.15.
tread the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of almighty God. Ans. 1. It
were lost travel to stay to confute Apud Forb. inst. hist. theo. lib. 5. Cap.
29. S. 10, 11.
Sergius, Honorius and other Monothelits their heretical gloss, who affirm
that Christ had no more a humane and natural will then he had sin, but that he
did speak these words in our room and name. 2. Damase. lib. 4. Orthodox. fid.
Cap. 19.
Damascen (the papists great Patriach) is no less ridiculous in his conceit,
while he affirms that Christ did not truly and properly pray, but only in
appearance, show and resemblance. 3. Therefore let us a little view what these
who are more solid and judicious have offered for clearing the place.

And we will begin with Aquinas his distinctions. And thus, 1. Christ Thom. 3.
part. quaest 18. art. 5.
(says he) did will the removing of the cup of his sufferings with a natural
and sensitive will, not with a rational will, for thus he did choose it, and
thirst after it. 2. If with a rational will (since it were absurd to say that
his will had no reason) yet as led and directed by Vid Thom. 1 part. quaest.
79. art. 9. and 1.2, quaest. 74. art. 7.
inferior reason, which pondereth only humane and sensible motives, and not by
superior reason, which perpendeth spiritual and divine considerations.

3. Christ did Thom. 3. part quaest 21. art. 4.
will the cup to pass from him according to some natural and indeliberat
motion, arising from the sensual appetite, but according to his will led by
deliberat reason, he submits and says, not as I will, but as thou will.

4. Christ Thom. ibid. talis voluntas magis dicenda est velleitas quam
absolutavoluntas, quia scil. homo hoc vellet fi aliud non obfisteret.
willed the removal of that bitter cup with an ineffectuall (velleity) not with
a positive and proper will, it was rather a wishing and woulding ( viz. if the
condition were feasible) then a true willing for the present.

5. Christ Tolet in Joan. cap. 12.27.
willed that cup to pass, not absolutely and peremptorily, but only
conditionally, and upon supposition, if thus God could be honored, and man
saved; he willed not upon any Non simplicitersed secundum quid. Thom. 3. part
quaest. 21. art. 4. secundum portionem inferiorem nolait passionem voluntate ut
natura and ut libera, noluit tantum conditionaliter nonabsolute Scot. in 3.
sent did. 15. quaest: unica. Aliud est alquid velle ex hypothesi, aliud vero
simpliciter velle, Camer. resp. ad epist. page 768.
terms, and all things being considered, but only in some respect.

But Becan. theol. seb. part. 3. tom. 2. cap. 17. quaest. 3.
Mart. Becan takes another way for clearing the difficulty [ It is (says he)
one thing to pray, another thing to propound a simple and ineffectuall desire,
thus Christ did not pray while he said, let this cup pass from me, but did
express his natural desire, which he did restrain while he subjoyned not as I
will, but as thou wilt] And he gives three reasons for this interpretation: 1.
Because we may not offer up our indeliberat and in-efficacious desires to God
prayer-wayes, but we must perpend what we ask, and ponder our words; we must
not take things as they appear at the first view, but we must consider them as
circumstantiated, and as relative to that end for which they are appointed of
God. 2. We must pray in faith and confidence to be heard; but, such a desire
could not be put up in faith: For, Christ knew that he was to drink that cup,
and therefore he knew as well that his desire was not to be granted, As he who
said, O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos. 3. If Christ did pray that
the cup might paste from him, he must at once pray for both parts of the
contradiction; for, he presently adds, not my will, to have this cup pass,
but thine, that I may drink it, be done: and then he concludes thus, Transeat
a me calix iste, non fuit oration, sed explicatio naturalis affectus quo Christi
humanitas abhorrebat a morte.

To which may be added a fourth reason, such a desire as is contrary, 1. to
promise, covenant and transaction. 2. To office and calling. 3. To the glory of
God's truth and mercy expressed in the Word. 4. To prophecies of old, and the
then more fully revealed Doctrine of the Gospel. And, 5. To the salvation of
man; could not be put up prayer-wayes to God by our faithful high Priest and
compassionat Savior; But that desire to have the cup of his sufferings to
pass from him, had been thus contrary to, etc.

5. Christ did most earnestly thirst after this cup. With Its an Hebrew manner
of Speech, expressing his carnest and longing desire to fulfill the will of his
Father, etc. English Divines on the place: Nam qui vult antecedens, vult etiam
consequens.
desire he desired it, Luke 22.15. He was, as it were, straightened and pained
till he drank it, such a longing desire had he after it, Luke 12.50. And how
resolutely does he encounter and meet it. Mat. 26.46. John 18.4. And would he
then pray contrary to the desire of his own heart, and thus act contrary to
what he prayed for?

6. Whatever men who know not the mind of God, nor what is good and expedient,
hic and nunc, may do or pray in reference to their sufferings; yet, to say,
that our blessed Lord, who knew that he must Luke 24.26.
suffer and then enter into his glory, would pray against his suffering, is not
very probable.

7. Will any wise man ask a thing upon a condition that he knows to be
impossible? and is it not all one as to ask a thing that is in it self
impossible? It were no less ridiculous to desire that we might flee if we had
wings, then to desire wings whereby we may flee. And if any man, to show his
affection to such a thing, did make use of such words as might import a present
desire; yet, there is none but would allow to him so much candor, as to
interpret his words as expressing what he would do, ( viz. if the condition
were placed or possible at least) and would not think him to be so foolish as
to ask upon a condition he knows to be impossible.

Yea, 8. Supposing that both these Non fuisse in Christo contrarietatem
voluntatum conatur Thom. ostendere 3. part. quaest. 18. art. 6. sed ratio quam
adfert frivolaest, juxtaeam enim sequitur non esse contrarietatem voluntatum in
nobis; rectius Dionys. Carthus. hune nodum solvit in 3. sent. did. 17. quaest.
1. quem vide.
desires were expressed by way of prayer and petition, yet, it may appear from
what we are to say, part 4. concerning the sense of conditional petitions, that
Christ did truly and properly desire that he might drink that cup, and that he
did not either desire or pray that that cup might pass from him: and thus we
may conceive the meaning of the words to be this, [ O, Father, if it were
possible, (if it might stand with thy glory and the salvation of man, for he is
not speaking in reference to Gods power, or of the possibility of the thing
simply considered) I woulda desire to be freed from this cup, which innocent
nature, according to it is innate propension and sinless appetite after
self-being and preservation, so much abhors, and must needs abominat: But
yet, since I know that it is not thus possible, but that thy glory, in the
salvation of man, does call for my suffering, this is it that I do desire and
do pray for, that thy will may be done, and that I may drink this bitter cup]
And can we imagine that the thoughts and desires of Christ's heart were not the
same then which they were a little after? Ioh. 18.11. O! How pathetically there
does he reject such a desire? For, says he, the cup which my Father, has
given me, shall I not drink it? And how does he abominat such a desire flowing
from Peter? and how smartly does he take him up? Get thee behind me, Satan,
Mat. 16.22, 23. And can we think that Christ would harbor such a Musculus in
Joh. 12.27. Petitionem carnis Dominus ipse confestim corrigit, servato me exbac
hora, est vox carnis, non spiritus. Calvin, in loc. dicit, Christum votum illud
subito sibielapsum, statimcorrigere and castigare. Nolo cum Bellarm, haec verba
nimium exagitare, modus tamen loquendi mihi non placet, quamvis Paraeus
pharmacum adhibeat distinguendo inter correctionem Logitam, Ethicam, and
Rhetoricam, vid. Par. in Mat. 26. and Udalricum apud Dion. Carthus. loc. cit.
ubi etiam de (...) and (...) Christi.
desire in himself, and offer it up in prayer, which in Peter he calls
Satan's motion? But, you will say, does not Christ in his prayer propound this
desire? Ans. Every thing spoken in Prayer is not asked; neither does it belong
to the matter and object of petition, but may be brought by way of narration,
meditation, motive, etc.

9. What if it were said, that the first words of this prayer (as that of the
afflicted, Ps. 102. from v, 3. to 12.) do rather contain a complaint then a
petition? as if he had said, [O Father, how does nature abhor this cup? and if
I would give way to it is complaint, and did not reflect on the glorious ends of
my suffering, I could not but desire that this cup might pass from me; but, I
will not entertain such a motion; for, I heartily acquiesce in thy will and
holy appointment: and this is it that I do indeed desire and pray for, that thy
will may be done.]

10. But, we have too long digressed in speaking to the matter of this prayer
by way of enquiry; (for, we purpose not, we need not now peremptorily
determine) let us only add some two or three words. 1. Some may perhaps think,
that Christ, looking upon his sufferings in themselves, and abstractively
without reference to the end, he could not but Desiderium voluntaetis naturalis
non deliberativae, and dici poterit (...) vid. hanc did. apud Tho. 3. part
quast. 181. art. 3.
abhor them; and why might he not give way to such an apprehension, that the
bitterness thereof might be a part of his suffering? and thus put up a
conditional prayer against them; not that absolutely, all things being
considered; or relatively, as they were a mean to such a glorious end, he did
not desire them: but merely to show the reality and greatness of his sufferings
in themselves, and to leave an Ratio quae petitionem proposuit nolebat ut boc
impleretur, sed ad instructionem nostram volebat demonstrare nobis suam
voluntatem naturalem, and motum sensualitatis quem sicut hom o habebat, Thom.
3. part. quaest. 21. art. 4. ad 1.
example to us how we should carry under our trials, viz. that though we may be
sensible of them, and may complain of them; yet, with submission and a perfect
resignation of our selves to Gods will and disposing: especially since it is
certain, that Christ did many things for to be our copy and example. Thus he
did Not only to be au evidence that he was sent of God, and did that miracle in
his strength: but also to teach the Apostlesto praise God when he wrought any
miracle by them.
praise God, Ioh. 11.41, 42. and why might he not also upon this account here
pray to God?

2. (says Gerhard harm de pas. cap. 2. page (mihi) 107, Christi voluntasvel
refertur circa se, velsupra se, etc.
Gerhard) Christ's will did either look to what was about him, viz. the wrath of
an angry Judge, his bitter sufferings, etc. And thus he desires, that the cup
might pass from him; Or, 2. He did look to the counsel of his Father and the
fruit of his sufferings, and thus he submits.

3. Others may think that Christ did not simply deprecat the cup, but that it
might quickly pass; ut post breve certamen (as Calv. in Heb. 5.7. Vid.
conjecturam Hilarii apud Lombard. 3. sent. did. 17. and Thom. 3. part. quaest.
21. art. 4, ad 1. Origenis, Ambros. Hieron. and Basilii apud Gerhard, har. de
pas. cap. 2.
Calvin speaks) triumphum ageret.

4. Some may conceive, that by the cup he did not understand the cup of his
bodily and sensible sufferings, but the spiritual cup of desertion; of which
also he complained on the cross, while he cried out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? and though he did not simply pray against all soul-trouble,
as knowing that to be a necessary part of our ransom; yet, might he not pray
against the extremity of it? and that some measure and degree of it might be
withheld? etc.

But whatever was the object of Christ's prayer, we need not doubt of it is
acceptance and success; I know thou always hear me, Ioh. 11.42. And the
Apostle, speaking indefinitly of the prayers which he offered up in the days
of his flesh, but more especially of his prayers in the time of his suffering,
testifies that he was Quod volebat obtinuit ut e mortis doloribus victor
emergeret, Calv. in Heb. 5.7.(...) exsuo mem Calvin. pro sua pietate Castaliv,
pro reverentia E^asm. See Calvin and Beza their interpretation defended against
the Rhemists, by Dr. Fulk on the place; ex metu (ait Beza in loc.) suisse
confirmatum ut omnem pavorem mortis deposuerit, vid. loc.
heard, there was none of his prayers that were rejected, Heb. 5.7.

2. There is none can imagine that Christ did Neque tamen diel potest filius a
Patre non penitus exauditus ut qui liberationem a morte non nisi ^^^ita
condition petierit, Beza ibid.
absolutely pray that that cup might pass from him, and the condition (upon
which he may be said to have asked) not being placed, he cannot be said to be
refused, since he only upon that condition did ask.

And, 3. If these words, let this cup pass, contain a prayer, yet, it is none
of his See this distinction (though applied to another purpose) brought by
Doctor Twisse against Arminius vind. lib. 1, part. 2 sect. 23. page 23. and at
length prosecuted against Corvin. digr, 7. page 237. alia est oration instituta
a Christo ex officio bomin is privati, alia ex officio Mediatoris, etc.
mediatory prayers put up for his ransomed ones: and therefore, though we did
suppose that Christ was not heard in that which he asked, 1. Conditionally. 3.
For himself. Yet, there were no ground to fear that what he asks absolutely
and to others by virtue of his own purchase, that he will, or can, be refused.

You will say, did not Christ thus pray for them who crucified him? Luke 23.34.
He prayed that the Father would forgive them, and yet how few of them were
pardoned and converted? Ans. 1. with Thom: 3. part. quaest. 21. art. 4. ad 2.
Dominus oravit pro his solum qui erant praedestinati. Non oravit Christus
promiscue pro omnibus etc. Calv. in loc.
Thomas, that Christ did not pray for all those who had a hand in his death,
but only for the Elect amongst them. 2. Though we would That such a supposition
is not improbable shall appear Chapter 7. Sect. 3.
suppose that our blessed Lord while he was breathing out his last words did
put up a Prayer for his cruel enemies, yet it will not follow that he can be
denied any thing which as Mediator he asks for his people, for whom he shed his
blood. Its certain Christ did many things for our example, and to be a pattern
for us, and if thus he prayed for all his persecutors that prayer was not
Mediatory but exemplar; and that Christ in his suffering did so carry as to
leave us an example, the Apostle testifies, 1 Pet. 2.21. He then left us an
example that we should follow his steps. And accordingly the saints have looked
on this copy, Stephen Act. 7.60. and James the brother of our Lord; who (as
Hierom lib. de scriptor^ eccbesiaft.
Jerome witnesses) when he was cast from the pinnacle of the temple did pray for
pardon to the murderers, saying, Lord, forgive them for they know not what
they do.

We will not multiply trifling objections, but that which seems mainly to
prevail with some Quos citat and sequitur. Becan. loc. cit. quaest. 4.
Schoolmen is, because that all power in heaven and in earth, is given unto
him, Mat. 28. ver. 18. Wherefore should he then in the exercise of that power
run to the Father, and by prayer ask, as it were, a new license? There is no
man who of himself may not uti sua potestate, use the power that is put in his
hands: Hence they conclude that Christ does not truly, expressly and properly
pray, but only improperly, and in some sense [ virtualiter and interpretative]
Ans. The Lord does not so give, and communicate power and authority to any
creature, yea not to the man Christ Jesus, as one creature gives to another,
for he still retains, and keeps his own propriety and right, and must
therefore be acknowledged to be the principal owner and Lord; and therefore it
cannot derogate from Christ's gift, that in the exercise of his power, he, by
prayer and intercession, acknowledge his dependence on the Father; and why may
he not observe the same method in governing, whereby he came to, and was put in
possession of the government? Though he was a son and heir, yet he must ask a
possession, Ps. 2. ver. 7, 8, Why may not he who did ask before he got, also
ask before he give and let out? and that it is so, he has once and again told
us for our comfort; and this objection cannot prove the contrary, but rather
holds out a notable ground of encouragement to all those who run unto this our
faithful and merciful high Priest, who ever lives to make intercession; that
since he has such moyen in heaven, since all power is put in his hands,
therefore will nothing be denied to him, nor to them who ask in his name,
according to that sweet and ample promise, Joh. 14.13, 14. etc.

So much for the first branch of this Section. As to the other: It were a
conceit too ridiculous, if any would collect from these figurative invitations
to the heavens and earth to praise God, that they were capable of such an
exercise, that they could praise God, or call upon him; but there are one or
two of these grounds for such expressions, when they occur in the Scriptures.

1. The heavens and earth with all their furniture, may be said to declare the
glory of God, be cause the beholding and contemplating of them may, and should
be an occasion, inviting and exciting man to his duty to admire and proclaim
the power, wisdom and glory of their maker; and thus objectively and
occasionally, these inanimate creatures may be said to praise God.

2. Because that order, beauty perfection which they have O quot sunc surdi qui
non audiunt vocem, quam insensibilia elementa audiverunt; audivit sol, and
obscuratus est; lapis, and divisus est; tetra, and tremuit; peccator, and non
com punctus est. Gerhard harm. de pas. cap. 14. page (mihi) 660.
kept unto this day (not having as yet lost their first luster they had when
they came from the press) may shame degene rate man, and cast him in the dust
to confess, that any of these base creatures, which God has put under his
feet, if it were capable of reason and to converse with God, would be more fit
to draw nigh to him and be employed in such an heavenly employment then sinful
men, who have lost Gods image and all their native beauty and ornaments; who
have so exceedingly polluted themselves, and who take such pleasure to wallow
in the mire, and who dare rebel against their Maker, to whom the senseless
creatures have always been obedient.

3. Since God, out of his general bounty, and as the great Lord of heaven and
earth, does provide for all their Host, and does answer and satisfy the
natural appetite of inanimate creatures, and the sensitive desire of the
brutes; these may be said in their own way, and according to their capacity to
call upon God, viz. 1. By the voice of subordination and subjection unto, and
dependence upon, him. 2. By the voice of natural exigence, and of want and
indigence: Thus, Ps. 104. 27. and 145. 15. the eyes of all things are said to
wait upon him, that he may give them their meat in due season; and ver. 21. the
Lions particularly are named, and those unruly proud beasts are said to stoop,
and seek their meat from him; and then ver. 10. all his works are said to
praise him, who is good to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works.

4. Such a glorious employment may be ascribed to these creatures not
absolutely, but hypothetically, and by way of supposition; not that they are
capable of such an exercise, but if they could, if they were fit to be thus
employed, its their duty to which they are infinitely engaged, and it would be
their happiness to be thus exercised; though we Alas! who have the honor to be
called to such a glorious work, do undervalue, and slight this great privilege.

Sect. 2. Who once were, but now are not capable of, nor called to offer up
this spiritual Sacrifice?
Whether the Angels and Saints in glory do pray; and whether the devils and
damned, may pray and call upon God?
That Angels and Men while viators, and before they were stated into an
unalterable condition, might have offered up their desires to God, and so were
capable of, and fit to be employed in this spiritual exercise, will not, I
think, be denied by any; and it is no less certain that devils, and the 1 Pet.
3.19.
spirits in prison, the souls of the damned now in torment dare not, they may
not now look up to God, they dare not now draw nigh to him who is a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire to them, they will not worship him and present their
supplications to him, and though they were able and willing, it were to no
purpose, God would not accept of them who have let the acceptable time pass
away: It is to no purpose to supplicate the Judge after the sentence is
pronounced.

But it is more dubious whether or not good Angels, and the Heb. 12.23.
spirits of just men made perfect do pray, that there is no unfitness in the
thing, is granted on all hands; but the question is, whether now de facto, they
are thus employed, or if all their work be to behold, enjoy, admire and praise
him who has put an incorruptible 1 Cor. 9.25.
crown upon their heads. 2. If the Church triumphant does in the general pray
for the Church militant, that God would preserve them from the rage, and malice
of devils and men, that he would comfort, and strengthen them under all their
trials and temptations. 3. If also in particular, such and such Saints, do pray
for such and such mercies, to such and such particular persons.

As for the two first branches of the question, orthodox Divines do not deny,
that the Angels and Saints in glory do, 1. pray, and 2. in the general, offer
up their desires for their brethren, while they are standing in the open field
exposed to the violence of so many and potent enemies, that the Lord would
pity, uphold and strengthen them; albeit they call to Papists for some evidence
from Scripture, before they determine that as a point of faith and indubitable
truth. Hence the learned Dan. Chamier panst. tom. 2. lib. 8. cap. 3, 4.
Chamier does bring all the arguments alleged by Papists unto the trial, and
has discovered their weakness; yet not denying, but on the contrary granting
that there is much P. Martyr grants that they desire the good of the Elect: but
he doubts if they offer up these desires prayer-wayes to God Quanquam ego
facile admisero sanctos in patria votis ardentissimis salutem electorum optare,
non tamen ausim dicere cos pro illis orare, praesertim cum scriptura id nusquam
doceat. loc. com. cl. 3. loc. 13. sect. 16.
probability in the thing; only he does Cham. loc. cit. cap. 5, 6, 7, 8.
deny that the Saints in glory do know our particular exigences and straits,
and that peculiarly they pray for such and such mercies to such and such
persons: But of this more when we come to speak against our invocating of, and
praying unto them.

But it may be asked, whether the souls in glory do now pray for any thing to
themselves? And here Tho. 2.2. quaest. 83. art. 11. ad 1. sanctis in patria
nihil deest beatitudinis nisi gloria corporis pro qua crant,
Thomas speaks more sparingly then the later Papists, affirming that they only
pray for the resurrection and glory of their bodies, since they stand in need
of no other thing to complete their happiness: But Al. Apud Swar. in 2.2,
tract, 4. lib. 1. de or cop. 11. Sect. 9.
Alensis will have them, not only to pray for what they want, but also for what
they have, that their happiness may be continued with them. And the common
opinion amongst them, though it be not so gross, yet it has a most fabulous
foundation, viz. that the Vid. Swar. loc, cit. Sect. 11.
Saints in glory, as to the measure, degree and increase of their happiness,
are yet, as it were, on the way, and are subject to some mutation, and thus are
capable of a farther measure of happiness which they do pray for, and for all
the means whereby this their accidental happiness (as they call it) may be
promoved.

We will not digress to confute that conceit, and to show that after Heb. 9.27.
Eccles. 11.3. 1 Cor. 9.24.25. 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. Romans 2, 6. etc. Joh. 9.4.
death we are judged, and stated into an unalterable condition, that the tree
must ly as, and where, it falls, that this day of our life is the time we
have to run the race, to fight the good fight, and that with our days we must
finish our course, that we must be judged according to the deeds done in the
body, after the night of death comes, no man can work any more; the long day
of eternity is for wearing, and not for purchasing the crown, or any pearl to
be added to it: And why should I prove what the Lord by a voice from heaven
has attested, that these who die in the Lord are blessed, and that their works
done on earth do follow them? but in heaven they rest from their labors, Rev.
13.14. I did think that heaven was our home and Heb. 4.9, 10.
resting place; and if after the Saints be come thither, they be yet in via, I
would ask when they shall come to their journeys end? For I see no reason why
unto all eternity they may not always be panting after, and endeavoring for
some new addition to their happiness (according to their principles who plead
for this accidental felicity, to which they ascribe so great a latitude) for,
if after the crown is put on their head, it be liable to so many changes, I
know not when it wall be so fixed, that it will suffer no new alteration and
addition: If the particular Quod enim in die judicii futurum est omnibus, hoc
in singulis die mortis impletur. Hieronym. in Joel. cap. 2.
judgment after death does not state us into an unchangable condition, why
should the general Judgment do it?

2. As for Alensis his Yet Medina his conceit is more gross, who affirms
that neither Gods Word nor works, can be a ground of confidence. Deus
potestatem suam non alligavit Scripturis and promissis quae in Scriptura
continentur. Jo. Med. cod de orat. quaest 6. But of this more part 2. and part
4. where we shall hear Mendoza (though a Papist) blush at such abominable
doctrine.
conjecture, it does suppose that the Saints shall never be secure of their
happiness which they enjoy, and that we shall be still under the Ordinances;
and that we must use the means after we have attained the end, that the state
of glory is alterable, and the sentence of the great Judge revocable.

3. As to Thomas his opinion, it is more probable; but the souls in glory,
being so fully satisfied with the beatifieal vision and fruition of God, they
can have no anxiety, fear, unquietness, or dissatisfaction with their present
condition; and though their bodies be in the dust, and they may be said to long
for the consummation of their happiness, in the rising again of their bodies,
and their partaking (according to their capacity) of the Crown of felicity; yet
since they are sure that the day of Coronation (when both soul and body, being
united, shall be filled with glory) is approaching, it may be questioned,
whether or not they pour out these longings and desires prayer-wayes to God?
For they being now above Ordinances, and faith being changed into vision, and
hope into fruition, it seems most agreeable to that state, that prayers also
should be changed into continual praises.

As for that place, Rev. 6.9, 10. which is mainly urged for their praying for
the consummation of their happiness, (albeit the prayer there mentioned, is
intended against their persecutors; and only in the return made, ver. 11. there
is a word which may aim at the Resurrection, which though it be there promised
by God, yet it was not asked by them; and it is mentioned there rather to design
the period of time, and date of the return of their prayer, then as a part of
it.) I do not deny that some of our As Diodat. on the place, and Seb. Mayer
apud Marlorat. in loc. etc. But M. Thomas Goodwin loc. cit. sect, 5. chapter 7.
page 109. speaks most expressly, affirming that this is not spoken
metaphorically of them, but truly done by them, that not only their blood, but
themselves did cry.
Divines do seem to say, that it is a proper prayer; yet we rather think with
Tironius (whom Ribera on that place cites, and though a Papist does not
reject) that the souls of them who were slain for the Word, are there said to
cry for vengeance on persecutors; not that they did truly, and properly pour
out any such complaint against them, unto whom, while on earth they prayed for
mercy and pardon, but that their sufferings and their blood (like Heb. 21.24.
Thus also the English Divines, and Dr. Hamond interpret the place; and Mr.
Durham. and Da. Paraeus, grant that here is an allusion to the cry of Abels
blood. Heb. 12.24.
Abels) did cry against ^^e murderers, and such as succeeded to them in their
cruelty and persecution.

As for the souls in hell, they are to come to their (as it is said of Judas,
Act. 1.25. that he went to his) own place; that place of torment, of weeping
and gnashing of teeth; that place of despair, cursing and blasphemy (and so
cannot be a place of hope, supplication and prayer) they know how false that
fancy is, which commonly is ascribed to Mr. Rosse(...) sect. 7. quaest. 22.
page (mihi) 202. a Castro adver. haer. lib. 8. de inf. 2. haer. page (mihi)
620. August. de haeres. cap. 43. But its though that Origens writings have been
miser ably corrupted by heretics.
Origin; and that they shall never come out of that prison until they have
Luke 12.59. Mat. 5.26.
paid the very last farthing; and they not being solvendo, and never able to
satisfy for the least offense (but must still contract new debt) therefore can
conceive no ground of hope that ever they shall escape; and thus in despair
they continually belch out cursings and blasphemies.

We do indeed read of a conference between a rich man in hell, and Abraham,
Luke 16.24. etc. Where Dives bemoaneth his sad condition unto Abraham, but dare
not look up to God and present his supplications unto him: But it was for no
purpose to him to run to the empty Cistern, after the fountain was stopped; its
folly to run to the Saints for help, when the Lord himself does hide his face.
And the scope of this parable (so its conceived to be rather then a History) is
to show how hopeless and remediless the condition of the damned is, and that
they need not look either to God or man, for help and relief.

You will say, Obj.
Is it not their duty to call upon God? are they not as his creatures obliged
to worship him? Ans.
Their prison and bonds, cannot discharge them of that debt. Ans. Every part of
immediate worship, should rather be considered as the creatures privilege then
duty; though Subjects must wait upon their King, yet they may not approach the
Throne without a call; Whosoever, whether man or woman, did thus come unto
Ahasuerus into the inner Court, he must die, none was to be spared but he to
whom the King held forth the golden Scepter, Esth. 4.11. And now the damned are
Luke 3.17.
chaffs, and God to them is a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire, and he has told them he will never stretch forth the golden
Scepter to them; and therefore they may not, they dare not draw nigh to him,
they have lost that privilege, and prayer can be no more a mean to them of
good, whatever may be said of it under some subtle abstraction, and the naked
consideration of it as a duty, which they little mind, or regard; and therefore
the very thoughts of a communion with God, and drawing nigh to him in any
Ordinance, must be a torment and abhorring unto them; and though they may not,
yet it leaves not off to be their sin, that they do not draw nigh to God,
because through their own fault they have brought upon themselves that cursed
incapacity, which now is Peccatum and paena peccati.
both their sin and their misery.

You will say, did not the devil pray to God, Obj.
and ask a license to plague Job; Job 1.11. and 2.5. And did not the devils
beseech Christ to suffer them to enter into the herd of Swine? Ans.
Mat. 8.31. Ans. Its one thing to Petitio est quid communius and quas^ genus
precationis, unde recte Swarez loc. cit. lib. 1. cap 2. sect. 10 In hac vero
materia (inquit) oration sumitur pro specie quadam perfectissimae petitionis
quae religiosa fit and ad cultum Dei pertineat, and ideo per petitionem tanquam
per genus definitur.
ask from God, another thing to pray unto him; though he who prays must ask,
yet every sort of asking is not a prayer, unless it be a religious asking, by
way of adoration and worship; it is a religious offering up of our desires to
God, as a part of that homage and service we owe to him, and that thereby he
might be glorified: But Satan did not thus ask from God, whose worship and
service he abhors, and whom in all his ways he labors to dishonor: and
therefore he cannot be said to pray unto him, whatever he may ask from him.
Though Papists dare Cum Thom. 2.2. quaest 83. art. 3.
dispute, yet none of them are so impudent, as to deny that Oration est actus
Religionis, and that it does import a religious adoration of God.

If you enquire how Satan dare ask any thing of God, whom he labors to
dishonor in all his ways? Ans. Though Satan be already sentenced, and sent
to prison; yet that sentence will not be fully executed, as to his torment and
confinement, till the great and general Judgment; and therefore, though now he
be in everlasting chains of darkness, yet he is said to be reserved unto the
Judgment of the great day, Jud. ver. 8. And therefore during this time of hard
reprivall, some links of this chain are now and then loosed, and this Rev.
20.7, 3.
prisoner is permitted to ascend out of the bottomless pit, as an executioner
of Gods wrath, to deceive, ensnare, and plague a wicked, secure and rebellious
world; and he thirsting after man's ruin and misery, and the dishonor of God,
may be permitted to ask a license to plague sinners, and to chastise the godly
(though he intend their ruin). And the Lord in wrath to him and the vessels of
wrath, and for the trial of his servants, may give to him, as his Lictor and
Officer a commission, and grant his desire, and yet make his work become a Some
think that Satan's torment shall be the greater the more be brings to hell;
and thus in some respect they are yet Viators, and are reserved unto an
additional sentence.
snare to himself, and in that great day reckon with him for all his snares and
temptations laid before the sons of men.

O! ye who are yet in the land of the living, and under the use of the means;
when ye consider the case of the devils and damned, praise God that your case
is not as hopeless and irrecoverable; as theirs, that the door is not yet shut
upon you, that ye may draw nigh to God; that the King is yet on the Throne of
mercy, stretching out the golden Scepter unto you, so that you need not fear to
approach and present your supplications unto him: O! Be of good courage (may I
say as they unto blind Bartimeus, Mark 10.26.) rise, he calls thee, and if
thou answer his call, he will not, he cannot in Joh. 6.37.
any ways reject thee. O! But take heed that thou mispend not and squander
away the market day: What know thou O man! how soon thy glass may be
turned? it may now be the evening of thy day; O! then run, that night surprise
thee not: O! run to the King for a pardon before this short day of thy
reprivall be past. I have read of one, who being asked why he prayed so much; O
said he, I must die; O! remember this, all ye that forget God, that forget your
selves, and do not consider what ye have lying at the stake, if you do not
present your supplications to the King, while he holds forth the golden Scepter
unto you; if thou make not thy peace with him whom thou have provoked, while
thou art in the way, thou will be sent to the prison, from which there is no
out-coming; Mat. 5.25, 26. Oh! draw nigh to God in time, and consider your
ways before he come against you as an enemy to tear you in pieces, when there
will be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22.15, Though ye would then cry to him,
it would be to no purpose; he will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind, Prove, 1.26,
27. Though thou would howl to God to all eternity, though streams of tears;
yea, though of blood should continually drop from thine eyes, it should do thee
no good. O! that ye Luke 19.42.
knew in this your day, the things that belong to your peace, before they be
hid from your eyes; this is the acceptable day, this is your day of prayer, and
the day of Gods hearing; come then with confidence unto the throne of grace,
and he will give you an answer of peace.

Sect. 3. To whom is the Golden Scepter stretched forth whether the unconverted
should pray, etc.
IN the description of this solemn performance. Chapter 3. Its said to be an
offering up of Our desires i. e, the desires of us Viators.
our desires to God: all we who are on our journey and traveling toward our
eternal home, who have so many wants and are exposed to so many trials, are
called to look up to God, and present our requests unto him; so that it may be
called the pilgrims pass, scrip and provision: this sweet duty does ly upon
all who are yet in the land of the living, and it is our privilege and
happiness that we may thus look up to God for a supply of all our wants, that
so long as we are on our journey we have such a kind Master and provisor, who
will not deny us any thing that we shall ask of him.

But while we say that prayer is the pilgrims talent, wherewith he can only
trade in time: though, for time and eternity, for this life and that which is
to come, we do not deny Christ's intercession: for though our blessed redeemer
be entered into the promised land, yet his people and servants are sojourning
in the wilderness, and as our surety and head he appears in heaven for us,
and though he has no personal wants which he can present to the Father, yet
the head in Glory pitieth and compassionateth his suffering members; and thus
being touched with the feeling of their wants and infirmities he pleads their
cause, and makes continual intercession for them. We will not now add any
thing to what has been said Where having fallen upon that sweet subject we
would not make an interruption until we had spoken what we conceived necessary
for opening up of that question, albeit according to the rules of method, much
of that matter did belong to this place.
Sect. 1. having spoken of that subject there at so great length; only with
Petrus (e) Tarantasius, we may Christus secundum quod Deus orare non potuit,
quia aequalis est patri, secundum quod homo consideratur dupliciter, 1. ut
comprehensor, sic ei 0182 0 competit orare pro aliis non prose, quia non
indigebat. 2. ut Viator, sic competebat ei orare pro aliis et prose: omnis
namque oration est pro indigentia quadam supplenda Hae^ Petrus de Tarantasia
apud Dionys. Cartbus. in, 3. sent. did. 17. quaest. 2.
here observe, that while Christ was a Viator, and till he finished his course
on earth and entered into his glory; he prayed not only for others, but also
for himself; but now while he is a comprehensor and does sit at the right hand
of God, clothed with honor and majesty, and is put in possession of so much
felicity as the humane nature is capable of, and thus standing in need of
nothing for himself, he can no more pray for himself, but only for his ransomed
ones, who in this their pilgrimage are laboring under so much weakness and
infirmities, and who are lying under so many burdens and wants.

But to speak of us mortals, who are traveling to eternity, and have this
price put in our hands, and this help for our journey, there be here two sorts
of persons (as in the former Sections) upon whom this duty does ly; 1. The
godly; 2. The wicked. As for the first, it will not be denied that Gods
children have an Ephesians, 2.18. Heb. 4.16. Philip. 4.6. Jam. 5.16. Isa. 45.19. Mat.
7.7. Ioh. 14.13.
access to their Father, purchased to them by the blood of Christ, that they
may come boldly unto the Throne of grace; that they may obtain mercy and find
grace to help in time of need; that in every thing they should let their
requests be made known unto God; that the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much; that the seed of Jacob do never seek his face in
vain; if such knock, he will open; if they seek, they shall find; and
whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be given them. And there needs be no more
question concerning the wicked, Object. Answer.
were it not that Antinomians Object, If such would draw nigh to God in prayer
or any other Ordinance they would the more provoke him to wrath, their prayer
being an abomination unto him, Prove. 28.9. And what could such chafe expect,
but that they should be burnt up when they approach to him who is a consuming
fire? Heb. 12.29. Ans. Its a sad thing to consider how far Satan (transforming
himself into an Angel of light) has prevailed with some eminent Professors,
who laying a great claim to holiness and Gospel-liberty under that vizard,
have opened a door to all looseness and profanity: thus these grand preachers
of free grace (I mean Antinomian seducers) as they cast off themselves all See
Edwards Gangrana in the catologue of ^rrors, part. 1. page (mihi) 21.26, 27,
error 66, 132, 137 Pagits heresiography from 109. Al. Rosse his (...) Sect. 12.
quaest. 4.1
cords and bonds, calling it a legal course to subject themselves to the holy
Law of God, or to look on it as a rule obliging them to conform their actions
unto it; so they would exempt the wicked from their duty; telling such that
nothing can, or ought to be, done by them for fitting and preparing them to
believe and embrace Christ.

And thus they have made all the world, at once Out laws; and happy must the
world now at length become, when there is no such thing in it as sin: Which
will of necessity flow from these principles; for where there is no Law,
obliging the sons of men to conformity and obedience, there can be no sin; sin
being nothing else but the transgression of the law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. But they tell
us, that now under the Gospel there is no such thing as a Law obliging any man
to obey it; yea, some have come that length of impudence, as to Ephesians. Pagit loc.
cit. page 106, 107. Al. Rosse. loc. cit.
affirm, that Christians are not only free from the mandatory power of the Law,
but that it is blasphemous in Divinity, and monstrous in Nature to make the Law
a rule of life. Thus one of them in the Pulpit cried, Away with the Law which
cuts off a man's legs, and then bids him walk: And thus not only the godly, but
also the wicked are become According to their assertion, that neither good
works profit unto salvation, nor can ill works do any hurt. Sec. Ephesians. Pagit.
loc cit.
Libertines, yea, and innocent and sinlesse creatures. 1. The godly, because
they not being under the Law, but under grace and the immediate direction of the
Spirit, they cannot be said to transgress the Law. 2. Neither will the wicked
be found guilty; for they, not being obliged to do any thing, or to use the
means for obtaining of grace, nor to mourn for sin, repent, pray, etc. they
cannot be guilty of the breach of any (affirmative at least) precept; nay say
they, those who will not follow such a course, do run away from Christ to
themselves, from the Gospel to the Law; and the further they go on in that way,
they must provoke the Lord the more; all their performances being an
abomination unto him, whom without Faith (which they have not) they cannot
please, Heb. 11.6.

We may not now stay to confute these Dreamers. Only for removing what is now
objected against the wicked, their obligation, duty, and liberty to pray, We
would offer these few Assertions.

Asser. 1. The Gospel, as it is not opposite unto, and destructive of, the
natural and moral Law, so neither does it abolish or diminish that obligation,
which the Law at its first promulgation did lay upon the sons of men: We are no
less then the Jews, liable to that curse, Gal. 3.10. If we do not obey it in
all things; how does the Apostle, Romans 3.21 abominat the Antimonian fancy? Do
we then make void the law through faith, God forbid; yea (says he) we
establish it? Turks, Pagans, Jews and Christians, Believers and Unbeleevers,
are all alike under the directive, and mandatory power of the Law: And
therefore since Prayer is a moral duty prescribed in the first Commandment;
and which Pagans by the dark lamp of nature have discovered, as flowing from
the dictates of the primaevall Law, which God at first did write in the heart
of man, and does yet so far abide in man, as he is a reasonable Creature; that
though he has not a Law, yet by nature, he may do the things contained in the
Law, Romans 2.14, 15. There is yet so much light in that old ruinous house, as to
discover a Deity, and to point out this sanctuary and refuge in the time of
need; and accordingly the most rude and heathenish people, have hither run for
help in the day of their calamity: What ever in their vain imaginations they
fancied to be God, to it they made their address and presented their
supplications. So that Antimonians would do well to go to School, and learn of
them the truth of this particular. The heathen Mariners, Jonah 1.5, 6. did
prove better casuists; they knew better what course to take in that tempest,
then if they had had those Seducers to have taught them; yea, such Dreamers
should have been a greater offense to them then sleeping Jonah: If they thought
strange to see one man not busy at prayer in that storm, what would they have
thought of him who would have told them, that they should not pray? That they
themselves would do better to sleep, then to take Gods name in their mouth; I
think they should not have cast lots for finding out the man, for whose cause
that evil was upon them, but the Antimonian, without deliberation, in Jonah
his stead, should have been cast into the Sea.

Asser. 2. As the moral and natural law does bind and oblige all men; so in
every man there is some power and ability for doing and performing what it does
hold out unto him, as his duty: we do not say, that men by nature are able to
keep any of the commandments in a spiritual manner, much less that they can
perfectly keep the commandments, but that they can do the thing commanded, they
can perform the external acts, and the substance of many moral duties; Though,
1. the principle from which, 2. The end to which, And, 3. the manner of
performance be corrupt and naught.

Asser. 3. As the unregenerat are obliged to do, having gotten some light to
discern their duty, and some power and ability for doing; so if they make
conscience of their duty, and honestly endeavor to improve the little strength
and few talents which they have received, their labor shall not be lost: for
albeit gracious habits be not acquired by our labor and industry, but
immediately infused by the Spirit of God (as without our physical concurrence
and activity, so also without any kind of moral-influence and causality by way
of merit and deserving on our part) yet by frequenting the Ordinances, (for I
do not now speak of those who are without the pale of the visible Church) and
going about duties, as we are able, (though we cannot do so much as make our
selves negatively good, and to be without sin, yet) we may thus become less
evil, and not so indisposed and unfit for grace; some thing of the stubbornness
of the will, and of its averseness from what is good may be removed, and some
inclinations (though moral and not gracious) may thus be wrought, begotten and
stirred up in the heart, and the man (like the scribe, Mark. 12.34.) may be
brought near to the kingdom of God; and though the Lord be not tied to such
previous dispositions, (so that he must help forward the work and bring it to
perfection when and where these are placed, or that he cannot work without such
legal and previous preparations) yet ordinarily he observes that method, it is
his usual way to help us, when being sensible of the 1 King 8.38
plague of our own hearts, we are wrestling and tugging at duty, and seeking
after him in the use of the means he has prescribed.

So that in carrying on of that blessed work we may take notice of these
several steps, 1. God, by the common operation of his spirit, does awaken the
secure sleeping sinner, and lets him see his misery; 2. He discovers to him
his duty and the way how he may escape and come out of that state; 3. He
stirs him up and sets him a work; 4. After that for a while the man has
wearied himself in thus wrestling by his own strength, the Lord humbles him
and lays him low, and makes him despair in himself, and see that by his doing
he cannot help himself; and having thus killed; Then, 5. he waketh Deuteronomy. 32.39.
alive, and having wounded then he heals, and makes the spirit of bondage a
forerunner of the Spirit of Adoption: and when the poor sinner is thus, as it
were, hopeless and helpless, then he points out to him the brazen serpent,
that he may look Isa. 45.22.
to it and live.

And thus we see how legal performances and the use of the means in the
strength received (though it be but little) riddeth room in the heart, and
makes way to the right embracing and closing with Christ; In that, 1. it
takes off the heart in great part from vain and sinful objects; 2. It keeps
off many temptations; 3. It begets some desire and inclination to that which
is good and well-pleasing unto God; which disposition and affection is not
over-thrown and removed, but only refined and spiritualized in the work of
conversion, while selfish and carnal motives and ends are abandoned, and a new
principle of life and motion infused; and thus the former inclination becomes
as a material disposition to the new birth, making the subject more sit and
capacious to bring forth, and entertain the man-child; like as dryness in
timber disposes and sits it for the fire, and makes it combustible: so
that these legal performances, the frequenting the Ordinances and pouring out
of the soul in prayer according to the present ability, does not only, 1.
Negatively dispose the soul for grace, by removing obstructions and
impediments, and cutting off some leaves, yea and branches of sin, and drawing
out some sap from the root; But also, 2. positively, by begetting these
positive qualifications, which (though purged and rectified) remain after
conversion, as siccity does in the tree while it burns; and lastly by using
the means and attending the Ordinances, we cast our selves in Christ's way: and
who dare say that the compassionat Physician will not pity the halt and the
lame while he goes by? Certainly such as do cast themselves in his way are at
a fair venture, Christ's invitation, yea and command (which all who are under
the Gospel-call have) does open a large door of hope, and may be looked on as a
sufficient warrant for success to the obedient: the sick and diseased had not
such an encouragment to come unto him while he was on earth, and yet they would
venture, and their labor was not lost, he healed them all; none were sent away
empty, and many got more then they sought; they came to have their bodily
diseases cured, and he often healed both soul and body.

And thus it may appear, that wicked men should pray, yea and that with some
sort of confidence they may draw nigh unto God. We will not now meddle with the
Jesuitical and Arminian principles, and two great Aphorisms, viz. 1. facienti
quod in se est, Deus non denegat gratiam. 2. Deus neminem deserit nisi prius
deseratur; i. e. 1. God will not deny his grace to him that improveth the
strength he has; 2. God will leave none till he first leave God, and slight
his work and service; he will help forward the beginnings of a saving work, if
we do not draw back. We know they can admit an orthodox gloss, according to
which Zum. var. disp. ad 1. and 2. tom. 3. page 15, 71, 244, 254, 351, and tom.
2. page 135. Alvar. de. aux. disp. 58. 7. and disp. 113. 12. and resp. lib. 3.
cap. 5. 12. and de. aux. disp. 49. 2. disp. 56. 6. and 12. disp. 59. per.
toram, and resp. lib. ult. cap. 20. 2. Gul. Tuiss ad. Corv. def. cont. Til.
page 359. and page 106.107.90, 98. etc. Rhet. de provid-cap. 26. etc. Although
these divines apply these axioms to the converted, yet what they say may be
extended to our case and to these who are on the way to conversion. See Fenners
wilful impenitent.
Zumel and Alvarez, these two great Patrons of physical predetermination
amongst the Papists, and Tuisse and Rutherfoord, amongst our Divines, will not
reject them; and we have said nothing that will import such an infallible
connection between our endeavors and Gods acceptance and remuneration thereof,
as will inferre^, or look toward any of these axioms as they are urged and
interpreted by the adversaries.

Now we come to speak to the objection, which needs not the hand of an enemy
to overthrow it, there being fire enough in its own bosom to consume and
dissolve the knot; 1. Then as to that place, Heb. 12. any who will look on the
context, may at the first view discern, that the main scope of that Chapter is
to persuade and exhort unto faith, patience, and to draw nigh unto God with
reverence and godly fear; and then, v. 29. we have a pressing motive subjoyned,
because God is a consuming fire; but to whom? (let me ask) Is it not to briars
and thorns that dar stand in battle array against him, who While we turn our
back on duty, we fight against the command and sets our selves against his
sovereign authority who commands.
run away from him and cast off the cords of duty, Is. 27.4. But as to them who
submit, who draw nigh to him in his Ordinances, and present their complaints
and supplications unto him, he is full of mercy and compassion; that is the
way, and the only right way to escape the everlasting flames of divine
vengeance, that is the way (according to the following words, v. 5.) To take
hold of his strength and make peace with him. Behold then how deluders abuse
the Scriptures, and dare make use of that to drive men away from God, which the
holy Ghost holds out as a motive to chase them in to God.

As to the place, Prove. 28.9. Whose prayer is said there to be abomination unto
the Lord? We need go no further then the words to find an answer; for, says
that Text, He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
shall be abomination, but if the wicked will turn from his sins, he shall
surely live, Ezekiel. 18.21, 28. Unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do
to take my Covenant in thy mouth? But if he will forsake his wickedness, if he
will vow unto the Lord and pay his vows, then says the Lord, come and call
upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.16.15. The Lord
must be sanctified in all them that draw nigh to him, Levit. 10.3. If thou will
not actively honor him by thy work, he will vindicate his own honor in thy
just punishment, and make thee a passive instrument thereof, and a subject
whereon his justice will work. And therefore, considering that thus the Lord is
a consuming fire, should we therefore withdraw from his service and not
approach the fire? Nay, says the Lord in that place, Heh. 12.28. Ye must not
do so, ye cannot escape that way; for whether shall we flee from his presence,
Psalm. 139.7. But let us the rather, and upon any terms draw nigh to him, and in
our approach take the better heed to our steps, that we may serve him
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. The wicked must not draw nigh with
their lips and remove their heart far away, Isa. 29.13. they must not draw nigh
to God in their sins while they love them, and resolve to follow that trade; if
thou regard iniquity in thy heart, the Lord will not hear thy prayer, Psalm.
66.18. and while thou draws nigh, thou must take heed that thou present not a
treacherous libel to the King; thou must not ask provision for Satan's work and
fuel to feed thy lusts, Jam. 4.3. If Antinomians would only plead against
lip-labor, formality and hypocrisy in drawing nigh to God; and that none
should with that impudent woman, Prove. 7.14. dare to approach Gods Altar, that
thereby they may either cloak and palliate their sins, that they may commit it
with the more freedom and less suspicion, or that thereby they may hire God,
and purchase a license from him to follow that cursed trade; if (I say) those
Seducers, would only argue against lip-labor and hypocrisy in Gods service,
all the servants of God and the Word of God would join with them; for that is
not prayer but prattling, not service done to God, but an intolerable mockery of
his holy Majesty; that is not to draw nigh to God, but to step aside from him;
for while the heart is removed, all is removed; and the Sea Chapter 4.
distance is still made greater and greater; but under this Pretense to cry
down the use of the means, which God has appointed for healing and softning
the heart, is as abominable as to teach, that these who are on the way to hell,
should continue in that way, and not endeavor to go out of it and turn; that
they should not Mat. 7.13, 14.
strive to enter in at the strait gate, nor search after the narrow way that
leads unto life.

O! but (may these Seducers say) without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11.6. Wherefore then should these who have not faith, spend their time and
strength in wrestling with duties, which (since they cannot please God) cannot
profit the workers? Ans. Without faith it is impossible to please God, as his
friend, as reconciled to him, as his son, etc. There is no justification nor
peace with God without faith, whereby we lay hold on him who is our Ephesians. 2.14,
15, 16. 1 Cor. 1.30.
peace, reconciliation, righteousness and sanctification; without faith the
person cannot please him, the state and condition of the man is unsafe, naught
and loathsome to God, and therefore the work cannot please him: The tree must
be good before it brings forth good fruit, the Lord first has pleasure in
the person, then in his work; first he had respect to Abel, then to his
offering, Genesis 4.4. Yet in some Placere Deo, est non modo communiter approbari
tanquam voluntati suae non adversum quomodo omnia bona naturalia and
indifferentia dicuntur placere Deo: sed ita acceprari tanquam, etc. placere Deo
est justificari D. Paraeus in loc.
respect, the works and endeavors of the unregenerate, wh^ are on their way to
a change, may be said to please God, the travail and pangs of the new birth,
our wrestling with the strong man till he be cast out, cannot be displeasing to
him for whom thus room is made in the heart; yea, not only these works, which
have a more immediate connection with grace, are thus in some respect pleasing
to God: But also the very first endeavors and breathings after God, do so far
please God and are approven of him, as that he will accept of them as some
steps (though not in, yet) toward the way, so that by these the man is brought
a little Mark. 12.34.
nearer the kingdom of God, he is in some measure fitted and disposed for grace.

And the Lord, in these three respects, may be said to be pleased with, and
accept such, endeavors and duties performed by men, not yet 1 John 3.14.
translated from death to life, though looking (with natures eye weeping, and
being a little anointed and 2 Pet. 2.22.
enlightened by the common operation of the Spirit) toward God.

1. Or in these four respects, ^. Negatively 2. Positively, 3. Comparatively,
and 4. Relatively.

Positively, because as to the matter and substance, these duties are good and
agreeable to the rule, though as to the manner and way of performance there be
many defects.

2. Comparatively, and that in these two respects, 1. Because God is better
pleased with such approaches to him, then with the running from him to the
excess of riot; and though the Sow when washed, is still a 2 Pet. 2.22.
Sow, and has not laid aside its nature, yet it is more pleasing, or rather
(if ye would express it negatively) less displeasing then when she wallowed
in the mire; yea, and 2. Because such performances and endeavors are more
acceptable and agreeable to the will of God, then the omission and not
performance of these duties: Nay, our Divines generally confess that the moral
Virtutes morales fidelium specie and formaliter non differ a virtutibus
Ethnicorum ab Aristotele definitis: multis conatur ostendere. Frid. Wendel.
phil. mor. lib. 1. cap. 7. quast. 2. idcirco in Christianorum scholis docendas,
cap. 1. quaest. 12.
virtues of Pagans, and the exercise of these, were upon the matter good, and
that the doers (though they did not refer their work to a spiritual end) were
less guilty and evil then if they had omitted these duties; albeit upon a
spiritual and theological consideration, they might well be called by Vid.
August. vindicatum apud Chamier. panstrat. tom. 3. lib. 4 and sophismata Bell.
refutata.
Augustine, splendida peccata, beautiful and shining sins.

3. Relatively, as means which he has appointed to be the way of conveighance
of grace, and which he so far accepts, as usually to make them reach the end;
Thus Romans 10.17. Faith is said to come by hearing; and why not also by prayer?
While Cornelius was fasting and praying, behold a messenger from heaven was
sent unto him to show him what he should do, Act. 10.20. While Paul was
praying, Ananias was sent unto him to open his eyes, Act. 9.11, 17. We will not
enquire whether Cornelius and Paul were then converted or not. But behold here
an In that a voice from heaven should send Cornelius to Peter to enquire after
him, and Annanias to Paul to enquire for him.
extraordinary blessing upon the use of the ordinary means; thy prayers and
thine alms (says the Angel to Cornelius, Act. 10.4,) are come up for a
memorial before the Lord: Enquire for Paul, why? what is them atter? For (says
the Lord, Act. 9.11.) behold he prays.

O sinners! whose trade has been to destroy your selves in departing from God;
O! all ye who are yet strangers to this heavenly employment of speaking with
your Maker, I have a glad message unto you to day; what ever have been your
provocations, or whatever be your present fears, yet look up to him whom ye
have so often provoked; and if ye will forsake the evil of your ways and
present your supplications unto him, ye need not fear, he will not deal with
you as Solomon dealt with 1. Kings 2.17.23, Adonijah (as would appear) in that
particular did most humbly supplicate Solomon, though the reasons alleged by
Diodati and others might prevail with Solomon justly to deal with him as he did.
Adonijah, he will not tear thy supplication, and make it a dittay against thee
for taking away thy life; only beware of Adonijah his heart, do not design
treason (as its thought he did) while thou presents thy desire t^ the King; if
then thou would ask what course thou should take that thou might be
saved, I would tender thee no better advice then Peter did to Simon the
Sorcerer, while he was yet in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, Act.
8.23, 22. repent of thy wickedness and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy
heart may be forgiven thee.

And to press this so necessary advice and exhortation, let us brieflly, by
way of motive and encouragement, hold forth some grounds, which may serve as so
many arguments to vindicate the point from the Antimonian dream. 1. What ground
have thou to entertain the least scruple, concerning thy duty to pray to God
and bemoan thy condition to him, to perform this part of worship, which not
only thy indigence, but also his honor calls for at thy hands; what see
thou? what do Antimonians hold forth unto thee for taking off the tie and
obligation, which thy condition and dependence, thy wants and fears, and Gods
law written in thy heart and in the Scriptures does lay upon thee? Can thy
former wickedness make thee now a Libertine? can it pull out thy shoulders from
under the yoke? 2. Thou being convinced of thy duty, will thou ask whether thou
may perform it or not? There can hardly be a clearer contradiction imagined
then, to say its my duty to pray, and yet I may not, I ought not to pray; I am
infinitely obliged to do, and yet I should not do; for what call ye duty but
that which we are obliged to do? Was there ever such a subtle notion as to
abstract duty from the obligation to do? Or can there be a more unreasonable
fancy, then to say that these who are under the means may not use them? true it
is, that after death the case is altered, thou art no more under the means,
neither does the King call and invite thee to come; but yet even then, if he
would hold forth the golden Scepter to the damned (as now he does to the
unconverted) they were obliged to draw nigh the Throne. 3. Art thou not
convinced that grace is lovely and desirable? and from whom can thou desire
it but from God? and that is to pray; for, what is prayer but an offering up of
our desires to God? 4. For thy warrant thou have the command of God, again and
again repeated in the Word. 5. Many sad threatenings denounced against kingdoms,
families and persons that will not call upon God. 6. Thou have seen, heard and
may read of many judgments temporal and spiritual, poured out upon such as
did not call upon him. 7. We may with the Apostle in another case, 1 Cor.
11.14. appeal to nature it self; does it not teach him that is in misery to cry
to him who is able to help and relieve, and to entreat him whom he has wronged
and off nded to pardon and forgive? Thus the light of nature discovers this
duty to Pagans, and as with a double cord binds it unto thee, who also have
the light of the Word pointing out that way to thy feet. 8. Several talents
bestowed on thee for this effect, do call to thee to improve them: What? have
thou not some natural power and ability to desire and express (though not in a
spititual and saving way) thy desires to God? 9. Does not thy conscience draw
thee to the Throne? Does it not accuse and challenge thee, when thou omittest
this necessary and (as I may call it) natural duty? 10. Have thou not many
wants, fears, etc. and what do all these say unto thee, but O! run to the
Throne for a supply and remedy? 11. The greatness of the privilege, that thou
may approach the great King, does call upon thee to imp^ove it, together
with the great benefits which thereby may be purchased. Yea, 12. though there
were no other income then the present effect, which usually it has on the
heart to enlarge, fit, and in some measure dispose it for becoming a temple for
the holy Ghost, and to be a fit room to receive and welcome the King with all
his train of attendant graces, which are the harbingers of glory; nay it is not
only a disposition, but a beginning of the saving work; prayer, if serious, is
a turning of the heart to God, its a spiritual and converting motion of the
soul, its the first breathing of the new creature: desire of grace (say
Divines) is grace. Certainly if it be effectual and resolute, it must be so;
and desire is the life of prayer, and without it there is no prayer, so that
such as forbid the unregenerate to pray, do dissuade them to be converted and
turn to God, or begin the saving work of grace; prayer is not only a converting
ordinance, but also the first breathing of the converted; not only a mean, but
also a part and the first fruit of conversion. 13. The doleful and sad
consequents, that must follow the contempt of this promising remedy, the King
ere it be long will tear these proud rebels in pieces, who would not submit and
supplicate him for a pardon. 14. The great advantage that may be expected, that
probability, if not certainty of success that God will fulfill thy desire, may
as a strong cord draw thee nigh to God; thou have not one, but many
encouragements to excite and set thee a work 1. Gods bowels opened (in the
Ordinances) and his arms stretched forth to embrace thee. 2. His call and
invitation, his counsel, entreaties, requests, expostulations, etc. together
with his solemn protestation, that he delights not in the sinners ruin, but
rather that he would draw nigh to him, that he might live: while the King
inviteth the traitor to come and seek his pardon, what should discourage him?
3. His Ordinance and appointment* in making prayer a mean for that end: they
who teach that sinners cannot expect a blessing on their offering up their
desires to God, do say (yea though we did abstract from his fidelity in
fulfilling his promises) that God has appointed that Ordinance in vain. 4. His
stirring up the heart and filling it (though by a common work of the spirit)
with such desires and purposes as are fit materials of prayer, do say, that if
we will improve that season, the Lord purposes not to send us away empty; he
will not be wanting to promove what good he begins to work in us, till we
resist his spirit and first draw off and lie by, and thus stifle the new birth
in its conception. 5. God's satisfying the natural appetite of inanimate
creatures, and fulfilling the sensual desires of the brutes and brutish
requests of sensual men: when selfish Ahabs have opened their mouths for
outward mercies and deliverances, he has filled them many a time, and casten
such bones to these dogs, while they drew nigh their masters table and looked
up to him. 6. The example of others, who have followed the like course, the
success that weary and laden sinners have always met with, may be (though
thou had no more) encouragement enough for going about this sweet and
promising duty: There is none in hell to day, who dare say that they took them
to this course, and constantly pursued it with such diligence and enlargement
of heart and affections as they might, and according to that measure of
strength they had, and yet were no better; when they had done what in them lay,
they could not help the matter, there was no remedy but they must perish; nay,
nay, but their consciences can testify against them, that they were slothful
and did neglect the means, that they would not present their request to God and
constantly pursue their suit, and so they did perish, not in the use of the
means, but because they would not further use the means God had appointed for
obtaining of mercy and salvation.

You will say, Obj.
till men believe they cannot ask in faith nothing wavering, for they cannot
lay hold on a promise; and therefore they need not think they shall receive any
thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.6, 7. Ans. Ans.
The Apostle speaks not there of the faith whereby we are justified (though
it be true he supposes it to be in the subject) but of the faith of Which ye^
is not a distinct faith, but a different consideration of one and the same
principle, a reference to another kind of act flowing from it.
audience, whereby we certainly expect a return of our prayers, as Vid. part. 2.
afterward shall appear. And he speaks to believers, exciting them to
exercise their faith, as to that particular act which reaches the success of
prayer, and certifieth the supplicant that his labor shall not be lost; so
this place does not concern the unregenerat: And yet while they are minding a
change and looking up to God for help, there may be in them some shadow of
this faith; as of that mentioned, Heb. 11.6. (which imports one and the same
thing with this) he may in some measure believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him; he may upon the former and such like
grounds, draw nigh to God in some sort of confidence and expectation of
success, which if it serve to stir him up and hold him at his work, if it keep
him from wearying and fainting in his addresses to God, may be supposed to be
sufficient for that state and condition.

You will say, may not wicked men lay hold on a We purpose to speak to this
question in another place (if the Lord will) and therefore will not now
digress to speak to it at any long^h.
promise for audience and success? Ans. 1. Though the wicked may not claim a
right to any qualified and conditional promise, since he has not as yet
(though he be in the way (for we do not now speak of swine wallowing in the
mire) to obtain) these qualifications and conditions, which the promise does
suppose in him to whom it is made; yet who knows that he is not under the
absolute promises? God has promised to quicken the dead, to give a new heart,
and to write his law in the heart of some men, and who dare say he is not the
man? and certainly all these to whom these prom^ses do belong, shall in due
time have them accomplished in them; and this looks to be the very time, when
thou art panting after the Lord, and wrestling at the Throne: and therefore if
thou do not faint, thou must prevail.

2. The promises, for the most part are conceived in such general terms,
without any qualification; as Mat. 7.7. Luke 11.9. Isa. 55.2, 3. etc. that thou
should not question and dispute away thy interest in them, and through thy
diffidence turn thy back on thy duty, and thus exclude thy self from the
promise annexed to it; thou should not then so much perplex thy self,
concerning Gods purpose to pity thee, and his promise to hear thee (for as yet
these may be hid from thee) as thou should be diligent in going about thy
duty, thou needst not doubt of that, what needst thou then linger and delay? O!
cast away all such discouragements and follow thy duty, and thus in the use of
the means, cast thy self over upon the promises, and ere it be long thou may
find, that there was room enough there left for thee to write in thy name, and
then come to know what was Gods purpose toward thee.

3. Gods call and invitation, has much of a promise in it; he is serious in
his offers, he does not complement with thee, when he inviteth thee to come to
him, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. etc. When he inviteth to open to him, Rev. 3.20,
etc. if thou will come, he will make thee welcome.

And then, 4. The command of God has half a promise in the bosom of it; and
certainly all the commandments do belong to thee, as well as to the most holy
men on earth; for what has made thee a Libertine, and exempted thee from duty?

O! then, be of good courage; I tell thee (as they did Bartimeus for his
comfort) he calls thee, yea, and commands thee to come: Ah! what mean ye
thus to doubt, debate, and dispute away the market day, and let the gol^en
opportunity slip: If such a voice were heard in hell, if these wretches were
once more invited to make their requests to God, would they thus dispute and
question? would they refuse to labor in Gods vineyard, without a bond for
their hire? nay, it would be a glad voice to them, and they would seek after no
other security and warrant, then his call and invitation. O! then, while its
called to day hearken to his voice, that it be not your case, for ever to weep
and wail for loosing such an opportunity; O! then, cast away (as Bartimeus did
his garments, when Christ called him) all impediments and hindrances; cast off
these garments of sin, your lusts, and these Heb. 12.1.
weights that so easily beset you, and run to the Scriptures for light, fall on
your knees, run to the Throne, run to the father, and say, I am not worthy to
be called thy son; and when he sees thee, yet Luke 15.20.
afar off, he will meet thee, and fall on thy neck and kiss thee; thus he has
dealt with such prodigals, and why will he not also thus welcome thee? Is their
any in hell or on earth, that can give an instance to the contrary, and say, I
am the man who thus came to God, and yet was rejected? It may be indeed, that
some being awakened by some outward, or inward rod, have now and then fallen
into some good fits and moods, but that early dew has been quickly dried up,
and what crop could then be expected from that stony ground? Thou may indeed
make some steps toward the right way, and yet weary, and sit up long ere thou
come to it; but can thou tell me the man, who took this course and constantly
pursued it, who continued instant in prayer and met with a repulse?

Let Antimonians then bark and declaim against duties, and the use of the means
God has appointed, yet rest thou on Gods Word, who has said, Mat. 7.7.
ask, and it shall be given you, (whoever thou art, thou art not excluded,
unless by refusing to perform the condition, thou exclude thy self) seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: But what ground of hope
and expectation, can these Seducers hold out unto thee, if thou will not ask? I
know not. Though the Lord has been Isa. 65.2.
found of them that sought him not, yet there is none found of him, whom he
stirs not up to ask; so that, if thou do not ask, thou shall never receive;
there is I speak of the adult, the Lord has a way unknown to us for saving
young ones.
none in heaven, who were not supplicants on earth.

But Ah! though none of you do seruple concerning your duty, and though you
think your labor would not be lost, yet how many of you are practical
Antimonians? though all of you abominate their doctrine, yet too many of you
make it the rule, whereby ye walk; ye will not speak against prayer, yet
whoever heard your voice in prayer (except in a customary formal way) ye will
not condemn them who pray, and yet will rather damn your own souls then pray;
ye dow not away with the doctrine of deluded sectaries, and yet ye dance as
their pipe plays: What is said of heretics, Tit. 3.11. may well be applied
to such Atheists, they are self-condemned, they are Romans 2.1
unexcusable in judging Antimonians, while they walk according to the rule they
set before them.

I have too long insisted on this point: But my main aim was to hold out a
caveat for preventing this practical Antinomianisme, which accompanies an
Orthodox profession; and I will say no more now to the speculative Antimonians,
these wretched opiniators, after I have mentioned their cruelty, not only to
the wicked, in shutting the door on them, but also to the Saints in excluding,
or (as we may call it) excommunicating them from this solemn and
soul-comforting Ordinance, yea then, when they stand most in need of
consolation, to wit, in their sad nights of desertion, when neither sun nor
moon does shine upon them, when the Lord withdraws the refreshing beams of his
countenance, and the sealing and witnessing testimony of his Spirit; that Job.
29.3.
candle of the almighty, whereby we might be guided and encouraged in the
greatest darkness, occasioned by the eclipse of creature comforts; when they
are thus, as it were, hopeless and helpless, when they cannot see to read
their names written in the book of life, nor discern any seal at their
charter, and thus are in hazard to draw sad conclusions against themselves, O!
then must these see Ephr. Pagit. loc. cit.
miserable comforters say, to these children of light, while they are thus
walking in darkness, beware that ye draw not nigh to God, since ye are not
assured of your adoption and reconciliation; for if ye have the least jealousy
and suspicion, the least scruple and doubt concerning his love, ye may provok
him to become a consuming fire unto you, if you should draw nigh to him: nay
say they, these legal terrors, and spirit of bondage, and the want of
assurance do not only evidence some present distemper, and fit of unbelief,
but also the want and absence of faith; and therefore those doubters must be
enrolled with unbeleevers, and such must be See Pagit loc. cit.
legal preachers who exhort either the one or the other to pray.

CHAP. VI. Of the object to which we should direct our Prayers.
Whosoever calls upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Romans 10. v. 13.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? v. 14.
1. We will show to whom we may and should direct our prayers. 2. To whom we
may not bow the knee, not to Saints, or angels, nor to any other creature: and
accordingly this Chapter may be divided in two parts.

Sect. 1. To whom should we pray?
NOt only, 1. the word of God; and, 2. the practice of all the saints; but, 3.
the very light of nature, these relics of sound reason, yet abiding in
corrupt man; and, 4. the practice of heathens and pagans do clearly show to the
blindest ey that prayer and every part of worship, should be directed to God:
for although the nations were foolish and ridiculous in their apprehensions of
God, yet whatever they fancied to be God, to it they did present their
supplications. We need not then spend time in demonstrating so clear and
unquestionable a truth; for not only, 1. Gods soveraignity in governing the
world according to his good pleasure, 2. his omniscience, 3. his power, 4. his
mercy and tender bowels ready to pity and relieve his creatures, etc. but all
the grounds and reasons that hold out the necessity of this duty, do also prove
that it should be directed to God.

But whether or not we should pray to Christ as Mediator, and perform any point
of worship to him under that formality, is questioned in the schools: I say
that its disputed whether or not Christ should be worshipped under that
redupl^cation and formality? for otherwise its certain and will be denied by
none who profess the name of Christ, (except the blasphemous Arrians and
Socinians, these fighters against the Godhead of the Mediator, and yet these
do not agree in this amongst themselves; Socinus himself with many of his
Disciples pleading for the adoration of Christ, against Franciscus Davidis and
his party; though not Franciscus Davidis challenges Socinus of idolatry for
wo^^^^i (...) ameer creature, and Socinus denies that such should be
acknowledged for brethren who will not worship the redeemer. vid. Socin. de
ador. Chris. advers. Christ. Franken. and in epistol. and Hoo^nb. Soc. conf.
tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9.
consequentially to his principles) all Divines I say whether Popish or
Protestant agree in this, that the Mediator should be worsh^ped adored and
invocated, that we should trust in him and pray to him, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, amen, Romans 9.5. Yet there be two particulars that here fall
under debate, 1. under what formal reason and consideration Christ should be
worshipped; 2. whether or not our worship be terminated in his humane nature,
if it does share with his Godhead in that worship which is tendered up to the
Mediator in whom the divine and humane nature are personally united. But since
these questions belong to another subject, and here only occasionly fall in, as
having no great influence on this duty; and our carriage therein not depending
upon their determination, we remitt such problematick speculations to the
Schools, where they are disputed with greater These who stand for the negative,
challenging those who plead for the affirmative in these questions for idolatry
and creature-worship; they accusing them of impiety, if not bla^phemy, for not
worshipping the Mediator in both bis natures, and because of his office.
animosity then As may appear from these testimonies, which Dr. Ames (in
auctar. assert. theol. de ador, Christi) alleges for his opinion; whereas,
the same Authors in several other places, may also be made use of against his
opinion: and on the other hand, Dr. Voet, who has been at the greatest pains
of any (whom I have seen) to clear the question as to the negative, yet has
several expressions, which seem to yield as much as Dr. Ames does plead for,
vid. Voet. sell. disp. page 526, 527, 535, 536. 549. etc. And again, Dr. Ames
seems to concede as much as Dr. Voet. does affirm in the passages cited by
Dr. Voet, loc. cit. page 538. the judicious Gzydlovius rides the marches best
of any whom I have perused, vid. vindic. quaest. cap. 3, 4, 5, 6. And the
ancient Doctors disputing against the Arrians, do join with hira, who condemn
all creature-worship as idolatrous, and particularly the adoration of Christ,
if a creature; and therefore in so far as he is a creature: thus the Fathers
convened in the Antiochian council. Ann. Dom. 272. do determine that Christ
should be worshipped and adored (...), but not according to his corporeal and
humane nature.
perspicu^ty; but sober Christians, who use not, need not trouble themselves
with such subtilities and formalities, have no reason to stumble, because of
such debates amongst judicious and orthodox Divines; for albeit, not a few
affirm; 1. that nothing is adorable except the divine nature; and 2. that
nothing except the Deity, can be the formal reason of adoration and worship,
yet its granted on all hands; 1. that its blasphemous once to imagine, that the
Mediator should not be adored, worshipped and invocated; 2. that because he is
Mediator, and has redeemed us, therefore we should worship him according to
that full word (though too far extended by Dr. Ames) Revel. 5.12, 9. Worthy is
the lamb that was slain, to receive power and wisdom, strength, honor and
glory, because ((...) quia non quatenus ut interpretatur Ames.) thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God: and accordingly the four and twenty Elders,
and all the creatures in heaven and earth, fall down and worship him, ver. 13,
14.3. Its certain, that as Christ is God, he is equal with the Father and holy
Ghost, and that also the three persons of the blessed Trinity, are the last,
chief and ultimate object of our worship, so also, that Christ as Mediator is
the formal and immediate object of our faith and worship, by whom, and in whose
name we must offer it up, without whom we may not draw nigh to God in any point
of service, we may not trust in him, nor call upon him; he is the way, none can
come unto God but by him, Joh. 14.6. He is our Peacemaker and Advocat, there
is no other Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 25, 6. Ephesians. 2.18. 2 Cor. 5.29.

Sect. 2. To whom ought we not pray? No: to Angels, Saints, or any other
creature.
WE will not so far expatiat and enlarge this discourse, as to confute the
fanatic dreams and delusions of, 1. Pagans, who did worship and invocate, not
only their good and evil Genius, but also loathsome beasts; nor 2. these vile
(rather monsters then) haereticks the Satanici, who worshipped the devil, not
only that he might not tempt and vex them, but also as the procurer and author
of much good; nor 3. the Ophits, who worshipped the serpent by which Eve was
deceived, as being the author of salvation.

O! let us rather labor to be thankful to God, that he has not given us over
to such strange delusions, then busy our selves in admiring and declaiming
against such abjects, who being judicially plagued and deserted of God (because
while they knew, or by the volum of creation and providence, might have known
him, they glorified him not as God) have fallen into such vain, and more then
brutish imaginations. O! let us beware, least if we like not to retain God in
our knowledge, God give us (as he did them, Romans 1.28.) over to a reprobate
mind.

And were not Popery that large and overreaching net, that now catches so
many and great fish of the world, yea there, where the Gospel is preached and
professed, we should no less reject their foolish and idolatrous way of
worship, as being unworthy of refutation; for these superstitious wretches
(being judicially blinded, and made Rev. 17.1, 2.
drunk with the wine of fornication of the great whore that sits upon many
waters) have gone beyond many Pagans in their idolatry, and least they should
appear to mince the matter, they have not spared the rule; but having first
mutilated the first table of the decalogue (in diminishing the number of
commandments belonging to it, and making the second to be but an appendix of
the first) they have quite overturned that second commandment by their strange
glosses and misinterpretations, while they tell us, that only the images of
false Gods are there forbidden, that this precept is only ceremonial, and does
lay no obligation upon us Christians. But their idolatry has not stayed in the
manner, but does extend also to the object of worship, for they have set up so
many new gods and goddesses, to whom they have Costerus in Enchirid. cap. 9.
yea and Bellar. de sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 12. grants that God has reserved
that kind of worship to himself alone. yet cap. 13. and lib. de cult. sanct.
cap. 4. sect. 4. he contradicts his former concession, and lays down his
position sacrae domus non solum Deo sed etiam sanctis recte aedificantur and
dedicantur. and concerning the worship and invocation of saints, vid. lib. 1.
de sanct. beat. per totum, and alias passim.
dedicated their temples, and offer daily sacrifice of prayer and praises: Nay,
in this they have exceeded the Athenians, the old Romans, and the most
superstitious Heathens, who have lived in any age; and the Pope by his
canonization, has made more petty gods, then any of the Pagan nations did
acknowledge; for in Popery, every Country, City, Family, yea, and person, has
his peculiar Saint and tutelar Angel, whom he does worship and invocate; nay
every state and condition, every disease and malady, every art and trade, has
its proper mediator and protector, to whom recourse is made for preventing and
removing of the evil, and the giving continuance and increase of the good
wtihin their several spheres and diocesses; thus they have made Gallus their
geese-god, Wendilin their sheep-god, Eulogius their horse-god, Antonius their
swine-god, etc. Rochus their plague-physician and protector, Appollonia their
toothache doctrix, John a god of the Epilepsy, Eutropius of the Hydropsy, and
Dame Catharine is lady of the mid-wives, etc.

O! what matter of astonishment is it to consider, that these who profess the
Gospel should be so far left of God, as thus to lick up the very dregs of Pagan
superstition and idolatry; and that so many learned Rabbis should come to that
height of impudence, not only to borrow from such, and learn of them their way
of worship, but also to make use of those reasons and arguments, which blind
heathens alleged for their manner of devotion; yea, and that after the Fathers
(whose doctrine they would seem to own with so much care and zeal) had razed
from the ground that foolish building. It were no hard task for one of ordinary
parts and reading, to demonstrate from the writings of the primitive and most
ancient Doctors of the Church, that the popish Saint-worship is all one (
mutato nomine, the name of Saturn, Mars, Venus, etc. being changed into
Francisce, Catharin. etc.) with the Pagan multiplicity of gods, and that it
does stand upon the same foundation and pillars. They who will take a little
vieu of Vid. argument Celsapud Orig. sub. fin. lib. 7. and init. lib 8. contra
Celsum. and Ambros. in epist ad Romans cap. 1. (si auctor fit istius commentaril)
hanc Ethnicoru^ stultitiam redarguentem, corumque vanam excusationem.
Origin and Ambrose, need go no further for making out this parallel: and if we
will hearken to what Pagans say for themselves, and compare their writings with
the popish; we need not run to an arbiter to give sentence: for as in Prove.
27.19.
water, face answers to face, so the pagan and popish way of worship; for
albeit, the poor Pagans did worship many gods, yet they Thus Augustine ( in Ps.
96. nobis 97.) brings in one of the Pagans excusing their idolatry, non illud
colo, seu adoro quod video, sed servio ei quem non video, quis est iste? numen
quoddam invisibile quod praesidet illi simulacro, etc. vid. etiam. in Ps. 113.
and Chrysostom in Ephesians. 5. Hom. 18.
acknowledged only one supreme God, and though many of them did not know who he
was, and what name to give him, yet they knew there was such an absolute
majesty, whom they did fear and worship; and thus (as it were) with the
Athenians, they did consecrate an altar to the unknown God, and through this
blindness and ignorance, they fell into many strange apprehensions concerning
this infinite Deity, and particularly to our purpose, they imagined it to be
below this great God to take notice of sublunary affairs, and of matters which
were not of great and public concernment, and that he had committed the care
of such things to some deputies and officers of trust, whom he had appointed to
be the overseers and dispensators of these things that concern the sons of men,
to whom they should have their recourse, as to inferior gods, who were more
familiar and condescending, and who would not stand at such a distance from
mortals, as being by nature nearer unto them, and so more compassionate and
easy to be entreated; and thus thinking it too great boldness in them to make
an immediate address to the great God, they made use of these inferior gods as
mediators and patrons, by whom they might get their business dispatched, as
having power and moyen with, and commission from the great God for that effect.
And the Platonicks (who were the best refined, and most polished Pagans) did
Vid. Eusebius. lib. 15. de praep. evan. and August. in libris de civit. Dei.
constitute two sort of patrons, to whom they did run, and by whom, as
mediators, their prayers might be presented to the great God; viz. their
Damones or Angels, and their Heroes, or the souls of the defunct; and is not
this the very popish doctrine? can one non ovum ovo s^milius.
egg be more like to another? If it be asked when, and by what steps did this
pagan doctrine creep into the Church? Ans. Although idolatry was the epidemical
disease of the Jewish Church; they were ready to worship the 2 King 17.16.17.
host of heaven, the sun, moon and stars, and in their mad zeal to cause their
children pass through the 2 King. 23.10, 11.
fire to Molech, yet we Though Papists run to some apocryphal texts contrary to
their own concessions, as we shall hear.
read not of their worshipping and invocating of Angels or Saints departed; yea
even then, when they were on the declining ^and. And all the true Israelits did
only have their recourse to God in Christ, disclaiming all other mediators and
advocates, as being ignorant of them and their condition: We have their
confession of faith, as to this article, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our
father (says that Church to God) though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not, thou, O Lord, art our father and redeemer. But what now
(since they were cut off and scattered among the nations) they profess or
practice, cannot be so well known, nor is it needful to enquire; they being
Hos. 1.6.9.
now Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah, their carriage can be no precedent or rule to us:
neither can it be imagined, that now they keep that uniformity in worship,
which they observed, while they were united in one incorporation; and as to
this particular, it would appear from Philo their great Rabbi, that not a few
of them after their dispersion, were tainted with this leaven; for he being a
Platonic, and having from his master Vid. Phil. Judaeum lib. de exceratione
sub finem, page (mihi) 594.
learned that point of divinity, he would not want followers amongst that
people; who might also, from the nations amongst whom they lived, learn this
lesson.

As for the Christian Church, many of them being lately converted from the
heathenish superstition and idolatry, it would appear that they stood in some
hazard to look back again to their former way of devotion; so that the Apostle
had need to warn them (as he did the Colossians, Col. 2.18.) to beware, least
any man beguile them in a voluntary (or without warrant and command) humility
in worshipping of Angels; and it would appear, that the heresy of the Angelici
did then creep in, which shortly after (as Apud August lib de haer. ad
Quodvultdeum, haeres. 39. Angelici in angelorum cultum inclinati quos
Epiphanins jam omnino defecisse testatur: haec August. vid. Theodoret. in Col.
2.18. and Council. Laodic. can. 35.(...), etc.
Epiphanins does witness) was universally disclaimed, and had none to own it.
O! who can admire the impudence of Papists who acknowledging the Fathers and
Councels to be a rule of faith, and yet read that heresy of Angel-worship and
invocation so generally condemned by these, will notwithstanding lick up that
venom and hold it out to their followers as a cordial, and that upon the very
ground Vid. Theophil. in Col. 2.18.
alleged by these old heretics, and condemned by the Apostle, to wit, a
pretended humility, in not daring to make an immediate address to God.

But though some few did fall into that Viz. Of Angel-worship.
error, yet its certain from Ecclesiastic history, that the Christian Church,
for the space of some hundredth years, was kept free of creature-worship and
invocation; all Churches and Incorporations condemning these few Angelick
Heretics. And as for the worship and invocation of Saints, or the souls of the
defunct, it was not so much (for ought that can be known from history) as once
named amongst Christians for the space of two hundred years and above; the
Church for that time, being for the most part in the furnace, (one storm
following upon the back of another, like the Waves of the sea) did retain her
Eusebius with Egisippus calls the Church a pure and chaste Virgin for the space
of the first two hundred years. vid. Eus. hist. lib. 3. cap. 31.
virginity, and continued all that while a chaste spouse to Christ; and as in
other things, so also in this; as she gave to him her heart, so also her
outward service, worship and obedience: but after these storms were over, and
while under the reign of Constantine and other Christian Emperors, the world
began to smile upon her, she began to gad after other lovers, and (as being
ashamed of Christ and the simplicity of the Gospel) to deck her self with
Ornaments of her own devising, till at length the mystery of iniquity came to
its maturity, and a bill of divorcement must be put in the hand of the strumpet
and great whore, so that she was no longer to be accounted a spouse.

The popish Doctors apprehending it to be a great prejudice to their cause to
have these first and purest times not only silent, and not to speak for them,
but also to condemn and abominat their doctrine, as being the very dregs of
Pagan superstition and idolatry, (though a little purified and refined by
subtle wits) they have adventured upon a strange remedy, (which to the
intelligent, maks their disease to appear the worse and more desperate) they
have, 1. dared to wrest, change, corrupt and expunge several monuments of
purest antiquity, and have been bold to publish to the view of the world their
indices expurgatorii; and as that had not been enough, they have, 2. without
all modesty published their own late dreams, under the name of ancient Doctors;
and thus have fathered upon them whom they call fathers, such children as were
not conceived till some hundredth years after the death of their supposed
parents; so that it is an usual trick for Monks (as in another sense so also
in this) to father their own children on other parents.

But when these covers could not hide their nakedness, they confess
something; but yet, like some impudent strumpets, they still plead not guilty;
and they will give you reason for it, why they may play the harlot, though
other women were chaste, and then least they should seem singular, they tell us
that they want not companions; though others be more modest and will not avouch
it, yet they are as guilty; for Vid Eccium in Enchirid. Bellarm. de sanct.
beat. lib. 1. cap. 19. Suarez. in, 3. Tom. 2. dis. 42. sect.
1. they will show you why they may invocat the Saints, though the Jewish
Church did not, and might not call upon them. 2. As for the Apostles and first
founders of the Christian Church ye must believe that they did approve this
Saint-invocation, but in modesty did conceal it, least they should be thought
ambitious and to desire that they themselves after their death should be
worshipped and invocated. And thus Paul, least he should seem arrogant, must
become a Thus his modesty must 1. make him unfaithful in concealing his
masters will. 2. a liar, in attesting and protesting that he had concealed
nothing.
liar, and make the elders of Ephesus witnesses of his lie, while he protests
that he has not shunned to declare unto them all the council of God, Act.
20.26, 27. But as such groundless pretenses show the weakness of their plea,
so this extorted confession, and concession does clearly hold out the novelty
of this Popish device, and that (as Christ said of the Jewish divorcement, Mat.
19.8.) from the beginning it was not so.

The first who did lay a stone in this foundation, seems to be Origin about
the year 240; for overturning of which we need not run to the common answer,
and put Papists in mind that his Doctrine has always been suspected, and that
his greatest followers and admirers, when they could stand no longer to his
defense, have been forced to confess that his writings have been miserably
adulterated by haereticks; so that much weight cannot be laid upon any
testimony brought from thence. Yet let us hear how Origin does plead their
cause. O! Orig. Hom. 3. in Cant. and in Joshom. 16.
says he, It shall not be amiss to think that the Saints departed, have a
care of our salvation, and that they help us by their prayers. And In Epist. ad
Romans lib. 2. cap. 2.
else where, Whether the Saints who have left their bodies and are now with
Christ, do care and labor for us as the Angels who are employed in the
ministry of our salvation, let this remain amongst the Habeatur hoc quoque
inter occulta Dei, nec chartis committenda mysteria.
hidden and secret mysteries of God, which are not to be committed to writing.
I would know what Papists can collect from these testimonies; Is there any
orthodox Divine who will scruple to say as much? yea some have positively
determined what he propounds as a mystery, and at the best but an Apocryphal
tradition; what though the saints do pray for us? must we therefore make idols
of them, and pray to them? I might Vid. lib. 7. cont. Cells. sub sin. and init.
lib. 8. and hom. 6. in lib. Jes. Nave hom. 5. in diversos and in Epist ad Romans
lib. 8. cap. 10. etc.
cite many passages where this learned man does condemn and confute
Saint-invocation as a pagan delusion.

But Cyprian about the year two hundred and fifty, did advance this error a
step further: for this holy man, supposing as certain what Origin had delivered
with much haesitation, viz. that the Sa^nts in glory did pray for us, though he
was far from thinking, that we should therefore pray to them, yet he did Cyp.
lib. 3. epist. 18.
exhort the people of God, that after their death they would remember one
another, and that after they came to their fathers house they would not forget
their brethren on earth, nor neglect to pray for them. But the Arrian haeresie
(which a little after Cyprians time began to spread it self) did so choke this
seed, that for a considerable space it lay, as it were, dead and rotten; for,
amongst the many arguments which the orthodox Doctors did bring against the
Arrians this was not the least; He Vid. Athanas. orat. 3. cont. Arrian. and
orat. 4.
whom we should worship and invocat must be God; But we must worship Christ and
pray to him: Ergo.

And thus by the good providence of God, one poison did prove a remedy and
antidote against another, until about the year three hundred and sixty four,
by the help of Basil, Nazianzen and Nissen, this idolatrous creature invocation
was advanced a considerable length further; for they, not content with the
simplicity of the Gospel, and affecting too much humane eloquence, by adorning
their panegyrical orations in the praise of Martyrs, with such artificial
flowers, such apostrophe's, prosopopaea's and rhetoricisms, in supposing of
things or persons to do, speak and appear, when really there was no such thing:
at length they thus unawares hatched this cockatrice egg: for while they, by
supposition and fiction, did in these orations direct their speech to the
Martyrs, as if they had been present and did hear; this in process of time,
was deemed to be really done; albeit the whole strain of their discourse might
show their scope to the intelligent, yea some times they would add a word for
warding off such a mistake, telling, they directed their speech to the defunct,
only by way of fiction and apostrophe; thus Nazianzen, in his first invective
against Julian, O! thou soul of great Constantine ( if thou (...), upon which
words the greek Scholiast says, that it is an Isocratisme; for Isocrates once
and again uses this form of speech to the dead in his orations.
have any understanding of these things) hear, and, etc. And in his funeral
oration on his sister Gorgonia, while he speaks to her, he adds, (...),
etc. If thou have any care of the things done by us, and if holy souls receive
this honor from God to have any feeling of these things, receive this oration
etc. And in his Fathers epitaph, having insisted in the like Apostrophe, he
adds by way of correction, If it (...).
be not too great boldness to speak so. And Jerome in Nepotianus his epitaph,
whatsoever I say seems mute, (as if I spak not) because he hears not; --
Then let us never leave off to speak of him, with whom we cannot speak. Thus
while it would appear that he speaks to him, he tells us he cannot speak to
him, he cannot but by way of supposition, and according to a rhetoric
apostrophe; and thus they might as well, yea, and did speak to inanimat
creatures; So the same Naz. orat. insanct. pasch.
Nazianzen to the Ordinance of the Passover, O great and holy Passover, etc.
But though these ancient Doctors may, and should thus, for the most part, be
interpreted, because (as we heard) they thus interpret themselves: yet it
cannot be denied, that by this affected eloquence they laid snares, not only to
simple About that time the monastical kind of life is thought to have its rise;
yea, some affirm that Basil himself was the first father and inventor of it
amongst Christians, though not a few do rather think that Paul the Theban, was
the first that practiced it, about the year 260. and that Anthony did first
plead for it, and persuade unto it, anno, 300.
monks, but also to themselves (which may serve for warning to all Ministers
not to seek after applause, and to please the ear with the melodious found of
humane literature) for they afterward, forgetting these figures and
elegancies, followed the letter, properly invocating them, to whom at first
they did speak only by way of fiction and supposition; though they performed
that new piece of will worship always with much wavering and haesitation
doubting both of its warrant and success.

Thus we have seen by what steps and authors, this idolatrous worship did creep
in, but as yet it durst not appear in the day time, but was only received and
entertained in a clandestine way, and like stolen wares, which the resetters
durst not avouch nor own: all this while it was only the private opinion of
some few Monks and private persons, and was not generally received, nor
approven by any Council for a catholic and certain doctrine, but on the
contrary, was condemned by the (d) Council of Laodicea, and their own Adrian,
the Pope approved and retained that thirty fifth article (which did condemn
creature-worship as idolatrous) in his epitome of the Canons, See that Council
(as to that particular) fully vindicated by Dr. Usher, in his answer to the
Jesuits challenge, page 460. etc.
which long after he delivered to Charles the great: And many ancient Fathers,
from time to time, did testify against this abomination; yea, these who are
reputed to be the chief authors and promoters of it, have once and again
disowned and disclaimed it, as their writings (notwithstanding of their late
purgation by the popish Doctors) can testify.

But we have too long insisted on the discovery of this invention, and need add
no more; especially since Chemn. exam. conc. Trid, in can. de invocat. Dr.
Usher loc, cit. page 418. etc. Forbes. instr. histor, theol. lib. 7. cap. 1, 2,
3, etc.
Chemnitius, Usher and Forbesse, have said enough for vindicating the truth and
the first and purest times, from popish imputations; and we might to good
purpose here set down Dr. Ibi. cap. 5.
Forbesse his twelve rules, which he brings for vindicating the Fathers, as
being useful not only in this, but in several other controverted points of
divinity. But that we may close this historical narration, its observable that
the main, if not authors, yet owners and spreaders of this idolatrous
invocation, were (as is thought) some women, and therefore its called by
Epiphanius, the (...), Epiphan. Here Is. 79.
woman's heresy. And the first, who labored to have the Saints publicly
invocated in the public prayers of the Church, was one Peter Vid. Chemn. loc.
cit. page (mihi) 339. and W. Perkins demonstr. probl. 2. vol. page 529.
Gnapheus a Fuller, who about the year 407. was condemned for an haeretick by
the fifth general Council.

You will say, but when was it generally received? Ans. Albeit, it were great
arrogance in any one to affirm, that he had perused all the monuments of
antiquity; yet since many Usher, Perkins, Chemnitius, loc. cit.
orthodox Divines, have long since put Papists to it, to show them the least
shadow of Saint-invocation in the first and purest times, and that to this day
(so far as we have seen or heard) they have not been able to produce one
testimony, or to make a reply that deserves consideration; we may, upon this
ground, together with positive evidences, from the most learned, judicious and
most approven Fathers affirm, that albeit, 1. In the days of Nazianzen, there
were several ground-stores brought for this work, to wit, the rhetorical
Dialogues, and apostrophes to the defunct, which, 2. were afterward laid by
some foolish builders, yet with much doubting and haesitation; and 3. though
some did call to the martyrs, yet they did not invocat them, they were (as
Usher loc. cit. pog. 444. and Geo. Cassand. a moderate Papist, thinks it yet
sufficient only to present our wishes and desires to them, and not to pray to
them, satis est si dicamus per modum desiderri eas interpellationes explicari
posse, etc. oper. page 1109. vid. Uss.
one speaks) only vocati, not invocati, they were desired (as we do the
living) to pray with us, but were not prayed unto. 4. Though some did call upon
them, yet with some moderation, not pleading their merits, and only in their
private devotion; Yet 5. till after the death of Epiphanius and Augustine
(these two great opposers of this idolatrous invention) it came not to its
height; but after a little while, it fell into the hands of some Such as
Prudentius, Paulinus Fortunatus, etc.
Poets, who without all modesty, used a licentious liberty to pass all bounds,
and by a strange kind of metamotphosis to make new gods and mediators of holy
men and martyrs; but all this time it was kept, as it were, within doors, in
the private or domestic worship, till about the year six hundred. For albeit,
Gnapheus before that time essayed to have insert it into the public Liturgies,
yet he and his motion were rejected; that great work being reserved for Gregory
the great, who, for that and his other superstitious conceits, may well be
called the grand innovator and father of superstition: and then lastly, Adrian
the third, about the year eight hundred eighty five, did put on the cop-stone,
claiming to himself and his successors, the power of Canonization, and making
Gods of men.

We need not stay long in confuting this dream, yea, one of its patrons, the
learned Swarez, does furnish us with an argument (confirmed by the authority of
their master Thomas) in which we may rest, viz. No Religionis virtus circa
solum Deum versatur sed oration est proprius actus religionis etc. Swar. loc.
cit. cap. 9. sect. 2.
religious act can without idolatry be terminated in the creature; But must
only be directed to God; But prayer is a religious act: Ergo. And before he
brings this, he tells us, that the conclusion of it must be supponed as
certain: You will then say, the controversy is at an end. O! but hearken and
ye shall hear a limitation, its certain (says he) that prayer under some
consideration, as it belongs to their cultus latriae, does only belong to
God; but as it falls under cultum duliae, so it may be tendered to Saints, We
will not now meddle with these strange terms; but, in a word, he grants, that
prayer, as it is a religious Ibid. cap. 7. and 8.
act, cannot be made to any creature without gross impiety, and thus he has
hit right; for their idolatrous Saint-invocation, being a most impious and
idolatrous abomination, can be no religious performance, nor savor of piety
and devotion.

1. We may argue thus, we must not call on him in whom we do not believe, Romans
10.14. But woe to him that believes, or trusts in any mere creature, and
makes it his arm and city of refuge, Jer. 17.5. Ergo. O says Bellarmine, the
Prophet Jeremy must be mistaken, for otherwise Saint-invocation must be
disclaimed; for Non potest sanctos invocare qui'suo modo in eos non credit and
in iis non sperat, Bell. de sanct. beat. lib. 2. cap. 20. sect. ad primum.
none can be said to call upon the Saints, who does not in his own way trust
and hope in them: But, thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in
man, under what pretense soever, for his heart must depart from the Lord: If
any thing of it thus be let out toward the creatures, He will accept of none
of it, He dow not away with a corrival.

You will say, they give God the first place, and they acknowledge him to be
the first Primito auctor bonorum. Bell. ibid.
author. Reply, Instruments and means must not share with the first author in
what is due to him alone; while we use the creature, we must only confide and
trust in God. Whatever we make an object of our faith, confidence, or hope,
must be either an Idol or God; and the most vile Pagan idolater might run to
this popish plea; for though they worshipped many inferior gods, yet they
acknowledged only one, viz. their great Jupiter, to be the first and chief
author of all.

As for the two texts Bellarmine cites, the first, viz. Genesis 48.16. It is most
impertinently alleged, and it is as impertinently applied, viz. not to the
present point of trusting in, but of calling upon, the Saints: and thus also he
contradicts himself, while he grants that the Saints were not invocated under
the old Testament; and the text speaks only of the adoption of Manasseh and
Ephraim, to be accounted as Jacobs sons; and thus to become heads of two
distinct Tribes; and now Jacob, by these words of his blessing performs what he
said, ver. 5. As for the other place, we remit him to their own Cajet. in
Philem.
Cajetan, who has so much modesty as to blush at the popish gloss, and will
not have the Saints there ( viz. Philem. ver. 5.) to be named as the object,
but as the Fides refertur in sanctos tanquam consertes fidei.
subject of faith; so that Philemon there is commended for that faith, which he
had with all Saints, and not which he had in the Saints; but as to the genuine
sense of the words, we rather close with Theodoret, viz. that the Apostle
having named faith and love, does assign to each of these its proper object, so
that Yet here there is an inversion of order, vid. Calv, in loc.
faith must be terminated in the Lord Jesus, and love in the Saints.

2. These who teach for doctrines the commandments of men, do in vain worship
God, Mat. 15.9. Woe to such presumptuous fools, what plea will they be able to
bring, when it will be said to them (as it was said to that people, Isa. 1.12.)
who required these things at your hand? But the Scriptures hold out, 1. no
warrant or command, as we shall hear the Papists anon confess. 2. No promise
or reward to such a performance; and 3. no threatening or punishment, for
neglecting and slighting it; and 4. No example of holy men, who have performed
it with success and approbation; but on the contrary, when through ignorance
and infirmity, and being under a surprisal, they have tendered but a little of
their homage, and that worship they owe to God unto the creature, though never
so eminent and excellent, though an Apostle or Angel, they have been admonished
of, and rebuked for, their error, as Act. 10.25, 26. Rev. 19.10. and 22.8, 9.

O! but may Saint-worshipers say, what is refused in modesty, should not
therefore be denied or withheld. O! but hearken, and ye shall hear reason for
their refusing, yea, and abominating that service and homage. O! says What
Peter abominateth while he was on earth, he will not accept while he is in
heaven, until the reason he used prove null, and he leave off to be a man, or
fellow creature with us.
Peter to Cornelius, why will thou fall down at my feet? Ah! am not I a man,
and will thou make an idol of me? and see thou do it not (says the Angel to
John) for I am thy fellow servant and of thy brethren, worship not me but God.
We may here admire Bell. de sanct. beat. lib, 1. cap. 14. sect. ad 4. dico.
Bellarmines impudency in pleading John's practice as a rule and ground for
ours; Whether (says number melius Johanne norunt Calvinistae? etc.
he) did John or the Calvinists best know if Angels should be worshipped? And
wherefore are we reprehended for doing what John did? Ans. Because John himself
is reprehended, and who knowing what he says, would affirm that we should
practice what is condemned in him, and make that for which he was rebuked a
rule whereby we should walk. Albeit Balaams ass, when she saw the Angel of the
Lord standing in the way, turned aside; yet these men, though they hear an
Angel from heaven crossing their way, and calling to them to halt, they will
notwithstanding drive on and go forward. Its true, John was the Disciple whom
Christ loved, and an eminent Saint, but not free of sin, until by death, he
was freed of the body of sin and death, which was derived to him from the first
Adam, he was subject to mistakes failings and infirmities: and whether shall we
think that John, or the Angel, was in an error? for both could not be right,
there being such an opposition; the Angel condemning what the Apostle
practices, and holding out a reason for his reproof; and John's relapsing into
the same fault, is a further proof of his weakness, while he was surprised with
the glorious appearance of the Angel; but it no ways helps Bellarmin's cause:
But the Angels renewed reproof, is a new confirmation of his error; for
though, Mala non sunt bis facienda; yet pulchra and vera sunt bis dicenda,
eoque magis observanda. The oftener an evil is committed, it is the worse; but
the oftener a truth is inculcated, it should be the more headed and observed.
Then, while Papists shall be able, 1. to convince us, that they know better how
to entertain Saints and Angels, then they themselves know how they should be
used by us; yea, 2. While they shall make good, that the holy Angels can
dissemble, and, like men, in their vain complements, refuse what is due to
them, and bring a lie to back their complement; and, 3. Till they can prove
that their canonized Saints are not yet According to that usual synecdoche
totius pro part, the soul (as being the nobler part) gets the denomination of
the whole.
men, their fellow servants and creatures, they must have us excused if we
challenge them of idolatry, while they give the worship which is due to God unto
the work of his hands.

3. Arg. 3.
We should only pray to him, who is, 1. omnipotent and able to save and
deliver, and to do Ephesians. 3.20.
exceeding abundantly, above all that we can think or ask; 2. Omnipresent, and
always at hand, who is not on a journey (as 1 King. 18.27.
Eliah mockingly said of Baal, while his Priests were crying unto him) and far
from home when we knock; 3. Omniscient, and knows the very 1 King. 8.39.
thoughts and desires of our hearts, he must know our wants and hear our cries
and complaint, he must not be a sleep, or diverted by talking with some other
petitioner; so that like Baals Priests, we should cry aloud to awaken him, or
wait till he be at leisure to hearken to us: but there is only one Omnipotent,
to whom all things are possible, Mat. 19.26 One who is omni-present, from whose
presence we cannot flee, run where we will, Ps. 139.7, 8, 9. And only he is
omniscient, from whose eyes nothing is hid, and he it is (and he only) with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Ergo. Albeit Papists dare not so impudently
blaspheme, as to ascribe any of these divine attributes to the creature, yet
(say they) the Saints in glory have power with God, and he has put in their
hands the dispensation of mercies, and by beholding his face, they see there,
as in a glass, though not all things whatsoever, yet what concerns them, and
is pertinent to them to know, and thus they must know and hear when we pray
unto them. Ans. Yet Scripture holds forth the ministry of Angels, Heb. 1 14.
but it does not speak of any such ministry committed to the Saints after their
removal; but supposing it were so, should we therefore rob the master, and give
to his servant that honor and glory, that is due to him alone? I am the Lord
(says the holy one) that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven images, Isa. 42.8. Idolatry in the Word, is
frequently called whoredom: now it were a poor plea for the whorish wife to
say to her husband, ye sent your servant to wait upon me, and minister unto me;
or, I knew such a one to be your friend and have moyen with you, and why might
I not then use him as my husband? since ye loved him, why might I not deal
kindly with him for your sake? And should not the honest servant, if tempted by
an impudent woman, say with Genes. 39.8, 9.
Joseph, my kind master has committed Qui babet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
all to my hand, neither has he kept back any thing (in that he has given me
himself) except his glory, how then can I do this great wickedness to rob him
thereof? We heard how Peter and the Angel would not, durst not rob him thereof;
and how zealously did Barnabas and Paul protest against their madness, who
would have sacrificed unto them? And little know these deluded creatures with
what Nemo dicat, timeo ne irascatur mihi angelus si non illum colo, tunc tibi
irascitur quando illum colere volueris; bonus est enim and Deum amat, etc
August. in Ps. 96.
indignation the holy Angels and the spirits of just men, do abhor these
spiritual sacrifices of prayers and praises, which deluded idolaters do offer
up unto them.

As for that glass of the trinity, in which they imagine the Saints to behold
all things that concern them, and so what prayers are offered up unto them;
many Papists, long since, have dashed it in pieces, as being ashamed of such a
groundless invention; So Scotus, Bonaventura, Gabriel, C^^^m and Quos
simpliciter illud co^mentum rejicere affirmat (inter quos enumerat ipsum Thomam
sect. 9. and omnes Thomistas sect. 14. and omnes Theologos, sect. 15. ex quorum
placitis argumentatur contra hoc fictitium speculum) Mart. Becan. theol. schoi.
part. 1. tract. 1. cap. 9. q. 13.
others, whom the Jesuit Becan cites and follows; to which we may add
Henricus Gandavensis, quo^^. 6. art. 4. (whom Dom. Bannez in 1. tom. 1. ad
quaest. 12. art. 8.
Bannez will have the first who removed the black from the back of that glass)
and our learned Countryman, Io. Major, in 4. sent. did. 49. quaest. 5. So that
Quilibet beatus videt in verbo (he est, in essentia divina) tanquam objecto
cognito, ut explicatur ab aliis, ea omnia quae pertinent ad suum statum, ut
docent communiter omnes theologi cum S. Tho. 1. p. q. 12. art. 6. haec Alvar.
in 3. quaest. 10. art 3. disp. 55. it.
Didacus Alvarez has wronged himself, while he would abuse the reader in
making him believe that all Theologs, with Thom. 1. part. quaest. 12. art. 6.
(but as he has mistaken the thing, so also, he or the Printer, the figure; for
in that sixth article, Thomas speaks not one word to that question, but art.
8.) do teach, that the Saints, by beholding of God, do Recte Calvin. in 1. Cor.
13.8. imaginantur (inquit) Papistae, sanctos ex reftexo lumine quod haebent ex
conspectu Dei videre totum mundum, sed profanum est figmentum and prorsus
gemilitium quod Aegyptiacam Theologiam magis recipit quam Christianae
philosophiae conveniat, etc.
see in him all things that belong to their state.

You will say, what prospect have they who reject this glass, found for the
Saints to look down from heaven to earth? Ans. Martin Becan. loc. cit.
Becan, for healing the wound he had made, brings three sorts of plasters
(nor knowing any thing on which he could rely) 1. The report of those who daily
come from earth; (as if the dead, after their arrival in heaven, made it their
work to show to their brethren what was doing on earth when they removed from
it.) 2. The relation of Angels; as if these ministering Spirits, for the heirs
of salvation, did minister unto them after they were brought home to their
Fathers house; they are indeed (...), but (...); they are ministering Spirits to
them who shall be (not to these who already are) heirs and inheritors of
salvation, Heb. 1.14.) 3. Revelation from God, as if the Lord did say unto
them, pity such and such a man, for he prays unto you; but will not the Lord
rather pity and show mercy of himself then wait upon, and thus, as it were,
deal with others, that they may deal with him for that effect? And then I would
ask, what warrant they can produce for such a revelation? and how they came to
know it before it was revealed unto them? and whether it be an extraordinary
dispensation or not? whether the Lord makes such a revelation to the Saints
immediately, or by some signs and instruments? and what these are* etc. Bell.
de sanct. beat. lib. ^. cap. 20.
Bellarmine finding himself at a loss here, having alleged four opinions of
the Roman Rabbis, he leaves the question with this uncertain determination,
that one of these four, ( viz. that dream of the glass of the Trinity) is most
probable; and another, ( viz. the last of Becans subterfuges concerning divine
revelation) is more fit and efficacious for convincing of haereticks, and that
the other two are not satisfactory.

We may fitly here allege Erasmus, his pithy Sarcasme, as being more pertinent
then Arguments, while we have to deal with such obstinat adversaries. There was
one (says Apud Chemn. loc. cit page (mihi) 296.
he) who in the time of a storm, being in great danger, and seeing every one to
run to his tutelar Angel, reasoned thus with himself, If I should now call upon
our Nicholaus, (to whom the care of Seamen is committed) perhaps he will not
hear me, and is ignorant of my hazard; and though he know my condition and hear
what I say, yet, what know I but he may be so busied and taken up with the
complaints of others, that he has no leisure to help me; therefore he resolves
to take the surest and shortest out, and immediately to run to God in Christ,
who is able and willing to pity us, and who has commanded us to call on him in
the day of trouble, and promised to deliver us, Ps. 50.15. Surely, that Vid
Chem. ibid.
Nobleman that was with George, Duke of Saxony, at the time of his death, did
rightly determine the controversy that was among the Moncks; some counselling
him to pray to Mary, some that he would pray to the Angels, others to this and
that Saint: O! says this Nobleman, your Highness, as to civil and politic
affairs, used always to say, that the straight way was the shortest and best:
wherefore then suffer ye your self to be misled, by looking after these
Maeanders, these crooked and by-ways? and do not rather directly run to God in
Christ, who is able and ready to help all these that come unto him.

Jam. 1.6. But Papists cannot pray to Saints in faith, they must waver and
doubt, 1. of their warrant; for there is no such thing enjoined in the Word, as
we shall hear themselves confess; O but, says the Lord, what thing soever I
command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto nor diminish from it,
Deuteronomy. 12.32. Thou must (says August. de consensevang. 1.2. Deum sic colere
oportet quomodo scipsum colendum esse praece^it-^orare aliter quam Deminus
docuis, non ignorantia solum sed culpa est. quare honorandus esse non
intelligitur nisi ipse docuerit honorandum, dei honorem per Deum docemur; non
est de Deo humanis judiclis sentiondum, Aug de trin. lib. 5.
Austin) so worship God, as he has prescribed; and if thou pray otherwise then
he has taught thee, thou offerest to him the sacrifice of a fool, thou must
not make thy reason a rule for his service. 2. They must doubt, whether these
new patrons will accept of that piece of homage from their hands, since in the
Scriptures we read of none, who would thus suffer their master to be robbed of
his glory. 3. They must waver and doubt, concerning the state of those to whom
they pray, whether they be in hell or heaven; thus their Rabbis, Cajet. tract.
de indulg. Canus lib. 5. cap. 5. Joan. Pic. Mirand. apolog. quaest. 7. Bell.
loc. cit. respondeo sanctorum.
Cajetan, Canus, Mirandula, etc. have confessed, that the Pope may err in the
canonization of Saints; and Bellarmine himself grants, that the histories of
some of their canonized Saints are apocryphal and uncertain; yea, says Tanta
est fides adhibenda eccles^^ in damnatione alicujus quanta est adhibenda in
canonizatione sanctorum; sed dicit, Thom. ult art. quodl. 9. quod sanctos
canonizatos ab ecclesia non tenemur de necessitate sidel credere esse in
gloria; fundamentum Thomae est quia in his tantum tenemur de necessitate
salutis ecclesia credere quae ad substantiam fidei pertinent. Mirand. loc, cit.
sub finem quaest. fol. (mihi) 55. vid. etiam fol. 51.
Mirandula, we should as well believe the Church when it passes a sentence of
condemnation, as in its canonization of Saints; But we are not (as Thomas
says) to believe that these are in glory, which the Church has canonized for
Saints (and shall we pray to these, who are in hell and dare not pray for
themselves?) yea, we may upon good grounds question if ever there were such men
and women in the world, as some of their deified Saints, such as St.
Christopher, St. George, St. Catharin, etc.

4. They must also waver and haesitate, to whom of the Saints rather then to
others, they should have their recourse, they have made unto themselves so many
Patrons and Advecats that they know not whom to employ; and therefore
Ribadineira in vita Borg.
Franciscus Borgia did appoint, that that controversy should every month be
determined by lot, which custom is punctually observed by the Jesuits, who (as
Lorin. in 1 Act.
Lorinus testifies) from month to month by lot make choice of new gods and
patrons, and others throw the dyce and make it decide the question.

5. They must doubt, whether, 1. their patron they have chosen does hear and
take notice of them; whether, 2. he be otherwise employed in dispatching
business for those who have prevented them, and have more moyen with him;
whether, 3. he has gotten a commission to be their guardian, and if he will
intrude himself on that office without a call from his master, etc.

Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.2.
record for our copy, does show us to whom we should direct our prayers; viz.
only to our heavenly Father, and to whom we must ascribe the Kingdom, Power and
Glory. The meanest man and the greatest Angel (says Quod colit uminus Angelus
id colendum ab homine ultimo Tertul. advers Marcion. lib. 4.
Tertullian) have one and the same object of worship. Our King stands not in
need of a deputy, all his subjects may make an immediate address to him in
Christ.

Bellarmine answers, 1. That according to this pattern we must neither
invocat the Son nor holy Ghost, but only the Father. Repl. By what reason can
Bellarmine prove that the Father there is taken, (...), personally for the
first person of the Trinity, and not (...), essentially as it is common to all
the persons in the Trinity? 2. Supposing that it were there taken personally,
yet his inference is naught, and does not beseem the learning of so great a
Doctor; but I should rather think that he goes against his own light, while he
argues against the rule acknowledged by De Christo lib. 1. cap. 17. etc.
himself and all orthodox Divines in their disputs against the Arrians, ( viz.
that when one of the persons of the blessed Trinity is named in reference to
the creatures, (yea though there were an exclusive particle added, yet) the
other two must not be excluded. 2. He Ans. that Christ there did not teach his
Disciples to whom, but for what they should pray. Reply, 1.

Then that Pattern must not be perfect. 2. Why did Christ suppress that which
was most material? for there is greater hazard in mistaking the one way then
the other. But he answers, that the Disciples did well know, that God, yea
and only God, should be invocated as the first author of all good. Reply, But
why does he add that limitation? it is contrary to his own confession; for
before that time the Saints were not at all invocated; because (says Quod illi
adhuc inferni carceribus clausi detinerentur Bell, ord. dis. de beat. and
canoniz.
he) they were then kept in a prison of hell viz. in limbo patrum, and
therefore neither did the Disciples desire, nor Christ prescribe a directory
for worshipping of any creature; and therefore Saint-invocation must be a
popish anti-scripturall invention.

Before the time of the Anno 1550. See ^po^sw. hist. Chapter Sect page 91.
Reformation, there was a great debate in the University of St. Andrews,
whether the Pater noster should be said to the saints; and after much disput a
simple fellow was judged to give a wiser decision of the question then all the
Doctors with their distinctions. O! (said he to the Sub-prior) Sir, To whom
should the Pater noster be said but to God only? give the saints aves and
creeds enew in the devils name (so he after his rude way of speech) for that
may suffice them. But Bell. loc. cit cap. 10. 6. ibid.
Bellarmine condemns those learned Fathers, and all others who say the Pater
noster to any creature, as simple and stupid; yet it may be questioned, whether
the Popish cause does ow more to him for disallowing that vile prostitution of
the name of God, his kingdom, power and works to the creature; or to them who
are loath to disclaim that pattern of prayer, which our blessed Lord has left
on record for our use till he come again?

that we should worship the Lord our God, and Only serve him, Mat. 4. v. 10.
This stopped the devils mouth, v. 11. but yet his factors will not be silent; but
will tell you of a dulia and latria, which in scripture do signify one and the
same thing* and looking to the Etymon and common use of the wor^^ their Dulia,
which they give to Saints, does import more servitude, reverence and subjection
then their Latria, which they allow to God; and therefore, Bell. loc. cit. cap.
12.
Bellarmine had reason to confess this their appropriation of these terms to
be apocryphal, and to have been excogitated in their Schools, (which have been
a very nursery and seminary of superstition and idolatry) to be a cloak to
cover their apostasy. yea, in the preface to that disput, he grants that
Saint-invocation is eximium adorationis genus. And Azor, instit. moral. tom 1.
lib. 9. cap. 10.
Azorius says, that the Saints are to be worshipped Divino cultu and honor,
qui est relligionis actus. And did ever any pagan go a greater length? What can
be given more to God then they allow to the poor creature? for what use then
serves their distinction of Dulia and Latria?

Lev. 17.7, Deuteronomy. 32.17, Ps. 106.37. 1 Cor. 10.20. How should they tremble, be
amazed and confounded at their creature-worship and invocation? We do not read
in all the Scriptures, that the Israelits at any time, professedly and
purposely, did worship the devil; yea there were but a few of the Gentiles, and
these most rude and barbarous so far demented. O! but faith the Lord (in the
places cited) both of the Jews and of all the Gentiles, the most sober and
intelligent who did worship and other but God, they worshipped and sacrificed to
devils. If thou make an idol of the creature, whatever that creature be in it
self, though very good and excellent, yet it becomes a devil unto thee, though
the Jews and Gentiles might have made use of the same plea which Papists run
to: we have seen how Pagans take them to that same city of refuge, and that the
idolatrous Israelits did cover themselves with the same mantle, we need not
question, while they worshipped the host of Heaven and sacrificed to the Queen
of Heaven, yet they did not forget the King of Heaven. Thus after they had
chosen new Gods, and Aaron had said of the golden calf, These be thy Gods, O
Israel; yet he immediately subjoyneth to morrow is a feast to the Lord, Exodus
32.5. though Jeroboam said of the calves he had made, Behold thy Gods, O
Israel, 1 King. 12.28. yet he still acknowledged the true and great God;
therefore he desired the man of God to pray to God for him, Chapter 13.6. and sent
to Ahijah the Prophet of the true God, Chapter 14.2. But why do (...) insist on
particulars, we have the manner of worship of all Idolaters, whether Pagans or
Israelites, set down 2 King. 17.33.41. etc. They fear the Lord and serve their
own gods, they would give to the great God the first place, and mainly fear and
reverence him, though they would allow to their inferior gods and patrons,
some inferior piece of service and worship. But both they and Papists are in a
gross mistake, while they estimate prayer to be an inferior part of worship;
yea, it is such an eminent part of it, that sometimes to show its excellency,
its put for the whole worship of God, as Genesis 4.26. Ps. 79.6. Jer. 10.25. Isa.
64.7. and thus also the place of Gods worship, is called the house of prayer,
Isa. 56.7. Mat. 21.13. Yea, Thom. 22. quaest. 83. art. 3. conclus. art.
manifestum est quod est prepriae religionis actus.
Thomas grants, that its most certain that prayer is a religious act; and all
the Vid. Thom. ibid. and quast. 81. art. 1, 2, 3.
Schoolmen confess, that Religion has God only for its object, to which it
must be directed. And I would ask of Papists, 1. where they do read any
description of prayer in any Divine, till these last and idolatrous days, in
which there is mention of any other object of invocation but God alone? And, 2.
I would know what are these affections, which they exercise and pour out in
their prayers to God, which they do not employ (yea, as to the measure and
degree) in their prayers to the Saints? Nay, we shall hear, how they do more
reverence and religiously worship the creatures, then the infinite Creator. And
Est eximium adorationis genu^. Bell. ord. disp. de ^eat. and Canoniz. vid.
Azor. in^^^t. moral. tom. 1. lib 9. cap. 10.
Bellarmine, notwithstanding of all the fig leaves he gathers to cover the
nakedness of the whorish Church, yet is forced to confess, in the very Porch to
the dispute, that Saint-invocation is a notable and eminent kind of worship.
And must it not then be as evident as the Sun to shine, that Papists are
egregious idolaters?

And then, 7. Prayer, according to the Scripture phrase, Mat. 1.11. Ps. 141.2.
Rev. 8.3, 4. by Divines, Sacrifice; and the Apostle gives it a distinguishing
epithet, for discriminating it from the Levitical Oblation, while he calls it a
spiritual sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. And so it must be more noble and excellent,
then these outward and material offerings. It is not (says Sacrificium verum
non est quod ex arca, sed quod ex cord profertur, nec quod manu sed quod mente
libatur. Lactant. de opif. Dei cap. 2.
one) a true sacrifice, which is brought from the coffer or herd, but which
proceeds from the heart; not that which is offered by the hand, but by the
mind and soul. But it was always unlawful to offer sacrifice unto any, but to
the true and living God: and therefore it must be unlawful to pray to any but
to him. And Thom. 22. quaest. 83. art. 3 orando tradit homo mentem suam De,
quam ei per reverentiam subjicit and quodamodo praesentat. And yet he makes it
the subject of the following article, to show, that we should pray to the
Saints.
Thomas well proves, that it must be so; because in prayer, we offer up our
heart and soul, and profess our reverence and subjection to him to whom we
pray: But it were vile idolatry to offer up our heart, and to profess the
subjection of our souls to any creature; and therefore it must be a strange
abomination to pray to any creature.

Joh. 2.1. Heb. 7.25. He cannot be so diverted, or taken up with the multitude
of clients and causes, as to forget or slight thee, he will not send thee to
another, he cannot, he will not reject any who come unto him; he has such
bowels toward his supplicants, and is so touched with the feeling of their
infirmities, that they need not fear their cause shall miscarry in his hands,
Joh. 6.37. Heb. 4.15. O! let us then hearken to the exhortation, ver. 16. Let
us in him come boldly to the throne of grace. And woe to those deluded
creatures, who run to other advocates and patrons; is he not as ready to
undertake for thee, as when he invited Mat. 11 28.
all those, who were heavy laden and weary to come unto him? Can he weary of
employment, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8? and who
ever lives to plead his peoples cause, and interceed for them, Heb. 7.25, 24?
In the outward Court and Tabernacle the whole congregation might pray, but none
might enter into the Holy of Holies, but the high Priest with blood, Heb. 9.6,
7. All Saints may join on earth in this lower and outer Court; but in the
heavens, that Holy of holies, only our high Priest appears for us, presenting
our sacrifices, and mingling his blood (that excellent perfume) therewith, Heb.
6.20.

But Papists would cloak the matter with a distinction between a Mediator of
intercession and a Mediator of redemption; and they say they do not wrong
Christ, while they substitute many intercessors, since they only acknowledge
him to be the Redeemer. Repl. But if we believe the Scriptures, then we must
grant, that as there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator between God
and man, to interceed with God for man; to wit, the man Christ Jesus, Its
observable that the Apostle here, while he speaks of prayer excludes the
mediation of all others, as Calvin well observes, atque horum quoque
insu^sitatem coargu^ loci circumstantia quandequidem hie de precibus ex
professo tractatur. Calvin in 1 Timothy 2, 5^
1 Timothy 2.5, 6. Heb. 9.15. Where also we have the ground of his mediation; from
which we may argue thus, 1. None can be a Mediator to interceed for sinners,
but he who has offered himself a ransom for sin; but no Angel or man did, or
was able to pay a farthing of our debt. Ergo. 2. He who is our Patron and
Advocate, must be able in point of law and justice to carry our cause, and so
he must be (according to the Apostles inference, 1 John 1, 2.) the propitiation
for our sins, but Christ is the alone propitiation, and therefore the sole
advocate of sinners. It was well said by Pro quo autem nullus interpellar sed
ipse pro emnibus, hic unus verusque mediator est Aug. lib. 2. cont. Parm, cap.
8.
Austin, He for whom none interceedeth, but he for all, must be the alone and
true Mediator. But such is Bell. loc. cit. cap. 20. hanc rationem secutus est
B. August.
Bellarmines, rather impudence then ingenuous confidence, that he dare cite
this passage for clearing one of his distinctions: But yet he is pleased to
take notice of Calvin's abuse (as he would make us believe) of that place: yet
in effect says nothing to that, which mainly strikes at the root of
Saint-invocation, viz. that Christ is the alone and true Mediator, and
therefore all other mediators, to whom we offer our prayers, must be so many
empty shadows and lying waters, which will not refresh the weary passenger. And
the following words (which Bellarmine either has not been at the pains to read
and ponder, or else of purpose passes over) will sufficiently vindicate
Augustine from the popish false glosses; for, says he, Nam si esset mediator
Paulus, essent utique and caeteri co-apestoli ejus, ac sic multi Mediatores
essent, nec ipsi Paulo constaret ratio qua dixerat, unus enim Deus, unus
Mediator Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus, Aug. loc. cit. But as redemption
and intercession must not be separated in the Mediator, neither have the
authors of that distinction separated these in their practice, but to whom they
have run as unto intercessors, to them they have leaned as unto Vid. Calvin in
1 Timothy 2.5.
Redeemers. Thus in their Litanies and forms of prayer, and particularly in
Mary her Psaltery, published to the view of the world, they call to the Saints
as authors and procurers of mercies spiritual and temporal. O! what blasphemy
has been vented in their blind zeal toward these strange gods? The learned
Chem. exam. Conc. Trid. part 3. in decr. de invocat, See also Dr. Usher lol.
cit.
Chemnitius has set down a large catalogue of this kind of abomination and
impudent idolatry, especially in their supplications to the virgin Mary, in
which they call her the queen of heaven, the mother of mercy, their hope, life,
refuge, strength, etc. and in her Psalter they have ascribed to her, what was
said by the Prophet in the Psalms, for proclaiming the glory and majesty of
God, viz. that Psalter B. Mar^ virg. Ps. 18. Ps. ^7. Ps 30. etc.
the heavens declare her glory; In thee, O Lady, have I put my trust, let me
never be confounded; save me, Lady, by thy name; O come, let us sing unto our
queen that brings salvation, her mercy endures for ever; except our Lady build
the house of our heart, the building will not continue, etc. Be astonished, O
ye heavens, and be confounded, O ye earth, (who to this day declare the glory
of your Maker) to see the sons of men (for whose use ye were made) thus to
dishonor their Master, and to give his glory to the poor creature. If their
set forms compiled by the learned, be laden with such stuff, what must then
the licentious liberty be, which the rude Let us hear Calvin who was better
acquainted with their practice then we who live at suc a distance. Quod Satan
sub papatu eousque perduxit ut vix millesimus quisque mediatorem Christum vel
titulo tenus agnosceret -- ita illis nomen est invisum ut si quispiam Christi
Mediatoris faciat mentionem praeteritis sanctis mox suspicione gravetur
haeresios Calvin. in 1 Timothy 2.5.
multitude takes to themselves at their private devotion? And albeit
Bellarmine, Suarez and others, dare not own these execrable blasphemies in
point of dispute, yet take their best refined speculations, and view them
narrowly, and they shall appear to be nothing else but a nursery of such
abominations; and though in their debates, they will not (because they cannot)
defend, yet who is he amongst them that freely rebukes, or takes pains to
remedy this evil, though so publicly and frequently committed? Yea not only
their Postillators, with the rabble of their ignorant and blind preachers, but
their most learned and subtle Rabbis do lay the foundation for such a
superstructure; their Magist. sent. lib. 4. dis. 45. Scot. ibid. q. 4. Thom.
2.2. quaest. 83. art. 4. in corp. summa Tab. 5. orare Bellarm. de sanct. beat.
lib. 1. cap 20. Suarez. loc. cit lib. 1. de or. cap. 10. 12. etc. I might here
fill some pages with citations.
Lombard, Thomas, Scotus, Summa Tabiena, Bellarmine, Vasquez, Suarez, Valentia,
Bannez, Becanus, etc. do maintain and plead, that the Saints by their merits do
obtain, and thus with their money purchase an answer to our prayers. I needed
not have named any for this, it being the doctrine of all the popish Clergy;
who of them have written on this subject, who does not make the merits of the
Saints the ground of Saint-invocation? According to their Thom. loc. jam citato.
masters doctrine, Orationem porrigimus sanctis ut eorum precibus ac meritis
orationes nostrae sortiantur effectum, We pray to the Saints (says Aqui^as)
that through their prayers and merits we may be heard, and obtain a return of
our prayers. Yet the Fathers of the Vid. decret. publicaum, sess. ult. t die 3.
Dec. 1563. de pur. invoc. etc,
Council of Trent judged it safest to suppress this ground in their Canon
about Saint-worship and invocation. And thus its evident that the popish Church
has made their canonized Saints their mediators not only of intercession, but
also of redemption, upon whose purchase and merits they rely for a return to
their prayers: So that in these creature-worshippers, is verified what our
blessed Redeemer said, Mat. 6.24. that no man can serve two masters, unless he
rob the one of his due, and that they who commit one evil in hewing out (with
that people, Jer. 2.13.) broken Cisterns that can hold no water, will add the
second evil, and also with them forsake the true fountain of living waters. For
since Papists began to worship the creature, and make it their city of refuge,
they have proceeded from one step to another, till Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Jesurun-like they have lightly esteemed, and kicked at the rock of their
salvation. Its long since Bodin in method. hist. cap. 5. page 100. S. Antonius
a plerisque in Italia and Gallia Narbon^nsi ardentiori voto certe majori metu
colitur quam Deus immortalis.
Bodin ingenuously acknowledged and complained of this madness. That St.
Anthony by many in Italy and France was more feared, and zealously worshipped
then the immortal God. And Cast. cons. art. 21. quidam homines non mali certos
sibi sanctos tanquam patronos deligunt inque eorum moritis and intercessione
plus quam in Christi merito fiduciam ponunt.
Cassander grants, That some well meaning men, having chosen some Saints to be
their patrones, do trust more in their merits and intercession then Christ's.
And Vives in lib. 8 August. de civil. Dei cap. ^7.
Vives lam^nteth, that many are come to that height of Idolatry, that they
worship their he and she Saints no otherwise then God himself. Nay says Biel
in canone. Mis. lect. 30.
Biel, many of us are often more affected toward Saints, then toward God. And
Jacobus de Valentia is not ashamed to profess, that there is no other refuge
lose for us in this our pilgrimage, but to run to the mediatrix the virgin
Mary. I might easily add to these: But any who will look on their psalms and
hymns on the virgin Mary, and on their prayers to the Saints (though digested
and published in print) shall find there no more mention of God, and no
petition in any of these put up to him, more then to the devil. And thus they
have dealt worse with the great God, then Pagans did with their Jupiter: And
loc. cit,
Vives confesses, that he could see little difference between their opinion
of, and carriage toward the Saints, and the vilest heathens estimation of
their gods.

As for the Mediator, there be three things which in a special manner proclaim
his glory, and declare his admirable love toward the sons of men; and they
have robbed him of all th^se. 1. His bowels and tenderness, his compassion
toward and his readiness to welcome and receive all weary and humbled sinners;
and that his pity and love to lost ones is such, that he prevents them with his
loving invitations, and becomes the first seeker; that he will not take a
repulse, but will draw in all his rans^med ones, and pull them with a strong
hand from the snare, Heb. 4.15. Mat. 11.28. Cant 1.4. etc. 2. His death and
bitter sufferings, that he is the propitiation, and gave himself to be a
ransom for sinners, 1 Timothy 2.6. R^m. 5.8. 1 John 2.2. etc. 3. That thus he is
the way to life and happiness, that in him we may come boldly to the Throne of
grace, and in his name ask what we will, that he is our advocate and makes
continual intercession for us, Joh. 14.6. Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
1 John 2, 1. Heb. 7.25. etc.

As for the first, not only do they hold out the Father as an angry and
implacable one, to whom sinners dare not approach, (though he so loved the
world, that he spared not his only begotten Son, that it might not perish, Ioh.
3.16. 1 Ioh. 4.9.) but also the compassionat Redeemer, who did not spare his
blood that he might slay the enmity, and become the propiciation for
reconciling us to God, Ephesians. 2.16. 1 Ioh. 2.2. And they have appealed from him
(as being too rigid and severe to poor sinners) unto the throne of the Virgin
Mary, as being more compassionat and condescending, and more ready to receive
and do good to such: Hence their axiom and article of Faith (acknowledged by
Bell. loc. cit. cap. 17. 2. probatur.
Bellarmine and Suar. ubi supra 17. ex Ber. ser. de B. Virgin.
Suarez) opus est mediatore ad mediatorem; We stand in need of a mediator to
plead for us at the Mediators hands: and particularly as to the virgin Mary,
they tells us, that Pater caelcstis cum habeat justitiam and ^isericordiam
tanquam potiora sui regni bona justitia sibi retenta misericordiam matri
virgini concessit Gab. Biel in c^n. miss. lect. 80 vid. etiam Berchorium lib.
19. moralit. cap. 4. and Jo. Gerson tract. 4. super magnisicat.
mercy and justice being the two Jewels of the crown of heaven, God has
divided his kingdom ( as Ahasue^us offered to give the half of his to Esther)
between himself and the virgin, giving to her mercy, and reserving only justice
to himself. Hence they Et ideo si quis seusit se gravari a foro justitiae Dei
appellet ad forum miseri^ordiae matris ejus. Bernard. de bust. maral. part, 23.
sermon, 3.
appeal from the sons justice, to the mercy of his mother, and therefore she is
commonly called the mother of in o^sto^o beatae Mariae.
mercy, and the Berchorius loc. cit.
Queen of mercy, regina misericordiae, and matter misericordiae.

As to the second, they do not only undervalue Christ's sufferings and merits as
being unsufficient, by joining with them the merits of these new mediators, to
make up (as it were) what was wanting on Ch^ists part, but they so far
undervalue what he did and suffered for sinners, that they will not vouchsafe
once to ment^on his name or mer^ts in their prayers; (as may be seen in many of
their printed forms) and at other times, they dare take his glorious name in
their mouths in such a contemptible manner, that if they had not had the
confidence to commit it to paper, it would scarce have been believed upon the
testimony of others; while as they pray to the Virgin, that by the right of a
mother she would Jure matris impera filio tuo dilectissimo Bonav in Cor. B.
mar. virg. and. oper. tom. 6.
command, yea and Inclina vultum filii tui super nos, coge illum. etc. Psalt.
Bon. seorsim edit. Paris.
compel him to show mercy to sinners; for Vt docet lex divina, tu illius es
domina, nam lex jubet and ratio matrem praeesse filio, haec ex libro cui titul.
Antidotum animae. O faelix puerpera nostra pians scelera jure matris, impera
redemptori missal. Romans
both law and reason do hold out the mothers power over the son, etc. O! the
abominable Doctrine of merit in the poor creature, has sent many a soul to
hell; and has so bewitched and infatuated many great and learned ones, till at
length they have reverenced and worshipped the creature more then the Creator.

As to the 3. they are so far from acknowledging him to be the alone stor-house
and conduit of mercy, that they have hew^d out to themselves so many empty and
broken cisterns, as there are evils they fear, or good things they desire: they
have multiplied their Gods, not only according to the number of their cities,
(as is said of back-slyding Judah, Jer. 2.28.) but to the number of the
inhabitants; non tantum pronumero Its observable that Bellarmine reckons this
amongst Calvin's calumnies and yet returns no answer unto it Bell. loc. cit.
cap. 16. 4 dicit
urbium sed pro numero capitum. Nay one and the same person must have his
recourse to as many gods as there be mercies he stands in need of; they must
commend their oxen to St. Pelagius, their horse to St. Eulogius, their sheep to
St. Wendilin, etc. And thus what is said of Christ, Col. 3.11. Ephesians. 3.12. etc.
they may apply to their new mediators, whom they have substituted in his room.
They are all, and in all to them, they are the way, and their propitiation, in
them they have access with confidence, etc. Yea some of them have not stayed
here, but as if it had been too little thus to undervalue, pass over, and
forget the blessed Mediator, and put a Saint in his room, they have also been
so bold as to make a comparison: as to their Practice, we heard Cassanders
ingenuous confession, that many did more trust and confide in the merits and
intercession of their Saints, then in the merits of Christ. But you will say, can
any be so shameless as to avouch, that of themselves? yet we heard also
Jacobus de Valentia his impudence, in professing (that we have no other refuge
in our calamities but to run to the Virgin Mary the mediatrix, to pacify her
sons wrath; quae iram filii sui placabit. and O! says another Expedition in
calum est via per Franciscum quam per Christum apud Wendil. Christ. theol lib.
2. cap. 5.
it is a more expedite and ready way to heaven by St. Francis, then by Christ.
But I am wearied in relating such abominable blasphemies and ridiculous dreams.

We will not lose time in returning an answer to obj^ctions, so many of our
Divines having so fully vindicated these few Scriptures which some Papists,
contrary to their own light, wrest, (as they 2 Pet. 3.16.) unto their own
destruction; one of the most judicious and searching wits of the Jesuitick
School, Fran. Suarez, having employed all his strength for finding out
arguments, yet behold the result of all his labor, the custom and appointment
of the Church, which is the pillar of truth, may ( says Swar. loc. cit. cap.
10. 3.4.
he) suffice for confirming this truth. (as if the lustings and whoredoms of an
adulterous wife, should be a rule to the chaste spouse.) And yet he not daring
to lean to this pillar, concludes, that Ratio potiss^ma sumenda est ex
responsione ad argumeta haerti^orum ibid 3.
the best reason he can fall upon is to answer the heretics (so he calls the
orthodox) arguments.

As for the scriptures of the old Testament, not only Ibid 3. Alb Pigh contr.
13 Bellar. loc. cit. cap. 19. and. ced. disp. Salmer in 1 Timoth. 2. disp. 8.
etc.
he, but Bellarmin, Pigkius, Salmeron etc. do confess that they hold out no
warrant for saint-invocation; and that it had been in vain to have gone to poor
prisoners, (such they will have the saints to have been till Christ went to
hell and ^elivered them from the prison) and to supplicat their help: but
Eccius (as we heard) clears both new and old Testament from any imputation
that Saint-worshippers can lay on them; and Dominicus Dom. Bann^z in 2.2. art.
10. in quadam (nam varias habet conclusiones iste tractatus.) conclus. 2. page
(mihi) 107. neque aperte neque obscure, neque express, neque impresse, and.
involute sacrae literae docent orationes esse ad sanctos facieudas etc.
Bannez confesses and pleads that neither explicitly or implicity, directly
or by consequence, hold out to us any ground for praying to the Saints.

When Papists therefore cite Scripture for this their Pagan dream, they hold
out to us a torch for letting us see what is their temper, and that in this, as
in many other cases, they are too like their brethren, these heretics whom the
Apostle mentions Tit. 3.11. They are (...); They are self convicted and
condemned; but we remit them to their own consciences, to be sentenced there;
and if they would speak what it faith, and some of them have been so ingennous
as to confess, they would not want for a reply from us.

Yet we deny not (and will ye therefore think that we deal more kindly with
them, then some of their own number) but freely confess, that in Scripture
they may find both an exhortation or command, and practices or examples, if
they be pleased to make use of these since they can find no better; thus, Mat.
4.9. we have an exhortation to creature-worship: But Ah! it was but a
temptation suggested by Satan. Secondly, for examples, we find Saul seeking
after Samuel, and making his address to him, 1 Samuel 28. But Ah! first he went
to the Witch at Endor, and by her enchantments did meet with the supposed, but
not the true Samuel. And then, Luke 16. the rich man in hell calls to Abraham:
But he learned that point of Divinity in hell; and what success he found, we
may read from ver. 25.

As for reasons; the most of these they have borrowed from Pagans, a long time
after that ancient Christians had sufficiently answered and confuted them.
There be only three other grounds, viz. 1. the mutual prayers of the living for
one another. 2. the pretended miracles in confirmation of Saint-invocation. 3.
the honor we ow to them. Of these in a word.

As to the first; Though the Saints desire the prayers of their brethren, they
do not pray to them, nor worship them; and there be several reasons for such a
practice. 1. Because the Saints while in via and on their journey, are in a
praying condition; they pray for themselves, and why not also for their
brethren? 2. They may know, and easily be acquainted with the trials and wants
of their brethren. 3. They have a command to pray for one another. 4. They have
a promise of audience and success; and 5. The unquestionable and constant
practice of the godly in all ages, for their encouragement in the performance
of this duty. And thus the disparity between the living and the dead, as to the
present case, is manifest; and therefore we have no such ground to call for the
prayers of the dead as of the living.

Yet if Papists did only plead, that the dead did pray for the living, we
should not condemn them upon this account; since many reformed Divines do in
the general grant this; the Augustan, the Saxonick, and the Wirtenbergick
confession, Melancthon, Brentius, Chemnitius, Tilenus, Diodati, Paraeus,
Durham, etc. Yea, 2. If they did only desire the prayers of the Saints, as we
do of the living, and did not pray to them and worship them, though we would
pity them in this their fruitless and unwarrantable labor, while they took
pains to solicit them, who neither did hear, know, nor take notice of them,
yet we could not accuse them of idolatry and creature worship: And this one of
them Credebam ad calumnias nonnullorum repellendas satis esse si dicamus per
modum desiderii eas interpellationes explicari posse quod minus habet
absurditatis and divinarum literarum exemplis congruit, etc. Cassand. epist.
19. ad Molin. vid. etiam schol. in him. eccl. operum page 242.
( George Cassander a moderate Papist) does profess to be his judgment, Our
interpellaetions, says he, should be expounded by way of wishing and desiring
that they would pray to God for us without any act of worship. But I know not a
second who does join with him in this; but for his modesty in this and other
particulars, he is accounted by the rest to be a lukewarm Catholic: but thus,
if they would only The first of these (according to our way of speech) only
importing a desire and request, but the second an act of worship.
pray the Saints, and not pray to the Saints to pray for them, we should rather
commiserate them, then take pains to confute them.

As to the second, The miracles (which Accedunt postreme infinita miracula,
etc. Bell. loc. cit. cap. ^9.
Bellarmine will have to be infinite) wrought in confirmation of this, are not
all of one size. 1. The Histories of many are fabulous, being invented by some
idle Monks and lying Poets. 2. A great part of these miracles ar counterfeit,
for fostering the deluded multitude in their superstition; such is their
restoring the sight to those who never wanted it, and their curing many
diseases in them, who are as whole as the Physicians. 3. We deny not, that
something like a real miracle may be wrought by him and his emissaries, whose
coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. O! If Papists would ponder that which follows, ver.
10, 11, 12. they durst not make use of this objection.

As to the third. We do not wrong the Saints in glory, while we refuse to take
the crown off Christ's head and put it on theirs; they cast their crowns down at
his feet, Rev. 4.10. and shall we throw down Christ's crown at their feet? they
fall down and worship him, as being worthy to receive glory and honor, having
created all things for himself, ver 10, ^1. and shall we idolize and worship
the poor creature? Oh! how do these holy spirits abominate that honor and
worship, that is given unto them? and if they were on earth, and did converse
with the living, they would join with us, and with indignation say to Papists
(as Paul and Barnabas did in the like case, Act. 14.14, 15.) Sirs, why do ye
these things? we were also men, of like passions with you, and are yet your
fellow creatures and brethren; Ah, turn from these vanities unto the living God.

We say with Augustine, August. de ver. relig. cap. 55
Honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem; honoramus
eos charitaete non servitute; de civit, Dei lib. 22. cap. 10,
nominantur a Sacerdote, non invocantur. We honor the Saints with the honor
of love, not of servitude, for imitation not for adoration; and the Pastor does
name them for their virtue, but does not call upon them as gods and patrons:
though we make not idols of them, yet their memory is precious with us; as we
praise God for that measure of grace he gave to them, so we love and reverence
them, because they were thus beloved of our Father, and because they honestly
endeavored to improve his talents to the honor of his name, and we labor to
imitate them in their humility, faith, patience, zeal, etc.

But praise be to our God, Use
who has not left us to the care of such Patrons, who are ignorant of us, and
know not what we stand in need of; and praise to him, who will not shut the
door on us till these Courtiers make way for our admission: Though all Angels
and Saints in glory be ignorant of us, and do not acknowledge us, yet we may
(with that people, Isa, 63.16.) to our comfort say, Doubtless thou art our
father, and as a father pittieth his children, so thou will pity us, and
welcome us when we draw nigh to thee. Ps. 103, 13. His eyes are still over us,
and his ear open to our prayers, Pet. 3.12. Men would purchase at a dear rate
such a privilege on earth, always to have the Kings ear, that he would but
hearken to their desires, that they might but always have access to him; but
we have this liberty purchased to us by the blood of the Kings son, we may
always draw nigh to the King of Kings; we have moyen at Court; and we have not
only the privilege to come, but also our acceptance and success made sure
unto us by the word of the King and the purchase of his Son, and now we may ask
what we will and it shall be given us. Praise be to him, who has such bowels
toward poor sinners, and will not send them to the empty Cisterns of
creature-compassion and bounty: And all praise and honor be for ever ascribed
to him, who is the propitiation, in whom we have access with boldness unto the
throne of grace. What need we other advocates to plead our cause? Does not our
Redeemer live for ever? does he not live to make intercession for us? We
neither want a Priest nor Heb. 13.10.
Altaer; why do we not then daily bring our offering; our Priest will not
mingle our blood (as Luke 13.1.
Pilat did the Galileans) but his own with our sacrifices; the smoke of his
incense ascends for ever; his blood cries while we are silent; he is our ALL,
he is all to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. And from him as the fountain, all our streams do flow, all the good and
great things we have and hope for, must be conveyed to us through this Conduit,
1 Cor. 3.22, 23. O what a spirit of delusion and desperate folly, must
blindfold and act these miserable wretches, who do despise this open and full
fountain, and run to the empty and dry pools, which have no water to spare:
Though the wife virgins now have their vessels filled to the brim, yet they
have no oil to spare; though they have more now then while they did wait the
coming of the bridegroom, yet they have no more to spare; all their flock and
treasure, being for their own use and employment: And since they had not one
Acceperunt justi, non dederunt coronas; and de fortitudine fidelium exemplae
natae sunt patientla non dona justitiae. L^o. 1. Papa epist. 83. ad Palist.
epis. cap 4.
penny wherewith they might buy for themselves, how shall they be able to lend
to others? Their reward was not of Romans 4.4, 5.
debt, but of grace. And if with the foolish virgins we trust to their money,
and come to them for a supply, we will speed no better then they did. Long may
deluded Papists knock at their gates before they open; the doors are shut, and
they do not look out; and to what purpose should they open? they have not an
alms to give: If they did speak, they would return this answer. Oh Sirs, ye
are wrong, what do ye mean? why come ye unto us who live upon mercy, as if we
had purchased a stock whereon ye and we might live? and do ye think, that the
unsearchable riches of Christ are so far spent, that there is nothing left for
you? Ah, leave these vanities, and go to the right and only fountain, that of
its fullness ye may receive, that ye may drink and be satisfied, and may taste
of that pure river of Ps. 16.11
pleasures, that are at his right hand for evermore.

CHAP. VII. Of the matter and object of prayer.
1 John 5.14. If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
PRayer being our spritual Thus in the definition its said to be an offering up
of our desires to God.
oblation, we must take heed what we offer to the great King, least he Mat. 2.3.
spread upon our faces the dung of our sacrifices: We must Mal. 1.8.
not offer to him the blind and the lame, far less the ibid. v. 7.
polluted and unclean; we must not ibid. v. 8.
deal worse with him then with our Governors; and who dare present to them a
supplication stuffed with treason and contempt? And should we not beware, that
our petitions to God be not treacherous, and contain nothing against his
majesty and holiness? Our prayers then ought only be for things agreeable to
his will, 1 John 5.14. Thus in few words we have the materials of prayer held
forth. And for further explication, we shall speak to these three particulars.
1. Of the rule whereunto our desires and petitions must be conformed. And then,
because the matter it self and object of prayer, is either things or persons;
we shall in the 2. place enquire, what are these things for which we should
pray, and after what method and order; and 3. for whom, or for what persons we
may supplicate; that having shown, 1. what kind of desire, 2. who should offer
it up, and 3. to whom; so now it may appear, 4. for what, and 5. for whom.

Sect 1. Of the warrant, ground, and rule of prayer.
ALbeit no reason can be given why that proud King should have appointed, that
none, who came unto him without a call, should live, except such to whom he
held forth the golden Scepter, Esth. 4.11. Yet who can doubt, or needs ask a
reason, why stubble should not approach the fire? why we rebels durst not draw
nigh to the provoked King, without his call and invitation; if he did not
stretch forth the golden Scepter unto us, not only for our safety after we
come, but also to allure us to come, we were in as desperate a case as the
devils and damned in hell, and durst not more then they approach the Throne.
But praise to his free grace, who has prevented us with his loving entreaties
and ravishing invitations, and has given us so many large promises of
success, that we may draw nigh to him with confidence. But as thus, we must
have a warrant to come, so for what we should say and ask when we come; and the
sole ground both of the one and of the other, must be the will of God revealed
to us in his Word: We will speak of the first in its Viz. part. 2. in the
supports of faith, and part. 4. in the motives to the frequent practice of this
duty.
own place, but now we must only enquire, what is the rule and copy whereby we
must regulate, and whereunto we must conform our supplications; and thus in the
description of prayer, the object and matter of it is qualified and limited; we
must not ask what our carnal will and lusts would crave, but only these things
that are agreeable to the will of God: And thus the will of God must be our
alone rule and warrant.

The We will not here meddle with the School debates and subtilties concerning
the conformity of our actions to the will of God. Albeit for the most part the
Rabbis are very gross and erroneous, yet I know no question handled by them
with so much obscurity and confusion as this, by those I have perused, as Lomb.
lib. 1. sent. did. 48. Thom. 1.1. q. 19. a. 9, 10. Scot. in. lib. 1. sent.
did. 48. q. uni^a. Gu^. Occam. and Gab. Biel ibid. Jo. Majo^. in 1. sent.
did. 47. q. unica. and in did. 48. q un Raynand. mor. discip. did 4. q. 1.
a. 3. 77. Vasquez. tom. 1. in 1.2. disp. 72. Suarez ibid. tract. 4. disp. 11.
(and it may be enquired by what secret sympathy these two (last named) Doctors
have so far homologated in this question, as that ye would scarce discern any
difference between the children, albeit the parents lived at so great a
distance. But Arriaga in another case clears this mystery, showing, that
though Valquez did first publish that tome in print, yet he did see Suarez
dictates, and transcribed several particulars from thence) we need not name
those who only in the by have spoken to that question, such as Becan, Petrus a
S. Joseph, etc. since these who have spent whole and entire disputations for
clearing the matter, have so much darkened and obscured it, that it were no
difficult task to hold out, not only several errors, but also contradictious in
one and the same author: but we shall only meddle with so much of that question
as concerns our present purpose.
will of God (as to our point) way fall under a threefold consideration, 1. as
it does import the decrees and eternal purposes of God. 2. The commands and
precepts; and 3. the promises. The Scriptures frequently hold forth all these
as the will of God, and so we must speak of them. For albeit the commandments
and promises, are rather signs of Gods will and expressions; the one, viz. the
commandments, of our duty; and the other, viz. the premises, of our reward, the
one holding out the rule of, the other, a comfortable motive to obedience. Yet
they do suppose, and carry along with them the mind and will of God, not
concerning events which must come to pass, but concerning our duty and
carriage; they show unto us what God has appointed us to do, and what would be
well-pleasing and acceptable unto him; and what we may expect from him when we
make conscience of our duty, and are careful to obey and conform our ways to
his will.

As for the first, the purposes and decrees of God concerning the futurition of
events, cannot be the rule of prayer: God's determining and appointing that
such things shall, or shall not come to pass, cannot be a warrant and rule for
us to ask, or not to ask such things. 1. Because the decrees of God are hidden
and not known to us, but by their execution, and thus if the decree were a
rule, we should not know what to ask till we had received, and then we should
praise and not petition: it were foolish to ask what we have already gotten. 2.
There could be no sinful omission, and none must be obliged to do more then he
does; for God not having decreed that he shall do, he must (according to that
opinion) want a rule and warrant for acting and doing, and so cannot be obliged
to do, but must do well in not doing, and become guilty if he did act and do.
3. If the decrees of God concerning the futurition of events were a rule,
either for our works or desires and prayers, all the scandal^ and offenses, all
the abominable practices of vile men, all their tr^^cheries, oppressions, etc.
would be service done to God; and while the actors were doing or designing
their misch^^vous c^urses, they might recommend these to God and off^r (...) ^p
in prayer, and accordingly expect success unto, and a blessing upon such
wicked endeavors.

But some perhaps will reply: Albeit the secret counsel, and hidden decrees of
God cannot be our rule, as being unknown to us, till the event and execution
bring them to light; yet if the eternal and immutable purpose of God were
revealed unto us, and therefore so far as, and when it is discovered and
r^^^aled to us, it must lay an obligation on us to comply with it, and not to
counteract, or in the least oppose and appear against it, least we be found to
proclaim a war with the heavens, and a license for po^sheards on earth to
strive with their Maker. Ans. Not only the decrees of God, as they are locked up
in the infinite treasure of his om^iscience, and kept secret from us. cannot be
a rule whereunto we should conform our ways and actions, but ^ven after they
are revealed unto us; and we may as truly be said to fight against God and
oppose our wills to his, while we pray and wrestle against his hidden, as when
against his revealed purposes. For though our ignorance may excuse and diminish
our guiltiness in part, yet it cannot altogether remove it, nor annul that real
opposition, that is between our prayers and endeavors and the decrees of God.
And thus the godly, when they meet with disappointment, and thus come to see
that they have had the decree of God against them, must be in a sad plight,
when they consider, that all the while they have been fighting and rebelling
against God in their prayers, endeavors, etc.

As therefore we must not make Gods secret decrees concerning things that shall
come to pass our rule, so neither though they were, and when they are revealed
to us; for, Herod, Pontius Pilat, and the people of Israel did nothing against
our blessed Savior but what the hand and counsel of God had determined to be
done, Act. 4.27.28. And yet that was no plea for them; and though they had (as
all of them from the Scriptures might have) known the mind of God in this, yet
should they not have prayed for grace, whereby they might have been enabled to
withstand temptations to such a vile fact? and was it not their duty,
notwithstanding of such a decree, to own and stand for Christ? and had it been
a sin in Hazael to continue in that good mood, in which he seemed to be, when
he ask't if he was a dog to commit such wickedness and cruelty as the Prophet
foretold to be don by him? 2 King. 8.13, 12. Christ show to Peter that he
should deny him, and that the rest of the disciples would forsake him, and be
offended because of him, Mat. 26.31. Joh. 16.32. Will any man therefore imagine
that it was not lawful for Peter, and the rest of the Apostles to And then
Christ's exhortation to watch and pray Mat. 26.41, had been needless if not
also sinful.
pray, watch, and strive against the temptations wherewith they were to
encounter? Nay if this foundation were once laid, what vile and abominable
inferences might be drawn from it? That holiness were needless, yea that
there could no sin be committed by devils or men, and that the vilest wretch
did no less please God then the holiest man on earth, or Saint in heaven;
because that all things that come to pass do fall under the decree of God;
thus also the wicked son (according to that well known instance of August.
Ench. rid. cap. 101. Aliquando autem bona voluntate homo vult aliquid quod Deus
non vult -- tanquam si bonus filius patrem velit vivere, quem Deus bona
voluntate vult mori, and rursus fieri potest ut hoc velit homo voluntate mala
quod Deus vult bona ut si malus silius velit mori patrem, velit hoc etiam Deus,
etc. vid loc.
Augustine) who wishes his sick Fathers death, that he might enjoy the
inheritance, would be more innocent and commendable then the godly son, who
prays and desires that his Father may live; because the wicked son has the
decree of God on his side, and wills what God wills and has decreed; since
(as is supposed) the father dies, and does not recover. The Apostle, Romans 9,
19. meets with a blasphemy which sprang from this root; Why does he yet find
fault? (did desperate sinners say) for, who has resisted his will? as if they
had said we are to be excused who have done nothing contrary to the will and
decree of God; Nay, say they, the will of God did not only lay an obligation,
but a necest^ty on us to obey and conform our ways, and is there any reason
then why God should complain of us, who have such a warrant for all we have
don? To which vain Plea the Apostle replieth ver, 20. Nay, but O man, who art
thou that reply against God? and proceeds to show from Gods sovereignty,
his right and power to dispose of his creatures according to his own good
pleasure; but from this dispute we may clearly discern, that Gods decree is no
cloak for sin, nor a law to justify our ways and desires.

But you will say, though it be not an adequate rule, and so not a sufficient
ground to denominat an action good, because its conform thereunto, yet it must
so far be acknowledged for a rule, as that it must acquit and excuse (if not
justify) the doer, in that it did lay on him a necessity to obey and conform
his work thereunto. Answ. He who would plead not guilty, because his ways are
conform to the decrees of God, must either be grossly ignorant, or desperately
perverse, not knowing, or not caring what he says; for God by his most holy
and spotless Decrees does not force, draw, necessitat, or tempt any man to
sin; neither does be thereby command, approve, or testify his approbation of,
or complacency in any sinful action; only he purposes not to hinder, but to
permit sinful men to become a prey to their own lusts, and the temptations
they shall meet with in their way: we must not indeed imagine that Gods
providence is sleeping while occasions are offered, or that there is in his
most holy will, no positive act concerning the futurition of sin; its long
since Circa quod cunque est Dei permissio, est and ejus volitio actualis Brad*
de causa Dei, lib 1. cap. 22.33. hoc quippe ipso quod contra voluntatem
D^ifecerunt de ipsis factaest voluntas ejus, propterea namque magna opera
Domini, -- ut miro and inffabili modo non fiat praeter ejus voluntatem quod
etiam contro ejus fit voluntatem, quianon fieretst non siueret nec utique
nolens sinit sed volens August. Ench. ad Laur. cap. 100.
Bradwardin did demonstrat the contrary; and the Jesuits themselves do confess
that there is a necessary connection between the divine permission and the
creatures committing of sin, so that the futurition of sin may be concluded by
a necessary illation from such a permission of it; our Divines and the
Dominicans call it a permissive Decree, decretum permissivum. I like not the
expression: but the penury of words has extorted it: that epithet and
denomination is not taken from the act, as if it were not, 1. Positive, and, 2.
efficacious, but from the object, Because the holy Lord thus does purpose not
to procure and work, but to permit the creature to follow its course: but we
will lanch no further now into this Ocean; but thus it may appear, that the
divine Decree concerning the futurition of sin, does not import Gods willing,
or approving, his working, or procuring of sin: we cannot be said to fight
against God, or to oppose his will and work, while we strive against sin:
albeit we can do nothing without or beyond the divine appointment; and albeit
he will order and dispose of our sins to his own glory, and thus cause Judge.
14.14.
sweetness come out of the strong; yet this is no excuse for the sinner who
Vid. August. Euch cap. 101.
minds no such matter, but serves his own lusts, and thus provokes and
dishonors God.

And thus notwithstanding of any decree in God, he is justly displeased with
sin, and justly punishes the sinner; albeit there can nothing come to pass
without his efficacious, well ordering and all-governing providence; yet sin is
none of Gods works, there is nothing in it that God will own, its a bastard,
begotten by the wretched creature, which cannot without blasphemy be fathered
on God; what is said of the child is true of the parent, what of a particular
rod, Ezekiel. 7.5. is verified in every sin, it is an evil, an only evil, not Non
solum subjective sed etiam formaliter and in se.
only to the committers as that judgment to the sufferers, and to the
impenitent on whom it was inflicted; but also in it self, there is nothing in
it which God can will or love: though he will suffer and permit sin to be, yet
we cannot say that God wills sin to be, though he decrees to suffer and
permit us to sin, yet he decrees not, and wills not (for that does import
his approbation and efficiency) us to sin: there is here then an efficacious
permission, and a willing, and decreeing to suffer men and devils to sin, but
there is no warrant, or commission, no approbation or license for us to sin;
and no divine Non in sed circa peccatum.
efficiency and causality in (though about) sin.

Thus then the morality of our actions must not be measured by any decree
concerning the futurition of events, but by some other rule, in which must
concur Gods will and appointment, setting bounds unto us, and designing our
duty, and discovering what is well-pleasing and acceptable to God, honest and
laudable in it self, and profitable and comfortable to us in the issiue; and
thus we have the word of God for our direction, and have his laws and
testimonies to be our rule. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Isa. 8.20. Deuteronomy. 30.10, 11, 12, Deuteronomy.
5.29. Psalm. 147.19. Rom, 12.2. 1 These. 4.2. 1 Pet. 4.2. etc* and we may take
notice of these three things as necessarily requisite and concurring in that
which is a warrant unto, and rule of our actions and petitions. 1. The good
pleasure and decree of God, not concerning what shall come to pass, but
concerning the quality and moral goodness of human actions, and which does
limit and set bounds to reasonable creatures, and prescribes unto them their
duty; and this is the fountain and first spring, (yea and by many judicious and
sober Divines is judged to be the supreme adaequate and first rule) of moral
rectitude. Hence we may conceive that Gods laws in Scripture are called
Decrees, Statuts and Ordinances. 2. From this decree and appointment, does (to
our apprehension) flow divine approbation, complacency and delight in what is
thus appointed to be our work and duty: hence that appointment is called the
good, acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2. and our actions when
conform to that rule, are said to be well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.2. yea
the Lord does not only declare his love of his complacency, and delight in
these when they are performed, but also he is said to will and desire (though
not according to the Arm. Socin. and Jes. from thence would collect a
frustrable and inefficatious will and desire in God, but this phrase does only
import Gods serious approbation of the works of righteousness and detestation
of the contrary.
Jesuiticall and Arminian gloss) those works while he is speaking to the
rebellious and disobedient, who have slighted his laws, and casten all his
statutes behind their backs. Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. Ezekiel. 33.11. Hos. 6.6. 1 Samuel
15.22, Isa. 61.8. Mat, 9.13. 2 Pet, 3.9. etc. 3. There must be an intimation
and promulgation of this decree and appointment, and a declaration of those
things that would be well pleasing, and acceptable to God. Its disputed amongst
Gratian. ap. in istis temporal. d. 4. leges instituuntur cum promulgantur, vid.
juto civ meth Con lag part 1.13. ubi cit. l. digna vox and de leg etc.
Lawyers and Vid. Tho. 1.2. quaest 90. art 4 and Com. ad loc.
Schoolmen, whether humane laws do bind and oblige before they be intimated,
and made known; and what sort of promulgation is necessary; but this question
is more thorny and difficult, while it is applied to divine laws (which were
not pertinent for us here to debate) yet we expect, that none will deny, that
some sort of promulgation and intimation is necessary, unless it be granted,
that reasonable creatures may be obliged to a blind and brutish obedience; yea,
obedience in such a case were not obedience; for though there may be some part
of conformity to the law, and so a kind of material obedience, yet properly it
cannot be so called, because thus to obey does import the law and command to be
a motive (and so must be known) engaging and prevailing with us to do. And that
Gods law does not impose an obligation, where there is no kind of promulgation,
may be collected from, Rom 2.12. where the Apostle affirms that Pagans, who
had not the means for attaining the knowledge of Gods will revealed in the
Scriptures, shall not be judged by the Scriptures, and that word which they
could not know; hence Divines affirm their ignorance of the mysteries of the
Gospel, and their infidelity to be negative, and not privative.

But we did say, that some sort of signification and promulgation was
necessary, not determining the particular way and manner; but from that Text it
does appear, that a formal promulgation by voice or writ, is not necessary, for
God did not thus communicate and impart any law to Pagans; yet they shall
perish and be judged by a law, and be condemnned for their disobedience unto
that law, which was not written (as to them) with pen and ink, but with the
finger of God engraven on their hearts, ver. 15. The Lord did implant and
radically promulgate a law to them, while he infused into them a reasonable
soul, whereby they might know, and discern between right and wrong, good and
evil: There be many practical (...) practicae.
principles of moral equity, which the light of nature can discover, and were
known to heathens; yea, the most of duties prescribed in the decalogue, are to
be found in the writings of Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, etc. We might
ascend higher to the first and primaeval principle, that light and sound
reason, which was in Adam before the fall, which was a more bright lamp, and of
a farther reach, then that dark candie that si^ce is left in us, ^o direct our
steps and point out our way. There was indeed in man, while he stood, that
recta ra^^o, which might have been admitted for a rule, but subordinate to the
will and law of God, regula regu^a^a, not regulans; there was then no
disconformity between these two rules; but pop^sh Sch^olmen must be very
impudent, who will make our Quod R^yn^^ us ^^at juai^ium practicum prude^tiale,
vid mor did. 4 quaest 1. art. 3 per totum
judgment and reason to be the proper, and (as Thom, ^, 2. quaest. 7^. art. 6.
in corp.
Th^ma^ c^^^th it) homogeneal rule of our actions, now after it ha h ^ost its
rectitude; Woe to them, who were left to the direction of this blind guide;
though seeing Samson was a Judge and leader of the people of Israel, yet after
his eyes were put ^ut the meanest Judge. 16.26.
boy of Philistia was sitter to be a guid^ and leader to him.

But we may here enquire if what was, or might have been known of our duty by
Adam in innocence, if what that pure and clear lamp (...) him could discover,
should be esteemed and accounted to be manifested unto us, who then were in his
loins? Albeit now, after we have not only shut, but put out our own eyes, we
cannot discern nor look ^o far off* But we need not meddle with that debate,
nor go so far ^o light a candle to let us see our way, albeit in that case,
there were a radical promulgation of Gods mind and our du^y made to us, as
branches of that old root; and thus the Lord out of his sovereignty, might
reckon with us, as being guilty of the sin of Even that ignorance which Divines
call negative, may thus be reputed privative and culpable.
ignorance, after that we had improven to the utmost all the helps that Pagans
have for attaining of knowledge: But praised be our God, who has not sent ^s
to wander into such a wilderness, nor to ^ook to the Sun through such a
prospect, and to read his mind in that dark volum of creation and providence,
by the pagan starlight of natural reason, but has showed unto us in his Word,
what is good and acceptable to him, and what he requires of us, Mic. 6.8.
Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. and 30.31. etc. Therefore Gods laws and commandments, as to
us, may well be As Isa. 8* 20. Ps. 78.56. Deuteronomy. 6.20.
called Testimonies; because by his Prophets and messengers, as so many
heralds, he has again and again promulgate them, and testified unto us what
he requires of us, and has left to us an authentic register to which we may
have our recourse.

But since there must be some kind of intimation and manifestation of the
approbative (as we may call it) and legislative Thom. 1 quaest. 19. art. 12.
enumerates five signs of Gods will, viz, Prohibitionem, praeceprum, consi^ium,
operationem and permissionem. We will not now stay to show that 1. this number
is not full, 2. that the members are not opposite, 3. that all of them are not
proper signs, etc. but we wave that enumeration as being impertinent to our
purpose.
will of God; it may be enquired how, and after what manner are the materials of
prayer determined and discovered to us? and I think the question may only be
moved concerning these four; whether, 1. by precept, 2. by promise, 3. by
approven examples of the Saints, who have petitioned the like mercies; and, 4.
by the works of providence.

Ans. 1. It will not be denied, that the most part of things, whether bodily or
spiritual, which Christians stand in need of, may be petitioned, and prayed for
with that threefold warrant of precept, promise and approven example; and that
either directly, or by clear and undeniable consequence, or at least by
analogy,, similitude and parity of reason: and when those concur, there can be
no place for doubting; such a threefold cord will easily bind the most
scrupulous conscience.

2. To speak of these severally, the third alone, and without a restriction
cannot be acknowledged to be a rule, or warrant for our practice, either in
this or other cases; for the Prophets, Apostles and eminent Saints, whose
practice is registrated in the Word, being extraordinarily qualified, and
sometimes called to extraordinary duties and service, as to work miracles, etc.
their carriage cannot be a warrant to us to take such works in hand, and to
essay to do what they did; so they meeting with singular occasions and
exigencies, and having a special call, impression, and impulse on their
spirits, might confidently expect, and in faith pray for several mercies, which
others have no warrant to petition: Their pract^ce then and prayers, must only
be looked upon as an additional, and cumulative warrant and encouragement to us;
that is to say, when their practice does suppose some other foundation and
ground (which must either be a standing and general command or promise) we may
safely follow their footsteps.

3. As for the first, viz. the Precepts and Commandments of God, because of the
majesty and supreme authority of the Lawgiver; these do not only carry along
with them a warrant for us to conform our ways thereunto, but also lay a
necessity and obligation upon us to obey.

4. The difficulty then only remains concerning the promises, and the
dispensations of providence.

1. Then as to the promises, it may be enquired, whether they alone and of
themselves, be a sufficient ground and warrant for our prayers, so that we may
confidently and in faith pray for what the Lord has promised to give, though
we have no express command to ask such a particular merry. For removing and
clearing of which, it may be, 1. enquired if such a case be ordinary and often
occurreth, or if it be merely speculative and by way of supposition. 2.
Whatever others may see, yet I know no promised mercy, that we may not pray for
by virtue of a Precept, either particularly expressing such a mercy, or
comprehending and including it under its object (and generals hold out as sure
a ground for particulars comprehended under them, as if these particulars were
named) yea, precept and promise (as to our case especially) go hand in hand,
are of equal extent, and cannot be separated, Mat. 7.7. Joh. 16.23, 24. And
this is one of our Christian principles and precognita, which all must believe,
viz. That God is a rewarder of them all that come unto him, in the way he has
But otherwise he might say to these who seek his face, as to them, Isa. 1.12.
who required these things at your hands?
appointed and commanded, Heb. 11.6. Isa. 45.19.

Yet, 2. If we look upon these severally, and enquire after their proper,
formal and most direct effect, end and use, we deny* not [that We deny not this
hypothesis of that worthy Divine with whom we cannot close in his resolution of
this case, which we have not seen propounded by any other, and whose opinion
herein has occasioned this enquiry.
the command may be said to be that whereby prayer is authorized and made
necessary; and the promise to be that which holds out a comfortable motive and
encouragement; and that the Precept is the ground of conscience, for
undertaking and regulating the duty, and the promise, the ground of confidence
and assurance of success.]

3. We would put a difference between general, constant and standing, and
special and occasional promises, made to some one or few persons, upon some
particular account and exigence; for these special promises cannot be a ground
for others to expect or pray for such mercies; yea, nor to them to whom they
were made, if the occasion be past or altered; yet when, and so long as the
promise is in force, and so long as the ground and occasion continues, it is
warrant enough to expect and petition such a mercy. Thus David professes, that
the word of promise was warrant and motive enough to him to pray for the
establishment of his house and throne for many generations, 2 Samuel 7.27.25, 26,
29. And as thus, special promises are a sufficient rule for particular persons
and cases, so general promises are general rules to all persons.

But it would be remembered, that some promises are called general, because they
belong to all and every one in their several places, stations, occasions and
exigences; and these hold out a general rule and directory to all Christians.
Other promises are called general, not because they belong to all and every
one, but only to all in such a rank, station and condition; thus the Christian
Magistrate, may pray for the gift of Government; the Minister for a blessing
upon his ministry, and every one according to his place and employment, or
particular business or need, may seek assistance, success, direction,
deliverance, etc. by virtue of general promises made to all in such a rank and
condition: And if thy particular employment and business, be not expressly
mentioned in the Word, thou may have recourse to general promises, as being
a sufficient warrant and encouragement for thee to ask such and such a
particular blessing. There is room enough, and a blank left in the general word
of promise, for thee to write in thy name and condition. And such promises are
as sure foundation for thy prayers, as if thy particular business and exigence
had been there expressed; and thou need not fear to apply them to thee, and
then confidently thou may expect their performance.

And thus, 5. In answer to the question we affirm, that the promise is a
sufficient warrant, to all to whom it belongs, to pray for the mercy it
holds forth; and this may appear, 1. from the nature, scope and end of the
promise. For, what is a promise, but an intimation and expression of Gods will,
to give good things, and withhold or remove evil from us? And if so, then to
deny the promise to be a ground and warrant to pray, is in effect to deny, 1.
That we may pray the Lord to bestow these mercies he purposes to bestow upon
us, 2. That we may desire from God these things we know to be agreeable to his
will and for our good. And 3. That the promise is an encouragement to duty; for
if it encourage us to duty, it must carry along with it a warrant for doing,
since a divine motive (such as Gods promise must be) must be to a good and
lawful end; and therefore, since the promises are as so many motives and
encouragements to pray for what is promised, they must carry along with them a
sufficient ground and warrant for our prayers; and accordingly, the servant of
God David, no sooner meets with a promise, but he turns it into a prayer, 2 Samuel 7.27. Where we may take notice of the inference he there makes, Because
thou have promised (says he) Therefore thy servant has found in his heart to
pray. O might some have said, ye are too rash to run to the Throne, where is
your warrant? you have no command. O but (says David) have I not Gods Word? He
has said, and promised to give, and that is warrant enough for me to ask. Its
true, before the word of promise came, I had no warrant thus peremptorily and
absolutely to ask such a temporal mercy, but now having his Word to build upon,
what can devils and men say for shaking my faith? You will say, So that eminent
modern Divine Treat. of prayer and divine providence, chapter 3. 2. page 104.
objecte^^*
that promise was concerning a peculiar blessing out of the common road, and
therefore, though it was ground enough for David to build his prayer upon; yet
general and perpetual promises are not a warrant. Ans. That difference makes
for us, and not for the objecter. For when the promised mercy is peculiar, it
would appear, that there were greater need of a special warrant and command,
then when the mercy is common, in which all have some sort of right by a
general word of promise; and so none need to scruple to plead their right. The
more narrow the way is, there is the greater need of light and hedges, to keep
us from mistakes and deviation.

But Ibid. page 105.
you will object, some things may be sound promised that are not to be prayed
for; Romans 12.19. Heb. 10.30. and that there shall not perish one hair of our
head, Luke 21.1^. Ans. While we draw nigh to God, we need not fear. 1. Least,
we mistake the way, when we have the Sunlight of a promise to direct our steps.
2. Least we faint and weary (unless the cause be within and from our selves)
who have such a cordial as the breasts of the promise does yield, for quickening
and reviving our spirits, and such refreshment as the refulgent beams of that
luminary will afford, when they shine and reflect upon us* As to the first
instance, it being made up of a promise, respecting our good, protection and
deliverance from the rage of cruel enemies, and of a threatening of judgment and
wrath as to them; we must put a difference between these two, and may go safely
as far as the promise conducteth; we may pray for deliverance from enemies,
abstracting from the threatening, and committing the manner and way of our
deliverance to God, that he might take such course in his holy and wise
providence for accomplishing that promise as seems good to him, viz. either
by confounding, restraining, or reclaiming of them; so that notwithstanding of
our pleading that promise of deliverance, which is complicated with a
threatening against enemies, we might pray for their good here, and eternally
hereafter. For we did not say, that threatenings were a warrant for, and rule of
our prayers; yea, on the contrary, the end That is the end of the dispensation,
whatever holy end the Lord in his wisdom has proposed, finis operis, though
not always finis operantis.
of the threatening being the conversion and repentance of the sinner, we should
improve it, as a strong motive to deprecat that and other judgments; not only
should the threatening stir up them to pray for themselves, but it may stir up
others, though injured by them, to pray for them. As to the second instance, we
should not so much look on the letter, as the meaning and scope of these words,
which is to comfort the godly under their trials, from the consideration of
Gods powerful and overruling providence, who can (notwithstanding of the
power and malice of enemies) so guard and defend (yea, and if it be for the
glory of his name and their good, will certainly so protect) them, that they
shall not be able in the least to wrong them; and for strengthening their
confidence in God, and that they might the better undervalue the threatening and
proud boasting of vain weak man, the least and most inconsiderable injury is
instanced, that enemies shall not be able to do so much as pull out one hair
out of their head; and what is there in this promise (though we would only
consider what is directly held forth in the words) that does not beseem the
prayers of the Saints? You will say, it does not beseem the modesty, and
looks not like Christian self-denial, to be so far in love with our selves
and our own things, as to desire and put up a prayer for these smaller things,
which the very Pagans do far undervalue, as not to set their hearts upon them,
or once to mention them. Ans, That is, as if it had been said That we should be
ashamed to ask, what the Lord was not ashamed to promise. And should we not
think it worthy of room in our Cabin, which the Lord thought worthy to put in
Bond and give us security for. And is there any mercy so little, for which we
ate not bound to praise God when he gives it? And may we not pray for that for
which we should give thanks? Its true, we should not set our heart and
affections upon these small things; yea, nor upon the greatest bodily and
perishing thing; and yet we may pray for our daily bread; though not after that
See sect. 2^.
manner which we must ask spiritual and eternal things: and as for these mercies
which are less necessary and considerable, we need not be so express as to
name and particularly condescend on every one of them, for that would be an
argument of too great love to them, if we durst take up so much of our time,
while we are speaking to God, and would suffer our thoughts to be so far
scattered and divided. And it could not but give offense, if while before and
with others, we did thus multiply petitions for such things of little use or
value; but yet, we must not lay aside or exclude from our prayers, what God
has not excluded out of his promises, though the Lord did not name them in the
promise that we should name them in our prayers, yet there is nothing in the
promise which we may not ask, though in a fit and decent manner and order.

2. Ibid.
The general promise of hearing must be resolved in that proviso, Ans. There is
no promise of audience so particular, but it has several proviso's and
limitations, unto which we must advert, least we make a wrong application, and
think we are walking by rule, and sailing to the right harbor, while we are
following our own sensual and groundless imaginations. We do not plead, that a
mistake and wrong gloss of the promise, but that the promise it self,
according to the true and genuine meaning, sense and scope of it, is a
sufficient warrant to pray for what it holds out; and as the promises may be
mistaken, so also the precepts, but they leave not off to be a rule because of
our error and ignorance. 2. Though we should have our recourse to the precepts
for coming to a right up taking of the promises, yet would not the promises
therefore become a secondary rule, and the precept the first and radical
warrant. What must be made use of as a mean for understanding any part of
Scripture, must not be judged to be the ground and foundation of it. And as to
these means, the general helps in expounding of Scripture have here place, we
must pray the Lord to open our eyes, that we may see his mind, we must
diligently compare Scripture with Scripture, especially general and particular
promises together; and the returns that have been made to the prayers of the
Saints in accomplishing of them, may give not a little light, etc. But how the
commands (to which we are only sent in the objection) can be such a proper mean
and help, I see not; the precepts holding out our duty, and the promises our
reward; which two are very different.

3. Obj. Ibid.
Abraham prayed for Sodom, 18. Moses for Israel, Exodus 32. Paul for the
conversion of the Jews, Romans 10.1. And we should pray for all men. 1 Timothy 2.1.
Yea, for persecuting enemies, Mat. 5.44. But there is no promise made to such
prayers. Ans. This Objection does not conclude that which is in controversy;
its one thing to say, that the promise is the alone and adequate ground of
prayer, so that we may not pray for what we have not a promise; against which
this argument may be urged (though to little purpose) and its another thing to
say (as we said) that the promise is a sufficient, sure and infallible rule and
warrant to pray for what it offers, Albeit there may be other grounds to pray
where that is wanting. Yet it may be a sufficient warrant, though not the sole
and only warrant. But, 2. the promise does extend to every thing that is good,
Ps. 84.11. Ps. 85.^2. Ps. 34.10. etc. And therefore unless these prayers have
not some good for their object (and so if they be not sinful, which none dare
affirm, they being commanded of God) they must be grounded upon a promise, and
accordingly have met with success, when the conditions have had place: and as
to the instances in the objection. 1. If there had been ten righteous men in
Sodom. Abraham had prevailed, and the whole City had been spared. 2. And the
Lord did answer Moses his prayer, and did not destroy that stubborn generation,
Exodus 33.14, 17. 3. Paul's prayer was so far heard, that many Jews were
converted; And, 4. many a time have persecuting enemies been reclaimed, and in
answer to the prayers of those whom they put to hard sufferings, they have been
converted. And as thus, 1. the object of such prayers being good, 2. the
success great (though strange and admirable) So also, 3. the qualification of
such prayers, they being poured out in See part, 2. chap. 2,
faith, do evidence, that those supplicants did not want a promise for their
encouragement.

Thus we may conclude, that precepts and promises are like veins and arteries
in the body, they are inseparable and go hand in hand: the promise implying a
command (for God did never promise to reward our will worship, or to give what
we should not ask and pray for) and the command is a promise (for he never
commanded the seed of Jacob to seek his face in vain) the precept shows unto
us what we should do; and the promise what we may expect and shall receive. The
Lord in the Covenant first and last, out of his mere good pleasure for our
encouragement in his work, has made these two reciprocal and relative, our
doing and receiving, our doing our duty and receiving a gracious reward: and
thus the commands and the promises must be no less inseparable, these being
nothing else but an intimation and declaration of the former two. Its true, God
needed not have indented with us for our hire, while he sent us to work in his
vineyard, and we as his creatures had been obliged to obey; but the terms of
his Covenant are more sweet and condescending; and now he, who comes to God in
the way of commanded duties, must believe that he shall not want his reward,
heb. 11.6.

And thus the Lord with two strong and golden cords, does draw and bind us to
our duty, 1. by his authority and command, 2. by his mercy and free promises.
And O! what suitable affections may these stir up and work in us? the one,
reverence and godly fear, and the other, cheerfulness, love and confidence. And
from this last consideration we may collect, that the promises are not only a
sure and infallible, but also the most proper and direct ground of prayer; for
though the precepts be the most proper and immediate rule of doing, and so of
prayer as it is a duty, and under that general notion; yet the promises are the
most proper and only ground of prayer, as ^t is a mean for obtaining the
desired blessing and mercy (which is the more special, and as I may call it,
specifical consideration of prayer) and the promises are the only ground of
confidence and faith, which is so necessary to the acceptable performance of it.

As to the fourth, whether divine We use the word providence according to the
vulgar but ^east proper signification which should rather be called the effect
of providence.
providence (taking the word not formally, for the eternal and immanent act of
Gods counsel, but effectively, for the outward and temporary Ad divinam
providentiam spectat non tantum 1 (...), 2. (...), verum etiam (...).
administration, or as it is operative, and by the effect declares and
manifests Gods eternal counsel to us.) It may be ask't (I say) whether, and
how far divine providence may be acknowledged as an intimation and declaration
of the preceptive and approving will of God? and so, when and how far it should
be made a rule of our actings or prayers? And albeit this debate and enquity
may seem occasional, because of the affinity between the rule of our actions
and prayers, yet without any culpable digression we may speak a little to it in
thesi, yet only so much as may help us to a resolution of this quaeree (which
in these late days of confusion and oppression was so necessary, when
treacherous usurpers had no other plea for justifying their oppression, but
their success and signal (as they called them) victories) whether we should
own, approve and pray for these courses, ways and designs, which we see to be
followed with success; and forsake and pray against these interests and
courses, which are trysted with cross providence and disappointments? In
answer to which, we shall give some few conclusions.

Concl. 1, Successful providence are comfortable commentaries upon these
Scriptures that clearly hold forth our duty; if while we are walking by rule,
being set a work by the authority of God held forth in the word of command, and
encouraged by the word of promise, God smileth upon us by his work; as it will
add oil to the wheels and quicken our diligence, so it will be as eye salve to
anoint thine eyes, that thou may see more clearly; it will add light, and
prevent needless fears and scruples, which might arise from sense and carnal
reason, in case of disappointment and cross dispensations. Thus Cato (who at
first was a resolute asserter of divine providence) seeing Pompey so often
prosper when his cause was bad, and miserably overthrown by Caesar while his
cause was good, and See B^bington on Exoa^ chap. 29.
himself so unsuccessefull in his essays to maintain and recover the liberty
of the Roman state, he then judged, that the world was governed by fortune and
hap. And not Pagans only, but some eminent Saints have been sore put to it, and
have succumbed at this temptation; from thence Jobs friends did infer, that he
was an hypocrite; and David sa^d, J shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. Yea, Asaph is not far from blasphemy, Ps, 73.12, 13.14.

Concl. 2. Providence is a bad commentary upon a dark Scripture; when the rule
is questioned, we must not run to Gods works as interpreters of his Word; when
Scripture is pretended by both parties for their cause, we should not make
providence the gloss for clearing what difficulty was in the text, and give
sentence for that cause which is followed with success, and against them, who
all the day Ps. 73.14.
long, are plagued, and chastened every morning. Providence may encourage a
seeing man to walk forward, but Caennot morally, though physically it has.
dispensations of providence, cannot enlighten the eyes of the mind, though by a
miraculous dispensation the bodily eye has been restored to the blind.
cannot either give eyes to the blind, or make a dim eye see clearly: It may be
compared to ciphers which serve to augment the number, when a significant note
is set before them; but otherwise a 1000 ciphers cannot amount to the least of
numbers. When success follows a promise made to a commanded duty, its a new
bond and encouragement to continue in well-doing; but when it goes alone, or
before, and wou^d draw Scripture along with it, to give an echo and report to
what providence is thought to say and cry, it will prove a poor warrant to him
who is unbyassed.

And as success will not justify an action or course otherwise questionable,
so we can have no Thus the sectaries when they invaded this land an. 1650. made
an appeal to providence, and after the deseat of our a^my at Dumbar they
insulted, that providence had determined the controversy on their side.
warrant to appeal to providence in our undertakings; and make it a judge to
determine any contraversie. This were to oblige the Lord to give us a new rule,
and to make his works speak what he never commanded them to say; this were to
limit the Lord, that he might never chasten his people while they had to do
with unjust and self-seeking men, and when they owned a good cause; etc. Thus
providence must only be esteemed a commentary for amplification of a clear
text, but not for explication of what is abstruse and difficult.

Concl. 3, far less must providence be acknowledged to be declarative of the
approving will of God. 1. Without the word, when such a way and course can lay
no claim to any precept or promise: and yet less, 2. when it is directly
contrary to the word, and therein condemned. And its observable that such as
boast of providence, are men who (albeit if we look to their profession we
would judge them to be saints, yet) make little conscience of duty, and that
they run not to Gods works for a testimony, till first they have cast his word
behind their backs, and are at a loss there. Such ^s have no other plea for
justifying their ways, judge [it their wisdom to make use of this rather then
of none; especially since it is a popular and sensible demonstration, which
often proves more concludent with the brutish multitude, then the word of God;
especially if there be a As in the late case while Scotaries did prosper for so
long a time.
continued series and succession of favorable Providence, and that
notwithstanding of many and great interveening difficulties; O! (will the
multitude then say) this is the hand of God, we may see the Lord owning and
working for such courses and ways: but certainly such as lean to such a rule,
must either be very blind, or wilfully blindfold themselves: all ages and
interests may furnish many instances for showing the crookedness and
inequality of this pretended rule: and who is he, (whether he be good or bad)
who has observed the several steps of providence toward himself, who cannot
tell of the many and various vicissituds of providence he has met with? and
the Scriptures afford so many examples of crosse-providences toward the Saints
while they have been following their duty, and maintaining a just cause, and of
prosperous and successful dispensations toward the wicked in their
oppression, injustice and violence against the Saints, that it were lost labor
to stay upon citations. And O! what gross and abominable absurdities would
follow, if providence were set up as a Careat successibus opto. quisquisab
eventu facta notanda putat Ovid. 2 Epist.
rule? Then treason, rebellion, theft, murder, oppression, etc. would loss
their name, and become good and commendable, when they are accompanied with
success; and conscience of duty, religion, loyalty, self-defence against
usurping and oppressing invaders, etc. must be accounted sinful and unlawful,
when unsuccessefull. And thus if we make providence our Bible, and seek our
rule from thence, we must condemn the generation of the righteous and bless
them whom the Lord abhors; yea and the Godly must be accounted too rash, if
they set themselves to do never so necessary and commendable a work, unless
they be assured (which without a revelation cannot be) that their undertaking
shall be accompanied with success, and if the vilest miscreant did design
never so wicked an enterprise* we might not dissuade or rebuke him, if he can
show us how he shall accomplish it: and thus the wild Irish must become
excellent casuists, Who (as Guil. Camb. in Hiberuia pag^ (mibi) 790.
latrocinaturi preces ad Deum fundunt, utpraeda offeratur, and praedam pro
munere d Deo oblatam arbitrantur: neque vim, neque rapinam neque bomicidium,
Deo displicere persuadentur; nequaquam illum velle sibi hanc occafionem
praebere si peccarent, into peccatum esse, si occasionem non arriperent: haec
Camb. ex J. Good.
Cambden reports) suppose that a booty is sent to them from God, and that
they would sin if they improved not such an opportunity as God did offer unto
them: and they do not think that violence, oppression, theft, manslaughter,
etc. displeases God; because God would not offer them an opportunity to sin,
and yet he opens a door to them for doing these things, and follows them
with success.

You will say, the Lord sends us to his works as our instructers and
monitors, Psa. 19.1. Psa. 46.8. Mic. 6.9, Act. 10.17. Romans 1.20.21, etc. Ans.
We do not deny that Gods works have a voice, but for the most part not easily
understood, its like the handwriting upon the wall, which though the
Astrologers and Caldeans did see, yet they could not find out the meaning and
interpretation of it. Its true that providence is, 1. a sure commentary (as
being no other thing bu^ the product and execution) of Gods purposes and
decrees, but as Gods decrees are not our rule, so neither any intimation or
declaration thereof. As Prophecies and predictions, which show us what God
purposes to do or permit, are not, (as we have heard); so neither providence
which declare what God has done or permitted to be done: the one holds out
to us the object of Gods decrees as future, the other as present or past; and
so if the former be not a warrant for us to do, neither can the latter justify
what we have done. 2. Though providence cannot discover our duty, yet it
discovers to us much of God. His works proclaim his glory, his mercy, justice,
forebearance, wisdom, power, holiness, etc. And thus by necessary consequence
(though only secondarily and indirectly) they may discover unto us the Because
the light of nature without any immediate revelation, may serve to discover it.
natural (as some call it) worship of God, that he is to be feared, obeyed,
loved, etc. and upon this account the Gentiles are said to be guilty, in that
while by the creatures, and works of Gods hand they did know him, yet did not
worship him accordingly; in that they did not put in practice that lecture
concerning the glorifying of God, which the volum of creation and providence
did hold out unto them. Romans 1.21, 20. Yea, 3. as to the instituted worship of
God, and the duties of the second table, which we ought to perform one toward
another, the works of providence do not define, determine and declare what we
should do or not do in that kind; and so are an unfit umpire and judge to
determine controversies amongst men, or concerning the positive worship of God,
and the right manner of glorifying him; yet in that they manifest his eternal
power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. they may, 1. in the general show unto us, that
God is to be obeyed in all things he commands; though they do not in
particular declare what he commands, yet supposing that to be known by
whatsoever means (though no other be possible but a revelation, whether mediate
or immediate, of his will and appointment) the works of Creation and Providence
may serve to discover that bond and obligation, (under which we lie as his
creatures) to obey whatever he commands, notwithstanding of all the pretenses
that sense and selfe-interest can allege to the contrary. And, 2. they may be
so far useful and subservient to us who have the light of the word, for making
us come to the knowledge of particulars, that they (especially if they be
considerable or not ordinary) may prove to us so many monitors, items and
memento's, to make us ponder our ways, and compare them with the right rule:
thus the rod is said to cry to the man of wisdom, that he would ponder what is
good, and what the Lord requires of him, that thus he might repent and turn
from his evil ways. Mic. 6.9, 8, 10. etc. And accordingly Joseph's Brethren
hearkened to what the rod said to them, and were convinced of and humbled for an
old crime, Genesis 42, 21, 22. Thus also mercies are said to speak, and to invite
us to repentance, Romans 2.4. and to bear witness for God and against the wicked
ways of men. Act. 14.17. but alas! many make both Gods rods and mercy's become
false witnesses, and to speak that which the Lord never appointed them to say;
they make mercies sing some pleasant tune for lulling them a sleep, and the rod
to sound a retreat from the service of God, and with him to say what should ye
wait any longer on the Lord? 2 King. 6.33. Thus Saul imagined, that the rod did
point out to him the way to Endor, 1 Samuel 28.7.15. thus mercies to such, become
Proverb. Sirenum can^us, (...), Crocodili lachrymae.
Sirens, they sing to them till they sink them; and rods become Crocodiles, by
their tears they draw the passenger from the right way, and then drive him to
his ruin. O! beware then least thou mistake the voice of providence; that thou
run not to thy lusts and carnal interest to consult with these, while it
sends thee to the word: and see thou sit not down satisfied with the stream,
which is offered as a guide to lead thee into the fountain; make not the rod say
what it cannot, and has no commission to speak; though it may open the window
that the sunbeams may enter in, and anoint thine eyes that thou may see the
light; though it point out the fountain, yet light must come from the sun, and
water be brought from the right fountain. It cannot testify Mic. 6.9.
what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee, without, far less contrary
to, the Word; it may be an additional and cumulative, but must not be made a
solitary witness. The Lord has warned thee, that if thou make it bear
witness to the goodness or badness of an action or cause, or concerning his
approving or disapproving will, that it will prove a lying and false witness,
Eccles. 9.1, 2. Eccles. 8.14, etc. He recalleth thee from following such a
blind guide, and sends thee to that sure and infallible rule, His laws and
testimonies, as absolute arbiters to judge and determine what is light, what
darkness, and what right, what wrong, Isa. 8.20. And woe to him that dare add
unto the Word of God, and set up another rule, as if it alone were not
complete, perfect and sufficient, Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Deuteronomy.
12.32. And here Papists and Sectaries, these two great extreme, do meet and
join together in accusing (though upon far different The conclusion is one and
the same, though the premises be much different.
grounds and pretenses) the Word of God, of insufficiency and imperfection. Oh!
let us pity poor Pagans, who have not another Bible wherein to read the mind
of God, and whence to learn their duty, except the works of God Viz. the
relics of Gods image and the law written in their hearts, Romans 2.14, 15.
within and without them. And let us more thankfully improve the Word of truth
communicated to us, then to set up in its room, another rule of our own
devising, and Cor. 14.8.
prepare our selves to the battle at the uncertain sound of that trumpet.

But not minding to prosecute this point any further, we grant, that providence
should be the matter of praise, and a motive to confession, but must not be set
up for a rule to our prayers and supplications: we should bless God when he
prospers our But when our course is sinful, success is but a snare
lawful endeavors; and when he crosses our sinful ways and stampeth them
with some mark of his displeasure, we should take with our guiltiness; when he
sends out his storm, its time for sleeping Jonah to awaken, to strike sail
and turn.

It may here be enquired, if in our personal cases, any light may be received
from providential encouragements and discouragements? and it must be remembered,
that this question is not propounded concerning duty and sin, and what is in it
self, and in specie, lawful and unlawful, having already spoken to that
quaeree, and shown, that we have no other judge for determining that
controversy, but the law and the testimony: But the present question is only
to be extended to things Viz. negative, h^c. non prohibita.
lawful, which of themselves are indifferent; and which (if we abstract from
circumstances of persons, time, place, etc.) may without sin be either done or
left undone, whether or not in such a case the dispensations of providence, may
be made use of for clearing of scruples and difficulties concerning expediency
and inexpediency, a call or want of a call to do, hic and nunc; so that what
was only in the general, and permissively (that I may so speak) lawful, may by
a call and invitation from providence, become good and expedient, and so in
particular lawful, mihi and in act^ exercitol, fit and pertinent to be done by
me at such and such a time.

For answer. 1. It will not be denied, that to observe these signs and freets,
which ignorant and deluded creatures do more carefully mark and reverence then
the commandments, promises or threatenings of the Word, is abominable, and Pagan
like superstition. Thus, if some in their way meet such a beast or person, they
will not prosper in that journey, etc. Ah! how should Christians be ashamed to
observe such lying vanities, since the very Vid. Cicer. lib. 2. de divinat.
heathens have condemned this madness and folly; which may be called Satan's A
B C, the first rudiments he teaches his disciples, whom at length he leads 2 Timothy 2.26.
captive at his will: And as the devil will be busy, and do what he can to
make the event answer these ridiculous prefigurations, so God in judgment to
those who observe such vanities, may suffer it to be so, for hardening them in
their delusion. But O! what blindness and superstition must it be to divine and
prognosticate the event of enterprises from such providential occurrences as
have no influence upon, nor connection with such a business and undertaking? And
they, who do not value or observe such lying signs, will find them to prove as
false in their threatenings and promises concerning the futurition of events, as
they are unable, unfit and disproportionat; yea, ridiculous and altogether
impertinent for effectuating and bringing them to pass. But since the bell
must clink what the fool does think, No wonder though he can spell what it does
knell. Certainly such Dreamers have justified the presumptuous Astrologers and
Star-gazers; for albeit they dare undertake to read in the great ordinances of
the heavens, what the Lord never wrote in them; yet there be many lineaments in
that great and glorious volum, which the most intelligent cannot discern, and
the Astrologers may see (but they will not content themselves with that sight)
some natural connection of causes and effects, and where they cannot perceive
that clearly, yet there may be some ground for a probable conjecture; but there
no essay can be made, neither is there the least ground to enquire after any
connection, dependence, or causality between the symbol and the thing signified.

Neither, 2. will it be denied to be rash and unwarrantable, for any man now to
desire and expect a miraculous dispensation; and to say with Judge. 6.^ 7.
Gideon, show me a sign? And albeit the Saints sometimes have such a thought
suggested to them, yet they should reject it, as a temptation coming from him,
who can transform himself into an Angel of light, that he may draw us to the
paths of darkness. But yet the hand of Joah is not always discerned,
especially in the night of desertion. Thus that religious Lady Gregoria, being
much disquieted about her salvation, writes to Gregory, that she would not
cease to importune him till he received a revelation from heaven that she
should be saved; to whom he well replied, that she did ask an Rem dissi cilem
postulas and inutilem etc.
hard and unprofitable thing; for though I did receive (says he) yet how
should I be able to certify thee that I had received a revelation. Thus also
that English See Clerks mirror. chap. 1. 20. Edit. 2. ann. 1654.
Gentlewoman, who being under exercise of conscience, said to the Minister
sitting by her, If I must be saved, let this Venice glass be kept from
breaking while I throw it against the wall. And though the Lord would not break
this bruised reed, but would rather work a miracle, yet his wonderful
condescension does not excuse her rashness, and she was justly rebuked by the
Minister for her sin. Luther his practice was most heroic and observable, who
being (as he Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo ne mihi mittat, etc.
confesses) often tempted to ask signs and revelations from heaven to confirm
him in that way, which was at the first so solitary and full of dangers,
protested he would have no visions or miracles, but would take Gods Word
revealed in the Scriptures for all. And no less considerable was the carriage
of that holy old man, to whom (as Gerson Gers. de probatione spiritum.
reports) Satan appeared in a most glorious manner, professing himself to be
Christ, and that he appeared unto him because of his exemplary holiness; to
whom that experienced servant of Christ quickly replied, I am not so curious as
to desire a sight of my Savior here on earth, it shall suffice me to see and
enjoy him hereafter in heaven; withal adds this pathetick ejaculation, O
Lord Sit in ali^ seculo non in hoe visio tua merces mea.
let a sight of thee in another world, and not in this, be my reward.

Yet, 3. if the Lord should appear in any extraordinary work of providence, we
must not slight or despise such a dispensation: It has a voice and does cry,
and we should hearken and observe what it says; I say not we should welcome
Antichrist, though he come with signs and lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9. and that
we should believe another Gospel, though preached by an Angel from heaven, Gal.
1.8. we having a more sure word of prophecy whereunto we must take heed, 2 Pet.
1.19. when we have the light of the Word for our direction, we must not stay or
alter our course for any dispensation of providence, although extraordinary and
wonderful; yet, we should not altogether slight such rare and astonishing
works of God; they speak to us and we should ponder what they say; they are our
talents, and we should improve them: we should re-view our ways, and warrant,
that if we be following duty, we may, from such a reflection, strengthen our
selves, and guard our hearts against that temptation which the Lord has sent
(as that sign and wonder of the false Prophet, Deuteronomy 12.1, 2, 3.) to prove us;
but if upon examination we come to see that our course is wrong, and that we
have been set a work upon some mistake, and that our zeal has been without
knowledge; let us then thank God for it, and turn at that warning. We have a
considerable instance hereof in those Jews, who at the command of Julian the
Apostat, did essay to build again the Temple at Jerusalem, against whom the
Lord appeared by so many Cluver. hist. epit. page (mihi) 365. Pat. Symson,
hist. of the chapter ^mp. in Juliano.
signs of his displeasure in these strange dispensations, first a great tempest
of wind and thunder, and terrible earthquakes swallowing up the new-laid
foundation of the Temple, together with the instruments and materials they had
prepared for the work; and though thereby they were a little stopped, yet they
will make a second attempt: And then behold, 2. a fire rising from the
foundation they were laying, which continuing for a days space, did consume
the new work, the work men, and what necessaries they had again provided for
the work: and while (as Vid. Luc. Osiand. hist. eccl. cent. 4. lib. 3. cap 34.
some report) they will not yet desist, but will make the third essay, behold a
cross appearing in the air, and in their garments, which all their washing
could not wipe away; which strange dispensations, as they did so far work upon
them all, as to make them leave off to prosecute that design any further, so
they did prevail with some to fall upon an impartial examination of their way,
whereby they were led in to see their error; and taking that warning as coming
from God, did immediately give up their names to Christ. The Lord's hand is not
now shortened that it cannot work as in the days of old, when it seems good
to him, he yet works wonders in the earth: But, though now it be more rare to
meet with such signs and wonders, yet, there may be such a series and
combination of ordinary dispensations, as may deserve our serious
consideration, and the effect and product may seem strange and astonishing. O!
but let us take heed lest we be deceived by the working of Satan, that his
signs and lying wonders beget not in us strong delusions, and turn us not from
the way of righteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

4. As for ordinary dispensations, we have no warrant from the Scriptures, or
the practice of the Saints, to lay too much weight on them, or to expect light
and direction from them. And as it were a tempting of God to appeal to
providence, and the event and success of our undertakings for their
justifiableness; So it were no less rash and unwarrantable, foolish and
dangerous, to be led by invitation from providence, and to wait for that before
we set forth. The Lord might justly make thee meet with disappoint meant in the
issue, when success and a smiling providence, in the beginning, was the motive
that led thee on. If thou will not knock till the door be opened, thou may
wait long and ly without, while all within was in readiness to have welcomed
and kindly entertained thee; and if thou be too confident in a promising
opportunity, he may send some blast in thy teeth to make thee strike sail, and
cause thy vessel return to the harbor empty. Hamans promotion and moyen with
the King did prove a step in his way to the gallows, his advancement made him
proud and became an occasion of his ruin, Esth. 3.5. and 7.10. and Joseph's
fetters and imprisonment did lead to his advancement; Joseph must be sold as a
slave before he be a Father to Pharaoh and Lord of all his house, Genesis 45.7, 8.

Yet, 5. we dare not simply condemn the observation of the ordinary works of
providence, and generally conclude, that no use may be made of these for light
and direction in our way. But, to determine and set bounds here, and say, thus
far may we go and no further, and at such a time and occasion and no other, is
no small difficulty, hoc opus, hic labor est; and knowing none who have gone
before us in this enquiry, we shall take the more heed to our steps, and, in
modesty and with submission, offer some few particulars, which may occasion a
more full disquisition by others. 1. Then, although it be certain that we
should commend our ways to God, asking light and direction from him in every
business we put our hands to, that he would hold us (as he did that holy man,
Ps. 73.23, 24.) by the right hand, and guide us by his counsel; yet, we cannot
expect an extraordinary revelation, or to hear a voice from heaven pointing out
our way. Neither, 2. must we imagine, that the Lord will blindfold our
understanding, and violently draw us; But that, 3. he will deal with us in a
suitable and convenient way, making use of congruous means for persuading and
alluring reasonable creatures to follow, or to reclaim them from such and such
ways and courses. And thus he does direct us by suggesting to us, or bringing
to our memories, such motives and arguments as will prevail with us, and
offering to our consideration such dispensations as may have influence upon our
judgment, and help us to right purposes and resolutions.

And to say that we should not thus ponder and improve such works of
providence, is in effect, 1. to deny that we should take notice of Gods care,
and what our kind Father does for us. And, 2. to say that we should not make
use of our reason, nor lay hold upon what opportunity the Lord does offer unto
us, and thus to give carnal men the advantage of Christians, as to the
observation and right improvement of providence: For, though such take little
notice of his band, yet they observe his work, and what price he puts into
their hands; and will not be so foolish as to walk in that Remember the
question is not concerning sin and duty, but expediency and inexpediency.
way they see hedged up with thorns, nor to slight any promising opportunity
calling them to enter in at an open door.

But, 2. we must not lay so much weight upon providential occurrences, as to
make them the alone or main guide in our consultations; for, if there be much
lying at the stake, a contrary blast must not hinder us in our course: when we
must buy and the market will not last, we should not say the day is not fair;
and if God called me to go from home, he would make the Sun to shine upon me.
Ah! fool, thy necessity does call thee to go, but the Lord does not promise to
bind up the clouds while thou art on the way.

Yet, 3. if the Lord, by some special, remarkable or unexpected providence,
does, as it were, cross our way, or open a door formerly shut, and that after
thou have been a supplicant at the Throne for direction and success; thou
may, with some cautions, look upon such a dispensation as sent by way of
return to thy prayers. If, 1. thou can say, that thou have respect to all
God's Commandments, and labourest to approve thy self to him in thy whole
conversation; if thou make conscience of thy ways, and art not a stranger to
a spiritual and close communion with God, so that thou have not now gone to him
in a fit and good mode, or while thou art in a strait; and as it is thy
constant course to commend thy ways to him, so thou trustest and dependest on
him, and if, while thou art living in a dependence on him, and waiting for an
answer in a grave and weighty business that deserves thy serious
consideration, and much deliberation, he send thee such a dispensation, thou
may look upon it as a warning and message from the Lord. But, 2. be not too
rash, but wait a while; go to him again and ask his help and assistance to make
a right use of that dispensation. And, 3. in the mean time thou may take a
view of the motives which may induce thee to undertake such a business, or may
draw thee off; and what may be the consequents of the having or wanting such a
supposed mercy, etc. And if in thy inquiry and consultation, thou find
nothing from thence to counter-ballance the impression which that dispensation
has made upon thy spirit, but rather much to second and concur with it; and
thus find the Lord inwardly to back and carry that work home upon thy heart,
and make it as a strong cord to draw thee, who formerly was in some sort of
suspense, not knowing what hand to turn thee to, thou may with some
confidence say, Now I see the Lord making good his word to me, in bringing the
blind by a way he knew not, and making darkness light before him, Isa. 42.16.
But remember, though the present case be concerning expediency and
inexpediency, gain and loss, outward advantage and disadvantage, yet not
simply (as if there were no more to be enquired after) but in reference to the
sanctified use thereof, as it may be a mean and help to us in glorifying the
giver, and for working out our own salvation, O but whatsoever dispensation
would draw us aside from the holy commandment, and would lead us to any sinful
way; let us not hearken to it, but let us reject and abominat it as a
temptation. Pro^. 28.1.
The (l) righteous must be bold as a Lion, and with resolution set himself
against all mountains of opposition, not hearkening to the voice of any work
that would stop his ears from hearing and obeying Gods Word.

4. As we have no warrant to ask, and upon every occasion to expect such
weighty and remarkable dispensations, so to value too See Ass. 1.2.
much, and to be led by ordinary occurrences and common dispensations of
providence, were foolishly to bind our selves with setters of our own making,
and superstitiously to set up, and follow a directory of our own devising, and
with our own hands to plait a net for catching our selves, and to wreath a yoke
about our own necks; and those who are so far deluded as to walk by such a
rule, would rather be an object of compassion then derision, as being
infatuated and given over to the hight of folly and delusion.

But, 5. that which seems to be most intricate in this question, is, whether
or not it be lawful with Abraham's servant to pray, that the Damsel, who shall
say, drink and I will draw water for thee and thy Camels also, may be the woman
thou have appointed for thy servant Isaac, Genesis 24. 14. And with David to say,
If he speak thus, thy servant shall have peace, 1 Samuel 20.7. And if with
Jonathan we may conclude, that, if they say come up unto us, we will go up, for
the Lord has delivered them into our hands. 1 Samuel 14.9, 10. We did not
enquire, if with these Pagan priests and sorcerers, 1 Samuel 6.9. And with
Timotheus, 1 Maccab. 5.40. we might go to the devil (as the custom and
superstition of these men, and the event answering their sign does show they
did) to ask a sign from him. Neither, 2. did we enquire if we might (with
Gideon, Judge. 6.36.) desire that the dew should be on our fleece, while it is
dry upon all the earth; because such a sign is altogether impertinent, and has
no connection with the end for which it was sought, and is of it self
miraculous, and so may not without an extrordinary call and warrant be desired
and ask't; but we did enquire, if it be lawful to desire and pray the Lord to
make some ordinary dispensation, having some connection with the present
business, a sign for discovering his purpose concerning the event of such a
business, and our call to go about it. For Ans. 1. None will be so rash as to
condeme those holy men, who no doubt in this were directed by some
extraordinary instinct of the Spirit of God. But, 2. since the persons were
eminent and not in an ordinary condition, and directed by a special (we will
not say revelation, yet) impulse and motion, their practice must not be looked
upon as a general rule and pattern, which we may imitate upon every occasion.
Yet, 3. we dare not so limit the servants of God as to say, that in no case
they may take such a course, and make use of those examples, if these cautions
were observed, 1. if the person be eminent in holiness, 2. under some great
trial and strait, so that the case is grave, weighty and intricate, 3. when he
finds a more then ordinary motion and impulse, stirring him up to take that
course, and pointing out the particular dispensation he is to seek for a sign,
4. that he be not peremptory in his desire, but seeks such a sign with
submission; so that he will not grudge or repine, if he meet not with such a
dispensation, or if it be given, yet the event does not answer: otherwise we
must tempt God, and limit the holy one, by binding him to a sign of our
choosing, while we had no command to require that dispensation, or warrant to
set it up for a mark, and no promise that the event should answer it. 5. This
must not be done, 1. out of pride, as if thou were a nonesuch, and might
expect and ask from God that which others might not. Nor, 2. of curiosity to
try the Lord, and put him to it by thy conceit. Neither, 3. out of diffidence,
as it were in vain to wait any longer upon God, if he give not such a pledge of
his love and care. Neither, 4. out of rashness, or in every trifling business,
but deliberarely, and upon some weighty ground and special consideration.
Neither, 5. must such a one boast, and be too confident in that dispensation he
pitched upon for a sign, though it be given, he should not promise too much of
it, but patiently wait till he see if the event does answer his expectation;
and in the mean time, he should beware least his impatience, or vain confidence
in that he has met with, do not intercept and hinder the accomplishment. 6.
After he has seen the event to answer his desire and expectation, that it may
prove a blessing, he should, 1. be humble, 2. be thankful, and, 3. beware that
he make not a wrong use of this rare dispensation, and set it not up as a
preparative for ordinary cases, and be not from thence encouraged to follow the
like course, while he is not placed in the like circumstances. If these and
such like conditions be observed, we dare not peremptorily condemn such a
practice, and deny that the Saints may at any time say (with him, Ps, 86.17.)
show me a token for good. As there is no ground to think, that David there did
ask an extraordinary and miraculous sign, so neither to affirm that he had some
extraordinary and special warrant to put up such a desire. I know that our
Divines do generally conclude, that it is unlawful and a tempting of God to
ask a sign from him without some special warrant and revelation. But they may be
interpreted to speak of miraculous, or impertinent signs, which have no
connection with the event; or if of such signs also to which we did limit the
question, then they have not absolutely and universally condemned such a
practice, but when it is not so qualified according to the conditons and
proviso's held forth in our resolution, Thus Ames. Cas. cons. lib. 4. cap. 23.
and Med. theol. lib. 2. cap. 11. 18 and cap. 12. 17, 18. etc.
Amesius (though once and again he see neth to speak as peremptorily against
this course, as any I have read, yet) Signum a Deo petere humiliter circa
aliquod particulare necessarium, quod altas non est a Deo sufficienter
manifestatum, potest aliquando fidelis aliquis sine peccato. Med. theol. lib.
2. cap. 12. Sect. 18.
grants, that Believers may sometimes, without any special inspiration or
instinct (such as he had been speaking of, Sect. 17.) seek a sign from God in
some necessary and intricate case, and for confirmation, alleges Abraham's
practice, Gen 15.8. which upon examination will be found to hold out (if it be
acknowledged for a rule) more then we have granted.

6. It may be enquired, if in our several straits and exigenees, we may run to
the Scriptures, and set up that for a rule that first occurreth, if pertinent
to our case? and if we should look on what it says, or may be from it
collected as a call to us to do or not do, and to do thus or thus? Ans. As it
is certain, 1. that we may commend our case to God and ask direction from him;
2. that we should reflect upon such passages of the word as relate to our case,
and may give light to us; So, 3. I think that it were too rash and truel
peremptorily to condemn the practice of some experienced Christians, who while
in suspense, and not knowing what hand to turn, have had their recourse to the
Scriptures, leting their anchor fall where the Lord in his providence did lead,
who thus at a venture have met with a suitable and pertinent word: Yet, 4. we
grant that it is not easy to determine what use should be made of such a word;
for albeit sin and duty be clearly revealed in the Word, yet expediency and
inexpediency, a call to do or not do, hic and nunc, could not (because of the
multitude and variety of circumstances) be particularly there determined. And
this case seems to be much like the former, there being here a sign (as it
were) sought from Gods Word, as there by his work; and so observing the
directions set down there, we may make the like use of that passage of
Scripture, which might be made of that dispensation: yet (as it would appear)
we have a greater liberty here, and we may with less hazard of tempting the
Lord, run to his word, then to any of his works; he having appointed the former
and not the latter, to be our Gods works in no sense are a preper rule, but his
Word is; though not universally not properly as to our case, it not being
determined there; albeit we must reflect on the general rules held forth in the
Word, in our cousult ation, and must walk by them.
rule (though not properly as to this, yet in another case) and there-therefore
it would seem, that we may more confidently in every case run to it for
direction, then to the other. Yet here also there may be several mistakes and
errors; as curiosity, rashness, pride, a mistake and mis-application of the
Word; superstition, by laying more weight on that passage then it will bear,
extending it beyond its light and direction, and looking after something by way
of a sign, in that the Lord has offered a Word suitable and pertinent to our
case. Ah thou simple and rashly confident! know, though that Word may speak of
case much like to thine, and hold out a word which thou would lay hold on,
yet it may hold out no warrant for thee, either to do or not to do, and no
ground from which thou may conjecture concerning the event. But otherwise,
O! what light, direction, comfort and encouragement have the servants of God
met with from such passages of Scripture, as the Lord in his providence has
occasionally offered; from thence they have seen and learned what formerly the
did not see, or not ponder or regard: O! Christian, have thou tried this
course? do thou run to the Word when other counselors fail thee? and can
thou not from thine own experience put to a seal to this truth? The Word of God
enlightneth the eyes, and makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7, 8. Hitherto we
have especially spoken of a transient occasion, and what use may be made of
providence for a right improvement thereof, in reference to some particular act
or end. Now let us add a word for discovering how far providence may be
helpful for constituting us into a permanent state and relation; and here we
must only speak of such a state and condition, as falls under our choice; for
otherwise we need not wait for a call, nor enquire after a warrant, we being
already determined and placed into such a condition, and standing already under
such and such a relation, which obliges us to the performance of such and such
duties; thus we are born children, subjects, heirs, etc. And here providence
does constitute, and actually and de facto, invest and place us into such a
station, antecedently and previously to our deliberation, choice and consent.
But as to the former case we answer, that providence, albeit it may invite,
open a door, and offer a fit occasion for entering into such a place, calling
and state as falls under our election and choice, and where our consent must
go before our being invested therein, and some qualifications are required,
whether moral (as the consent of, and a call from others who are concerned) or
physical, as parts, ability and dexterity to discharge the same aright, though
(I say) providence may thus concur, yet it cannot directly, formally, and of
its self constitute and instate us into such a place and condition: But as we
must walk by another rule in the discharging of such a place, so we must
another, and better warrant for our entering upon and undertaking of it; thou
must not invade another man's right, though thou have an opportunity offered for
doing it successfully; neither must thou pass over that order and method which
the Word of God, and the laudable laws and constitutions of men have appointed,
though thou have no competitor, who can lay any claim or plead a right to such
a place: But those steps being observed, providence may be subservient, and in
some respect directive, and so far point out thy way, that thou can not
slight that invitation from providence without sin. But still remember, that
providence must not go alone, though a providential call be required, yet it is
not sufficient. Providence may open a door, at which, if thou enter in, thou
must take heed to thy steps, least thou dash thy brains against the lintels of
that door. Thou must have a call both from God and man, from within and
without, concurring with the call of providence, otherwise thou should not
hearken to its voice, as if it seem to call thee 1. to any place or condition
not warrantable and lawful; 2. without the consent and concurrence of them by
whom thou should enter; 3. contrary to thy inclination, and for the
discharging of which thou art not qualified, etc. But you will say, we cannot
expect an extraordinary revelation, but the Lord having appointed in his Word,
and in the general determined there what stations and callings are lawful and
what not, he has left the particular determination thereof to providence; so
that we cannot expect to meet with no other call, and thus must think, that God
by it does call us to determine and apply the general rules of the Word to such
a particular exigence; and finding these to agree, we may judge that joint
testimony to be the voice of God pointing out our way. Ans. If by providence be
meant all these steps, we must tread in our entry to such a place and station,
all the conditions, transactions and qualifications which are required, we do
not deny, that the call and invitation of providence, fitting and preparing all
these requisites, and opening a door for improvement of them, may suffice for
determining and applying to our case the general rules held forth in the Word,
and we should look upon it as the call and voice of God, which we should not
reject or resist; but if by providence there be not (as usually there is not)
any other thing meant, but a fair opportunity of entering into such a place and
station with facility and success, thou may for thy trial meet with such an
occasion, which thou should not set up as a rule, and make it thy warrant,
but should rather resist it as a temptation, and turn away from it as a door
set open to sin.

And albeit he law and appointment of God (manifested either in his Word, or by
his work on our hearts) be the first radical and regulating principle, which
ordains, authorizeth and appoints such and such callings, employments and
relations to be amongst men; yet as to the entrance unto, and the investing of
such and such persons, in such particular places and stations, a call from man,
together with the observance of that order and way appointed by man, is
necessary; yea, it is the very basis and foundation, and (as it were) formal
reason, which does install and constitute a person into such a place and under
such a relation, so that now he may and ought (while formerly he might not)
discharge the several duties belonging to such a place and station, and flowing
from such a relation.

We have spoken to this case for the most part in an abstract way, having
seldom made any application to the subject matter which occasioned this enquiry;
but it is no difficult work to collect from what has been said, how we should
frame our prayers in reference to providential dispensations in so far, as we
may not make providence a rule of our actions, neither must we make it a copy
and directory for our supplications.

Praise be to him, who has not left us to such blind and dumb guides, who
neither know nor can point out to us the way. Ah! let us pity poor Pagans, who
have no other Bible but the volum of creation and providence, which is often
sealed so, that they cannot open it and read; and often it is blank, and has
not light to impart, or else its written in such dark characters, that few or
none is able to read and understand: Though the works of God do speak, yet they
often give an uncertain found. But we have that clear and sure Word of truth
for our direction, which we may safely follow, and whereupon we may securely
rest. The Sun-light of one single precept or promise, is of more use for our
direction, then the glistring of may constellations of providence. The night is
past of us, and though all the stare disappear and hold out no light, yet we on
whom the Sun does shine have no cause to complain, as if we were lest in the
dark. And as the Word is, 1. a clear, infallible and never-erring rule; so its
2. constant, perpetual and immovable; we need not fear least the Lord abrogate
and disannul it: but that same hand of providence, which now holds out to us
what our hears desire, may in a moment be lifted up against us; that same hand
that now seems to open the door, may shut it when he pleases, and crush
thee, if thou stand in the way.

Sect. 2. For what things, and in what order and manner should we pray?
THe promise being such a sure ground and foundation of prayer, we may safely
go where see this star point out our way; the promises are not only precious
and exceeding great, 2 Pet. 1.4. But also (like the Ps. 119.96.
commandments) exceeding broad, and of a large extent; they go as far as a
rational and sanctified appetite can reach. The will (I confess) may choose
every Bonum est quod omnia appe^uus. Arist. Eth. 1. cap.
good thing, and the promise is of as large a compass. The Lord has said,
that he will give grace and glory, and are not these very large and
comprehensive? yet least any should complain, he will leave no room for any
exception, but as he has promised to give these great mercies; so that he will
withhold no good thing from his honest servants and supplicants, Ps. 84.11. Ps.
34.9, 10. Ps. 23.1. Ps. 85.12. etc. and that he will preserve them from all
evil, Ps. 1 21.7. that he will preserve their soul, ver. 7. and their body,
their going out and coming in; and that he will not suffer their foot to be
moved, ver. 8, 3, 5, 6. Thus the promise excludes nothing that is good; and I
know no good thing, which we may not pray for. Goodness by the Philosophers, is
thought to be a relative property; and in the Schools that is called good,
which is fit and Bonum est ens ut conveniens non fibi (ut ex tern^^^^ videtur
manifestum) sed alteri: unde Hurtado, ex divisione boni in honestum u^ile, and
delectabile recte colligit bonum communiter usurpari pro convenienti quia
(inquit) honestas utilitas and delectatio dicunt ordinem ad aliud. Hurt.
metaph. disp. 7. 5. 56.
convenient; which general may to good purpose be applied to this case in
divinity, while we enquire what is good for a Christian, and what he may claim
and ask, as being his by virtue of a promise? viz not every thing which his
lust does crave, but every thing that is fit and convenient (and so good) for
him: It may be riches, pleasures, honors, etc. would not hic and nunc, and at
such a season be convenient for him, but would prove a snare; and therefore
there is no promise, that we can absolutely and peremptorily plead as a bond
for such a supposed mercy. The object of the promise must be some good thing,
bonum tibi, there can be no promise made to thee, but it must be concerning
something which is good and covenient for thee; otherwise, it were rather a
threatening then a promise.

O! If all our prayers and desires were thus limited, and did carry along
with them this proviso; we would not be so peremptory in our requests, nor so
impatient under a repulse, nor so ready to call in question Gods love and care,
and the truth of his promises, when in mercy he refuses to satisfy our lusts
and foolish desires. And O! with what confidence, security and calmness of
spirit might we roll our selves, and all our affairs over upon our kind and
provident Father? who as he will not withhold what as good, so will not suffer
what is evil to come near us. But as thou may ask every good, so only what
is good: for no evil can be an object of love and desire, but rather of hatred
and aversation, and so falls not under a promise but a threatening: and thus
cannot be a fit material for prayer and supplication, but rather for
deprecation or imprecation.

But here we might speak to this question, whether we may desire and pray for
any evil, whether of sin or suffering, though not absolutely and for it self,
yet as it may be a mean for humbling of us, and drawing us near to God? There
be few of those we have read who propound, and none who at any length do speak
to this material (as we conceive) case; but since there be so many particulars,
which we must speak to in this Chapter, we shall remit this to Part 3. and
handle it amongst the cases. Only let us from thence suppose, that the object
of our prayers must be something that is good, fit, convenient and profitable
to us, and that not only respectively and in reference to such an end, but also
absolutely and of it self, at least negatively and permissively. And thus it
must not be evil, either morally, or physically, it must not of it self be
either dishonorable to God and contrary to his law, or afflictive and bitter
to us. But as to what is thus good, thou art not straightened either by the
promise, or the nature of this performance; we have both conjoined and meeting
together in this center, or rather diffused through this large circumferene,
Mat. 7.11. Your Father which is in heaven shall give good things to them that
ask him.

We need not descend unto particulars, these being so many and different;
whatever thou stands in need of, what ever may be useful and profitable either
for soul or body, for this life or that which is to come, for thy state and
calling, for thy present exigence and condition, etc. thou may ask in
prayer, and plead a promise for the obtaining of it. All which good and
desirable things, are summarily comprehended under six heads, in that perfect
pattern which our Lord Jesus taught his Disciples, Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.2. a
commentary and explication whereof, we purpose not to offer now, especially,
since that has been often and fully done by many judicious and learned
Divines. But we shall reduce what we judged necessary to add concerning the
object of prayer, into two generals, viz. of things and persons. Of the first,
we shall speak here, and of the second in the following Section.

1. Then as to these good things and mercies, which are the matter of prayer;
it would be observed, 1. that these are either temporal, belonging to our
bodily and perishing being in this world, or spiritual, which do For even these
temporal things have a remote tendency, and should by us be referred to such a
noble end.
more immediately concern the soul, and our everlasting being and happiness.

2. Both spiritual and temporal mercies may be subdivided, for some of them are
more, some less necessary for obtaining the aforesaid ends, as amongst
spirituals, some are necessary for our being and spiritual life, others only
for our greater comfort, vigor and activity in doing; so amongst temporals,
some are necessary for our bodily being and life, others only for the comfort,
better accommodation and emolument thereof. And accordingly the promises do,
and our desires and prayers should in a different manner respect these objects.
For clearing of which (as being the main scope of this Section) v^e shall lay
down some few positions, beginning with temporals; and as to these, first,
laying the foundation, and showing that they may be lawfully asked, before we
speak of the manner how they should be asked.

Concl. 1. We need not fear to go to our Father for a supply of all our wants,
as well outward and bodily, as spiritual. Thus our blessed Lord, in that
perfect pattern of prayer, Mat. 6.11. Luke 11.3. has taught us to ask our
daily bread; and Agur by his example, Prove. 30.8. does warrant us to pray for
food convenient: and the Apostle exhorts us to make our requests known unto
God in every thing, Phil. 4.6. And there be so many promises concerning these
outward things, and so many instances of prayers put up by the Saints,
registered in the Word; especially in the book of the Psalms, that it were not
worth the time to insist upon citations; having the constant practice of all
the Saints, as daily memorials of our duty, and as so many torches to show us
our way. Yea, this seems to be one, and not the least of these reasons, why
the Lord does subject and expose us to so many wants and dangers, that we may
run to him for a supply of our wants, and for protection from the evil we fear;
and we should look upon these, as so many messengers sent to invite us (as the
famine did the prodigal) to draw nigh to our Father. We will not now digress to
confute the old Manicheans, who affirmed, that only these temporal and outward
things were promised in the old Testament; with whom in this Cateches. Raccov
cap. 5. per t^tum. Socin. praelect. theol. cap. 17. and com. in epist. Joan. p.
207, 210. Ossor. inst. rel. Christi. a cap. 22. usque ad 34. Smalc. de div.
Jes. Chapter cap. 5. p. 17.25, 26. etc.
Soci^ians and Remonst. apolog. page 26 and conf. cap. 10, 12. Sim. Episcop.
disp. 12. de faedere Dei, these. 4. and disp. de conven. and discri. vet. and
nov Test these. 5, 20, 31, etc.
Arminians do join, albeit some of them would mitigate the matter by their
distinctions, while they tell us, that the Scriptures of the old Testament do
expressly and directly speak only of temporals, so that the people of the Jews
could not understand, nor collect from thence any ground for believing a life
eternal: As if God had only proposed to that people a swinish and Turkish
felicity. Neither will we now meddle with these heretics (whom Theophyl. fol.
156. edit. an. 1533. in Joa. 6.27. August. de here^^b cap. 57. Psalliani pro
Messaliani scriptum est c^rruptissime inquit L. Danaeus in locum August. and
ra^iones quas subjicit videntur pr^habiles, sed Theophylactus, ut mo^ui vo^at
bos hareticos Mosselianos.
Theophylact calls Masselians, and Augustine, Psallians, who on the other hand
do teach, that we should not labor or care for temporal and outward things;
her^^e it would appear, that they did teach that we should not p^ay for them:
were it nor that Aug. loc. cit. Euchitae and Masseliani signify the same
thing, the one word being as to its ^riginal Syriack, and the other Greek, vid
Danaeum, loc. cit.
Augustine tells us, that they belong to the Sect of the Euchits, who pleaded,
(but I am sure not by their p^^ctice) that men ought always, and without
intermission to pray; and then surely no object, whether temporal or spiritual,
must be excluded from those perpetual prayers: And yet what we may not some one
way or another care for (especially as to those things that require our labor
and endeavor for obtaining of them) that we may not (I would think) pray for.
But in opposition both to Manicheans and Those whom Theophylact calls
Masselians, others most usually call Messalians.
Masselians, let us lay down this sure conclusion; That godliness always was,
and still is profitable for all things, having the promises for things
belonging both to this bodily perishing life, and for that eternal life of
glory, which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Its true, the ancient people had many
particular promises of earthly things, which we cannot lay claim to. The Church
then being in her infancy, was accordingly left under an elementary paedagogy,
and had a greater allowance of sensible and outward mercies, as being more
suitable to their condition: as their ordinances were more Heb. 7.16. and 9, 10.
carnal, consisting for a great part in externals, and in outward bodily
performances; so the promises and motives to obedience, accordingly did more
respect their outward state and condition here in the world, then now under the
Gospel, when we (being liberate of the yoke of these bod ly rites and
ceremonies, and light having arisen to us after these Cant. ^ 2.17.
shadows are gone) have more spiritual duties, and more pure motives and
encouragments. Not that their performance were not also spiritual, and as if
these types had not pointed out Christ, whom they were to eye in all
sacrifices, washings, etc. But because the manner of performance was much
conversant about the outward man, and sensible things, Nor, 2. That Christians
have not the promise of this life and for temporal mercies; but because they
had many particular, peremptory and absolute promises for such things, which do
not belong to us, who instead of Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey,
have for the most part the cross for our portion and badge here in this
wilderness, as being more profitable to us, and more subservient to his glory,
who often makes. the Sanguis martyrum semen ecclesiae.
ashes of the Saints the seed of the Church. Its true, the general promises
made to that people, do no less belong to us then they did to them; for
instance, that word, Ps. 84.11. is no less true to day, then when it was at
first written; the Lord being no less then he was then, a Sun to comfort, and
a Shield to protect his people. As the Lords hand is not shortened, so neither
is his bowels more straightened and narrow toward us Christians; yea, as to these
temporal mercies. And if they were as fit and convenient for us, we should have
them as certainly, and in as great abundance. But the thing indefinitly
promised, not being hic and nunc, and as clothed with such and such
circumstances fit and convenient for us, qua talis, and as such it is not
contained in the promise. And thus, though the Lord will with hold no good
thing from them that walk uprightly, yet he will not give such a supposed
mercy, but really a snare. And thus in withholding of it, he withholdeth not
what is good, but what would be evil. We will not now enter the lists with
Thom. 22 q. 83. art. 4. in corp. Omnes orationes nostra ordinari debent ad
gratiam and gloriam consequendam quae sosus Deus dat etc. and Cajet. in locum^
negat orationem non ordinatam ad consecutionem gratiae esse simpliciter
orationem, vel actum religionis.
Thomas and Cajetan, whose words, if rightly understood, may admit an orthodox
sense, albeit to the first view it would appear, that they denied that
temporals should be asked. But Guido de Ba. super lecreto, part. 1. did. 95.
Presbyteros, cit sola aeterna pet^nda esse, decens enim est (inquit) and
ratiouabile ut ista-petantur a Deo and non transitoria and caduca, sed part 2.
causa 12. q. 1. habebat, docet temporalia esse petenda, and quo modo and in
quem finem. vid. loc.
Guido de Baisio, has here fallen into such a manifest contradiction, that I
know not what can be said for his vindication; but leaving that task to those
of his profession, we shall only propound one or two objections, which might
(as we conceive) stumble some weak ones.

Object, 1. We should be careful for nothing, for none of these temporal
perishing things, nor lay up for our selves treasures on earth, nor take
thought for our life what we shall eat, what we shall drink, or for our body
what we shall put on; it is pagan like to take thought for to morrow, or to
seek after these things. Philip, 4.6. Mat. 6.19, 25, 28, 31, 32, 34. we must
not labor for that meat that perishes, but only for the meat that endures
unto eternal life. Joh. 6.27. and were it not to mock and tempt the great God,
and to prostitute one of his ordinances, taking his name in vain, if we should
pray for such things for which we may not take thought, care, or labor. Ans.
These and the like Scriptures do not, cannot condemn all sort of care and
labor for these things; not a moderat, orderly and subordinar care and labor
for, and provision of them, for that is frequently enjoined as a duty, and has
accordingly been accompanied with success and a blessing; as we ought to be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, so we must not be slothful in business
that concerns the outward man, Romans 12.11, we should follow our calling, and
may work with our hands, that we may have lack of nothing. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11, 12.
yea and if any man do not care and provide for his family, he is (so far, and
in respect of his negligence which the very light of nature does condemn,)
worse then an infidel. 1 Timothy 5.8.

And thus we may well retort the argument, what we may August. ad prob. de
ordeum, hoc licer orare quod licet desiderare. epist. 121.
desire, care and labor for, that we may pray for; we may not put our hands to
that work, on which we should not ask a blessing, and praise him when he
follows our labors with success: all care then is not forbidden, but a
carnal, immoderat, distrustful, excessive, perplexing, and soul-destroying
care, anxiety, and labor; when thus we seek these outward things, and make
them our idol, when we prefer them to the Kingdom of God, and dote upon them as
necessary things, which we cannot and will not upon any terms want, this is a
pagan-lik sin to be abominated by all who believe that there is a life to come;
and it is the bane of our profession, that so many titular Christians do rather
serve Mammon then the true God,

Object, 2. That which we most desire and covet, may prove most hurtful and
noxious to us; Evertore dom ostotas optantibus ipsis Dii faciles, nocitura
toga, nocitura petuntur Militia -- ergo quid optandum foret ignorasse fateris.
Juven Sat 10. divitiae multis exitio fuere, honores complures pessunaederunt,
regnorum exitus saepe miserabiles cernuntur, splendida conjugia nonnunquam
domus funditus ever terunt etc. Thom. loc. cit. art. 5. ex M. Val erio.
riches, honors and pleasures have often occasioned not only the eternal ruin
of the soul, but also the shame, misery and bodily ruin of who have enjoyed
them in greatest abundance; Were it not then best and safest not to pitch upon
any of these things, but to hold in the general, casting our selves over upon
the Lords holy and wise providence, what he may make choice of that which is
good and expedient for us to have and enjoy? Ans. I have often with admiration
called to mind the opinion of Apud Platon. loc. infra citando though Plato
there brings in Socrates speaking yet its known to them who are acquaint with
his wayof writing that be makes Socrates express what be himself would say
and did aprove: some do cite this opinion from Thomas, and Thomas from M.
Valor. and all ascribe it only to Socrates; but ^e who will go to the first
sountain will see that Plato was also of that judgment; yea there may be some
question concerning Socrates what was indeed his opinion, he being only by way
of supposition, and because of that kind of writing by way of dialogue
mentioned; the work and words, and often the manner and opinion being only
Plato's.
Socrates and Plato concerning this particular, their modesty and self-denial,
and resigning themselves wholly over to divine disposal, they would not
prescribe to the Lord as not knowing what in particular to ask, and therefore
would only in the general pray, that ^od would give what is good. O! how
should such a consideration as this humble us, who are often so particular and
peremptory in our carnal desires, that Fachel-lik we must have them satisfied
or esse we must die through impatience and coffeehouse? Many Pagans shall
rise up in judgment against this generation and condemn it because of its
worldly mindedness. O! If we did trust more to the Lord, and were less
peremptory in our desires after these things, our earthly portion would be
greater, better and more secure; and our way to the heavenly inheritance more
easy, sweet and safe; yet we do not condemn the examples of holy men set down
in the word, nor the constant practice of the Saints, who in their Prayers have
named such particulars as they conceived to be needful and convenient for
them: what others have done in this kind we may and ought to do, we have
particular promises concerning such and such temporal mercies, and express
commands to ask such and such mercies, and therefore we may ask and name the
mercy we stand in need of; only let us ask with submission, and in dependence
on the wisdom, love and care of our Father, and in subordination to the one
thing necessary; and though we know not, yet our Father knows what is good
and expedient for us; and he has promised to give his Spirit to be our guide
and to help us to pray as we ought both as to the matter and manner. And albeit
we may follow the light of the promise, and ask what is there held forth, and
name what is there expressed, yet we should pray that not what we will, but
what he has appointed to be good for us may be given unto us, and that the
Spirit would moderat our desires, and rectify them when they are misplaced.

3. Object. may be this, we must pray in faith, Ans. we shall in the Lords
strength, Part. 2. Chap. 2. show what is that faith which is required in an
acceptable prayer; and therefore we will remit this Objection there to be
discussed and answered. It were an egregious tempting of the Lord to ask a
miracle without a revelation and some special warrant, which none can now
expect, and yet without a miracle (according to the Jesuiticall hypothesis) the
Lord can neither give nor withhold any thing from us, and wherefore then should
we pray unto him?


Here we might enquire of Socinians, Jesuits and Arminians, what is the sense
and meaning of their Prayers? and what they do ask from the Lord while they
pray for these temporal and outward things? Either it must be nothing, or too
much, some one or other miraculous dispensation, that either he would suspend
his concurrence from these second causes which propend to what may hurt us, or
that he would employ and determine and provide means for procuring to us such
and such mercies: neither of which can be done without a (s) miracle; for these
men have limited the holy one, and bound the almighty as with Adamantine
chains, and fetters of iron, unto the will and determination of the poor
creature, fancying an obligation to ly upon him by virtue of that law whereby
he as the first (rather last) and general cause must concur with all and
every one of the creatures, according to their exigence, and at their nod, call
and determination. And thus the Lord (unless he will work a miracle and alter
the course of nature, and contraveen that law and order he has appointed in
governing the world, or rather his suffering the creatures to sit in the throne
of providence, and to govern the world according to their pleasure and
inclination) must become like the Pagan idols, who can neither do good nor
evil, Isa. 41.23. Jer. ^0.5. and the world must be governed by fortune and a
blind providence: And the Lord must not be said to guide, rule, lead and
determine his creatures, but they to rule, lead and determine him, yea, often
(as in evil actions) against his will, and with abhorrence and reluctance; nay,
Deus quaesi co actus munere causae universalis permittitsuum con^ursum qui
torquetur contra intentionem ad malum. Ruiz. de vel. Dei, disp. 38. sect. 2.
and disp. 26. sect. 5. Deus pertrabitur and veluti abripiiur a causa secundae
Raynand. mor. discip. did 4. q. 3. art. 5. sect. 355. Deus non solum non
concurrit cum inclinatione sed etiam cum repugnantia -- adverte omnipotentiam
ex netura r^i esse indifferentem ut subjiciatur quasi potestati voluntatis
creatae ^^ut habitu^ voluntati hominis, unde fit ut Deus supposita voluntate
(seu ut loquitur Raynand. loc cit sect 360. pacto cum causis secundis inito vel
potius lege sua de cooperando) non fit agens liberum sed perinde ac si ess^^
necessarium and nobiscum sine cognitione concurrens, Atriag. curs. phil. disp.
10. phys. sect. 2. subs. 3. ing^^ua est haec Jesuitae cofessio cui alii
sub^^^^bere tenentur, immerito itaque and inconsequenter a Raynando vapulant
Canus, Sot. V ^^q. Sal. and alii quod statuant Deum non esse causam liberam sed
naturalem and necessari^m dum cooperatur ad actus nostros, vid. Ray. loc. cit.
sect. 359. paragrapho lamen sequenti fatetur hunc dicendi modum posse trahi ad
bonum sensum
adversaries themselves are not ashamed to avouch and profess, that he who
does all things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. is often
forced (by virtue of that office, which as the universal cause he is obliged to
discharge) to concur with his creatures according as they shall determine him,
that he is often drawn and compelled by them. So that omnipotency is no less
subjected to our will, then those habits and members which we use as we will;
so that the Lord now is not a free agent, but a natural and necessary; and
though he does know, yet he must wink as if he did not see, and follow the
creature wheresoever it does draw him. Thus in the general, those learned
Rabbles dogmatize, and particularly as to the present case Sot. lib. de not.
and great. cap. 31. ad secundum arg. Greg. Veg. opuse. de iustif. q. 12.
Sotus and Vega confess, that while we pray for temporal mercies, we only ask
that the world may be governed by blind fortune, and that God would neither do
good nor evil. For though their words be more smooth, while they say that they
ask, that God would give us these things, generali suo concursu and
providentia, out of a general providence; yet, these words being duly pondered,
do hold out no other thing then what we collected from them: for, their general
providence is nothing else but an abdication of God's care and provision of his
government and bounty. As for others, they either (of purpose, as it would
appear) pass over this difficulty, and only speak of the necessity of prayer,
as to spiritual matters; others hunt after some evasions, which neither they
nor the reader can lay hold on. But, Pelag. apud Suar. de great prol. 5. cap. 3.
18.
Polagius, their old Master, dealt more ingenuously, when he confessed, that
prayer was scarce necessary, yea, or profitable: For, it was well said by Quid
stultius quam Deum orare ut faciat quod in potestate habes, August. de
pecc^^mer. and remiss. lib. 2. cap 6.
Augustine, that there is nothing more foolish, th^n ^o ask from another that
which is in our own power. We might extend this question to spiritual things,
and show, that these also, according to the principles of those men, do wholly
depend upon our selves, our own wills, and the right improvement of our natural
abilities. And thus the ancient August. plurin^is in locis de not. and great.
lib. 1. cap. 18. epist. ^0. (cui subscribunt Patres concilii Carthaginensis.)
91. (quae est Innoce^tii) and 107. Hieron. epist. ad Cresiph. and lib. 1.
contra Pelag. etc.
Doctors, from this Topic, have drawn a strong argument against Pelagius and
all his followers; that either we must leave off to pray, or else I knew a
reverend Divine, who in his younger age, being tainted with Arminianism, was,
by the mercy of God, reclaimed upon this consideration suggested to him (as he
professed to me) while he was praying, what need ye ask of me that which is in
your own power.
disclaim the Pelagian Doctrine. I know they speak of some moral swasion, some
impression upon the understanding and outward offer of the Gospel; but, as for
any work upon the will and heart, that they will not acknowledge: and as to the
former, they put it in our hands also, in that they teach that we may merit,
deserve, and thus procure, and (as it were) purchase it with our own money. But
we will not now launch any further into this Ocean.

Concl. 2. Albeit we may pray for temporals, and particularly name what we
stand in need of, yet, we must not offer up to God any desire that can have no
spiritual or rational motive; we may not offer up in prayer, our sinful
desires, yea, nor any sensual, rash and indeliberate desire, though upon the
matter lawful. As it beseems not the prudence and self denial that it
required in Christians to care for, and be taken up with trifles, so far less
the gravity, reverence, z^a^ and importunity that should be observed and
expressed in prayer, to petition such things from God; and therefore, as the
desires poured out to God must be upon the matter lawful, so also as to the
manner, and qualification they must be deliberate and serious; and as to all
such desires we join with Hoc licet orare quod licet desiderare August. ad
prob. epist 121.
Augustine while he says, that What we may lawfully desire, that we may
lawfully pray for. And what the Lord has expressed in the promise, and given
us his bond for, that some one way or other we may petition, either
particularly, or in the general; as has been shown Sect. 1. But yet
particularly to name, and desire such trifles as we could give no reason why we
did ask them, and would be at a non plus if the Lord would put us to it to
declare upon what motive and consideration we did offer up such desires unto
him, would no doubt involve us in the guilt of taking Gods name in vain, and
prostituting of a solemn ordinance, and not observing the preachers caution,
Eccl. 5.1, 2. such a rash and empty oblation would prove a sacrifice of fools:
for instance we may desire to overcome, and carry away the prize in pastimes,
(it were too rash simply to condemn such desires, unless we also condemn
such recreations as sinful and unlawful) and yet if we should go and present
these desires to God, our conscience would smite us: for though we may desire
such trifles, yet we must not be serious and earnest in such desires, nor let
them have such room in our rational appetite as to dar to offer them to God,
unless it be in general: and then such prayers may truly be called According
to that sense in which logic propositions are called conditional.
conditional, because while we express not the particular, but only in the
general pray for what is good, if such a particular be not good, nor held out
in the promise, it cannot be included into such qualified and conditional
petitions.

But you will say, what if much be lying at the stake, may we not be more
earnest in our desires, and offer them up to God? Ans. But what warrant have
thou to venture so much? either pride, or covetousness must be the motive, and
dare thou offer to God such desires as spring from such a root? it were a
righteous thing with God, and might prove a For success may prove a snare to
thee, and make thee love the gain too well, and to mispend thy time, and
neglect thy calling; but when it is good for thee to prevail, then that is
included in thy general desire for what is good.
mercy to thee, if such prayers were rejected, and thou did meet with
disappointment, these who would not have recreations become their burden, and
matter of grief, should be much indifferent as to the event; and albeit thou
may have, and cannot choose but have some kind of complacency in success,
and some sort of desire after it, yet that is rather sensual then rational,
and should rather be esteemed indeliberat, then to flow from a due
consideration, as being concerning a thing of so little value and moment, as
cannot afford any ground for a spiritual desire; which only (as we shall show)
can be a fit material of our Christian Sacrifice. O! but if thou have any
rational ground, and such a plea as thou dare own and mention before the
Lord, then what is the particular mercy thou judge to be suitable and
convenient for thee, with which thine inclination does close, thy place calling
or opportunity of providence does lead and invite thee, that thou may name,
and whatever it be, thou may particularly ask it of God, (though with
submission) there be so many instances of this kind in Scripture, that we need
not stay upon citations.

Concl. 3. The promise (which is the rule of Prayer both as to matter and Not
in every thing and as to every object yet as to the present particular and in a
qualified sense but mainly the conformity must be as to the matter as
afterward shall be shown.
manner) concerning temporalls, not being absolute, universal and peremptory,
neither ought we to pray for them absolutely peremptorily and without
limitation, but conditionally, relatively, and with submission to the good
pleasure of him who knows what is good and convenient for us: for these
outward things being of themselves indifferent, cannot be absolutely and
universally promised, the object of the promise being some good, something good
to us, and in relation to our happiness, and the one thing necessary, so that
temporalls being of their own nature indifferent, they must stand under the
relation of utility and profitablenesse when they are held forth in the
promise, and should only be petitioned by us in so far as they may prove helps
and means for obtaining that great end, and be subservient to us in the service
of God and the work of our Salvation for we have no Heb. 13 14. and 11.10.
Mica. 2.10. Heb. 4.9.
continuing city, but we seek one to come, whose builder and maker is God. Ah
what have we to do here, but to make for home? this is not our rest, we are but
sojourners, pilgrims and strangers while in this wilderness, and what is there
in this desert that can take up our hearts? to what purpose do we walk and run
if every step we move bring us not nearer to the promised Land? and what will
golden aples profit us, if they make us halt while we are running for the rich
prize? Ah! what are carnal delights, riches and honors, but so many snares and
weights which should be laid aside while we are running the r^ce that is set
before us? Heb. 12.1. Since therefore we know not what is the measure and
portion and of temporal and outward things which is good and suitable for us,
we ought not to be peremptory in our desires after such or such a measure of
them, but should submissively roll our selves over upon the wisdom, fidelity,
love and care of our Father, that he may give us such a portion of these things
as may be most conducible for his glory, and our eternal happiness. And O!
how carefully should we watch over our hearts, that our lusts, our pride, or
covetousness do not inflame, and add fuel to our desires which naturally are
thus set on fire; laboring to moderat them, and always to keep them within
bounds, that they be not excessive, and exorbitant; saying with Agur, give me
neither poverty nor riches, Pro. 30.8. and having food and raiment, let us
(according to the Apostles exhortation and Jacobs wish) be therewith content 1.
Tim. 6.8. Gen, 28.20. O! let us often mind our main business, and chief end,
that it may regulat all our desires, they being confined and kept in
subordination to it.

Concl. 4. Although none of these outward things, no not our bodily life and
being (which as the end must be more noble then all other things which are but
means for maintaining and comforting thereof) are so necessary that they should
be absolutely and peremptorily loved, desired and asked, yet we may more
confidently and peremptorily pray for a competent measure of those things that
are more necessary for our being and life, then for mere accessories, or for
abundance and afluence of these transitory things: we may more warrantably
pray for our Mat. 6.11.
daily Bread then that our Psa. 4.7.
corn and wine may abound; and with Prove. 30.
Agur we may more peremptorily ask food Sufficientiam non indecent^r vult
quisquis vult necamplius vult, alioquin non ipsam vult, and ideo nondecenter
vult. August ad prob: epist 121. cap. 6.
convenient, and that we be not pinched with poverty, then that we may have Qui
autem dicit in oratione, Domine multiplica divitias meas -- aut honores meos
auge, aut fac me in hoc seculo praepotentem, atque clarentem etc. puto cum non
invenire in oratione Dominica quo possit haec vota cooptare. Aug. ibid. cap. 12.
riches, honors and pleasures. There is a competency and sufficiency which we
cannot determine, because it alters and varieth according to our calling,
place and condition; so that in respect of one and the same man, that may be a
competency and sufficient portion for him while in a private capacity, which
after he is a magistrate, judge, master of family, etc. is not enough nor
sufficient for his condition, rank and place: albeit it were no difficult work
to appoint for every one a Physical (as I may call it) competency and measure,
which may suffice for maintaining his natural life and being; thus a very
little may suffice the most gluttonous appetite, for natura est paucis contenta.
Yet only he whose wisdom is an unsearchable depth, can assign to every man a
politic and civil competency suitable not only to his condition and rank in
the world, but also to his condition as he is a Pilgrim and viator and as he
is on his journey homewards; for we are ready either to allow too much, or too
little to others; and always too much to our selves: but certainly, a
competency is desirable, he who is the 1 Cor. 14.33.
God of order having appointed several degrees and stations amongst men, does
no doubt allow to every man such a measure of these outward things as may be
sufficient to maintain him in such a rank; and he may as warrantably petition
such a measure of these things as is sufficient for that end, as he may ask
bread to put in his own mouth: nay, this civil and moral competency is no
less then the natural included in that Mat. 6.11.
petition for daily bread, and in Agurs Prove. 30.8.
desire of food convenient; for the persons Mat. 6.11.
us and Pro. 30.8.
me, must not only be considered in a natural, but also in a moral and
politic condition and relation; if we be masters of families, that will not be
food convenient for us which does not serve for the maintenance of the family,
and that which may be enough for us and our families, will not be sufficient
for maintaining us into that rank and degree which is requisite for one who is
in a public charge, nor for defraying the expenses our place may put us to.

Yet let us not here exclude the former cautions, though such a measure of
these things may be comparatively and retatively necessary, that is, 1. more
necessary then what is above the just measure; and 2. necessary in reference to
our being in, and the discharging of our places aright, yet these most
necessary things ought only be desired and petitioned, 1 secondarily, giving
spiritualls the precedence in our estimation and affection; 2. relatively and
in subordination to the great and chief end. And thus, 3 conditionally, if
these things be, and only so far as they shall prove subservient to the one
thing necessary. And, 4. submissively and with a cheerful resignation of our
selves to the good pleasure and disposal of our kind Father, who knows best
what is good for us to have or want; and 5. moderatly, too great promotion or
honors, too great affluence and plenty, may prove a snare and a judgment.
Deuteronomy. 32.15. Thy estate may be too great, as thy shoes and garments too large;
much baggage and provision will rather prove a burden then a help to the
pilgrim. Oh let us then take heed to the exhortation, and see that our
conversation be without covetousness. Heb. 13.5. though thou may provide
for thy family, 1 Timothy 5, 8. Though thou may lay up a fore hand as Joseph
did against the famine, Genesis 41.48. though thou may thus moderatly care for
to morrow, and parents provide for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14. yet with
moderation, all care for these things that wants this qualification, is
sinful, and must be abandoned. Phil. 4.6, 5.

Concl. 5. While we say that temporalls ought not be absolutely asked, we do not
affirm our prayers for these things should be in that sense conditional, in
which the Logicians do call an enunciation conditional and hypothetick;
because thus the truth Vera enim est haec conditionalis Si Petrus esset
Bucephalus esset irrationalis.
of neither part is considered, but only their connection; and thus does
Suppositio (ut aiunt) nihil ponit.
affirm nothing to be existing, it does not import that either the condition
is, or shall be placed; or that the consequent, viz. what is inferred upon such
a supposition or condition, now is, or at any time hereafter shall really be. I
grant the promises concerning these outward things may thus be called
conditional; because the condition (either 1. of the expediency of these
things, 2. of faith and other requisits in our prayer; and, 3. of walking
uprightly as to the person and supplicant) failing, these are not included in
the promise, which is intailed to such a condition and proviso; and so we
cannot in faith plead such a promise, until first we beg and obtain a pardon.
And though there were no such failing, either in the person or his performance;
either in the supplicant or in his supplication, which might infer and
(according to the tenor of the covenant of grace) procure a forfeiture of our
right, and exclude us from the promise; though we may confidently and in faith
approach the Throne, knowing assuredly that we shall have in answer to our
prayers, either the particular ( viz. if it be good and expedient) or See part.
4. sect. 1.
else the equivalent, some other, yea, some better thing in stead of it, yet we
must ask with submission as to the particular it self, not knowing whether or
not, hic and nune, it be good for us, and so whether or not the promise does
give us a right to it.

Thus the promises are conditional in the former sense, but our prayers are
not: For though we ask upon condition, yet positively and determinately we ask:
for that condition rather respects the return, grant and answer, then prayer it
self; rather our getting and obtaining, then our asking and desicing: for
absolutely we ask and desire, but we do not ask and desire, that we may
absolutely and upon any terms have and receive, but only upon condition, if it
be good and expedient for us to have. And thus the condition is rather included
in the object of prayer, then in the act it self. Yet since the act does
include a necessary habitude to the object, and prayer to the return and
answer; (for what is it to pray for such and such a particular, but to petition
that it may be given to us and we may have it) therefore is it that prayer it
self is said to he conditional; which does not, cannot import, that we do not
really and properly ask and desire, but that we do not ask and desire
peremptorily; and that we may have upon any terms; and that we ask with
submission to the divine appointment, and in subordination to the one thing
that is absolutely necessary. But though we thus determinatly, and (in a manner)
absolutely ask, if we respect the act and performance it self, yet looking to
the whole complex, especially to the grant and return, in the supposed case of
non-expediency, equivalently, and by just interpretation, we may be said not to
ask the particular which we name in our prayers, but rather to ask that we may
not have it; while we ask in subordination to the great end, we pray that we
may not get, that which would obstruct and hinder our obtaining of it: And
therefore since the particular we pitched on as convenient for us, is such as
would prove a snare and a weight to beset us, while we are running the race
that is set before us, while we pray for it relatively and in subordination, we
pray that we may not have it in the supposed case of opposition, as shall at
greater length be shown, Part 4. Here it may be ask't, whether we may also pray
for the condition? and thus pray absolutely for temporals. For according to the
rule in the Schools, An Hypothetica exposita con ditione evadit absoluta.
hypothetick proposition when the condition is placed, becomes absolute. And
thus if the condition be a part of the object, and directly and in recto,
belong to the matter of the petition, it is placed there, and the petition
cannot be said to depend upon it as a condition, and so cannot in respect of it
be called conditional. But not to contend for terms, the question is whether we
may pray for the condition, that it may be placed; as for the thing, that it
may be given? viz. 1. That the Lord would give such a particular; and, 2. make
it a blessing. Ans. There is no doubt that we may ask a blessing with all we
enjoy, but whether we may ask, that such a thing (of it self indifferent) may
become a blessing that we may enjoy it, seems more difficult. For to us, such
a petition seems to import too much eagerness and peremptoriness in our
desire after such a thing; and therefore whatever may be said of this way of
asking in it self, as not being simply unlawful; yet it appears to be most
safe, either to ask conditionally, or if the condition be also asked, and the
placing of it be a part of the petition, our submission would then be
expressed, and we would cordially protest, that though we ask such a thing, and
that it may prove a blessing, yet we will not grudge nor repine though it be
withheld, but will acquiesce in the good pleasure of God, and will construe a
denial to proceed from the love and care of a Father, who knows best what is
fittest for us to have or want; and who can abundantly compense and make up
that supposed loss. But since the condition of expediency and subserviency to
the great end, must belong to the object of our prayers either as a part, or
limitation of it; we may enquire, whether always we may reflect upon that
condition? and only ask these temporals in relation and subordination to the
one thing necessary. Ans. We will not now digress to speak to that noble
question, how we should in all our ways intend and aim at the glory of God?
But in answer to the present question, it will not be denied that they, who
must do 1 Cor. 10.31.
all to the glory of God, must propose this end in that most spiritual and
immediate part of worship, wherein we have 1 John 1.3.
fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ; that they, who must eat
and drink to the glory of God, must ask their daily bread to the glory of God.
Its true, the Saints do not in every petition actually and formally reflect
upon that great end; yet virtually and by just interpretation they do; so that
if they were asked, if they desired such a mercy, though it should prove
prejudicial unto, and obstructive of the glory of God, and a hinderance of
their salvation; they might truly reply, that they would not in any wise have
it upon these terms, and that they would prefer affliction to such a supposed
mercy: and this virtual and habitual intention, must exclude all peremptory and
impatient desires after these things; we must not so forget the chief end, as
to make these base things our end; which we must do, when we desire them so
absolutely and peremptorily, as that we will not bear a denial: when these
things are sought in subordination, they must also be sought with submission,
as not knowing but they may be hindrances and impediments of that which should
be most desired. I do not deny, that those things have a more immediate and
direct tendency to another end, as being supports and comforts of our bodily
and perishing life; and that they may lawfully be desired for that end; but
life it self, and so all the means tending to that end, must be referred to an
higher end, unless we prove selfish and sensual Epicureans. And thus I would
rather interpret then exaggerat that common saying of Philosophers and Yea,
Suarez goes a greater length then others, affirming, that outward and
indifferent things, such as riches are, perse expetibilia and propter se
amabilia And yet Suarez will not deny, that there externals are but bona
utilia, and so cannot, as such, be desired for themselves, but only because of
their use.
Schoolmen, that knowledge, health, etc. are desirable for themselves. I grant
that they have some intrinsical goodness in them, and convenience with us, and
agreeableness to our natural, yea and rational inclination, and upon that
account may be loved and desired, and so may become fines proximi and
intermedii, the mediat and nearest end of our desires and endeavors: but, he
who will rest on these temporal things (the most noble and excellent of them,
yea, though they were all united and combined together and laid in one heap) as
his ultimat, chief and last end, deserves not the name of a Christian.

Concl. 6. Not only must we ask temporal things, that we may have and enjoy
them; but also, after we have received use of them, that we may have the right
and sanctified use of them: many care not how they have, if they have; not
knowing (or not regarding) that they may want a right to what they possess; and
so many have reason to ask what they have already, to ask a right and interest
in it through the Covenant of Grace, that it may be added as a pendicle of the
Kingdom of God; according to that word of promise, Mat. 6.32. and that it may
come through the channel of a promise, and as the purchase of his blood, in
whom all the promises (conerning temporals as well as spirituals) are yea and
amen, and have their accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1.20. We will not here enquire, 1.
if these temporal and outward things should be asked in the name of Christ; but
will suppose that it must be so from the following Chapter. Nor, 2 will we now
digress to ask what right unbelievers have to the creatures, albeit a sentence
of condemnation be past against them, Joh. 3.18. Yet, as the condemned rebel,
by the Kings concession, grant and donation, has some food and refreshment
allowed to him till the day of execution come, so they, out of the general
bounty and forbearance of God, being, for a time, spared, have out of that
bounty the possession of the creatain grant and donation from the great King;
so that none of their fellow creatures may question their right and put them
from their possessions: though they, by their rebellion against God, have
forfeited their right to his creatures; yet, thou may not, without a license
from the King, (which no Anabaptist can produce) serze upon the forfeiture. And
thus the wicked have not only a providential right (as some, but most
improperly do call it; for, though providence may give the possession, yet, it
cannot give a right; otherwise thee us and robbers might justify their course,
and plead their title to what they enjoy) but also, 2. a civil right, ratified
by the Law of Nature and Nations, and the municipal Statutes of the place where
they live: they have a right, 3. of inheritance, descending unto them from
their ancestors; or, a right, 4. of purchase, by their labors and industry, by
bargain, covenant and transaction, etc. And thus their civil right will stand
as firm and valid in humane Courts, as if they were Saints and the holiest men
on earth; but alas! they want a filial and federal right, they being Ephesians. 2.12.
strangers from the covenants of Promise, and (notwithstanding of their
Profession) without God in the world; and (though they be titular Christians)
without Christ, who is Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and through whom only they
can have a spiritual right and sanctified use of the creatures; they will only
thus become ours, if we be in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. and woe to him, though
his possessions were never so great, who does not hold of Christ; who dar
meddle with what is his without his leave, he is the great Heir, he is Heir of
all, and yet how few do acknowledge his right: but, what is spoken of riches,
Prove. 23.5. may well be said of all that is enjoyed without Christ; they are
and they are not, as if they were not; they will do no more good then if they
were not enjoyed, nay, but much hurt, they are cursed: all will prove a snare,
his meat in his bowels shall be turned into the gall and poison of asps, Job.
20.14, 16.

Thus then, beside the having and possessing of the creatures, we must ask, 1.
a spiritual and federal right unto, and interest in them; a right in him who is
Heir of all, and as being the purchase of his blood. 2. For a blessing to them,
that they may prove helpful unto us, that our clothes may give heat, and our
meat may feed us. 3. For the sanctified use of them, that they may prove a
blessing and not a snare; that they prove not weights and hindrances; but
rather a staff in our hand; that they become not fuel to feed our lusts and
weapons of unrighteousness; but rather motives to obedience, and talents
wherewith we will trade for the honor of our Lord, and the salvation of our
souls.

It is true, prayerless ones may have and possess the creatures; but only by
prayer thou can have a spiritual right, and the sanctified use of them, 1 Timothy 4 5. O then! whatever course thou take, do not slight and neglect prayer;
we spoke of thy warrant, Conl. 1. and now for pressing this exhortation, we
shall add these few particulars. 1. What need thou scruple to pray for these
outward things, though they be not thy portion, and be as nothing in respect of
the pearl of price and the one thing necessary? yet, they are in their own kind
and manner Ne putentur mala, dantur and bonis: ne putentur maegna vel summa
bona, dantur and malis Itemque auferuntur ista and bonis ut probentur and malis
ut cruclentur, August epist. 70. Bonif. com.
good and desirable, 2 Timothy 4.4. they are useful, they are suitable and
convevenient for thee, Prove. 30.8. Yea, 2. they are in some way necessary, and
we stand in need of them, Mat. 6.32. Nature requires them, our vocation, place
and condition calls for them: Nay, 3. duty toward God and man does call to
thee to pray for them; for, without them thou can not obey the Romans 12.13.
Romans 13.7, 8. etc.
commandment of paying tribute, of owing nothing to any man, thou can not be
hospital and distribute to the necessity of the Saints, etc. 4. And as the want
of them does thus hinder the performance of several duties, so it is a great
temptation to many sins. O! says Agur, Let me not have poverty least I steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. 5. Go to the Lions and Ravens and they
will teach thee thy duty; they cry to God in their own way; the eyes of all
things wait upon him, that he may give them their meat in due season, Ps.
104.21, 27. Ps. 145.15. Ps. 147.9. They cry with the voice of nature, and will
not thou lift up thy soul and thy heart to God; indigence makes them groan,
and will it not send thee to the Throne, and make thee cry to thy Father that
he may pity thee? 6. What we get by prayer, has a heavenly excellency in it;
though it were but a morsel of bread, it has more dignity in it then all the
gems and diamonds, and all the imperial Crowns of the world, which come by the
hand of a common providence; all these things are but the bones without the
marrow, the whole Turkish Empire ( says Luth. in Genesis
Luther) as great as it is, is but a crum which the Master of the family casts
to the dogs: but, be it little or much that is given in return to prayer, it is
a blessing indeed, and part of the childrens bread: and it is excellency
appears in these particulars. 1. In that it is a stream flowing from the
purest fountain; to wit, the love and good will of our Father; it is a fruit of
love, and a seal and pledge of love, and as it comes from love, So, 2. it
tends to love; it is a coal to inflame our affections and to warm our heart;
it is a motive and lays an engagment on us to love our kind Father, who
visits us every morning with his tender mercies: but prayerless souls take no
notice of Gods hand, nor do they much value his love. Hence, 3. it is a mercy
indeed, a promised and covenanted mercy; as it comes without that vexation,
heart-cutring and distrustful care, and excessive toil and labor; so it is
enjoyed with less fear, and is free of the snares and temptations that
otherwise use to accompany it; the blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he
adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10.22. It is by prayer that the creatures
become good to us, and are sanctified as to their enjoyment and use, 1 Timothy
4.45. 4. The right and title of possession does add very much to the worth and
goodness of things, though not in themselves, yet as to us who possess them:
for, 1. Who does value what a thief, robber, usurper or oppressor does
possess? 2. How quickly may he be called to an account, and as in a moment,
with disgrace, be stripped naked of all? yes, though there were not such hazard
of losing them, yet, an ingenuous spirit, yea, a moral Pagan, would rather
choose a little, to which he has a right, then thus to enjoy great revenues,
Prove. 16.8. 5. We use to judge and esteem of the worth of things by their
price, especially if laid out by a wise man and good merchant; but every morsel
of bread, the meanest creature thou gettest in return to thy prayers, is the
purchase of blood, it cost more then a world; though thou were the greatest
Monarch on earth, by all thy Crowns thou could not purchase a right and
sanctified title to the meanest of the creatures; silver and gold may give
possession and a civil right, but they cannot give a spiritual right unto, and
a sanctified use of the least crum of bread; and therefore we must ask in his
name, who has paid the price and in whose blood our mercies must be washen,
that they may become pure and sanctified, and may prove blessings indeed.

O then! since thou can not enjoy these things in mercy and in love, unless
they be given in return to thy prayer, let this be thy way, which is not the
way of the men of this world; though it be an easy and safe way, and though
only the right and approven way; but you will say, who does condemn this way?
Ans. Though few dare with their mouth belch out such atheism, yet in their
heart, and by their life and practice, too many say, O let us rather choose any
other way, let us employ our wit, care and industry, and if that will not do
the turn, let us add falsehood and deceit, and whatsoever course else, though
never so unlawful and unjust, yet if it be called our own, and if we by it be
thought to help our selves, we will rather follow that way then rest on Gods
care and providence; 1. because (think they) if we may enjoy them without God,
we may be masters of them, and dispose of them as we will; we may cut and carve
for our selves; and like him, Hab. 2.5. enlarge our desires as hell; 2. Because
we dow not away with such preciseness, tenderness and circumspection in our
whole conversation, and such zeal and fervency in prayer as is required, and
therefore we rather work and toil a week, then pray half an hour; we rather
sweat at our calling, then take such heed to our steps: We know not, we are not
acquaint with, we love not, and cannot endure that way, but we know our
business, and like our work, and when its done its done, and we are at rest;
but if we get any thing by prayer, our work is but as it were to begin, we must
yet watch over our hearts and ways, and take heed how we use and employ what
we have gotten; we must return the sacrifice of praise to God for his bounty in
giving, etc. And therefore the Apostle had reason to exhort us, That in every
thing, by prayer, supplication and thanks giving, we should make our requests
known unto God, Phil. 4.6. Not as if the Apostle, and we now, while we are
pressing this necessary, though much slighted duty would have you enlarge your
desires after these things, or be too solicitous about them, and peremptory in
your requests and prayers for them. No, no, if our zeal be spent that way (as
alas too often it is) that will mar the acceptance of our prayers, and bring
down a curse rather then a blessing; but the end and scope of this exhortation
is, that we would live in a constant dependence upon God, committing to him our
selves and all our affairs; begging his blessing on all our ways and
endeavors; and that whatever we get and enjoy, be it little be it much, it may
prove a blessing, and may be given in mercy and in love; that we may have the
sanctified use of all we enjoy, and grace to improve it to the honor of his
name, and for promoving the work of our salvation.

O then! art thou called a Christian? and if thou be not an atheist and
worldling, whatever pains and diligence thou art at, let this be the main, from
which thou expectest more then from thy rising early and going late to bed;
whatever care and labor may want success, and prove to no purpose, yet thou
shall never seek his face in vain. He has said, he will not send the praying
soul away empty; and will he not perform? O then let us say, we would rather
have a little this way, then all the riches and honors imaginable without the
blessing; rather let us have none of these things with the love of God, then
never so much in wrath. Have we little or much, or nothing with the blessing,
we are happy; and all the work without this will prove but a curse and a snare
(...), a gift and no gift. Ah Sirs! all of us would have, and when would we say
its enough? But O! how few are they who take the right course, and run to the
right fountain? Whether would you trade with your own stock or not? whether do
you expect more by your prayers, or your labor and industry? and whether would
you rather receive from God, or by the work of your own hands? can thou say,
that thou dependest upon God and will be content with his allowance, and
resolvest to improve what he gives, to the honor of his name; if this be thy
purpose and desire, then have thou little, or have thou much, it is a blessing;
thy condition is good, and best for thee; thou have, and thou shall have more
until thou be satisfied, when the immortal crown shall be put upon thy head.

We will close this discourse concerning the right manner of asking temporal and
outward things, with a word from the learned Augustine. When ye ask temporals,
ask (says Quando temporalia petitis, cum modo petite, cum ^imore petite, illi
committite ut si prosint det, si scit obesse, non det, quid autem prosit quid
obsit, medicus novit non aegrotus, Aug. sermon. 53. de ver. dom.
he) in measure and with moderation; ask in fear and with submission,
committing to him to give, if what we ask would do us good; and to withhold, if
he know it would hurt. The Physician knows, but not the sick, what would
obstruct and what would procure health.

Concl. 7. While we compare spiritual things with temporal we must observe
that order prescribed by our Lord Jesus. Mat. 6.32. Spiritual things must have
the precedeney, we should seek first the kingdom of God, (which consists in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.) We must seek the
things that belong to that kingdom Primum h. e. praecipue. Glos interlin.
Primum non tempore sell dig mi^ate; primum querite regnum Dei, i. e. prae ponite
omnibus rebus caeteris Glos. ordi. and quod primum relative dicatur ad secundum
pater, etc. Nic. de Lyra in loc.
first, not so much in respect of time, and external method, (for the holy
Ghost does not peremptorily determine, and confine us to any order that way;
and in that perfect pattern of prayer Mat. 7. the petition for daily bread, is
put in the middle) but first in regard of our estimation, affection and desire;
our love, our care and endeavors must mainly be spent, and employed about
these more excellent things; nay in respect of these, we must hate father and
mother, and life it self when they come in competition; we must carry our
selves toward these inferior things, which we are obliged to love most dearly,
as if we hared them; we must forsake and abandon them, Luke 14.26. Mat. 10.37,
39. We must count them as loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, Philip. 3.8. there is no comparison between-things temporal and
eternal; things that are momentany and the exceeding, and eternal weight of
Glory; things that belong to the outward, and to the inward man, 2 Cor, 4.16,
17, 18. if the strength and z^al of our affections be not placed on God and
spiritual things, we undervalue them; if our desires be not thus enlarged, if
we do not thus hunger and thrist after the heavenly manna, we shall never taste
of it. The general precept, and promise Mat. 7.7. etc. when it is applied to
these excellent things, must take in a suitable qualification and proviso;
things must be asked and desired according to their necessity, worth and
excellency; there is but only one thing necessary, which we may not want upon
any terms, Luke 10.42. and therefore all other things should be loved and sought
in subordination, and in reference unto it: we must not be absolute and
peremptory in our desires after them, (for what we thus covet, and affect, we
cannot want, we must have it whatever it cost) O! let us not so set our he arts
upon perishing tr fles: but earnestly Cor. 12.31.
covet the best things: nay if these excellent and spiritual things have not
the precedence, and first place in our estimation, affection, desires,
endeavors, pains and diligence; if these be not mainly employed for getting,
and keeping of them; we will not only lose what we have thus basely
undervalued, but we will lose all, our first born, and the son of our strength
not being the son of the promise, will get none of the blessing. O! the folly
of worldlings: their diligence and zeal for the fat of the earth, does not only
consume their strength, and Mat. 16.26. 1 Timothy 6.9.
destroy their Soul, but also marreth their gain; while they trade for the
earth, they lose both earth, and heaven; for that we should seek first
spiritual things and give them the precedence, is Mat 6.32.
required, not only as a condition for our finding of them, but also for the
obtaining of temporalls, that they as pendicles and casualities of the Kingdom
of grace may be added, and given as a mercy and blessing. And albeit some
temporal mercies be more necessary, then other, yet the least measure of grace
should be preferred to the most necessary and useful thing that concerns the
outward man, and to the greatest earthly excellency as being more excellent in
it self, and having a more immediate and direct tendency and reference unto the
great end; and therefore as the soul is to be preferred to the body, heaven to
earth, eternal happiness to a perishing trifle, the chidrens portion to the
bones that fall to the dogs, and that which tends to the glorifying of God
and the saving of our souls, to that which serves to the satisfying of our
carnal lusts and selfish desires, So must spiritual things always have the
pre-eminence, yea we should prefer not only grace it self, but also every mean
that tends to the begetting or strengthening of it, all Gods ordinances, and
every part of his worship, to all things under the Sun; and with Job esteem the
words of Gods mouth more then our necessary food, not only more then our
abundance and superfluities, but more then our necessary food, without which
we cannot live and subsist, Job. 23.12.

Concl. 8. Albeit all spiritual mercies must thus have the precedence, and the
least measure of grace should be preferred to the greatest worldly excellency,
yet while we compare spirituals with spirituals, these which are most
absolutely, and universally necessary to our spiritual life and being, which
may be called the vitals of Christianity (and such are all graces, as to their
nature and existence, whatever may be said of moral and acquired virtues, yet
certainly all spiritual and infused virtues are inseparably 1 John 3.9. Ephesians.
4.24. 2 Cor. 5.17. etc. grace is (as it were) the soul of the new man, and
instanti infunditur, it comes at once and animates the whole.
conjoined) are more earnestly and peremptorily to be desired and prayed for;
and the degree and grad^al perfection of grace being variable, and not the same
in every one, but differently dispensed to some in greater, to others in a
less measure, according to the good pleasure and appointment of God, we may
not be so absolute and peremptory in carving to our selves, and appointing our
own stature; as knowing that all the trees in Gods Orchard, are not tal Cedars,
and that in Gods family there are babes as well as strong men, and that these
tender plants and babes, shall ere it be long come unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. And if we will ponder the
promises, which are the rule and ground of prayer, we will find, that as there
is a difference both amongst temporals and spirituals, some temporals being
more necessary then others, and some spirituals more necessary then others; so
the promises accordingly do hold out after a diff^rent manner both spirituals
and temporals; and that they do more absolutely and peremptorily engage for,
and secure us of these thinga that are most necessary for us; and so we may,
and should more confidently and In what sense we may be said to pray absolutely
for spiritual things. See Concl. 10. and in what cases properly, Concl. 11.
absolutely pray for such things as are most necessary and useful. For the
promises having for their end and object, our good, and what may contribute for
our everlasting happiness, the more necessary any thing is for obtaining that
great end, and for maintaining this bodily life, during the time our master
has appointed us to work in his vineyard, it must be the more infallibly and
peremptorily held forth in the promise: The Finis dat mensuram and ordinem
m^diis in omnibus appetibil bus and agibilibus (inquit Thom) mensura est finis
-- and id^o quae sunt ad finem habent modum ex eo quod sunt fini proportionata,
Thom. 2, 2. quaest 27. art. 6. in corp.
end being the measure, and prescribing the order that is amongst the means.

Thus far in the general we may safely go, but when we descend unto
particulars, we will find more difficulty; and to make way for the following
Assertions, we will first enquire in what sense the promises for spiritual
things, that are indispensibly necessary to salvation may be called absolute?
Ans. Certainly not as if they concerned, and did belong ^o all and every one
without exception; but because they are irrespective, not supposing any
condition and qualification in the subject for obtaining what they hold forth:
Though then they be thus absolute, yet they are not universal, though nothing
in us does make the difference, or can be alleged as a limitation, yet the
Lord out of his good pleasure has made a difference between sinners, and
having elected some unto eternal life, to them he makes an effectual offer of
salvation, and preventeth them with his free promises: H^s election then is the
only ground of discrimination. Hence we may argue thus, if these promises that
are called absolute did belong to all, then all would be converted and saved,
since they do not suppose any condition on our part to their performance, there
can be no reason given why they should be accomplished in some and not in
others, if they did belong to all: Its true, we know not till the event show,
to whom they belong and to whom not, and therefore we must not exclude our
selves; especially since they are large enough, and will be found to exclude
none to whom the offer of the Gospel is made, who do not reject that offer and
wilfully exclude themselves; the Lords discriminating love of election and
foreknowledge, does not hinder the sinner from laying hold on eternal life,
but the sinner with his own hands does plait the snare wherein he is Ps 7.15.
and 9.15.16. Prove. 5.22.
catched and held fast; there is none in hell to day, that can challenge the
general invitation and off^r made in the Gospel, to all, to come, and whosoever
will, to take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. Isa. 55.1, 2. etc.
Neither shall they be able to fetch an excuse from the promise, because it was
intended to some only; it being indefinitly proposed, and no restraint laid on
thee, that thou might not lay hold on it; thus the Lord, not expr^ssing any
man by name, condition or qualification, and yet excluding none, promises, To
write his laws in our hearts and in the inward parts; to put a new spirit
within us, to take away the stony heart, and give a heart of flesh, to heal our
backslidings, and be merciful to our unrighteousness, to love us freely, and
become our God, and that we shall be his people; and that he will cause us walk
in his statutes, and put his fear in our hearts, that we shall never depart
from him, etc. Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.
Jer. 32.40. Hos. 14.4. etc. These and the like are called promises of grace,
not supposing any condition on our part previous to their accomplishment; and
thus are distinguished from the promises made to grace, which are conditional,
and suppose a precedent gracious qualification and fitness in the subject for
receiving what they hold forth: Thus a renewed pardon of sin, is promised upon
repentance; Vid. apud Gul. Tuis. in Corv. defens. Arm. page 106. explicationem
dicti, Mat. 13.12, habenti dabitur.
increase of grace to him who improveth the grace he has received, comfort to
mourners, etc. And as they, and only they who have these gracious
qualifications wrought in them, can plead these promises, so no man, I will not
say, unless he knew and were certain of his election, and that his name were
written in the book of the Lamb (that authentic register of our charter to
happiness where there is no blank bond) yet certainly none, till he be in the
state of grace, can in faith plead, and lay claim to the absolute promises: But
it is impossible that any man, while under an absolute promise and before it be
accomplished, can know what were the eternal purposes of God concerning his
state; and it were ridiculous to say, that before the performance of the
absolute promises, he were in the state of grace; therefore none can in faith
plead these promises. Yet he must ask, as shall be shown: may not God know what
will become of us, unless we in despair break our own neck?

We will not now enter on that debate, concerning the necessity of legal
preparations, and their connection with grace; and enquire if these who are
under the spirit of bondage, convincing and humbling them for their sins, may
lay claim to these absolute promises. For though Scripture and experience (I
might also add reason) hold out the usefulness and expediency (if not
necessity) of such a law-work, if we speak of the ordinary method the Lord
observes in working grace in them who are come to years of discretion: Yet our
Divines do maintain against Jesuits and Arminians, that there is not such an
infallibilis nexus, and necessary connection between those previous dispositions
and the grace of conversion, as that the work, notwithstanding of these
preparations, may not miscarry, as it did in the hands of Felix, Agrippa, Herod
and others: and so efficacious and powerful is the wo^k of the spirit, that it
can overcome all opposition; so that grace can (if we speak absolutely and as
to the possibility of the thing) make way for it self, without such
preparations; albeit it cannot be denied that usually it begins in these; and
that common grace (as I may call it, for that assistance of the spirit being
free, may be called grace) makes way to saving, but since the spirit of
bondage, and that legal work is carried on by the help of the spirit; it may be
enquired whether there be any promise made to such a work, not as flowing from
us and as it is our work; but as it flows from the spirit, carrying on the
soul some steps, though not in, yet toward the way? One thing is certain, this
is the right way and method, and if we follow on and do not draw back, we shall
meet with mercy. There is none in hell who dare say that they took this course
and constantly followed it, and yet were no better; but, their conscience can
tell them that they did soon weary and fell off, that they were negligent, and
that they thus perished not in the use of the means, but through their
negligence: though the Lord has not bound himself by any promise, yet, he will
be so far out of the reach of any such challenge, that none shall be able to
say, we perished because we must perish; though we had the Gospel preached to
us, yet it could do us no good.

But, (that we may not digress) it is certain, and none can deny it, that if
thou hold on in that way, thou may meet with mercy, and if, with the dog,
thou return to thy vomit, thou must perish; and though thou have no more but a
peradventure, a who knows, and a may be, the Lord will be gracious; that is
some comfort and encouragment, and warrant and ground enough for thee to
venture and follow that course: others have had no more, Zeph. 2.2. Joel, 2.14.
Dan. 4.27. Amos, 5.15. and their labor has not been in vain, Jonah, 3.9, 10.
thou will seek no more for thy encouragment in things that concern thy bodily
life and estate; will thou not send for the Physician, unless thou be assured
his pains will be successful? will thou not sow, unless thou be assured thou
shall have a plentiful harvest? and not go to sea, unless thou know that thou will return safe? Ah! shall these trifles make thee venture and hazard
sometimes, not only thy labor and diligence, but also much of state and
riches, yea and life it self? and will thou be at no pains for the immortal
crown. The voyage is more safe, (in the use of the means thou neither hazardest
life nor estate) and the success is more certain; thou can not produce one
instance, nor point out the man who made shipwreck, while he was trading for
the pearl of price; albeit too many have turned sail and splitted upon the
rocks, after they had wearied of that trade. Thus, whatever be pretended, the
true cause must be thy hatred of holiness, and want of care for thy soul, and
thy undervaluing the undefiled inheritance: he who loves not his work, will
not want excuses for his idleness.

Hence, our ninth Conclusion must be this, grace, as to it is being and
existence, the habits, Concl. 9.
(or Quia habitus non dat p^sse, sed melius and facilius operari; male ergo
vulgo dicuniur habitus gratiosi cum aent simpliciter posse.
rather faculties) of grace, that 1 John 3.9.
seed of God, the radical cause, and physical principle of all spiritual
actions, these absolutely necessary spiritual mercies, are not, cannot be the
object of the prayer of Jam. 5 15. Concl. 10.
faith, unless we will say that unbeleevers may pray in faith, and that faith
in the subject is not a necessary condition for laying claim to the promise of
success and audience.

Concl. 10. How we may be said to pray A modest enquiry after the sense of the
common assertion of Casuists ^practicall Divines, etc. laid down as a principle
to be embraced by all, rather then to be examined by any, viz. that grace
should be prayed for absolutely, but the degree conditionally.
absolutely; for, what we cannot pray confidently, and in faith, will be
somewhat difficult to conjecture: unless it be said, that to pray absolutely,
is nothing else but to pray with such fervency, zeal and enlarged desires
(though that heat come only from the furnace of nature, a little warmed by the
operation of the spirit, as that we will not be put off, or satisfied till we
obtain a grant; refusing all capitulation, or to have any thing by way of
recompense for what we thus desire: Thus being in a kind of impatience and
commendable implacability: not like her, who in her passion Genesis 30.1.
said, give me children or else I die; or like Genesis 15.2.
him, who too rashly and If he had not his eyes fixed on the Messiah, who was
to be his son.
unadvisedly (though otherwise an eminent Saint) said, Lord God what will thou
give me since I go childlesse? these longing souls may have such a vehement
desire and impatience (but more deliberate and upon more weighty and pressing
considerations) if their heart were opened up, we would find this As Queen Mary
of England a little before her death said, If she were anatomized, Calis would
be found engraven upon her heart, such was her grief for the lose of it.
written there in capital letters, What It may be here asked, whether the man
child be brought forth, or if the soul be yet in be pangs of the new birth when
it does thus groan? but it suffices to our purpose, that many have come a
great length that way, who have perished eternally.
will thou give me Lord, since I go graceless and Christlesse, show mercy upon
me? or else I die; what do I value other things, if I want thy love? what can
trifles profit me, if I be a vessel of wrath and a castaway? But that we may
more fully express the way, how the unregenerate (yet looking and panting
after a change) may be said to pray absolutely for grace, we will branch out
what has been hinted at, in these three particulars, 1. because the object of
their prayer is absolutely, universally and invariably good, and indispensably
necessary to salvation and happiness, so that no state or condition, no
combination of circumstances can make it evil or indifferent; and no recompense
can be made for the want of it; 2. Because the desire of the soul is (certainly
should be) so boundless and enlarged, so absolute and peremptory, that no
proviso, no offers by way of commutation and exchange, can satisfy and quiet
the soul, or make a just compensation; 3. Albei^ no unbeleever (though in the
pangs of the new birth, and on the way to conversion) can pray in faith, and in
full assurance of acceptance and audience, yet he may wait and still venture,
and say with Esth. 4.16.
Esther, I will present my requests to the King, and if I perish I perish: And
who knows but the King will say to him (as Ahasuerus said to her) what will thou, what is thy request, it shall be granted? one thing he knows, that
otherwise he must perish, and that there is no other way to escape, and
therefore he must not, he will not give over, whatever discouragments on the
one hand, or alluring baits on the other, he may meet with to draw him off;
knowing that though he should perish, it were better to perish at Christ's feet,
and with his eyes fixed on him, then any other way; especially, since he
knows none who ever ^ook that course and constantly followed it, who did
miscarry, and met with disappointment. If it be asked, whether the unconverted
may pray acceptably? we have spoken to that question. Chap. 6. Sect. 3.

Concl. 11. Albeit it be most proper and pertinent for unbeleevers to pray for
grace, as to its being and existence; yet Believers upon a mistake, and in the
night of desertion, when they cannot see to read their charter to the
inheritance, may pray for the very first work and impression of the spirit: Its
true, if they did see, and knew what they had received, they could not
complain, as if they were altogether empty, nor could they ask what they had
already received, but standing to the supposition, they cannot well be blamed
for asking what is so necessary, and they so much love and desire: yet if they
were only in suspense and under some fears, it would be fitter to pray
conditionally, and to say, Lord, if thou have not already wrought in the that
blessed change, which is so desirable, and which I so much long for, O Lord
work it in me, and if thou only hidest from mine eyes that seed of grace thou
have sown in my heart, Lord open my eyes that I may see thy work, and praise
thee for what thou have done.

But here it may be ask, how doubting Believers may pray for grace, and
whether they may be said to pray in faith? Ans. 1. Certainly they may be said
to pray absolutely for grace, in the sense held forth in the preceding
conclusion; will any think that their longing and thirst will be less
vehement, and their diligence will not be so great, as the desire and
endeavors of the unconverted? but, 2. as to the particular expressed in the
question, it seems undeniable, that Believers, while they are, and so long as
they continue in the supposed case of doubting, denying, fearing, etc. cannot
pray in faith, as that imports an assurance of audience and acceptance: but
whether or not, that be a necessary qualification of an acceptable and
prevailing prayer, shall in its own viz. part. 2. ob. 2.
place be enquired; but if by faith required in prayer be only meant a
qualification of him who prays, rather then of prayer it self; a
qualification rather of the subject and agent, then of the act and performance
it self; such doubting souls may no doubt be said to pray in faith; 1. because
its supposed they are Believers, and so cannot be without faith; yea, 2. their
prayers may be Heb. 4.2.
mixed with faith, faith may act lively, and join in the duty, though it carry
not the foul the full length, and fill it not with joy in the assured
expectation of a gracious return; yea, 3. there may be a kind of recumbency,
and dependence on God for a gracious return, such may adventure and cast
themselves upon him for success.

Concl 12.
Concl. 12 Yet believers may pray absolutely, and in full assurance of audience
for grace, when not doubting of their state and the acceptance of their
persons, 1. They pray that they may persevere, and that they may be kept from
total, and final apostasy; (for perseverance in grace is no less necessary
then our first being in that state) 2. They may in faith pray for the
consummacion of grace into Glory; that the body of sin may be destroyed, and
Gods image perfectly restored unto them, that the Cant. 2.17.
day would break and the shadows fl^e away* that they may see their beloved
face to face, and may become happy in a full fruition of him unto all eternity;
Yea 3. they may in faith ask a further measure of grace, that they, may not
stand still in this wilderness, but may go forward, that the stock of grace
may increase and grow in their hands, an^ that a further measure of actual and
habitual strength may from time to time be let out to them; he who said l Mark.
9.24.
believe, might in faith say, Lord, help my unbeleef; as we are commanded to
The Christian must be like the Crocadile, that (as some affirm) grows as long
as it livethand cease to be when it cease to grow.
grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. so we are obliged to ask of God what he requires
of us, that he who works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
Philip. 2.13. would make us grow in grace, and Joh. 15.8.
bear much fruit to the glory of his name; and we may ask in faith relying on
the promise, to him that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,
Mat. 13.12. Mat. 25.29. Luke 8.28.

I see no reason why it is commonly said, that we may not pray absolutely and
in faith for the measure and degree, for the increase and further perfection of
grace. Some do The^ Gloss confuted.
Ans. because the measure and degree of grace is not absolutely necessary to
salvation. But I would ask, if a further measure of grace be not necessary that
we may bring forth more fruit, that we may glorisie God more, that we may be
the more able to stand in the hour of temptation? etc. and if it be thus
necessary, unless our desires be carnal and selfish, they should be no less
(but rather much more) peremptory and absolute for such a measure of grace,
then for what is merely necessary for our Salvation and happiness; though we
may dispense with our own comforts, enlargement in duty, gracious
manifestations and heart-melting in ordinances, peace, joy, assurance and all
the consolations of the Almighty, as they are sweet and pleasant to our taste;
and be content to go mourning to Zion, if it seem good to the Lord, and if
thereby his name may be magnified; yet, we must not be slack and remiss in our
desires concerning that which may promove his service, and whereby we may
glorify him more, we must not be easily put off and satisfied, nor bargain and
compone for a little, or any thing whatsoever in stead of that.

2. It is The second evasion confuted.
answered, that such or such a measure of grace is not absolutely promised.
Repl. 1 would know what such do mean by an absolute promise? It is true, such a
measure of grace is not promised to all and every one; but thus grace it self
must not be absolutely promised, if, by an absolute promise, be understood, a
promise that does belong to every one; yea, there should be no absolute promise
in all the word of God; because there is no promise there that does belong, and
has been performed to all and every one: though then it be a very usual, yet
it is a very gross mistake, to confound an absolute and universal promise; as
if to be promised absolutely were nothing else but to be promised universally
and to all. You will perhaps say, though no promises belong to all and every
one, yet, some promises belong to all believers; and so have a limited kind of
universality, and accordingly some sort of absoluteness. Ans. If a limited
universality will make a promise absolute, that is not wanting in this case:
for, all those whom the Lord has appointed to be tall Cedars in his Lebanon,
and to be strong men in his house, must have the promise of increase performed
unto them; such shall be strong in grace, But, 2. if believers be the rule and
object of absolute promises, so that these do belong unto, and shall be
performed toward them, when they in faith do plead their accompl^shment; even
thus there shall be no absolute promise: For, what promises they thus call
absolute, do nor, cannot belong to believers, but to the unconverted elect
before they believe; before the heart of stone be removed, and the seeds of
grace sown in the heart: for, when this change is wrought the promise is
fulfilled; so that after conversion we cannot (except upon a mistake of our
estate and condition) pray for grace, (as to it is being and existence) nor
plead those absolute promises at the Throne; nay, but we should rather praise
God for what he has done for, and to our souls, and say, not that we may be
Joh. 15.1, 2.
ing^e^ted in the true vine, but that being in him we may bring forth fruit
abundantly. And then, 2. since unbelievers have not faith, they cannot pray in
faith, and so thus cannot pray absolutely for faith: but, some will yet say,
though believers be not the object to which those promises belong, yet, the
Elect, and all the Elect, have an interest in them. Ans. 1. Yet, the Elect,
before their conversion, cannot in faith (which they have not as yet) plead
these promises, and so they cannot be said to pray absolutely for what is held
forth in these promises; and therefore the consideration of their election must
be impertinent for clearing the present question. But, 2. I cannot see in what
propriety of speech, or according to what ground or reason the absoluteness of
the promises, or of our petitions can be explained by this kind of
universality; and what light can be brought from thence for determining this
controversy.

You will then say, but what call you an absolute promise? For ans. we would
distinguish between the promise, and the object of the promise; not the object
to which, but whereabout it is conversant, viz. the thing promised: albeit it
be gross to confound these two, yet the present debate appears to be
occasioned in great part by that mistake, 1 then as to the promise it self,
that must be accounted absolute which (as to the performance of it) does not
depend upon any condition required on our part, and thus an absolute promise is
opposed to a conditional promise, and so these which we called Promises of
Grace must be absolute, because they do not suppose any gracious disposion in
the subject that they may have their accomplishment. And these which we called
promises to grace must be conditional, because they require and suppose some
qualification and condition on our part, that they may be performed to us: but
then, 2. the thing promised may be said to be absolute, not because it
abstracteth from any condition to be performed by us; but because it
abstracteth from the circumstances of person, time, place, etc. as to its
goodness, and convenience, and that it may be the object of a promise: and
this kind of absoluteness must be measured in reference to the promise it
self, and not in reference to the way and manner of its performance and
accomplishment: and such a thing may be said to be absolutely promised, because
it does not depend upon any other thing that it may become a fit material of a
Divine promise, and a fit object for our prayers, and desires; that it does not
borrow its goodness from without, nor depend upon any extrinsecall and
variable circumstances, nor upon any end, for the obtaining of which it may be
conducible; so that it is intrinsecally, and of it self, and thus absolutely,
and indispensably good and desirable: and thus, such a thing may be said to be
absolutely promised, because it is absolutely good, albeit the performance of
such a promise depend upon some condition and qualification in him to whom the
promise is made; and such a promise may thus viz. objectively be called
absolute: and thus grace with every degree and further measure of it, both as
to its being and graduall perfection, may be said to be absolutely promised;
albeit upon another consideration, and if we have reference unto the way and
manner of performance, grace it self may be said to be absolutely promised, and
the increase of it conditionally.

But you will then say, since the promise is the rule of prayer, and the
measure of grace may be said to be conditionally promised, why should it not
also be conditionally asked and prayed for? Ans. As we have shown in what sense
the promise may be said to be absolute, so we shall now, in answer to the
question, show, 1. What it is to pray absolutely. 2. In what sense the promise
must be acknowledged the rule of prayer. As to the first, we are said to pray
absolutely for any mercy, not because the promise (whereupon our prayer is
grounded) as to it is performance, does exclude all conditions, or that we
expect an answer without any consideration of him who prays; not regarding
any fitness, or qualification in him to receive, what he asks: for thus,
none of the Saints could be said to ask any thing absolutely; not the immortal
Crown; for that will only be given to the righteous, to him that overcomes,
etc. not the increase of grace, for that is only promised to him that is
faithful in a little; and grace, as to it is being and existence, is not
promised to believers, (for, to them the promise is already accomplished) but
to the unconverted elect; and those with whom we have now to deal do maintain,
that only grace it self is absolutely promised, which cannot, according to
their hypotheses, be asked absolutely; because the unconverted (to whom only
such absolute promises do belong) cannot pray in faith, nor lay claim to any
promise, so long as they continue in that state.

Then to pray absolutely for any mercy, must be nothing else but to pray for
it, 1. abstracting from all proviso's and conditions of expediency, or
subserviency to such or such an end; 2. abstracting from all circumstances of
person, time, place, etc. upon which it does depend, and from which it does, as
it were, borrow its goodness; and thus to pray for it as a thing intrinsecally,
absolutely, universally and indispensably good, at all times, and to all
persons; And, 3. to be so peremptory in our desires after it, that we will not
compone, nor bargain for any other thing in lieu of it: And thus we should pray
absolutely for grace, and for its growth and increase. Who knows the worth of
the least measure and degree of it? all the gold and rubies of the earth are
not worthy to be laid in the balance with it; who can set a price on it, and
appoint the equivalent? it is of more worth and excellency, then that a
compensation may be made for it: Thus we may not upon any terms sell or
transact; only we must submit, and (upon the considerations forthwith to be
named) acquiesce in that measure the Lord shall assign to every one.

As to the second, how should our prayers as to the present case be conform to
the promises: for answer, we offer these few distinctions; 1. we would
distinguish between prayer it self, and the return and answer of prayer. Hence,
2. we should distinguish between the presenting or offering up of our desires
and our expecting or waiting for an answer. 3. Let us distinguish between a
simple desire (though never so intense and fervent) because of the goodness and
amiablness of the object, and a confident desire grounded upon a Divine
promise. 4. Let us distinguish between the promise abstractly and formally
considered, and the object of the promise. Hence these conclusions in answer to
the question.

Concl. 1, It is sufficient, that our prayers keep conformity with the promises
as to the object, so that the matter of our petitions, be the object of a
promise: This objective conformity was, that which we estabilshed, while we
spoke to the question in the general, Sect. 1. And therefore we must not make a
comparison between the promises and our prayers formally considered; either, 1.
as to the acts, for thus the promise is an intimation of the will of God to us,
and prayer an intimation and directing of our desires, and the acts of our
heart to God. Nor yet, 2. As to the manner, nec quo ad rem nec modum rei; the
promise may be delivered conditionally, and may include a precept, requiring
such and such qualifications in him who would lay claim to it; from which our
supplications may abstract, albeit the supplicant must endeavor the
performance of the condition, to which the promise is entailed, that he may
obtain what it holds forth; yea, he may pray for strength to perform the
conditions; but then that precept cannot be the ground of our confidence, nor
the promise to which it is annexed, but some other promise, intimating Gods
purpose to help and assist us in that work; yea, the precept as such, and as it
annexeth such a proviso to the promise, is a rule of our duty, but not a
warrant for our prayer; and thus we may absolutely pray for what is
conditionally promised; and when we pray, that we may be enabled to perform the
condition, there must be a distinct petition, having a distinct, and another
promise for the ground of our faith.

Concl. We may pray absolutely for the measure and degree of grace; albeit we
cannot confidently wait and expect a return to our prayers, but by reflecting
on the condition required on our part, and finding it wrought in and performed
by us. Hence,

Concl. We may desire, but we cannot confidently and in faith desire and ask,
till we thus reflect upon the condition; and unless we desire upon the terms
expressed, or involved in the promise.

Concl. Prayer may be absolute, though its answer and return, the performing
and fulfilling of our desires be conditional; the accomplishing of our desires
and of the promises, may depend upon a condition, upon which our desires do not
depend: albeit we must look to its performance, that our desires may be granted.

But it may be here enquired, whether, supposing the performance of the
condition, we may confidently and in full assurance of faith, expect the
fulfilling of the promise, as to the very particular desired? And what is the
difference between our praying thus for grace, and our praying for outward and
temporal things, which (as all confess) must only be conditionally asked? Ans.
As the Lord, according to his good pleasure, and to evidence the freeness of
his grace, does show mercy and bestow grace on whom he will, so he does give a
greater or lesser measure of grace, when, and to whom he pleases: Yet, 1. The
way expressed in the covenant, is thy way, the way prescribed unto thee, and in
which thou must walk, if thou would obtain the promised mercy. Yet, 2. if
thou make conscience to perform the condition, the want of mo talents, is
rather thy cross and trial, then thy I do not speak of the original want of
Gods image, as if that were not our sin, but of an acquired impotency, as if
that in the supposed case would be imputed to us according to the tenor of the
covenant of grace.
sin, and in the issue, thou shall be no looser, because that more strength was
not let out to thee. But, 3. Though I deny not, that many Christians, who are
very diligent in the performance of duties and attending the ordinances,
continue still weak, and are left in a mourning and comfortless condition; yet
it may perhaps be questioned, 1. whether such do perform the condition? because
there may be much hypocrisy, self-seeking, pride, etc. at the ^oot, and mixed
with specious performances; and this gall and wormwood, may eat out of these
their sweet savor: These dead Eccl. 10.1.
flies may spoil that precious ointment, and cause it stink. And thus, 2. Some
who are diligent in waiting upon ordinances, and going about duties, being
proud, selfish, uncharitable, censorious, factious, etc. fall under a
threatening, which may intercept the promised mercy, and counter-act their
performances and duties, and in stead of the expected blessing, procure some
one rod or other to awaken them, that they may consider their ways, and repent
and abandon these evils. And, 3. The promise may be fulfilled and thou not
discern, some mist and darkness may so obnebulat the air, and some film
overspread thine eyes, that thou can not see, and art not fit to judge of the
state and condition of thy soul: what though thou find not such enlargement
in duties, such a measure of assurance and joy, as others, yet thou may have
more grace, and a greater stock, thou may spread at the root, in humility,
self-denial, love, desire, etc. Though thou sendest not forth such branches of
comfort, peace, and such melting of affections under ordinances, etc. And thus,
though thy fruit be not so sensible, yet it may be as real and solid, as if thy
tree did fairly blossom: And as such a dispensation may flow from the good
pleasure of God, who will not have all the walkers to Zion to tread the same
steps, nor have the same provision by the way; so from our selves, and from thy
natural melancholic temper, and the temptations of Satan fitted to thy
inclination and natural infirmity; and thus there may be much unquietness, many
fears and sad complaints, and much stirring of corruption where there is much
grace; So that it is a difficult task to judge rightly here, and to pass a
sentence concerning the measure of our graces, when we grow, and when we decay
in grace: But the best rule to judge by, is our zeal for God and against sin,
and our activity and diligence in the work of the Lord: And not our comforts
and enlargements, or melting of affections, by which too many judge and pass a
wrong sentence. Thus it is hard to judge of our selves; but as for others, as
we cannot discern and infallibly know, who have performed the condition, who
not, so we can hardly conjecture to whom the promise has been fulfilled, to
whom not.

Yet, 4. If at any time they, who could plead the performance of the condition,
might complain that the promises were not performed to them, such a
dispensation ought not be construed to be a denial, but rather a delay, a
suspension and not a perpertual withholding; ere it be long there will be a
compensation made, and such shall not be losers in the day of reckoning; for
then (supposing there shall be different degrees of glory) his crown shall be
no less 2 Cor. 4.7.
weighty and resplendent, then if here he bed received and improven those
talent to which the promise did give him a right. Thus then, the promised mercy
is only for a short time delayed and suspended, and the Lord has his holy ends
for that delay, which will abundantly satisfy his honest supplicants and
expectants, when they shall once see his face and know his mind.

And herein is the difference between spiritual and temporal things, (and one
main ground of the different manner of praying for these) that though
spirituals may be withheld for a while from them who ask in faith; yet, they
shall not like temporals be finally and altogether withheld; all the promises
concerning spirituals shall one day be fulfilled, though not completely here,
yet hereafter: for, when we come home to our Fathers house, grace shall not be
destroyed, but completed and perfected; nothing then shall be wanting, neither
part nor degree, only imperfections and defects, and what is repugnant unto,
and not suitable with, such happiness, and that glorious condition, shall then
be done away, Perfectio adveniens abolebit quicquid imperfectioni servit. Calv.
in loc.
1 Cor. 13.10. not only grace in the general, but every patticular grace as to
it is nature and being, and to what gradual perfection it has, shall then
continue; the gold shall abide and be made more pure, when the dross shall be
done away and removed: though after that renovation it shall get a new name,
and grace shall be turned into glory, yet, what perfection formerly was in the
thing, shall still Hence we reject Cajetans gloss on that place, 1 Cor. 13.10.
where universally he affirm th, that whatsoever has any imperfection in it
shall be totally done away: quod non supplebitur ei quod ex part est, altera
part, sed iplum quod ex part est tolletur; only he makes an exception in love
upon a strange ground, which we will not stay to examine. You will say, does
not the Ap^stle affirm, that knowledge shall vanish away, ver. 8. Ans. Not
simply and totally, but as to its imperfections, both negative and privative.
Neque enim ipse scientiae and notitiae habitus abolebitur, sed alius fiet, tum
qualitate, tum quantitate, Beza in 1 Cor. 13, 8. vid. Scholasticos in 3
sentent. did. 36. and ad Thom. 1, 2. quaest. 67.
remain, what light and knowledge, what assent, affiance, dependence, etc. is
now in faith, shall then abide and be increased; what love, zeal and
estimation, etc. is now in hope and desire, shall not be destroyed, but
perfected and enlarged, when in stead of that which we now call faith, shall be
a blessed vision and immediate sight; when we shall no more see darkly and
through a glass, but shall behold the Lord face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. when in
stead of desire and hope, shall be a full fruition, and the pure rivers of
pleasure, joy and delight, Ps. 16.10.

And thus all prayers for grace shall at length be answered, and we shall
receive all, and more then our hearts could desire, or our thoughts conceive
and apprehend, 1 Cor. 2.9. and thus they who plead against our praying
absolutely for the degree and perfection of grace, because that is not
absolutely promised, nor to be given to all, may see how groundless their plea
is; and yet, though it were true, it would not be sufficient as has been shown.

But as to the promises of temporal things, they do not hold out Gods purpose,
and an engagment to give the very particular in kind to all, who shall ask them
aright; many in this life get not what they much desired and frequently
petitioned, and after we come home, we will not stand in need of those things,
there is provision enough for us in our Fathers house, and we must not
discredit the place by longing for the broken slaves to which we did lean, or
the nesty conches on which we did rest, while we were in a pilgrim^ condition,
and wandering in this wilderness.

3. It is M. Gee Treat, of Pray. chapter 3. sect 2. page 126, 127.
answered, though all aspiritual mercies be in themselves good and desirable,
yet, in regard of us, this or that measure and degree may be hurtful and
unexpedient, and in that case not fall under a promise, which concerning such
things does always take in the proviso of expediency, sure, ableness and
subserviency to our good, in promoting of God's glory. Repl. Though this be
true in temporal things, which clothed with some circumstances may prove (and
too often have be) a snare, and so hurtful and unexpedient for us; yet, upon
what ground or parity of reason this should be; by any judicious Divine,
applied to grace, it is measure and degr^e I know not; but, if it be true, that
the Schoolmen teach of moral virtues, that they cannot be abused, that none,
not the worst of men, can make an ill use of them, nullus Tho. 1, 2. quaest.
55. art. 4. vid. Alph. Curiel ad loc and ad art. 3. dub. 1, 2, 3,
malus male utitur. This must more necessarily hold in spiritual things, in
grace and in every degree and gradual perfection of it; yet, not so as if
spiritual pride might not grow up with our graces, but that it cannot flow from
grace, but from corruption: what the Virtute potest aliquis male utitanquam
objecto, puta cum male sentit de virture, cum odit came vel superbit de ca non
autem tanquam principto usus, ita scil. quoa malus sit actus virtutis. Thom
loc. cit. ad 5.
Schoolmen say of virtue in the general, that it cannot be abused as a
principle of action, yet it may become an object, if not an occasion of sin,
this we deny not of grace: As Pagans made their moral virtues, and pharisaical
hypocrites their devotion and superstitious performances, a matter of vain glory
and ostentation; so the Saints (the most emment of them, are not out of the
reach of this temptation) are too ready to be puffed up through the
apprehension of their spiritual excellencies, 2 Cor. 12.7. and to look down
upon others as below them, forgetting that the more we have received, we should
be the mote humble and thankful: Satan joining with our corruption, can make
the decay and overthrow of other sins, become (as it were) the seed of pride,
and after we have gotten, and while we seem to pursue the victory, he may (if
the Lord prevent not the snare) take us at a disadvantage; and it is one of his
most subtle depths, that if he cannot puff us up with the conceit of our
privileges, graces and performances, then to fill our minds with high thoughts
of our self-annihilation and humility; and thus to entertain high thoughts of
our own low thoughts; to be proud that we are not proud; and to be high minded
because we are not high minded; (that is to say, because we are not puffed up
with such things which swell others, we will blow up and fill our selves with
our own emptiness.) But all this is a fruit, not of grace, but of corruption:
Grace is a shield, which being improven, would ward off and prevent such
abuses; its a fountain, that always yields sweet and wholesome waters; it is a
principle, whose act, are only and always good; though those spiders within
us, can extract poison out of the most excellent ointment, and can make grace
an object matter, and (as it were) occasion of sin, to which of it self it is so
much opposite: And if upon this account, we may not pray absolutely for a
further measure and degree of grace, neither must we pray absolutely for grace,
as to its essence, nor for that 1 John 2.9.
seed, and the habits and principles of our spiritual life, for these also may
be thus Nullum est in hae vita bonum quo bomo prosua liberate non possit male
uti aliquo modo, Suar, ubi supra cap. 17. sect. 9.
abused; and the less the measure of grace be, the greater is the hazard of
this abuse.

But some perhaps will reply, that upon this very ground we ought not pray
absolutely and peremptorily for spirtiual things, because, albeit of themselves
they be the good gifts of God, yet they may prove a snare, and become hurtful
in the use. Ans. That is not the adequat and sole reason, and though it were,
yet the disparity is manifest; 1. Then the true and complete reason, why
temporals should not be absolutely asked, is, because they having no moral and
intrinsecal goodness in them, nor any formal, direct and immediate tendency and
reference to our happiness, may prove, and often have proven impediments and
hindrances of hapiness, and occasions of eternal ruin; therefore, they should
only be asked conditionally and relatively; that though they have a natural
goodness in them, and are fit to nourish, refresh and comfort this bodily life,
yea, and to be (as learning, parts, etc.) civil ornaments and qualifications of
the whole outward man, and thus become blessings, when they are sanctified in
the use yet since they have no spiritual goodness in them, and are so ready to
be abused, we must only ask them as helps, and when, and so far only, as they
may be subservient unto our spiritual and eternal good. But spiritual things as
such, and because they have a necessary and immediate tendency to that great
end, they may and ought to be absolutely asked: And it were a degrading and
disparaging of grace, to desire and petition it with a limitation, condition or
exception; 1. the things themselves being so excellent, so intrinsecally and
indispensibly good; 2. so good and useful to us, and for our happiness; and,
3. so conform to the will of God, and so subservient to his honor: What can we
then imagine for counterballancing so great goodness? And what condition can
there be added for warranting us to dispense with so much goodness? and to
part with such a price which may bring so much honor to God and happiness to
our selves.

As to the second, The abuse of grace and spiritual privileges, is merely
accidental, and solely from our selves, no occasion, nor invitation being
offered from the things themselves, but on the contrary, their sole inclination
and tendency is toward the right work, and to keep our feet in a right path;
but as for temporals, they being of themselves indifferent, as to the right and
wrong use of them, and they (especially the abundance or excess of them) being
fit baits to our lusts, and thus of themselves, as it were, occasions and
temptations to sin; we must not be absolute and peremptory in our desires after
them; the condition of expediency must always be expressed or included; as we
must be circumspect in the use of them, so we must be submissive in our
desiring of them.

You will say, there is some hazard, from whatsoever fountain it flow, whether
from our selves, or from the object; and should we not guard against that in
our prayers? Ans. Yet not so, as to pray conditionally for these excellent and
necessary things, otherwise we may ask nothing absolutely: because (as we have
said) the best and most necessary things, may be abused by our corruption, we
must then absolutely and peremptorily ask, and with the thing it self ask the
right use and improvement of it: And here it is not difficult to determine the
viz. Whether we may ask peremptorily the thing, and that the condition may be
placed.
question we propounded concerning temporals. Here we may ask the thing and the
condition; but we may not ask the thing upon condition and supposition, we must
not add an If, we may as determinately, absolutely and peremptorily ask the
qualification, as the thing it self; the sanctified use and right improvement
of it, and that all abuse of it may be prevented, as well as that we may have
it; we must not make a divorce and separation, yea, not so much as by way of
supposition, so as to offer that up prayer-wayes to God: We then may, and
should deprecate the abuse, and pray that it may have no place; but we may not
suppose the possibility of abuse, and under that supposition rest content with
the want of the thing, but we must in our desires and prayers peremptorily set
our selves, both against the want of the thing and the abuse of it, and that
such a supposition may be excluded; and that there may be no place for such
abuse, but that we may be holy, humble, charitable, etc.

It seems to be liable to a very harsh construction, to say or imagine, that
a further measure and degree of grace may be hurtful and inexpedient to us in
whatsoever case or combination of circumstances; nor know I any ground that can
be alleged with the least appearance of probability for such an assertion: It
is true, not only outward and bodily things, such as riches, honors and
pleasures, but also parts and moral endowments, yea and the common gifts of the
spirit, have often proven snares; the Lord in his just judgment may, according
to that threatening, Mal. 2.2. curse all such blessings; but, how grace can
become a snare, and how the Lord may be said to curse it, is not easy to
conjecture; that he never threatened, neither know I how such a thing is
possible: O! how does it sound in a Christians ear, to say, that grace or
holiness is cursed? Though the Lord may remove our talents, for our not
improving of them, yet all our talents of grace, as such are blessings, and
cannot incline or dispose us to any sin; what though some eminent in grace,
have fallen into gross and grievous sins, and though some have been puffed up
with their privileges, performances, etc. yet that was not a fruit of grace,
but of sin not totally subdued; it was not, because there was much strength of
grace in the heart; but because there was not more; and because the principles
and habits of grace were not awakened, and further strengthened and stirred up
by actual influences and the quickening motions of the spirit, that such did
fall; and though they did take, yet no occasion was given from their graces to
become proud; so that grace can never be called a snare or temptation; though
corruption, when yielded unto, and not watched against, will never want an
object, but will fancy and make to its self an occasion where there is none to
be found.

But some may yet reply, what? should we not submit to the holy and wise
dispensations of God, not murmuring and repining, because our Lord does not
entrust us with mo talents? Might he (in the parable, Mat. 25.15.) who received
the two, have said, nay Master, but I must have five as well as my fellow
servant? Ans. Though he might not murmr and repine, but should highly have
prized and thankfully acknowledged the little he had received, yet in zeal to
the glory of his Lord, he might have said, [Lord let me also have five (if you
extend the parable only to talents of grace, though the Talentum significat
quaelibet Dei dona, Basil. in reg brevior. inter reg. 253.
scope of it would point out another kind of All these talents must be of one
nature, and therefore since he who received only one, cannot be said to have
received a talent of grace, so, etc.
talents) that I may be the more enabled to serve and honor thee.]

But for a more full answer to the question, we would remember, that there are
Haec talenta scholasticis vocantur gratiae gratis datae, and posteri ora
gratiae gratum facientes, sed minus commode; cum omnis gratia nobis gratis
detur and sola Christi justitia nos gratos faciat.
talents of gifts, such as knowledge, utterance, and the extraordinary
privileges of some in the primitive Church, as prophesies and tongues, 1. Cor.
13.8. And there are talents of grace, in which the life of religion does
directly and essentially consist; in which, as In hisce spiritualibus honis
major vis est, and certior veritas, and fructuosior profectus, and purior
perfectio. Bon. de process. rel. sex cap. 18.20.
Bonaventure well said, there is greater power, truth, purity and perfection.
And as in all this enquiry after spirituals, we did only speak of saving and
sanctifying grace, as it is contradistinguished from whatsoever gifts, though
never so precious and excellent, if not of themselves sanctifying and saving,
and if common to the elect and reprobate; so now we affirm that what fervency,
importunity and zeal, we did plead for in prayer, as to any particular and
determinate object, must be limited to the talents of grace, and not of gifts;
we may not peremptorily desire and pray for such a measure of gifts, whereby we
may edify and do good unto others, but should rest content, as with our
station; so with the measure of gifts and abilities, it has pleased our master
to put in our hands, albeit we may, and ought improve that stock he has
entrusted us with to the best advantage, that by our diligence our master may
be honored, and our talents multiplied: And this moderation of our desires,
should not only be extended to gifts of edification, such as the gifts of
preaching, praying, etc. But also to gifts of consotation, such as assurance,
peace, joy, etc. (as these are sweet to our taste and a part of our reward)
though we be allowed to Phil. 4.4.
rejoice, and must give all 2 Pet. 1.10.
diligence to make our election sure, etc. yet we must not idolize our comfort;
but must patiently wait Gods time of Ps. 4.6.
lifting up the light of his countenance upon us: But talents of grace being of
another nature; and our sanctification consisting in them and their right
improvement; we should be peremptory in our desiring of, and praying for them;
and we need add no proviso or limitation: And that servant might well have
said, O Lord, though these two talents be enough for me, and more then I can
well improve, yet let me have more grace, and strength to improve them to the
honor of thy name.

Yet I do not deny, that we should submit unto, and carry our selves patiently
under the want of such and such a measure of grace; 1. as it is our own loss
and misery; 2. in that our Lord will allow us no more provision for our
journey, nor entrust us with a greater stock; and 3. in that the different
dispensation of grace, as to its measure and gradual perfection, may serve
(though in a way unknown to us) to proclaim the wisdom and glory of God, his
power, and the freeness of his grace; its our part in humility to adore the
depths of his counsel, and in silence submit to all his dispensations toward
us; especially, if thereby his glory might be promoved: Moses his prayer, Exodus
32.32. And Paul his wish, Romans 9.3 are patterns of a more illimited submission
to any dispensation, that might be subservient to that high end; to be accursed
from Christ, is worse then to be a weak Christian; and to be blotted out of
Gods book, then to want light to discover, and whereby we might discern our
names written there.

But abstracting from these considerations, our desires after grace should be
most absolute and peremptory; and our endeavors in the diligent use of the
ordinances for increasing and strengthening of it, should be uncessant and
without wearying; and as the want of a further measure of grace and strength,
does render us less fit and able to serve God, it should be matter of sad
regrate, and of continual complaints to him, who as he is zealous of his own
glory, so will he no doubt pity such, whose sad affliction is, that they cannot
serve him better. Tantum possumus in negotio Religionis, quantum volumus, may
admit an orthodox sense, if we did more earnestly desire and diligently seek,
we would obtain.

A word of application.
(f) O! let us praise the Lord, who has not dealt sparingly with us, we are not
straightened in the promise; our charter is large and exceeding broad; what can
thou desire, either 1 Timothy 4. 2 Pet. 1.3.
pertaining to life or godliness, which thou may not read in the promise? or
what is it that he is not ready to give, if thou would ask? thou may
confidently plead thy right, thou shall be no looser that thy party is thy
judge; he will own his own bond, and will perform his word, though justly he
might cast thy bill over the bar, and give out a sentence of forfeiture,
because of thy not performance of the condition, and thus nullifying the
contract, which was mutual; but as a loving father, he will pardon and cover
thy failings, and will withhold no part of the inheritance, because of thy
bewailed infirmities; and he, who said, I will give whatsoever ye shall ask,
will give whenever, and whatsoever thou ask.

But ah! Though we be not strained in the promise, yet we are 2 Cor. 6.12.
straightened in our own bowels; our Hab. 2.5.
desires, though they be enlarged as hell, after the empty Cistern, yet how
easily are we satisfied, how Because inordinatly, our desires not answering the
excellency and necessity of the object.
immoderatly moderate are our desires after grace? a little of that; yea,
rather a shadow and picture of holiness contents us; as much as will silence a
clamorous conscience, and may be a foundation for a false peace, will do the
turn. Oh worldling! why do thou not consider, that one day, one hour, one
moment will rob thee of all thy earthly treasures? This night, O Luke 12.20.
fool, thy soul may be required of thee; and to whom then shall those things
fall, which thou have purchased with the lose of thy soul and the wrath of God?
Ah, how many metamorphosed Nebuchadnezzars do live in the world? yea, in (but
are not of) the Church and house of God, who have the heart of beasts, and are
satisfied with the grass (I may say dung, for such it will prove in the issue)
of the earth: What? wast thou made for no higher end? may not thy intellectual
and immortal soul, if thou would reflect upon its nature, privileges and
excellency, rebuke thy folly, and discover the vanity of thy purchase and
travel? But since thou must have these things, why do thou not then take the
right course? thou losest these trifles, because thou seek them first, and
give them the precedence in thy desire and endeavor: or if the Lord gives
thee them, whilst thou so greedily covets them, he gives them in wrath, and
with his curse; and thou may fear, least, while the meat is in thy mouth
Gods wrath sease upon thee, as it did on these Israelits, Ps. 78.30. If
spirituals have the precedence, then, and only then are we in the right way to
have temporals added as a blessing, Mat. 6.33, Though then thou may desire
these outward things, because of their suitablness to thy bodily exigences, and
to supply thy necessities, yet thou can not desire them aright, neither can
thou enjoy them as a blessing, unless thy desire be, 1. spiritual, as to the
motive; the main and ultimate design; 2. moderate, as to the measure; 3.
conditional, as to the manner; 4. relative to the great end; 5. subordinate also
thereunto; 6. submissive, as to the event; and, 7. believing, and mixed with
faith in Gods care and providence in disposing all things to his own glory, and
the good of his honest supplicants. But for spirituals, there is no other
measure of our desiring them, but to desire them without measure; In eo non
potest esse nimium quod debet esse maximum, What Modus diligendi Deum, est s^^e
modo diligere, Bern. de dilig. Deum in princ. vid. Thom. 2, 2. quaest. 27. art
6.
Bernard said of our love as terminated in God, may well be applied to our
desire and endeavors after grace, (whereby, pro modulo, we enjoy and are
united to God) that the modus, should be sine modo; we should be boundless and
unsatiable, resolute, fervent and peremptory in our affection; we must 1 Cor.
12.31.
earnestly covet these best blessings. Here the Poet did hit right Propert. 1
eleg. 3.
Verus amor nullum novit habere modum. True love, when pitched upon a right
object, should be boundless and illimited.

Sect. 3. For whom should we pray? not for the dead.
Whether and after what manner for the reprobat, and those who have committed
that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, etc.
WE need not ask if we should pray for others? the Law of God, the Jam. 2.8.
royal law of love, and the constant practice of the Saints do point out this
duty, and as a threefold cord binds us thereunto, first, then God has
commanded us to pray for others; Jam. 5.16. 1 John 5.^6. Secondly, he has
promised to answer, 1 John 5.14, 16. Jam. 5.15. Thirdly, he has accordingly
answered those prayers that have been put up for others, Genesis 20.17. Exodus
33.17. Job. 42.9, 8. and though he be a reprobat for whom the Saints do pray,
yet they shall not lose their labor, their prayers shall return into their own
bosom, they shall not return empty and without a blessing, but shall bring
with them an answer of peace to the supplicant, Psa. 35.13. Fourthly, not only
the Godly have required the mutual help of one another prayers, 2 Cor. 1.11.
1 These. 5.25. 2 These. 3.1. Heb. 13.18. but the wicked also, (as being convinced
of the need they stood of the Saints prayers, and the good which might be
expected from thence) 1 King. 13.6. Act. 8.24. Fifthly, as the Saints have
desired others to pray for them, so they have been careful to Orat apostolus
pro pl^be, orat plebs pro apostolo, oro se omnia membra orant, coput pro
omnibus interpellat, August in Psa. 34.
perform that duty toward others, Col. 1.9. 2 These. 1.11. Exodus 32 31. Exodus
33.16. Numb. 21.7. 1 Samuel 7.9. and Christ our head and leader, while on earth,
prayed not only for his disciples, Joh. 17. and for the unconverted elect, v.
9.20. but also for his bloody persecutors, Luke 23.34. And how did he weep and
pathetically lament over apostat Jerusalem? Luk, 19.41. Luke 13.34. and he now
lives in heaven to make continual intercession for his people. Sixthly, not
only has our blessed Savior thus by his example taught us this point of our
duty, but by his command, leaving us a pattern in that Ideo non dicimus,
patermeus, sed noster, nec da mihi sed da nobis, quia unitatis magister noluit
privatim preces fieri, ut scilicet quis prose tantum precetur Cypr. in lib. de
orat. Dom.
comprehensive directory, Mat. 6.9. to pray for others whenever we pray for
our selves, and whatsoever we ask for our selves; thus we are not there taught
to say, my Father, give me, forgive me, etc. but, our Father, give us, forgive
us, etc. And thus we are more straightly bound to that duty, then if either in
the preface, or the close there had been an express command insert to pray for
others; for thus we are taught to pray for our brethren not only at some
seasons and occasions, or when we will, but always whenever we pray for our
selves; and not to ask only some few things for them, but whatsoever we ask to
our selves: and why should we not wish, desire and petition all those good
things which we desire to our selves, to those whom we are bound to Mat. 19 19
love as our selves? what indigence and Prose orare necessitas cogit, pro
altero autem charitas fraternitatis hortatur. Author operis imper in Mat. cir.
prin tom. 2. hom. 14.
necessity will drive us to ask for our selves, that brotherly love should draw
us to desire and petition to others: and love being a more kindly motive then
necessity, and the good of others a more noble attractive then self interest,
it must be a better evidence of sincerity to pray for others, then to pray for
ourselves.

You will say must we then pray for all and every one? For Answer we shall
bring some conclusions partly negative partly affirmative.

Concl. 1. Concl. 1.
We abominat the Popish conceit of praying for the dead; as, 1 foolish and
unprofitable; for after death the judgment, Heb. 9.27. then we must appear
before the tribunal of Christ, and be stated into an inalterable condition,
which all the devotion of Papists, all their masses and supplications cannot
change; 2. as groundless and unwarrantable, having no command nor precedent in
Scripture, yea nor from the first and purest antiquity; and reason can here
have no place, for the Saints want no good, and they fear no evil, (which are
the two occasions of prayer mentioned by the Apostle The two grounds of prayer
mentioned by the Apostle, 1. the want and abfence of some good; (...). 2. The
presence or fear of some evil, (...).
Jam. 1.5. and 5.13.) and an irrevocable sentence is already past upon the
damned; where the tree is fallen, there it mustly for ever, Ecles. 11.3. the
evening is come, and there can be no more working in the Lords vineyard, every
one must now receive his reward according as he has employed the day past;
David would pray no longer for his child when he heard it was dead, the reason
he brings in reference to the child's bodily life and being here again in the
world, is applicable to the state and condition of the soul, there can be no
alteration after death; and therefore he would pray no more for either the
child's bodily being here again, or concerning the eternal portion, or spiritual
condition of his soul, 2 Samuel 12.23. The Saints are now at home, and rest
secure till the day of the resurrection, when soul and body being united shall
partake of glory and happiness (according to their several capacities) to all
eternity; and till that day they rest upon Gods word, (as to the resurrection
of their bodies) which is another kind of This appears to me to be the main
ground of difference* which, with submission, Ioffer to the consideration of
the judicious.
word, then the word of promise which believers on earth plead in their
prayers. It is the sentence of a Judge, and would an earthly Judge take it
well, if any man should petition him to own and stand to his sentence? They are
not now on their way, nor in the Preces ge mituslachrymae arma sunt athletarum
in stadio versantium in agone sudaentium, non victorum in caelo triumphantium,
Tilen. synt. part. 2. disp. 49. 22.
condition of a Viator and traveller; they are now above ordinances, they are
no more under the means, what then can prayer profit them?

As for the popish Purgatory, (that Chapel in which all these Saints are
conveened, who call for the prayers and masses of the Roman Church, or rather
that prison in which are detained those captives, till the Romanists, by their
devotion, purchase their liberty) our Divines, long since, have thrown down the
imaginary partition wall betwixt that goal and hell, and have shown, that those
Mat. 5.26.
prisoners shall never be able to pay the uttermost farthing, and therefore
shall never be set at liberty: and it was no difficult task to overthrow a
house that was built upon the sand of Platonic dreams, poetical fictions and
humane and antiscriptural tradition. I do not deny that it was an ancient
custom of the Church, to pray for the dead; yet, Mat. 19.8.
from the beginning it was not so. We will not now enquire after the punctual
time when it began, nor yet what was the occasion of that custom; yet, it were
an easy work to show, that the ancient custom does no ways favor the Roman
cause; Dr. Usher, in bis answer to the challenge made by a Jesuit, of prayer
for the dead. Dr. Forbes. instr. hist. theol. lib. 13. cap. 9. etc. M. Perkins,
Them. of the Problem. page 531, 561. etc.
Dr. Usher and Dr. Forbesse, Mr. Perkins and several other orthodox Divines
have undertaken that task, and performed it to the satisfaction of all
impartial readers: yea, that great Dr. Usher loc cit. of Purgatory, page, (mihi)
190.
Antiquary, Dr. Usher, has demonstrated [that Purgatory, wherewith the Romish
Clergy does now delude the world, is a new device, never heard of in the Church
of God, for the space of a thousand years after the birth of our Savior.] Yet,
I deny not in the sixth Century, when the mystery of iniquity (which began to
work in the days of the Apostles, 2 These. 2.7.) was grown up to a considerable
stature, and was in great part established by a Law, that then many materials
were provided, yea, and many stones laid of that structure; but the
afterbuilders being more wise, demolished much of that work, that they might
rear up (if not a more sumptuous, yet) a more profitable building: Nay, I deny
not, that long before that time, (before the days of Gregory the great, that
great Innovator and Parron of monkish superstition, and grand builder of
Purgatory.) Tertullian and Origin did make way for that dream; the one, viz.
Tertullian, being the Albeit before that time the Saints did mention the
Defunct, (especially the Martyrs) in their prayers; yet, that was only, 1. by
way of commemoration, proposing them as an example worthy of their imitation.
2. By way of congratulation: but not, 3. by way of petition, as if they had
asked any thing from or for the Martyrs.
first amongst Christians, who Tert. lib. de monog. cap. 10. where he lays
this charge upon a widows to pray frequently for their dead husband.
pleaded, that prayers should be offered up for the dead: but, first, he turned
Montanist; for, while he was Orthodox, with what indignation did he Tert. de
test. anim. cap. 4.
mock the Pagans for their praying for the dead? who could have imagined, that
he himself should have approven that custom? But thus we may see, that this
lesson was first learned from the Pagan Academy. As for the other, viz. Origin.
lib. 2. de princ. cap. 10, 11, 12. hom. 3. in Psa. 36. hom. 13. in Hieron.
Origin, who is reputed to be the first who espied the fire of Purgatory,
having brought a prospect from the Platonic Schools, whereby he might discern
and take up this ignis fatuus: but, we dar not confidently father this conceit
upon that learned man, albeit now it may be found in his Writings, knowing how
miserably these have been corrupted and adulterated; and yet, the Purgatory
mentioned there, is far different from, and much unlike to the Romish.

But, since Papists have no other Plea but Antiquity and humane Tradition
(though, as we said, the first and purest times were ignorant of this piece of
devotion, and though the first custom of praying for the dead, was not founded
upon the popish Purgatory, which was not then acknowledged, yea, and I may say
not discerned, it being then as a Or shall I say, aer incognitus: for, some of
them will have Purgatory to be in the air, potest dici probabiliter quod in
superiori regione, i. e. in aere sit locus Purgatorii, Guide. de Baiis. super
decret* part. 2. causa 13. quaest. 2. Fol. (mihi) 237.
terra incognita.) I would ask, why they disclaim their Patrons in so many
particulars, and are ashamed to own or build upon the first foundation? and
even these materials which they now make use of, must first be polished by
School-subtilties (so that the first owners would scarce know and could not
acknowledge them for legitimat) before they employ them in their building, or
upon them erect their several limbs and chambers of hell. 1. If Origin must be
their Patron for Purgatory, why do they not with Lib. 2. de prin, cap. 6. lib.
ib. 3. cap. 6. tom. 18. in evang. Johan. hom. 1. in Levit. But how far contrary
is this to what he affirms in other places; and in his Lamentation he
affirms, that he was condemned to everlasting punishment, and could he then
think that the devils at length would escape.
him (if we may judge of his opinions from his Writings) also maintain, that
the devils at length shall, by the mercy of God, be saved and liberated from
their torments? Or, if that seem too gross, yet, 2. why do they not, with these
whom Thom. in sup. quaest. 99. art 3. in corp ex Aug. lib. 21. de civit. Dei
cap. 17.18. vid. Chrysostom. hom. 21. in Acta, August. Encherid. cap. 110. and de
civit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 24.
Thomas cites from Austin, affirm, that albeit the devils should be tormented
for ever, yet, all men, though never so wicked or slagitious, should at length
be delivered from the torments of hell, since the ancient custom of praying for
the dead (upon which they build) did exclude none, no not the worst of sinners?
Or, 3. if they will not plead for all that are in hell, yet, why do they not
allow the liberty to plead for some few, which their Sermon. de Defunct.
Damascen has granted? affirming, that by the prayers of the Saints some have
been delivered out of hell; as the Emperor Trajan by the prayers of And yet
Gregory himself professes, that those who die in their sins are no more to be
prayed for then the devils, Dialog lib. 4. cap. 44.
Gregory the first, and Falconilla by the prayers of Theela. 4 If it be thought
too heard a task for them to pull souls from hell, yet why do they not, with
Non dixit metuatis eum qui postquam occiderit, mittit, etc. Theoph. in Luc.
12.5.
Theophilact (one of their grand pillars of invocation for the dead) affirm,
that they may help them who are not yet cast, (though deceased) but are ready
to be cast into hell, having died in their infidelity and other grievous sins?
Thus it is reported of Dunstan, that after he knew that the soul of Edwin, King
of England, was to be carried into hell, never ceased to pray for him until he
got that sentence repealed, and Edwins Purgatory. 5. Why do they not at least
plead with Chrysostom. in Acta hom. 21. in epist. ad Philip. hom 3. vid. Thom in
4. sent. did. 45. quaest. 2. art. 2.
Chrysostowe, Altisiodorensis and Porretanus, that albeir, neither these, who
already are in hell, or who are sentenced thither, and ready to be cast in, can
be wholly delivered from that place of torment, yet their pains there may be
mitigated by the prayers of the Saints? Damas. loc. cit.
Daemaescen his fable concerning the skull of a dead man (whom Thom. in lib. 4.
seut. did 45 quaest. 2 art 2. ad. quartum.
Thomas and many others affirm to have been a Pagan and idolatrous Priest)
which should have uttered these words u to Macarius the Egyptian Anchoret [when
thou do ofter up thy prayers for the dead, we (who are in hell) receive some
little ease of our torment.] Alph. Mendoz. cout t^col. quaest. 6. sect. 5.
Mendoza thinks this skull not to be the head of one that was damned, but of a
just man in Purgatory; but Bellar. depurga^. lib. 2 cap 18. At fortesse melius.
rejicerentur ut Apocrypha quae asseruntur de illo cranio non enim in libro, etc.
Bellarmine is content this history be accounted apocryphal: but as to the
testimonies we have alleged, to which may be added many mo, and that (...),
and often inculcated aphorism, which the Master Lomb. 4. sent. did. 45. ex
Aug. Ench. cap. 110. quibus prosunt suffragia aut ad hoc prosune ut plena siat
remissio, aut tolerabilior sit ipsa damnatio -- mediocriter malis suffragantur
ad paenae mitigationem.
of Sentences does cite from Augustine, and approve, Prayers for the dead, do
either profit them to the obtaining of a full pardon, or to the diminution and
mitigation of their torment, Papists now think it safest for them not to
mention these, and Bellarmine only takes notice of that passage of Augustine,
telling us, that the learned father by damnation, did understand the pains of
purgatory; which strange gloss, as it is contrary to Lombard and all others
who make use of that passage, so to the words and their distinction, which must
import an opposition, and warrant us to infer from Bellarmines interpretation,
That those who are in purgatory shall never obtain the remission of their sins.

Thus we see that Papists, though they would make us believe, that they embrace
the doctrine of the fathers as a rule of faith, yet do cry up or cry down,
follow or reject what these say, according as that makes for or against their
interest and opinion. And they do not scruple to disclaim those fancies we have
mentioned, though more clearly asserted by them, then what they in this
controversy would father upon them; because these conc^i^s were not so
advantageous for the Popes treasury, nor so fit for feeding the Priests
bellies: and such is Bellarmines impudence, that as if none of these
particulars had ever been mentioned, or maintained by any of the learned, he
dare confidently Certum est Ecclesiae suffragia non prodesse beatis nec
damnatis, sed solum its qui in Purgatorio degunt -- id quod docent omnes
scholastici, etc. Bellar. loc. cit.
affirm, It to be certain, that the suffrages of the Church do not profit
either the damned or the blessed, but only those who are in Purgatory, as all
the Schoolmen (says this bold man) do maintain with Augustine. But the Jesuit
and his accomplices, had reason to expunge, 1. the damned out of their roll,
knowing that they would wait long before the devil and the damned would send
them money, that they might say mass for them; and the living will hardly be
persuaded, that the popish devotion will bring their friends from hell. 2. As
for the Spirits in glory, their condition were miserable, if they stood in need
of our help; and wherefore (would Papiss say) should we pray to them who stand
in need of our prayers?

You will say, though the Spirits of just men, made perfect, be happy in the
fruition of God, and the assured expectation of the resurrection of their
bodies, yet why may not both we and they pray for the consummation of their
happiness? Ans. I grant, that certainty of success does not exclude, but rather
suppose the means, and may be a notable encouragment to use them; but wherefore
should they, who have already used the means, and now are begun to enjoy the
end, use them any more? and far less should others undergo such a needless
task for them; who will go to buy after the market day is past? they have run
the race and finished their course, and now they must rest from their labors,
and eat the sweet fruit thereof unto all eternity, R^v. 14.13. And therefore
Bellarmine had reason to confess, that our prayers can do them no good; albeit
it be certain, and we might from many pregnant testimonies clearly demonstrate,
that those fathers, from whom the custom of praying for the dead took its rise,
did (yea especially) pray for those, whom they supposed to enjoy the crown of
glory.

Thus the popish Rabbis finding no place, either in heaven or hell, where they
could vent their wares, at length they espied a middle place, where with
greater advantage they might proclaim the market, though earth must be the
place where the money must be laid down, for their merchants grand axiom is, no
pay no mass, no trust, no not for one hour; but if you bring their hire in
your hand, these mountebanks will promise you a good peny-worth; though they
cannot ascend so high as heaven, nor descend so low as hell, yet they will ply
a voyage to Purgatory, and from thence, by the cords of their prayers and
masses draw out souls lying in torment; one thing they are sure of, that thus
they shall draw moneys from the cabins of the living, and though they drive no
spoil from Purgatory (as having no ground of quarrel against that place, since
the fire of purgatory makes their kitchins to smoke, and This strange fire
must have a strange effect other fires can serve to dress, boil, etc.
provideth a portion for their fat bellies) yet they shall make a good booty on
earth; and thus, though these prayers and masses (like the Pagan Isa. 41.23.
Jer. 10.5. Concl. 2.
idols) can neither do good nor evil to the dead, yet they both profit and hurt
the living, the Priests lose not their labor, but the heirs and friends of the
defunct find the smart; they buy at a dear rate that which is of no value.

Concl. 2. We are not obliged, we are under no divine command to pray for
those, whom we know to have committed the sin against the holy Ghost: this is
that sin unto death, for which the Apostle will not command us to pray, 1 John
5.16. It is the blasphemy that God will never pardon, Mat. 12.31, 32. Its
impossible that they, who fall into this sin, can renew themselves again unto
repentance, Heb. 6.4, 6. God has determined (and revealed this his purpose)
never to show mercy unto them, nor give them grace to repent.

The popish Doctors from these Scriptures, especially from the first, would
collect their anti-scriptural distinction of mortal and venial si^s, whom
Calvin and Beza on the place do well confute: The Rhemists, by the sin unto
death there mentioned, will have us to understand the sin of final impenitence,
and those mortal sins whereof men never repent; and Nulla iniquitas ex proprio
genere est peccatum ad mortem, led aliunde habet quod sit ad morton, viz. ex
part peccantis, si ^ta affictus fit ad peccatum ut veli^^n co per severar:
u^que ad mortem, Cajetan. in 1. Joh. 5.16.
Cajetan his conjecture is not unlike to this* who thinks, that the Apostle
there, by the sin unto death, means, a purpose never to leave and forsake sin
until death. And Alf a Est aliquod peccatum quod uunquam ren ittitur, hoc
autem est duritia cordis qua homo renuit usque ad sine^n vitae remissionem
peccati per paenit entiam accipere. Alf. de Castro advers. haeres live. 12 sect.
peccatum baer. 6.
Castro does not dissent, while by the unpardonable sin, he understands the
hardness of heart whereby the sinner refuses to the end of his life to
receive pardon by repentance. And thus those authors deny (as Cajetan
confesses) that by the sin against the holy Ghost, is meant any special sin,
but only some extrinsecall aggravation of any sin, and thus every sin (if not
repented of) may become the blasphemy against the holy Ghost. It were
impertinent for us now to digress so far as to confute those men; and
particularly to enquire wherein this sin did consist, but we may suppose from
the clear testimony of Scripture, 1. that there is such a particular sin; 2.
that it is unpardonable.

O! bu^ (say Rhem. on 1 John 5.16.
the Rhemists) it is great blasphemy in the Calvinists to affirm, that there is
any sin which is this life cannot be pardoned, for the Church has often prayed
and been heard for heretics, Jews, Turks, Apostats, etc. and therefore all
sins whatsoever must be pardonable so long as the committers are in this world;
and (says Alf. Alf. a Castro loc cit.
a Castro) it was the heresy of the Haeresis Armenorum.
Armens to affirm that any sin in this life is unpardonable. Ans. Behold the
impudence of erroneous and blind folded men, who dar accuse orthodox Divines of
blasphemy for reaching what is expressly asserted in the Scriptures, and which
August deSerm dom in monte prope finem.
Augustine, their own Beda in 1 John 5.
Beda, and many eminent Divines being convinced by the clear testimony of the
word of God long before them professed, and maintained: and it were not worth
the while to confute a dream so directly contrary to the Scriptures of truth;
we do not deny that many grievous sins have been pardoned, and that Turks,
Pagans, (who are not capable of this sin) and heretics, have been converted,
but never any who committed this sin against the holy Ghost obtained pardon And
Richard. de Sancto Victore apud Alf. a Castro loc. cit.
Richardus de S. Victore, his distinction is vain and ridiculous, who will have
that sin to be called unpardonable not in respect of the remission, of the
fault, but in respect of the remission and relaxation of the punishment, so
that albeit he who I^a ut quamvis paenitentia facta, culpa remittatur oportet
tamen ut omnem paenam peccato debitamsolvat.
committed that sin by his repentance did obtain a pardon of the fault, yet he
behoved to undergo the punishment. Alf. a Castro having alleged Theophyl.
Mat. 12.
Theophylact also for this opinion does prefer it to Augustines, and joyneth
with these Authors. We will not stay to canvass this strange doctrine; only, in
a word, 1. Can the fault be pardoned and a punishment inflicted? after the
cause is removed, the effect must cease; 2. Is the punishment capable of
pardon? then all suffering must be sin; 3. Does not the Apostle expressly
affirm, that its impossible that such should repent? and it were as impossible
that they should be eternally punished, if they did repent: a damned penitent
is such a monster, as never was nor shall be. I do not say, that this blasphemy
is unpardonable, because it is greater then the mercy of God, or the worth and
merit of Christ's blood; as if God could not of his free mercy pardon it, or
Christ by his blood have purchased a pardon unto it: But because God has
determined never to show mercy, nor give repentance, and Christ will not
interceed for such a one as has fallen into that sin.

And the Lord having revealed his purpose not to pardon that sin, will lay no
bond on us to interceed for a pardon unto it; so highly does he value that
eminent exercise, and so tender is he of his Saints, and so careful to provide
an encouragment to them when they are thus employed, that he will not command
us to work, when he gives us no promise for our encouragment, and when we know
we shall not meet with success; and therefore, says the Apostle in the Lords
name, I do not say ye shall (or that there is an obligation lying upon you to)
pray for them, who have sinned unto death, 1 John 5.16. and yet he does not
forbid them to pray for such, as afterward shall appear.

Concl. 3. it were foolish and ridiculous, Concl. 3.
bold and presumptuous to Except according to the limitation to be added
afterward.
pray for reprobares, as such, and under that reduplication. That were, as if
we said, Lord alter thy purpose and decree, and become thou mutable and
changeable, like vain man.

Concl. 4. Yet, Concl. 4.
though we knew such and such persons to be reprobate, or to have committed
that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost; and to have, out of spite and
malice, opposed and set themselves against the known truth of God, we might
lawfully pray for them. We shall speak to these severally: but first, we will
give a general caveat concerning both those cases, that they are rather
speculative, then practical, the one does seldom, the other never occur. We
must not expect to meet with a revelation, concerning the reprobation of any
man; and as for the sin against the holy Ghost, Quum id peccatum magis intus
lateat quam foris se prodat, nihil aequa nobis caven^um que hoc unumn^ de
quoquam temerc hac in part juaicemus. Beza in 1. Joh. 5.16.
Beza his caution is very necessary, viz. That since that sin is hardly known
and discerned, we must not be rash in determining of any man, though most
wicked and profane, that he has committed this unpardonable sin, and upon that
account to think that we may cast him out of our prayers.

As to the first case concerning reprobates, it may be asked, whether we be
under any command to pray for them? supposing that the decree of reprobation
were revealed unto us, and whether or not, in our prayers for others, we should
add this proviso, If they belong to the election of God, and he not reprobates?
Ans. In these few particulars; 1. if the decree of reprobation were revealed to
us, it would appear, that we were no more obliged to pray for those, whom we
knew to be under that irrecoverable sentence, then for such, as we know to be
guilty of the blasphemy against the holy Ghost; the Lord does not call us to
work, when he withdraws all ground of encouragment: when we have no promise to
look to, it will be hard to espy a command; there is no command to seek Gods
face in vain, Isa. 45, 19. Its true, the decree of God, though revealed, is not
our rule, yet it may warrant me to leave off the performance of several duties,
to which, otherwise, I were obliged; as providence (which is the execution of
the decree) may cast some out of my prayers, by casting them into hell, so the
decree, when known, may be to me a ground to leave out, and for bear to mention
some in my prayers, whom, otherwise, I were obliged to remember. 2. As for
ordinary (the former case being extraordinary, and rare vel nunquam contingens)
as we know not what is Gods purpose concerning any man, so we must not look to
the decree, and by it limit the object of our prayers, but we must look to the
general command to pray for all men, and make it our rule, Since Nescientes
quis pertineat ad praedestinatorum numerum, quis non pertineat, sie affici
debemus charitatis affectu ut omnes velimus salvos fieri, Aug. de cor. and
gras. cap. 15.
we know not (as Angustine says) who does, or does not belong to the number of
those who are predestined unto life, we should be so affected toward all, as
that we should desire all to be saved, And thus our desires of their salvation
should be absolute, neither need we add that limitation and condition, which
some judicious Divines (and particularly the learned Dr. Au non homini
sanctissimo convenit palam protestari se (nisi Deus aliter statuisset)
percupere ut ipsis ignosceret de quibus tamen Deus aliter forsitan
constituerit, Twiss. vindic. part. 2. sect. 23. digres. 7. prope finem.
Twisse) do mention, viz. If it may stand with the decree of God, or if such
belong to the number of the Elect, etc. As we are obliged to love all our
neighbors without exception (and all men on earth, as Casuists determine, are
such) so to desire and pray for their good and happiness. And albeit the event
and success of our prayers depend upon the decree and appointment of God, yet
our praying and desiring must not depend upon that condition, but must be
regulated by the command, which is general and illimited, 1 Timothy 2.1. etc.
What! did not Christ on the cross pray for his persecutors, without any
limitation or discrimination, and weep and lament over Jerusalem? Yea, albeit;
1. he knew their rejection; yea and, 2. as God, he has appointed and decreed
it; which practice of Christ, as man, not to be contrary unto, or unbeseeming
his absolute and eternal decree, as he was God, that judicious Twis. loc. cit.
page 243.
Divine does evince against the cavils of Arnold Corvin.

Yet thirdly, I grant, that we may more confidently pray for others, when that
qualification is added, not by way of exclusion; but as a designation of the
subject, and by way of encouragment and motive to stir us up to the performance
of that duty, and to perform it with the greater confidence of success, then
if promiscuously we did pray for all, not knowing, who amongst them were elect,
who reprobate; as there are special bonds lying upon us to pray for, and every
way to promove the good of the Elect (and yet more especially of them, who
already are of the household of faith, Gal. 6.10.) so we may pray for such with
the greater confidence and assurance of success, for to such the absolute
promises do belong, and shall in due time be performed; and they are given to
Christ, and are the object of his prayer, Joh. 17.20. And if Christ join with
us, we need not fear least our prayers be rejected. And thus, I would interpret
those reverent practical Divines, who seem to limit their prayers to the Elect,
that they make mention of their election, not as if they would exclude all
others, who belong not thereunto, from their prayers, but to testify that
special obligation that lies upon them to pray for the Elect; albeit it cannot
be denied, that we may put up some particular petitions for the Elect; and thus
we may well add such a limitation, though we must not always and altogether
exclude others who are not of that numbee.

But, it may be asked whether we may follow that form of words, 1 Timothy 4.10. and
as the Lord there is said to be the Savior of all men, but especially of those
that believe; So we may pray for salvation to all men, adding, that we do seek
that especially to believers. Ans. 1. Albeit thus we do not formally pray for
reprobats, and under that reduplication; yet, this form of prayer seems to
border too near thereunto, and it has thus much in it, Lord, though such be
reprobats, I will pray for their salvation: and thus, as it were, in a
compounded sense, we pray for reprobats, and though not as they are reprobats
and under that reduplication; yet, although they be reprobats, we say thus,
that we do pray for them; were it not better to abstract from the decree, and
not mention it at all? 2. That form of words cannot be our pattern; because God
is there said to be the Savior of all men and of believers, respectu
diversorum objectorum; he is not, ad idem, the Savior of believers and
unbelievers; for, the one receives only an outward, bodily and temporal
protection, the other a spiritual and eternal salvation; while as the question
does suppose, that the object is the same, and that the difference is only as
to the manner, measure and degree; for, how can we be said to petition any
thing, rather and especially for some beyond others, unless we petition the
same thing both to the one and the other? But, 3. if the object were the same,
and no incapacity supposed or included into such a note of preference. I see no
inconveniency that can be objected from such a form of prayer: thus when we are
praying for temporal and outward benefits to a multitude, we may especially
seek these to the elect; thereby intimating either the further degree of our
affection toward them, and desiring good things to them, or that we desire a
greater measure of these things unto them then unto others.

These things being premised, we proceed to show, that notwithstanding we had a
revelation concerning the reprobation of some particular persons; yet, we might
lawfully pray for them; albeit that general command to pray for all men did not
oblige us: the promise (which is the main motive) being removed, and an
infallible intimation being made, that no success can be gotten thereby, it can
be no more used as a mean, and we will not find that any where it is enjoined
as a mere duty: and it is probable, that the sole ground why that command is
relaxed, as to those who have sinned against the holy Ghost, is, because there
Heb. 10.26, 27.
remains no more sacrifice to be offered for such, but a certain fearful
looking-for of judgment: and therefore, since there is no hope of success in
the one case more then in the other, the command seems to expire in this as
well as in that case: but yet, our obligation may arise from another ground, as
our special (yea, perhaps general) relations to such a person, which may, by
just consequence, bring us under the bond of another command, warranting the
performance of this duty. And thus, when we compare the general relaxation with
this special obligation, the result will be this, that when we look to the
decree of God, and consider, that our prayers will not prevail, we may forbear
to offer up such a vain (as to the good of such a person) oblation; and yet,
when we look upon the miserable state of such a person, especially if standing
under some near relation to him, we may pity him, and may pour our complaint
in his behalf to the Lord. I am not ignorant, that many do approve that ancient
saying or Si de aliquibus ita certa esset ecclesia ut qui sunt illi etiam
nosset qui, licet in hac vita sunt constituti, tamen praedestinati sunt in
aternu^ ignem ire cum diabolo, tam pro cis non oraret quam nec pro ipso,
August. de civit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 24.
Augustine, that if we knew who were reprobats, we should no more pray for them
then for the devils and damned in hell: which Lyra in 1 John 5.16.
Lyra applies to those who are guilty of the unpardonable sin against the holy
Ghost; but, we hope, before we close, the disparity between those who are yet
in the land of the living, and those who are judged and sent unto their place
shall be made manifest. And here we might allege the authority of a great
Divine, D. Twiss. vind. part. 2. dig. 7. ad. 23. and in Corvin. def. Armin.
animad. page 256.
Dr. Twisse, confirmed b^^y^w pregnant instances in our blessed Savior, who
prayed that the cup might pass from him; and wept and lamented over Jerusalem,
saying, O! that thou had known, in this thy day, the things that belong unto
thy peace; and yet, Christ knew that his Father had decreed that he should
drink that cup, and that Jerusalem should be destroyed.

And I would ask, if the Lord did intimat his decree of reprobation, and that
he would never show mercy to such a man, might not, and ought not such a one,
notwithstanding of that revealed decree, pray for mercy, and use the means
whereby he might escape the wrath of the Almighty? You will say, it may be
questioned if any man were obliged to look upon such a revelation as holding
out a peremptoty and irrevocable sentence, and not rather as a threatening,
implying a proviso and condition, and a virtual promise of mercy upon
repentance, since all the promises and threatenings of the word, though as to
the letter they appear to be most absolute and peremptory; yet, admit a
suitable condition, limitation and exception, Ezekiel. 33.13, 14, 15. Nay, but
standing to the supposition, (the Lord preserve us from such a sad and
desperate case) I think it can hardly be denied that such a one should use the
means; and who dare blame him if he should say, [Lord, thy decrees and
unsearchable counsels are a depth, I dare not bark against the heavens; but,
Lord, keep me from sinning against thee, and from blaspheming thy holy Name,
Lord give me grace to do my duty, and to submit unto thy holy will; Lord, do
thou unto me what thou will, but, Lord, keep me from sinning against thee.] And
thus he may pray and attend the Ordinances, resist temptations, etc. as if such
a sentence were not given out against him.

But, you will perhaps reply, can a reprobat do these things? Ans. The question
is not what he is able to do, but what is is his duty; and albeit that be not
the way to fulfill the revealed decree, but rather to escape that sad sentence;
yet, such a revelation does not make that course to become sinful and
unlawful; nor does it liberat him from any point of duty, to which (as a
rational creature, being yet on the way (he was obliged; Qua viator.
though his condition be hopeless, yet he is not removed from the means, nor
stated in, and brought to his place; and the decrees of God though made known
to us, are not (as has been shown, Art. 1.) the rule of our duty; especially
when they do not import the suturition of sin, but are conversant a bout the
state and final portion of sinners.

But it may be enquired, if such a one as he is obliged to use the means, so
may look after the end, and pray for life and salvation? Ans. Albeit submission
be the duty of sufferers, and there be no punishment due to sin, though never
so great, albeit the pains and torments of hell, that should cause sinners
murmur and blaspheme; yet the decree of God coucerning events not being our
rule, does not lay an obligation on us to conform our ways and desires
thereunto; as we may resist temptations to sin, though we with Peter had a
revelation concerning the futurition of it, so we may use the means to escape a
revealed judgment, and pray against that stroke: and what is it to desire and
use the means of grace? but upon the matter, and by just interpretation to seek
after, wish and desire Salvation, which is the 1 Pet. 1.9.
end: and it seems to be very unreasonable to imagine that we should labor,
endeavor and be diligent in using the means, and that yet we may not desire
and pray for a blessing upon them, that they may prove effectual, and be
subservient for obtaing the end: Augustins case mentioned, Sect, 1. Concerning
the wicked son complying with the decree in desiring his Fathers death, and the
godly son praying (though with submission) that his Father may recover and
using (albeit he had no hope) all lawful means for that end, may serve for
clearing our case; and who will condemn 2 Samuel 12.14, 16.
David his fasting and praying, that his child might recover, notwithstanding
the Prophet Nathan had revealed unto him that he should die, which message he
might have looked upon as a peremptory sentence, and not as a conditional
threatening.

Since then we are obliged to pray for our selves notwithstanding of whatsoever
decree, though known to us; why may we not also pray for others, whatever be
the decree of God concerning their everlasting estate? I grant there is some
difference, we being far more necessarily and indispensably bound to our great
master and Lord, then to our fellow servants; there is nothing can be imagined
so long as he gives us leave to work in his vineyard, and casts us not out,
that can liberat us from that duty we ow to him, the subordination being
essential, the bond and ty must be indissolvable; but love being the measure,
and as it were rule of our duty to men, when we know our labor will be in
vain, though we may in testimony of our love appear for them, yet we will
hardly find a ground whereupon to build an obligation thereunto; and therefore
a revealed decree, though it does not make our endeavors for the good of our
brethren unlawful, yet it may liberat us of that obligation under which
otherwise we did ly; it must always be our duty to pray for our selves, but to
pray for others only then when we can look upon our prayers as a mean for their
good.

You will say, if it be not our duty, then we must supererogat, and walk
without rule when we pray for these whom we know to be in a hopeless
condition. Ans. Albeit there arise no obligation from the general command to
pray for all, (which is the rule that falls under the present disquisition)
yet there may so much obligation arise from other grounds, as may warrant our
practice, and will have the force of a Law to him who is pressed to act upon such
a motive. Thus our Divines, disputing against the Popish supererogation, do
maintain, that what they call evangelical counsels, has the strength of a law,
when some special circumstances do concur, invite, yea and engage him, who
obsolutely and abstracting from such a state and condition is not obliged so to
act; thus says Davenant determine. 32. vitam ducere virginalem in genere res
consilii est non praecepti, atque sic videtis ca quaconfilia haud incommode
dicuntur, si operis speciem consideremus fieri tamen posse praecepta aliquando
si speciales circumstantias penfitemus.
Davenant, to live in perpetull virginity in the general is the matter of
counsel and not of precept, there being no general command obliging all to
continue in that state; yet Paul, having the gift of continency etc. found
himself obliged by the authority of God to continue in that condition; and as
to our case, if we would reflect upon the decree we may forbear to pray for
those whom we know to be cast-awayes, yet if we will abstract from that
sentence (which we are not obliged to reflect upon, though it be revealed to
us, the Lord not having made it our rule) and would consider them as our
brethren, there is no restraint lying upon us, why we may not put up a prayer
for them, yea, and by thus abstracting from the decree (which only gives to us
a supersedeas) it would appear, that we bring our selves under the obligation
of the general precept, pray for all men; and alth^ugh we would suppose that
command in the present case, viz. of a known decree still to be expired, yet
there may, as to some men, arise an obligation from their special relations
unto them. Though the Lord did reveal to Parents and Pastors, etc. that their
Children and people, etc. were reprobates, yet its hard to affirm, that they
might not pray for their salvation; not as if they might pray the Lord to alter
his decrees; but abstracting from these, though revealed to them, that they
might entreat that the object of that decree might be altered, and that their
dear relations might be taken out of a stare (not of reprobation, from which we
do suppose they do abstract, but out of a state) of sin and misery, and put
into a state of grace and happiness; and though some from thence might infer,
that they thus prayed the Lord to change his eternal purpose, yet as they
should abstract from the antecedent, so from such a consequence and consequent,
and absolutely pray for that to our near interests, which in it self, and to
them is good and desirable: Thus we should rather play the part of a
Metaphysician, then Logician. And that we may make such a kind of Theological
abstraction, seems to be certain, from what has been said, Art. 1. And the
former consequence is as valid in the case of Peter's avouching and adhereing to
his master, as in this case; for Peter's denial was revealed unto him: yea, the
same argument may as well be framed against Christ his praying, that the cup
might pass from him, while he knew that it was decreed that he should drink it.

Nay, though a prohibition were added to a revealed decree, yet it would appear
from the practice of eminent Saints, that our hands were not bound up; for
albeit the Lord had revealed to Samuel his purpose to reject Saul, 1 Samuel
15.11, 26. adding a prohibition upon the account that he was rejected, not to
pray any more for him, Chapter 16.1. yet it would appear, that this restraint was
rather a relaxation of the command, and a permission granted to Samuel not to
pray any more for Saul (though his King) then a peremptory prohibition; for
albeit Samuel came no more to see Saul till the day of his death, yet he left
not off to mourn, (and who can imagine then that he left off to pray?) for
Saul, Chapter 15, 35. So the Prophet Jeremiah, though he knew that the Lord had
purposed to cast that people out of his sight, and thereupon had received, as
would appear, a peremptory prohibition to pray no more for them, Chapter 7.14, 15,
16. yet forbeareth not to pray for them; though the Lord had told him that he
would not hear him, though he did cry, ver. 16. yet he would cry, until he met
with a second prohibition, having the former reason annexed to it, Chapter 11.14.
yea, he would not yet cease, so that the command is renewed the third time, Chapter
14.11.12, and notwithstanding of all these prohibitions, he still prays, as
it would appear from the rest of that prophecy, that he continued a supplicant
for Israel until the day of his death, the book of the Lamentations clearly
show. Thus also Moses continues to pray for a stubborn people, after the Lord
had said to him, Let me alone, Exodus 32.10. A prohibition seems to have more
in it then a revealed decree, and yet it did not bind; Moses, Samuel and
Jeremiah, would not be driven from the Throne, though by both these cords they
were pulled back, and yet I hope none will be so uncharitable, as to think that
these holy men did sin in so doing.

Now we come to the second part of the question, concerning the blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, which is in great part cleared by what has been
already said. Mr. Burgess ou Joh. 17. sermon. 41.
Burgess cites the opinion of some Ancient, who thought that the words, 1 John
5.16. did not hold out an absolute prohibition of all to pray for such; though
ordinary Christians might not interceed for those heinous transgressors, yet
eminent Saints (thought they) might do it; though every one in the Court may
not interceed for a vile malefactor, yet a special Favorite may interpose: And
this special privilege of eminent Christians to interceed for them, for whom
others need not appear, seems to be intimated, Jerem. 15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14.
Moses and Samuel, Noah, Daniel and Joh, though they would not have prevailed
for those there mentioned, yet in that they are there named, their moyen with
God is clearly employed; which gloss the learned Burgess does reject, thinking
the prohibition to be general; but we, because we conceive that there is held
forth there no peremptory prohibition; and though, Moses, Samuel, etc. might
prevail more with the Lord then others (which is the thing there intimated) yet
we know no petition they were allowed to put up for any, which others might not
as well present unto the Lord; all Christians of whatsoever size, having the
same rule, and being under the same commands.

Secondly, Others, as Lyra think, that though we may not pray for such as have
committed that sin, that they may escape eternal punishment, yet we may pray,
that in part they would leave off Nicholaus de Lyra in 1 John 5.16. non esset
pro eo orandum ut paenam aternam evaderet, posse tamen orari pro co ut minus
peccaret and per consequens ut minus puniretur in inferno.
to sin, that thus their eternal punishment may be the less: To which, may be
added a third conjecture more probable then any of the former two, that we may
pray for temporal good things to them, while they are here in the world, though
we may not pray for their eternal salvation, and that they may repent.

But the words being general, not to pray, they must either hold out a general
prohibition, or no prohibition at all, but a relaxation of the general command,
and a general permission to all not to pray for such; and if we do more
narrowly ponder the words, we will find that they hold out no prohibition; for
says the Apostle in that, 1 John 5.16. there is a sin unto death (...), I do
not say that he shall pray for it. As if it had been said, ye are lying under a
bond, ye are under the necessity of a command to pray for brethren, who have
not committed that unpardonable sin; but there is no command lying upon you to
pray for such as have thus sinned, neither can thou expect to be heard,
though thou did pray for such; the Apostle says not, ye shall not pray, the
note of negation does not exclude the performance of that heavenly exercise,
but it removes the command; and thus notwithstanding of what is there said, we
may out of zeal to the glory of God in the salvation of such a one, and because
of some particular relation to him, wish and pray for his salvation,
abstracting from the appointment of God, and his peremptory threatening never to
show mercy to such a one: It seems to be a cruel and monstrous thing, to lay
the hand on the mouth of a parent or child, of a pastor or master of family,
and to say they may not wish, desire and pray for the salvation of their
several relations, though their condition were never so hopeless and
desperate: How pathetically did Moses and Paul desire and pray, that Israel
might be saved, notwithstanding they knew that Gods decree did stand in the
way, and that many of them (as we may from several grounds collect, and from
Christ's Sermon, Mat. 12. from 25. and Chapter 23. from 13. etc. necessarily
conclude) were guilty of that blasphemy.

Then, 2. It is considerable, upon what ground the Apostle refuses to press
that command, pray for the brethren, in reference to those, who have sinned
unto death, viz. because his former motive, ver. 14, 15. which holds out a
promise of success and audience, has not place as to them; so that the
Apostle does not simply forbid to pray for such, but says he, I do not, I
cannot urge the performance of this duty toward such, uupon that ground which
may stir you up to pray for others, for whom, if ye ask, God will give; I do
not say, you should pray for them, not that ye may not pray for them, but
because ye cannot pray for them with confidence and hope of success, your
prayers can do them no good: Thus also the Lord does liberate Samuel from
praying for Saul, upon the same account, 1 Samuel 16.1.
How long (says the Lord) will thou mourn for him, seeing I have rejected him?
thy mourning is to no purpose, it will not profit him; and pray not (says the
Lord to Jer. 17.6.
Jeremiah) for that people, for I will not hear thee, all thy tears and prayers
will not withhold the determined judgment: so that such apparent prohibitions,
are rather peremptory denunciations of judgment against those people or
persons, then a restraint upon the Prophets and servants of God, as to the
performance of that duty, to which otherwise they were obliged; and they seem
to be almost parallel with, Jer. 15.1. and Ezekiel. 14.14. where Moses, Samuel,
Noah, Daniel and Job are not said to become guilty, if they had been living,
and had prayed for that people; but that though they had prayed, yet Gods mind
could not be toward that stubborn generation, and that notwithstanding of
their prayers, he would have cast them out of his sight: So that the Lord by
this form of speech, does not testify the dislike of the thing, for if it had
displeased him to pray for such, these holy men durst not have offered up any
desire to God for them, nor persevered in so doing, as Samuel and Jeremiah did;
but by this relaxation the Lord does warn his honest supplicants, that their
prayers would not be heard in behalf of such wretches; albeit the Lord would
accept of his Saints and their prayers, though poured out for cast-awayes, yet
he would not answer their requ^sts, nor show mercy to these for whom they did
pray; and yet their prayers should not be lost, but should (like David's fasting
for his malicious enemies, Ps. 35.13.) return into their own bosom.

And thus the Lord does not simply dissuade them to pray, but by an argument
taken, ab inuti^i, which if they would let pass, they might be doing, but they
could not blame him, if their labor wanted sucesse. Nay, such an app^rent
prohibition, is so far from laying a restraint upon the Saints, that if
thereupon they did forbear, they would provoke the Lord, and wrong themselves
and others. Thus, Genesis 32.26. the Lord says to Jacob, let me go, but he will
not till he get the blessing; and if he had yielded, we may suppose, he would
not then have gotten the blessing; so, Exodus 30.10. the Lord says to Moses,
let me alone: Nay, but replyeth Moses, I will stand in the breach, and will not
leave off to interceed for that people, though it has most grievously provoked
thee.

You will say, may we not pray against such as have committed that unpardonable
sin? Thus the Christians of old prayed against Julian the Apostate, if then we
may pray for such, it must be lawful to put up contradictory prayers. Ans.
Albeit too many (no doubt) have been guilty of that blasphemy, yet, since that
which is the main ingredient of it, viz. malice, rage and hatred of the known
truth, is a latent thing, and not obvious to the eye of our discretion, I never
read of any since the days of the Apostles, whom the Church of Christ durst
determine and peremptorily conclude to be guilty of that sin, except Theodor.
hist. lib. 4. cap. 9.17.19.
Julian the Apostat, for whom they left off to pray, and prayed against his
malice and rage, that the Lord would prevent that mischief he intended against
Christians, and would remove such a stumbling block out of the way of the
Gospel; but they did not pray for Julians condemnation, nor had they any
warrant to pray for that.

Again, you will object and ask, what difference there is between one lying
under that peremptory sentence, and him upon whom it is already executed? May
we not as well pray for them that are in hell, as for those we know to have
sinned unto death? Ans. Because we conceive this to be the main objection, we
will now speak to it at some length. And, first, if we abstract from a
revelation (which cannot now be expected) and spe^k of those who have
grievously backslidden, as we would remember Beza his caveat, and beware lest
we too rashly judge of any man that he has committed that unpardonable sin; So
this may be warrant enough for us to pray for any man, though never so gu lty,
and lying under many sad threatenings, that there is no sentence and threatening
though never so peremptory, but it admits a limitation and proviso, When I
say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, (would not this appear to be a most
peremptory and irrevocable sentence? and yet, hearken to what follows) if he
turn from his sin he shall surely live, he shall not die, Ezekiel. 33.14, 16. It
is true, 1. these who are guilty of the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall
never find grace to turn and repent, and lay hold on Christ, and so shall never
be pardoned; yet, if they did turn they should find mercy and live. And then,
2. albeit there be no particular sin that is unpardonable, except that
blasphemy; yet, the most part of sins and sinners shall never be pardoned, and
therefore our prayers can do them no good: and thus, unless we limit our
prayers to the Elect, and add this condition when we pray for others, if they
belong to the election of God, we must pray for them whom our prayers will not
profit. Secondly, and especially, we answer, Albeit these who are guilty of
that unpardonable sin be under an irrevocable sentence, and though we (as is
supposed) know their condition to be desperate; yet, we must carry our selves
far otherwise toward them, then toward those who are in hell, and as upon a
civil consideration we owe them, if our Superiors, Magistrates, Parents,
Masters, etc. honor and obedience; So also, upon a sp ritual account, there be
several duties which we may perform toward and with them, while they are
Viators and on the way, which we may not perform with or for them, after they
are cast into hell; for, so long as they live in this world, they are under the
Nunc enim propterea orat Ecclesia pro iis quos in genere humano habet inimices
quia tempus est paenitentiae fructuosae, Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 24.
means, (though these shall do them no good) their day is not yet come to an
end; and though they were excommunicated, and thus in part shut from public
ordinances, they are not as yet actually stated into an unalterable condition;
and therefore they may well be an object of prayer, pity and Christian
compassion; though the malefactor be sentenced and condemned, yet, we may deal
with the King for a pardon. O! but when the sentence is once executed there is
no remedy; after the repobats are cast into hell, and come to their everlasting
home; after their day is spent and they removed from the ordinances and means
of grace, to what purpose should we pray for them? after the ship is broken,
sails, cables and anchors will not profit; if life be gone, no medecin can do
any good; when the night has surprised them, so that they can no more work for
themselves, we must not imagine that we can help them with our hands.

But, some may yet reply, we cannot in faith pray for such as we know to be
reprobats, or to have committed that unpardonable sin; we cannot have the least
hope or expectation of success, and dare we pray and not in faith? and such a
prayer must be performed as a mere task, and (if I might call that which we
grant is not commanded) a duty. It cannot not be a mean for good to them, and
why may we not thus pray for those that are in hell? Ans. Certainly, we should
not ask what we may not ask in faith: only the prayer of faith is an acceptable
sacrifice; but the faith that is required in prayer has not always one and
the same object, as shall more fully be shown, Part 2. Chapter 2. And if we know
that God will accept of such prayers as a testimony of our love and commpassion
toward our neighb urs, and of our zeal to his glory in their conversion, then
we may know our labor shall not be lost: what though they for whom we pray
reap no benefit thereby; The Popish dream of Falconilla and Tr^j^ns deliverance
out of bell by the prayers of Theela and Gregory, is fabulous and ridiculous.
As also that of Augustine, (though an eminent Ancient) Neque enim de quibusdam
veraciter d^ceretur, quod non eis r^mitratur, neque in hoc seculo, neque in
futur (Mat. 12.23) nisi ^ssent quibus etsi non in isto tamen remitteretur in
futuro, Aug. de civit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 24.
yet, if our prayers (as David's for his enemies) return into our own bosom
with a message of peace; we have no cause to complain, as if we had sought the
Lord in vain: what God accepts, as service done to him, that he will reward.
But, 2. though in the supposed case we cannot pray confidently, as to the
success that will redound to them for whom we pray; yet, even thus we may pray
affectionatly and compassionatly: but those who are in hell are not such an
object of Christ^an-pity and compassion; although we may have some fl^shes of
natural sorrow and pity toward them, and some kind of desire of their delivery
and salvation; yet, we may not go to God and offer it up prayer ways to him;
we have no warrant to do so, nor any practice or example of any of the Saints
who did so: the^r day is spent, the door is shut and the sentence executed;
they are removed from the means and may not use them themselves, and it were
too great boldness in any other to use them for them, and thus bring them under
the means whom God has excluded from them: but, so long as the Lord lengthneth
out the day of life, and forbears the ex cution of the sentence, the man is not
altogether exclud^d from the means; and why may we not then put up a prayer for
him, abstracting from the decree of God, which (though known to us) is not our
rule? after death, the judgment, Heb. 9.27. but, till then, thy hands are not
bound up: So long as men fall under the object of the command of love, (which
does not expire so long as they are our neighbors and in the land of the
living) thou may perform this, as well as any other office of love toward
them.

But, that we may put a close to this enquiry, (which though it be rather
speculative then practical, as to the proposed cases, which seldom or never
occur; yet, may be very useful for clearing what is to be said in the
following Conclusion, which concerns our daity and ordinary practice) we
will, 1. in a word, resume those instances which may be a foundation to the
present resolution, which at the first view may seem somewhat strange to those
who have not hither to pondered the case. 2. We will offer two or three
distinctions for removing difficulties and objections.

For the first, let us seriously ponder and consider Christ his prayer, that
the cup might pass from him: David his prayer for his child, after the Prophet
had told him that he should die; Samuels prayer for Saul, notwithstanding he
knew the Lord had rejected him; Jeremiah, his prayer for Israel, albeit the
Lord had once and again fobidden him to pray for them; Paul, his prayer for his
brethren and kinsmen, notwithstanding he knew they were rejected and reprobat,
and that many of them (as not improbably may be supposed) were guilty of that
unpardonable sin. And then let us compare Paul's An impossible wish conceived by
the Apostle, to witness, 1. his charity toward his brethren; and 2. his zeal
of Gods glory, to be illustrated in the salvation of a whole Nation, Diod on
Romans 9.3.
wish with Moses his desire and prayer, which were not only concerning things
impossible and contrary to the known purpose of God; but also concerning, 1.
the worst of evils. 2. To themselves, (which are two considerable circumstances
for clearing the present case) viz. to be Rom 9.3.
accursed from Christ, and Exodus 32.32.
blotted out of Gods book: if it be lawful to wish evil, shall it not be
lawful to wish what is good? and if we may wish evil to our selves, (which
seems more hard then to wish it to others) may we not wish good things to our
neighbors? if we may desire (whatever be the nature of that desire, whether
absolute or conditional) our own damnation, Atqui hoc esse norat impossible
and Dei proposito adversum; ideo votum conditionale est -- nec ideo frustra,
quia etsi norat fieri non posse, tamen sic vehementiam affectus sui testatam
fecit-Sic and Mosis votum accipi debet, D. Paraeus in Romans 9. dub. 1.
contrary unto the known decree of God, may we not far rather desire and pray
for the salvation of others? Here is much more then parity of reason, and we
may well argue from the greater to the lesser, none (I think) will be so rash
as to Absit ut hoc sentiamus: neque enim temere hoc ve tum effutivit, sed
deliberato consilio scripsit dictante Spiritu Sancto. Ait enim se non mentiri
sed veritatem dicere in Christo attestante sibi conscientia sua in Sp. S. D.
Par.. ibid.
condemn that hight of zeal in those eminent Saints; neither should any man be
offended while we plead for such holy, innocent, submissive, silent,
conditional and affectionat desires of the salvation of our neighbors,
whatever be their guiltiness, or God's eternal purpose toward them.

As to the second, let us view these instances; and perpend what kind of
desires and prayers they hold forth, that we make these our copy; especially
the prayer of Christ, Moses and Paul, as coming nearest to our case: and from
these, we may collect these three qualifications of such prayers as we now
plead for. 1. In Christ his prayer, Mat. 26, 39. we may observe his submission
to the good pleasure and appointment of God; for, says he, nevertheless (or,
albeit the thing absolutely considered be good and desirable, yet) not as I
will, but as thou will. 2. Christ prayed conditionally, for the removal of that
cup, viz. if it were possible, that is, if it might stand with the good
pleasure of God concerning the salvation of lost man. 3. From Moses his prayer,
Exodus 32.32. and by comparing Paul his wish, Romans 9.3. with his prayer, Romans
10.1. we may collect that such prayers are rather wishes then formal petitions,
rather conditional wouldings (that I may so speak) and velleities, then
absolute desires; and thereby these holy men rather express what they would
(...), optarim, may well be rendered, I would wish, viz if it were possible,
vide lector number accipi possit, ( says Erasmus in lo^) (...), pro optarim si
fieri poss^t.
pray for, if possibly it could be granted, then what they did absolutely pray
for: and such prayers do contain a submissive and silent compassionating of
these misers, but not a premptory request or murmuring complaint of God's
justice and severity against them. Such prayers then, as we now plead for, must
be, 1. submissive. 2. Conditional: And, 3. by way of wishing and woulding, viz.
if the thing were not impossible; and that, 1. in Tanti erat apud illum Dei
gloria and charitas in suos, etc. Beza in Romans 9.3.
testimony of our zeal to the glory of God in the conversion and salvation of
these abjects, (abstracting from Gods decree which is not our rule.) 2. In
testimony of our affection, sympathy and tenderness toward our brethren and
neighbors.

Only let us add a caution concerning these three qualifications, that the two
first have especially place when we abstract from the decree, though known, and
the third and last while we reflect on the decree, and thus, as it were,
formally, and in sensu composito, pray for the reprobate. And hence the
difference is manifest between such prayers and the prayers put up for others,
for whom we may ask more confidently and peremptorily, and without those
limitations and proviso's.

You will say, but why should we love them whom the Lord hates? Ans. Ask at
Paul, Jeremiah, Samuel and others, and what will serve for their vindication,
may be a sufficient plea for us. My hearts desire (says Paul, Romans 10.1.) and
prayer to God for Israel, is that they might be saved, and yet the main scope
of that, as also of the preceding and following Chapter, is to show the
reprobation and rejection of that people, and to vindicate Gods sovereignty,
justice, holiness, and the immutability of his purpose. And for a more direct
answer, 2. we say, that the command to love our neighbors does not expire, so
long as they are our neighbors and in the land of the living; only, let us
love them in the Lord, though they hate him, and be hated of him, yet we may
love them in, and for him, if our motives be spiritual, such as respect to his
command and zeal to his glory, we need not fear least he challenge us for
loving them he had rejected.

Let us hear what the learned judicious and Mr. Ferventiores isti affectus ut
precipitanter feruntur, ita nihil aliud intuentur aut (...) considerant quam id
quo tendunt; itaque non conjung ebat clectionem Dei cum vot^ suo Paulus; sed
praeterita ejus memoria, totus in Judaeorum salutem intentus erat -- quod si
ergo in Deo, non extra Deum diligomus, nunquam erit nimius nos^er amor. Calvin
in Romans 9.3. porre quod tantopere Paulum cruciavit Judaeorum exitium, quod Deo
volente atque ita disponente accidisse noverat? hinc docemur non impedire
obedientiam quam Dei providentiae deferimus, quin ad perditorum hominum ruinam
ingemis^amus, cui tamen sciamus justo Dei judicio destinatos: potest enim idem
animus duplicem hvnc affectum recipere; ut quum in Deum respicit, libenter
perire sustineat quos perdere ille de^revit, quum ad homines cogitationem
reflexit, eorum malis condolescat, long ergo falluntiur qui (...) in hominibus
piis requirunt, ne Dei ordinationi repugnent. Calu. ibid in ver. 2. videmus
igitur Christianam sidem non inducere (...) vel Stoicismum D. Paraeus in Romans
9.2.
Calvin says for removing this objection, and for clearing the whole question.
We need not (says he) fear least we love our neighbors too much, so long as
we love them in the Lord; it is a gross error to think, that Christians should
become Stoics, and cast away all bowels of tenderness, for fear lest they
should repugn and oppose the decree and appointment of God, for our obedience
we ow to God, and submission to his purpose and providence, does not hinder us
to mourn and lament the ruin and misery of the reprobat, whom we know in the
just judgment of God to be appointed to destruction; for these two affections
may well consist, when we look to God in silence to submit to their just
punishment, and when we look on men to bewail their case and deplorable
condition.

Concl. 5. If we abstract from these extraordinary cases, ( viz. of a revealed
decree concerning the reprobation of some particular persons, and the certain
knowledge that this or that person, has committed the unpardonable sin against
the holy Ghost) we may universally affirm that we are obliged to pray for all
men, though never so wicked and profane, according to the exhortation, 1
Timoth. 2.1. I know there are not a few judicious Divines who think that the
Apostle here does not exhort to pray universally for all and every one, pro
singulis generum, but for all indesinitly, for men of all ranks and degrees pro
generibus singulorum; not for every individual man, but for every rank of men,
for rich poor, noble, ignoble, Jew, Gentile, etc. and they add this limitation,
because Arminians from that place compared with v. 6. do draw an argument for
universal redemption. But we may not now meddle with that controversy, nor need
we for clearing these words, which abso lutely considered speak of no such
matter: and we think that any who will impartially look upon them will think
that Mr. Calvin had reason to say, that the Apostle in these words Jubet
orationes, non pro fidelibus modo concipi, sed prouniverso genere humano --
jubet precibus complecti omnes mortales. Calvin. 1 Timoth. 2.1.
commands that prayers be made for all mankind, and the reasons alleged in the
preceding conclusions do more strongly and forcibly conclude and prove this.

But before we now argue and propound some special grounds for confirming this
point, let us view two subtle distinctions of two reverend Divines viz. Dr.
Ames and Volf. Musculus. for the, 1. Dr. Ames. cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Ames, having asserted that we should pray for some things to all and every one
who is in the land of the living, because the goodness of God extends to all
men, 1 Timoth. 4.10. when he comes to speak of salvation and happiness, he
propounds a distinction, denying that we may pray, that all and every one
collectively should be saved, because (says he) we know from the Scriptures
that all shall not be saved, and yet (says he) we may pray for every one
severally, pro singulis speciatim; because in charity we are obliged to hope
the best of every particular man.

There be several reasons we might bring against this distinction, and, 1. I
would ask, if all collectively does include any one person beside every one
severally? hence we might argue thus, if we may not pray for all collectively,
there must be some one or more for whom we may not pray severally: But that is
contrary to his concession in the other branch of the distinction; what
guiltiness can there be imagined in praying jointly for all those, for whom we
pray severally?

2. This distinction supposes the decree of God to be our rule; contrary to
what has been said, Sect, 1. and the Authors own Medul. lib. cap. 7. Bell.
enerv. Tom. 4. lib. 2. cap. 2. contra Gre^inch. de prades. tin. cap. 5. etc.
hypotheses. And if it were our rule we might not pray for every one severally,
but only for the elect.

3. As, 1. our charity and hoping well of men, (which he makes the ground of
the last part of this distinction) must no more be our rule, then the decree of
God; (for we must pray not only for them of whom we hope well, but to whom we
are obliged to wish and desire good things; whether we have any ground of hope
(as to them) or not) So, 2. our charity will be too large, if we extend it to
every one without exception; we may not indeed pass a sentence concerning the
final state of any man, though never so wicked; yet there be too many of whom
we have no ground to hope well. And 3, if we might hope well of every one, why
not of all? if of this and that Pagan, and profane man, why not of all? 4. We
will find the Apostles wish grace unto, and pray for whole Churches and
incorporations, though they did not think that all and every one amongst these
multituds should be saved, yea though they had ground to fear the worst of many
of them, as we may see, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. and 5.1. and 6.8. and 11.21, 30. Gal.
3.1. etc.

But Musc. on Joh. 17.9.
Musculus his distinction is more subtle, while he affirms that we may not
(as Christ would not, Joh. 17.9.) pray for the world, though we should pray for
all mortals and for all and every one in the world. We will not exagitar these
terms, and enquire what the world (as to the present case can import beside all
men and women in the world? or all mortals, (as he speaks) neither will we
exaggerat what is brought by that reverend Divine by way of Nec Christus pro
mundo 1. e. filiis lujus seculi oravit, nec Apostolus petit ut pro mundo
or^mus: aliud est simpliciter pro omnibus hominibus -- aliud promundo orare,
sicut aliud est omnes mortales diligere and aliud diligere mundum; nos
ignoramus quinam alli sint etc
explication; but the meaning (as I conjecture) is this, that we may speak of
the reprobat world either Which he expr^sseth by the world
formally as such, and as it is hated and rejected of God, and under that
consideration and reduplication they are neither an object of our love nor
prayers; or we may speak of the reprobat And thus he calls them all men in
the world or all mor^a^ls.
materially, that is of these who are wicked, abstracting from the decree of
reprobation, and looking on them as men of one common stock, and having the
same nature with us, as they are our brethren, neighbors etc. and thus we are
obliged to love and pray for all men: and this distinction being thus
understood, (and I know no other sense that can be given to it) agrees (as to
the first member) with what we said Concl. 2. and as to the Second branch, with
this present conclusion.

Now we come to propound some arguments for confirming the point, 1. If we may
pray for ab^min^ble Nero's, and such as were in authority when the Apostle wrote
that first Epistle to Timothy, I would know the man for whom we may not pray?
but the Apostle exhorts us to pray for Nero, and sworn enemies of Christ who
then did govern, quot quot enim erant illo tempore (says Calvin in 1 Timothy 2 1.
Calvin) Magistratus, totidem erant quasi jurati Christi hosts; and the
learned Beza though he interpret the particle all, 1. v. indefinitly, yet when
he comes to the 2. verse he grants as much as we plead: for, the church Qu^t
erant eo temporemagistratus tot e^ant ecclesiae hosts; and pen^^ Romanos
infideles erat summa rerum -- Jubet autem Paulus nominatim illos in precibus
comprehendi: sed quid s^ tum Julianus Apostata imperasset? nempe hic unus erat
ex little numero pro quibus precandum non erat. Beza. in 1 Timoth. 2.2.
(says he) then had as many enemies at there were rulers and magistrates, for
the sword was in the hands of Pagan Romans, and yet Paul commands that they be
named in our prayers: and he asks, what if Julian the Apostat had then been
Emperor? And answers, that this one man would then have been excepted. That
monster of men, Nero, and his wicked counselors and parasites must be prayed
for, and only such as have committed the unpardonable sin against the holy
Ghost (of whom we spak, Concl. 4.) may be excluded from our prayers.

Hence, 2. From this concession we would argue, if we must pray for all
Magistrates, and thus for all individuals of one rank? why not also for all of
every other rank, and thus universally for all mankind? Whatsoever ground can
be pretended for not praying for all individuals of other ranks and degrees of
men, has as well here place (and therefore since they are not concludent in
this, neither are they in any other case) for as we cannot think that all the
world will be saved, so neither that all Magistrates will be saved; not many
wise men, not many mighty, not many noble are chosen, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. they are
exposed to greater temptations then others: and it is no small mercy to have
the feet kept from burning while we Prove. 6.28.
walk upon hot coals, etc. But Beza confesses, and the text it self, in
terminis, says that we should pray for all in authority; and, 1. It were
ridiculous here to run to the distinction of ranks and persons, because here
the rank is specified, and all in it named; 2. This is not only asserted, but
proven, and a reason that extends to all Magistrates annexed, viz. that under
them, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
Ergo.

3. We must pray for all, to whom the Lord peradventure will show mercy; but
(for ought we know) the Lord may show mercy, and give repentance unto the most
vile and wicked men on earth; unto a Manasseh, unto a Paul, etc. unto bloody
and cruel perse cutors, unto these that are in the snare of the devil, and are
taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timoth. 2.25, 26.

You will say, we know the Lord will not show mercy to all men; only a few are
chosen and shall be saved, Mat. 20.16. Luke 13.23, 24. etc. Ans. 1. We know
from the Word of God, that the number of the Elect is small, and that few shall
be saved comparatively, and in respect of them who shall eternally perish. 2.
By experience, and judging by the rules and characters held forth in the
Scriptures, we may know, that few in every age have been saved. Yet, 3. We know
not (whatever may be our fears) that the Lord will not show mercy to this
present generation, that now the Lord will not fulfill that promse ( Ps. 2.8.)
to give to Christ the heathen for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for a possession, that now in their last days, the Lord will not
accomplish that word, Isa. 2.2, 3. Micah. 4.1, 2. and establish the mountain of
his house in the top of the mountains, and exalt it above the hills, and make
all nations flow unto it; who knows when that word, Isa. 11.9. shall be made
good? The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the Sea, etc. If all nations may embrace and profess the Gospel (and many
Divines from several prophesies of the Scripture labor to prove, that thus it
shall be, and none can deny that it may be) then I would ask why we may not
pray for this blessing unto them? that all the earth may hear the joyful
sound, and welcome the glad tidings of salvation; and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. and from that Text, we may further argue thus, That
which we should propose as our end in teaching, exhorting, etc. may be a fit
object of our petitions, but the recovery of sinners is the end of the
ministry, of exhortation, doctrine, etc. and therefore we may and ought pray,
that our Ministry may have this blessed effect. The distinction of finis
operis, and finis operantis, has not place here; for the work and worker, must
here have one and the same end; whatever be the high and holy design of the
first and sovereign agent.

You will say, we are not Apostles, upon whom the 2 Cor. 11.28.
care of all the Churches and of all mankind should lie. Ans. 1. What the
Apostles might pray for, that every Minister, yea, every member of Christ may
pray for: albeit all have not a ministerial care, yet all should have a
fraternal and brotherly care for all and every one; 2. A Minister (as some
judicious Divines of late (specially Mr. Mr. Hudson, vind. of the ess. and
unity, etc. chapter 6. sect. 5. page 137. etc. O! if that point were more seriously
pondered by the Ministers of Christ, how that thus in some respect, and by
virtue of their office the care of all the Churches lies upon them; how
affectionatly would they desire? and with what fervency would they pray for
their welfare, to whom they could not preach? etc.
Hudson) have asserted and maintained against Independents) by virtue of
Christ's institution, and by his ordination to the office of the Ministry, is
made a Minister of, and receives that office habitually, and in actu primo, in
relation to the whole visible Church, so that he may, and ought exercise that
function in relation to any part, as the good of the whole does require, and as
he has a particular and orderly call: So that his fixing to this or that
particular congregation (albeit it tie him to a constant and ordinary exercise
of his office amongst that people, yet it) does not limit the office it self,
which by his potestative mission, according to Christ's institution, he has
received in relation to the Catholic Church indefinitly and universally. And
thus he may exercise not only his gifts, but also his pastoral office, and
preach the Gospel in any place indefinitly, wherever he meets with a call;
and should universally pray for all, to whatsoever particular place he be
fixed, as to the exercise of the more special parts of his Ministry: And
albeit prayer be a common and general duty lying upon the people as well as the
Pastors, yet it is a pastoral duty, and that not the least, and as a Minister
of Christ, he prays not only for his particular flock, but also for the whole
Church. But, 3. The ground alleged by those, who differ from us in this
particular, does as well militat against a Pastors praying for his own
congregation (if there be any ignorant or scandalous persons there) as against
his praying for all members of the visible Church; yea, and for all mortals:
for, who is the man that has ground to hope that all his flock shall be saved?

But it is replied by Dr. Ames loc. cit. Mr. Gee treat of prayer, page 109.
some Divines, Though God be Luke 6.35.
kind to the evil and unthankful, and Mat. 5.45.
makes his Sun to rise on good and bad, and thus we may pray for common
mercies to all; yet God will not bestow special and spiritual mercies to all:
and therefore we may not pray for their conversion and salvation. Ans. 1. The
decree of God, his purpose either to give or not to give, is not (as has been
shown) our rule. 2. That Conscience must be too scrupulous (to say no more,
because of that reverence we ow to them with whom we have now to do) which dare
not wish and desire, which dare not pray and say, [Lord, let all the world
taste of thy goodness, let them glorify thy name, and obtain Ex p^rte boni
quod amico optamus omnes homines aeque diligimus ex charitate, quia omnibus
optamus bonum idem in genere sc. beatitudinem aeternam, Thom. 2.2. quaest. 26.
art. 6. ad. 1.
salvation through Christ; let all the earth be filled with the saving
knowledge of God, let them kiss the Son that they perish not in his anger, let
them turn from their evil ways and follow that which is good, etc.] 3. It may
be questioned, whether to pray for common mercies for those, for whom we may
not pray for grace to use them aright, be not to pray for a snare to them;
since common mercies to graceless souls are but as so many Prove. 25* 22.
coals of fire heaped upon their head, to aggravate their guiltiness and
increase their misery, 4. These whom we are obliged to acknowledge for our
neighbors, yea, and brethren, them we should love, and by all means procure
their good, especially their spiritual and eternal good, in which the glory of
God is so nearly concerned; and therefore, since prayer is a principal mean
which we may use for the good of all whom we can no otherwise profit, we must
not leave that mean un-essayed: but all men on earth are Proximus aliquo modo
est omnis homo, cui aliqua ratione possi^mus commodare, Ames. Ca^* consc. lib.
5. cap. 7. honor extendi debet ad omnem proximum, i. e. ad omnem hominem,
Sciagraph. ^at. Chr. Domin. 39. vid. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 25.26.
neighbors, and every one according to his ability, and as opportunity does
offer, should perform the duties that flow from such a relation, Luk
10.27.33.36. etc. All men are brethren and of one blood, Act* 17.26. Mal. 2.10.
Genesis 19.7. Ah! should we love our neighbors as our selves? and may we not pray
for them when we pray for our selves? and shall Conscience and Religion be
pretended as a Plea for Nam si ab uno homine quem Deus finxit omnes sumus
oriundi certe consanguinei sumus -- summum inter se hominum vinculum est
humanitas, quod qui diruperit is nefarius and parricida existimandus. -- Quod
si ab uno Deo inspirati omnes and animati sumus, quid aliud quam fratres sumus?
etc. Reusn. symb. Imper. part. 3. symb. 12. Othonis 1. Amicitia non angustis
sintbus terminanda est; omnes enim quibus amor and dilectio debetur,
amplectitur -- pervenit au^em usque ad inimicos pro quibus etiam orare
praecipimur; ita nemo est in genere humano cut non dilectio^, etsi non pro
mutua charitate, pro ipsa tamen communis naturae societate debeatur, August.
ad. Preb. epist. 121. cap. 8 At pater ut gnati sic nos debemus amicis si quod
sit vitium non fastidire, Horat. 1. Sermon. 3.
brethren not to interpose with the provoked Father for his favor? and that
there may be a reconciliation, that he would reclaim and show mercy unto those
prodigals, who have nothing but husks to feed upon? Hence,

We may further argue thus, if we should love our brethren and neighbors, (and
all men are such) then we should wish and desire their good both temporal and
eternal; and from whom can we desire it but from him who only can kill and make
alive, who only can save and destroy, and who shows mercy on whom he will?
And what is it to desire the Lord to do them good, but to pray for their good;
prayer being nothing else but an offering up of our desires to God,(...) (says
the Arist. 2. Rhetor. cap. 4.
Philosopher) (...), to love is to desire those things that are good to any
man, not for any benefit may thereby redound to us, but that they may profit
him: and can thou say, that thou love thy brethren, while thou do not
desire their good, while thou do not desire it from God who only can give?
What? though they did hate and persecute thee, yet thou must love them: albeit
not (as Augustine speaks) for that mutual love they bear to thee, yet for
their partaking of the same nature with thee, and because of the authority of
God, who has commanded thee to love thy neighbor as thy self. Let Jeremiahs
practice be thy copy; though they recompense evil for good, though they dig a
pit for thy soul; yet, do not thou leave off to stand before the Lord to speak
good for them, Jer. 18.20. remember Christ's prayer, Luke 23.34. and Stephens,
Act. 7.60. Albeit as to the measure and degree of love there may be some
variety; yet, in respect of the object, we must (as Thom. loc. cit. scil 2.2.
quaest. 26. art. 6. ad 1.
Aquinas says) love all men alike; and wish to all the same good things. Am I
my Genesis 4.9.
brothers keeper? were the words of a wretched Cain; [although we had no
command, yet, nature bids us (says Dr. Quantumvis non accederet expressum
custodiae mandatum, na^^ra omnes jubet mutuo esse custodes ac defens^res
salutis nostrae and alienae. D. Paraeus in loc.
Paraeus) keep and procure our own and other men's salvation.]

We might here make use of Si autem diligerent non dicerent quid nobis and
tibi? August. ad Sixth. Romans Presb. epist. 105.
Augustine his argument, whereby he proves, that the devils did not love
Christ, If (says he) they had loved him, they would not have said to him, what
Luke 4.34.
have we to do with thee? and if, according to the Jam. 2.8.
royal Law, we loved our neighbors as our selves, would we say, what are we
concerned in our neighbors salvation? and why should we mention them in our
prayers?

5. If once we begin to limit this Assertion, we will not be able to rid our
feet, and assign the bounds where we must stand. You will say, we may pray for
all ranks of men. Repl. But the question is, for whom in these ranks, and why
for such, and not for others? You will say, we may pray for all the Elect.
Repl. But I would know, 1. by what rule we can judge who are Elect, who not? 2.
where they learned that limitation, and where did they read in the Word, that
Gods decree is our rule? And, 3. if Pastors, Parents, Subjects, etc. should not
pray for their relations, unless they belong to the election of God? 4. Where
do we find such a limitation added in the prayers of the Saints, If such and
such men be among the number of the Elect? I would ask, whether such a
limitation would not beget a jealousy in the hearers, and would not rather
irritate those for whom we thus prayed (if they were present or heard of it)
then do them good?

Yea, 6. If this limitation must be added while we pray for some, then it must
be added when we pray for any, though never so eminent, as to their carriage
and profession; for, I think none will presume to tell us, who are Elect, who
not. You will yet say, its enough we know not that they are reprobates. Ans. 1.
Thus they come up the length of this present couclusion, and lead us to an
extraordinary case, viz. of a revealed decree, to which we have already spoken.
And then, 2. Who dare say, that he is assured of the reprobation of any man? If
again it be replied, that we must not pray for the incorrigible enemies of
Christ. Ans. 1. But how shall we know who are incorrigible, who not? If the 1 Timothy 1.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, 17. Prayer is the best tribute we can give to
our Kings and Rulers.
Apostles did exhort to submit unto, and pray for vile Nero, and these cruel
and malicious persecutors, who then did bear the sword, who are these enemies
for whom we should not pray? who can be judged to be more incorrigible then
they? And then, 2. Are not all the reprobate incorrigible? and therefore, if
upon this account, we may not pray for enemies, neither must we pray for any
reprobate. But, 3. We would here remember the caution mentioned, Concl. 2.
concerning reprobation, viz. That as we should not pray for reprobates as such,
so neither for Christ's incorrigible enemies formally as such, and standing
under such a consideration (which upon the matter, and as to the present case,
is one and the same with that of reprobation) but abstracting from the decree
(which is antecedent) and the event (that is subsequent, viz. their continuing
in their wicked courses) we must absolutely ask, that which is good in it self,
and good for them, and which would make for the glory of Gods pardoning mercy,
and the increase of Christ's kingdom.

But if it be asked, whether we pray for such as enemies of Christ, though not
as incorrigible? Ans. If the particle As, do import the formal reason and
ground wherefore we pray for such, we deny that we pray for such as enemies to
Christ, but rather as men, brethren, neighbors, etc. and because of the
command of God, and that God by their conversion may be glorified, etc. But if
the particle As, does only signify the object of consideration, upon which we
must reflect in our prayers, then we must pray for them as such; we must
consider their wickedness, malice, etc. else how could we pray that it should
be pardoned? that they may repent of it and turn from it, and thus we may be
said to pray for Papists, Jews, Turks, etc. as such: not that they should
continue, and that God would bless them in those courses, but that he would
give them grace to forsake and abandon their sinful ways and courses.

Obj. 1. Will the holy Spirit of God dictate a prayer for a reprobate? will he
stir us up to pray for them he has rejected? Ans. The Spirit teaches us to
pray as we ought, and for what we ought, Romans 8.26. and therefore for what we
are commanded and obliged to pray; and thus dictateth always such prayers as
will be acceptable to God, albeit he will not grant the particular that is
asked. And such prayers shall not be successelesse, as to us, however it fare
with those for whom we pray. And thus we may retort the argument, and ask
whether the holy Spirit who is our leader and guide, who will teach us to pray
as we ought, will not help us to pray for all them for whom we are commanded to
pray? The command of God is the rule of our duty, and the Spirit will help us
to conform thereto; but the success and event of duty, is not its rule,
neither the decree concerning that; and therefore as we should not, neither
will the Spirit teach us to look on that as our copy, but will help us to pray
according to Gods Word and commands, not according to his decree and work.
Would the Lord make that our duty, to the performance whereof, he would not
give his help and assistance? and if it be our sin not to pray for such, will
not the Spirit help us to pray for them?

Obj. 2. What Christ would not do, neither should we; but Christ would not pray
for the reprobate world, Joh. 17.9. Ans. Christ is our copy and pattern, but
not in all things he did; all Christ's actions were not of the same kind, some
of them being imitable by us, and done for our instruction and example, but
there were other actions of Christ that were peculiar; and though in them he
aimed at our good, yet he purposed not to set them up as a directory to us, as
being rather for our admiration then imitation. Christ sometimes acted as a
Romans 15.8.
minister of the circumcision, and as a preacher of righteousness, both by his
doctrine and example; and thus he weepeth for his desperate and incorrigible
enemies, Luke 19.41. and prays for them, Luke 23.34. At other times, he acted
as God manifested in the flesh, and in a transcendent manner, not agreeable to
any mere creature; and thus he pardoned sin, and preached as one having
authority of himself; and in those actions we would distinguish between their
nature and way of performance: thus to preach and pardon sin, is not peculiar
to Christ, his messengers may do the same, but not after that manner, they
ministerially, but he authoritively. And thus prayer was common to him and us,
but there were some specialities in his prayers, which we must not imitate; and
to go no further then the Text in the objection, let us, 1. look on the motives
whereby he presses his petition, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 18, 19, 22, 23,
etc. 2. on the matter, ver. 15, 21, 23, 24, 26. Why should we then make this 9.
ver. our pattern and copy, rather then the rest of that prayer? Christ did pour
out this prayer, not as man nor as our pattern, but as Speciales hae preces ad
Apostolos solum pertinent, alias pro amicis, pro inimicis, pro bostibus
aliisque ^mnibus oravit silius Dei Aretius in l^c.
Mediator, and as our head and redeemer, and therefore he would only pray for
his ransomed ones, and that upon the account of election, donation, redemption,
sanctification, etc. which are peculiar to the Elect.

Obj. 3. We cannot ask in Christ's name what he has not purchased by his death:
But by his death, he did not purchase mercy and salvation to any but to the
Elect. Ergo. Ans. As in our prayers, we must not look on the decree of God as a
rule, so neither on Christ's purpose and intention; its certain, and granted on
all hands, I. that Christ's sufferings of themselves, were a sufficient price
for all the mercies we can ask for our selves or others; 2. that we cannot know
for whom in particular he purchased life and happiness. And therefore we must
pray for none, if we must only pray for such, as we know he intended to save;
yea, nor for our selves, 1. before conversion; nor, 2. in the night of
desertion, when we stand most in need of prayer; and, 3. Thus all the reprobate
are exempted from this duty, and it must not be their sin that they do not
pray. Hence we may distinguish the proposition thus, we cannot ask in Christ's
name, that for which he has not laid down a Here the distinction (so much
tossed in the schools) between the sufficiency and efficacy of Christ's death,
will not (as I conceive) be denied to have place.
sufficient price; yet, we may ask what he never intended to give, nor by his
Spirit to apply to such and such persons: because we are not sent to his secret
purpose to be the copy of our prayers, but to the promises; the object of
which, is every thing that is good, either to our selves or others. And all the
promises, are yea and amen in Christ, and are accomplished through his blood.
If then we ask nothing, but what is held forth in the promise, and expect an
answer only through Christ, we may be said to ask in his name, albeit we know
not what is his secret purpose, as to the person for whom we pray. Which may be
yet further confirmed by the Saints prayers for outward things, which they ask
in Christ's name, albeit they know not whether or not he intended to purchase
and procure to them the possession of such and such particulars as they ask,
since they know not whether they shall enjoy them or not.

2. To the assumption, that Christ by his death did not purchase grace and
salvation, which are the things petitioned; it is denied. That he did not
purchase these for the reprobate, to whom they are petitioned; it may be
distinguished thus, he did not truly and in effect purchase those mercies to
them for whom we pray, supposing they are reprobats, it may be granted: that we
Sed quiae de nullo certa est ( viz. Ecclesia) orat pro omnibus -- nee tamen pro
emnibus exauditur August de civit. dei lib. 21. cap. 24.
know he did not purchase and will not give to them what we ask for them, is
denied. It is not known to us not only in particular what individual man or
woman are elect or reprobat, but also in the general as to the present and
following generation, (whatever may be said of times past whose wickedness and
impiety is notour and known) for, who can bind up Gods hand that he may not
show mercy to all the world? and shall we allege an unknown decree, purpose
and intention, (which though it were known, must not be acknowledged for a rule
and law) for a ground and plea why we should forsake the known commandment to
pray for all men? And that we might pray for cast-awayes though their
reprobation (and why not also though Christ's purpose and intention not to shed
his blood for them) were known, has been shown, Concl. 4.

3. It is not faith in the Object, but in the Subject; not in him for whom, but
in him who does pray, that is required in the Jam. 5.15.
prayer of faith, and that it may be offered up in Christ's name as shall
appear, Part, 2. Chapter 2. From this general we may draw several particulars, the
most matterial shall be named in the following Conclusions.

Concl. 6. Concl. 6.1.2.3.4.5.6.
We should pray for our enemies. 1. David did so, Psa. 35.13. and Stephen Act.
7.60. Yea and our blessed Lord Jesus, Luke 23.34. And, 2. commands us to do so
Mat. 5.44. And, 3. makes the conscientious performance thereof an evidence of
our sonship; And, 4. of our conformity with our Father which is in heaven, v.
45. And, 5. of discrimination between us and Publicans, v. 46.6. This is the
best mean to reclaim enemies and to make them friends with God and with us,
(and that is the most noble Quo quisque est major magis est placabilis irae
Ovid. 3. trist. 5.7.
victory over enemies in which the true Christian will more rejoice and triumph
(though one were only thus gained) then in the destruction of a multitude)
However, 7. thus he does his duty, and shall be no loser; his prayer shall not
be as 2 Samuel 14.14.
water spilt on the ground, but shall return with a message of peace to
himself; Psa. 35.13. And, 8. in so doing he heapeth coals of fire (though he
intend not their hurt) upon the head of incorrigible enemies. Romans 12.20. And,
9.
it is no small evidence of sincerity, and may be a ground of comfort to thee O
Saint, if while enemies are injuring and persecuting thee, thou can with the
Prophet say; O Lord, remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them,
and to turn away thy wrath, while they were digging a pit for my soul. Jer.
18.20. And as this is a notable mean of our peace with God, and with our own
consciences; So it is, 10. an evidence and a sure ground of confidence that our
prayers for our selves are heard, 10.
and our iniquities pardoned, Mat. 6.14. Mark. 11.25. and, 11.
11. thereby also we prevail against, and most valiantly Bis vin ci^ qui se
vincit. Publian. apud Reusn. clas. 1. Sym. 50.
triumph over that devil of malice and revenge, which makes the Lord himself
become our enemy, and to back the lashes of men with a stroke from heaven,
because we tak upon us to sit on his Throne who has said, vengeance is mine, I
will repay. Deuteronomy. 35.35. Heb. 10.30. Romans 12.19.

O! Then pray for your enemies, and ye shall have God to be your friend; and
shall thus obey that evangelicall command, give place to Wrath, Romans 12 19.
Psa. 37.8. Prove. 20.3. O! bless them that persecut you, Romans 12.14. and thus
thou may get a blessing both to thy self and them. But ah! although this
duty does make us resemble God who is kind unto the unthankful and to the
evil, Luk 6.35. albeit it has so much of heaven in it, so much humility, self
denial and tenderness, though it be such a notable mean of our comfort, peace
and acceptance with God, and may prove a mean of so much good to others, yet
how few make conscience thereof, and are careful to perform it? but if thou
go mourning all the day long for want of comfort, enlargement of affections,
divine manifestations, and acceptance in thy addresses to God, enquire after
the cause; and perhaps thou will find, that if thou were compassionat toward
thy enemies, God would be more kind to thee, and manifest himself more
familiarly: the Lord deals with many as if he were an enemy, because they live
in malice and at enmity with their brethren; and their prayers meet not with
that Qui tollit litem fas huic est fausta precari. Reusn. class. 3. Symb. 16.
acceptance they desire, because they do not cordially desire the good of
others; God seems to slight their Qui litem aufert execrationem in
benedictionem mutat, symb. Henrici, 3. Nigri.
prayers, that they may learn no more to hate or slight their brethren in their
prayers, Mat. 6.15. Mar. 11.26.

Concl. 7. Albeit we should thus pray for all men, though strangers, yea though
enemies and persecuters, yet there are special bonds and ties lying upon us to
pray for those to whom we have special relations; and the mo and greater, and
the more near and engaging the relation is, our obligation to the performance
of this duty is the greater we may not speak to particulars, these being so
many, this duty so clear, and uncontroverted, Scripture-instances so obvious,
and the advantage both to our selves and them so certain and great.

And, 1. in the general, who is so ignorant as not to know, that it is his
duty to pray for the Church of Christ, and that his Kingdom may come; that the
borders thereof may be enlarged, that the heathen may be given to him for an
inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the earth for a possession? Mat. 6.10.
Psa. 2.8. that the whole earth may be filed with the knowledge of God, Isa.
11.8. that the Gospel may have a free and effectual passage, 2 These. 3.2. that
all Israel might be saved, that Sem may be persuaded to dwell in the tents of
Japhet, Romans 11.26. Genesis 9.27, that the fullness of the Gentiles were brought
in, and that those who yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of death may be
enlightened, Romans 11.25. Luke 1.79. that God in his good pleasure would do good
to Zion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem, that peace may be within Her
walls and prosperity within her Palaces, and that God would redeem Israel out
of all his troubles, Psa. 51.18. Psa. 122.7. Psa. 25.22.

2. Who knows not that we should pray for Kings and Rulers? that God would
bless them, and make them a blessing to his people, that he would instruct our
Magistrates, and teach our Senators wisdom; that judgment may run down as a
river, and righteousness as a mighty stream; that thus they may prove nursing
Fathers both to the Church and Kingdom; being an encouragment to them that do
well, and a terror to such (and only to such) as do evil, that under them we
may lead a quiet and peaceable in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timoth. 2.2.
Romans 13.3. Isa. 49.23. Psa. 105 22. Amos. 5.2. Prayer is the best tribute ye
can pay to them; and the best Vid. August. contr. liter. Petiliani lib. 2. cap.
23.86, 92. and in Evan. Joan tract. 2.
office ye can perform to your neighbors and fellow subjects; whatever be the
judgment of the world, or its reward, yet the best Christians will be found to
be the best subjects, and the best neighbors. Sed bonus vir Cajus Seius, tantum
malus quod Christianus.

3. Who will ask, whether he should pray for the Kingdom city an place of his
abod and nativity? 1, Because of several relations we stand under toward our
contrymen, as being fellow subjects, compatriots, brethren, (being nearer in
kin to many of them then to strangers) and companions, we are obliged in a
special manner to pray for them. Psa. 122.8. Romans 9.2, 3. Secondly, because
our peace and welfare consists in theirs. Jer. 29.7. And, 3. thus we should not
only pray for temporals to them, but also for grace and spiritual mercies; we
cannot live securely where the fear of God is not, least, like the fish in the
sea, the greater devour and make a prey of the lesser, Genesis 20.11. O! then pray
for them, if thou would not have them make a Isa. 59.15.
prey of thee. Did Abraham so importunatly interceed for Genesis 18.
Sodom, though he was not concerned in their misery? and wilt not thou plead
for the place of thy habitation, with whom thou must share in their prosperity
or adversity? Its the Saints privilege that they may be a blessing in the
midst of the land, Isa. 19.24. and bear up the pillars of a sinking sinful
world; Psa. 75.3. were there not a Saint on earth, how quickly might the earth
and all its inhabitants be dissolved? Behold the difference between the upright
and the wicked! the one is a blessing, and the other a curse to the place,
Prove. 11.11. and prayer is that messenger the Saints employ to fetch home the
blessing to themselves and others.

4. This duty in a special manner lies on them who live together in one
family, as being yet more nearly concerned in the good or evil of one another.
Its true this duty does in a special manner lie upon the master of the Family,
who must with good Josh. 24.15.
Joshua undertake for himself and all within his house: He must be a King to
rule there, a Prophet to teach and instruct them, and a Priest to offer up
daily sacrifices with them, and for them; none are exempted from this duty,
David, though a King on whom the care of the whole nation did ly, yet did not
forget his family, after he had been employed in the public worship of God, it
is said of him to his commendation, that he returned to bless his household, 2 Samuel 6.20. If Cornelius be a devour man, his religion must not be confined
within his own breast, and therefore its observed, that he feared God with all
his house, and prayed to God allway. Act. 10.2. But albeit this duty,
especially (as to the performance of it with the whole family, as being their
mouth and minister) does ly upon the master of the house, yet none in the
family are exempted from a private and personal communion with God in prayer;
what though the head of the house neglect his duty, and were a graceless man,
will thou go to hell because thy Father and master does run thither? Ah! rather
with holy David lament and say, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in
the tents Not that David ever was in those countries, but he called those so,
amongst whom he was, by reason of their fierce barbarousnesse and wickedness.
Diodat on the place.
of Kedar, Psa. 120.5. and thou should the rather be busy thy self, if the
rest of the family be negligent, that thou may get thy name out of the curse
that is denounced against prayerlesse families. Ier. 10.25. and what know
thou but thy prayers may procure a blessing to the whole family? Genesis 30.30.
Labans house and estate was blessed for Jacobs sake, and Genesis 39.5.
Potiphars house, yea and all Genesis 41.
Egypt for Joseph. And then if others make conscience of their duty, what a
shame is it for thee to be singular in evil? and that thou alone shall be
plucked out of the family and cast into hell. Ah! be no longer a devil to tempt
the Saints by thy wicked example. Thou wicked son or servant what will thou
say? and with what horror and confusion will thou behold thy Father and master
in Glory, whilst thou art cast out? Oh! (said dying Sam. Clerk. in his life.
Mr. Bolton to his children) I Verily believe that none of you dar think to
meet me at the great Tribunal of Christ in an unregenerat state.

Yet. 5, this duty does ly more forcibly upon those who are of the Household of
(a) faith, Sicuti in aliis charitatis officiis ita in precibus prima debet esse
cura sanctorum. Calvin. in Ephesians. 6.18.
though the members of that family be far scattered through many nations, yet
they are more firmly united then those of any other incorporation; we have
seven ligaments and bonds of union held sorth in one Scripture, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
which are brought as so many motives to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, v. 3. and may serve as so many arguments to stir us up to make
conscience of this duty, to pray one for another. 1. All the Saints are members
of One Body; 2. All are animated by One and the same Spirit; 3 All are called
in one hope, and are joint heirs of the same Crown and Kingdom; 4. They all
serve the same Lord and master; 5. All have one and the same Faith and
profession, one task and work, all are walking in the same way, and traveling
to the same home, and all must lodge together unto all eternity; 6. One
Baptism, all have the same badge, and wear the same livery; 7. All have one
God and Father in Christ Jesus, all are of a noble descent, and of the blood
Royal (as to their regeneration and new birth) Is there then any relation like
to that which is amongst the Saints? Is there any union which is so intimat and
strong? and yet alas, in this jangling and contending age, self-love, as a
canker consumes and eats our true love to the brethren; now are the days
foretold by our Lord Jesus, in which the love of many should wax cold, Mat. 24
12. where there is not true love, there cannot be a cordial desire of their
good, and no prayer for them that God will accept; O but its a sad character
thou art no son, who do not mind thy brethren; and if thou have no Sympathy
with the rest of the members while they suffer, and seek not after a remedy,
its a token thou art a rotten and dead member, which must be cut off; O! but
Christ the head continually prays for all the members of his body, and will thou not join with him? hell and the world are enraged against them, they have
but few friends, and shall these prove unfaithful, and not help them by their
prayers, whom otherwise they cannot profit? will thou prove like Pharouh's
butler? whilst thou art advanced and have moyen at court, will thou forget the
affliction of Joseph? if hitherto thou have done so, say with Genesis 41.9.
him, I do remember my fault this day. Albeit no Saint should be excluded from
our prayers, yet more specially we should remember the afflicted, whoever be
forgotten, the sick child will be cared for: affliction is a fit season for
prayer, and not only the afflicted should pray for himself, but others should
join and put up a prayer for him, Iam. 5.13, 14. But yet more especially we
should compassionat persecuted Saints, who suffer for righteousness sake;
though Moses, Nehemiah, Esther, and Daniel might have enjoyed the pleasures
which a Kings Court could furnish, yet the affliction of Gods people did
afflict their spirits, and send them to the throne to interceed for their
brethren.

You will perhaps say, who is he that forgets the Saints? Answ. But it may
be thou prayest not for them as Saints, but as thy friends, and near relations;
if thou pray for any one as a Saint, thou (...) includit and supponit, (...),
quod enim alicuiconvenitqua tali necessario convenit omui; ideoque a quatenus
adomne vales consequentia, vid Arist, 1. Post. cap. 4.
must pray for all Ephesians. 6.18.
Saints, self-love as it may make thee pray for thy self, so also for thy
relations, amongst which may be many Saints; but only the love of God can make
the love his children as such, and all that bear his image, though never so
mean and despicable in the eyes of the world, and not able to serve or profit
thee. O! let us hearken to the invitation, Isa. 45.11. Let us ask of God
concerning his sons, the Lord calls us, and assures us of success; only let
us take heed that we forget none of his sons, the father will not take it well
that any of his children should be slighted; as Joseph would not speak to his
brethren till all were present, so thou may meet with many frowns from the
Almighty, if thou come alone, or forget any of thy brethren behind thee.

6. (And we shall instance no mo particulars) The relation that is between
Pastors and people do engage to the mutual performance of this duty; as for
the Ministers of the Gospel, as they are by their calling obliged, so they will
make conscience (if of any thing) to pray that the word preached by them may be
accompanied with power for the conversion of the hearers, that it may be
received with meekness, and reverence, not as the word of man, but as the word
of the living God, which is able to make wise the simple, and to save their
souls, that they may not become unfruitful hearers, but doers, that their
fruit may be holiness, and the end everlasting life, that they may grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Jam. 1.21, 25. Romans
6.22. Psa. 19.7.2. Pet. 3.18 etc.

You will not deny that Ministers should pray for the people committed to their
charge, for whose souls they must answer in the day of accounts, that they have
labored to feed them, and rescue them from the snare of the devil, and have
watched for them, and sought their good in every ordinance. Heb. 13.17. 2
Timoth. 2.24, 25, 20. But that the people should pray for their Pastor, we do
not (too many will say) see such reason or necessity, nor is it very usual.
Answ. What do thou talk of reason or necessity? when may we argue from these
if not in the present case? and therefore hearken O negligent hearers! (who
care not for your own souls, but would cast all the care of them over upon the
Minister, to whom you deny your assistance in that work) and ponder these few
(amongst many) motives, that may prevail with you to make more conscience of
this so much slighted though most necessary duty. 1. Thou can nor prepare thy
heart to hear the word (and no wonder then though thou get no good by it) if
thou neglect this duty; if the husbandman take pains on the ground, he will not
be wanting (so far as his care and industry can reach) to provide good seed;
and if thou desire and expect a blessing on the word, which is the seed of
immortal life, as thou will labor to have thy heart (which is the ground)
fitted and enlarged to receive, so thou will by prayer wrestle with the Lord,
who is the great master and Joh. 15.1.
husbandman, that he would enable his messengers, that they may speak as the
oracles of God, in power and demonstration of the Spirit, that a door of
utterance may be opened unto them, for to make known the mystery of the Gospel,
that they may speak boldly, and may exhort and rebuke with all authority, and
may be instant in season and out of season, with all long suffering and
patience, that they preach not themselves but Christ, that they may take heed
to their Ministy, to fulfill it, that they may be clothed with
righteousness, being an example to the flock, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in faith, purity, self denial, and holiness; that thus they may save
themselves, and those that hear them. etc. 1 Pet. 4 11. 1 Cor. 2.4. Col.
4.3.17, 2 Timothy 2.15. Tit. 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.2. 2 Cor. 4.5. Psa. 132.9. 1 Timothy
4.12. etc. if thou desire the Pet 2.2.
sincere milk of the word, that thou may grow thereby, thou will not forget the
nurse; if thou regard what seed be sown in the ground thou will not neglect to
go to him who only can fill the hand of the sower, and to say to him, O! let us
not have tares in stead of good seed; if thou care for thy spiritual life,
thou will say, O! let the stewards hands be full, let him have an allowance for
us, that we starve not for want of the childrens bread.

2. What are Ministers, weak, frail men, subject to like passions as others
are, Jam. 5.17. Act. 14.15. and who is sufficient for such an high and weighty
charge? 2 Cor, 2.16. and therefore as they have need to watch over their own
hearts, to take heed to there steps, and to be frequent and servent in their
addresses to God; so the people should wrestle together with them in their
prayers to God for them; Romans 15.30. and thereby strengthen their hands against
all the discouragments and difficulties they may encounter with: and thus the
meanest labourer in the Paroch, may join in the work, and give his help and
assistance; and the most able and zealous Minister stands in need of the
prayers of the meanest Christian; such as have the greatest measure of holiness
knowledge, etc, may have their stock yet increased; and daily stand in need of
grace, and of a new supply of strength, and actual assistance for improving
their talents for the honor of God, and the salvation of the flock, Ephesians. 6.19.

3. Otherwise, you must either idolize them or your selves, and sacrifice
either to the sower, or to the ground, as if from either, or both, the increase
did come; if the blessing were expected from God, it would be asked from him,
and that the instrument might be enabled for doing his work acceptably and
succesfully; if all be nothing, 1 Cor. 3.7. God is all: and the increase must
be expected and sought from him, he has not put that in the hands of any
creature. v. 6. and should we not ask and wait upon him alone for it?

4. Ministers are in greater hazard then others; and shall their people ly by
and give them no help? the devil and the world are mad and enraged at a godly
and faithful ministry, Behold I send you forth as Lambs amongst Wolves, says
our blessed Lord to his disciples, Luke 10.3. which in part has had its
accomplishment in all who have succeeded them in the Ministry: praedicare nihil
aliud est, quam derivare in se furorem mundi; To be a Preacher is nothing else
(said Luther) but to draw the worlds fury and malice upon himself: And as to
his own case, he Mr. S. Cleark in his life.
writes thus, Lutherus foris a toto mundo, intus a diabolo patitur, and
omnibus angelis ejus; that he was pursued from without by the world, and from
within by the devil and all his angels: Contempt, scorn, oppression, violence,
etc. are all the reward that can be expected from a wicked world, which hates
the light because their works are evil: But we (if faithful) shall have better
entertainment in the world to come; and though now by men we be (as our betters
were) 1 Cor. 4.13.
accounted the filth of the world and the off-scourings of all things, yet we
are precious in the eyes of our master, we are (what shall I say) his Jewels;
yea, it is written (and can thou read it, and not admire?) we are the 2 Cor.
8.23.
glory of Christ. But it were well, if we had not greater and worse enemies
then the world, who only can vex a frail decaying body; Satan, the Joh. 12.31.
Prince of this world, and all the wit and might of hell is engaged in that
quarrel: If Joshua appear before the Lord to interceed for the people, Satan
will stand at his right hand to resist him, Zeth. 3.2. Ephesians. 6.12.
Principalities and powers do stand in battel-aray against us, and shall we
have no help from our friends? Many be the temptations and snares that are laid
for poor Ministers, and shall their people look on as nothing concerned in the
matter? not knowing that at the breach made in the Pastors, Satan purposes to
enter in, and spoil and make a prey of the flock: He knows that their fall
will occasion the stumbling of many, and be a great discredit to the holy
profession, and therefore he draws out all his forces against them, giving
these a charge (not unlike to that which the King of Syria gave to his
Captains, in reference to the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.31.) to sight neither
with small nor great, save only (in a comparative sense) with the Ministers.
Ministers are Isa. 9.15, 16. Mat. 15.14.
leaders, Isa. 56.10, 11. Ezekiel. 34.2.
shepherds 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 6.20.
ambassadors, Isa. 56.10. Jer. 6.17
watchmen, etc. What is our Christian life but a 2 Cor. 10.3, 4.
war fare? we are called out to fight the Lords battle against hell, the flesh
and the world, and to wrestle with Ephesians. 6.11, 12.
principalities and powers, against the rulers of darkness and wicked (...), i.
e. (inquit Beza in loc.) (...) sceleratos spiritus.
spirits; now if in this contest the leaders fall, or the watchmen be
corrupted, Satan is sure to carry the day; if the shepherds be turned out of
the way, must not the sheep go a stray? if ambassadors deal deceitfully and
comply with the enemy, much hurt and mischief may thereby redound to the whole
state and intorporation; thus you see how nearly ye are concerned in your
Ministers trials, temptations and perils; and will you not remember him in your
prayers; and though he run all that hazard for your sake, will you do nothing
for his help and assistance?

5. If we ponder the several steps, and (as it were) parts of the ministry, we
will find, that prayer has a hand in them all, and may be instrumental in the
procuring, and for the right administration of them. 1. It has a hand in the
sending forth and planting of Ministers where there is no labourer, Mat. 9.38.
2. Prayer may be instrumental for the continuing of Ministers, their staying
and abiding with their flock, and their deliverance from the fury and rage of
persecutors, and from all their troubles and temptations, 2 Cor. 1 10, 11. Act.
12.5.3. That their ministry may be successful, and that a door of utterance
may be opened unto them, that they may make known the mystery of the Gospel,
and may preach in the power and demonstration of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.19. Col.
4.3, 4.4. Neither the care and diligence of the husbandman, nor the goodness
of the seed, can make the stony ground become fruitful and yield increase;
though the Pastors mouth be opened, yet the people may be 2 Cor^ 6.11, 12.
straightened in their own bowels, their hearts may be locked and receive nothing;
and prayer is the best key to open a shut, and the best hammer to break a hard
heart, Ps. 119.18, 27, 32, 33, 34. etc.

Thus you see your duty and danger. O then I as you love your own souls, make
conscience to pray for your Ministers; pray that they may be faithful, and may
stand in the hour of temptation, that they may be zealous for their master, and
may diligently discharge their trust, that they become not proud because of
their parts, that they become not careless, secure, carnal, and
worldly-minded; we will not be ashamed so beg the help of your prayers; and to
confess our own weakness and frailty; Paul, though an eminent Apostle and
valiant champion (you may take a view of his gifts, graces, revelations, pains.
sufferings, etc. 1 Cor. 15.10 2 Cor. 12) yet was sensible of the need he stood
in of the prayers of the Saints; and how pathetically did he obtest the
Churches to which he wrote, that they would not forget him in their prayers?
Romans 15.30. Ephesians. 6.19. Phil. 1.19. Col. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. And
we again and again, Beseech you brethren (as he did the Romans) for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit, that ye strive together
with your pastors in your prayers to God for them, that their ministry and
message may meet with acceptance and success amongst you. But if ye will
neglect the nurse, the blood of the child will be upon your heads.

Ye will (no doubt) be ready to complain, that the Minister speaks not home
to your condition, that you hear the Word, but are little better of all you
hear, the Word preached is unsavory, and O! will some (who think they are some
body) say, If I were living under a more searching and powerful ministry. Thus
many will be ready to cry out against Christ's messengers and ordinances, and
plead conscience for their complaint, when they can find no other thing to
object, either against the man or his ministry: The Lord pity poor frail men,
who notwithstanding they gladly spend, and are ready to be spent for their
people, yet (with him, 2 Cor. 12.15.) have reason to complain, that the more
abundantly they love their flock, the less they are beloved; all the reward
they meet with from the most part of hearers, is a load of reproach and
contempt. So that, if we durst be silent, if there were not a necessity lying
upon us to preach (and woe unto us, if we preach not the Gospel of Christ, 1
Cor. 9.16.) if we looked for no other return, but what we meet with from man,
we would deservedly be the most contemptible men upon earth: And while parents
are deliberating how to dispose of their children, they had reason to say, what
many carnal men do say, such a son is for this calling and employment, and
such for another, but this naughty underling child is fit for nothing, but to
be a minster: as if the worst and bas^st of men, were good and fit enough for
that, which is the most high, eminent and excellent employment (pardon me to
say so from the Word of God, whatever the world do think or say) if such as
reason thus, be not amongst the number of those cursed deceivers, Mal. 1.14.
who having a male in iheir flock, do vow and sacrifice to the Lord a corrupt
thing, let their own conscience judge and give out sentence.

O! But they have (you will say) a considerable pension and stipend. Ans. But
no thanks to thee, who art ready to hold b^ck from them what is their own,
which God has allowed them, King and Parliament, and the laws of the kingdom
has secured unto them; thou, who would live upon their maintenance, and
delight in their ruin, if thou were permitted to enjoy what belongs to them,
thou art not the man to whom they are obliged for their allowance: and though
all be not so carnal and selfish, yet if Ministers were to live on the
benevolence of the people, they might often take a sleep for their supper. But
O! What a poor base thing is it for an ingenuous spirit, to undergo such a
burden of pains, care, grief, ingratitude, reproach and disrespect, for such a
mean maintenance? though I deny not there may be some, and too many mercenary
Ministers, yet where is the man of parts, resolution and candor, who might not
be as well provided another way? and who would not rather choose a mean
maintenance in any other condition, then to endure the affronts and reproaches,
that accompany the calling of the I hope none will judge that I am particularly
aiming at this people to whom I have a special relation, and that I am
preaching my own case; though I had reason, (and I wish none had greater) I
would not go to the pulpit, far less to the press with any sach challenge and
complaint.
ministry?

But to return to those complainers of the ministry, I would ask, 1. If ever to
this day, they have seriously reflected upon, and complained of the hardness
and naughtiness of their own hearts? if they had been thus busy at home,
perhaps they had not brought their complaints so far off; 2. I would ask
whether thou, who art so ready to complain of the Minister, have been as
careful to pray for him? thou think thou sees his infirmities and weakness,
but did thou ever pray the Lord to strengthen and enable him? thou art ready
many ways to discourage and weaken his hands, but when, and wherein have thou
encouraged and assisted him? As no Sermon can have life and influence upon a
dead careless people, so their deadness may exceedingly indispose the Minister,
and provoke the Lord in part to stop his mouth: A dead people may occasion and
procure a cold and liveless Sermon. Who knows what a discouragment it is to
preach (as he, Isa. 6.18. and 53.1.) to stony hearts, to heavy ears, to shut
eyes, and for a Minister to consider, that he runs in vain, and few or none
believes or regards his report? and with this discouragment the Lord often
joyneth h^s stroke, and in judgment straitneth his messengers, and thus
withholdeth a seasonable word from despisers.

If people did care for their souls, they would not commit the whole work to
another: ye will not so entrust any worldly business to whatsoever factor or
agent, but ye will be doing, waiting on, and some one way or other giving your
help; and yet he, who watches for the good of your souls shall have none of
your aid and assistance, not one tear or prayer; and must such be accounted
Christians? Oh! remember he is but a weak sinful man, called out to encounter
with many and strong enemies, many discouragments, difficulties, trials and
temptations; and the work is great, and far above his strength: his shoulders
are too weak for bearing such a heavy burden. O then! put in your necks under
the yoke, and lend a lift. Your joint prayers may bring help from heaven, vis
unita fortior. Solitariness, as it is uncomfortable, so it is unsuccessefull.
If the work be great, it needs the more hands. Ye may help your Minister to
preach, and you may hinder: see what ye will answer to God if you ly by; what?
can ye not pray? and if ye would, ye should have less cause to complain: Ye
will seek a blessing on your work and meal, and will ye not mind the work of
the Ministry, and that which should be meat to your souls?

But, to pass from this particular to the general, how should we bewail the
neglect of this necessary, sweet and evangelical duty? Thou who have the
communion of the Saints standing as an article in thy Creed, will thou keep no
communion with them, and allow them no room in thy prayers? Thou who
acknowledgest that prayer which Christ did dictate to his disciples, to be a
perfect pattern, dare thou pray for thy self and not for others? Thou who
call God Father, will thou forget thy brethren and the rest of his children?
Thou who complainest that Phil. 2.21.
all seek their own things, will thou seek for thy self and not for others?
Thou who professest that thou should love thy neighbor as thy self, how
dare thou desire and ask any good thing for thy self, and not also entreat for
the same to thy neighbor? Thou who regratest, that in this sinning age, the
love of many waxes cold, why do thou not pray more frequently and fervently?
Prayer would eat out malice out of thy heart, and out of thy brothers heart; if
we would pray more for one another, we would contend less: who dare hate him
whom he knows to desire and pray for his good? and the Lord would draw his
heart unto thee, if thou did more zealously lift up thy heart in prayer for
him; this fire, kept alive upon the Altar, would consume and root out the seeds
of discord, contention and jealousy. Thou who professest great zeal to the
glory of God, in the salvation of sinners, do thou do not desire and pray for
their salvation? Thou who professest thy self a Romans 1.14.
debtor to all men, to strangers, yea to enemies when, and how will thou pay
this debt, if not while thou have the key in thy hand to open thy Fathers
treasure? And what will thou give unto those, or do for them, who will not ask
from another any thing unto them? Thou can not say thou have not moyen, or
thou art afraid, lest thou should displease the King, if you put in for so
many: for, he himself inviteth, yea, and commands thee, and complains of
the selfishness and narrowness of thy heart; and he takes it very kindly when
thou have a public spirit in prayer: when was it that Daniel obtained that
Testimonial from heaven, that he was greatly beloved? was it not while he was
praying for the people of God? Dan. 9.20, 21, 22, 23. And as for the prevalency
of thy request, if they be the children of God, then, says the Lord, ye may
command what ye will for those, Isa. 45.11. and though they be a stubborn
generation, yea, though they were persecuting Pagans, thou may obtain
something for them: How often did Moses hold off a visible stroke from the
rebellious Israelites, and reverse the plagues that were inflicted upon Egypt?
So often as he did pray, so often he prevailed; and when the prayers of the
Saints do not prevail for, removing an outward judgment, nothing can help, such
are in a hopeless and helpless condition: if Moses and Samuel, Noah, Daniel, or
Job, will not be heard, the case must be desperate* Jer. 15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14. but
what know thou, O man! but such a miserable wretch may belong to the
election of God, and that thy prayer may be instrumental for drawing him out of
the snare? And what matter of comfort should it be to thee, if thereby thou
did gain a soul to Christ? and if, while thou appearest before the tribunal
of Christ, it be said to thee, these are the men and women for whom ye did
mourn and pray; they that turn many to righteousness shall then shine as the
stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

Oh parents! look on your children, wives on your husbands, neighbor on
neighbor, and behold that which may stir thy bowels. Ah! have thou no
compassion toward thy relations? Alas! it may be thou do not pity thine own
soul, and no wonder then though thou prove not kind to others, who art so cruel
to thy self: but, if thou knew the terrors of the Almighty, and then
considered the woeful condition of such wretches, how could thou forbear? how
pathetically did the Prophet Jeremy lament, when he did lay to heart the
outward calamity that was to come upon the people of Israel? My Jer. 4.19.
bowels (says he) my bowels! I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a
noise in me, I cannot hold my peace: And shall not the eternal and (unless the
Lord in mercy reclaim such) inevitable ruin of your brethren and neighbors,
of the once beloved Nation of the Jews, of so many flourishing Kingdoms, of
Turks and blind Pagans, stir up the bowels of your compassion, and send you to
the throne of Grace, to pour out a prayer in their behalf? and though ye could
forget strangers and such as live at a distance, yet, it is unnatural cruelty
to deal thus with your friends and relations, not to pity their deplorable
condition, nor to awaken those ye see sleeping securely within the sea-mark of
Gods displeasure; if you would cry mightily to God, who knows but the echo of
your supplications, might allarm them, and (being conveyed by the arm of the
Almighty) rouse them up out of their brutish security? But, alas! not a few are
more ready to revile their brethren, and to cry out against their faults, by
way of insultation, then to pity and pray for them: but, though a Christian
rebuke, and loving admonition may be necessary, yet, thus to revile and
reproach is a ready way rather to exasperate then to reclaim them. O! but an
affectionat fervent prayer to him who has the hearts of all men in his hand,
may be very instrumental to melt a hard heart, and to turn it to the Lord, and
do not say, they are past remedy whom the Lord has not as yet cast into hell;
do not bury them in the grave of oblivion, whom the Lord continues in the land
of the living: what though they have lain long in a dead Lethargy, yet the Lord
may revive them, and breath the spirit of life and grace into them, and make
such dry (a) bones live. Ezekiel. 37.3, 4, 5.10, 11.
What though thou have prayed once and again for such a rebellious son, such a
wicked neighbor, do not faint nor give over, though the vision Hab. 2.3.
tarry, wait for it. Holy Monica continued instant in prayer for her son
Augustine, though she saw no success, nor any change wrought in him; but there
was a compensation made for that delay, and at length, Augustine not only
believes, but becomes a shining light in the Church. While Paul did
persecute, Stephen prays for him, and God answered that prayer. Christ, while
he was on the cross, prayed for his malicious murdering enemies, and in return
to that prayer, at one sermon preached by Peter, some thousands were converted.
Do not then say, it were lost labor to pray for such, and to what purpose
should we pray for these, who will not pray for themselves? nay, but thou
should the rather pity such misers, who will not pity themselves: If thou
saw a mad man not spare his own flesh, would thou look on and withhold thy
help? would thou say he is mad, and why should I hold his hands? nay, but
thou would the rather pity him, because of his mad cruelty against himself:
Ah! What are desperate sinners, but so many Gal. 3.1.
bewitched fools and mad men, who are daily offering violence to their own
souls? and what know thou but thy prayers may bind them? Ah! therefore
should every Saint (with Samuel concerning a stubborn and wicked generation)
say, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you,
1 Samuel 12.23. and could thou be a witness of the dishonor they do to God,
the scandal they give to the godly, and the mischief they do to themselves, and
not warn and rebuke them? if thou did not, thou should partake of their
sins, Levit. 19.17. but if thou did, would thou not desire, and might
thou not pray the Lord to bless thy reproves?

But though, thus we are obliged to pray for all men, specially for our
relations, our brethren, kinsmem, magistrates, etc. Yet amongst all these, the
Elect should have the pre-eminence. There is a peculiar bond lying upon us to
desire and pray for their good; and we may more comfortably and confidently
perform that duty toward them then others; then our desires and Gods Though]
(...) neither the decree nor providence of God be our-rule, yet both are a
comfortable motive to pray.
decree, promise and providence do meet in one point, and such prayers shall
certainly at length be answered: Christ prayed for all these, Joh. 17.20. and
his prayer is on record; and now in heaven he renews it, and still lives to
make intercession for such. And should not we join and add our poor weak
concurrence? they are those with whom we must dwell for ever, and with whom we
must join in uninterrupted praises, and shall we not now allow them any room in
our prayers. But yet there is a more special obligation lying on us toward
them who already believe and are of the household of faith, as we should
specially do good unto them, Gal. 6.10. so in a special manner we are obliged to
pray for, and desire their good. They are the object, not only of Gods
benevolence, but also of his beneficence and complacence, they are actually in
Christ, and members of his body, and must not then the union be intimate and
strong? And should not their communion answer and keep some proportion
therewith? and must there not be a tender Amicorum est (...), Arist. idem velle
atque idem nille ea demum vera amicitia est Salust. amicus quasi alter idem,
amicitia una anima in duobus corporibus. Amicorum communia omnia. dicta Pythag.
sympathy amongst the members of one body? they will together suffer, and
rejoice together, 1 Cor. 12.26, 27. And as the feet will walk, and the hands
work for the good of the rest of the members, should not also the tongue speak
for their good? The Saints have few friends, but many enemies, Satan and the
world do rage, and will ye stand by? they desire and expect your help, and will
you disappoint them? you are the favorites of heaven, ye have the Kings ear,
and will you not improve your moyen for the good of poor Saints? shall your
friends, who expect your help, be forgotten? will ye prove so unfaithful and
so unkind, and will ye thus by your negligence betray that trust that is lying
upon you, and not improve that price that is put in your hand? you may be
instruments of much good to others, and will you defraud them of what they may
expect, yea, and what as debt ye ow to them? (Gods command to you to pray for
them, is their bond whereby you are become their debtors) and which
notwithstanding they are ready to pay you again in kind, and in your own coin:
and ye need not be afraid, that the master will upbraid you for pleading for
them, they will not prove ungrate, and make their mercies weapons of
unrighteousness; and your prayers, as they may prove instrumental for the
obtaining, so for the right improvement of their mercies. And as thus the
obligation is great, so also the encouragement. What a refreshing and engaging
motive was it to Paul to pray for the Ephesians, when he heard of their faith
and love? Ephesians. 2.15, 16. and for the Philippians, when he considered their
constancy and their fellowship in the Gospel, Phil. 1.4, 5, 6. etc.

Hence from this duty, we may infer another, as we should pray for the Saints,
so we should desire and beg their prayers; we should open up our case to them,
and Jam. 5.16.
confess our faults one to another, that they may know what to ask for us; and
if you will not, you undervalue Gods care for you in engaging them by command
to perform this duty toward you. 2. Ye undervalue his bounty in encouraging
them by a promise of success, Jam. 5.16. 1 John 5.16. Isa. 45.11. 3. Ye wrong
the Saints in undervaluing their privilege, as if they were not Gods
favorites, and had not moyen with him; these who are in Kings Courts will not
want employment: And yet, 4. ye despise your own mercies, and are not sensible
of your own wants, who will not make use of this promising mean of relief; and
it must either be foolish modesty, or base pride, that must occasion the
neglect hereof, (ignorance can hardly be pretended in so clear a case) what?
art thou (a poor weak indigent creature) ashamed to seek help? Dan. 2.17, 18.
Daniel, Esth. 4.16.
Esther and Romans 15.30. 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.19. Colos. 4.3. Phil. 1.19.
Paul, though eminent Saints and great favorites of heaven, were not ashamed;
they knew the prevalency of joint prayer, which to enemies is Cant. 6.4.
terrible, like an army with banners, and to friends comfortable, like Cant
4.15.
streams from Lebanon. As in the natural body, the eye cannot say to the hand,
I have no need of thee, etc. 1 Cor. 12.21. So in this mystical body, there is a
mutual dependence of one member upon another; there is no member so strong,
that it needs not the help and concurrence of the rest: no Christian should
be so proud, as not to desire the prayers of the brethren, and none should be
so uncharitable as to forget the fellow-heirs of the same Crown, when they
approach to the throne of Grace.

For conclusion, we shall only add a word of encouragment to the Saints, and of
rebuke to the wicked, intermixing a word of direction to both.

1. To you who mind this duty, and make conscience to perform it, know, that
ye are honored with this dignity to be men of public spirits, and to have a
hand in the great affairs that concern the kingdom of Christ; ye have the
liberty to speak to the King as often as you will, and to obtain what you
desire; and thus you may have (if your negligence do no hinder) a hand in all
the mercies the Saints enjoy, whether national or personal, temporal or
spiritual; thou may be instrumental in the procuring of these, and none may
say they ow no thanks to thee, who art an honest supplicant and favourit of the
great King; though thou have not purchased their mercies with thy money (Ah!
what has the poor beggar to give for an alms?) yet thy request has
prevailed, and thy prayers have gotten a gracious return; though the Lord has
blasted all means we essayed for our deliverance from the oppression of
usurping Sectaries, yet the Saints by their prayers have had a hand in it, and
who ever take to themselves the glory of the work, yet the Lord knows, that
Scottish men and women, who with fasting and supplications were wrestling with
him, did obtain this mercy as a return of their prayers: And the hand of the
Lord may evidently be seen in it, he bowed the hearts of some, and turned the
hands of others, employing them against their heart, to hold the sword for the
terror of those who were in arms, or might rise to oppose the work, which they
themselves did as much hate (whatever was the design of some of the chief
leaders of the English army, who went from Scotland in that service, yet it is
well enough known that the generality of instruments deserved little thanks, as
going about a work they neither loved nor intended.) O then! let all and every
one of us pray that this mercy may be improven for the glory of the giver, the
honor of the King, and the good of those, who did wrestle at the the one of
grace till they obtained a grant: And as the Saints are thus great adventurers
for others, and send many packs to sea in their name, so there be many that are
employed in their business, and who agent their cause; as they are great
Factors, so they are great Merchants; as they adventure for many, so many for
them. The care of all the Saints lies upon every Saint. And how pressing a
motive should that be for thee (O Heb. 6.17.
heir of the promise!) to pray for others, while thou considerest, that thy
trade is going on while thou art a sleep, and in as many places, cities and
families as call upon the name of our Lord Jesus? and how should thy heart
rejoice when thou look upon such a town and incorporation, such a house and
family, and can say, that's my shop, there they are treading for me; there
some are praying and wrestling at the Thron for some one mercy or other to be
bestowed on me? And how should the consideration hereof stir us up to be more
and more free in opening up our condition one to another, that we may know what
in particular to ask for one another? the I shall now offer to your
consideration a motion made by a judicious Divine, with his regrate that few or
none make conscience to seek after that promising remedy held forth by him
there, In such a case (viz. of Spiritual desertion) Commend (says he) thy
condition to the publick' prayers of the Church, especially upon days of
solemn seeking God: if persons be sick and in danger of death, then a Minister
shall have a bill handed to him, to pray for their bodily health; but I wonder
that amongst all our bills there are no complaints of soul-sickness: Oh!
beloved, It would do a Ministers heart good (as we say) to receive a score or
two of bills upon a sabbath day to this purpose, one that has a hard heart,
that has been often heated and is grown cold again, one that has been long
under conviction, and finds no gracious issue of it, one that cries aloud after
God and can have no answer, one that is assaulted with fearful temptations,
that cannot get any evidence of Gods love, and goes heavily all the day long
etc. desires their prayers. It may be God expects ye should thus make many
friends to speak to him, that thanks may be rendered by many on your behalf; as
the Apostle expresses himself in a like case 2 Cor. 1.11. etc. Sym. Ford
Spirit of bond. and Adopt. 2. Treat. Chapter 15. Page 30. if the Saints do thus
need the public prayers of the congregation, must not ignorant secure
hard-hearted sinners stand in far greater need of this help? with what
seriousness and fervency should they commend their condition to the prayers of
the Church? but alas! many will rather perish then complain of their case and
danger.
want of this liberty and freedom is in great part (I dare say) the cause why
many walk so uncomfortably; many are weak faint and disquieted, and are ashamed
to tell what alleth them, and God punishes their pride with desertion, and
suffers them to Psalm. 68^3.
ly amongst the pots till they call for help from their brethren.

I have sometimes reflected on Job. 42.8. to know why the Lord did commend
Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar unto Jobs prayers, adding a threatening if they
should presume to offer up a sacrifice to him till Job did pray for them,
though they were holy men, and had pleaded zealously for the Lord, yet for
their mistake, and want of charity toward Job, though they should pray, God
would hide his face, till Job joined in the work; but we may to good purpose
apply that place to this case: it may be a pardon is sealed in heaven, but the
sense of it is withheld till some one or other Job do pray for thee; the Lord
may make choice of thy brothers prayer rather then thine own, as the messenger
by whom he will send the mercy thou longest for; now consider who this Job was.

1. He was an eminent Saint, a great favourit of heaven, Noah, Daniel and Job,
Ezekiel. 14.14. as Moses and Samuel, Jer. 15.1. are recorded amongst the worthies
of the great King, and that rather because of their power with him then over
men; and the case was rare (such as that there mentioned) in which they could
not prevail and obtain what they asked: what meanest thou, O Saint! thus to
mourn and complain; is there not a Saint on earth to whom thou may commend
thy case? and if thou be living under the charge of a faithful Minister, wh^^
can be more fit to minister comfort and be an instrument of good to thy soul?
The Lord will bless his own Ordinance, and he will have thee to run to it; but
what ever good may be expected from thence, thou may employ the help of
others, the mo join in the work, and the more eminent they are for holiness,
their prayers will be the more prevalent: when two or three are met together,
and when they agree in the matter of their supplication (though they be in
different places) they may expect a special blessing, Mat. 18.19, 20. Faithful
Abraham could have obtained mercy for the abominable Sodomits, if there had
been ten righteous ones amongst them, Genesis 18.32. and meek Moses was heard, and
did prevail for an idolatrous, stubborn, and most ungrate people, Exodus 32.
Exodus 33.

2. Job was one whom those his friends had wronged, they added affliction to
the afflicted, and pronounced a rash and uncharitable sentence against him, and
the Lord would not accept their payers till Job (whom they had accounted a very
hypocrite) did interceed for them: if then thou have injured thy brother, if he
has ought against thee, leave thy gift before the Altar, go thy way, first be
reconciled to him, and then come and offer thy gift, Mat. 3.23, 24. But offer
not alone, let thy brother join with thee in the sacrifice; it may be thy
acceptance depends upon his concurrence: but, especially, if he be a Saint whom
thou have wronged, if thou have been uncharitable to him, and dealt hardly with
him, go to him and confess thy fault, and beg the help of his prayers; and thus
ye may mutually conspire and lay a mighty siege to heaven, and continuing thus
to Romans 15.30.
wrestle together, ye must prevail. Such professors as are proud, disdainful,
censorious, envious, and living at variance with their brethren, if their
graces be weak, their enlargement little, and their consolations rare, let them
consider where the blame lies.

3. Job was one whom the Lord had grievously afflicted, The terrors of God did
(as he Job. 6.4.
complains) set themselves in array against him, the arrows of the almighty
were within him, Job 10.6.
the Lord hunted him as a fierce Lion, and Job 7.20.
set him up as a mark at w^^^ (...) did shoot, he Job 9.17.
multiplied his wounds, and he did bre^^ (...) with a sore tempest, his Job
13.24, 25, 26, 27.
feet were casten in the stocks, and he was broken as a leaf driven to and fro,
and pursued like dry stubble, the Lord did write bitter things against him, as
if he had held him for his enemy, etc. And should not to him that is afflicted
pity be Job 6.14.
shown by his friends? but they Job 6.15.
dealt deceitfully with him, He was wounded in the Zech. 13.6.
house of his friends. They proved miserable comforters, and Job 13.4.
physicians of no value, therefore the Lord did break them with a grievous
wound, putting the plaster, that only could cure them, into Jobs hand: As a
tender parent takes special notice of the sick child, so the Lord of the
afflicted Saints, and most severely punishes the injuries done to them. See,
Obad. 10, 11, 12, 13, 24. etc. And the prayers of the afflicted are very
powerful and prevailing; the sick child must not be refused; If then, thou
Obad. 22.
have spoken proudly in the day of distress, recommend thy self to the prayers
of the afflicted, least Job 42 8.
the Lord deal with you according to your folly.

Thus I have insisted a while in discovering this treasury of the Church, far
more precious, excellent and useful, then that of gold and rubies; not that
popish treasure, filled with the fictitious merits and Quarum alioquin nullus
esser usus nec enim quae semel applicatae fuere redire possunt sed ipso usu
consumuntur and pereunt adeoque papistae (ut been observat Chamierus) candem
ponunt divinae liberalitati legem quam severitati; ut nec bis vindicet in id
ipsum, nec bis idem remuneret, Dan. Cha. panst. tom. 3. lib. 24. cap. 3.
superfluous (as Cajetan speaks) satisfaction of the Saints departed, but the
treasure of the living Saints intercession; the Dispensation whereof belongs
not to the Pope, but to every Saint, all who have an interest in this treasure,
have a key, and may open it when they will, for the relief of themselves and
all their brethren. And this treasure, viz. the common stock of the Saints
prayers, (if we would speak properly) is rather the key, then the true treasure
it self, which is only Christ's satisfaction and intercession: but yet in that
the other is the porch whereat we must enter, and the messenger which brings
from thence a supply for all our wants and maladies, it may metonymically be
called a treasure, and rather then that anti-scriptural and irrational popish
dream of Saint-satisfaction.

As for these, who (as Job 15.4.
Eliphaz unjustly charged Job) cast off fear and restrain prayer, what good can
the prayers of all the Saints do to such (...) albeit through their prayers,
the Spirit of prayer and supplication may be poured out upon thee, who wast as
a Jer. 31.18.
bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, yet unless at length, thou put in thy neck
and join in the duty, the prayers of others cannot profit thee. Its the
character of a graceless heart, when Gods hand is stretched out against it, to
employ others to interceed; but not to lift up a voice for it self, as we may
see in Pharaoh, Exodus 10.17. Jeroboam, 2 King. 13.6. Simon the Sorcerer. Act.
8.24.

Yet (you will say) Moses was heard for Pharaoh, Obj.
and the man of God for Jeroboam, Ans. As the Lord out of a common providence,
Ans.
may bestow many outward mercies and deliverances to the wicked for his peoples
sake, with whom they are incorporated; so they may meet with some special
dispensations, as to these outward things, upon the prayers of the Saints. The
Lord to evidence the greatness of his love toward his chosen ones, will thus
hear them, while they interceed for the wicked; as that Vid. hist, aepud Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 5. Magdeburg. cen. 2 Luc. Osiand cen^. 2. lib. 3. cap. 12. etc.
legio fulminatrix obtained water to refresh, and a notable victory unto the
host of the pagan-persecuting Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antonnius. But these
mercies, though never so great and singular, yet wanted the marrow and
substance, and in the issue proved through their abuse, rather cursings then
blessings. And as for spiritual mercies, which only deserve the name, no
prayerlesse soul did ever ^ast of these.

But you will say, who is he that does not pray? Ans. But, I would rather ask,
who is he that does pray? That which is current and passes for good coin
amongst men, God will reject as Jer. 6.30.
reprobare silver; the prayer of the wicked, is an abomination rather then
devotion, Prove. 28.9. Prove. 2.27. The Lord does not regard the prayer of him,
who regards iniquity in his hear. Ps. 66.18. O then! cast off and break
asunder the cords of sin, and call upon God with the whole heart, that he may
bear thee when thou cryest, and may fulfill the desires of others for thee.

And if the prayers of the Saints for prayer-lesse wretches prove
unsuccessefull, and can do those misers no good, what shall we think of their
prayers for others, who make not conscience to pray for themselves? O! how
should it vex our souls to hear that cursed crew of vagabond beggars (who have
no other rhetoric but their counterfeit prayers and flattering praises) to
interpose the name of the great God for every morsel of bread they ask, and to
take his dreadful name in vain, in their frequent prayers promiscuously poured
out for every giver, without all life or sense? Who would not mock a Traitor,
who should undertake to go to Court and plead for others? and what King would
suffer himself to be thus abused? and what a return might such as employed
rebels to interceed for them expect? but if the rebel will lay down his arms
and submit to the King, if he will beg pardon for his former rebellion, and
make his peace, others may be heard, while they interceed for favor to be
showed to him, and in process of time, he may get the Kings ear, and have moyen
to plead and prevail for others.

CHAP. VIII. What it is to ask in the name of Christ, why we must, and whether
the Jewish Church did pray in his name?
Joh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my Name, he will give it
you, Joh. 14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, etc.
ALbeit every act of worship and adoration must ulti matly, be terminated in
God, and be equally directed to all the persons of the blessed Trinity, as its
chief and principal object, and therefore in prayer (as a main point of divine
worship) we must draw nigh to God, and offer up our desires to the Father, Son
and holy Ghost, as having one and the same divine nature, power and glory; yet
in this spiritual performance (as also in every other ordinance) there is
something, as it were, proper and peculiar to each person of the Trinity; as we
shall more fully show, Part. 3. Chap. 1. where we are to enquire, how we should
conceive of God in prayer, and after what order we should direct our petitions
to each of these glorious persons? But now, in a word, we take notice how the
Apostle expresses this appropriation, Ephesians. 2.18. where we are said through
Christ to have access to the Father by the Spirit; 1. The holy Ghost dictates
and draws up our bill; 2. The Son gets us access and audience, he presents and
pleads our cause; and, 3. The Father accepts and grants our requests; which
being thus framed by the Spirit, and perfumed with Christ's incense, must be a
Phil. 4.18.
sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing odor of a sweet smell to God. We will
not now ask, why we are said to have access to the Father, while we must also
approach the Son and holy Ghost; but remitting that to its own place, we shall
now, for clearing the description of prayer, only show, 1. what it is to pray
through Christ or in his name; 2. what it is to pray by the holy Ghost, and
what is the help and assistance he affords: of the first, in this; and of the
second, in the following Chapter.

Time was, when there was a sweet communion between God and man, and that was
man's happiness; he needed not have been afraid to approach the Throne; but sin
did make a woeful breach and separation, and ever since the apostat rebel has
lien under a twofold incapacity to draw near to the King; 1. Moral, in respect
of guiltiness and provocation; the wrath and terrors of the provoked
majesty, like that flaming sword, Genesis 3.24. does guard the way, and hold off
the rebel, that he may not approach the Throne; fear did not keep man from
sining and departing from God, therefore fear shall arrest him in the place
that he dar not return; 2. Physical, in respect of weakness and impotency,
and that not merely privative, but accompanied with a positive enimity,
stubbornness and averseness from returning Man by his fall did not only break
his legs, and so dis-enable himself, that from that time forth he had no
strength to ascend to the place from which he fell; but also, like some
vagabonds who having resolved to make a tread of begging, rejoice in their
impotency and sores, and refuse to be healed; so the wretched sinner accounts
his loss gain, and rejoices to wallow in the mire into which he has fallen,
hating God, and abhorring a communion with him, he does not consider nor lay to
heart his own misery and unhappiness.

But while no Physician was employed, nor could be found to cure this desperate
disease and soul-lethargy, our blessed Savior was Isa. 65.1.
found of them that sought him not. When he looked and Isa. 63.5.
saw none to help or uphold, his own arm brought Salvation; Ezekiel. 16.5, 6, 8.
when no eve pitied us to have compassion upon us, when we were cast out into
the open field, to the loathing of our person being polluted and wallowing in
our own blood, when he passed by and looked upon us, that was a time of love;
he spread his skirt over us, and covered our nakedness, and while we were lying
in our blood he said unto us, live, and to a generation not worthy to be
pitied, Isa. 65.1.
behold me, behold me; he became a Numb. 21.9.
brazen Serpent, saying to all these that were bitten and stinged to death by
the old serpent Isa, 45, 22.
look unto me, and be ye saved. When the precious redemption of the soul did
cease for ever, and none was able to give God a ransom for it, Psa. 49.7, 8. He
gave his precious soul an offering for our sin, Isa. 53.10. When none could
cure our sores, he made a plaster of his own blood, he did bear our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed, Isa. 53.4, 5.

And now all honor and praise be to our physician, who has cured all our
sores, and has removed both that moral and physical incapac ty and
impotency, of which we did labor; He has, 1. by his blood washen away the
guilt, so that now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus;
Secondly, by his Spirit (whose Gal. 4, 5.6. Ioh. 14.26. Ioh. 15.26. John. 16.14.
sending into our hearts he has also purchased with his blood) he strengthens
us with might in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16. the Spirit of Christ will make us
both willing and able to draw nigh to God. Thirdly, he has purchased liberty
and access, and now by his blood we have boldness to enter into the Holiest
by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us; Heb. 10.19, 20.
Fourthly, he has purchased to us success and a safe return of our prayers; so
that the Father now can deny us nothing we ask in his name. John. 16.23.

Thus to us Col. 3.11.
Christ is all, in point of, 1. conciliation; 2. assistance; 3. access; and,
4. success; and should we not then draw nigh to God in his name? a d may we
not fear lest God prove a consuming fire, and Mal. 2.3.
spread upon our faces the dung of our sacrifices, if they be not offered up by
the hand of this our high Priest? but when we approach in his name, we must
prevail in him, we have access with confidence, and may come boldly to the
Throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of
need, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 4.14.16.

And there be these three most powerful grounds of this prevalency, whereupon
our confidence should be built when we approach in his name.

1. The Fathers love and tender bowels toward his only Ioh. 3.16.
begotten son, Mat. 3.17. John, 3.35. and. 5.20. Col. 1.13. Heb. 3.6. the So
let enim etiam apud nos multum valere ami^orum dilectio and quod propter ipsos
etiam absentes and mortuos rogamur prompte facimus To let. in Joan. 16.23.
name of a dear friend, though absent or dead, will be very prevalent with us
for obtaining a favor, and shall not the name of Christ (who ever lives with
the Father, and who has the same nature and will with the Father) being
interposed, obtain a grant to our desires? Was the remembrance of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, who were Gods 2 Chr. 20.7. Isa. 41.8.
friends, pleaded as a motive for the Lord to show mercy to their posterity,
Exodus 32.13. Deuteronomy. 9 27. etc. And shall the Lord reject us when we come to him
in the name of his dearly beloved Son?

2. His blood and sufferings, that price he has laid down for all our mercies;
though we can only plead mercy and grace, yet our cautioner has satisfied
divine justice: he has purchased us and all our mercies at a dear rate, Act.
20.28. Ephesians. 1.5. and 2.13. Col. 1.20. 1 Cor. 3.2, 22, 23. etc.

3. His intercession and appearing in the heavens, pleading our cause with the
Father there, and s^c^^^ing the cry of his blood wh ch was shed on earth, and
obtaining to us, what he purchased by it. See Chap. 5.

And thus, though we should pray in the holy Ghost, Jud. 20. yet not in the
name of the holy Ghost; the Spirit must help us to pray, but he is not our
Mediator, for whose sake our prayers are accepted. I have Jenkin on Jude 20.
read of Arrius, that one of his haeresies was, that he attributed the office
of mediator to the holy Ghost; but why should we stay to confute that dream;
and to show, that as there is but are God, so there is but one Mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom to red (...) l^st
men? 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. For clearing of this point, we will show, 1. what it is to
ask in Christ's name; 2. why we must as, in his name; 3. whether the J^wish
Church did believe in him and pray in his name; 4. we will close with a word of
application.

For the first, To pray in Christ's name, is not a work of the Non enim senum
literarum ac syllabarum, sed quod sonus ipse sign^ficat and quod eo sono recte
ac veraciter intellegitur, hoc accipiendus est dicere cum dicit, in nomine meo.
Aug. tract. 102. in Joan.
lips, or to say, Lord hear us for Christ's sake; we dishonor Christ, and we
mock the Father, when thus we take his name in vain, and mention it in our
prayers without reverence and dependence on him for an answer. You will say,
what then does this phrase import? Ans. If we perpend it as in the Scriptures
attributed, either to the Father or Son, we will find, that it does signify as
to our purpose (for it has several other significations) 1. his Non petimus in
nomine magistri quod petimus praeter regulam ipsius mugisterii. Aug. tract. 73.
in Joan.
command and appointment, as, Exodus 5.23. Deuteronomy. 18.20. Mat. 18.20. Secondly,
his help and assistance, or our dependence upon his strength and power; as, Ps.
44.5.1 Sam. 17.45. Luke 10.17. Thirdly, his glory, as the end of our actions,
and the dispensations of providence toward us, Col. 3. 17. Mat. 18.20. Ps.
31.3. Fourthly, as it is particularly attributed to Christ, especially and most
usually it imports our dependence on him, as our Mediator and advocate, and
our confidence in his merit and intercession; as Joh. 14.13, 14, and 16.23.
etc. And in this last sense, especially, we are said to pray in Christ's name.
For though, 1. we must have his warrant and approbation, and look to his will
and command; and, 2. though we must expect strength and assistance from him,
and, 3. though we must aim at his glory in all our desires, yet while it is
required that we should pray in his name, these things are as it were
presupposed, and directly, principally and properly, is only held forth our
dependence on him, as our Redeemer, Reconciler, Mediator, and Advocate with the
Father, in whom alone, and through whose merit, intercession and satisfaction,
we expect access, acceptance and audience of our prayers. Two ancient Doctors.
viz. the judicious Evigila igitur homo sidelis, and vigilanter audi quod illic
positum est in nomine meo, qui promisit ergo tam magnum beneficium, qui
vocatur? utique Christus Jesus, Christus significatregem, Jesus salvatorem, non
itaque nos salvos faci^t quicunque rex, sed rex salvator; as per hoc quodcunque
petimus adversus utilitatem salutis, non petimns in nomine salvatoris and tamen
ip^e salvator est, non solum quando facit quoa petimus, verum etiam quando non
facit; qnoniam quod videt peti contra salutem, non faciendo potius se exhibet
salvatorem: novit enim medicus quid pro sua, quid contra suam sanitatem poscat
aegrolus; and ideo contraria poscentis non facit voluntatem, ut faciat
sanitatem -- si autem qui in cum credit aliquid per ignorantiam contra suam
salutem petit, non in nomine salvatoris petit, quia salvator ei non erit, si
quod ejus salutem impedit fecerit, unde tunc expedit potius ut non faciendo
propier quod invocatur faciat quod vocatur -- ut sic intelligamus non p^tere
nos in nomine magistri quod pe^imus praeter regulam ipsius magisterit, Aug.
tract. 73. in Joan. vide etiam. tract. 81. and 102.
Augustine and Nomen filii Jesus est, Jesus autem salvator vel salutaris
dicitur; ille ergo in nomine salvatoris petit qui illud petit quod ad veram
salutem pertinet; nam si id quod non expedit petitur, non in nomine Jesu
petitur pater; unde and eisdem apostolis adhuc in firmantibus dominus dicit,
usque modo non petistis quicquam in nomine meo, ae si aperte dicevetur, non
petiistis in nomine salvatoris qui nescitis quaerere aeternam salutem. Hinc est
quod and Vaulus non exauditur, quia si liberaretur a tentatione, ei non
prodesset ad salutem, etc. Greg. mag. hom. 27. in evang. vide etiam
Theophylact. in Joan. 16.24. As for Augustine his reason, viz. that all other
things in comparison of salvation and spiritual mercies, are as nothing.
Quicquid ergo petitur quod pertinet ad hoc gaudium ( de quo Joan 16.24.)
consequendumhoc est in nomine Christi petendum, si divinam intelligimus
gratiam, si vere beatam poscim us vitam, quicquid autem aliud petitur nihil
petitur; non quia nulla omnino res est, sed quia in tantae rei comparatione
quicquid aliud concupiscitur, nihil est, Aug. tract. 10^. in Joan. This reason
(I say) though it hold forth a considerable truth too little pondred, yet it
does not conclude the point for which it is brought; for 1. though temporals be
not such and so great mercies as spirituals, yet they are mercies, they are
good, expedient and desirable, and so must be asked; and therefore in his name,
who is the purchaser of all our mercies And, 2. all these things are
subservient unto, and may some one way or other contribute for our salvation,
we may trade for heaven with our money on earth, and should improve all our
mercies for the honor of the giver. There is a second conjecture of the same
Author which we did not mention, because though it contain one of the
pre-requisits to our asking in Christ's name, viz. the sound knowledge of his
person and office, yet serves not for clearing the meaning and proper sense of
that phrase. Vnde (inquit) qui hoc sentit de Christo quod non est de unico Dei
filio sentiendum, non petit in ejus nomine eitamsi non taceat in eo literis ac
syllabic Christum; quoniam in esus nomine petit quem cogitat cum petit: qui
vero quod est de illo sentiendum sentit, ipse in ejus nomine petit and accipit
quod petit, si non contra suam salutem sempiternam pet it, August. tract. 102.
in Joan.


Gregory, have made an allusion to the name Jesus, holding for a truth in their
interpretation, but a little beside the scope and genuine meaning of that
phrase. For (they say) since Jesus signifies a Savior, he does ask in his
name, who asks that which is profitable unto salvation, and whatsoever is
contrary to salvation cannot be asked in his name; Christ, as a Savior, does no
less refuse to answer our selfish and carnal desires, as grant our spiritual
and well regulated petitions. He is our great Physician, who has undertaken
the cure of all our soul-maladies, and were he a faithful Physician who would
please his patient, by giving what were pleasant to the taste, if obstructive
of health?

Albeit this gloss do not serve for clearing the words, which do not speak of
the quality of the matter of our petitions, but of the way how we should ask,
and the In nomine Christi petere efficacissimus titulus est impetrandi a patre.
Tolet. in Joan. 16.23.
ground of their prevalency, and which we should plead and interpose in all our
pet^^i^ns. Though (I say) these Doctors do not thus show what it is to ask in
Christ's name, yet while we come in his name, he will deal thus with us; when we
trust him, and rely upon him, he will make a right choice for us, he will give
what is good, but will not sati^fie our foolish desires: We shall not want
bread, but he will not give a Serpent, though we (bewitched with its fair and
beautiful colors) do ask it most importunatly.

Hab. 1.13. with him is terrible majesty, Job 37.22. He is a consuming fire,
and we sinners are as dry stubble, Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Isa. 13.9. And shall
stubble approach the fire without a covering, shelter and fence?

Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath* both objectively and subjectively, as hated, so haters of
God; as under the curse and sentence of condemnation, so daily deserving that
woeful sentence, still grieving and provoking the holy Lord, all the thoughts
and imaginations of the heart being only evil continually, Romans 5.10, 12. Gal.
3.10. Genesis 6.5. How then dare such rebels approach the provoked King without a
mediator and intercessor?

Romans 5.6. 2 Cor. 3.5, And therefore unless the Spirit of Christ strengthen us
with might in the inner man, we know not, we cannot pray as we ought, Ephesians.
3.16. Romans 8.26. without Christ we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. shall we then
presume to draw nigh to God without him, or to offer any desire but in his
name? So much for obstructions, impediments, and (as I may call them)
negatives. Now let us argue from the several benefits purchased by Christ, his
offices and the relation under which he stands to us, and other positive
grounds.

Mic. 5.5. Isa. 53, 5. He is our propitiation and reconciliation, Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2. Col* 1.20. He is the alone way, Ioh. 14.6. He is the door, Ioh. 10.7.
He is the true vine and fruitful root, which communicates sap to all the
branches, Joh. 15.1, 5. Isa. 11.10. He is the foundation and corner stone of
all the building, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. He is the fountain from which all our mercies,
as so many streams, do flow, Zech. 13.1. He is the head, from which all the
body receives nourishment, and increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19.
Nay, he is all, and in all, both in point of doing and receiving,; as without
him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. so we can receive nothing; all are ours, if
we be in Christ, 1 Cor. 3 22, 23. but without him we can receive nothing as a
mercy and blessing, and can have no sanctified right and title unto it; for he
is heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. He is the alone treasure and storehouse of
all our mercies, he is the hand and the conduit, whereby all good is conveyed
to us; and what can the Apostle say more (and if less, he had come short of
his fullness and sufficiency) Christ is all, Col. 3.11. Hence we may instance
some few particulars, and from these draw so many several arguments.

As first, Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Amos, 3.3. Can there
be any fellowship and communion between them who are at enmity? and there was
none but Christ who could interpose, only he, by his death has abolished and
slain the enmity, and put us (who were as far off as devils) in a capacity to
draw nigh to God, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15, 16.

But secondly, though subjects have not provoked their King, yet how shall they
get access? they may long wait before they see his face, but as Christ has
made our peace, so he has purchased access to us, Ephesians. 2.18.

But thirdly, though access be gotten, yet the petition may be rejected, and
not granted; but in Christ, as we have access, so also acceptance and audience;
so that we may ask whatsoever we will in his name, and it will not be denied,
Ephesians. 1.6. Joh. 14.13. so that in him we may draw nigh with boldness and
confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. If his Rev. 8.3.
incense be offered with our prayers, they must be well pleasing and prevail.

Mediator between God and man, 1 Timoth. 2.5, 6, How then dare we make an
immediate adresse to God? he purchased at too dear a rate our peace and
acceptance with God, and shall we, (1.) so far undervalue what he did and
suffered for us, as not to improve his mediation? or, (2.) thus slight the love
of the Father, (who spared not his only begotten Son that he might purchase
that privilege to us) as not to make use of what he has procured to us by his
sons death? 2. He is our priest, the high priest of our profession, Heb. 3.1.
How then dare we offer any sacrifice but by his hand? all oblations under the
law must be brought to the priest, (if any other presumed to offer he must die)
the Lord thereby would typifie and represent to us the necessity of Christ's
priesthood, and the offering up of all our spiritual sacrifices in his name.
3. He is our Advocat who ever lives to make intercession for us, 1 Ioh. 2.1.
Heb. 7.25. Ah! what can the client say, when he comes before the judge, who
has not employed an Advocat to plead his cause? 4. The manyfold and binding
relations under which he stands to us, may encourage us to employ his help,
and to come in his name; he is our Isa. 9.6.
Father, Heb. 2.11.
brother, and Ioh. 15.13, 14, 15.
friend, he has moyen at court, and will we not improve that for our access
and acceptance? When the men of Tire and Sidon had made Blastus the Kings
chamberlain their friend, by him they make their address to the king. Act. 12,
20. Christ is our Blastus, he is nearer then a servant, he is the Kings beloved
and only begotten Son, who will not only (like him) speak some few words in the
behalf of these who have fled to him for Heb. 6.8
refuge, but has shed his blood and tread the Vinepresse of the fierceness
and wrath of almighty God, Rev. 19.15. and shall he not then be heard in our
behalf, and we when we come in his name?

in faithfulness and righteousness is said to hear and answer us, and all his
ways toward the Saints to be not only mercy but truth, Psa, 143.1. Psa.
111.8. Psa. 25.10. But we cannot plead the promises, we cannot lay claim to any
of them, we cannot plead the Lords faithfulness and truth, but through Christ;
all the promises, as to us, are as so many blank bonds, and we dare not put in
our name till we bring our cautioner along with us; we have no moyen nor
trust, we have no dexterity nor skill to writ one letter, till Christ put the
pen in our hand, and dip it in his blood; there is no other ink wherewith we
can insert our name, God will not acknowledge any characters as genuine and
authentic which are not thus engraven; our works and sufferings, our
complaints and tears, are an Pro. 2.27.
abomination, they are but Phil. 3.8.
dung, and as a loathsome and Isa. 64.6.
menstruous cloth; Ah! these can make no impression, nor give to the
banquerupt sinner any right to these bills of exchange, which our Father has
sent to his children in this their Pilgrimage, nor to the portion bequeathed to
us by our Elder brother in his legacy and testament; for in Christ Jesus all
the promises are yea and amen, in him they were made, in him they are applied
to us, and have their accomplishment 2 Cor. 1.20. and therefore while we are
without Christ we are aliens and strangers from the covenants of promise, Ephesians.
2.12. and so cannot Though we may offer up a simple and natural desire, yet we
may not argue from Gods fidelity and truth.
plead the accomplishment of them.

7. Here we have a command for our warrant, and a promise for our encouragment,
and though from the one we might gather and collect the other, these two being
See chapter 7. Sect. 2.
inseparable, yet both, for clearing our way, and strengthening our hands, are
expressed. Ioh. 16.24, 23. Ioh. 14.13.14.

8. We might add the constant practice of all Christians in all ages. You will
say, (and thus we proceed to speak to the third particular) if it be now so
necessary to ask in Christ's name, if our acceptance and success depend
thereupon, how came it to pass that holy men of old were strangers to, and
ignorant of this manner of invocation, and that essential qualification of
prayer? and wherefore is that made necessary to us, which was not required in
others? Answ. We will not now dispute the question with Nec revolatum vel
indicatum fuit unquam in sacris literis, nec jussisunt usquam illi veteres,
nedum aliud sed neque etiam credere in Christum venturum, quod sub novo Test:
requiritur, ut necessarium sit considere Deo per Christum; quod quatenus ad id
a^tinent, quod diximus per Christum, sub veteri Testamento neque necessarium
fuit, nec porro in quoquam fuisse ulla ratione dici potest, Socin. frag de
just: page, 47. 51. vid. Smalc. resp refut. Smigles. cap. 23. and disp. 4.
contra. Fr^nt. these. 8. Ostor. just. cap 5. Armin. resp. ad art. 31. Remonst.
confess cap. 7. sect 8. Epis^op. disp: de discrimine Vet. and N. Test. etc.
Socinians (with whom many Arminians in this, as in several other points, do
join) who maintain that the ancient people of God who lived before the coming
of Christ were not Justified after that manner and way which we Christians are,
viz by faith in a Mediator; yea, they dare Nusquam in lege Mosis reperies vel
vitam aeternam, aut donum Spiritus sancti obedientibus praeceptis legis
promissum. Catech. R^cov, de proph, Jes. Chapter Mun: cap. 5.
affirm, that the Jews had no express promise of eternal life and
spiritual blessings, Nemo negare potest ^ub v. Test. nec vitam aeternam
promissam fuisse, adco nec modum illam consequendi, fuisse paetefactum ita ut
illud intelligeretur ab iis qui came consecuturi essent; n^m si nihilominus
antequam Christus suum evangelium predicaret, fuerunt in populo Dei qui sibi
vitam aeternam pollicebantur, eamque a Deo sperabant, id non ex promissis dei
aperte colligebant, sed vel mystice interpretabantur, vel prae summo atque
innato immotalitatis desiderio ipsi sibi fingebant. Socin. commont in 1 Joan.
1^4. Deum omnibus qui sub veteri Testamento sibi confisi sunt daturum vitam
aeternam statuendum est, non ex ullo promisso aut pacto, sed ex sola gratia and
mera benignitate. Smalc hom. 3. in 1 cap Joan.
albeit some of them out of an andent desire of immortality and from some
probale conjectures, did labor to persuade themselves, that there was a life
eternal after thi^; and not only dare they averr this of the body of that
people, but also of the patriarchs, prophets, and most eminent Saints who lived
before the incarnation of our blessed Lord, yea and of John the baptist, who
pointed out Christ with the finger, and who because of his clear knowledge of
Gospel-mysteries, is said (as judicious Interpreters think) to be the greatest
of them that had been born of Women, Mat. 11.11. John the Baptist (says
Johannes Baptista ipse illud quod resipiscentibus annunctavit, non ^^tis
intellexit, nec illud quod promittebat aliis. Small hom. 4.
Smalcius) did not understand what he preached and promised to the penitent:
And yet he grants, that those Jews, who did trust in God, did obtain
everlasting life, though not by covenant or promise, but of the mere grace and
bounty of God, which does not seem to agree well with what at another time he
affirms, viz. That they themselves did purchase Modum expiandi peccata eumque
non ita difficilem imo facilem admodum ostenderat sub lege Deus, facilis est
enim j^ctura pecudis; Smalc. resp refus. Smigles. cap. 31.
pardon of sin (and (...) just^fi^ation and life) by their sacrifices and
offering up of beasts. Thus daring, in terminis to contradict the holy Ghost,
testifying that those gifts and sacrifices could not make him, who did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; nay, that it was impossible,
that the blood of bulls and go^^s should take away sins, Heb. 9.9. and 10.4.
only the blood of Christ could do that, Heb. 9.14.

But not purposing to enter the lists with those dreamers; for answer to the
question, it would be observed, that we may know truly, what we know not
distinctly and particularly; Gospel mysteries were not hidden from the Jews,
albeit they had not such a measure of light as we, to whom the Sun has risen,
and does shine as at the noon day, they had light, but it was as the morning
twilight before the day which now we enjoy, did dawn; but will any be so
childish, as to argue and say, that because they knew not so much of Christ,
and of the mystery of Incarnation, (...) we Christians, therefore they knew
nothing, and were altogether ignorant of it. There is a general (and as they
call it) confused knowledge of a thing, which is, as it were, a medium between
ignorance and a distinct particular knowledge. These may be truly said to know
a thing, who know not so much concerning it as others do; and this general and
imperfect Christus non qua clare notus servat, sed qua sincere and vere
agnitus, jam vero Christum fuisse vere and sincere agnitum in ecclesia Judaica
nemo est qui possit negare quin totam neget Scripturam. Camer. praelect. in
Mat. 18.1. page 77. and praelect. de eccl. page 237.
knowledge of Christ, then was as efficacious to salvation, as that further
measure, which Christians now have.

2. We would distinguish between simple Distinguendum inter ignorantiam purae
negationi, and pravae dispositionis.
ignorance, and a false and erroneous apprehension and opinion: that imperfect
and obscure knowledge of Christ, which was in the mustitude and body of the
Jewish Church, might consist, and was joined with much ignorance, but erroneous
opinions concerning Christ's person, kingdom, sufferings, etc. (such as were in
the Apostles, for a long time, notwithstanding of the many large and clear
sermons they had heard Christ preach) these errors (I say) were not the proper
and inseparable effects of their knowledge, but rather of their curiosity,
oblivion carnal reasoning, etc.

But if it be ask't, how much the weakest believer must then have known, and
what was the minimum quod sic of Gospel truths, that then was fundamental, and
the knowledge thereof necessary to salvation? Ans. I think it were more
pertinent and profitable for us, thankfully to prize that measure of light
reserved for us, and diligently to improve it for our comfort and the honor of
the giver, then curiously to enquire what measure was dispensed unto, and
required in others; and though we can say little for clearing what measure of
light was then necessary to salvation (neither needs that seem strange to
him, who is but a little acquainted with these debates, which to this day are
amongst the learned, about fundamental articles of Christianity, what and how
many there be) but to as the thing it self, that they did truly and sincerely
know the Mediator, and had so much light as to direct them in their way to God
by him; may appear, 1. (not to speak of Abraham, who saw, and rejoiced to see
Christ's day, Joh. 8.58. or of the Prophets, Patriarchs, Kings, and righteous
ones, who desired to hear and see these great things, which the Apostles did
behold, Mat. 13.16, 17. All these having received, and seen (though a far off)
the promises, Heb. 11.13.) from that first, and (as I may call it) fundamental
promise, Genesis 3.15. that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head;
the promise made to Abraham, and so often repeated, that in his seed all the
families of the earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18.
Jacobs old prophecy of the coming of Shiloh, and the gathering of the people
to him, Genesis 49.10. Jobs knowledge (left on record) that his Redeemer lived,
and should come to judge the world, Job. 19.25. If we would view the book of
the Psalms, how many clear sermons and predictions are there of Christ's
kingdom, priest hood, sufferings, intercession, etc. And what is the scope of
Solomon's song, but to hold out Christ's love to the Church? but why should I
stay on particulars? since to him all the Prophets gave witness, that through
his name, whosoever believed in him, should have remissi^n of sins. Act. 10.43.
and 3.18. But especially the G^spel (rather then prophecy) of Isaiah, does so
clearly hold out his nativity, sufferings, divine nature, etc. that such as
will deny these (who were so well acquainted with this and other Scriptures) to
have known any thing of Christ and his mediation, must make that people more
stupid and brutish, then the most barbarous nations. 2. Their daily sacrifices
and manifold types, were as so many lectures and sermons concerning Christ, his
su^^^rings and satisfaction; by these Christ was daily preached and held forth
to their eyes, that being the most popular and familiar kind of manifestation:
And what shadow of probability can be alleged for their resting on their
sacrifices as expiatory? it being impossible (and shall we think that the
people of God and their teachers, who were taught of God, were ignorant of this
impossibility, and that in so necess^rty and fundamentel a point?) that the
blood of bulls and goats should take away sins, Heb 10.4. and that all their
ceremonies and types did point out Christ, the writer of that epistle death most
freely and clearly show, arguing against the Jews, not ^^^m new ground^, but
from acknowledged p^^^ciples, and (as ^e ^^ed) ad hominem, proving that the S^n
of Mary, whom they crucified, was the promised Messiah, in whom they believed,
and to whom they did look in all the types, sacrifices and other parts of
worship: Nay, if Jacobs testament enlarged (a Copy whereof, translated into our
language, I once had) be not suppositious, and if we will give credit to Vid.
Galatin de arcan cath verit, praeetipue, Heb. 2, 3, 6, 7.
Galatine, and to these testimonies of the ^ewish Rabbi^^, whose words he
cites, we will rather admire how they attained to such a measure of knowledge
concerning the Trinity, Incarnation, Person and Offices of Christ, then once
question whether they did know and believe in the Mosaiah, and looked to him in
all their performances. And it is most considerable, that the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye^, and the rude multitude in all their debates with Christ, in all
their challenges and accusations, did always grant that they expected the
coming of the Messiah, who was to be the Son of God: according to which well
known principle, the high Priest adjured him to tell, (though he purposed not
to believe his words) whether he was the Christ the Son of God, Mat. 26.63.
Mark 14.61. And to this day, albeit they (being judicially b^^nded for
rejecting the true Messiah) have many strong delusions and gros^ errors, both
concerning his Person and Office; yet they still expect and wait for the coming
of the promised (as they suppose) Messiah: and it is the great work of their
Rabbles to enquire after the cause why he delayeth so long; and how
pathetically do they all lament and mourn for this? and with what importunity
and affection (though carnal and selfish) do they pray for his coming? Yea, the
Gentiles were not altogether left without a testimony: the Sybills prophecies
of Christ were very full and clear; and (as Thom. 22. quaest. 2. art 7. ad 3.
Summa Tabi. eredere. Ramerii pan. theol. de fide cap. 10. etc.
Aquinas, Joannes de Thabia, Ramerius and others testify) in the reign of the
Emperor Constantine, and his mother So Thomas, but Ramerius calls her Sirene.
Joannes de Thabia and others call her Helena
Irene, there was a sepulcher found, in which did lie the corpse of a man,
having a golden plate on his breast, on which was this engraving, Christ shall
be born of a Virgin, and I believe in him. O, Sun! thou shall again see me in
the days of Irene and Constantine. And Job knew Christ distinctly, and as his
Redeemer; and will any imagine that his friends, who spoke so divinely of God,
were ignorant of Christ? Job (idem de amicis ejus dicendum) non fuit in^igena,
nec proseli^us, id est, advenae populi Israel, sed ex gente Idumaea genus
ducens ibi or^us, ibidem mor^uus est, August. de civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 47.


3. Christ is a Priest for ever, Psa. 110.4. Heb. 5.6. Heb. 6.20. Heb. 7.17. He
is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. He is the same as to
the necessity and efficacy of his death and satisfaction, (albeit as to the
ex^cution of his priestly Office, he did not assume our nature, and in it die
and interceed for his people, till the fullness of time came, Gal. 4.4.)
Salvation could never be found in any other; there was never any other Name by
which the sons of men could be saved, Act. 4.12.

4. We may here add the suffrage of the learned, not only of orthodox ^ivines,
(concerning whose testimony there will be no question) but also of popish
Casuists and Schoolmen, all of them joining with their Masters Lombard and
Thomas, and with them maintaining that Faith in the Mediator always, and in
every Licet Hugo de S. victored pud Ramer. pamheol. de side cap 10. neget
personam Mediatoris mittendam fuisse cognitam ante legem Mosaicam; sed Joan. de
Lugo de virtuts fidei, disp. 12. 4. 101. aliam adfert opinionem Hugonis ex
Suar^zio, quod, viz siaes explicata Christi semper sint necessaria in corpore
Ecclesiae, non vero in singulis personis.
state of the Church was necessary to salvation, there being no expiation of
sin without his blood. Thus all of them agree in this general assertion, though
they be divided as to the explication of it; some of them pleading for the
necessity of an explicit faith of the mystery of Incarnation; others only
requiring an implicit faith, whereby a man does know and believe all the ways
and means which God then had, or afterward would reveal, concerning the
salvation of man: amongst which, this of the incarnation of the Son of God
being one, he who thus generally believes may be said to believe that, though
he never heardany thing of Christ, his Person or Offices. Yea, some Explicit
oredere est specialiter and actualiter credere implicit ^redere est
generaliter credere quod Catholica tenet Ecclesia, vel credit: quae fides
sufficit, dummodo in contrarium no^ se^tiatur, Guide. de Baiis. supedeer. did.
15. canones generalium.
extend this implicit faith to the days of the Gospel, holding it now to be
sufficient to salvation to believe and embrace all that the Church of Rome
believes and ^^aintaineth: and though now the learned Doctors of the Romish
Church be ashamed to own such an assertion, yet, that opinion was common among
the ancient Canonists and School men, and has many Patrons, such as
Innocentius, Joannes, Andreas, Abbas, Hostiensis, Imola, Anantas, Baldus,
Zanchinus, Wiliel-Parasiensis, Altisiodorensis, Summa Rosella, etc. as Locis cis
Sanchez and Lugo do confess, citing these Authors for that abominable
Doctrine, which they themselves would seem to disclaim: but whatever be the
profession of the more learned when the point is brought to the trial; yet,
such as are acquainted with their Priests carriage, in hearing confessions and
absolving ignorants, know, that these judicious and tender Casuists do rest
satisfied with this blinded faith, calling it the mother of devotion. But
leaving these blind Guides and miserable Physicians to the sentence of the
great Judge, we proceed to the other member of the distinction.

Fran. Suar. defid. disp. 12. sect. 3. sect. 16. Joan. de Lu. go de fid. disp
12. sect. 4. 83.
Suarez, and with him Joan. de Lugo, distinguish four degrees of explicit
faith, 1. when God is believed in, as the Savior and Justifier of sinners by
such means as he has, or shall appoint and reveal, not determining any in
particular. And this degree does very little differ from that which is most
implicit, except that it condescendeth on our misery, and upon a remedy in the
general. 2. When a Mediator is known and believed on, not determining the
particular way of redemption, and whether that Mediator be God or not. 3. When
the divine nature of the Mediator is also known and believed, but not the way
and manner of Redemption. 4. When both the Godhead and humane nature of the
Mediator are distinctly known, and also the way of redemption, viz. by his
death and suffering: It were too large a field to speak particularly to these,
and in opposition to Pelagius aiebat Christum venisso tantum ut doctorem, non
autem ut mediatorem and redemptorem, cujue meritis sustificaremur Dom. Bannez
in 22. quaest. 2. a^t 8. sect. 3. conclus.
Pelagians of old, and late Socinians, to apply them to the several states and
conditions of the Church. Only in the general, we may affirm, that albeit the
mystery of Incarnation was some one way or other made known to the people of
God since the fall of Adam, yet d^fferently, according to the various state and
condition of the Church; 1. before the Ante legem, sub lege, and sub gratia, ut
loquitur Hugo apud Ramerium, or before revelata in Evangelie.
giving of the law on mount Sinal; 2 under the Law; and, 3. under the Gospel;
according unto which different administrations, there was a different degree
and measure of knowledge required, since the light of the Gospel from time to
time did break forth and shine more clearly, till the dawning of the day of the
Gospel, which we now enjoy, 1 Pet. 1.10.11, 12. Romans 16.25. They who lived
he^^e the Incarnation, the nearer they were to the morning Star, did (as Via
autem bominibus veniendi ad beatitudinem est mysterium incarnationis and
passionis Christi, and ideo mysterium incarnationis Christi aliqualiter
oportuit omni tempore esse creditum apud omnes, diverso mo do tamen secundum
diversitatem temporum and personarum -- eq quae ad mysteria Christi pertinent,
tanto difficilius cognoverunt, quanto a Christo remoritieres suerunt; and tanto
distinctius cognoverunt, quanto Christo propinquiores suerunt. Thom. 22.
quaest. 2. art 7. in corp. quaest. 1. art. 7. ad im.
Aquinas observes) see the the more clearly.

And then in their disputes, they speak of a twofold necessity. For a thing may
be said to be necessary; either, 1. necessitate praecepti; because it is
commanded by him, who can lay an indispensible obligation upon us to obey. Or,
2. necessitate medii; because it is a necessary mean, without which the end
cannot be obtained, albeit it were not enjoined by any divine command. Or as
Lugo loc. cit. sect. 1.. 1.
Lugo speaks, Sine quo etiam inculpabiliter omisso non potest h^berisalus.
And whatsoever is thus necessary unto salvation as a mean, must also be
necessary because of the command; for that same command that obliges us to
work out our salvation, obliges us to apply and make use of all the means
without which we cannot obtain salvation.

Albeit in reference to this distinction the Schoolmen do not agree, some of
them maintaining the knowledge of, and faith in Christ, to have been always
necessary, as a mean, without which, salvation was impossible; others thinking
that this necessity did only flow from the divine appointment and command,
requiring this faith in all men. Yet Lombard. 3. sent. did. 25. Bonavent.
Thom. Dionys. Carthus. Scot. Ricard. Gabriel, Pitigian, Durand. in magistrum
ibid. and Hugo Cavellus in Scotum ibid. Thomas 22. quaest 2. art. 7.8. Bannez.
in loc. Alens. 3. part. quaest. 69, in art. 1. Suarez. de fide disp. 12. sect.
3. Valent. ibid quaest. 2. punct. 4. Lug. disp. 12. sect. 4. Hurtad. disp. 44.
sect. 1. Lorca. disp. 21. Coninch. disp. 14. dub. 9. Zumel. 12. quaest. 89.
art. 6. disp. 4. Becan. de vir Theol cap. 12. quaest. 2. Pet. art. 8. Joseph de
theol. mer. lib. 3. cap. 5. res. 3. Medina de recta in Deum. side cap. 10. Vega
lib. 6. in Trident. 1. cap. 22. Javel. 2. part. Christ. phil. tract. 1. cap. 1.
Soto lib. 2. de not. and cap. 11. Canus relect. de sacra. part. 2 quaest. 2.
Corduba. quaest. ar. lib. 2. quaest. 5. Sanchez in decal. lib. 2., cap 2. Summa
Tabiena credere. Ramerii pantheol de fid. cap. 10.
all of them agree in this (which is enough for our purpose) that some measure
of the Albeit (as we observed) some maintoin an implicit knowledge to be
sufficient.
knowledge of Christ was always, either the one way or the other, necessary to
salvation. But that these debates do not enervat their joint testimony for our
point, may appear from the concessions of three or four of those, who plead for
the least measure of necessity; such as Quilibet tamen habens usum rationis
tenetur pro aliquando ad aliquem actum explicitum etc Scotus loc. cit quaest.
1. Fides Christi explicita semper fuit necessaria in populo fideli necessitate
praecepti, maxim tempore legis scriptae, Ba^n^z loc. cit. 6 conclusio.
Explicita fides mediatoris s^u redemptorts semper fuit necessaria ad sa^utem,
tam in verteri quam in novo Testamento, loquor (inpu^t) de fide quae sit
explicita respectu Mediatoris seu Redemptoris praecise, licet non sit explicata
respectu divinitatis and passi^nis ejusdem Mediatoris. Martin. Bec^n. loc. cit.
^. and Joannes de Lugo explicans ^ocum Augustini de civit Dei lib. 18. cap. 47.
loquentis de iis qui olim ex gentibus salvati sunt: Quod nemini (ait August.)
concessum fuisse credendum est, (...) cui divinitus ^evelatus unus Mediator Dei
and hominum, homo, Christus Jesus, qui venturus in (...) etc. Dici posset
Augustinum ( inquit Lugo) circa quaestionem de facto, in ea fuisse s^^tentia
quod de facto nullus fu^sset justus and sanctus in aliquo statu qui fidem
explicitam unius Mediatoris non habuerit; nam sicut de facto probabile videtur
nullum apud Christianos reperiri hominem fidelem and justum qui aliquid de
Christo non ^u^^erit and crediderit; sic idem apud Judaeos ante adventum
Christi existimari potest: in quibus tam como unis orat notitia Messiae venturi
a^ apud nos Christi jam nati. ^x^ra illum vero populum qui sideles erant apud
gentes and justi, vel illuminati fuerunt divinitus per Angelum. Vel notitiam
fidei per homines acceperant; and id fieri non poterat ni^ vel quio a Judais
eam acciperent, vel per traditionem in aliquibus familiis conservatam: At sine
notitia Mediatoris futuri fides Judaeorum non communicabatur; quae ex
traditio^e Patriarcharum simul cum notitia very Dei conservabatur apud eos in
quibus conservabantur vera Religio and ^ides unius Dei, L^g. loc. cit. 101. And
albeit Thomas does think, that in some case an implicit faith may be
sufficient, viz suppos^ng some of the Gentiles to have been saved, to whom no
revelation of this mystery was made, (which yet he does not absolutely affirm)
and though he say, that these amongst the Jews whom he calls minores, had but
velat^m cognitionem de Christo venturo, which he supposes to be an explicit
knowledge of the Mediator, 22 quaest. 2 art. 7. ad 3. and in ^orp. Yet,
elsewhere he pleads for the necessity of an explicit faith in Christ, as
while he maintains, that faith, which is necessary to salvation, consistere
in du^bus, viz. in vera cognitione Dei, and mysterii incarnationis. 22. quaest.
174. art. 6. in corp. And while he affirms, that articuli fid^^ non creverunt
quoad substantiam, licet quoad explicationem, s^cundum successionem temporum
and vicinitatem ad Christum, 22 quaest. 1 art. 7. in corp. and quaest. 2 art.
7. item ^. part. quaest. 61. art. 3. ad. 2.
Scotus, Bannez, Becanus and Lugo, cited on the margent.

There is another distinction, which may also be here alleged for clearing the
present question, It is one Aliud est petere in nomine Christi, aliud dare and
concedere v^ and virtute ejus, vel potius ut infra addit, aliud virtute Christi
impetrare, To^et. com. in Joan. cap. 16.
thing (says Tolet) to ask in Christ's name, and another to obtain for his
sake, or (as Bannez speaks) it is one Aliud est fidem Christi esse
necessariam, aliud sieve Christo non esse salutem vel justificationem, Bannez
loc. cit. page 192. Concl. 3.
thing to say, that faith in Christ is necessary to salvation, and another
thing to say, that salvation is impossible without Christ. And in this sense
also may that distinction of Lugo, which he brings from Augustine, be
understood. We must (says he) put a difference between the faith in Christ as
the Object, Alia est sides Christi ut objecti seu ut loquitur ^ugust^nus) qua
Christum credimus, alia est sides Christi u^ causae meritoriae, s^u quam p^r
Christum accepimus; viz fides explicita unius Dei remuneratoris, quam ^atuit
essenecessarium necessitate medii, propter il^ua Pau^t ad Heb. 11.6. oportet
etc. and hanc fidem statuit esse supe^naturalem and infun^i ac dari propter
Christum, quamvis ipse Christus ignoretur. loc. cit. disp. 12. sect. 5 ^ 108
and sect 4.885 disp. 13 sect, 3 5 (...) vid etiam sect 1.2, 2.5. disp ^^.
and the faith of Christ as the meritorius cause; or between that faith whereby
we know and believe in him, and the says which we obtain for his sake and
merit, viz, the faith of God as the remunerator of them that seek him; of which
Heb. 11.6 which, says he, may be supernatural and given for Christ to them
who know not Christ; but yet (as we heard) he denies that ever any obtained
salvation by that faith, without the faith and knowledge of Christ as Mediator.

Albeit this distinction may be thus abused and too far extended, yet however
it be applied, it cannot make for the Socinian cause, but much against it as to
the present case of prayer. We grant that we obtain for Christ many things we
do not ask, (and so not in his name) for he does for us, and gives to us,
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. We know not
all our wants, nor the mercies we stand in need of; nay the prime and radical,
the most excellent mercies both in nature and grace, both our natural
generation, and spiritual regeneration; our life, and grace which is the life
of the soul, are previous to our asking in faith, and yet they are given to us
for Christ's sake; which Tolet. Multa and magna Deus etiam non rogatus nec
petitus concedit tam temporalia quam spirituatia bona; doctrine a hac est Basil.
and Clement. Alex and experientia ipsa confirmatur: quis enim nostrum petiit a
Deo animam, corpus and multa alia natu alia? quis petiit ut Christianus fieret?
nemo, and tamen obtinuit: and sunt infinita hu jusmoai, quae enim non rogatus
Deus dat, multo plura sunt quam quae rogatus concedit, Tolet. com: in Joan. cap
16. tom, 2. col. 192.
(though a Jesuit, and it is some what rare to bear one of that sect to plead
for the free grace and bounty of God previous to our works and endeavors)
confesses; adding the testimony of Basil and Clement, and app^aling to
experience: but though we may obtain so many things from Christ, and for
Christ, which we d^ not ask in his name, yet unless we know him, and believe
in him, and improve his name whenever we come to the Throne of grace, we
receive nothing for his sake; but all our mercies must come to us by a common
providence; such as are not in Christ, and never Though they receive before
they believe, yet at length they must believe and acknowledge all to come from
him.
shall be engraffed into that noble vine, do receive nothing for his sake, and
therefore there is no ground from this distinction to think that Pagans who
lived and died in the ignorance of Christ, were saved by his blood; for as Dom.
Bannez loc. cit page 192. est autem in hoc.
Bannez (though he does not affirm that the knowledge of Christ is necessary,
necessitate med^i) well observes, the virtue and merit of Christ is applied to
none but by faith in his name; Romans 3.22, 25, 26, 27, 30. etc. Nay every
passage of Scripture that holds out the necessity of faith, (and how many be
these?) do clearly show that all these places which speak of the impossibility
of salvation without Christ, do also intimat the necessity of knowing and
believing in him as Act. 4.12. Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21. 1 Cor. 15.22. 2 Timothy 1 9. etc. especially, since the Apostle, Act. 15.11. affirms, that by
the grace of the Lord Jesus we are saved even as they.

I have proceeded further in this argument then I intended, but I hope it will
not be unacceptable to the reader who desires to know something of the grounds
and judgment of the learned concerning this intricat question; we shall now
only 1. point out some scriptures, from which some judicious divines have, and
not without probability might collect, that if not the whole body of the Jewish
church, yet some who were more eminent for knowledge and holiness, did pray in
Christ's name; 2. we will propound a distinction; and 3. obviat an objection.

As for the first, these and such like expressions seem to intimat that the
ancient people of God did tender up their supplications in the name of the
Mediator; as 1, while they ask of God for his names sake, Psa. 25.11. Psa.
79.9. if we look on Exodus 23.21. where Gods name is said to be in the angel
which did conduct the Israelites, (which angel was the Mal. 3.1.
messenger of the covenant, the promised Messiah) may we not conceive that
while they desired to be heard, for the name of God, they asked for his sake in
whom Gods name (says Diodat on Exodus 23.21.
Diodati) is said to be, because he is of one essence and glory with the
Father? 2. while they desire an answer to their prayers for his mercies sake,
as Psa. 6 4. Psa. 109.26. might they not look to the Messiah, in whom the
bowels of mercy are opened to sinners? 3. while they plead Gods faithfulness
and truth, as Psa. 40.11. Psa. 143.1. did they not plead in his name in whom
all the promises are yea and amen? 4, While they ask for David's And albeit they
might mention the promites made to David, and the kindness showed to him, yea
and mention his obedience and sincerity as that which the Lord might be pleased
graciously to remuneratin them, they being in some sense his children, and he
their Father, and governor; and so might look to the promise, Exodus 20.6. yet
they could not ask for his sake as the meritorious cause, the type must not
thus rob the truth of his honor.
sake, as Psa. 132.10. did they not rely on him of whom David was a type? would
they run to the shadow and neglect the substance? especially since the Messiah
once and again is called David, as Isa. 37.35. Ier. 30.9. Eze. 34.23, 24. the
truth going under the name of the type; why may we not think that they rather
looked after the typified David, then him who only was the type and figure? 5.
while they prayed the Lord to hear for his own sake; thus the Lord promises,
(and they accordingly might have prayed him) to defend Jerusalem, 2 King 19.34.
where by way of explication is added, and for my servant David's sake. viz. for
him whom David did typifie: thus also we have that same phrase expounded, 2
King. 20.6. Isa. 37.35. and may not he be said to be the Fathers own, Who is
the brightness of his glory and the express image of his person? Heb. 1.3.6.
Hezekiah has his recourse to him as his cautioner and undertaker, and David
runs to him as his Surety, Isa. 38.14. Psa. 119.122.

But you will say, what ever truth may be in such a commentary upon these
places, yet none of them do expressly and convincingly hold out the point. Ans.
1. It cannot be imagined that the Jews who did see Christ afar off, and whose
light in comparison of ours was but darkness, should speak so distinctly and
expressly of Christ, as we who live in the days of the Gospel; 2. As of
sermons, so of prayers, for the most part we have only some brief notes set
down in the Scriptures; and therefore we may not conclude what was not spoken,
from what is not written: so that if we would know how the ancient people of
God did tender up their worship to him, whether in the name of a Mediator or
not; it seems a surer and better way to survey all the Scriptures of the old
Testament which speak of his person and offices, then to confine our inquiry to
these few and brief parcells of prayers recorded there. But since so much
weight is laid upon an express text, let us look on Dan. 9, 17. Where the
Prophet prays thus, O! our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolat,
for the Lords sake. After which manner, and in the same words, we Christians to
this day use to pray, while we express our dependence upon the merit and
intercession of our blessed Savior, and why should we conceive that Daniel
using the same words did not express the same thing?

Albeit there be, 1. thus so many several expressions in the prayers of the
ancient people, which may have relation to Christ; yea, 2. though there be so
many clear predictions of his Incarnation, Passion, etc. And, 3. although some
eminent Believers, might expressly offer up their prayers in his name, yet for
ordinary, and as to the body of Believers (we need not speak of the rude and
carnal multitude, who rested on their outward oblations, and looked no further
then sense could reach.) We think with English Divines on Joh. 16.24. Tolet
Cajetan ibid Calvin. Mayer Diodati etc.
judicous Divines, that they did not use to express the name of Christ, of the
Messiah, or of the Mediator in their prayers; albeit relying on his merit and
satisfaction, they expected to be heard; and thus they did not ask formally and
expressly in his name, but virtually and really; and therefore our Lord in that
perfect pattern of prayer, which he taught his Disciples, though between (as it
were) the Levitical and Gospel way of worship; yet did not enjoin them to ask
expressly in his name.

And that place, Joh. 16.24. (which may be objected against their praying in
the name of Christ) does only serve to clear this distinction; for it may be
supposed, that Christ there does not simply deny that his Apostles had asked any
thing in his name; could these, who knew him to be the Savior of of the world,
draw near to God in any part of worship not relying on him? but he denies that
directly, expressly and by name they had asked any thing for his sake, although
after the former manner of worship they had asked in his name; viz. virtually,
implicitly under types and shadows. Hence Cajet loc. cit.
Cajetan calls that manner of invocation, ( viz. expressly in his name) which
he prescribed to his disciples a little before his death, and to all the true
Israelits to the end of the world, notum orandi modum. But though the main
scope of that place be to hold out these two different ways of asking in his
name; the one formerly followed, the other now prescribed, yet it may
rationally be thought, that our Lord there does also upbraid them for living
too much by sense, and that being too much taken up with his bodily presence,
they had too much neglected the spiritual improvement of his Mediatory office.
Albeit it seem hard to think that the honest servants of God did not some one
way or other look to the Mediator in all their performances, as being typified
and represented by all their sacrifices, sacraments, etc. yet, according to
their measure of faith and light, they did more or less rely upon his name,
and notwithstanding of that rich opportunity the Apostles had for increasing
their knowledge and faith, yet its certain, that before their master was taken
from them, they had attained but to a small measure of both.

But that we may be said truly and really to ask in Christ's name, when the
habitual intention of our heart does rest on him; albeit we do not actually
think on him, and so cannot mention his name, is manifest from the many
petitions in our prayers, to which his name is not annexed, (I know none who
uses, neither is it needful thus at every petition to mention his glorious
Name.) and yet none will once question whether all these petitions may be thus
presented in his Name, yea and no less then these other desires expressly
offered in his Name: its true we use to close our prayers in his Name,
professing that we ask all for his sake, but before that clause be added, were
not (I would ask) the several petitions put up in faith? otherwise, how could
they be acceptable?

Before we proceed to the application, there is a question may be here
propounded, viz. whether we should ask temporal and bodily things in the name
of Christ? for it will not be denied that Spiritualls, which have such a direct
tendency unto, and connection with eternal Salvation (whereof he is the
purchaser) should be asked for his sake. Ans. Although this question be not much
agitated, yet, I know no orthodox Divine who does not suppose that it must be
so, and who, by their practice, does not show their judgment; only August.
tract. 102. in Joan. Theoph. in Joh. cap. 16.24. Gregot. hom. 27. in evan.
their words we have already cited.
Augustine, Gregory and Theophilact, may be by some mistaken, as if they did
deny, that any thing could be asked in Christ's name except salvation, and what
has an immediate tendency thereto. But Augustine himself shows, that he
speaks only comparatively, viz. that all temporal things are not absolutely
nothing, but nothing in respect of salvation. And Gregooy and Theophilact do
only deny, that Christ can be improven as a Savior, if we do not seek to him
for life and salvation: Yet, for preventing of such a gross error, we shall
briefly give some few reasons.

1. We, in Adam, by our manifold actual rebellions, did forfeit our right to
all the creatures, and therefore we cannot have a sanctified right and title to
them, but in him who is the Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things: but all are ours if we be Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. and
therefore, in testimony of our dependence on him, and our acknowledgment of his
purchase and right, we must ask all in his name.

2. All the promises (of 1. Tim. 4.8.
this life, as well as of that which is to come) in him, are yea and amen, in
him they were made, and in him they have their accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1.20. How
then can we plead any promise but in his Name; and without a promise we have no
warrant to ask, and cannot ask in faith: Nay, I would ask, in whose name do we
ask if not in Christ's Name? What can be the title or claim we can pretend, if
we be not in him, and ask not for his sake? Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is; and must not that flow from his blood who is our
righteousness and sanctification? 2 Cor. 1.30. Our inherent holiness cannot
give us a right to the promise, though it be an evidence and fruit of our being
in him, who has purchased for us a right to all things.

3. Our blessed Lord, in that pattern which he prescribed to his disciples,
Mat. 6. did teach them to ask temporals, comprehending all those
synecdochically under our daily bread; and he required that all their prayers
should be tendered up in his Name, Joh. 14.12.13. Joh. 16.24. adding no
limitation, but on the contrary, extending the promise to whatsoever they would
ask: and shall we limit his general grant, and say, that there are some things
we may not ask in his Name, and which he will not give nor we obtain for his
sake?

4. What we may not ask in faith we should not ask at all, Jam. 1.6, 7. But our
faith can have no rock to stay on but the name of Christ: if we come not to
this living stone we cannot offer up an acceptable sacrifice to God, 1 Pet.
2.4, 5. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and faith must
be toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 20.21.

5. These outward things being of themselves indifferent, they become
instruments and weapons either of sin or righteousness; and therefore, that
they may become blessings indeed, and sanctified in the use, they must be asked
in his name who is the fountain, and whose Spirit is the efficient of all our
sanctification, and the right improving of all our mercies, Heb. 10.29. 1 Cor.
1.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Here we might resume the reasons brought for the point in the general, and
apply them to this particular; we may not draw nigh to God, nor ask any thing
from him, but in Christ's name; therefore not temporals.

Is Application.
it so (O friends!) Is God a consumeing fire, and we as dry stubble? Has
Christ undertaken, and is he so able and willing to keep us from the devouring
flames? What folly and madness were it then in us to draw nigh to God without a
Mediator, whom we may interpose between us and divine justice, and who may be a
shelter to guard us against the frowns and terrors of the Almighty? If mo then
fifty thousand 1 Samuel 6.19.
Bethshemits were smitten for looking into the Ark (which was but a symbol of
God's presence) if Exodus, 19.12.21.
Israel durst not look on, nor touch the mount when the Lord did manifest a
little of his glory; if thus without a warrant and protection we may not look
on God's back parts, nor meddle with the least testimony and token of his
presence, and manifestation of his glory; O! how should we be afraid to come
before his Ps. 27.8. Ps. 105.4.
face, and to draw nigh, not the Mount, but the Heb. 4.16.
Throne, unless Esth. 4.11.
the King hold out the golden Scepter to us? and Christ has purchased, and
still pleads, that the Scepter may be stretched forth to us; there is none in
heaven or earth beside him, who can get us access and acceptance; the fountain,
that infinite fountain of Gods mercy was stopped, that not so much as one drop
could issue out to sinners, till our blessed Redeemer did lay down an
invaluable price, and by his blood did obtain, that the Zech. ^3.1.
fountain should stand open for washing away sin and uncleanness. And now he
has the keys in his hand, and offers water to the Rev. 22.17.
thirsty: The door was shut, and the way to the treasure was unpassable, till
Christ himself became the Joh. 10.7.
door and the Joh 1.4.6.
way; and now in him, we have access with boldness and confidence, Ephesians. 3.12.
and, 2.18. Romans 5.2. The people of Israel might not offer sacrifices, but upon
the Altar God appointed; and Christ was that Altar, so he is called, Heb.
13.10. and that other was of no value, but as it did typifie this true Altar:
The Altar under the Law did sanctify the oblation, Exodus 29.37. Mat. 23.19.
and Christ does sanctify our prayers and all our performances: His blood is
that incense, the smoke whereof must always ascend, or else our sacrifices
cannot be a sweet savor to God, Rev. 8.3, 4. Ephesians. 5.2. Not only Christ's
sacrifice was an offering to God of a sweet smelling savor, but it also makes
our oblations acceptable, 1 Pet. 2.5. The typical Altar did sanctify the gift,
but Christ must first sanctify the Altar; the horns of it must be sprinkled
with blood, Exodus 29.12. and 30.10. and thus it did ceremonially sanctify, and
typifie the blood of Christ, Who through the eternal spirit offered himself
without spot to God, to purge our conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God, Heb. 9.14. O then be thankful to God for this Altar! and bring all
your offerings to it; ye have not far to go, ye are not sent to Jerusalem nor
to the Temple, ye always have this Altar at hand: Thou need'st not ascend unto
heaven, nor descend unto the deep, that thou may find it, Romans 10.6, 7. thou
may worship where thou will, only in Spirit and truth; this Altar always
stands by thee, it fills heaven and earth, 1 Timothy 2.18. Joh. 4.21, 23. O
then! do not dishonor this Altar, do not with Papists, Papists substitute many
mediators in Christ's room. See chap. 6.
erect In Christi nomine oration porrigatur, non in nomine angelorum, non in
nomine aliquorum sanctorum, non in nomine ipsorum petentium, non in nomine
bonorum operum, sed in Christ's nomine: nomen, hoc est non quod scribitur
literis; sed meritum est incar naetionis, nativitatis, vitae, passionis, crucis
orationis and mortis. Simon de Cassia, lib. 12. cap. 15.
many altars of earth, and forsake this heavenly and golden Altar: but let us
rather say with them, Josh. 22.29, God forbid that we should rebel against the
Lord, and turn this day from following the Lord, to build an altar besides the
altar of the Lord our God; yea, and which is the Lord our God. Remember
Jeroboams sin and punishment; he would erect new altars, 1 Kings 12.32. and God
did put a mark of his displeasure upon him and his posterity. The Lord
abhors all other altars, none of them can sanctify the gift; all our
performances, though never so specious, if they be not done in Christ's name and
strength, and washen in his blood, are an abomination to God; though our head
were Jer. 9.1.
waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears; thouh Ps. 119.156.
rivers should run down our eyes for our iniquities, though we could pray with
the 1 Cor. 13.1.
tongue of Angels, and diligently follow every duty, yet the Lord would not
regard our tears, nor value our service and work.

As Christ is thus our Altar, so he is our Priest, who with his own blood has
purchased liberty to us to enter into the holiest by a new and living way,
which he has consecrated for us, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21. If any man under the law
did offer a sacrifice, and did not bring it to the Priest, that man must be cut
off from among his people, Lev. 17.4, 5. Let us remember the judgments of God
upon Saul for offering sacrifice; and on Vzziah for taking a censer in his hand
to burn incense; therefore the Lord rejected Saul from being King over Israel,
and smote Vzziah with a leprosy unto the day of his death, wherefore he was
cut off from the kingdom, and from the house of the Lord. 1 Samuel 13.9, 14 2 Chronicles. 26.19, 21. O then! let not our hearts be lifted up, (as Vzziahs was,
ver. 16.) to our destruction; let us not dare to offer our sacrifice in our own
name. Ah! what is our worth, or the worth of our sacrifice? But having such a
High Priest, let us draw nigh in his name, with boldness and in full assurance
of faith, Heb. 4.14, 16. Though thy hands were clean (as to any gross
defilement) and thy sacrifice without blemish, yet if thou come in thy own
strength, the Lord may say to thee, as to that people, Isa. 1.11, 12. To what
purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? who has required this at your
hands, thus to tread my courts? Behold the sinner and his sacrifices, but where
is the Priest? May I say, as Isaac once asked, where was the Lamb, when he saw
the fire and the wood? Genesis 22.7. Thou drawest nigh to plead for covenanted
mercies, and do not look to Jesus the Heb. 12.24.
Mediator of the new covenant; thy sacrifice, like to the popish mass, is an
unbloody sacrifice; if thou neglect the blood Ibid.
of sprinklings, the Lord will reject thee: We read of a golden Censer and
Altar, and much Incense, that should-be offered with the prayers of all Saints,
Rev. 8.3. And Christ is that golden Censer and Altar, and his blood the sweet
Incense; and what are our sacrifices, all our prayers and tears, of themselves,
but Phil. 3.8.
(...) and loathsome dung, and notwithstanding of these, the Lord will be to us
(...) Deuteronomy. 4* 24.
Esh-ochla and Elkanna, and we our selves Hos. 1.6, 9.
Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah; O! but in Christ the Lord is Isa. 7.14.
Immanuel, and we Hos. 2.1.
Ammi and Ruhamah; He, who was to us a consuming fire, will become our God, and
have Hos. 2.23.
mercy on them, who otherwise could not obtain mercy; and will say to them, who
by nature were not his people; thou art my people: And they being in Christ,
will say, thou art my God.

The famous Athenian Captain, Themistocles, being banished by his ingrate
Contrymen, Themistocles veterem regis iram metuens, se supplicem praebuit
proprium quendam regionis morem sequutus, arrepto Admeti parvulo filio cum eo
in sacrarium (quod summa colebatur religione) se conjecit; quod supplicondi
genus maximum ac serme solum nunquam repudiandum Molossi opiniaebantur. Plut.
Cher. Grec. and Romans illi vit. in Themistoc. Lapo Florent. interpret, page
(mihi) 118. May we not think the Lord by this custom among Pagans, would
shadow and hold forth to us his tender bowels, to all those who fled for refuge
to his Son Jesus Christ.
and flying for refuge to Admetus, King of the Molossians, whom he had mocked,
and exceedingly irritated, while he had power in the Athenian commonwealth, and
therefore fearing least Admetus should revenge that old quarrel, he ran to the
sanctuary with the Kings Son in his arms, and thus supplicated the provoked
King; which kind of entreaty did always (says Plutarch) prevail with the
Molossians, yea, then when all other means did prove ineffectual. Ah! could the
Pagan King refuse them nothing, who came with his Son in their arms; and shall
the King of the Saints reject such as come to him with his Son in their heart?
Oh! what needs then discourage thee, O disconsolat Saint! Ask whatsoever thou will, the King can refuse thee nothing; thou, who have fled in to his Son and
ask in his name, what can thou ask (if good) that will be withheld? Joh.
14.13, 14. what? have thou many infirmities? he is touched and affected
therewith, he sympathizeth with thee, Heb. 4.15. what? is thy condition
hopeless and desperate? it is thy unbelief that makes thee think so; for he is
able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. what? art
thou poor, blind, naked? what is thy malady? can thou tell what aileth thee?
Hearken to glad-tidings, and Though they be of an old date (for the Gospel was
preached in Paradise, Genesis 3.5.) yet they are to this day as sweet* ravishing
and refreshing, as at the first, they always make anew impression upon the
heart and affections, and so are still news to the longing soul.
news that may revive thy fainting soul; thy Redeemer lives for ever, he is
able and willing to save (...), he will heal all thy diseases.

Ah! (will the poor sinner say) but my desires are faint and remiss, my prayers
cold and formal; and my adresses few and rare, and while I am at work I make
little progress, I meet with many sad interruptions, many wandering thoughts and
diversions, and thus my hopes are cut off; for what good can be expected by the
hands of such a lazy and unfaithful messenger? Ans. But though it be thus with
thee, though there be much dross mixed with thy gold, and much inequality in
thy work, yet Christ's gold is pure and without mixture, and thou must trade
with his money, thou have neither price nor money; penny nor peny-worth of thine
own, though thou must buy, thou have nothing of thine own to give; the
christian merchandise is a paradox to the world, there was never such a market
proclaimed by men as that, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. etc. where money-lesse men
are invited to come, and buy freely, and the indigent may have a supply of all
his wants; though he has no money to give; yet he may get what he will, yea
the poor may there buy gold that he may be enriched, Rev. 3.18. What though
thou faint by the way, and when thou come to the well thou have nothing (as
thou think) to draw with, yet if thy thirst continue, thou will not be sent
away empty; though thou have not a hand to bring in, yet thou have a mouth
ready to receive; What though thy walk and work be unequal, yet Christ's work
for thee is constant and equal, without change and interruption, and he makes
continual intercession for thee, Heb. 7.25. what should then discourage thee?
if he interceed, must he not prevail? has he not moyen and money enough to
lay out for all thy wants? shall thy weakness and infirmities (but take heed
lest rebellions and reigning sins be accounted such) mar his work, and
outcry his blood? he prays and interceedeth as effectually for thee when
thou art weak and sick, as when thou art stronger, and then lends (as it
were) a better lift, and will not suffer the work to miscarry for want of thy
help: but thou must not make this a plea for thee to lie by, thou must join and
concur; his incense must not be offered up alone, but with the prayers of the
Saints. Rev. 8.3.

CHAP. IX. Of the help and assistance of the holy Spirit, of its necessity, and
how it may be known, and differenced from Satanicall suggestions, and from that
activity and fervency which may flow from the light and conviction of a
natural conscience, sense of wants, etc.
Jud. v. 20. praying in the holy Ghost; Romans 8. v. 26. Likewise the spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the spirit it self Viz. efficien ter and causaliter, by enabling us to
interceed and pray with such fervency as uses to be accompanied with sighs and
groanings; as has been shown, Ch, 5. sect, 1,
makes intercession for us etc.
It Is a strange word which we read, Phil. 3.20. carnal hearts will not believe
it, they do not know how those who constantly abide on earth, can be said to
have their conversation in heaven, and O! may the trembling sinner say, would
to God I might The word (...), Phil. ^.20. may well he renared city-converse,
or, commerce, we behave our selves as free denizens of the city of heaven,
having free commerce and trading with the place* see Leigh. Critie. Sac.
trade with that place; but Ah! the distance is great, and the way unpassable,
where shall I find a ladder that will reach the heavens? I cannot move one
foot, nor ascend one step toward the Jerusalem that is above, and who will
take me by the hand? who can help? what can the weak creature (though willing
and ready) do for my assistance? what though I stood upon its shoulders, and
though all the power in nature were combined and united together, it could not
elevat a sinner above the earth. Nay, but though thou be weak and infirm, and
very unfit for such a journey, yet thou have help at hand, the Spirit is ready
to help thy infirmities, and to enable thee to pray, and thus to keep
correspondence with, and have thy conversation in heaven; unto thee, O Lord, do
I lift up my soul. You will say, O noble design and resolution! but where
shall David find a chariot to carry his half dead and heavy heart so far? and
by what wing^ shall he ascend and mount so high? Nay, but hearken, and he will
teach thee the way, he takes the right course, he does not debate nor dispute
the question, but by prayer approaches the Throne, and quickly as with wings
ascends to heaven, and gets access, and presents his supplication to the King,
Psalm. 25.1, 2. etc. Psalm. 86.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. But yet if David had been left
alone, he would have found the distance too great and his legs too weak for
such a ^^r voyage; after his fall he missed his guide, and with what importunity
did he pray the Lord to uphold him with his free Spirit, and that he would not
utterly take away his holy Spirit from him, that his mouth, which for want of
the breathing of the spirit for a while was slopt, might be opened again? Psalm.
51.12.11.15.

What we are now to say concerning the help and assistance of the Spirit, may
be comprehended under th^^^ three ^cads. 1. We will bring some reasons holding
forth its ^^^ss^ty; 2. We will show how and after what manner the Spirit helps
us to pray* 3. How the motion of the Spirit may be distinguished. 1. From
satanicall suggestions; 2. from the natural motions of our own spirit,
sometimes pressing and drawing us to the Throne; adding a word of application,
but reserving several practical questions to the cases, Part, 3.

As for the first, The necessity of divine help and assistance, may appear, 1.
from our ignorance; 2. from our impotency and inability; 3. from our
unwillingnesse and averseness; and, 4. from Gods justice and holiness, which
otherwise would obstruct our access and acceptance.

1. Then we are naturally blind and ignorant, we know not spiritual things,
those most excellent and necessary things; nay, they are foolishness unto us,
until the Spirit discover their excellency, and our misery without them, 1
Cor. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. and therefore, without the light and direction of the
Spirit, we cannot love and desire them, nor pray for them; what we Ignotinulla
cupid^.
know not, we cannot love or prize. Yea as to temporalls, we are ready also to
mistake, and to ask a Mat. 7.10.
serpent in stead of fish; and we are ready to be too peremptory in those
foolish destructive desires. We know neither what, nor how to ask; and
therefore we stand in need of the help of the Spirit, that he may teach us to
pray as we ought, and according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27.

2. As we are thus foolish and ignorant, so we are weak and impotent; nay, dead
and without strength, and cannot move one step toward God without his help;
until he Ezekiel. 37.6.
blow upon those dry bones, and put a new principle of life into them, and then
draw our heavy and dull (though a little quickened and enlivened) hearts up to
the Throne of grace, Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 5.6. Ioh. 6.44. we are not able and
sufficient of our selves to think one good thought, 2 Cor. 3, 5. nor to speak a
right word; none can (beleevingly and with affections suitable to such an
object) say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Cor. 12.3. such
corrupt trees as we naturally are, can bring forth no good fruit; Mat. 7.18.
unto the defiled and unbeleeving, nothing is pure, Tit. 1.15. his heart and
conscience being polluted, his best things, his prayers and sacrifices are
naught and loathsome, they are an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 21.27. and 28.9.
and therefore unless the Almighty stretch forth his arm for our help, we
cannot look up to him; we have no oblation which we can offer to him, not a
thought or word suitable to his Majesty and greatness, and the nature of that
heavenly exercise; nay, though we were translated from death to life, yet still
we labor under so much weakness and infirmity, that we neither know nor are
able to ask what or as we ought, unless the Spirit (...) is a metaphore taken
from him who goes to lift a great weight, which he is not able to meve from
the ground; and another stands over against him, withwhom, joining hands, they
tak up the weight together. see Edw. Leigh in vec, (...).
help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. Prayer is too great a weight for our weak
arms to lift, but when we are pulling and tugging to no purpose, then the
Spirit comes, and Particula enim (...) ad nes laborantes refertur, quorum
tomen vis omnis ab eo spiritu proficiscitur, qui sicut nos penituscollapsos
erexit, ita etiam erectos regit, Beza in Romans 8.26.
takes up the heaviest end, and also upholdeth and strengthens our hands for
lifting the lightest, and thus makes the work sweet and easy to us; the Spirit
helps (says Leigh loc. cit.
Leigh) as the nurse helps the little child, who by it self can neither stand
nor walk; and thus by the hands of the nurse, taking it by the steeves, it is
enabled to go as she directs; so weak Saints, etc.

But, 3. as we are thus blind and weak, so we are unwilling, wicked and
obstinat; We have much enmity against God, and averseness from a communion with
him; the carnal mind is enmity (in the abstract) against God and spiritual
things, it is not subject to his Law and Ordinances, neither indeed can be,
Col. 1.21. Romans 1.30. Romans 8.7. and how shall this enmity be removed, and the
foolish self-destroying potshard be made be made to submit to its maker, and
the rebel subject to make his supplication to the King? only the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in us can make us yield, and lay down our weapons, and resolve
to fight no more against God; the Spirit of adoption, of enemies can make us
sons, and beget filial affections in us, that we with confidence may draw nigh
to God, and call him Abba Father. v. 9, 14, 15.16. Gal. 4.6.

4, Our acceptance and welcome depends upon the help and concurrence of the
Spirit; as wear enemies to God, so children of his wrath; haters, and hated of
God; wa'king contrary to him, and he to us, Ephesians. 2.3. Lev. 26.23, 24.27, 28.
Psa. 18.26. O! but the Lord knows the mind of the Spirit, and will accept
those desires that are breathed in the heart by him, Romans 8.27. The Lord
knows not our howling and crying, he regards not our tears and prayers, they
are an abomination to him, Prove. 28.9. Though all the spirits of just men made
perfect, and all the Angels in heaven would join with us, yet they could not
purchase access to us; by one Spirit (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.18.) we have
access unto the Father, and ^^ere is none beside him, that can obtain an
entrance for us: Its true, Christ is the door, Joh. 10.7. but the Spirit must
open the door, and get us access, he must take us by the hand and bring us to
the Father, and put acceptable words in our mouth; yea, after he has made our
peace with God, and breathed in us the Spirit of life, yet if he do not
constantly actuar and quicken that principle, our prayers will want life and
^eat, and can no more ^e called spiritual sacrifices then the levitical
offering until Lev. 9.24.
sire (which was of a heavenly descent) was brought from the Altar to burn it:
It Is true, there may be much fervency and heat, there may be much fire brought
from natures furnace, but that common fire is strange fire, though it be
brought from our own ch^mney, yet it is extraneous and unfit for the use; its
smo^k is loathsome, and a favor of unpleasant smell to God. The strange
punishment of Na^ab and Abih^s for bringing strange fire to the Lords
sacrifices, should be a warning to us: they should have brought sacred fire
from the Which should have been always preserved burning, and never go out,
Lev* 6.13.
Altar, and not have prefaced the ordinance of God with that which was common;
now this sacred fire (says Diod on Levit. 10.1.
Diodati on the place) signified the power of the holy Ghost, by which we can
only offer sacrifices acceptable to God; our sacrifices must be an abomination
to God unless we bring a coal from the Altar, and writ u^^n the br^^things of
his Spirit to quicken and warm our dead and c^ld affecti^^e, Mant. on Jud. 20.
Fire from heaven on the sacrifice, once was (says one) and yet is a solemn
token of acceptance.

You will say, those who are in the way to conversion, who are lying under some
legal preparations, who are looking after God, and advancing some steps toward
the kingdom, do often meet with acceptance, though as yet they have not the Rom
8.9*
Spirit of Christ, and are none of his, and so cannot pray in the Spirit; yet
their prayers are heard, and their endeavors prove successful. Ans. 1. There
is a twofold acceptance, one absolute and illimited, by way of sovereignty, and
there is a qualified and covenanted acceptance, by way of gracious transaction
and free promise; the Lord out of his absolute sovereignty, may do with his own
what he will, and show mercy to whom he will, and thus accept of persons, and
grant their desires, though they cannot ^^y claim to a promise, but a
covenanted and ^^^^^lible acceptance supposes an i^t rest in Christ, pleaded
^t the th^^ne of Grace by the help of the Spirit. But. 2* though such as are
seeking after God in a legal way of hum^^^tion, conviction, endeavor, etc.
have not as yet the Spirit (...) Christ dwelling in their hearts yet they have
some wark^^^d impression of the Spirit on their (...); though (...) be not yet
renewed and sanctifi^^, (...) the Spirit (...) a s^^cial hand in every step
they move ^^^^^ds God, (...) cial insh^^ce upon their heart, (...) in the ev^^
^^y prove, and so may be called saving and effectual; ^^^^ce it tends that
way, and may in the issue proves^^h. ^^ay, there is not any excellency in m^^,
or difference (as to the better) of ^^e from another, but it prece^ds from the
Spirit* and every (...) toward the kingdom of God, must be ordered and carried
on by him, and the nearer we are brought, the ^^ore we owe to the Spirit, and
his work is the more eminent and sp^ciall.

As to the second, how does the Spirit ^^lo us? what is that assistance he
ass^^deth to us in praye^? Ans. There is a common a distance, and (...) is an
ass^^^^ (...) ^^^atly given to the Saints, and (...): for it would (...) See
^h^^ 1.
^^^embred, that prayer may be considered, either as a g^ft common to good or
bad, or as it is a grace and ^^^ct find mea^ for obtaining what we stand in
ne^d of, and thus it is prop r^^o the Saint. 1. Then as to the gift of prayer,
or an ability and readines^ to express our desires (whether real or in s^^w
only) in a sit and decent man^r, that must (...) from (...) Spirit of God, and
be fr^^ly given to ^s, wh^^ ^^tu^^lly (...) not only g^a^i^ gr^^^^^ saciens (^s
they p^^k but not properly if truty) but also g^^tia gratis da^^, not only
(...), but (...), p^^^ce ^eth from the Spirit; and the word, 1 C^^* 4.7. may be
c^^c^ded to (...) ^x^^^^^cy whereby one diss^reth from another.
destitute, as of the grace, so of the gift of prayer: not only that
extraordinary gift, whereby in the infancy of th Church some were able upon all
occasions, according to the exigence of the hearers, to pray in a strange
language, which they never learned; not only this miraculous gift, immediately
infused by the holy Ghost (which notwithstanding was but a gift, and might be
abused, as may appear from, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16.) but also the ordinary gift and
faculty of expressing our conceptions and desires in apt words, and a decent
manner before the Lord (to which our natural parts and industry, our hearing,
reading, meditation, conference, etc. do contribute and concur) must be freely
given, and proceed from the Spirit of God, as the principal author and
efficient: He who filled Bezaleel and Aholiab with wisdom and understanding in
all manner of workmanship, Exodus 35.31. and to whom the Plowman owes his skill
in tilling and sowing the ground, Isa. 28.26.29. must not he stir up in our
minds holy thoughts, and fill our mouths with suitable expressions when we come
before the Lord? There is here much more then parity of reason; this being a
gift for the edification and sanctification of the Church (which is his special
work) though there be diversitiy of gifts (as to that end, viz. the good and
building up of the Church) yet one and the same Spirit works all these,
dividing to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.4, 11. But though thus
the gift of prayer proceeds from the Spirit of God, yet it being a common
gift, we cannot thereby be said to pray in the Spirit, or in the holy Ghost,
according to the proper sense of these words, Ephesians. 6.18. and Jud. 20. and as
they are used by Christians, for thus they rather signify the grace, then gift
of prayer; and thus the bestowing of this gift, cannot be that assistance,
after which we now enquire; there is a mutual separation, for as thus the gift
may be without grace, so there may be this gracious assistance without any
considerable measure of that gift, as we show, Chap. 1. But so much now of the
common assistance of the Spirit, whether miraculous or ordinary.

2. As for that special assistance which is peculiar to the Saints, it is
either habitual or actual, 1. Then habitual grace, that seed of God and
principle of life, (the soul of the new man) is necessary to prayer, as to
every spiritual performance; a dead man cannot move, and natural life is no
more necessary to vital actions, then the life of grace to every spiritual
action; the tree must be made good, else it cannot bring forth good fruit, Luke
6.43, 44, 45. Mat. 12.33. we cannot pray in the spirit till we have received
the spirit of adoption, we must be, (I do not say we must know that we are)
Sons, before we can truly and in faith call God Father. The Spirit does not
infuse prayer in us as he does the habits (or rather faculties) of grace and
life, without our activity and concurrence; prayer is not (as Yea and Aunomians
also, according to Pagits cata logue of their errors; here siog. page 110.
Where they are said to affirm that allgiaces are in Christ as the subject and
none in us, so that Christ believes Christ loves etc. and so they agree, with
familists in denying our concurrence.
Familists foundly dream) so the work of the Spirit, that it is not our work
also, the spirit does not pray in us or for us, but helps us to pray for our
selves Vna sub levet Beza, ad juvat, ^ulgata; auxiliatur Erasmus, una capessit
Scapula in voc. (...) part^cula (...) ad nos laborantes refertur Bez.
(...), Romans 8.26. he concurreth and adds his assistance to our work, which
subjectively is terminated in us, and denominats us; and can we work without
strength, and until first an active principle of life be breathed into us?
hence Interpreters by the phrase praying in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. do affirm to
be held forth both the spirit of him who prays, ( viz. the new nature which
frequently is so called in the Scripture) and the Spirit of God which helps
and assisteth us in that work.

But though habitual grace be thus so necessary, yet it is not sufficient; its
true the spirit of regeneration is also the spirit of supplication, therefore
these two are conjoined in the promise, Zech. 12.10. A gracious soul must pray,
there is no blind nor dumb children in Gods family, all of them as they must
look up to their Father, and depend on him; so they must speak to him, and lay
out their wants and necessities before him: but yet there is not such a
inseparable connection, but there may be and often is a separation; a gracious
heart at some seasons and occasions, may want the assistance of the Spirit when
he would draw nigh to God, so that he may pour out natural and carnal
desires, yea and when as, to the matter, the desires are spiritual, yet they
may be so weak and faint, so remiss and destitute of that life, that
attention, high estimation, fervency, seriousness, etc. which the quality and
worth of the object, and the nature of that solemn and heavenly exercise
requires, that it were a great in sign ty to the holy Ghost to f^ther such
prayers upon him. While then the pious and learned Mr. Mr. Baxter, m^th for a
settled peace of con^cience, direct 29. doubt. 9.
Baxter, says, He ^e^^^veth there is never a prayer that ever a Believer did
(...) up to God for things lawful and useful, but it was put up by the help
of the Spirit. I would think this judicious Divine does not speak universally
of all prayers put up by Believers, but only of all such prayers as have some
life and seriousness in them, some measure of attention, etc. which are the
proper effects of the Spirits assistance; and while the Lord is thus Ps. 145.18.
called upon in truth, though there be much weakness and manifold infirmities;
yet (I grant, and this may be all that this Author aims at) that the Lord in
mercy covers, and for Christ's sake pardons these imperfections, and
accepts the duty. Yet there may be such carnal ends, such deadness,
indisposition, and w^nt of attention, that the believer, after he has done,
cannot give an account what he has asked, at least as to some p titions* and it
were very gross to ^ffi^^^, that such prayers were put up by the help of the
Spirit, there being nothing of that life, truth and other qualifications, which
always accompany the Spirits work and assistance. And with what shame and
confusion do Believers many a time come from the Throne, while they reflect
upon their work, and the dishonor they have done to God for ^^king ^i^ name
thus in vain, and profaning such a soler^n ordinance, through their neglig^^^^,
and giving way to carnal and distracting thoughts? and such An objection from
that author obviated.
prayers cannot be said to contain good desires; for where ^^^re is no atten
i^^ and seriousness, there no d^si^^ ca^ be kindled, enlivered and s^^ct^fi^d;
and so though (...) ^^re never so good and ^^^^ent, yet the prayer m^st ^^^ght.
Except in that sense in which Philosophers affirm, that gravi^ and levia
moventur a g^nerante, To^et. 8. phys. quaest. 2. Con^^br. R^vius, ibid. cap. 4.
quaest. 2. Su^^ met^ph. dl p. ^. sect. 2.


S^ much for the habitu^^ (...) is pre-su^^osed (...) previous unto, (...)
p^^^ing (...) ^he (...) is self, and (...) upon i^ bu^ (...) ^ff^ct, viz tha^
(...) preserved by the Sp^^^; and wh^ich ^^^^g actu^^ed by the spirit, does
concur with the Spirit in all our spiritual performances.

3. Then that assistance which directly and properly is held forth by the help
of the Spirit, must be some actual influence and work upon the soul, and
concurrence with it in it is actings; which we may branch forth in these few
particulars, and speak of a fourfold act of the Spirit by way of actual
assistance, (beside that constant and continual supply and influence, whereby
the new man and weak principle of life is conserved and supported against the
mighty assaults of old Adam within, and the strong man without.) 1. To actuat
and exuscitat. 2. To strengthen and corroborat. 3. To instruct, direct and
regulat. And, 4. to encourage, embolden, and make us draw nigh to God with
confidence. 1. Then, the Spirit exciteth, quickneth and blows up the Ps. 3 ^^.
fire; though there be a principle of heat within, yet the spirit must blow
upon these coals and dispell the embres before they will burn; the habits of
grace do stand in need of quickening and stirring up, otherwise they cannot act,
they lose their vigor and activity; unless the Spirit draw us we will not run,
Cant. 1.4. Unless the wind blow upon our garden, the spices thereof will not
flow out.

But, 2. we must not think that we stand in need of no more but of this
quickening and exciting motion, as if the man were strong and able enough to
walk, if once awakned; nay, unless the Spirit concur and assist, unless he
bring furniture and provision, and put new strength in us, the work will be
marred; though he did set u^ upon our feet, we would quickly go to the ground
and fall asleep again; though you would draw a paralitick man after you, yet he
could not follow; though you did lift him up, yet he would instantly fall back
again, unless you would add strength to his muscles and joints: but I said,
that the Spirit must not only concur, but also strengthen and corroborat, the
spirit must supply our weakness and inability. So that here we may take notice
of a twofold act; 1. to concur with the new man, according to the measure of
its strength and activity; 2. since the new creature is weak and not able to go
of its self, the nurse must take it by the sleeves and uphold it; we have not a
sufficiency in our selves for one good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. If the Lord hold
not up our goings in his paths, our feet would quickly slip, Ps. 17.5. If his
right hand did not uphold us, we could not follow after him, Ps. 63.8. There
being, 1. from within so much weakness; and, 2. so much indisposition and
deadness; yea, and, 3. so much contrariety, opposition and enmity, the flesh
continually lusting and warring against the spirit (and though there were no
more, this last were enough to render us unable to do, Gal. 5.17. The old man
waxing strong, proves a tyrant, and often binds the new man hand and foot,
and leads him captive to the law of sin, Romans 7.23.) Nay, and, 4. From
without, many and subtle snares and tentations from the world. And, 5. mighty
and strong assaults from the Luke 11.21.
strong-man, that 1 Pet. 5 8.
roaring Lion Satan, continually laying siege to the soul, and storming it
with fierce and fresh assaults from time to time; so that we must not, with
Pelagians and Though Jesuits and Arminians admit a moral per^wasion and some
illuminati on of the mind and understanding, yet they deny any power and
strength to be communicated and imparted* to the will and executive faculties.
Arminians, think that the Spirt does concur with, and assist us in our
spiritual performances, according to that concurrence that is given to natural
agents in their operations; for they have a sufficient and complete power and
ability in their own rank and order for doing their works, and producing their
several effects, though as creatures, they be indigent and dependent both in
being and working, in esse and operari. As the infinite arm of the Almighty must
uphold them, otherwise they must instantly evanish and return to their mother
nothing, that womb from which they did come; so that same arm of divine
providence must help them, and concur with them, otherwise they can do nothing:
But yet a general concurrence and common work of providence, is sufficient to
Viz. to actuat determinando, and to assist concurrendo.
actuat and assist them, they being in their own kind complete agents, and
sufficiently thus proportionated for their several works and operations. But
the new man is a weak creature, and has no strength of himself to walk, he is
an incomplete agent, and not able to work, unless he get a continual supply of
strength from heaven, not only to actuat and assist the little strength and
activity he has, but also to complete and perfect the principle and fountain;
unless new water be put into our cisterns, there can no water be drawn from
them; and therefore the Spirit does not only actuat and concur, but also supply
the weakness, impotency and defect of the cause it self, in all our spiritual
^ctions. And particularly as to prayer, both in reference to innate weakness,
indisposition, blindness, opposition, etc. and to outward tentations and
assaults, there be several things which the Spirit does perform; and to speak
now to the present point of corroboration and assistance, as distinguished from
the two following, viz. the illumination and imboldning of the soul (which also
belong to this general head of supply and help, but for distinctions cause,
shall be handled by themselves) we shall not here speak of that common, and (as
I may call it) accidental supply, which though it be required for the further
perfection of the work, yet is not necessary for its prevalency and acceptance,
as variety and plenty of matter, decent and apt expressions, and what else
belongs to prayer as a gift; of which we have already spoken. But we shall now
speak of the proper and more necessary supply, whereby the Spirit does provide
and furnish, help and assist the soul to all these Spiritus sanctus non solum
docet, sed etiam monet and movet; docet rationem, monet memoriam, and movet
voluntatem; docet ut sciamus, sug gerit ut volimus, roborat ut possimus
Gerhard. harm. evang. cont. cap. 76. Illuminat mentem bominis ad intelligendum,
voluntatem instammat ad amandum, and virtutem ac robur praestat. ad exequendum,
Did. Alexandr. desp. S. apud eundum.
requisits and gracious qualifications to which the promise is made, and which
may promove the efficacy and acceptance of prayer: and though none of these be
common, and no crumb of this bread (which is the childrens allowance) be at any
time casten to the dogs, all of them being spiritual and good of themselves,
yet some of them are more essential and necessary then others; and in all of
them there is a latitude, some having these in a greater measure and degree,
then others; yea, one and the same supplicant may now find them in a greater,
and afterward in a less measure and gradual perfection: but we will not now
stay on a comparison, nor enquire what qualifications are necessary to the
acceptance of prayer, what not, but remitting that question to Part. 2. chap.
3. we shall now speak to the point, and since the qualification of prayer as of
every duty may be measured, 1. by the object; 2. by its end and principles;
and, 3. by its manner of performance; so we shall consider prayer under all
these respects and relations; 1. Then as to the matter and object of prayer,
though we have some gift of apprehension and fancy, whereby we may find variety
of matter, yet unless the Spirit illuminat the understanding, and make a
discovery of the excellency and expediency of fit objects, how ready are we to
mistake? as shall be shown in the third particular. But here we would show how
the Spirit upon that discovery, determins the will to close with and make
choice of fit objects, and having thus enflamed the heart with love to
spiritual objects, and moderated our thirst after the creature, he sends us to
the throne with suitable desires, and enableth us to ask what is good for us and
agreeable to the will of God, Romans 8.27. Secondly, as to the ends and
principles, we will not separate these two, because we are not now speaking of
physical principles, but of moral, viz. those motives which per modum finis, do
attract and draw along the heart, and allure it to the duty: especially those
three, which we find conjoined, 1 Timothy 1.5. (where also they are called (...),
the end of the commandment, and may also be called the end of our obedience,
endeavors and performances, which are so many evidences and fruits of, and
means to strengthen them) viz. faith, (...).
love and conscience of our obligation, and the duty we ow to God, both by way
of debt, as his creatures, and gratitude, as his favorites and objects of his
love and bounty, and this our obedience becomes not a task, a hard or
unpleasant service and work, especially since, further, it is sweetened by love;
and, 2. by the expectation of a new reward, whereof faith is an assurance; and
it is the work of the Spirit of God to purify our hearts by faith and love, 1 Timothy 1.14. Ephesians. 6.23. and to sprinkle them from an evil conscience by the blood
of Christ, See Diodat. on the place.
Heb. 10 21.

As to that which more properly and principally is called, and should be the
last and ultimat end of all our prayers and performances, viz. the glory of
God, it is above the reach of corrupt nature to aim at such a noble mark, but
every one, while in that state, must (with them, Phil. 2.21.) seek their own,
and not the things of Christ: Ah! our ease, honors, pleasures and wealth,
naturally are our idols, these are our great end, and we cannot desire or ask
any thing from God, unless with a design to Jam. 4.3.
consume what we receive upon our lusts; and thus we are too apt to desire God
to help us to sin against him, to put a weapon in our hand, whereby we might
fight against him, and to provide fuel for our lust^, Jam. 3.6,
which are set on fire of hell. Nay, self is the last and great aim of our most
refined desires of grace and glory, until the Spirit purify our affections,
and elevate them to a more high and noble end* and enable us to obey the
exhortation, 1 Cor, 10, 31. and honestly to seek the glory of God, and to
propose it as our scope in all our actions and performances, doing whatsoever
we go about heartily as to the Lord, and not to men (whether our selves or
others) Col. 3.23.

3. As to the manner, what, 1. reverence, 2. tenderness, 3. importunity, 4.
fervency, 5. watchfulness, 6, sincerity, etc. is in our prayers must Quia autem
persunctorie vulgo oramus, addit, in spiritu, ac si diceret tantum esse
pigritia^ tantum que srigus carnis nostrae, ut rite orare nemo queat nisi
spiritu Dei ex^ citatus; nam hinc solicitudo, hinc ^rdor and vehementia, hinc
alactitas, hinc fiducia, etc. Calvin in Jud. 20.
come from above; our barren ground cannot yield such fruit: what cold and dead
performances, what loathsome and abominable sacrifices have we to offer to the
Lord, until the Spirit of Christ (who is our life, Col. 3.4.) breath in some
life and heat into our When the Spirit comes, it is a time of life, the
Christians affections spring i^ his besome at bis voice, as the babe in
Elizabeth a^ the salutation of the Virgin Mary, or as he strings under the
musici^ns hand stir and speak harmoniously, so do all the Saints affection^ at
the secret touch of the Spirit. Gurn. spir. arm. part. 3. page 580.
affections? those who have the naked gift, but want the Spirit of prayer;
though they may have matter enough and plenty of words, yet they want a
heavenly desire, which is the soul of prayer; there is meat enough before them,
but they want an appetice; there are bullocks and rams enough for sacrifice,
but where is the fire? a lifeless carrion is not such an object of pity, as a
dead formal prayer. I do not deny, that Numb. 23.10.
Balaam may Every desire of grace is not spiritual and saving, nor an evidence
of grace.
desire to dye the death of the righteous; carnal men may have some velleities
and wouldings, some lazy languishing and selfish desires after grace and
happiness, but no man ever did, or is able, without the help of the Spirit, to
come to the length of, 1. a permanent and habitual, 2. an operative,
efficacious and prevailing over corruption, vigorous and restless till it be
satisfied, and 3. a pure and spiritual desire of grace and holiness, of
Christ for himself, because of his excellency, of a crucified and persecuted,
of a naked and despised Christ, of holiness because of its beauty and
conformity to the Law and will of God; Nay, but there was so much dross in the
best refined desires and prayers of the most Saint-like formalist as did not
only obscure but consume the Gold, so that the most expert artist was never
able from thence to extract the least grain that could abide the trial; though
alas! there be too many mountebanks, and boasting chemists who therewith are
deluded, and would cozen the world with such brass and counterfeit metal;
with the shadow in stead of the substance, condemning all these as too precise
who do not think such coin good enough for carrying on a trade with heaven and
for eternity.

Thus the blessed Spirit works sutably to his name, and makes us in some
measure Romans 8.29.
conformable to his own image, he Spiritualizeth our carnal, earthly and
selfish desires; or rather, in stead of these, does Coloss. 3.10. Ephesians. 10.
creat in us new and heavenly affections, which being offered up to God are our
spiritual Sacrifice, and therefore 1 Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ: they are spiritual, not only in
respect of the principal efficient, the holy spirit, and, 2. in respect of the
subject a renewed spirit put in us; but also, 3. in respect of the object; 4.
in respect of the motive, principle, and end; and, 5. in respect of the manner
of performance.

Now we come to third act of the Spirit whereby he enlightneth the blind eye,
and regulats, directs and points out the right object of our desires; ah! we
know not what to ask, we are ready to ask a stone instead of bread, till the
Spirit come with his help, and teach us to ask what is good and expedient for
us, and agreeable to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. Unless the Spirit, 1.
anoint our eyes, that they may behold and discern; 2. present the object; 3.
manifest and discover its beauty andexcellency; and, 4. stay our wand^ing eye
and hold it to the object, nor suffering it to stray and slip; we will not
think on spiritual things, nor are we able to contemplat their excellency, and
so they will not become amiable and desirable to us; and though we get a flight
view of them, yet we soon weary in beholding such an Object, till the Spirit
stay our unstable spirits, and ma^^ us ponder more seriously, and still press
the honeycomb till it drop sweetness; unless the Lord be our pilot and guide,
unless he direct and order our thoughts, we neither know what to desire nor
how to ask: What need have we then, with the Apostle, 2 These. 3.5. to pray that
the Lord would direct our hearts not only unto the love of God, (which is one
of the particulars there instanced) but also to the love and desire of every
thing whereby our communion with God may be promoved, and our happiness in
enjoying of him for our portion, may be secured, and evidenced to our hearts.

4. The Spirit filles the heart with reverentiall boldness and confidence in
its adresses to God; the sense of guilt may make the holiest Saint on earth
(with (p) Adam) be afraid of God, and tremble at his presence. Genesis 3.10.
O! but the Spirit removes that terror and dread, and faith to the fugitive
and trembling sinner (what Christ by an audible voice to the paralitick, Math.
9.2.) Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, and if thou be a Son,
what needs discourage thee? if a child, then an heir, an heir of God, and joint
heir with Christ, Romans 8.17. and so you may ask what you will, it will be given
to you; will the Father withhold any part of the portion from the heir? or
needs the son be afraid to draw nigh to his kind Father? Thus the Spirit of
adoption, by discovering and witnessing our relation, does enable us to come
with, 1. boldness; 2. confidence; and, 3. importunity, crying (which is a
token as of seriousness, so of boldness and who but the Kings son and child
dar cry in his presence?) Abba is a Syriack word signifying Father, coming from
the hebrew (...) from which it only differs in the termination: it may be
thought strange, that the learned Augustine did herein so grossly mistake as to
say, that Abba was graecum Vocabulum, August. epist. 178 where we have his
dispute (rather then an epistle) with Poscentius the Arrian, Lamentius being
arbiter.
Abba (which shows the familiarity and confidence, which every son has not
the liberty to use; but must make choice of another kind of compellation,
importing greater distance and reverence Abba, Father) thus doubling the word
to be an evidence of fervency and importunity, Romans 8. 15. Galat. 4.6.

Its true, this confidence and boldness admits a latitude, but every step
and degree of it must come from the Spirit, by (...) only we can have access,
Ephesians. 2.18. and therefore that access, with any measure of boldness and
confidence mentioned, Chapter 3.12. But though it must come from the Spirit, yet
not always by that witnessing act, whereby he testifies to our Spirits, that
we are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. but by applying other grounds, and making
some sort of confidence arise from thence; as, 1. Sense of our need and wants
will banish shame and fear, yea and sometimes modesty, necessi^ as non habet
legem. necessity shakes off all bonds; it made those lepers, 2 Kings, 7.3, 5.
venture to go to the camp of the Syrians, and Esther go to the King with her
life in her hand, Esth, 4.16. Extremity will make a dumb man speak: will it
not open a mouth morally shut, while once it opened the mouth of Craesus son
which nature had closed? I am ashamed to beg, says the unjust steward, while
he lived in abundance, Luk 16.13. but stay till he was stripped naked of all,
and he can see no remedy, his Durum telum necessitas.
extremity would banish away his shame. If the conscience were once awakned
(as in the Saints) to see our guilt and misery, and our need of Christ, though
we wanted the immediate light of Gods countenance, and manifestation of his
favor, yet would we venture and go boldly to the Throne, resolving if we
should perish to perish (if it were posible) there. This is the first and
lowest step, and rather of our boldness to pray, then boldness in prayer:
which may, 2. be promoved from the sense of our obligation, flowing from the
command: conscience of duty may pull, and strongly draw us to the throne, (in
obedience to him who has commanded us to call upon him and pay him this
homage) though we be not assured of the success of our work; But, 3. and more
properly, this boldness may arise from hopes of success, which though
grounded upon certainties, viz. the command of him, who never said to the seed
of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain; his gracious attributes, his mercy,
compassion, forbearance, etc. his invitations, entreaties, expostulations,
promises, threatenings and judgments upon the disobedient, who will not call
upon his name; the success that others have met with, etc. Though the soul does
not doubt of these in the general, and as to others, yet as to thee (while thou
sit in darkness, and wants the light of assurance flowing from the inward
testimony of the Spirit) these can only beget a probable hope, and thereby
raise up the heart to a proportionable boldness and confidence, banishing
slavish fear, despondency of spirit, and such discouragments as may draw off
the heart, or weaken the hands: and thus, 1. negatively, (viz. by removing
obstructions) the foundation-stone of confidence is laid: 2. and positively,
enlivening and quickening the soul by a rational expectation of success.

But betwixt this probable hope, and that (...), the full assurance of faith,
Heb. 10.22. There is a middle and third kind of confidence, arising from divine
argumentation; the Spirit breathing upon, and sealing all the propositions of
the practical Syllogism, but especially the minor, by discovering to us the
reality and sincerity of our graces, and thus enabling us to assume and say, I
love and fear God, keep his commandments, etc. From which (supposing the
knowledge and faith of these general discoveries held forth in the major) the
conclusion concerning our state and condition does clearly and necessarily
flow. You will say, if the conclusion do clearly follow, it must beget as full
an assurance as the immediate testimony of the Spirit. Ans. We will not now
compare the immediate and direct irradiation and evidence of the Spirit, with
the mediate and argumentative reflex by a practical Syllogism, in which the
word is applied, and from thence a conclusion drawn concerning our state and
condition; or compare (as I may speak) the Spirit's wit-nessing to our spirit,
and Romans 8.16.
bearing witness to our spirit. But to the question, we grant, that a great
measure of confidence and boldness may be had both ways; and whenever the
soul can say, with her, Cant. 6.3. I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine,
by whatsoever means this assurance be attai^ned, h may draw nigh to God in full
assurance of faith, grounded upon this particular interest in him; but often,
by reason of the small measure of irradiation from the Spirit, the assent given
to the minor is so weak, that it diff^reth not much from a mere opinion, having
much fear and jealousy mixed with it, so that albeit an assent be given to the
assumption, yet cum formidine partis oppositae; and thus the conclusion, as the
effect, must be in part tainted with that imperfection, as of the cause; and so
cannot be the foundation of such a measure of confidence and boldness, as might
arise from a clear evidence and full assurance. But here there is a great
latitude, concerning which we shall now say no more, but that if there be such
a measure of assent, as does banish and calm the storm and boistrous winds of
despair, distrust, unquietness, anxiety, etc. and does carry the soul to trust
and stay it self upon God, and to adhere, rely and depend upon him and his free
grace in Christ, held forth in the promises, adventuring soul and a l upon it,
this may prove a sufficient ground of acceptable confidence and boldness which
will prevail, and will not be sent away from the throne of grace empty.

Here we may reach a word, 1. to the proud Pharisee; 2. to the mocking Atheist;
2. to the disconsolat; 4. to the enlivened and strong Saint.

First then, from this point, I may reach a rebuke to him, who, presuming on
his parts and eloquence, or (with that boast ng hypocrit, Luke 18.11.) on his
own worth and goodness, does think that he has at home provision enough for
the work, and so minds nor, neither seeks help from above, but dare draw
nigh to God in his own strength. Ah! what does the Almighty regard the acting
of parts, and the moving of the tongue, though with much art and elegance? He
knows the mind of the Spirit, the meaning of the least sigh and groan poured
out in his strength, Romans 8.27, 26. but will not acknowledge or hearken to the
voice of thy spirit; it is too weak (whatever conceit thou may entertain
concerning its might and excellency) to wrestle with, and overcome the
Almighty; but Isa. 41.14.
worm Jacob was strong, he got power from above, and in it he wrestled with
God, and at length prevailed and carried the day, C^n. 32.25. he prevailed by
weeping and supplication, Hos. 12.4. What strange weapons were these for a
conqueror? and durst the potsheard strive wiah his Maker? (the Angel of the
covenant appearing in a created shape) Ans. Yes, the Lord allows us to fight
and wrestle with such weapons, (...), Col. 4.12. to strive, as it were, in an
agony, and not to faint nor give over till we get the victory: Nay, but we must
not dare to wrestle with God but by his own strength, Deus in Jacobo fuit
seipso fortior, God did lend Jacob more strength then he did fetch against him;
he did, says Dicitur ergo Deus vinci a nobis quando virtute spiritus sui nos
confirmat and reddit in ex^ugnabiles, in^o facit ut trium phum agamus de
tentationi bus, and si singula reputamus talis est tunc partitio, ut
Deusmajore^^ partem suae virtu^isa part nostra staere velit, and tantum sumat
partem magis infirmam ad nos tentandos vel experiendos -- a^qui si Jacob suo
mart pugnass^t non poterat far umbram ipsius Dei, quin conci^eret, redactus
suisset in nihilum nisi opposita fuisset major virtus quam bominis, hanc
similitudinem (inquit) adducere soleo quando loquor de lucta and quotidianis
^ertaminibus quibus Deus exercet pios, quod pugnet nobiscum sinistra manu, and
quod nos tueatur dextra sua, etc. Calvin. comment. in Hos. 12.3, 4.
Calvin uphold Jacob (and continually upholdeth the Saints in all their trials
and combats) with the right hand, and fought against him only with the left.
But you will say, Jacob is said by his strength to have power with God, Hos.
12.3. Ans. There can be (as Nulius est melior titulus quam donationi^ut vulgo
dicunt, and Deus solet in nos transfer quicq uid con^ulit ac si nosirum
esset; distinguere ergo prudenter necesse est hic inter vi^tutem bominis quam
habet aseipso (id est a na^ura) and eam quam Dominus in ipsum contulit. Calv.
ibid.
Calvin says) no better title then donation, what strength the Lord out of his
free mercy had bestowed on Jacob during the combat, was Jacobs strength, the
Lord had freely given it to him, and does allow that it be called his: O! but
there is no prevailing over the omnipotent, but by his own strength; if thou
draw nigh to him in thy pride, thou may fear his hand; he resists the
proud and will not yield, he is angry with them, and they shall not be able to
stand before him.

Secondly, A word to the blasphemous Atheist, who dare mock the Spirit of God,
rather then the Saints, while he upbraideth them with having, and being led by
the Spirit; and if any infirmity be espied in such, that must be reckoned in
the first place amongst the works of the Spirit. Its true, there is a
generation of vile deluded sectaries, who father all their wicked and enormous
actings upon the holy Spirit; I plead not for such monsters, let them bear
their own just punishment, ignominy and reproach; but for any upon this
pretense, to mock and flout humble self-denied and circumspect Christians, who
dare not brag of their having the Spirit, but labor to maintain and prize his
presence, and to bring forth these fruits of the Spirit, mentioned, Ephesians. 5.9.
Gal. 5.22. these mockers do evidence, that they have not Spirit; for if they
had, they durst not make a jeer of having it, and if thou have not the Spirit
of Christ, thou art none of his, Romans 8 9. thou art a dead man, the sentence of
death is already past upon thee, and thou art destitute of the Spirit of life,
ver. 13.10. and thy mocking the Saints is, as if the dead could mock the
living, because they do live and have a principle of life: I will not say, with
a learned Mr. Baxter.
Divine, that to mock the Spirit, and to attribute his work (as the Pharisees
did Christ's) to the devil, is that unpardonable sin against ^he holy Ghost, but
certainly it is near in kin to it; and from thence our blessed Lord took
occasion to speak of that sin, Mat. 12.31, 32. compared with ver. 24. and let
such mark, that this unpardonable blasphemy is there called, speaking against
the holy Ghost. O! but all those, who live in the Spirit walk in the Spirit,
Gal. 5.25. let the fruits of the Spirit appear in your conversation, let your
goodness, righteousness and truth Ephesians. 5 9.
stop the mouth of mockers; dare ye also reproach his holy name, all the
balsphemies of Atheists do not so much Heb. 6.6.
put the blessed Spirit (as it were) to an open shame, as the miscarriages of
the Saints; and these often prove, and are called, 2 Samuel 12.14. a great
occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.

Thirdly, Rejoice, O ye Zech. 9.12.
prisoners of hope, cast off your fears and complaints, and do not say my sins
are so many, my deadness and indisposition for duty so great, and my spiritual
enemies so strong and fierce, that my hope is cut off, I have no strength to
wrestle with such mighty adversaries, and to remove such great mountains of
impediments. I grant, if thou were Helpless, thy condition were Hopeless, but
all thine enemies are not able to stop the way, and to intercept thy supply
from heaven: what though creature-help did fail, what though those pools were
dried up, yet thou might run to the full fountain; the Lord himself is thy
helper, his Spirit will strengthen and support thee, no bonds nor prison can
hold out, all the power of men and devils cannot drive away the Christians
guard or disarm him; if he can pray, he shall not want help to, and by that
work; the spirit will help him to pray, and in answer to his prayer, will give
what else he stands in need of; and do not say, ah! but I cannot pray; for
though thou can not of thy self, yet thou have help at hand: the Spirit is
ready to help thine infirmities. We shall speak of the means for recovering and
maintaining the quickening and assisting presence of the Spirit in the cases,
Part. 3. But now let me only enquire, have thou not a heart to desire and ask
his presence and help? If thou have not such a desire, why do thou complain?
and surely thou art unworthy to receive, and un^it to entertain such a guest;
but if thou desire, and w^lt ask, what needst thou f^ar, will not your
heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11.13. O! what
an excellent master do we serve, who, as he sets us a task, and appoints our
wages, so also he gives strength to perform: He will enable us to work, and
then reward our labor.

Fourthly, All ye, who live under the breathings of the Almighty, ye on whom
the Sun does shine, and who are warmed and refreshed with its pleasant beams,
take heed least ye sin away this great mercy and privilege; 1 These. 5.5.
ye are not of the night, why should darkness surprise you? an eclipse may
prove terrible and dangerous to you. The office of the Roman Plutarch cher.
gree. Romans illust. vit in Number. Pamphil page (mihi) 44, 45. and in Camill. page
127.
Vestals, chiefily was to keep in the sacred (as was supposed) fire, which if
let out, they were driven into a dark corner, stripped naked, and scourged for
their negligence: and you, who are 2 Cor. 11.2.
chaste virgins to Christ, are called to maintain the heavenly fire, and if
through your negligence it be quenched, you will be left for a while in the
dark, and a 2 Cor: 12.7.
messenger of Satan may be let loose to buffet you; especially if by some
gross and scandalous sin ye drive away the Spirit, and scandalize your
profession, then ye may expect some remarkable stroke; the Lord will vindicate
his glorious Name before the sons of men, who have been witnesses of the
dishonor done to him. If the Vestal Nuns were deflowred, they suffered a
most Vid. Plut. loc. cit.
terrible kind of death; their profession and function was thought holy and
honorable, and therefore their punishment was fearful and remarkable; and
though the Lord will not destroy any of his honest servants, yet he will
distress and chastise them; when they Ps. 85.8.
step aside to folly; he may drive them from his presence, and shut them up in
prison, where there is neither light nor heat; and in this extremity, they are
ready to warm themselves at their own fire, and to Is 50.1. a
walk in the light of the sparks they have kindled, running either to
creature comforts to calm that storm (being in that distemper somewhat like to
1 Samuel 16.
Saul, who when the evil spirt from the Lord came upon him, called for the
musicians) or else they rest on their duties, not looking up to the Spirit for
his help; thus, as it were, daring, with Nadab and Abihu, to offer strange fire
before the Lord. It was not lawful for the Vestal, Vid. Plut. loc cit.
Nuns to kindle their sacred fire, if once put out, any other way but from
the Sunbeams; though the Saints fire be never totally extinguished, yet in the
night of desertion (while the soul is asleep and neglects to maintain it) it
becomes so we^k, that without a new supply from heaven, it will not burn our
sacrifice; and if strange fire be taken in the place of it, our sacrifice will
not be accepted: Every fire is not kindled from heaven, there is a fire that
arises from the bowels of the earth (as in Lev. 10.1.
earthquakes) and that is dangerous: there is also a Vid. doctiss. Io^n. de
May. Sac. Phys part. 2. loc. 5.
fire that comes from hell, and this (whatever be the fuel and matter, yet as
to its original) is devilish. The bullock thou offerest may be without blemish,
and yet brought from the wrong herd: it concerns us therefore to know whence
good motions come, and how they arise in the heart, before we bring them to the
Altar and offer them up to God. And thus we come to the last particular we
promised to speak to, which has two branches, viz. how that sacred fire that
comes from heaven, may be known and d^stinguished, 1. from that fire which
comes from hell 2. from the fire that proceeds only from our own bowels, or
is brought from our own harth.

As for the first, we shall, 1. speak a word to that which is supposed; and
then, 2. to the question it self. 1. Then it is here supposed, that Satan has
an influence upon the heart and can suggest to us either good (as to the object
and matter) or ill thoughts, and can obstetricat to the bringing forth of vile
lusts and affections. It were too large a field (neither will we digress so
far) to speak of the several Vid cantur Scholast: ad 1.2, quaest 80. loc com.
Scriptores de tentatione, Catechist: in orat. domin. inprimis vero I hom.
Goodwin de desertion. or a chird of light Ch 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
ways and methods Satan observes that he may allu^e and entangle weak and
foolish me, but we shall now only in the general, and briefly speak to that
intricat and obstruse question, how Satan does work on the understanding and
will; whether mediatly or imediatly: and the common opinion not only of popish
Casuists and School men, but of all Divines of whatsoever profession, whether
orthodox, Lutheran etc. is, that Satan has only a mediat access unto, and
indirect work upon the heart, v z. in that he can work upon the senses,
(whether outward or inward) and imagination, and there stir up Phantasms and
representations, whereby the mind and will (by reason of their sympathy and
connection with those inferior faculties) being affected, are drawn along to
subscribe, approve and comply with what is thus suggested unto them by these
native trusties. And thus Satan may be compared to an enemy besieging an
impregnable fort, who having gained some outworks, does from thence at a
venture cast fire balls over the wall, or in at the windows, not knowing
whether they shall hurt or not; so Satan that malicious enemy, having access
to the senses, imagination, and sensitive appetit* (those natural agents,
neither being ab^eto resist his po^er, nor watchful against his assaults, are
more easily brought under; and he havi g friends within to open the door, and
welcome him, may enter when he will, unless the Lord rebuke and with hold him)
does from thence cast his Ephesians. 6.16.
fiery darts and temptations, not knowing whether these will prevail with the
mind and will.

But we would rather join with those Gisb. Voet. sell disput part. 1. de not.
and oper. daem. page 962. (quamvis ibid: page 924. dixerat solum Deum in
voluntatem rationalem influere; sed forte loquirur de action cum dominio
conjuncta* ita ut tantum neget voluntatem nostram ulli creaturae esse
subjectam. Jo Duns Scotus nostras Loco citando. Pet. a S. Joseph i would. theol.
spec. lib 3. de aug. cap, 4. res. 6. Hurted: de Mendoza etiam citari potest cu^
statuat actus liberos ideo praecise non cognosci ab angelo, quia Deus non
concurrit ad little cognitionem sine consensu loqueatis, at (inquam) iste
consensus nihil virtutis addit potentiae intellectivae Angeli audientis, ergo
ex s;e potuisset etc. metaph. dis, 12. sect, 4. 31. We might here also cite
s^verall others both School men and practical Divines, but when they come to
their limitations, and meet with objections, they seem to overthrow what they
had builded.
few, (who yet do not so expressly assert and deliver that point) Which affirm
that Satan, if (and so when) permitted by God might have an immediate access,
not only to the sensitive and maeriall, but also to the rational and spiritual
faculties of the soul.

1. Because modern Philosophers have discovered the weakness of those grounds
whereupon the common opinion concerning the real and Physical difference and
distinction of those faculties amongst themselves, or from one another and from
the soul, was founded and built; and if there be no such difference amongst
them, what reason can be given why Satan may immediately and directly work upon
some but not upon others?

2. Though sensitive and material objects be more proportionat and suitable
for us, (who in our acting depend upon the senses) to work upon, yet wherefore
should we thus limit spirits, and deny that they can have an immediate access
to our spirits? Especially, since, 3. Angels (both good and evil) have some
society among themselves, converse mutually together, and open up their
thoughts to one another: and to say (as some Schoolmen imagine) that they
stand in need, and make use of outward symbols and signs for this effect, is
to deny that they can Modus o perandi^ equitur modum essendi
act as spirits, and suitably to their nature; or else to join with those
Angelos esse corporeos docuerunt, Tertull, Lactant: Justin: Martyr, Method jus,
Eusebjus, Origin. Augustine: and alii quos cum Molina in 1. quaest 50. art. 1,
citat. M. Becan. theol s^h. part, 1 tract. 3. cap. 1. quaest. 2. and in
coucilio Niceno 2. act 5. Joa. Thessaloniens. epis. dixit, itae ecclesiam
catholicam docere.
Fathers (whom yet the popish Doctors in this reject) who taught that angels
were corporeal. We might resume, and apply this argument to the society that
is among the souls of just men made perfect.

4. Many temptations (as in the case of desertion) are spiritual, and such as
cannot be immagined to arise from the sensitive faculties, unless it were very
remotly, occasionally, indirectly and ineffectually, while as they are often
strong, continued for a long time, etc. Thus also we might argue from
prophecies, and sudden suggestions, revelations, and discovery of Secrets made
by Satan to his emissaries; his teaching of them sciences, languages, etc. his
resolving intricat and dark questions, and giving to them ability to manage and
interpose in subtle d^sputations: it seems very strange to imagine how these
things could be performed by his working upon the The fantasy and sensual
appetit, may be called matteriall, not entitative and in it self, but only
Objective, because it is conversant about matteriall objects upon sensible
motives: but according to the common opinion, which maintains a real
difference between the faculties of the soul, the present diffiently will be
greater; for, etc.
matteriall faculties.

5. The Scriptures which speak of Satan's temptations and work upon the heart,
seem to hold out more then an impression upon the senses and imagination; as if
Satan only at a distance, mediatly, and indirectly could work upon the mind and
heart; for it is said, that he puttieth in the heart to do, Joh. 13.2. that he
fills the heart and blinds the mind, Act. 5.3, 2. Cor. 4.4. that he
beguileth and corrupts the mind, 2 Cor. 11.3. and that he enters into the
man, and takes him captive at his will, Luk* 22.3. 2 Timoth. 2.26* that he
became a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 18, 2. etc.

But here arises a subtle question (more fit to be debated in the Schools
then here by us) viz. what kind of work has Satan upon the mind and heart?
what does he, and whereby represents he objects to the mind and motives to
allure the will? Ans. The same difficulty has place concerning his work upon
the fantasy and sensual appetite; and concerning the spe^ch and society that
is among Angels, and souls separated from the body; none of which can be
performed without some kind of work, impression, communication, intimation,
manifestation, etc. There is here then no special difficulty, and what might
satisfy for clearing these other questions, would also prove satisfactory in
this. But, 1. It is certain that albeit Satan can obstetricat and help forward,
yet he cannot of himself produce and elicit any vital act in man; for that of
necessity must flow from an internal p^inciple. Yet, 2. on the other hand, it
seems no less certain from Scripture and experience, that Satan can offer
some one way or other objects unto the understanding, and make some kind of
representation and manifestation of them there. But, 3. and more directly to
the question, if the most common opinion of Vid. scholastic. communi^er ad 1.
quaest: 107. and Becan. theol. schol. part 1. tract. 3. quaest 14.
Schoolmen, concerning the speech of Angels, has any truth in it, why may it
not also here have place? for those Doctors affirm, that one Angel speaks to
another [by imprinting the intelligible (as they Tunc angelus manifestat alteri
su um actum interiorem quando imprimit illi speciem intelligibilem intuitive
represen^antem actum interriorem, and hoc facit per modum objecti: Ergo tantum
intentionaliter, and non Phisice; eliciendo scil. aliquem actum in audiente.
Becan. loc. cit. 2.3. de distinctione inter speciem hanc impressam and speciem
expressam vid. philosoph. de anima, ubi hanc statuunt esse actualem, illam
tantum virtualem cognitionem: sed adhuc sub judicie lis est, an species possit
cemmunicari ab objecto spirituali, sicut a materiali, and sensibili, vid. Rev.
Suar. repurgat. in disp: 35. page 804. 806.
call them) species, intuitively representing the internal act of the
speaker.] That is, by making some image and representation thereof in the mind
of him that hears; and if Satan can make and beget such images, species and
representations of objects in our mind and cognoscitive faculty, there needs no
more be said for clearing the present question, only it would be observed, that
thus (according to the vulgar opinion concerning the blindness of the will)
Satan can have no immediate access unto, nor work and influence upon the will
and affections; but only indirect and mediat, viz. by the intervention of the
mind and cognoscitive faculty, to which the object is only directly offered and
represented. But we will not now prosecute further this speculation.

As for Objections, all that I have met with of Some other objections might be
alleged from the schoolmen, but such as scarce deserve a refutation, as that
Satan cannot illabi in animan, Ergo. Ans. If by that illapsus in
essentiamanimae (which Dom, Bannez thinks to be so necessarily required in him
who may be said to work immediately upon the heart) any other thing be
understood (as I know in the schools there is, and Bannez there does require
viz. ut det illi esse actuaie, conservando, fovendo etc.) then a due
approximation, so that the patient is within the agents sphere of activit, such
a condition is gratis and without ground required and made necessary, for an
immediate influence upon the heart, and as easily denied and rejected by us, as
asserted and required by Bannez ad 1. quaest. 111. page 539. that phrase seems
to have been first used by Austin, or whosoever was the author of that book, de
Ecclesiast. dog mat whom Lomb^rd. 2. sent. did. 8 call^^h Gennadius, and
Erasmus in his critical Preface to that book says that it was reputed to be
Tertullians; but it is commonly placed amongst Angustins works tom 3.) where
that author, cap, 183. affirms, that illabi menti, illi soli possibile est
qui creav^t. But we need not further enquire conceruing the meaning of that
phrase; but if to our case there be a sufficient approximation, what can hinder
the agent from working upon a suitable subject? neither 2. is Scotus his reason
more weighty and concludent; who upon this account deni^th that the devil can
work upon the intellect, quia intellectus noster pro isto statu est passivum
determinatum ad determinatum activum, scil Phantasmata and inte^llectum
agentem. etc. 2. sent did ^3* quaest unica, page (n^thi) 17^. For I grant, that
the ^ind of it self cannot work but dependently, upon the imagination; yet
there is no ground for alleging that it cannot recieve an immediate impression
from a superior agent, either from the Lord himself, or from Angels, good or
bad.
any moment, or which (I think) can be brought against Satan's immediate
influence upon the superior and spiritual faculties of the soul, may be
comprised in this one, viz. That hence it would follow, 1. That Satan might
know the secrets of the heart; And, 2. that he had power over it to turn it
whethersoever he would; both which the Lord does challenge as his own
incommunicable privilege. Ans. Its true, the Lord has reserved both these as
the royal prerogatives of his crown; he has not put in the hands either of
Angels or men, either, 1. to search and know; or, 2. to rule and bow the heart.
As to the first, the Scripture once and again excludes all creatures, and
proclaims it to be the Lords property to know our thoughts and secrets, and
to search the heart. 2 Chr. 6.30.1 King. 8.39. 1 Samuel 16.7. Jer. 17.9, 10. Jer.
11.20. Jer. 12.20. Psa. 7.9 Psa. 44.21. Prove. 17.3. Prove. 2.2. Act. 1.24. 1
These. 2.4. Rev. 2.23. etc. From those and many other texts, it is manifest,
that the Lord has cast a veil and covering over the thoughts and desires of
the heart, that no fellow creature can look in and see or discern them. 1, As
an evidence of his soveraignity; this chamber of presence is reserved for the
King alone; no subject without his license dare come in here. 2. That there
might be some society, fellowship and communication amongst Angels, and amongst
souls in the state of separation from the body. 3. For the comfort of weak men,
who have to do with such a strong, subtle and vigilant enemy; if Satan knew
all our thoughts and purposes, what mischief might he do to us? how easily
might he surprise us? and how effectually tempt us?

But what that vail is, which the Lord has drawn over the heart, to hide and
cover it from Satan's eye, and what that bull-work is, which the Lord has
reared up to hold off that enemy, so that he cannot enter, nor thrust in any of
his fiery darts without a license and permission, is, I confess, not easy to
determine or explain; sense cannot reach, nor reason fully discover it, and we
have no revelation here to direct us. But though we cannot particularly
discover what that covert (which no creature can remove, pierce, or look
thorough) is, and wherein it consists; yet it would appear, that there is
some positive obstacle and impediment, which hinders Angels from beholding an
object of it self intelligible, and proportionated to their understanding (for
if our thoughts and purposes did exceed their cognoscitive faculty, they could
not know then when that vail is removed, and there could be no communication
and society amongst Angels and spirits.) only this much we may say, that albeit
the bodily eye has potentiam visivam, so that of it self, it is sufficiently
qualified for discerning and beholding colors. Yet, 1. it must be directed
toward, and applied to look upon the object; otherwise it cannot see it: so
the Angels, when they do not reflect upon and look into our heart, cannot see
and know what is there. But, 2. as 1, a seeing eye, 2. a visible object, and,
3. attention, is not sufficient, unless there be some light from without to
illustrat the object, and to manifest it to the eye; so neither can any created
spirit discern spiritual objects without some proportionable beam and
manifestation of them from the Father of lights, which he vouchsafes and
suspendeth according to his own good pleasure. Yea, 3. If the Lord would only
withdraw his general influence, determination and concurrence (which is so
necessary to the creatures being and acting) the seeing eye could not discern
colors, nor the fire (as is Sed rectius (meo judicio) doctissin us nostras
Strangius, putat id non ideo factum quod Deus subtrabens concursum suum,
effecerit ne^gnis ureret, quia, etc. Sed quia Deus interea servos suos adversus
violentiam ignis munivit, ne laedi possent. via. loc. Strange. de volunt and
act. lib. 1. cap. ^1.
thought to have happened in the Babylonish furnace, Dan. 3.25, 27.) burn what is
cast into it. And thus some (though but a Viz Pet. A. S. Jose (...) i would* theol.
spec. lib. 3. cap 4 and Hurtad. metaph. disp* 12 sect. 4.
few) give this as the only reason why Angels do not know the secrets of the
heart, viz. because the Lord will not concur with any creature for knowing the
thoughts and secrets of its fellow creature, till the party himself consent,
that such or such a one should know and be made privy to his thoughts; and that
then the Lord only concurreth to the knowing of so much, and by such only, as
the party concerned wills and consents should be imparted and made known.
And thus angel-speech must import no more, ex part loquentis, but a willing
and consenting, that others (whether one or more) should know such and such a
thought, or desire and purpose of his heart. I know none, who of purpose has
disputed against this modern opinion concerning the speech of Angels; only I
find in M. Becan (speaking to M. Becan disputing against Scotus his assertion,
who thinks that there may be species intelligibiles in the understanding
without cognition, vid. Bec. theo. schol. part. 1. tract. 3. cap. 1. quaest. 10.
another purpose) two reasons that may be urged against it; 1. its miraculous
for the Lord to deny his general and ordinary help and concurrence to the
creature when it requires it, and is ready to work, if not thus impeded and
hindered. 2. But if God would concur, an Angel might thus search the heart and
know what is in man; which is Gods incommunicable property. Ans. 1. What is
ordinary and constant, ought not to be called miraculous, especially when a
public good requires it (as here the good of man, his preservation from
Satan, that roaring Lion, that there may be some society amongst spirits, etc.
Thus the earth and the water make one globe for the commodity of living
creatures (which is contrary to the natural inclination of these elements, the
waters naturally propending to be above, and cover the earth, but no such
contrariety to any natural inclination can be alleged to be in the present
case) 2. To imagine an equal, constant and uniform concurrence to be due to
free and moral agents, and that at all times and occasions, is contrary to
reason and experience, and to the limitation, Jam. 4.15. If the Lord will
(should the creature say) we shall do th^s or that. That debt and obligation
which Jesuits and Arminians will have the Lord to ly under, so that he must
concur with second causes as they shall require, and always answer their beck
and nodd, is a most intolerable limitation of the most high and lofty one, to
the will and appointment of the poor weak ignorant foolish Orthedoxi theologi
nihilominus cum Thoma fatentur Deum quocies cum causis secundis concurrit, non
nisi congruenter naturis genio and dispositioni ipsarum operari, vid doctiss
Twist de sci med lib 3. page 434. Ubi optime expli cat quo modo Deus pro suo
beneplacito possit immutare voluntatem homini; and lib. 1. page 170. concedit
in Deo ^sse decretum quoddam generale de ciendis creaturis suis ad suos motus
congruenter naturis ipsarum.
creature. 3. I would ask, whether it be not granted on all hands, that one
Angel cannot know the thoughts of another without his consent? but that consent
does not add any light or strength to the intellective faculty of the other,
whereby he becomes more able to know what formerly he could not; and therefore
all must needs here acknowledge some special dispensation of providence;
whether it should be called miraculous or not, we will not further enquire,
neither does it concern us more then others.

As to the second, the question is not, whether an Angel might be so assisted,
as that he might search the heart (which our famous Countryman Jo. Nihil est
in mente (operatio scil. quaecunque intellectus vel voluntatis, vel quaecunque
proprietas vel conditio reali^ husus vel ^stius) quin totum ita pateat angelo
praeseuti non impedito sicut animae apparet albedo prasens per sensus. Illud
ergo dictum, solus Deus novit abscondita cordium verum est universaliter, and
ex propria persectione; ita quod impossible sit per aliquid impediens sibi
lateat (...) at Angeli muitos tales motus non noverunt, propter defectum
debitae presentiae. and mali angeli multa talia etiam praesentia non noverunt,
Deo impediente, etc. Scot. in 4. sent did. 45. quaest. 4. sect. ad 2. dico.
page (mihi) 472.
Scotus long since taught, with some limitations, and in a qualified sense) and
know the thoughts; but whether or not the Lord does allow to him such a measure
of light and assistance, and does remove all impediments, so that he does
actually know, and may at his pleasure search the heart of his fellow creature.
And all here agree in denying that it is so, neither will it follow from
Satan's immediate influence, which we affirm to have place only them, when the
Lord is pleased to remove the vail, and permit him to look in. And yet in the
former case, and supposi^g that there were no covering spread over the heart,
yet the understanding of Angels (whether good or bad) being of a limited and
finite capacity, could not, 1. comprehend all the thoughts, nor thoroughly and
perfectly search the heart; far less, 2. the hearts of all men; especally, 3.
when they do not advert and look in, and, 4. if the distance be too great; and,
5. when they are not, viz. either before they arise in the heart, or after that
they are past; O! but the infinite eye of God does perfectly and independently
search the heart, he does not need the assistance of any, nor can any thing
escape his knowledge, so that he must know, 1, all the thoughts; 2. of all men;
3. at whatsoever distance; and 4. a fare off, while they have no being, and
after they are past; and before they have a being or did arise in the heart, or
could fall under the view of any creature (and thus before we could know our
own thoughts) Ps. 139.2. The Lord from all eternity did appoint, and foresee
what thoughts and purposes should be in the hearts of men and angels unto all
eternity. And so much concerning Satan's knowing and searching.

As to the other branch of the difficulty, propounded at the beginning, viz.
concerning his power over the heart. We Ans. Albeit Satan (when the Lord
permits him) has an immediate access to our most secret chamber and cabin,
and thus may cast his fiery darts not only toward, but also up and down the
house, yet he cannot set it on fire; though he may parley with the will, and
suggest his temptations, yet he cannot Latrare potest, sollicitare potest,
mordere omnino non potest nisi volentem; non enim cogendo sed suadendo nocet;
nec extorquet a nobis consensum sed petit, Aug. sermon. 197. de tempore, prope
finem -- nos dia bolum non adjuvemus and vincimus; dat ille quidem consilium
sed Deo auxiliante nostrum est vel eligere vel repudiare quod suggerit, hom.
12. ex 50. oper. Tom. 10. fol. (mihi) 96. Sed tantum turbare potest and fallere
quantum (...) nos volumus (...) Prudent. in hamartogenia (...) Angelus non sic
est supra hominum quod sit causa voluntatis ejus; -- nihil aliud potest esse
causa voluntatis nisi iple Deus -- Angelus autem tantum objective movere potest
voluntatem. Thom. 1, 2. quaest. 9 art. 6.
force it to consent and welcome the temptation: That Virgin cannot be ravished
by him without her own voluntary choice and consent; and then it is not a rape,
but a free bargain and spoutaneous yielding to him; though he can counsel and
allure, and many ways insinuate and labor to persuade, yet he has not power
over the will to compel and draw it along; he can blow at the fire within, and
cast in fuel, but he cannot inflame the heart and affections; he can with much
art and subtilty suggest, but he cannot force us to entertain his suggestions.
Only, he who made the heart, can bow and change it, and turn it whethersoever
he will, Prou. 21.1. Prove. 16.1, 9. Jer. 10.23. Jer. 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. Act.
16.14. etc.

You will say, if the Saints did think that Satan could come so near to them,
they would live in a continual fear? this is ve y terrible and uncomfortable
doctrine. Ans. Can it vex and grieve the Saints, that they are in the hand of
God, and that they must live in a continual dependence upon him? Satan is
chained, Jude, v. 6. and he cannot advance one foot toward thee, unless the
Lord loose some links of that chain: And though that Lion roar never so
fiercely, yet he cannot make a prey of thee without thine own consent.
Therefore, albeit the consideration of Satan's immediate approach, should stir
us up to watchfulness and circumspection in our walk, yet it needs not in the
least discourage the Saints. Whatever be said, as to the way and manner of his
working upon the heart (whether it be mediat or immediate) if the Lord would
permit him to do his worst, and would leave us (who are so weak, foolish and
corrupt) to our selves, how easily would we become a prey to his manifold and
subtle temptations? it were no difficult work for him to set on fire that
powdertrain that is within us: And does not our life, both natural and
spiritual, our estate, all our comforts and accommodations, depend upon God?
and will it grieve the child that he must look up to his kind father for
protection and provision?

fall, yet he shall never be able to make their faith fail, Luke 22.31, 32. and
without their own consent and concurrence, he cannot draw and compel them to
commit the least sin. Hence,

volunteers, none are taken captive by him as his 2 Timothy 2.26.
will, ^^thout their own will and consent. To this purpose, the ^^^ous Sed
dicet aliquis, (...) gatus est, quare adhuc tantum praevalet? vetum est,
fratres charissimi, quod mulium praevalet, sed tepidis ^c negligentibus and
Deum in veritate non ^^men^ibus dominatur, alligatus enim est tanquam innexus
canis cate^is, and neminem potest mordere ni si eum quise illi mortifera
securitate conjunxerit: jam videte fratres quam st^ltus est homo ill^ quem
canis in catena pofitus mordet, tute illi per voluntates and ^^p^ dit at^^
^^culi noli conjungere, and ille ad te non praesumit accedere; latrare potest,
s^^^^ita^^ p^^est, mordere omnino non potest nisi volentem: non enim cogendo
sed suadendo (...), nec ^^torquet a nobis consensum sed petit. August. Sermon.
197. de tempore.
Augustine speaks notably well, Satan (says (...)) is a dog chained, and
can bite none, but those who come within his reach, and who by their stupid
scourity cast themselves in his way. He must be a mad man, who is bitten by a
chained dog. Do not then by giving way to thy sensual and carnal delights and
lusts, cast thy self within the compass of his chain, and though he may bark at
thee, yet he cannot bite; though he may counsel and solicit, yet he cannot
draw and compel. He cannot bite or wound any man without his own will and
consent. And Mul^i ^^^^ssio^^^ peccati sic fa^inat, ut ipsum satana^^ accusent,
etc. (vid. insig^^^^ (...) ^^uculerte^ (...) ^^nstrat perperam homim^ cel^^ibus
surs ostendere vim a daem^^^^ll atam) Au^. hom. 12. ex. 50.
elsewhere, There is nothing (says he) can delight the devil more, then to
hear sinners excuse themselves, and cast the blame upon him; knowing their
condition to be desperate, till they confess and take with their guiltiness; but
could Satan force thee, O man? did their not voluntarity go to work? All
that Satan could do, was to counsel and solicit, but why did thou not
rath^^ hearken to Gods counsel? thou had a monitor on the right ^and, and on
the lest, and thou wast placed, as it were, in the middle, why then did thou
rather hearken to Satan's Siren song on the left hand, then to the voice from
heaven on the right? why did then rather follow Satan into everlasting
perditi^^, then Christ into eternal life? did not God offer thee strength, and
wast thou not able in the power of his might to stand against the power and
wiles of the devil? Ephesians. 6.10.11. Its true, Satan does obtestricate, and
plays the midwife to the bringing forth of sin; yea, in some sense he is the
father, and concurreth to the conception of it: but yet never without the
mothers consent: and as in the proper and natural generation, though some of
the learned do think that Satan may have a hand in it, as is commonly reported
of the famous English Merlin, that he was begotten of the devil; and Lud. Vives
Ludov. Vives in August. de civ. Dei lib. 5. cap. 23.
says that some nations did most abominably glory, that they did descend of
the devils; but whatever truth be in the thing it self, yet its granted on all
hands, that the devil is not the true and proper Nonnulli affirmant diab^lum
posse semen virile aliunde adferre and in uterum faemineum injiceere, ut inde
sequatur conceptio; ita ut verus pater istius faetus non sit diabolus sed is ex
cujus semine gigneretur, vid. Sholast. ad 1. quaest. 51. art. 3. and in lib. 2.
sent. did. 8.
father of such a child, and that any help he did contribute to that
conception, was by borrowing from another hand, to which (according to this
disputable supposition) the conception is to be ascribed, and he, and not the
devil, to be accounted the true father of such a wretched child. So that the
devil was only the instrumental cause, by applying pertinent actives and
passives. And thus it is in the moral and metaphorical conception of sin,
though the devil may have his hand, and be very instrumental in the work, by
applying suitable objects for alluring the will, yet the true and proper parent,
is the sinner himself, and the lusts of his own heart: and therefore while in
Scripture, the pedigree and parentage of sin is described, these only are
mentioned; as if in comparison of these, any hand that Satan could have in
that wicked work, scarce deserved to be named and mentioned, Jam. 1.14, 15. And
then, 2. as in respect of that physical generation, many children are fathered
upon the devil by fabulous writers, to the conception of whom, he did no ways
contribute or concur (whatever truth may be in the general assertion, yet there
is no judicious Divine, who will not reject the fables of Poets and platonic
Cabalists, as fictitious and ridiculous) so also as to his moral influence in
the conception of sin, there be too many, who are ready to bring an excuse for
their wicked deeds from Satan's temptations, while as he had no hand, and did
not solicit them to such practices, and perhaps would scarce be at the pains
to tempt such, as being already catched, and lying contentedly in his snare. It
is a groundless conceit to think, that all sins come from the suggestions of
the devil; for, albeit there were not a devil to tempt (as Thom. 1. quaest.
114. art. 3. in corp. Etiamsi diabolus non esset, etc. vid. etiam auct. lib. de
eccles. dogmat. cap. 182. Fatetur tamen Thomas omnia peccata iudirecte a
diabolo oriri, quia viz. primum hominem instigavit ad peccandum, ex cujus
peccato pronitas in natura humana ad omnia alia peccata consecuta est, ibid.
incorp.
Aquinas from Origin says) yet there would be sin enough in the world. There
is fire enough within, and much fuel still ministered from without; though
there were no devil, yet the world would bring provision enough to feed the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 2.15,
16. Though seed must be cast in the earth before it bring forth precious
fruits, yet weeds will spring up of their own accord; we need not plow nor sow;
we need not prune nor dig that briars and thorns may come up; nay, unless we
carefully keep and dress our vineyard, and be at much pains to hold them down,
they will quickly overspread it, Isa. 5.6. And therefore Satan needs not be at
the pains to tempt carnal and secure sinners, they need not a monitor, they
will be busy enough at his work, though he neither over-see, solicit, nor
concur. And as for the Saints, against whom he mainly rages, what his
subtility and craft can devise, or his power effectuat, his malice will stir
him up to do for their ruin and mischief, and to hinder them in their way to
the place from which he was thrust down; O! how does it vex fallen angels to
consider, that frail weak men, by nature far inferior to them, and by sin too
like unto them, should fill their room, and be taken up to the Jud v. 6.
habitation they have left. But praise be to the keeper of Israel, who has
bound this strong one, and now this cruel mastiff Angeli mali multa etiam
praese^tia non noverunt Deo impediente propter cujus impedimentum non possunt
multa quae tamen non impediti naturaliter possent, Scotus in 4. sent. did. 45.
quaest 4. prope finem.
can go no further then his chain does reach; woe to us, if we were in the hands
of devils, if they might tempt and vex us at their pleasure. But alas, we often
tempt Satan to tempt us, and provoke the Lord to let loose this Lion upon us:
and therefore have reason rather to chide our own hearts, and accuse our own
selves because Satan has tempted us, then to extenuat and excuse our sins and
transgressions upon that account.

humility, Ah! how ready is the foolish vain creature to vilify and disdain,
and to keep a distance from those who have a mean portion of the trash of this
world; they will not stoop so low as to converse with, or let a word fall to
such (as they conceive) objects, though perhaps they be the precious and Psa.
16.3. Heb. 11.38.
excellent ones, of whom the world is not worthy. Ah! proud man, do thou not
know that thou perhaps entertainest worse company? thou who think it below
thee, to suffer thy brethren to draw nigh to thee, Satan may be permitted to
enter thy most secret closet, and be acquainted with thy most secret thoughts
and purposes, he may be familiar with thee, and have too much moyen with thee,
yea and power over thee; and thus by thy pride thou openest a door for him to
enter in at. God Est autem cognoscere aliquem de longinquo statim absque ullo.
familiaritatis commercio velut ex remotis; quis and qualis s^t cognoscere,
accognitum aspernari, Muscul. in Psa. 138.6.
knows the proud afar off, but suffers Satan to come near to them: not as if
the Lord did not know, and would not one day judge the proud, but because he
does not regard him, but gives him over to Satan's searching and tutory: such
as would hold off and resist the devil, would labor to Colos. 3.12.
put on bowels of kindness, meekness and humbleness of mind, Jam. 4.6, 7.
Self-denial, self-resignation and submission to God, is a necessary mean of
self-preservation, and the souls security, and protection from Satan's assaults.

2. This may serve to stir us up to sobriety, circumspection and watchfulness,
1 Pet. 5.8. Its no time for sleep and security, while the enemy is not only
going about our tents, and looking in at the windows, but has entered the
utter-court, yea and perhaps the parlour, and most secret corner; what need
have we to look narrowly not only to our words, and works, but to our thoughts
and imaginations, while our adversary is so near us, who is such a diligent
observer of the very first motions of the heart, and so ready to improve every
advantage he gets? if we halt and stumble, he will not fail to lay a snare
before our feet that he may catch us; he is waiting that he may join with the
least distemper, and to blow up the first spark of inordinacy that he espieth
in our affections; and the Lord in justice may suffer those to fall, who did
not look better to their steps. Let us then 1 Pet. 1.13.
gird up the loins of our mind, and take unto us the whole armor of God, that
we may be able to stand against the wiles of of the devil, and the violence of
these principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13.

3. The consideration of Satan's power and malice should make us live in a
continual dependence on him who is stronger then this mighty one, and who is
able Job 5.24.
to keep thy tabernacle in peace, notwithstanding his fury and terrible
assaults. Though we must put on the whole armor of God, yet above all the
shield of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
that wicked one. Ephesians 6.11.16. Faith engages God in our quarrel, and if he be
on our side we are strong enough, who ever be against us, Romans 8.31. we must
prevail, and be victorious; what can persecution, tribulation and distress,
whether from devils or men, do unto us? nay, (says the Apostle) in all these
things we are more then conquerors through him that loved us. v. 35, 37.

4. The danger we stand in from this cruel one, should chase us in to God, and
make us frequently and fervently ask of him, that he would limit and bind this
mighty one, that he would appoint his holy Psa. 91.11, 12.
angels to be a guard about our tabernacle, and give them charge over us to
keep us in all our ways: and (whatever Aquinas affirms that all the good we
do proceeds from the ^uggestion of good angels. Sum 1. part. quaest. 114.
art. 3. in 3. and ad 3. But the Author of that book de Eccl. dogmat. having
denied that all our evil thoughts do stow from the suggestion of Satan, does
by way of opposition, more warrantably subjoyn, that all our good cogitations
and works do come from God, cap. 182. Albeit we desire not in the least to
diminish the Ministry of Angels, nor simply deny that they may suggest good
thoughts, as well as the devil can suggest evil, yet we conceive that the
Scripture does mainly and more expressly hold out to us their external then
inward Ministry, in that they are sent to guard and protect the Saints from the
violence of devils and men. Yet not so as if all our external (far less those
which are internal and spiritual) mercies were dispensed to us by their
hands, or that such and such were deputed constantly to attend such persons;
but because the Lord does employ, when it seems good to him such and such
Angels to minister to such and such Saints some particular mercies which at
other times he does im^ediatly bestow (yea to the same persons) without their
ministry. And since they may be thus employed to withstand the devil in all his
assaults, (whether Spiritull or external) against us, we may well pray, that
the Lord would employ them for our assistance in our Christian warfare against
Satan and his emissaries; albeit, 1. the work of grace on the heart, in its
renovation, conversion and the in fusion of the principles of life, be above
their reach, Creatura non potest create, holds true as well in respect of the
second, as the first Creation. And, 2. though they may have some hand, and be
some ways isntrumental in the exercise of our graces, by uggesting good
motions and pertinent motives etc, yet we must look over the instrument unto
the Lord himself, who only has power over the heart, and who of himself only
can quicken enlarge and enable us for every good word and work. Hence in
Scripture our Sanctification in all its parts and their exercise, is only and
adequatly ascribed to the holy Ghost.
instruments be employed for our protection) that he would not withhold his
immediate influence, without which all creature-watching will be in vain Psa.
127.1, 2. Though there were no other thing to stir us up to continue instant in
prayer but the tyranny of Satan, were not that alone a sufficient motive? Ah!
whether should the child run when it is pursued, if not in to the Fathers
bosom? and to whom should it complain if not to him? Prayer is a most necessary
part of the christians armor; and though it be last named, yet it is not the
least, but happily it is put after the rest, as having a general influence, and
being necessary to all the other, to sharpen them, and to bind them to us, and
to actuat and strengthen the new man in exercising them; and therefore we must
not only pray, but pray always, with all prayer, and watch thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18. He well knew what was necessary for us to ask, who
Mat. 6.13.
taught us to pray, lead us not into temptation. If Michael, contending with
Satan, did see what need he stood in of divine assistance, and therefore prayed
the Lord to rebuke him, Jud. v. 9. what need must we have to present that
petition to God? not that we should Non cusus est M^chael a^rocius maledicere
Satana quam ut illum Deo cohibendu^ traderet. Calv. in Jud. v 9. The word
(...), here rendered rebuk, significat aliquid cum interminatione and
indignatione vel praecipere vel prohibere. vid Edw, Leigh. crit sac. in voo.
curse those cursed spirits, but that we should earnestly beg, that the Lord
would bind and limit them and restrain their power and violence: O! but a
prayer-lesse Saint is weak, and wanting such a necessary part of his armor, he
may be easily wounded and foiled.

5. While we look upon our selves standing in the open field and exposed to the
violence of these mighty and cruel spirits, and while we behold all the legions
of hell engaged and rageing against us, O! how should we be affected with the
astonishing goodness of God, who all this while has kept and preserved us?
and how should it melt our hearts to consider that while we was provoking God,
he was watching over us and standing for our defense? that while we was working
Satan's work, he was guarding us against Satan's violence? All honor and
praise be for ever ascribed to our God, who has not given us over to be led
captive by Satan at his will; that, with Job, we are not afflicted in our
persons and estates, that our hearts are not pestered with hellish suggestions,
and blasphemous imaginations, and that we have been preserved from so many
strong and subtle temptations; for our peace within and without, praise be to
the name of our God.

But, 4. Out of Judge. 14.14.
the eater may come meat, and sweetness out of the strong: from this point,
which may seem so terrible, the Saints may bring some ground of consolation,
while they find strange and atheistical thoughts of unbelief, yea perhaps and
of blasphemy to rise in their heart; while they might apprehend that such
guests durst not once offer to enter in, and to which they gave no call nor
invitation and suitable entertainment when they came; by abominating the company
of these unwelcom intruders, they may, to their comfort, know that an enemy
has sown these tares in their field: that ill seed was not brought from their
garner, it is Satan's work, he has stolen in that cursed grain in their
ground; and if they do not cherish, comply with, and consent unto his motions,
his injecting of them will not be imputed to them as their sin; it was not Genesis
44.^.
Benjamins fault that Joseph's cup was put into his sack, but if Benjamin had
known and concealed the matter, and thus gone away with the cup, who could have
said he was innocent. But Ah! how hard a thing is it to keep powder from
kindling when it meets with the fire: Satan's fiery darts do easily ^^^me our
lust, and that seed of corruption that still abides in the best of men: how
seldom does Satan labor in vain, and we, when tempted, not sin? yet he who
knew no sin, was tempted to sin Heb. 4.15. Mat. 4. etc. but he found nothing in
him, I^^. ^^.30. no friends within to open the door, no pledge nor ear^^^ he
had left behind him, he had no claim, and he must go a^^ without his errand.
And if we were able to hold him ^^t, whatever claim he may pretend, he were
not able to hurt us; and only when, and so far as we welcome, follow, and ^^ld
to his temptations, we are guilty. O! then let us watch and take heed to our
steps, that we may not Satan (says Chrysostom, homil, 3. de Lazaro) is like to
a dog that stands looking to them that sit at table, waiting to have
something cast to him; but if he come once (...) aga^, and ^^thing be t^^own to
him, he goes away and is no more troubelsome. so etc.
minister to Satan any occasion to assault us. It was while the husband man
sleept that the enemy came and sowed his tares, Mat. 13.25. and let us watch
and observe their first rise, that we may set our selves against them,
laboring to bruise these cockatrice eggs in their hatching: though we have to
do with a strong and a crafty enemy, whose spies and friends lurk in our bosom,
let us not fear; for greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world,
1 Ioh. 4.4. Though of our selves we be weak, yet in the Ephesians. 6.10.
power of Gods might we may do valiantly; let us be doing and 1 Cor. 16.
acquiting our selves like men in the combat, and we will meet with help from
heaven; and the God of peace shall tread Satan under our feet shortly, Romans
16.20. If we put on the whole armor of God, we will be enabled to stand
against the wiles and stratagems of the devil, Ephesians. 6.11. We must not in the
least give place to him, Ephesians. 4.27. the least advantage does encourage him, and
he will pursue the first beginings of the victory: but if we keep our ground,
and resolutly resist him, though he may tempt and molest us, and from day to
day renew his assaults, yet he shall always be a loser, and at length he shall
flee from us, and be trodden under foot, I^m, 4.7.

Having premised these things concerning what is supposed, and implied, we come
now to speak to the question it self; where we shall not confine our selves to
the subject matter, but shall speak more generally of Satan's moving to what is
of it self good, but with an eye to the present case, which could not be so
well determined in an abstract and peculiar way. But it may seem strange, that
the evil one should stir us up to any good, especially to prayer, that being no
small part of the Christians armor and guard against his wiles and assaults,
Ephesians. 6.11.18. Yet, his design being thereby to dishonor God and work mischief
to us, we need not question and debate the matter; but let us rather take heed
to his Ephesians. 6.11.
wiles and devices, who while he cannot gain his point by appearing in his own
colors and as the prince of darkness, can 2 Cor. 2.11. Tantacnim vis est
probitatis ut omnis vel pene omnis ejus laud moveotur humana natura nec usque
adeo sit turpitudine vitiosa ut totum amittat sensum honestatis, ^roinde
maligimitas doemovum, nisi alicubi se transsigurent in angelos lucis, non
implet negotium deceptio nis. August de civit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 26.
transform himself into an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.

There be some who Vid Gisb. Voet. sell disp. de not. and oper. daem. page 946.
affirm, that Satan is so limited, as to the manner of his apparition, that he
cannot assume the perfect shape of a man; So that if the beholders did narrowly
mark, they might espy some deformity, whereby they might conjecture, that it
were not a true and ordinary body: Thus it is reported of Luther, that he
discerned Satan appearing to him in a Monks shape and apparel, when he espied
the paw of a Lion in stead of an arm: but whatever truth be in that, as to his
bodily and visible appearing, it must be so in his secret and invisible
transformation; he can never so assimilate and resemble an Angel of light; but
if we did observe and could discern all his wiles and designs, we might see so
much deformity in him, and so much crookedness in his best motions, as might
make us say, surely the finger of Satan is here. And,

1. The devil may move us to do some good, if thereby he may hinder a greater,
to perform some one or other duty, to the neglect of some other of more weight
and importance. If he can make a lesser duty to justle out the greater, and a
less good prove an impediment to a greater, he will not be wanting, but will
afford all the provision he can for the doing of that which is less, though not
as it is good, but as it is an impediment of good, and therefore as it may
prove a mean to a wicked end. Thus Satan, in those that were possessed, did
acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God, and the Apostles to be the servants of
the most High, which showed the way of salvation, Luk 8.28. Mat. 8.29. Act.
16.17. Was it not a good work to confess Christ to be the Messiah, and to give
a testimony to his servants that they were preachers of righteousness? but
Satan's design therein was most wicked, and like himself; for thereby he
intended to obscure the mystery of incarnation, and to foster that hellish
blasphemy of the Pharisees, that Christ did cast out devils by Mat. 9 34. Mat.
12.24.
Beelzebub the prince of devils. The enemy of all truth, would give testimony
to that great and fundamental truth, that Christ was the promised Messiah,
that thus he might render the testimony of faithful witnesses, and of the Lord
from heaven the more suspect; and that he might invalidat and obscure that
clear and convincing evidence which the astonishing miracles wrought by him did
produce and hold forth. But the Lord, who can Hoc suit ex omnipotente sapien^ia
Dei ut inimiciveritatis, fiantipsi testes veritatis. August contra Petil. Donat
lib 2 cap, 30.
overrule and befool the devil and his instruments, did thereby declare Christ's
power over those his enemies, that nill they, will they, they must give a
testimony to him, and to his servants, and the doctrine of the Gospel; the
confession of adversaries was always acknowledged to be a most Nullum
efficacius argumentum, etc.
efficacious largument for the truth. Another instance we have in Peter's
counsel to Christ to spare himself, Mat. 16.22. O! (may some think) there was
much love, Zeal and tenderness in that motion, but it being obstructive of the
work of redemption, it came from hell; and because Peter in it did follow
Satan's suggestion, our blessed Lord calls him Satan. v. 23. Thus also while
we should be employed in the public ordinances, and attend unto them, Satan
may suggest some pious (though impertinent as to the present work) meditation,
or stir us up to pray, that thereby he may hinder our edification or conviction
by the word preached.

2. Satan may press us to duty, as to prayer, reading, conference, etc. that
he may make those religious performances a snare to catch our selves and
others. He has many a time laid this snare before young converts, whom he was
not The devil will sail with wind and tide and improve the present temperature
and disposition of spirit for his own end.
able to divert from the exercise of holiness, he would labor to drive
forward, and to make them over do, to the neglect of their bodily health and
callings; that at length he might weary them, and make them faint and give
over; and that he might terrify others from putting their necks under such an
insupportable yoke, and that religion might be esteemed to be a tyrant and
cruel exactor, which can never be satisfied, and to be inconsistent with
health, joy, use of the creatures, lawful employments, recreations, etc.
Albeit we cannot love God and hate sin too much, yet there may See M. Symonds
case and cure chap. 20.
be a nimium in the external exercises of religion, and there may be some
excess and distemper intermixed with our spiritual affections; which Satan by
all means will labor to foster and increase. Thus he improved the zeal of the
Church of Corinth against the penitent incestuous man, that his sorrow might
degenerate into despair, and that he might be swallowed up thereby, 2 Cor. 2.7.
Satan can well bear that some few, and for a short while, be very zealous and
active for the Lord, and diligent and frequent in duties, if thereby he can
beget a prejudice in the hearts of men against Gods service, and can make them
think that Christ's burden were like the Mat. 23.4. Luke 11.46.
Pharisees, heavy and grievous to be born, contrary to that word of truth, Mat.
11.30. 1 John 5.3.

3. Satan may move us to be frequent in prayer, and to wait upon the public
ordinances most punctually, that thereby he may either stop and silence the
consciences, and that thus we may commit sin with the greater freedom and
boldness, or else (as in gross hypocrites) that this may be a cloak and
pretense, a mask and cover to hide our wicked designs and ways from the eyes
of others, that so we may be able to do them the more mischief, and to sin with
the less suspicion and hazard. Thus the hypocritical Pharisees, that they might
with the more security devours widows houses, for a pretense made long prayers,
Mat. 23.14. And Absalom, that he might cover his conspiracy and treason, will
go and pay his vow in Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.7. Satan could well suggest such a
fair pretense to Absalom; and bear with pharisaical oppressors in their seeming
devotion. But especially his hand may appear when sinners become so mad, as to
think not only to hide cheir wickedness from men by those outward performances,
but also thereby to purchase a liberty from the Lord; and thus, as it were, to
hire and bribe him, as they do their own consciences, to be silent; as that
impudent woman, Prove. 7.14, 15. I have this day (says she to the foolish youth
whom she enticed to whordom) paid my vows, and I have peace offerings with me,
therefore came I forth to meet thee. As if she had said, I have paid old debt,
and by my sacrifices purchased a liberty for us to do wickedly, we need not
fear, I have moyen for time to come. I have provided a ransom, and given my
bond for what debt we can now contract, I have Albeit in peace offerings a
portion returned to them that offered, wherewith they might make a feast unto
which this woman in these words inviteth the young fool, yet I conceive that
mainly she labors to allure him by the religious pretense here mentioned.
See Annot. on the Bible edit. Amsterd. in fol. ann. 1640.
peace offerings with me, which will make amends and satisfy for all the wrong
we can now do to God,

4. Satan may come and stir us up to religious exercises, that thereby he may
add fuel to our pride. Thus Pharisees of old, and superstitious Papists to
this day, in their madness and exceeding zeal (as Paul speaking of his
persecuting the Church of Christ calls it) are helped of Satan; they meet with
fire from hell to kindle their affections in their unwarrantable performances;
and though their work upon the matter were good and commendable, yet Satan
will not draw back his hand, if thereby he can puff them up, and beget in them
an opinion of their own worth, and that by their good works they are justified
and merit heaven. This persuasion comes not of him that calls you, Gal. 5.8.
This persuasion, that by your works ye are justified ( v. 4.) comes not from
God, who calls you to the kingdom of his dear Son, but from him, who thereby
labors to make Christ of none effect unto you ( v. 24.) and to drive you to
hell. We need not then ask, why many Papists are so eminent for works of
Charity and liberality, and so frequent in their dead, formal and carnal way
of worship, since Satan will be ready to fill the sails with wind, when the
vessel is laden with provision to feed our ambition and pride; but if that
current be once stopped, and a trade rightly carried on for eternity, he will
raise what storms he can, and send out many pirates, either ^o surprise or draw
it back again. Many are the snares and temptations, hindrances and
impediments, which the Saints do meet with in their way to heaven; whereas
hypocrites and formal professors go on in their course without opposition or
difficulty. But let none mistake, as if hereby a pretense were ministered unto
the laziness, stoth and negligence of such as are in the right way; certainly
the zeal, activity and diligence of those who are without, shall stop thy
mouth, and make thee inexcusable in the great day, if thou thus rest upon an
orthodox profession; and if thou be in Christ and art led by his Spirit, 1 John
4.4.
Stronger is he who is in thee, then he who is in the world, thou have another
kind of help and assistance for doing good then others: O then, let thy work be
answerable.

If in any good motion, we can discern one or more of those wicked designs, we
may be jealous least Satan have a hand in it, and should guard against his
devices; which, when espied, may serve as so many marks and characters, whereby
we may know the print of his foot, though he be disguised, appearing in white
raiment. To which these few may be added.

1. As to the matter. If in prayer our desires be merely, or mainly selfish and
natural, Satan may concur and blow up the coal of carnal heat within: And thus
there may be much enlargement of affections, much fervency and importunity
without the help of the Spirit, as in that people, Hos. 7.14. when they
assembled themselves, and howled for corn and wine, Isa. 26.16. and when they
multiplied their prayers and sacrifices, Isa. 1.15, 11. Esau may weep for want
of an earthly blessing, Genesis 27.34. though he undervalued and little minded the
marrow of the blessing, the love and favor of God. But none can, without the
Spirit of God, say with David, one thing have I desired, that will I seek
after, that I may behold the beauty of the Lord, Ps. 27.4. And with Asaph, whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, I desire besides thee,
Ps. 73.25. Who is able seriously to pray for help to pluck out the right eye,
and cut off the right hand, and to part with his darling lusts and affections,
unless he be acted and strengthened by the Spirit of God? Who can, with Agar,
say, give me not riches least they proven snare, Prove. 30.8, 9. unless the
Lord breath into his heart such a desire; Satan will not help thee to Mat.
6.33.
seek, the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and in thy desires to prefer
holiness to riches, heaven to earth, and Gods glory to thy own self-interest.

2. As to the end, Satan may stir thee up to Jam. 4.3.
ask, that thou may consume what thou gettest upon thy lusts; but who does
desire any thing from God, that he may be Ps. 35.27.
magnified, and that what he gives may be employed for his honor, unless he
get help from heaven? Only the Spirit of God can elevate our desires to so high
and noble an Of the ends of prayer. Part. 2. ch, 1.
end, and make us honestly obey the exhortation, 1 Cor. 10.31. He, who must do
all, must also pray to the glory of God, and this of our selves we cannot do.

3. As to the manner. Satan can stir us up to pour out absolute and peremptory
desires for outward things, and faint, lazy, moderate and submissive desires
for grace. Satan makes us invert the right order and method; he will not
protest, though thou ask mercy, pardon, of sins, etc. that conscience may be
stilled and satisfied; but thou must not be too earnest and anxious concerning
those things, and thy desires must not be boundless and illimited; a little of
grace (says he) will do the turn, and any kind of desire, though never so ^old
and formal, is sufficient. 2. Satan can move thee to ask the world for it
self, and to make self thy last end; but the Spirit of God must enable us to
deny our selves, and to ask outward things in subordination and in relation to
the great end. If Satan prescribe, our lusts must reign, and grace must be the
handmaid, and be only so far sought, as it is subservient to our carnal ends,
and for a quiet and peaceable fulfilling of our lusts. 3. Satan can beget in
the heart a child-like expectation and confidence: though thou be a stranger,
he can make thee expect the portion of a son; he will not suffer thee once to
question thy state and acceptance, least if conscience were awakened, thou
should seek after a change; But it is the work of the Spirit to beget in us
childlike affections, and make us love God, delight in a communion with him and
be loath to grieve him; and he only can enable us to call him, in truth, Abba
Father, Romans 8.15.4. Satan can move thee to what is good, unorderly; by making
thee leave thy place and station, and invade another man's office; 2 Samuel 15.4.
Oh! that I were made Judge in the land, said Absalom, (and may thou say
prayerwayes) Thus also Saul would offer sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13.9. and Vzziah burn
incense, 2 Chr. 26.16.19. They would go out of their own sphere and exercise
the ministerial Function; wherefore the Lord justly punished both the one and
the other. It was good and a commanded duty to offer sacrifice, but it did not
belong to Saul's office; it was fit that supplication should be made to the
Lord, but it belonged not to Saul to do it in a public and ministerial way,
(as it would appear Saul then did, v. 12) it was necessary that incense should
be burnt before the Lord, but it did not appertain to Vzziah (as Azariah told
him, v. 18.) but to the Priests, the sons of Aaron, who were consecrated to
that office. But the Spirit of Christ moves orderly, making us to contain
within our own sphere, and to abide in the same calling wherein we were called,
according to his commandment, 1 Cor. 7.20.24. A heart acted by the Spirit can,
with David, Psa. 131.1. say, when he makes his supplication to God, O Lord, my
heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in
great matters, or in things too high for me. The Lord will have all things done
decently and in order, and is not the author of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.40.43. and
as he leads not his children out of the way, So neither does he bring them to
dark and unpassable paths: it is not from him that weak Christians, especially
these of the female Sex, do meddle and vex themselves with dark questions and
intricat disputes; or, that the most strong and learned do dive too curiously
in things not revealed, and in the secrets of the Almighty. He knows that to
be an unprofitable task and too high for us, and will not have such new wine
put into our old bottels, (till they be renewed) lest they break, Mat. 9.17.5.
Satan, as a cruel exacter, may press thee to deal inhumanely and too
rigourously, either toward thy self or others; and though such a work may seem
to have much piety and zeal in it; yet, Satan does blow the bellows, Thus, if
tender Christians should find a mighty impulse upon their spirits, to pray and
fast so long and so frequently as to hazard their health, and to neglect their
calling and not provide for their family, (ah! how rare a case is this? but
though multitudes do spare and pamper their bodies, to the neglect and ruin of
their soul; yet some have failed on the other hand, and then certainly) Satan
is not idle; it is he that helps forward this cruel zeal. Thus he stirred up
the Jews (in But the command given to him was only for trial; there being a ram
provided for the sacrifice, Genesis 22.13. but they could pretend no kind of
command, Jer. 7.31. Nay, the Lord will rather have no sacrifice then a work of
mercy should be omitted, (far more then cruelty should be exercised) Mat. 11.7.
imitation, as it would appear, of faithful Abraham) to offer up their
children; the Lord commanded them to sacrifice their beasts; but Satan taught
them, in a mad fit of zeal, thus to super-erogat and to sacrifice their sons
and daughters: which oblations are said to be offered up to devils, as for
other reasons, so happily for this, because Satan did prescribe, require and
stir them up thereunto, Psa. 106.37. Thus also he moved Baal's Priests to cut
themselves with knives and lancets till the blood gushed out, 1 King. 18.28.
Thus also he drives blind Papists to afflict and scourge themselves, etc. and
yet, this sort of cruelty is far more tolerable then the fury of Anabaptists
and other Sectaries, who are merciful to themselves, but mad against all
others; in their zeal for God, they could embrue their hands in their
neighbors blood, and cut off all others that they might enjoy their
possessions, that they might live as Kings, there being no man to say to them,
Eccl. 8.4.
What do ye? 6. Satan moves tumultuously and confusedly; holy motions having
no dependence one upon another, and tending to distract the heart in the
present work, (whether that be prayer, hearing the word, etc.) must come from
him who likes not the work, and who labors by all means (and that his hand
may not be discerned, makes choice of the most fair and specious, as being at
such a season most probable) to mar the work in hand: but the Lord prepares,
strengthueth, fixes and enlarges the heart, and inclines it to perform His
Statutes, and establishes our goings, Psa. 10.17. Psa. 27.14. Psa. 40.2. etc.
He will not raise, but rather expel those storms and mist of confusion, that
dis-inableth us in His work. 7. Satan will suggest and stir us up to good,
divisively and partially; Satan, when he moves us to do good being out of his
own element, his motion cannot be equal and uniform, if to some good, not to
all: yea, to some for this very purpose, that we may be stayed from following
some other, happily of more concernment. However, he knows, that he who is
guilty of offending in one point, is guilty of all, and that God will accept of
none of our works, unless we have respect to all His commandments, Psa. 119.6.
Jam. 2.10. and therefore, if he can set one table of the Law, or any one
commandment against another, he will not withdraw his help for enabling thee to
bear that part of the burden thou have chosen. Thus some seem to be very
zealous and diligent in religious performances, who neglect their relative
duties as they are parents, masters, servants, neighbors, etc. not unlike to
those who were taught of the Pharisees to be liberal in their contributions for
pious uses, and undutifull to their indigent parents, Mat. 15.5.6. But there
are others (and these not a few) who place all their Religion in the duties of
the second Table, and they have no other charter to happiness but that they are
good neighbors; they deal justly, they wrong no man, etc. and that Satan may
foster their delusion, he will allow them to be very strict and exact in their
carriage toward men: Ah! what a monstrous kind of Religion must that be [to
wrong men in nothing, and to rob God of all his service and worship, (except
perhaps some outward performances without life and heat) to give to man all his
due, and to God none of his?]. O! but the Spirit teaches and helps us to
walk uniformly, and to Act. 24.16.
exercise our selves always to keep a good conscience, both toward God and
man.

4. As to the rule, if there be a mistake as to it, if a false rule be set up,
Satan will stir us up to be very active for it, and zealous in our conformity
to it, if he can get our zeal wrong placed, he will blow up the coal: it was he
that stirred up Paul to be Act. 26.11.
exceedingly mad against the Saints, and violently to Act. 22.3, 4.
persecute them: he did cherish that blind zeal in the Jews, who ( Romans 10.2,
3.) labored to establish blish their own righteousness; he did kindle that
zeal in those false brethren, who ( Gal. 4.17.) sought to seduce and draw away
the Galatians from the simplicity of the Gospel; and he it is who rules in
Schismatics, Heretics, and all kind of persecutors, making them mad against
the truth and the sincere Professors of it: Nay, every motion (though upon the
matter never so good) which tends to justify any sinful course, to harden
our heart therein, and to feed any distempered passion and lust, must come from
the evil one; and from him it also proceeds, that men are more zealous for
their own inventions and superstitious customs, then for the commands of God.
O! but the Spirit teaches us to be Gal. 4.18.
zealously affected always in a good thing; to follow the direct on of the
word, and, with Job. 23.12.
Job, to esteem his commandments and the words of his mouth more then our
necessary food: but, every anti-scriptural and erroneous motion is a satanical
suggestion, proceeding, not from the spirit of truth, but from the father of
lies, who can cite Scripture and pretend divine Authority (as he did to Christ,
Mat. 4.6.) to back his temptations.

5. As to the time. 1. Satan may move us to pray by fits and starts, but the
Spirit only can make us Romans 12.12.
continue instant in prayer; we cannot pray always unless we pray in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. carnal men will not constantly call on God, Job 27.10. 2.
Satan can move thee to pray unseasonably; as while a Judge is sitting on the
Bench, and God calls him, and his place calls him to minister justice, if then
he find an impression upon his spirit to desert his duty, and go to his closet
and pray, he may fear lest Satan have a hand in it. Thus, while we are at Thus
he labored to divert the people from attending to Christ's Doctrine, by a most
specious but unseasonable confession, that Christ was the holy one of God, Luk
4.33, 34. Thus also, while Paul and those who were with him were at prayer, he
endeavored to interrupt them by a fair testimony given to the Apostles and
their doctrine by a possessed damsel; Act. 16.16, 17. If Satan can steal away
the heart from the present duty, he cares not by what means.
prayer, if we find some good motion suggested, which does distract and draw
away our hearts from the present work, if while we are hearing, conscience
press us to read, if while we are attending our Masters business, conscience
call us to employ that time which is not our own in some religious exercise,
etc. these and the like are unseasonable motions, and cannot then proceed from
him who has appointed a season and fit time for every thing under the Sun, and
made every thing beautiful in its time, Eccl. 3.1.11. But, as he makes his
servants to reap in due season, Gal. 6.8, 9. he will also make them sow and
bring forth fruit in the right season, Psa. 1.3.

6. As to the effect. Though satanical suggestions may be very violent and
impetuous, and forcibly press us to act; yet, they are fruitless, they bring no
provision for the work, and for a right and spiritual way of performance; they
are like water poured out upon the rock, not like the rain that falls upon
the valleys: Satan's morsels do not feed the soul. 1. Then, it leaves no
heavenly and spiritual impression upon the heart, it does not enlarge and open
it toward God, Luk 10.18. it is an evanishing flash quickly gone, which though
it may awaken, yet it does not warm the traveller. But, Pharaoh and the
Taskmasters once dealt with the Israelites, who urged them to work and make
brick, but would allow them no straw or materials for the work, Exodus 5.6, 7.
But, and dispose the heart for doing hereafter; a good work flowing from his
breath is infectious, it rather deadneth and indisposeth, then quickneth the
heart, and rather begets a prejudice against holiness, then true love to it,
because of its power (which then is not felt) and beauty, (which is not seen
and perceived.) Far less, 6. is Satan's motion influential on the life and
conversation; if it do not incline and dispose the heart for duties of the same
kind and nature, it can hardly be imagined that it will extend it self further;
if praying now thus, will not make thee love that exercise the better, and fit
and dispose thee for praying hereafter, then, though the Lord in his wise
providence, and for ends known to himself, should give what thou thus
desiredst, that mercy would not prove a mean to increase thy love to him,
neither would thou labor to improve it for him, and lay it out for his
honor; far less upon this account would thou take heed to thy steps, as
being loath to offend him, and say with him, Psa. 116.9.12.14. What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will pay my vows unto him, and in
my whole carriage walk before him unto all Col. 1.10.
well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. O! but the influence of the
Spirit is soulstrengthning and enlarging; it is fruitful, like the warm
showers upon the mowen grass, Psa. 72.6. and like that water poured upon the
thirsty, Isa. 44.3, 4. As he quickneth and stirs us up to do, So he enableth
and helps our weakness and infirmities, Romans 8.26. His influence is not
partial, it extends to the whole life and conversation, to strengthen and
establish us in every good word and work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. 1. To do. 2. To do
well. And, 3. to do every thing that the Lord commands; if the Spirit help us
to pray, he will help us to pray well and love well. Now a word of application.

the Lord, etc. Satan can transform himself, and then he is most dangerous and
mischievous to the Saints; a white devil is an ill guest.



We now come to the second branch of the qu^stion, viz. By what marks and
characters we may discern and distinguish spiritual and divine motions from
natural and moral? How shall we know, whether the good motions that arise in
our heart, and our activity in duty, proceed from the holy Spirit, or from, 1.
conviction and some light in the conscience (though not yet sanctified and
renewed) or, 2. from a melting ordinance, or remarkable dispensation of
providence; or, 3. from our natural inclination and temperature (which though
infected with the old leprosy derived from Adam, yet did impell some heathens
to the exercise of several moral virtues) or, 4. from education, custom,
civility and mere morality, though a little elevated and assisted by the common
operation and influence of the Spirit? Thus we might speak to several
particulars, but we will not separate them, because to the present case they
are much alike; neither will we now enquire when good motions do flow from
those moral principles solitarily, there not being another, and more noble
principle within, to give life unto them: and when there is another principle
in the subject, though not then acting and producing them: But shall speak to
the point in general; it being an easy task to apply the several marks to the
regenerat and inregenerat; especially, since, as to the question in hand, they
often agree, and where there is a difference not palpable, we shall add a word
of discrimination.

1. Then Natural as opposed to spiritual and supernatural; and thus it
comprehends all the particulars alleged in the question, in opposiion to the
assistance of the Spirit.
natural motions are empty and swelling, they puff up and make us proud; nature
sacrifices to it self, and in all its elavations, it elevateth it self, and
makes, us with the Luke 18.11.
Pharisee, say, I am not like other men; and be ready, with 1 Kings, 22.24.
Zedekiah, to smite on the cheek such as would discover our delusion. Nature
desires many Scire tuum nibil est, nisi tescire hoc sciat alter. Pers.
witnesses to admire and trumpet its praise; behold 2 Kings, 10.16.
says Jehu) my zeal for the Lord. When the wind beats upon empty barrels
there is a great noise, but no echo comes from the full. O! but true grace
lays the soul lowest, when it is most elevated; the Saints are like the
vine-trees, the more fruit they bear, they are the more bowed down; the more
they are enlarged in duty, the more they are straightened in their selfadmiring
imaginations. No doubt the Publican was then enlarged, when he durst not look
up to heaven, and while he looked in to himself, saw nothing but sin; happily he
had parts and great possessions, some name and place amongst men, and must he
not be designed by these? nay, but whether he had any considerable portion of
these worldly excellencies, we know not, he regards not, they were not worthy
once to be mentioned; but his name, expressing all that he could say of
himself, was this, a sinner, Luke 18.13. When the Lord admitted Abraham (as it
were) to his privy council, and revealed to him his purpose to destroy Sodom,
did this puff him up? nay, but says Abraham, though I have taken upon me to
speak to the Lord, yet I am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. Its true,
corruption may take occasion where no occasion is offered; and Paul may thus be
in hazard to exalt himself thorough the abundance of revelations; but surely
that is a very unnatural and unkindly fruit from such seed, and it cannot be
said of grace, which is said of one (and might be said of all) gift, viz.
knowledge, to wit, that it puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. But on the contrary, while
the Spirit of Christ does act, and so far as he breaths upon the soul, he
does mightily assist us in the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down
imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. By
this then we may 1 John 4; 1.
try the Spirits, whether they are of God or not. Every seelf-seeking,
self-pleasing, self exalting, and self-embracing motion is natural; though
there would appear never so much zeal in it, that fire must either come from
our own furnace, or from hell; but every self-abasing, self-loathing,
self-fearing, yea, and despairing; but Christ admiring, exalting, loving and
embracing motion, must proceed from the Spirit of Christ, who only can enable
us to deny our self and follow him. These two are inseparably conjoined, and
both mutually concur here, the one helping to clear the other, and both jointly
the point in hand; the more we see our own vileness and misery, we will love
and prize Christ the more. And therefore we may suspect every discovery of our
own emptiness, as being only moral and philosophical, if it do not enlarge the
heart toward Christ, and send us out to his fullness; and on the contrary, all
our pretended love to Christ, and presumptuous closing with him, which does not
flow from conviction, despair and self-denial, is a mere delusion, Mark, 8.38.
If then we will judge by this infallible rule, what must we think of all the
seeming devotion, tears, pr^vers, heart-meltings, enlargements, and specious
performances of pharasaical Papists, and all other self-justifying
merit-mongers? From this root also springs another characteristical branch.
If thou get a sight of thine own vileness, if thy assistance in duty does not
puff thee up, but rather makes thee more humble and vile in thine own eyes,
thou will return to God the sacrifice of praise for his goodness toward thee;
if thou be sensible of thine own weakness and inability, thou will render to
God the glory of all thine enlargements and actings: what comes from God,
leads in to him; but what flows from nature, is coafined within its own
orb, and will not look so high: As water in the pipe can ascend no higher then
the head-spring, from which it did flow; So neither can our streams elevate us
above the wellfrom which they did spring. Its true, the proud Pharisee, while
he would thank himself, can say, Luke 18.11.
God, I thank thee, he will pass a complement upon God, that thereby he may
usher in his own praise; his work was not to give thanks to God, but to boast
that he was a nonesuch. But we cannot from the heart praise God, till he has
renewed it; we cannot look so high, till he anoint our eyes.

2. The natural conscience, if it press to do good, yet not all that is
commanded; though it set thee a task, yet it limiteth and binds up thy hands;
so far thou may go, but no further. Its true, there is here a latitude,
according to the present measure of light and conviction, but always there is
some kind of limitation and restraint; so much only must be done as may serve
to quiet and silence the clamours and accusations of the judge within; and for
the most part a little will do the turn, some few outward performances, without
life and affection; the popish opus operatum, if the work be done, no matter
how it be done, from what principle, upon what motives, and to what end. Thus
Paul before his conversion was a great zealot, conscience did press him to do
many things upon the matter good, and he verily thought, with that Ruler, Luke
18.21. that he had perfectly kept the whole law, and lacked nothing, Act. 22.3.
Gal. 1.14. Though then he was (as afterward, when his eyes were opened, he
professes) a blasphemer, a persecutor and injurious, 1 Timothy 1.13. O! but the
Spirit enlarges the heart, and makes us (with him, Ps. 119.6.) have respect
unto all Gods commandments; he moves to good, and to all good, without any
reservation or limitation, and enableth us to do, and to do well, and
especially to look to the inward frame and carriage of the heart, as knowing
that to be the first thing the Lord asks for and mainly regards, Prove. 23.6.
etc.

3. Albeit sometimes there may be a flash of impetuous violence and fervency,
as in him who (riding post for a kingdom) said, 2 King 10.16.
come and see my zeal for the Lord; yet Natural motions to good, are, 1. rare
and not usual; 2. they are weak and (...) faint; 3. they are transient and
quickly gone.
ordinarily and habitually, and when such fits (which are but evanishing
flashes) are past, the stirrings and motions of an unrenewed heart, are faint,
weak and remiss, a little blast will blow them away; how small a temptation did
make that great zealot embrace Jeroboams calves, and turn aside from the law of
the Lord? ver. 31. A little trouble and difficulty, loss, hazard or danger,
will outcry a natural conscience, and either stop its mouth, or prevail
against its clamours; thus Pilat, though convinced of Christ's innocence, and
desirous to set him at liberty, will rather deliver him to be crucified. then
lose the peoples favor; his conscience soon yielded to their importunity; the
warning of a natural conscience, is transient and soon choked; like to Ephraim
and Judah, their goodness, which was Hos. 6.4.
as the morning cloud and the early dew, which at the approaching of the Sun
will quickly vanish and pass away: O! but the Spirit enableth us to stand fast,
and be constant and immovable in the day of temptation, being in nothing
terrified by our adversaries; and to obey the exhortation, Phil. 4.1. Phil.
1.27, 28. 1 Cor. 16.13. etc. A proof whereof we have in that cloud of
witnesses, who under cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds, etc. obtained a good
report, Heb. 11. The Spirit fills the heart with Heb. 6.18.
strong consolations, as an antidot against strong temptations, and by the
power of his might out of weakness we are made strong, Heb. 11.34. 2 Cor. 12.9.
Yea, when the quickening presence of the Spirit is withdrawn, yet his assisting
and supporting presence continues without change and alteration; except in
some extraordinary cases procured by our pride, sloth, etc. in which there is,
as it were, deliquium gratiae, the new man is cast in a sownd; and yet if a
discerning Physician did feel his pulse, he would find some motion; the man is
not quite dead, his soul is in him, the fountain of life is not yet altogether
stopped; the seed of God yet remains in him, 1 John 3.9. But during that fit of
lethargy, the old man rages and tyranizeth, improving that advantage to the
utmost; and like that dumb devil, Mark, 9.17.20, 22. he often teareth the man,
and casts him into the fire and the water to destroy him, but the Lord at
length pitieth him; and (as Christ there, ver. 25.) rebukes the foul spirit,
and restores the captive to his former liberty: but for ordinary, the Lord does
not withdraw the assisting, yea and in some measure quickening (yea even when
he does withold the comforting, sealing and witnessing) influence of his
Spirit; therefore the Saints stand when others do fall away, their leaves are
always green, and they being planted in God's orchard, and from time to time
watered by his hand, they constantly bring forth fruit in all seasons; whileas
brambles, seeming to blosom for a season, shall quickly wither and decay, Psa.
1.3, 4. What though the Saints be not always alike enlarged in duty, and have
not the same quickening, comforting and ravishing manifestations and influences?
Yet, always they have what is necessary to life and motion, and they are still
advancing and going forward toward their home: and it is an evidence the sails
were filled with a kindly wind, when the Vessel, without interruption (though
not always equally) is carried on, till at length it arrive at the desired
haven. But, the whirlwind that blows from a natural conscience, though it
may impetuously fill the sails and drive the Vessel by a confused motion; yet,
it carries it not on toward the harbor, but after much tossing too and fro,
the ship may be as far from the port as before that blast did come; and so,
though it may trouble and molest, yet it does not help the passenger: but he
seldom meets with such a storm, which usually arises from some extraordinary
occasion, and when it comes, it is quickly over and gone.

4, The motions of a natural conscience are ill seated and placed; as
strangers, they are admitted to the utter court, but they are not taken in to
the parlor; they may have some room as common trash in the house, but they are
not like the jewels laid up in the cabin; as weeds, they may grow without the
hedge, but they are not taken in to the garden; they fleet in the
understanding, and get a candle set down before them there, and are attended by
the practical judgment and the sentence of the conscience: but, though they
come to the heart, and stand at the door and knock; yet, they cannot get
entrance, the will and affections take up arms against them and hold them at
the door; and thus, though they come from within, yet in some respect they may
b^ called violent and unnatural; the bias and inclination of the heart and
will, (which is the great sovereign and sord of our microcosme) is against
them: they are not unlike the faith of devils, which makes them tremble, Jam.
2.19 For, 1. as to their original and rise, they do not proceed from a kindly
principle, but from slavish fear, conviction, and the challenges of conscience
awakned by some outward rod or threatening, etc. As thus they come before they
be sent for, they rush in without the consent of the will. Multitud^s are ready
here to mistake, and to esteem the light of conscience to be the choice and
inclination of the will, thinking that they love God and the beauty of
holiness, because the practical judgment does dictate, that God is the most
lovely object, and grace most desirable; the worst of men may have much light,
together with much hatred and enmity at what they know to be good and right;
and often they could wish that their light were darkness, that they might with
the greater liberty and freedom follow their course, they could Like to the
siug guard, who lying on his bed, said, O! si hoc esset laborare.
wish that sin were duty, and evil good, and then there should be no better
Saints and Perfectionists then they, they would become the greatest Puritans in
the world. But, it is far otherwise with the children of God, they wait upon
the breathings of the Spirit, and stir up the seed and habits of grace in the
heart; they love their duty and delight to do the will of God, who has not
given unto them the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.6, 7. Sinners are students in evil, and plot how they may do wickedly;
but good thoughts arise in their mind without study and meditation, and
therefore, as it were, casually and by chance, (as to their labor, care and
providence) But the Saints study how to do that which is commanded, and would
be wellpleasing and acceptable to God; and sinful motions arise in them
without their consent, and contrary to the desire of their heart: it is with
them as it was with the Apostle, when they would do good, evil is present with
them against their will, Romans 7.21. 2. As to their welcome and entertainment, as
good motions do thus come to carnal hearts before they be sent for, So they are
hardly used when they come; they are unwelcom guests, and there will be no
peace till the house be freed of their trouble: and any service and
entertainment they meet with for the time, is most unchea^full and constrained;
but if they be civil and modest, and call for no more but some external, easy
and not costly service, as to pray, hear sermon, etc. some obedience for the
fashion must be yielded, but without love and delight, the heart still
protesting against the work, and while employed therein, saying with that
people, Amos 8.5. When will the Sabbath be gone, and the sermon ended? etc.
Thou come to the work unwillingly, and followest it with unchearfulness and
weariness, and go away rejoicing that thy task is finished: but, if some
inward work and heart-exercise be required, thou cannot away with such
taskmasters, thou must shake off that intolerable yoke, and some one way or
other ease thy self of that weary some burdon; any Physician, though never so
miserable and accursed, must be employed, rather than thou should thus be
held on the rack. If Cain be pricked in conscience, he will go build a City,
and by business abroad labor to calm the storm within; Saul calls for music,
Judas runs to the halter, and Felix throws away the nipping plaster, etc. But
it is matter of sad regrate to the Saints, when the Lord with-draws the awakning
and quickening motions of his Spirit; and with what importunity will they pray
the wind may blow? Ye may hear them, with the spouse, thus panting after the
heavenly breathings, Awake, O north wind, and come thou south, blow thou upon
my garden that the spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.16. and when the
precious gaile comes, they will sit down under Christ's shadow with great
delight, his fruit will then be sweet to their taste, Cant. 2.3.

But you will say, Obj.
may not the unconverted taste the good word of God and the powers of the world
to come, and not only be enlightened, Ans.
but also taste of the heavenly gifts? Ans, Yes, they may, Heb. 6.4, 5. But, 1.
that taste is rare and not usual. 2. It is superficial and not satisfying. And,
3. it is not pure and spiritual.

A word in the by to that weighty case, concerning the difference between a
temporary flash and the solid and pure joy of the holy Ghost.
1. It is rare, and seldom attained by any reprobat, and then it is not a work
of mere morality and nature, but must proceed from some (though not proper and
peculiar to the Saints, nor sanctifying and converting) operation of the
Spirit. Hence they are said to be made partakers of the holy Ghost, v. 4. And
because it is thus singular and extraordinary, therefore a most terrible and
extraordinary judgment is denounced against such as have thus been brought so
near the harbor, and yet turn sail, that they shall never taste of the
pardoning mercy of God, nor get grace to repent, v. 4.6.

But, 2. their taste is superficial and slight, in comparison of that which the
converted find; it is not meat to them, it makes them not grow; they taste
spiritual things, as cooks do the meat which they dress for others; they could
not live upon what they thus eat, but must have their meals beside; or rather
as they who serve at the table, they find the smell of the meat but eat none of
it; though some ordinary dish may be left for them, yet they must have nothing
of the more delicat portion: So the unconverted may get something of the
portion that is set on the childrens table, and find, as it were, a smell of
the heavenly and spiritual gifts, which may so affect them as if they did eat,
and is therefore called a taste, but yet nothing of that is let fall to them.
Albeit some of the Israelites might taste of the pomegranates of the land of
Canaan (brought Numb. 13.23.
from thence by the spies) who never entered the promised land; yet, none (I
think) ever tasted of the fruit of the heavenly Canaan, but must come thither,
and enjoy the fruit of that place to the full; a stranger does not intermeddle
with their joy.

But then, whether that taste was real, or only called so, because it was much
like, and did did resemble a true taste; yet certainly, 1. it was but an
evanishing flash, it was but a lightning, and no continuing heat flowing from a
principle within to feed and give life unto it. And thus, 2. it was empty and
weak, fleeting in the affections, and not reaching the heart to make an
impression upon it; by it the streams (the actings of the heart) were somewhat
enlightened and sweetened, but the fountain (and heart it self) was not bettered
or altered thereby, and nothing of its poison and bitterness removed; though
the word was received with joy in the stony heart, yet that joy was rootless
and soon withered, it did not pierce the ground, only some moisture from thence
was conveyed to it, which the heat of the day did quickly did eat out, and it
decayed, Mat. 13.20, 21.

3. It is not pure and spiritual, there is much of self, and of a sensual
interest, mixed with, and prevailing in it: and albeit it often surprizeth the
man without any previous deliberation or endeavor, (who for the time uses not
to reflect upon the motives and end) yet if then he did reflect, or if after it
is gone he would consider, he might, with 2 Samuel 18.29.
Achimaaz, say, that he saw a great tumult, but knows not well what it was.
And, 1. he will not find that God was it is object, or if it did close with God,
yet in a philosophical way immediately, and not in the Mediator Jesus Christ. 2.
Not for himself, or because of any beauty and excellency discovered in him;
there was much of self in it, and it did flow rather from what was expected by
being with him, then by beholding of his face and enjoying himself; such a one
would rather have heaven without God, then (if these could be separated) God
without heaven. 3. Though it come A soul thot has not delight in the exercises
of Gods worship may yet find delight while employed in them, arssing from some
selfish and carnal motives.
through an ordnance, yet it is not in the ordinance; there goes not along
with it a discovery of the beauty and amiableness of holiness, neither is the
heart engaged to love and delight therein. But, any love to God, or to his work
and service, which they seem to have, is selfish, viz. because therein
something was enjoyed that was pleasant to their taste, and the heart was
thereby raised up to expect some sort of pleasures hereafter, and to escape
wrath and judgment; but they come not the length to rejoice in the exercises of
religion, because God was thereby honored; and thus their joy is not a
God-exalting and God-loving, but a self-seeking and self-delighting joy.

But supposing, that while we compare transient acts together, it were hard to
show the difference between such temporary flashes, and that more solid joy,
which flows from an inward and abiding principle created in the heart, and
elevated in its acting above the sphere of nature, by the sweet breathings of
the Almighty. What if the Lord (to stay our curiosity, and to stir up our
diligence, that we may not rest upon any measure here attained, etc.) would not
clearly reveal, and in his word discover it (and experience here can have no
place, if we speak of that special taste, which only they get, who are to get no
more, since from that state they fall headlong into the blasphemy against the
holy Ghost) it may banish anxiety, and satisfy us, that in their properties
and effects they much differ; as, 1. that temporary flash does not purify and
change the heart; 2. it does not make us love God for himself, nor fall in love
with the beauty of holiness; 3. it makes not a man deny himself; 4. it does
not abide, etc.

You will say, the Saints themselves often complain, Obj.
that the Lord quickly withdraws the comfortable sense of his presence, that
they do not always Ps. 34.8.
taste and see his goodness and beauty, that he often hides his face, and they
do not taste that joy and sweetness in the ordinances which they have formerly
found; many a poor soul, may, with Bernard, say, heu Domine Deus, rara hora,
and brevis mora. Ans. Yet it is not such a stranger to them as to others; Ans.
though it go, yet it* will come again, and from time to time renew its visits:
and it never so withdraws, but it leaves some pledge behind it, till the
marriage day, and then there shall be no more a separation and departing; the
Bridegroom shall never withdraw his countenance, neither shall he any more
withold this Jewel; yea, and during the time of espousals, there is a
difference between that claim the bride has to it, and the title which any
other can pretend; and that in respect, 1. of her right unto, 2. estimation,
and 3. enjoying of it: For, 1. it is her allowance, her husband has left it to
her in his legacy, Joh. 16.22. Secondly, it is not such a stranger to the
Saints as to others, who when they think they have it, get but the shell and
casket, they do not truly enjoy it, only they think and seem to have it (...),
Luke 8.18. Thirdly, it is better secured to them, no man can take it from them,
and they cannot themselves so lose it, that they shall not sind it again, if
they will ask and make enquiry for it, Joh. 16.22, 24. Fourthly, when they have
it, they prize and esteem highly of it. Fifthly, they labor to maintain and
cherish it: Sixthly, it is their affliction to want it, and they long for it:
And seventhly, they diligently seek after it in the use of every ordinance. But
it is not so with carnal hearts; it is, 1. a mystery, and 2. for the most part
a matter of mocking to them; they do not, 3. prize it; nor, 4. long for it; and
if it come, 5. it surprizeth them in any ordinance (as it were) at unawares;
and then, 6. they undervalue it; and, 7. do not labor to retain it; and thus,
8. it quickly vanishes and passes away, never to return again, and the latter
end is worse with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.

But to return, 5. It were no difficult work here to multiply particulars; as,
1. If such motions come regularly and in the use of the ordinances, if while
thou art waiting and longing for the breathings of the Spirit; if it blow upon
thy garden, while thou art saying, awake, O north wind. If fire fall on thy
sacrifice (as it did upon Elijahs, 1 King. 18.36.37, 38.) thou may safely
conclude, that it came from, heaven. 2. If these motions be followed with
suitable engagements and promises, if, as we are moved and stirred up to do
good, so we are careful to do, and make conscience to follow that motion; and
if, as we promise and pray well, so we live well and are circumspect in our
walk; we do not go to work by fits and starts, but keep a constant course in
our walking with God, and praying to him; here there is a concatenation, if one
link of this golden chain be broken, the whole becomes useless, yea, loses
its name and nature, it is no more gold, but tin or brass. He cannot pray
well, who does not live well, and e contra. But, 3. the work of the Spirit is
sometimes so signal and remarkable, that it brings a full and clear evidence
with it; as, 1. when it is so notable and eminent, that it elevateth the soul
above the sphere of nature, and thus, by his work it self, the Lord discovers
his hand: 2. Though the work be not so eminent and ravishing, yet it may bring
along with it a torch in its hand, to let us see the place from which it
came; and thus the Spirit witnesses with his work; and whether his finger be
discovered the one way or the other, whether he thus work, or witness, we need
not an additional testimony to confirm what he has deponed: There will then be
no place for this case.

6. We might here apply most of the characters brought for clearing the former
quaeree concerning Satan's suggestions, which here will be as discriminative as
they are there; as, 1. if these motions be spiritual, as to the motives and
end, they cannot flow from nature; for no Nihil agit supra sphaeram activitatis.
agent can act beyond its own sphere. 2. If they stir us up to do in a right
manner, etc. we will not resume the several particulars; only let us press the
last a little further. Now the motions of the Spirit do manifestly differ from
our natural motions, as to their effect upon the heart. For, 1. they being weak
(as we have shown, Chap. 3.) they can make no lively impression upon the heart,
nor engage the affections; and thus they are often choked and repelled; yea,
albeit when they (as in Jehu) are animated by self-interest and base carnal
ends, Satan also obstetricating and putting his to hand to help forward the
work, albeit thus they become violent and impetuous, yet they are helpless;
though they press the heart to yield, yet they furnish no strength for doing
in a suitable and spiritual manner; though they may add vigor to the outward man
in its natural actings; and thus also there may be a habit, facility and gift
acquired for producing the like acts hereafter, yet the heart is no whit
bettered, nor thereby made to fall in love with the beauty of holiness; the
doing of one duty thus, does not fit and prepare the heart for doing better,
and more spiritually hereafter, but rather indisposeth it, by habituating it to
do in a formal carnal manner. O! but the Spirit of God, is the Spirit of power,
2 Timothy 1.7. who, as he exciteth us to do, so also assisteth us in doing, and
enableth us to do well, and in an acceptable manner; he helps our infirmities,
and supplieth our weakness, Romans 8.26. 1 Pet. 5.10. Colos. 1.11. He makes us
believe, and then speak, he will stir up faith to act, and thereby fit and
prepare the heart to pour out its desires to God, Ps. 116.10. Its true, the
Saints may meet with streitnings, and ly under much deadness, when the spirit
begins to move, but even then, they meet with secret strength and assistance,
whereby they are supported to hold our, and not give over, nor to yield to the
contrary suggestions of Satan and the flesh; and therefore we should not
always measure the Spirits help by sense and feeling, but when thus it cannot
be so sensibly discerned; though it truly be afforded, yet we cannot make use
of it, as a mark and sign for clearing the present case, till in the issue this
mist and darkness be dispelled. 2. Then, wait, and the vision shall come, it
shall not tarry; ere it be long, ye shall discern his hand to your comfort, and
find a sweet sent and savor left upon the heart behind him; when he comes, he
will leave some myrrh upon the handles of the lock, which will make our fingers
drop sweetly, Cant. 5.5. Lastly, as natural motions do not positively amend and
make the heart better, so neither do they negatively amend it, or make it less
evil; as they add no good to it, so they take no evil out of it; though the
acts of sin may be restrained, yet the habits are not debilitated; though the
streams be stopped, yet the fountain still abides full; though some branches be
cut off, yet the bulk and root suffers not prejudice, but may be all the
while growing and enlarging it self. O! but the Spirit helps with might in
the inner, as well as in the outward man, he helps us to do, not only some
outward acts, but also to pull down the strong holds of Satan, and every
imagination and high thing, that would exalt it self against God, Ephesians. 3.16. 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. When the Spirit once begins to breath upon us, then sin (in
root and branches) must (like the house of 2 Samuel 3.1.
Saul, after David did come to the throne) daily wax weaker and weaker.

Use, 1. You have need to 1 John 4.1.
try by what spirit ye are acted and led, the most miserable have something
that looks like current money, wherewith they rest satisfied, but when they
bring it to the market, they are sent away empty; the worst of men have not
only had some good motions, some light and pressing convictions, but also good
affections; some pangs of sorrow and repentance, and some flashes of zeal, joy
and holy desires: carnal men will have their fits of seeming devotion, and
their good moods; you may look upon Cain, complaining and lamenting his misery,
Esau weeping for the blessing, Ahab humbling himself, Felix trembling, Judas
repenting, and confessing his sin, Jehu in his zeal for the Lord destroying
idolaters, Herod and the stony ground hearing the Word gladly, Balaam desiring
to die the death of the righteous, etc. And therefore, as ye would not be
deceived in a business of such concernment, put the matter to the trial.

2. Here is matter of praise to God unto all eternity: Ps. 103.1.
call to our soul, and summon all that is within us, to join in this work: let
us invite the holy Angels to assist us, yea, let Ps. 69.34.
heaven and earth, sea and land, with all their hosts (if they had a tongue to
speak) join with us in praising our God for this his mervellous loving kindness
toward the sons of men: that he will give his Spirit to be our leader and
guide, our helper and comforter, to awaken and quicken us when we are dull, to
corroborat and strengthen our fainting spirits; to help and assist us in our
work, to comfort and refresh us when we grow weary, and thus every way to help
our infirmities. O ye dull, faint, weak and disconsolated ones! consider what a
master ye serve, and turn your complaints into songs of praises: But remember,
that abused mercies exceedingly provoke: the nearer the Lord draws to us in his
kindness, if we prove unthankful, our punishment will be more heavy and
grievons. Let us then look on the warning to the people of Israel, concerning
that Angel (the great Angel of the Covenant) who should conduct them to the
promised land, as if to day it were made to us in reference to this our blessed
leader and guide to the heavenly Canaan, Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not, least he pardon not your transgressions; for my In quo nomen
Dei veraciter est. quia verus Deus est Gloss. interlin in loc.
name is in him, (says the) Lord, Exodus 23.21.

PART II. Of the qualifications of an acceptable prayer.
ALbeit the levitical Priesthood and material sacrifices did cease, and those
shadows Heb. 8.13.
evanish, after the Heb. 3.1.
high Priest of our profession had once made his Isa. 53.10.
soul an off^ring for sin, and by that one oblation, Heb. 10.10.14.
perfected for ever, all that are sanctified; yet the Lord will have a
spiritual Priesthood to continue, and his people still to 1 Pet. 2.5.
offer up to him their daily sacrifices, and that Exodus 28.36.38.
engraving that was on the plate upon Aarons forehead, to be written upon our
hearts, Holiness to the Lord. The pagan, pharisaical and popish way of worship,
is an abomination to him; he Mat. 23.27.
valueth not whited sepulchers and a V. 25.
clean outside, he will not be mocked with fair professions, though
accompanied with specious performances; if the heart be wrong all is naught, if
it be not Ephesians. 4.24.
renewed and consecrated to the Lord in holiness, to what purpose is the
multitude of sacrifices? they are but vain oblations: Ah! Who has required
these things at your hands? says the Lord, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13. His Israel must
be holiness to him, holiness within and without; every pot in Judah and
Jerusalem must be holiness to the Lord, Jer. 2.3. Zech. 14.21. I would ask
after no other evidence of a false Church then, with Papists, to plead for the
opus operatum, the work done, however it were done, the mere carcass of a
performance void of all heat and life; as if it were acceptable service to him
who must be Ioh. 4.23.
worshipped in spirit and truth, who calls for See Part 1. Chapter 4.
heart-service as too little, and without which he will accept nothing from our
hands; though we did bestow all our goods to feed the poor, nay, though we gave
our bodies to be burnt, if the heart and affections go not along, if it be not
a free will offering, it is nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. Hypocritical and formal
Professors from time to time have been very frequent in duties, and said many
prayers; but yet, to this day never Psa. 62.8.
poured out their heart before the Lord; their frequency was not accompanied
with fervency, their sacrifices lay cold on the Altar, there came no fire from
heaven to kindle them; and will the Lord accept such empty and deceitful
oblations? he cannot away with them, they are an abomination unto him; and what
matter of lamentation is it, that so much precious ointment should be thus
wasted, and such a noble work prove so fruitless and unprofitable, that so
excellent and promising an exercise, if rightly performed, should be a
miscarrying womb. We are ready to complain of the Lord, that he will not hear
nor hearken to our cry, whileas the fault is in our selves, we will not cry; he
valueth not the voice of our tongue: but if the heart did speak, he would
quickly hear and answer; if we would seriously reflect upon the frame of our
soul, and diligently ponder our ways and work, we would find, nay, Gods own
people and honest servants might see and be convinced, that too often they send
an unfaithful messenger to the throne, who does miscarry and mar our cause,
because he cannot speak, and is not acquainted with the language of the court.
And thus we receive not because we do not ask; our asking is no asking in Gods
account, because we do not ask aright, and do not seek God in that way in which
he will be found: and therefore it concerns us to take heed what kind of
prayers we offer up to God, lest our labor be lost and the Lord provoked
against us, while we are ready to conceive that we are doing him good service.

And for the direction of such as would not trade with heaven with counterfit
coin, and who desire not to be found amongst the number of those Jer. 48.10.
cursed mockers, who do the work of the Lord negligently and deceitfully, we
purpose now (in the Lords strength) to enquire after the qualifications,
conditions and properties of an acceptable and prevailing prayer. We would not
have these terms to be pressed in their strict and philosophical sense, as if
we minded now to enquire what did belong to prayer as essentials, what only as
accidentals, reciprocal or not reciprocal; but having in the first part of this
Treatise, spoken to those things that more properly serve to the opening up the
nature of prayer, we shall now take a view of those things that belong to the
manner of performance, and which are so necessary to its prevalency and
acceptance. All which, if we duly ponder, will be found (as it were) to flow
from the two last particulars, mentioned in the description, Of which, Part 1.
Chapter 8, 9.
viz. the purchase of Christ and the work of his spirit, which therefore were
placed in the first Part, as being the fountain and original of all the rest,
(and the sole ground of the prevalency of our prayers) and would not conjoyn
them with the streams and their effects, which now come to be considered here;
albeit otherwise we deny not, that these two also may be reckoned among the
conditions and requisits of prayer, yea, and in some such improper sense, all
that belongs to its nature and essence, and every branch of the definition may
be called a condition, though hardly in any sense a property and Albeit in the
Schools they speak of a quale essentiale; yet the word qualification in our
language is not used in that sense.
qualification (which three may here be promiscuously used) of prayer. And
though the merit of Christ and the help of the Spirit might be called
conditions, yet they are no intrinsecal part of our work, though our prayers
must be, as it were, animated and enlivened by them: but now we are to speak of
that which must be wrought by us, and be from us, (though supposing the
assistance of the Spirit whereby we are enabled thereunto) and therefore the
disparity is manifest.

But, that we may no more contend for words or method in this discovery of the
qualifications of an acceptable prayer, we shall not enumerate all and every
one, for scarce is there any one that does concur, and is required in any Where
the seven moral circumstances of our actions have place, viz. quis, quid, ubi,
quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.
spiritual performance, that may not, some one way or other, have place here;
but we shall only Aquinas, 2, 2 quaest. 83. art. 15. ad 1. to the prevalen^y of
prayer riquireth four conditions. viz. Ut orans pro se, perat necessaria ad
salutem, pie, ac perseveranter. Bonavent. in stimul. divin. amor. cap. 4.
requiri affirmat ut oration siat. 1. Humiliter. 2. Fidenter. 3. Pure. Et, 4
instanter. Rayner. pan-theolog. o^are cap. 7 ut orans exaudiatur quatuor
requiri decet, viz. Ut oret, 1. Fideliter. 2. Humiliter 3. Utiliter. Et, 4.
Perseveranter. Et cap. 9. statuit orationem comprehendere septem quae hoc
versiculo continentur; 1. ad Quem. 2. Quis clamat. 3. Cur. 4. Quomodo. 5.
Quando. 6. Quid. 7. Vnde.
name some few as being most necessary or most slighted and neglected, and upon
which the rest do hing, and will not readily be wanting when conscience is made
of the other: among which, faith being the most proper and deserving a more
full discovery, we shall speak of it at greatest length. But, for our more
clear and distinct procedure, the qualifications and requisits of prayer may be
divided into three ranks. 1. Some are previous and antecedent. 2. Some are
concomitant and belong to the performance of the duty, and must go along with
it. 3. Others are consequent and must follow after.

CHAP 1. Some antecedent and previous conditions of Prayer, which should be
observed before and While we are drawing nigh the throne of Grace. As, 1. some
enquiry after our state. 2. Circumspection in our walk. 3. A praying
disposition and spiritual frame of heart. 4. Preparation. 5. Right ends.
Psalm. 50.16. Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do -- to take my
covenant in thy mouth? etc. Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask
amiss that you may consume it upon your lusts. Psalm. 10.17. Thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, etc.
BE not rash with thy mouth, (either As expositors upon good grounds extend the
word, see Diodat, annotat. on the Bible in fol. Amsterd. an. 1640. English
Divin. Pemble, Cotton.
in vowing or praying) and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God, Was the Preachers caveat, Eccles. 5.2. which should be carefully
heeded by us in all our addresses to God, and may be laid as a foundation to
what we are to say here; none will draw nigh to the King, but as he will labor
to order his words when he is admitted to speak, So he will premeditate, not
only what he should say, but also who he is that thus takes upon him to
interceed and deal with such a honorable person: But, ah! how few do thus
prepare themselves to meet the great King? And hence, too many, through their
negligence, irreverence and precipitancy in the worship of God, in stead of a
sweet savor, do offer up to him the sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 5.1. But, that
our service and oblation may prove acceptable, let us prepare for that work
which is so far above us, and for which we are so unfit and unsufficient, 2
Cor. 3.5.

And, 1. we would look after the qualification of the person, what is thy
condition and state, and under what relation thou stand toward God, whether
the old enmity be yet removed, and whether thou, who go to knock at the gate
of heaven, be a friend or an adversary, a son or a stranger; not as if thou
should always dispute and question thy state, but that thou should bring
thy state to the touchstone, and try and 2 Cor. 13.5.
examine whether thou art in the faith, and thus once put thy relation and
spiritual condition out of question, which may be a constant and abiding ground
of confidence and encouragment to draw nigh to God, until some new storm,
either raised by Satan, or flowing from thine own bowels, do blow out that
light, till either thou sin away that evidence, or the enemy steal it away from
thee. But it concerns us much to know our interest in God, and that we are in a
state of favor and friendship, lest he prove a consuming fire, and we as
stubble, if we approach to him in our sins. Albeit the Lord be no respecter of
persons, yet the prayer of the Which Socrates, though a Pagan, did acknowledge;
see Baldwins moral Philos. book, 9. chapter 5.
wicked is an abomination unto him, and the prayer of the upright his delight,
Prove. 15.8. He who will not hear sinners, Joh. 9.31. yet will not send the
righteous away empty, Jam. 1.16. For, albeit in matter of justice, we may not
ask, who? nor respect the persons of men, we must not show favor to our
nearest relations, no not to the poor, Exodus 23.3. Lev. 19.15. yet in bestowing
of courtesies, and in acts of bounty, meer-pleasure and good will, the
consideration of the person may well have the first place, Psa. 16.3. Gal.
6.10. If sinners could carry their suit in point of equity and justice, the
Lord would do them no wrong, he would not send them away empty: but since none,
not the best of men, is able to maintain such a plea, but he of his mere mercy
does give to whom he will, shall he be unrighteous in showing favor to his
servants, while he refuses to satisfy the desire of strangers and enemies?
Hence,

The first ground of the point, is, because our duties and services, 1. Reas.
our good works and prayers, cannot merit and deserve any good from God; they
cannot justify our persons, nor procure a pardon for our offenses, how then
shall they be able to purchase new favors? The popish doctrine, concerning the
merit of our works, and our justification thereby, is detestable; its a
soul-destroying dream of Proud Pharisees; the fruit cannot make the tree good,
but the tree must first be good, before it can bring forth good fruit, Mat.
7.17. Thou can not pray acceptably till thy heart be renewed, till thou get
strength from above, and till a See Part 1. chap. 9.
principle of life be infused and the Spirit concur with it, and help thee to
pray according to the will of God, Romans 8.26.27. The Lord first Cajetan his
observa^ion (which he repeateth) on the place is the more remarkable, because
of the author, he being a Papist. Externa (and them de internisdicendum)
oblationes (inquit ille) non sunt Deo grata secundum seipsas, sed ratione
offerentium placent vel displicent.
had respect to Abel, and then to his sacrifice, Genesis 4.4. (which was not the
cause, but an effect, evidence and witness of his righteousness, Heb. 11.4.) we
cannot offer to the Lord but of his 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
own, he must give unto us before we can render unto him; he must draw up our
supplication, and put it into our hands, else we know not what to say when we
come before him, and though we could order our words, yet so long as the heart
does keep and entertain its old enmity against God and his holy commandments,
he will not be mocked with fair pretenses, nor accept of his supplication,
whose heart plotteth, contriveth and breaths after treason and rebellion
against him. We must first lay down our weapons, and accept his pardon, before
he will accept our supplications and fulfill our desires: And therefore, if
thou resolvest still to hold up the former feud, and only come to God in a
strait, and to serve thy turn, I may appeal to thy own conscience (if there be
any relics of light and ingenuity left there) whether it were not a righteous
thing with God to deal with thee according to thy folly.

2. God does not so much value our work and performance, as the Mentem
offerentis non oblationem attendit, glos. iuterlin. in Genesis 4 4.
fountain and principle from which it does flow, and the end and scope at which
we aim; but until thy heart be renewed, thou can not act from a principle of
love, nor make his will and command thy motive, nor honestly aim at his glory;
but thy motives must be carnal, and thy end self-interest: thou can not act
spiritually, nor bring out fruit to God, till thou be ingraffed into the true
and lively vine, the Lord Jesus, Joh. 15.5. And therefore thy prayers and
performances, though never so specious, must be an abomination to him; self
being thy idol, before which thou fallest down in every act of worship, thou
seek nor God for himself, but for thine own base carnal ends, which if thou
could otherwise obtain, thou could with all thy heart bid farewell to God,
his worship and service; he should hear no more of thy prayers and
supplications. And thus, as the supplicant is not the same, not a son, but a
stranger, so the supplication is not alike; there is a great difference and
inequality in the work it self; the Saints pour out other kind of prayers unto
God then the unregenerate; and therefore no wonder the success be not the
same, albeit there may be much art and eloquence, and great variety of
pertinent expressions, yet till the heart be renewed, our censer's, in stead of
incense, must be filled with such loathsome filth, as must make our sacrifice
abominable. The old root does continually send out, and communicate so much
venom to all its branches, that no fruit can be gathered from thence, but what
is full of deadly poison; a polluted heart will so pollute and infect all our
actions and performances, that they must be naught in Gods account: hence, 1
Kings, 8.38. this leprosy, because of it infection, is called the plague of the
heart.

But though these two be very considerable; 1. the state of the person; for
what father will not hearken more to the cry of his son and child, then to the
voice of a stranger and enemy? 2. the quality of the work; for who would lay
brass in the balance with gold? Yet these are not the main grounds of
discrimination and difference, as to the present case, concerning the
acceptance and audience of the one and not the other; but that must be brought
from another root, which now we shall only name, as being already more fully
opened, viz. 1. the assistance and concurrence of the Spirit; 2. the merit and
intercession of Christ. Hence,

A third reason of the point, may be this; we cannot pray acceptably without
the help and assistance of the Spirit, unless he enable us to speak and teach
us what to say; ah! what can we plead upon the account of any (though never so
eminent) work as coming from us? Hence, says a Mr. Fenner Sacrif. of the
faith: page 6. and page 52.
reverend Divine, God no more respects the prayers of the wicked (as being
offered up by themselves, without the concurrence of the Spirit) then he
respects the lowing of Oxen, or the gruntling of Hogs. None have the spirit of
supplication, but such as have the spirit of adoption; and therefore we cannot
be assured of the success of our prayers, till our sonship and adoption be
cleared and sealed to us. See, Part 1. chap. 9.4. All the promises, are yea and
amen in Christ; and therefore whatever the Lord, out of his general bounty and
pity, and by the hand of a common providence, may bestow upon an Ahab, fasting
and humbling himself, and upon an Ishmael, crying and weeping, yet they had no
covenant right to what they did receive, nor could they lay claim unto, or
plead a Nay Sua rez, though a Jesuit, and a great patron of the merit of
congruity, yet grants, ora. tionem non esse impetratoriam ex vi promissionis
nisi ex fide procedat, quia promissio non fit orationi nisi procedat ex fide,
Suar ubi supra, cap. 24. sect. 1, 2.
promise in prayer; and therefore, though at a venture they might pray, and God
out of his sovereignty, and by way of prerogative, might answer their desires,
yet they could not promise to themselves (as not having an interest in the
promises) that their prayers would prove successful. Christ is the alone way
to the Father, and he is our altar, and therefore until we be united to him,
we have not access to the throne, and can offer up no acceptable sacrifice.
Nay, says Zeal. Christ. page ult.
reverend Mr. Love. God is as well pleased with the barking of a dog, as with
the prayers of a Christlesse man. See Part, 1. chap. 8.

Use 1. Use 1.
Whenever then thou go to Gods door to knock and cry for an asmes, expect to
meet with this question: who art thou that calls? whether art thou a friend or
an enemy? what is thy plea? who brought thee hither? what interest have thou in
the place? can thou produce the Kings bond? did his Spirit fetch thee? have
thou any claim to the purchase of his Son, etc. Its too ordinary, not to
consider or regard what prayers we offer up to God, but to rest on the opus
operatum, the work done, however it be performed; but yet it is more ordinary
not to enquire after the person his state and condition; many care not what
they offer, as all gross hypocrites; but even amongst the Saints there are not a
few, who seldom ask, who art thou who take upon thee to sacrifice to the
Lord? It is indeed an evidence of love and respect to provide the best of the
flock, and not dare to bring the halt and the lame; but that is not enough, thou
must also take heed in whose hands thou put'st it: under the law none durst
offer but the Priests, who were consecrated to that office; and there is a
Priesthood under the Gospel, by which only acceptable sacrifices can be
offered, 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. If thou durst appear before the throne of
Justice, and were able to carry thy cause in point of law and equity, then thou
might order thy cause, and not fear, Genesis 18.25.
the juage of all the earth would do right. But since, we have nothing of our
own to hold out, but sin and misery, indigence and wretchedness; and (like
beggars) our sores and manifold infirmities, we might be the more hopeful to
carry our suit, if we could plead our relation to the place: Supplicants do not
prevail with God, as an orator with the hearers, but as children with their
father; the sigh and groan of the Videmus vulgo parcutes magis delectari
balbutienti infantia infantium, quam universa eloquentra hominum
eloquentissimorum; ^pat^r autem noster caelestis magis oblectatur ruditate ac
infantia nostra, qui sumus cjus filii, quam, etc. Rolloc. in Joan 4.
child will move the tender father more, then all the art and eloquence of a
stranger. Use, 2.


2. A word of caution; and, 1. let not this discourage the Isa. 50.10.
children of light, while they are walking in darkness; do not thou, O
disconsolate Saint! who art Ps. 42.1
panting after the Lord, as the Heart after the waterbrooks, do not thou make
this a plea for thee to run away from the throne; ye that fear the Lord, need
not fear, ye are called and allowed in this sad case to trust in the name of
the Lord, and to stay upon your God, Isa. 50.10. What though it be night with
the soul, so that thou can not see and discern thy interest in God, yet he
knows who are his own, and will hear his children when ever they cry to him,
and will own them and answer their requests, while they are ready to apprehend
that they are cast off, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. Neither, 2. should this discourage
such as are in the pangs of the new birth, who have taken their leave of their
old lovers, and are on the way to Zion; whatever thou have been, if thou
honestly now desire to offer up thy self to the service of God, and to give
him thy heart, he will not reject thee, Joh. 6, 37. Ezekiel. 18 21.27, 28. yea,
though there be much refuse and and filth mixed with thy sacrifice, and much
unwillingness joined with thy desires, so that thou have but a (...), Eurip.
apud Erasm. in Ghib nolens volens vel potius (...), Homer volens nolente animo.
nilling willing, thy soul being in a confusion, by reason of the sad
complaints from thy lusts and former lovers, who are unwilling to be divorced:
yet thou may draw nigh to God, and look up to him for help, and pray that he
would stretch forth his hand and pull thee out of this snare, and having
brought thee forth, would so establish thy goings, that thou may never look
back again to Sodom. Its true, that till thou have escaped, thou can not lay
hold on the Covenant, thou can not in faith plead any promise, till thou be 2
Cor. 13.5.
in the faith. But yet, what know thou, O mourning sinner! but the promise
may belong to thee, the absolute promises to show mercy, love freely, to renew
the heart, etc. And certainly God will accomplish what he has promised, and of
his free grace may make use of thy prayers, as a mean to that end. See Part, 1.
chap. 5. sect. 3.

Only let this word alarm all secure sinners, who dare draw nigh to God with
their supplications, while they are resolved to follow their old course and
trade of sin; who dare call God Father, and yet are not afraid to offend him,
who dare supplicate the King with their weapons in their hand, and while they
purpose to continue in their rebellion. Unto such desperate wretches, thus
says the Lord, What have thou to do to take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing
thou hate instruction, and casts my words behind thee? Ps. 50.16, 17. Its a
dishonor to God, that such should take his name in their mouth, that such
should call upon him, and lay any claim to his covenant and promises. O!
consider this all ye that forget God in your life and conversation, least,
notwithstanding all your prayers and seeming devotion, he come against you and
tear you in pieces, while their will be none to deliver, ver. 22. Hence,

2. As the fountain must be purified, the streams should be clean; its not
enough that our state be good, 2. Qualification.
but our walk must be answerable: as our persons must be reconciled, and the
habits of grace and sanctification must be rooted in the heart, so the fruits
thereof must appear, and holiness must be expressed in our life and
conversation. In the most dark and impure times, this was an acknowledged
principle, God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. Job, 27.9 Ezekiel. 8.18. Prove,
1.28. Micah, 3.4. Isa. 1.15. Jer. 14.12. etc. Hence, Solomon in that solemn
prayer, 1 Kings, 8. does once and again caveat and limit his intercession for
the success of prayer, which should be poured out in, or toward that house he
had built for the worship of God: If they turn from their sin, and know the
plague of their own heart, if they confess and repent, etc. ver. 33, 35, 37,
47, 48. Under the law, if any man in his uncleanness durst offer to sacrifice,
or offer to meddle with holy things, he was to be cut off from the presence of
God, Levit. 22.3. etc. Of how much sorer punishment (suppose ye) shall he be
thought worthy, who dare draw nigh to God, and and presume to offer a spiritual
sacrifice in his moral uncleanness, whereof the natural was only a shadow, and
therefore was it so severely forbidden, to show how the holy Lord does
abominate and will avenge the other. Such as dare come before the Lord in their
sins, are like a thief that would present himself before the Judge with the
fang in his hand. There is no man in his right wits (says Mr. Downam spir.
arm. part. 3 lib. 2. cha^. 4.
one) would come as a suitor unto his Prince, and bring his accuser with him,
who could prove and testify to his face his treason and rebellion. Much less
would any man dare to come with the The sins of Gods people were the murderers
of the Prince of life, and though the high and lofty one be out of the reach of
sinners, yet every sin is accounted to be interpreratively D^i-cide. And no
thanks to him, who resolutely and deliberately sint against God, that his evil
extends not to God.
weapon in his hand, wherewith he had killed the Kings only Son and heir, and
resolving theirwith to offer violence to the King himself. And there is no Sin
is frequently (and most fitly) in the Scriptures compared to whoredom, and our
lasts are called our lovers.
Adultress so shamelesly impudent, as to supplicat her husband, having still
her lover in her arms, purposing yet to follow him. But if any were so
desperate, what success might they expect? Would not such a Judge, King or
Husband, be avenged of those wretches, not only because of their crimes, but
also because of this their impudence and mockery? And yet, alas! inconsiderat
sinners are not afraid to deal thus with the great God; but though he long
forbear, yet vile pot-sheards will not always be suffered thus to mock their
Maker; and though the Lord will not utterly cast off his elect ones, but will
at length pull them out of the snare, yet their sins will provoke him to hide
his face for a while, and not to hearken to their prayers, so long as they stop
their ears at his reproof, and will not turn from their iniquity, Ps. 66.18. If
I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Though now I be
assured of my reconciliation and of Gods favor and love, and that he has
attended to the voice of my prayer, yet (says he) if I should sin against him,
he would turn away my prayer and refuse to answer my desire. God will not speak
peace to his Saints, if they return to folly, Ps. 85.8. Then, and only then,
shall I not be ashamed and disappointed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments. Ps. 119.6. As if the Psalmist had said, however the swine of the
world will come from the mire, and in their filth draw nigh to thee, yet I
would not have the forehead, I would blush, be ashamed and confounded to look
up to thee, unless I labored to walk before thee in all well-pleasing, taking
heed to my steps, and making thy law the rule of all my ways. Its disputed,
whether gross sins, committed against knowledge and conscience, be inconsistent
which grace, so that when believers thus fall, they fall away from the state of
grace and justification? Now though we dare not go along with them who stand
for the affirmative; yet we may safely affirm, that such sins (yea and every
known and allowed sin, whatever be the matter and object; and though it were
never so latent and hidden, and so not scandalous) do so far make a breach upon
the blessed state of justification, as that the privileges and comforts
thereof are suspended, until the sinner renew his repentance, and forsake and
be ashamed of the evil of his doings. What did it profit the poor Prodigal,
that there was bread enough in his fathers house, till he came to himself and
arose and went to his father? Luk 15.17, 18. Believers, ye are great heirs, you
have great privileges, and this is not the least, you may ask what you will,
and it will be given you. O! then, be not so foolish as to sin away your own
mercies.

But, though these two be necessarily required, and the success of prayer does
very much depend upon them; yet, they are remote, and, as it were, indirect
conditions and qualifications of prayer, as belonging rather to the person,
then to the duty it self, and being required rather in him who prays, then in
prayer it self, as any cause, part, property or effect of it: But now we come
to speak of those requisits which have a more immediate influence upon, and
reference to, this performance.

3. Then, if thou would pray acceptably and successfully, labor to maintain
a praying frame and disposition in thy heart; 3. Qualification.
and let not thy lusts or worldly cares deaden and extinguish that live-coal
which must inflame thy sacrifice. And thus some interpret the exhortation to
pray always and without ceasing, Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. as if thereby were
commended to us, to keep our heart in a continual fitness and readiness to
approach to God, and present our requests to him; and it is granted on all
hands, that that is employed in the words, though they hold out some more (as
shall appear, Part 3.) For, how can he pray always (supposing that universal
particle only to import all seasons and occasions) who does not constantly
preserve this praying temper and disposition; and who is not always fit and in
readiness to go about the duty: may not a call and fit season triste with his
unfitness and indisposition? when the Instrument is out of tune, the Musician
cannot play, or he will make bad melody.

You will say, but Ah! how shall that little coal be kept in, it being exposed
to so many storms and blasts, both from within and without? Ans. What we are to
say, Part 3. concerning the cure of deadness and wandering thoughts in prayer,
may be helpful for removing and withholding unfitness and indisposition to
pray: and now we would only commend these three preservatives of this good
disposition, and remedies of an evil one, viz. 1. Exercise. 2. Meditation. 3.
Watchfullness; of which in the following requisite.

The fourth previous condition (and it has yet a more immediate and actual
influence upon the duty then any of the former) is preparation, 4.
Qualification.
the work is high and great, it is difficult and of much concernment; we have
much lying at the stake, and of our selves we are unable and ready to miscarry:
we had need then to 1 Pet. 1.13.
gird up the loins of our mind, to call to our Ps. 103.
soul and all that is within us to make ready for the work, to bring in
provision for it, and to look about us, but especially above us, for assistance
and supply, and to improve that word, Psa. 10.17. and say, Lord, prepare my
heart, that thou may cause thine ear to hear. We have to deal with him who
is of Job. 37.22.
terrible majesty, and who must be Levit. 10.3.
sanctified in all them who draw nigh to him in any point of worship; and
therefore we would take Eccl. 5.1.
heed to our steps while we are approaching the throne, The very pagan Priests,
before they did offer their material sacrifices to their idol-gods, would make
some kind of preparation, by purging and Hence the proverb, accedere ad rem
illotis manibus, when we go about any husiness without due preparation.
washing their body, especially their hands and feet, and by abstinence from
diverse kinds of meats; and shall we dare to offer up spiritual sacrifices to
the true God without pre-meditation? And if we would be at some pains before
hand to prepare our hearts, the work would prove more, 1. easy; 2. sweet; and,
3. successful. Our An heavy and slow stying bird.
Buzzard-like hearts cannot instantly get upon the wing, and rise up from the
world (in which they are often so deeply plunged) without more ado, and fly up
to heaven: nay, as it is harder to raise a great bell, then to ring it after it
is up and brought in motion; So often it is more difficult to raise up the
heart, and to prepare it for spiritual duties, then to perform them when it is
brought to a heavenly frame; and if we could always maintain that heat, we
needed not be at the pains to blow at the coals for recovering of it: But, Ah!
our stony hearts are no sooner removed from the fire, but by degrees they
return to the r native coldness; and therefore, whatever other means we make
use of for preserving a praying disposition, and for fitting and preparing our
selves for that solemn work, we would not suffer the heart to be too much
cooled and deadned, through Constant and frequent exercise, the first branch of
preparation. By doing we are fitted to do, and to do better, and with greater
facility.
dis-use and too long biding away from the place where fire from heaven uses
to descend. If the tradesman, through neglecting his calling, suffer his tools
to rust, he will make but bad work when he comes to use them; O! but, as in
other arts, so also in this our heavenly trade, frequency in acting, diligent
use and exercise, begets both facility and delight; if we were not too great
strangers to a heavenly communion, good thoughts and spiritual meditation would
become more familiar, kindly, and (as it were) natural to us; and therefore,
frequency in doing is not the least part of our preparation for duty, to which
we shall now only add the other two we promised here to speak to, viz.
Watchfulness and Meditation. 2. Then, 2. Watchfulness.


We must watch unto prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. 1. Our spirits are lazy and sluggish,
and we are very prone to fall asleep, unless we watch over them and often rouse
them up, saying, with that holy woman, Judge. 5.12. awak, awak. 2. Our lusts are
always in arms, and the devil watches for an opportunity against us, and is
it time for us to sleep while the enemy is standing at the gate, and some of
his forces already within doors? We cannot step one foot but Satan has his
train laid to blow us up; the world is Satan's bird-lime to entangle us, or
rather gunpowder which our lusts are ready to set on fire; and should not we
be on our guard continually? And albeit the enemies main design be to spoil the
treasure and take away the jewel, yet he has a greedy eye at all that is ours:
therefore we had need to watch over our eyes, our hands, our tongue, our
thoughts, our passions, etc. if any one of these be let slip within his reach,
he will not fail to improve the advantage; and every sin as it may provoke the
Lord to turn away his ear, So it will indispose and turn our hearts from the
duty: it is of a stupifying nature, it is, as Mr. Gura. spir. arm. part. 3.
page 605. where ye will find this argument handled at greater length.
one speaks, the devils opium, wherewith if be be suffered to anoint thy
temples, thou art in danger to fall asleep. 3. we should watch and observe the
many mercies we receive, and our daily sins and failings, our weakness and
manifold wants, all which may be fit materials for our prayers; which being
pondred and kept on record, will prove a good help for the duty. 4. We should
watch that we may hear when we are called to come to the throne, that we may
observe every season and opportunity of prayer, that we may hearken to the
voice of Gods dispensations toward us, and may welcome every messenger he sends
out to invite us to come before him: that whenever he says to us (as he did
to him, Psa. 27.8.) seek ye my face, our heart (like his) may be ready to
reply, thy face Lord we will seek. If thus we could discern, and did carefully
improve the several advantages offered unto us, what manner of Christians, how
powerful and mighty in prayer would we be? If we were such watchmen and
students in holiness as becomes the Lords supplicants, and those who by
profession are agents and pleaders at the bar of heaven and before the Psa.
47.2.
great King, with what diligence would we Pleaders at the throne of grace would
be great students, that they may be able to improve the several to picks of
divinity for carrying their plea and cause.
study our hearts, and study our lives, and the several st^ps of providence,
our condition, exigence, etc. that we might know when to come, and what to say
while we appear before the Lord. O! if we did thus prepare and watch unto
prayer, with what reverence and confidence, with what importunity, fervency and
zeal might we Psa. 62.8. Third branch of preparation is meditation.
pour out our heart before him? we should not want matter nor words; we might
pray pertinently and seriously, and far more successfully, then for the most
part we do.

3. Meditation is a good preparation for prayer; it is a token for good when we
can say, with David, Psa. 5.1. Lord hear and consider my meditation. When the
Verbaque praevisam rem non invita sequuntur Hor. agere volentem se^per meditari
decet. nam segniores omnes inceptis novis. Meditatio si rei gerendae defuit
Auson. de lud. 7. sapient. The Hebrews do use one and the same word for
signifying to meditate and to pray, viz. (...) Thus be word Genesis 24.63 where
Isaac is said to have went out (...) is rendered either to pray or to meditate;
and it were to be wished, that these two in our practice were not separated,
that as that word may be applied to, So what is signified by, it may be found
in all our prayers.
heart, by meditation, inditeth a good matter, the tongue will be as the pen of
a ready writer, Psa. 45.1. Meditation will facilitat the work, and direct and
excite the worker; it will give eyes to the blind, hands to the weak, and bring
in provision for the empty. If we were to speak to some great person,
especially if to a King, how would we pre-medirate and ponder what we should
say, and how we should carry our selves in his presence? and yet we will be at
no pains to meet the great King; it is true, he will accept of the sighs and
sobs of mourners, though we do but Isa. 38.14.
lament as a dove, and chatcter as a swallow and crane, he will pity and show
mercy: but, alas! we basely abuse this astonishing condescension. Ah! should we
be negligent and irreverent, because he is tender and indulgent? Many complain
for want of enlargment, and because of deadness and coldness in prayer, that
wandering and impertinent thoughts break in, etc. but will not be at the pains
to prevent these evils by watchfulness and meditation. If thou would set some
time apart seriously to ponder and meditate, what a great and dreadful
Majesty, and yet how loving and merciful, thou have to deal with, that would
beget both reverence and confidence; if thou would consider his omni-presence
and omni science, this would stir thee up to watchfulness, it would six thy
heart and prevent wandering thoughts; if thou did remember his power and
omnipotence, his fidelity and truth, this would strengthen thy faith and
expectation of success; if thou would consider who thou art, what is thy
distance as a poor creature, and yet more in that thou art so great a sinner,
and he the just and holy Lord, this would beget humility and godly fear; if
thou would lay to heart thy several wants, and what thou stands in need of
for 2 Pet. 1.3.
life and godliness, what are thy straits and dangers, and what kindness the
Lord has hitherto she wed, and what long-suffering and patience he has
ex^rcised toward thee, and what are the mercies which from time to time thou
receivest, this would sill thy heart with matter both of prayer and praise. I do
not say, that all are alike unfit and unprepared, or that upon every occasion
we should spend so much or so much time upon this preparatory work. When the
heart is in such a spiritual frame and disposition as his was, Psa. 42.1, 2.
when it thirsts and pants after the living Lord, it were a pity to stay
such a longing soul for one moment from the fountain. And, 2. we will not
always have opportunity (especially when we are occasionally called to join
with others) thus to prepare for the work; but then we may dart up some short
ejaculation to God for his help and assistance, which we may confidently expect
when the work of preparation was not slighted, by reason of our sloth and
negligence; and though thou did set apart a considerable time for meditation,
especially when thou meetest with some extraordinary occasion, and when thou
joynest fasting to prayer, (for even those who, for ordinary, neglect this
work, will then be at some pains to prepare their hearts for that more solemn
exercise) but whatever be the occasion and whenever thou go about that
duty, such short and ejaculatory petitions might well be intermixed all along
the work; thus we may bring help from heaven and engage God in our quarrel, it
is not good to wrestle alone with a hard heart. I have read of Luther, that
whenever he found any distemper and indisposition creep on, he would instantly
go to the throne and complain of it to God; and certainly prayer is one of the
best preparations for prayer, this was David's practice, Psa. 141.1, 2, 3, 4. he
would review his heart and his ways, and his prayers, and make one prayer the
object of another, (he would pray for success both to the prayer he had made
and was to make, and thus make prayer a transition from paayer to prayer) They
who know what a hard task it is to recall their thoughts from worldly and
distracting cares, and to silence our lusts after they are once in arms, they
will see a necessity of divine assistance, and to dispatch a messenger to the
throne of Grace for that effect. Though it be necessary to meditate upon, and
consider our ways, and to take a view of such motives as may imbitter our case
unto us; yet unless an omnipotent arm go along with, and apply these
considerations, they will not prevail with our deaf and stubborn hearts, nor
draw them off these lovers and turn them to God: and therefore, since in our
private converse with him we are allowed the liberty to intermix those duties,
and to join prayer with meditation; we would not in our practice separate those
two, which are thus so mutually helpful one to the other, and both so
subservient and instrumental in disposing and preparing the heart for a more
solemn address to God: a little eating before meal prepares a weak stomach,
and sets an edge upon the appetite, but long fasting takes away the the
stomach, and blunts the desire after meat; prayer is the best harbenger for
prayer; and a little gust of the heavenly manna will dispose for a set meal;
but the longer we discontinue our acquaintance with God, our love waxes the
colder, and the heart the more dead and indisposed for a communion with him;
and he is thus provoked to hide his face when we draw nigh to him.

Thus ye see what should be done, and will ye thus prepare to seek the Lord?
but if ye will not, if deadness and indisposition come on, if the Lord with
draw and Ps. 66.20.
turn away thy prayer, thou may know whom to blame; Hezekiah would only pray
for those who made conscience of this preparatory work, and for them he was
heard, 2 Chr. 30.19, 20. and such may most confidently pray for themselves and
expect that the Lord will Ver. 19.
attend to the voice of their supplications. When we are unwillingly drawn to
the throne, and are uncheerfull in Gods presence, no wonder though he hide his
countenance and send us away empty; but when the heart Ps 42.1, 2.
pants after him, and thirsts to appear before him, when his fruit is Sol.
Song, 2, 3.
sweet to our taste, and we sit down under his shadow with delight, he will
welcome us, upon whom already he thus begins to smile, and whom he has
brought in to the Ver. 4.5. Qualification.
banqueting house, he will satisfy with his goodness such longing souls.

5. Before we draw the bow, we would have our eyes fixed upon the right mark,
if the arrow be not right directed, neither its swiftness, nor the goodness of
the bow, nor the strength of the arm can profit; high raised affections not
right levelled, are like to a ship carried with full sails, but wanting the
rudder. The end is the main and principal Statuenda est sententia certa, sinem
esse veram propriam ac realam causam, etc. Suar. hoc est receptum dogma and
quasi primum principium in philosophia and theologia, metaph. dis. 23. sect. 1.
circumstance of moral actions, nay, it is reckoned by Philosophers (most
Propter rations quas ibid, proponit Suar. (praecipue secundam) quibus
solvendis non fuit par, and ideo sect. 4. 17. satetur causalitatem finis
quodamodo, dixisset omnimodo, esse molem and quasi artific osam and
intellectualem.
commonly, though most Finis, etsi sit postremus in executione est tameu primus
in imentione agentis, and hoc modo habet rationem causae, Thom. 1.2. quaest 1.
art 1. ad im
grossly) amongst the four physical causes; yea, in some respect its Finis
precipua est inter circumstantias act us humani, cum aeliae se tantum habent
per modum accidentis, sinis vero sit causa actus. Pet. 8. Joseph id. theol
moral. lib. 2. depec. cap. 1. res. 4.
accounted the first of them, but though it should have no place there (its
influence not being physical and proper, but only intentional and objective)
yet on all hands its granted, that it is the first basis and foundation of
morality; and the Lord takes special notice of it, and mainly looks after the
end we propose in all our actions and endeavors, when that is wrong, all is
wrong: all Jehu his zeal against Baals priests, and his fidelity in executing
the divine sentence against the house of Ahab, for want of a right end, lost
both name and thing. It was not obedience but murder, therefore (says the
Lord) I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
notwithstanding any warrant from me he could pretend to, Hos. 1.4. Though Jehu
did what was commanded, yet being animated by self-interest, and looking rather
after Ahabs crown, and that he might secure himself in the throne, then after
the command and glory of God; the Lord did not value what he did, but on the
contrary, most justly threatened to deal with him as a murderer, for shedding
the blood of Princes to satissie his lust and ambition. Base, low, carnal,
selfish ends, do Noveris itaque non officiis sed finibus a vitiis discernendas
esse viriutes: officum est autem quod faciendum est, finis vero propter quod
faciendum est: cum itaque facit homo aliquid u by peccare non vide tur, si non
proper hoc facit propter quod facere debet, peccare con vincitur, August. lib.
4. contro Julianum, cap. 3.
spoil and debase the most specious performances, and make all our religious
exercises, and most spiritual acts of worship, become a sacrifice to the
creature, and to be mere idolatry and self-worship. When ye fasted and mourned
in the fifth and seventh month, even these seventy years, did ye at all fast
unto me, even unto me? Zech. 7.5. They did fast, and that very often, and for a
long time, for the space of their seventy years captivity: O! but (says the
Lord) I do not value your fasting, weeping and praying, for though ye professed
to humble your self before me, yet all this was done for your selves; ye did
not at all fast unto me, that I might thereby be honored, ye did not aim at
the glory of my name, which ye had so much profaned and dishououred, but your
captivity and low condition made you cry for deliverance; self was your utmost
end, and therefore ye did not at all fast unto me. Thus also they are said,
Hos. 7.14. to assemble themselves, to howl, weep, and make many supplications
to God, and yet he denied that then they cried to him, because they did not
seek him with the whole heart, nor honestly aim at his glory; they sought him
only for the fashion, and upon design, for corn and wine, that they might eat
and make merry; they were content thus to complement with God, that they might
hire him to gratify and serve their lusts. Ah! who would not abominate that
vile woman, who with an impudent face durst pretend her vows and
peace offerings for a cloak; nay rather as a price, whereby she purchased a
license to commit whoredom, Prove. 7.14. etc. And yet, behold how small the
difference is between this strumpet and carnal professors; she would hire God
with her sacrifices to connive at her lust, and to prosper her in her
wantonness; but they will seek after God, that he may Its much that ye should
be servants of sin, but that ye should make God fellow servants, and yoke him in
the same servility, is not to be endured, Mant. on Jam. 4.3.
gratify a more cleanly lust; their honor, their profit, their ease, etc. And
thus both the one and the other would have God (according to that sad
complaint, Isa. 43.24.) to serve with their sins.

But, 2. though the end thou aimest at be not thus of it self sinful and
unlawful, yet it may be natural and selfish; though thou do not, with the
thief in the fable, kindle thy torch to let thee see to steal at the Lucernam
fur accendit ex ara Jovis, etc.
lamps of the altar, yet thou may from thence bring light to let thee see to
walk.

Yea, 3. thy aim may be wrong, though it be not either sinful, or merely
natural; if it be moral, or (shall I say) spiritual, thou may pray to
satisfy and quiet thy conscience, which otherwise would flee in thy face, and
arrest thee as a very Atheist; yea, thou may thus look up to God, desiring
to make some satisfaction to, and be at peace with him, and yet thy end may be
merely legal and selfish, there may be no love to God in the heart, nor any
desire to glorify him; and will the Lord accept such a performance? If the Hic
objici posset quod Suarcz, loc. cit. lib. 1. cap. 14. sect. 5. proponit, contra
suam and communem pontificiorum sententiam, quod scil. orandum sit pro
defunctis qui jam beatifica visione Dei fruuntur. Sed missis istiusmodi nugis,
argumentum unde proponemus, quatenus, viz militare videtur contra finem ultimum
orationis. Estque ejusmodi OBJ. Si divina gloria a nobis desideretur and in
oratione postuletur, ut in primis verbis orationis dominicae orare docemur,
sequetur orationem fieri pro ipso Deo cum tamen fiat ad. Deum. Quemadmodum
interdum rogamus hominem ut sibi ipsi aliquod bonum facias, sed hoc durum, etc.
Resp. Alius esse petere gloriam Dei, aliud vero petere propter gloriam Dei; in
priori, gloria Dei est objectum; in posteriori, finis petitionis. Et objectio,
licet videatur concludere contra utrumque, maxim tamen co^^ra primum (sed
revera contra neutrum) de quo nobis nunc non est sermo. Ad objectionem tamen
paucis. Resp. cum Soario, totam utilitatem vel commoditatem illius extrinseeae
gloriae Dei quam manifestari petimus, esse propriam illorum hominum qui illum
glorificant, nostra enim bonitas and pietas ad Deum non pertingit, Ps. 16.2.
Job, 22.2. Job, 35.7. Quamvis itaque petitio nostra tendat in Deum ut in finem,
imo ticet ut in objectum, non tamen dici potest cum proprietate (ut lo quitur
Suar.) nos orare pro Deo, quia proprie dicimur orare pro aliquo solum, quando
per orationem quaerimus illius commodum vel utilitatem.
glory of God must be the chief and ultimat end of our eating and drinking,
nay, of all our actions, 1 Cor. 10.31: Shall we aim at a lower end in the
immediate acts of worship? And should not all things be to him, of whom, and
through whom they are? Romans 11.35. There be many supplicants at the throne of
Grace; but, alas! few level at so noble a mark, or look up to so high an end;
and thus they ask and receive not, because they ask amiss, Jam. 4.3.

Its true, thou may make the creature thy secondary, subordinat and immediate
end, thou may moderatly love and desire it, and therefore thou may ask
it, and use the means for obtaining of it; bread may send an hungry man to the
throne, and whatsoever be thy want and necessity, thou art allowed to ask a
supply and remedy: the creature may occasion and give the rise unto thy prayer,
but thou must not rest up on it; thou should pray, that thou may obtain
(for God both appointed it as a mean for that end) but yet thou may not seek
it for its self, or for thy self, that thou may lay it out upon thy lusts;
if we thus seek, we shall not receive and if any thing fall to us by a common
providence, it becomes gall and wormwood in the belly; what we make meat for
our lusts, becomes fuel to feed the ever-devouring, but never-destroying
flames of the indignation of the Almighty; such as love themselves inordinatly,
such as serve and idolize their lusts, are forced in the issue, to undergo what
they most abhor; self-love proves the grossest self-murder, Mat. 16.25. Such
as make self their last and great end, their state is wretched and miserable,
and their woes shall never come to an end.

You will say, Quaest.
since prayer should be used as a mean for obtaining the desired mercy, how
shall I know when I idolize that mercy, and make it my ultimate end in prayer?
Ans. Thou do provoke the Lord, and abuse a most solemn and promising
ordinance, Ans.
when thou expectest no return of thy prayers, and ask not that thou may
obtain; and therefore whatever other end thou may propose (as discharge of
duty, the enjoying of fellowship with the Father and his Son, an heavenly frame
of spirit, the shining of Gods countenance in that ordinance, and a taste of the
heavenly manna) yet the proper, immediatand direct end of prayer, etc. is to
procure the particular mercy we desire and stand in need of; and therefore we
must use it for that end, and have it often in our eye; 1. before we come, it
must send us to the throne; 2. while we come, it must animat the desire; and,
3. after prayer, it will make us wait and look for a return. But let us beware
of the popish leaven, that no Suar. lib. 1. cap. 11. sect. 13. Ex Alense
proponit tres fiues seu fructus orationis, viz. 1. ad degustandum seu ad
dulcedinem and delectationem ex contemplatione and amore Dei capiendam; 2. ad
exsolvendum seu ad merendum and satis faciendum divinae justitiae: 3. Ad
impretandum quod petimus. De primo and tertio non est quaestio inter nos and
Pentificios; de secundo disputari selet in articulo de merito bonorum operum,
quod nostri Theologi passim refellunt ut vanum and absurdum commentum, sed fere
nihil (ut fatetur Suarez,) cap. 22. sect. 1. hoc loco specialiter de oratione
dicere necesse est, quamvis oration sit praecipuum inter tria principalia capita
ad quae opera satisfactoria a papistis reduci solent: Jejunium enim refertur ad
orationem, and eleemosyna est opus exterius vid Thom. 22. quaest 83. art. 13.
opinion of merit do feed our expectation; who would not abominat that beggar,
who would ask an alms upon the account of debt, as if his asking did give him
a right? and what creditor would accept of entreaties and requests as good
payment? all would go to that market where such money were current. Ah foolish
Papists and unwise! how dare ye thus mock the holy one? And shall such proud
boasting Pharisees Jam. 1.7.
expect to An opinion of dignity and merit would hinder and obstruct the
acceptance and success of prayers, he who has money wherewith he may buy,
needs not beg. When we resolve to stand to a legal plea, we need not make our
supplication to the Judge, Job, 9.15.
receive any thing from the Lord? such as would carry on a trade with heaven,
must not bring such Isa, 64.6.
filthy rags. Ah what are all our righteousnesses? all our prayers and
performances? who will go about to establish their own righteousness, but such
as are ignorant of the righteousness of God? Romans 10.3. If our works have such
a meritorious worth in them, Christ died in vain: and what do we ow to the free
mercy and grace of God? For to him that works, the reward is reckoned, not of
grace, but of debt, Romans 4.4. It is Christ's prerogative to ask upon the account
of justice, and ^o plead the title of purchase, but to us all is free; his
love, his blood, all the promises, all our enjoyments, and all the good we
stand in need of, grace, glory, our bodily being and life, with all its
comforts and accommodations. Though the Lord, by his free promise, has made a
connection between our working and the reward, yet we must not imagine any kind
of causality, by way of merit; though our works be via regni, yet not causa
regnandi. They are the way, and a mean sanctified and appointed of God for
obtaining the blessing, but not the cause, nor can they give any title by way
of purchase and causality; but yet the connection is no less sure and
infallible, the Lords truth and veracity being as strong and firm a ground and
support of faith, as his equity and justice; hence we may as confidently look
for the return of our prayers, as if by these we did merit and purchase what we
desired.

But though thus we be Subordinata non pugnant.
allowed to look after those inferior and subordinat ends, yet if these
exclude, yea, if they no not stoop unto the great and ultimat end, viz. the
glory of God the whole work is Bonum opus intintio facit, non enim valde
attendas quid homo faciat, sed quid cum facit, aspiciat. prin. quinquag ex
prolo Ps. 31. August. Quicquid autem boni sit ab bomine, and non propter hoc
fit propter quod fieri debere sapientia praecipit, etsi officio vidoatur bonum,
ipso non recto fine peccatum est, August. lib. contra
marred, and wants one of the most noble qualifications, and that which must be
a necessary ingredient in all our acceptable sacrifices; not as if in every
petition we must reflect upon that high end, but that habitually, virtually and
interpretatively, it must always be intended, it must so far abide as to have
influence upon the whole action, so that we must always so carry, as if
always we did mind and think upon it; as he who is riding a journey, must so
far mind the place he is going to, as not to be diverted or driven out of the
way.

And now we come to speak more directly to the main question, viz. what is it
to intend the glory of God, and how shall I know when I make it my great and
ultimate end in prayer? Ans. We may make use of these few characters for a
discovery of what end we propound and aim at; 1. the end has a Quid est ergo
amor nisi quedam vitta duo aliqua copulans -- amentom scil. and id quod amatur,
August. de trin. lib. 8. cap. 10.
magnetical and attractive virtue, it draws out the soul after it, and if it be
our chief good and the great end, it so glueth and uniteth the heart to it,
that there can be no divorce. Hence the soul is said Anima magis est ubi amat
quam ubi animat.
to be more where it loves, then where it lives. And indeed, as to the
estimation and choice, it will prefer what it most loves unto life it self;
thus Paul was ready not only to be bound, but also to die for the name of
Christ, Act. 21.13. and the glory of God in the discharge of his ministry, was
more dear to him then his life, Act. 20.24. And the Martyrs (...) contempserunt
vitam pro Christi gloria, vid. Pareum and Bez in Rev. 12.11.
loved not their lives unto the death, they were content rather to lay down
their lives, then God should lose the least of his glory. True love, as it is
Amor meus pondus meum, eo feror quocunque feror.
active and resolute, so it is liberal, it will do much, encounter many trials
and hazards, and part with much; yea, with all, rather then it will suffer the
soul to be divorced from what it pursues as the chief good and ultimat end.
Hence, when we would try, whether we ask temporals in subordination, and with
reference unto the glory of God (as concerning spirituals this question scarce
has place while we sincerely ask them, these having such an immediate and
direct tendency to Gods glory, that it may be called their Finis intrinsec and
finis operis.
intrinsecal end, and the end of the work it self; though yet I deny not, but
the worker, through the subtilty of Satan, and the corruption, pride and
deceitfulness of the heart, may abuse and pervert these precious things to base
and selfish ends, which may be discerned by what we are now to say concerning
temporals, which may proportionally be applied to our thus asking spirituals.)
But now to that question, how shall I know what end I aim at in my prayer?
suppose thou heardst the Lord from heaven, saying unto thee [upon what terms
desire thou this mercy? and would thou have it upon any terms, though it
might prove a weapon to dishonor me] what would thou reply? can thou truly
say, [nay Lord, my soul abominats it as such, and I would rather part with what
mercies I enjoy, then receive an addition to them upon such terms] and thus, if
thou art as ready to pray against, and deprecate these outward things under
that redpulication, as thou wast serious in asking them as supposed blessings,
thou needst not fear least thou have asked amiss; if thy end had been wrong,
thy desire had been more peremptory, neither would it have thus stooped to the
will of God. Self and lust are impetuous, and Genesis 30.1.
Rachel like are impatient in desiring, and cannot bear a denial or delay, but
if they be satisfied, its no matter though God lose of his glory, and the soul
of its beauty and heavenly ornaments; but when Gods glory is intended, temporal
things will be asked, 1. moderatly, both as to the degree of the desire, and to
the measure of the thing desired; 2. with submission to the will of God; and,
3. in subordination to his glory; And thus all regular prayers for temporals,
have two parts; as we pray for such a mercy upon supposition of expediency and
subserviency to the great end, so either virtually or expressly, we deprecat it
upon the supposition of inexpediency and hurt, as shall appear, Part, 4. chap.
1. And herein honest supplicants do imitate their Master, and when they pray
for any outward mercy or deliverance, either actually or in the habitual
intention, they include a proviso, and either imply in their desire, or
expressly ad this postscript to all such supplications, Mat. 26.39, 42.
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, thy will be done.

2. What we much love and mainly intend, will be much in our eye, and will
often run in the thoughts; we will not need a monitor to put us in mind of it,
but What the Poet said of the land of our nativity, viz. [that it will not
suffer us to forget it] may more truly be said of our chief good and ultimas
end.
Sua dulcedine semper -- Ducet and immemores non sinet esse sui; the mind must
frequently meditate upon that which the heart much loves, and though it be
shut out, yet it will intrude and insinuate it self, and creep in again upon
the thoughts; nay, absence, distance, hazard and difficulty will but rather
inflame the desire, quicken and double our diligence, and arrest and more
seriously take up our thoughts, then divert them from looking upon that which
we much love and effectually intend. If then the glory of God be the great
errand and business and mark thou aimest at, thou must frequently meditate upon
it, unless the archer have the mark in his eye he must shoot at random.

You will say, Quest. Ans.
but we cannot always actually mind the glory of God; When must we then, and
how often mind it? Ans. The more we think upon it, it is an evidence that we
intend it the more; yet, we must not determine how often, and for how long a
time the thoughts must be thus employed. As in other works and parts of
holiness, so here, there is a great variety and latitude: A popish Casuist Pet
a S. Joseph in Ethic. ad quaest. An detur aliquis actus humanus indifferens in
individuo, seu, ut loquuntur, in actu exercito.
affirms, that once, at least, every day we should renew our resolution, to
refer all our ways to the glory of God; and well might he say, that this
should be the minimum, the least that ought to be done, albeit, alas! too many
titular Christians never once yet to this day did make, or sincerely came to
this resolution: but I should think, that, at least, as often as we pray we
should renew this resolution, and whenever we ask temporals, we should
cordially say, [not our will, but thine, O Lord, be done] Proponitur hic
exemplum enimi very pit rihil aliud spectontantis quam glo^iam Dei dum in
tribulationibu^ and periculis auxilium divinum implorat, Mus^^l. in Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory; do what
seems good in thy eyes, and what serve^h most to illustrate the glory of thy
name, but Psa. 140.8.
grant not our foolish desires, and further not our hurtful devices, etc.

3. He who asks for the glory of God, when he has obtained what he desired,
will be careful to improve and lay it out for that end. Thus Hannah asked a son
from the Lord, and lent him to the Lord as long as he lived, 1 Samuel 1.27, 28.
It is true, she did not thus consecrate her other three sons to the public
ministry in the temple, and it may be the Lord will not call thee to part with
all; but yet thou should be in readiness if it were to offer up thy Isaac,
and to abandon thy darling and most beloved comforts; and though thou art
allowed still to possess, yet, may thou not improve thy possessions better
for his glory, and spare so much of them as he calls for, which happily will be
but a little? But, Ah! so much health and strength, so much wealth and honor,
and nothing of that laid out for God, and none of it employed in, and for his
service: None under thy charge, encouraged by thy example and warning, no
hungry Saints fed, no good work promoved by thy substance, but thou accountest
all lost that is laid out that way, and thou would rather suffer the public
Ministry and schools of Learning to decay, then thou would contribute for
their maintenance, did not the Law of the land compel thee to give a little
for that end; with which (though it be not thine, and thon never had any
right unto it, yet) thou as unwillingly partest as the Mariner with his goods
in a storm. Ah! had thou asked for God, thou would now employ it better, and
mind his interest and service more.

4. If thou ask for God, thou will not only take heed what, but how thou
ask; as thou will be careful to improve the mercy when enjoyed to the
honor of God; So thou will be careful to honor him by thy asking; thou will
make conscience of thy duty and take heed how thou performest it, thou will
look in to thy prayer as well as after its return; as thou art sensible of thy
wants, so of thy debt, and that prayer is no small part of that homage we owe
to God. Carnal prayers run to prayer as to a charm, they use it as a mean, and
though never so superficially performed, are ready, with that people, Isa.
58.3. to complain if God do not presently answer and give what they desired. O!
but the Saints are more anxious about their duty then it is success, as to the
having or wanting these outward things; and though they can use prayer as a
sanctified mean, and confidently expect a return, yet they dare not plead their
own righteousness nor the worth of their prayers; and if God may be glorified
in withholding what they desired, they rest satisfied and acquiesce in his
will; if they honor God in their prayer, and if his name get honor by denying
what they petitioned, this double advantage will not only sufficiently compense
that loss, but also rejoice the heart of the supplicant (when seen and
considered by him) and fill his mouth with songs of praise and thanksgiving.

Ah! Application.
what matter of humiliation, that we have so often prostituted so solemn an
ordinance to our lusts and sensual appetite, and that so often we have been led
by base and low ends; the custom of the place and family, our wants and
necessities, yea, and, many a time, our lusts and carnal desires have sent us
to the throne, and we without blushing, have thus taken the holy and dreadful
name of God in vain (because upon such a base account) and at the best,
conscience of duty, and challenges from within, have set a work not a few, and
the Saints too often. If conscience be satisfied, though the honor of God was
little minded in the duty, we rest content, and if we enjoy our hearts desire,
we do not look up to him from whom it came, nor are we careful to improve it
for his honor; and as we little mind Gods glory in asking, so we expect small
success, and accordingly reap little fruit of our labors. O! when will we be
humbled for doing Gods work, and our own work, so negligently and deceitfully;
if we were more serious and fervent in our desires, and did more cordially aim
at the glory of God, he would more effectually procure our good, and our
prayers would be more peevalent and successful: but no wonder (as one said)
though those prayers that want a good aim, do also want a good issue. But, ah!
what motives can prevail with him who does not sincerely Ad eum ergo qui ubique
praesens est, non pedibus ire licet, sed moribus. Mo, res autem nostri non ex
eo quod quisque novit, sed ex eo quod quisque diligit, dijudicari solent; non
faciunt bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores. August Macedonio
epist. 52.
love God, to seriously mind and regard his honor and service? The water in
the pipe can ascend no higher then the head-spring from whence it came; when
self-love is the spring, self-interest must be the aim; but if God were at the
beginning of prayer, he would be the end; if love to him, were the fountain and
principle, his glory would be the mark and scope. And O! if we were less carnal
and selfish! if we did seek more for God, we would receive more from him; if
his kingdom, glory and interest, had the precedence, our business would be more
quickly dispatched, and we might trade for the creature more successefully,
Mat. 6.33. and what ever were our portion and allowance of it, were it small or
great, it would prove sufficient and enough, yea, all, Phil. 4.18. Temporals
thus asked and received, lose, as it were, their nature and name, they are no
more in the category of indifferent things; nay (says Si temp oralia bona
considerentur pro ut sunt u^ilia ad opera virtutu^n quibus perducimur ad vitam
aeternam, in tantum suut simpliciter bona. Thom. 1, 2. quaest 114. art 10. in
corp.
the great School-man) thus they become fimpliciterbona, absolutely good, and
blessings indeed, they are now of one kindred with spiritual mercies, they are
thus (whatever difference be, as to their matter) arrows of the same quiver,
bought at the same market, and with the same price, shot out of the same bow,
and levelled at the same mark: all of them slow from the same fountain of free
love, and are the purchase of blood, and being asked and received in faith, are
improven to the honor of the giver. And thus we may upon good grounds
subscribe, and put to our seal to that Christian paradox, that a little which a
righteous man has (not only his state and condition, but his creature-stock
and outward possessions) is better (because better come, better employed, and
laid out for a better use) then the great treasures and revenues of the wicked,
Ps. 37.16. Prove. 15.16. Prove. 16.8.

CHAP. II. Some concommitant qualifications of prayer. What should be our
carriage while we are at the throne? and what are these graces which should
especially then be exercised?
PRayer being a Isa. 1, 18. Jer. 30.13.
pleading with the wise God, and a Romans 15.30. Genesis 32.24. Hos. 12.4.
wrestling with the Almighty, we had need of much wisdom from above, and of the
tongue of the learned, that we may order our cause aright before him; we have
need of circumspection, and to take heed to our steps; we would then put on the
whole armor of God, and stand in need of much strength, for making use of
every part of it; as always, so then especially the help of the Spirit is
necessary, for quicknnig and enabling us to exercise all our graces; we had
need then to awaken and rouse up, to invite and summon the soul, and all that
is within us to join and contribute its assistance; the understanding and
affections, as the main agents, must then be set a work, the zeal and strength
of these, and of whatsoever other faculties can be subservient unto the work,
must be let out; the greatest seriousness and activity is here too little; and
all our graces should be awakened, and all of them may, some one way or other,
be here employed and exercised; our faith, our hope, our love, humility, etc.
It were too large a field to speak particularly to all these, but we shall only
name a few, and insist a little on faith, as being very necessary to the right
performance of this duty, though little known, or minded by too many.

Sect. I. Of the, 1. attention, 2. reverence, 3. humility, 4. sincerity, 5.
importunity, 6. watchfulness, and, 7. perseverance required in prayer.
Ps. 103.1. Blessing and praise is commonly reputed a part of prayer; however,
it is conjoined with it, and is of the same nature, and requires the exercise
of the same faculties and graces.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, with all that is within me. Ps. 145.18, 19. The
Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, etc.
1. WE should not need to spend time in showing, that we must take heed what we
utter before the Lord, were it not that the false Church does maintain and
plead the cause of all formal and pharisaical professors [It is not necessary
(says their great Doctor Aquinas) that we attend to every petition we offer up
to God, if we come to prayer with an Intentio est actus voluntatis de qua
dictum sect. praecad. attentio vere est actus intellectus de qua jam dicendum.
intention to seek God; 1. Attention.
for by virtue of this intention (which others call a virtual intention) albeit
the mind in prayer does wander, yet the prayer will not only, 1. prevail, but
also, 2. be meritorious, and deserve an answer; Tertius autem effectus
orationis est quem praesentialiter officit, scil. quaedam spiritualis refectio
mentis, and ad hoc de necessitate in oratione requiritur attentio. Thom. 2.2.
quaest. 83. art. 13. in corp.
yet (says he) 3. prayer without attention will not stir up and quicken the
heart to a spiritual frame, nor inflame it with zeal toward God.] But Suarez,
either pitying his masters weakness, or envying his liberality in yielding too
much to the heretics, denies attention to be necessary to this spiritual
refection (as they speak) for (says he) the rude and ignorant people praying
in an unknown tongue, may thereby stir up their zeal and devotion: But for
confuting of this abominable doctrine of Romanists, it would be remembered that
there is a Suar. lib 3. cap. 5. sect. 5, 6. cum tamen, sect. 2. dixerat ad
spiritualem refectionem necessariam esse actualem attentionem, esse per se tam
notum ut nulla iudigent robatione: and cap. 4. sect. 3. fatetur Bonaventuram
recte dix. isse, valde indecens esse ut quis cum Deo loquatur ore and alind
meditetur cord, talemque orationem nunquam a Deo exaudiri.
twofold attention, virtual and actual; 1. virtual, which consists in the
purpose and intention of the heart to be attent and serious in the work, which
purpose and intention, though it be not actual and in being, yet is conceived
to continue and abide, until, 1. either there arise a contrary purpose in the
heart to divert the mind to some other subject; or else, 2. by our gross and
supine negligence, we suffer the mind so to be diverted and distracted with
other thoughts, that that distraction (though it be not formally and directly
voluntary, yet indirectly, and by just interpretation) may be accounted
voluntary. Now albeit this virtual attention, being neither of these two ways
interrupted, may be useful for clearing the case concerning distractions and
wandering thoughts in prayer, viz. whether they do nullify and obstruct the
whole performance, or not (of which, Part, 3.) yet it is impertinent for
clearing the present question, concerning the act of the understanding that
should be exercised in every petition we offer up to God; for whatever be the
success of prayer, as to those petitions in which the mind was employed, and
albeit they prove not successess, because in Bonavent. opus de process.Religion.
lib. 7. cap. 3. triplicem facit attentionem, viz superficialem ( viz. ad verba)
literalem. ( viz. ad sensum verborum* and spiritualem (seu ad sen u n mysticum
si verba admit^ant) sed rectius Thom. loc cit. tertium hoc membrum attentionis
refert, 1. ad Deum qui, 2. ad rem pro quo oratur Sed noster. Ames. cas. cons.
lib. 4. cap. 14. addit quartum quo ad nosmet ipsos and dispositiones affectuum
no trarum attendimus; verum hoc genus attentionis potius spectat ad conditiones
praevias; cum hac attentione potius invig lemus intention and dispositioni
cordis (de quibus diximus) quam ipsi orarioni: and primum ac secundum
includitur in tertio, adeoque hoc terrium quo, scil. ad Deum and ad rem
attendimus, est praecipuum and (ut loquitur Thomas) maxim necessarium.
that same continued action, with them was mixed some wandering and impertinent
thoughts, yet those other petitions then put up without attention, may be
rejected as unprofitable, yea, and as sinful, though of the free mercy of God
in Christ pardoned. And he who has but half an eye, may as palpably discern
the popish tergiversation in this, as in any other article; while they labor
to divert the dispute, having the boldness to Cum Thom. art. cit.
affirm, that all the arguments brought by orthodox Divines to demonstrate the
necessity of actual attention, do only speak of, and conclude the necessity of
this their virtual attention; but I think Suar los. cit cap. 4.
Suarez has gone more handsomely to work, in dissimulating the strength of our
reasons, in not once mentioning them for the point which they prove so
convincingly, that the reader might apprehend that he saw no ground why
heretics should allege what he thought not worthy of an answer; while indeed
(as I think) he knew not what answer to return; yet those must be named (they
must not altogether escape so great a disputer) but no ways against him, but
to prove his conclusion concerning the necessity of that Hanc dirtualem
attentionem tunc solum desinere affirmat quando homo scions and videns so de
aliis cogitare, and non attendere, non curat, sed negligit, vel direct vult
illo modo dicere. Suar. lib. 4. cap. 26. sect. 13.
virtual attention; which is (as we observed) not only impertinent for clearing
the present question, but also deserves not the name of attention, as being
not an act of the mind, but of the will, and so more fitly (as also it is
sometimes by Art cit. in corp.
Aquinas) called the Velle attendere non est p^atinde in re, Cajet in Sum. 1.2.
quaest 83. art. 13.
purpose and intention. How would those Rabbis declaim against heretics, if
they had fallen into such a gross mistake and confusion? its true, the object
of that intention, is attention, for thereby we purpose to attend; but who is
so childish as to confound the act and the object? for so we might take
quidlibet pro quolibet. And yet attention cannot always be the object of their
intention, especially when they go to pray in an unknown language; for how can
they resolve to attend to what they know not, unless it be to the sound and
pronunciation of the letters? And thus Parrots may as well be said to pray to
God as Papists.

Hence our first argument; they who teach and plead for a brutish way of
worship, must be the followers and admirers of Rev. 13, 4. and 16.2.
the beast, who have his mark upon their forehead: But beasts having learned
to utter words, may pray to God in the popish way, without reverence and
attention. Ergo,

But, it is not strange to see them who make so many gods of idols and images,
(in giving them divine worship and honor) to make an idol of the true God, and
to serve him as if he neither knew, nor Jer. 10.5.
could do good or evil. Hence,

2. Who dare thus mock a King or Ruler? Will any speak to such and not take
heed what he faith? If thou did Mal. 1.8.
offer such irreverence to thy Governor, would he be pleased with thee?

3. If God be a Spirit, he must be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.24.
What does the holy Lord value the gesture of the body and the moving of the
tongue, if the heart be not employed in the work? [there must be (as Ratio
redditur ex part naturae ipsius Dei; quia scil, natura ejus est non corporeum
aliquid, sed spiritus; propterea oportet adorantes eum adorare in spiritu and
veritate, ut adoratio conformis sit adorato. -- Sub spiritu voluntas, sub
veritate intellectus comprehend itur; -- In spiritu, non cultu temporale, non
lingua, sed interiore cultu consistente in spiritu, hoc est in adnimo, etc.
Cajet. in Joa, 4 23, 24. Imo ipse, Suar. loc. cit. cap. 4. 4. fatetur
adorationem Dei requirere attentionem mentis, alia^ fieri solo corpore, and non
in spiritu; quia licet adoratio in spiritu non excludat actionem corporis,
requirit tamen principaliter spiritus influxum ut sit vera adoratio.
Cajetan confesses) a conformity between our worship and him whom we worship]
We must seek to the father of Spirits with our spirit and whole soul; the mind
must attend and direct, and the will must intend and follow the pursuit,
otherwise the name of God is taken in vain, and the holy one is not worshipped,
but dishonored by our babbling; we may thus fear to meet with a return in
wrath, and that the Lord will deal with us according to our folly, but have no
Non remiss, nec mente huc vel illuc evagante, eo quod talis non solum non
impetrabit quod petit, sed magis Deum irrit abit, Basilius apud Thom. dict. art.
ground to expect an answer in mercy, and that God will accept such vain
oblations.

4. We may argue from the nature of this exercise. What is prayer but a lifting
up of the soul to God; Psa. 25.1. and, 86.4. Or, as commonly from (...),
ascensus mentis ad Deum.
Damascen it is defined, an elevation of the mind to him. And this (as Suarez
loc cit. 5.
Suarez confesses) is essential to prayer; So that there can be no prayer
unless the soul and mind be thus elevated to God: but it were ridiculous to
imagine, that the mind is lifted up to God when it does not attend, but wander
and run away from him, and divert to other objects. Ergo,

5. How did the Apostle abominate this strange doctrine, while he would not
permit that any man should utter words in prayer, before others, which they did
not understand, albeit the speaker did well know their meaning? But, says he,
I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with the understanding also; and in
the Church and before others, he would rather speak five words to their
understanding, then ten thousand in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15.19.
Hence, some of the Papists themselves, yea, some of their great Ex hac^ Pauli
doctrina habetur quod melius ad edificationem Ecclesia est orationes publicas
quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi clericis and populo, quam
dici la^ine, Cajer. in 1 Cor. 14. ad 17. Quod si populus intelligat orationem
and benedictionem saecrdotis, melius reducitur in Deum. and devotius respondet,
amen, Lyra in 1 Cor. 4.15.
Doctors, have been forced to acknowledge, that it were better and more
profitable for the people, that their prayers and public service were
performed in their vulgar language, that all might understand and join in the
work, then in latin, which few or none, except the Priest (yea happily not he)
does understand; thus Lyra and Cajetan. And as for private prayers, De privata
autem oratione non improbabiliter dici potest, utilius esse personis idiotis
vocaliter orare in sua lingua vulgari, quam in latina vel alia sibi ignota; nam
per se loquendo hoc videtur fructus sius ad fiuem orationis, Suar. loc. cit.
cap 5. 4.
Suarez grants, that it were more fit and convenient, that the multitude and
rude people should pray to God in their own language then in latin, whereof
they are ignorant.

You will say, what then can be the reason why still they retain that
ridiculous practice, and at other times plead so earnestly for it? Ans. The
Pope and his Cardinals being earnestly solicited and pressed with fear, had
almost yielded at the Council of Trent to reform this and several other abuses,
(from which, little gain might be reaped, and whereby the Popes treasure was
not much increased) till at length they considered that this was an ill
preparative, and might prove dangerous, if thus once they suffered the
foundation, concerning the Popes infallibility, Nihil-ominus ex istis ritibus
quovis uno mutato, subrui conti nuo fundamen ta prorsus omnia Ecclesiae
Romanae; -- and prudentis esse non tam principia quam fines rerum
animadvertere, etc. Sva. Pol. hist. conc. Trident. lib. 7. page (mihi) 775.
to be shaken; for, thus the people might be brought to believe, that they who
had erred in these few things, might also be mistaken in other things of
greater concernment. And thus we may see what a woeful snare the infallibility
of the Roman Church has proven, and still will be, to deluded Papists while
they adhere to it.

6. The Christian sacrifice must be, 1. Vid. Calvinum loco citando.
spiritual, 1 Pet. 2.5. and will the tongue, without the attention and
concurrence of the spirit and mind, be a fit Priest to offer such an oblation?
2. It must be reasonable, Vid. Paraeum and Bezam in locum, qui docent hunc
Textum optime interpretari a Petro, 1 epist 2.5. Ergo includit orationem.
Romans 12.1. and is it reasonable to do the work of the Lord negligently, and
while we are employed in his worship not to attend what we say? this were to
run upon the curse, Mal. 1.14. Ah! shall we, having a male in the flock, offer
to God a corrupt thing? has he not deserved the best? Ah! what have we to
give? and shall we think any thing too good, and our hypocritical performance,
without heart and life, to be acceptable service? such deceivers are cursed,
but God will not be mocked. Let us remember the sad threatening against that
people, Isa. 29.13, 14. for drawing near to God with their mouth, and honoring
him with their lips, while their heart was removed and did not concur in the
work: and let us hearken to the exhortation, Eccl. 5.1, 2. Let us take heed to
our steps and watch over our thoughts, while we approach before the Lord, that
we may not offer up to him the sacrifice of fools; the tongue is the hearts
messenger, let it not then run un-sent, and go to God without an errand. Let
the lips (says Dictent labia quod habet cor, August. in Psalm. 39. cum oration
spiritualis sit Dei cultus, quid magis alienum est ab ejus natura quan a labiis
tantum, non autem intimo animo proficisci, Calv. in 1 Cor. 14.14.
Augustine) speak what is in the heart; though the tongue be employed in the
work, yet it must not be the chief agent, men's orat, lingua loquitur; the
tongue can speak in prayer, but it cannot pray; lip labor is no devotion, but
a ready way to atheism and contempt of God; if the heart were filled with
suitable thoughts of his majesty, excellency and goodness, it durst not thus
slight his worship and service; and the longer we continue in thus dallying
with his ordinances, we grow the more bold and impudent, till at length we cast
off all fear and reverence. Its a sad thing that any should be so careless and
negligent, as to suffer his mind to diverted, while he is speaking to God, and
that any should be so foolish and irreverent, as to entertain discourse with
the servants, while he is looking up to the King, and presenting his
supplication to him; but yet it is more intolerable, and scarce credible, that
amongst those who profess the name of Christ, there should be found a
generation so impudent, as to plead and maintain that it is not necessary, that
we should know or attend to what we say in prayer. Must not Satan (as Unde
discimus qualiter and quam effraeni licentia grassatus sit Satan in Papatu --
nonne Paulum pro idiota habent and Deum ex professo contemnunt? videmus ergo
quam impune apud cos Satan ludat, in eo autem diabolica little contuma^ia se
prodit quod monati tantum absunt a paenitentia ut ferro and igni tam crassam
corruptelam tueantur, Calvin in 1 Cor. 14.16.
Calvin lamenteth) have much power over these men? O! but it is a dreadful
judgment to be given over to the Spirit of delusion.

But Suar. loc cit. cap. 5. sect. 7.
Suarez objecteth, that it is difficult, yea, morally impossible to be so
attentive in prayer as not to give way to some distractions and wandering
thoughts. And would God require of us a condition that could be so hardly
performed? Ans. But it is more impossible to the holiest man on earth to keep
the Law perfectly, and not to sin against God; and shall we therefore say that
the Lord in his most holy Law does not require perfect obedience of us, and
shall our sins thus become no sins? The Lord once gave us power, which through
our own fault we have lost, and disinabled our selves; but shall the Creditor
lose his right because the Debtor has wasted the stock he entrusted him with?
Our ability cannot now be the rule and measure of our duty, and what we owe to
God. And Suarez might as well have brought this argument against the spiritual
performance of any duty, as against attention in prayer; for failings and
infirmities will always accompany our best way of performance: what? must we
not at all then endeavor, and shall we do nothing? and albeit in prayer
wandering and impertinent thoughts will now and then intrude themselves, yet we
may drive them away, as Abraham did the fowls which came down upon the
carcasses: and watchfulness and attention is a good preservative for
preventing, and also a sit remedy for curing this evil: and the greater the
danger be, we should the more diligently use the remedy; and though some sits
may still recur, yet the disease may thus be kept from proving deadly; if thou
stir up thy heart to attend, if thou set a guard and keep watch, though
impertinent thoughts may notwithstanding creep in, yet they shall not be able
to mar the acceptance and success of thy prayer (as shall appear at greater
length; Part 3. where we shall speak to the case concerning wandering thoughts)
O! but if we give way unto, and do not strive against them, and if they be
suffered to grow up, and overspread the whole duty, and thus to choke the good
seed, what cropped can be expected? How can we (says Quomodo te a Deo audiri
postulas cum te ipse non audias? vis esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas, cum tu
ipse memor tui non sis, Cyprian. de orat. domin. 2. Fear and reverence.
Cyprian) imagine that God will hearken, when we our selves will not hearken,
and that he should hear and regard those prayers and requests which we our
selves do not regard or attend unto? It is unreasonable to desire, and foolish
to expect any good from, or a gracious answer unto such irreverent, unadvised
and unsavory supplications.

But, 2, Albeit, thus we must attend and be serious in the work of the Lord,
yet that is not enough; we cannot serve God acceptably in any point of his
worship, far less in prayer, unless we do it with reverence and godly fear,
Heb, 12.28. This godly fear is so necessary, that it is frequently put for the
whole worship of God, and a holy man is often described by it; and as it is
thus so excellent in it self, and so necessary for us, so it prevails very
much with God; For, He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he will
hear their cry, and will save them. Ps. 145.19. O! but every fear is not this
reverential and godly fear; there may be much fear in the soul, and yet this
may be wanting; the people of Israel were exceedingly afraid, when they heard
Gods voice out of the midst of the fire, and cried unto Moses, ah I this great
fire will consume us. Deuteronomy. 5.24, 25. yet there was little of this holy fear in
them, as afterward appeared in their frequent murmuring; and therefore says
the Lord, there, ver. 29. O! that there were such an heart in them, that they
would fear me. They did then fear God, but O! says the Lord, if they would
fear me aright: there is a slavish and selfish fear of God, only because of his
power, justice and terrors, and there is much of this fear in hell, where it
is accompanied with much enmity and hatred of, and rebellion against him; and
though on earth it may produce an outside and half-reformation, yet no cordial
and heart-renovation; though some may thus forbear to commit sin, yet it makes
them not hate sin; though it may disturb and drive away the thief from his
prey, yet it will not make him leave off to covet it; this fear may perplex a
man, and put him on the rack, but it cannot convert him, and turn the heart
unto the Lord. But then there is a sonlike and filial fear of reverence, due
distance and respect; which though it exclude not Gods justice (for we may thus
fear him, as being able to cast into hell, Luke 12.5.) yet is mainly conversant
about, 1. his majesty and greatness; 2. his bounty and goodness: his excellency
begets reverence, and makes us keep a due distance; and his loving kindness
makes us stand in aw, and fear least we grieve and offend him; though the Son
did not fear the rod, yet would he stand in awe and be loath to offend his kind
Father; and the greater the Fathers kindness, and the love of the Son be, the
Fathers displeasure will be the more grievous unto the Son; when the children
of Israel shall return and cordially seek the Lord their God, they shall fear
the Lord and his goodness. Hos. 3.5. Ah! were there any thing of this reverence
and filial fear in the heart, it would be as a lodestone to draw us in to God,
and it would be as honey and the honeycomb, to sweeten our communion with him,
and make us go about our duty cheerfully; and what a notable guard and
preservative would it prove against wandering thoughts? and what attention and
seriousness would it beget and maintain? When we speak to a King, with what
diligence will we watch over our thoughts, words, and whole carriage? the
reverence we ow to him will make us circumspect. And is it not the want of that
reverence we ow to the infinite majesty of the great God, that makes us so
careless and negligent of his worship? But O! if we did more seriously mind our
stistance, and did consider what base sinful wretches we are, who are admitted
to draw nigh to the Mal. 1.14.
great King, if we did lay to heart his condescending love, his mercy and
goodness, yet not fotgetting his excellency and greatness, with what both
confidence and reverence might we approach to him? This reverential and filial
fear is not opposite unto, but is the ground and foundation of, solid
confidence: there can be no security without this fear; the false peace of
fearless sinners is but desperate madness, but where this fear is, there is no
danger; and such a soul needs not perplex it self any more with terrors and a
slavish fear, it may now come to God with confidence, yea and with boldness; if
thou hearken to the exhortatation, and wilt serve God with reverence and godly
fear, Heb. 12.28. thou may also lay hold on the privilege and consolation,
and come boldly unto the throne of grace, that thou may obtain what mercy
thou standst in need of, Heb. 4.16. Thus Bone Deus (inquit Vitus Theodorus in
epist. ad Melancht.) qua^tus spiritus, quanta fides in ipsius verbis inest:
tanta reverentia aliquid petit ut cum Deo: tanta spe and fide ut cum patre and
amieo se loquisentiat, Mel. Adamus in vita Lutheri, page (mibi) 142.
Luther (as Vitus Theodorus testifies) used to pray to God, [with as great
reverence as became a finfull creature speaking to the holy Lord; and yet with
such hope, confidence and boldness as if he had been speaking to a father and
intimat friend.] But, ah! how should not only formal Professors, but the Saints
also and children of God, be humbled for their careless and irreverent carriage
in Gods worship and service; many a time might the Lord say, even to his
precious ones, [is this the reverence ye owe to your Maker? is this the worship
ye allow me? durst ye deal so with the ruler, though a poor creature like your
self? would not such irreverence in his presence, be thought unseeemly and
intolerable, yea, and justly censurable? And yet, your heart is not smitten for
the affront ye offer to me, but rather thinks, that by such service, an
obligation is put upon me, and that ye have causs to complain if I refuse or
delay to answer such formal and lazy prayers. O! repent of this your rashness
and deadness in my Worship and Ordinances, and for your dis-respect and
contempt of me, lest I deal with you according to your folly.]

3. We must pray in humility: as we must have high and reverential thoughts of
God, 3. Mumility.
So we must have low and humble thoughts of our selves; pride is detestable in
all, but intolerable in beggars; thou come to ask an alms from God, let the
frame of thy heart and thy carriage be suitable unto thy trade and employment:
if thou draw nigh in thy pride, thou may fear an answer in wrath. But, the
heavens may be astonished, and the earth blush, at the popish arrogance; God
for bid (says Absit ut justi vitam aeternam expectent sicut pau^er
elecmosynam: multo namque gloriosius est, etc. Taper. in art Lov to. 2. ar 9.
Tapperus) that the Saints should expect heaven, as beggars do an alms; it is
more glorious for them to receive it as a triumphant garland, due to them for
their sweating and laboring; and (says Magis enim honorificum est habere
aliquid ex merito quam exsola donatione, Bell. de justif impri and bon. op.
contrav 2. princip. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Bellarmine) it is more honorable to enjoy by purchase and merit, then by a
free donation. I am ashamed to relate such a blasphemous dream, as Illud quod
sumus, and quod habemu^, sive sunt boni actus, sive boni habitus, vel usus,
totum est in nobis ex liberalitate divina gratis dante and conservante, and
quia ex dono gratuito nullus obligatur ad dandum amplius, sed potius recipiens
magis obligatur danti; idco en^^onis habitibus, and ex bonis actibus sive
usibus nobis a Deo datis Deus non obligatur nobis ex aliquo debito justi^ia ad
aliquid amplius danaum, ita quod si non dederit sit injustus, sed potius nos
sumus Deo obligati: and sentire seu dicere, oppositum est temerarium seu
blasphemum, Durand. in 2. sent did. 27. quaest. 2.
one of their own number (to wit Durand) calls it, and if we might stay to
debate the matter with these unreasonable men, his reason is very considerable:
For, (says he) [if God of his free grace enable us to pray or perform any
other duty, we are so far from obliging God thereby, that thus we become the
more adebted to him for this goodness; how absurd is it to think, that, by a
free gift, the giver must be obliged to give more?] And, says Si Dei gratiam
and favorem conservare cupis, nullam meritorum tuorum fac mentionem, Ferus in
Matthew. 20
another [if ye would not lose the favor of God, ye must not once mention your
own merits.] Yea, Suarez and Bellarmine, the two great Champions of the Roman
Church, after all their boasting, are forced in the issue to yield, (contrary
to the whole scope of their dispute and arguments) that though this money be
current, yet it is not safe to bring it to the market; but, (says Propter
incertitudinem propriae justitiae and periculum inanis gloriae ^utissimum est
totam siduciam in sola Dei misericordia and beniguitate reponere, Bell. loc.
cit. cap. 7.
Bellarmine) it is best and most sure to put all our confidence solely in the
mercy of God: For, (says Qui orat raro aut nunquam debet consideratio. nem
pouere in propriis meritis ut inde impetrandi fiduciam accipiat; quia in hoc
magnum est periculum superbiae and deceptionis: nam licet verum sit dari in
justis merita de condigno quibus respondet certum aliquod praemium suo tempore
dandum, tamen in hac vita non postulamus illud praemium prout sub ea ratione
debitum est sed prout in ipsa gratia gratis datur, Suar. loc. cit. lib. 1. cap
25. 12.13.
Swarez) there is great hazard of being puffed up, and being deceived with the
opinion of our own merits, and therefore seldom or never should our confidence
in prayer arise from our merits; for, albeit our works do condignly deserve a
reward, yet we ask it not under that consideration, but as a free gift. Thus we
see how the popish Doctors would learn us in prayer to complement with God; as
if the buyer did say to the seller, [albeit I give you as much money as your
commodity is worth, yet I will take it as a gift and thank you for it.] We will
not now digress to a dispute, expecting that a discovery of such abominable
doctrine will be a sufficient confutation of it to every sober man; what need
such rich men ask and pray, having money enough wherewith they may buy? the
Lord is engaged to resist such proud ones, Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. He who has
respect to the lowly will look to such at a distance, he will disdain to behold
such objects but with contempt, Psa. 138.6. so much of pride as is in the
heart, there is so much atheism and rebellion against God. [If then (says
Esto parvus in oculis tuis, ut fis magnus in oculis Dei; tanto enim eris apud
Deum preciosior, quanto fueris in oculis tuis despect ior, Isidor. in synonim.
one) thou would be precious in the eyes of God, be low in thine own; the
more thou abasest thy self, the more thou will be esteemed by him.] And
[although (as Minus quippe est abnegare quod habet, valde autem multum est
homini abnegare quod est -- nec tamen sufficit nostra relinquere, nisi
relinquamus and nos. -- nisi quis a seips^ deficiat, ad Deum qui super ipsum
est non appropinquat, Gregor. hom, 32. in evang.
Pope Gregory said) it be more difficult to deny our selves, then to forsake
our possessions, yet, unless we come from self, we cannot go to God.]
Self-denial and humility is as physic to the stomach, it purges out ill
humors which unfit and indispose it for its meat; it emptieth the heart, and
removes the distempers of pride, ambition and self-conceit, which so Lumen
enim intelligeniae humilitas aperit, superbia abscondit; nom secretum quoddam
pietatis est, and tanto minus ad illud animus pervenit, quanto magis
intumescit; quia co ipso for as repellitur quo insanius inflatur, Gregor. in
Job. lib. 25. cap. 17. fol. (mihi) 158. and infra, origo virtutis humilitas
est. Illa in nobis virtus veraciter pullulat quae in rodice propria, id est,
humilitate perdurat, a qua nimirum si abscinditur arescit; quiae vivificantem
se in intimis humorem charitatis perdit, ibid. lib. 27. cap. 26. fol. 175. B.
surfeits the soul, that it can receive nothing without prejudice and hurt;
only the humble are fit to receive, improve, and give God the honor of his
mercies; and the Lord will not suffer such poor ones to go away from his door
without an alms, he will not send such hungry ones empty away, but will fill
them with good things, Psa. 34.6. Luk 1.53.

This humility that is so necessary in the supplicants of heaven, consists
especially in, and is made up of, these ingredients. 1. In having low thoughts
of our selves, and confessing, with Genesis 18.27.
Abraham, that we are but dust and ashes, and with Genesis 32.10.
Jacob, that we are not worthy of the least of all the mercies the Lord has
showed unto us; as knowing, that any difference (as to the better) which is
between us and the vilest wretch on earth, proceeds from the free bounty and
dispensation of God, 1 Cor. 4.7. Ah! what are we? and what have we which we
have not received? What reason have we then to boast, and be pust up as if all
were our own and we had received nothing? as if a debtor would brag and glory,
that he had taken on great sums, and was much in debt. 2. In having low
thoughts of our selves and best performances; as knowing, that there is no
worth or excellency in these, as they flow from us: but on the contrary, much
weakness and manifold imperfections; So that the holy Lord might justly Mal.
2.3.
cast upon our faces the dung of our best sacrifices: even then when the King
has brought us in to his chambers, and when with greatest freedom and devotion
we are pouring out our heart to him, we have reason, with the spouse, to say,
look not upon me because I am black, Cant. 1.4.6. And, 3. in being thus Ezra
9.6.
ashamed to lift up our face to the Lord, and saying, with the Luke 15.19.21.
Prodigal, I am not worthy to be called thy son, and, with the Luke 18.13.
Publican, smiting the breast, and from thence bringing deep sighs in stead of
words, and having our sins so much in our eyes, that we dare not lift them up
to heaven; and when once vent is made to words, this becomes the great suit
and desire, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. 4. In being sensible of all our
sores and maladies, of all our wants, hazards, dangers and temptations we are
exposed unto, of all our sins and provocations, of our weakness and inability,
and of our manifold failings and infirmities; the consideration whereof, as it
will serve to humble us, so to keep us low; and as it will send us to the
throne, so it will furnish us with matter and expressions; it will keep out
that boistrous wind that is ready to blow us up and turn us from our course,
and make us, with the Pharisee, to boast of our enjoyments and perfection, when
we should mourn for sin and complain of wants. A lively sense of our sins,
weakness, dangers and wants, is both the mother and daughter, the nurse and
milk, and (shall I say) the very nature and life of humility.

You will say, and should the servants of God be so much dejected, and be so
uncheerfull while they are at his work? Ans. Albeit while we look in to our
selves, we see nothing but sores and wants, sin, misery and matter of shame,
blushing and confusion, yet when we look up, 1. to the bowels of a Father
inviting and commanding us to draw nigh to him, and assuring us of the success
by his large and free promises; 2. to the arm of the Spirit drawing us to the
throne, and putting words in our mouth; and, 3. to the price Christ has paid,
and to his mediation and intercession for us; with what confidence and boldness
may we present our requests to God? Humble and self-abasing thoughts are not
Mr. Clerk. in the life of Mrs Ratcliffe reports, that when she had poured out
her heart before the Lord with the greatest confidence and delight, yet used to
close with a protestation, that all the acceptance she desired (as to her
praising of God) was that he would pardon her presumption (as the error of her
love) for taking upon her to speak of his excellency.
contrary unto nor inconsistent with that fiducial recumbency, and child like
liberty and boldness the Saints have used in prayer. Nay, but rather the one
supposes and makes way for the other; had not Jacob been sensible of his own
unworthiness, expressed, Genesis 32 10. he might not have been so peremptory and
bold, as we find him, ver. 26. though he deserved nothing, yet he would not
part with God, he would not let him go till he blessed him. And on the other
hand, the more full discovery of Gods majesty and goodness Job met with, the
more he abased and abhorred himself, Job, 42.5, 6. And not only discoveries of
Gods justice and holiness, but also (yea, especially) of his kindness,
tenderness and fatherly care will exceedingly melt an ingenuous and honest
heart; when David heard that God would build him a house for a long time, ah!
what am I, (says he) and what is my fathers house? and is this the manner of
man, O Lord God, and what can David say? etc. He knew not how to express the
low thoughts he had of himself, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19, 20. Yea, often mercies have
prevailed, when rods have proven ineffectual, Ezekiel. 16, 63, 61. mercies will
break the hard oaks, that would not yield at strokes; and its a very bad
symptom when mercies puff us up and make us proud, ah I should we lift up our
selves against him, who is thus exalting us? and it is monstrous, and
exceedingly detestable that Saints should grow proud of their graces, which yet
are so contrary and opposite to pride; that this serpent should breed in the
ashes and overthrow of other sins, yea, and According to the scarce credible
history of that rare bird.
Phaenix-like out of its own ashes; that we should be proud because we are not
proud, and should have high thoughts of our humility and self-annihilation. And
yet (as a holy Rara avis in terris aut sanctitatem non perdere, out humilitatem
sanctimonia non exicudi, Bernard. sup. Cantic. sermon. 45.
man long since complained) what a rare fowl on earth is a holy and humble man?
O! if we were more humble, we would not, 1. Baruch-like seek such great things,
nor; 2. be so peremptory in our desires after them; we would not, 3. so fret
and complain when we are crossed; nor, 4. envy and repine that others had a
greater measure of creature-enjoyments; we would not 5. so hunt after the
applause of men, nor be so sensible of reproaches, wrongs and injuries from
them; 6. we would not so undervalue mean Saints, and be so uncharitable and
severe to them; 7. we would prize more one smile from heaven then all
creature-embracements; that the high and holy one should look upon such sinful
wretches, would exceedingly rejoice the heart; and, 8. we would be more in
confessing our sin and begging pardon, etc.

4. There must be truth and sinecrity in thy prayers; 4. Truth and sincerity.
God will be worshipped in truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. Thy prayer must not go out of
feigned lips, Ps. 17.1. The Lord is far from hypocrites, but he is high to all
that call upon him in truth, to hear and answer them when they cry, Ps. 145.18.
falsehood Isa. 28.15.
will prove a lying refuge, especially while we deal with the omniscient God;
we may thus show our folly, but God will not be mocked; nay, such montebanks do
in a manner engage the Lord in point of honor to find them out; they provoke
his majesty to put some mark upon them, that others may see that they were not
hid from him; such, by their work, do say what those wretches, Ps. 73.11. said
with their mouth, how does God know, and is there knowledge in the most high?
And will not the Lord then be avenged on such hypocrites, who notwithstanding
dare draw nigh to him in their lip-devotion, and (with that people, Ps. 78.36.)
flatter him with their mouth, though their heart be thus removed from him? the
sacrifice of such fools, Hos. 7.11.
Ephraim-like, is a silly dove without heart, they offer the calves of the
lips, but yet (as one speaks) M. Crooks (...).
mentem imprecatam gerunt, if any beast offered up by Pagans to their idols,
was found to want the heart (as it is Alexand. ab Alex. gen: dier. lib. 5. cap.
25.
said to have happened in the case of Julius Caesar, a little before the
conspiracy against him, and of Pertinax that same day he died) this was judged
ominous and prodigious for that person for whom it was sacrificed. This, I
grant, was somewhat extraordinary in nature, but it was superstitious in these
Pagans from thence to divine what such a dispensation did portend; but we may
safely say, that a heartless spiritual sacrifice is a bad omen for the Priest,
and though it be too usual and ordinary, yet it never wants a sad effect.

This godly sincerity, that is so necessary to the acceptance of prayer,
extends, not only to the act and desire therein expressed, but also to the
principle and fountain, the end, intention and motives; I grant that the
sincerity of the heart absolutely, and as to our Christian profession, our
covenant and engagement to the Lord, must be presupposed, as pertaining to the
previous qualifications mentioned, chap. 1. But by prayersincerity here
required, is held forth several fruits, flowing from that principle relatively
to this duty, and which must appear in the practice of it; and therefore this
sincerity is distinguished from that, as the effect from the cause; and we may
in the general describe it, as implying, 1. knowledge and understanding (which
excludes the popish babbling in an unknown language) 2. attention, and taking
heed what we utter before the Lord (of which we have spoken under another head,
but) 3. and more directly, it imports seriousness and reality in our desires,
so that if the Lord did ask whether we did cordially wish to be heard, we might
reply, Lord thou know we durst not mock thy majesty, by presenting a
petition which the heart did not Ps. 45.1.
indite and subscribe. Yet, 4. and most properly, this truth and sincerity
imports a sweet harmony and conformity; 1. between our expressions and
desires, our heart and our mouth; 2. between our will and our judgment, our
inclination and conscience; when we not only judge such a thing to be
desirable, but do really desire it; and, 3. between our promises and purposes,
our profession and practice, our engagements and endeavors; so that the heart
and all that is Ps. 103.1.
within us do accordingly join in the work. And thus, if in our prayers, 1. we
profess our love to God, and respect to his commandments; there must be this
affection of love and reverence toward him in the heart; 2. if we ask our
increase of grace, and the assistance of the Spirit for the subduing of our
lusts and corruptions; we must desire to be more holy, and must be willing to
part with the right hand and right eye, our darling and bosome-corruptions; 3.
If we renew our covenant with God, or if we take on new bonds, in reference to
some particular service or duty, we must be cordial in that engagement; yea,
though we did not (with Jacob, Genesis 28.30.) make any express covenant or
promise in prayer, yet the duty it self is a great bond and engagement to walk
circumspectly, least if we return to any sinful way, the Lord hide his face,
and withhold an answer of peace, Ps. 85.8. Ps. 66.18 4. When we confess our
sins, we must not lessen the matter, and extenuate the offense, we must not
hide and keep up any of our ways, as being unwilling he should be privy unto,
or acquainted with, the vileness of our way, and the naughtiness of our heart.
Job, 31.33.
If we cover our transgressions, as Adam, and hide any iniquity in our bosom,
do we not say the Lord shall not see nor find this out?

O! but if the heart be not sincere and upright, there will be no truth and
reality in our work no stability nor equality in our course; a double minded
man is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.8. and they who are not sincere in
their work, will not be sincere in their words. These who are not sincere in
their walk, neither will they be sincere in their speech. If the life, course
and conversation, be not straight, neither will there be truth and uprightness
in our prayers and supplications; and those who are not sincere in their
carriage toward men, neither will they be honest in their trading with God;
their The hypocrit cares more for words sespecially while with, and before
others) then holy desires; and to have his lust satisfied, then God glorified.
money will be counterfeit, their ends, carnal and selfish, and the whole
bargain and transaction deceitful and unsure; cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. Woe to him, who comes before the Lord with
a ly Isa. 44.20.
in his right hand, who dare not only lie unto men, but also Act. 5.3, 4.
unto the holy Ghost; this sour Luke 12.1.
leaven of hypocrisy will 1. Cor. 5.6.
leaven the whole lump; and though it seem pleasant to the stomach, yet will
prove bitter in the belly. The joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment, Job,
20.14, 5. He works a deceitful work, which at length will prove a snare to
catch his own feet.

You will say, does not flesh and sense often contradict the sanctified desires
of honest supplicants? do not they often find a Romans 7.23.
law in their members warring against the law of their mind? will not their
lusts and corruptions, not yet totally subdued, always protest and dissent
from every holy motion and desire? Ans. Its a sign of sincerity to be sensible
of, and to complain and bewail thy hypocrisy, and if it be thy burden, and
thou desire to be eased of it, if thou do not hide it, but lay it out before
the Lord, thou may expect his help against it, and that in the mean time it
shall not frustrate thy prayers, and hinder their success. And what matter of
lamentation has it been to the Saints, that they have found such unwillingness
to have their darling sins totally subdued, and that they have not only been so
unready to rise, but so loath to be brought to the highest pitch of a holy
conversation, and that with their professions, desires and prayers, there has
been so much of this leaven mingled? and the more honest and tender the heart
is, it will be the more sensible of this evil; hence, that holy Martyr, Mr.
Bradford, subscribed some of his letters from prison, thus Sam. Clerk in his
life, 1 part of the marrow of Eccl. hist. 5. Importunity.
John Bradford, a very painted hypocrit.

5. We must pray with importunity, fervency and zeal; it is not every prayer,
no not of the righteous, but his effectnal fervent prayer, that prevails,
Jam. 5.16. It is (...), a well wrought prayer, (as some render it) in Qua non
perfunctorie sed ardenter oratur, Beza. in loc.
which, all our strength and utmost diligence and fervency is employed. Or, as
others, a prayer possessed (but not with an evil spirit, such as they, who in
the Gospel are called Vide etymologian and varia significata vocis, (...) apud
Voet. sell. disp. part 1. page 10.9.
(...), were vexed with) Or, rather (as Dr. Hammond) an inspired prayer,
breathed into us by the holy Ghost, and in which there is a sweet concurrence
of the heavenly influence and of our own activity. Every measure of affection
is not suitable for this great work, but the zeal, strength and vigor of the
heart must be here employed; there must be much heat in the pot before the
water boil: (...) a (...), ferveo, bull^o, Scap. in voc. In the strict
acception of the word, it is a fiery, hissing heat, lighting with the contrary,
Mr. Leigh, his crit. sac.
zeal in the heart (if we look to the original of the word) is the boiling of
the affections, it imports the highest measure of fervor and intention; and
all is too little in this solemn performance. Prayer should be (...), it should
be extended, not only to a length, in respect of frequency and continuance, (as
the word in our translation is expounded, Act. 12.5.) but also as to the
affection, it should be intense and stretched out as on the tenners; and thus
some ancient Liturgies (as D. Ham. on Act 12.5. (...) intentae ( viz. preces)
si ad animi ardorem placet refer, Beza ibid.
Dr. Hammond witnesses) are called (...), because of their vehement, fervent
and importunat form of supplication. The holy man David did stretch out his
soul so far till he strained it, according to his complaint, Psa. 119.20. My
soul breaks for longing. And, Psa. 69.3. he draws up the strings so high till
three of them become for a while useless, and must be laid by; his soul was so
earnest and fervent, so active and quick in its motion, that not only, 1. his
throat, and, 2. his eyes began to fail, but, 3. his heart also, became weary,
and was scarce able to hold up any longer. But, ah! our bow is not able to
discharge the arrow, not because it is become feeble, through too much bending,
but because it is not bent enough; our affections are so languid and remiss,
because the heart is not drawn up far enough off the world and toward God; and
because they are so weak and faint, therefore they are easily broken off and
interrupted by Satan or our lusts. But, O! if there were this holy zeal and
enlargment in our affections, what a notable guard and preservative would that
be against wandering thoughts; when the honey is boiling in the pot, it is out
of the reach of flees, they dare not touch it; and so long as that holy heat
and zeal is maintained in the heart, it is secured from these suggestions which
otherwise might divert and interrupt it. And albeit Satan notwithstanding
would still assault, yet his temptations would be but as a little water cast
upon a great fire, which though it might cause a hissing for a time, yet would
serve to cause it burn more clearly and hotly thereafter; but for want of this
holy fire, our sacrifices lie cold on the Altar, and the Genesis 15.11.
fowls may come and make a prey of them. The Lord has made us Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet.
2.5.
Priests, but where is the fire to burn our sacrifices? his Servants and
Ministers should, like the Angels, be a flaming fire, Psa. 104.4. His Ministers
in heaven are Seraphims, h. e. ardentes a (...) incendit ussit.
Seraphims, Isa. 6.6. they Seraphim denominantur ab ardore charitatis quae cum
mortali peccato esse non potest, and ideo primus Angelus peecans, non est
denomiuatus Seraphim, Thom 1. quaest, 63. art. 7. ad im.
burn with love to God, and so dare not sin against him, nor do his work
negligently. Hence Aquinas infers, that the Angels which fell were not
called Seraphims; but whatever ground there be for such an inference, yet,
certainly this fire of zeal and love to God is a strong guard against sin, and
a sharp spur to duty, which must, by little and little, be first worn out of
the heart before we become grossly negligent and careless of Gods worship.
Hence Plurimi novitate conversionis ferventer orant, postea ^rigide, postea
languide, postea negligenter; vel potius ut loquitur alias viz. epist. 121. ad
Probam cap. 9. Ferventior praecedit effectus, semper ergo a Domino desideremus
-- Ne quod tepescere caeperat, omnino frigescat, and penitus extinguatur nisi
crebrius inflammetur.
Austins four degrees of decay; at first (says he) when there is zeal in the
heart men pray fervently; 2. afterward more remissly and luk-warmly, and then,
3. coldly and negligently; and, 4. at length the work cease and is left off.
O! if we were more careful to keep in this heat, with what success might we
pray? An importunat supplicant will not take, and he shall not get, a repulse;
if God, 1. delay, he will (with that widow, Luke 18.4.) renew his request,
though an answer come not at first, he will not faint, but will once and again
re-iterat his complaint; nay, 2. though the Lord threaten and seem to deny, yet
he will follow and pursue his suit, Judge. 10.13.15. Mark 7.27, 28. Nay, 3.
though he entreat and request, yea and seem to command the supplicant to be
gone, and trouble him no more, yet Moses and Jacob will not let him alone,
Exodus 32.10, 11. Genesis 32.26. As there is a holy and commendable Matthew. 11.12.
violence, So also impudence; the (...) impudentia ex (...) private. and (...)
pudor.
word, Luk 11.8. rendered importunity, properly signifies impudence and
shamelessness; an impudent beggar will not be put off, neither will he hold his
peace till he get an alms; and the Lord will nor complain, he allows, yea and
commends this holy kind of impudence in his supplicants, that they will give
him no rest till they get an answer, Isa. 62.6, 7. And was it not a shameless
and unmannerly earnestness in the paralitick man, who finding no other way to
come to Christ but by untyling a part of the roof, would adventure upon that
course, though thus Christ's sermon must be for a while interrupted, and some
tumult and confusion in the house, if not fear, lest some part of the tyling
should fall upon them; yet, Christ was not offended, but commends his faith,
and gives him more then he did ask, Luk 5.20.24. And then for time, ye cannot
be unmannerly, ye may come at midnight, early in the morning and when ye will,
ye shall be welcome, the door shall be opened unto you, and ye shall get an
answer, Luk 11.5. Psalm. 63.1. and as no threatening, entreaty or seeming command
will scar an honest supplicant from the throne; So neither, 4. will contumelies
and reproaches; thus the Syrophenician woman, though disgraced and called a
dog, yet will not fly from her Master, but will cast her self down under his
table, and look up to him for some crumbs, Mark 7.28. and thus turn her
reproach into a plea and prevailing argument. And the reason of all this is,
not only, 1. because the Lord requires it; the best of the flock must be
sacrificed to the great King, Mael. 1.14. Nor yet, 2. is it only because of the
great violence and importunity that Satan and our lusts do use against us,
either to interrupt our prayers or contract them; but also, 3. because (as a
reverend Mr. Bur. grac. spirit. part 2. chapter 1. page 311.
Divine speaks) there is in the Saints a holy kind of desperatness, not like
that unbelieving and wicked despair that was in Judas, which drove him away
from God and from the means; but this desperation (that we may keep that word
which usually is taken in an ill sense) is both the forerunner and companion
of faith, it animats our love to God and his Son Jesus Christ, and quickens our
diligence in the use of the means, and it flows from conviction and sense of
our sin and misery, and the extremity we are in, till we say hold on the remedy
which must be sought to by prayer as a special mean. Hence, while there is any
fear upon the soul, the sinner, though a believer, will pray desperately. What
though he must meet with devils and men in the way, he will venture? he is
desperate, he fears nothing; he must kill sin or be killed; he must pray and
prevail, or he must go to hell. Hence flows his impatience, violence and
impudence: when a man's life is at the stake, ye need not bid him run; and
whoever meet him by the way, they must not call him unmannerly, though he stay
not upon salutations, ceremonies and formalities. O! if we knew our hazard and
saw the extremity we are in, could we be so careless and negligent, and would
we offer up such cold and faint desires to God? Who can enough admire the
desperate folly of sinners for want of this holy desperation? Do you think
(says a holy Siccine putas Jonam in profundo, Danielem inter Leones, Latronem
in cruce oraesse? Hieron. in loc. citand. S. 2.
man) that Jonah in the whales belly, Daniel among the Lions, or the thief on
the Cross, prayed thus? And yet, the I do not deny that the thief, yea and
Jonah also, had reason to fear the wrath of God, but their outward danger was
that which mainly occasioned Jeroms question.
outward danger in which those supplicants were then, was nothing in respect of
the everlasting wrath of God, which not only those have reason to deprecat who
are under terrors, but they also who have the surest evidence of Gods love; for
they as well as others have deserved his wrath: and they who stand must pray
that they may not fall, they must rejoice with trembling, and fear the Lord and
his goodness.

But, ah! that bodily hazard and fear of the skin, should make men so earnest
and resolute, yea, and so desperate as to venture, whatever difficulties be in
the way; there can be none so great that they will not encounter with, yea, the
greatest coward will become stout, and will fear nothing, if he must kill or be
killed; if extremity once make a man desperate, with what When William the
Conqueror landed at Pemsey near Hastings, he sent back the ships, that his
soldiers might see no way to escape, but that now they must either fight or
die; and thus being desperately resolute, albeit they encountered with a great,
valiant and well ordered army, yet they prevailed and got the victory. Bakers
chron. of Engl. page (mihi) 24. Hence politicians in reference to military
affairs, lay down this rule (that a wise Commander should by all means labor
to take away all occasion of necessity of fighting from the enemy, but should
endeavor to bring his own into that necessity) vid. Nic. Macchiavel, disput.
de rep. lib. 3. cap. 12. per totum.
courage, what care, what unwearied strength, activity and diligence will he
use the means of self-preservation? and yet, 1. he runs as uncertain, and at a
mere possibility and may be; 2. for a perishing trifle, which is as nothing, in
respect of life eternal, and the incorruptible crown which God will certainly
give to all them who thus run the Christian race. But ah! we little mind,
either the importance and great consequence of the work, or yet the honor of
our Master; Pagans will rise up in judgment against us, who do express more
reverence and zeal in their devotion to their idols, then we in the worship of
the true and living God. When the Pagan-priest went to sacrifice, one went
before with a rod in his hand, and either he or the priest did stir up and
arrest the attention of the people, by this memento and alarm, hoc Vid. Plut.
in. Numa, page (mihi) 47.
age (and the Grecian priests, their (...) is thought to have been used for the
same purpose) this do, mind the present work, and lay all other business aside
when ye are employed in Gods service: Ah! did the Pythagorians say Et Alex ab
Alexandro genial. dier. lib. 4. cap. 17.
will ye worship the immortal God, in transitu, in the by, and passing, and
while ye are going about another errand? And what preparation before, what
attention seriousness and fervency in the service of God, did the Pagan King In
profestis autem and omnino in sacerdotum festis, per urbem praecones
praecedebant, qui ut quiescerent and ab operibus defisterent, jubebant;
quemadmodum enim Pythagoricos dicunt non sinere homines per transitum adorare
Deos immortales illosque orate sed continuo ex ipsa domo, mente ad id paratos
pergere, etc. Plutarch, ibid. Lop. Floren, interpret.
Numa require and prescribe; so that heathnish Rome in this, had the advantage
of the now apostat and popish Rome; their Pagan king complained though the work
was Plutarch. loc. cit.
done, yet if it was not performed with that reverence, attention and devotion,
yea, and preparation which was due to the immortal God; but the Pope cries up
the work done, and will have it to be meritorious and satisfactory however it
be done, though perfunctoriously and superficially, without knowledge,
attention, etc. And O! if many careless and formal Protestants were not liable
to the like challenge; yea, alas! the Saints themselves too often so pray, as
if they intended to provoke the Lord not to give what they so coldly ask; for,
qui frigide rogat docet negare, he who remisly, and as it were, with much
indifferency petitioneth, does say that he is not very desirous to have, and
that it were to little purpose to give him what he thus asks. Ah! that we
should be so careless in the worship of our God, while poor Pagans were so
zealous and serious in their devotion to Idols. Ah! shall Baals priests 1
Kings, 18.28.
tear and cut themselves with knives and lancets till the blood gush out, and
all (as is thought) to stir up their affection, and to make them call on him
more zealously and fervently (however they looked upon that as acceptable
service to their idol) and shall we think it enough, if we but put Proverb.
molli brachio, sou extremis digitis attingere: and summis naribus olfacere.
to our fingers to the work, and perform it never so negligently, and will not
be at the expenses of some few tears or affectionat desires? we will not be at
so much pains as to Isa. 64.7.
stir up our selves to call upon, and to take hold of the Lord, how then shall
we suffer any thing for him, or in his service? While Alexander was offering
incense to his God, a coal fell on the young man's hand who held the golden
censer, but he considering the sacred action in which he was employed, would
rather suffer the burning and extremity of pain till the service was ended,
then in the least once stir, or move his arm, and thus interrupt that holy (as
he imagined) performance; and yet the least of Satan's fiery darts, the least
worldly trifle and sensual thought, will quickly and easily divert us, and turn
away the heart while it is sacrificing to him, who only should be served and
worshipped. The Pagan Reusuer. symb. imper. clas. 1. ad sym. L. Very. page 65.
Emperor L. Aurelius Verus his motto, was, nil obiter; Nothing must be done
remisly, negligently, and, as it were, in the by. Far rather should this be the
motto of every true Israelite in the matters of God; other things, to him ought
to be (in a comparative sense handled in the In transcursu, Proverb. Plutar. de
lib. educandis.
passing, using the world as if he used it not; for here is not our home and
rest, but our trade and great business is with God, and for a kingdom rhat is
worthy of our chief care and diligence: If Mat. 6.33.
we seek it, obiter, and as (...), we undervalue it and lose our labor: but
alas! as that Emperor did not answer his symbol (being wholly Cluver. hist.
epit. page 302.
addicted to effeminatness, luxury and pleasure) so neither do many Christians,
their engagements and profession; and titular Saints, who have no more but the
outward badge and the mere name of Christianity, employ all their strength,
diligence and seriousness about the perishing trifles in the world, and seek
after heaven only in the by, using the ordinances of life as if they used them
not; their hearts not being toward them, they go about them in a dead lazy
way, without activity and life; they see not their danger and misery, and hence
not being affected with it, they act not as if they were in any strait and
extremity; they pray not against sin, as knowing that either they must mortify
it here, or else it will kill and destroy them for ever; they pray not for
pardon, as knowing they must have it, or else go to hell, and there be
tormented with the devils for ever and ever. There is no remedy till once we be
brought to this extremity, and accordingly act as becomes those who are in
such danger and hazard.

We will not now stay to press this necessary point, but remitting you to those
practical M. Love, zea l. Christ. on Luke 11.8. M. Cobbet on prayer, part. 2.
chapter 1. M. Gurnal spir. arm. part. 3. page 553. etc.
Divines who have at length insisted on it; only let me add a word by way of
caution; mistake not, and beware least thou call thy lust, zeal; and thy
impatience* this holy fervency and importunity: If we spend our affections upon
earthly things, they are misspent and misplaced, Col. 3.2. Ah! shall our love,
our zeal and strength be laid out upon such trash? shall the marrow and
activity of our most precious things, be thus debased? Corruption optimi
pessima. We have many experiences in nature, Who can endure the smell of a dead
carrion, especially of the body of man, (...) which is the most excellent of
all living creatures? etc.
showing the corruption of the best things to be accompanied with loathsome and
noxious consequents; and shall not the abuse (which is the corruption) of
spiritual things, have very sad and doleful consequents to the soul? It is
Thom. Fullers good thoughts in worse times, page 90.
reported of witches, that they say the Lords prayer backwards; this is one of
the ordinances of hell, whereby Satan does engage these wretches to him; and
shall this course be followed by any, who has not renounced his part in
Christ? now as for order of words and place, that is not material, the Lord
has not bound and stinted us that way (yea, even their daily bread is put
before remission of sins) but he has fixed an order as to our estimation,
affection and diligence, and thus Gods kingdom must be sought before our daily
bread; nay, comparatively, and in respect of that, this must not be sought; our
labor must be no labor, and our love, hatred, Mat. 6.33. Joh, 6.27. Luke
14.26. And thus too many pray backwards, they prefer earth to heaven, the
creature to God, the body to the soul, and their daily bread to Gods kingdom.
Ah! that so many should walk after Satan's rule, and thus carry his mark on
their forehead: O! but honest supplicants, though they will be very zealous for
the Lord, and impatient when he is dishonored; yet with what moderation and
submission will they ask these outward things? and how patiently will they bear
the loss of such trifles? and they will be more anxious and solicitous
concerning their duty to ask, and in every thing to make their requests known
to God, then concerning the success, as to the having and receiving these
things, Phil. 4.6. You will say, should we not then pray importunatly for
temporal mercies? Ans. 1. Importunity and fervency is required in every prayer
thou offerest up to God, thou must always offer up the best of the flock to
the great King; cold lukewarm affections in the worship of God is loathsome
and unacceptable; we must seek the Lord with the whole heart, else we will not
find; if prayer be not fervent, it avails nothing, Jam. 5.16. But take heed
where thou placest thy zeal and fervency; when ye seek the world, let heaven be
your mark, and when ye desire the creature, let the glory of the giver be your
end. Though thou must not spend thy zeal upon perishing things, yet thou may
earnestly seek the sanctified use of them, and the blessing either with, or
without them, and that the Lord, either in giving, or withholding of them,
would mind his own glory and our souls good; and the more direct tendency any
of these things seem to have to these ends, we may be the more earnest in our
desiring and praying for it. 1 And then, 2. our desire to have fellowship with
God in that ordinance, of prayer, and our love toward him and delight in him,
may be very fervent and intense, though our errand and business (or rather the
special occasion that gave the invitation) be not very considerable, and though
we do not passionatly and inordinatly covet what we ask, as to the thing it
self: The Ps. 39.3.6. Watchfulness.
fire may burn, and the heart be hot within, while the bellows which did blow
that fire, and the occasion and first rise of that meditation, did come from
some outward comfort and accommodation apprehended to be suitable and
convenient, or some strait affliction or bodily rod, as being bitter and
unpleasant to sense and the outward man. And so much now concerning
importunity, as it imports zeal and fervency, but as it does include
frequency and constancy, it will fall in under the seventh Particular, viz.
perseverance.

6. We must Non solum (...), 1 Pet. 4.7. sed etiam (...), Col. 4.2.
watch in prayer, Colos. 4.2. Its not enough to watch unto In ipsum hoc
vigilantes Erasm. in Ephesians. 6.18.
((...)) prayer, and for that very As has been shown, chap. 1.
end, that we may be fit to pray; but we must also watch while we are employed
in the work, for even then we are ready to fall a sleep: and unless drousiness
be prevented by watchfulness, while we are speaking to God, it will be as
needful to awake us, as it was the Zech. 4.1.
Prophet when the Angel was speaking to him; and therefore we must watch, 1.
over the senses and outward man, for often thieves break in by that back door,
and steal away the heart from the duty. 2. We must watch over our thoughts and
affections, which are ready to fall a gadding though the door be shut; and not
only must we thus watch at the beginning, but all Nam vigilare leve est,
pervigilare grave. Martial.
along the duty; the soul may set out vigorously, and with full sail, and yet
quickly meet with a contrary blast which may make us turn our course: If we do
but a little slack our hand in watching, what foolish and impertinent, what
sensual and wicked, yea, and atheistical thoughts may on a sudden break in?
what strong lusts and Si non intendes animum Sudiis and rebus honestis, in
vidia vel amore vigil torquebere, Horat. 1. epist. 2.
carnal affections may begin to stir, and what irreverent and unseemly words
may we utter before the Lord? how necessary then must it be for us to keep a
watch; and considering how weak, lazy and short sighted our best watchmen are,
and how strong, subtle and vigilant the enemy is, and that he has the
advantage to have already a party within doors; what need have we to employ and
beg the Kings guard, which is always at hand, and to say, with the, Psalmist,
while he ver^, 1. etc. ver. 8, 9, 10.
was busy at prayer, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and suffer no
wicked thought and inclination to arise in my heart? Ps. 141.3, 4. When none
sits upon the watchtower, or when the watchman is blind or a sleep, how
easily may the enemy surprise us? O! but when the Lord sees us standing with
our weapons in our hand, and looking well about us, he pittieth us, and though
the enemy may approach, yet he will not suffer him to prevail; a watching eye
will look up, and bring supply from heaven.

7. Its not enough to present our requests once, or twice with great
seriousness, and then to recoyl; but we must continue instant in prayer,
watching thereunto with all perseverance. We must pray always, and never
faint: knowing that though an answer tarry, yet it will surely come, that it is
for an appointed time, but at length it will not fail, except we faint, Romans
12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 18.1. Hab. 2.3. Gal. 6.9. Though there be an
interruption, and prayer may give place to the performance of other duties, yet
there must not be a cessation, Act. 12.5. We must not (...).
make an end of praying, till the end of our prayer, 1 These. 5.17. As he who
goes to law, does always follow his suit, though he does not evermore speak,
or think of it, he never gives over, but waits all opportunities for
promoving his cause; so though the Saints be not always employed in prayer,
yet they wait, and at every season renew their requests, resolving never to
weary nor give over till the Lord hear and answer them; and either grant their
desire, or declare his purpose as to the particular, by removing the occasion,
and altering the subject and matter of their petition, as often it may fall out
as to temporals. If the child die, David must no longer pray for its recovery,
and if we have holden out in prayer till the Lord thus declare his mind, either
by giving or withholding the particular, we need not doubt of the success of
our prayers, and of a compensation in better things, when what we ask is not
given, see Sect. 2. and, Part 4. Chapter 1.

Thus then to persevere in prayer is nothing else but to continue instant in
it, (as we have it expressed, Romans 12.12.) and to attend the work with
activity, diligence and might; the word there signifies not only continuance,
in regard of time, (says Mr. (...), the word is attributed to the hunting of
dogs, which will not cease following the game till they have got it: it
signifies to persevere with str^ngth. Mr. Leigh crit. sac.
Leigh) but also instancy and importunity. Of this last we have already spoken,
and shall now especially consider that constancy and continuance that is
thereby held forth, yet always supposing the other as necessarily included.
When we begin to faint we leave off to pray, a lifeless, heartless prayer being
no prayer in Gods account; honest supplicants should rather double their
diligence and put to more strength, as those who lift a weight, when it is not
moved, and does not yield at the first essay, they fall a work more vigorously
the next time; and beggars, when they meet with no answer, will cry and knock
more loudly. So, etc.

As to the other importance of the word, that we may now mainly press that; 1.
What a privilege is it that we may come to the King and present our
supplications to him as often as we will? Yea, 2. that we are not only allowed
and permitted, but also commanded. And, 3. that we are commended for not giving
God rest till he hear and answer? and it is held forth as a mark of fincerity
thus to persevere. And, 4 a character of an hypocrit that he will not hold out,
Job 27.10. and to restrain prayer and cast off fear, are made The error and
mistake here was in the application of both, but not in their connection, and,
as it were, illation, and inference of the one from the presence of the the
other.
companions, and, as it were, reciprocal adjuncts, Job. 15.4. And as faith is
the mother of prayer, so infidelity and distrust must beget this fainting and
drive us from Gods door, and make us say, (with him, 2 King. 6.33.) What should
I wait for the Lord any longer? We first say, his Psa. 77.8.
promise fails, and then we weary in pleading it, and at length cast it aside
as the Bond of a bankrupt debtor. 5. God is honored by our Psa. 63.8.
following hard after him, when he seems to hide his face and turn away our
prayers, yea, and to pursue us (as he did Job. 9.17.
Job) with his tempests, and multiply our wounds; when we will still wait upon
him, though we meet with many repulses and discouragments. 6. Perseverance
wants not its reward; not only shall our desire at length be granted, but a
recompense shall be made for the delay; the answer shall be more full, and with
an overplus of additional comforts, and the mercy shall be more sweet, stable
and firm; and as it will be more prized, So usually it is better improven,
received more thankfully and cheerfully, and used more holily and cautelously:
and as more of God is seen, more of his love, faithfulness and tender care in
thus giving, So what is thus gotten after many prayers, much pains, waiting and
dependence, will be the more carefully laid out for his honor; and if God
should declare his purpose, not to give the particular, a soul that has not
fainted under delays, will bear a denial the more patiently and submissively,
and can acquiesce in the good will of his Father as being best for him; and
thus can praise him for with holding or As, Job. 1 21. and David, 2 Samuel 12.20.
removing, as well as for giving, such things. 7. The sad and bitter effects
and dangerous consequences that may attend our fainting and giving over, may
provoke us to continue instant in prayer; What folly is it, because the mercy
comes not in thy time, to run away from it that it may never come? perhaps it
is prepared, yea on the way and not far off, and will thou indispose and make
thy self unfit to receive, and thus intercept it by the way, or shut the door
that it may not get entrance? Nay, if thus thou restrain prayer, and cast thy
duty behind thy back, and forsake Gods work and service, [the Master Gurnall
page 624.
may send thee to school with a rod at thy back, the Lord may send out a storm
to bring back his fugitive Jonah's, and thou may fear lest thy omission be
punished with desertion, and Gods leaving thee to fall into some sin of
commission; he that leaves a duty may fear to be left to commit a crime.] 8.
Consider who thou art, what is thy condition and what thy trade; and thou will
say, good reason the poor beggar should wait till an alms come, that he should
not limit and set a time when he must be answered, or else he will be gone: And
ah! has not the Lord for a long time stretched forth his hand toward us, and
waited upon us; he has long knocked at shut doors, and yet to this day he
stands and has not given over, and shall we at the first run away from his
door, because it is not opened to us, etc. We might have spoken to these and
such like motives at greater length, had not such an able Pen pressed that
point so fully; to wit, the judicious Mr. Gurnal, Spir. Arm. part. 3. page 614.
etc. But it would be here observed, that it is one thing to weary in prayer,
and another to weary of prayer; the Saints too often (through the weakness and
debility of grace, and the renewed assaults of Satan and their lusts) may
faint and weary in prayer, when yet they do not weary of their duty, and desire
not to be fred of that yoke: they love their Master, and like his work, even
while they are sweating at it, and fainting under it; as a Tradesman may love
his work and employment, albeit through weakness of body and some distemper, he
be not able to follow it as formerly; and it will be his affliction that he is
not able to go about it as he would, and thus he is not weary of his trade, but
of his sickness and weakness; thus the godly are rather weary of their
deadness, indisposition and unfitness to pray, then of prayer it self, and not
because it is their duty to pray, but because they cannot pray better; and thus
they take pains to get that indisposition removed, that they may pray more
instantly and affectionatly; and if it be thus with thee, the Lord will not
account his work to be interrupted, by such a diversion, thou may be said to
pray with perseverance, notwithstanding of such fainting fits and involuntary
distempers. I deny not, that Satan and our lusts, may labor to beget
prejudices in the heart against the duty it self, and may so far prevail as to
divide the heart, and occasion a confusion, not unlike that which was in that
assembly, Act. 19.32. The regenerate part still pleading, at least not
disowning, but still maintaining some secret love to, and longing after a
communion with God, and the old man not only protesting against, but laboring
with might to silence conscience, and to bind the new man, and draw or drive
him aside; but yet still it is with the true Israelite, as it was with Paul,
Romans 7.21, 22.23, 25. When evil is thus present, there is a secret willingness
to do good, and a delighting in the worship of God; even when the flesh serves
the law of sin, yet the regenerat mind does still own God, his work and
service: And though for a while, and as to some particular suit, through the
violence of corruption and temptations, there may be an interruption of, and
cessation from prayer, yet grace at length prevails, and the new man must not
die in that swoun and fit, he must recover and go about his business, and do
his first work (and the first word the child speaks, after that deliquium is
over, must be Abba Father) because the Physician never leaves him, but holds
him continually by the right hand, Ps. 73.23. Ps. 17.5. But yet in the mean
time the Lord may hide his face, and not only frown, and shake over him the
rod, but also chastise him and withhold mercies formerly asked, and, as it were,
granted; a sealed petition may be recalled upon the supplicants miscarriage.

Let us close, with the judicious Iudex iniquus audivit, victus taedio, non
pietate inclinatus. Si ergo exaudivit qui oderat quod rogabatur, quomodo non
exaudit qui ut rogemus hortatur? ( August. sermon. 36. de verbis Domini) -- fecit
taedio, quod nolebat beneficio -- ille qui nolebat dare, quod petebatur fecit;
quia ille ( viz. cui hospes venerat, Luke 11.) in petendo non defecit; quanto
magis dabit Deus bonus, qui nos hortatur ut petamus, cui displicet si non
petamus; sed cum aliquando tardius dat, commendat dona non negat, diu
desiderata dulcius obtinentur, cito autem data vilescunt; pete, quaere justa,
petendo and quaerendo crescis at capias. Servat tibi Deus quod non vult cito
dare, ut and tu discas magna, magne desiderare. Inde opertet semper orare and
non deficerc, etc. ibid. sermon. 5. And let us close this Section in reference to
all the particulars contained in it, with reverend Bernard his words) Omniano
oportet not orationis tempore curiam intrare calestem, illam utique curiam in
quarex regum stellato sedet solio, circumdante innumerabili and ineffabili
beatorum spirituum exercitu: quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta
illuc humilitate, accedere debet a palude sua procedens, and repens ranuncula
vilis? quam tremebundus, quam supplex, quam denique humilis, and sollicitus.
and toto intentus animo majestati gloriae, in praesentia Angelorum, in concilio
justorum and congregatione assistere poterit miser homuncio? in cunctis igitur
actionibus nostris multa est opus animi vigilantia, sed praecipue in oratione,
Bernard, sermon. de 4. modis orandi.
Austin his pathetick persuasive to persevere in prayer without fainting,
notwithstanding what seeming discouragments may interveen, from Luke 11.5. etc.
and, Luke 18.1. etc. If the unjust Judge, to whom it was a burden to be
entreated, was at length overcome with the widows importunity, how shall he not
hear who inviteth us to ask, and delights in our importunity, and who is
grieved and displeased when we ly by and forbear? he delayeth to give, not out
of unwillingness, but that we may ask more instantly and fervently, and may be
the better prepared to receive, and thankfully prize his bounty, that the mercy
may be the more sweet and welcome, and that we may learn to wait and not make
have, etc.

Sect. 2. Of faith in prayer. What it imports, by what means it may be
increased, and how it may be known?
Jam. 1.6, 7. Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering for he that wavereth, is
like, etc. Let not that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
THough the Lord Jesus be the Christians all, Colos. 3.11. and all our graces,
qualifications and most specious performances be nothing; not the least part of
our money and treasure, they cannot make us happy, nor purchase the least pearl
of the crown: yet as they are employed to attend the great King, and to do his
work; and as they may be instrumental for our good and happiness, to bring to
us from the rich treasure, and to receive from thence a supply of all our
wants; thus faith has the precedence; and comparing it with the rest of our
graces, we may (apply the words of Lemuels mother, Prove. 31.29. spoken of the
virtuous woman there described; and) say, though other graces have done great
things, yet faith excels them all. It is the Christians (...), it is the
great wheel of the soul, and the first spring of all its gracious motions. And
though love, because of its perpetuity, be called greater, 1 Cor. 13.13. yet
thus it is Si cxcutiamus singulas fidei effectus, and conferamus, reperietur in
multis superior fides: quin etiam ipsa charitas eodem Apostolo test, effectus
est fidei: effectus autem sua causa procul dubio est inferior, etc. Calvin in 1
Cor. 13.13. vid. etiam D. Pareum ibid.
less, it being, as it were, the daughter and handmaid of faith, Gal. 5.6. 1
These. 1.3. we will not enumerat the several effects and properties of this
cardinal virtue and grace; but by faith we are Romans 5.^.
justified and have peace with God, by faith we are Act. 26.18.
sanctified, and the heart Act. 15.9.
purified, and obtain this privilege and Joh. 1.1 2.
power to become the sons of God; it is the great mover and agent, the root and
foundation of our Gal. 5.6.
sanctification, and of every good work; by faith we live and act; by it we are
Romans 4.20.
strong and Romans 11.20.
stand fast, and through it, by the power of God, we are 1 Pet. 1.5.
kept unto salvation and eternal life: Faith is our Ephesians. 6.16.
shield and sword also; it serves for defense and offense, with it we fight,
and by it are enabled to quench all the fiery darts of the devil; it is our 1 John 5.4.
victory over hell and the world, and our protection and safeguard against
Satan and all his temptations. It is our (...) omnium morbornm curatio, (...),
h. e. a sananau omnibus morbis.
panacaea and sovereign Catholicon; its a general remedy and cure of all Joh.
14.1.
soul-trouble, anxiety, care and fear, and the fountain of Mark, 5.34.
peace and tranquillity of mind; yea, and of 1 Pet. 1.8.
rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory. O! but without faith their
is no safety, nor any ground of solid peace? our Joh. 3.18.
state is wretched and miserable, and our work and service unprofitable; for
without faith it is impossible to please God, and what is not of faith is sin.
And not only all our 1 Timothy 4.5.
creature enjoyments are defiled, and can do us no good; but also the Heb 4.2.
Word of life and Gospel of peace, yea, and the purchase of 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Christ, his blood and sufferings and the rich and infinite bowels of Gods
mercy, will profit us nothing. Had not then the Apostle reason to exhort us,
above all to take the shield of faith? Ephesians. 6.16. all the rest of our armor
being (in a manner) useless and unprofitable without it, which is, as the hand
of the new man, without which he can neither fight nor work, and without which,
he can neither ask, receive, nor return; he can neither pray to, wait upon, nor
praise God acceptably. Prayer (says a judicious Mr. Gurnal spir. arm. part. 3.
on Ephesians. 6.18. chapter 21.
Divine) is the bow, the promise is the arrow, and faith the hand which draws
the bow, and sends the arrow with the hearts message to heaven. Both bow and
arrow are to no purpose without the strength of the hand, and neither the
promise nor prayer, without faith, avails the Christian any thing. As the Heb.
3.19.
Israelites could not enter Canaan so neither our prayers enter heaven because
of unbelief. O! but the Isa. 5.15.
prayer of faith will not be shut out, it will not go away and return empty; it
will not take, and it shall not get a nay and repulse: it avails much (says
(a) the Apostle) but how much, ver. 6.15.
O man of God? that he does not express, because it was beyond expression, if
particulars must be named; but in the general, all things (says our blessed
Lord) are possible to him that believes, Mark, 9.23. and unto the believing
soul (he says) be it unto thee even as thou will, Mat. 15.28. and, Mat. 17.20.
If ye have faith, nothing shall be impossible unto you. and Mat. 21.21, 22. If
ye have faith, and doubt not, if ye shall say, it shall be done; and all things
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. See also, Mark,
11.24. Heb. 11.33. etc. And so much of the excellency, necessity and use of
faith.

But you will say. what is it to pray in faith? and what faith is that, without
which, we need not think to obtain any thing of the Lord? Jam. 1.6, 7. Ans.
Albeit faith be so necessary to the acceptable performance of every duty, that
without it, its impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. yet in a special manner it
is required in prayer. Hence, an acceptable prayer, is called the Jam. 5.15
prayer of faith. It is not so much the prayer of the man, as of his faith, it
is the great agent and Fides sundit orationem fusa oration fidei impetrat
firmitatem -- si fides deficit, oration perit: quis enim orat qui non credit? --
unde ut Apostolus ostenderet fidem fontem esse orationis nec posse ire rivum
ubi caput aquae siccaretur, adjunnit, atque ait, quomodo autem invocabunt in
quem non crediderunt; etc. August de verb. dom. sermon. 36.
efficient, and to it the work should be ascribed; and as faith, is thus, in a
special manner here necessary, so some peculiar act of faith must be exercised
and put forth in this solemn performance, from which it gets a proper name,
and makes, as it were, a distinct and special kind of faith, and so, as prayer
(because of its special relation unto, and dependence upon faith) is called the
prayer of faith. So this faith, because of its connection with, and relation
unto prayer, may be called the faith of prayer. But ah! how often is this
necessary qualification wanting? hence we ask and receive not; and no wonder
though faithless prayers be unsuccessefull and fruitless; but since too many
are ignorant and do not know what it does import, and so cannot discern why
their prayers are so often abortive, and become as a miscarrying womb, we shall
offer some conclusions, partly negative, partly affirmative, for discovering
what it is to pray in faith, and what that faith does import, which is so
necessary to the prevalency of prayer.

Concl. 1. It is not faith of science (that for distinctions sake we may so
speak) whereby we know what God has revealed in his Word concerning his nature
and attributes, and concerning our duty and that worship we owe to him, and how
it ought to be performed; for many in hell to day, know more of this, then
while they were on earth, and yet they dare not look up to God, nor pray to
him, Luke 16.23, 27. etc.

Concl. 2. Neither is it faith of credence and assent, whereby we not only
know, but also believe, and give credit to the Word of God, as being true and
worthy of all acceptance; for thus the devils believe, they know that the Word
of God is surer then heaven and earth, these being only founded upon a word of
command, which the Lord may alter and remove at his pleasure, but the Word is
grounded upon Gods truth and fidelity, which is a foundation that cannot be
shaken; and therefore his Word must be infallible and immutable, it will stand
and abide for ever, Isa. 40.8. Therefore the devils tremble (as knowing their
prison doors shall never be opened, nor the golden Scepter held forth to them)
Jam. 2.19.

Concl. 3, Neither is it faith of external profession, whereby we are received
to the visible Church, and are enrolled amongst the number of believers, for
albeit at the first preaching of the Gospel of Christ (when the great
controversy was, whether the Son of Mary, was the Son of God, and the promised
Messiah) by faith and believing frequently, was held forth an acknowledging,
and profession, that he was the Savior of the world, and that he was able to
do what he would, yet that was not sufficient for the acceptance of their
persons or prayers, Mat. 7.21, 22. But there being then so many dangers,
difficulties and discouragments lying in the way, it may be supposed that then
there were fewer hypocrites, and that then it was more rare to profess and own
Christ and his interest, without true love to him, zeal to his glory, then now,
in these places, where we may safely and without hazard profess the Gospel;
yea, where without shame, if not also trouble and hazard, we cannot reject and
dis-own it; and therefore believers and professors were then more reciprocal
and convertible terms; and thus might then the better be used indifferently.

Concl. 4. Neither is it faith of an immediate dependence upon God, as the
fountain and author of our life and being, and of all our comforts and
enjoyments; for this may be the fruit of natural reason and mere morality, and
may be in a Socrates or Plato, and such as know nothing of Christ, in whose
name we must ask, and in whom faith must be acted, if we would prevail, Joh.
14.13, 14.

Concl. 5. Neither is it justifying faith, whereby we rest upon Christ his
merit and satisfaction, and plead his name in prayer; for though this be
necessary, yea, and the main ground of the success of our prayers, yet it is
not that faith from which our prayers are denominat; and has for its object
not any person or incomplex thing, but our prayers and their success; as shall
appear in the positive conclusions.

Concl. 6. Neither is it faith of assurance, and persuasion, whereby we know
that our names are written in the book of life; for though this assurance be a
sweet effect and fruit of justifying faith; yet, 1. it is not constant and
perpetual; and what shall the Isa. 50.10.
children of light do, when they walk in darkness, and have not the light of
assurance, if they may not stay upon God, and call on his name? and then, 2.
this assurance has for its object our state and condition, and what shall be
our portion for ever, but the faith concerning which we enquire, is conversant
about our desires and petitions, and their success and prevalency; unto which,
we deny not this assurance, where it is, to be a good help and encouragment: a
sight of our adoption is a good evidence of audience, such as know, that God
spared not his own Son, but delivered him to death for them, may confidently
believe and expect, that he will withhold and deny them no good thing they
shall ask of him, Romans 8.32.

Concl. 7. Neither is it faith of evidence, as to the warrant, goodness and
lawfulness of our desires and requests; for albeit it be necessary that thus we
know, that they are agreeable to the will of God (for what is not thus of faith
is sin, Romans 14.23.) yet thy petitions may, as to their object and matter. be
lawful and according to the will of God, and yet thy prayer may be an
abomination to him, and thou a faithless and graceless one.

Concl. 8. But it is faith of audience, whereby we believe, and rest upon God
for a return and answer to our prayers. Their imperfections that import an
opposition ( v. g. the fourth, as it holds out an immediate dependence) being
removed.
I do not deny, that this faith does suppose, yea, 01 and some one way or other
include all the forementioned (e) particulars; 1. that we know God; 2. that we
believe and assent to his Word astrue; 3. that we own and profess the truth; 4.
that we depend upon him; 5. that we believe in Christ, and ask in his name; 6.
that we know the rule, and ask what is agreeable to his will; and, 7. it would
very much contribute to the faith here required, if we were fully assured of
our adoption and reconciliation with God, through Jesus Christ (but of this
last we shall speak at greater length in the cases, Part. 3.) and therefore we
do not condemn those practical Divines, who in opening up this qualification of
prayer, have Mr. Cobbet on prayer. part. 2. chap 4. Mr Mancon on Jam. 1.6.
Gutnal, spir. arm. part. 3. on Ephesians. 6.16. chap. 21. p. 343. etc. Morn. lect.
part. 2. sermon. 14.
insisted on some of these particulars, we have only named as pre-requisits;
for although we conceive the proper and direct importance of that faith which
is required in prayer, to be relative to the return and answer of prayer; yet
we acknowledge, that the return and answer of our prayers, does mainly and
principally depend upon that which those eminent Divines have mainly insisted
upon: but that not being (as we, with Fides est qua Dei pr^^^ssionibus sreta
no, impetrandi quod petimus ceri^s reddit. -- Vult ergo fic nobis persuasum
esse quod semel Deus promisit, ut in dubitationem non vocemus exaudiendi simus
necne ^^insignis est hic locus ad refell^ndum impium illud dogma quod in toto
paratu pro oraculo habetur, nempe dubitanter and incerta successus opinione
esse orandum, quare principium hoc teneamus non aliter exaudiri preces nostras
a Domino nisi quum adest impetrandi siducia, Jo. Calvin. in Jac. 1.6.
Bellarminu^ tamen postquam hunc (ut vocat) errorem Lutheranorum refucare
conatus fue rat, tandem concludit, oportet tamen per spom ac fiduciam quae est
actus voluntatis firmiter adhaerere benignitati divinae, and certo confidere
Deam facturum esse quod petimus. Bell. de bon oper. in part cap, lib. 1. cap.
9. sect. altera conditio. Et Suarez cum Cassiano collat. 9. cap. 32. fatetur
signum suturae impetrations esse, quando spiritus sanctus movet ad petendum cum
magna fiducia (quam ad voluntatem pertinere dixetat, sect. 5.) and quasi
securitate impetrandi, Suar. loc. saepius citato, lib. 1. cap. 24. sect. 9.
Litem non movebimus Bellarmino vel Suarezio utrum fides haec spectet ad
intellectum vel ad volunratem, modo fateantur eam includere, vel conjunctam
esse cum securitate impetrandi Quinimo, concedit Suarez, sect* citata, saepe
perveniri ad judicium ita credibile ac terminatum, ut excludat omnem actualem
haesitationem, and animum ora ^tit pacatum reddat.
Calvin, Pareus and other judicious Divines do think) the thing purposely and
directly held forth by the Apostle, Jam. 1.6. And in other Scriptures, where
faith is required as a condition and qualification of a prevailing prayer, we
thought fit, supposing what has been spoken to this case by these practical
Divines, to add some few things for clearing what has been but only hinted at
by judicious Expositors, and for vindicating those Scriptures that speak to
this point, and that thus we may learn our duty, and might know how to frame
our prayers in reference to the present case.

And, 1. We might here allege the suffrage of orthodox Divines, who have
maintained against Papists, that we may, and ought be certain of the success of
our prayers; yea, Mr. Call vin calls the opinion of the Roman Church, concerning
the uncertainty of the success of prayer, impium dogma, a wicked tenet, and in
opposition thereto lays down this as a principle, that our prayers do only
then prevail, when we are confident of their success. And Dr. D. Fulk (confut
of the Rhem. errors in their Com on the N w Test.) on Jam. 1.6. Fiduciam igitur
exauditionis ^ivina requirit Jacobus, cum dicit oret in fide. Fiducia
exauditionis (...) promissione oritur, in promissione igitur men's certo
assersu, cor sirma fiducia acquiescet, ut oration in fide fias D. Pareus ibid.
To pray in faith is to go as far as the promise, and not only to believe God to
be well affected toward you, as a Father, and to tender your good; but also
that he will do that, in the particular asked, that shall be most for his own
glory and for your good: and if you do so, you pray in faith, though for the
particular you know not whether it shall be granted or no, Mr. Prestons Saints
Exercise, Sern. 4 page (mihi) 99. Thou art not to limit thy faith to the thing
it self, but ex^ect money or money-worth, health or as good as health,
deliverance or better then deliverance, Gurnal loc. cit. page 343.


Fulk, for confutation of the Rhemists gloss of Jam. 1.6. cites and approves
Oecumenius his Commentary on the words, which is this; If he has faith let him
ask, but if he doubt, let him not a^k: for be shall not receive who distrusteth
that he shall receive. Yea, and for preventing prejudices against this truth we
now assert, we might cite the adversaries themselves, some of the most
Bellarminus and Suarez locis jam citatis.
learned amongst them, yea even there where they have condemned it as a
Calvinian error.

And now, for confirmation of this most sweet and comfortable point, we shall
first speak to it in the general; and then, 2. bring some few conclusions for
obviating objections, and for a more full discovery of the truth; 3. since
Satan, our lusts and carnal sense will still be ready to quarrel, dispute and
depone against, and improve every occasion for overturning this our confidence,
we shall bring some supports for upholding and strengthening of it; and, 4. we
will bring some marks and characters of the prayer of faith.

1. Then, the truth of this point may appear, 1. from that well known, but
little pondered, Scripture, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe that
he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Hence we may
argue, if the Lord will reward, and we must believe that he will reward all
that come to him and all that diligently seek him, then certainly he will
reward every one who come and draw nigh to him in prayer, and who seek him
diligently in that Ordinance; and we must believe that he will never send away
such honest supplicants empty, but that he will hear and answer all their
prayers. For, 1. not only the words themselves, as being general, do warrant us
to make an application, and to descend unto particulars, but also in a special
manner, they seem to point out, and to lead us into this particular, as if this
general truth were in some respect appropriat to prayer, it being expressed in
terms which frequently in the Scripture do signify that solemn performance,
viz. coming to God and se king him; and therefore we may, upon good ground with
the judicious Privatim ad se quisque usum and fructum ejus doctrinae accomodare
debet, nempe ut sciamus nos a Deo respici tantae illi curae salutem esse
nostra^ ut nobis nunquam sit desuturus, preces ab eo nostras exaudiri, etc.
Calv. in loc.
Calvin, extend the reward here mentioned to the success and answer of our
prayers, and the faith here required to the confident expectation of an answer.
But, as thus the words have a special reference to prayer; So, 2. the nature of
that exercise does serve for clearing this inference: For, it being one of the
principal and most solemn Ordinances in which we seek God, we may the more
confidently expect a reward, and that it shall not be successless. And, 3. the
end and errand of prayer being to obtain the blessing, whatever messenger be
sent away empty, i^ shall not: will he, who has made nothing in vain, help us
by his Spirit to pour out vain and fruitless prayers? We might here, to the
same purpose, also improve that sweet word, Isa. 45.19. I said not unto the
seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain? And we might add the testimony of those
licentious Casuists, (to wit, the popish Schoolmen) who albeit they have
confined the Creed to a narrow compass, yet allow this article a room in it;
all of them Fidem explicitam Dei remuneratoris esse necessariam necessitate
medii, communiter docent Theologi, quos citat and sequitur, Jo. de Lugo de
virtute sidei dis* 2. sect. 2. 62. and fufius dis. 12. sect. 5.
confessing, that an explicit faith of God, as remunerat^r, is absolutely
necessary. And says Aliter enim nullus iret ad ipsum, si non speraret aliquam
remunerationem ab ips^, Thom. in Heb. 11.6.
Aquinas, none would go to God, if they did not expect some good thereby.

2. We may argue from the faith of miracles (required in some at the first
plantation of the Christian Church) whereby a man had a particular confidence
and persuasion, that God would work such a miracle by him, which when it did
fail, the work did cease; when Peter was afraid, he began to sink, Mat. 14.30.
Now if such a persuasion was necessary for Ad modum subjecti and nudi vehiculi
potestatis divinae, (in ordine ad quam habuit ^perans, vel potius instrument um
potentiam mere obedientialem) non vero agentis and principii activi.
receiving power to work, why should it not also be required for the receiving
of any other mercy? For, albeit the object was extraordinary, yet the way of
receiving was ordinary, and by the use of prayer and such other means as we
should follow for obtaining an answer to our supplications. Hence, our blessed
Lord extends this condition to all cases and to all prayers, whatever be
their object; Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, and if ye doubt not,
ye shall receive, Mat. 21.21, 22. What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye (...), credit vos accepturos: hujus temporum enallages aliqua
videtur esse emphasis, loquitur enim de re certa futura, ac si esset jam
praesens, Beza in loc.
will receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.24 etc. Can any, unless he
manifestly offer violence to the words, limit them unto the gift of miracles?
Nay, but our Lord takes occasion from a particular he had been speaking of, to
extend their privilege (for their comfort) to all occasions, and every
exigence they might meet with. We may observe a considerable (as it were)
gradation, amplification and further extension of the promise; 1. If their
doubting and unbelief did not hinder, they might do the like of what they had
seen in the fig tree. 2. Not only such a miracle, but whatsoever other
dispensation or work, though far more astonishing, if it might serve for the
glory of God and the promoving of the Gospel. Yea, and, 3. whatsoever was the
mercy they did stand in need of, they should receive it, whether it were
miraculous or not. And that none might have the least occasion to limit that
promise to miraculous dispensation, we have a twofold note of universality
conjoined, Mat. 21.22. (...), omnia quaecunque, Mat. 21.22. and Mar. 11.24.
all things whatsoever, etc.

3. If the Lord will certainly answer every prayer of faith, may we not, and
ought we not believe, that he will answer? But, the Lord does always answer
such prayers, yea, even then when he gives not the particular expressed in
prayer; as shall appear, Part 4. Chap. 1. And therefore, etc.

4. None will be so absurd as to deny, that we should believe the promises
without any limitation or exception of our own devising; but the promise of
audience is universal, there is no exception nor limitation in it, as to the
prayer of faith, Mat. 7.7, 8. Luke 11.9, 10. Joh. 14.13, 14. Joh. 16.23, 24.
And albeit the word of God be surer then all bonds and evidences imaginable,
and stands not in need of any confirmation; yet, for strengthening our weak
faith, the promise of audience is (as a learned Gerhard ubi infra.
Divine says) more then a hundred times repeated: and shall we yet doubt, yea
and plead for our doubting, and by our jealousy and doubting, provoke the Lord
to hide his face and Psalm. 66.20.
turn away our prayers?

5. That faith that is required in prayer is opposed to doubting, not
concerning Gods word and power, but concerning his purpose and will to grant
our desires, and concerning the success of our prayers, Jam. 1.6, 7. 1 Timoth.
2.8.

You will say, the object of that doubting and wavering that is forbidden in
prayer, is the promise of God; thus Abraham is commended for not staggering at
the promise through unbelief, Romans 4.20. Ans. Faith and doubting must be
relative to one and the same object, otherwise there would not be an
opposition; and therefore, since faith must lay hold on a promise, so doubting
does counter-act our faith and assault the promise. But, the question is, what
is that promise which is the object of that faith that is required in prayer,
and so of that doubting that is condemned in, and may frustrate our prayers?
And I should think, that there were little ground to move such a question; 1.
because all the promises being an intimation and declaration of God's purpose,
to give to us such and such mercies, we cannot doubt of our receiving, but we
must also doubt of the promise that intimates Gods purpose to give: For, as in
other cases, so also in this, giving and receiving are cor-relatives, and the
one must suppose and infer the other. But, 2. albeit faith in prayer does lay
hold on the promises, as relative to us, yet it does not rest there, but the
most proper and formal object of that faith, which is required as a special
condition of prayer, is the promise made to praeyer concerning its success and
audience; and therefore, that doubting which it excludes, must be the doubting
of the prevalency of prayer, and not concerning the truth of the promise in a
general and abstract manner: it is the doubting of the event and of Gods work,
rather then of his word; and albeit the one (as has been observed) may, by
just and necessary consequence, be collected from the other, yet the supplicant
may make an abstraction, and labor to divert the dispute from the truth unto
the sense or meaning and conditions of the promise, where, though he may allow
to himself a greater liberty, yet in the issue and upon the matter, these
doubtings, concerning the meaning of the promise, do resolve in doubting
concerning its truth: But, that the doubting which faith does exclude imports
both the one and the other, but especially the latter, is evident from those
places already cited, in which this faith is required; Whatsoever ye shall ask,
believing, ye shall receive, etc. Mat. 21.22. Mark 11.24. etc. O! thou of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? and fear lest thou should sink?
wherefor did thou doubt of the event, and whether I would hold thee up or
not? Mat. 14 30, 31. But, why should we stay to collect from Scripture, that
which is so clearly determined in it, 1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the
confidence (and what is that faith and confidence, O beloved disciple, that is
the great question concerning which we would be resolved?) that we have in him,
that if we ask any thing according to his Not his secret will concerning the
futurition of events, but his will, revealing our duty what is profitable to us
and well-pleasing to him; and therefore this limitation needs not discourage
thee nor make thee stagger or doubt, unless thou resolve to ask of the Lord
that he would help thee to sin against him, and to satisfy and fulsill the
lusts of the flesh.
will, he hears us; and if we know (and so believe without doubting and
wavering) that he hears us, whatsoever we ask we know that we have the
petitions we desired of him. Let us then, says Mr. Teneamus ergo hanc Apostoli
sententiam: invocationem Dei summum fidei nostrae examen esse: Deum autem non
rite, ne que ex fide invocari, ni^ quum certo persuasi sumus non irritas fore
nostras preces; nam qui suspensi haesitant, etc. Calvin in loc.
Calvin, remember that the invocation of God is the chief trial of our faith,
and that God is not invocated aright or in faith, unless we be certainly
persuaded, that our prayers shall not be in vain nor want a return.

But, you will say, what ground have we to expect that God will answer our
desires and give the particular we ask? For, 1. the experience of all Saints,
yea, of such as were dearest to God, does appear and plead against this
confidence; How earnestly did Moses pray that he might go to Canaan, and David
for his child, Samuel for Saul, and Paul that the thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan, might depart? etc and yet they were not heard, as to what
they desired and petitioned. And, 2. this confidence seems to be very
unreasonable and unwarrantable; for, faith can go no further then the promise,
but we have no promise intimating Gods purpose particularly, and peremptorily
to give us such and such mercies; especially those outward and bodily things
which are of themselves indifferent, and may prove (and often have been) rather
hindrances then helps, in reference to the great end; these things are only
promised conditionally and relatively when they will be good for us, and will
prove means for promoting of Gods glory in our salvation; and therefore, since
we cannot determine when these things will prove good to us and when hurtful,
neither can we determine when they are, or are not included in the promise, and
so we cannot in faith plead such promises, nor An absolute faith on a
conditional promise is fancy not faith; and to be free on Gods purse without a
grant; and it is as had Divinity as Logic, to put more in the conclusion of
faith, then is in the premises of the promise, Gurn. Spr. Arm. part. 3. page
343.
peremptorily expect their accomplishment. Ans. As no act must be extended
beyond its object, So neither faith beyond the promise; it must be our fancy,
and not divine faith, which anchoreth not upon the word of God: and therefore,
carnal men, who build their faith upon another foundation, are like to these
fools who built an house upon the sand, Mat. 7.26. If thou believe, show thy
warrant, otherwise thou may believe what thou will: But, when the storm
arises and beats upon that house, it will fall; and such a faith, like the
hypocrites hope, must perish, and at length thou, like to them, Isa. 20.5. shall
be ashamed of thy expectation. But, for the further clearing the point in hand,
and for obviating what has been objected, let us add some few Conclusions.

Concl. 9. That faith that is required in prayer may persuade and assure the
supplicant, that his prayer, concerning things What things are absolutely good,
bath been shown, Chapter 7. Sect. 2.
absolutely and intrinsecally good, (and so peremptorily and universally
promised) shall be heard, and the very particular shall be given in kind.

Concl. 10. Albeit the Lord will certainly give what he has thus promised and
sees to be so good and necessary for us, yet he has not limited himself, as
to the circumstances, 1. of time when; 2. of the means by which; 3. or of the
manner how; neither, 4. as to such a measure and degree of the thing here in
this life; nor, 5. to evidence these spiritual things to our sense, feeling and
discerning: and therefore we must patiently wait until, by the event, (or by
what other mean he pleases) he reveal to us his purpose, as to these
particulars; especially considering, that albeit in this case there may be a
delay and suspension, yet there shall be no denial nor final frustration, see
Part 1. Chapter 7. Sect. 2.

Concl. 11. Faith may persuade the soul, that temporal and outward things which
we stand in need of, and which may be useful for us, shall never be asked in
vain; faith can assure thee that it is the language of cursed Atheists to say,
with these miscreants, Job 21.15. Mal. 3.14. It is in vain to serve the Lord;
and what profit should we have to pray unto him? etc. Faith never wants an
object wherewith it may close in seeking Gods face; he that comes unto him,
whatever be the errand and particular, shall not be sent away empty: for, he is
a rewarder of all that come unto him; as has in the general been shown, Concl.
8.

What (you will say) can be the object of faith in such a case? We cannot know
what God will do, whether he will give or withold the particular, and
therefore we must doubt and waver concerning the success and answer of such
prayers. Ans. Albeit we be not obliged, and have no warrant to put out an act
of faith, as to the Lords giving the particular we prayed for; yet, we may, and
are obliged to believe, that our labor shall not be lost, and that our prayers
shall not be fruitless and successless.

You will say, if we obtain not what we desired, what good can be expected upon
our praying? Ans. In these few particulars, 1. It is a mercy to be found
faithful in doing our duty; Mat. 24.46.
blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so employed.
You will say, what? thus seeking his daily bread, many will then be found busy
at that trade. Nay, but whatever be the occasion and particular, such as will
then be found conversing with God, shall abide with him for ever. It is true,
many seek, but from the wrong hand; there be but few that look up to God: but,
to ask in obedience to that command, Phil. 4.6. and that we may approve our
selves to God in the discharge of our duty, is not the course and custom of the
world. 2. If thy bodily appetite be not satisfied, yet by prayer the desire of
the soul may be enlarged, and thou may be fitted for receiving more grace
and strength for subduing thy lusts: and are spiritual mercies and the good of
the soul not worthy to be taken notice of? shall our labor be accounted lost
when we get gold in stead of brass, and when we enjoy a nearer and more intimat
fellowship with God, albeit we get no new portion of trifling vanities? Many
Papists, when their interest is not touched nor concerned, prove better
Casuists then carnal Protestants: we Viz eb. 1.
heard from Thomas, Alensis and Swarez, what ends we should But what they thus
build with the one hand, they overturn with the other, in pleading for lip
devotion without reverence, yea and knowledge or attention; as has been shown,
loc, cit.
propound in prayer, and that among other things that should draw us to the
throne, that sweetness and delight which may be had in a communion with God,
should be one, and certainly not the least; now he that obtains one of his
ends, especially if that be better nor what he has not yet obtained, cannot be
judged to have labored in vain: if then the Lord has smiled upon thee, and
lifted up the light of his countenance when thou came before him, will thou
think thy travel lost? If an earthly King would thus entertain and feast, with
royal dainties, a mean supplicant, would he not prize that favor and honor
more then if his petty suit had been granted? and has the great Cant. 2.4.
and, 5.1.
King taken thee in to the banqueting house and spread the banner of love over
thee, and will thou complain because some trifle is withheld? Ah! be ashamed of
thy base ingratitude and brutish sensuality: but yet, the great Mountebank,
Cardinal Bellarmine, that famous Patron of formality and lip-devotion, has, in
a good mode, proven a better Divine then any of his fellows, and does more
fully But before he open the fountain he prepares poison to cast into it, and
tells us, that those he subjoineth; and which we now mention, must not be
accounted the chief and principal ends of prayer, but, 1. to satisfy, and, 2.
to merit, must have the precedence, Bell. de bon. oper. in part. lib. 1. cap. 3.
enumerat the fruits of prayer then any of these we have named; and by way of
preface he shows from Chrysostom, that prayer is the Oration est organum
organotum qua si hemo been utatur omnia fine dubio obtinebii, Bell ibid.
instrument of instruments, whereby without doubt we may obtain all things
whatsoever we stand in need of, either for life 2 Pet. 1.3.
or godliness. And then he comes to particulars, which have place when the
desired mercy is not obtained; as, 1. Prayer enlightneth the mind, there is
light in Gods countenance, none can frequently converse with him and continue
in darkness and ignorance; and this knowledge is not empty and speculative, but
practical and influential; such must taste and see that God is gracious. 2.
Prayer strengthens our faith, hope and expectation; familiarity with beget
confidence. 3. It does enlarge and capacitat the soul for receiving more, and a
greater measure of the best things; it will leave a heavenly impression behind,
which is a fit disposition for heavenly blessings. 4. Prayer will increase our
humility and godly fear (then certainly it must banish all opinion of merit,
and so must overturn that which Bellarmine calls one of the principal and chief
ends of prayer) but let us further observe the reason he annexeth, and we may
consider-with what conscience or candor Papists do oppose the truth. For (says
he) we must know we are beggars, and therefore must carry in all humility when
we approach before God. 5. It will beget in us a contempt of earthly things,
for he that is often in heaven, cannot but look down upon all things under the
Sun, and be sensible of their vanity. 6. (As we heard from Suarez) it begets
and brings with it admirable sweetness and delight, while in that ordinance
we taste and see the goodness of the Lord. And, 7. it brings great honor and
dignity to the soul. O! what honor is it to converse with a King? but how much
more to have continual access to the King of kings? And thus we may see what
good may be gotten, and how great and excellent things may be obtained by
prayer, though the particular be not granted. But, 3. as prayer has thus
something in hand, and meat, as it were, in the mouth, so it is a seed, which
though it seem for a time to lie dead in the ground, yet it will revive, and
ere it be long we shall reap in joy; in the day of general retribution, when it
shall be Romans 2* 6.
rendered to every man according to his deeds, all our prayers shall get a
second hearing, and new reward; and the King will then say (as he in the case
of Esth. 6.3, 6.
Mordecay) what honor and dignity has been done to those mine honest
subjects, who would not join with rebels, nor conceal the conspiracy of false
friends, what have those favorites of heaven, who have lain so long at the
gate, and have waited for an answer to their many prayers and supplications
(though in the mean time some crumbs have been let fall to them, yet) what have
they gotten answerable to the large and full promises I have made unto them,
and to their expectation from such a great and bountiful Lord and Master? and
then they shall receive what they can desire and more; that is the great day of
audience, when all our tears and prayers and complaints shall be brought to
remembrance. And thus, though we got nothing in hand, yet we might say, with
him, Isa. 49.4 Surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my (...): opus vel
operis merces. Buxtorf. opus laborando productum. Mr. Leigh, crit. sac.
reward with my God. And we may, with them, 1 Cor. 15.58. know that our labor
is not in vain in the Lord. And though we had no cause to complain, albeit we
were thus put to wait all this short day of our life, and till the evening,
when the Master will call all the laborers in his vineyard, and give to every
man his penny, and will make a recompense for all the delays and
disappointments his honest supplicants did meet with here in this their
pilgrimage, since none will have cause to grudge and murmr then, or to say
that he has received too little, or waited too long. Yet, 4. our kind Master
will not put us off to so long a day, though, as to the crown and great
inheritance, we must patiently wait, and be expectants till then, yet in the
mean time he will give something in hand, he will give so much as may encourage
us to follow our duty without fainting, and which may be esteemed a present
answer and return to our prayers. And that it must be so, may appear, 1.
because he has appointed prayer to be a mean for obtaining the blessing, not
in a general way, for thus every duty may be called a mean for obtaining the
great end, and a step forward in the way to happiness, but prayer is appointed
as a special mean, in reference to such a particular end, viz. for obtaining
such a particular suit, and to have such and such desires satisfied; and thus
there are special promises made to prayer, in reference to this particular end,
which no other duty can lay claim to; the Lord has not only promised to reward
our prayers as other good works, but the has specified a particular reward,
and has promised to give whatsoever, and whenever we shall ask; and
therefore there must be some particular answer and return made to every prayer
we offer up to God. Otherwise, 2. It must be granted, that we might in our
several straits and difficulties, as well go about any other duty as prayer, at
least whenever (and that falls out very often) the particular we ask is not
given: and thus, in such a case, prayer will be no more suitable and pertinent
to the afflicted, then any other Christian exercise. And, 3. prayer could bring
no ease nor relief to perplexed and disconsolated souls, and the Apostles
inference, Phil. 4.6, 7. must be groundless and unwarrantable; for if no good,
in reference to our present exigence and difficulty, may be expected from
prayer, how can peace, quietness and contentment follow thereupon? prayer must
open some door of hope, and must bring some olive leaf in its mouth, else the
waters would not be abated, nor the storm calmed.

You will say, what is that answer which we may always, and in every case
confidently and infallibly expect? For answer to this (which we suppose to be
the main difficulty) we offer this twelfth Concl. Coucl. 12.
Albeit we have no ground to imagine, that God will always given the very
particular we ask, yet faith can assure the soul, that God will do that which
is best for us in the present business and particular exigence; albeit the
captive may not peremtorily conclude, that upon his praying he shall be set at
liberty, nor the sick, that he shall be restored to health, yet the may, and
should believe that God will do what is best for them, and is most for his own
glory; albeit the cannot determine, whether liberty or captivity, sickness or
health, be best for them in such a case, and such a time (allthough their
natural appetite and sensitive desire, did close with a suitable object, and
made choice of what seemed fittest and most convenient for it) yet they may be
persuaded, that as the omniscient and wise God knows what is best for them,
so as a loving Father, he will do what is best to them; and that though they,
relying upon his wisdom do mistake, and with submission do desire and ask a
serpent, supposing it to be convenient food, yet he will not give it, nor
satisfy their foolish desires, but he will do what is better, he will
sanctify the trial, and thereby promove their everlasting happiness; if he let
the burden ly on, he will strengthen our shoulders to bear: and say to us, as
he did to Paul, my grace shall be sufficient for you, 2 Cor. 12.9. Hence may
arise, that peace promised to every sincere supplicant, Phil. 4.7. For having
thus commended our case to God, we may securely rest upon his care and
providence, who knows how to do us good by such a dispensation, and who would
not thus put us to the trial, unless he minded thereby to procure our profit
and advantage.

And that the Lord does thus answer every prayer put up to him in truth, viz.
either giving the mercy in kind, and the very particular that was asked, or else
giving what was better, and that not only, 1. by withholding what would hurt,
which though it may seem to be a mere negative, yet should be acknowledge to be
no small part of the return and answer of prayer, and a fruit of the fatherly
care and watchful providence of our kind Lord toward us, in thus fulfilling
his Ps. 121.7. Prove. 12.21. Eccles. 8.5. Job, 5.19. etc.
promise to suffer no evil to come near us. For it is (as Petamus ut non faciat
quod non been petimus, quia ad hoc pertinet quod in oratione dominica dicimus
ne nos inducas in tentationem: neque enim parva est tenta^io, si contra tuam
sit causam tua postulatio, August. tract. 73. in Joan.
Augustine observes) no small temptation to have our desires and requests to
become contrary to our cause, and obstruct^ve of our good and interest. Hence,
it must be no small mercy to get that snare broken, and when the Lord does
frustrat such desires, though offered up prayer-wayes, he does answer that part
of our prayer, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Mat.
6.13. And it were good, that we did more mind that part of our copy and
pattern, and that when we pray, we did (as that Ancient adviceth) ask that God
would not grant what we ask a miss; but not only does the Lord thus answer, by
not giving those serpents we desire; but also, 2. by giving us a heart to
welcome the dispensation, and grace to improve the trial aright, he would not
suffer us to be cast into the furnace, if he purposed not thereby to purge away
some dross from us; but now, for clearing the point, we shall not multiply
arguments, but that the Lord must thus answer all our prayers, may appear, 1.
from the universality of the promise, which excludes no Sed malum culpae and
peccatum cum non sit eligibile non debet referri ad classem (...).
object, no case, nor condition in which we may be cast, no time, nor place,
nor whatsoever other circumstance, but (as we heard) extends unto, and
comprehends all things whatsoever we shall ask, Mark, 11.24. 1 John 5.15. and
3.22. Joh. 14.13. etc. And therefore there can be no case, nor combination of
circumstances, that can frustrate our prayers of a gracious return and answer:
otherwise the promise of audience must be too large, and so must fail of its
accomplishment. 2. We may argue from the extent and utility of prayer, it is
useful at all times, and for every thing, hence its prescribed as a sovereign
antidote against every evil, and all our fears, Phil. 4.6. But if only then it
were heard and answered, when we get the particular in kind, how often would it
be useless and to no purpose? 3. I would ask what difference there would be
between the trials and crosses of the godly and the wicked, if to the one they
were not sanctified by prayer, and not to the other, because he restrains
prayer? What is said of the creatures, 1 Timothy 4.5. may be applied as well to
every dispensation of providence, it cannot be sanctified to us but by prayer;
and if we ask the blessing, we may as confidently expect it in such a case
(though never so cross and contrary to our selfish inclination) as while we use
the creatures with much contentment and satisfaction. And we may upon good
ground say, we know that such a dispensation is good for us, and that we had
been at a loss, if we had wanted it: and hence will flow, not only patience and
submission, but also rejoicing and thankfulness; thus David, by way of
congratulation and praise to God, could say, it is good for me that I have been
afflicted, Ps, 119.71. thus also Paul could rejoice, whether Christ was preached
out of contention and in pretense only (which in it self was a sad affliction
and trial to the zealous Apostle) or in truth and sincerity, as knowing that by
the Philippians prayers (and none will imagine that he excluded his own, though
not needful to be mentioned, while he was speaking to them) that should turn
to his salvation, Phil. 1.18, 19. Hence also the Psalmist might conclude, that
he was afflicted in In hebraeoest justitia loquitut de bonitate and prohitate
Dei and hoc sensu subdi^ and quod me fideliter, hoc est meo commodo adfligis,
and castigas -- observandum est quod fidem Dei erga se in afflictionibus
considerat certo sibi, p^rsuadens quod fideliter suo ipsius commodo adfligatur
a Domino. Muscul. in loc.
faithfulness, Ps. 119.75. and therefore his afflictions must be the fruit and
accomplishment of the promises he had pleaded in prayer, and so must have been
sent by way of return to his prayers. 4. we might argue from the sense and
meaning of our prayers, when regular (of which we only speak) which must not be
absolute and peremptory as to the particular, but conditional and dis-junctive
[Lord give us such a supposed mercy if it be good for us, but otherwise we do
not desire it, and will not have it.] Or thus [Lord give us what we ask, or
what thou know will be better for us.] As has been shown, Part, 1. chap. 7.
sect. 1. And thus our faith may keep a conformity and correspondence with our
prayers, Obstrepit enim hic carnis sensus, minime apparere quod Deus us ta
nostra exaudiat, quando codem semper cursu procedunt afflictiones nostrae.
Itaque apostolus occu pat, quamvis non statim succurrat suis Deus, non tamen
cos descrere: quia miro artisicio quae videntur incommoda, in eorum salutem
convertat, Calvin. in loc.
and we may confidently expect that God will answer them, and grant our
desires; that he will either give the particular in kind (if good and
convenient for us) or else what is better and more fit for us at at such a
season. 5. Let us ponder that conclusion, which the Apostle draws from what
he had said concerning prayer, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together
for good to them that love God. It may be this or that particular, may seem to
do thee no good; but take all collectively and jointly together, and if your
eyes be opened, you will see them mutually conspire for your good. If we look
upon the prescription of a Physician, we may there see several ingredients,
which singly and by themselves, would rather hurt then profit the patient; but
if we take in the correctives, and more narrowly observe the composition: we
will be forced to commend the art and knowledge of the Physician, and to
confess that all together do jointly concur, and contribute for the patients
health. So, etc.

Hence it must necessarily follow, that whether God give or withhold the
particular, he does what is for our good, and what is most fit and convenient
for us: if all things must work together for our God, then certainly the
several answers and returns to our prayers; and this we may (as well as these
Romans did) know, and should believe. 6. Those Scriptures, which hold out Gods
purpose to withhold no good thing from his upright supplicants, as, Ps. 84.11.
Ps. 34.10. etc. as they do show, that when the particular asked, is withheld, it
is not good for us, hic and nunc, so they may serve to convince and persuade
us, that when the particular is withheld, the Lord does what is best for us
upon such an occasion. 7. Otherwise it would follow, that often we must seek
the Lord in vain, contrary to his own protestation, Isa. 45.19. For albeit it
were granted, that our prayers were accepted as service done to him, and would
not want their reward in the day of general retribution, yet still those
prayers that want a particular return, as to the present exigence and occasion,
would prove to be in vain, as to that end for which they are employed, and for
which the Lord has appointed them to be used. 8. Let us consider how loathsome
and displeasing to our kind Lord, our jealousy and diffidence must be, vult
sibi quisque credi (says Seneca) and habita fides obligat. There is no man can
endure to be distrusted, and shall we deal thus with the God of truth? but when
we trust and rely upon our friend, he will think himself obliged not to
disappoint us, fidelem si putaveris faciet. And will not our kind Father answer
the expectation and confidence of those who trust in him? Mr. Mr. Bolton
instruct. for right comforting, sect. 3. part. 1. chap. 2.
Bolton reports of a godly man, who being asked in his last sickness (by some
Christian friends admiring the singularity of his peace and calmness of spirit,
especially under such a trial) how he came to that quietness? answered, that he
had steadfastly fixed his heart upon that sweet promise, Isa. 26 3. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace, whose heart is stayed on thee; Because he trusts
in thee. And (said he) my God has graciously made this good unto my soul. So
(says Mr. Bolton) must every Saint do, who would sound the sweetness of a
promise to the bottom. For God is wont to make good his promises unto his
children proportionably to their trust in him, and dependence upon his upon his
truth and goodness, for a seasonable performance of them. Great Luther was a
man of much faith, and it was said of him, potuit quic quid voluit; he could do
what he would. For, says Tantum quisque habet quantum credit. junta illud
secundum fidem tuam tibi fiat, Zanch. in 5. ad Ephesians.
Zanchius, every one has as much as he believes: according to that word, be
it unto thee according to thy faith. Many want because they ask not, Jam. 4.3.
and many ask and receive not, because they ask not in faith, Jam. 1.6, 7. they
are jealous of God, and expect little from him, and therefore he hides his
face, and turns away our prayer and his mercy from us: Oh! the unbelief of
our hearts, we complain of God, while the fault is in our selves; we mistrust
his Word, and yet murmur because it is not accomplish^d to us: But if we did
more firmly believe the promises, we should see, and have experience of Gods
truth and fidelity; and would acknowledge that even then, when sense and carnal
reason are most ready to complain, the Lord in great mercy and faithfulness
does deal with us, and provide for our good, by those means which we are ready
to conceive to be so contrary unto our happiness, because bitter and afflictive
to sense. We will rather choose to be under our own tutory, then at Gods
disposing; we cannot endure to be curbed and hemmed in; and O! will unbelief
say, why might I not have such a mercy? what evil is there in it? and why might
not such a rod be removed? what good can it do? were it not better to be at
liberty, then shut up in prison, or arrested on the bed of languishing? As if
the Petitaeger ut quod ad salutem apponit medicus auferatur; tu dicis toll
quod mordet, medicus dicit non tollo quia sanat; tu ad medicum, quare venisti
sanori, an molestiam non part? non ergo exaudivit Dominus Paulum ad voluntatem.
quia exaudivit ad sanitatem, quare non habeatis pro magno exaudiri ad
utilitatem: quia autem obsit, quid profit, medicus novit non aegrotus, August
de verbis Domini, sermon. 53.
Patient should complain, and say, why is such a bitter ingredient put into
this potion? were it not better to put in the place of it some delicious
cordial? while as this exchange might cost him his life: Ah! will thou trust
the Physician for the good of thy body, and yet not trust the sovereign
Physician for the good of thy soul? But fools despise their own mercies, and
are ready to murmur when they are best dealt with. It is no great matter, says
Augustine, to get our desire; for the devils sometimes have been thus heard,
but it is a mercy indeed to obtain what makes for our life and happiness. If
we Periissem, nisi sic periissem.
had many of our desires (says a late Mr. Goodwin return of prayer, chap. 9.
page 49. Optima da nobis, vel si, pater illa rogamus, Vel non: at damnum caeco
si errore petamus, Tu damnum a nobis prae^ens avertit^ Jova. Vet Poct. Prima
fere vota, and cunctis notissimae temp^is, Divitiae crescant, ut opes and
maxima toto Nostra sit arca foro -- Sed plures nimia congesta pecunia cura;
Strangulat, and cuncta exuperans patrimonia census, Juven. Satyr. 10. vid. loc.
Ah, how should earthly minded professors be ashamed to read such a sermon
preached by a Pagan.
Divine) we had been undone. But our kind Father will not put a cup of poison
in our hand, though we much long for it. And it is no wonder, while we thus
live by sense, and judge by that crooked rule, though we mistake Gods meaning
in his dispensations toward us; and because we walk by such a rule, and will
not submit to God, nor trust him, and because we are so carnal, so selfish and
sensual, and love our own things too much, therefore does the Lord withdraw
them from those he loves, that they may learn no more to dote upon, and
idolize those trifles; and therefore are they held in the furnace, because they
will not part with their dross; it were not fit to remove the plaster, until
the sore be cured, nor to prescribe cordials, until ill humors be purged out.
And were our eyes Rev. 3.18.
anointed with Christ's eye salve, that we might see our state and condition,
and if we were more acquainted with the noble life of faith, we would
acknowledge (with him, Ps. 119.75.) that all our afflictions, rods and trials,
did flow from Gods mercy, faithfulness and kindness toward us, and when we
come home, and shall be more able to judge of Gods Word and works, then we will
confess with thankfulness, that we could not have wanted any of these rods,
wherewith we were exercised in our pilgrimage; and that those supposed mercies
we so much longed for, might have undone us.

And now, I would ask at carnal hearts, who undervalue this heavenly and
soul-enriching exercise, being ready to say, if I might have my desire
satisfied, none should pray more frequently then I? but I see little good that
may be expected thereby, no income, nor advantage; since they who are most
employed in that work, have as many wants and trials as other folk; I see no
good they get by all their prayers; why should I loss my pains? Ah! Atheist,
do thou not know, that a little which a righteous man has, is better then
all the riches and great revenue of the wicked, Ps. 37.16. Prove. 15.16. Prove.
16.8. Whatever the righteous has, be it litlte, be it much, it is a blessing
and mercy indeed. Nay, his wants and crosses become blessings unto him, they
are medicines prescribed by the great Physician for the health of the soul, and
preservatives to keep us from infection, while we live in a contagious world;
but on the other hand, all that the wicked have, their choycest blessings are
(according to that threatening, Mal. 2.2.) Aliquando Deus iratus dat quod petis,
and Deus propitius negat quod petis. August. de verbis Domini, sermon. 53.
nocitura toga, nocitura petuntur Militia, Juvenal, Sat. 10.
cursed; they are snares and thorns to prick them, and will prove as coals
heaped on their head, to increase their misery and torment for ever; and their
present rods and sufferings, are an earnest and prelude, the first fruits and
beginning of their eternal woe and punishment: The godly and the wicked, while
under one and the Multum quippe interest non quid accipiat, sed quis accipiat;
nec quale sit quod datur, sed qualis sit ipse cui datur; nam and bona obsunt,
and mala prosunt, sicut fuerint quibus dantur, August. tract. 62. in Joan.
same outward rod, and in the same furnace, find it not to be the same to both;
the furnace that purges the dross from the gold, does by little and little
consume the tinn; the godly are gold, and are more refined by trials; but that
fire, in which the wicked are now cast, does dry up their marrow and fat, till
at length it consume them by a never ending consumption.

But while thou say thou would ask; if thou thought thou would
obtain; do thou think that thou art a loser by any limitation or
qualification of the promise of audience, unless thou be an Epicure, We heard
the confession of Pagans and wilt not thou who art called a Christian come
their length? and will thou grudge when the Lord does that to thee and for
thee, which Pagans have asked and prayed for to themselves? Ah, shall they allow
to God the liberty to make their choice of their mercies, as knowing what is
best for them to have or want, and will thou prescribe to him?
and mindest no more but the satisfying of thy beastly and sensual appetite?
Ah! is not the promise, while thus limited to thy eternal happiness and
spiritual good, more (z) sweet and full, then if it wanted such a proviso?
What? would thou have God to join and comply with thy foolish and hurtful
desires, and to give thee, upon thy asking, a serpent to sting thee to death,
and a delicious potion full of deadly poison, because perhaps it is pleasant to
thy taste? whether is it better for a Pupil to be guided by a wise Governor,
then to be left to his own choice, and to follow his youthful and unadvised
courses? albeit the discreet Governor will curb and hold him in, and often
withhold what he craveth, yet its for his good that he thus deals with him;
if the inconsiderat youth might have his will, he would quickly lavish and
spend his large patrimony, and with the Prodigal, bring himself into great
extremity: And our kind Lord deals with us as pupils and children, this is
the time of our under-age, and if now we had our wills, we would undo our
selves: Adam was more knowing and wise then we, who yet being left to the
counsel of his own will, did prove a prodigal, and quickly spent one of the
largest patrimonies that ever did fall unto any mere man. Is it not then for
our good, that the Lord himself will be our Tutor and Governor, and will give
us what is good for us, but will not satisfy our Recordaris dixisse te in
plarima dubitatio^c discrimineque versari, ne teipsum falleres, cum mala
quandoque, pro bonis op^ares -- verum mi hi v^detur ab animo tao prius
o^ortere, caliginem qua nunc offunditur auferre, deinde illa pro^iu^ admovere,
per quae seu bonum quid fit, five malum dignoscas: nunc enim impos esse videris
-- insanum quiddam mibi videtur temero Deum precari ac diligenter
considerandum, ne quis seip um fallat, mala petens, dum bona se putat orare --
prudentior po^ta, qui precabatur mala ab orantibus abesse. Plato temo primo.
Alcib 2. page (mihi) 139, 140, 136. interpret. Mars. Ficin.
hurtful and sensual desires?

But you will say, albeit from what has been said, I be now convinced, that
the Lord often (yea, even then while he withholdeth the particular that was
asked) does that which is best, by way of return to the prayers of his honest
supplicants; and though I would fain believe, that the Lord does always thus
hear and answer our prayers, because the Scriptures seem to hold out this point
most frequently and very convincingly, yet there be some cases, in which the
Lord does not satisfy and fulfill the desires of his children, which cannot
fall under the exception of non expediency, hurt and evil; particularly these
three 1. when we pray against our sins and corruptions, and that we may not be
led into temptation; 2. when we pray for spiritual mercies to others; that the
Lord would open their eyes and change their hearts, and bring them out of the
snare in which they are caught; 3. when we pray for outward and public mercies
to the Church and people of God; what evil can there be in those petitions,
that the Lord should not always hear and answer them? In answer to this
question, we shall first speak to the first case by it self, because it is
concerning a personal mercy to the supplicant himself; then in the second
place, we shall speak to the other two jointly, because they are concerning
mercies asked for others; and, thirdly, we shall obviat objections.

To the first, we answe, 1. albeit it be our indispensible duty to subdue and
mortify sin, so that we should always be opposing and fighting against our
lusts, and resisting temptations, yet the Lord may have his holy and wise ends,
why he will suffer us for a while to wrestle, before he give the victory, or
remove the temptation; and though the mortification of sin, and the removing of
temptations be absolutely good and always; yet in the issue it may be
comparatively Accipit autem quando debet accipere: quaedam enim non negantur
sed ut congruo dentur tempore differuntur, Aug. tract. 102. in Joan.
better for us to fight a while, if in the mean time he furnish us with
necessaries for the war, and say unto us (as he did to him, 2 Cor. 12.9.) my
grace is sufficient for you.

Hence, 2. The question is not, whether it be better for us to have, or to want
the desired mercy, but whether our time of receiving, or Gods time be best;
though there may be a delay for a season, yet not a denial or final
frustration; such warriors shall at length carry the day, and triumph over
their lusts, the devil and the world, Romans 8.37. and 16.20. etc. God knows
how to time our mercies a right, as what, so when to give; and should we not
allow to his wisdom the liberty to choose the fittest time?

You will say, O, but delays break the heart! and God looks on while Satan
buffets his poor servants. Ans. But do not imagine, or say, that God looks on
as a mere spectator, he is a faithful second; nay, he is more, he is our help,
strength, safguard and shield, Ps. 84.11. Ps. 62.2, 6. Ps. 125.2. etc. The Lord
fights for us, and enableth us to fight, and he guards and defends us from
Satan's fiery darts, that they may not hurt us; and if at any time they pierce,
and draw blood, yet they shall not kill, nor give a deadly wound, but shall,
through the wisdom and care of our heavenly Physician, rather prove healthful
and Ducere autem ad bonum tripliciter dicitur aliquid, scil. per modum causae
vel per mo dum casus, vel per modum occasionis; and differunt haec tria: nam
causa per se ducit -- causus vero private intentionem sed non operationem, sicut
patet in fodiente qui invenit thesaurum, occasio autem, etc. quod vero ducit
per modum occasionis, cum nullam habeat intra se rationem ordinationis in
finem, nec bonitatem, and propter hoc non potest denominari bonam -- cum ergo
malum non ducat ad bonum ex se, sed per illud quod clicitur ex ipso a sapiente
Deo, absolute loquendo malum sieri non est bonum. I mo omnes consimiles sunt
negandae, etc. vid. loc. Bonavent, in 1. sent. did. 46. art. 1. quaest. 3.
sect. 20.
medicinal, these shall, like the Spear of Jasons enemy, open an inveterat
imposthume, which otherwise could hardly have been cured. I do not say, that it
is good to sin, or to yield to any temptation, yet such is the power and wisdom
of the great Physician, and such is his care of his honest supplicants, that he
can make poysonable darts become healing medicines to them, and make those open
a vein, out of which shall run no blood, but only venom and hurtful humors;
the Lord can make our fall to alarm and awaken us, and a mean, through his
blessing, to walk more humbly and circumspectly hereafter; and he can thereby
empty the heart of much pride, self-confidence, security, etc. Hence, Audeo
dicore superbis esse utile cadere in aliquod apertum manifestumque peccatum,
unde sibi displiceant, qui jam sibi placendo ceciderant: salubrius enim Petrus
sibi displicuit quando flevit, quam sibi placuit quando praesumpsit. hoc dicit
and sacer psalmus imple facies eorum ignominia, and quaerent nomen tuum Domine,
August. de civit. Dei, lib. 14 cap. ^12.
Austins audeo dicere, etc. I dare (says that eminent Doctor) affirm, that it
may be profitable for the proud to fall into some gross and manifest sin,
whereby they may fall out of love with, and may learn to loath themselves, etc.
Nay, the same Deus diligentibus eum omnia co-operatur in bonum, usque adeo
prorsus omnia, ut etiam si qui eorum deviant and exorbitant, etiam hoc ipsum
eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia humiliores redeunt, atque doctiores; discum
enim in ipsa via justa cum tremore se exultare debere, non sibi arrogando
tanquam de sua virtute fiduciam permanendi, etc. Aug. de corr. and gra. cap. 9
similia habet Anselmus in Romans 8.28. and Lyra ibid.
Austin, Anselm, Sed nunquid etiam eis peccata co-operantur in bonum? quidam
dicunt quod peccata non continentur sub hoc quod dicit omnia, quia secundum
Angustinum peccatum nihil est; sed contra hoc est quod in glossa, etc. (and hoc
subtilius quam firmius esse recte statuunt nostri theologi communiterin hoc and
istiusmodi casibus) sed dicendum est, etc. ex hoc autem quod justus cadit
resurgit cautior and humilior, etc. Thomas in loc.
Thomas and other Divines, do not doubt to assert, that the sins of the Saints
are not excluded from these all things which are said to work together for
their good, Romans 8.28.

And thus the present case does no ways militat against the former Conclusion,
for, 1. at length the Lord will give the particular in kind which was asked;
and, 2. for the delay he makes a compensation, and does us good in the mean
while, and makes that delay contribute for the increase of grace, and our
eternal comfort.

2. As for the other two cases, concerning mercies asked for others, it is the
opinion of a reverend Treatise of prayer, and Div. provid. page 139. etc.
Divine, that we can have no ground of assurance to speed for others, unless
they be in the state of grace, and have all those conditions and qualifications
which are required to a persons being acceptable to God; and thus he will have
that text, Jam. 5.15. to require faith in the sick, as well as in those who
must pray for him; and it may suffice (says Ibid. page 141.
he) that in relation to others, we have, 1. a precept and command to pray for
them; and, 2. any hope or possibility of the thing, as Joels, Joel. 2.14. Ames.
5.15. Jon. 3.9.
who knows? Amos, his it may be and Jonahs (or rather the people of Nineveh
their) who can tell? And, 3. that however it be, it will be to our good. And as
to them, that, 4. we have a conditional assurance, that if they have the
requisits and conditons suitable to the promises, they shall have the benefit of
those our prayers that are grounded on them; and thus it will behove us to look
more at our duty, then any infallible certainty of the particular issue to
them; and to be more pressing in our desires, then peremptory in our resolves.
Thus (says he) I give my judgment and grounds for it, under submission, the
case being not much handled by any that I meet with. Ans. Albeit upon the matter
the difference will not be found to be so very considerable, yet there be
several expressions, and some few particulars here, to which we cannot
subscribe; and, 1. as to the opinion it self, I find it to be of a much older
date; the ancient Ita sane intelligendum est quod ait dabi^ vobis ut ea
beneficia significata sciantur his verbis, quae ad eos qui petunt proprie
pertinent exaudiuntur quippe omnes sancti pro seipsis, non autem pro omnibus
exandiunturvel amicis vel inimicis vel quibuslibet aliis quia non utcunque
dictum est dabit sed dabit vobis, Aug. tract. 102. in Joan.
Austin did own it; and the great Unde Thomas stauit has quatuor requirt
conditiones, ut aliquis semper impetret quod petit; viz. ut, 1. petat pro se,
2. necessaria ad salutem, 3. pie, and 4. perseveranter. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 83.
art. 15. ad 2. and art. 7. ad 2. Pro hac sententia citari etiam potest doctis.
Twistus* Nos (inquit) dum ad preces accingimur, quid nostri sit officii serio
consideramus, quibus profuturae sunt preces anxii non sumus; Deo illud
remittendum ducimus, nihil dubitantes operam nostram acceptam habeat, in Corv.
defens. Arm. page 255. and Guil. Ames. in quantum statuit nos posse and debere
eadem charitate sed non eadem fide ac spe pro aliis orare ac pro
nobismeteipsis; cas. consc. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 14.
Schoolman with, and from him, did plead for it many hundred years since,
making that one of the conditions of an effectual and prevailing prayer, that
it be put up for the supplicant himself, and not for others. But, 2. that the
Lord has not left us without a promise, wherewith our faith may close, while
we pray for others, may appear from Part, 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 1. where we show,
that the promise and command go hand in hand; and that they are like veins and
arteries in the body of man; and therefore as we have a command for our warrant
to pray for others, we must also have a promise for our encouragement. Hence,
in that perfect pattern of prayer, as we are taught to pray for others
whatsoever we should ask for our selves, give us (not me only) for give us, and
lead us not, etc. So to pray in faith, and in testimony as of our desire, so of
our Thus that word is interpreted in our care^bume, approven by so many Divines
in both kingdoms, thus also those who are acquainted with the emphasis of that
word in the H^brew (which is its origin^l) have rendered it, as Bux orf, Pagnin,
Mercerus and others, and thus it answers the first root (...) which in hiphil
signifies to trust and believe. And hence we may draw a new argument for
confirming the main conclusion concerning the assurance of audience, and we may
argue thus; all our prayers ought to be so qualified that in the close we may
be able to say, Amen, but unless we be assured of their success, and that they
will be heard, we cannot truly say, Amen. Ergo. We must either abandon and omit
that usual postscript and conclusion of prayer, or we must speak we know not
what, if we be not assured of the success of our prayers, we cannot say, Amen,
unless, as we desire, so we believe, and expect to be heard.
assurance to be heard to say Amen, Mat. 6.13. But, 2. the Lord has not left
us thus to collect a promise, either from the commands, or from that pattern
and example, or from a word, which though it does emphatically express it to
the more learned, yet not so clearly, as that others might see or be persuaded
hereof; but we have express promises; 1. indefinite; 2. universal; and, 3.
particular, to assure us that our prayers for others shall be heard; 1.
indefinite, ask and ye shall receive, Mat. 7.7. Job. 16.24. 2. universal
whatsoever ye shall ask shall be given, and nothing witheld, Joh. 16.23. Joh.
14.13, 14. The promise has no limitation, it is as full and comprehensive as
if all particulars had been named and expressed; and therefore should we devise
restrictions and exceptions of our own, and without warrant say, that these
large promises must be limited to personal mercies, which concern the
supplicant? 3. particular. Thus the Lord promises to raise up the sick, and to
forgive his sins, in answer to the prayers of the Elders of the Church, Jam.
5.14, 15. And while the prayer of faith is said to save ( viz. as a mean of
divine appointment) the sick, the words need not a commentary; for thereby is
clearly held forth, faith in the subject, or in the persons who did pray; and
not in the object, or in him for whom they should pray; for the faith here
required is relative to the duty, as its qualification; and so must be acted
while they duty is performed, and by him who performs it; otherwise such a
prayer could not be called the prayer of faith, but rather a prayer for the
faithful: and thus it is added, v. 16. that the effectual fervent prayer (not
for, but) of a righteous man, avails much.

Now, although no mercy can be received or improven aright, but by the
faithful, yet that faith in the object is not a necessary qualification for
the audience and success of our prayers for others, or that whereupon our faith
does lay hold is certain. 1. Because faith must have a more sure foundation
then our conjecture concerning the state of others, whether they be in the
faith or not. 2. We must pray for unbelievers and ask grace for such as are
graceless, and we must ask in faith, otherwise (says reverend Calv. loc, cit.
viz. in Jac. 1.6.
Calvin) we pray deceitfully, and not seriously or to purpose. 3. The Lord
often gives grace to the unconverted in answer to the prayers of his children;
thus Paul's conversion is thought to be the fruit of Stephens last prayer, Act.
7.60. and therefore, faith being the object of prayer and the thing petitioned
for them, cannot be a condition of prayer, nor somewhat previous in them.

You will say, but what kind of faith can we act in praying for others? and
what is its object? Ans. 1. Faith, as to the success of our prayers for others,
is not absolute but conditional; and yet, the condition is not faith in the
object, or any present disposition or qualification thereof, but rather an act
of providence relative to the event, or the decree and divine purpose
concerning such a person, his final state and portion here and hereafter: and
that object wherewith our faith does close, as to the particular asked, may be
thus expressed, [If those for whom we pray be not reprobats, and if the Lord
purposes to show mercy to them, and if there be any way and mean of
conveighance of such a blessing to them, and if there be any I speak of an
extrinsecal and moral possibility, flowing from the decree and purpose of God
concerning the futurition of such an object.
possibility in the thing petitioned, that in that case the Lord will so far
respect our prayers, as that in return to them, he will at length give to them
what we asked for them; and that though many happily have Whether in praying for
the salvation of one particular person, or for public mereles and deliverance
to the Church; for now we are jointly speaking of both cases.
concurred in the work, and though we have often petitioned that mercy, yet
none of our prayers shall be forgotten, but all and every one of our
supplications shall have a proportionable insluence in procuring the blessing.]
Albeit the mercy may be for a long time withheld, yet the Lord keeps all the
prayers of all his honest supplicants in remembrance, and in answer to them the
mercy in due time shall be given. Albeit Monica, for a long time, prayed for
her son Austin his conversion, yet none of her prayers were lost; the Lord had
them all on record, and at last satisfied the desire of that zealous woman:
but, we must not imagine that God then only had regard to the prayer put up
about the time of her sons conversion, nay but every tear and prayer, which
from time to time she had poured out, had influence upon the work, and helped
forward the new birth of that convert. But, 2. as to the compensation, (when
the Lord purposes not to hear and give the particular we prayed for to others)
that will not be made to them for whom we pray, but to us who pray: for they
being reprobats and despisers of the mercies of God, no ordinance can do them
good; but if they be Saints, and yet the Lord in his holy and wise providence
will not give them such outward mercies (for, as to spirituals, these shall not
be finally withheld from such) as we did petition for them, albeit the Lord
may, and no doubt often does, make some compensation to them, and will not
suffer them to be deprived of the fruit of our prayers, although what we did
ask was not good, hic and nunc; yet, that which universally, and in all cases
our faith may lay hold on, by way of compensation when the particular is
withheld, must be something respecting the supplicant himself, some one or
other mercy to be bestowed on him by way of return and answer to his prayers;
and thus, while we pray for the salvation of reprobats, or for such public
mercies to the Church and People of God, which he, according to the depth of
his counsel, has determined not to give, our prayers notwithstanding are not
lost as to us; for, though Israelites captivity be continued, yet they who love
and pray for Jerusalem shall prosper, Psa. 122.6. Albeit the Lord did not give
to David's enemies those mercies he petitioned for them, yet his labor was not
lost, nor his prayers like water spilt upon the ground; the Lord did receive
and welcome them, and would not send back those faithful messengers empty;
though no return came to those incorrigible enemies, in whose behalf they were
sent, yet some And this may be the occasion of that expression, and the reason
why David's prayer is said to return into his bosom, viz. because it did bring
along with it some seasonable or some considerable mercy; for, what we take
into our bosom must lie near the heart, and have some room in the estimation.
heart-affecting and bosom-blessing was dispatched to David, his prayer
returned, but not Etsi non eis prosit, ego tamen nonsa (...) frustratus m^a
mercede gloss. in loc. vid. etiam Lyr. ibid.
empty, (though it be the manner of men, yet not of the great and gracious King,
to send away any honest supplicant without an answer) Psa. 35.13.

But, do not mistake and say, O! then it must be better with the supplicant
when his prayer for others is not heard as to them, and when they get no good
by it, because then it returns into his own bosom, and the good redounds to
him: Do not (I say) entertain such a conceit; for although we now only
mentioned the personal return made to the supplicant, when his desire for
others was not granted, that being the present case to which we should speak,
and a notable encouragment to to the conscionable and constant performance of
that duty, whatever might be it is fruit and success, as to those for whom it
were performed; yet we did not exclude that personal return which every
petitioner may expect, when the Lord does fulfill his desire toward others; we
shall not fair the worse because it goes well with others, nor shall the Lord
be less kind to us, because for our sake he shows kindness to others; we
shall not lose because others do gain by our trading; our God has blessings
enew to bestow, and though he answer the supplication, he will not let the
messenger go away without his wages; he shall get something in hand, but that
is not all nor the main, but they who (by their prayers, exhortations, etc.)
turn Though Gods servants and messengers labor in vain, and though Israel be
not gathered, yet honest supplicants and laborers shall be glorious in the
eyes of their Master, and their reward shall be with their God, Isa. 40.4, 5.
Yet, when God blesses his own Ordinance, as that will cause the hearts of
henest laborers to rejoice; So the Lord may, out of his good pleasure and
sovereign mercy, crown that mercy with other mercies, both to him who did pray,
and to him for whom supplication was made.
mary to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.
not only their prayers and endeavors shall come in remembrance, but also the
fruit and success thereof, but not to obstruct and hinder their mercies, but
rather to promove their happiness.

If it be here asked, whether the former assertion concerning Gods hearing and
answering of all our prayers so far, as always to do what is best for us, in
the particular which we desired and petitioned, whether (I say) that has place
in this case? Ans. That assertion it self, without any further explication,
might have prevented such a question; for, while the matter of our prayer is not
personal, and does not concern us but others, it seems a little impertinent
to ask, whether the Lord, when he gives not the particular asked, ( viz. to
others) does that which is best for us: for what does not concern us cannot be
said to be more or less convenient for us. But, 2. albeit what we ask for
others does not concern us, as to our personal loss or advantage, (except when
we ask public mercies for the Church, or Incorporation whereof we are members)
yet to a believer, (who already has a right to all personal happiness and
felicity) no compensation can be made for those spiritual mercies which he does
ask for his brethren, or for public mercies to the Church, her deliverance,
peace, prosperity, increase, etc. Nay, a Moses and Paul could subscribe a very
sad doom against themselves, in reference to their own crown and personal
state; Exodus 32.32.
Moses that his name might be blotted out of God's Book, and Romans 9.3.
Paul that he might be accursed from Christ, that it might go well with their
brethren and Gods ancient people and Church.

And yet even in this, as in all other cases, it is certain, that God always
does what is best and most subservient to those high and great ends, viz. the
manifestation of his own glory, and the promoving the good and eternal
happiness of the Elect; and as to those great things, to which all other things
must stoop and be in subordination, so also our prayers, and what we ask,
whether for our selves or others, must be asked with an eye to this noble mark:
and we should not desire nor expect a return, but in subordination to this high
end. And therefore, when the event does discover his purpose not to give the
particular we desired for others, we must submit to his holy and wise
dispensation, and take encouragment, not only from the returning of our prayers
into our bosom, and that personal reward we may confidently expect, but also
from the former consideration, and while we reflect upon the last and ultimat
end of our prayers; knowing that he who is infinite in wisdom and counsel, has
carried on the same by means unknown to us, yet fittest for the purpose. And if
we know that Christ's kingdom does come, and that Gods glory is thus advanced,
we have no cause to complain, whatever otherwise may be the success of our
prayers. And thus, if we be considered as self-denied Christians, looking most
to the will and honor of our Master, it may in some sense and respect be said,
that in the proposed case the Lord does that which is best for us, and what we
most desire; but otherwise, if we speak of that dispensation absolutely and in
it self, or in relation to its proper rule, viz. the revealed will and word of
God, which is the only rule of our desires, and which must determine the
particulars which we may make choice of, yea, in reference to that great end,
which yet the Lord may promove and carry on by what means seems good to the
holy counsel of his blessed will; thus (I say) such a sad dispensation toward
our neighbors and brethren, may be very bitter and afflictive to us; as it was
to Moses, Paul. Samuel, Jeremiah, and to the rest of the Saints from time to
time.

So much for confirmation and explication of this sweet point, concerning the
certainty of the success of prayer; now we come to objections. But we shall not
meddle with Bellar. de justif. lib. 1. cap. 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and lib. 3. cap. 4.
and seqq.
Bellarmines arguments against the certainty of faith, and the assurance of
salvation; these being so fully answered by many Divines, and it not being our
purpose now to speak to these questions (albeit this our case does much depend
upon those truths asserted by orthodox Divines against Papists) but we shall
only propound those objections, which we conceive to militat directly against
the present point, which has not been much debated.

You will say, 1. Obj.
albeit I abominat the popish uncertainty of faith, yet, alas! I fear my own
state and condition, that I do not believe; and how shall I be assured of the
success of of my prayers? I think none but Atheists dare question the truth of
the promises, or doubt of Gods power; and I know that he does always hear his
children when they cry, but I know not if I be one of that number; and should
such a one as I pray in confidence? Ans. 1. I deny not, that our confidence in
prayer must, Ans.
in some proportion, answer our assurance of our state and adoption, and
therefore such as would pray in faith, should 2 Cor. 13.5.
try and examine themselves, whether they be in the faith. Not that they ought
to (as many precious ones do) hold themselves upon the rack, and live in
perplexing fears and doubtings, by running to uncertain marks and making the
privileges of some eminent Christians, a touch stone to try the reality of
their profession; and by making the mark and scope at which they should aim, a
mark and character for trying their state and condition: I will say no more now
to such, but that it were better that much of that time, which is spent in
trying, were employed in strengthening their graces; God is more glorified by
believing, then doubting; that darkness, as it is uncomfortable to us, so it is
displeasing to God, and hinders his work; for what is that duty that can be
cheerfully performed in such a state? And while we divert to the work of
examination, we cannot close with Christ by a direct act of faith, which of
purpose then we do suspend. But yet, 2. the matter would once be put out of
question, and if thou never yet came that length, now is the time thou art
called to that work: Ah! delay no longer, not for one hour, to give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Not by
maintaining a debate which will prove endless, nor yet so much by reflecting
upon the frame of thy heart, and thy former obedience (albeit we do not simply
condemn that course, or deny that some light may he gotten from thence) for
thus thou may be at a loss, and these marks thou have run to, may be
obscure, or not reciprocal, and may stand in need of other marks for knowing,
1. when, 2. what weight may be laid upon them; and, 3. whether or not yet they
be wrought in thee. But thy safest course were instantly to resolve the
question, by closing with Christ, as thy Lord and Savior; and then thou have
answered all the scruples and objections that devils or men, or thy own
unbeleeving heart could forge; For, 1. if thou have closed with him as thy
Savior, by relying and resting upon him alone for salvation, here is thy
faith; and if thou have taken on his sweet yoke, and art honestly resolved to
acknowledge him for thy only Lord and Master, here is the fruit and trial of
thy faith; and having thus once made sure thy state, will thou again raze that
building to the foundation, and suffer thy fears so far to prevail, as to bring
thee again under the Spirit of bondage? Ah! be not so foolish and cruel to your
own soul, but mark, and lay up that evidence and experience for time to come,
that by the blessing of God it may guard the heart from after terrors and
debates, unless that light be ecclipsed, or rather utterly overthrown, by the
returning Ps. 85.^8.
to folly, and falling into some gross and conscience-wasting sin.

But, 3. if notwithstanding all thy diligence and endeavors, thou have not yet
attained to such a measure of assurance, that thou can say [I know I am in
Christ] yet of thou seriously desire to be found in him, and if thou continue
in that diligence, to make thy election sure, if thou love him, and carefully
abstain from every thing that may displease him, and have respect to all his
commandments, thou needst not be afraid, or ashamed, Ps. 119, 6. thou may
draw nigh in faith, and confidently plead the promises; thy child-like
affection, is ground enough to beget this child-like confidence and boldness,
Thou, who have the love and heart of a Son, needst not fear while thou drawest
nigh to thy kind Father. O! but thou will say, I dare not call him Father. Ans.
We shall speak to this weighty question, Part. 3. Chap. 1. But now let me ask,
if he be not thy Father, who has wrought these filial affections in thee?
unless thou had received the Spirit of adoption, thou could not have the
heart and love of a Son; such fruit will not of it self arise and spring up in
our barren desert and wilderness. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, He is the first lover and suitor; thou could not love him,
unless he had prevented thee with his free love. We love him because he first
loved us, 1 John 4.10, 19. why then is there fear in thy love? and why does not
thy love cast out fear, ver. 18.

4. If thy fear and jealousy yet continue, I have one word more unto thee;
albeit I cannot excuse, and desire not to extenuat thy fault, for thus
harboring so long such thoughts of distrust, yet I must not conceal the bowels
and loving kindnese of the Lord: If this thy unbelief does only arise from a
mis-apprehension of thine own state and condition; as it does not null thy
interest in the promise, so neither will it hinder its performance and
accomplishment to thee; albeit the Child in the fit of a fever will not
acknowledge his Father, but will perhaps deny that he has any interest in him,
will the Father therefore disinherit such a Son? or will not his tender bowels
the rather stir toward the Child, to pity and commpassionat him the more,
while he sees him into such a condition? And ah! what is the state of
desertion, and such darkness, but a feverish distemper of the soul, refusing to
acknowledge its heavenly Father? and will he therefore forget or disown his
Saints in such a forlorn case? Nay, though we thus believe not, yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself, his word and truth, his promises and
watchful providence, and that relation under which he stands toward such, 2 Timothy 2.13. He has still the heart of a Father, tam Tertull. de paenit.
pius nemo, tam-pater nemo, and he will not cast off his paternal care, he will
hear when thou cryest to him, albeit thou be jealous of his love, and of thy
interest in him. Indeed, if thou did distrust his truth, mercy and power, the
case were altered; but since thou dare not once doubt of these, but thy fear
proceeds only from thine own bowels, because thou think that thou art not
such a one, nor so qualified as to have an interest in the promise, and to be
an object of Gods mercy and love, We may here apply what is spoken of another
kind of unbelief, Romans 3.3.
shall thy unbelief make the faith and promise of God without effect?

Thus thou shall not want necessaries, albeit several things that may
contribute for thy comfort, may for a while be suspended, because of thy
distrust and jealousy. You will say, and is it not sad, that our God should
frown, and (as it were) hide his face for a season, and shut out our prayers.
Ans. But where must the blame be laid? If ye will be suspicious, and fear
without ground, may not the Lord answer you according to your fear, and give
you ground to complain, (but not of his word or As if these were to be blamed.
work, but of your own heart, and its distrust and unbelief) if the Child will
reject those medicines the Father has provided for curing his distemper, he
may justly chide with, and hide his face from such a Son. But who dare limit
the Lord, either as to time when, how long, or how often; or as to the manner
and measure, how far, and what way he will hide his face, and by what
dispensations he will manifest his displeasure; he may when he will disappoint
thy fear, and do beyond what thou could expect, and thereby melt thy heart,
cure thy distemper, and banish thy fear. It would go ill with the Saints, if
the Lord did always deal with them according to their fears, even as to their
comforts, and the accomodations of the outward man.

2. Obj. There are such difficulties and debates concerning the extent and
meaning of temporal promises, 2. Obj.
that it can hardly be expected that weak believers, and such as have not
attained to a considerable measure of knowledge, should be able to extricate
themselves out of such a labyrinth, and certainly believe the performance of
that bond, the contents and tenor whereof they are ignorant of. Ans. Albeit
there may be some controversy and difficulty concerning the meaning of some
particular promises, considered singly and by themselves; yet there is no good
thing thou can desire, that is not clearly held forth, or comprehended in
some one or more promises; as has been shown Part 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 2. And, 2.
we do not affirm that our faith should lay hold on the particular held forth in
the promise absolutely and peremptorily, but only disjunctively; that God will
either give the particular in kind, or the equivalent, but better to us, at
such a time and season; as has been there also shown. And that there is no
ground for any to question such a disjunction alternative, may appear from what
has been here said. But yet, we do not require such an explicit, particular
and determinat knowledge of both parts of the disjunction, as we have now for
explication described; but if in our addresses to God there be these two, which
seem to be so essential and necessary to the least measure of faith, viz. 1. a
believing that God is; and, 2. that he is a rewarder of them that seek him,
Heb. 11.6. If we confidently expect a reward, though we cannot peremptorily
determine what or when it shall be given, nor whether it shall be in reference
to the present exigence, I dare not affirm that such a prayer will be shut out,
or such a supplicant sent away empty. Albeit it be matter of sad regrate, that
we do not more clearly and particularly know what we may expect from God, he
having so fully revealed his mind thereanent, vet, those weak and less-knowing
Christians need not fear, if, 1. they have that dogmatical faith and know that
there is a God, and that he is such, as he has revealed himself in his
Scriptures, as to his infinite nature and the trinity of persons, and those
divine attributes and properties which are incommunicable to any creature, that
Christ is the way and the life, that none can come to the Father but by him,
etc. 2. If they believe that their labor shall not be lost, he being a
rewarder of all them who diligently seek him, and particularly, as to the
present duty, they know that he is a Psa. 65.2.
prayer-hearing God, albeit they cannot determine the particular mercy he will
give by way of return thereto, yet they know that their prayer shall not want
an answer, and that it is not in vain (as those wicked ones did blaspheme, Job.
21.15.) to pray unto him.

3. Obj. It is a received axiom among practical Divines, 3. Obj.
that temporal promises are to be understood, cum exceptione crucis; hence Mr.
Mr. Spurstow, Wells of Salvation, chapter 16.
Spurstow laith down this as a rule for the right understanding of these
promises, that they are to be expounded with the reservation and exception of
the cross: and if the promises cannot withold the Lord from chastning the
Saints with rods and afflictions, how shall their (e) prayers be able to do it?
especially since prayer must be grounded on the promise. Ans. Albeit there be a
truth in that assertion, that the Lord may chasten his servants with whatsoever
rod he will, yet, why this should be propounded as a limitation of the promise,
I know not: and I would ask, whether the Lord does at any time afflict the
Saints but for their good? by this he is distinguished from earthly parents,
that they chasten many times out of passion and anger, and without discretion
after their own pleasure; but he only for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. And if the Lord never correct us, but
that by that rod he may promove our spiritual good and holiness, can we imagine
that he will with hold any temporal mercy we ask from him, (which is a sort of
affliction and correction, yea some times very sad and bitter) unless he
purposed to do us more good by such a dispensation, then if we had received
what we desired. Hence it must necessarily follow, that the Lord does never
withold what we ask, but when it is better to want then to have such a
supposed mercy; and therefore, he must do what is best for us in such a
condition, and this we may believe and confidently expect in all our addresses
unto him; and when we get not what we asked, we may be persuaded that it was not
good and convenient for us at such a season, that comparatively it was not
good, nor so fit and expedient for us as the present dispensation; which
therefore must not be looked upon as an exception from the promise, but rather
as an amplification and further extension of the promise, and an object of that
promise, to withold no good from them that walk uprightly, and to suffer no
evil to come near them. Hence the same Mr. Spur. ibid page 232.
Author acknowledges, that the faith required, Jam. 1.6. albeit it be not the
faith of a particular persuasion, that God will give the very thing it self
that we beg of him, yet it is the faith of submission by which we resolve our
prayers into his will, and believe that he will do whatever is best for our
good and his glory. And this (says he) was the faith that our Lord Jesus
Christ did put forth in his prayer, when he said, not my will, but thy will be
done. And thus we are agreed; neither do I dissent from what he subjoyneth,
viz, that although God may sometimes assure, and incline the hearts of his
children that are importunat wrestlers in prayer, to be confident of granting
the very particular temporal blessing that they seek, yet this is a confidence,
that is rather begotten by the Spirit in the height and vigor of prayer, then
brought with us unto the duty. Sometimes (says he) such a confidence may be;
but it is neither ordinary nor usual.

We may shut up this particular with the words of zealous Bernard. Let none of
the Saints (says Nemo nostrum parvipendat orationem suam; dico enim vobis quod
ipse ad quem oramus, non parvipendit eam, priusquam ^gressa sit ab ore vestro,
ipse eam scribi jubet in libro suo, and unum ex duobus indubitanter sperare
possumus; quoniam aut dabit quod petimus, aut quod nobis erit utilius: nos enim
quid oremus sicat oportet nescimus, sed miseretur ille super ignorantia nostra,
and orationem benign suscipiens quod nobis aut omnino non est utile, aut non
tam cito dare necesse est, minime tribuit, tamen infructuosa non crit; quoniam
quidem tanta super te cura est Deo tuo, ut quoties ignorans queris quod tibi
inutile est, non te audiat super hoc, habet in med. devotis. cap 6.
this reverend ancient) undervalue his prayer, for he to whom we pray does not
undervalue it: before it proceed out of our mouth, he causes write it in his
book, and one of two we may most confidently expect, that he will either give
what we ask, or that which will be better for us. He pitieth our ignorance, and
will not give when it is not fit, or what would not profit us, yet such is his
love and care, that he will not suffer our prayers to return empty, but when he
gives not what we out of ignorance (not knowing the hurt that might come to us
thereby) do ask, he will make a compensation and commutation, and will convert
it in a more profitable gift.

Now we come to some grounds and encouraging considerations, which may support
our weak faith under all the temptations and objections which Satan and our
lusts, Stat nulla diu mortalibus usquam Fortuna titubante fides -- Silius. 11.
L.
sense and carnal reason can suggest; and, 1. the infinite mercy and tender
bowels of our God, if known and duly pondred, may silence our unbelief, and
banish all our fears; when we draw nigh to him: his tender mercies are Nemo est
hominum, vel etiam diabolorum qui dicere possit, se non esse participem
misericordia Dei, Zanch. de nature. Dei lik. 4. q. 3.
over all his works. Ps. 145.9. his mercy is great unto the heavens, Ps. 57.10.
What is said of one stream, may well be applied to the great Ocean, from which
it flows as a small part; what is said of the word of promise, and Gods
fidelity in accomplishing it, Ps. 138.2. may truly be said of his mercy and
those bowels from which the promises did spring, viz. that he has magnified
that attribute above all his name. Albeit all his excellencies and properties,
as they are in himself, be equal and infinite; yet if we consider them, as to
their exercise and execution, and their egresse (as they speak) toward the
creatures, his mercy Divina misericordia tanta est, ut si quis universa peccata
totius mundi commisisset, and doleret quod tam bonum Dominum, tam superbe
offendisset; firmiterque proponeret amplius abstinere, Deus talem nunquam
damnaret: sed stulti sua per versitate (ut conqueritur, August. de temp. sermon.
109.) sic volunt Deum esse misericordem, ut non sit justus, sed observent quae
contra istorum hominum stultitiam, profert idem author lib. de 10 chordis, cap.
1. tom, 9. fol. (mihi) 199. (vid. loc) recte enim Gregor. in 1. Reg. cap. 3. v.
18. fol. (mihi) 252. peccare, and de Dei creatoris clementia presumere pelago
justitiae ejus exponi est, nam (inquit vir doctus) misericordia sine justitia
non est misericordia sed fatuitas.
does far outshine all the rest; and thus it has the first and chief room in
his name, Exodus 3.6.7. and is most emphatically branched forth in several
particulars; and a word is only added concerning his justice to guard against
the abuse of the former most glorious attribute, by the presumption of secure
sinners: And this is the attribute which the Psalmist, in praising of God, in
on Hymn must repeat twenty six several times, Ps. 136. See also Ps. 36. Ps.
103. Ps. 86.5. Jonah, 4 2. Joel, 2.13. Exodus 20.6. etc. And albeit the Lord
being provoked by the ungratitude and rebellion of devils and men, does
exercise his justice and severity upon the creatures he has made, yet he does
it not willingly, but, as it were, by way of Ut estendat Deus se quodammodo
invitum cogi ad panas de populo suo exigendas, cum gemitu quodam minatur; quia
enim nihil ei magis proprium est quam benefacere, quoties nobis irascitur, de
severius nos tractat certum est pravitate nostra huc adigi, quia ejus
beneficientiae liberum cursum non permittimus: praesertim vero propensus est ad
suos humaniter tractandos, and dum videt indulgentiae suae non amplius esse
locum, quasi tristis ad puniendum accingitur. Jo. Calvin in Ila. 1.24.
constraint, Lam. 3.33. O, but he delights in mercy. That is (as it were) his
Great is the hainousness of sin, that can provoke a God of so much mercy, to
express much severity: that drop of gall must needs be bitter, that can
imbitter a sea of honey -- God afflicts not willingly, he gives honey naturally,
but stings not till provoked. Mr. JenkinM on Jud. 2.
native, and (as Calvin speaks) his proper work, Micah, 7.18. Hence, when he
is diverted from that course, by the madness of self-destroying sinners, how
does he regrate, and express a kind of reluctance to smite and punish his poor
creatures? Isa. 1.24. Hos. 11.8, 9. and how pathetically does he hold out his
complacency and delight, when there is in his people such a frame and
disposition as is capable of mercy, and lament, as it were, when it is wanting,
Deuteronomy. 5.29. Ps. 81.13. Isa. 48.18. Hos. 6.4. etc. and shall any humble and
thirsting penitent fear, while he draws nigh to this full fountain? and shall
any tenderhearted supplicant doubt of the acceptance and prevalency of his
prayers, with this kind and gracious God? O, ye jealous and suspicious ones I
ye know not who he is, with whom ye have to do, who dare entertain such base
thoughts of the infinite mercy and tender bowels of our God: Ah! what are the
bowels of the most compassionate mother toward the Son of her womb? they are
but a dark shadow of his love, and like a drop to the Ocean. Tam pater nemo,
etc. Isa. 49.15. God Joh. 3.16.
so loved the world, that there was none amongst the creatures, and nothing in
any of them, to be found to make out the comparison: this was such a sic (says
one) as had not a sicut. And yet ye will confidently ask what ye stand in need
of from your earthly Parents, and cannot ask from your Father in heaven without
fear and doubting. Ah! let us be ashamed and humbled for our base and unworthy
thoughts of that most glorious attribute of God, which he most manifests, and
would have most magnified. Its thy desire to have, and how would it delight
thee to receive? what needs then discourage thee, while thou come to ask
from him who is more willing and ready to give, then thou to ask or receive. He
delights in mercy and to do good: He is goodness it self, goodness in the
abstract; and the goodness of the creature scarce deserves the name: Now it is
the nature of Bonum est sui communicativum, and diffusivum.
goodness (as Philosophers affirm) to diffuse and communicate it self. Its
true, God is a free agent in the communication of his goodness, he dispenses
it according to his pleasure; but yet he is, and has declared himself to be
always ready to pity and show mercy to the indigent, and that he will rejoice
over his servants to do them good, Deuteronomy. 30.9. Jer. 32.41. Ps. 35.10. etc. O,
ye of little faith I why do ye then fear, and by your unbelief obstruct your
own mercies? If (says Profluens largiter spiritus nullis finibus premitur, nec
coercentibus claustris intra certa metarum spatta refraenatur; manat jugiter,
exuperat offluenter, nostrum tantum sitiat pectus, and pateat: quantum illuc
fidei capacis afferimus, tantum gratiae inundantis haurimus, Cypr. lib 1. epist
2.
Cyprian) ye had faith to receive, he has a hand to give without measure,
above all that ye can think or ask.

Thus we have, as it were, Gods natural propension to do good to his creatures;
to which, 2. we may add that moral obligation to show mercy to his servants,
with whom he has made a Covenant; he (to whom none of the creatures could set
bounds, nor oblige) has of his own good pleasure made known to us in his
promises that way of mercy, in which he will walk toward us; so that now we
have the credit of heaven, and the truth and fidelity of the great King
morgaged (as it were) for our security, and shall we still fear and distrust?
and by our jealousy and unbelief dishonor the high and lofty one, who has
stoupt so low as to bring himself under the obligation of a And not one
promise, but so many; and concerning not some few and small things, but
whatsoever may make for our good and happiness here, and hereafter. 1 Timothy 4 8.
2 Pet. 1.3. and therefore the Apostle there had reason to admire the exceeding
greatness and preciousness of the promises, (...).
promise, and to confirm it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which
it was impossible for God to ly, we might have strong consolation and
confidence, Heb, 6.17, 18. But albeit some out of weakness, and upon a mistake
of their own state, may question their interest in the promise, yet that any
one out of hell should be so desperately mad, as once to doubt of the truth of
the promises, and of Gods fidelity and veracity, will hardly be imagined; nay,
the devils themselves believe, and are convinced of the truth, both of Gods
promises and threatenings, and therefore tremble, Jam. 2.19. And there is none
in hell, but as they find by their sad experience, that Gods Word against them
is accomplished, so they know that there has not 1 Kings, 9.56.
failed one word of all his good promises toward his servants. But amongst
these Rev. 4.8.
locusts that come from the bottomless pit, I mean the Roman Seducers, there is
found one Medina, who dare open his mouth to utter such a mad (I cannot say
Though hell be the place of blasphemies, yet the present sense and misery does
banish such a fancy from thence.
hellish) blasphemy, and who is not ashamed to pretend religion, and to draw an
argument from Gods sovereignty, and absolute power to confirm that wicked
dream: For (says Sciens ecclesia -- quod Deus potestatem suam non alligaverit
scripturis, and promissis quae in scriptura continentur; quandoquidem ipse
super omnia est, and tam omnipotens post promissa, ac si nil promisisset ideo
ecclesia simpliciter Deum orat ne illa absoluta omnipotentia contra animas
fidelium qui in gratia decesserunt utatur: ideo orat ut eas ab ateruls paenis
and a vindicta and judicio condemnationis liberare, and ut eas cum suis electis
resuscitare dignetur. Jo. Medina in cod. orat. quaest. 6.
he) God has not limited and astricted his power to the Scriptures, or to the
promises that are therein contained, since he is above all things, and as
omnipotent after all his promises, as if he had made no promise; therefore
(says he) the Church does humbly pray, that he would not use this absolute
power and omnipotency against the souls of just men after their death, but that
he would keep them from everlasting pains, and raise them up at the last day.
We have spoken to this unreasonable and antiscriptural conclusion, which that
author would collect from thence, and now will say no more but that this is
dignum patella operculum, that a blasphemous conceit is a fit medium to prove
an article of the antichristian faith. And we would be too prodigal of time, if
we did spend much of it in confuting that strange fancy, which falls under
the present disquisition; there being none of whatsoever profession, besides
that author, who will not abominat such a vile assertion; which Alph. Mendoz.
contrav. theol. quaest. 6. 5.
Alphonsus Mendoza (though one of the Romish Clergy, and who owneth that
conclusion for which it was brought by Medina) calls indignum viro theologo, a
tenet unworthy of him who bears the name of a Divine. Let us hear what the
Pagan Plutarch says concerning the like (yea, he instanceth this very
particular) case, If (says A in vero? qui esse non putat Deos, nefarius sit:
qui tales ducit esse quales superstitiosi, nonne opinionibus tenentur magis
nefariis? ego quidem de me homines praedicare mavelim, neque omnino natum
fuisse, neque esse Plutarchum, quam dicere bominem esse Plutarchum instabilem,
volucrem, etc. Atqui de Diana quam opinabantur esse Deam credunt superstitiosi
similia his, and praviora, etc. Plutar. Ethic. de superst. interp. Herm.
Cruser. page (mihi.) 317.
he) they be most nefarious and abominable who deny that there is a God, yet
certainly those are more nefarious and blasphemous, who entertain such eroneous
and unworthy conceits of God, as superstitious dreamers do cherish and vent: I
rather (says he) men would think, that there is not in the world, neither ever
was such a one as Plutarch, then that they would say that Plutarch is an
unstable and unconstant man, who does not stand to his word, etc. and yet such
and worse apprehensions have the superstitious of their God, etc. If the pure
creature cannot endure that his truth and fidelity should be questioned, what
an indignity must it be to cast such an imputation upon the infinite Creator? He
who will not suffer the least jot or title of his word to fall to the ground,
Mat. 5.17, 18. and who (as we heard from Psa. 138.2.) has magnified his truth
above all his name, will certainly be avenged on such who dare rob him of that
glory; and if Psa. 11.3.
this foundation fail, well may we ask, What can the righteous do? what is his
hope and where shall he ground his confidence? We will say no more now for
confuting that intolerable blasphemy, but shall remit the reader to Impios
extremae blasphemia reos facit, quod Deum mendacii arguant: certe Deo nihil
pretiosius est, quam sua veritas: quare nulla illi atrocior injuria ficri
potest, quam dum hoc honor spoliatur; ergo ut nos ad credendum incitit
argumentum a contrario sumit* nom si Deum facere mendacem, horribilis est and
execranda impie^as, qui^ tunc quod illi maxim proprium est eripitur: quis non
horreat fidem Evan gelio der^gare, in quo Deus unice verax and sidelis vult
baberi^ hoc diligenter notandum est; mirantur aiiqui cur, tantopere Deus fidem
commendet, cur tam severe damnetur incredulitas: atqui hic vertitur summa Dei
gloria, nam quum pracipuum veritatis suae specimen in Evangelio edere v^l^eri^,
nibil illi faciunt reliquum quicunque oblatum illic Christum respuunt, quare u^
quempiam in reliquis vitae partibu^ demu^ Angelo esse p^rem, diabolica tamen
est ejus sanctitas, quamdiu Christum rejirit, etc. Jo. Calv. in 1 Io. 5.10.
Calvin's full Commentary on 1 John 5.10. he that believes not God has made
him a liar, and can any make him worse?

O! but will the doubting believer say, If I should suffer such a blasphemous
thought once to enter into my heart, I were deservedly accursed; if I discredit
but a vain, lying deceitful man like my self, he will think himself
dishonored, and should I deal thus with him for whom it is impossible to lie?
I know that God is true, though all men be liars and may deceive or be
deceived, I know that God will make his word good, and faithfully perform all
his promises to whom they belong: but, alas! I fear lest I be not among that
number, and that I have no interest in the promises though God cannot deceive,
yet I may be deceived in applying his word without a ground and warrant; For,
ah! such is my unworthiness, etc. Ans. We will not now digress to examine thy
title, albeit such as have no right, use not to question their right; So that
thy very anxiety and fear may open some door of hope, and be some ground of
confidence unto thee: and if thou did not believe, could thou still thus
depend on God and call upon him? and (as has been observed) thy not knowing
thy interest in the promises, will not nullify thy interest. But now, thou who
say thou daist not distrust God, but thy self and thine own state, let me
ask, 1. if thy faith be as strong to the fulfilling of the promises, as to thy
interest in them, and whether thou would still doubt, though thou were
assured that thy state were safe? and whether thou believe that all the
prayers of those who are Saints indeed are heard, and meet with a return, and
that God does always accomplish the many and large promises he has made to
prayer? Thou can not thus (which is too ordinary) doubt, but thou must call
Gods fidelity in question; however, thou may think or profess that thou do
only doubt of thine own condition. 2. Supposing thou art at a point, as to thy
state and condition, I would ask whether thou art as confident to receive the
very particular in kind which thou did petition, as thou art confident of the
goodness and convenience of it for thee? If thou do more doubt as to the
first, then as to the second, thy doubting must flow from thy distrusting Gods
goodness, care and fidelity; and thou can not say, that while thou come
before the Lord to present thy supplications to him, thou did believe that he
would do that which was best for thee in such a particular. 3. I would enquire,
whether notwithstanding thy doubting either concerning thy state or the success
of thy prayers, yet still thou hingest and dependest upon God, saying, with
him, Job. 13.15. Though he should slay me, yet will I trust in him, and call
upon him as long as I live; and if it be thus with thee, thou may
confidently lay hold on that word, Isa. 26.3. (though thou walk in darkness and
have no light, yet if fearing the Lord and obeying his voice, thou trust in him
as thou art allowed, Isa. 50.10.) thou have his word, that he will keep thee in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on him, because thou trustest in him: Nay,
when arguments drawn from sense and light do fail, yet thou may plead and
argue from thy trusting and dependence upon him, and improve that topic in thy
prayer, with Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. and David, Psa. 7.1. Psa. 25.2.20. Psa. 57.1.
Psa. 71.5. Psa. 86.2. etc. Indeed, if thou did not depend and rely on Christ,
and if thou did not obey that command, 1 John 3.23. thou could not escape
that curse sealed with an oath, Heb. 3.18. For, as Calvin. loc jam ci^.
Calvin says, though we were unblamable in our whole conversation, yet, if we
do not believe in Christ, all this were but a devilish holiness and could not
profit us; while thou stand at a distance from Christ, thou rejectest all
the promises, which only in him are yea and amen. And, O! what Nullum genus
insipientiae infidelitate (ut sic loquar) insipientius. Bern. de confid.
folly thus to cast away and to despise thine own mercies: but if thou close
with, and still hing upon him, though thou have weak eyes and can not see and
discern the grips and hold thou have laid on him, yet he will not cast thee off
nor suffer thee to fall. But, whatever be our ignorance, weakness or mistake,
the Lord has bountifully given to us his truth and veracity, as a sure and
immovable ground of confidence; he being as unchangeable in his truth, as in
his being; he can no more falsify his word and break promise, then leave off
to be: what place then is there left for doubting, while we have not one, but
so many full and clear promises, that God will hear and answer our prayers? the
promise of audience (says the judicious Mr. Cujus siducia fulcrum principal^,
est ve^^eissimi, and om^ipot^^ti^ Dei promiss^o de exauditione plus centies in
Scripturis rep^^i^^, Psa. 50.15. Isa. 65.24. Mat. 7.7. Mat. 18.19. Luc. 11.9.
Joa. 14.1^, 14. Jo. 16.23. Jac. 1.5. 1 Joa. 3.22. and 5.14, 15. etc. Hanc
promissionem quam Christu^ j^r^^^^to consfirma^it, quamque ^piritus sanctu^ in
cord nost^^ ^^cri^^ ^bsign^^, fides debe^ fixis oculis intueri, eique firmiter
inniti, ut cer^^^ de (...) di^ione procum sid^^iam ^^^^^^iat, Gerhard harm,
evang. cap. 149.
Gerhard) is more then an hundred times repeated. If a man of credit once speak
the word, thou will rest on it, and yet dare doubt after the God of truth has
spoken once and again; and may thou not fear, lest he who has magnified his
truth above all his name, will magnify his justice in being avenged on thee,
for this dishonor done to his name?

3. The infinite power and omnipotent arm of God; we ask from him who can do
exceeding abundantly above all we can think or ask, Ephesians. 3.20. The poor
creature may be kind, willing and ready to help, but it is weak and unable; but
as our God is incomparably more kind, tender and affectiona^, So nothing is
hard difficult or impossible to him, Mat. 19.26. Mark 10.27. Luke 1.37. Prayer
lays hold on Gods omnipotency, and engages it in our quarrel: Hence (says
Jenkin on Jude, v. 20.
one) there is a shadow of omnipotency in prayer; and are not praying Saints
strong, and to persecuting enemies Cant. 6.4.
terrible, as an army with banners? one praying Elijah, was (in the estimation
of him who had learned of God to judge aright, and give to things their right
name) the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, 2 King. 2.12. and wicked King Joash
had so much light and conviction as to acknowledge the Est quadam precum
omnipotentia.
same of his successor Elisha, 2 King. 13.14. Ah! who knows the power and
efficacy of fervent prayer? Jam. 5.16. Faith and prayer (says Ineffabilem,
supernaturalem, superartificialem, super omne ingenium hominum, super damonum
astutiam and facultatem -- Fide^ and oration potestatem atque virtutem efficacia
a Domine acceporunt, ut ea credamus esse sacta per fidem, qua ^ulli^, aliis
argumentis fieri potuissent, atque illa orationi concessa, quae omnibus aliis
sun^ denegata donis, oblatisque muneribus, atque ullis humanis digni^^tibus non
porrecta, Simon de Cassia, lib. 9. de gest. Christi cap. 49. Gratio est oranti
prasidium, adversari^ inc^^dium, Augel^^ solat^um, Deo gra^um sacrificium, Aug.
apud. Archidiac sup. dec, did, 96. fol. 105. col. 3.
one) have obtained from God a supernatural and ineffable power, over and
against all the policy and might of devils and men; So that those things have
been done by faith and given in return to prayer, that no wisdom, gift,
dignity, excellency or strength could effectuat. See Heb. 11.

You will say, nay, but the Lord works no wonders now, and my case is so
desperate, that less will not do the turn. Ans. Albeit now a days we have no
warrant to ask or expect miracles, yet his hand is not shortened; and albeit the
doctrine of faith be sufficiently confirmed by the miracles wrought by the
Prophets and Apostles, and though there be no extraordinary calling of men,
requiring extraordinary dispensations to evidence that it is of God; yet, if
Gods glory and his peoples good did as much call for miracles now as in former
times, these should not be wanting; the Lord is still what once he was,
wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, Isa. 28.29. And albeit the
popish Legends of their Saints miracles be apocryphal, and in many things
ridiculous, yet there was searce one age, since the days of Christ, that
cannot furnish authentic evidences of the wonderful works of God toward his
children: Nay, the Lord can, by an extraordinary (though strange and
astonishing to us) providence, bring to pass whatever can make for our good and
happiness. Our extremity cannot be so great, that it may not be a fit
opportunity for him to work; there is no case so desperate in which he cannot
help, and far beyond our expectation provide means when the creature can see
none, and bless such means as are at hand, though few and weak; and thus by an
ordinary providence, work great and admirable things for the deliverance,
comfort and happiness of his Saints; thy wound cannot be so deep, but his balm
can cure it, nor thy disease and malady so great, but he has a remedy at hand:
and do not say, O! if I had been living in former days, when the Lord wrought
miracles for his people; thou art unworthy of this Gospel Light, who would
once lay it in the balance with those works of providence, which also were
wrought for thee, and which thou (to whose hands an authentic Register of them
is sent) ought to improve as thy talents. And as to thy present case and
trial, neither thus art thou at a loss: for, 1. the goodness and mercy, the
love and tender bowels of the Father, is the same. 2. His word and promises,
his truth and fidelity are unchangable. 3. The blood of Christ and his
purchase, and so the title and right of his servants is the same, yesterday, to
day and for ever; yea we, for our further comfort, have his intercession
super-added. 4. The help of the Spirit to direct and instruct, to assist and
strengthen, to witness, seal, comfort, etc. is now rather more then less. Since
all things stand as formerly (and any alteration being additional and for the
better to usward) our interest in God and in the blood of his Son, our right
to the Promises, and to the Covenant the same, why may not our expectation and
confidence be as great and strong, and Gods care and providence as sweet and
comfortable as in days of old? especially since our need, straits and
difficulties may be as great, and Gods glory no less concerned therein, then at
any time formerly; since all things thus stand alike, shall not the event be
the same? Though there may be some change in outward dispensations, and in the
manner of working, yet the work and effect may be the same, as effectual and
seasonable, as sweet and comfortable to us, and as unexpected, astonishing and
admirable to enemies: and why then may not we, as well as Gods people and
servants of old, lay hold on his omnipotency and infinite power for our stay and
comfort?

4. Consider that title and name the word of truth gives unto the Lord, he is
the hearer of prayer, Ps. 65.2. he is plenteous in mercy to all that call upon
him, Ps. 86.5. he will fulfill the desire of those that fear him, and hear
their cry, Ps. 145.19. And may we not have this confidence in him, that he will
hear us whenever we call? and may we not know that he will answer our
desires, 1 John 5.14, 15. etc. It is reported to the commendation of some
States and Princes, that they never rejected any Petitioner; the Senators of
old Rome did Rob. Cawdray treas. of simil. page 548.
judge it a great disgrace to the Roman state, that any man should have
occasion to say, that he had in vain asked help at their hands. It does not
become the Emperor (said Ne quem sine spe dimitteret, negans oportere quenquam
a sermon principis tristem discedere Cluver. Hist. epit. in Tito. Vespas. page
(mihi) 289.
the noble and magnanimous Titus Vespasian) to send any supplicant sad from
him. Ah! shall the poor creature have such large bowels, and shall not the
infinite Creator, the 2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of mercies and God of all comfort, pity all his honest supplicants?
Shall it be below a generous Prince to send away any of his subjects sad from
his presence, and shall not the King of Saints regard the prayer of his
destitute ones, and hearken to their complaint? Ps. 102.17. Such as never went
to school, and know not how to frame an argument according to art, may without
hesitation, from this encouraging principle (with the Prophet, Ps. 65.2.) draw
that sweet conclusion, therefore unto thee shall all flesh come, and may (if
the fault be not in themselves) with confidence present their supplications
unto thee. And who would faint in that exercise, that cannot want success? O!
let us consider the parable, Luke 18.1. with the several encouraging
dissimilitudes, and let us no more doubt of Gods readiness to hear and answer
our requests: particularly let us ponder how it was a burden to that cruel
Judge, who neither regarded God nor man, to be petitioned; but the prayers of
the Saints are Gods delight, Prove. 15.8. they ascend up before him as incense,
as an odor of a sweet smell, and a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to
him, Ps. 141.2. Revel. 8.3, 4. The voice of his petitioners is sweet, and as
music in his ears, Cant. 2.14. Rev. 5.8. Ah! why should thou weary in
speaking, since he does not weary in hearing? what! though the vision tarry,
yet wait for it, because it will surely come; it will not tarry. What strange
language is this, though it tarry, it shall not tarry? But there is no
contradiction; though as to our sense and apprehension it tarry, and for a long
time; yet it shall not tarry one moment longer, then the fit and appointed
time. The Lord waits, that he may be gracious unto us, and do us good; that we
may be fit to receive, and improve every mercy aright, and that it may be a
mercy and blessing indeed, Isa. 30.18. And will we not suffer him to time our
mercies so, that they may do us good? and if once the fit season were come,
while his servants are yet speaking, he will hear: yea, and answer before they
speak, Isa. 65.24. Ps. 32.5. Many a time has our suit been dispatched, before
we have presented it; the Lord in his providence has met us in our way to the
throne, and filled our mouth with songs of praise, instead of prayers and
complaints; and has given us not only what we would ask and desire, but Thus
to Solomon asking only wisdom, the Lord did give riches and honor in great
abundance, 1 Kings, 3.9.13. and to Hannah, asking one Son, 1 Samuel 1.11. the
Lord did give three Sons and two Daughters more, Chapter ^.21. to Jacob asking only
food and raiment, Genesis 28.20. he gave two bands and companies. Genesis 32.10. etc.
abundantly more; the Lord can do unto us, and for us, above what we can think
or ask; and who dare limit, or set bounds to his Majesty?

5. If we consider what persons and prayers have met with success, it will seem
very unreasonable once to doubt of the prevalency of the fervent prayer of the
righteous; 1. for persons, we may for our encouragment call to mind, that the
eyes of all things wait upon him, and that accordingly he gives them their
meat in due season, that he hears the moaning of brute beasts, and satisfies
the very natural and and sensitive desire of every living thing, Ps. 145.15,
16. etc. Hence, we may well argue with our blessed Master, if God thus feed the
Ravens, and cloth and array the lillies and grass of the field; if he thus care
for brutes, and satisfy the natural inclination and desire of these inferior
creatures, will he not far rather hear the cry, and answer the desire of his
own children? Luke 12.24, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 9.9. But, 2. as the Lord thus hears
the natural and sensitive voice of brutes, so also out of his general bounty,
he pitieth brutish sensual men, and often answers them in the day of their
trouble and extremity; thus he hearkened to the voice of Hagar and Ishmael,
Gen, 21.17. of Rehoboam, 2 Chr. 12.7. of J^h^ahaz, 2. King. 13.4. of Ahab, 1
King. 21.29. of (formerly vile, though then repenting) Manasseh, 2 Chr. 33.13.
of heathnish Niniveh, Jonah, 3.10. of Pagan Mariners, Ps. 107.28. of the proud
tyrant Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.34. of dissembling and hypocritical Professors,
Ps. 78.34, 38. etc. Thus the Lord would testify that high account he has of
the fervent prayer of his honest supplicants, in regarding the very picture and
shadow of that ordinance so far, as to remunerat the same with the benefits of
a common providence: which will be yet more apparent, if, 3. we remember what
kind of prayers have not only met with a Viz. some fruit of a common and
general providence.
bountiful return, but also have been graciously accepted, and have obtained a
blessing indeed; yea, and not only when there has been much weakness in the
performance, but also some present distemper in the supplicant; thus he
answered the desire of quarelling Moses, Exodus 6.1. Exodus 5.22.23. of
passionate Jonah, Jon. 2.10, 7. of David changing his behavior, as if he had
been mad, Ps. 34.4. of Abraham denying his wife, and exposing her to so great a
temptation, etc. And then for infirmities and weakness, as to the work it self;
did not the Lord hearken to Hezekiah his chattering like a Crane, and mourning
like a Dove, Isa. 38.5, 14. to the Psalmist his crying and broken language,
when his spirit was so overwhelmed that he could not speak, Ps. 77.1, 4. to the
prisoners groans, Ps. 102.20. to the sighs of the needy, Ps. 12.5. to the
publicans short ejaculation, Luke 18.14. If the Lord will hear the cry of weak
ones, who cannot speak, will he then reject thee, whose mouth he has opened to
pour out thy complaint before him? But let none abuse this fatherly
condescension of our God, as to imagine that it is enough, and acceptable
service to God, if we can speak some few words in a dead formal way, without
all life, and sense; which is the mad conceit of carnal and hypocritical
professors; for though the Lord pity his sick children, and hear the sighs and
groans of a broken and contrite heart, yet he will, in his wrath, break those
stony-hearted hypocrites, who dare thus mock his infinite majesty with such
superficial performances: and it would be remembered, that though there was no
spiritual life and heat in those natural (as I may call them) sacrifices of
Ahab, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. yet there was a proportionable and suitable fervor,
tenderness and affection in their supplications and complaints; in respect of
which, they had the advantage of formal hypocrites, whose hearts (such as they
are) do not join in the work, and who do not express so much as a natural
affection and desire; especially while they are asking heavenly and spiritual
mercies.

6. Let us consider the experience of all the Saints; and Da mihi Christianum
and scit. quid dico.
carnal hearts are not fit judges in a matter, which as yet does not belong to
them, and therefore no wonder though they have no experience of Gods fulfilling
the promises to themselves, (they not having an interest in them) the
Scriptures and ecclesiastical history hold out many instances of Hence reverend
Mr. Bolton Just. for right. conf. affl. sect. 1. part. 1. ^h. 2. having given
several instances of its prevalency, adds, These are (says he) registrated
to represent unto us to the worlds end, the almighty and wonder-working power
of prayer -- that precious and almost, if not altogether omnipotent grace: and
cites a passage from Chrysostom, De orando Deum, lib. 1. Deprecatio armatura
est inexpugnalis; ac tutissimum, nec nunquam fallens muni mentum; pari
facilitate vel unum repellens militem, vel innumerabilia hostium millia.
remarkable providence in return to their prayers; and as for particulars, he
who would undertake to give a catalogue of them, might first go number the sand
on the Seashore; yea, there never was one Saint (though never so mean and
weak) who has observed the works of God, and the several steps of providence
toward himself, but will put to his seal to this truth, that the Lord is the
hearer of prayers. and such as converse with the godly, will hear them from
time to time admire Gods bounty and care for them, and to proclaim his fidelity
in answering their prayers, though mixed with much weakness and dross, and
though sometimes through ignorance and impatience, they have (with Zion, Isa.
49.14.) complained that God had forgotten them, yet ere long they became
sensible of their mistake, and have been forced to confess and bewail their
folly and unbelief, and to say (as there, ver. 15, 16.) that though a tender
mother could forget her sucking child, yet the Lord could not forget his
people, they being graven upon the palms of his hands: As we have the Word of
him who is truth it self, and cannot lie, that he will always hear, and give a
gracious return to all the prayers of his honest supplicants, which is the
foundation of faith, so every Saint has his own experiences, which
spiritualized sense and feeling may lay hold upon; and is there yet any thing
wanting for thy comfort and establishment? is there yet any of the sons of Zion
who dare doubt of the tender love and care of their Father, and (which is
worse) who dare give God the lie? he may summond all his creatures, and put
them to it, if there be any among them who can bear testimony against his Word.
O! what an impudent and blasphemous lie were it, to say, that God had not kept
promise? and yet this atheism lurketh in the hearts of too many; yea, and so
much of unbelief as lodges in the best, so much also of this venom, which the
old serpent did Gen 3.5, 6.
spue out upon our first parents, and which they too greedily sucked in; but
after that we have cast out all that poison, and are perfectly purged; after
that our eyes are anointed, and all mists of darkness are dispelled, we will
doubt no more, and complain no more; after we are once entered in the light of
glory, we will then clearly see our errors and mistakes, and will proclaim to
all eternity the Lords faithfulness in fullfilling all his promises, and his
bounty and kindness toward us, in not granting our foolish and sensual
requests: nay, who did ever hear a Saint, on his deathbed (when carnal baits
and worldly temptations could promise little, and furnish no contentment, and
thus were not able so to allure, infatuat and bewitch, as formerly) who (I say)
was the man, that entering upon the borders of eternity, durst challenge the
Almighty for not accomplishing his promises? or who could say, that at any time
he had called upon God in vain? All ages can give their evidences, and all
believers will, and must sooner, or at length confess, that there was never a
prayer put up in faith, that proved abortive; though all our labors and
endeavors under the Sun, may be fruitless and to no purpose, yet prayer will
never be as a Hos. 9.^4.
miscarrying womb and dry breasts, but always proves that good seed, which
(though it may for a while lie hid under ground, yet) still yields good fruit,
for the comfort and satisfaction of the sower. What is 2 Sa^^ ^.22.
said of the bow of Jonathan and the sword of Saul, is a fit motto of the
prayer of faith; it never returns empty. And this truth will not be called in
question by any, except, when sense and carnal reason (these corrupt judges in
the matters of God) do sit on the bench, and give out sentence: But ah! our
unbelief, negligence and estrangedness from God, does deprive our selves and
the Church, of many mercies, and of much matter of comfort to our selves, of
praise to God, and terror and astonishment to enemies.

7. If we consider the many, sweet and binding relations, which the Lord has
been pleased to undertake toward his covenanted people, who are true
Israelits, and are sincers in their profession; if we consider how all the
persons of the blessed Trinity are affected toward them, what is the love of
the Father, the purchase of the Son, and the work of the holy Ghost, our
doubting and unbelief will be most unteasonable; 1. then is not God our Maker,
our Lord and Master, our Father and Husband, etc. And will not the infinite
Creaator care for his creatures, who depend upon him? will not the great Lord
and Master of heaven and earth, care and provide for his honest servants? will
not the Father of mercies pity his children in the day of their trouble, and
hear their cry? will not the Husband hearken to the voice of the Spouse, and
grant her desire? etc. 2. As to the relations under which we stand toward the
persons of the blessed Trinity severally; Quem enim invocamus? Patrem, Fratrem,
Advo^atum; Quo ausu? Patre jubente, Fratrejustituente, Advocoeto inpellente
Quae fiducia? Patre promittente Fraire adjurante, Advocato testificante. Quid
petimus? baereditatem quam nobis impetravit Fraterconcessit Pater, obsignavit
Spiritus sanctus, Gerhar. harm. Evang. cap. 149.
is not the (x) Father our father, the Son our brother and advocat; and the
holy Ghost our helper leader and guide? and who will doubt of acceeptance,
welcome and success while his father commands, his brother inviteth, and his
guide and counselor persuades and allureth him to come and present this
requests? while the father promises; the elder brother and heir renews and
(y) confirms his fathers grant; our leader and assistant does put that
security in our hand, and is willing to engage with them in the same bond, and
puts to his seal and subscription, confirming their evidence, and adding his
own; what place is there left for unbelief, doubting and fears? Especially if,
3. we consider, 1. the Fathers love; that mysterious love, in giving his only
begotten Son to death, that we might live, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.9. and shall we
think, that he who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us, will
not freely with him also give us what we shall ask in his name? Romans 8.32. I
say not (says the Son) that I will pray the Father for you; for the Father
himself loves you, Joh. 16.26, 27. I would not have you think, that you have
no other ground whereon to build your faith, By a most emphatick asseveration
(which to many of the learned appears to be an oath) as Joh. 16.23. etc.
but my intercession, I will not pray for you to one who knows you not, and
has no respect to you, I will not pray for you, as if ye were enemies and
strangers, neither should ye thus pray for your selves after that ye are
reconciled to him, through my blood; after ye are become children, and mutually
love, and are loved of the Father and me; Courteours will confidently draw nigh
to their Prince; and we have moyen in heaven; the King himself loves us, and
has adopted us, to the crown; and will he withhold lesser mercies, and hide
his face while we present our requests to him? But as the Father does thus love
us, and freely give, and by covenant dispone to us all that we can desire, or
stand in need of; So, 2. the Son has laid out a price for us, and by his blood
has purchased all these things to us; and ever lives to make intercession for
us, and to apply to us the merit of his death, and to put us in possession of
all these good things which are the purchase of his blood; ah! we seldom visit
the throne, yet Christ is always there; we weary in praying for our selves,
but Christ wearieth not to pray for us; our prayers are cold and without life;
but Christ does not faint, nor grow remiss; our manifold iniquities do cry
against us, but the blood of Christ does outcry them: And since we come not in
our own name, but in his, and ask not for our own worth and goodness, but for
his sake who has paid our debt and purchased our peace and acceptance through
his own blood, and who does concur with us in our supplications, why should we
fear? the Father always hears him. Joh. 11.42. and therefore must also hear
us, with whom he always joyneth; the Father cannot reject us and our prayers,
unless he also hide his face from the Son of his love; which since he will not,
and cannot do, we may rest confident and secure: but as the Father has
promised and freely disponed, and the Sun purchased all the good things we can
ask, So, 3. the holy Ghost does enable, fit and prepare us, both to ask and
receive, he draws, and helps weak ones to ascend to the throne, and puts
words in their mouth, and teaches them what to say, Romans 8.26, 27. Joh. 14.16,
17. And will the Lord reject those prayers that are breathed into us by his
Spirit? but as the Spirit does thus help us to pray, so to pray in faith; as he
helps our infirmities, by enlarging the heart, and filling it with spiritual
affections, so also by working in us a child-like confidence, and making us cry
(not only with the mouth, which were no great matter, but with the heart,
having made an impression and sense of it there) Abba Father, Romans 8.16. As he
leads the Saints into all truth, and puts to his seal to the whole Word of
God, Joh. 16.13. Joh. 14.26. so particularly to the promises concerning the
success of their prayers, that if they knock it shall be opened, if they seek
they shall find, etc. Oh! what a blasphemy were it once to imagine that God
could lie, and would not perform these promises? or that the Spirit of truth
would put to his seal to an untruth?

The Lord pity and pardon our unbelief, that having to do with such a
compassionat and condescending Lord, who has stoopt so low, and come so nigh
to us, who has held forth himself to us under the nearest, most amiable and
engaging relations, and who has taken upon him so many bonds to do us good;
we, notwithstanding will yet doubt of his good will, and of his faithfulness in
performing his promises: Oh! 1. what a dishonor do we offer to our kind Master
thus to question his love, care and fidelity? 2. what a shame to our holy
profession? 3. what a base return do we make for the many mercies we still
receive? and, 4. what loss and damage do we bring to our selves? we expect
little, and receive little; we will not trust God, and he will not satisfy our
desires, Jam. 1.6, 7.

Are ye now convinced of your folly and guiltiness, in thus distrusting the
Lord? and is it the desire of your soul to have this evil cured? O! then, 1.
ponder frequently and seriously these and such like considerations; if this
were the matter of your daily meditation, if these things did sink down into
your hearts, and did abide upon your spirits, they might prove a notable
preservative against your unbelief, doubtings and jealousies. 2. Let us
exercise our selves in the Scriptures; especially laying hold on such promises,
as are most pertinent and suitable to our condition; faith must have a word of
promise whereon it must rest, and the more express and particular that it be,
our faith will proportionably cleave to it the more firmly; O! but what
atheism must there lodge in that heart, that dare doubt where it has this
warrant, thus says the Lord? 3. Labor to know more of God, his love, mercy,
power, fidelity, etc. Ignorance of God, his nature and attributes, is the
mother of jealousy and infidelity, but they who know his name, will put their
trust in him, Ps. 9.10. With what zeal and success did Moses plead from Gods
attributes? Numb. 14.17, 18, 19.4. Since sensible demonstrations are so
concludent, and prevail so much with us, who live too much upon sensible
objects, let us observe and keep a register of the gracious returns from time
to time made to the prayers of Gods people and honest servants. 1. Our own
experiences would be kept on record; he who can say with David, the Lord has
delivered me out of the paw of the Lion and of the Bear, will be able the more
confidently to say, with him, the Lord will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.37. experience begets confidence. But, 2. we should
also observe the dispensations of providence toward others: the Saints
experiences are recorded in Scripture for our instruction, comfort and
encouragment, Romans 15.4. If God regard the prayer of the destitute, this must
be written for the generations to come, Psa. 102.17, 18. the success that
others have met with will encourage us to follow the like course. 5, Let us be
exact and circumspect in our walk; if our conscience condemn us we will fear
the Judge; every blot in our life does darken and obscure the promise, and
dazzle the eye of faith; when the Saints fall, their faith does shake;
guiltiness is the mother of jealousy; when we do ill we become suspicious, and
are ready to question his love and kindness to us, when we prove ungrate and
come short of our duty to him. O! but if we would believe without staggering,
let us not halt in our walking, let us be conscienciously diligent in every
point of duty, and 1 Pet, 1.14
holy in all manner of conversation, if we would plead the promise and ask in
Jam. 1.6.
faith, nothing wavering.

Hence, for trial, this will be a good negative mark, whereby we may know who
cannot pray in faith; if we do not walk as children, we cannot call God Father,
nor with confidence expect that he will hear us: What son will not be afraid
and ashamed to look his father in the face after he has dishonored him? and
how will he blush to mention that relation, and to call him Father to whom he
has not paid the debt of love, reverence and obedience? And if any perfidious
and rebellious son should be so impudent as, with Herod having given to his son
Antipater his Authority (as he speaks) his favor, his secrets, his heart and
crown in a will signed with his hand; yet that unnatural monster could not stay
a little till his fathers death, but labored by all means to prevent nature;
particularly by sedueing and persuading Pheroras to poison the King; yet having
the boldness to offer to kiss his father (after he was informed of his
conspiracy, though the traitor knew not that his conspiracy was discovered) met
with this terrible repulse, Avaunt thou murderer of brethren and father; the
kiss of a father was not instituted for thee. Behold Quintilius thy Judge, etc.
Nich. Caussin, holy court, part. 1. lib 4. page 133.
Antipater, to offer to salute and kiss his father, he might expect such a
welcome and reward as he met with from the hand of Herod, and to find the
severity of a Judge in stead of the love a Father; and yet, are there not
multitudes? Ah! how many are there, who have the boldness to deal thus with the
father of Spirits? Who, Judas-like, with a Every reigning sin is treason and
rebellion against the great King: and interoretatively Deicide and Regicide;
and every sinner does comply and conspire with Satan, and take up arms for him
against his Master and Lord.
treacherous heart, dare offer to kiss him, in whom they live, move and have
their being, who is their Father by creation, and who offers unto them and
entreats them to accept of the inheritance of children? Such think themselves
to be sons and dare call him father, though they have the heart of an enemy;
such have a kind of faith, confidence and hope, which is nothing but
presumption, delusion, and groundless imagination, suggested by the father of
lies, and maintained and cherished by their own foolish and deceitful hearts.
This their faith is not built upon the word, it has not for its warrant, [thus
says the Lord,] but only, [thus says the murderer and great impostor; thus
says the deceiver and our deceitful and deceived hearts] It does not arise
from the Promises, (as having no foundation there) but only from some
principles of Satan's Catechism, which he carefully instilleth into the ears
and minds of his disciples; and among the many articles of that anti-scriptural
and cursed Creed, this (to our purpose) is one, [If we have some form of
devotion, and now and then speak some few words prayer-wayes, it is no matter
how we live; our prayers will make amends for all; God is merciful, and
therefore (will Satan say, and they upon his word think) he will pity his poor
creatures and servants, and hear them whenever they cry to him: nay, such
will be ready to apprehend, that it were cruelty and injustice to reject such
well-meaning supplicants.] We may not now confute that soul-destroying
delusion; but what the Apostle said of doubting, Jam. 1.7. may far rather be
applied to this mad and desperate presumption and confidence, Let not such
seeure, bold wretches think, that they shall receive any thing of the Lord;
though too many be ready to think they shall receive, yet, says the Apostle,
let them not think so, or if they do, they will but deceive their own souls;
and whatever, for the present, may be the dispensations of a common providence,
yet, ere it be long, they shall know and be convinced, that they received
nothing in mercy and in return to their prayers, and nothing from the Lord, as
their God and Redeemer: he was better acquaint with the mind of God, and did
not mistake, who said, If Iregard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me, Psa. 66.18. And it was an acknowledged principle, that he who was born
blind urged against the Jews in his apology for Christ, Joh. 9.31 For, says
he, we Let bold finners consider how gross their delusion must be, who,
contrary to this known truth, dare presume and draw nigh in any ordinance
without fear.
know, that God hears not sinners; but if any man be a worshiper of him and
does his will, him he hears: Neither would the Saints themselves think they
were not concerned in this caveat; for, albeit the Lord will pity them in the
day of their trouble and hear their prayers, yet, if they step aside from the
approven path, the Lord will hide his face; hence the Psalmist having asserted
Gods care of his Saints and People, and that he would speak peace to such; yet,
he adds a necessary caution and warning, but let them not turn again to
folly; as if it had been said [though they were Gods people, his Saints and
precious ones, who have prayed and wait for an answer, yea, though they have
asked in faith and have met with access and acceptance, so that a message of
peace is dispatched, and is (as it were) on the way toward them in return to
their prayers; yet, if they should, through their folly, turn aside from God,
and in that interim commit some known sin, he would recall (as it were) his
former grant and draw back his hand, and would not speak peace to them who had
made peace with sin.]

Now come we to some positive evidences and marks of the prayer of faith: And,
1. when the affections are much enlarged, when we meet with a gale from heaven
filling the sails, we may, and usually do, expect that voyage will prove
successful; when God opens the heart, and fills the mouth with more then
ordinary boldness, fervency and liberty, we readily will apprehend, that he
purposes to fill our hands and will not send us away empty, according to that
word. Psa. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, (but Only he who is said to open the
ears, Psa. 40.6. Isa. 50.5. to open the eyes, Psa. 146.8. and to open the
heart, (whose messenger and interpreter the lips are) Act. 16.14. He only can
open the mouth to ask aright, he only can open it wide, both extensively and
intensively, and make us desire and ask great things greatly; grandia
granditer, ut loquitur August, loc. cit.
who is sufficient for such a work, unless the Lord put to his hand?) and I
will fill it; We may believe he will fill that mouth with songs of praise for
his gracious answers, which he has opened so wide in fervent and importunate
prayers: when we have spiritual boldness in pleading with God, we will also
have confidence as to the success; and therefore these are joined together and
both ascribed to faith, Ephesians. 3.12. We have boldness, and access with
confidence, through faith. If the Lord lift up the soul to him, if he quicken
and inflame the affections with a more then ordinary ardor and zeal, we will
not readily doubt of our acceptance; when fire from heaven thus falls upon
our sacrifice, we will be very confident: thus, Psa. 27. we have both David's
fervency and confidence, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seck
after, etc. v. 4. this was his importunity; but then his faith did act strongly
and vigorously, v. 1.3.5, 6. I grant our lusts may add wings to our desires,
and be as oil to the wheels, and make us very diligent in our pursuit: there
may be a natural and carnal fervency and importunity, which will rather add to
our fears, then make us in faith rest upon Gods word, love and care; but the
difference may easily appear, (though we will not now prosecute it) because
that holy zeal and importunity is, 1. spiritual, as to the motives and end; 2.
humble, and joined with much self-emptiness and denial; 3. tender of Gods gloty
and honor; and, 4. submissive to his will, whileas the natural importunity is,
1. carnal; 2. proud and selfish; 3. careless of Gods glory and interest, if it
might be satisfied; and, 4, impatient, under a frustration and disappointment.
O! let us labor to curb our lusts, and beat down this their impetuousness and
importunity; but, let us cherish and maintain that holy and spiritual
importunity, which is so acceptable and prevalent with God and profitable to
us: and if we would pray more confidently, let us pray more fervently and
importunatly; when we are cold and formal in prayer, we cannot be very
confident of success, as knowing a lazy and careless way of asking to be a kind
of invitation to deny, qui timide rogat docet negare. Yea, the heathens, though
they thought much babbling acceptable to God, Mat. 6.7. yet, in their
sacrifices, they had a shadow that might have served for confuting that folly;
for, Neque enim sine igue ullum sacrificium fieri licebat -- Si autem mortus
carbone sacrificetur, signum neglectae religionis fore, and perniciosum nemo
dubitavit, Alex. ab Alexandro, genial. dier, lib. 4. cap. 17.
they would not presume to sacrifice without fire, and if the fire had gone
out, they looked upon that as a sign that Gods worship was neglected, and as a
sad omen and presage to him for whom the sacrifice was offered.

2. If frequency in praying be added to fervency, as it may be a further
ground, So another evidence and mark of confidence; without faith we would soon
weary, I believed, therefore have I spoken, Psa. 116.10. But will believing
David faint and leave off, having once spoken? Nay, says he, but I will
continue instant in this exercise, and my faith being strengthened by renewed
mercies, given in return to former prayers, I will call upon him as long as I
live, v. 2. As in handy-trades, men would soon weary in following them, if no
gain were reaped or expected; So the Saints would too quickly faint in trading
with heaven, if they did not see their reward: and therefore, when we continue
instant in prayer, when we constantly follow that course, and not superficially
and perfunctoriously, but seriously and with the whole heart, our faith must be
acting, and there must be some confidence that our labor shall not be lost.
But there be two cases in which, after a signal manner, this restless
importunity, diligence, frequency and continuing instant in prayer, does
evidence our faith and expectation. 1. When we meet with long and continued
delays, if notwithstanding we continue and still renew our supplications; thus
David, under his long-continued persecution by the hand of Saul, continued all
the while busy at the throne, he would not run away from God because he seemed
to hide his face, but rather makes that sad dispensation an occasion to draw
nigh to God, and turns it in matter of complaint (not of, but) to God: as
Psa. 13.1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord? But, if we ask, what kept
David all this time from fainting? I have (says he) trusted in thy mercy: his
faith kept his head above the waters and sent him often to the throne. Hope
deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. but when all other remedies prove
ineffectual, faith will cure that discase. 2. When we not only meet with
delays, but also many discouragments and contrary blasts in our face, to make
us streek sail and give over; if we notwithstanding still follow our duty, and
continue to wrestle with God in his Ordinances while be thus seems to sight
against us by his providence, we must have our loins girt and our spiritual
armor on, and above all, we must make use of the shield of faith in this great
conflict; thus, while Christ seemed not only to slight the woman of Canaan, and
not take notice of her or her request, but also to reproach her as a dog; yet,
she continues to enforce, renew and pursue her suit, she being (according to
Christ's testimony of her) a woman of great faith, Mat. 15, 28. Thus also blind
Bartimeous, when checked and charged to hold his peace, cries the more a great
deal, and will not be put off till he get an answer from Christ himself,
because he believed; hence our blessed Lord ascribes the whole work to his
faith, Mark. 10.52. If falth be strong, it will set it self against all
discouragments, and, like an impetuous river, will overflow and carry down all
ramparts and bulwarks that stand in its way; and therefore, if we faint in the
day of adversity, our strength must be small, Prove. 24.10. But, let none
imagine, that while we say that the believing sold will not be beaten from the
throne, whatsoever impediments and discouragments it may meet with in the way,
as if we excluded the use of other means; nay, faith will stir thee up to every
mean the Lord in his providence offers unto thee, as knowing, that to trust
God and to neglect the means, is to tempt God to work a miracle, and to provoke
him to do no more for us, who would not improve what he offered for our help.
O! but faith in the use of the means will, 1. regulat our choice and keep us
back from all sinful and unlawful means, though our strait were never so
great, and they never so probable and promising. 2. Faith will regulate the use
of them and will make us keep them in a due subordination, not relying or
trusting in them, but only in God, who can, as he pleases, bless or blast
them, and who can work for us though they were removed; and therefore, though
all creature-help did fail, yet a believer could hing and depend upon a word of
promise, till the Lord did beat him off by declaring his purpose as to the
particular, and then submission will come in the place of faith. 3. As faith
dare not tie God to the means, So neither as to the time, way and manner of
working; it dare not limit the Lord nor prescribe to him, but will securely
rest upon Gods wisdom, love and care, and leave all to Gods disposal.

3. Quietness, serenity, calmness and composure of spirit after prayer, is a
good evidence of faith acted in prayer; what can liberat the heart of anxiety,
fear, solicitude and carking cares? what can rebuke these storms and make a
calm in the soul if the Lord himself do not speak peace to it, and if he do not
fasten the hand of faith upon the rock of strength and defense, and cause the
soul rest safely there, notwithstanding all the boisterous winds that may blow
from without? Deep calls unto deep: all thy waves and thy billows are gone
over me, says the Psalmist: But what? had he no stay nor shelter under this
storm? his faith discovered a rock, and unto that he did flee; his faith did
close with a promise, which being pleaded in prayer, he espied a command for
mercy and deliverance flowing from thence, Psa. 42.7.9.8. And then
particularly, he applies the remedy to this distemper, and chideth his own
soul for being disquieted and cast down, having the cure at hand: What? O my
soul, have thou not put up a prayer to God, ( v. 8.) and yet art disquieted?
have thou not faith? can thou not hope and confidently expect a return of thy
prayers? Oh! trust in God, and be no more troubled and perplexed: And to show
how groundless and unreasonable his disquietness was, he repeats this pathetick
question thrice, Psa. 42.5.11. Psa. 43.5. What made Hannah, who came to the
throne with a sorrowful spirit, go away rejoicing, and her countenance be no
more sad? 1 Samuel 1.15.18. She came doubting and went away believing; and now,
knowing that God had heard her prayer, she looked no more sad. And what was it
that supported Paul and calmed his spirit while he was buffeted by the
messenger of Satan? the trial and temptation still continued, albeit he had
prayed against it once and again; but was he thereby discouraged? nay, on the
contrary, his faith from thence collected a sweet and encouraging conclusion,
that since he had prayed, and the particular was withheld, therefore the Lord
purposed to do him good by the trial; and therefore in the interim he should
not want strength and assiststance, for wrestling with the temptation: the
grace of God should be sufficient for him in the combat, and for gaining to him
a complete victory at length, 2 Cor. 12, 7, 8, 9. And what was it that quieted
and composed David's spirit, under that sad and long continued trial, while the
Lord for so long a time delayed to answer the many prayers he had put up for
deliverance from his enemies? I had fainted (says he) unless I had believed to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, Ps. 27.13. his faith
and confidence, that God at length would answer his prayers, did keep him at
his work, and from despondency and dejection of spirit.

4. Waiting and looking for an answer, is a good symptom thou have prayed in
faith; if thou stand upon thy watchtower, to see what the Lord will say unto
thee, and what answer he will send thee (as the Prophet, while he waited for
the vision) it is an evidence that (with him, Habak. 2, 3.) thou expectest it
will surely come: when thou hearknest what God will say, its a token thou
beleivest he will speak, Ps. 85.8. but if thou pray, and lookst not after a
return (which is the sin and folly of too many) though thou may have gone to
the throne in obedience to the command, and that thou might perform that
piece of homage to thy Master and Lord, yet not in faith, laying hold on the
promise of thy kind Father: if thou expectedst an answer, thou would wait for
it; and would not run away from Gods door so soon as thou had knocked.

5. If under our trials and sad sufferings, and when the Lord seems to hide
himself in the day of our trouble, and Ps. 66.20.
to turn away our prayers; yea, if when by his providence, he has manifested
his purpose not to give the particular we have once and again petitioned, and
many days waited for; if notwithstanding we are not only silent and
submissive, patiently acquiescing in his will, but also thankful and
cheerful; if thou not only justify his majesty, and take shame to thy self,
as being unworthy of the least of his mercies, but also magnify and praise
him, while he thus seems to smite thee, and frustrate thy expectation, its a
notable evidence of thy faith, that thou have prayed in faith, and do by
faith live and rest upon his love and care: thus David (as to afflictions and
cross dispensations) acted his faith, Ps. 22. though he was a reproach of men,
though they did laugh him to scorn, shoot out the lip, and shake the head at
him, and though the Lord was silent while he cried to him in the day time and
night season, ver. 1, 2.7. yet he justifies God, and takes shame to himself.
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel! -- but I am a
worm, ver. 3, 6. and still trusts in God, praises his goodness, and inviteth
others to join with him in that exercise, ver. 9, 22, 23, 25. And then for the
other case, viz. of denial and frustration, as to the particular asked; the same
holy man is a notable pattern, who having fasted and prayed for the recovery of
his sick child, yet so soon as he heard he was dead, anointed himself, and went
to the house of God to worship and praise him; and being comforted himself,
comforted also Bathsheba his wife, 2 Samuel 12.20, 24. Now what can uphold the
heart under cross dispensations and sad disappointments, but faith, which can
look up to God as the hearer of prayers; who, when he does not answer us, ad
votum (as Aug. loccit. Permittas ipfis expendere numinibus quid, Conveniat
nobis rebusque sit utile nostris, Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Di.
Juvenal. Sat. 10.
Austin speaks) yet ad profectum, who minds our good when he grants not
our desire; and does that which is better for us, when he withholdeth what we
asked: and thus when reason can epsy no evil in the enioyment of such a
supposed mercy, yet faith will look higher, and rest upon the wisdom, care and
fidelity of him, who has promised to withhold nothing that is good from his
honest suppliants, and to make all things work for their good: Hence, faith
will not only submit to the present dispensation, but will thankfully praise
God, who has ordered all things for the best, and done what was most suitable
for us, and most subservient to his glory in our everlasting happiness,

6. Albeit an immediate testimony, either concerning out state and adoption, or
concerning our acceptance and answer of our prayers be not usual and ordinary,
yet the latter is more rare then the former. If we speak, 1. of an immediate
testimony; and, 2. of a persuasion that God will give the very particular we
prayed for; but otherwise, 1. a general assurance and persuasion built upon,
and drawn from the promises; and, 2. a persuasion that God will hear and answer
our prayers, in that way which is best for us, is that condition and
qualification of prayer after which we enquire: But as to that immediate and
particular testimony, albeit it be not ordinary, yet some eminent Saints at
some special occasions have met with it; and such might close their prayer, as
Christ began his, Joh. 11.41. Father I thank thee that thou have heard me, as
to the very particular I have prayed for: but this cannot properly be called a
mark of faith, it being the highest measure and degree of that faith which
falls under the present disquisition; and, 2. because light needs not
another light, that it may be seen and discerned, but this particular
persuasion is a beam of divine light, clearly shining before our eyes; and
therefore needs no further discovery, nor any marks whereby we may know it.
But as to the other testimony concerning our state, whether it be immediate and
by way of direct illumination and irradiation, or mediat, by application of the
word, or argumentation from it, however (I say) this assurance and persuasion
be wrought in the heart, it is a good foundation, from which we may (if the
fault lie not much at our door) gather the other assurance concerning the
success of our prayers; For, if we know that we have eternal life, and believe
on the name of the Son of God; this is the confidence that we may have in him,
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us, whatsoever we
ask, and that we have the petitions we desired of him, 1 John 5.13, 14, 15. If
the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, and speak to thy heart
and tell thee (as once he did Dan. 10.
Daniel by an audible voice) that thou art greatly beloved, he will also say to
thee, as he said to (h) him, Ver. 12.
that thy words and prayers are heard; if the Lord smile upon thee, and embrace
thee, he will deal kindly with thee, and welcome thee indeed: he is not like
dissembling men, who will use the highest expressions of love, and entertain
with the fairest words and complements, those whom they least respect, and to
whom they purpose to show no favor, nor to grant any of their requests.

O! if we were more humbled for our unbelief, and did more seriously lay to
heart, 1. our sin and ingratitude, in having such hard thoughts of so good a
Master, and distrusting such a kind and loving Father; 2. our folly, in not
only thus provoking our God to hide his face; but also by vexing and tormenting
our selves with imaginary fears, and depriving our heart of that quiet and
peace which is the proper fruit of faith; why should Jacob mourn for his
Benjamin, going to his elder and kind brother Joseph? his fear was but
imaginary, and grounded upon a mistake; and such is thy fear, O believing soul;
are not thy prayers sent to thy Joseph, and will not he accept and welcome them?
and has he not moyen with the King, and shall thy Benjamin, the Son of thy
right hand, return empty? nay, but he shall come with wagons full of provision
for the way, and to carry thee at length to thy beloved Joseph. Ah! what a
scandal are we to our holy profession, what are the promises such dry
breasts,? is thy God so hard a Master? is there nothing in the word of life to
keep thee from fainting in the day of trouble? have thou no advantage of Pagans
and Atheists? nay, if thou do not live by faith, and look up to God for an
answer to thy prayers, unbelievers acting a kind of natural Arising from
natural reason and some common notions of a Deity, and of the divine
attributes, but not leaning to a word of promise.
faith, may (as to the present case) have the advantage of thee; ah! how should
Christians under their dejection and despondency, blush when they hear of the
composure of spirit, and confidence of that excellent moralist Ipsum vero Numam
ade^ divina in re spes suas collocasse perhibent, ut cum aliquando fibi de
hostium adventu, atque incursu nuntiatum esset, subrideret, diceretque, at ego
sacrifico, Plutarch, vit. Grac. Romans fol. (mihi) 24. Lap. Flor. inter.
Numa Pompilius, who hearing of the approach of the enemy, was no whit dismayed
of their number, resolution, valor, strength, etc. but resting securely upon
divine providence, and (as Plutarch says) laughing, as it were, at their folly
and madness, the Lord being engaged in his quarrel; replied, and said no more
at these news, but ego sacrifico, I am busy offering sacrifice to God, and
therefore I do not fear what men can do.

Here it may be asked. 1. Quaest.
1. what faith did Adam in innocence act in worshipping God, and calling upon
his name? Ans. We will not enquire how long Adam continued in that state,
albeit we see no ground for that peremptory assertion of Schoolmen, concerning
the Thom 1. quaest. 63. art. 6. Bannez. in locum and alii passim.
apostasy of Angels next instant after their creation, yet we grant, that very
early, both devils and man did fall; the Scripture tells us that the devil
sinned from the beginning, 1 John 3.8. And the first news we hear of man after
his creation, Genesis 2. is his fall and yielding to the temptation, Genesis 3. and
it is not improbably thought, that he continued not in innocence for the space
of one whole day; so that the present question had place but for a very short
while; to which we answer, that Adam, while innocent, exercised, and if he had
continued in that state, would still have exercised the faith of immediate
dependence upon God, for the accomplishment of his promises. As Adam had a rule
and law (whereof only one parcel is mentioned, Genesis 2.16, 17.) so he had
promises and encouragments for doing his duty, to which he did firmly assent,
till the dark night of temptation surprised him; but this faith did immediately
close with God, and lean to his mercy, power, fidelity, etc. For Adam, before
the fall, did not know the Mediator, nor any thing of the mystery of
incarnation, and therefore could not tender up his worship in the name of
Christ: Its true, Adam then had potentiam credendi (as our Divines disputing
against Arminians speak) so that he would have believed that mystery if it had
been revealed to him, but it seems strange, that any should imagine that Adam
in that state did know that mystery; but yet it seems more absurd and
irrational to affirm (according to the common Thom. 3. quaest. 1. art. 3. ad 5.
Becan. theol. schol. part. 3. tom. 2. cap. 1. quaest. 7. and part. 1. tract. 5.
cap. 2. q 5. and alii passim.
opinion of the popish Doctors) that he knew the mystery of incarnation, and
yet was ignorant of the mystery of redemption, and of his own apostasy, and
falling away from that blessed condition: but supposing both the one and the
other to have been known to Adam; yet while the first covenant stood, Adam
could not look to the Mediator; he not having place in that covenant of works,
which did stand so long as man continued in his first and primeval state.

A second question may be concerning the Saints in glory (supposing that they
pray for the Church militant, 2. Quest.
which in the general is not As has been observed part. 1. chapter 5. page 79. and
chapter 6. page, 1.37.
denied by orthodox Divines) whether they may be said to pray in faith? Ans.
Thom. 1, 2. quaest. 67. art. 3.5. and alii passim; pro contraria tamen
sententia citari potest A lens. Durand Argentin, etc.
Aquinas (and with him the rest of the Roman Clergy) denies that faith is
consistent with the state of glory; yea Apud Jo. de Lugo de virt fid. disp. 17.
sect. 1.
some deny that the Angels, while they were viators, did believe; and those And
this is the common opinion, for which we need not cite any author, because it
is maintained by so many.
Schoolmen who think, that in that state they had faith, are put to strange
shifts for maintaining that assertion, according to the principles whereby they
argue against the consistency of faith with glory; and therefore a modern Lugo,
loc. cit. disp. 2. sect. 1. and disp. 17. sect. 1., and sect. 3. sect. 27.
concludit cum evidentia revelationis non dari fidem.
Doctor, having propounded some subterfuges brought by others, and discovered
their weakness and error, could epsy no other refuge, but to affirm, that
Angels could only then act faith, when they had no clear revelation, but did
doubt, or not clearly know that such a revelation did come from God. Who would
take pains to confute those men, who throw themselves headlong from these
precipices, on which they delight to walk? what? can that be called a divine
faith, that knows not its warrant? and where is the certainty of faith, which
justly should be preferred to the certainty of every science, if it be not
built upon the Word of God and a sure revelation? I deny not, that all the
imperfections of faith shall be done away, when that which is perfect comes, 1
Cor. 13.10. there shall be no more doubting, inevidence and obscurity, as to
the revelation it self: but yet, as Vasq in 1. tom. 2. disp 135. cap. 3.
Vasquez affirms, the assent may be inevident; because, albeit the ground and
formal reason of the assent be clear and evident in it self, as to its meaning
and sense, and as to its author and infallibility, yet it does not manifest to
us, nor give clearness unto its object; since it has no intrinsecal connection
with the object, neither brings with it any light, whereby we may discern and
see any intrinsecal connection between the parts of such an enunciation, or any
reason and ground of such a truth, beside the mere authority and testimony of
God; which though it be a foundation of the greatest certainty, yet not of
clearness and evidence.

We will not prosecute that debate any further, but to the question propounded,
we answer, that speaking of faith, as it And if we lay aside the former
controversy. we shall have these adversaries themselves to join with us in the
general, for, seith Lugo, loc. cit. disp. 17. sect. 3. 25. certum omnino
videtur, and extra contro versiam, quod in beatis possit esse sides late
sumpta, hoc est assensus fundatus in revelatione clara Dei.
imports an assent founded upon the word, authority and testimony of God; if
we suppose the Saints in heaven to pray, we must also think, that by faith they
lay hold on a word of promise; and do confidently rest thereupon for an answer
to their prayers. You will say, the promises only belong to viators, and not to
those who have finished their course? Ans. Has not the Lord promised to raise
up their bodies, and to absolve and acquit them in the day of judgment? etc.
and do not these promises yet belong to them? But as to their prayers for
others, we may here apply what we Part. 1. ^h. 5. page 85.
observed from Petrus de Tarantasia, concerning Christ his intercession for us;
albeit the Saints in glory stand not in need of those things themselves, yet we
for whom they ask them, do stand in need of them, and they may plead the
promises mad to us: But you will say, Christ pleads for us upon his own
account and the title of purchase? Ans. I grant the disparity to be so great,
that it were intolerable once to institute a comparison; but you will yet
reply, if they only plead the promises made to others, that cannot be a
foundation for their faith: Ans. It may be justly questioned, whether the
promises of audience, with which their faith might close while they were on
earth, do belong to them now in heaven, and therefore it may also be
questioned, whether now indeed they do pray; but supposing they do, we must
also suppose that they want not a promise of audience for their encouragment;
unless we will have them to run as uncertain, and shoot at a venture. You will
say, may not they plead the promises made to others, relying on Gods fidelity
to perform these promises? Ans. But what is their warrant to interpose and ^f
they have a command for their warrant, they must also have a promise for their
encouragment. But, 2. albeit they may know in the general that God wiill
perform his promises, yet they know not to whom in particular the absolute
promises do belong, until they be accomplished; yea and even then they may
hesitat, as not being able nor called to search the heart, and as to the
measure of outward things, which is fit and convenient for every believer, and
what is the fittest time and season to receive, etc. they can but conjecture.

But still standing to the supposition that they do pray, it is certain they
must ask in Christ's name and for his sake, as the author and alone-purchaser of
all the good things they can ask. As to the prayers of the holy Angels (that
being also grounded upon a supposition) the case is not so clear, since it
depends upon another question, viz. whether Christ be not only the Lord and
head, but also the Mediator of Angels, they being, in him and for his merit,
confirmed in that blessed state and kept from falling; but though we did
suppose, that as Heb. 2.16.
he took not on him their nature, So he was not their Redeemer; yet, they might
ask in his name for others, What he by his blood did purchase for them.

A third question may be this, whether the misbelief of the promises or of the
threatenings be the greater sin? 3. Quest.
Ans. If the question were concerning total unbelief, what sin can be more
grievous? But, the comparison being between the seeming faith of hypocrites and
the partial (may I not also say unvoluntary) unbelief of Sa^nts, we shall speak
to that in these few particulars. 1. Albeit both the one and the other, in the
general, profess their assent unto, and belief of, both the promises and
threatenings; yet, in the application, there is a woeful miscarriage on both
hands, the one without ground applying the promises, and the other fearing the
threatenings when there is no cause of fear. 2. Thus the one is the sin and
doleful neck-break of the wicked, the other is the infirmity and sad trial of
the Saints; the one is the sin of presumption and hypocritical kindness of
enemies, the other the sin of jealousy, unkindness and ingratitude of
children; the one banisheth fear and trouble for the time, but makes way and
prepares for eternal woe and misery; the other is uncomfortable for the
present, but is like an Eclipse or Sea-sickness that will quickly pass. And
thus, 3. the one is foolishly merciful to himself, entertaining a groundless
fancy of Gods mercy as separated from his holiness an justice; yea and denying
the truth of the threatenings thastand against him, he laith claim to the
promises to which he has no right, and makes lies his refuge, and so
perishes in his delusion, going to hell laughing and rejoicing, hoping the
best till he find the worst, and see his case to be remeediless; the other is
unadvisedly cruel to himself, tormenting and vexing his own soul with a
needless jealousy; the one goes laughing to hell, the other weeping to
heaven; the one enjoys a fools paradise on earth, the other a sort of hell in
this life, living in darkness till the dawning of the glorious and long-lasting
day of eternity. And thus, both mistaking their state and condition, the one
apprehending it to be better, the other to be worse then it is, both pass a
wrong sentence, the one for, the other against himself, both mis-applying the
Scriptures, the one to his eternal ruin, the other to his present trouble and
disquiet: and thus it is easy to judge whose case is most dangerous, and whose
fault and error most grievous; only let me add a word to the doubting (or shall
I say unbelieving) believer, from Non orarem si non crederem; sed si vere
crederem, illud cor quo Deus videtur mundarem, manibus tunderem pectus; genas
lachrymis rigarem, corpore inhorrescerem, ore pallerem, jacerem ad Domini mei
pedes, cosque ^^eiu perfunderem, crine tergerem, haererem certo trunco crucis,
nec prius amitterem quam miscricordiam impetrarem: Nunc vero creberrime in
oratione mea aut per portious deambulo, aut de faenore computo, aut abductus
turpi cogitatione etiam quae dictu erubescenda sunt gero. Ubi est fides?
Siccine putamus orasse Jonam? Sic tres puer^s? Sic Danielem inter Leones? Sic
cerie Latronem in cruee? Hieronym. dialog. advers. Luciser.
Jeroms pathetick encomium of, and exhortation to, exercise and act faith,
particularly in prayer. If I (says this holy man) did not believe, I could not
pray; but having faith, with what humility, tenderness, reverence and godly
fear may we draw nigh to God? etc.

CHAP. III. Some consequent conditions, what we must do after we come from the
throne of Grace. 1. We must wait; 2. watch; 3. be busy in using the means;
and, 4. renewing our requests; and, 5. we must thankfully improve what the Lord
gives in return to our prayers. With a word concerning the necessity of these
and the former qualifications.
Psa. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for, he will speak peace
unto his people -- but let them not turn again to folly. Psa. 50.15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. 2
Chr. 30.18, 19. The good Lord pardon every one, etc.
HAving spoken of the antecedent and concomitant qualifications of an
acceptable prayer, now come we to show what must be done after we go from the
throne. Ah! too many go to work heedlessly and without all kind of preparation,
and perform it perfunctoriously and in a dead formal manner; and no wonder
though such have done when they have said, that when they leave off to speak,
they mind the work no more; but thou who tookst heed to thy steps while thou
drewest nigh, and who wast serious when thou did approach, pouring out thy
soul unto thy God, wilt expect some fruit of thy labor and wilt take heed to
thy ways, lest by thy folly, thou should intercept and obstruct the return
of thy prayers.

1. Then, after thou have poured out thy complaint to God, thou must wait,
listen and diligently observe when he answers and how far he answers thy
prayers, we must hear what God the Lord will speak, Psa. 85.8. If we presented
a supplication to a King, how would he think himself mocked if we did not stay
for an answer? If beggars knock and cry, but will not wait till an alms come,
who will send it after them? Ah! 1. are we not Gods subjects and servants, and
should we not look up to our King and Master, and patiently wait till he have
mercy upon us? Psa. 123.2. 2. Did the Lord ever disappoint them who thus did
wait and depend upon him? Isa. 26.3. Psa. 85.8. Mic. 7.7. Psa. 107.43. 3. But
if ye will not wait for an answer, if no answer come, know who should bear the
blame; if the beggar be gone while the alms is coming, his pride, impatience
and sloth must be the cause of his not receiving; faith is not more necessary
in asking, then that we may receive; and if ye do not wait, unbelief must say,
2 King. 6, 33.
What? should I wait on the Lord any longer? And (with them, Joh. 21.15.) What
profit have we if we pray to him? It was in vain to pray and now to look for an
answer. 4. Nay, though the Lord answer in wrath, and reward thy contempt and
the dishonor done to his name with some remarkable judgment, thou had no
cause to complain; who could endure such an indignity? what is truth? said
Pilat to Christ, and when he had said, he goth away and will not wait for an
answer, Joh. 18 38. Ah! will ye deal no better with the great God, then a
mocking pagan dealt with Christ in the day of his reproach? may ye not fear
lest he be avenged on you for this dishonor, injury and affront offered to his
Majesty? 5. As you thus dishonor God and provoke him not only to withhold the
desired mercy, but also to take the rod in his hand; So, if the Lord should
answer, follow and pursue you with his mercies while ye are running away from
him, you would deprive your selves of a double advantage. 1. Of the joy and
comfort that redounds to an honest supplicant, when he observes God to have
hearkened to his desire; nay, the comfort that many times arises from this
consideration does exceed the satisfaction reaped by the naked enjoyment of the
mercy it self, that being an evidence of our adoption, of Gods love toward us,
of our moyen with him, etc. 2. We thus deprive our selves of a notable mean, 1.
for strengthening our faith in the promises; 2. for clearing the Lords fidelity
in keeping his word to his servants; and, 3. for judging of the sincerity of
our hearts and ways, and knowing when we have prayed acceptably; and, 4. for
encouraging us to continue instant in prayer, and to say, (with him, Psa.
116.2.) therefore will I call upon God as long as I live. And as thus you are
injurious to your selves, So also to the Lord and to your brethren. 1. To the
Lord, if he should answer, ye who do not hearken, would not hear; ye who would
not look up to him, would not see nor discern his hand, but would Habak. 1.16.
sacrifice to your own net, and ascribe that mercy to your own wisdom,
activity, moyen with, or power over, some creature helper and second cause: and
thus, though God should deliver us in the day of our trouble, yet we would not
glorify him; nor would we (with him, Psa. 116.1, 2.) say, I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice, etc. 2. If we were careful to ponder Gods
ways toward us, and laid up experiences, we might be helpful to others,
especially to weak Saints and to children of light walking in darkness; our
experiences might prove a mean to support and strengthen their faith; if God
regard the prayer of the destitute, this shall be written for the generation to
come, Psa. 102.17, 18. See this point more fully demonstrated and improven, by
Mr. Goodw. Ret. of Pray. chapter 10. Ah! where is the man who has not reason to
smite his breast and say, wo's me that I am so guilty of so vile, ungrate,
foolish and mischievous an offense? O! let us justify God if he has not heard
us, while we did not listen nor hear what he would say; and O! if we were more
careful to amend this fault that is so common and ordinary, that we would no
more so carry, as if we thought with Atheists that our praying were lost
labor: and if we will trust God and depend upon him, we shall have no cause to
be ashamed of our expectation, he will not fail nor disappoint us; if we will
go to our watchtower (as the Prophet did after he had prayed, Hab. 1.12, 13.
etc.) we would (with him, chapter 2.3.) find, that an answer would at length come;
that at the end it should speak and not lie; though it tarried (as to our sense
and apprehension) yet if we waited for it, it should not tarry nor be suspended
for one moment, after the fit, convenient and due time.

But as this waiting upon God does import a looking up to him, so, 2. a patient
and submissive, a silent and believing expectation, and not fainting all the
while the Lord delayeth to answer our prayers; he that believes will not make
have, but will patiently wait upon the Lord his God, till he have mercy upon
him, Is. 28.16., Ps. 123.2. he will not fret because of cross-dispensations,
but will rest on the Lord, and commit his way unto him; knowing, that at length
he will bring forth his righteousness as light, and his judgment as the
noonday, Ps. 37.7, 5, 6. We have need of patience, that we may receive the
promise. Least, if we fret, the promised mercy be withheld, Heb. 10.36. Its not
enough, that we once believe and assent to the promise, but we must wait the
fit time for its accomplishment: And thus, as we have need of faith, so also of
patience, that we may inherit, and be put in possession of the promised mercy,
Heb. 6.12. Some Pagans have shown much magnanimity and composure of spirit
under their trials and sad disappointments, who yet were strangers to this
confident and filial dependence upon God, and to this Christian patience, which
is founded upon better grounds and spiritual motives, and which is the daughter
of faith, and one of the privileges and ornaments of the heirs of glory; being
of a heavenly descent, and coming from him, who is the fountain and author of
all our graces: we would soon faint, if we were not strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering, with
joyfulness, Colos. 1.11. There may be some appearance of joy in hypocrites and
moralists, in the day of their trouble and trial, but there can be no real and
solid joy, but in believers, who know, that yet a little whi e, and he who
shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. And that the Lord waits
till the fit and appointed time come, that he may be gracious to us, and bless
us indeed, Isa. 30.18. As the Spirit helps us to pray, so to wait till the
fit time for us to receive come; hence, the Lord is called the God of patience,
not only because he exercises it toward us, but Especially since there also he
is called the God of consolation, which must be interpreted of his working of
it in us, and making us rejoice,
because he works it in us, Romans 15.5. O! then let us labor to exercise this
heavenly grace, and our labor shall not be in vain; the more thou do venture
in thy trade with heaven, and the greater stock of prayers thou sendest forth,
thou may expect the larger return; nay, and the longer thou waitest, thou
may expect the more gain; as knowing thy trade to be carrying on all the
while, and thy stock to be in his hand, who during the delay will improve it to
thy best advantage, who will not suffer it to miscarry, nor thee to be on the
losing hand who have entrusted it to him; yea, and, 2. such mercies as are long
expected and waited for, are most sweet and welcome August, loc. cit
cito data vilescunt; what we quickly and easily get, we undervalue; but what
we have often asked and desired, and long waited for, proves sweet and
refreshing. A love-letter and token from a dear friend, we thought to have been
dead, will bring much delight and content; and those vessels, when the voyages
prove long and dangerous, so that the owners have made their account they shall
never hear of them again, as they use to return with the greater advantage, so
their return is more refreshing and comfortable; so when our faith is ready to
fail, and we look upon our prayers as Eccl. 11, 1.
bread cast upon the waters, and as so much lost pains; when an answer comes,
and a love-token from our God (whom we through unbelief had almost thought to
have forgotten us) O, how sweet and acceptable will it prove! and the oftener we
read and peruse those missives from our heavenly Father (especially coming by
the hand of a messenger we judged to be lost, and as dead) we will observe some
precious, and (as it were) new passages, which will mightily refresh and
comfort us, and will become a seal and notable evidence of his love to us, and
strong a support of our faith and confidence in him. But, 3. if we weary and
faint, we may, through our impatience and discontent, provoke the Lord to
recall (as it were) his former grant, and not to answer these prayers, which
otherwise might have laid claim to the promise, and would not have wanted a
gracious return and answer.

But as we must thus wait, so, 2. we must watch; as we must look up to God, so
we must look in to our own hearts, and about us, to our ways and course; as we
must watch unto prayer, and in prayer, so also after prayer. Satan always
lies in wait, and we know not; he may have a train laid, when and where we are
least apprehensive of danger, but when we see any temptation which is his
scout, we may know that the enemy of our souls is not far off: and that we
become not a prey to his temptations, we must watch and pray, Mar. 26.41. There
must be a reciprocal sequel, and consequence of the one from the other; as we
must watch and pray, So we must pray and watch; nay, upon a special account we
must watch after prayer, that the influence of that ordinance may abide upon
our heart, and that we lose not that life, vigor and heat which uses to
accompany the spiritual performance of this heavenly exercise; a cold catched
after heat is most dangerous, and yet it is most usual, if it be not prevented
by a watchful care and circumspection: And therefore, as in prayer we must 1 Timothy 2.8.
lift up holy hands, so after prayer we would take heed to our feet, and that
when we come from the throne, we do not run to the 2 Pet. 2.22.
mire to wallow in it. If we would receive whatsoever we ask, we must keep the
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in the sight of God, 1 John
3.22. The Lord will hide his face from them, who behave themselves ill in their
doings, and will not hear them though they cry, Micah, 3.4. If we regard
iniquity in our heart (whether before or after prayer) the Lord will not hear
nor answer us, Ps. 66.18. If the Saints, after they have prayed, and are
waiting for an answer, return to folly, God will not speak peace, Ps. 85, 8.
Sin will make God hide his face and draw back his hand, Isa. 59.2. If after we
went from the Kings presence, we disobeyed his commands, plotted and conspired
against him, and that under his eye, and while he were looking on; what folly
and madness were it to expect that he would regard and answer these
supplications we had presented to him; and is not this our case? Ah! many
desperate sinners deal no better with God, then Absalom with Joab, 2 Samuel
14.30. while the Lord delays to answer their requests, they set his field on
fire, and set their face against the heavens, as if they thought to break him
with their ill deeds, whom they could not persuade by entreaties; or else,
since they cannot help the matter, either in revenge against God, or to make a
compensation to themselves, they will Hos. 2.7.
follow after their lovers, and seek to satisfy their lusts; that since the
Lord would not answer these desires they offered up to him, they may fulfill
the desires of the flesh, which are contrary to his holy will, and sweet and
wel-pleasing to their sensual appetite.

3. As we must watch and pray, and pray and watch, so we must pray and pray;
its not enough once to present our requests, but we must renew our suit and
fortify our plea; we must ask again and again, we must not keep silence, nor
hold our peace, nor give him any rest (according to the expression, Isa. 62.2.)
till he show mercy upon us, and grant our requests; thus the primitive Church
prayed for Peter's enlargement and deliverance, Act. 12.5. And thou art allowed
and commanded to follow this course; the gates of heaven are never shut, and
thou may get access to the King when, and as often as thou will, he will not
chide with thee, because of thy importunity and frequent addresses, but he
complains when we faint and hold our peace, Isa. 43.22. and commands us to
continue instant in prayer, Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Colos. 4.2. 1 These. 5.17.
And as in every thing, so always to make our requests known unto him; and
promises that our labor shall not be lost Phil. 4.6, 7. Luke 18.1. etc. And
gives this as one reason why he will not answer hypocrites, crying to him in
the day of their trouble; because they having no delight in the Almighty, will
not always call upon him, Job, 27.9, 10. Prayer is a wearisome burden to many,
which they must quickly shake off, and then for a pretense, are ready to say
(with him, 2 King. 6.33.) its in vain to wait upon God any longer; we are ready
to complain that God will not hear, while he regrateth we will not cry; if we
continued instant in prayer, an answer would certainly come, and would not
tarry. See Chap. 2. Sect. 1.

4. As we must be busy at the throne, so we must not be idle at home; as we
must not forget the Lords work, and what duty else he calls for at our hands,
So neither must we forget our own work; as we must continue instant in prayer,
Romans 12.12. So we must not be slothful in business: and yet we must not so
mind our own, as to forget the Lords work and service, v. 11. There ought to
be a subordination, but there is no opposition between the Lords work and our
work, that must have the precedence, but this may follow in its own place; and
in it, as we are to look up to God for the blessing, so we must be doing our
selves: Prayer does not exclude the use of the means, nor give to us a
super-sedeas from our work and labor; if Vid Hieronym. lib 1. epis. 55. Marco
Presb.
any will not work, neither should he eat, 2 These. 3.10. Ah! you will say, may
he not pray, and should a praying Saint starve? may he not eat? Ah! why should
we not pray? but prayer must not be pretended as a cloak for our negligence;
whosoever he be, though a Saint and fervent supplicant, yet, says the Apostle,
if he will not work, let him not eat, (...), ora and labora, Prayer does not
exclude our diligence and activity, but we must pray Valde namque apud Deum
utraque haec sibi necessario congruunt, ut and oratione operatio, and
operatione fulciatur oration; Greg. mor. lib. 18, cap 3.
and work: as we must lift up our heart to heaven, So we must put to our hand
to our work on earth, precibusque manus, etc. Hence some of the ancient
Doctors, in allusion (as I would think, rather then intending to hold out the
meaning and true sense of the place) to these words, Lam. 3.41. Let us lift up
our heart with our hands unto God, do Hinc Hierimias ait, levemus corda nostra
cum manibus ad Deum: Corda vero cum manibus levat, qui orationem suam operibus
roborat; nam quisquis orat, sed operari dissimulat, cor levat, and manus non
levat, etc. Gregor. moral. lib. 18, cap, 3, and eisdem pene verbis, Hieron, in
Lam, 3, and Bernard, de mol, ben, viv,
tell us, that such as pray and do not work, do make a divorce and separation
of these two the Prophet has conjoined; they lift up their heart, but not
their hands, to God; yea (says Orans and non operans iram provocat.
one) he who prays and does not work, does tempt and provoke God. The
husbandman must not lie on his bed when he should attend his work, and by his
prayers expect a good crop; the Lord has not appointed the means in vain: and
though thou should not trust in them nor distrust God when they are not
afforded, yet thou must expect the blessing from the Almighty in the use of the
means, which in his providence he offers to thee: What? do thou pray
against sin, and do thou not resolve against it? do thou not fight against
it, and strive and endeavor to mortify it? prayest thou for grace, and do
thou not attend the ordinances and diligently improve the means of grace? thy
prayers are a provocation, they cannot be serious; for if thou did earnestly
desire, thou would strive and give all diligence that thou might obtain:
would thou have God to help thee who wilt not help thy self, nor enter in at
the door he has opened? though the Lord stands not in need of thy help and
industry, yet wherefore does he put a price in thy hand if thou ought not
improve it? If then thou would have the Lord to be with thee, thou must arise
and be doing, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. If thou would have the Lord to meet thee with
his help, thou must be working righteousness, Isa. 64.5. The Lord has
appointed (said Hesiod. (...). Vi^tutem posuere dii sudore parandam and Menaud.
(...). Ut sis bea^us est laborandum tibi.
the Pagan) that virtue should be purchasea by our sweat. None can be happy
(says another) who is not active and diligent: though we must pray for
salvation, yet we must work out our own salvation, and give all diligence to
make our calling and election sure, Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10. I do not think
that there are any Vid. August. de haer^sib. ad Quodvultdeum, cap. 37.
Euchits or Messalians now a days, who teach that we should do nothing but
pray: yet, there be too many hypocrites and formal professors, who think to come
to heaven by their empty, cold, lifeless and dead prayers, who having a form of
godliness, deny the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.5. who cry at the gate, but never
strive to enter in, they seek to enter in, but with the lips only and in a lazy
formal way; and thus they are not able, their crying will not do the turn, Luke
13.24. It is thought a fault among men to welcome and entertain idle beggars,
thus they who are the reproach of the Kingdom, who have no order nor
government, and neither fear God nor man, are encouraged and increased; and
shall the holy one hear and answer those out laws and rebels who have respect
to none of his commands? and will he fill their hands who will not put to their
hands to his work, nor do what he requires? their negligent, yea and stubborn
omission of duty, will outcry their prayers, yea every command of God, which
they have presumptuously transgressed, will appear against them and plead for
vengeance; and therefore, those who will not work, though they be not (with
him, Luk 16.3.) ashamed, yet may be afraid to beg. See reasons for, and rules
to be observed in the use of the means with prayer, at Cob. Treat of pray.
part. 3. chapter 4.


5. If the Lord answer our prayers and grant our desires, let us return to him
the sacrifice of praise; this is all the recompense we can make to him, unto
whom Psa, 16.2.
our goodness extends not, and whom we Job 22.2.
cannot profit; this is all the tribute and revenue the Lord requires of all
our mercies, this the meanest Saint may give, and the greatest and most
glorious Angel can give no more. What can David, though a King, a Prophet and
eminent Saint, render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward him, but to
offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving? Psa. 116.12.17. and the weakest must do no
less; if God answer thee (whosoever thou art, whether rich or poor, noble or
ignoble, weak or strong) and deliver thee in the day of thy trouble, thou must
glorify him, Pso. 50.15. There is no better theme (says Nam quid melius and
animo geramus, and ore promamus, and calamo exprimamus, quam Deo gratias? hoc
nec dici brevius, nec audiri laetius, nec intelligi grandius, nec ogi
fructuosius potest, August. Aurelio epist. 77.
Austin) for our meditation, speech or pen, then the praise of God; what can we
say in fewer words, and yet what work is so profitable? what should we hear
more gladly, or think on more seriously? And, O! (says Haud quicquam ita
proprie in terris representat celestis habitationis statum, sicut alacritas
Deum laudandi, Bernard. sermon. 1. in Cantic. Nullum referendae gratiae majus est
officium; quod si homini non refer, simile homicidio judicatum est, quantum
crimen est non refer Deo? Ambros. orat. funeb, de fratre Satyro.
Bernard) there is nothing on earth that does so much resemble the glorious
state of the heavenly habitation, as to be cheerful in praising God* But,
remember that canticum novum and vetus homo male concordant; thy heart must be
renewed if thou would sing th^s new song: Unto the wicked God says, what
have thou to do to declare my statutes, and to proclaim my name and praise?
Psa. 50.16. dare rebels draw nigh to the King and offer to complement him?
they who hate instruction and cast Gods word behind them, would consider what a
mockery it is to the Lord if such take his name in their mouth; if they draw
nigh to him, they may fear lest he tear them in pieces, ver. 17, 20. to obey is
better then sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. Thou must first pay the debt of obedience,
before thou can render the tribute of praise, who so would glorify God by
his sacrifice of praise, must order his conversation a right, Ps. 50.23. And
albeit our thanksgiving does most directly Ad gratituainom requiritur, 1. ut
homo acceptum beneficium recognoscat 2 ut laudet and gratias agat, 3. quod
retribuat secundum suam facultatem, Thom. 2, 2. quaest. 107. art. 2. in cor.
officia gratitudinis sunt quinque ^. benefici estimatio, 2. benigna acceptatio,
3. gr^tiarum actio, 4. grata commemoratio, 5. repensio seu beneficii relatio,
quando vicissim beneficium re vel ob^equio redditur, Leonard. less. de just.
and ar. lib. 2. cap 47. dub. 1. quomodo autem, and quibus med is gratitudo in
Deum excitanda sit vid. ibid dub. 2. sect. 13. We will not here canvass the
School distinction, between praise and thanks, as if praise properly did only
respect the divine perfections, and thanks were relative to some emanation
toward the creature: or thus we may b^ said to praise God, because of his
infinite nature and transcendent excell^neies, but we thank him for his
benefits and his goodness toward his creatures: Nay, says Rainer, Panth. de
laud, cap. 1. If God be considered according ^o his nature and ^ntity, which
is incomprehensible and ineffable. So we cannot properly he said ^o prai^e him,
but rather to reverence, adore and admire him, quia (inquit) secunaum
ph^lo^ophum optimorum sed aliquid majus and melius laud. vid. etiam Thom* ^,
(...) quaest 9^. art. 1.
import, 1. our sense and acknowledging of Gods bounty and kindness; 2* our
praising hi^ name, and proclaiming the riches of his grace and mercy, yet ^t it
does* 3. necessarily infer our obedience, and cheerful walking in all his
commandments; to which, as upon other grounds and titles we are obliged, so
also upon the account and by way of gratitude; So, that the evil must also be
unthankful. Ah! how many are there who thus The proverb is verified in too
many, they render to the Lord, (...).
requite the Lord? Luke 6.3. We will not speak to this point in the general
(See the judicious Mr. Gurnall, Spir. A^m. Part. 3. on Ephesians. 6 18. Chapter 56. etc.)
only now remember, that ingratitude m^keth a man become a Ingratus est
seminartum scelerum omuium -- tell us ipsa faedius nihil creat, portentum id
omnium est habe^dum maximum, Petr Crinit. lib. 2. poem.
monster, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris [if ye call me an unthankful man,
ye speak the worst, and Ingratitudine nibil mali non inest Cicer. ad Attic. 8.
nihil amas si ingratum amas. Plautus in Persa.
all the ill of me that can be said] Ah! how have Pagans abominated that devil
of unthankfulness, that seed and seminary of all evil? It were easy to fill
many pages with their invective declamations against it and shall not
Christians much more abhor it? and yet, alas! it is the bane of our profession;
Quo usque se diffundit gratia, eo patet ingratitudo.
who is the man or woman amongst us, that are not highly guilty herein? Our
mercies are not common and ordinary, nor such as the dark candle of nature
could discover and let us see, and therefore our ingratitude must be the
greater, and the more abominable; but honest Christians will make it their work
to lament this evil, and will study to abound more and more in the knowledge,
sense and acknowledgment of the bounty and love of Christ, that passes all
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. But as to the present case, if thou would not have the
Lord to hide his face from thee, and not Gratiarum cessat decursus ubi recursus
non suerit; nec modo nil augetur ingrato, sed and quod decipit vertiturei
inperniciem. Bern. sermon. 1. in cap. Jeiu. Qui enim de bono tuo gloriam sibi
quaerit, and non tibi quarit, hic ^ur est, and latro, and fimilis est Diabolo
quivoluit furam gloriam tuam -- hic licet propter donum tuum laudetur a^
hominibus, a te tamen vituperatur -- qui autem ab hominibus laudatur
vituperante te non defendotur ab hominibus judicante te, nec liberabitur
condemnante te Aug. tom. 9. soliloque cap. 15.
hear and answer thee in the day of thy trouble, be thankful for the mercies
he has given; yea, and if thou would not have these quickly removed, or else
blasted, and cursed in the enjoyment; if thou would not have thy roses spring
up with thorns to prick and molest thee, and if thou would have thy comforts
stable, pure and unmixed, and nothing of the wrath and indignation of the
Almighty, nothing of the curse, vexation and venom wrung into thy cup; O! then
as thy mercies should come by way of return, and in answer to thy prayers, So
let them be received and enjoyed with thanksgiving, and used and improven for
the honor of the giver, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. 1 These. 5.18. Prove. 10.22. But though
providence should smile upon us, and men would flatter us in our ingratitude,
yet what will we do, or be able to say in the day of reckoning and account?
Then (as Austin says) We will be found to have been thieves and robbers, and
like to the devil, who sought to steal and rob God of his honor; and what will
the praise of men, and all creature-enjoyments avail us in the day, when the
Lord judges and condems us?

We will shut up this discourse concerning the qualifications of prayer, with
an useful case and question concerning their necessity, and how far the want
of these, or any of them, does nullify our prayers, and hinder their success
and acceptance.

Obj. Ah! will many honest supplicant say, if we must pray thus, if all these
particulars must concur, and be required to the acceptable performance of this
duty, if there must be such preparation before; such fervency and importunity
in the work, and such watchfulness and diligence must follow after; woe is me!
what are become of all my prayers? I fear, I have never yet prayed aright: and,
O! that I might know whether all these qualifications, were essential and
necessary; and if all be not alike necessary, what be those requisits which are
more, and what less necessary. Ans. Albeit often such as have least cause to
fear, are most jealous of themselves and their way; yet, 1. it is certain, water
spilt on the ground, and like the beating of the air, they being as no prayers
in Gods account, because not such, and so qualified as he has commanded, and
does require; and there is none of those qualifications we have named, which
are not held forth and prescribed in the Word of God, and which does not concur
to the perfection of the work, and contribute to its acceptance and success:
and therefore it were better (with the Psalmist, when he was going to praise
God, Ps. 103.1.) to stir up our soul and all that is within us, to join and
contribute their help and assistance for the cheerful and acceptable
performance of our duty, not separating what the Lord has conjoined; then to
trouble our selves with such a comparison, and by enquiring what may be forbo
n, spared and left undone, of that which the Lord has commanded and required.
Yet, 2. that no tender conscience may be disquieted, and that none may go about
this duty with terror and fear, to order thy whole conversation aright; 3.
that thou prayest, 1. in sincerity, with Hannah, pouring out thy soul before
the Lord; 2. in faith, relying upon Christ's merit and intercession, and in his
name coming to God as the hearer of prayers, and the rewarder of all them who
diligently seek him; and, 3. with an eye to his glory, arming at that as thy
great and chief scope and end; 4. that thou dependest upon him, patiently
waiting till he show mercy upon thee, not daring to limitat and prescribe to
him, nor murmuring because he delayeth to give, or withholdeth the particular
thou desire; and, 5. that if he fill thy hands with his mercies, thy heart
and mouth will be filled with his praises; supposing, I say, that thou do
pray thus, that the truth and reality of all these (in whatsoever measure or
degree) are to be found in thy prayers, thou need not fear; thy prayers are
acceptable, and the Lord will in his owe time and way hear and answer thee, and
as a Father pitieth the sickness and weakness of his tender Child, So the Lord
in mercy pitieth thee, and covers all thine infirmities, and notwithstanding
thou may in faith plead the promises of audience, and confidently wait for
and answer to thy prayers. But, 3. If thou make conscience of these few
particulars, etc. yet thou, who do thus call upon God in sincerity, art in
some measure fitted and prepared to meet thy God, thou art in the state of
grace, and the Spirit helps thine infirmities, and helps thee to pray
according to the will of God, and thou do honestly aim at his glory, thou art
truly humble and self-emptied, thou do believe and depend upon God, and with
the heart importune and cry to him, etc. For, not only may the habits of grace
lurk, but also their acts and exercise (if weak and remiss, and if mixed with
the stirring and motions of the contrary vices) may be for a while insensible;
and thus occasion not only scruples anent their reality and existence, but also
the denial thereof: And as to the measure of grace, there is such a latitude
and variety, that it is difficult, if not impossible, here to But as
Philosophers do make and imagine their 8. gradus or eight degrees of intention,
four of which are made necessary, that any form or quality may denominat the
sub. ject, So we may suppose such a measure of grace here attainable, and
necessarily required for the acceptance of our performances.
determine, either the minimum or maximum. Why then should weak Christians fish
into such drumly waters, and raise those storms they are not able to calm?

But that what has beeen said from the word of truth, for asserting these
qualifications, may not (through a mistake) break any bruised reed, nor
disquiet such as Christ would have comforted (though the weakest should hear
and learn their duty, the extent of the promises, and the qualifications of
their spiritual service, yet) since weak ones are ready to mistake both their
state and work, and to judge hardly of themselves for want of light and
dexterity, for reflecting upon, and discerning their condition and the quality
of their performances and for making a right comparison of these with the rule,
and so for passing a right judgment, and knowing their own case; we will bring
some grounds, laid down by practical Divines, and collected from the
Scriptures, which may serve to stay and uphold them, and which they, for their
comfort, may make use of, as not being contrary to what has been here said,
albeit such cannot punctually ride the marches: We shall now only name these
grounds, and refer to the Authors, where they are insisted on at greater
length. But for preventing the abuse and mis-improvement of the condescension
of our compassionat Lord, See our Parallel, Part. 1. Chap. 2. And we will begin
with a passage of that excellent Commentary of our judicious and eminent Mr.
Rollock, We may observe (says Videas quantop^re placeat Deo, vel pauxillum
fidei, and quan. ropere delectetur precihus ex quantulacunque fide profectis,
etiam^^ conjunctam habeant multiplicem imperfectionem, videmus vulgo parents
magis delectari balbutienti infantia infantium, quam universa cloquentia, etc.
Rolloc. in Johan. cap. 4.
this reverend Divine) how much a little of faith does please God, and how much
he delights in those prayers that proceeds from never so weak and small a
measure of faith, albeit otherwise they be mixed with a great multitude of
weakness and imperfections, as a Father will be more moved with, and delight
more in the broken language of his stammering Child, then in all the eloquence
of the greatest Orators, So our heavenly Father, etc.

2. It would be remembered (says the pious and experienced Mr. Tenendum est non
minus placere posse Deo conditionem sanctorum quando angustantur ipsorum
spiritus in precatione quam quando dilatari maxim videntur -- quandiu igitur
sancti fructibus fidei seu fructibus spiritus ferendes studens, and erant
secundum Dei voluntatem, petentes id quod Deus promisit in side, animique
submissione, expectantes responsionem a Deo, tandiu preces ipsorum and via
ipsorum Deo placent: sive angustentur sive dilatentur ipsorum spiritus in
precatione, etc. Dicson. Therap. Sac, lib. 3. cap 10
Dickson) that the Saints condition may no less please God when their spirits
are straightened in prayer, then when they seem to be most enlarged; and the
Apostle shows that the Saints may be so far bound up in spirit in the day of
trouble, that they do not know what to ask, and must chose to send up groans in
stead of prayers, Romans 8.26. So long then as the Saints study to bring forth
the fruits of faith, and of the spirit, and do pray according to the will of
God, asking what he has promised, and in some measure of faith, are patiently
waiting for an answer from God; their prayers and way does please the Lord,
whether their heart be straightened or enlarged in prayer, 1 John 5.14, 15.

3. Faith does sigh prayers to heaven (says Rutherf. Tri. and Trium. of faith,
Sermon. 6.
learned Mr. Rutherfurd) Christ receives sighs in his censur for prayers: --
looking up to heaven, lifting up of the eyes goes also for prayer in Gods
books, Ps. 5.3. Isa. 48.14. Ps. 69.3. -- I A strange expression, which should
not be critically examined; the Author takes liberty emphatically thus to
express the prevalency and acceptance of the look of faith, which if possibly
it could be in hell, would in that place of despair open a door of hope.
would wish no more, if I were in hell, but to send a long look up to heaven;
there be many love-looks of the Saints lying up before the throne, in the
bosom of Christ; the twinkling of the eyes in prayer are not lost to Christ,
etc.

4. Though there be much We would put a difference between a weak or saint
prayer, and a slothful or negligent prayer.
weakness in thy prayers, yet if it does not proceed from thy slothfulness and
negligence, but thou do pray with all thy might; then though that thy might
be weak in it self, and in thine own apprehension such, yet because it is all
the might which thou have, and which grace has in thee, it shall be accepted,
2 Cor. 8.12. Mr. Goodwin, Ret. pray. cha. 10. page (mihi) 56, 59.

5. The sinful infirmities that cleave to a Christian and his duty, though
they be the great bugbear, with which many Saints are scared, yet if these be
lamented and not cockered, they need not discourage thee; since the privileges
of the Covenant of Grace are not impropriated to a few favorites, more eminent
in grace then their brethren, but stand open to the whole family, it being a
common salvation, and like precious faith -- Gods promise for hearing of
prayer, shall not be made void by the Saints weakness in prayer. Mr. Gurnal,
Sp. Arm. part. 3. page 355. etc. Where the heart is upright and sincere, our
infirmities shall not hinder our prayers; Jesus Christ does away the weakness
of our services: Those that do not allow their infirmities, may pray with hope
of success; these will be no impediment. Mr. Manton, on Jam. 5.17. Obs. 6.
There is often faith, when there is little or no feeling; unbelief felt,
bewailed, opposed and resisted, shall never hurt us. Mr. Harris, Pet. enlarg.
page (mihi) 33.

PART III. Some practical Cases.
HAving propounded several questions and cases, both speculative and practical,
as occasion was offered in the two former Parts of this Treatise; we shall now
only speak to a few which may be very useful for clearing of doubts, and
removing some difficulties which may occur in the practice of this solemn
performance, which did not so properly belong to any of the heads already
treated of, or which deserved a particular consideration; reserving some few
things of this nature, touching the return of prayer, to Part fourth. And here
we shall only, 1. as to the object to which our prayers must be directed, ask,
how we should conceive of God in prayer, and after what order must we make our
address to the persons of the blessed Trinity? 2. As to the Author and
principal efficient, we shall enquire what are the causes why the Spirit does
withdraw his help and assistance, and what course should be taken for
recovering and maintaining the quickening and assisting presence of the Spirit?
And because our enlargment and straitning does much depend upon, and has such
a necessary connection with, the presence and withdrawing of the Spirit, we
shall speak to these, as also of wandering thoughts (which use to accompany our
deadness and indisposition) their cure and remedy. And then as to the matter of
prayer, 3. we shall ask whether we may pray for and rod or affliction? And, 4.
whether we may imprecat and pray against any person or society? And, 5. as to
the time, we shall enquire when and how often we should pray?

CHAP. I. How should we conceive of God and of the persons of the glorious
Trinity.
Sect. 1. What should be our apprehensions of the dreadful majesty of God when
we come before him?
Job. 37.22, 23. With God is terrible majesty; touching the Almighty, we cannot
find him out. Luk 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.
WIth what humility, reverence and admiration should we Excedit supereminentia
D^itatis, non solum usitati eloquii, sed etiam intelligentiae facultatem;
verius enim cogitatur Deus quam dicitur; and verius est quam cogitatur, August.
de vera innocent. cap. 61.
speak, write or think of the Almighty and incomprehensible God, who dwells
in light to which no man can approach, whom no man has seen nor can see; whose
perfection cannot, by searching, be found out, whose counsel and ways are a
great depth, and whose infinite nature and majesty is so far above our reach and
apprehension? 1 Timothy 6.16. Job 11.7, 8, 9. Damascen. lib. 1, de side orthod. in
initio.
(...), all that is in God is a mystery. Agurs question may give a check to our
curiosity and boldness; O! (says he) what is his name, and what is his sons
name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30.4. The greatest Student in this mystery, the
holiest Saint when he looks up to God, will see, with Zophar, a height and
depth that cannot be measured, Job 11.8. Agur in his Prophecy, while the Lord,
in an extraordinary manner, did manifest himself to him, professes his
ignorance, and would begin at the first elements and A, B, C, and Male and
absurd hinc infert Buridanus, lib. 7. polit. quaest. 10. Deum quantum ad ejus
essentiam non esse a nobis laudandum, quia, viz. non est sic a nobis
cognoscibilis. Nam licet sic non sit perfect and quidditative cognoscibilis,
tamenscimus cum sic esse laudandum. Imo hoc est (...) and primo. cognitum.
ask but after his name, who has gathered the wind in his fists, who has
bound the waters in a garment, and who has est blished the ends of the earth.
Nay, the boly Angels and the Saints in glory, though they see and behold so
much of God as does ravish their hearts with unspeakable joy and delight, and
which does fully satiat their utmost capacity; yet, O! what more, yea infinitely
more of God does remain, which will never, and cannot to all eternity, be
comprehended by any finit understanding? Ah! our empty vessels are to narrow to
contain this ocean; do ye ask of me (says August. in Psa. 85.
Austin) what he is, whom eye has not seen nor ear heard, and of whom it has
not entered in the heart of man to conceive? would you have my tongue to
express what my heart cannot apprehend? The modesty of the Pagan Philosopher
Cicer. lib. 1. de not. deor.
Simonides, may put to silence our presumption and curiosity, who being asked by
King Hiero what God was, at first desired one day for meditation, and to
deliberat and think on an answer; but, being the second time asked, he required
two days, and after that four, still desiring the more time, because (said he)
the longer I think on the matter, it appears the more hard, dark and difficult.

But, though we cannot Vid Schol. ad 1 quaest. 1 2. and. Scot in 1. lib. sent.
did. 2.3.
quidditatively and comprehensively know God, though we cannot know his nature
and essence, though we cannot see his face and know him as he is in himself,
Exodus 33.20.23. yet we may see his back parts, we may know him darkly and
through a glass, Exodus 33.23. 1 Cor. 13.12. we may Cognoscimus Deum per, 1
causalitatem, per, 2 eminemiam, per, 3. remotionem imperfectionum and per
fidem, Davenant. in epist. ad Colos. cap. 1.15.
know him as he has revealed himself in his word and by his works; thus we may
know something of his divine attributes, and thus much we may know of his
infinite nature, that it Si quis Deum videat, and intelligat quod vidit, Deum
non vidi^.
passes our knowledge; thus we may know him, thus we may Humana infi^mitatis
religiosa confessio est, de Deo hoc solum nesse quod Deus est; caeterum secret
a illa and profunda -- Men's terrena non penetrat; investigare quidem ea,
perscruta (...) q^ie pium est, sed inscrutabilia esse, and investigabilia
confitenda sunt: quorum alterum est religiosae voluntatis, alterum
imperspicabilis naturae, Hilar. in Psa. 129. (nobis 130.)
search after his perfections, and such a measure of knowledge he has promised
to us in this state of perigrination and absence, Heb. 8.11. Jer. 1.34. Hos.
6.3. But, since our eyes are so ready to dazzle when we look upon this bright
sun, and we to mistake by applying our short and unfit measure to this infinite
object, what need have we to use all circumspection and to take heed to our
steps when we approach to him, with whom is terrible majesty, and of whom, to
speak or conceive, even what is true, is dangerous; de Deo etiam vera dicere
periculosum. Let us then with all caution, modesty and humility, in answer to
the case propounded, observe some few particulars.

1. Concl. Beware and take heed that thou make not to thy self any image to
represent the incomprehensible nature of God; De Dei simplicissima and
perfectissima essentia spiritualiter cogitemus; omnes crassos and terrenos
conceptus, omnes sensibiles imagines, omnia imaginativae facultatis phantasmata
procul habeamus, Voet. sell. disp part. 1. disp. 13^ page 245. Tale enim
simulachrum De inefas est Christiano in templo collocare, multo magis in cord
nefarium est, ubi vere est Templum Dei, si a terrena cupiditate atque errore
mundetur, August. de side and symh^lo, cap. 7.
mental-idols, false conceptions and unwarrantable apprehensions and
representations of the infinite majesty, make way (and are thought to have given
occasion) unto the pagan and popish idolatry: we are ready to mistake when we
essay to apprehend the nature of Angels, of our own souls or any spiritual
object, so gross are we in our apprehensions which depend so much upon the
senses. Albeit our understanding and intellect be immaterial, yet hardly can we
get our conceptions spiritualized and purged from those material images which
it has received from the outward senses; and if our apprehensions be so
defective and fall so far short as to those finit objects, shall we be able to
make suitable representations of Gods infinite nature and essence? Hence,

2. Concl. A good measure of that knowledge of God, whereof we are here
capable, consists in the removing of all creature-imperfections from his
glorious majesty; not only in bodies and corruptible things are there defects
and imperfections, but also in the most pure, spiritual and incorruptible
creatures, though they had all the perfection they are capable of, (so that
their imperfections were negative and not privative) yet their best perfections
are but blots and imperfections in respect of the Perfectiones simpliciter
simplices.
absolute perfections of God, and cannot without blasphemy be ascribed to him,
till they be purged from the dross, weakness and emptiness of the creature as
such, though never so excellent in it is kind: and to do this, will not be found
so easy a matter as some may conceive; and without his own help and special
assistance, we cannot aright know what he is, So neither what he is not. Hence
Non parva notitia pars est, si antequam scire possumus quid sit Deus, possumus
scire quid non sit, Ang. de vera innocent. cap. 61. Et inter sententias ex
Augustino de cerptos and adjectas tomo 3. haee est 61. quinnimo D^onysius
(vulge sed falso) Areopagita de divin nominib, cap. 7. affirmat, hunc modum
cognoscendi Deum, viz. per ignorationem (ut loquitur) seu potius per
negationem, removendo a Deo omina creaturarum attributa prout iu e^s sunt, hunc
(inquam) modum cognoscendi Deum judicat pro hujus vitae statu esse meliorem,
and divinae excellentiae magis accomodatum: Ista tamen negatio non est pura,
sed supponit conceptum Dei positivumin quo sistendum, viz. conceptum valac
generalem and confusum cu^usdam entis quod nec est homo nec Angelus, etc. Sed
eminentius omnibus creaturis quae sunt vel esse possunt. Et doctissimus
Augustinus in Psa. 85. fatetur, se solum potuisse dicere quid non sit Deus;
supponendo tamen praedictum conceptum positivum. But neither this our
conclusion, nor what at any time has been said by any of the learned, does
favor the dreaming Shoemaker, John Bohman, while he says, that God is an
infinite nothing; he is indeed none of the creatures, he is no such thing, yet
he is all; he does eminently contain the perfections of all, here is a clear
contradiction and repugnancy (or shall I say nonsense, that being so familiar
to this empty bold man) For what is infinite must have all perfection, but what
is nothing can have no perfection: but this vain babbler deserves no refutation.
Austin well said, that it was no small part of our knowledge of God to know
what he is not.

3. Concl. Yet the Lord allows us (even in this state of absence and
ignorance) a further measure of knowledge, and calls us to behold his positive
perfections, his all sufficiency, his omni-science, his omni-potence, his
omni-presence and other attributes held out in the Scriptures; and his (...)
existens, ens aeternum, nomen Dei (inquit Buxtorfius) proprium essentiale, ab
(...) suit, aliis ab (...) idem. Non dubium est (inquis Mercerus) (...)
decurtatum esse ex nomine tetragrammato (...).
name, Jehovah, does most significantly express his glorious being; as also,
his name Jah, (which seems to be no other then the former Jehovah contracted)
both which come from a root that signifies to be: hence also the holy one is
called I A M, Exodus 3.14. none of the creatures can say I am, or I shall be,
(as the word there may, and I (...) Mercer. sum, sed rectius and
significantius, Pagninus in rad. (...) ero, est enim futuri temporis.
think should, be rendered) ah! they have a borrowed, finite and depending
being, they are, but where were they when God said the foundation of the earth?
and if the Lord withdraw his hand, where are they, or shall they be? but he is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: He is an all-sufficient, necessary
and independent being, and all creatures being Quae participatioue nobis
veneranda (...) ^n comparatione ejus memoranda non sunt, Gregor.
compared, and laid in the balance with his most glorious majesty, are as
nothing, yea, and less then nothing, Isa. 40.17. we have undervaluing thoughts
of God, when we make a comparison; all the stars must disappear, and evanish
out of our sight, when we behold this bright Sun; whatever light may be in
them, yet it is darkened at the glorious appearance o^ this great Luminary; He,
and only he, is the Lord who can say, I am, and there is none else besides me,
Isa 43.11.

But when thus we meditate upon Gods infinite being, or any of his divine
perfections, we must not limit his incompre hensible majesty to our shallow
apprehensions, bu^ should conceive his glorious attributes and nature to be far
above, and infinitely beyond what we can conceive of them. We must (says
Interest c^rim, and nostrae pi^tatis, and Dei immensitatis, casen ^^ de Deo
quae sentire non possumus, Jul. Scal. exercit. 165 ^ect o.
Scaliger) think of God what we are not able to think, a holy, silent,
submissive admiration of what we cannot know, should supply the defects of our
knowledge; we must not give way to our curiosity, nor labor, by searching, to
find out his infinite excellency, Job, 11.7. though in humility we should
Investiggare quidem ea perscrutarique pium est, sed inscrutabilia esse and in
vestigabi lia confiten a ^unt, Hilar loc. jam jam cit.
follow on to know the Lord, Hos 6.3. yet we must not 2 Cor. 10.14.
stretch our selves beyond our measure, but should thankfully improve what help
he does afford, and diligently seek after the light of the word, praising him
who has given us such a glass, wherein we may behold so much of his majesty,
until at length we shall know him as we are known, and see him face to face, 1
Cor. 13.12.

4 Concl. As thus we may safely go where the Word does lead us, and follow on
when we see it going before and pointing out the way, and may speak and
conceive of God, as he has revealed himself in the Scriptures, So in improving
that knowledge in any ordinance, particularly, in prayer, we may select and make
use of such names, titles or attributes of God, as are most surable to the
present performance, and may excite in our hearts that zeal, tenderness and
holy affections which are required, and are pertinent to our case and exigence,
thus, while in prayer, 1. we are confessing out sins, and accordingly would
have the affections of reverence and godly fear, shame, sorrow, etc. excited,
we should consider Gods majesty, justice, holiness, power, zeal for his own
glory, threatenings and judgments, etc. 2. When we are asking and petitioning,
and should act faith, and have our confidence strengthened, etc. we should
consider Gods bowels and mercy, his fidelity and truth, his promises and tender
care, etc. And, 3. when we offer the sacrifice of praise, we would meditat on
his patience, his pardoning mercy, his free love, his watchful providence,
liberal hand, etc. that thereby we may be provoked to admire his bounty toward
us, and proclaim his praise, and express our senseof his goodness, by walking
before him in all holiness of conversation. The Book of the Psalms holds forth
to us many instances of this heavenly art and dexterity, in making choice of,
and fixing upon suitable meditations of God, his attributes, word, or works.

5. Concl. We must not in prayer, or any other ordinance, look upon God
absolutely, for so he will be a consuming fire, and we as stubble; but we must
conceive of him, and draw night to him, as he is A modern Author affirms the
divine essence or Godhead in Jesus Christ to be the proper object of all
worship, alleging from Dr. Owen and some others, that the essence of the
Godhead is the primary and proper object of worship, Morn. Exer. Sermon. 17. We
will not now meddle with that assertion of Dr. Owens. knowing it to be
maintained by many, as we show from Franc. a. S. Clara. part. 1. But we hope
this Author does not think that the Godhead as personally united to Christ, is
the proper object of worship, but as the Godhead is in Christ under a
Covenant Relation, and as the head of the Church, and thus the Godhead, as it
is common to all the three persons of the Trinity, and not as it is in the
second, only may be said to be the primary object of worship.
in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. As we cannot have
the light of the knowledge of his glory, but in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. So, though we had it, it could not profit us, it would but astonish
us, and be for our terrou^ and confusion, as the glory of Christ, coming to
judge the world at the last day, will be to the wicked. But we have spoken to
this head at some length, Part. 1. Chap. 8.

6. Concl. But in Christ Jesus we may, and should draw night to him
confidently, as children to a father, who is able and ready to hear us: But you
will say, were it not presumption in me to call God Father? Ans. Is it
presumption to acknowledge the bounty and wonderful condescension of God, and
in prayer to follow that pattern be has prescribed to us? or is it not rather
a foolish jealousy, and most ingrate under valuing of his tender love, yea,
and a bold contempt of his authority, and a manifest transgression of his
commandment, to say we will not, we dare not call him Father, while he has
said, when ye pray, say, our Father etc. Luke 11.2. where Nomen Patris non
accipi (...) pro prim^ tantum trivitatis perlona, sed (...) pro omnibus tribus
deiatatis personis opparet ex regula illa quam Forbesius ex Patribus, and
communi theologorum suffragio proponit contra Antitrinitarios, estque ejusmodi
omne nomen dictum de Deo respectu creaturae indicat essentiam, adeoque
predicatui de tribus personis simul, exceptis quae pertinent ad incarnationem,
seu assumptam naturam, and exam. plorum loco hac adsert, Deus noster Pater
noster, Praedestinator, Creator, Recomc^liator, Adoptator, Sanctificator,
exauditor precum, Forh. instr. Histor. theo^l lib. 1. ^cap. 12.
our blessed Lord teaches us to call God, Father, not as if thereby he did
point out to us the distinction, or relation that is among the persons of the
trinity, or to single out to us the first, excluding the other two (for its
certain, we should direct our prayers to God, who is Father, Son and holy
Ghost) but to hold out to us Ostenait ad veram, and Deo gratam orationem
requiri, ut in vera siducia oremus, ac jciamus nos invocare Deum qui in Christo
dilecto suo filio nos dilexit ante jacta mundi fundamenta, qui in filios suos
adoptavit, ac spiritum (...) nobis donavit and qui paternum erga nos gerit
animum: quem proinde juxta ipsius exemplum and mandatum, ut panem nostrum
invocare possumus, Gerhard. in loc. cont. harm. cap. 180.
the fatherly affection, and tender bowels of God, and of all the persons of
the blessed Trinity, and to encourage us to draw nigh to God with confidence,
as children to a father, ready to help and pity us; and though we be not
limited to the same words, or to say no other then is held forth in that
pattern and copy, yet we may not change our thoughts of God, nor imagine that
he has cast off his fatherly care and affection toward us: And herein, as we
have the command, So we have the example of Christ, he looked upon God as a
father, in that solemn prayer, Joh. 17.1. Father the hour is come, glorify thy
Son. So also, ver. 11, 21, 24, 25. For, though he has another kind of interest
in the Father then others, yet this does not nullify, and hinder our interest
and relation; especially since ours is founded upon his, God having adopted us
in this his beloved Son; we are truly sons, though not such sons as Christ; we
are his sons, not merely nor especially by creation, but by adoption,
redemption, and a right to the inheritance. And that Christ and believers have
the same Father, and thus stand under the relation of brethren, he himself is
not ashamed to profess, Heb. 2.11. and Joh. 20.17. Go to my brethren (says our
blessed Lord to Mary) and say unto them, Iascend unto my Father, and to your
Father, and to my God, and unto your God. And thus the ancient Church in their
prayer, Isa. 63.16. ingeminat this Dulce nomen patris.
sweet relation with much confidence, Doubtless thou art our Father -- thou, O
Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer. And as thus we have, 1. a precept, and, 2.
practice, so also, 3. a promise for our warrant, 2 Cor. 6. 17.18. Touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters; says the Lord almighty. And, 4. this is made
one end and design of the sending of the spirit into our hearts, viz. because
we are sons, and that we may know, and improve our relation by calling him
Father, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15. to banish fear, and to make us draw nigh in
confidence and love, 2 Timothy 1.7.

But you will say, how can we call God Father, since we are not assured of our
adoption? Ans. If God be not thy father, he must be thy Mr. Murcot. being in
great anguish, because he feared that God was not his father, had these words
impressed on his mind, If I be not thy father, am I thy enemy? and again, if I
be not thy father; why do thou follow after me, Mor. exerc. Sermon. 14.
enemy (for there is no middle state) and how dare thou, who art stuble, draw
nigh to the consuming fire? If thou be not a son, thou have no interest in
Christ, in whom only we have access to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18 Joh. 14.6. And if
God be not thy Father, why do thou hing and depend upon him, yea, even then
when he frowns, and seems to beat thee off, and drive thee away? I spoke a
little to the like case, Part. 2. Chap. 2. Sect. 2. and shall not now say much,
but remember, that the Lord, as in another case, So also in this, 2 Cor 9.7.
loves a cheerful giver, He would not have us to come to his altar, and to
bring our oblation grudgingly, he would not have his spouse look sad, or his
children to distrust his love and care toward them, nor his servants fear,
least he were such a one as the ill and wicked servant called him, a hard
master and ill to please, Mat. 25.24. What a grief was it to Peter to have his
love to Christ questioned ( Job. 21.17.) yea, though lately he had denied and
disowned him? and must it not grieve the good Spirit of God* when we have base
and low thoughts of his mercy and kindness toward us, yea, even then while we
are constantly reaping the sweet fruits thereof? Ah! will ye thus requite the
Lord, and deal no better with him then they? Mal. 1.2. I have loved you, says
the Lord: yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us. But if ye will trust him, ye
have his word, he will not disappoint you; and ye do thus, as it were, engage
his majesty not to fail you: O! then draw nigh to him in confidence, and fear
not to call him father, who has purchased so great an inheritance at so dear a
rate for thee; its good in some cases (as a reverend divine said) to threap
kindness upon God. He will never challenge thee, who have the heart and love of
a son, for calling him Father: If thou be a child of light, though thou fittest
in darkness, yet thou are still a child, and thy father will not disown thee if
thou claim an interest in him; what though thou blushest to call thy self a
son, as being unworthy of that relation, yet surely God has not lost his
title, nor deserved at thy hands, that thou should rob him of that relation
he has bought by the unvaluable price of his Sons blood; and its observable,
that the Saints many a time would divide the relation that is mutual, at least
are more positive and peremptory in asserting the one part then the other; and
as the prodigal, when he had by his riotous living forfeited his sonship, and
was brought to confess, that he was no more worthy to be called a Son, yet
durst profess that he had a Father, and durst call him by that relation, and
take on this resolution, to arise and go to his father, and say father, Luke
15.19.18. So they may call God Father, while they are convinced, and may, from
an humbled heart, confess that they are not worthy to be called his sons; and
even then, while their face is filled with shame and confusion, they may
notwithstanding assert his relation.

But you will say, ah I should I utter a lie before God? would he not account
it a mockery to call him father, while he is not our father? Ans. I grant there
is too much presumption in the world, and too many are ready to make bold with
God, and to call him father, against whom he is coming in wrath to Hos. 3.5.
tear them in pieces. Ps. 50, 22.
But yet if, 1. thou have the love of a son, thou may come to him at a
Father; if thou have child-like affections, thou may have a childlike
confidence. See Part. 2. 2. If thou have godly fear and reverence, and high and
admiring thoughts of his majesty, and art striving to give to him the honor
due to his name; if thou can answer that question, Mat. 1.6. If I be a
father, where is mine honor? Thou needst not fear, that ever he will question
thy claim to him as a Father; if thou As having hope, ver. 3. abiding in him,
ver. 6. being born of God, ver. 9. being the children of God, ver. 10. having
passed from death to s^e, ver. 14. etc.
fear him and his goodness, and art loath to offend him, though there were not
a rod to correct thee; though thou should meet with rods and afflictions,
yet thou might know them to be but the corrections of a Father, and not the
stroke of avenging justice. But we will not multiply particulars let us only
hold out from, 1 John 3. two or three words more. This point concerning our
adoption, is there laid down in the entry, ver. 1. and therefore, though the
words be (d) altered, yet the case is the same that is brought to the trial to
the close of the Chapter. 3. Then such as hope that God is their Father, must
purify themselves as he is pure, v. 3. they must wash and make them clean, and
walk as becomes the children of such a family, they must no more be like the
swine of the world, wallowing in the mire of sin; he that is born of God must
sin no more, ver. 9. for he that allows himself, and continues in the
practice of any one known sin, is not of God, but of the devil, ver. 8. 4. If
we be the children of God, we must obey his commandments, and do those things
which are pleasing in his fight ver. 22. we must deny our selves, and renounce
our own will and affections, and take on Christ's yoke, which (if we be his)
will not be wearisom, but our relation and love to our Master, will make his
work sweet and easy, Mat. 11.30. 5. Such as love the Father, will love his
children for his sake; such as are brethren must have some sort of sympathy
with, and mutual love to one another, ver. 14. If all thy delight (with him,
Psa. 16.3.) be in the Saints, and if thou judge them the excellent of the
earth, if thou delight in their society, and rejoice at their prosperity, ye
must be of one stock and kindred, and belong to one and the same family: and
hence must follow that separation (as to any arbitrary and voluntary commerce
with those wicked ones, to whom we are not bound by any natural or moral tie)
required in them, to whom God promises to be a Father, 2 Cor. 6.17. It will be
no pleasure to the genuine son to stay in the company, where his Father is
reproached and dishonored; and, O! when occasionally he is easten into the
society of such wretches, with what zeal and holy indignation will his heart
burn? 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
their vile and profane words and ways, must Ps. ^.6.
vex his righteous soul.

Is it thus with thee, O dejected Saint? do thou follow after God, and still
long and hunger for more of him, and that he would lift (f) up the light of his
countenance upon thee? and though thou still walk in darkness, and cannot see
his face, yet hearknest thou to his voice and followest after righteousness,
thou need not fear to call him thy God and thy Father; thou art allowed to
claim an interest in him, and to stay upon him as thy God, Isa. 50.10. Such
hungring souls are blessed, Mat. 5.6. and is there any blessedness without an
interest in him, who is the fountain of all blessedness? yea though he seem to
frown, and to forsake thee, yet the union and relation stands firm and sure, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? said David, Ps, 22.1. and one who was
greater then David, Mat. 27.46. Zion said, my Lord has forgotten me. And thus,
a believer at his lowest may maintain his claim to God; as the state of
darkness, gloominess and desertion, does noth not nullify our relation, So
neither needs it hinder us to assert and plead it; neither did the Lord at any
time challenge, nor was he grieved with a doubting believer for staying on him,
and calling him Father, but rather is grieved at their jealousy, and standing
at such a distance from him, who has stoopt so low to them; only to the
wicked, God says, what have thou to do to take my covenant in thy mouth, and
to plead any covenant relation, and to call me thy God, or thy Father? Ye who
hate instruction, and cast his words behind you, ye may fear his severity and
justice, and look upon him as a Judge coming against you to tear you in pieces,
Psalm. 50.16, 17, 22.

But you will yet say, whatever truth may be in the thing it self, yet I cannot
in truth call him Father, who know not, and am not assured of my adoption. Ans.
Thy knowledge is so far from being a ground of this thy covenant relation to
God, that it is not so much as one of its bonds and ligatures; now albeit the
Spirit of Christ, who is the author, be also the keeper and preserver of our
spiritual life, and of all its privileges, and of our interest in God, as not
the least; yet the same Spirit has given us an arm whereby we receive and lay
hold on him, and every finger and joint of that arm (I mean our several graces)
are so many cords and bonds whereby we stay and lay hold on God, as our God and
portion; and if thou see but any one of these bonds fastened on him, what needst
thou fear and complain as if there were no union, interest or closing with him?
say then; he is not thine by certain knowledge and persuasion; I answer, he
cannot thus be said to be thine, for though thou may know thy relation to
him (and O, if thou did know! how sweet, comfortable, strengthening and
encouraging must that evidence be?) yet he cannot be said to be thy Father by
thy knowing that he is thy Father, for the object must have a being, and be
presupposed to such a reflect act, he must be thy Father Si non tempore, saltem
nature, imo^^e^ per ^em pore, si non profluat ex immediata irradiation^
spiritus, sed per argumentationem colligatur; ut fieri solet.
before thou know him to be thy Father; but there be some uniting graces,
whereby we close with him as our Father, which though they do not confer the
right of adoption, yet they bind us to our Father, and are as so many cords,
whereby he draws us in to himself, and whereby we close and lay hold on him; 1.
then is not God thy Father, optando, seu vonto and desiderio, is it not the
great desire of thy soul to have an interest in him? and has not this thy
desire a lie in its right hand? is it effectual, operative and diligent in the
use of the means, not like the desire of the sluggard, foolish, faint and lazy?
2. Is not God thy Father considendo, seu aliquali spe and expectaetione; have
thou no hope, nor expectation? if thou be not assured that God is thy Father,
art thou perswade^, and do thou know that he is thy enemy? surely, if it were
so, thou would not thus seek in to him: Say, that thy hope is not so positive
and peremptory, that it is not grounded upon certainties and particular
promises, which thou do apply to thy self, yet see thou not many promising
and encouraging probabilities, grounded upon general invitations, entreaties,
promises, which open to thee no small door of hope, and makes thee look up to
God, seek in to him, and follow after him; have thou not a may be and a
peradventure? and may thou not improve that without presumption? thou art
allowed to use a holy kind of violence, to break through all discouragments;
and to lay hold on the King, as well as to take his kingdom by force, Mat.
11.12. 3. Is he not thy Father amando, seu filiali dilectione? have thou not
the love and heart of a son? and will he prove thy enemy? 4. Is he not thy
Father adhaerendo, seu dependentia, adhaesione and acquiescentia? do thou not
rely and depend upon God, and cleave to him though he frown, and follow after
him when he forsakes and withdraws from thee? do thou trust in him, and cast
thy self on him? dare thou adventure thy soul upon his tender bowels, free
offer, and promises? art thou resolved to Job, 13.15.
trust in him though he should kill thee? do thou acquiesce in him as the
alone-fountain of all true happiness? and how small soever thy hopes be, yet
with what indignation would thou disdain the offer of a world to quit thy
claim to, and renounce thy part in him? 5. Is he not thy Father obtemperando?
seu obse quio, conatu, opere, reverentia and honor? do thou not give him
that honor, reverence and obedience that is due to a Father? and will he then
use thee as Luke 15.91.
one of his hired servants? or reject thee as a vessel of wrath and
disobedience? what? is God thus thy Father, and do thou lay hold on him by
thy desire, hope, love, reliance aed reverence? and may thou not in truth
thus call him thy Father? have thou those fruits and evidences of thy adoption,
and findst thou those uniting graces to close with him? Be of good courage,
thou needst not fear to come to him as a Father, he will welcome thee as a son,
and hear and answer thy requests.

Sect. 2. After what manner and order should we direct our prayers to the
persons of the blessed Trinity?
Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we both have an access, by one Spirit, unto the Father.
2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the holy Ghost, be with you all.
WHile we, who Job, 8.9.
are but of yesterday and know nothing while we poor, blind, short-sighted
sinners, speak of this unspeakable and glorious mystery of mysteries, which the
Seraphims and holy Vis scire naturam Dei? hoc scito quod nescias, neo in hoc
contristeris quia nescias, quia and Angeli nescierunt -- sed requiris a me,
quomodo uno ^omine tres appellantur? nescio and libere me nescire profiteor;
quod Christus voluit indicare hoc solum scio, August. de tempor. sermon. 189.
Angels, do rather with admiration adore, then curiously search after, we would
consider who we are, how great our Lutum and vas figuli de creatore disputat,
and ad naturae suae rationem non potest pervenire, and curiose quaerit scire de
mysterio Trinitatis, quod, etc. August. ibid.
ignorance is, and how great and incomprehensible this sublime and transcendent
object, of which (as Hoc solum ex eo comprehendimus, quod comprehendi non
potest, Ambros. in Symb. Apost. cap. 2. vide etiam, August. loc. cit
Ambrose says) we can know little more, but that it cannot be known; and
therefore should rather in humility be Ubi est mentis excessio, idonea est
fidei successio; mirabile ergo illud de Trinitatis unitate, de unitatis Deifica
Trinitate Sacramentum magis est credendum, quam exponendum, Aug. de visitat.
infirmor. lib. 2. cap. 2.
believed, then curiously examined by our shallow apprehensions, narrow enquiry
and halting reason: it is true, that a little knowledge here is (as Vbi
quaeritur unitas Trinitatis, -- Nec periculosius alicubi erratur, nec
laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, ^ec fructuosius aliquid invenitur, Aug. de
Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Austin says) well worthy of the pains, but an error and mistake is most
dangerous; and therefore, while in all modesty and humility we search after it,
we have need to pray the blessed Trinity to anoint our eyes, that we may see
what is necessary for us to believe, and that we may not be wise 1 Cor. 4.6.
above what is writeen.

Now, albeit the To (...), etc. Nazianzen. orat. 29,
(...), the manner and way, be inconceivable; yet, the (...), the thing it self,
is clearly revealed; and we have here the concurring testimony of Omnes, quos
legere potui qui ante me scripserunt de Trinitate quae est Deus, divinorum
librorum veterum and novorum Catholici Tractatores, hoc intenderunt secundum
Scripturas docere, quod Pater, Filius and Spiritus sanctus unius ejusdemque
substantiae, inseparabili aqualitate, divinam insinuent unitatem, August. de
Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 4. Vide consensum antiquae Ecclesia, omnibus
Antitrinitariis pacis repudium mittentis apud Voet. sell. disp. part. 1, page
492. and consensum Christianismi, media atatis and hodierni, page 493, 494.
add etiam page 502. ad page 509.
all Divines, except some few contemptible heretics; the Arrians of old, and
the Socinians of late, being the most famous opposers of this fundamental
article of our faith; and such a great cloud of so many witnesses may be no
small support to our faith: But certainly, this glorious mystery was not
revealed either to satisfy our curiosity, or to be matter of mere speculation,
as Arminians seem to maintain and would make us believe. We will not now stay
to confute those bold men, neither will we enumerat the several practical uses
of this high point, especially since the learned Dr. Voet. ibid. disp. 28, 29.
Voet has spoken so fully and judiciously to that head in two distinct
disputes: But we may well, with this Non facile enim quis obscurabi^, ne dum ut
extingu t in nobis fidem Trinitatis, fiera tiam Filii and amorem Patris, and
communionem Spiritus sancti quetidie in nobis sentiamus, confirmemus, excitemus
con^^^^ onibus, precibus, doxologtis, and renovatis fidei spei charitatisque
amplexibus: in quo quidem tum antiquae omnium, tum hodiernae nostrerum
concieues, liturgiae, doxologiae, nobis affatim praecunt quippe quae a
Trinitate incipiunt, and in Trinitate desinunt, Voet. ibid. disp. 26. antid.
gen advers Socin.
Author, elsewhere assirm, that such as find the grace of the Lord Jesus, the
love of the Father and the communion of the holy Ghost, and who are daily
laboring to cherish and confirm the same by prayer, meditation and renewed
acts of faith, love and charity, will hardly suffer the doctrine of the Trinity
to be obscured, far less will they be brought to deny or oppose it.

But we proceed to the case propounded, in answer to which we offer in all
humility these few conclusions.

Concl. 1. Albeit there be no inequality, no superiority nor inferiority among
the persons of the blessed Trinity; yet there is an order, not only to our
apprehension, but truly and really: there is a natural order of subsisting,
according to which the Father is the first, the Son the second, and the holy
Ghost the third person of the Trinity; the Son is begotten of the Father, the
holy Ghost proceeds from both, but the Father, as he has not his being and
nature, So neither his subsistence and personality of any, but is prorsus(...),
he is neither begotten nor proceeds; and according to this order of
subsisting there is an order of working, which notwithstanding, opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, the works of the Trinity are (as they speak)
individed, and common to all the persons, there being nothing proper and
peculiar to any one, How the hypostatical union is proper to the Son, sec Conel
3. Quod habet, hoc est; excepto quod relative quaeque persona ad alteram d^^a
ur, Aug de civit. Dei, lib. 11 cap. 10.
except their personal properties and intrinsecal relation; and it is Non
potest operatio esse divisa, ubi non s^lum aqualis est, verum etiam indiscreta
natura, Aug contra sermon. Arrian. cap 15. Non naturam sec mus, sed unitatem
naturae and voluntatis, and operationis confitemur, Ambros. in symb. apost cap
3 una ergo in tribus divinitas, una essentia, una omnipotentia, and quicquid
substanti^^ter potest d^ci de Deo, Aug. de temp ser. 38. Si quis non dixcrit
Patris, Filit, and Spiritus sanct unam divinitatem, parem (seu unam ut constat
ex sermon citate) Majestatem, Potentiam, unam Gloriam, Dominationem, unam
Regnum, atque unam voluntatem enathema sit, ibid. ser. 129.
impossible it should be In his peno^^i ordo originis est, secundum quem
procedit non essentia ab essentia absolut and in abstracto a ciprendo
essentiam, non essentia a persona, non persona ab essentia, non unus Deus
abalio Deo, led una persona ab alia persona, vel aliis personis, Forb. instr.
hist theol. lib. 1. cap. 35. these 9.
otherwise; since they are not only Ut idem non est simile, ita nec aequale.
equal in power according to the ordinary, though improper, form of speech) but
have one and the same power, as the same nature, understanding, will, etc. and
therefore must have one and the same work; what things soever the Father does,
these also does the Son likewise, Joh. 5.19. Hence,

Concl. 2. There are not three first causes, principal agents and governors,
but one only; for, though there be three distinct subsistences and
personalities, yet there is but one fountain and principle of action, which is
one and the same in the Father, Son and holy Ghost; for the personality as
such, is not the principle of action (else there would be three agents) but the
divine nature, Non vacas jam inquirera utrum potentia divina sit attrib
formaliter distinctum a vogluntate.
power and will. And hence, 1. all the persons must work (...) and inseparably;
since all have the same nature and power, which is the principle of action. 2.
Every one of these glorious persons is a principal and complete agent, because
every one has the complete principle of action; and all the three are but one
complete principal agent, since every person has perfectly all that nature and
power that is in all the three. 3. Here then there can no suggestion nor
mediation interveen, as if one person did begin, and work before, or without
the other two, or as if one were a nearer and more immediate cause, then
another; for, though there be an internal order, as of subsisting, so also of
working, yet as to the outward work and operation, there is no difference as to
its production, emanation, and dependence from all and every one of the
persons; hence, as the Son is said to work what things soever the Father does,
so to work likewise, and after the same manner, (...) Joh. 5.19. though then
there be here an admirable order, yet no subordination, inequality, nor
inferiority, no division, nor separation in working. Hence,

Concl. 3. That appropriation of works and attributes, so frequently insinuated
in the Scriptures, and inculcated by Divines of old and late, must not be
exclusive, as if thus what is appropriated to the Father, did not also agree to
the Son and holy Ghost, or what is appropriated to the Son, might not as truly
be ascribed to the Father and holy Ghost; but We purpose not to meddle with the
hold, groundless and vain speculations of the Schoolmen here; but if this were
not a subject that required the greatest seriousness and gravity, we might go
to the popish clergy for matter of recreation; but for instance, we shall only
mention these two, 1. our learned Country man, John Mayor his ridiculous
reason for appropriating strength to the Father, wisdom to the Son, and
goodness to the holy Ghost. Resp. (inquit) propter haereticos ponuntur divinis
personis illa appropriata; quia enim inter mortales inveniuntur Patres esse
Filiis debiliores, putarent aliqui Patrem in divinis Filio esse impotentiorem,
propterea consulto adjectum est epitheton fortis; and quia Filii non solent
esse it^ sapientes sicut Patres inter homines, ne idem de Filio in divinis
existmarent, adjectum est in Filio epithetum sapientis; and quia spiritus in
modo loquendi in superbam partem capitur: dicimus enim Alexandrum Macedonem
fuisse alti spiritus: propterea additursanctus vel bonus Jo. Mayor in 1. sent.
did. 14, 15, 16. quaest. unica. And, 2^ the great Aquinas his reason why we
use not so ordinarily to pray particularly to the holy Spirit as to the Father
and Son, is little better, quia (inquit) Spiritus sanctus procedit ut donum,
cujus magis proprium est dari, quam dare, etc. Thom. in 4 sent. did. 15.
quast. 3. ad 2.
because some works and attributes do more resemble the personal properties of
each of those glorious persons, and because, among those works and attributes,
there is some such order as does adumbrat that natural order that is among the
persons of the Trinity; and thus the three main and great works of God ad
extra, and which respect the creatures, viz. creation, redemption and
sanctification, are accordingly ascribed to the persons of the Trinity
severally, together with the attributes and divine properties, which did
especially appear, and were manifested in these dispensations; and so, 1. the
work of Under which is comprehended providence, as being a kind of continued
ereation, and result and consequent thereof.
creation, as being the first, is thus, as it were, appropriated to the Father,
the first person of the Trinity, as also majesty, power, goodness and love,
which were greatly manifested in that work; and, 2. the work of redemption
(together with grace, reconciliation and pity) as being the second great work
of God, is ascribed to the Son, the second person of the Trinity; and, 3. the
work of sanctification and illumination (as being the third and For
glorification is not a distinct work, but the perfection and consummation of
sanctification and grace.
last great work of God toward the world) together with holiness and
perfection, is ascribed to the holy Ghost, the third person of the Trinity. Of
which appropriation, we shall speak a little more in the eight and ninth
Conclusions; but here it would be observed, that although we should ponder, and
may improve and make use of what is so frequently held forth in the Word, yet
we would carefully guard against a mistake which is incident unto too many, who
upon this account are ready to divide the object of worship, and to separate
these essentially united persons; but we must take heed, that we do not so
appropriate any work, or divine attribute to any one, as to exclude the other
two; remembering that the fountain and Author, the cause and efficient of all
good, is one and the same, viz. the only wise, powerful and merciful There is
only one blessed potentate. 1 Timothy 6 15.
God, who is Father, Son and holy Ghost; and therefore all good must equally
(though not after the same order and way) come from all the three persons of
the Trinity: only in the work of redemption there is some thing peculiar to the
Son, who was incarnat, and took on our nature, which therefore was personally
united to the Son, but not to the Father and holy Ghost; and thus all Christ's
actions and sufferings (albeit, in them, the Natus ex virgin non non nisi
filius, and vox de nube, tu es filius meus dilectus, ad solius personam
pertinet patris, and in specie corporali columba solus apparuit Spiritus
sanctus, tamen and illam carnem solius Filii, and illam vocem solius Patris.
and illam speciem columbae solius Spiritus sancti, universa Trinitas operata
est. Aug. de Trinit and unitate Dei, cap. 9. vid, etiam, Ambros. loc. cit. cap.
9.
humane nature did depend upon the providence, efficiency and assistance of
God, and of all the three blessed persons of the Godhead equally (for if the
humane nature had been thus independent, it had not been a creature) yet these)
were so peculiar to Christ, that they were not communicable to the Father, or
holy Ghost, as their subject which they could denominate, they were not
terminatively in, nor causally from these other two persons, as their nearest
and proper cause; but thus they were only from, and in the humane nature of
Christ, which was personally united only to the Son, and by virtue of that
hypostatical and mysterious Union, they could denominate not only the humane
nature, but also, by a Per communicationem idiomatum.
communication of properties, the second person of the Trinity; and thus the
Son died for us, not the Father, nor holy Spirit.

And then, as to this appropriation of works, we would distinguish between that
which was natural, and what was voluntary; we must not imagine any natural
obligation lying on the Son to become our Redeemer, or on the holy Ghost to be
our Sanctifier; as to the creation, albeit there did lie no obligation on God
to creat the world, yet supposing him according to the counsel of his own will,
and of his own free choice to have created it, the sole ground of appropriating
that work to the Father, appears to be that natural order that is among the
persons of the Trinity; for the Father did not come under any voluntary economy
and mission toward the sons of men; but the other two by a voluntary economy
received, as it were commissions and a mandate, the Son from the Father, to
accomplish the work of Redemption, and the holy Spirit from the Father and the
Son, to begin and carry on our Sanctification, till it be perfected in glory:
And by reason of this arbitrary and free economy, the works and dispensations
of these two glorious persons, in reference to the salvation and redemption of
sinners, do in a special manner, and upon this particular account denominate
them: yet, still it must be remembered, that the actions and sufferings of the
humane nature of Christ, do after a far other manner, and upon another account
denominate, or have reference unto the Son of God, then any other works and
dispensations which are ascribed either to the Son or holy Spirit, because of
their economy toward the Sons of men. Hence,

Concl. 4. We must not, in prayer or any other part of worship, so name and
direct our worship, adoration or invocation to any one of the persons of the
Trinity, as to exclude the other two; for. 1 that same divine nature (which
many Schoolmen and orthodox Divines will have to be the proper object of
worship) that is in the one, is in the other two. 2. Because all the persons
have the same power and causality, and their work is the same toward us; and
why should not we look up unto, and worship all the three Vid. Forbes. instr.
histor. theol. lib. 1. cap. 23. ubi variis argumensis ex Alense and aliis,
collectis hanccertaem conclusionem confirmat, and Durham in Apocalyp. page 11,
12.
alike? (...), (said Nazianz. orat. 37.
Nazianzen) (...). While we adore one, we must and ought adore all the three,
if we exclude any of the persons of the Trinity from the object of worship, we
deny him to be God: And since their names are relative, let the naming of the
one lead us in to remember the other two; and thus the Apostle, while he
requires some conditions in those who call on the Father, mentions the
knowledge of the Son, and sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19,
22. As if he had warned them in their acts of worship not so to mind the
Father, as to forget the Son and holy Spirit; and accordingly the Saints, in
the close of their prayers, yea, and frequently also in the beginning, Vid.
Voet. sell. disp. 26. and Forbes. loc. cit.
use expressly to mention all the three persons of the Trinity; and though only
in the close they did name those glorious persons, ascribing glory and praise
to the Father, Son and holy Ghost; yet thereby they declare, that while in any
part of that worship they did name any one of the persons, yet they included
the other two, at least, as to their habitual intention.

Concl. 5. But though it be fit, that thus the meditation of the one should
lead us in to contemplat the other two, and though we must at no time, in any
point of worship, so fix our heart upon any one, as to exclude the other two
from that act of worship, yet we may, upon occasion, so look upon one, as not
Peculiarl and distincto mentis conceptu, and religionis actu tendimus in unam
aliquam personam, ut codem illo actu tunc direct and explicit non tendamus in
aliam -- quia preces and gratiarum actiones distincto and scorsim diriguntur ad
Spir. sanctum aut ad Filium, aut ad Patrem; quod docet univer, salis consensus
and devotio omnium fidelium, Act. 7.60 Apoc. 22.20. 2 Cor. 13, 14. Voet. ubi
supra. disp. 28. page 478.
actually to meditate and think upon the other two. The limited nature of our
thoughts, which cannot at one and the same instant of time seriously contemplat
and be taken up with many different objects, yea, or different considerations
of one and the same object; and the experience of all Saints in their
meditations, does show the necessity of this limitation: Yet, 1. that same
divine nature that is in the other two, is in this case the object of worship,
and therefore they being considered essentially and as God, they may thus be
said to be expressly worshipped, no less then the glorious person that was named.
2. Then and always there must be in us an equal respect to all the three
persons of the blessed Trinity, habitually, intentionally, and as to the
inclination and general bent of the heart.

Concl. 6. In singling out any one person of the blessed Trinity, we may look
upon, and be directed by that appropriation of works and attributes, and the
different order of subsisting and working, and accordingly fix our eyes upon
that person, to whom the Scripture, in a special manner, does ascribe those
attributes and dispensations as are most suitable to our condition and the
present exigence, according to that pattern, 2 Cor. 13.14.

Concl. 7. Yet we are not so limited by that appropriation, or order that is
among those holy persons, that upon any occasion we may not indifferently name,
and particularly fix upon any, or that in the contemplation of them severally,
we may not first fix upon any one; thus the Son is invocated before the Father,
in that place now cited, 1 Cor. 13.14. and the holy The holy Spirit there is
called the seven Spirits communi (says Parae us) metalepsi effectorum pro ou
a^ He is called so, not form ^^y, ^ut effectively, and in reference to the
seven Churchs, and his spiritual gifts dispensed to each of them, and since no
created spirits can be the objects of worship from whom grace and peace may be
asked, as there, these seven spirits must be the holy Ghost. See Durham on Rev
page 4.5.
Ghost before the Son, Rovel. 1.4, 5. Whereby is clearly held forth to us, that
notwithstanding there be a priority of order among those glorious persons, yet
no priority of dignity and perfection. And thus, as we may first fix upon any
one, So we may particularly make our address to any one, not expressly men
ioning the other two. Thus Stephen, and the penitent Thief, do supplicate the
Son, Act. 7.59. Luke 23.42. And the Apostle does particularly wish and ask of
the holy Ghost to the Corrinthians his communion, whereby they might be united,
and have fellowship with Christ their Head and among themselves as members of
his Body, 2 Cor. 13.14. And as the Spirit particularly speaks to the Church,
Rev. 2.7. why may not the Church particularly speak and pray unto the Spirit?
and accordingly Christians from time to time in their prayers, meditations and
ejaculations, have particularly named, and fixed upon any one of those glorious
persons.

But here it may be asked, whether or not, as we may put up several petitions to
the several persons of the Trinity, So we may put up one and the same petition
to several persons? Ans. Our learned antiquary Forb. loc. cit. cap. 23. sect.
Dr. Forbess denies this to be a fit and decent manner of worship; but, 1. if
we may ask several things from them continuedly, and without interruption, as 2
Cor. 13.14. why may we not as well ask one and the same thing from them
severally? the hazard of altering, dividing and varying the object of worship
(which is the only inconvenience he objecteth) is no less in that case then in
this. 2. If we may jointly praise all the persons, why may we not jointly pray
to them? but I think none will scruple to praise them jointly, naming all the
three particularly; and it is most usual to close our prayers, ascribing praise
to the Father, Son and holy Ghost for all and every one of our mercies; and may
we not as warrantably pray for mercy from all those glorious persons, as to
praise them for it while they give it? 3. Since, while we pray to God, we
understand and include all the three persons, and must exclude none, as has
been shown, why may we not particularly name them all? 4. Is not grace and
peace particularly ask't from By him which is, which was and which is to come,
Diodat. Mr. Durham, and not a few learned Exposito^s will have the Father to be
circumscribed and his eternal being.
all these blessed persons? Rev. 1.4, 5. according to the interpretation of
several judicious Divines. Yet, here we do not reject Mr. Mr. Durham, loc cit.
page 12, 15.
Durham his caution, Viz. Since our imagination is ready to foster divided
conceptions concerning the object of worship, it may be conceived safest,
especially in public, and before the multitude not to alter the denomination
of the persons in the same petition, ( in the same prayer, says he) the
generality of people being prone to imagine different objects of worship in
such cases.

Concl. 8. Albeit we may thus fix our minds upon, and expressly name and direct
our prayers unto any one of these glorious persons, yet as our blessed Lord, in
the days of his flesh, So Christians most usually adress themselves to the
^ather; for he being the first person, according to that blessed order that is
among the persons of the Trinity, there may be several considerations inviting
us particularly to fix upon him; for thus, as the first, both immanent and
transient act, The appointing of the end, according to the order of nature, is
before the election of the means, vid. Twiss. vind. great. lib. err. 7. dig 3.
page 706.
both Heb. 5 7.
predestination and creation by this appropriation, is ascribed to the Father;
hence, sin being a defacing of the image of God, which was implanted in man by
his creation, it must in a special manner be against the Father and his work;
and thus the Father having in a special manner received the wrong, to him, upon
this particular account, satisfaction should be made, and reconciliation with
him, and pardon from him should be asked; and thus Christ in his prayers,
sufferings, and in every step of our redemption, See Mr. Shepherds select Csse^
in a letter from new England, page (mihi) 20, 21. Albeit there be some
expressions of that pious man, which would be warily used, and which need a
favorable interpretation, as, 1. while he calls the Father (as some may think)
the Son and holy Ghost, the original and first cause of all good; 2, while he
says, that Christ came into the world by his death and intercession to
satisfy the Father, and not the holy Ghost; 3. that we should chiefly eye the
Father in our prayers, etc. Vid. Calv. dicen^em filium esseimproprie ^rea^orem
respectu persona vindicatum a Chamier. panstrat. tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 4
did especially look to the Father; and thus the Saints also from to time time
most ordinarily direct their worship to the Father, in their confessions,
acknowledging his work to have been defaced by their sins, his justice
provoked, etc. in their petitions, asking pardon from him, his peace and
favor, etc. and in their praises ascribing to him their election, adoption,
etc. admiring his wisdom and love in providing such a remedy, and so great a
salvation for self-destroying sinners, etc. And this practice is conform to the
constant tenor of the Scriptures of the new Testament; and albeit in the old,
while the Prophets and ancient Church of the Jews call God, Father, they rather
thus express his tender bowels and fatherly affection toward them, then any
internal relation among the persons of the Trinity, yet its hard to affirm,
that all that people, the most eminent and knowing among them, were ignorant of
this appropriation of works and attributes, and that they never particularly
eyed the Father as the first person of the Trinity; But it would be observed,
while we say that the Father was in a manner primarily and most directly wronged
by sin, we do not only understand Adam's first sin, which did obliterat and
deface his image, engraven on the heart by his first work of creation, and
which thus was a base requital of his bounty, of whom first in order he had his
being and honor, not only (I say) did God the Father receive in some special
manner the wrong by that first sin of man, and by our original sin flowing from
it, but also by the constant tract of our actual transgressions, which as they
flow from that common root in us, So they reflect upon that bright Sun which
the creature at first labored to obscure; and hence its said, If any man sin
we have an advocat with the father (1 John 2.1) as being in some special manner
wronged thereby: yet, notwithstanding there be some sins whereby more directly
offense is offered to the Son and holy Ghost, then to the Father; thus the
contempt of the Gospel and undervaluing of the blood of Christ, do most
immediately reflect upon the Son and his work of redemption; and the quenching
and resisting of the holy Spirit in his heavenly motions, is most directly
against the Spirit and his work of illumination and sanctification; hence, the
Spirit thereby is said to be Ephesians. 4.30.
grieved and Isa. 63.10.
vexed. And in that unpardonable sin (or rather mass of sins) both the Son and
holy Ghost are put to an open shame, as is expressly said of Christ, whom they
crucify to themselves afresh, Heb. 6.6. and it is no less evident, as the holy
Ghost, whose works and gifts they abuse and undervalue, ver. 4, 5, 6. Hence it
has its name, and is particularly called the sin against the holy Ghost, Mat.
12.31. Mark, 3.29. Luke 12.10. Thus also notwithstanding of that appropriation
of works, we will find one and the same work ascribed particularly to diverse
persons; thus our sanctification, though appropriated and usually ascribed to
the holy Ghost, yet it is called of the Father, Jude, 1. and thus also our
reconciliation is ascribed to the Father, 2 The words themselves without a
commentary do clearly hold out God the Father, though as frequently else where
expressed by his essential Name.
Cor. 5.19, 20. Joh. 3.16. etc. and to the Son, Romans 5.10, 11, 15. Col.
1.20.21. Joh. 14.16. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. etc. Our Calvinus in 2 Cor. 13.14. ostendit
quomodo dicam^r reconciliari, quum essemus inimici Deo, per mortem Christi, and
tamen Deum ita mundum dilexisse ut dares silium suum unigenitum, etc. Hinc,
inquit, Deum inde nos intuemur; nam Deus quantum ad se dilexit ante mundi
creationem; at cum in nobis nihil cernamus praeter materiam irae, ita sit ut
respectu nostri initium dilectionis sit a morte Christi.
reconciliation is ascribed to the Father, because of his free grace he elected
us to salvation; and to Christ, because by his death he purchased our salvation
and reconciliation; and it is ascribed to the Spirit also, because it is his
proper work to bring us to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.

Concl. 9. Albeit we do not deny, that the Father may be said to work by, and
with the Son and holy Ghost, and the Son with, and by the holy Ghost, because
of that natural procession, order and priority that is among those glorious
persons; yet we humbly conceive, that the way of conveying of all good to the
Saints, which the Scriptures so frequently inculcat, and which we should
especially eye in all our adresses to God; to wit, from the Father, through the
Son, and by the holy (...).
Ghost; that this noble way does not by any natural result flow from that
original order that is among those blessed persons, but rather from that
voluntary and eternal transaction among the persons of the ever glorious
Trinity, for the recovery of lost man. I do not deny, that many ancient and
modern Divines do speak of this order of working, as importing no more but that
natural order of procession and subsisting, in reference to some operation and
work toward the creatures; and having been at some pains in perusing the
writings of such as seemed more subtle and inquisitive (I mean the popish If
any will be at the pains to trace the Schoolmen here, how will they see them
evanish in their empty speculations? Their old Master, Lombard, some hundred
years since has involved them in a labyrinth from which, to this day, they
cannot extricate themselves; sometimes they seem to affirm, that any person may
send another, yea, and that one and the same person may send himself, vid.
Thom. 1. part. quaest. 43. art. 8. quaelibet personae (Dom. Bannez. in his
gloss, which is more clear then the text) mittit se vel aliam. But when they
would speak more properly and acurately, they tell us that permissionem nihil
aliud intelligunt nifi aeternam processionem alicujus personae divinae cum
habitudine ad effectum temporalem. And thus they maintain, that the Father is
sent of none, but the Son to be sent of the Father, and the holy Ghost by both.
It were an easy thing here to fill whole pages with the vain speculations of
Lombard, Scotus, and Thomas, and others whom I have perused on this subject, to
whom I went, expecting some satisfaction to this dark question from such
learned men, but I found that it was lost labor to expect any solid knowledge
from such luxuriant wits: and this is all they say for explaining how the
Father is said to work by the Son and holy Spirit, they send us to the mission
of those persons from the Father, and for explaining this, they recur to their
procession from the Father.
Schoolmen) they sent me away with less satisfaction then I came to them; here,
if any where, we would beware of curiosity and rashness; and we need not be
ashamed to profess our ignorance in this, as in many other points of our belief
concerning this mystery; therefore, we shall in all modesty propound some few
things for clearing this covenant and voluntary transaction, which seeme^^ so
fully to explain, that which was rather darkened then unfolded by
School-speculations. And, 1. it would be observed, that great (...), etc. Basil
apud Forbes. page 49.
Basil long since spoke of an economick mission of the Spirit, which can hardly
be conceived, but in order to this voluntary transaction. 2. Its granted on all
hands, that the Father from eternity did enter in covenant with the Son
concerning the redemption of man, and why might not the holy Ghost be included
in that covenant, in reference to his work for the sanctification and salvation
of sinners? nay, he cannot be altogether excluded, unless we make him
essentially to differ from the other two: now those arguments that may be
brought against this transaction, in reference to the holy Ghost, will as
forcibly militate against that covenant and transaction between the Father and
the Son. 3. That designation of the Sons manner of working, does manifestly
relate to his mediatory office, and should we not also conceive the holy Spirit
to be there designed as the comforter, and in relation to that peculiar work
which he undertook in that eternal covenant? Now that the Son is there
designed, not as the second person of the Godhead, but as the Mediator; and
not as the efficient, but as the meritorious cause, the particle (...) and the
very phrase it self, compared with the like phrase, Ephesians, 2.18. may evince. This
is it that the Scriptures do so often inculcat, and this is so necessary to be
known, and to be always improven by us, when we draw nigh to God; but as to
their mysterious different natural manner of working, though the thing it self
and (...) be asserted, yet the (...), the manner and way I know no where
expressed, as being above us, and not very necessary for us to know; but all
that the Scripture says concerning the different manner of working of these
glorious persons, may be applied to that gracious economy, which the Lord would
have us with admiration to consider, and for our comfort improve in all our
addresses to him. 4. If their natural order of working be thus expressed, then
the Father and the Son may be thought to be remote causes, and only the holy
Ghost to work Unless the particles through and by be expounded by with, as we
did in propounding 9. Concl. which would make little for the purpose of these
Authors:
immediately. 5. The difference, as to this which is between the works of nature
and grace, does very convincingly show, that this different way of
administration through the Son and by the Spirit, does not relate to that
natural order of working, but to this gracious economy; otherwise the works of
nature, as well as the gracious habits and actions of the Saints might be
ascribed to the Spirit as his work, and might be said to be dispensed through
Christ, and for his sake.

That which here seems only to have difficulty, is, what is the fruit and
special benefit of this economy, as to the holy Ghost, and what is it that
thereby is superadded to that natural order of working which agrees to him as
the third person of the blessed Trinity? Ans. We may not think to satisfy all
the cavils that carnal reason can suggest, we should suppress and not give way
to our curiosity, nor labor to be wise beyond what is written; and to that
question, we say no more but these two things, 1. albeit that economy be
voluntary and of free choice (for who can give a reason that might have moved
the Father to elect, the Son to redeem, and the holy Ghost to sanctify any of
the sons of Adam?) yet in that economy there is a respect had, and proportion
kept with that natural order that is among these glorious persons; and here (as
in all Gods ways) there is a decency and fitness; there is a congruity, though
no Nulla ratio obligans vel determinans.
reason or motive which could oblige and determine the Lord; for the Father,
having his being of none, is sent by none, and works from none; the Son being
begotten of the the Father, is sent of the Father, and acts as having in a
special manner received commission from him, and directs his actions and
sufferings for the redemption of man unto the Father, as a price and
satisfaction given to him; and the holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and
Son, carries on the work of salvation in all them whom the Father has elected
unto life, and for whom the Son has laid down his life; thus in time
effectuating what the Father from eternity had decreed, and applying the
medicine the Son has purchased and prepared for us. 2. While its ask't what
the Spirit works by virtue of this economy? Ans. When thou come home to thy
fathers house, and see his face, either thy curiosity shall be silenced, or
satisfied: but now, if thou only ask what? we may rather ask what not? Are
not all the gracious actings of the Spirit, and the whole work of
sanctification first and last, the sweet fruit of this economy, covenant and
transaction, and without which our case had been as bad and desperate as the
devils? and now the Spirit by virtue of that covenant, not only works, but
creates grace in subjecto inhabili, where there was no inclination, fitness, or
preparation, till he began to work; and not only actuatch grace where he has
wrought it, and concurreth with it, but also supplieth the defect of the cause
and principle it self, which still remains incomplete till he perfect it in
glory; which is another kind of providence, nor what is afforded to natural
agents: And holiness, sanctification and illumination, being the third great
work of God, which by virtue of that voluntary transaction remained to be
wrought toward the sons of men, that did lie upon the third person of the
blessed Trinity; and thus, by this eternal covenant, holiness was fitly
appropriated to the holy Spirit.

And thus we may see, that there is not a full enumeration in the three-membred
distinction of mission (so often ininculcated in the Schools) 1. per imperium,
or by command, which supposes the subjection of him who is sent; 2. per
consilium, or by counsel and advice, which supposes weakness and ignorance in
him who is sent; 3. per originem, or by natural descent, as trees send forth
their branches, and this (say they) kind of mission only has place among the
persons of the Trinity; but we may doubt if any where in the Scriptures, the
word mission or sending, is put to signify the natural procession of any of
the persons of the Trinity? but however, from what has been said, it may
appear, that this three-footed distinction does halt and wants one of its
legs, ye^, and that member which is most useful and necessary, and which (as
we conceive) only has place in the Scriptures, viz. by mutual consent,
agreement and covenant; and none can question, that this sort of mission may
have place among equals.

Before we come to the application, Concl. We are not so limited to conceive of
the divine nature under one or more personal properties, and distinct
subsistences, that in prayer, or any other point of worship, we may not draw
nigh to him as the alone Jehovah and true God; we are not so obliged to
conceive of the divine nature relatively, and as subsisting in the Father, Son
and Spirit, as that we may not apprehend him absolutely as God, abstracting, as
it were, from the different subsistences of the Godhead (though not excluding
them.) And thus the Jewish Church used to worship him, and for ordinary made
their adress to him, as that one, true and living God, laying hold, rather on
his essential and glorious attributes, then on his personal properties or
relations.

But, A word of warning and caution.
1. It were to be wished now under so full a discovery of this mysterious unity
and Trinity, that in beholding the infinite nature of the one Jehovah and true
God, we might adore the glorious Trinity of persons; yet not suffering our
thoughts so to expatiat, and be scattered in musing on three, as distinct
objects of worship, but still fixing our eye upon the unity of the divine
nature and Godhead, which is the formal object of worship, and which is not
multiplied, nor divided in the several persons; for (as Vna est enim Patris and
Filii and Spiritus sancti essentia, quam Graci (...) vocant, in qua non est
aliud Pater, aliud Filius, aliud Spiritus sanctus, quamvis personaliter fit
alius Pater, alius Filius, alius Spiritus sanctus. Aug. tom 3. de fid. ad Pet
diac. cap. 1. fol 48.
Austin says) albeit in the Trinity there be alius and alius, yet not aliud;
though there be a distinction of persons, yet not of natures, nor a distinct
object of worship; but the same Godhead is in all the persons, and therefore,
whether one or mo, or none of the persons be named, the object of worship is
the same, and we should in the unity of nature, (...) author. expos apud,
Forhes. loo. cit. cap. 33.
behold the admirable Trinity of persons, and in that Trinity the glorious
unity of nature, without division, or confusion, multiplication, or alteration.

But, 2. Albeit we may name any one of the persons particularly, as being the
true God, and a fit object of worship, yet we must not imagine any special
respect and honor thereby to be given to him, as if the other two were less
worshipped in that act of worship; and therefore, albeit the Saints do
frequently make their adress to the Father, yet, 1. they do not exclude the Son
and holy Ghost; nor, 2. imagine that the Son and holy Spirit has not an equal
hand with the Father in all their mercies; and thus, 3. they do not come to the
Father as another, and greater God, to whom more honor and reverence were due
then to the Son and Spirit; and, 4. they do not apprehend, that thereby the
Father is engaged more to help them then the other two which are not named.

3. As we should not stumble at the Arrian and Socinian cavils against the
mystery of the Trinity, which is an object of faith so far beyond the reach of
our dark-sighted reason and apprehension, and is such a depth, as our shallow
understanding and short measure is not able to sound; So on the other hand, we
would beware least our belief of the Trinity make us incline toward the pagan
conceit of plurality of Gods, that it tend not nor lead that way, as too
freqently it does in the rude and stupid multitude, contrarily to the dictates
of Vide Scot in 1. sent did. 2. quaest. 3.
reason it self, which has convinced many Pagans of the impossibility of mo
Gods then one; which necessary point is so clearly held forth in the Scriptures
of truth, that he who runs may read, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Mark 12.32. 1 Cor. 8.4.6. etc.

But, hoping that sober Christians will abominat these and such like gross
conceptions of God, that which we would mainly here take notice of and improve,
is that gracious economy of the glorious persons of the ever blessed Trinity,
in dispensing of mercies to us, and that eternal covenant and transaction
whereby in time all good is conveyed to us, and which we should eye and make
use of in our addresses to God. And thus we may hearken to the voice of the
Father as from all eternity, saying, [How do my bowels yern toward the sons of
men? I am willing to pardon all their iniquities and receive them graciously;
Joh. 3.16.
Behold I so love the world as to give my only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. I pity poor,
foolish, self-destroying sinners, and I will Hos. 14.4.
heal their backslidings Is. 53.5.
with the blood of my dear Son, and will love them freely, Is. 63.7.
according to the multitude of my loving kindnesses.] And we may behold the Son
himself concurring and consenting to that blessed motion, and saying, [O! let
the ungrate rebel have a pardon, though it should be subscribed with my blood;
let bankrupt sinners have a discharge, and all their debts be laid on me, I am
willing to lay down my life that they may live; Lo I Ps. 40.7, 8. 1 John 4.10.
come to be the propitiation for their sins, I delight to do thy will, O
Father, and to Tit. 2.14.
give my self for them to redeem them from all iniquity, and to purify by my
blood a peculiar people zealous of good works.] And we may hear the holy Spirit
saying, [Behold, I am willing and ready to tender to them the gracious offer of
peace and reconciliation, to persuade and allure them to embrace that offer,
and to convince and Cant. 1.4.
draw them after thee, to Jer. 31.33.
write thy Law in their hearts, to Joh. 14.26.
comfort and strengthen them, and Romans 8.26.
help their infirmities, to defend and keep them from all evil, and to fit,
prepare and Joh. 14.16.
preserve them unto eternal life.] But, it would be remembered, that though
virtually and as to our apprehensions, these several steps may be distinguished
in that gracious transaction, yet properly there cannot be such a stipulation,
such conditions, offers, consenting, and, as it were, consultation, where there
is but one nature, will and understanding; but that there was such a Covenant,
having eminently these things in it, cannot be denied by any who acknowledge
our salvation to be carried on according to an eternal Covenant between the
Father and the Son; and when we shall understand that conference and, as it
were, consultation concerning the creation of man, Genesis 1.26. we shall be more
able to comprehend this transaction concerning the salvation of man: but now,
let none from thence imagine the love of the Father to be really different from
the love of the Son and holy Ghost, and that they did not contrive and had no
hand in predestinating us to life, but as consenters and approvers of the
Fathers free purpose of love: For, albeit predestination be ascribed to the
Father by some sort of appropriation, as being (according to that mysterious
order in the Trinity) the first person; yet, we must not think that there is
such a priority or distinction of persons as does import a distinction of
nature or a real difference among the essential attributes as they are in these
glorious persons, and so conceive that there is another will, power and
understanding in the Father, then in the Son and holy Spirit, and accordingly
different acts flowing from these different principles. O! let us not rob these
blessed persons of the honor of being Phil. 2.6.
equal with the Father, and having the same nature and divine properties,
because they of their mere good pleasure have stoopt so low to exalt us and do
us good; and because voluntarily and of their free accord, they have undertaken
an economy and dispensing of offices for us to make us happy; and have received
(as it were) a commission, the Son to redeem us and lay down his life for us,
and the holy Spirit to sanctify and prepare us for the heavenly inheritance,
and have thus undergone a sort of Inaequalitat officiorum non tollit
aequalitatem naturae aut personarum.
inferiority, dependence and subordination, in being sent to execute these
offices, which they undertook in mercy and love to us. O! who is able to Ephesians.
3.18, 19.
comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of this love
of the Son and holy Spirit, which passes knowledge? O! let us praise and
magnify God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, for undertaking an economy (and,
as it were, ministry) for us; now unto the ever glorious and blessed Spirit of
grace; and unto him that Rev. 1.5.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
loved us, and washed us in his own blood, and has made us Kings and a royal
Priesthood, be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. And, O! let us
thankfully and diligently improve this noble and and admirable way of
conveyance of all good to us, and let us in all our adresses to God desire and
wait for every mercy from the Father, through the Son, and by the holy Spirit;
looking upon Christ as the inexhaustible treasure and Col. 1.19.
storehouse of all blessings; and depending on the Spirit, as the great
dispenser, giver and disposer of all that fullness and riches that is in Christ;
from the 2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of mercies and God of all comfort, of 1 Cor. 8.6.
whom are all things, as the fountain and first person of the Trinity, who laid
the foundation of our redemption, and who is the Father of our blessed Lord and
Savior. We cannot perform any duty acceptably, we cannot praise God, nor pray
to him, unless we come in the name of Christ as our Mediator and Advocat, and
wait for the help of the Spirit, and depend on him as our shield, strength,
leader and guide; and yet, we must look over that economy and dispensation, and
close with the Father, Son and holy Spirit as that one God, to whom in every
part of worship we should come, as to the chief and ultimat object, to which
primarily it is directed, and in which it does rest.

Here we will stand, we can go no further; and praise be to his name who has
brought us this length; albeit our light be darkness in respect of the light of
glory, yet the light of the ancient Church was but like the morning star before
the Sun Mal. 4.2.
which now shines before our eyes: And, O! when will that day come, when we
shall behold so much in this mystery as shall ravish our hearts, and fill our
mouths with songs of joy, admiration and p^aise to all eternity, when we shall
not see through a glass darkly, but face to face; when we shall not know in
part, but as we are known; when we shall be like him, and see him as he is, 1
Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.

CHAP. II. Of the withdrawing of the Spirit, of deadness, indisposition, and
wandering thoughts in prayer, their causes and remedy.
ALL our light and strength, our activity, life and zeal, being the fruit of
the free Spirit of grace, as has been shown, Part. 1. Chap. 9. We not being of
our selves sufficient to think, far less to do as we ought; all our sufficiency
coming from God alone; 2 Cor. 3.5. If the Lord withdraw his Spirit, and if the
Spirit of Romans 8.10.
life do not quicken and enable us for our our duty, what deadness and
indisposition must there be upon our spirit? and how unfit and unable must we
be for the work of the Lord, and for any part of his worship? We shall not then
here separate the cause and the effect; but we not being mere patients, but by
our folly and unkindness provoking the Spirit to depart; yea, and not only thus
procuring this sad dispensation, but also joining and actively concurring, and
taking, as it were, the hammer in our hands for hardening our own heart,
shutting our own eyes that we might not see, and casting water upon the fire,
that it might not burn, we shall enquire after both sort of causes adding some
few things for curing and remedying this evil, and for our direction whilewe
are under this sad trial.

Sect. 1. How far the Spirit does withdraw? and why?
Joh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Psalm.
5.11, 12. Take not thy holy Spirit from me; -- uphold me with thy free Spirit.
WE shall not now speak of the case and state of desertion in the general, what
it is, what be its kinds, what are the causes, what the symptoms and marks,
what the effects and woeful consequents of that malady, and what should be done
by way of cure and remedy; that were a large field, has been the subject of
several excellent Mr. Boltons instructions for a right comforting, etc. Mr.
Goodwins child of light, etc. Mr. Symonds desert. souls case and cure, etc.
Treatises; but we shall only meddle with so much of that case as concerns
the present subject, and now enquire how far the Spirit does withdraw his help
and assistance from the Saints, in reference to their prayers? and shall but in
a word, and very briefly speak to that, and to the rest of the particulars in
this and the following Sections; because they fall in here occasionally, and as
in the by, as also since they very much depend upon the case in the si (of
which now we cannot speak) and the general grounds and purposes which belong to
that head.

As to the first question here propounded, how far the Spirit does withdraw?
Let us, 1. suppose against Socinians, Papists and Arminians, that the Spirit
does neither totally nor finally leave and forsake any of the Saints, 1 John
3.9. Joh. 10.28, 29. Jer. 32.39, 40. Heb. 13.5. etc. 2. From the constant
presence of the Spirit, we may well collect his constant work and operation,
there is a necessary influence of the Spirit whereby the Saint^ are supported
and upheld, the life of the new man is preserved, and the 1 John 3.9.
seed of God is kept from corruption; and that influence is never denied or
withheld from the Saints when they are at the lowest, and in their worst and
weakest condition, when they have been sadly buffeted by Satan, and
dangerously wounded by their lusts, and after that little of life which yet
Rev. 3.2.
remains in them is ready to die, yet there is a secret hand that supporteth
them, so that they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28. But, 3. it is more diff^^ult
to determine, whether as the Spirit always works to the conservation of
spiritual life, So also to its operation, acting and exercise (and the work of
the Spirit, as to the former, may be called, upholding and conserving grace,
and as to the latter, assisting and concurring grace.) Ans. Albeit we did join
with an Mr. Symonds case and cure, chapter 4. page (mihi) 36.
excellent modern Divine, while he thus resolves this question; God never
wholly denies his assistance to a faithful soul: though some degrees of
divine help be withheld, so that the soul languish in a sort, and sink into a
state of deadness and au^ness, yet there is life, and that both habitual and
actual. Gods clock never stanos; there is no such deliquium gratae, no such
swoun of the new man, in which all acts do cease -- though a Christian may do
less, yet still he does something, and though he may lose some help from God,
yet not all. Albeit (I say) we did grant what is here asserted, yet these
actings may be so weak and faint, that it will be hard to discern and put a
difference between them and our natural motions; they may be so cold and
liveless, as if no fire had come from heaven; and as if the Spirit of life had
never breathed upon the soul: nay, though something of the new life, and of
grace, might be discerned in those actings, yet we could not assent to what is
said by this As the Spirit works always to the conservation of spiritual
life, So it works ever to the growth of graces A Christian is over growing,
yea, then when he seems to himself and others to stand at a stay, yea, to
decline, he grows always really, though nor apparently, nor equally, idid.
page 26.
Author concerning the constant growth of grace unless by growth, he understand
no other thing but the bringing forth, and bearing some fruit, though never so
small and little; but this cannot be the importance of the word, while we are
exhorted to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. And thus a man may be said to grow,
while he is lying on his death bed, and while he is in the most languishing
condition: for even then he can elicit some vital acts and bring forth some
f^uits of life; and yet it would be thought a strange paradox to affirm that
such were in a And the instance (of plants under the nipping blasts of the
winter when the fruit and leaves fall off) brought by that Author, overturneth
his conclusion; for though then there be a tendency to growth; yet there is no
acttual growing, but a d^cay.
growing condition: there is no proper growth, but when the habit, fountain and
principle does receive an addition and increase. But, 4. what ever be said as
to a total cessation from all acts of spiritual life, and to an universal
withdrawing of all assisting grace: though a Saint, under the most dreadful
storms, and while he is at his lowest, were never such an empty vine, as to
bring forth no fruit, and though at no time he were so far deserted, as to have
all measure of assistance for every spiritual duty withheld, yet there may be a
total suspension of influence and assistance in reference to some particular
performance, and that it may be so in the present case, is too apparent; and
thus some Mr ^ildersh^n^ on Ps 51. Mr. Love* Tre^t. of mortification.
Divines observe, that all the w^^l* David wallowed in the mire, and till he
repented of his murder and adultery, his mouth wa^ shut, and he could not pray;
and therefore after he had bewailed his sins, he begs that God would open his
lips, and would uphold and streng then him with his free Spirit, Psa. 51.15,
12. Guilt upon the conscience will make the sinner speechless when he comes
before the Lord; ah! what can the rebel say, who purposes to go on in his
rebellion? dare he say (and what el^e can he say) [Lord though I purpose to
break thy holy commandments, and to provoke thee to thy face, yet withdraw not
thy Spirit be not angry, pardon my sin, etc.] or if any had the impudence thus
to mock the holy Lord, would any imagine that the holy Spirit did help and
assist him in such an hypocritical, bold and foolish performance?

And since the Spirit may thus be provoked totally to withdraw his help and
assistance, as to our spiritual sacrifice, and the offering up of our desires
to God, we need not descend to particulars, for all that actual help and
concurrence, with the several steps thereof Vid. loc. 337. and seq.
mentioned, Part. 1. Chap. 9. may be denied, and for a season withheld and
suspended.

It would be here observed, that this suspension of the assistance of the
Spirit, may fall under a twofold consideration; 1. as our trial; 2. as our
punishment: For, though he Lord does not withdraw his Spirit but from sinners,
yet not always for sin; though we be guilty, and sin may be called the Causa
sine qua non, dispositiva imo and meritoria
cause and occasion of desertion, that which of it self deserves this sad
stroke, and makes us liable to this sore trial (for in heaven, when we shall be
free of sin, there shall be no night nor ecclipses; there shall be no complaint
for the want of the influences and the light of this Sun) yet the Lord does not
always pursue a quarrel, and for our sins withdraw his Spirit; but for some
other high and holy ends, 1. the Lord, like a Physician, will take down the
body, and draw blood to prevent the disease; thus the Lord did so far withdraw
his assistance from Paul, as to suffer the messenger of Satan to buffet him,
to prevent Spiritual pride, and that he might not be exalted through the
abundance of revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7. 2. As a teacher and instructor of his
people, he will withdraw his help to teach and warn them of their own weakness
and inability, and the need they stand in of a continual supply from the
fountain; thus Peter in the hour of temptation was so far deserted and left,
that he denied his Master thrice, and with an oath, Mat. 26.70.72, 74. 3. As a
sovereign Lord and Master Mat. 20.15.
who may do what he will with his own, he will withdraw his Spirit for the
trial of his honest servants, and to give the world a proof and evidence of the
reality and strength of their graces; thus Job was left to Satan's buffering
from within and without, as if God had set him up as a mark at which he would
shoot all his arrows, Job, 7.20. so that his soul choosed (and had he not been
by a secret hand of providence upheld, would have embraced) strangling and
death rather then life, ver. 15. And yet the Lord all the while was not
pleading any controversy against Job, but rather offering him to the trial,
that his sincerity and uprightness might be brought to the light, and made more
manifest; and that we hearing of his patience, might learn to imitate it; and
seeing the issue and period the Lord put to his trial, might be encouraged in
the day of our trouble, Job, 1.8. Job, 2.3. Jam. 5.11. But, 4. though the
Spirit does not Quod ad tritum illud Augustini: and Prosperi Deus neminem
deserit nisi prius deseratur ab ipso. Intelligi potest vel de desertione totali
and finali, vel de desertione castigatoria ae quasi paenali -- and si loquamur
de homine lapso certum est omnem hominem ^ut loquitur Did. Aluarez de auxil div
disp. 58. sect 7. prius deseruisse Deum per peccatum actuale v^l orignale quam
Deus illum deserat.
always, yet often, and most usually he withdraws for sin, according to that
threatening, 2 Cor. 5.2. If ye forsake him, he will Not only in respect of
outward blessings, prosperity, prorection, etc. but also in respect of inward
and sanctifying grace withdrawing both the one and the other.
forsake you. Our kind Father will withdraw and hide his face from his own
children when they become unkind and undutifull, and then desertion is a
paternal chastisement and undutifull, and then But rather negative then
positive, and if we would speak strictly, it is rather the suspension of an
act; but in that it does flow from the holy counsel and appointment of God, we
may in respect of its original, seu causaluer, call it an act u^ loquamur cum
vulgo.
act not of mere sovereignty, but rather of justice, though not pure and
vindictive, but rather paternal and castigatory, and mixed with much love, and
tending to our good profit and amendment, Heb. 12.10. And thus there are, as it
were, four kinds of substractions and withdrawings of the influence of the
Spirit, viz. 1. medicinal, cau^ionary, and for preventing of sin; 2. monitory
and doctrinal; 3. probatory, exploratory and for trial (albeit the former two
also in some general sense may go under this name, and be said to be for trial,
which thus is opposed to punishment, which falls under the last sort of
desertion, which is) 4. castigatory, and, as it were, penal, and by way of
chastisement for sin: we will not further prosecute the difference; let us only
observe, that as it is more honorable and comfortable for the Saints to be
cast into this furnace, then to cast themselves into it; to suffer according to
the will of God, then for their sin: So usually there is some one or other
circumstance and ingredient in the trial it self, that has much love in it, or
is some kind of mitigation and extenuation of that sad stroke, or some thing in
the issue for the greater advantage and establishment of such as have been
under the trial; thus Paul, though buffeted by Satan, yet not foiled, but
keeps his ground; though he was left to wrestle with the temptation, yet not to
become a prey to it; and though Peter fell foully and most deplorably, yet he
was not left in the mire, but instantly recovered by Christ's look; and though
Jobs trial was very sore, yet the issue was very glorious and comfortable.

But though the Lord thus may for holy ends (known to himself, but always for
the good of his honest servants) withdraw his Spirit in some measure from
these, who have not by their negligence or folly procured it, they being most
regular and exemplar in their walk, yet, 1. since most usually the Lord
withdraws for sin; and, 2. since we always deserve, and may (if the Lord would
deal in justice with us) by our failings provoke the holy Spirit to depart and
forsake us; and, 3. Since the Lords high and holy ends and designs are secret,
and cannot well at the first view be discerned by us, therefore it is always
our duty, and should be our work, when we meet with straitning, deadness, etc,
(which are the symptoms of the Spirits withdrawing) to search after our ways,
and to examine our hearts, that if our conscience condemn us not, we may be
comforted, or having found out the cause, and the particular sin for which the
Spirit has withdrawn, we may repent and forsake it; but we would not rest on a
superficial veiw of our ways, nor because we cannot at the first discern,
therefore conclude there is no cause in us; but let us, according to Elihu his
counsel to Job, say unto God, that which I see not, teach thou me, Job, 34.32.
Let us impartially deal with our own heart, and ask conscience, and set it a
work; let us again ponder our ways, and let our enquiry be more particular,
and of a larger extent, and readily we will epsy one of the following causes
to have procured and brought on this malady, and will perhaps be forced with
him Tu me non deseris, nisi prior ego te deseram, August. tom. 9. s^liloq cap.
14. fol. (mihi) 166.
sto say, Lord thou did not leave me till, I first left thee.

And thus we come to the second thing propounded; what are these sins for which
the Spirit is provoked to withdraw and forsake the Saints, and not help them in
prayer, or any other spiritual performance; at least not in such a measure or
manner as formerly? But it would be remembered, that this question must be
limited to the fourth and last case, viz. when the Spirit does hide his face
for sin, and when our iniquities separat between us and our God, as Isa. 59.2.
For in the three former Cases, when the Lord for our trial, and for high and
holy ends known to his majesty, does depart, albeit then it be our duty to
search and enquire whether by our folly we have procured that stroke, that
seeing our fault, we may amend our ways, and how ever we may walk more closely
and circumspectly, and follow after him while he withdraws from us; yet then
no such cause can be discerned and found out, because (as is supposed) the Lord
in that dispensation does not pursue a quarrel against us. 2. We would
distinguish between the comforting presence of the Spirit, and his quickening
and strengthening presence; there may be much life, vivacity, activity, fervency
and heart-melting in prayer, or any other ordinance, when through the want of
assurance the Saints may mourn and pour out many a sad complaint before the
Lord; now albeit both those cases belong to the general head of desertion, and
have some place here in reference to prayer, since our enlargement in that duty
does not a little depend upon, and might be much promoved by, the assurance of
our adoption, reconciliation, and God's favor; yet, since there needs
nothing be here added to what belongs to the general case, we shall remit that
part of the question, that concerns the comforting presence of the Spirit to
its own place, and now only speak of the causes why the Spirit withdraws his
help and assistance; especially since the causes and cure both of the one and
the other, will be found the same and alike, if not altogether, yet for the
most part; as the Spirit uses to withdraw his comforting, when he withdraws
his quickening presence, So what means would be used for recovering the
quickening, may also prove instrumental for regaining the Spirits comforting
presence, albeit the one may prevent the other, and the Spirit may for a while
quicken and assist before be comfort.

Before we descend to particulars, it would be observed, that the holy Spirit
may be provok^t to depart, 1. more directly, immediately, and by way of affront,
as when any indignity is immediately offered to his majesty and holiness, or to
his work; 2. mediatly (as it were) and indirectly, by way of demerit, when
through our folly we transgress any of the commandments of God, and thus more
directly sin against him as Lawgiver, King and Lord, rather then as our helper
and comforter: And here we shall especially speak of the Yet not excluding the
second, nor denying its-influence in these provocations.
first sort of causes, as being most proper to this place, referring the other
to the following Section.

As to the first, the Scripture holds forth the unkindness, affronts and
indignities offered to the Spirit of God under several expressions, as of, 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
quenching; 2. Ephesians. 4.30.
grieving, 3. Isa. 7.13.
wearying, 4. Ps. 78.56.
provoking, 5. Act. 5.9.
tempting, 6. Act. 7.51.
resisting, 7. Isa. 63.10.
vexing, 8. Isa. 63.10.
rebelling against; and, 9. doing Heb. 10.29.
despite unto the Spirit of grace. We will not enter upon an explication of
these phrases, nor, particularly enquire after their importance or diffirence,
but we may at the first view take notice of some kind of gradation from the
less to the greater, for the most part, if not in all, according to the order
they are here placed; and albeit there must be an inequality, for according to
the measure and degree of the offense, the provocation must be the less or the
greater, yet all and every one of these indignities in whatsoever degree does
deserve, and may justly provoke the Spirit to depart; but we shall now only
instance some few particulars, as being the most ordinary and the epidemical
distempers of this generation, and we shall name them as so many branches of
the first head, viz. quenching the Spirit, which being most general, may well
be extended to the several particulars.

As That we may improve the me^aphor and fimilitude used by the holy Ghost.
fire may be quenched, either by withholding fuel and matter whereon it
should feed, or by casting water upon it, to choke and extinguish it; so the
Spirit may be said to be quenched, either negatively by not cherishing, or
positively by opposing and abasing his office or work; either by omission, or
by commission. 1. Then negatively, the Spirit may be quenched these three manner
of ways; 1. by not opening to him and yielding to his motions; thus while
Christ came to the spouse door knocking and crying, open to me my sister, my
love, my dove, my und-filed, etc. She holds him out, pretending trifling
excuses, for her folly and unkindness; why? she had put off her coat, and could
not put it on, she had washen her feet, and would not defile them; therefore
Christ withdrew his Spirit and departs; and when she (laying to heart, and
repenting of her folly) sought him, could not for a while find him; she called,
but he gave her no answer, Cant. 5.2, 3, 6. Thus also while the Spirit of God
cried to Israel, and they would not hear; and testified to them, both by his
servants the Prophets, and by his motions and inward suggestions, but they
would not hearken nor obey, he withdrew, and gave them up to the lusts of their
own heart; since they would not follow his counsel and directions, he left them
to themselves and to follow their own counsels, Psa. 81.8.10, 11, 12, 13.

But, secondly, though the spouse be not so incivil and unmanerly as to hold
Christ at the door, yet if she do not welcome him and give him entertainment
suitable to his worth and kindness, his Spirit will not stay; if thou do not
make ready, and prepare the heart to receive him, he will not stay in any other
room, if the affections be not enlarged and roused up, to wait and attend him,
he does not value the empty complements of the fancy and imagination: if the
will, which is the mistress and supreme, do not welcome him, he regards not the
attendance of the inferior faculties; if thou be in a spiritual lethargy, when
the Spirit comes to visit thee, if thou meet him with a dead and dull See
Sect. 2.
heart, if thou be fearless of his terrible majesty, if thou keep not a due
distance, casting off that filial reverence, and tender respect which is due to
so great and compassionat a Lord, he will depart and forsake thee, res
delicatula (says an ancient) est Spiritus Dei, and ita nos tractat sicut
tractatur, the Spirit of God is tender and sensible of all the affronts and
injuries we off^r to him, and will deal with us accordingly; if we dishonor
him, he will afflict us, and lay us low; he will go away, and then our If the
glory departed with the Ark (which was but a symbol of Gods presence) 1 Samuel 4
21. far rather when the Lord himself departs.
glory departs; if we do not welcome the Spirit with the whole heart, and
entertain him with suitable and enlarged affections, he valueth not our empty
profession and vain oblations: Lukewarm Laodiceans will be spued ous of his
mouth, Rev. 3.16. these who would not Ps. 81.10.
open their mouth wide to receive his comforts, shall have their heart filled
with his terrors, and shut that it shall not receive his influences.

But thirdly, though there be not a total deadness or laziness, though there be
some life, activity and diligence, yet if there be a decay of love and zeal; if
we do not so cherish and entertain the motions of the Spirit as formerly, this
may grieve and quench the Spirit; if love wax cold, and if there be a decay of
respect and affection, that will bring on some sort of distance between married
persons, and will hinder friends from conversing so frequently and familiarly
together; and for this the Lord threatens not only to remove the presence of
his Spirit, but also the candelestick and outward ordinances (which were the
means of conveyance of the Spirit) from Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5. because thou have
left thy first love, etc.

As the Spirit may thus be quenched negatively, and by omission, So, 2.
positively and by commission; as, 1. when we prostitute and subject the gifts
of the Spirit, his work and interest to our selfish and carnal ends; desiring a
name, and taking up a porfession of godliness, that with Act. 8.9.19.
Simon Magus, we may seem some body; when we make piety a cloak to cover our
pride, covetousness, etc. or use it as a stir^op whereby we ascend to some high
place and station in the world, etc. 2. When we have low and undervaluing
thoughts of the gifts and graces of the Spirit; though they have some room in
our estimation and affection, yet if we prefer other things unto them, not
prizing them according to their worth and excellency, nor regarding as we ought
the condescension and kindness of the giver, we dishonor and grieve the
Spirit, and he may justly take away those love tokens; thus when we will not
lose our favor with man, our moyen and interest with the creature, our name,
place and possessions for his truth, ordinances, etc. yea, when we so far
undervalue these precious things, as to be ashamed of them before men, when not
only fear, but also shame will make us dissemble our profession* and conceal
our graces, duties, etc. may we not be afraid, lest, as the Luke 9.26.
Son will be ashamed of such when he comes in his glory, So the Spirit when he
comes to manifest himself in the ordinances of life. But, 3. when not only his
gifts and graces, his love and his kindness are undervalued, but also his
commands and authority are despised, his motions and sweet insinuations are
choked and opposed, while as the contrary suggestions of Satan the enemy, are
entertained, cherished, and cheerfully obeyed; must not the Spirit be much
displeased, and highly provoked with such an indignity? would an earthly King
endure such an affront? nay, what friend is he who seeing thee but slight his
counsel, entreaty and request, while thou did welcome his enemy, and gratify
him in what he desired, could digest such a disparagement and indignity? And,
4. so much of illumination (which is the work of the Spirit) light, knowledge
and conscience is choked and opposed by the sinner (whatever be the particular
transgression) so far the Spirit is dishonored and disparaged, and provoked to
depart and withdraw, nay, in every formal disobedience, viz. when the command
and counsel of God is known, there is much, not only of contempt, but also of
rebellion; and what will provoke if that do not? And thus albeit for
distinctions sake we did put a difference between sins, some of them being more
directly against the Spirit, his work and office, that being, as it were, their
object; yet there is no known sin which may not be said to be against the
Spirit of God and his work.

And thus we come to the second sort of provocation, whereby the Spirit is not
so directly opposed and quenched, his peculiar office and work not being the
matter and object of such sins (albeit it be The work of the Spirit is thus
opposed, quasi in obliquo, indirectly, and as a concurring circumstance; but
not in recto and quasi objectum.
opposed and choked by the sinner) and here we have a large field if we would
come to particulars, but the Gal. 5.19.
works of the flesh are manifest, and their opposition and contrariety to the
Spirit of grace and holiness, is no less evident, Gal. 5.16. If we The
opposition will be more clear if the words (...) be understood impertatively do
not fulfill, with Bez^, in hi^ translation which ^areus makes use of, albeit
in his Commentary, he read them indicatively non per ficietis
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, we cannot walk in the Spirit; the Spirit will
not abide with us, nor direct our steps; for what concord can there be between
l^ght and darkness, and the Spirit of holiness and the spirit of lust? As Doves
leave their place when it becomes nesty and unclean, So the holy Ghost (who in
the likeness of a Dove descended upon Christ) will not lodge in that heart that
is defiled with filthy lusts, and is Rev. 18.21
become the habittaion of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird. Every reigning sin is another Lord, and
takes up the house, and the Spirit will not dwell in a corner, nor Prove. 1.14.
cast in his lot with another lord and master; yet some do drive the Spirit
farther away then others, the more gross, crying, scandalous and
conscience-wasting the sin is, the more the Spirit is grieved, and the distance
becomes the greater; if David (though otherwise a man according to Gods heart)
fall into murder and adultery, it will cost him many a tear and prayer before
he recover the comforting presence of the Spirit; and his bones must be broken,
and the Spirit come against him as an enemy, before he prove a healer, and pour
in the oil of gladness in his wounds, Ps. 51.3, 8. And its observable, that
this penitent does first pray that God would create in him a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within him, ver. 10. before he beg the presence and joy of
the Spirit, ver. 11, 12. thereby intimating, that the Spirit will not dwell in
an unclean heart; as he had found by his sad experience all the while he
continued in his For impenitence is both a continuation and some sort of
justification of our sin.
impenitence.

Thus you see the cause, and if ye find the woeful effects of the Spirits
departure, O! its high time to consider your ways, and to repent of your evil
doings, and to seek the Lord till ye find hm; this is no state to be rested in;
ah! what stupidness, security, folly, ingratitude and contempt must it be to
sit down content, while thy God, thy husband, thy life and happiness is
departed? ye have taken away my gods (said Micah of his idols) and what have I
more? and say ye unto me, what aileth thee? Judge. 18.24. Ah! shall he weep,
cry, and so bitterly lament the loss of a supposed deity, and happiness
expected from its presence, and shall not we lament when the true God, the
fountain of real happiness is departed, or rather when through our folly and
unkindness we have banished and driven him from us? O, lay to heart thy loss I
thy fruitful vineyard is now become a barren wilderness, thou, who formerly
wast a Cant. 4.12.
garden enclosed and fenced, art now laid open to all the beasts of the
forest; thou, who once had a ver. 15.
fountain of living waters, how are thy streams now cut off? ver. 13.16.
thou whose plants were an Orchard of pomegranats, with pleasant fruits, and
whose spices did flow out, while the north and south wind did blow upon thy
garden, art now become as the 2 Samuel 1.21.
mountains of Gilboa, upon which neither dew nor rain does fall, nor fields of
offerings. Thou, who Cant. 7.6, 5.
wast fair and pleasant for delights, when the King wast held in thy galleries,
art now become black and pale, while thou live as a widow in solitariness,
and art suffered to wallow in the mire; when thou art Hos. 2.3.
stripped naked of all thy ornaments, and left in a dry and parched land, where
there is no water; now thy Lam. 4.1, 8.
gold is become dim, and thy visage darker then a coal; then, who wast fed with
manna from heaven, and did Cant. 5.1.
eat the honey with the hon^y-comb, mai'st now cry out, my leaness, my leaness,
while thou pinest away for want of the heavenly influences. Oh! who can
enumerat the several evils that befall him who is forsaken of God? nay, though
thou were a Saint (and to such only we now speak) and though the Spirit did not
totally withdraw, yet he may so far leave thee, that to thy sense and
apprehension thou may appear to be Hos. 2.3.
stripped naked, and set as in the day that thou wast born; where are thy
comforts and spiritual consolations now? where is thy furniture and strength,
for doing thy duty? where is thy armor and shield? now thou art exposed to
Satan's fiery darts, to the snares of an alluring and tempting world, and to
the rageing and impetuousness of thy lusts, which seemed (and were in great
part) mortified and subdued. The Saints themselves, when the Spirit withdraws,
are ready to fall, 1. upon the least temptation; 2. into the most gross and
vile sins; and, 3. without recovery, and to live and die in that filthy pudle,
unless he return (as certainly he will do to his own for his great names sake)
awaken them, and pluck them out of the snare; Peter, David, Solomon, etc. are
sad instances of the frai^ty, and naughtiness of the strongest Saints, when
left to themselves; 1. how long did David lie in that vile sin of adultery
without repentance? and, 2. with what craft and policy labored he to cover it?
and when other covers would not do the turn, he added to his adultery murder,
committing that crying sin with much deliberation, and afterward rejoiced in
the death of his faithful servant Vriah, which he had so cunningly pl^tted and
contrived. 3. Did not Peter once and again deny his Master, and relapse into
the same sin? yea, and, 4. did he not fall where he seemed to be strongest? his
zeal for his Master, his courage and resolution appeared to be very great, when
he protested, that though all should, yet he would not deny him, Mat. 26.33.35.
and yet at the voice of a damsel he denied him thrice, with an oath and
cursing; the unbelief of Abraham the father of the faithful, Genesis 12.11, 12.
The passion of Moses, the meekest of men, Numb. 11.15. Psa. 106.33. The
impatience of Job the pattern of patience, Job, 3.3. Job, 6.8, 9. are manifest
evidences, that the strongest Saints may fall into those sins that are contrary
to the graces in which they are most eminent. And, 5. they may be so far
forsaken, as to be permitted not only to commit, but also to justify and plead
for their sin, and with Jonah, to say they did well to be angry against God,
for exercising mercy and forbearance toward others, and for removing their
gourd, Jon. 4.9, 10. etc. But particularly as to the present case, the spirit
of prayer and supplication may be for a season totally withdrawn; but though
the Saints be seldom laid so low, yet there may be a partial departure
accompanied with many sad effects, which may easily be discerned, if we reflect
upon the several fruits of the Spirit (mentioned, Part. 1. Chap. 9.) and those
infirmities which he helps and removes; if then, 1. thou do not so prepare
thy heart to seek the Lord, if, 2. thy ends be not so pure and spieitual, if,
3. thou art unwillingly drawn (as it were) to the throne, rather by the
enforcement of conscience, then out of love to the duty; if, 4. thou pray not
so frequently, nor, 5. so fervently and feelingly, nor, 6. so confidently, nor,
7. with such complacency and delight, if, 8. thy communion with God in that
ordinance has not such influence upon thy heart, to warm and quicken it, and
to engage it for the Lord, and against sin, as sometimes it has had, etc. it
is an argument that the Spirit has in part withdrawn. Its true, the most
watchful and zealous Saints, do not always and without interruption enjoy the
comforting and quickening presence of the Spirit; the wind does not constantly
blow after one and the same manner upon the most fruitful garden, and therefore
we must not measure our state by some present indisposition, unless there be
some notable, considerable and abiding decay and abatement of our spiritual
life; but when that is observed we have reason to mourn, and to lay to heart
our loss, and the greater and more eminent and longer continued, we should be
the more affected and sensible of this evil; what a misery and sad judgment was
it to Sampson and Saul to have but the common gifts and operations of the
Spirit removed from them? (for as we may suppose Saul never to have had. So
Sampson never to have been totally deprived of the saving and sanctifying
presence of the Spirit) we may read their lamentation, Jud. 16.28, 30. 1 Samuel
28.15. And what is the chiefest measure of gifts and common privileges and
excellencies, in respect of the least portion and degree of grace? Ah! do not
then sit down content when the breathings of the Almighty are withdrawn, but go
and cry to the Cant. 4.16.
north wind to awake, and to the south wind to come and If the wind blow not,
thy ship cannot come to the haven, but being tossed to and fro by contrary
tides, is left to be a prey to pirates.
blow upon thy garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; go in faith, ye
have a promise for your encouragment, the Father will give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him; Luke 11.13. We will not insist on directions, but reserving
those in great part to the following Section, let us now remember, that if the
unclean spirit return after he has been cast out, and find the house empty and
swept, he will enter in again and lay claim to his former possession, Mat.
12.44. Nay, though the house be not totally desolate, yet so much room as he
finds empty, he will seek to possess, so far as the Spirit withdraws, so
much the nearer Satan approaches; if the Spirit withdraw his holy motions,
Satan will improve the advantage, and will fill the heart with vain, idle,
impertinent and sinful motions; as Pirates may easily surprise the ship, when
the Pilot is gone, So having entered it, and finding it empty, they will not
fail to laden and fill it with their trash and stolen wares.

Sect. 2. What may be the cause of that deadness and indisposition, and these
wandering thoughts that arise in the heart upon the Spirits departure? and what
course should be taken for removing this evil, and for recovering and
maintaining the presence of the Spirit, and a praying frame and disposition.
Psa. 81.11, 12. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would
none of me; So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in
their own counsels. Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the
heart.
IF the Sun be set, and leave our hemisphere, it must be night with us, and
darkness must cover the face of our earth; if the soul be separated from the
body, the man must be dead, and coldness must seize upon the liveless carrion;
So, if the Spirit, which is our Sun and life, depart, what darkness, deadness
and emptiness must be in the soul? But, as if it were too little to be dead and
destitute of life, foolish sinners will kill themselves, and harden yet more
the heart, which already is harder then the adamant or flint; and when the sun
goes down, they will shut the doors and windows, yea, and pull out their own
eyes that they may not see; and thus as Seducers, in respect of a total
privation of life, are said to be Jude, 12.
twice dead, So the Saints themselves, many a time, in respect of their partial
deadness, and the gradual departure of the Spirit of life, may be said to be
twice hardened, blinded and indisposed for duty. Not only does sin provoke the
holy Spirit to depart (and thus morally, and by way of demerit, it stops the
fountain of life) but also by its poison and venomous nature, it does pollute
and infect the heart, it leaves such a blot and tincture upon the soul, as
disposes it for blindness and deadness. Sin is not only of it self, and
formally opposite to grace, but it makes upon the heart, as it were,
efficiently such a contrary impression to grace, and matterially indisposeth it
for a communion with God and spiritual exercises; and thus steals and takes
a way the heart, Hos. 4.11. And albeit every sin has more or less of this
malignant quality in it, yet their be some sins which in a special manner do
produce this woeful effect, after which we shall now enquire, having in the
preceding Section spoken of the former head, viz. of the withdrawing of the
Spirit, and of these sins which did most directly and immediately bring on that
sad stroke; but there being such a connection between our deadness and the
departure of the Spirit of life, and the causes and cure of Viz. of the with
drawing of the Spirit, and of our deadness and indisposition for duty
both those evils being much alike, and the same; we may without any culpable
confusion here speak to those jointly, especially since we referred to this
place one sort of those Viz those causes which did not so directly, and by way
of indignity and contempt of his office and work, but rather condignly, and by
way of demerit prrooke the Spirit to depart.
causes which did provoke the Spirit to depart.

Before we speak of the remedy, we will search after the causes, which we shall
rather name, then enlarge and insist on at any length: First, then as to the
causes of deadness, indisposition and wandering thoughts in prayer (for all
these cursed branches may spring from one and the same root, and may be cured
by the same remedy, which therefore we will not separat in this enquiry) some
of these are external and without us, others internal and within us, or proceed
from us, and among these some are natural which we cannot totally remove (till
this our house, Levit. 14.44.45.
infected with that fretting leprosy, be broken down, and till we cast off
this Romans 7.24.
body of sin and death) albeit by watchfulness and the diligent use of the
means, we may guard against their prevailing; but other causes are more
voluntary, and occasioned by our sloth and negligence, or some inordinat
affection and lust; again, some of these do provoke the Spirit to withdraw and
to smite us with a judicial stroke, but others of these causes do of themselves
(in a special manner) in-dispose the heart for spiritual duties, and cast the
soul into a sort of lethargy and deadness.

1. Then as to the external causes, we will not reckon the Spirit of grace as
one; for albeit upon his withdrawing, this evil does follow; yet it is not his
work, nor is he the proper Removens prohibens non est prop^ie causa, nec per se
influit in effectum.
cause of it, while he suspends his gracious influences which would preserve
life and heat in the affections, which otherwise of themselves (like water when
the fire is removed) will return to their native coldness.

Neither, 2. can the Not the world, but worldly mindedness and our lusts that
fire.
world be properly called a cause of this malady; for if there were no venom
within us, we would suck no poison from its flowers; yet, in that it ministers
fuel to our lusts, it may be called a material and occasional cause; and
albeit the creatures do keep their station and primeval perfection, groaning
and traveling in pain when they are abused by degenerat man, and employed
against their Maker, Romans 8.22. yet through our wickedness we make them, and
they now become to us woeful snares and temptations.

Neither, 3. can Though thus wicked men cannot so properly be called the
efficient, yet their society, example, etc. may be reck^ned among the moral and
formal causes, as afterward here; Cause 14.
wicked men be said to be the true cause hereof, for though, by their ill
example, society, persuasion, etc. they may ensnare us, and draw us away with
them to sinful courses, which may provoke the Lord and harden our heart, yet
they can have no direct and immediate hand herein, since they have not access
unto, nor influence upon the heart.

So that, 4. Satan is the only true and most proper external cause of our
indisposition to pray, deadness and wandering thoughts in prayer; he being
always ready as a father to beget and as a nurse to dandle, and bring up such
an off spring to the dishonor of God and our hurt and mischief, that he may
either make thee weary of praying, or God Isa. 1.14.
weary of thy prayer, and that thou may provoke him either not to answer, or
to answer thee in wrath; when we are at prayer Satan is most busy, we may
expect to find him at Zech. 3.1.
our right hand to resist us; there is not a petition we offer up to God, but
is contrary to his interest and kingdom, and therefore (as on says) maxim
insidiatur orationibus fidelium, his main work and design is to cheat us of our
prayers; he is that fowl that is always ready to catch away any good motion
that is sown in the heart by the Word and Spirit, Mat. 13.14, 19. and when his
suggestions cannot do the turn, he will offer temptations and distracting
objects, to steal away the heart, or will by his instruments raise some tumult
to disturb and divert us, as Act. 16.16, 17. O! what need have we then not to
separat what the Apostle has conjoined, Jam. 4.7, 8. and to watch against and
resist the devil, when we draw nigh to God. But though he be strong, and has
many advantages, yet 1 John 4.4.
stronger is he that is in us; and if in his name and strength we carefully
resist him, he will flee from us, ver. 7.

O! but the chief and main cause is from within, this disease flows from our
own bowels, no infection nor contagion from without could harm us, were there
not a distemper and many ill humors within; neither Satan nor his
instruments, nor the allurements of the world could make us halt in our way to
heaven, were we not cripple and maimed in our own feet.

The first then and mother-cause, the womb where all the other were conceived,
and the root that sends sap to all the branches, is our original, natural and
hereditary corruption; that old man and body of sin, that enemy to God and all
righteousness, which lodges in the best Saint while on earth, and which never
is so far subdued and tamed, but if we be not upon our guard, it will be ready
to interpose and to hinder us in all our religious performances: this is that
Law in the members rebelling against the Law of the mind, whereof Paul
complains, Romans 7.21. This is that flesh that lusts against, and is
contrary to the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. this is that bias that leads us away
from, and makes us turn aside when we are following after, the Lord; and hence
proceeds that natural levity and slipperiness, that instability and
unstayedness of our spirits, that we can hardly fix and dwell long upon any
spiritual object, and that good motions are not so well rooted and abide not so
long with us: hence wandering and impertinent thoughts break in, and that
restless sea within still Isa. 57.10.
casts up mire and dirt, to be a rub in our way when we are looking to the
right mark. Hence Paul's complaint, (and where is there a Saint that may not
join with him) When I would do good, evil is present with me -- O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.21.24. O!
what need have we continually to watch over these vain, instable and gadding
hearts of ours? and to look up to him and come in his strength, who can unite
our heart to his fear and establish it with his grace? Heb. 13.9. Psa. 112.7.
Psa. 86.11. etc.

But, 2. if to this native, constant and abiding sink and puddle, be
super-added any grievous sin and actual transgression against light and
conscience, as this will mar our acceptance, So it will exceedingly straiten
and dull our Spirits: a guilty conscience dare not Its a certain truth which
has been observed by some practical Divines, viz. if prayer make thee not
leave finning, sin will make thee leave praying or make thee pray for the
fashion, and without life and affection.
look the judge in the face with such boldness, confidence, cheerfulness and
readiness as otherwise it would; then (and never till then) shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psa. 119.6. See Part 2.
Chapter 1. and 3. The Lord will not condescend to treat and reason with us, till we
wash and make our selves clean, till we put away the evil of our doings, and
cease to do wickedly and learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. and will he
suffer us to plead with him while we are wallowing in the mire and lying in our
uncleanness? Ah! with what deadness and confusion of spirit must guilty and
self-condemned sinners draw nigh to God? and what cold, formal and heartless
prayers must impenitent sinners offer up to the holy, just, all-seeing and
heart-searching Lord? But, since the honest servants of God will abominat such
gross pollutions, and by the grace of God are kept from them, so that they do
not ordinarily, easily and habitually fall into and commit such sins, and if at
any time they be thus surprised, yet will not lie in that puddle, nor add
impenitence unto their backsliding, the wicked one is not permitted thus to
touch them, 1 John 5.18. therefore they should not think it enough that they
are preserved from these conscience-wasting iniquities, but should also
carefully watch against those sins which are not so easily discerned, nor much
observed by too many, and which are reputed to be rather infirmities then
transgressions, and the result of humane frailty rather then the venom and
sting of the serpent in our bosom; yea the Saints should especially guard
against this sort of sins, as being most exposed to such and in greater danger
to meet with temptations that way, (Satan knowing, that for the most part it
is in vain to tempt them to gross and scandalous iniquities) and thus, being
more ready to fail and stumble where least hazard appears; as, 1. spiritual
pride, arising from our Christian privileges and enlargement of dutits, etc.
We will not insist on the aggravations of this monstrous (as I may call it)
sin, how unlike is the fruit to the root from which it springs? can darkness
be occasioned by light, and shall our graces become fuel to feed our pride?
Ah! remember that God in a special manner is engaged against the proud, he will
resist them, Vid. Leigh, Crit. See. in vec. (...).
(...); he is, as it were, set in battel-array against such, Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet.
5.5. O Christians, do not thus lift up your selves lest God lay you low, and
while ye elevat your selves above others, ye become as barren mountains,
exposed to tempests and storms; it is to the plain valleys that God will be as
the dew, making them to bring forth fruit as the vine, and to cast forth their
roots as Lebanon, Hos. 14.5.8. compared with Jer. 31.18, 19. There be many
sower grapes which this wild Olive yields, from whence proceeds, 1.
ostentation; 2. affectation; 3. singularity; 4. contempt; 5. censoriousness; 6.
rigidness and unmercifulness; 7. untractableness, stubborness and stifness of
spirit, etc. these and such like cursed branches do spring from the root of
ambition and pride; and shall we think it strange if the high Lord, who has
respect to the lowly, know the proud afar off? Psa. 138.6. 2. The Saints are in
hazard to provoke the Lord by the sins of their holy things, their dallying
with duties and ordinances, their formality, sloth and doing the work of the
Lord negligently and superficially, etc. See the causes of the Spirits
withdrawing, Sect. 1.

3. We come now to these causes, which do, as it were, formally indispose, and
of themselves steal away the heart, and make it unfit for a communion with God
in any ordinance. Such as,

1. Earthly-mindedness, if thy heart be too much let out upon the creature, it
will be straightened toward God; the Vid. Calv. in sphaer. page (mihi) 228.616.
Muler. inst astr. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Moon must be ecclipsed when the earth is interposed between the Sun and it:
our Moon has no light of it self, (whatever be said of that great Luminary in
the heavens) and therefore, when the world goes between, and intercepteth the
beams and influence of the sun of Righteousness, what darkness and deadness
must cover it is face? Ah Christian! do thou not find the world to be the
devils opium, whereby he stupifieth the heart and indisposeth it for a
communion with God? when we live too much upon the world, and suffer it to take
up so much of our time, strength and affections, we are unfit to walk with God.
Ah! does not our sad experience teach us, that hardly can we get our hearts
drawn up to God after an adulterous embr^cement of the creature: if a Saint but
bow the knew to the worlds trinity, and cast a greedy look on pleasures,
honors and profits, this, as it will provoke the Lord to jealousy, So it will
steal away the heart; and if these lovers once take possession there, they will
hardly be gotten driven out,

2. Want of awe and reverence makes us careless in our approaches to God. and
makes the Lord to hide his face. The Apud Persas ut venerabiliores reges
essent, a vulgi conspectu se re movebant and peccaro eopiam suo populo
faciebant, ne sa miliaritate and frequentiae vile ceret regia majest as, Greg
Theolos. de repub. lib. 8. cap. 3. 4.
Persian and Quod etiam a Parthis u^urpotur -- apud quos reges in pon^ralibus
regiae oeclusi sub spetie maj^statis delitescunt, Alex. ab Alex genesis dier. lib.
5. cap. 14.
Parthian Kings, to shun contempt, and that they might be the more honored,
did keep a distance and were seldom seen, but once or twice a year; if the
child forget to keep a due distance, the father must not smile and dandle it as
formerly, then nothing but austerity and frowns, that the unmannerly son may
learn no more to abuse his fathers kindness: and if we will not acknowledge the
greatness of God, it is justice with him to make us find his hand; hence the
Apostle, while he exhorts to reverence and godly fear, represents God as a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.28.19. See Part 2. Chapter 2. Sect. 1. Ah! shall the
reverence and respect we bear to a meet man make us watch over our thoughts,
and take heed to our words while we are in his presence? and shall we dare to
speak to him with whom is terrible majesty, and suffer our hearts to wander? If
the Lord did only punish this contempt by his withdrawing and going away from
us, (and who would not turn his back upon him who did not more pr^^^ and value
his presence?) what coldness and deadness must seize upon our hearts? and this
our voluntary deadness, slowing from an irreverent and aweless frame of spirit,
is justly followed with a penal desertion, which must be accompanied with a
further measure of deadness and irrevere^^^.

3. Hypocrisy and want of sincerity; a d^uble minded man is unstable in all
his ways, Jam, 1.8. and albeit this evil be in part cured in the Saints, yet
it may so far prevail upon occasion, as to keep the heart from fixing and being
serious at it is work: there can be no constancy not fervency where there is not
sincerity; and hypocritical heart must be a Hos. 10.2. The Hebrews hold out an
hypocrit as having two hearts, (...) cor and cor, 1 Chr. 12.33. Psa. 12.2. etc.
Hence also with us ho^is called a double minded man.
divided heart, and while that prevalleth we cannot seek the Lord, nor call
upon him with the whole heart; and so much of the heart as does not concur in
the duty, must be otherwise employed and divert the mind; hence wandering
thoughts, deadness, etc.

4. Want of feeling and sense of thy wants and indigence; when the poor man is
pinched with famine, and his empty stomach sets him a work, with what
seriousness and importunity will he cry and beg? but if he be full or forget
his misery, he may fall asleep or become remiss in asking. When Laodicea
fancied her self to stand in need of nothing, she would not go to the market to
buy; hence Christ's warning and counsel, Rev. 3.17, 18. the Pro. 27.7.
full soul leatheth the honeycomb, but to the hungry every bitter thing is
sweet. O! come not to Christ's door till thy hunger send thee thither; thou
can not feelingly nor seriously ask, neither would thou prize the mercy
though thou d^dst receive it, unless thou be sensible of thy indigence and need.

5. Diffidence and distrust; 1. if we distrust Gods care and providence in
governing the world, and minding his people in all their straits and
difficulties, we will readily seek to help our selves and run to the creature
for a supply, or if we seek to God, but for the fashion, in a careless and
formal manner; those who expect little from God, will not be very serious in
their addresses to him, Job 21.15. 2. Distrust of Gods fidelity in fulfilling
the promises to hear and answer our prayers; we will be heartless at work when
we expect little success, advantage or reward; they who begin to doubt and
(with them, Mal. 3.14.) to ask, what profit is it to follow the Or finances of
God? will be ready either (with him, a King. 6.33.) to say, why should we wait
or call upon him any longer? or else with Papists and Formalists to rest on the
outward performance without life and heat, and to think any sort of performance
enough and too much? our diffidence and distrust will be followed
proportionably with so much despondency, deadness, want of life, activity and
fervency in our work: faith (says Mr. Gurn loc. cit. chapter 6. page 565.
one) is the back of steel to the bow of prayer, which sends the arrow with
force to heaven; where faith is weak the cry will not be strong; he that goes
about a business with little hope to speed, will do it but faintly; he works
(as we say) for a dead horse, the less we hope the less we endeavor, See Part
2. Chapter 2. Sect. 2.

6. Excess and surfeiting; when the soul is full and glutted, it is not fit for
bodily, far less for spiritual, exercises: therefore, if ye would watch unto
prayer, ye must be sober, 1 Pet. 4.7. If we would not fall asleep at our work,
let us use the creatures with moderation and sobriety, and beware of
drunkenness and gluttony, 1 These. 5.6, 7. But, as there is a bodily, so also
there is a moral, surfeiting and over-charging mentioned and joined with the
other, Luke 21.34. when the soul is drunk with the Sea Cause 1.
cares of this life, it will, (...), (as the word is, Luk 12.29.) it will
become like to a wandering meteor, now up now down, and unfit for any spiritual
employment; wordly cares will choke good motions and mar the work, these thorns
will overtop the good seed and not suffer it to grow, Mat. 13.22. periclitatur
pietas in negotils: the world eats out our zeal, and exceedingly blunts and
takes off the edge from our spiritual affections; if we look up to God, we will
find that heavy clog and Heb. 12.1.
weight to beset us and press us down, and hardly will we get that burden
casten off; when the soul is drowned in the world, how can it mount up, as on
eagles wings, and a scend to the throne? The world is Satan's b^rdlime, if we
stay too long upon the earth, he will readily catch us, and cut off our wings;
if our chariot drive too far in the mire, it will leave the wheels behind; when
we come reeking and sweating out of the world, we will find our spirits to be
spent, and that we have no strength for doing the work of the Lord; nay, the
world will not thus part with us, though we would leave it for a while, yet it
will follow us and cry after us, and thus inter^upt, divert and disturb us
while we would look up to God, and therefore, if we would pray affection^^^y
and fervently, we must be careful for nothing; as prayer is a remedy, and
should come in the place of immoderat, excessive and distrust^ull care, So it
is inconsistent with, and cannot be to purpose performed when that is; hence
the opposition, Phil. 4 6, Prayer (as Melch. Adam. in vit. Luth page 139.
Lucher said) is hirudo cararum; the leeches that should suck out our cares;
but alas! there is no such venom and distemper in the spirits of many as
kills these leeches, and will not suffer them to enter; our cares do choke
our prayers, and in many are so excessive and incurable that they will not
admit a remedy.

7. Lasciviousness, wantonness and a spirit of lust, will take away the heart
and indisoose us for spiritual duties, Hos. 4.11. If Sampson fall a sleep in
Dalilahs lap, she will betray him to the Phil^stins, and he may lose both his
sight and his strength, and if he Judge. 16.20.
essay to go out as at other times before, and to shake off his fetters, he
will find they are now too strong for him; when that strange fire burns in
the heart, the smoke thereof will defile our sacrifices, and its flame will eat
out the fire of the sanctuary, which is of a heavenly descent.

8. Satan desires to fish in troubled waters; he no sooner espieth any
distemper in the affections, but be is in readiness to join with it, and to ad
fuel to that fire.
Discontent with our condition, family Inter jurgia and lites Precibu^ non est
locus.
contention, anger, wrath, jealousy, grief, fear and whatever excess and
distemper in the affections and passions of the soul; when these are out of
order, and raise tumults, stir up confusion, and make a noise in the heart, how
will they disturb and distract it in holy duties? especially since Satan will
concur and contribute his assistance to the uttermost. We are not fit to praise
God, nor to pray to him till the heart be fixed, and freed from disquiet
perturbations, Ps. 108.1. Hence the exhortation so often repeated, not to
suffer our hearts to be troubled or disquieted, Joh. 4.1.27. Ps. 42.5, 111. to
pray without wrath, 1 Timothy 2.8. and to married persons to dwell together in
love, honoring, and bearing with one another infirmities, that their prayers
might not be hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. Hence also David's complaint, that his
trouble had shut his mouth, Ps. 77.4. overwhelmed his spirit, ver. 3. and
closed his eyes, that he could not seriously look up to God, Ps. 40.12. that
his heart failed, and was unfit to be employed in God's service, etc.

9. If thou do not keep a constant watch, the enemy will break in; Satan and
thy lusts are always in arms; they still lie in wait to make a prey of thy
heart; and therefore if thou be not on the watchtower, and observe thy heart
all the time thou art at work, Satan's troops will enter in and overrun thy
field; he will cast golden apples in thy way to hinder thy course, and if once
thou begin to dandle his brats and entertain his suggestions, thou will hardly
get them shaken off; O! how much better were it to keep the heart with such
diligence, that they might not so much as once enter the palace, and if they
must needs intrude themselves, to repel them in the very entry, which cannot
be done unless we take heed and observe them; if then we would pray to purpose,
and not suffer Satan to make a prey of our hearts and prayert, we must hearken
to the exhortation, and add watching to prayer, Mark, 13.33. we must watch unto
prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. and watch in prayer, Colos. 4.2. See Part. 2. Chapter 1. and Chapter
2. Sect. 1.

10. Not guarding the outward senses, those Nibil in intellectu quod non fuit
prius in sensu.
in-lets of vanity, and betrayers of the heart to Satan's temptations,
especially the eyes, these doors that were first opened to that murderer; the
tree seemed pleasant to the eyes, and the woman apprehended it to be good for
food, Genesis 3.6. Hence Solomon arrests the eyes, as well as the heart at Gods
service, Prove. 23.26. And Job would have his eyes brought under the bond of a
covenant, that they should not entice his heart by beholding any lustful
object, Job, 31.1. A roving eye will make a wandering heart; if we did hold the
senses under a more severe restraint, we would be more equal, constant and
serious at our work: Ah! how may we blush when we hear of the fixedness,
seriousness and immovablness of Pagans? the story of the Spartan youth is most
remarkable, who holding the golden censer to Alexander while he was offering
incense, though a coal did fall on his hand, yet would rather suffer it to
burn, then by crying, or once stirring his hand to shake it off, he should in
the least disturb and interrupt the idolatrous service of a supposed God; and
upon how small an occasion offered either by the eye or ear, will we be
disturbed in, or diverted from the worship of the true God?

11. Taking unseasonable times for the performance of this duty; when we are
dull, sleepy and unfit for action, or when the heart is over charged with the
cares of this life, and deeply plunged in worldly business, or distempered with
some passion, if we make choice of such a season for prayer, no wonder though
deadness accompany, and wandering thoughts interrupt the duty. Its true, bodily
drousiness will creep on, yet it is our fault, and for the most part through
our negligence and not observance, that the affections are distempered, and
that the heart is so far Quid enim maris nomiue nisi secularium mentirm
inquietudo signatur? -- quia dum vitasecularium procellosis actionum motibus
concitatur ab interua quiet, atque stabilitate disjungitur, Gregor. mor. lib.
18. cap. 27.
drowned in the world; and therefore when we find any distemper to arise, and
the heart cleave too much to the creature, and to pursue and seek after it too
greedily and affectionatly, it is our duty, and it were our wisdom to found a
retrear: and that we might keep it from an adulterous embracement of the world,
when we are most serious in any such employment, we might now and then dart up
to God some spiritual desire and short meditation, but when we observe it to be
distempered and over charged, it were better to recollect our selves a little,
and to spend sometime in bringing off and composing our spiits by some awakning
meditation (which yet may be intermixed with ejaculatory petititons) then to
rush upon the duty while we are so indisposed and unprepared. Ah! how would we
be afraid? and what confusion would seize upon us, if Christ, when he came to
us, did find us in such a distemper? Luke 21.34. and should we not now be
afraid thus to go to him?

12. Want of frequency, Inaquabilitar, inconstantia, and tarditates non tantum
remoras faciunt, sunique impedimentum pro gressus, sed and causa regressus.
P^^. mor. de prof. virt. page ^6
omission, disuse and neglect of prayer; use (as we say) makes perfectness;
sure I am, thou can not attain to any perfection in holiness without
frequency, constancy and diligence; the Manifestum est quod babitu, virtutis
moralis facit bominem promptum ad oligendum medium in operationibus and
possionious; cum cutem aliquit ^on utitur habita virtutis ad moderandos
passiones, necesse est quod proveniant multa passiones and operationes praeter
modum virtutis ex inclinatione appetitus sensitivi, and aliorum quae exterius
movent. unde corrumpit. ur virtus, vel diminuitur per cessationem ab actu.
Thom. 1.2. quaest. 53. art. 3 in corp
mind cannot be idle, but must be employed, and all the while it stays away
from God, it is contracting and drawing on a contrary impression, and some
indisposition to look up to him; the world will leave a tincture behind it,
which thou will not easily rub off; and if the world be too familiar with thee,
it will grow bold, and will intrude its self when we would be rid of its
society; nay, but though the world did take its leave of us as soon as we
pleased, leaving no impression nor tincture behind, yet there is corruption
enough within which if it be not wrought out by holy exercises, will quickly
defile and contaminat the place where it is; a key, when not used, gathers
rust, and a vessel will leck and not hold what is put in it; So if the heart be
not inured to holy motions, it will set them slip, and will not be able to
retain them; and the key of prayer, if it be not often used will grow rusty,
and will not be able to open the gates of heaven: Hence the exhortation to pray
always, Luke 18.1. 2 These. 5.17. etc. importing at least that there should be
no such intermission of prayer, as may occasion deadness, and indispose us for
that duty.

13. A giving way to a slight, lazy, dead and superficial performance of this
solemn duty; if we accustom our selves to do the work of the Lord negligently,
we will find no small difficulty to scrue up the pins, and to bring the heart
in tune again; weak acts Aliqui actus ab habitu procedentes diminumt ipsum, ut
pote cum neglig enter fiunt, apud Thom. 1, 2. quast. 52. apt. 3. in (...)
weaken the habit and principle, and beget an inclination to do remisly and
negligently, or rather an impotency and inability to act Ahorse that is used as
mili, orio carri burdens, is not fi^ for a journey, be is so used to a slow
pace that he will not leave it.
vigoriously and to purpose; the sluggard will not purchase a meal by his work;
our lazy spiritual performances, as they cannot procure, So neither do they
bring with them meat in their mouth whereon the soul should live, they bring
with them no heavenly in fluence, and thus the new man for want of daily
refreshment must become We will not now at any length debate the question
concerning the growth and decay of grace, with learned Mr. Ford, affirming,
that no gracious babit can properly be said to grow or decay, but only in
respect of the acts that flow from it, in that it may be clog^ed and obstructed
as to its operations. But remove these obstructions, and grace will act as
vigorously as ever it did. Spir. of Adopt. cha. 43 page 499. We having here
supposed (as we thought) with all Divines, and asserted the contrary, we shall
only ad some few particulars in a word, for preventing such a mistake. And, 1.
that the great School-man Suarez, professes, that he never read any Divine who
affirmed, that the habits of grace were so indivisible that they could admit no
growth or decay, yea, or who durst deny, that actually and de facto they did
not grow and increase, Suar. de great. lib. 9. cap. 2. sect. 3. Hence he does
not dispute, but supposes that in every grace there is a sufficient latitude
of degrees, within which, as it may grow, So it may decay, ibid. lib, 11. cap.
8. sect. 1. Its true, the popish Schoolmen, albeit they plead for the growth of
grace, yet deny that actually there is any partial decay of it, but upon such
grounds as all orthodox Divines will abominate, viz. Because all and every
mortal sin does not diminish, but totally destroy and remove grace; and venial
sins, as they do not abolish and take away, So neither can they weaken and
diminish the habits of grace, Thom. 2, 2. quoest. 24. art. to in corp. Bannez
in loc. Suar loc. cit. Dur. and alii in 1. sent. did. 17. Lugo de fid. disp.
16. sect. 4. Becan. de chari. cap. 22. quaest. 6. But laying aside that vain
distinction of mortal and venial sins, and that opinion concerning the Saints
apostasy, none of them will deny, that grace may as truly be said to decay as
to grow, vid. Suar. loc. cit. lib. 9. cap. 2. sect. 24. In gratia ipsa non
deest latitudo graduum, ratione cujus possit successive amitei ac prius minui
quam omnino pereat; nibil ominus tamen ex defectu causarum corrumpentium, etc
But, 2. to speak to these severally, and first, as to the growth of grace; the
Scripture is most express in several places; this the Father of the possessed
prayed for, Mark. 9.24. this we are exhorted unto, 2 Pet. 3.18. Secondly, if we
come to particulars, may not ^^ith, hope, love, etc be encrealed? and why do we
use the means, if our state be not be tered thereby? and why do we trade any
more if our talents do not multiply and increase by a right and diligent imp
ovement of them, Thirdly, shall not grace at length be perfected, aed is it not
now on the way to perfection, and shall we imagine that there is no progress
made in that way? etc. 2. As to the decay of grace, through the withdrawing of
the Spirit, because of our negligence and folly: 1. if Adam lost a greater
stock (as all grant, albeit the learned Dr Twisse doubts whether or not he lost
all grace, vind. great. page 751.) why may not we who are weaker, loss a part
and some measure of ours? Hence our Divines, while they are pleading against
the total and final apostasy of the Saints, affirm, that the perseverance of
the Saints does not flow from their own strength, or from the nature and
measure of grace they have received, but from the f^^e promise, dec^ee and
appointment of God, and the custody of the Spirit, si fidem spectemus quo^d
naturam suam, amitti potest and perire sed si, etc. Perkin de praedest. lib^^.
err. 8. ^ect. 5 vid. et^am Twis. in sect 4. Its true, that according to the
tenor of the covenant of grace, the Jewel cannot totally be lost, the seed of
God must remain. 1 John 3.9. gracious habits cannot be lost (says Perkins)
secundum esse, yet they may be diminished secundum gradam aliquem; yea, if we
look upon them in their own nature, or in relation to us, they may altogether
perish or decay, ipse habitus (inquit Perk* loc. cit. sect. 10.) sive potentia
fidei per se amitti potest, sed propter gratiam confirmantem non perit fides
secundum esse, sed minuitur secundum gradum aliquem; and hinc sequitur posse
minui communionem cum Christo sed non posse solvi unionem. 2. If in different
believers there be a different measure and degree of grace (some being weaker
some stronger) why not also in one and the same subject? and why may not a
strong Saint by his fall lose some of his strength and become weaker? and why
did David complain that his bones were not only weakened, but, as it were,
broken, Ps. 51.9.3. Why was the Church of Sardis exhorted to strengthen that
which was ready to die, Rev. 3.2. if their graces were not on the decaying
hand? I willingly grant, that as the habits of grace are not produced by our
acts, So neither are they physically and efficiently increased thereby, or thus
diminished by the contrary acts of sin; yea the very Jesuits do affirm the
same, which also is a^ some length confirmed by Jo. de Lugo de fid. disp. 16.
sect. 4. where also he shows the difference (as to this point) that is
between natural and gracious habits, sect. 77. vid etiam, Suar. de great. lib.
8. cap 4. but the Spirit being provokt to depart and withdraw his influence,
proportionably to his departure, ob defectum causae conservantis, and this
decay of grace usually is accompanied with an obstruction of that little which
remains: So that we may here apply fitly that Authors similitude in Samson,
whose strength as it was abated (though not by his binding, yet while he was
bound) other wise their cords could not have held him (albeit being
extraordinarily assisted at his death and, with his hair, having then a little
recovered his strength, he laid the Philistines upon heaps) but as he lost his
great strength, So the little that remained was bound up, and he could not
improve it.
languish'd and feeble, and that heavenly impression which once was upon the
soul must wear off, and thus by little and little we come to the Laodicean
temper of lukewarmness, and are (as they were, Rev. 3.16.) in hazard to be
spued out of Christ's mouth.

14. Ill company will be as water to quench the heavenly fire; its very
dangerous for those who have the seed of all diseases in them, to converse with
those who have the plague; if the root of the matter were not within us, the
breath of the wicked would not be so contagious an infectious; there is not
only powder, but fire enough within, which though it lie, as it were, under the
embers, yet if it be blown up with a blast from without, the slame will quickly
appear, and when our lusts are set on fire, they eat out the fire of the
Spirit; do ye not find it so, O Saints? if ye stay but a little while in the
society of the wicked, do ye not find your feet to be cast in the fetters, and
that it will not be easy for you to cast these off when ye would draw nigh to
God? Its true, sometimes by a spiritual antiperistasis, these cooling vapors
may make thy zeal to burn; how will thy heart rise at the dishonor done to
God? and with what indignation mai'st thou at first hear their profane and
cursed words, and behold their debauched and riotous conversation? and yet if
thou abide a while among these vipers, their deadly poison may in a short space
so stupifie thee, and cast thee into such a lethargy, that thou will scarce be
affected with those evils, which at first were a vexation to thee; albeit Lot
lived in Sodom, and kept his garments unspotted, yet if he had familiarly
conversed with the vile Sodomits, his righteous soul in hearing and seeing, had
not been from day to day so vexed with their filthy conversation, as we find it
was, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Ah! should the living, like that possessed man, Mark 5.3.
forsake the company of the living, and abide among the dead? or should we,
Nebuchadnezzar like, abandon the society of men and eat grass with the beasts?
Ye, who would be afraid to dwell among the tombs, and would choose death rather
then to be driven from the society of men, and have no other meat but the grass
of the earth, do ye not know that the wicked are so many dead men. Mat. 8.22
(yea, twice dead, Jude, 12) and that beastly men? and the swine of the world
feed on husks, Luke 15.16. ye can have none of the childrens bread while ye sit
at their table, and should ye then eat of their dainties, Ps. 141.4. their is
something of the serpents venom mingled with all their cups, so that their
very breath is become infectious, it is not safe to live in such an unwholsom
air; holy Joseph in the court of Egypt learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh,
Genesis 42.15. and think thou that thou shall be able to keep thy self free of
contagion? but though thou did not so far comply, as to join with them in
their profanity, or in any wicked way, yet if ye do not timely obey the
exhortation, 2 Cor. 6.17. and so soon as ye perceive the edge of your zeal to
be blunted and wear off, if ye do not separate your selves, and come out from
among them, its no wonder though ye meet with straitning and deadness when ye
have left them and go to approach the throne.

Thus you see the causes, which if ye could remove, the cure would be in great
part Sublata causa tollitur effectus and posia ponitur.
carried on. As the Physicians skill is mainly put to the trial in finding out,
So his labor and diligence is especially employed in removing the causes of
the disease, which if they continue, all his lenitives and asswaging
medicaments will be to little purpose; and if ye suffer these weeds still to
grow, do not complain though the seed of the Word take not root, and the
Ordinances make no lively impression upon your heart, nor their influence abide
or appear in your life and conversation: lazy Christians must be dead and
liveless, there is much activity required for maintaining the quickening
presence of the Spirit, and is it not well worth all the pains? and will ye
still complain, while the fault lies at your own doors? The wise man's verdict,
as it has place in civil affairs, So far rather here: The soul of the sluggara
desires and has nothing, but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat --
the sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold, therefore shall he beg in
harvest, and have nothing, Prove. 13.4. Prove. 20.4. I went (says he) by the
field of the slothful, and lo it was all grown over with thorns, Prove. 24 30,
31. how long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy
sleep, Prove. 6.2. And if thou will hearken to this awakning question, and if
thou will pluck out these thorns out of thy field, and if thou will be at some
pains in plowing and sowing, thou may, through the blessing of the Almighty,
expect a plentiful crop.

And if thus the first part were faithfully performed, the latter would be the
more easily carried on, of ye would carefully remove these thorns and
obstructions we have named, we need not multiply positive directions; which
before we name, we shall yet once more resume these impediments, and enquire
whether or not yet thou be resolved through the help of the Spirit; 1. to use
the world as if thou used it not, to watch over it as an enemy, and not to
suffer thy soul to be so deeply plunged in it, that thou can not give it a
discharge, and leave it behind thee when thou art going to the King? 2. Will thou be more reverend in thy approaches to God, and learn to keep a due
distance? 3. Will thou be more sincere and upright in thy professions and
petitions? 4. Will thou lay thy condition to heart, and come more sensibly and
feelingly? 5. Will thou labor to strengthen and stir up thy faith? 6. Will thou use the creatures with moderation and in sobriety? 7. Will thou watch
against the lusting of the heart as well as against bodily uncleanness? 8. Will thou watch over thy passions that no distemper arise in them? will thou study
the hard lesson of contentment, humility and patience? 9. Will thou watch over
thy heart all the while thou art speaking to the great King? 10. Will thou also
guard the outward senses? 11. Will thou look after the frame of thy heart, and
first give a discharge to distracting objects, before thou come before the
throne? Will thou choose the fittest season for calling upon God? 12. Will thou
be more frequent in thy adresses to God? And, 13, Will thou be more serious not
giving way to laziness and formality? 14. Will thou labor to keep thy
conscience clear, having a constant respect to all the commandments, and hating
every sinful way, yea, and the very garment spotted by the flesh? 15. Will ye
not walk in the counsel of the ungodly? yea, nor stand in the way of sinners?
16. Will ye watch against the wiles of the devil, and resist his temptations?
17. Will ye take heed least ye grieve the holy Spirit by dallying with his
motions and ordinances? etc. And Will ye observe these qualifications of an
acceptable prayer, of which we spoke, Part. 2. and applied several of them to
this present case? If ye have come this length, there are but a few things
which I would now further add for completing the cure of a dead heart, and for
holding out wandering thoughts in prayer: but before I name those other
directions, I would premise these two things concerning what we have here said
as to the removing the former impediments and obstructions, and what we are now
to add further by way of remedy; 1. ye would remember, that the Spirit must The
Spirit may be present operatively where he is not present sensibly.
help you to put these directions in practice, else they will serve to little
purpose: he must help you to take the right course for getting his help, and
must work what ye are directed to do, else your endeavors will be fruitless;
and yet ye must so Our inability must not be pretended as a cloak for our
negligence, we have received strength which we should improve, waiting for the
help of the Spirt.
apply your selves to perform these things, and to follow those or such like
directions, as if ye stood in need of no help, and as if of your selves ye
could carry on the work: and when thou art acting to the utmost of thy
strength, thou may expect a sensible manifestation of the Spirits assistance.
2. We must not think that the most active and diligent Saints do always enjoy
the quickening presence of the Spirit; this state of our pilgrimage is not for a
constant abode; and the Spirit is a free agent, the wind blows where it
lists, that thou may learn not to ascribe thy enlargements to thine own
activity and diligence; though none but active, zealous and circumspect
Christians, are lively and enlarged in duty (as to any constancy or
considerable measure) yet they do not always enjoy the same influences, nor
are alike enlarged; but though vivacity in duty may thus for a while be lost to
thee, yet if it be not lost by thee, as it will not be reckoned unto thee as
being procured through thy fault and negligence, So neither will it mar thy
after-comfort and enlargement; if the Spirits withdrawing be not penal, though
it be for thy exercise and trial, yet it needs not discourage thee, it shall
not hinder thy acceptance, nor the success and prevalency of thy prayers, but
if thou procure this stroke through thy folly and sloth, and if thou rest and
sit down under it securely, not being affected with it, as not being much
concerned in that dispensations, if thou do not lay thy deadness to heart, and
labourest not to be rid of that burden, such a sleeping Jonah may fear a storm
from the Almighty to awaken him.

Now come we to these other directions; 1. if you would have your heart
enlarged in duty, labor to get your heart inflamed with love to your Master
and his work; if ye Vbi est amor non est labor sed sopor. Bern.
came in love, ye would stay with delight, when love is the cord that draws any
together, they will not weary in the mutual fellowship and society of one
another, but as there will be a longing in absence, So a delight and
contentment in presence and enjoyment; and what makes the husbands presence so
uncomfortable to the adulterous wife, but want of love? love is an uniting
affection, and pretend what we will, the want of love to God is the cause why
we weary at his work, and in his company; for the heart not being fixed by the
bond of love, nor arrested by delight, it gads abroad, and would be rid of the
duty, as of a wearisom burden; hence wandering thoughts break in, and the duty
is marred; but in heaven, when we shall see God face to face, and love him
perfectly, we shall not weary of his fellowship unto all eternity.

We will not digress to speak to these motives which may serve to quicken our
love, but certainly if we loved the Lord as we should, we could not, it would
be an insupportable burden to stay out of his company; and we would sooner part
with our life then abandon his fellowship; and Daniel would let others know,
that he served such a master as he would not be ashamed to own, and go unto,
notwithstanding all their cruelty and threatenings, Dan. 6.10. If the Lord be
kind to David. and his love of God be sincere, then this must be the conclusion
that must needs follow, The illation seems rather to be founded upon his love
to to God, then the benefits he had received from God though both be named
there.
therefore will he call upon God as long as he lives, Ps. 116.1, 2. hence also
flowed his gladness to go to the house of the Lord, Ps. 122.1. and would he
then readily weary while he was in it.

2. When thou find'st thy heart indisposed, and that deadness has already
seized on it, before we set upon the duty we would stir up and awaken our dull
and sleepy spirits, and rouse them from their drousiness: saying to our soul
(with Deborah when she was employed in praising God, Judge. 5.12. awake, awake;
O my sleepy soul, awake, awake, and draw nigh to the provoked King for thy
lif^, liberty, provision, protection, etc. We will not prescribe the several
heads of meditation, there being here so many several topics, which may with
great variety be improven to this purpose, only in the general let me entreat,
that choice may be made of such considerations as may serve most to quicken, 1.
the sense of thy indigence, misery and hazard; and thus, 2. what may most
humble thee and make thee see thy own vileness and insufficiency for doing so
great a work; 3. what may most inflame thy heart with love to God and his
service; and, 4. what may most quicken thy diligence and activiity; while David
was thus employed, he found life come in to his joint. When I was musing (says
he) the fire burned, Ps. 39.3. and then he goes to work; he would delay no
longer, nor suffer such an opportunity to slip, he would not choke the
breathings of the Spirit, but instantly runs to the throne; and we have his
prayer to the close of that Psalm: enlargement of the affections, sweetness and
delight in any ordinance use to accompany, and be the fruit of meditation, Ps.
23.6.5. Ps. 104.34. And this was the course which the 2 Samuel 23.1.
sweet singer of Israel used to take when he found his harp to be out of tone,
Ps. 77.5.12. Ps. 143.5. etc. Not as if ejaculatory prayer might not be
intermixed with our meditation, for alone we are too weak to wrestle with a
dead heart; a cry to heaven will bring help from thence; this is Vid. Pressed.
Saints exer. sermon. 2.
said to have been Luthers practice, and which from his own experience, and the
success he had met with, he pressed on others; and this seems to have been
David's custom also before he prays for quickening, we read of his meditation,
Ps. 119.148, 149. But whatever be our carriage while we are employed in the
work of meditation, Yet,

3. We would seriously and solemnly beg of God his quickening Spirit, and bemoan
the deadness of our heart, saying [Lord I dare, not I may not stay away, and I
am afraid to draw nigh to thee, I must speak, and I know not well what to say,
I miss my leader and guide, and what am I but a poor, blind, guilty sinner,
Lord pity me and help my infirmities, Lord Psa. 119.159.
quicken me according to thy loving kindness; Cant. 4.16:
Awake, O north wind, and come, O south, and blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out; let my beloved, who has for a while withdrawn,
return unto his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits; Isa. 51.9.11.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in former time,
that sorrow and mourning may flee away: Cant. 1.4.
Draw me, and I will run after thee; Psa. 51.12,
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit]
and in your complaint bewail more the loss of the quickening and assisting, then
of the comforting work of the Spirit; and be more afflicted because ye cannot
serve God better, then because ye find not that sweetness in his service which
formerly ye have felt: Ah! let us not be so much affected with our own loss, as
with the dishonor done to God by our empty and formal performances, especially
since we may well spare for a season the consolations of the Spirit, but his
help and assistance is necessary; a child of light may for a time walk in
darkness, but he cannot live, nor move without his leader and guide, and unless
the Spirit of life do breath (though insensibly) upon him.

You will say, my loss is thus greater then I can be sensible of; O! when I
remember my former enjoyments, while the beloved brought me to the banqueting
house, and his banner over me was love, when he stayed me with fl^gons, and
comforted me with apples, O, with what delight did I then sit down under his
shadow, and how sweet was his fruit to my taste? Cant. 2.4, 5, 3. Such ar never
tasted the honeycomb, know not its sweetness; O! but its a Miserum est fuisse
beatum.
sad thing to have been once happy. Ans. O! that the world knew, and had once
tasted the comforts of the holy Ghost, I might ask, with Eliphaz, are the
consolations of the Almighty small, and of little account with thee, Job, 15.11.
But alas! few are acquainted with; and do experimentally know, and therefore
few value and prize this hidden manna: And as for thee, O disconsolated Saint!
though thou have reason to lay to heart thy loss, yet thou should not idol ze
thy comfort, though spiritual and terminated in God; thou should not prefer the
gift to the Giver, and the tokens and pledges of love, to thy beloved his
honor, work and service.

4. Then observe the frame of thy heart diligently, and take notice when the
Spirit manifests himself, and when he withdraws, else, 1. thou can not
prize his presence, nor thankfully acknowledge his bounty and kindness, and
thus wilt provoke him to depart; if we forget to give God the glory of his
mercies, if we take no notice of what he has done to us, and if we sacrifice
to our own nets, its justice with hm to draw in his hand. 2. If we do not
observe when he goes away, and are not affected with this desolate condition,
this will provoke him to stay away, and to depart further. 3. If we observe not
when deadness first seizes upon us, and wandering thoughts interrupt Gods
service, we will not strive against this evil, nor seek after a remedy; and
thus the disease will continually increase, and become the more incurable: O!
let us not then become secure and negligent, let us often look in to our
hearts, and review our work, and let us under the greatest enlargement say,
with him, 1 Chr. 29.14. Who am I, that I should be able to offer so willingly;
all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. let us then be,
1. the more humble; 2. the more thankful, least by our pride and ingratitude
we provoke him to depart, by whom only we have access, liberty and strength,
and without whom none can so much as say seriously and with a believing heart,
that Christ is Lord; Ephesians. 2.18. 2 Cor. 3.5, 6, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 12.3. 3. Let no
former enlargement in duty make thee go in thy own strength, but in all thy
approaches to God lean to him, who only can strengthen and establish thy
goings; thy vine will not bring forth fruit, unless it lean to this wall, Psa.
119.116, 117. 4. So soon as thou observest any decay of life and activity, lay
it to heart, be humbled for it, strive against it, and complain to God of it;
if thou suffer deadness by little and little to creep on, it will turn to a
habit, which will hardly be shaken off; principiis obsta, remember Solomon, he
suffered his heart to be stolen away by his strange wives, till at length he
built high places to the abominations of the heathen (yea, and some think that
he sacrificed to them) 1 King. 11. The longer thou delayest to return, thou will depart the further from God: but if we did call our selves to an account
after every prayer and performance, and did judge our selves for every wandering
thought, for our deadness and negligence in doing the work of the Lord, what a
notable mean might this, through the blessing of God, prove for the remedying
these evils? what we daily observe with a mourning eye, we will watch against,
and will not readily commit, but when we forget, and do not lay this evil to
heart, it must continue, and may daily grow worse and worse. And thus.

5. Let us renew our resolutions to hold our heart fixed at the duty, to be
active and serious in the work, and to guard against all diversions and
impertinent thoughts whenever we shall draw nigh to God, there is never any
Albeit some natural and involuntary defects may sti^l remain during this state
of weakness and impotency.
voluntary omission of, or defect in duty, but there must be some fault and
deficiency in our resolution; for, if the will and resolution were absolute and
peremptory, all the rest of the faculties would be in readiness to obey, and to
follow the pursuit to the utmost of their power: But an unresolved and wavering
minded man, must be unstedfast in all his ways, Jam. 1.8. And here I may
appeal to thine own experience, O dejected Saint, did thou ever go to prayer
with such a renewed and fresh resolution, but thou fandst the fruit of it? and
art thou not now convinced of thy negligence for drawing n^gh to God many a
time in much despondency, and of thy careless yielding (as it were) and giving
way to the tempter to steal away thy heart from the duty? and though once there
was some kind of resolution, accompanied with a proportionable success, yet now
it is worn w^ak and feeble, because thou have not from time to time renewed it,
and kept it in life; O! but if thy heart were once steeled and fixed with
such a serious and new resolution, ye might more confidently expect the Lords
help, and in his name might engage, yea, and promise (with that holy man, Psa.
57.7. Psa. 180.1.) to be serious and fervent in praying or praising of God; if
ye were thus awakned, ye would awaken, summon and arrest all that is within you
to join in the work, which after such an alarm would not readily fall asleep so
soon, especially when they are employed and held at work, Psa. 57.8. Psa. 103.1.

6. In the intervals of prayer (which must not be long) let us hearken to the
exhortation, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy in all manner of conversation; if ye either
sin away, or suffer the world to steal away that heavenly frame of heart which
now thou enjoyest, when thou bring thine offering to the altar thou will
have fire to provide (which is not at thy For it must come from above.
call and command) and therefore no wonder though thy sacrifice be cold,
imperfect and loathsome; O! but when the heart is fitted and seasoned for the
duty, and when fire from heaven is kept alive, ye may take the censer in your
hand, and go offer to God an Phil 4.18. Ephesians. 5.2.
acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice, an odor of a sweet smell; when the
heart is spiritual, and heavenly thoughts are familiar to us, it will be no
hard task, out of that Mat. 12.35.
treasure, to bring an offering to the Lord; and for this effect, I shall now
only hold out these four or five words of counsel and advice (which may also
serve as so many directions, though more remote, and may be added to the
former) for quickening the heart in prayer, and guarding against wandering
thoughts.) 1. Then if thou would not have thy heart straightened in thy
addresses to God, do not stint thy self to ^uch a measure of holiness in thy
life and conversation; he who thinks himself holy enough already, is void of
true holiness; he who says, hither will I aim and go, and no further, may fear
least yet he has not advanced one step (though toward, yet not) in the way of
God: this was not Paul's course, he knew that he had not already attained to
perfection, but forgetting these things that were behind, and the measure he
had already won, to he reached forth unto those things which were before him,
pressing hard toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God, Phil.
3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And that herein he was not alone, but that all the Saints
did, and should follow the same course, he testifies, ver. 15. Now this mark
at which Paul did level, was not that imperfect copy, and half-reformation of
many unsound professors, but the perfect law of God: when we look to those who
are below us, we may, like the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. with a proud and unsound
heart thank God, that we are not as other men, who yet may be nearer the
kingdom of heaven then we our selves, ver. 14. Thus we must not look after, nor
make the example of the best our rule, or rest on their measure (because they
rested not there themselves) though we could attain to it; yet I deny not, that
good use may be made of the example of eminent Saints. Hence, our second
direction is this, Let us view and set before our eyes the zeal and unwearied
diligence of eminent Saints in all ages, as a motive to quicken us in our
course; a dull horse will mend his pace when he sees others before him to ride
quickly: when Julius Sueton in Jul. Ces.
Caesar beheld Alexanders statue, and considered what notabl acts had been done
by him yet a youth, and in so short a time, how did it affect him and quicken
his diligence? and Plutarchi Themistocl. fol. (mihi) 55.
Miltiades his rare Trophies mad Themistocles abandon his sleep, and almost
forget to eat: and for what was all this emulation and contention among those
noble Pagans, but for a poor perishing trifle, and so was not worthy once to be
named or compared with the magnanimous zeal, and unwearied diligence of the
Saints for the honor of their God, the 1 Pet. 1.4.
incorruptible crown of glory, and the undefiled inheritance reserved in heaven
for them: And shall not their example stir us up, and quicken us in our course?
especially since their faith, zeal, patience, activity and diligence is
recorded in the Scriptures for our imitation; thus the Apostle having set down
a brief catalogue of some of those renowned worthies, Heb. 11. he shows for
what purpose he did so, Chap. 12.1. viz. that we being compassed with such a
cloud of witnesses, might by their example be excited to run with the greater
alacrity and cheerfulness the race that is set before us; hence also Paul's
exhortation to follow him, as he did a more noble copy, 1 Cor. 11.1. and to
people to follow their teachers in the Lord, Heb. 13.7. and albeit every
generation has had some who have been eminent for holiness, and though of late
many famous Martyrs in England and elsewhere have suffered under popish
persecution and cruelty, yet in the first ages of the Church, for ordinary,
albeit there was less light, yet there was more heat; ah! now the lives of the
most part are a scandal to the holy profession, but then Christians were more
zealous, circumspect, tender, loving, self-denied, etc. And how many under the
first ten persecutions were glad of an opportunity to lay down their lives for
Christ? yea, many of their own accord I do not commend this practice, which yet
did very much evidence their zeal.
offered themselves to the flames; and though thousands from day to day did
suffer, yet the number of professors did daily increase; The Sanguis martyrum
semen ecclesia
ashes of the Martyrs becoming the seed of the Church; many strangers did then
come in, who seeing the zeal and courage of Christians, joined with them in
their sufferings, owning Christ and his Gospel in these cruel and bloody times;
but alas! how few in our days would abide the trial? a little storm would make
the multitude of professors to renounce and disown their old Master, with whom
they resolved to stand, but not for him to fall; and shall we make such our
copy, and think it enough to do as they do? A third direction is this, converse
with the Saints; their company and society may be very quickening, its not good
for the sick to be alone, the company of friends may then be very useful,
comfortable and refreshing; but especially dead Saints may be profited by the
society of their living brethren; spiritual conference flowing from sincerity,
experience, sense, tenderness, etc. is very qu^ckning and enlivening; Ferrum
ferro acuricur.
as iron sharpeth iron, So the Saints the countenance of their friends, Prove.
27.17. How did the hearts of the two disciples, going to Emaus, burn within
them at Christ's heavenly discourse, Luke 24.32. N^y, the Spirit of God may come
upon a 1 Samuel 10.10.
Saul when among the Prophets: such may find a temporary work upon their heart;
and shall a S^int among the S^ints meet with no heavenly impression? When they
that fea^ed the Lord spoke one to another, the Lord dr^w ^igh, and hearkened
(and would he come without a blessing?) Mal. 3.16. While the Disciples were
communing about Christ's sufferings, himself drew near and met them, Luke,
24.15. and he will never be far from those who are thus employed, and such
while alone, shall not (as he said of himself, John 16.32.) be left alone, his
spirit will come and visit them, Mat. 18.20. When Christ is the subject of our
conference, he will be an associar and assistant: Ah! that Saints now a days
should be such strangers to this prom^sing exercise; and this is one and not
the least of the causes, why the Saints of old did so far exceed us in z^al,
activity, life and tenderness, they could scarce meet together and see one
another in the face without a word concerning their beloved: but how do we
blush to speak of matters of soul concernment, lest we should be judged to be
hypocrites, singular, busybodies, and I know not what? I will say no more
now, but there will be found to be here a mutual causality, when Christ is near
the heart he will not readily be far from the mouth; and again the lips will
affect the heart, and heavenly discourse will make an impression there. 4.
Attend the ordinances of life diligently; as faith Romans 10.17.
comes, so it is strengthened by hearing, (though private ordinances must not
be slighted, yet a special blessing may be expected on Word, Sacrament and the
public Ministry) our graces, comforts, strength, activity and enlarg^ment, are
all conveyed through the same channel: and if the Word could beget a flash of
joy in Herod, Ma^k 6.20. if it could quicken, and, as it were, soften that
flinty heart, will it not make a more deep and lively impression upon a Ezekiel.
11.19.
heart of flesh? If the Word can thus beget heat where there was no fire, will
it not far rather blow up those coals which are already kindled? 5 If we would
be fervent in spirit, let us not be sl^thfull in business, Romans 12.11. Though
we must be careful for nothing, Phil. 4.6. yet we must not be idle and
negligent, he who will not work, should not eat, 2 These. 3 10. Immoderate,
excessive and distrustful care choaks the spirit, as too much oil the flame,
and yet moderate care in the fa^^hfull discharge of our particular calling is a
notable help against sleep and drowsiness, and a preservative against infection
as in the body the humors will putrify without motion, and will beget
dangerous diseases, So the faculties of the soul, when not employed, will
contract rust and become unfit for action; and when they are not set a work,
either in religious exercises or the duties of our calling, Satan will readily
improve the occasion and employ them in his Nihil agend^ homines m^le agero
di^cunt
work; an idle man tempts the d^vil to tempt him; Idleness (as O^ium pulvinar
Satanae and (...) alesicii principium apud R^us. sym. inter. part 1 sym 53.
Otia dant v^tia (...).
one says) is Satan's reposing be^ and the mother of all wickedness. Ah! this
in great part is the cause both of the outward and spiritual poverty of many in
this Land, who being asked (as Joseph's brethren were be Pharaoh, 2 Genesis 47.3.)
What is your occupation? could return no other answer but that they were
Gentlemen; as if by their birth they were licentiated to be idle and to follow
no calling or occupation, yea and as if a calling would be a reproach to them,
and a disparagment to their ancestors and education; whileas truly, and
according to Aristophanes his verdict, a (...). Aristo^han apud Reu^. loc c^^.
life of idleness better becomes beasts then men; and as Ego (inquit Cyrus
Xenophonteus) arbitror decere principem ante ire subditis, non vita deside and
laborum expert, sed eo quod ribus provideat, laboresque lubenter subeat, Reus.
ibid symb. 30.
Cyrus said, it is more noble and Prince-like to excel and go before others in
activity, diligence and pains, then in sloth, idleness and luxury. And, O! if
such would consider that idleness was one of the crying sins of Sodom, Ezekiel.
16.49. Time is too precious a talent to be hid in a napkin, and being once
past, cannot be recalled, are potest nullo perbreve tempus emi; no gold nor
money can buy and redeem it.

Thus you see how ye should prepare for, and come to, the work; now let us add
some few directions which may help to quicken us while we are at the Throne.

7. Then, limit your heart to the duty, and Now labor to put in practice that
resolution; of which direct. 5.
arrest it at the present work, lift up your heart to God and settle it upon
him, suffer it not to look down to the world or gad about; lay a restraint upon
thy vain, roaving and unstable mind, repelling without dispute and inquisition
every suggestion and impertinent thought, not asking whence or for what it
came; yea, though upon the matter and otherwise it were never so good and
necessary, yet reject it then with indignation, as being unseasonable and
coming to interrupt thee while thou art speaking to the great King: Albeit such
pretended friends may come and get access at another time, yet now thou art
better employed, and must not be diverted by such shameless and unmanerly
intruders, who dar trouble and molest thee so unseasonably, and therefore say
to them (but do not stay to debate with them) what Nehemiah said to Sanballat
and Geshem, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down; why should the
work cease whilst I leave it and come down to you, Nehem. 6.3. Such a holy
severity and contempt must you express toward every thing that would interrupt
you in the work of the Lord, it must be a temptation, though perhaps coming
from Satan as transformed into an angel of light; O! consider the weight and
importance of the present business and work, and that will keep thee from
dallying with this ordinance; will any man be so mad as to suffer his mind to
vag and be diverted with trifles, or by casting an eye on every in-comer, when
he is pleading before an earthly King for his life and state, which he has
forfeited by his folly and rebellion? and is it not so in this case? nay, thou
have far more lying at the stake, thy life, thy soul and incorruptible
inheritance, thou must pray or perish, and thou must so pray as to prevail, or
thou must go to hell and be tormented for ever and ever: what Moses said of the
words of the law, Deuteronomy. 32.47. may well be applied to this ordinance, It is not
a vain thing for you, because it is your life. Hence there must be that holy
despair, impatience and violence against every thing that stands in the way to
hinder us in this work, that importunity, fervency, yea, and impudence we spoke
of, Part. 2. Chap. 2. Page 447, 448.

8. Remember the greatness, goodness, all seeing eye, yea and severity of him
with whom we have to do; 1. should not his greatness and excellency make you
afraid to dally with his work? and should not his dread fall upon you in your
dead, formal and irreverent approaches to him? (that I may apply that to our
speaking to God, which Job said of his friends speaking for God, Job, 13.11.7.)
2. Should you not fear him and his goodness? Hos. 3.5. should not the tender
child take heed that he do not dishonor and grieve his kind father? 3. should
not his Deus est sph^era cujus centrum est ubique circumserentia nusquam. enter
praesenier Deus oi^ and abique potenter.
presence, his inspection and allseeing eye stir us up to greater attention and
reverence then the eye of all the creatures? and yet how would we blush and be
ashamed to utter such impertinencies before men, especially to a King, or some
great person, which many a time we have vented in prayer to God? yea, how would
we loath and abominat our selves, if we did but think that the Saints on earth
were acquainted with that deadness, formality, and these wandering and sensual
thoughts which we have often entertained while we came before the Lord? and yet
we do not consider, that the high and lofty one, who inhabiteth eternity, does
search the heart and try the reins, to give every man according to his ways,
and according to the fruit of his doings; that every creature is manifest in
his sight, and that all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, Jer. 17.10. Heb. 4.13. But if neither his greatness, nor
goodness, his presence nor all-searching knowledge can prevail with thee, yet
remember his holiness, justice and severity, with him is terrible majesty, he
is excellent in power and in judgment, and in plenty of justice, therefore
(says Elibu) do men fear him, Job, 37.22, 23, 24. The wrath of a King is as
the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. but what is the wrath of all the creatures
in respect of the indignation of the Almighty? Who knows the power of his
anger, who turns the children of men to destruction, and carries them away
as with a flood? Psa. 90.11.3, 5. who may stand in his sight when once he is
angry, Ps. 76.7. he is of purer eyes then to behold evil, and cannot look on
iniquity, Habak 1.13. he will not be mocked with our babl^ng, our cold, formal
and empty performances; O! let us then draw nigh to him with reverence and
godly fear, for (says the Apostle) our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28,
29. O! that bold, secure and presumptuous sinners would Dan. 6.26.
tremble and fear when they come before the great God, that they become not as
stubble and chaff to feed the devouring flames of his indignation to all
eternity.

9. Use such a gesture as thou findst most helpful to raise thy heart and stir
up thy affections, and which expresses that reverence and sense of thy
distance which becomes such a poor Isa. 41.14.
worm when it draws nigh to its Maker: here I grant thou art not limited,
for, 1. we will find the Saints to lift up their eyes to heaven, thus David,
Ps. 123. 1. Ps. 121. 1. Ps. 141.8. yea, and our blessed Savior, Job. 17. 1.
Joh. 11.41. Secondly, sometimes to cast down their eyes and smite the breast,
as the Publican, Luke 18 13. sometimes to hold up their hands, as Moses, Exodus
17.11. and this seems to have been an usual custom from, 1 Tem. 2.8. Thirdly,
sometimes to stretch forth their hands, as 1 King. 8.22. Exodus 9 29. Ps. 88.9.
Fourthly, sometimes to kneel down, as, Act. 7.60. Act. 9.40. Act. 20.36. Act.
21.5. yea, our blessed Lord, Luke 22.41. Fifthly, sometimes to fall on their
face, as the Leper, Luke 5.12. and Christ himself, Mat. 26.39. Sixthly,
sometimes to stand, Mark, 11.25. Luke 18.13. Seventhly, sometimes to lie, as
dying Jacob. Genesis 48.2. and sick Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 2. Yea, eighthly, and
sometimes to sit, as wearied Elijah, 1 King. 19.4. etc. And in this variety
thou may make choice of that gesture that is most subservient to the present
disposition of thy body, and for enlarging the affections, which may be
different, not only as to diverse persons, but also as to one and the same man
at diverse times and occasions: only let me from experience entreat, that thou
would beware of such a gesture as may press the vital spirits, or may dispose
the to drousiness; when we hing down the head, or suffer the breast to lean to
any hold, we will find the soul (because of its sympathy with the body in this
state of union and conjunction) not to be so free, active and sit to be
employed in the work of the Lord. Ah! do not many in their families use such a
gesture as does speak their dis-respect and want of reverence? and its too
ordinary in public for one and other in the time of prayer, to lay themselves
down, or so to lean on their dasks, as if they purposed to take a sleep; ah! is
this the reverence and godly fear with which ye should serve your Maker and
Judge? would ye, durst ye, speak so irreverently to a man like your self, if in
any eminent place, and having authority, far less to ^ King? Ah! let us be
humbled for our unmannerly, shameless and impudent boldness, or rather desperate
carelessness and negligence in the worship of the great God.

We might here also add somewhat concerning the use of the voice, yea,
sometimes the elevation and extension of it may be helpful to quicken the
heart; and then thou may retire to a solitary place, where thou may use
the greater freedom, and not be liable to mis-construction. But, if yet thou
find thy deadness and indisposition to continue, notwithstanding thou have
used the means for removing of it, I shall further add, by way of advice, but
these few particulars.

10. Whetever abuse may be of a set form, yet then thou may have recourse to
it; perhaps thou may be brought so low, and be so far straightened as to want
both matter and words; and might not a Saint be helped in such a strait, if he
had some materials at hand drawn up by holy men, or by himself from the
Scriptures, and fitted for his case and use? but yet not so as to stint and
limit himself precisely to these words or purposes: but if he find his fetters
to fall off, and the wind to blow, he may use his liberty; I must (says Mr.
Mr. Zach. Bogan pref. to his help to pr. and edis.
Bogan, who yet pleads very much for a form) needs say, if I would go by mine
own experience; the heart that is warmed and enlarged with the sense of the
love of God, and joy in the holy Ghost, although sometimes under a damp and
some violent straitning, it should be driven to a form; yet as soon as the heat
comes, and the bands slaken, would fied a form to wring, and long to be at
liberty. When one is weak and sickly he will make use of crutches, which after
he has recovered his strength, he will cast away. And on the other hand, the
judicious Mr. Ford, who is very severe against the abuse of forms, Mr. Ford
spirit of adoption, cha. 48. page 526.
comparing it to a custom, which he calls a ridiculous absuraity, and at
another Ibid. cha. 52. page 546, 547.
time prescribing this as a mean how to recover out of deadness in prayer, not
to rest in forms of prayer, nor to bind our selves to the same series and frame
of words; yet once and again Le is citatis.
protests, that he is not so severe as to condemn, or forbid the use of a
good form, either of our own or others framing, or to deny that young beginners
may find help in the matter, method and language of a good form, and that under
extraordinary deliquies and swoundings of spirit, in which the soul cannot put
forth its operations as before, that a godly man may not, as Christ in his
agony, Mat. 26.44. go and repeat to God, thrice and more, the same form of
words. And that we may not only at the same time repeat, but also at different
occasions make use of the same form of words, is evident also from David's
soliloquy and meditation in the case of his soul-trouble and dejection, in
which he thrice, and in two different Psalms repeateth the same words, viz. Ps.
42.5. and ver. 11. Ps. 43.5. And thus on all hands its agreed, that as a form
may be abused (for I As for the excellency of conceived prayer wherein the
devous Christian, out of the abundance of his heart pours out his requests to
God, none but a profane spirit dares open his mouth against it, Mr. Gurn. loc.
eit. page 438.
know none who plead, that believers should be precisely stinted and bound to a
set form in their private devotion) so it may be lawfully used in case of
extraordinary weakness or indisposition, neither may we now meddle with what is
here controversal.

11. While deadness and indisposition continues, let frequency supply the want
of continuance, come often, but stay not long at the throne till thou be more
able, and till the Lord arrest thee by the sweet breathings of his free Spirit.
The famous Dicuntus fratres in Egypt crebras quidem babere orationes, sed eas
tamen brevissin. as, and raptim, quodammodo jaculatas ne ills vigilon ter
erecta quae oranti pluri mum necessaria est, per productiores meras evanescat,
atque hebetetur intentio, ac per hoc etiam ipsi satis oste^dunt banc
intentionem fiout non est obtundenda, si per durare non potest, itae si per
duraverit non cito esse rum pendam. Absit enim ab oratione multa loquutio. non
desit multa precatio, si fervens perseverat intentio ( non intentio ut mendose
scribitur passim in hoc capite,) nam, etc. August. epist. 12. ad pob. cap. 10.
Austin, speaking of the Saints in Eygpt, who were eminent for holiness,
affirms that they used to pray often, but not long at a time, approving that
practice as limited to the case held forth in this direction; nay, the reverend
Mr. Mr. Gurn. loc. cit. page 477.
Gurnal, speaking generally of the duty, prescribes the same advice and
direction, with this Which Austin also adds verbis citatis.
caution only, that we give no check to the Spirit of God in his assistances,
nor interrupt the duty while we find the Spirit enlarging the heart, and
pressing us forward. We need not now speak to the general; but the book of the
Psalms affords us many instances of short prayers poured out by the Saints
while their Spirits were overwhelmed and straightened, and that one hundred and
second Psalm (which was penned to be, as it were, a directory in such a case)
if we look only upon the petitory part of it, will not be thought to be of any
considerable length,

12. Do not faint nor weary in waiting upon the Lord; put a good interpretation
on all Gods dealings and dispensations toward thee; and though thou meet with
no sensible manifestation, gain and advantage, yet follow the We spoke
particularly of prayer, and now again while we recommend the use of the
ordinances, though we think none, either public or private, may be neglected,
yet let me advi^e thee to make secret prayer thy daily and constant refuge; go
and say, with him, Psa. 80.18 quicken me and I will call upon thy name; thou
may reiterate and dwell upon this petition; for, in one Psalm the servant of
God eight several times renews the same request, and prays for quickening,
viz. Psa. 119 25, 37, 88, 107, 149, 154, 156, 159.
ordinances diligently, knowing that at length he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. Praise God, that ye may bear his voice, though
ye do not see his face, ye have a sure word of promise, labor to live upon it,
and in due time ye shall reap, if ye faint not, Gal. 6.9. they that wait upon
the Lord, they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, and they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40.31. O! then would thou have
strength, and be kept from fainting, wait upon the Lord in the use of the
means, and though for a short moment the trial continue, yet be not
discouraged, hearken to the exhortation and promise, Psa. 27.14. Wait on the
Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart; wait, I say, on
the Lord, Isa. 41.10. fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed: for I
am thy God; I will strengthen thee; yea I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness, says the Lord. O! do not then
quench the Spirit by thy dejection and negligence, do not sit down and mourn
when thou art called to work, but stir 2 Timothy 1.6.
up the grace of God that is in thee; blow up the coals, there is heat within,
and the help of the Spirit may be at hand though thou do not discern it, the
wind blows when, and where it lists, Joh. 3.8. But we must press this point
a little more fully in the following Section.

Sect. 3. Whether our deadness does excuse our negligence? and whether we
should pray when we are unfit and indisposed? and what will be the issue and
success of those prayers that want life and fervency, and which are pestred
with wandering thoughts.
Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself
to take hold of thee, etc. 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, etc.
WE would not think it worth the while to confute those dreaming Sectaries who
plead, that we should not draw nigh to God till he send out his Spirit, and
till we sensibly find some impression from heaven drawing and inviting us to
come to the throne; but since weak Christians may meet with the like
temptations, we shall labor briefly to take out of their way that stumbling
block, and to show them that their very deadness and indisposition, is ground
enough for them to draw nigh to the Physician that they may be healed, so far
is it from being an obstruction and impediment, or a plea for our negligence
and omission of duty.

1. Because one sin cannot be a plea for another; now our deadness and
indisposition is our sin; and therefore must not be alleged as a reason for
our neglect of prayer, which is our duty, as well as our privilege.

2. This were the ready way to Atheism, and to cast behind us all the
ordinances of life, and to abandon them for ever; for if thou be unfit to day,
and upon that account lie by, thou will readily be more unfit to morrow, and
so from time to time; the longer thou stayest away from God, the distance will
be the greater, till at length it become an easy and tolerable burden to
continue in that state; omission of duty will prove a bad preparation for it,
but thus thou will contract an habit of idleness, which thou will not easily
cast off.

3. If thou do not resolve to mock God, and slight his work, but wilt stir up
the little strength thou have, waiting upon the breathings and assistance of
his Spirit, though thou were never so weak and indisposed, thy oblation coming
from a willing mind, and according to what thou have, it will be accepted in
Christ, who pittieth thy weakness, and will not reject thy supplication upon
the account of thy bewailed infirmities; and thou need not doubt whether
such a prayer be more acceptable then no prayer, nor ask whether it were better
not to pray, then to pray no better? For it is granted on all hands, that the
very moral virtues of Pagans, were more acceptable then the want of them, and
that those workers of moral righteousness were less guilty, then those other
Pagans who omitted them. Hence, we may well argue from A pari
the like, that thy performance of duty must be more acceptable, then the
omission of it, especially since there must be some life in thy work (if a
Saint though weak) while there was none in theirs, and thou being in Christ,
through whom thy imperfections will be pardoned and done away.

4. The Spirit may draw insensibly, he may be present effectively, where he is
not feelingly, he may be stirring up the heart to the duty, though thou do
not discern his motion, and his help and assistance may be at hand when thou
art ready to apprehend he is farthest off; and have not the Saints many a time
brought a heavy, dejected and complaining spirit to the throne, and yet have
gone away rejoicing and triumphing over their fears and unbelief? As the book
of Psalms can afford many instances. The way of the Lord is strength to the
upright, Prove. 10.29. The Lord uses to meet them that work righteousness, and
remember him in their ways, Isa. 64.5. When we are following our duty, and
improving the ordinances, we lie in Christ's way, and he will not shut his eyes,
but will at length pity and heal such weak and impotent ones. I may then say
unto thee, concerning the use of prayer and other ordinances, as David did to
Solomon in reference to the building of the Temple, 1 Chr. 22.16. Arise
therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

5. Ah! where shall the sick go, but to the Physician? What should a troubled
spirit do, if it may not draw nigh to God for healing, comfort and life? The
Lord commands us to call upon him in the day of trouble, and has promised to
hear and deliver us, Psa. 50.15. and who is he that dare forbid us, and
threaten wrath, while he thus promises to pity and show mercy? and what
trouble is there that is comparable to soul-trouble, and what weakness and
infirmity is like to a wounded spirit laboring under the fetters, bondage and
captivity under which it has cast it self by its folly, sin and negligence?
and shall it be to no purpose for such a one to lay out his straits, and
weakness to God?

6. The Lord complains when we will not call on him, and stir up our selves
to lay hold on him, Isa. 64.4. and will he chide and challenge us when we stir
up our hearts to close with him, and look up to the throne of mercy? Metaphera
qua Paulus utitur sumpta est ab igne exiguo, vel qui paulatim extingueretur,
nisi flabellum subiude admovendo, and lignum novum ingerendo vires resumeret ac
flammam. proinde meminerimus in usum applicanda esse dona Dei, nerubiginem
o^losa and suppressa contrahaut Calvin in loc.
and do not say, thou wantst the Spirit to help thee, as if thou durst not go
when thou art not sure of his assistance; for, he has promised to give his
Spirit to them that ask him, Luke, 11.13.

Let none then pretend his unfitness and indisposition, as a cloak to cover his
negligence and unwillingness, but the less our strength, fitness and ability
is, we had need be the more busy and diligent; the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.6. uses
an excellent allusion, while he exhorts Timothy to stir up whether the (...).
gift or grace of God was in him (neither of the two, I think should be
excluded, both being very needful in the discharge of his ministry, to which
that exhortation mainly relates) the word (c) (...), properly signifying to
blow up the fire that is buried under ashes. And thus, as it were, to give and
restore again life to that which seemed to be dead; and thus the words of the
exhortation are general; and though spoken to Timothy (who had a large measure
both of gifts and graces) yet are applicable to all the Ministers of the
Gospel, yea, to all Christians, every one having received mo or fewer talents,
and some measure as of grace, so of gifts: and thus we may, to our point, from
thence collect, that every one is obliged to stir up and diligently improve,
that measure of strength he has, and the weaker and less the measure be, there
is the greater need of diligence; it were foolish to say, because the fire is
weak and seems to be dead and extinguished, that therefore it were needless
to blow the coals; nay, but the weaker it be, there is the greater need of
blowing, and that without delay, lest in the interim the little spark die and
go out; it were our wisdom then so soon as we perceive deadness to seize upon
us, to stir up our hearts and to blow upon the coal, lest our deadness become
universal and remeedyless: a candle, when first the flame is blown out, may
with little difficulty be blown in again, which after a little delay will
become more difficult, and then impossible.

Hence we may see how foolish and unreasonable the children of men are in their
pleas and excuses; for, to And thus may be a seventh argument against those
dreamers, who dar plead for the omission of duty in the case of unfitness and
indisposition.
say we should not go to God till we find the heart quickened and enlarged,
what else is it but to plead that we should not use the means till we have
obtained the end? For, is not prayer and meditation a most notable mean to
quicken a dead heart, and to beget familiarity, boldness and confidence? the
Lord has not deprived us of the means for removing that sad stroke, and should
we not use them? and if we will not, we may fear that sad threatening against
Laodicea, while in the like case, Rev. 3.16. Because thou art luketwarm, I will
spue thee out of my mouth. Such a temper is very loathsome to God, he cannot
endure it, and shall we rest in that state and be at no pains to be rid of it:
but if we will not awaken and stir up our own hearts, if the Lord mean to do us
good, he will put the spur to our dull, sluggish spirits, and shake the rod
over our head, and send out some one or other storm to alarm us; and were it
not better to prevent such a rough messenger? Ah! how should we fear that
curse, Ier. 48.10. when we do the work of the Lord (...) in Kal ejoculari in
Pihel eludere quasi aliquem arous fallacis more excui^re e spe sua, Mercer. in
rad. If our hands sl^ck, and if our work prove as a deceitful bow, the hurt
will redound to the archer.
negligently? O! if we were sensible of our danger, and were more humbled for
offering to the great King a corrupt and vain thing, Mal. 1.14. I will be
sanctified (says the Lord) in all that draw nigh to me, Lev. 10 3. If ye will
not stir up your selves to sanctify him in his Ordinances, he will sanctify
his great Name and vindicat his Glory in your just punishment; as there he did
in the destruction of Nadab and Abihu, he will not hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7. far less will he suffer his Name to be
taken in vain in the immediate acts of his Worship: and therefore, when we draw
nigh to him without reverence and godly fear, what a mercy is it that he
becomes not a consuming sire to devour us? Heb. 12.28, 29. 2. Though the Lord
would not add his stroke, yet by our dead, formal and careless performances, we
so dull and indispose the heart, and contract such an habit of deadness, that
if the Lord were not gracious to us, laying hands on us as on (u) Lot, and
pulling us, as it were, Genesis 19.16.
by force out of the snare, we would go on from evil to worse till there were
no remedy; for, when we become negligent and careless of God's work, we become
fearless and aweless of his majesty, and what a mercy is it that the next step
is not black atheism, contempt of God and total apostasy? Ah! have we not
enemies enough against our souls, and shall we also become our own enemies?
Satan, that active, cruel and busy enemy, is still in arms, going about like
a roaring Lion, and seeking to devour us, 1 Pet. 5.8. Our lusts are always in
readiness, and the world has every where stumbling blocks to cast in our way,
and is it time for us to sleep? especially when we are upon the watchtower and
have our sword in our hand, yea and in the time of the assault, while we seem
and profess to be fighting against our spiritual enemies and laying hold upon
the Lords strength, when we profess to look up to him and to wrestle with him,
and thus at once, as it were, wrestle with the Almighty, and against hell and
our lusts. O! that we were convinced of our folly and abominable security and
negligence. 3. Though there were no other hazard but the loss of the present
duty, and of misimproving that price the Lord puts in our hand, how might that
rouse us up and set us a work? this is like (but much worse then) that evil
whereof Solomon complains, Eccles. 6.1, 2. While we have liberty to draw nigh
to the King and present our supplications to him, he opens all his Cabins and
sets the full Treasure before us; So that the supplicant needs want nothing for
his soul of all that he desires: but if he be careless, slack and remiss in
asking, he has no power to eat; he wants a stomach and appetite, and in his
supposed fullness goes away as empty as he came; then (and not till then) shall
ye seek and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart, Jer.
29.13. Weak pangs do not further the deliverance, not bring the desired mercy
to the birth; and as Lambunt Petram, mel non sugunt.
good never a whit, as not the better; Ah! many pray as if they prayed not,
they do not, with (g) Eliah, pray in prayer, they forget and slight their work,
even then when they are employed in it; they have not a See Part. 1. Chap 4.
without the heart there is not a tongue that can speak to God. Ibid. page 28.
tongue to speak, they are stricken dumb and speechless, Jam. 5.17. (...).
while they are before the King; or rather they cut out their own tongue, and
thus bring along with themselves that sad doom and judgment that was inflicted
on the unprepared guest, Mat. 22.12. after which followed, binding hand and
foot, and casting into outer darkness, ver. 13. the shadow and first fruits
whereof, perhaps have already seized also upon thee; dumb supplicants usually
are deaf, blind and lame, they have not ears to hear the Word feelingly, nor
eyes to see Gods face and the light of his countenance, nor feet to walk
straightly in the ways of God: O! who knows how great his misery is? But
sleeping Jonah fears no storm. Ah! is there such a master as our God? is
there such a work as his service? and is there any reward which may once be
laid in the balance with the immortal crown? and is there any danger and loss
comparable with the loss of the soul? and yet is there any master so served,
any work so much slighted, and any danger so little minded and laid to heart?
we serve Satan and our lusts with all our soul and heart, and pursue the world
with all our might and strength; no time too long, nor pains too great, if thus
employed; and yet a moment of time, and any work or shadow of a duty, is too
much, and too good for God: Ah! though we had no religion nor conscience, yet
if there were but relics of reason remaining, how easily might we be
convinced of this desperate folly and madness? But alas! secure sinners are
These. 3.2.
unreasonable, and will not hearken to any monitor; but whether such hear or
not, yet not a day, nor hour passes without a warning; so often as we see the
men of the world busy in their several trades and callings, rising up early,
and traveling all the day with unwearied diligence, So often are we put in mind
of our duty, and warned to take pains for the one thing necessary; if many, to
day in torment, had spent but a little of that time and pains in Gods work, and
for their souls, which they employed in seeking after some perishing trifles,
they might, instead of their prison and chains, to day have been in their
heavenly mansions, enjoying the crown of righteousness. Perhaps you will be
ready to ask, what pains should I take for eternity? There is a copy sent from
heaven, ^ond recorded in the Scriptures; but you will say, we cannot come that
length; but shall I then bring you a copy from hell, how think you would these
misers spend their time, if they might enjoy again this day of the Gospel which
we undervalue; But, 3. shall I yet come nearer? How do the men of the world
labor, with what industry, activity, fervency and seriousness, do they seek
after the world, and did thou yet thus seek the kingdom of God? But shall I
yet, 4. come nearer to you? and entreat, that you would make your self your own
copy, and that ye would now so serve God, as formerly ye have served sin and
Satan; that I may not add the world, nor your lawful callings, in which, and
for which ye are allowed to employ a considerable part of time, diligence and
pains; but even as ye have served hell, and have been laboring to destroy your
souls, will ye but Admonor fideles nihil magis absurdum esse, vel etiam ^urpe
ac pudendum quam spiritualem Christi gratiam terrena mauumissione apud ipsos
minus valere; -- ut tamen agam vobiscum summa indulgeutia, hoc certe possum
merito postulare ne frigidius vel negligentius saltem colatis justitiam quam
peccata paruistis, Calv in Romans 6.19.
thus serve the living Lord, and work out your salvation: And this is that copy
which the Apostle sets before the Romans, Romans 6.19. But alas! we are active
and wise to what is evil, but slow and foolish to what is good; we have been
swift eagles in the way of sin, but creeping worms in the way of God.

But least weak Saints should be too much discouraged with the imperfections of
their prayers and performances, as if all their labor were lost, and the Lord
rather provoked then honored by their vain oblations; it may here be ask't,
what measure of deadness, and when wandering thoughts do nullify and frustrate
our prayers? And having spoken a little to that question, so far as it
concerns our deadness and want of fervency, Part. 2. Chap. 3. Let us now
mainly consider it as relating to wandering thoughts.

For answer, then let us, 1. remember the distinction of formal or actual, and
virtual or interpretative attention; from Part, 2. Page 428. Hence, 2. there is
a twofold distraction in duty, one voluntary, not resisted, regarded nor
bewailed; another involuntary, which, notwithstanding our purpose and
resolution to guard against it, and notwithstanding all our care and endeavors
to prevent it, yet creeps on, and interrupteth the duty; I grant, that none
but Atheists and gross hypocrites will resolve to give way to wandering thoughts,
or desire to parley with, and entertain these guests, while they are speaking to
God; yet there be too many who Haee and similes quaestiones spectant ad
doctrinam de voluntario and involuntario quam (si Dominus voluerit) a
scholasticorum fecibus purgatam brevi praelo subjiciam interim vid. schol. ad
1, 2.
virtually, and by just interpretation may be said to will and desire wandering
thoughts should break in, while they are speaking to God; for, according to the
principles of moral Philosophy, that evil may justly be imputed to us against
which we are obliged to watch and strive, and yet do not, but are careless and
negligent. Hence,

We Ans. If, 1. we resolve against, and, 2. resist wandering thoughts so soon as
we epsy them to break in; and, 3. lament and mourn over our duty, when pestred
therewith, then there is this virtual attention, and the distraction is
involuntary; and therefore, albeit so much of the duty must be lost as was
spent, or rather interrupted by such obtruders, yet these shall not be able
altogether to frustrate our prayers, nor hinder their success? what the fowls
did devour of Abraham's sacrifice was lost, but that loss did not nullify his
sacrifice, nor hinder his acceptance after he drove them away, Genesis 16.11. But
if thou will be at no pains to guard thy heart, if thou drive not away these
fowls, when thou see them fall upon thy sacrifice, and do not lay to heart,
nor mourn for the loss thou have sustained, thy loss is greater then can be
enough bewailed; these ravens have sucked all the marrow and fat out of thy
sacrifice, and have rendered it a vain and unprofitable oblation; those Eccles.
10.1.
dead flies cause thy ointment send forth a stinking savor. They will
overspread the whole duty, command and captivate the man, so that now they will
not be repelled, and thus they become constant, abiding and universal; these
weeds over-grow and choke the good seed; and what crop can be expected and thou
willingly entertainest these robbers and evil guests, and therefore thou art
inexcusable. This argument concerning wandering thoughts deserved a larger and
more particular disquisition, had it not been so fully and judiciously handled
by others. See Mr. Gurnal, loc. cit. page 310. to page ^32. Morn. Exerc. Sermon.
19. Mr. Cobbet, Part 3. Chap. 2. Only let us adn (as in the like case, Part 2.
Chap. 3) some few passages from these modern Divines, whose words may have
weight with such disconsolate ones, as are daily mourning under the burden of
roving thoughts in holy duties.

Believe it Christian, it is not thine 2 Cor. 12.10.
inevitable weakness, nor thy Mark, 14.38.
sensible dullness, nor thy Psa. 73.21, 22.
lamented roavings, nor thy Genesis 15.11.
opposed distractions, nor thy 1 John 5.13.
mistaken unbelief; it is not any, nor all these that can shut out thy prayer,
if thou do not Psa. 66.18.
regard iniquity in thy heart, Morn. Exerc. Sermon. 1.

If we fail in the manner of our prayer, and if it be a total failing, if we
pray without faith, without any faith at all, without zeal, and the like,
farewell to the success of such petitions; but if it be a partial failing, and
that failing strived against and prayed against, the case is very different: by
the evangelical allay; we do what we desire to do, in Gods gracious acceptance
-- our Advocate strikes in with us, and begs his Father to regard the matter,
and not the manner of our prayers, Mr. Newton on Joh. 17.24. page 499.

Believers prayers pass a refining before they come into Gods hands, did he
indeed read them with their impertinencies, and take our blotted copy out of
our hand, we could not fear too much what the issue might be; but they come
under the correctors hand, our Lord Jesus has the inspecti-of them, who sets
right all our broken requests and misplaced petitions, he washes out our blots
with his own blood, his mediation is the fine searse through which our prayers
are boulted, and all that is course and heterogeneal, he severes from the pure;
what is of his own Spirits breathihg, he presents, and what our fleshly part
added, he hides, that it shall not prejudice us, or our prayers: This was the
sweet Gospel Truth wrapped up in the Priests bearing the sin of the holy
offerings, Exodus 28.38. Mr. Gurnal. loc. cit. page 330.

I have the rather added these testimonies, because though it be too ordinary
for the most part of titular Christians not to regard what they offer to the
Lord, though they come in their pollution, and offer a corrupt thing to the
great King, yet their heart never smites them, they rest in the work done, not
caring how it be done; though the fowls come down upon their sacrifice, and eat
it up, yet they will not be at the pains to drive them away, nor do they lay
their loss to heart, nor mourn for it; but though it be thus with the
multitude, yet the generation of the righteous will take heed what they offer
to the Lord, they know that their is no road more infested with thieves, then
that which is between heaven and earth, and therefore when they pass that way,
they put on the whole armor of God, imploring the conduct of the spirit, and a
convoy from heaven to guard them thither, that they may with success carry on
that precious traffic; and they will follow their dull hearts as closely all
the while, as a Carrier will do the unruly Horse, fearing least if for one
moment they should not attend and drive, their heart should stand still, or
start aside, and yet, notwithstanding all their care and diligence, their
hearts will mis-give them, and those cheaters and robbers will draw on a parley,
and get advantage of them; for the flesh will lust against the spirit, so that
they cannot do what, and as they would, Gal. 5.17. The law in the members will
war against the law of the mind, bringing us into captivity to the law of sin,
so that though to will be present with us, yet how to perform we find not; and
thus the good that we would, we do not; but the evil that we would not, that we
do: as the holy Apostle complained and lamenteth (and where is the Saint on
earth that may not take up the same complaint, even when he is most spiritual
and best employed in meditation, prayer, etc?) Romans 7.15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23,
24. Though carnal hearts do not value a communion with God, yet who knows what
a sad affliction it is to the children of God to have their fellowship with him
thus interrupted? I verily believe (says Mr. Buroughs gosp. worsh. page 281.
a late Divine) there are many that have already good assurance of Gods love in
Christ, that if God should speak to them as he spoke to Solomon, bidding him
ask what he should give him, who for themselves would put up this petition. Oh!
Lord, that I may be delivered from a wandering spirit in holy duties, and
especially in the duty of prayer, that I may thereby come to enjoy a more holy
communion with thy self then ever yet I have enjoyed, and such would account
this to be a greater mercy then if God should give them to be Kings or Queens
over the whole world. O Christian! is thy deadness and wandering thoughts thus
thy burden? and is it the great desire of thy soul to be rid of them? and art
thou striving and endeavoring against them? I might tell you those glad
tidings, which one tendered to his friend in the like case, who seeing him
oppressed with such distempers, and under such sad complaints, came cheerfully
to him, and said, I can tell you good news, the best that ever you heard, viz.
as soon as ever you are in heaven, you shall serve Christ without interruption
and weariness: which words (says Thomas Shiphard in a letter from new England
page mihi 39.
my Author) well thought on, revived the man. Though the Lord will not utterly
(y) drive out these Canaanites out of the land, that they may be for our trial,
exercise and humiliation, yet it is through our fault and negligence, if they
be not brought under the yoke, and are not already become tributaries; Judge.
3.4.
and ere it be long the victory shall be complete, and they shall no more
molest any true Israelite; ah! why should the Saints be too much discouraged?
they will not stay long in this wilderness, and if they were once come home,
they will meet with no more trials nor temptations; we might here apply the word
spoken in reference to the various dispensations and difficulties the Israelits
met with in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.16. After the Lord has for a short while
proven and humbled us by this and other trials, he will at the latter end do us
good, and fully complete our happiness.

And so much briefly concerning those material and weighty cases propounded in
the entry, and which deserved a further prosecution; and we shall now only in a
word speak to two or three more; and, 1. it may be ask't, whether we may be too
spiritual and too much enlarged in prayer? Ans. This question might seem
superfluous, if not ridiculous, had not some of the popish zelots in their
mystical theology exceeded all bounds, so far as to fall into gross euthusiasme
(albeit their way and profession otherwise seems to be so far distant from,
and opposite unto, such a dream; for since they limit the Spirit to the Popes
chair, who could imagine that they could give way to this licentious liberty?
and since they plead so much for lip-devotion without heat and life; who would
think that they should plead for such enthusiastic raptures?) yea, and not
only to own and maintain exstasies and extraordinary elevations of the soul
(for who Vid. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 175 and scholast. in loc. and Rainer pantheol.
de raptu.
among them comes not this length?) but some of them also are so bold as to
affirm, that in prayer and spiritual contemplation, there may be such a rapture
and exstasie, as that not only the outward, but also the inward senses and
imagination may be suspended from all vital operation, and during that exercise
become incapable of any motion and action; yea, and that the soul may be so
much affected with, and drowned in that heavenly contemplation, as that all the
acts both of the mind and will are suspended, and cease; thus the father of
their mystical theology, the supposititious Dionys. de mist. theol. cap. 1.
Dionysius, Jo. Jo. Thaulerus institut. cap. 12.
Thaulerus, and others do seem to teach, and thus they are interpreted by their
Vid. Suar. de virt. and stat. lib. 2. cap. 12.
fellows; but Bonav. 2. tom. opus. de mist. theol, prope finem.
Bonaventure and others Apud Gerson alphah 66 lit O
admit an act of the will, without the enocurrence of the mind or understanding.

We will not digress to compare and examine the several tenets of those
mysterious Divines, only as to what concerns the present question; while they
affirm, that in prayer and meditation the soul may be so elevated, as that
neither the will nor mind elicit any act; we can pass no fitter verdict upon
that opinion, then Dionys. de div. nom. cap. 7. vocat singularem ac mystieam
sapientiam stultam, irrationabilem, and amentem. I know the popish Doctors put
a mysterious gloss on these words, and I will not say beyond the Authors scope,
yet contrary to the property of the words which we have retained.
Dionysius did on their mystical wisdom, calling it foolish, mad and
unreasonable: For, what can be more ridiculous then to affirm, that we may
meditate, and yet mind and think upon nothing; and that we can pray, and yet
desire and ask nothing: For, prayer, (as has been shown, Part 1. Chapter 4.)
essentially, consists in the act of the will, as meditation in the act of the
mind; and therefore, when those acts are removed, those exercises cannot be
performed* and it must be a strange kind of elevation and enlargement of the
soul, when all it is actions and operations are suspended, this must rather be a
lethargy, sleep or swound of the soul, then a perfection and elevation of it:
But enough of this childish dream. And now, in answer to the question, thou
needst not fear, O Christian, lest thou be too much enlarged in any Ordinance,
it is but a little the best are capable of here, it is but, as it were, a
tasting before the full meal, when we shall sit Mat. 8.11.
down at the table with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven; but
all of us have reason to be humbled for our deadness and want of zeal, even
then when we are most lively and most enlarged: And, alas! how often do we
bring cold hearts to the Throne, and carry them away again without any heat,
sense or tenderness? Who can say, with holy Bernard, Nunquam Bernard. Epist.
116.
abs te, absque te recedo; I will never go away from thee without thee, without
some heavenly and heart-melting impression. Who of us can say, with that old
man, of whom it is reported, that he always came from the Throne with these
words, O Claudimini, oculi mei, claudimini, nihil enim pulchrius videbitis, etc.
eyes be ye shut, be ye shut; for ye shall never look upon a more sweet and
lovely object, then the light of Gods countenance which I have now seen? Ah!
who can sufficiently bewail our deadness, and want of zeal and activity, in the
work of the Lord? but, because we are dead, we lay not this evil to heart.

And yet, sometimes, there may be a flash of life, and something looking like
the breathing of the spirit, which is not of a heavenly descent; for, Satan
See Part 1. Cha. 9. page 369.
transforming himself into an Angel of light, may cast in some holy motion, and
follow it with some quickening meditation, of purpose to divert and cheat us of
the present duty; and therefore, we would here take notice of Bernards advice
concerning our singing of Psalms, as having as well place in our praying to
God, as in our praising of him: [ O! (says this Nihil aliud dum psallitis
prater id quod psallitis c^gite^is; nec solas dico ^itandas esse cogitationes
vanas, and otiosas, sed vitanda sunt and illa quas, etc Salubria sunt sed
minime illa salubriter inter Psallendum revilvitis, Spiritus enim Sanctus illa
hora gratum non recipit, quicquid aliud quam debes, neglecto eo quod debe^,
obt^leris, Bern. sermon. 47. super Cantic.
reverend Ancient) do not then only shun idle and vain thoughts, but beware
lest ye think of those things which ye have read, or which ye have heard from
the Pulpit; for, though those things be good and precious, yet they are
unseasonable while ye are otherwise employed, and the spirit then will not
accept of any thing that is impertinent to the present work and duty. Yet. I
would not be so severe as always to limit the Saints in their private
devotion, albeit a Minister, or whosoever is, as it were, the mouth of others,
must look to the present work, and follow it for the good of those who join in
the duty; but if in private we meet with any notable and eminent irradiation
and impulse toward any spiritual object, I know no reason why we should choke
such a motion, unless we be straightened by time, so that if we give way to it, we
must neglect the main duty which we intended to go about, and which our
exigence does especially call for; and in such a case we may see Satan's hand
in it, and we should beware of his wiles: But if we can espy none of his
designs, we may a little follow that quickening meditation, and again return to
our work happily, with more life and activity. It will be found no
heterogenious mixture thus to join meditation with prayer, nor any culpable
intermission and interruption of duty, to make one thus bring supply and
provision for another; the book of the Psalms affords so many instances, that
we may think this to have been David's usual practice.

A second question may be this, Whether honest supplicants use to be more
enlarged in public or in private prayer? Ans. The wind blows where, and as
it lists, Joh. 3.8. the influence of the spirit is arbitrary, both as to the
seasons when, and the means whereby, it is conveyed: hence, not only are some
more enlarged in public and others in private, but also one and the same
believer may at one time be more fervent and importunat the one way, and at
another time the other way; and each of these Ordinances have their proper and
several advantages: For, first, in public the gifts of the speaker, and his
affectionat moving and pithy words and manner of expression; as also, the
reverence and zeal of others joining in the duty, may be very helpful and
instrumental in stirring up the affections; and then in private, there is, 1.
more liberty in dealing with our own hearts, and rousing them up by some
awakning meditation; and, 2. greater freedom in laying out our condition and
expressing our desires before the Lord; 3. the whole frame of the duty more
condescending and suitable to our disposition and exigence; 4. fewer
distractions, etc.

You will say, it is commonly made, by practical Divines, a mark of hypocrisy
to be more enlarged in public then in private. Ans. That mark is especially to
be understood of the speaker, and that, 1. when it is always so, and when all
his enlargement is in public; and thus, 2. when the motives and end is selfish
and carnal, as respect from, and the applause of, men, etc. But otherwise, both
speaker and hearer may meet with more then ordinary enlargement, by the
blessing of the Lord, upon the public Ordinance.

A third question may be this, Whether it be a mercy to have our prayers
answered, and to receive the particulars we ask, when we are cold and formal in
prayer, and careless and negligent in our walk and conversation? Ans. We may
judge by the event; for such a dispensation may either, 1. flow from wrath, not
pure, (for we do not now speak of the success and prosperity of the wicked) but
paternal, penal, by way of castigation, yea, and in some respect judicial; for
thus, for a while, they are lulled asleep, and are ready to rest in that state
and to be satisfied with such empty performances, because they are accompanied
with success: and as Apostat Israel, while in prosperity, said of their
enjoyments, These are my rewards which my lovers have given me, Hos. 2.12. So
the Saints themselves, in a fit of distemper, and while under desertion, may
think such a dispensation to be a fruit and evidence of love, whileas it were
better for them to have their way hedged up with thorns, that they might go and
return to their former love, zeal and diligence, Hos. 2.6, 7. These outward
things cannot Est honum quod faciat bonum, and est bo^um undo facias bonum --
habes ergo aurum bonum est, habes non unde fis bonus, sed unde facias bonum,
August. de verb. doos. sermon. 5*
make us good and happy, and therefore only are good, and become blessings
indeed, when they are improven aright, and then only are given in love, when
with the blessing and grace to use them to a right end.

Or, 2. such a dispensation may flow from love, and that, as it may be an
evidence of God's patience, forbearance and tender bowels, which will not be
straightened nor overcome by our ingratitude and manifold failings; So also, that
it may prove a mean to humble us and melt our hearts, when we consider and
compare our ways with the Lords dealing toward us, and when we see how
unequal our ways have been, and what a base requittal we have made to him for
his bounty and tender mercies; thus the Lord established his Covenant and dealt
kindly with Israel, that they might remember and be confounded, and never open
their mouth any more, because of their shame, when they should see his kindness
and tender bowels toward them, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 62, 63.

CHAP. III. Whether we may pray for any evil, either of sin or suffering.
Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy Statutes. Romans 3.8. As we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that
we say, let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is just.
HAving Part. 1. Chapter 7. Sect. 2:
shown, that the object of the promises and of our prayers is very ample and
large, extending to every thing that is good, either for life or godliness, we
(b) promised to enquire here, whether any evil, either of sin or suffering were
included in the promise, and might be desired and prayed for? And, I think,
none will deny, that every evil, as such, and absolutely considered, is an
object of hatred and aversation, and an object of the threatenings, and so not
of the promises; and therefore, a fit material for deprecation and imprecation,
but not for prayer and supplication. And on the other hand, I hope, it will not
be denied, that as to evil of affliction we may pray for it, 1. conditionally
thus; If my heart be so stubborn and hard, that nothing will break it but the
rod, if mercies will but harden my heart and prove fuel to feed my lusts, Lord
rather let me have the rod then a hard heart, and let me rather want mercies
and such and such creature-enjoyments, (which is a sort of rod, and may be a
very grievous affliction) then they should prove weapons of unrighteousness.
And thus, 2. we may pray for such an evil comparatively, (for, with the former
supposition, there was a sort of comparison) and we may say, Lord rather let me
suffer then sin against thee, let me rather lie under any rod and affliction,
then under thy wrath for ever: and, with the Emperor Hic non in illo seculo,
Cluver. hist. in Maurit, page 407.
Mauritius, choose to suffer rather here, then in the life to come; nay, and of
temporal evils, we may thus choose the less, Nam licet ex duobus malis culpa
neutrum, paenae tamen minimum est eligendum. All the controversy then seems to
stand in this, Whether we may pray for any evil, either of sin or suffering,
(for to one of those two heads may every evil be referred) relatively, and in
reference to some good and necessary end? That though neither of these two be
good and desirable of themselves, yet, since God, by them, and from them, may
bring good to us, and may make them means to humble us and to cause us walk
more circumspectly, may we not desire and pray for them in so far as they may
be subservient to such an end? Ans. We needed not have moved such a question,
were it not, that some weak Saints, upon a mistake, may be ready to pray thus
for some rod or affliction; and that the great school-man Non est intrinsece
malum petere hujusmodi mala vel sibi vel aliis, nam haec mala erunt simpliciter
bona si honesta ratione, and propter finem simplii^ter bonum appetantur --
Fatetur tamen hunc m^dum orandi fortasse non esse omnibus consulendum, cum ipso
Paulus ter Dominum rogaveritue stimulo carnis affligeretur, Suar. loc. cit lib.
1. cap. 19.
Suarez affirms, that we may desire and ask thus, not only evils of
suffering, both to our selves and others, but also temptations. As for his
arguments, they deserve no reply, and he makes it his work neither to prove,
nor vindicat, but to explain and illustrat this his assertion. But for
establishing a right directory of prayer, and for preventing a mistake of the
weaker; we shall, 1. bring some arguments for confirmation, and then, 2. answer
such objections as we conceived might readily occur, or become an occasion of
error: and because the main question will be concerning afflictions (for few
or none, I think, will be so impudent as to affirm, that we should desire, or
pray for strength to sin, albeit Suarez does mention temptations to sin,
amongst those evils he affirms we may pray for, and speaks of Paul's
temptation, 2 Cor. 12. as a thing he might have desired) therefore we shall
speak at greater length of suffering and affliction, and only add a word
concerning sin, and temptations to sin.

Mat. 6.13.) that we may be How we may, and should deprecat evils both of fin
and suffering. See Mr. Gurnal, loc. cis. page 491. and seq.
delivered from evil of whatsoever nature, whether of sin or suffering; and our
Lord Jesus, who knew well what to ask, what to deprecat, not only thus teaches
us by his doctrine, and that copy he has left us, but also by his example to
deprecat the cup of suffering and affliction, Mat. 26.39. I deny not, that the
Lord can, and often does sanctify the furnace to his children, but they
themselves must not choose nor cast themselves into that furnace, but if the
Lord determine their particular trial, and call them in his wise providence to
encounter it, they should not faint, nor repine, but should submit to the
dispensation, and look up to God for the right and sanctified use of it, and
for some good of, and fruit by the trial; but that not being the proper and
inseparable effect of the rod, and the Lord being able by mercies to work the
same, yea, and without any outward dispensation, by the immediate operation of
the Spirit on the heart, why should we make choice of such a rough and
troublesome way, and take a bitter potion, and draw blood when pleasant cordials
will do the turn? Hence,

King, 6.30. to fall upon this desperate conclusion, ver. 33. this evil is of
the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? How it sent Saul (once 1 Samuel ^0.9.10.
among the Prophets) to the witch at Endor, and at length made him fall upon
his own sword, 1 Samuel 28.8. 1 Samuel 31.4. And how often it made the people of
Israel in the wilderness to murmur and rebel against the Lord; nay, as many
rods and trials as they were exercised with, so often did they miscarry and
provoke the Lord.

keeping our Job, 5.24.
tabernacle in peace, and accordingly the Saints from time to time have made
conscience to perform this duty, and it is a provoking sin not to acknowledge
his bounty, nor ascribe to him the praise of these outward mercies, and for
which he is often provoked to remove them in wrath. Hence,

Psa. 50.15. Jam. 5.13. etc. And when the Saints remember their former
enjoyments, Job, chap. 29. they look upon them as great mercies, and their
present affliction as a sore and sad trial; and oh! (says Job) that I were as
in months past, as in the days when God preserved me, etc.

5. That which we may not procure nor bring on, but on the contrary should
labor and strive against, and use all lawful means for withholding when it is
feared, and removing when it is felt, I think few will join with Mr Collings in
his cordials, Part, 2. Sermon. 11. where he seems to candemn all disquietment
of spirit, all sorrow and trouble for external and temporal things as sinful;
unless by sorrow he understand the excess and distemper of that affection,
which was acted by Christ purely and without sin, Mat. 26.38. as for his
reason, viz. that our nature is so corrupt that we cannot act such a sorrow,
but we shall sin: If it were concludent here, it would as well conclude the
acting of all the other affections of the soul to be sinful, and that they
should be abandoned; but we would rather think, with this Author, Sermon 2 Page
16, that believers must not be stocks, altogether senceless of Gods judgments,
and dispensations toward them: As for these sinful grounds and effects of
this sorrow which be mentions, Page 141, 142, 144. these may, and should be
guarded against: But why does he not as well condemn all fear as sinful? there
will be found to be parity of reason here; and yet he pleads for such a kind of
fear as not being sinful See Sermon 2.
sorrow, that we may not desire and pray for; we Quomodo Paulus desideraverit
mortem, quam sibi infer non liciut statim videbimus
must not set our hands a work against our heart and tongue, nor make our
prayers and endeavors to be at such variance and contrariety; but we may not
procure afflictions, nor cast our selves in the furnace, but should use the
means for keeping us from, and bringing our feet out of the fetters; the law of
God and nature obliges us to the duty of self-defence and preservation from
such evils; we will not rashly condemn the practice of holy men of old, those
eminent Martyrs who in the time of persecution did offer themselves to the
flames, not knowing but they might have been stirred up by an heroic and
extraordinary impulse; the Lord intending to make their ashes the seed of the
Church, for as their courage and zeal did strengthen their brethren, and
encourage them to stand, So it invited strangers to come and embrace the faith;
but their practice is no warrant to others, not being in the like case, nor so
moved and strengthened to follow their foot steps, and even among them, some by
their fall, did leave us a warning to mind our own frailty, and not to be rash
in running upon trials without a call, least our courage fail us while we are
in the waters: And thus, though the great Physician can extract honey out of
the sowrest herbs, and make the most bitter pills medicinal and healthful to
us, yet we are not licenciat to take and prescribe to our selves such a remedy;
as nature first and last, sinless and corrupt, abhors such a course and
diet, So the Lord whose commands are equal and full of condescension, has not
made that an object of our choice and desire; neither will he prescribe a
bitter potion, when cordials are more pertinent, he (k) does not afflict
willingly; and there is no time when we can say, that the rod would do us more
good then mercies, and therefore we must never take upon us to determine, and
to prescribe to our selves that which the only Physician of souls has reserved
in his own hand; but supposing his appointment* and while in his holy
providence he calls us to suffer, we are commanded to submit, and patiently
bear the chastisement of the Lord, to hearken to the voice of the rod, and to
improve it as our talent; but thus it is not made an object of love and desire,
but is left to be the matter, and an occasion to exercise our patience,
submission and faith; and thus while we are in the furnace, we should pray for
the sanctified use of it; and before we be called to the trial, we should
prepare for it, and pray that the Lord would fit us for, and do us good by
every rod and trial he purposes to exercise us with, and would make these as
well as our mercies contribute for, and all work together for our good,
according to that word, Romans 8.28.

Obj. 1. What God promises, that we may pray for, but the Lord promised to
hedge up the way of his ancient people with thorns and by cross dispensations
to drive them in to their first husband, Hos. 2.6, 7. This is clear (says a
late Author) from Psa. 89.31, 32. where in the midst of the promises, that of
visiting their iniquities with rods, is put in the bosom: and if it were
believed, that crosses were the accomplishment of the promises, it would help a
Christian to much humble submission, and holiness under the cross. Ans. In both
these Scriptures, as frequently elsewhere, threatenings are mixed with promises,
and both may well be said to belong to the covenant; the promises as its
object, yea, rather as its integral parts, and the threatenings as the hedge to
keep us within the bounds of the covenant, and as a cord (though sharp) to draw
us back when we step aside, and do not perform the conditions to which the
promises are annexed; and thus both threatenings and rods (which are the
execution of threatenings) to the Saints may be called evangelical, as
proceeding from the same fountain from which the promises do flow, and having a
like gracious event and effect; afflictions to them, loss, as it were, their
nature and name; and though in themselves they still continue to be bitter and
evil, yet to them they prove good, they are fatherly chastisements, and
medicinal corrosives, and still the object of the threatening, though as to the
sanctified use of them, and the good reaped by them, they may fall under a
promise indirectly, and in obliquo. But thus not the rod it self, but the fruit
of it, is the proper object of the promise, and this may be desired and prayed
for.

You will say, that the Saints are afflicted in faithfulness, Psa. 119.75. and
therefore their crosses must be an accomplishment of some promise. Ans.
Fidelity and faithfulness appears as well in accomplishing threatenings as
promises; and thus the Psalmist in the words cited explaineth their scope,
while he says, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, viz. according to
thy righteous threatenings; and thus he justifies the Lord in all the evil
afflictions and trials he had met with.

2. Obj. What is good may be desired, and may be the object of the promise; but
afflictions were good to David, for, says he, It is good for me that I have
been afflicted, ver. 71. and gives his reason, ver. 67. and 71. before I was
afflicted, I went astray, but now. etc. And we may here again argue thus. That
which is matter of praise to God, because he has done it, may be a fit
material of our prayers to him, and we may desire that he would do it; but if
we view that context, we will find the Psalmist there collecting and gathering
together motives and grounds of praise, and he reckons his afflictions as not
the least. Ans. The Prophet calls not his afflictions good, they being of
themselves evil and bitter, and for removing of which, he prayed most
frequently and fervently, and praised God when, and because he removed them,
but he says, that it was good for him that he was afflicted, thus pointing out
the sanctified use and fruit of the rod, for which he had reason to praise God;
yea, and now all things being considered, it was better for him that he was
afflicted, then if he had seen no evil; 1. because the evil of the rod was now
past, but the fruit remained; 2. because that good reaped by it being
spiritual, did counter-ballance, yea, and far exceed the evil of the cross; it
did not only make a compensation, but was as gold instead of brass and dross:
But yet still the rod in it self was evil, and not to be desired without a
revelation concerning the necessity and fruit of it, which none can pretend to,
but must wait till the event make that manifest: And as we should praise God
for the sanctified use of the rod, So upon supposition we are to meet with it,
we may pray for the same,

3. Obj. That which is an evidence of Gods love, and a character of our
blessedness, that we may desire and ask; but afflictions are such, Rev. 3.19.
Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. Psa. 94, 12. Ans. Not the rod simply considered, but the
sanctified use of the rod, is an evidence of love, and of our happiness; Hence
in the words, Psa. 94.12. we have something added to the rod to make it a
complete character of our state, blessed is the man thou chastenest, and
teaches out of thy law. As if it had been said, albeit the rod alone and
without the blessing, can do no good, yet when it is sanctified, etc. And while
the Apostle says, that if we be without chastisement we are bastards, and not
sons, he points out the necessity of the cross, both because of our readiness
to idolize our mercies, if we meet with no warning, as also because of Gods
appointment, that now under the Gospel we should have spiritual mercies in
greater abundance then the Jewish Church, but not such a constant affluence of
outward things; but not as if we might choose the rod wherewith we should be
chastised, or desire and pray for such a particular cross, at such or such a
time.

You will say, but may we not then in the general pray for the cross, leaving
the particular to Gods choice? Ans. No, we may not, for as we know not what, So
neither if any rod would do us good; and yet we need not fear least we be
bastards for want of chastisements; no Saint ever (I think did, or,) shall want
more or fewer, greater or smaller crosses, though they did not meet or prevent
them, nor desire or pray for them.

4. Obj. That which we may lawfully desire, that we may pray for; but we may,
with Paul, Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. desire to be dissolved and depart, and to
have the earthly house of this tabernacle pulled down; and if we may desire to
encounter with death, that king of terrors, why not also with any other rod?
Ans. The Apostle does not make choice of a rod wherewith he might be whipped,
only he could be content the day were prevented, and tells us what he could
choose if the circumstance of time were referred to his determination; for
death is not a rod of our choosing, It being appointed for all men once to die,
Heb. 9.27. Neither did Paul love and desire death, there being nothing in it
amiable and desirable, for of its self it is a separation of two near and most
intimate friends, the soul and body, and has most unwelcome forerunners,
companions and consequents, viz. pain, sickness, the corruption of the body,
etc. But Paul desired by any means, and upon any terms to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23. he did not absolutely, but only comparatively desire death, being willing
rather to encounter with death (though grievous and terrible) then that bar and
impediment should hinder him from a full and immediate fruition Christ; the
terrors of death, the dark chambers of the grave, and the corruption of the
body were nothing terrible to him, these Anakims could not discourage him who
longed so much to take possession of the land of promise; the first fruits he
had tasted were so sweet, that he accounted nothing too costly that might bring
him to see the harvest; he was content to breakfast on sour herbs, that he
might have at dinner a well furnished table that would never be drawn; the
Apostle knew well what to choose and desire, he looked on death as an evil and
most formidable enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26, 55. he Concedit enim nor praesentis vitae
solutionem per se naturaliter fugere; quemadmodum nemo se libenter patitur exui
suis vestibus, sed post^^ subjungis naturalem mortis horrorem superari a
fiducia, sicuti non difficulter vestem pannosam, sordidam, detritam,
laceramdenique quivis abj^ciet ut eliganti, nitida nova, durabili ornetur --
fideles sciunt se corpore incluses teneri tanquam ergastulo, ide^ hac vita
gravantur quod in ca potiri verae and penfecta beatitudinis nequeunt quod
peceati servitutem non nisi morte possunt effugere, etc. Calvin, in 1 Cor. 5.4.
desired not it as it was an uncloathing of him, but as it made way for his
better clothing, 2 Cor. 5.4. he knew it was necessary he should cast off the
old rags of the body, before he could put on the rich robes of glory and
immortality; he was willing to die, that mortality might be swallowed up of
life; he longed to see death, as it was the jaylour which only could open the
prison door of sin, misery, mortality, absence from the Lord, etc. And thus his
desire was not properly terminated in death, only the terror of death did not
quench his thirst after a full enjoyment of Christ; and yet we might yield,
that he desired death, 1. conditionally, and since there was no other way for
him to attain his happiness; he knew this to be a necessary mean for his
attaining his end, and upon the supposition of its necessity, by virtue of
divine appointment, he might be said to will and desire it: 2. He might be said
to desire death comparatively, it being better to encounter that enemy, then to
have his perfect happiness suspended; he was willing, as he professes, 2 Cor.
5.8. rather to be absent from the body for a while: And that we might, 1.
conditionally; 2. Et quod sic desideramus non semper licet facere.
comparatively desire such an evil, we granted in the entry, and thus
conditionally and comparatively we may not only desire death, but also a total
annihilation and destruction, it being more Quod praeste^ non esse quam miserum
esse multis demonstrat Barlow contra Durandum, Exercit. Metaph. exer. 1.1 and
in terminis determinata videtur hac contraversia a Domino, Mat. 26.24. quamvis
Doctis, Twissus, vind lib. 2. dig. 1. putet (crvatorem locutum secundum
judicium bominum, non rectam sed erroneum.
eligible and better not to be, then to be in perpetual misery, Mat. 26.24. We
might here also allege Moses his desire, that his name should rather be
blotted out of Gods book, then that Gods name should be blasphemed by the
heathen, who should hear that he had brought his people out of Egypt to destroy
them in the wilderness; yea, and rather then the whole body of that people
should be destroyed, Exodus 32. And Paul his wish, that he rather were accursed
from Christ, then that his brethren and kinsmen should perish, Romans 9. But
these two practices being rather for admiration then imitation, (such a height
and measure of Zeal to Gods glory and for the happiness and salvation of his
people. Where there is no hazard of excess in our affection, we cannot be too
zealous for God, nor too desirous of the well fare of his people.
zeal being scarce attainable, since it cannot be affirmed that any other ever
did, or shall in this life, come their length) David his desire and prayer, 1
Chr. 21.17. is very considerable in the present case; Let thine hand (says
this holy man) be on me and on my fathers house, but not (or rather then) on
thy people, that they should be plagued. It is true, he had sinned and deserved
to be punished; but whatever were his motives, we see this holy man prefer the
good of Gods people to his own personal interest, and desire that the rod
should be rather on himself and his family, then on the body of the people.

But abstracting from such high and holy ends, and when the comparison is only
between some evil or temporal rod lying upon us, and some other evil which may
rid us out of the present trouble, if the Saints should desire any such evil by
way of remedy, such a desire must be sinful; the object being evil in it self,
and not determined as a necessary and the only mean for removing the present
evil, which perhaps is less in it self and less dangerous; and so the end being
base and low, and the root and principle sinful and carnal, such as pride,
passion, impatience, distrust and the like, I hope none will plead for such a
desire, though in the most eminent Saints, as in Job, chapter 6.8, 9. in Moses,
Numb. 11.15. in Jonah, chapter 4.39. in Eliah, 1 King. 19.4. in Jeremiah, chapter
20.14, 15, 16, 17. etc. For, though Job was a pattern of patience, Jam. 5.11.
Moses of meekness, Numb. 12.3. and Eliah of confidence, 1 King. 18. yet they
were subject to infirmities, even there where they were strongest; and those
slips and fits of passion and impatience are left on record, to be, 1. a
warning to us of our frailty, that we may learn to be humble, watchful and
circumspect; 2. to be as a beacon on the rock which we should shun; and, 3. to
teach us that our imitation of men, though eminent for holiness, should be with
a limitation and with caution, that we must only follow them when, and so far
as they follow Christ and walk by rule.

But though some weak Saints may miscarry on the one hand, by presuming on Gods
care and bounty, that he will bless such a severe course of physic as they
prescribe to themselves without his warrant and approbation; Yet, alas! it is
more usual to miscarry on the other hand; So that we need not stay long in
debating this case: all of us have a monitor within which will be too ready to
warn us of our danger, loss and bodily evil, and will be ready to call to us to
spare our selves, when the Lord does call us to suffer, and when his glory and
our everlasting happiness do cry to us not to Rev. 12.11.
love our lives unto the death, and when if we Mat. 16.25.
save our life we will lose it.

And since we may not wish evil to our selves, that the Lord may turn it to our
good, far less may we thus wish evil to others, with whose comforts and
creature-enjoyments, we have not such power to dispense as with our own, and of
the frame of whose hearr we know less, and of their readiness to abuse mercies.
As also, since here there may be some suspicion of malice, envy, etc. ah! who
would look upon him as a genuine son of Zion, who under the pretense that the
affliction of the Church has often proven a mean of reformation, humiliation,
etc. would wish and pray that her calamities might be multiplied or continued?
If these shall prosper that love and pray for her peace, Ps. 122.6. what shall
be their portion that under whatsoever color dare pray for her trouble?

3. As for evils of sin, who will be so mad as to plead, that these are
desirable; these laid the foundation of hell, and made Angels, once glorious,
become devils; these defaced the beautiful Image of God in man, and robbed him
of all his excellencies; these are the grand murderers that kill both body and
soul, and daily thrust multitudes into the pit; these are the procurers of all
our ^wo and misery here and hereafter; and yet, how many love and embrace these
scorpions, till they sting them to death, but yet secretly, and as stolen
wares, few being so impudent as to own and defend (though too many will excuse)
their sins, far less dare any pray to God for help to sin against him: sin is
an evil, August. loc. cit. page 486. vid. loc.
an only evil, there is nothing in it amiable or desirable; it is true, God can
bring light out of darkness, and make the lancet of an enemy to open a sore
that despised all remedy. Hence, (s) Austin durst affirm, that it might
sometimes be profitable to some Saints to fall into some gross sin, to humble
them and awaken them out of their security: No doubt the Lord can make the
consideration of our sins to humble us, and become more watchful and
circumspect, and thus even make our sins Romans 8.28.
work together for our good; which is a demonstration of the wisdom and power
of the Physician, and proclaims his mercy and tender bowels toward us, that
of our venom and poison he can, and sometimes will, make to us a healing
plaster; but this is no warrant to us to prescribe such a medicine for our
selves, we may not de evil, that good may come, Romans 3.8.

CHAP. IV. Of cursing and imprecations. Whether it be lawful to pray for
vengeance on the wicked, and on persecuters?
Romans 12.14. Bless them which persecute you, bless and curse not.
THere be Having in the preceding Chapter enquired, Whether we may desire any
evil to our selves or to the people of God, we come now to ask, Whether we may
wish and pray for any evil to the wicked and to our enemies?
here several particulars that need not be brought under debate; as that we may
pray against, 1. the sins of men, and say, with him, Ps. 7.9. Oh! let the
wickedness of the wicked come to an end. 2. Against the plots, counsels,
machinations and interprises of the wicked against the Saints and people of
God, his Truth and Ordinances, and say, with him, 2 Samuel 15.31. O Lord, I pray
thee, defeat the counsel of Ahithophel and turn it into foolishness. And, Ps.
9.19. Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail. 3. Neither will it be denied, that we
may complain to God of all the wrongs and injuries, of the cruelty,
persecution, threatenings and blasphemies of the wicked, with Hezekiah, Isa. 37.
David, Ps. 10. the Apostles, Act. 4.29. etc. And this complaint will be found
to have something of an imprecation in it; hence, while Eliah is thus
complaining to God, and lamenting Isreal's apostasy, the Apostle says, that he
makes intercession against Israel, Romans 11.2, 3. Neither, 4. will it be
denied, that we may pray the Lord to break the snare of prosperity and success
in any evil course, whereby as with chains Satan holds them at his work; nay,
and upon supposition that otherwise they would prove incorrigible, and if there
be no other mean to reclaim them, we may not only pray, that the Lord would not
further their wicked device, Psa. 140.8. but also, 5. that they might not
prevail, and meet with success in the ordinary works of their hands; yea, and
that the Lord would fill their faces with shame, that they may know themselves
to be but men, and might seek his name, Psa. 83.16. And, 6. we may pray that
justice may be impartially executed upon malefactors, that King and Rulers
would resolve, with David, early to cut off all wicked doers from the city of
the Lord, Psa. 101.8. We must so love the life of wicked men, as not to prefer
that to Gods law, and the laudable laws of the kingdom, appointing capital
punishment for gross crimes and heinous transgressors, that others may be
afraid to follow their footsteps.

On the other hand its certain, that we may not curse, 1. without a cause,
Prove. 26.2. Nor, 2. for our own cause, and because of private and personal
wrongs done to us; we should thus forgive our brethren, and not give way to the
spirit of malice and revenge, Mat. 6.15. and 18.35. etc. And. 3. we must not
curse our relations, nor cast off these bonds, whether natural, civil, or
spiritual, under which we stand toward others; children must not upon any
terms curse their parents, nor parents their children; people must not curse
their rulers and magistrates, nor one Saint another, notwithstanding personal
wrongs and injuries mutually received, Exodus 31.17. Mat. 15.4. Exodus 22.28. 1
Cor. 13.7. 1 Cor. 6.7. etc. And therefore, that cursed crew of passionat
creatures, who for a trifle will give their children, servants, or neighbors
to the devil, must have their tongues set on fire of hell, Jam. 3.6. and they
must be acted by the devil, who is the father of envy, malice, virulency, and
of all such cursing, Jam. 3.14, 15.

These things being premised, that which may here fall under debate, is whether
we may pray against, though not as they are our enemies, yet as they are Gods
enemies, and the Churches enemies, and though not for their eternal ruin (as
may appear from Part 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 3.) yet for their temporal destruction
and overthrow, and that either indefinitly, not pitching upon any particular
incorporation, or persons, with Deborah, 5.31. So let all thine enemies perish,
O Lord; and with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be anathema maranatha. Or particularly directing our prayers
against such and such enemies, as Judge. 5.23. and when there is thus an
application to such and such persons, whether we might curse them conditionally
though not absolutely, especially if with the condition a blessing be annexed
thus [Lord if these thine enemies be incorrigible, destroy them in thy justice,
and if not, reclaim them in thy mercy.] Here, I grant, there are far different
cases, and that there is less hazard in praying against Gods enemies, then
against our own enemies; and in the general, chen condescending upon such or
such a faction; and by way of supposition, If they be incorrigible, then
absolutely, and upon any terms: Neither would I rashly condemn those learned
and judicious Divines, who plead for the lawfulness of such maledictions, yet I
should think it a more Gospellike frame of spirit, to bless and pray for
persecutors, then to curse them, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. 1 Pet. 3.9. This wants
not that example that Christ left us to follow when he suffered, 1 Pet. 2.21.
But on the contrary, he left us this pattern, When we are reviled, not to
revile again, and when we suffer, not to threaten, but to commit our selves and
our cause to him that judges righteously, ver. 23. What? are not all men our
brethren and Proxim us est omnis homo. vid. Ames. loc. cit. part. 1. cap. 7.
qui fratrem suum oderit homicida est hoc loco fratrem omnem hominem oportet
intelligi, etc. August. de sancti, etc.
neighbors? and should we not then love them, and wish their good? how shall
we then curse them, and desire their ruin? and if we will not forgive them
their injuries done to us, how can we say, for give us our sins, as we forgive
them that sin against us? But if we would bless them, and pray for them, that
would be an evidence of our sincerity, and that we had overcome that devil of
malice and revenge that rages in carnal hearts, Mat. 5.45, 48. Romans 12.19, 20.
Did not Christ at his death pray for his persecutors? Luke 23.34. and Stephen
for those who stoned him? Act. 7.60. And did not David fast and pray for his
enemies (though at other times, upon some special account he prayed against
them?) Psa. 35.13. Nay, we may here allege the example of Pagans, when the
Athenians commanded their priest to curse Alcibiades after he was condemned;
nay, says she, for I Precibus non imprecationihus constituta sum sacerdos,
apud Wendelin Philos. mor. lib. 1. cap. 10.
was not consecrated a priest to Or by cursing but by prayer.
curse, but to bless?

But you will say, may we not pray that temporal judgments may be inflicted on
persecutors; yea, and that they may fall and never rise again to molest and vex
the Saints? Ans. There would be a difference put between private persons, and a
faction or multitude; for though we may desire that a malefactor may suffer
according to the law, yet we may not desire the ruin of a multitude; for
though it be an act of justice in the magistrate whom the Lord commissionateth
and sends against such a party, to fight against them, yet that sentence cannot
be so orderly and deliberately executed against them, as when a process is
legally led against a malefactor; and such a dispensation may prove a mean,
through the Lords blessing to prevent eternal ruin; but when a wicked faction
are killed in battle, death eternal usually follows their bodily death and
overthrow. Yet I deny not, that we should pray for success to the magistrate in
such an expedition, and that his enemies may not stand before him; but thus we
do it only comparatively, that since matters stand thus, that either they or
the magistrate must fall, we are warranted to pray, that rather they meet with
the stroke of justice, then that the magistrate and those who are with him
should be overthrown in the discharge of their duty; yet abstracting from such
an alternative, we should not desire the sudden death and ruin of enemies, but
rather that they may be scattered and taken captives, and have time to repent;
the rejoicing of the Saints is not their ruin, but in the deliverance of the
people of God, and the manifestation of the glory of God in helping his
servants, and making the Ps. 76.10.
rage of man to praise him, etc. And there is no question, but that
comparatively, and rather we may desire and pray that enemies may fall and be
ruined, then that they should prevail and oppress the Church, and blaspheme the
holy name of God.

Again, 2 Obj.
it may be objected, that there be many instances recorded in the word of
curses and maledictions uttered by the Saints against their enemies, and on the
wicked, as Deuteronomy. 27.14. etc, 2 Samuel 3.29. Psa. 59.12, 13, 14, 15. Psa. 69.22.
etc. Psa. 83.11. etc. Psa. 109.6. etc. Psa. 143.12. Jerem. 17.18. Lam. 3.64.
Hos. 9.14. Act. 8.20. etc. Ans. We will not say, with August. contra Faustum
and lib 1. deserm. Domini in morte, cap. 42. optativo (inquit) modo usi sunt
pro indicatiro.
Austine, that these were verba sive praedicantium, sive praedicentium, non
vota imprecantium. And that these holy men did speak so either by way of
prophecy and prediction, or by way of commination and denounciation of Gods
righteous judgments against implacable enemies; for the words are so clear,
that they will admit no such gloss: But we answer, that all that is recorded in
the Scriptures concerning the Saints, is not for our imitation; 1. not their
sins and infirmities, which are set down rather to be our warning and copy; and
as to the present case, who will justify Numb, 11.15. Job, 6.9. 1 King, 19.4.
Jer. 20.15, 17. Jon. 4.3.
Moses, Job, Eliah, Jeremiah and Jonah, their praying against themselves, and
cursing the day wherein they were born, and the man who brought tidings of
their birth, etc. 2. Neither what they did upon some special occasion or
warrant, as in the present case they might not only, 1. know who were
implacable enemies and devoted to destruction; but also, 2. have some
particular command, or some special impression and impulse upon their spirit,
moving and warranting them to pray for such and such judgments to be poured out
upon such and such enemies, and then we may suppose, that such prayers poured
out by such eminent Saints and Prophets upon such grounds and motives, did flow
from a pure zeal to the glory of God, without any mixture of carnal passion,
malice and revenge. O! but its hard for us to pray against Gods enemies,
especially if they be our enemies, and have wronged us, unless our hearts burn
with wrath, envy and rage: and therefore it would appear to be safest for us
not to follow such extraordinary practices, but to walk by the rule commanding
us to bless, and not to curse; especially since, 1. we can expect no revelation
concerning the final state of any, and so may be ready to curse some elect ones
whom the Lord purposes to bless; and, 2. we cannot expect any extraordinary
motion and impulse upon our spirits, unless it come from hell, or from our
lusts; ye know not (says our blessed Lord to some of his disciples, who out of
a preposterous zeal to imitate Elias, would have called for fire from heaven to
consume the Samaritans, for not receiving their Master) what manner of spirit
ye are of, Luke 9.55. Let such then as will take upon them to imitat the
Prophets in their extraordinary actings, be sure that they are led by the same
spirit, and that they can produce the like warrant: But as for humble
Christians, who dare not Ps. 131 ^^
exercise themselves in things too high for them, they would consider, that the
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1.20. Our wrath and
malice against men, may provoke the Lord to become as an enemy to us, and may
hinder the execution of his righteous judgments against them, but it can do us
no good and them no hurt; O! but if we render good for evil, and blessing for
cursing, then will the Lord bless us, and do us good, 1 Pet. 3.9. and it may be
no small comfort to us when we are suffering by them, if, with the Prophet, we
can say, remember, O Lord, that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and
to turn away thy wrath from them who had dug a pit for my soul, Jerem.
18.20. Nay, according to the son of Eccles. 21.27.
Sirack, we must not curse Satan, and who curses him curses his own soul;
and the Scriptures of truth tells us, that Michael the Archangel durst not
bring against him a railing accusation; and shall we then dare to bring any
railing accusation against our brethren and neighbors? When (says Tu quis es
qui non diligis? utique tu qui oras ut homo moriatur, malus or as contra malum,
and facti est is duo mali, ille male agendo, tu, male orando; tu malus orando
incipis esse quando dicis, Deus occide malum -- te facis judicem and Deum
quaeris esse tortorem, respondet tibi Deus, nonue me in tuis malis operibus
irritasti, etc. quare si voluntatem tuam haberem, te prius occiderem antequam
venires, si tunc te occidissem inimicum, quia ergo male orande deces me quod
non feci in te? etc. August. de sanctis sermon. 4. tom. 10. fol. 256.
Austin thou prayest for evil to thine enemy, thou thy self becomest evil, as
he was evil by doing wrong, So thou now by praying wrong; and now thou take
to thee Gods office, and becomest a judge pronouncing the sentence, and would
have him to be the executioner and lictor; but if the Lord had thus dealt with
thee when thou wronged him and became his enemy, thou had not now been to
complain of thy brother, ah! why do thou desire the Lord to do that to
others, which he has not done to thee? were it not better to imitate our
Savior on the cross, pitying and praying for his enemies, etc.

CHAP. V. When, how often, and how long, or how much time should be spent in
prayer?
1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing
WE shall speak to the first two branches of the question jointly, When, and
how often.
both being determined by the Apostle, while he exhorteh us to pray
continually, (...) indesinenter, sine interusissione.
or without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. And our blessed Lord Jesus propounds a
parable to this very purpose and end, that men ought (...), semper, hac
partitula (inquit liegh) and de loco and de tempore dicitur.
always to pray, and not faint, Luke 18.1. so also, Luke 21.36. And the
Apostle, Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.2. etc. But you will say, what is that
to pray always and without ceasing. Ans. 1. We need not spend much time in
confuting the old, (...) preces.
Euchites, Ab (...) lauds bona verba.
Euphemits, and (...) orare chald. inde methsalim in beno ni, piel pr^antes and
Graeci (...) causa Tsade in geminum ^igma com mutarunt.
Messalians, who are reckoned among the ancient heretics, because mistaking
the scope and genuine sense of these words, and looking to the mere letter,
they did from thence conclude, that Christians should spend all their time in
prayer, and never leave off that heavenly exercise. I find these poor deluded
men also called in reproach by many other names, as Because they honor one of
their number who was killed a soldier, and account him a famous Martyr.
Martyrians Because in their mad raptures, they are said to fancy themselves to
be Christ, or one of the Prophets, or Apostles.
Enthusiasts, yea, and Mr. Ross. (...). page 208. Alf. de Castro advers. haer.
lib. 11. page 747. and Mr. Ross affirms, that they worshipped the devil that
he might do them no burt. So also Danaeus in lib. August. de hares. in cap. 57.
Satanici. These are said to have lived under the Emperors Valentinian and
Valeus. I do not deny, that some subtle heretics to cloak their pernicious
errors, might plead for this conceit, as having a great show of zeal and
holiness; and thus Alf. loc. cit.
de Castro, Danaeus, Mr. Ross and others, do father upon the poor Euchites many
absurd and ridiculous opinions, but if any did only plead, that we should
continue in prayer without interruption, though I would pity such a one, as
being under a strange delusion, yet I would be loath to rank him in among the
heretics; it has been Satan's design from time to time to make many heretics
and schismatics, as by infusing the venom of pernicious errors into the
hearts of men, and sending them abroad to spread that deadly poison; so also by
stirring up the orthodox and zealous Christians (whom he and his instruments
were not able to seduce and draw from the truth) to over-do in opposing these
errors, as by mis-constructions, jealousies, bitter and approbrious speeches,
personal reflections, and upon the least difference in matters of religion to
account and call men heretics; thus making the breach greater, and driving
them (who in the Gal. 6.1.
spirit of meekness might have been gained and reclaimed) to strange courses
and practices, for the maintaining of which, they fell upon strange principles
and more dangerous errors then what at first occasioned the rent and schism:
As there be too many of the Popes canonized saints, of whom we may fear the
worst, So there may be many in heaven, who are standing in To speak nothing of
the popish heres^^graphers, where the orthodox and most eminent Christians are
reckoned to be the gressest heretics.
Ireneus, Austin, Epiphanius, and Theodoret their catalogue of heretics.

But to return to the error of the Euchites, 1. the practice of Christ and his
Apostles, of the Prophets, and of all the Saints in all ages; 2. the variety of
lawful callings, requiring a considerable part of time to be allowed for them;
3. the many talents we have received to be otherwise employed and laid out; 4.
the natural temper and condition of the body requiring daily refreshment, by
eating drinking, sleeping, and moderat recreations; 5. our manifold necessities
and wants, which must be supplied by our care, labor and diligence; 6. the
frailty and weakness of the strongest Saint on earth, and his inability to
presevere in spiritual exercises without intermission; 7. the several duties
both toward God and man, which we are obliged to perform in their season, and
when the Lord in his providence offers us an occasion, and calls us to the
doing of them; and, 8. the variety and multiplicity of other spiritual
exercises, as meditation, conference, hearing, reading, etc. do so clearly
discover the vanity of this dream, that we need not dwell any longer on that
head; especially since the experience of the owners and abetters of that error
(if The first relater upon a mistake might occasion the mistake of others, and
so from hand to hand it might come to us.
ever there were any such) might serve to convince them, how impossible it is
to walk by that rule for the space of one day.

But Alf. de Castro loc. cit. haer. 3. page 749.
Alfons. de Castro, with this mentions a far more dangerous heresy, which he
fathereth upon But he rests not on him, but will have Witcleff, Huss, Luther
and other orthodox Divines to maintain that impious tenet, viz. because they
assert the efficacy of divine providence, and upon this account he should have
proceeded to his brethren the Dominicans, who herein do join with orthodox
Divines.
Pelagius, viz. That it is needless and improfitable to pray to God, since we
are masters of our own lot, and have power and free will to do what we will:
Albeit we would be ashamed to undertake the vindication of Pelagius (though
supposed to be our countryman) knowing his doctrine to be most dangerous and
pernicious, yet it can hardly be thought, that he should have the impudence as
to profess such an abominable absurdity; but his writings not being extant, it
is not easy to determine what he maintained in this particular; but Jesuits
and Arminians, who are reputed to be his disciples, disclaim this impious
dream; albeit the orthodox by a just and necessary consequence labor to fasten
it upon them, as flowing from their principles concerning the power of free
will, and the indifferency and inefficacy of divine providence: And I should
think, that their patron Pelagius, can no otherwise otherwise be said to have
maintained the same; and the He cites Austin de haeresibus, and I find the
place he points at to be cap. 88. ubi haec habet Aug. destruunt etiam
orationes quas facit ecclesia sive pro infidelibus ut convertantur, sive pro
fidelibus ut augea^ur eis fides, and perseverent in ea haec quippe non a Deo
accipere: sed a seipsis homines habere tentendunt, haec Aug. de haer. cap. 88.
But I find a more full and particular testimony to this purpo e, Epist. 92.
which yet does only show that according to Pelagius doctrine, it will follow,
that two petitions of the Lords prayer are needless, viz. forgive us our sins,
and lead us not into temptation, nova haeresis and nimium perniciosa (inquit)
tempestas surgere inimicorum gratiae Christi caepit, qui nobis etiam dominicam
orari onem impiis disputationibus conantur auferre etc vid. loc. hinc.
epistolae etiam subscribunt patres Council. Milevitani, vid. etiam epist. 94.
testimony which a Castro cites from Austin, to prove this to have been
Pelagius opinion, does say no more, but that his doctrine did destroy the
necessity of prayer. But though there be few or none who have the forehead to
avouch such an atheistical tenet, yet alas! it is practically owned by too
many, and multitudes of orthodox professors are pestred with this heresy; for
all such as restrain prayer, and make no conscience to call upon God, do in
effect, and in Gods esteem, join with those Atheists, who said, it is vain to
serve God; and what should it profit us to pray to him? Mal. 3.14. Job. 21.15.

Having thus spoken a little to these two extremes, now come we to enquire more
narrowly after the meaning and genuine sense of the former exhortations, and to
satisfy the case propounded; and, 1. some Apud Salmeron com. in evang. tom. 7
tract. 31. in parab.
affirm, that the scope of these words is to persuade us to be liberal to the
poor, that they may always pray for us, that by their prayers procured by our
liberality and alms, we may be said to pray always: But, 1. many have not
whereupon to bestow so liberally to the poor; 2. neither do the poor always
pray for their berefactors; 3. if we speak of our ordinary beggars, their
lip-devotion and mock-prayers, is a grievous provocation, and a profanation of
the holy name of God; 4. we may not substitute a suffragan in the exercises of
religion, nor think that their actions shall be reckoned to us while we do not
concur and act with them, whatever profit may redound to us by the prayers of
others, yet this does not liberate us of any Or for any time, so that then we
may abstain, because others are employed for us
part of our duty to pray for our selves; the command to pray (as the other
commands and exhortations in the Word) is personal, and concerns every
particular man and woman, its a popish trick to substitute deputs in the
matters of God; such as will entrust their salvation to the care and diligence
of others, would take heed, least as others work for them, So they be crowned
for them: every one, without exception of whatsoever rank or degree, must Our
work is the way in which we must walk to heaven, but not our money (as Papists
dream) whereby we may purchase a possession there.
work out his own salvatton, Phil. 2.12.

2. Apud Salmer. loc. cit. page 194.
Others think that they may be said to pray always, who have resigned
themselves to God, and refer all their actions to his glory, who hearken to the
exhortation, 1 Cor. 10.31. and who endeavor in all their ways to approve
themselves to God, and whether they eat or drink, or whatsoever they do, to do
all to the glory of God; but this being so far sought, and so impertinent for
clearing the present difficulty, it deserves no refutation; especially since
it is so general, and no more concerns prayer then any other performance.

A third conjecture, much like to the former, is, that he Non desinit orare qui
non definit benefacere.
leaves not off to pray, who constantly does well. This is an old saying, and
brought by many for loosing the present knot; the most ancient writer of those,
I have known thus to interpret those Scriptures, is the famous Aug. loc. infra
cit.
Austin, and he who wrote Gloss ord. in Luke 18 1. and 1 These. 5.17.
the old gloss, whom the We should pray always by faith, hope and charity, and
by working the things that he acceptable to God. Rhemist. on Luke 18.1. vid.
etiam Aug. epist. 121. cap. 9. and Beda in Luc. 18.
Rhemists and several other popish commentators do follow. But thus faith is
confounded with other duties, and the scope and sense of the words grossy Sed
quamvis non incpte dici possent oper^ hona genus quoddam orationis, quoniam
Deum ad misericordiam provocants, quemadmodum and mala opera clamaent a a Deum,
and iram ac furorem ejus accendunt, tamen hoc non proprie Dominum voluisse, cum
ait oportet sempet orare perspicuum est, etc. Bellat. loc. cit. cop. 9.
mistaken, which do clearly hold out and recommend to us the practice of a
particular duty.

A fourth opinion, much lik the former, is that of the venerable (as they call
him) Beda, Beda in Luke 18.1. dicendum est omn is quae justus ecundum Deum
gerit and dicit ad orationem esse reputanda
who thinks that we may be said to pray always, when all our actings may be
reckoned unto prayer; that is (as I apprehend) when all we do, prepares and
fitteth us for prayer, and when we exercise our selves in other spiritual
performances for that very purpose, that we may be the more enabled to pray:
But though we grant, that there is a connection among spiritual exercises, so
that one may fit and prepare for another; yet there is a difference and
separation, and we may be employed in one, when we do not mind another; and as
other spiritual performances may be helps to prayer, So prayer may prepare the
heart for going about them; and yet we cannot be said to perform them when we
are praying, and wherefore should we be said more to pray when we are employed
in them? and the words do manifestly speak of prayer as contradistinguished
from other duties.

A fifth conjecture, is that of the learned Manet namque virtus hujus desiderii
in omnibus quae ex charitate facimus, Jo. de Thabi^ in voc. orare vid. etiam.
Tho. 2.2. quaest. 83. art 14.
Austine, who thinks that we should always pray, because we should always
desire eternal life; its true, the desire of the soul is the life of prayer,
and that Christians Sine intermissione orare quid est aliud quam beatam vitam
ab eo qui came selus dare potest sine intermissione desiderare? semper ergo hanc
a Domino desideremus, and oremus semper, August, epist 2 21. cap. 9. and ven.
Beda in collect ex Aug. in epist. 1. ad These. 5.17. continuum desiderium
continua oration -- quicquid aliud agris si desideras illud sabbatum, non
intermittis orare frigus charitatis silentium cordis est, flagrantia charitatis
clamor cordis est.
virtually, habitually, and as to the general bent and main inclination of the
heart, may be said always to desire eternal life; but it is as impossible at
all times actually to desire eternal life, as always to pray, and expressly
direct that desire to God.

But, 6. that opinion, I find to be most common among popish Beda in Luc. 18.1.
Alf. a Castro loc. cit. Salmeron loc. cit. gloss ord, Lyra and the Remists on
Luke 18.1. Rainerius in voc. oration, cap. 7. Lessius de justitia and jure, lib.
2. cap. 37. sect. 43. and ali^ passim.
writers, is, that he may be said to pray always, who prays in the canonical
hours appointed by the Doctors of the Roman Church; we will not now digress to
speak of their divine office (as they call it) and canonical hours, in which
the Viz. tom. 2. de virt. and stat. rel. lib. 1.
great Suarez has employed almost a whole book; and though Bellarmine speak to
that head in some few Chapters, yet he sends Bell. de bonis open. in partic.
lib. 1. cap. 11.
his reader to one Marcellus Francolinus, who (as he reports) has written a
large volume upon that subject; but, I would ask, where Christ or his Apostles
did prescribe these canonical hours? or whether these were known when
Christians at first were commanded to pray always? yet if that interpretation
were purged of the popish leaven and superstition, applying the general
particle always, to all fit seasons and occasions, or as their Cajet. in Luke
18.1 and in 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Cajetan speaks, horis congruis, it may help to clear the meaning of the
exhortation, and may be acknowledged to be one branch or part thereof, as shall
appear.

Thus we have seen what others have said to little purpose, we now come to give
the true and full sense of the exhortation to pray always, and to answer the
propounded question in the following particulars.

Concl. 1. Albeit we do not join with those Divines, who think the full
importance of that exhortation to be, that we should constantly maintain a
praying disposition, and always be in a readiness and fitness to be employed
in that necessary exercise; yet we grant, that this habitual frame of heart and
spiritual disposition, is supposed by that exhortation; so that, 1. we cannot
always obey it, unless we always be thus in readiness: For, if at any time
the heart be out of tune, the occasion and season of prayer may offer, and then
we are unfit to seek Gods face, what this disposition does import, how
necessary it is, and how it may be maintained, see Part 2. Chap. 1.

But you will say, may we not pray, though we be unfit and indisposed? Ans. It
is, notwithstanding our unfitness, yet our duty, and we must be doing, though
then we cannot pray; that is, we cannot pray to purpose and successefully
unless the Lord pity us, and in mercy remove those fetters we have wreathed
about our neck; though then we deny not the necessity of such a praying
disposition, yet the words do clearly point out the act and exercise of this
duty; and the following words, ver. 19. quench not the Spirit, do rather hold
out that point, for there (as Diodati observes) there is a similitude taken
from the fire of the altar which was to be kept continually alive and burning;
and thus we should not suffer through our rebellion, impurity, ingratitude
negligence or contempt, the gift of the Spirit of grace to depart or be
abolished in us, but should preserve it nourish it, and make use of it.

Concl. 2. This exhortation does clearly answer the question when we may pray,
assuring us, that there is no time in which we are not allowed, and when we may
not acceptably call upon God, and thus, Exodus 20.9. the Lord says, six days
shall thou labor, and that ruler, Luke 13.14. faithfully repeateth, though he
mis-applieth these words, while he says, there be six days in which men (...).
ought to work. You see here the word of a Yet Cajetan thinks, that these
words belong not to the command, for, says he, non praecipitur u^ sex diebus
homo operetur, sed quod septimo quiescat, Cajet. in Exodus 20.9. Non omnia
(inquit Aquinas) quaecontinentur in lege, tinduntur per modum praecepti, Thom.
2.2. quaest. 186. art. 9.
command, and a necessity mentioned, and yet they import no more but an
allowance and liberty; as if it had been said [you are permitted and allowed to
work and labor in any part of the six days, but there is no obligation laid
upon you to employ all that time in the works of your calling; for you must
eat, drink, sleep, and may also spend some time in lawful recreations, and ye
must serve God, and set some of that time apart to seek his face, though as to
the hour or particular circumstance, ye be not determined, but may use your
liberty.] So while we are commanded to pray always, thereby is clearly
implied, that there is no time in which we are not permitted and allowed to
pray and draw nigh the King, his door stands always open, and we may enter in,
and present our supplications to him; and this (as I conceive) is a part of
what these words hold forth, though not all, nor the main.

Concl. 3. To pray always, imports assiduity and frequency in prayer; we
cannot be said to do always what we do not often; but there is nothing more
ordinary with all sorts of people, and in all languagues, then to express
frequency by such a note of universality; so we use to say, that a child who
often eats, is always eating; that a diligent student is always at his
book; and a laborious tradesman is always busy at his work, etc. And the
places of Scripture, in which the particle, always, does import frequency, are
so many and obvious, that it were to no purpose to stay on citations, only let
us offer some few instances in the subject matter, and where the Saints are
said to pray always, and to ask such and such a particular without ceasing,
whereas it is evident from the very context, that they did not, could not,
without intermission continue in that exercise, though ordinarily and
frequently they did so, thus, Act. 10.2. its said that Cornelius prayed (...).
always; and yet he was a centurion, and must needs have been much employed in
military affairs; thus also Paul professes, that he prayed for the Corinthians
(...).
always, or without ceasing, 1 Cor. 1.4. and always (...).
for the Colossians, Col. 1.3. and (...).
always for the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.2. and 2 These. 1.11. and (p) always
for the Romans, Romans 1.9. thus also the Apostle Peter protests, that he will
put those Christians to whom he wrote, (q) always in remembrance of those
things which he had then mentioned, 2 Pet. 1.12. And will any be so absurd as
to imagine, that the Apostle did nothing else but continually inculcat and
repeat those things to them? but he tells them, that he would often and
frequently thus admonish them; and zealous Paul shows those to whom he wrote,
that ordinarily and frequently he prayed for them. And thus it is evident, that
to pray frequently, is to pray Semper, i. e. frequenter, vel frequentissime,
Bonav. in Luke 18 his verbis Dominus and apostolus nihil aliud commendare
voluerunt, nisi perseverantiam and assiduit atem orandi, quantam maximam habere
possumus, Bellar. loc cis. cap. 9 Bellar.
always; and I find Chrysoft. and Theoph. in 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Bonav. and ar. ubi
supra lib. 1. cap. 1, cum multis aliis
many judicious and learned Expositors thus to interpret this exhortation.

Concl. 4. If to frequency be added universality, constancy and equability,
there will be found yet some greater reason for this expression; and that it is
so in this case, yea, and that there is not one, but diverse kinds of
universality here, shall forthwith appear. And, 1. there is required an
universality in respect of the object; we must not only in some few things, but
in every thing, by prayer, supplication and thanksgiving, make our requests
known to to God, Phil. 4.6. Hypocrites will in their affliction seek God early,
when fear is upon them, God will hear from them, but otherwise they forget God,
and do not regard the work of his hand; but the Saints, as at all times, So in
every thing, will present their requests to God, knowing, that every Unde
colligendum est impur^m esse usurpationem ommum donorum Dei nisi adsit vera
cognitio and invocatio nominis Dei; ac belluinum esse vescondi morem, quum
homines sine ulla precationo ad mensam (6 ingerunt ac been saturati sepulta Dei
mentione allo se proripiunt, Calv. in 1 Timothy 4.5.
creature must be sanctified by the Word and blessing of God, and by prayer, 1 Timothy 4.3, 5. Ah! did sinners know their danger, not only from Satan, but from
the meanest of the creatures, they would not go abroad without the shield of
prayer? A stone lying in thy way, may occasion thy neck-break, and the least
morsel of bread thou put in thy mouth may choke thee; O! what a mercy then
must it be to have the very stones and beasts of the field in league and at
peace with us? Job, 5.23. and how careful should we be to improve this
covenant by frequent prayer to him, who is the preserver of man and Ps. 36.6.
beast.

2. There is an universality in respect of time, and that being the most proper
and pertinent to the present purpose, we will insist on it at greatest length;
for, if it can be made appear that we should pray at all times, it will be
manifest, that we ought to pray always. Now as time in humane And in all
languages, thus the Latin tempus, the Greek and the Hebrew does signify the
fit season and opportunity.
writings, So also in Scripture is put to signify the fit season, occasion and
opportunity of doing, as frequenly in the book of Ecclesiastes; and as there is
a season and fit time for every thing and purpose under the heaven, in which is
beautiful, Eccles. 3.1, 11. So prayer has its seasons and fit time in which
it should be performed, and in which it will be beautiful, and an Phil. 4.18.
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God. And
as it does very much contribute to the beauty and acceptance of prayer, that it
be performed seasonably, So we are obliged to observe and improve every season
and opportunity; when ever the Lord opens the door and calls upon us, either by
his word or work, if we do not answer his call, and improve this talent, then
are we sinfully deficient, and omit our duty; when we let the fit season and
opportunity of doing pass then are we idle and negligent, and then become we
guilty and culpable: And thus the Vid. scholastic (...) in 1, 2. de hac
quaestione fusius forte dicturi sumus loce citato.
moralists and School-men-do rightly teach, that an omission cannot be imputed
to us, but when we are called and obliged to do, and do not; or when we suffer
the occasion and season of doing to pass: yea, they do not only affirm, that
otherwise an omission is not imputed as our sin, but that it should not upon
any account be imputed to us, or esteemed ours, and therefore ought not, in
respect of us, fall under any moral denomination, or be accounted voluntary or
free, neither should we in respect of it come under any moral consideration, or
by it be thus denominated: And if it were not thus (at least as to any culpable
imputation, which is the point we now press) how many thousand omissions of
good might every moment be charged, not only upon weak sinful men, but also
upon the glorious and holy Angels, who are able to do many things which they do
not, for want of this call and opportunity of doing. Hence, since the omission
and not doing of and duty cannot be imputed to us as an interruption or
intermission on our part, except when we are Praecepta affirmativa obligant
semper sed non ad semper, and ideo solum pro tempor^ illo aliquis cessando
ab^^ctu peccat, pro quo praeceptum affirmativum obligat, Thom. 1.2. quaest. 7^.
art. 5. ad 3. vid. etiam quaest. 100. art. 10.
obliged, called, and have a fit opportunity to do; therefore it is evident,
that we may be well said to do always, what we do at all times and seasons of
doing; and that he may be said as to pray always, So without ceasing, who
prays as often as he has opportunity, and is called to that exercise; for thus
there is a moral continuation without any ceasing or intermission on his part,
he being then only concerned in that duty, when the fit season is offered, and
then he will always be doing.

But you will ask, what be these seasons of prayer which we must observe and
improve? Ans. There is a twofold season of prayer, one constant, another
occasional: 1. then as to the constant season of prayer, which every Christian
should daily make use of, albeit we will not limit or prescribe to the Saints,
yet we hope, that without hazard of a challenge from any sober Divine, we may
affirm, that the least which the word of God will admit for a set course of
prayer, is twice a day: as our daily wants, necessities, trials, temptations,
will so often, at least send us to the throne for a supply, protection,
deliverance, etc. So our mercies for their continuance and the sanctified use
of them; and if we have the heart of Children, we must so often at least visit
and speak with our Father; and if we be sensible of our enjoyments, and of his
mercy and tender bowels, we will so often, at least, offer to him the sacrifice
of praise, etc. And we cannot be said to do As in the preceding conclusion has
been shown, Quest. Ans.
always, what we do not often and frequently; and can he be said to pray often
or frequently, who does not at least keep a constant course of praying twice a
day?

But if it be asked what time of the day is fittest? Ans. Though we will not be
peremptory in fixing upon any part of time, yet it would appear, that evening
and morning were the fittest seasons; is it not equal, that we begin and end
the day in Gods worship and service? and how dare we sleep until we commend
our selves, and all that is ours to the care and custody of our Father? and how
dare we put our hands to any work in the morning till we praise him for our
preservation in the night past, and beg his blessing on the works of that day?
and thus both our need, and the honor of our Master call for this; for what we
highly prize and love dearly, will get the first and last of our thoughts, it
will, as it were, sleep and awake with us; and shall not the Lord have that
room in our heart? is there any better object to fill it? and can the first and
last of our time be better employed? The Jewish daily sacrifice was appointed
to be offered in the morning and evening, Exodus 29.39. and these are fit
seasons for the Christian sacrifice, and accordingly the Saints from time to
time have observed those seasons, though with some variety: But I should think,
that as the morning and evening, So the first of the morning, and the last at
night were due to the Lord; and if our calling, or some occasional diversion,
do hinder the family from meeting together, every one should then go to their
closet, and pour out their soul before the Lord, till the family may most
conveniently meet together to join in that exercise.

But ye may yet ask, what warrant we have from the Scriptures to press this?
Ans. We did not say, Quest. Ans.
that this was all which the Scripture does require, but that this was. The
least which from thence could be allowed and established. The Lord in his Word
requires, that we should pray always and without ceasing, but does not
determine how often, that albeit we should set some bounds and limits to our
loss, vain and idle hearts, which otherwise would be ready upon any trifling
occasion to slight and omit that duty, yet that we should not rest (as to
private converse with God) upon any number, nor thus stint and limite our
selves; though we should have our constant course of prayer morning and evening
at least, yet as to the occasional seasons of prayer, we should be liberal and
free, still laboring to enlarge our selves more and more in this sweet and
heavenly exercise, resolving (with the Psalmist in the point of praising God,
Psa. 71.14.) still to pray more and more; and here the Lord would leave some
liberty and latitude, according to the variety of our callings and employments
in the world, and according to the occasions and opportunities which in his
providence he would offer; for, as some in respect of their calling and
condition have more, some less time to spare, So one and the same Saint may now
meet with more occasions and motives, then at another time, and as thus there is
a great variety as to the nature of the thing, and occurring circumstances, and
no rule in the Word that does precisely limit and determine how often, So neither
is there any equality, as to this, among the examples recorded in the Word;
neither is it usual there to condescend upon any number, for as occasions are
thus so variable, So accordingly has the carriage and practice of the Saints
been, but as to their set and constant course, we will find some few instances,
and yet with some variety. Thus the servant of God, David, though a King upon
whom so much care and business did lie, yet professes, that Septies i. e.
pluries, Musc. in loc. See also Diod. and others; but though we did grant, that
here there is a definite number put for an indefinite, yet it will not follow,
that the greater is put for the less; but rather, on the contrary, that the
less is put for the greater.
seven times a day he praised (and who will doubt whether then also he prayed?
to) God, Psa. 119.164. And Daniel though a Ruler, and much employed at Court,
yet would not neglect to pray three times a day, Dan. 6.10. and the Psalmist, I
think, determines what these times were, while he promises to call upon God
evening and morning, and at noon, Psa. 55.17. And of the Elect it is
indefinitely said, that they cry to God day and night, Luke 18.7. etc And so
much of a constant course of prayer, to be performed at set, fixed and
appointed times.

Now come we, 2. to speak of occasional seasons of prayer; it is not Nec tantum
statutis horis and praefinitis, sed quovis tempore, etc. Theophil. in Ephesians. 6.18.
enough to fix and observe set times for prayer, but we must be always ready,
and from time to time watch and discern such opportunities as the Lord
occasionally in his wise providence offers, that we may improve them; we must
not only publikly, with the family, and privately in our closet, keep a
constant course of prayer, but we must also lay hold on every occasion,
invitation and message from heaven, and it must be a grievous provocation, to
slight such an opportunity; when the King is upon the throne, and sends a
messenger to invite thee to come, when he opens the door, and holds forth the
golden scepter to thee, assuring thee of acceptance and audidence, if thou do
not answer when he thus calls to thee, may he not justly suffer thee to knock
and cry, and not hear, nor answer? according to the threatening, Prove. 1.28. and
therefore if the Lord put such a Prove. 17.16.
prince in thy hand, and thou will not improve it, that is an evidence of thy
folly; for, what knows thou, O man, but this may be the acceptable time, in
which the Lord may be found? and if thou let it pass, what know thou if ever
thou meet with such a season? Now there be several times and seasons, in which
the Lord uses to visit and draw near to his people; and it were our wisdom, as
it is our duty, to call upon him while he is so near, Isa. 55.6. its a fit time
to offer our supplication to the King when he comes and makes a visit to us.

You will say, but how shall we know when the Lord draws nigh to us? and
whereby shall we discern his approach? Ans. The Lord in the Scriptures is said
to visit his children several ways, which (as to our purpose) may be referred
to these three general heads; he visits us, 1. by his mercies and benefits; 2.
by his rods and judgments; and, 3. by the inward work and motions of his
Spirit: O! then when ever thou meetest with any new mercy; and if thy former
enjoyments be continued, especially in the day of trial; or if thou meet with
any stroke, and art in any strait, danger or difficulty; or if the Lord make
thee hear a voice within, though there were no new occurrence, yet if the Lord
speak to thy heart, and say to thee, O! it were fit now to draw nigh to God, if
thy conscience (which is Gods depute) challenge thee for thy unkindness, and
invite thee to the throne, etc. in these and such like occasions, thou art
obliged in a special manner to Ps. 27.8.
seek Gods face; but yet its not enough to improve these special seasons, but
though no new occasion, or special invitation were offered, yet, 1. because of
the hazard we always stand in from Satan, our lusts, and an alluring and
bewitching world; 2. because of our old, and from day to day, a new contracted
guiltiness; 3. because of the continual need we stand in of a new supply of
grace for doing our duty; 4. because of the many mercies both spiritual and
temporal which we enjoy; and, 5. least by our negligence, and distance from the
Spirit of life, deadness and indisposition creep on, etc. Whenever we meet
with any time of solitariness, and are taken off from business, and out of the
crowd of worldly entanglments, that is a fit season for conversing with God,
and trading with heaven; such a secret trade may prove very advantageous, and
soul-enriching; when the King is held in the galleries, that is a time for
delights, Cant. 7.5, 6. O! what liberty and spiritual fredom will the soul use
and express, and what boldness and importunity, and what heart-ravishing
impressions will it find in a secret communion with its beloved? O! the
sweetness and satisfaction, the soul enjoys in those secret walks and turns
with the King in the galleries: yea, and the King himself is pleased to express
his delight in the secret voices of the spouse, rise up my love, my fair one,
and come away (as it were out of the crowd of the world, and let us go apart) O
my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for, sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely, Cant. 2.13, 14. Its true, the voice of
the beloved is sweet where ever its heard, in the market place, in the
concourse and public assemblies, thou may expect to meet with some
discoveries of him; there thou may behold much of his glory and beauty, Psa.
27.4. Psa. 63.2. etc. And we will not now make a comparison between public and
private ordinances; but if all thy religion consist in public performances,
its an evidence thou never yet reaped the fruit of any public ordinance, for
that would drive thee into thy closet, and make thee more frequent and fervent
in thy private adresses, where thou may be Isa. 25.6.
feasted with fat things full of marrow, and wines on the lees well refined;
but if thou neglect a secret communion with God, no wonder though leanness be
upon thy soul.

But you will say, how often should we thus draw nigh to God? Ans. The case it
self, if duly pondred, might prevent and exclude such a question; 1. because it
speaks of our occasional adresses to God, and occasions being so variable,
there can be, as to them, no determination; 2. because this part of the
question is opposite to the former, which did hold out a constant course; and
therefore here we can only in the general say, that frequency is required; but
will not limite any Christian to a set and determinat number* But since there
is here a great latitude, we would consider what should be our measure: as
those whom the Lord has freed from the drudgery employments of the world, have
much more time to spare, then ordinary tradesmen and laborers, So they must
one day answer for that precious talent of time, how it has been employed.

And thus if we improve every season of prayer, whether set, or occasional; if
we pray at all occasions, and so often as we have opportunity, we pray
continually and without ceasing, because we omit no season or opportunity of
doing; yea, if any one sort of seasons were observed, that might be ground
enough for such an expression: and, 1. as to the set and ordinary season, thus
Mephibosheth is said to eat bread at David's table always, 2 Samuel 9.7, 10. And
Jehoiachin to eat continually before the King of Babylon, 2 King. 25.29.
Mephibosheth and Jehoiachin are said to eat always and continually, where they
did eat ordinarily, and at the usual time of eating: And thus also (in a case
much like to the present) Exodus 29.42. the daily sacrifice, is called a
continual burnt offering; and thus the learned Quum Dominus dixerit, oportet
semper orare, and non deficere: and Apostolus, sine intermissione orate,
sanctissime sic accipitur, ut nullo die intermittantur certa tempora orandi,
Aug. de haeres. cap. 57.
Austine thinks the most genuine interpretation of the exhortation to pray
always, to be [that we should daily keep a constant course of prayer.] And
then, 2. as to an occasional season of doing; though very accidental and
variable, yet if it be observed, it will warrant such an universality; and thus
Solomon's servants are said to stand consinually before him, 1 King. 10.8. while
as they did either stand, or walk, go, or come as occasion required, and their
place and employment called them to: And thus it may appear, that to do a thing
in its season, and when the fit opportunity (whether set or occasional) does
offer, is according to the phrase of Scripture, to do ever, always, continually,
or without ceasing, especially when both seasons concur, and are observed, as
ought to be in the present case.

3. There is here an universality in respect of the subject, the supplicant his
condition, state and exigence; so that thus to pray always is nothing else,
but to pray in every condition; in In omni tempore, perinde valet, atque tam
sccundis rebns, quam adversis, Calvin in Ephesians. 6.18.
prosperity, in adversity, in the time of health and sickness, etc. Is any
afflicted, let him pray, Ja^. 5.13. has any man an abundance of
creature-comfores and enjoyments, let him pray for the blessing, the sanctified
use, and continuance of them, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Prayer is a medicine for every
malady, a tool for every trade, and a companion in every state and condition,
its 1 Timothy 4.8.
useful for all things, and its our duty to improve and use it at In every time
of need, says Dr. Hammond on Ephesians. 6.^18.) and what is that condition and state
that does not need and require the help of prayer?
all times.

Concl. 5. To pray continually imports perseverance in that exercise; that we
must not leave off, and give over praying till we prevail, and till the Lord
declare his mind, either by giving the particular, or removing the occasion,
and all ground of hope: Pleaders at the throne of Grace, must always attend
their cause. See Part 2. Chap. 2. Page 454. We must not (says Cum Christus
dicit oportet semper orare and non deficere. non intendit quod nunquam
interrumpatur actus orationis, sed quod non interrumpatur quasi nunquam
resumpturus; sicut faciunt quidam, qui statim ut non exaudiuntur a Deo, ab
oratious desistunt, Rain. panth. de orat. cap. 7.
Rainerius) so pray always, as if we might never be otherwise employed, but
that we may never go away from that duty, with a purpose not to return; as may
appear from that parable, Luke 18. propounded for this very end, that we might
learn by the example of that importunate widow, from time to tim to renew our
requests, and not weary nor faint till we obtain our desire; the season of
praying does not expire, till the day the Lord hear and answer our desire: and
as such honest and importunate supplicants will not take, So they will not get
a nay say, Luke 18.7. And here is a good evidence of sincerity, if delays do
not drive us from the throne; for though carnal hearts may adventure for once
or twice, and take (as it were) a trial of Gods service, the truth of the
promises, and the success of prayer, yet when they see no in-come, they quickly
weary; the hypocrit Will not always call upon God, Job, 27.10. The beggar
goes from the door before the alms be come, and so loses his labor; but
the Saints will cry again and again, and wait and not weary till God show mercy
upon them; yea, when they obtain what they desired, Sine intermissione orate,
h. e. quando est aliqua gratia, out mali liberatio, quod premit, prae^e^s, aut
imminet, and me^u cruciat, impetranda, non satis est sen^el aut bis orare, sed
insta^ter and pet^everanter, donec obtinca^; ut decet exemplum viauae, Luke 18
and ceclesiae orantis pro Petro, Act. 12. orandum ergo tam diu pro dono
obtinendo, donec illud impetremus, (...) ubi impetratum est, ne illud
omittamus, pro ejus co^servatione est Deu^ iterum a nobi^ ^^gandus, etc.
Salmer. loc. cit.
their work is not done, as they must pray till they prevail, and get an
answer, So after the Lord has heard them, and filled their hands, their mouth
must be filled with his praise, Psa. 50.15. Job, 22.27. Psa. 66.13, 14. What we
get by prayer, must be used with thanksgiving, that it may prove a solid and
stable mercy; and thus, as we must pray the Lord to give, So after he has
given, we must pray, that he would strengthen what he has wrought for us, Psa.
68.28, and that he would establish the work of our hands, Psa. 90.17. Then may
we cease from praying, when we shall stand in need of nothing, and shall be no
more exposed to wants, trials, dangers, troubles and temptations; and then our
prayers shall be changed into un-interrupted praises.

So much for the two first branches of the first question, viz when and how often
we should pray? now we proceed to the third and last, viz. how much time should
be spent in prayer, and how long we should continue in that exercise before we
leave off? Ans. Since the holy Spirit does not here limite the Saints, who are
we, that we should take upon us to prescribe, or to bind them to any rule: but
let every one according to his stock and measure of grace, according to his
present disposition and frame of spirit, according to his calling and present
exigence and condition, etc. stay longer, or for a shorter while at the throne
of Grace: As there is a great variety in reference to these considerable
circumstances, So the Lord does allow to us a proportionable latitude, as to
the time that should be employed in prayer: but least any should abuse this
tender condescension, let us only in the general offer these few cautions.

1. When we meet with new pressures and difficulties, great trials, or strong
temptations; as we should add to the number, So to the length of our prayers,
as we should pray more frequently, So we should continue longer at the work;
especially when we add fasting to prayer, and set some time apart to deprecate
some special evil, or to supplicat for some great mercy, either to our selves
or the Church. But,

2. Though thou did meet with no new trial, nor extraordinary pressure,
though thy outward state and condition be the same, yet if thy strength and
furniture be better, if thou meet with more then ordinary assistance, let thy
work be answerable. O! do not weary so long as the Cant. 4.16.
wind blows on thy garden, and makes the spices send forth a pleasant smell;
while the beloved Caut. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
stays thee with flagons, and his fruit is swee^ to thy taste, so long as he
holds his left hand under thy head, and embraces thee with his right hand,
making thee sit down under his shadow with great delight, do not withdraw from
his presence: O! do not go from the banqueting house, while thy hunger
continues, and the Master of the feast welcometh thee, and spreads his
banner of love over thee, but while the honeycomb droppeth, Cant. 5.1.
eat, O friends, eat abundantly, O beloved; while the heavenly gale lasts, do
not take in thy sails; thou art not yet near the harbor, and if ye let the
present opportunity pass, it may cost thee much pains, and sweat in plying the
oars, before thou shall make up that loss. And thus the judicious Austin having
spoken of the short and frequent prayers of some holy men in Egypt, did even
from thence infer this conclusion; for, therefore, says he, did they not stay
long away from the throne, least deadness should creep on; and would they then
leave the work so long as they met with enlargement? Hence, he Ac per hoc etiam
ipsi satis ostendunt, hanc intentionem sicut non esto^ tuntendasi perdurare non
potest, ita si perduraverit, non ci^o esse rumpendam: absit enim ab oratione
multa loquutio, sed non desit multa precatio, si fervens perseverat intentio,
Aug loc. cit. scil. epist. 121. cap 10.
concludes, that though much speaking, vain babbling, and idle repititions be
loathsome to the holy Lord, Mat. 6.7. yet much prayer is very acceptable to him,
if it be accompanied with fervency and enlargement of heart: and it is
considerable, that the popish Doctors (these patrons of formal and
lip-devotion) do approve this caveat, affirming, that long prayers are only
then prevalent and acceptable, when (accordings to Austins limitation) they are
fervent, zealous and importunate; So Thom. 2.2. quaest. 8 3. art. 14. ad 1.
Rainer. panth. sect. de orat. cap. 7. ubi concludit sic, unde quam diu in
orante devotio durat, tam diu oration durare debet, etc. vid. loc. Bellarm. de
bon oper. in part. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Aquinas with his disciples, and Rainereus; yea, and Bellarmine himself, that
great deceiver of this age by his patrociny of the mock-prayers of the Roman
Church. Ah! should we in this come short of these lax-casuists? and shall we,
while the cloud of presence abides upon our tabernacle, go out from the
presence of the Lord.

But here we may take occasion from Austius words, to enquire, whether it be
lawful to use repititions in prayer? Ans. Certainly some repetitions are
lawful, and warranted by the example of Christ and of the Saints, both in the
old and new Testament, and may be very pithy and emphatick expressions of zeal,
love, spiritual delight, importunity, faith, etc. or of the greatness of our
danger and strait, etc. But yet there are other repetitions, which are
unlawful and forbidden, Mat. 6.7. viz. 1. idle and vain repetitions,
proceeding from want of, 1. affection; 2. matter; and, 3. Viz. When want of
words, flows from want of zeal and affection.
expression or words: 2. affected and hypocritical repetitions, when either
that we may seem devout, or that we may play the orator, we may ingeminate the
same words, in a strain of eloquence and elegancy: 3. proud and boasting
repetitions, when we think to be heard for our much speaking, and that our vain
words does oblige the Lord, and deserve an answer.

But, 3. in case of dullness and indisposition of heart, yea, and of bodily
fainting and weakness, it were better to be frequent in prayer, then to
continue long in that exercise, and to divert a while, and by reading,
meditation, or conference to sharpen the irons, rather then to use them while
they are so blunt; nay, thou may well intermix the works of thy lawful
calling, and follow thy business in the world, or moderatly use some recreation
for repairing some natural vigor and activity, which may be subservient in
this heavenly exercise: We do not serve a hard Master, who will call for alike
work from the weak and strong, and who will allow us no time for our own work,
or for fitting and preparing us for his service.

You will say, but were it not better always to be short in prayer, whatever
be our fitness and disposition, since these prayers which arerecorded in the
Scriptures, are of no considerable length, the longest being that of Solomon at
the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8. and of our blessed Lord a little
before his Passion, Joh. 17. the complaint of the afflicted, Psa. 102. Ezra his
confession, chap. 9. the Levits thanksgiving and acknowledging of the Lords
justice in punishing that people for their sins, Nehem. 9. etc. We have also
the practice of these Saints in Egypt, whom Loc. jam. cit.
Austin mentions, and does not condemn; some also of the present age, eminent
for piety, might here be alleged, particularly the judicious, Mr. Vbi suprae
page 477.
Gurnal. Ans. Albeit, 1. we must not quench the Spirit, nor draw back so long
as the Lord does arrest us at the throne, by the smiles of his countenance;
yet, 2. for ordinary, I do not dissent from those, who do advise rather to be
frequent in prayer, then to continue long at once; our hearts are very
slippery, and our affections cannot long keep their vigor and zeal, but like a
deceitful bow, will quickly slaken, and not be able to carry the arrow to the
mark. But especially in public, and when we join with others, we would so far
condescend to their weakness, as not to stretch forth our selves to such a
length, as the most enlarged can scarcely reach, as is too usual, and I wish,
that no principle of Pharisism and self-seeking had influence therein; but, 3.
though thus for ordinary, we need not be very long, yet when we are under
indisposition, we may yet be shorter, but then we would be more frequent; yea,
4. as to occasional prayer, we may yet spend less time in it, and yet prevail;
and we would here observe a very considerable difference, for albeit we need
not stay long in our ordinary course of daily prayer, yet comparatively some
considerable space of time would be allowed for that exercise, but as to
occasional prayer, we may be very short in it; yea, when we are pressed with
business, or company, and have not opportunity to go apart, and in a solemn
manner to make our adress to God, we may dart up to heaven some short
ejaculation, which will not be thrust out, nor sent away without the blessing.

And having thus made mention of ejaculatory prayer, we could not leave that
sweet point, till we had digressed a little to its use, necessity and singular
use, were it not that Mr. Mr. Cobbet of pray. part. 1. cha. 2. Mr. Gurnal ubi
supra cha. 30. page ( 375. which should be) 383.
Cobbet, and Mr. Gur^al have spoken so fully and pithily to that subject; and
now, I shall need add no more, but recommend what they have written, to all
those who desire to walk with God, and to carry on a safe and thriving trade
with heaven: But, who is able to discover the excellency, and several
advantages of such short ejaculations and apostrophe's to God? O! how do they
help to maintain a heavenly and praying-disposition in the heart? These are the
swift messengers, which upon all occasions we may dispatch to the throne; by
these, we may beep constant correspondence with heaven, and have our
conversation there; no calling, trade, nor condition of life needs hinder this
spiritual traffic and negotiation; the most laborious tradesman may follow
his business constantly, and work hard in his shop, and thus pour out a prayer
to God; such a short parenthesis, will make no sensible and considerable
interruption in any business or employment. And oh! what a difference is there
between those Christians, who exercise themselves in such spiritual diversions,
and short conversions to God, and others who suffer their heart to stay so long
here beneath, and so to fasten and take such deep root in the earth. The Lord
in his providence offers to us many occasions for some spiritual thoughts and
heavenly meditation; where can thou cast thine eyes, and not behold a
miracle, which thou do slight, because it is ordinary, and from day to day
renewed, or continued? who has covered the face of the earth with such variety
of herbs, flowers, etc who makes the fire to burn, the wind to blow, etc. And
besidethese outward occasions, how many motions does the Spirit suggest for
lifting up the heart to God? and were it not our wisdom, not to choke these
motions, nor let such opportunities slip, but to dart up some short desire and
ejaculation, till thy business permit thee to go to the throne in a more solemn
and continued way? But let not such ejaculations be pretended as a cloak for
laying aside a constant course of continued prayer; that were to make things
act contrary to their nature, and to make the means which are subordinat, and
should be subservient unto the end, to exclude the end; for this is one, and a
main fruit of such ejaculations, to fit and prepare the heart to continue
instant in prayer, when of purpose we perform that solemn duty.

But least any should abuse these Scripture-instances, making these a cloak for
their negligence, and want of love to the work; saying, what, should we be more
holy, and continue longer in prayer then those eminent Saints whose
supplications are recorded in the Word? Let such consider, 1. that as of
sermons, So of prayers for the most part we have but some brief notes; all was
not written that was at such an occasion spoken by the Saints, though all was
spoken that is written of them; and yet as to the present case there is so much
written, as may rather make us tremble, then thus boast and presume, as if it
were no great matter to come that length; for, though the words be not set
down, yet the time is sometimes specified, and such a proportion of it, as few
will make their measure, thus our blessed Lord continued all night in prayer,
Luke 6.12. Nehemiah spent certain days in fasting and prayer, Neh. 1.4. and a
fourth part of a day is spent in prayer and confession, Neh. 9.3. The Jews
fasted (and to what purpose did they fast, if prayer was not joined therewith?)
neither eating nor drinking three days, Esth. 4.16, 17. And David professes,
that he had cried himself hoarse, and that his throat was dried, Psa. 69.3.
that all night he made his bed to swim, and watered his couch with tears, Psa.
6.6. And will any dare yet to boast, that they have come the length required,
or recorded in Scripture? But, 2. such would remember, that the prayers that
are set down in the Scriptures, were poured out upon some special occasion, and
were framed only, or mainly in reference to the present particular; but we in
our daily, and constant course of prayer, must look to all our wants and
necessities; and must petition not some one mercy, but what we stand in need of
2 Pet. 1.3.
for life and godliness, personal mercies, and public mercies, mercies for our
selves, and for all the Saints; and we should particularly confess our sins,
with their several aggravations, and beg pardon for all our provocations, and
grace and strength for every duty; and praise God for all his mercies: And can
all this be to purpose performed in so short a space of time as those vain
talkers, and mockers of the holy Scriptures would allow? But yet (as we said in
the entry) we will prescribe no time; only we would not have any upon a mistake
to limit themselves to a shorter time, then the nature of this exercise, and
their own need does require.

But here we may behold our duty, and great privilege to pray always; as we
are obliged, So it would be our happiness to improve every season and
opportunity of prayer: Christ purchased to us, not with his money, but with his
blood this liberty to draw nigh to the King as often as we will and as our need
requires; I have read of one, who offered to his King a great sum of money but
to have leave once or twice a day to come and say, God save your Majesty. But
you may not come once or twice, but as often as you please to the King of kings,
you will always get access, and will never be sent away empty, and without the
blessing; if you come to bless and praise his great Name, you shall be blessed
of him; if you come to ask, you shall receive, not only Mark. 6.13.
unto the half of a kingdom, but a whole kingdom, and an incorruptible crown of
glory that fades not away: Ah! who would not come to his doors, who has such
an alms to give? But ah! the folly and desperate negligence of secure sinners,
who will not enter in at such an open door, who will not knock nor cry, though
their need press them never so much, and who will not seek though they have a
promise to find; O! what diligence and frequency is necessary here? An earthly
King will get great attendance, and yet what has he to give to his followers
and supplicants? Solomon's servants waited upon, and stood before him
continually, 1 Kings, 10.8. and yet we soon weary in standing before the King
of kings; the importunate widow, Luke 18. did not faint, but from time to time
renewed her complaint, till she was answered, and yet though our business be
great, though our life and happiness, and matters of soul concernment be lying
at the stake, we are secure and negligent; as we are foolish and injurious to
our own souls, So we are unfaithful to our Master and Lord, and a scandal and
reproach to our holy profession; though no master can so reward his servants,
yet what master is so ill served? The Idols of the nations were more diligently
and frequently worshipped, no cost was spared in their service; how sumptuous
were their sacrifices? Nay, they did not Jer. 7.31 and 32.35. vid. Alex. ab
Alex gen lier. lib. 6. cap ult. and Polyd. Verg^l de invent. rer. lib. 5. cap 8.
spare their children, yea, nor their own lives in their sacrifices; and yet
though our Christian sacrifice be so easy and reasonable, how slow are we to
offer it? Ma^ume^ans and Papists will rise up in judgment against us; Mahomet
and canonized men and women, are more carefully and frequently worshipped then
the true and living God; and the ordinances of that great Impostor and of
Antichrist, are better observed then the commands of the Lord of heaven and
earth: Alex. Rosse (...) sect. 6. page 171.
Mahomet appointed his followers to pray five times a day, and they do so: the
Papists have their seven canonical hours of prayer, and these must be observed;
no business nor employment will hinder or divert them, and this is the Certum
est horas canonicas non esse panciores quam septem^ uar. loc. cit. lib 4. cap.
6. unde Rainerius cum glossa interpretatur haec verba, Psalm. 119.164. septies
quotidie laudo te sic septies (inquit) in die i. e. septem vicibus, seu septem
horis canonicis incumbit religiosis laudare Deum Rain. pantheel in voc. orat.
cap. 7.
least their canons will allow, and yet, though our Lord and Savior command us
to pray always, and without ceasing, many will not pray at all, and not a few
but for the fashion: And who are they that continue instant in prayer at all
seasons and occasions? and how shall we then be able to stand in judgment? Ah!
what can we answer for this desperate negligence and contempt, when we must give
an account of our stewardship?

But as for such as prize their prividedge, and make conscience of their duty,
they would take heed least frequency and custom make them not formal and
customary, and that they do not undervalue and slight this heavenly exercise,
because they are often employed in it, it is not a vain thing, it is (as Deuteronomy.
32.47.
Moses said of the commands) your life. Thy wants, trials and difficulties, do
every day recur; thou have as much need of help, of grace, and of mercy to day,
as at the first, and why should thou slack thy hand? especially since a dead,
lazy, formal prayer, is no See Part. 2. Chapter 2. Sect. 1. Condit. 5
better then no prayer, and is a provocation and abomination, rather then an
acceptable sacrifice. Prayer is thy work, trade and great employment, O Pilgrim
of Zion; and will thou slight thy calling because thou must daily be employed
in it? But ah! the Luke 16.8.
children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light; O! if we would learn of the world our duty; will any man slight, and
become superficial in the works of his calling, because he is continually
exercised therein? but on the contrary, will rather labor to mend his work,
and to Fabricando fabrisimus.
learn by doing to do better: What? is the market come down? are thy hopes
less, or thy encouragments fewer? why then art thou become more remiss and
negligent? does the King chide with thee for coming so often, and Is. 62.7.
giving him no rest? or does he upbraid thee with former favors? nay does he
not rather challenge thee for thy unkindness, and invite thee to come more
frequently, yea, and always, never Isa. 62.6.
keeping silence, nor holding thy peace day or night? the ofter thou come,
the welcomer thou will be; and the more thou have received, the more will yet
be given unto thee, Mat. 25.29. Mark. 4.25.

PART. IV. Of the return of prayer.
IN the fourth and last part of this Treatise, we will speak, 1. of the
certainty of the return of prayer, and the different ways the Lord observes
in answering his honest supplicants; 2. of the Lords hiding himself from the
prayers of the wicked; yea and of his own people when they return to folly;
and, 3. be way of conclusion, we will hold out several motives to stir us up to
the serious and frequent performance of this solemn exercise, with an answer to
objections.

CHAP. I. Of the success of prayer, what the Lords hearing of prayer does
import, how it may be known, and why the Lord does not always answer the
prayers of his servants after one and the same manner?
THere be here several particulars, to which we shall speak in order; 1. that
the Lord will always hear those prayers that can lay claim to a promise; 2.
for removing the great stumbling block of prayer-less souls, we shall endeavor
to show, 1. what an answer to prayer does import, 2. what are the different
ways the Lord observes in answering our prayers; 3. that the Lord always
hears the regular prayers of his servants, but at no time the prayers of the
wicked; 3. we will propound some marks and evidences for discerning the success
of prayer; 4. we will modestly enquire after these holy ends and designs, why
the Lord will not always give the particular mercy that was desired, even when
he accepts and answers their prayer.

Sect. I. The Lord will certainly answer all those prayers that are grounded
upon the promises.
1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; and if, etc. Isa. 45.19. I
said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.
A wight man (we use to say) never wants a weapon; this is the Christians
motto, none can rob him of his arms; enemies may assault, and fight against us,
yea, they may prevail, and tread upon us; they may spoil us and disarm us, and
take away from us all such weapons as they use against us; but yet when devils
and men have done their worst, the Christian stands always girt with his
armor of proof; it is out of the enemies reach; our magazine is in a high and
impregnable rock, which cannot be stormed; its Ephesians. 6.11, 13.
the armor of God, and he who made it, does still keep and preserve it; though
he gave it to us for our use, yet he is still the owner, and keeper both of it,
and of those in whose hands he puts it, Ephesians. 6.11, 13, 14, 16. The Christian
(if he prove not false to his Master, and fainthearted without cause) can never
be brought so low, as to render his sword; no enemy can force him to yield; and
therefore he only is the truly worthy and invincible man; he will not and
cannot upon any terms submit, or be overcome; he disdaineth to capitulate with
an enemy, whatsoever conditions of peace are dishonorable to him, he must
prevail and carry the day, Ephesians. 6.16. Romans 8.37. Jam. 4.7. Now prayer is a main
Ephesians. 6.18. And it is there last placed, not as if it were the least part of it,
but because it imports, and makes use of all the former.
parcel of this armor, which supposes and girdeth all the rest fast to us,
and therefore frequently carries the name of the whole, preces and lachrymae
sunt arma Eecclesiae, prayers and tears (according to the old saying) are the
arms of the Church; as none are able, So neither will any labor to rob them of
their arms, though some mocking, others insulting, will upbraid them with them;
but let such mock on, yet woe to them, if they use these arms against them,
their malice, plots and machinations; if David pray, that the counsel of
Achithophel may be turned into foolishness, it will not stand, and being
rejected, it will prove an occasion of his ruin, 2 Samuel 15.31. and 17.23.
whether persecutors fall, or prevail, they are hastening their own ruin; and
though the prayers of the Saints be not directed against their persons, nor for
their eternal destruction, yet, the Lord in justice, does thus punish
incorrigible enemies at length; and in the mean time the Lord is treasuring up
wrath against them, and many a time pours out some visible judgment upon them
here; and if there be any way or mean for reclaiming of them, the prayers of
the persecuted will prevail; so that the Saints prayers never return empty;
this sword is never drawn, nor this bow bent in vain; and therefore may fitly
be compared to the bow of Jonathan, and the sword of Saul, which are said never
to return empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. Honest supplicants are like these left handed
Benjamits, which could aim at an hairbreadth and not miss, Judge. 20.16. And
this is the excellency of this notable piece of armor, that it is not only a
weapon for defense, but a talent also wherewith we may trade for time and
eternity; its useful in times of peace, as well as war; and therefore it shall
continue and abide, even then when (according to that sweet promise concerning
the days of the Gospel, Isa. 24.) men shall beat their swords into
plough-shares, and their spears into prunning-hooks, and shall learn war no
more: What is said of godliness in the general, 1 Timothy 4.8. may well be applied
to prayer in particular, it is profitable unto all things, and in all times, in
every trade and condition of life, in every business and occurence it may be
improven to advantage; the praying soul as he only, so always, is happy and
successful; he cannot miscarry nor be disappointed, (when his faith and
expectation is regulated by the promise, the least jot whereof shall not be un
fulfilled to him) the Lord will hear him when he cries, and satisfy his
desire, Psa. 145.18, 19. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that
if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; -- and we know that
we have the petitions we desired of him: if we ask, it shall be given; if we
seek, we shall find; if we knock, it shall be opened, and we shall receive
liberally, not some few things, but all things whatsoever we shall ask in
Christ's Name, 1 John 5.14, 15. Mat. 7.7. Mat. 21.22. Mark 11.24. Luke 11.9, 10.
Jam. 1.5. Ioh. 14.13, 14. Ioh. 16.23, 24. etc.

We will not now stay to enumerat the several promises made to prayer, these
being so many and obvious; nor to vindicat the Lords fidelity from atheistical
cavils; or to hold forth some grounds for supporting our faith, in waiting upon
the Lord for the accomplishment of his promises, having at so great a length
insisted to these particulars, Part 2. Chapter 2. Sect. 2. Let us now only view
some few Scriptures, and ponder how pithily the Spirit of God there expresses
the efficacy, power and prevalency of prayer; Let me alone (says the Lord to
praying Moses) Exodus 32.10. Domine, quis tenet te? who holds thee, O Lord?
says Austin: an honest supplicant holds (as it were) my hands, and will not
(says the Lord) let me alone; though I would compound with him and buy his
peace, yet he will not be put off, but I must yield to him, v. 10.14. And then
let us consider, what is recorded of praying Jacob, Genesis 32.24, 25, 26.28. Hos.
12.3, 4. first, that he had power with God; yea, and, 2. that he had power Vid
Calvin. (supr citatum) in loc.
over God, and prevailed over the great See Diodat. on Hos. 12.
Angel of the Covenant; 3. that though he said Let me go, yet he would not let
him go till he blessed him; and, 4. wherein his strength did lie, viz. in his
tears and supplications: but, let none through their folly and ignorance strain
and abuse these words, which do most significantly hold forth the power and
success of prayer, but not any weakness and imperfection in our holy and
merciful God, Who did (as Calvin speakeah) hold up Jacob with his right hand,
and fight against him only with his left. To these we shall add no more but a
word or two from Isa. 45. where, v. 11. the Saints are invited to to ask him of
things concerning his sons, which we may conceive to be spoken of spiritual
mercies to every thirsting soul, or of public mercies to the Church; and
concerning the works of my hands, or things that fall under a common and
general providence, viz. temporal and outward mercies, (...) praecipietis mihi,
Pagnin. Jubete mihi Mercer. in rad. (...)
command ye me, says the Lord, who commands all the host of heaven and earth,
v. 12. If these words had dropped from the pen of a man, we might justly have
abominated them as blasphemous; but the Lord himself having thus stooped so low
to strengthen our faith, let us admire this wonderful condescension and
improve it to the right end, for supporting our confidence when we draw nigh to
God: What? shall worm Jacob have power with God, and pot-sheards on earth
strive and wrestle with their Maker? yea, and may they in the combat prevail
and carry the day? Yea, says the Lord, this honor and privilege have all the
Saints; all mourning Jacobs shall become prevailing and victorious Isreal's.
What? may the base beggar and wretched rebel come to court and have access to
the King? Yea, says the Lord, the beggar may come in his rags and lay out all
his sores; and if the rebel has submitted and gotten a pardon, he may present
his supplication to me; and all my subjects and servants, of whatsoever rank or
condition, may not only come and ask what they will, but they may command me:
surely the Lord does not complement with his poor creatures, when he says,
they may command him There is here the reality of the thing, but in a way that
is suitable to the glorious majesty of the great and infinite Lord, in that the
Saints have more power and moyen with God, then the greatest Courtiers and
Favorites of an earthly King have with him; and in that they shall as certainly
prevail, as if they could command. O! when will we be sensible enough of this
astonishing condescension and love, that the high and lofty one will regard us
and take notice of our requests; and then stoop so low to express his tender
bowels, and to encourage us while we draw nigh to him, as in our own dialect to
speak to us, and to hold out himself as one with whom and over whom we had
power, yea, and shall I say (what he himself has said) whom we may command?
and shall we be so base and ingrate as to doubt any more? O! let us rebuke our
ignorance and unbelief, and from henceforth, with confidence, and in Heb. 10.22.
full assurance of faith, draw nigh to him; knowing, that though the fig tree
do not blossom, nor fruit be in the vines, though the labor of the Olive fail,
and the fields yield no meat, though the flock be cut off from the fold, and
there be no herd in the stalls, yet all honest supplicants may rejoice in the
God of their salvation, who will not suffer the promise to fail nor disappoint
those that wait upon him: the return of prayer is more certain and infallible
then the seasons of the year; though these long ago were established by an
un-alterable covenant, Genesis 8.22. yet, the Lord has reserved a liberty, not to
follow always there the same course, and by such variations of providence to
punish (when it seems good to him) the delinquencies of men; but this word of
promise, concerning the success of prayer, is so absolute and peremptory, that
it admits of no exception; and the return of prayer being grounded upon such a
sure foundation, though Habak. 3.17, 18.
heaven and earth should pass away, though the mountains should melt as wax,
and all the host of heaven be dissolved, and fall down as the leaf falls off
from the vine, yet the Lord will own his Isa. 34.3, 4. Psa. 97.5.
Word, and will fulfill all his Promises, the least jot or title whereof shall
not, cannot fail, Mat. 5.18. Luke 16 17. And does he not solemnly protest, that
though he commands, inviteth and entreats us to come unto him and pour out
our desires before him, and proclaims his fury and indignation to all persons
and families that call not upon his Name, yet he never said, seek ye me in
vain? Isa. 45.19. Who is the man that dare challenge the God of truth, and can
say, that ever he sought him in vain, if in truth and with the whole heart?

Sect. II. The great prejudice and stumbling block of prayerless souls: their
mistake discovered; what the Lords hearing does import; that the Lord does not
always answer prayer after one and the same manner, and what are these
different ways; that he never hears the wicked, and wherefore
notwithstanding he will satisfy their desire; and that he always hears his
servants, when they call upon him in truth.
Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the
prayer of the upright is his delight. Joh. 9.31. We know that God hears not
sinners; but if any man be a worshiper of God, and does his will, him he
hears.
THere is one great objection against the success of prayer, which proves a
neck-break to carnal hearts, and may sometimes be the Psa. 73^ 2. etc. Jerem.
12.1, 2. Job 21.7 etc. Obj.
trial of, and a sad temptation to, the Saints: and it is this.

Obj. Do not all things come alike to all? is there not one event to the
righteous and to the wicked? and did not the wisest of men observe and preach
this truth? Eccl. 9.2. Do not the wicked, who Job 15.4.
cast off fear and restrain prayer, prosper as well as they that fear the Lord,
and who in Phil. 4.6.
all things make their requests known unto him? And therefore, those who are
accounted Atheists, are unjustly taxed, for asking, What is the Almighty that
we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Job
21.15. And the Prophet had no reason to complain of those men, who said, that
it was in vain to serve God, to keep his Ordinances, and walk mournfully before
him? Mal. 3.14. Does not experience (that is the best master) clearly show,
that godliness is no gain, and that there is no good nor advantage that can be
reaped by prayer, and that all the promises of audience, and all that can be
said concerning the success and return of prayer, are but empty words, having
no truth nor reality in them? Was not Esau honorable and rich, as well as
Jacob? was not Ahab a King as well as Josiah, and were they not alike in their
deaths? Nay, did it not go well with the Jews, so long as they served the
Queen of heaven? but, so soon as they returned to worship the God of heaven,
they were consumed by famine and the sword, Ier. 44.17, 18. And therefore, they
had reason to resolve and say to Jeremiah, what they said, v. 16. As for the
word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee. Ans. Though few be so impudent as to speak thus with their mouth;
yet, alas! it is the heart-language of too many, else they durst not cast off
fear and restrain prayer before God: But, that we may encounter with this
Goliath, who thus defieth and insulteth over the armies of Israel, saying in the
name of all Atheists, (as he in the name of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 17.9, 10.)
If there be among you a man that is able to fight with me and kill me, then we
will submit, and all of us become tributaries to the God of Israel, and pay him
the revenue of daily prayer. Let us, with little David, come forth against this
Champion, in the name of the Lord of hosts, (whose Truth and Name is
blasphemed, and whose Worship and Ordinances reproached) and in his strength we
may confidently say, (with him, v. 46.) This day will the Lord deliver thee
into my hand, and I will smite thee and take thine head from thee; for the
battle is the Lords, and he will give thee into our hands: and we may not only
be encouraged (with David, v. 37.) from former experiences in other cases, as
hard and difficult; but also from the experience of all Saints in the same
case, while they have been called out to wrestle with this strong temptation.
And, O that the Lord were pleased to furnish us with a word, that may be
helpful to those who shall hereafter meet with the same conflict; and that in
his strength we may so encounter this Hydra, that after one head is cut off,
two others do not arise and grow up in its place, but that it may be utterly
overthrown and destroyed: the battle is the Lords, and his honest servants,
after they have fought a while with his enemy, have always at length found his
help, and by the following or suchlike considerations, as so many weapons of
proof, have prevailed and carried the day, and cut off the head of this mighty
adversary and enemy of the faith and peace of Gods children.

For answer, we will speak to the two branches of the objection severally; and
(...) to that which concerns the wicked, their success and prosperity,
applying that point more particularly to those who live in the visible Church,
(that being our case) who have some form of godliness, though they deny the
power of it, and never knew what it was to call upon God in truth; and thus
their prayers being no prayers in Gods account, and yet followed with success,
their case may well come under the former objection: and in answer both (d) to
the one and the other, we will, 1. show what Gods hearing of prayer does
import; 2. that the wicked, though they pray, yet receive nothing in answer to
their prayers; and, 3. that whether they pray or not, they receive nothing in
mercy and love, or for their good, but for other holy ends, which we shall
briefly name; and thus all their blessings must be cursed, and their prosperity
and success their ruin and snare.

As to the first, the Lords hearing of prayer does import, 1. his approbation
of the matter and object of our desires; for if we ask what he does not approve,
if we ask any sinful and unlawful thing, we cannot ask according to his will;
and therefore must not think that he will hear, 1 Ioh. 5.14. 2* (...) imports
an admission, reception, and the acceptance of the prayer it self, it having
those qualifications which the promise of audience does suppose and require,
Iam. 5.15. Iam. 1.6, 7. etc. See Part 2. Chapter 2. 3. The return and answer must
be given in mercy, and out of special and paternal love. Romans 8.15.32. Ioh.
16.24.26, 27. 4. The desired mercy must be given in faithfulness, and as an
accomplishment of the promises, upon which the supplicant did build his
confidence, Psa. 25.10. Psa. 143.1. 5. It must be the fruit of Christ's
purchase, and therefore must be asked for his sake and in his name, Ioh. 14.13,
14. through him only we can have access and acceptance, Ephesians. 2.18. 6. Thou must
pray in the holy Ghost, the Spirit must help thee to pour out that prayer that
God will accept and hear, Romans 8.27. See Part 1. Chapter 9.7. The mercy must be
given as the reward, fruit, and (as it were) the purchase of thy prayer; not as
if our prayers could merit and deserve the least mercy, or had any proper
efficiency or causality in procuring the blessing, which is totally and solely
the purchase of the blood of Christ; but because prayer is a mean appointed of
God, (and thus, by virtue of his own ordinance and appointment, it has power
and does prevail with him) for obtaining, not only a reward in the general, (as
every duty and ordinance) but particularly for procuring the blessing, as to
the particular desired and asked, whether by giving or withholding it; for thus,
prayer it self must avail, and prevail with God, Iam. 1.15, 16.

Hence, in the general and at the first view, it may appear, how groundless and
gross the common mistake here is; for, multitudes do think, when the Lord, in
the course of providence, does give what men did desire and ask, that then he
hears and answers their prayers; and on the contrary, that when he does not
give the particular that was asked, that then he does not hear and answer the
prayer: and this gross and brutish mistake has in great part occasioned, and
is the main ground of this objection, and is the great stumbling block whereon
Atheists fall and ruin their souls. But, how false both these are, may easily
appear, not only to those who have the Word for their information, but even by
the light of nature, as might be made manifest from the Writings of heathens:
but now we must speak to the first; and here we might resume the several
requisits that do concur, and must be, where any mercy is received as a return
of prayer; all those being wanting and deficient, as to the wicked their asking
and receiving, except the first, and it also very often, (for though outward
things may be sought and desired, yet not in that manner and measure as they do,
who make them their idol and place their felicity in them) and thus we have as
many arguments to prove, that they receive nothing in mercy and in answer to
their prayers, as we now did enumerat conditions and requisits in the
acceptance and audience of prayers; for, 1. they ask amiss often, as to the
matter, and always, as to the manner and end; 2. their prayers have no gracious
and spiritual qualification; 3. they have no interest in the covenant of
Promise, neither are they objects of Gods love, etc. To which we shall only add
a word or two; first, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 15.8. and will the Lord accept and remunerat what he thus loatheth
and abominateth? and yet such have their desires satisfied, which they durst
offer to God prayer-wayes; (for the vilest of men may have some form of
devotion) (...) I have Apud Cambden, hoc cit. part. 1. cap. 7. page 162.
read of thieves and robbers, who when they were going to steal and murder
their innocent neighbors, have prayed to God for success, and who have
prospered in such wicked ways; and will any be so absurd and blasphemous, as
to father upon the holy one of Israel such wicked courses, or to say that he
did hear and accept such abominable desires and prayers? 2. The mercy given in
return of prayer is a mercy indeed, and proves a blessing; but what the wicked
receive, proves in the issue to be a curse and snare; as it is given in wrath,
So it does them little good: thus he gave the Israelites a King in his wrath,
and they had little comfort in him, Hos. 13.11. thus also he gave them flesh
after they had lusted after it in the wilderness, but while it was in their
mouth, his wrath came upon them, Psa. 78.29, 30, 31. And thus the Lord, when he
satisfies the desire of carnal hearts, has no respect either to the promise
or to their prayers, but rather to the threatenings and the cry of their
iniquities, since he gives in wrath, and what he gives proves a judgment,
curse and snare; their riches, honors and pleasures become fuel to feed their
lusts, and thus through their abuse and ingratitude they add to their
guiltiness, and therefore to their eternal misery, and these become as coals
heaped on their head. What the wise man says of riches, may be applied to all
their enjoyments, they are kept for the owners hurt, Eccl. 5.13. All their
consolations (as Omnes humanae consolationes fine gratia and benedictione
divina sunt desolationes.
one speaks) one speaks) are desolations: nay, to the Saints themselves
they have often been strong Secundum tritum illad Aagust^ni relig^o peperit
divit^^s, and ylia devoravit matrem. luxiriant animir bus plerumque secundis;
nec faci le est aequa commonda mente pati, Ovid de art am. lib. 2.
temptations, as David's ease, Solomon's peace, etc. And there is nothing that
can sanctify them, and prevent this snare, but the prayer of faith, 1 Timothy
3.4, 5. Jam. 5.16. And thus we may hear the Lord speaking to carnal hearts when
he satisfies their desires; what we use to say to ou^ unk^od nei^hbours and
relations, when we grant their request [It is Nay, sometimes the Lord speake^h
thus to his own people, as Ezekiel. 36.22, 33.
not (will we say) for your sake, nor for your request; but for this or that
other reason, that we will do] And thus, though their prayers may prove
successful, and they get what they desired, yet their prayers are not
answered, neither do they receive in return to their prayers, but for such and
such other holy ends, to which they are strangers and little mind.

You will say, what be these high and holy ends, which the Lord does aim at in
such a dispensation? Ans. These are not the same to all persons, nor at all
occasions to one and the same person; but we will readily find some one, or more
of the following ends to have place in every bountiful dispensation to the
wicked, whether they have a form of godliness, and pour out some carnal
prayers, or not: As, 1. the Lord will follow them with the blessings of a
common providence in Orationem peccatoris ex bono naturae, desiderio
procedentem, Deus audit -- ex pura misericordia. Thom. 22. quaest 83. art. 16.
in corp.
testimony of his general bounty, kindness, and propension to show mercy, and
do good to all his creatures; thus, he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and
on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45. Thus,
he is kind to the evil and unthankful; and thus he satisfies the desire of
every living thing, Luke 6.35. Psa. 145.16.

And as, 1. thus to be an evidence of his bounty, So also, 2. that he may
manifest his long-suffering and patience toward the vessels of wrath, he will
withold deserved judgments, and follow them with outward mercies, Romans 9.22.
And thus he will show that he is (what he is called, Romans 15.5.) the God of
patience, not only by working it in his Saints, but by exercising it toward
all men.

3. To allure them, and lead them in to repentance, Romans 2.4. This is the end
of the Finis operis licet non operantis.
work and dispensation, which though wicked men may abuse to their own ruin,
yet the Lords counsel must stand; they cannot frustrate his holy designs,
however they pervert his work.

4. The Lord will do good to the wicked, and satisfy their desires, when they
offer them up prayer-waies to him, to evidence his approbaton of, and delight
in the prayers of his servants; he will so far welcome and regard the very
picture of prayer, as to give some benefits of a common providence, to show the
power and prevalency of a regular and a well qualified prayer, and to encourage
his people to the frequent and incessant practice thereof; to raise up their
hearts to an higher esteem of prayer, and to strengthen their faith and
confident expectation of a return to their prayers; thus in testimony of our
tender respect to a dear friend, we will welcome and show kindness to any, who
is like, and does resemble such a person; and thus the Lord takes notice of
Ahabs fasting and prayers, 1 King. 21.39.

But you will say, does not the Lord say, Obj. Ans.
because Ahab had done so, therefore he would, etc? Ans. Yet Ahabs humiliation
was not a proper mean (as not being right qualified, nor such as the Lord
required) yet it gets the name, and the reward not for it self, but as being a
sign and shadow of that which should have been; and thus the Lord did hearken
to Ahab, not for his own sake, nor for his prayers sake, but to evidence his
high esteem of that duty, when performed aright.

5. The Lord will thus satisfy the desires of the wicked for the trial of his
honest servants; their faith and patience must be brought to the touchstone,
and be (as many other ways, So also) assaulted by this temptation, and that
often proves a very strong one, Psa. 73. where we will find the servant of God
sore put to it, and much shaken, His feet were almost gone, his steps had
wel-nigh slipped, when he considered how the wicked had all, and more then their
heart could wish, while he was plagued, and chastened every morning; thus also,
Psa. 37. Psa. 17. from ver. 9. Jer. 12.1.2. Habak. 1. from ver. 13. etc. But
this does add very much to the trial, when the wicked prosper in their
oppression of the Saints, when the Lord seems to reject his people and their
prayers, and in his providence to smile upon their enemies; and this was the
case of the Saints, and the occasion of their sad complaints in some of these
Scriptures now cited, as Hab. 1. Ier. 12. etc.

But, 6. this may not only be for trial, but also for correction, and a
paternal castigation of the people of God for their sins; when the Lord is
wr^th with them, he sets up the right hand of their adversaries, and makes
their enemies to rejoice, Psa. 89.38, 42. etc.

7. The Lord will thus deal with the wicked in judgment and in wrath.

You will say, how can it be possible that these good things can be given in
wrath? they seem rather to be pledges of love. Ans. These things in themselves
are mercies, and should lead us in to repentance, and make us fear and love the
Giver, but yet those venomous vipers suck poison out of these sweet flowers;
and thus in the, issue these blessings (according to that sad word, Mal. 2.2.)
prove cursed and hurtful; When the Lord purposes to show his wrath, he
endures with much long-suffering, and entertaineth with many favors, the
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Romans 9.22. Mercies abused degenerat
into curses, and prove dangerous snares and occasions of sin and misery; hence,
kindness thus shown to the wicked, is called by an ancient, misericordia omni
indignatione crudelior, mercy more terrible then any rod and judgment: And
another comparing the affliction of the Saints, with the prosperity of the
wicked, calls the one misericordia puniens, mercy punishing, and the other
crudelitas parcens, fury and indignation sparing: Woe Male ergo usurus eo quod
vult accipere, Deo potius miserams non accipit; pro inde si hoc ab illo petitur
unde homo ladatur exauditus, magis metuendum est ne quod posset non dare
propitius, det iratus. Aug. just. in Joan. tract. 73.
to him who gets his will, to his ruin; the Lord many a time in Aliquando Deus
iratus dat, quod petis; and Deus propitius negat quod petis, Aug. de verb. dom.
sermon. 53.
mercy withholds from his children, what he gives in wrath to enemies; the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32. and not only their
abundance, and having more then their heart could wish, but their necessary
accommodations, their food and raiment, their table, and that which should have
been for their welfare, becomes a snare, a trap and stumbling block unto them,
Psa. 69.22. The success and prosperity of the wicked becomes an occasion, both
of sin and misery; first of sin; and here we Qui nimios optabat honores, Et
nimias poscebat opes numerosa parabat, Excelsae turris tabula^a, unde^altior
esset Casus, and impulsae praeceps immane ruinae Quid Crassos, quid Pompeios
evertit? and illum Adsua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites? Summus nempe
locus, nulla non art petitus; Magnaque numinibus vota ex^udita malignis, Juven
satyr. 10.
might instance several particulars, as it proves an occasion of pride; Sed
quae reverentia legum quis metus aut pudor est unquam properantis avart? Ad
scelus atque nefas quodcunque est purpura ducit, Juven. Sat. 14.
if the Lord grant the desires of the wicked, they will exalt themselves, Psa.
140 8. Secondly, of impenitence, security and self pleasing: when Ephraim
became rich, and found out substance in all his ways, he said no iniquity
should be found in him, Hos. 12.8. when the ground of the rich man brought
forth plentifully, he said to his soul, take thee ease, eat, drink and be
merry, Luke 12.16, 19. Because the degenerat Israelits saw no evil, and had
plenty when they sacrificed to the queen of heaven, they would not hearken to
the words of the Prophet, Ier. 44 16, 17. Thirdly, of cruelty, These words may
esspecially relate to the prosperous days of Antiochus Epiphanes, who yet in
his sickness, and when the hand of God was upon him professed much tenderness
to the people of God, a Maccab. 9.
though the tender mercies of the wicked are usually cruel, Prove. 12.10. yet
especially when they are lifted up with success, then they become intolerable;
not only their hand, but their tongue is cruel, and full of venom, Heb. 11.36
Non est cur sideles deflectant a lege sibi divinitus imposita, vel invideant
incredulis, quasi magnum lucrum fecerint, ubi a depti sunt quod volebant,
Calvin. instit. lib. 3. cap. 20
37.

And as thus the prosperity of the wicked becomes an occasion of sin, So also
of misery and suffering; their victorious sword will at length enter into their
own belly, Psa. 37.15. they will ere long be enclosed in their own fat, Psa.
17.10. their prosperity shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32. Ier. 12.1, 2, 3. their
success is not only a forerunner, but also a preparation and occasion of their
ruin; tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant: they are lifted up, that
their fall might be the greater; and their place in the world becomes a (p)
rock, from which they are casten down headlong.

We need (q) not then fret our selves because of evil doers, nor envy their
prosperity, Psa. 37.1. neither need we question the Lords fidelity, either in
performing his promises to his children, or his threatening against the wicked;
nor have we any reason to ask, with those wretches, Mol. 2.17. Where is the God
of judgment? nor to say, with them, Zeph. 1.12. the Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil; but whatsoever cross-dispensations the godly are
exercised with, and whatever success the wicked get in their evil ways, yet we
may be persuaded, that the froward is an abomination to the Lord; and that his
secret (his blessing, though thou discern it not) is with the righteous, that
the curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked (though full of riches) and
his blessing on the habitation of the just, though never so mean and poor,
Prove. 3.31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

And now we proceed to that other branch of the objection, that concerns the
Saints, their disappointments and want of success; as if the Lord did not hear
nor regard their prayers. For answer, as we would remember what the Lords
hearing of prayer does import, So we would know how, and what be the different
ways after which the Lord answers the prayers of his people; least through
our ignorance, unbelief, or want of observance, the Lord hear and answer our
prayers, and yet we not know, nor take notice of his hand, as it was with Job,
chapter 9.16, 17. and the reason he gives there of his mistake, may also blind our
eyes; for, we often, like foolish children, regard not what we have, and take
little notice of what we receive, because we get not what we would have, and
what our carnal desires crave; and thus, when the Lord delayeth for a while,
though he draw nigh to us in the fit time and right season; yet (as that
eminent Saint professes of himself, ver. 11.) though he goes by, we see him
not; and when he passes on, we perceive him not; our eyes are shut, that we
cannot see his hand; and our ears are heavy, that we cannot hear what he says
in answer to our prayers; especially when the heavenly echo does not answer
voice, and when he gives not the particular mercy which was asked, but some
other thing (though better for us) by way of compensation and gracious
commutation. It would then be diligently observed, that the Lord may hear our
prayers four different ways; 1. by way of performance, and giving the very
particular we desired, and in our time and manner; 2. by way of compensation,
when he gives not the very particular, but makes a commutation in that which
is better for us; 3. by a^^^ying to give till the fit time for us to receive;
and, 4. by denying what we asked: For, though then he make a compensation, yet
it is no small mercy that he withholds what would hurt us, and of it self is
a gracious return of our prayers, and should with thanksgiving be
acknowledged, though no new, and other mercy were then added.

You will say, when the Lord performs, and satisfies our desire by giving
what we asked, yea, and when he makes a compensation and exchange, giving us
some other mercy in lieu of it, especially when he gives what is better, as
spirituals in stead of temporals (as usually he does) in those cases it will
not be denied, that the Lord hears our prayers; but, 1. while he delayeth,
and during the interim of the delay; 2. when he denies what was asked, and will
^ever give it, we cannot conceive how in those cases the Lord can be said to
hear and answer our prayers; especially si^ce the Lords denying to give what we
prayed for, appears to be nothing else but his rejecting our prayers, and
denying to answer them. Ans. Its too usual here to confound things much
different, and to commit a most gross and dangerous fallacy, as if it were one
and the same thing to receive what we ask, and to receive an answer to our
prayers; and not to receive what we desire and ask, and to have our prayers
rejected: But as we have shown, that the wicked may get their hearts desire and
more in wrath, though their prayer be an abomination to the Lord; So now it
shall appear, that the Lord does accept and answer the prayers of his servants,
though he give not what they asked; yea, and that the very delay for a season,
and an absolute denial, may be a return and answer to their prayers.

You will say, that is strange doctrine. Ans. But most certain, and which
should not be questioned amo^^ believers; for clearing of which; 1. let me ask
how (...) did pray for such a supposed mercy? whether absolut^ly and
peremptorily, as if thou had (...) [Lord, I know^ what is fit for me to have,
and this I have made choice of, and desire not to want upon any terms; and as
to this, let me have my will, and not be at thy disposin] and if thou have
prayed thus, thou have reason to go and beg pardon for thy folly and
intolerable pride and presumption; otherwise thou may fear an answer in
wrath, to humble thee, and make thee know, that thou Romans 8.26.
know not what to ask; and to learn thee to be no more so rash, positive and
peremptory in desiring those those things which, are in their own nature We are
not now speaking of spirituals which have no place here, because these shall
not be with held, no not as to their measure and degree, as may appear from
Patt. 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 2.
indifferent, and may in the use prove serpents to sting thee, and not bread to
nourish thee; and so could not be given to thee when such, but in wrath: But if
thou have learned to pray as thou ought, submitting to him who is Isa. 28.29.
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, to the only wise God, and thy
compassion at Father, who will not give thee a stone in stead of fish; and
confining thy desires within the bounds of the promise (for these indifferent
things only then fall under the promise, when hic and nunc, they are good to
us, as has been shown, Part 1. Chap. 7. and Part 2. Chap 2.) if thou have thus
learned to pray aright, thou needst not doubt of the success of thy prayers;
but may be assured, that though thou have not gotten the particular that thou
named in thy prayer, yet thy prayer has been heard and answered: the true
sense and meaning whereof must be this, 1 Timothy 1.17.
[O Lord thou know what is good for me to have, or want; and this is the
mercy that I desire, if it may prove a mercy and blessing indeed; but otherwise
let me rather want it, then have it in wrath, and to be a snare unto me.] So
that every prayer for outward and temporal things, must have a condition either
tacit or expressed, and so must have two parts and members; and as we pray for
such a supposed mercy upon supposition of expediency and convenience, So we
pray against it, and that it may not be given upon supposition of inexpediency
and hurt: Hence its evident, that the Lord in denying, when the condition of
expediency fails, or delaying till it be placed, does hear and answer thy
prayer; and if he did give the particular, he would not answer, but reject thy
prayer; for under both parts of the supposition, this is it which is absolutely
said and asked, [Lord do thou as a wise and tender father make choice for thy
foolish child, and do, as to the particular desired, what may prove for thy
glory, the good of the Church and thy servants comfort, advantage and eternal
happiness.] And when we thus pray, if the Lord did not withold what would be
for our hurt (for otherwise (as we may suppose from, Part. 2. Chap. 2. Sect. 2.
and what here follows) when these outward things would prove good for us,
they will not be withheld) and if he did give the particular we named, he
should not answer our prayers, nor fulfill his promises, nor do according to
our faith and expectation, nor according to our trust in him, or that fatherly
care and providence he exercises toward his chosen ones; but in withholding
what we thus desired, in the supposed case of inexpediency, he answers all
those ends and engagements.

And upon the former ground, we may yet further argue; 1. what is only
conditionally asked, if the condition fail, it is not asked; and what is only
relatively, and in reference to such an end loved and desired, when it will not
conduce unto, but rather hinder and obstruct that end, it is not loved and
desired, but rather hated and loathed: But the Saints pray for these outward
and temporal things only conditionally and relatively, as we have seen, Part 1.
Chap. 7. Sect. 2. and in the present case the condition fails, and their
subserviency to the great end; and therefore, they being thus clothed with
such circumstances, they are not asked not desired; and therefore their prayers
cannot be said to want an answer, because these are not given. 2. Such
conditional petitions must have two parts, and those opposite, according to the
nature of the condition, viz. that such a particular may be given upon the
supposition of expediency, and upon the contrary supposition of hurt and
inexpediency, that it may be withheld and not given; now both these conditions
cannot concur, as being opposite, and so both these parts jointly, and in sensu
composito, cannot subsist, nor be asked, and one of them (and that the best, and
which only in the supposed case is desired, and (shall I say?) absolutely (x)
asked) is always heard and answered, When the condition is placed and included,
an bypothetical proposition be co^eth absolute, condition^lis p^sita cou^^ one
fit absoluta.
even then when the particular is not given. 3. If our prayers must not be thus
resolved, and so thus heard and answered when the particular is denied) as we
would, 1, prove forgetful of our main and great unsiness, and the one thing
necessary, in not asking in subordination threunto; and, 2. as we might
prejudge the Church, and wrong others who may be also concerned therein. So. 3
we might be inju^^ous to our own selves, in reference to our self ends (which
then must rule and mislead) for what know thou but in the denial there may
be a reservation for some greater mercy of the same nature and kind, which
would have been obstructed by ^^y getting what for the present thou so
earnestly desired; if thou had come to such a place, and had been put in
such a station and condition of life, as thou did so greedily cover, that
might have obstructed thy greater preferment, and better accommodation in the
world, and then again, ^^y getting such a particular, might bring along with it
some sad and heavy cross, which the having of such a mercy could not
counter-ballance, and therefore the Lord in his love, and in his pity may
prevent such a great evil by withholding a less good.

And th^n what has been said in reference to the prayers of the wicked, that
they are not accepted, heard, nor answered (a^ being (...) abomination to the
Lord) when the particular they desired is given, may serve as a second ground
for illustrating the present point, concerning the Lords hearing and answering
the Saints prayers when the particular is not granted: As there will hear be
found parity of reason, though upon contrary grounds, So the ends and designs
(keeping still the opposition) will appear to be proportionably alike, by
comparing what has been here said concerning the one, viz. the ends propounded
in the dispensation of those mercies to the wicked, with what follows, Sect.
4. concerning the trials and disappointments of the Saints; only in the general
now we may suppose, that as the Lord in wrath gives to the Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath, that which through their folly and abuse becomes a snare,
and occasion of their ruin, So in mercy he withholds from the vessels of
mercy what would harm them, and become a temptation and occasion of their hurt;
and therefore, as he answers ^ot the prayers of the wicked when he gives
them their hearts des^re, So he answers the prayers of his servants when he
withholdeth the particular they desi^^d.

3. From the return ma^e to Christ's prayer (once and again Mat. 26.39, 42, 44.
renewed) that the (...) ^^^ght ^^^s from ^im, it is evident, that the prayer
may be (...) when the particular is not gra^ced; for (...) or p^^s a ^ay from
him, but he did drink it o^^ (...) the ^^^^om, and ye^ it were blasphemous to
imagine that Christ's ^^ayer w^^ not heard, contrary to what h^ himself ^ff^^^th
Joh. 11.4^. Father, I know that thou always hea^est me. And pa^^icularly, as
to that prayer, the holy Spirit ^^stifieth that he was heard, Heb. 5.7.

And then, 4. in the general the Scriptures of truth do most clearly, fully and
frequently assert, that they th^^ s^ek the Lord shall not want any good thing,
Psa. 34 10. the same is affirmed of them that walk vpright^^, Psa. 84.11. and
of them that fear the Lord, Ps^. 34.9. H^^ce, we may well infer, since they
shall want ^o good thing, they cannot want a return ^o their prayers, and (...)
answer from their God, the Lord doing what is (...) for them (...) reference to
the particular they desired. And si^^e no (...) shall befall the righteous,
Psa. 91.10. P^^v. 12.21. etc. therefore they shall not g^^ that (...) them,
(...) they should ask it upon a mistake; (...) ^aths of the (...) are m^^c^
(...) truth ^esu^ ha^ k^^p (...) moneys, Psa. 25.10. If all his (...) such,
then (...) those paths in which he (...) in ^^swering th^^ prayers, those paths
must be su^^ (...) of ^^uth and fidelity in (...) forming th^^e (...) and
answer them when they call upon him. There (...) ^ever a p^^yer p^^^^ed out in
truth, at which the God of truth did ^o^ drew nigh, and to which he did not
(...), Psa. 145.18.19. all his paths are mercy and truth to all true (...), who
can produce one exception or instance to the co^tr^^y? He never said to such,
sock ye me in vain, Isa. 45.19. and then there is a considerable word to this
purpose, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them that
love him; if we ponder the scope of the place, we will find this general truth
to have a special relation to prayer, of which the Apostle had been speaking in
the two preceding verses (where he had shown our ignorance, and that we know
not what to ask, and the need we stand in of light and help) and now, says he,
you having been assisted to do your duty and pray ar^ght, you need not be
anxious for Gods part, and that which lies upon him to do by way of return,
for ye may be assured, whether he give or withold the particular, he will
have such a care of you, as to do nothing but what he will make contribute and
work for your good; though we know not what to ask, yet God knows what to
give; he will not challenge thee for asking what thou apprehended to be good
for thee; if Especially since his Spirit may concur and assist thee in the
pouring out of such a prayer; it being our duty to go to God, and hold up to
him what we conceived to be good and fit for us, committing to him to make
choice for us what he knows to be best. See Part 1. Chap. 9. Page 269.
upon the matter it be lawful, and if thy desire be moderate and submissive,
although, as to the particular, there may be a mistake flowing from thy
ignorance of the event, and those following circumstances which thou could
not for-see, but yet the Lord will do what he of his infinite wisdom and
knowledge sees will be indeed good and convenient for thee; and we (I, and ye
believing Romans, says the Apostle) do know that God will care for them that
love him, and who in all things do make their requests known to him, he will
procure their good by the fittest means; though the wicked will not know and
acknowledge Gods care and fidelity in performing his promises, and therefore
think it in vain to seek the Lord, yet we know, and are persuaded of his love
and care: Surely the knowledge and belief of this point is a differencing mark
and character, they who have no interest in Gods love and care, will not
believe it toward others.

And thus its certain, that the Lord always hears his honest supplicants, Si
Aug. ^u^i supra.
non ad voluntatem, tamen ad utilitatem. If not according to their desire, yet
for their profit (which if our Our desires are often foolish and ^^rtfull.
desires would not hinder and obstruct, they should always be answered) what?
does our kind Father grudge to give us such empty trifles which he bestows in
such abundance upon the wicked? would he, who has so loved us as to give his
only begotten Son to death for us, and to prepare an exceeding and 2 Cor. 4.17.
eternal weight of glory for us: would he withold these perishing things from
us, if it were not for our good? Romans 8.^2. Nay, if we had not asked, as we
could have no solid peace, either in the having or wanting such a particular,
that being the fruit of prayer, Phil. 4.6, 7. So we might have Deus concedit
tratus quod negat propitius, vid. Aug. loco jam jam citato.
gotten in wrath, what the Lord now in mercy withholds from thee, who have
committed the matter to God, and have referred all to his wise, free and loving
choice. And thus, whatever be the particular ends and reasons (of which, Sect.
4.) why the Lord withholds such and such particular mercies as we desired,
in the general it is evident, that his design herein always is to prevent our
hurt, and promove our comfort and happiness; and that all his paths toward us
may be mercy and truth, by making all things work together for our good.

And now to the Objection as it is propounded, we answer. Although al things
did come alike to all, yet they are not alike to all; though in the outward
dispensation there appear no diff^rence, yet as to the fountain from which such
a dispensation did flow, the end to which it does tend, the effect, fruit, use,
etc there is a vast difference; for, those things which are mercies, blessings
and pledges of love to the Saints, prove snares, judgments, and an earnest of
everlasting wrath to the wicked; and what greater difference can be imagined?
yea, not only is there so great an inequality and dissimilitude where they seem
to be equal and alike, but also where there is an inequality, and the advantage
appears to be on the part of the wicked, as while we compare them in their
prosperity and success, and having Ps. 73.7^.
more then their heart could wish, with the godly under persecution, affliction
and sore calamities, yet even thus the case is not altered, nor the difference
and disproportion less; for the Saints afflictions, wants and trials are
sanctified unto them, and are made to work for their good, as being included in
these all things which must pay tribute to the godly, and be subservient to
them in their great work, that concerns the glory of God and their own
salvation, Romans 8.28. and the wickeds full cup, is full of poison, and in the
belly will become like gall and wormwood: The Scripture speaks of a strange
kind of wine, Rev. 14.10. viz. the wine of the wrath and indignation of the
everliving God, a part whereof is mingled with all their delicious liquors,
which makes them prove so deadly and astonishing; the wicked will never be able
to digest or vomit up this wine, the fattest and strongest among them will not
be able to wrestle with it, though they cannot flee from it, and therefore in
despair, when they find it begin to work, and cease upon their vitals, they,
even the Kings of the earth, the great, rich and mighty men will in vain cry to
the mountains and rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the wrath of the
Lamb, from which they cannot flee, and before which they cannot stand, Rev.
6.15, 16, 17. and in that day every one shall be able to discern the great
difference that shall be between the righteous and the wicked, and between him
that serves God and him that serves him not, Mal, 3.18. and after that unto
all eternity their lot and outward condition shall be no more alike; that shall
be the general day of audience and discrimination; no more prosperity to the
wicked, nor affliction to the Saints; all tears shall then be wipt from their
eyes, but the wicked shall be cast into that lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 7.17. Rev. 14.10. Mat. 13.42. Mat. 25.41, 46. Isa. 3.10, 11.

What? will ye, whose privilege it is to have a good understanding, Psa.
111.10. become so foolish and brutish as to envy or fret because of the
prosperity of evil doers, or the afflictions of the Saints? Psa. 73.3, 14, 22.
and will thou be so basely ungrate as upon such an account once to question his
love, care and fidelity? all whose parts toward thee are mercy and truth,
especially then while he will not suffer thee through thy folly to undo thy
self, nor put a sword in thy hand whereby thou would offer violence to thy
own soul? and what are all our lustings, our immoderat and peremptory desires
after such and such creature-enjoyments, but as roving fits of distempered
brains seeking after that which may occasion their ruin? Let us not then be so
earnest and peremptory in such desires, nor too anxious concerning the event of
our prayers for them, let us not measure the answer and success of prayer by
such a rule, but let us leave all upon the care, love and wisdom of our Father.

You will say, wherefore then should we pray for those things, since we may not
be anxious concerning the success of such prayers? Ans. As we must pray, So we
ought to pray so as we may prevail; and as we must look to our prayers, So
after their success; but yet we must not be anxious concering the particular,
whether in kind it be given or not; and though the particular we apprehend to
be good and desirable, be not Hic and nunc, and nobis.
good for us at such a time, yet to pray for it in a regular way is good and
acceptable to God, and may flow from the breathing and assistance of the
Spirit, who helps us to mind our duty, but not to look to the decree of God
concerning the giving or withholding of such a particular; now the Lord having
put such a price and opportunity into our hand, as to see and consider such a
mercy which in it self is not evil, and may be lawfully desired, and may prove
a blessing to us, it is our duty to improve that opportunity, and to hold out
the case to God, referring all to his wise and holy will, and begging that he
would do what may be best for us: And thus, as, 1. thou do thy duty, and
obeyest the command to make thy request known to God in every thing, Phil. 4.6.
So, 2. now thou may have peace, while otherwise a tender conscience in no
business, case or particular, can have rest, for until we recommend our case
to God, how can we expect his blessing? But, 3. by prayer, we will not only
thus have a kind of negative peace, and fredom from the challenges of
conscience, but also a positive and promising peace, Phil. 4.7. where after the
exhortation to pray in every case, there is a promise, not that we shall get
the very particular desired, but whatever we get or want, we shall get the
peace of God to guard our hearts, both against anxiety As anxious care is
impertinent to us who are servants and children, for that lies on the father
and on the master of the master of the family, So it is improfitable, and can
do us no good, but rather provoke the Lord to smite us, Mat. 6.27. and prayer
is prescribed as a remedy of this care, Phil. 4.6. and shall we then make our
prayers become fuel to feed it? by being anxious concerning the event and
success of our prayers.
and care, and against grief and disquietness when what we desired is not
given, and the right and sanctified use of the mercy when it is given; our
prayers cannot want an answer, which shall be better then all outward trifles;
to wit, the peace of God that passes all understanding. If the answer quiet
and content our heart, it must be full and satisfactory, for all we can have is
peace and contentment, and let the Lord speak it by what mean he pleases,
whether by giving or withholding such a mercy, it is no great matter, but
certainly some one way or other he will speak peace to his Saints, Psa. 85.8.
And as this spiritual peace is thus promised, So it is promising and
evidencing; 1. it declares that God has accepted our prayers; for, what else
is this peace but a messenger from heaven to show us that the King has heard
and welcomed our supplication? And then, 2. its an earnest and pledge of more,
and that the Lord will make his dispensation (as to the particular) to work for
our good; and thus, as such a prayer is good and acceptable (whatever be the
indifferency of the object in its own nature) So it is a mean for good to us,
and for procuring the blessing, which as it is sought, So it will not be
withheld, whether the particular in kind be given or not; such a prayer will
prove a mean for good, though not by the mean that thou did desire and name,
the Lord will ^less thee in reference to the particular, by doing what he will
make prove best for thee, though he lay The Saints faith does offer (as Joseph
did his two sons) both the having or wanting of such a particular mercy to the
Lords choice; only they peremptorily desire the blessing: but yet they set the
supposed mercy to the right hond (as it (...) were) and desire that it may be
preferred; but the Lord often, etc.
the right hand on Ephraim, and prefer him to Manasseh.

And thus it may appear, that though the particular be not given, yet the
prayer may not only be said to be accepted and heard, but also answered; though
we desire not to contend for words, yet we think, that when ever the Lord
hears, then he may be said to answer; because his hearing, is never separated
from his speaking; for, either then he stays the heart with this spiritual
peace, or secretly upholdeth the supplicant that he faint not, or some one way
or other does him good; but if any will refer the answer of prayer to a
sensible manifestation of Gods hand, either by giving what was asked, or making
some notable compensation and exchange; we will not debate such a nominal
question, but its certain, the Lord may accept and hearken to thy prayer, a
long t^me before thou meet with any such sensible manifestation of his
acceptance.

But woe Isa 3.11.
to the wicked! when shall they hear of their prayers? though many mercies be
^^spensed to them by the hand of a common providence, yet ^^ching in mercy, and
as a return of their supplications; though they have a c^vil ^^ght (which no
man dare challenge) to what they enjoy, and whatever grant and donation from
the Lord, or tenure by his providence they can pretend, yet they by their
ingratitude and abuse of these mercies (which they have emp^oyed as so many
weapons to fight against the G^ver) have forfeited all that right, and may
every moment be thrust out of all their possessions as tennents at will, and
certainly one day the heir Heb 1.2.
of all things will reckon with them as thieves and usurpers for meddling with,
and taking possession of his goods without his license, and for not
acknowledging his propriety, by employing them for his honor; yea, and often
here he reckons with such, they sit in slippery places, Psa. 73.18. they are
not like the people of God, who dwells in a sure habitation, Isa. 32.18. as
the whirlwind passes, So is the wicked no more; but the righteous is an
everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. the wicked get none of the sure mercies of
David, promised to the Elect, Isa. 55.3. but snares, fire, brimstone, and an
horrible tempest is the portion of their cup; they cannot promise to themselves
an hours security from such a storm, they know not how soon the Lord will thus
rain upon them, Psa. 11.6. The right of providence is a mutable title and
foundation, revocable at pleasure; the Lord may change his work, and the
dispensations of providence when he will, but he cannot change nor alter his
Word and break his promise, upon which the mercies of the Saints are founded,
and therefore their mercies are Mercies given in return to prayer are, 1. real;
2. stable; 3. costly; 4. pure; 5. witnessing; 6. promising.
real and stable; they are sure because they have such an immutable ground as
the Word of God; and they are the mercies of David, and therefore they are
real, because they are given for the merit and intercession of the typified
David, they come to them through the covenant of promise, whereby the
forfeiture is taken off, and the curse removed; their mercies are me^^^es
indeed, and no wonder they being so costly (though cheap to us) they are the
purchase of blood, they stood Christ at a dear rate: they are pure mercies, the
blessing of the Lord takes away the sting and thorns from them, Prove. 10.22.
they are witnessing and sealing mercies, they are as so many testimonies of the
love of our Father, and of the acceptance of our prayers; and they are Every
one of the Saints mercies may be called Gad, for a troop comes.
promising mercies, and pledges of more; yea, and of all things whatsoever we
shall stand in need of: But the wicked are not so, they are fed as oxen for the
slaughter, and their mercies are as so many forerunners of their woe and
misery; their blessings are cursed, and their mercies given in wrath and in
judgment.

Sect. III. How we may know, 1.; whether the Lord has heard our prayers when
he deniethor delayeth to give what we asked? and, 2. whether the mercies we
receive be the fruits of Gods general bounty conveyed to us by the hand of
common providence, or given in love as a gracious return to our prayers?
Psa. 66.19. Verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my
prayer.
WE will not stay to prove, that the Saints may discern the Lords voice while
he answers their prayers, there being so many instances hereof in the Word,
and that not only when he gives the particular mercy they petitioned, as to
David, Psa. 116.1, 2. Psa. 66.19* Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.27. etc. but also when the
particular is withheld, as from Paul, who yet discerned the Lords voice, and
what he said in answer to his prayers, 2 Cor. 12.9. Neither will it be needful
to show, that we should hearken to the Lords voice, and observe what he says;
1. for strengthening our faith by such experiences of the Lords bounty and
fidelity; 2. that we may pay our vows, and return to him the sacrifice of
praise; and, 3. that a new engagement may be laid upon our heart to improve his
mercies to the honor of his Name.

But all the difficulty lies in this, how, and by what means we may discern
when the Lord speaks, and when he is silent at our prayers; and we will find
the case more difficult as to its first branch, viz. when the Lord withholds
or delayeth to give what we asked, because we must then wrestle against sense
and carnal reason; but yet there is difficulty enough to discern from what
fountain, and by what means our mercies come when we get what we desired. We
shall speak to both those branches of the question, which has been propounded
by several practical Divines; but the first (so far as we know) who at any
length has handled this case, is the judicious Mr. Goodw. return of prayer
chap. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Goodwin; to whom Such as Mr. Fenner, s^rm on Lam. 3.57. Isaac Ambros in mediis
Chris. Love zeal. Chris. Gurnal part 1. page 43. and part. 3 page 362.
others have added little or nothing, but none has spoken so fully; therefore
we shall only name some few particulars, referring to him for their larger
explication, adding but a word of observation, for the right improvement of
these rules.

And first, we will speak to the case in general, and then to its several
branches; 1. then by these and such like marks, we may know that our prayers
are accepted and heard, whether the particular we desired be given or not; as,
1. Goodw. chapter 5. observations taken from before and in praying.
when the Lord stirs the hearr up to pray and enlarges the affections in
prayer; 2. if by, or in prayer, he quiet the heart, and make thee Hannah* like
come from the Kings presence with a contented and calmed spirit; 3. if whilst
thou art praying the Lord smile upon thee, and lift up the light of his
countenance upon thee, and make any intimation to thee concerning his love and
thy adoption and sonship; 4. if he stir up in the heart a particular faith
whereby thou assuredly expectest the very particular thou desired, enabling
thee to wait for it maugre all impediments and discouragments (but this
now-a-daies is not very usual;) 5. when the Lord does put a r^stless
importunity in the heart, whereby it continu^th instant in prayer, (though with
submission as to the particular) 6. Cha. 6. after prayer, how is suc^ess may be
discerned.
if after prayer thou walk obediently and circumspectly; if thou be as careful
to hearken to the voice of the Lord in his commandments, as thou art desirous
that he should hearken to thy supplications; 7. if all the while the Lord
delayeth, thou wait upon him, and look up for an answer; 8. but if thou get
what thou desired, and in that very way, and by these very means which thou
pitchedst upon (as it often falls out) what need thou doubt of the success
of thy prayers?

But now we come to particulars; and, 1. by these directions we may know, that
our prayers are heard when the thing we desired is not Cha. 9.
accomplished; as, 1. if thou can discern any thing given by way of
commutation and exchange, thou will not readily more d^ubt of the success of
thy prayer, then if thy desire had been accomplished: But though thou can not
discern a compensation made to thee; yet if, 2. thou wast not per^mptory in thy
desire, if thou durst entrust the Lord, and roll all over upon his wise choice,
thou needst not fear least he dis-appoint thee [if thou have prayed
submissively to his will, thou may be assured that he will do what will be
most for thy well] 3. would not this support thee, if the Lord should deal with
thee as he did with Moses, giving to him a Deuteronomy. 34.1. etc.
Pisgah-sight of that land into which he so earnestly desired to enter; if the
Lord do yield far in such a particular, as if he labored to give thee all
satisfaction, would not that quiet thy heart? Nay, 4. if he discover his hand
by some remarkable dispensation in suspending his ordinary influence, or
turning second causes, even then when it would have appeared, that such a mercy
as thou desiredst, was brought to the birth; this may be an evidence to thee,
that the Lord has some special respect to thee and to thy prayers, and some
special design in withholding such a supposed mercy [^ts true, if there be any
Psa. 139.24:
wicked way in thee, such a dispensation may be for thy warning and
instruction; but yet always it is in mercy and in love toward thee, who
committing thy way to God, do call upon him in sincerity.] 5. This and the
following ho^d forth the effects, that a sancti^^ed acnial (or rather a
graciou^ grant ^^cundum cardinem precationis) has upon the heart.
If the Lord fill the heart, not only, 1. with a ^^ent submission unto his
will, but also, 2. with a holy contentment and satisfaction in his choice, as
being best for thee; and thus, if, 3. out of faith thou can praise and render
thanks to God, r^sting on his love, care and fidelity, whatever sense and
carnal reason depone and suggest to the contrary, this may be an evidence to
thee, that the spirit that now rests upon thee, has led thee to the th^one,
and has not suffered thee to go away empty; [You will say, but who is he that
uses to praise God for denying what he asked, and does not rather complain and
mourn when he meets with such a dispensation? Ans. Our ignorance, unbelief
and groundless jealousy makes us too often take a quite contrary course, to
what we ought and should follow; and thus, while we are called to praise, we
are ready to murmr and complain; and the cause of this our error and mistake
(besides our unbelief and sensuality) is our negligence, and because we will
not be at the pains, as to bring our hearts into a right frame, and to pray
with the whole heart, so neither to reflect upon our hearts and prayers, and to
compare them with the rule, and those qualifications which the promise does
require, that thus we might judge aright of the success of our work.] 6. If
thou be not discouraged, neither entertainest hard thoughts of thy master and
his work, if thou love not prayer worse, but continuest instant in that
exercise, not daring to run away from God in a fit of coffeehouse [as this
may be an evidence of thy patience, submission and That which the Lord mainly
regards, is thy faith, without which we would soon weary, and yet thy
patience and submission abstructly considered, cannot but be welpleasing to
God: For (^aith our Author here) it moves ingenious natures to see men take
repu^ses and d^nia^^ well, which proud persons will not do; and (...) it mov^s
God, etc.
faith, So also of the acceptance and success of thy prayer; in that the spirit
of prayer and supplication does thus rest upon thee, thou may conclude, that
thou have pray^d in the Spirit, and that therefore thy prayers cannot want an
answer.]

Now we proceed to the other branch of the question, viz. how we may discern
whether mercies come to us by the hand of a common providence, or in return to
ou^ prayers? (...) Ibid. cha. 7.
If we can discern the Lords hand in a m^re then ordinary m^nner, we may be
confident he has hearkened ^o our voice; as first, when he brings a thing to
pass through many difficulties that stood in the way. 2. When he provideth and
facilitateth the means, and makes them conspire and combine in the
accomplishing of a mercy for us. 3. When he does it suddenly, and ere thou art
aware of it; as Joseph's and Peter's delivery from prison, and the Israelites
return from Babylon; they were as men in a dream, and could scarce believe what
was done, because so suddenly and unexpectedly. 4. If God do above what we did
ask or think, giving an overplus and casting in other mercies together with
that which we desired, and (perhaps for a long time) prayed for. 5. By making
some remarkable circumstance a token for good, and a seal of his love and care;
and thus a circumstance small, in its self, may be magnum indicium, as the dogs
not barking at the children of Israel when they went out of Egypt in the night,
Exodus 11.7. etc.

2. The consideration of the time when such a mercy is accomplished and given,
may help us to discern whether it be in answer to our prayers; as, 1. if at, or
about that very time when thou art most instant and earnest in prayer for it,
as Peter was sent from prison to the Church, while they were assembled to pray
for him, Act. 12.12. 2. if in the most fit and acceptable time, as first, when
thou have most need, and thy extremity is great, as Peter's delivery in that
night which Herod had decreed should be his last; Secondly, to encourage thee
against some new trial and conflict; Thirdly, when thy heart is most weaned
from such a temporal mercy; and thus [thy heart is fitted to receive and
improve it, which otherwise might have proven a woeful snare, and might have
become thine Idol, if it had been given before the inordinacy of thy affection
was cured] as the Lord does not withold such mercies from his servants out of
want of love, So neither so much for what is Former sint, if bewailed and
pardoned, do not hinder the success of prayer.
past, as for the present evil disposition of their hearts, and to keep them
from hurt thereby.

3. If we see the Lord observe, as it were, some proportion in his dealing with
our prayers and walk; as there is often a proportion between sin and the
punishment of it, So between our work and reward; and thus when thy desires
were spiritual, and thy prayers fervent, thy success in business was
proportionable; but now thou art grown faint in prayer, and negligent in thy
walk, and all thy hopes are, as it were, dashed; and now, while Exodus 17.11.
Meses his hands fall down, Amaleck prevails; if, as the more pure and
spiritual thy ends in praying were, the mercy proves the more pure and stable;
and the less zeal and fervency thou expressed in prayer, and the more
self-interest did prevail, the more of bitterness and wormwood is mingled with
the mercy when granted, etc. [and how should the consideration hereof, that the
Lord will notwithstanding our failings, yet regard, and in some manner answer
our prayers, and discover his hand, and that he takes notice of our way and
walk? how should this. 1. humble us for our manifold failings, and not
regarding the Lords hand; 2. stir us up to thankfulness for thus warning, and
waiting upon us, and filling our hands with so many mercies; 3. provoke us to
diligence and circumspection, zeal and sincerity in every part of his worship,
and in our whole course and conversation?]

4. We may discern whether our mercies be given in answer to our prayers by
their Ibid. cha. 8.
effects upon the heart; as, 1. if they prove not fuel to feed thy lusts, but
do rather kindle thy zeal for, and love to God; if they draw thy heart nearer
to him, and make thee rejoice more in his favor discovered by the giving of
such or such a mercy, then in the thing it self; and to prize it as a greater
mercy, that thy prayer has been heard, then that such an outward thing has
been given. 2. If the receiving of mercies enlarges thy heart with
thankfulness, self-love makes us more forward to pray, then to give thanks; but
thankfulness of all duties proceeds most from pure grace; if then the Spirit of
grace does stir thee up to praise God for his mercies, he has helped thee to
pray, and to obtain such a mercy by thy prayer; it must then be a good sign,
that a mercy has been won by prayer, when it is worn with thankfulness. 3. If
the receiving of mercies make thee careful; 1. to pay thy vows made in prayer;
and, 2. to improve what thou have received to the honor of the Giver, it is an
evidence that such mercies have come from God; otherwise they would not thus
lead in to him. 4. If thou look over second causes, by faith acknowledging his
sole hand, who governs and orders second causes according to his pleasure;
it is an evidence of thy dependence on him, and that thou have prayed in faith,
and so must have prevailed. 5. If the mercy obtained encourage thee to continue
in prayer, and in all other cases to run to God; making thee say, with him,
therefore will I call upon God so long as I live, Psa. 116. 1, 2. if it quicken
thy diligence, and strengthen thy faith in prayer, its a token the Lord has
spoken, and thou have heard his answer. 6. If with the mercy there come some
evidence of love, if the Lord smile upon thee, and lift up the light of his
countenance, and intimat his favor, there will be no place left for doubting,
since thou have not only a love-token, but a letter also with it, to bear
witness of his love, And, 7. the event will bring with it an additional
confirmation, that such a mercy has been obtained, and sanctified by prayer;
if it prove a real and stable mercy, if the trouble, vexation and snare, that
otherwise might accompany it, be removed, it may be an evidence that it is a
blessing indeed, Prove. 10.22.

Now for the right A Caution.
improvement of these directions, I deny not, that these and the like
particulars deserve our serious consideration, and when they occur, may be
helpful for discovering the Lords mind in his dispensations toward us; but we
would distinguish and put a difference between those necessary qualifications
of prayer, which are required on our part, and which belong to the performance
it self, and so are indispensably required at our hands, and between those
gracious dispensations which the Lord according to his mere good pleasure may
impart or withold. As to the 1. we would carefully observe those directions
that concern our duty, for, if we be negligent in prayer, and in those other
duties that relate thereto, or if we be loose in our walk, we may fear the rod,
but cannot expect a gracious return to our formal prayers. But, 2. as to those
signs that depend upon the good pleasure of the Lord to bestow or not, we would
beware of curiosity in requiring, expecting, or looking to much after them; and
of rashness and presumption in laying too much weight upon them if they shou d
occur: Therefore the safest and surest course, must be not to lean too much to
sensible demonstrations of providence, but rather to reflect on Gods Word, both
on the word of promise and precept, and according to that rule to judge of our
prayers and their success; and thus, though we can espy no ground of hope and
encouragment from any dispensation of providence, yet if we find our prayers
run parallel with the promise, and the qualifications and conditions thereto
annexed, and that we have prayed according to the will of God, both as to the
matter and manner of performance, we need not doubt of their success, whether
we have gotten the particular we asked or not.

But here it may be enquired, whether those mercies which the Saints receive
when they are on the declining hand, and are negligent in their walk, and cold
and formal in their prayers, be given in return to their prayers? Ans. This
question does not concern tender Christians who are circumspect in their walk,
and who are busy and d ligent (though not so enlarged, neither have such
melting affections, nor such a measure of confidence as sometimes they have
had) in prayers, and other ordinances; whatever hard conclusions such may draw
against themselves, yet their state is safe, their prayers are accepted, and
their mercies and enjoyments sanctified, as may appear from, Part 3. Chap. 2.
Neither, 2. do we now enquire concerning the health, wealth and prosperity of
the wicked, and the success of their prayers and vain oblations; their seeming
mercies and blessings being cursed, and their prayers an abomination to the
Lord, as has been shown in the preceding Section. But, 3. we now only enquire
concerning the Saints, and the success of their prayers, when they are under a
distemper, and are negligent in their soul-trade and carriage, and cold and
formal in their prayers, we do not separate these two in the question, because
in practice they are seldom divided: And though the most eminent, circumspect
and active Saints, may sometimes be lukewarm, and meet with little life or
quickening in prayer or any other ordinance, yet that is but for a short season,
it is but a fit, not a state and abiding condition, and before an answer come,
there may be a supply (I do not say a compensation by way of merit and
satisfaction for the former negligence, but that) there may interveen such
acceptable activity and fervency in prayer, as will prevail, notwithstanding
the fore going slackness and deadness; and then whatever be the issue of their
former, dead and liveless prayers, yet their after servency will not want a
reward, and their enjoyments will thereby be sanctified, and their mercies will
be given in return thereto; and in this case there is no ground for anxiety and
fear, neither has the present question place here, unless it were to satifie
curiosity; and thus if we consider these formal prayers abstractly and by
themselves, and without any reference to the after enlargement and activity in
that exercise, we do not deny, that such prayers may be included in the
question, though it mainly relate to a state of negligence and formality, and
to such deadness in prayer as has been usual and customary, and to which way
has been given for a considerable space of time, during which the mercies thus
prayed for have been given. Unto which now we answer, That such mercies should
not be esteemed to be the fruit of prayer, nor be given in return thereto; 1.
because such prayers are no prayers in Gods account; since the heart is not set
a work, and does not concur in such lazy performances: and can that which is no
prayer, prevail? and will the Lord hearken to any voice in Though in such a
case it may get the name, yet it is rather the picture of prayer, then the
thing is self.
prayer that proceeds not form the heart? See Part 1. Chap. 4. 2. Because
this lukewarm temper is much displeasing to God; he threatens to punish it,
Rev. 3.16. and will he then reward it, and bestow mercies for its sake? 3. Such
prayers are not regular, but are many ways defective, and come short of the
conditions annexed to the promise of audience; and therefore (...) ought not
lay claim to, and cannot obtain the thing promised. 4. We might here apply the
several particulars required to the audience of prayer; Sect. 2. which will be
found to be here wanting, no less then there they appeared to be lacking in the
prayers of the wicked; and between those two cases there is no considerable
difference, except us to the state of the person; so that we might here resume
the arguments we there used in the case belonging to that place.

Hence, we may conclude, that the Lord cannot be said to give to his children
under such a distemper any of those mercies in truth, and to accomplish the
promises (unless we understand such absolute promises as belong to the elect
before their conversion, or some general promises concerning the Saints
perseverance, repentance, reformation, establishment, etc. in which those
mercies cannot be said to be directly included) but out of his absolute
sovereignty and mere good pleasure, and therefore such a dispensation (as not
flowing from any covenant-transaction, promise and encouragment) may be altered
when it shall seem good to the Lord, and all those mercies thus given, may be
removed, and the contrary evils and judgments inflicted, without any breach as
to the Lords fidelity and faithfulness in performing his promises, they having
so far It is not (...) complete and absolute forfeiture, because the right and
jus in actu primo (that I may so speak) is not lost, so that whenever this
obstruction is removed, the Saints may pursue their former claim without a new
grant and donations: it must rather be a ^^questration then a forfeiture.
forfeited a right to these, as that during that state of deadness and
formality in his worship, they cannot plead and lay claim to any of these, as
belonging to them upon the account of any ordinance or duty performed by them;
since they come short of those conditions and gracious qualifications which the
promise does require, and suppose to be in all those to whom they will be
accomplished.

But if it be further asked, whether in this case mercies be given in mercy and
love, or in wrath and paternal anger? Ans. We spoke to this question in a word,
Part. 3. Chap. 2. Sect. 3. and now again we affi^m, that there can be no
general rule given here, but we must judge by the effect and event; 1. if these
mercies humble us, and become as so many cords to draw us in to the fountain
from which they flow, if they open our eyes and make us see the evil of our
ways, if they engage and set the heart a work to wonder and admire the
patience and kindness of him whose love Cant. 8.7.
many waters cannot quench, and if they make us blush and be ashamed when we
confider the inequality and disproportion that is between our ways and God's
ways toward us, and resolve with the prodigal (though the case be not the
same, nor the distance so great) to return and go to our Father, being
convinced that such a lazy and negligent walk does rather tend to a separation
from, then an union with God, etc. if this be the fruit of these mercies, they
must be given in love. But, 2. if they lull us a sleep, and make us secure, as
if our state were safe, and our performances acceptable because successful,
and thus followed with outward mercies, they must be given in wrath (not pure
and vindictive, but paternal and castigatory) for this dallying in his worship,
and with his ordinances. So that the Lord may for a while punish and chastize
his children as with rods, so with mercies, to make us know that there is so
much of the old root in the best, that if the Lord withdraw his hand and
withold the blessing, neither rods nor mercies could do us good, but the
venom within us would suck poison out of the most pleasant flowers, and turn
the most healing medicines into deadly corrosives: Let us not then rest on our
enjoyments, though thou be a Son thy Father may grant thy desire in anger;
parents when most grieved and displeased with their children, may give way to
them, and let them have their will without control, but ere it be long the
father will chide his son, and upbraid him for his meddling and taking upon him;
and then the son (if he be not an unnatural wretch) could wish that his liberty
had rather been restrained, then his father in anger given way to his course;
and who among the genuin Sons of Zion, would not rather choose to be under the
rod, then to have his hearts desire with the displeasure of his heavenly
Father? O! then do not mistake, as if thou had with thy fathers leave and
good will, because thou did ask, and he has answered thy desire; for, he may
give thee in wrath (as he did the Israelits, Psalm. 78.29.31.) thine own hearts
desire, and not with hold the request of thy lips. Let us then examine our
hearts and ways, and then rejoice in our mercies; let us observe the Apostles
method, 1 John 5.14, 15. and judge of our having and receiving by the audience
of our prayers, (which must be known, not by sensible demonstrations of
providence, but by comparing our prayers with the right rule, viz. the will of
God revealed in his commands and promises) but if we proceed contrarily, and
conclude that our prayers are heard because we have the petitions we desired of
him, we may readily mistake and apprehend these prayers to be heard and
answered, whereby the Lord has been provoked and dishonored; O! but when it
is with us as it was with him, Psa. 21.2, 6. when the Lord gives us our hearts
desire, and withholds not the request of our lips; and we rejoice in his
salvation, and are glad because he lifts up his countenance upon us; when these
are joined together, then is our peace stable, and our comforts solid; but when
we rejoice in mercies and grieve the God of our mercies, our joy will end in
mourning.

Sect. IV. A modest enquiry after the reason, holy design^, and ends why the
Lord delayeth, or denies the particular merey that was desired, though he
accept and answer our prayers.
Psa. 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, --
and that he may have mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of judgment. 2 Cor.
12.8, 9. For this thing, I besought the Lord thrice, -- and he said unto me, my
grace is sufficient for thee.
THe present question is not concerning the Lords hiding himself from the
prayers, either of the wicked or of the Saints, (that being the matter of the
following Chapter) but concerning such and such a way of answering the
effectual fervent prayer of the righteous; which must prevail and cannot want a
return) viz. 1. why the Lord for so long a time delayeth to give what he
purposes at length to give; 2* why he denies and withholds the particular
mercy that was asked, and will rather give some other thing (which will be
better for us) in lieu and consideration of what was desired, and thus will
rather make a gracious compensation, then grant the mercy in kind that was
desired? We shall begin with the last, as being many a time the sad trial and
exercise of the Saints, who not seeing the Lords design, nor observing the
compensation (it happily being in spirituals which are not so easily discerned)
have been ready to apprehend such a dispensation to be in wrath, and that the
Lord has hid himself from their prayers.

But here it would be remembered, that our work is not to enquire after the
meritorious and procuring cause, which by way of demerit does provoke the Lord
either to deny or delay, because although the Lord delay to give or deny what
was asked, yet he does not (as the question supposes) either deny or delay the
acceptance and hearing of our prayers; yea, such a denial and delay is not only
in mercy and love, but by See Sect. 2
way of answer to our prayers; and he who knew no sin, did meet with such a
return to his prayers, Mat. 26.39, 42, 44. And therefore now we must only
enquir concerning the holy ends and gracious designs the Lord propounds in
such a dispensation; under which we would not have the castigation of his
people to be comprehended; for, albeit in his purpose, and in the issue that
has much love in it, yet it being in it self grievous, bitter and afflictive,
and not a fit See Part. 3. Chap. 3.
object of our prayers, it cannot so properly be said to be given by way of
return to them, yet since it proceeds from love, and may be very profitable to
us, and thus may be asked conditionally and comparatively (as has been Ibid.
shown) we shall in the close add a word concerning it; though still it would
be considered, that there is a great difference between this, and those other
designs which have nothing of anger and wrath in them, and here the object it
self being absolutely considered is Malum paena.
evil, a fruit and punishment of sin, and a testimony of divine displeasure,
and therefore whatever be said of the fruit and event, yet the thing it self
abstractly considered, cannot well be called a return and answer of prayer.

Now let us name some of those gracious ends for which the Lord denies to give
the particular mercy we desired; as, 1. the exercise of our faith and patience;
graces are given us for use, as talents wherewith we should trade and gain, and
not to be laid up in a napkin to rust and corrupt, and therefore its needful,
that the Lord in his providence should offer occasions for their exercise; as
in the present case, while he withholds our hearts desire, then in patience
to submit to his holy counsel, and still to depend upon him, as it must be the
work of honest supplicants; So, 2. it is their trial; thus the sincerity of
their hearts and reality of their grace is brought to the touchstone, not only
must our graces be exercised for their growth and increase, but also for their
trial and discovery; and to give Satan, the world, yea and our own hearts an
evidence of their truth; yea, and sometimes of their strength and perfection,
if notwithstanding we meet with no sensible demonstrations, yet we will believe
God's Word of promise, depend upon him, and patiently bear a seeming repulse
and denial. 3. Hereby the Lord would draw our hearts off from the creature,
that we may enjoy a more ful^ and immediate communion with himself; he will cut
off the streams, that we may run to the fountain it self, to have a supply and
an up-making there; the Lord will with hold many creature enjoyments that we
may know our home not to be here, and that our minority is not yet past, nor
the inheritance to be yet entrusted to us, as being but pupils who must depend
and ro^l themselves and their affairs over upon the care and fidelicy of
another; and that thus our hearts may be enlarged with longing desires after
that day, when our wills shall run parallel with our good, and the glory and
purpose of our Master. 4. To prevent our hurt; we are ready to mistake, and to
ask a serpent in stead of an egg, but God will not grant such foolish desires,
but will (according to Christ's Joh. 17.25.
prayer) keep us (thus, as it were, against our wills) from the evil of the
world; 1. from the evil of temptation, for often See Sect. 2.
such things prove an occasion of sin; 2. from the evil of suffering; for
riches, honors and pleasures have often proven a precipice from which the men
of the world have been cast headlong; 5. to promove our good and greater
advantage, what we desire may prove obstructive of a greater mercy, either
spiritual or temporal, and the Lord in his pity and love will not suffer such a
block and impediment to be cast into our way; 6. for our instruction; what is
said of the cross, schola crucis, schola lucis, may well be applied to this
dispensation (which often, through our ignorance and mistake, proves a sad
affliction to us) thus we may learn no more to live by sense, and hereby we may
be set a work to examine our hearts and ways more narrowly, that we may know
whether such a dispensation proceeds from anger or love, and thus we may be
brought to espy what formerly did escape our view, etc. nay, here we might
allege all those motives which prevail with the Lord to afflict his people,
and honest servants while he does not pursue any quarrel against them; as in
the case of Job, of the Apostles and Martyrs; for, as this case is much like to
that, this being often very grievous to us, and looking affliction-like, So the
ends and motives on the Lords part, will be found to be much alike, and for the
most part the same.

As to the second branch of the question, viz. those ends for which the Lord
delayeth to give what he purposes at length to give; we might here resume
several particulars mentioned in the former head, as there also might be
applied much of what we are now to say; these cases not being much different as
to the present enquiry, since both those dispensations flow from one and the
same fountain of love, wisdom, care and fidelity of a compassionat father
toward his children and servants. 1. Then the Lord delays to give till we be
fitted and Tauto quippe illud quod valde magnum est sumemus eapacius, quanto
and fidelius credimus and speramus sirmius, and defideramus ardentius.
prepared to receive, and that such a dispensation may be a mean to humble and
prepare us; every thing is good and beautiful in its season, and the Lord
knows best how to time our mercies right; if the Lord should give in our time,
and before we be prepared to receive and improve, such a gift would be as
medicine unseasonably taken, which would rather increase and beget, then remove
diseases; but as the Lord thus delayeth till we be fitted to receive and
improve his mercies aright; So, 2. till other things be fitted, and be in
readiness to join with the desired mercy for our good, that thus (according to
that sweet, though little pondred or believed word, Romans 8.28.) all things may
work together for our good; that impediments may be removed, and other means
may be placed and join hands with such a mercy, that fit occasions may be
offered, and such circumstances may combine, etc. and thus a considerable space
of time may interveen before the right and fit season come. 3. To make us prize
the Lords bounty the more when he fulfilleth our desire, and to make us the
more thankful for the mercy; Augustine. supra citat.
cito data vilescunt, soon and easily gotten, little prized, and soon
forgotten. 4. To make us pray more frequently and importunatly; Ibid.
Deus differt dare ut tu discas orare, the Lord delayeth that we may add both
to the number and measure of our prayers, that we may become both more
assiduous, and more ardent supplicants. 5. That at length he may appear for our
greater comfort; the Lord waits that he may be gracious, and that our mercies
may be full, complete and stable. 6. To learn us that hard lesson of
submission, and that we may not dare to limit and prescribe to the Lord, that
we may patiently wait and look up to him until he show us his loving kindness;
to make us examples to others of patience, dependence and self-denial, etc. I
have not insisted on these particulars, because many of them, or such like are
more fully handled, and applied to a more Viz. both to this and that which
follows; chap. 2.
general case, by the judicious Mr. Gee in his elaborat Treatise concerning
prayer-obstruction, Chap. 4. But what has be said may suffice for convincing
us of our impatience, folly and ingratitude to our kind God, who waits that he
may be gracious to us, and who will not withold our desires, when these are
not contrary to his glory; the good of his people, and our own comfort and
happiness.

CHAP. II. When, and whose prayer will the Lord not hear nor answer.
WE will, 1. speak of this question as it concerns the Saints; 2. as it
concerns the wicked.

Sect. 1. When will the Lord not hear his children and servants? and what are
these sins that will obstruct and hinder the success of their prayers.
Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.
WE may speak of the Saints prayers, either for private and personal mercies,
or for public mercies to the Church and incorporation of believers; but as to
the present case we need not insist on this distinction, but in reference to
both sort of prayers, we may generally answer with the Psalmist, Psa. 66.18. if
we regard iniquity in our heart, the Lord will not accept or answer any of our
prayers, either for our selves or others. See Part. 2. Chap. 1. But it may be
asked, what are those sins which in a special manner do obstruct and hinder the
success of our prayers? Ans. Albeit we condemn the stoical dream concerning the
equality of sins, it being evident from the Word of truth and sound reason,
that there is a great difference between sins and sins, some being much more
heinous and grievous then others, both in respect of the act, object, manner of
performance, and many aggravating circumstances; and thus those sins that are
most grievous, hell-like, and conscience-wasting, must especially provoke the
Lord, and mainly obstruct the acceptance and audience of prayer; yet, I know no
sin that does not deserve, and may not procure this sad judgment. But we would
here take notice of the Gospel-condescension to the weakness and infirmity of
the Saints; for, though the Law still abides in force, not only as a rule, and
as to its direction, but also as a command, and in reference to its obligation,
so that the least breach of the law does no less now, then while man continued
in innocence, and was able perfectly to fulfill and obey it, deserve the curse,
and make us liable to the wrath of God, Gal. 3.10. yet as to the acceptance of
the person and performances there is a sweet mitigation in the new covenant,
that covenant of grace made with sinners in a Mediator, and the tenor of the
Gospel runs thus, If thou should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared, Psa. 130.3, 4.
when we have respect to all he commandments (though we do not exactly fulfill
them) we shall not be ashamed, Psalm. 119.6. When in sincerity we apply our
selves to obey God in all things, and fulfill his will, our kind Master will
pardon and pass over our infirmities; what the Apostle says concerning our
particular duty, viz. giving of alms, upon the same ground will hold in every
case, and may be looked upon as a general rule whereby we may judge concerning
the acceptance of all our duties and service. viz. When there is a willing
mind, and a performance out of that which we have (or according to our power
and ability) it is accepted according to what a man has, and not according to
that a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. The Lord does not exact impossibilities
of his The wicked who are yet under the covenant of works, though they be not
yet solvendo, as having through their own fault spent that stock wherewith
their master entrusted them, yet are still liable to the law, and are obliged
to answer according to their intromission.
people, he will not deal with them in justice, but having accepted a ransom
and satisfaction from their Cautioner, and being through him reconciled with
them, he will as a loving Father accept their honest endeavors, pity their
weakness, and pardon and cover their infirmities: and thus sins of weakness,
humane frailty and daily incursion, will not mar, not hinder the acceptance
and success of our prayers; but sins of wilfulness and stubbornness, and of
continued and countenanced laziness and negligence, will be as a thick Lament.
3.44.
cloud through which our prayers will not be able to pierce; such sins have a
voice, and they will outcry our prayers, and in stead of the desired mercy,
will bring down the deserved judgment; when we sin willingly, deliberatly, and
presumptuously, when sin lodges in the heart, and is welcomed, or (as the
Psalmist speaks) is regarded there, the Lord will not hear our prayers;
whatever the sin be whether in it self greater, or less (though there be no
little sin, every sin being committed against the great God) it may provoke the
Lord to hide himself from our prayers; the Scriptures hold out many instances,
and brand a multitude of sins with this woeful effect, which are at some length
set down by Mr. Gee in the forementioned Mr. Gee treat. of prayer and divine
providence, chap. 4. sect. 5.
Treatise lately and seasonably published, to give some clearing to this
material and grave case concerning prayer-obstruction. And since its certain,
1. that every sin regarded in the heart, deserves, and may procure this sad
stroke; and since, 2. its as uncertain what is the particular sin, which now
and then does provoke the Lord to hide his face; neither see I any reason why
we should as to the procuring and meritorious cause, put a difference between
this and other judgments; and therefore the best resolution of this quaeree,
(as it relates to those personal prayers put up for our selves, though Mr. Gee
especially propounds the case as relating to public prayers, put up for the
Church and people of God) must be brought from within; let us then examine our
own hearts and ways impartially, and seek light from heaven, and thus we may
discover and find out the accursed thing, for what man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11. And not only is this
the best course for finding out the ground of the Lords controversy against
every man in particular, but also for knowing and removing the cause why he
contendeth with a Church or Nation; for albeit there may be public, common and
scandalous sins, which should be publicly acknowledged and repented of, yet
that is not sufficient, but every one must descend to his own heart, and ponder
his own ways, and forsake the evil of his doings: and here there will be found
a great variety, and almost as many different causes as persons; yea, and
sometimes it may fall out, that the sole ground of the present controversy
against a people, may be some secret gross sin committed by one or some few
among them, as Josh. 7.11.12. And albeit then Joshua and the Elders of Israel
could not tell why the Lords anger was kindled against that people, yet Achan
might easily have found out the cause, he knew that he had taken, and where he
had laid the Babylonish garment, and wedge of gold.

But though we need not come to particulars, yet in the general it would be
observed, that prayer-obstruction may be procured either by sin in praying, or
in him who prays; as for the, 1. viz. sins in, or about prayer it self, let
us reflect on the qualifications and requisits of prayer held forth, Part 2.
and from thence judge of the defects of prayer; and thus it will appear, that
those prayers do carry in their bosom an evidence and witness against
themselves, and a counter-pleader, in which, or with which is, 1. pride and
self-worth; 2. hypocrisy and unsoundness; 3. formality and lip-devotion; 4.
anger, malice and envy; 5. unbelief and distrust; 6. base, carnal and selfish
ends, etc.

2. As for the other rank of sins, which have not such a dependence upon, nor
connection with prayer, and yet may hinder and obstruct its acceptance and
success; these are of such a general latitude and extent, that we know no sin
that needs be excluded and excepted; and so we need name none; only let us
especially guard against such sins as are most gross, crying,
conscience-wasting and defiling, which have most of the will, and of
deliberation in them, and in which is engraven the deepest impression of
ingratitude and rebellion; and where such sins are given way to, there must
either be a total abstinence and cessation from prayer, or else but a
superficial, dead and formal way of performance; an impenitent bold sinner,
dare not, cannot pray importunatly, and in faith; and thus the prayers of
secure sinners must be naught, and many ways defective; so that this sort of
sins, does bring a long, and must be accompanied with the former; a guilty
supplicant will not pray to purpose, but supposing his prayer were regular, yet
his sins would outcry his prayers; while David (though an eminent Saint) was
praying, he heard a voice crying, and pleading against him; hence he
complains, Psalm. 95.3. that iniquities (or as it is in the Hebrew) the verba
iniquitatum. Ar. Mon.
words of iniquity prevailed against him. We will not now enquire whether he
complains of his own personal sins, or the sins of them for whom he prayed?
it being evident, that here he regrateth the prevalency of sin against his
prayers, and that he heard its voice and cry. You will say, it could not be the
voice of David's own sins which he heard, he not being then guilty of any such
sin as could obstruct an answer to his prayers, wherefore he had not repented
and humbled himself, and whereof he had not obtained a pardon; and a pardoned
sin is as no sin. Ans. Albeit a pardoned sin cannot hinder the acceptance of
our prayers, yea, nor their answer and success, yet it may hinder their
acceptance, in reference to such a particular temporal mercy as is desired; and
repentance sometimes cannot (though it be a promising and necessary mean)
remove or hold off temporal rods (though it will prevent the evil and hurt that
might thereby redound, for then the sting and curse will be taken out of the
rod, and it will be turned into a blessing, and the Lord thereby will do us
good) Deuteronomy. 3.26. 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. 2 Samuel 24.10.13. Nay, the Lord may justly
punish Israel for the sins of penitent and glorified Manasseh, many years after
his death, Jerem. 15.4. But yet neither the sins of others nor our own sins
after they are pardoned, can hinder the Jam. 5.1.16.
effectual, fervent prayer of the righteous from availing much; such a prayer
cannot want an See Cha. 1. Sect. 1, 2.
answer, nor prove unsuccessefull; whatever be the Lords dispensations toward
such an one in respect of his outward and temporal state, (and yet if there be
any mean for obtaining outward prosperity and success, this is it; yea, it will
and must prevail for that end, if that be for such a one his spiritual and
eternal happi^ess.) But sin not laid to heart, will hide God's face from his
people, that he will not hear them when they cry, Isa. 59.2. If we hearken not
to God's voice, he will not hearken to ours; if we obey not his command ments,
he will not fulfill our desires: The promise of audience, has the condition of
obedience annexed unto it, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you, (says our blessed Lord) but upon this condition, that ye abide in me, and
my words abide in you, Joh. 15.7. And is there not a fitness and decency in
such a dispensation, and a suitable proportion between such a sin and it is
punishment? which the Lord holds forth to be observed by us, Zech. 7.13.
Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so
they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts. See also, Prove.
1.28. Isa. 1.15. Ier. 11.11. etc. Thus the Lord does justly require us; and his
dealing with us runs parallel, and keeps a fit proportion with ours toward
him; and who will think, that the Prince should answer the traitors
supplication, so long as he continues in his rebellion and disobedience?

Sect. II. Who are they, whose prayers the Lord will never hear nor answer? By
what marks and characters may such be known? With a word of direction to them
who fear, lest their names be written in that black roll.
Prove. 1.28. etc. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early, but shall not find me: for that they, etc.
ALbeit the Lord cannot be said to hear the prayers of any unregenerat person,
by virtue of a Covenant pleaded in the Mediator, (such not being as yet in
Christ, nor brought under the Covenant) Yet, the Lord in mercy and free grace,
and of his absolute sovereignty, does some times so far accept the endeavors
and prayers of natural men, which from sense of sin and a desire (though
quickened by a common operation of the Spirit, yet natural) of pardon, that he
gives the desired mercy; for, he having appointed prayer to be a special mean
of regeneration, he will thus bless his own Ordinance with success, albeit it
be not so and so qualified; as we show at some length, Part 1. Chap. 5. But,
the question now is, when wicked men come to such a state, that prayer will be
no more a mean to do them good? when they may be said to have lost the season
and opportunity of audience, and to have let slip the day of grace and
acceptable time? and that they may, yea and that many indeed do, come to such a
state, may be made appear from several Scriptures, as Prove. 1.24.28. Psa.
18.41. Micah 3.4. Isa. 1.15. Jer. 14.12. Jer. 11.11. Ezekiel. 8.18. Job 27.9. etc.
Hence the exhortation, To seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon
him while he is near, Isa. 55.6. and it is said of the godly, that they will
call upon the Lord in a time when he may be found, Ps. 3.62. and thus the Sun
may be said to set upon some, before their day come to an end, though they have
the ordinances of life and the means of grace constituted with them, and in
this respect, (and as to us who know not the Lords purpose and secrets) the day
of grace may be said not to be yet past to such, yet there may be a judicial
stroke upon many hearts, and the time in which the Lord might be found may be
past and gone as to them. But we will not now meddle with that high point of
induration, but shall confine our selves within the bounds of the present
enquiry; and shall, 1. offer some marks and characters, whereby such may be
known who have let this acceptable time pass; and, 2. we shall propound some
few particulars for clearing difficulties that may here occur; with a word of
direction to such as fear lest this may be their case.

As to the first, though the Scriptures do not hold forth any general and
infallible rules, whereby we may here judge and pass a peremptory sentence;
yet, both Scripture and experience do point out several grounds of fear: and
from thence we shall briefly offer some few signs and characters, whereby we
may more then probably guess and conjecture whose names are written in this
black roll. And, O how terrible and awaking may such a point be? and with what
amazement should secure sinners (were they not judicially plagued and deserted)
hear such a discovery? which is not only of such as are going and on the way to
hell, (this were easily known, if men would hearken to the word of Truth and
impartially judge themselves; all they who are under the reign and dominion of
any sin, and thus have another master then the Lord, must be the servants of
sin and of hell, Romans 6.16.) But the question is, who are they who must perish
in that way, and who, in all probability, (yea, unless by a miracle of mercy
they be reclaimed) will never turn nor seek the Lord with the whole heart, and
therefore will never meet with audience and acceptance, though they should call
upon him? And In the following characters, we speak of the case of rejection in
the general, because the Scripture most frequently speaks of that; and because
it includes, with the rejection of persons, the rejection of their prayers
also.
because the final rejection of their persons and prayers are so inseparably
and necessarily conjoined, we may in this discovery indifferently speak of
either of these two.

1. Then, all those may fear lest this be their case, who have lived under a
powerful and searching ministry, and yet are so far from bringing forth fruit,
that they are still on the declining hand; and so far from being renewed and
converted, that they grow worse and worse, and their heart becomes harder and
more incorrigible, till at length they are become preaching-proof, and will not
be afraid of the terrors of the Almighty: perhaps at first they had some
tenderness and heart-meltings under Ordinances, but now their 1 Timothy 4.2.
conscience is seared as with a hot iron; So that the quick and powerful Heb.
4.12.
Word of God, which is sharper then any twoedged sword, cannot draw blood nor
pierce them, and he that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall be
destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. The Lords Word cannot return
void, Isa. 55.11. and therefore, when it is not the savor of life, it will
become the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2.16. Hence is that judicial woe denounced
against Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, for despising and not profiting
under Christ's ministry, Mat. 11.21.23. and thus that sad judgment, foretold by
the Prophet, Isa. 6.9. was accordingly inflicted upon the Jews, Joh. 12.36, 37,
38.40. And upon the same ground also does our blessed Lord apply this prophecy
to them, Mat. 13.14, 15. where we may still observe, that impenitency and
hardness of heart, under a powerful ministry, are held forth as a mark and
evidence o^ a judicial stroke and final desertion; especially where the
Ordinances have been continued for a considerable time, and many warnings have
been despised, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you,
but you would not? therefore, etc. Mat. 23.37, 38, 39. When the Israelits had
grieved him forty years, he swore they should not enter into his rest, Heb.
3.17, 18.

2. Hypocritical Professors, who have a form and name of godliness, but deny
and hate the power of it, will hardly escape the damnation of hell, Mat. 23.29
33. Such think to deceive both God and man, and to hide themselves under a
vizard, and the Lord, in his righteous judgment, makes that cloak and cover a
woeful snare to them; their resting on a name that they live, keeps them off
from laying hold on eternal life: how rarely and hardly are such convinced and
converted, Publicans and harlots go into the Kingdom of God before them, Mat.
21.31. but they are, as it were, Proprietors and Landlords in hell. Hence that
place is described by their interest in it, Mat. 24.51. and comparing this
place with Mat. 25.41. we will find, that their interest there is like the
devils; and is it any wonder then, that our meek Savior denounce woe upon woe
against Scribes and Pharisees for their hypocrisy? Mat. 23.

3. Old gray-haired sinners, who for a long time have lived in gross and
scandalous sins, may fear lest this sad judgment has over-taken them; custom
in sin fortifieth the devils garrison in the heart, and every new sin puts on a
new bar on the door to hold Christ out; we are had enough by nature, and too
far estranged and Ephesians 4.18;
alienated from the life of God, but Consuetudo est altera natura.
custom is, as it were, another nature, not for quality, but by way of addition
to the former mass of corruption, making the distance between us and the holy
one greater and greater, till at length the conscience (whose office is to
accuse for sin, and which now and then, if it be not thus obstructed, will do
its duty, Romans 2.15.) be past feeling, and the sinner be given over to work all
uncleanness and wickedness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. As the highway, by
often treading on it becomes hard like a stone, and a work-mans hand by
constant labor becomes insensible, So the sinners heart by suffering Satan
for a long time to tread upon it, and by frequency and diligence at his work
becomes hard as an Adamant, and incorrigible; how seldom, and with what
difficulty (or shall I say, how miracul^usly) do such as have been Satan's old
servants change their master? as if such (like those servants; Exodus 21.6.) had
suffered their ear to be bored through with an aul, that they might serve their
master for ever; what a wonder is it to see an old drunkard, swearer, covetous
man, etc. reuent and turn? As we read of a measure of sin set to public and
outward judgments, Genesis 15.16. So that when the cup of iniquity is full, a cup
of wrath and aston shment must be put in the hand; so the Lord has appointed
such a measure of sin, for spiritual and personal judgment; and what know
thou, O man, if thou continue but one day longer in impenitence, adding but
some few more to the former, but thy cup may be full, Genesis 6.3;
and then the Lord will (g) strive no more with thee, but will give thee up
unto thine own hearts lust, and to walk in thine own counsels; as he did them,
Psa. 81.12. But some will happily say; well! I must then have many years before
my hand, before it be thus with me; for I am but a young man. Ans. As the number
and measure of iniquities is not the same in respect of all, So neither the
measure of time; it may be the Lord will allow thee but three years; these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none, cut it down,
Luke 13.7. It may be the acceptable time is, (as it is called, Isa. 61.2.) but
one year; perhaps but one day, Heb. 4.7. nay, perhaps but for a short In what
place or house soever the Apostles entered, though they abode not there for the
spa^e of an hour they were commanded to s^ake of the dust under their feet for
a test money against despisers; whose case then became perat.
part of a day, Mark, 6.11. And thus young men cannot promise to themselves one
days security from this sad stroke; and old sinners have reason to fear least
already they have let the acceptable time pass.

4. Those who have been entrusted with many talents; men of great parts,
wisdom, learning, honor, wealth, etc, who have not only hid those, and not
improven them to the honor of the Giver, but (which is worse) made them
weapons to war against him, may fear the worst of themselves, and least what is
said of riches, Eccles. 5.13. be verified in all their mercies, viz. that they
are given and continued with them for their hurt: Thus Julian the Apostat
received many talents, but he improved them ill, and employed his wisdom,
learning and imperial power against the Gospel which once he professed, and for
rooting out the Christian religion out of his empire, and that was an evidence
that God had rejected him, and given him up to the lusts of his own heart: Not
many mighty, not many wise, not many noble, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26. Wisdom, power and
nobility being improven a right, would prove no impediment, but these being (as
too ordinarily they are) abused, the Lord quickly gives such ungrate men over,
and passes a sentence against them; hence, not many, etc. Saul, Jeroboam,
Jehu, Hered, Korah, Dathan and Abiram, the Scribes and Pharisees are sad
instances of Gods displeasure against their ingratitud who have received much,
or whom he has brought near to himself.

5. Such as often resist the Spirit of God, and the checks of conscience, may
fear least the Lord strive no more with them; the Jews were famous for this, as
Stephen (the first Martyr for the Christian faith) testified to their face,
Act. 7.51. and accordingly our blessed Lord once and again applies to them
that sad threatening, Isa. 6.9, 10. as Mat. 13, 14. Joh. 12 40. and the Apostle,
Act. 28, 26. Romans 11.8. Albeit the inward motions of the Spirit usually
accompany the outward preaching of the Word, yet in one and the same ordinance
these may be more powerful and frequent to one then to others; and the
guiltiness of such a one in resisting and quenching the Spirit, must
accordingly be the greater: It may be thou have not been an hearer of the
Gospel so long as others, nor lived under such a powerful ministry, and yet
happily thou have had mo and stronger heavenly impressions, persuasions and
convictions; (for the Joh. 3.8.
wind blows where it lists) which if thou have choked, till at length the
Spirit has withdrawn, thou may fear least he never return: but if the Lord
not only thus by the inward motions of his Spirit, but also by the outward
dispensations of providence has drawn and allured thee, if the Lord has given
thee many mercies, and these happily not ordinary, but great, or often, or long
continued; and frequently delivered thee from thy fears, etc. and thus by some
one or other circumstance in a special manner has called upon thee, and thou
have not hearkened to that voice; or if by several rods, or some sharp or long
continued affliction he has warned thee, and thou have not heard what Mic. 6.9.
the rod said, nor known who has appointed it, thou may fear least thy Isa.
6.9.10.
heart be made fat, thine ears heavy, and that thine eyes be now shut, that
thou may not see with thine eyes, nor hear with thine cars, nor understand
with thine heart, that thou might be converted and healed.

6. Such as were once brought Mark, 12.34.
near the kingdom of God, who had 2 Pet. 2.20.
escaped the pollutions of the world, and were advanced some length in their
journey, looking toward Zion, and yet turn back to Egypt again, being
entangled, overcome and ensnared by the world, it had been better for such
never to have known, nor entered in the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21. Ah!
how many half converts are there among us, who once were awakened and
convinced, but the smell of the Egyptian onions and garlic has drawn them
back, and the spies which they sent forth to view the way and the Land of
promise, being unfaithful, have terrified them by their ill report; (as these
did the Israelits, Numb. 13.32, 33.) and now they will go no further; the
giants and mighty sons of Anak are lying in wait, and what can they do, but
(with them, Numb. 14.2, 3.) return again to Egypt? There be so many duties that
must be performed, such circumspection, tenderness, zeal and diligence is
required, and there be so many and strong temptations and trials, and such
mighty enemies, the devil, the world and the flesh to be resisted, that now
they are wearied, and can do no more, such a course is not for them; O, but the
fleshpots of Egypt do please them well, and the way thither is easy and
broad, and now they are at a point what to do; we have a sad word concerning
such back-sliders, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. It is impossible for such Apostats to return
again to the Lord.

But you will say, though such went some length, yet they were never brought so
near as those, of whom the Apostle speaks, nor was their apostasy so great;
for it may be supposed, that these words are spoken of those who are guilty of
the blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Ans. As there are degrees of
illumination, So also of apostasy, and therefore proportionably also of
desertion and induration; but the least degree here is dangerous; but supposing
thou never tasted of the heavenly gifts, and the powers of the world to come in
such a measure as some others, yet if thou have diligently attended the
ordinances, and sought the Lord in these, especially at some solemn occasion,
as in days of humiliation, or at the Lords table, etc. I might ask, whether
thou did not find some taste of the heavenly influences? but granting thou
have not, yet thou can not deny, but once it was better with thee then now,
thou once followed thy duty, and made conscience of thy ways, but now thou
art loose, negligent, and live at random, and thus it has happened according
to the true proverb the dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that
was washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. Thou may hear what the
Lord says unto thee, O back-slider, Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. O, but might some reply, though the Lord be
provokt by their backsliding, yet they may return again and do their first
works, and then the Lord will return from his anger. Ans. Though the Saints be
liable to a partial decay of grace who after their fall will return, and seek
the Lord more diligently then formerly, yet they will find by their sad
experience, that it was an evil and terrible thing even thus to have departed
from the Lord; but as for those who never were brought in, but only advanced
some steps in the way, if such fall back, there are small hopes of their
recovery, and this their backsliding is a mark and character of their
reprobation and rejection, for, says the Lord, they draw back unto perdition,
ver. 39. O! how dangerous is it to make but some few steps forward, and then
return; and to choke some (as it were) half-purposes and resolutions, and
half-convictions and humiliations; Felix once (p) trembled, but he quenched
that motion, and we hear no more of that work on him; Agrippa was once almost
(q) persuaded to be a Christian, but he followed not his look, and what was the
event? And are there not many a trembling Felix, and half-converted Agrippa's
among you? how often have you quenched and resisted the holy Ghost? the Lord
has many a time knocked at your door, and has yet come nearer you, and cried
in your ears, and pulled you, as it were, by the arms, to awaken you; and you
have, as it were, through your sleep spoken some few words in answer to his
call, and have started to your feet, as if ye had purposed to rise and follow
him, but alas! ye soon wearied, and notwithstanding this seeming beginning, ye
quickly drew back, and while the Lord withdrew a little, waiting (as it were)
till you should put on your clothes, ye have returned to your old couch again,
and laid your head on the cod, and you are how more deeply plunged in your
rest, and sleep more softly then in former time; and were it not a just thing
with the Lord to trouble you no more, and to say unto you, sleep on, and take
your rest, yet a little (r) sleep, a little slumber, and folding of the hands
to sleep: There is a time of awaking coming, after which secure sinners will
sleep no more; then weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth hereafter; there
will be no ease nor mitigation of their torment unto all eternity.

7. There is little hope of proud, obstinat, stubborn and presumptuous sinners,
who have hardened their hearts against the fear of the Lord, and by boldness in
sinning, have come to a cursed liberty to sin against knowledge and conscience
without check or challenge; such impudent wretches are often in Scripture
called workers of iniquity, they having made it their trade to do wickedly with
both hands earnestly, and to drink in sin greedily, as the Ox does water: and
the Word of truth holds such out as men devoted to destruction, Job, 31.3. Psa.
5.5. Psa. 37, 1, 2. Psa. 92.7.9. Psa. 94.20. Prove. 10.29. Prove. 21.15. etc. And
in the day of accounts the sentence will be this, depart from me all ye workers
of iniquity, Luk 13.27.

8. Heretics, both speculative and practical, are in a most dangerous
condition: 1. Speculative, such as maintain and spread poysonable doctrine, for
the subverting of those who hear and converse with them, are held forth in the
Scriptures with a black mark on their forehead, that we may beware of them,
and may abominat their way, Tit. 3.10, 11., 2 These. 2.10, 11. where, first,
such are said to be (s) subverted, or quite over-turned, and fallen without
hope of recovery: Secondly, they are to be reputed as self-condemned, and
having a judge within themselves, who has given out sentence against them:
Thirdly, such must not be tolerated, but if they continue obstinate, (and who
among them will ever turn?) after the first and second admonition, should be
rejected and excommunicated: Fourthly, we have the reason why the Lord suffers
such thus to fall, and why he gives them up to such errors, not because they
are pious, learned and ingenuous men (as their followers would make us believe,
and under which mask deceivers usually do cover their wates, and by this
pretense often prevail with simple ignorant people) but because he purposes to
destroy them, and never show mercy upon them. And its observable, that this is
not only said of Antichrist (that great impostor and deceiver) and of his
emissaries (those famous seducers and deceivers of the greatest part of the
world where the name of Christ is professed) but of all these who being
seduced, receive and embrace damnable errors from whatsoever hand; and because
they received not the love of the truth while it shined before their eyes,
therefore did the Lord send them strong delusions, and suffered them to believe
a lie, that they all might be damned, 2 These. 2.10.11, 12. And thus the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.1. tells us, that as heretics and false teachers bring upon
themselves swift destruction, So their way and doctrine, their errors and
heresies are damnable, of their own nature, and therefore to all; not only
bringing damnation to the first hands, to the merchants and sellers; but also
to the buyers and possessors, and to all who welcome and embrace them. With what
indignation then should we hear some plead that heretics should be tolerated,
and get liberty to spread their poysonable doctrine, as being a simple innocent
matter, an error only in the mind, while the life and conscience may be pure
and holy? But though, 1. we deny not, that truth may go under the notion of
error, as in the Roman Church, where orthodox professors are accounted
heretics; and, 2. though we do not think every error to be inconsistent with
true holiness; yet, 3. it seems strange to call a man a holy heretic, or
that any should have the face to plead that such should be suffered to ensnare
and deceive, and so ruin and destroy the souls of simple people; for, though
they embrace damnable errors under the notion of truth and new light, yet that
will not excuse them, but by so doing they bring to themselves swift
destruction, their judgment lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not;
they have believed and received a lie, that they might be damned.

But you will say, who among us are guilty of this sin? Ans. We have reason to
praise God for withholding the temptation, but no reason to boast of our own
strength and stedfastness; for, had not the Lord preserved Mal. 2.7.
knowledge and truth in our teachers lips, how easily might seducers have
prevailed with many of us? Ships that want ballast, must be tossed to and fro
with every wind, such as have no more but a name and profession, no change in
the heart, no grace nor ballast within, nor the anchor of hope to keep them
from reeling, may easily be subverted with the least blast of a temptation; and
yet there may be a moral, pagan and and selfish stedfastness in a way and
course in which a man is once engaged, without any knowledge, or fear of God;
nay, that may also flow from a damnable indifferency and neutrality, because
too many, Act. 18.17.
Gallio-like, care for none of those things that concern the glory of God, they
will not be at the pains to try and examine what is right or wrong in points of
religion, but will live and dye in the religion of their forefathers, and in
which they themselves were born and brought up; and thus, if such had been born
under popery, or Mahumetisme, they would have been as zealous for either of
these, as now they are for the truth: And may it not seem strange, that
neutrality should make a man a zealot? (if he deserve that name who has no
love, care nor diligence) and is it not as strange that negligence should prove
an occasion of stedfastness? But yet since such Gallio's have no love to
matters of soul-concernment, and no desire to be troubled in hearing or
learning any thing of that nature from whatsoever hand, therefore as they do
not much regard the preachers of righteousness, So neither will they readily
hearken to false teachers, and thus are not in great hazard to be seduced. What
then? though thou be not an herotick, yet thou may be an atheist, and which
of the twain is worst? though thou art not a speculative, yet thou may be a
practical heretic, though thou never wast tainted with any speculative error
in the fundamentals of our Christian faith, yet thou may be poisoned with
practical errors in the vitals of our Christian life; albeit thou be sound and
orthodox in points that are to be believed, yet thou may be a gross heretic
as to the rule of our practice, and the right way to happiness.

And thus we come to the second branch of this character, 1. Practical heresy.
in which too many among us are concerned; and among many practical heresies
which might be named, we shall only mention two or three, which as they are
near in kin, and seldom separated, So are most dangerous and pernicious, having
from time to time sent so many souls to hell where the Gospel is purely
preached, and the first of those heresies does set up a new and anti-scriptural
way to heaven, a broad and easy way, in which men may walk and take along
their lovers and idols with them, there is room enough in that way, they may
join hands and walk in it together: And such as are tainted with this heresy
(and ah! who are they who do not embrace it?) do esteem the narrow way a
mystery and paradox, which precise and conceity people do cry up, because it is
singular, and would make others believe that they walk in it, that they might
be admired, but as for themselves, they will not be so rigid and unreasonable,
they know that godliness imports a change, and that they must be new creatures,
and do something that they may come to heaven; and the greatest length that the
most will go, is to abstain from some scandalous and gross pollutions, and be
ready to cry out against such sins with the best; and they will go to the
Church, and countenance public ordinances, and perhaps they will follow some
form of family worship, yea, and of private devotion, they will say (and yet
their heart be silent) their prayers every day, and who can epsy any fault in
them? and what needs more? they will not be righteous over much; for why should
they destroy themselves? Eccles. 7.16. and thus they stint themselves, and such
a length they will come, but not one step further, though the Lord by his word
and works, and by his messengers (who come to them in his name) warn them of
their danger and desperate folly; they will not be so cruel as to wrestle and
fight with their bosom friends, nor so violent as to take the kingdom of heaven
by force, nor will they be at the pains to work out their salvation with fear
and trembling, to run as in a race for the prize that is set before them, and
to sweat at their duty; and they know not what use the affections have in Gods
service, they have heard of such a thing as mortification, self-denial, zeal,
tenderness, etc. but they look upon these as empty notions, and which do rather
hurt then profit those who exercise themselves in them. And thus those men
become secure, and think it needless to be at any more pains to make sure their
calling and election; what needs more? they have peace; but can it be
otherwise, since the strong man is kept within, and therefore he will not
assault it? (Satan is not so foolish as to awaken those who are securely
sleeping in his bosom) and they will not be so cruel as to rouse themselves out
of that sweet dream, and cast themselves upon the rack; nay, they have closed
the doors and windows, that no warning or threatening counsel or invitation may
enter in, and have stopped their ears that they may not be molested with the
cries of Gods faithful messengers, who must (say they) have liberty to speak
what they will, but we know what we should do, and therefore let them speak on;
so that unless the omnipotent arm of the Almighty by a sort of miracle pull
them out of that snare into which they are so far plunged, they must perish
without remedy: If Ministers could preach down this damnable error, and once
convince people of this strong delusion, what a change and reformation in all
ranks of people might be seen? lawyers would not have so many clients, nor
Physicians so many Patients coming to their doors to ask their advice and
counsel, as ministers would have mourners coming with tears in their eyes,
confessing their folly, and enquiring after the good old way, the narrow and
safe way in which they must walk to Zion; and saying (with the trembling
Jailer, Act. 16.30.) Sirs, what must we do to be saved? We may not stay to
confute this desperate and soul-destroying delusion, but as to that place, Ecel.
7. we grant that there may be a nimium, and too much in externals, and that
Papists, Pharisees and Formalists of whatsoever stamp or profession, may add
unto the rule, and when they have supererogated and vexed themselves in their
voluntary acts of worship and devotion, have this question put to them, but who
required these things at your hand? yea, and, 2. there may be an indiscreet and
unwarrantable rigidity and severity as to things lawful and commanded, which
may be very grievous to our selves, and troublesome to others; but while we walk
by the rule, both as to the matter and manner of performance, there is no^ hazard
of excess; especially as to the inward acts of love, knowledge, estimation,
desire, hope, dependence and delight in God, to which these secure fomalists
are so great strangers, who (x) having a form of godliness deny the power
thereof, resting upon some few outward and liveless performances: to whom we
will now say no more, but in the general warn them, that he who thinks himself
holy enough, is yet a stranger to true holiness, Phil. 3.12. 2 Pet. 3.18. etc.

2 Practical heresy.
The second practical heresy is the ground and foundation of the former, and it
is a fond opinion and conceit, that the grace, mercy and goodness of God
discovered in the Gospel, does grant a toleration to sin, and that the covenant
of grace does give a dispensation from the law, and yield a great deal of
liberty; so that it is needless now to aim at perfection, men must repent and
believe, and so (say they) we do; but we cannot away with the acuracy and
strictness of some puritans, we are not now Romans 6.14.
under the law but under grace; we know that God is merciful, and Christ has
died for sinners, and let ministers say what they please, we will trust in God,
and in our dear Savior, and hope to speed as well as the precis^st puritan.

We spoke of the obligation of the law, Sect. 1. and shall now only show that
this woeful error is a monster of many heads: for, 1. it denies Gods justice,
and says, that the righteous Lord will acquit and clear the guilty; contrary
to his name whereby he proclaimed himself, Exodus 34.7. And its observable, that
there his mercy has the first place, and is amplified by several expressions,
as if that were the great and main property whereby the holy one would be
described, yet by way of anticipation, and to prevent this delusion, this
caveat is added, that (yet for as merciful as he is) he will by no means clear
the guilty; thus also after the prophet Nahum had asserted the Lords kindness
and forbearance, he tells secure sinners that this is nothing to them, they
will never taste of his goodness; for, says he, though the Lord be slow to
anger, yet he will not at all acquit the wicked. But they, notwithstanding all
his goodness, mercy and forbearance, shall perish in their iniquiries, and the
reward of their hands shall be given unto them, Nah. 1.3. Isa. 3.11.

2. It denies Gods holiness, and that Habak. 1.13.
he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; and thus it must have been to no
purpose for the Apostle to exhort us to holiness, because we have to do with a
holy Lord, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. albeit the Lord himself once and again press this
motive, as, Lev. 11.44. Lev. 19.2. Lev. 20.7. etc.

3. It denies the Lords truth and fidelity in fulfilling his threatenings, as
if these were set down in the Scriptures only to terrify fools or children;
but these men know God to be more merciful then to damn his own creatures and
honest servants; and the Apostle John (think they) was too rash and
uncharitable in saying, that he who commits sin is of the devil, and that he
who is born of God, does not, yea, cannot sin, but purifieth himself as he is
pure, 1 John 3.8, 9.3. And St. James was too strict and precise a puritan,
while he affirms, that though a man should keep the whole law, yet if he
offend in one point, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10.

4. It separateth Christ's offices, denying him to be a King and Prophet, for
though those men would close with him as a Priest, and lay hold on that
sacrifice he once offered for sin, as a perfect medicine to cure all their
diseases, yet they Luke 19.14.
will not have him as a King to reign over them, nor as a Prophet to reveal the
safe and narrow way to salvation: And thus by separating Christ's offices, they
are separated from him; and while they quit two parts, they are deprived of the
third.

3. Practical heresy.
The third practical heresy is embraced by too many infatuated people, who
think that they may love God and serve the devil, that they may give God their
heart, while they give the devil their hands, and that they may believe in
Christ, though they keep not his commandments: And (such will say) though we
cannot be so strict and precise as some folk, yet none love God more; and
though we often sin against him, yet we daily Like the French King who would
swear, and then kiss his crucifix, and then swear again, etc.
repent, and ask Gods mercy, we are sorry for all our sins, and would fain
serve God better, but we cannot help it; and we are sure to keep our hearts for
God, and we hope he will accept our good meaning, and the will for the deed,
and will never be so cruel as to damn so many well meaning folk, who mind him
no ill, but love him with all their heart, though they cannot do all they
should, etc. Oh! that our eyes were a fountain of tears, that we might weep and
lament the mad security, and desperate folly of those wretches! what! is it not
one of the most ridiculous paradoxes, to mean well, and do ill? such a gloss
(like that of Orleans) manifestly destroys the text; our hearts and intentions
are a riddle and mystery, not only to others, but also to our selves; and our
actions and doings are the best commentary on that obscure text; hence while
the Prophet complained of the hearts deceitfulness and desperate wickedness,
which could be known and searched out by none but the Lord, yet acknowledges
this commentary, Jer. 17.9, 10. as if he had said [do not deceive your selves
with your good meaning, and the honesty of your hearts, for they are exceeding
deceitful; but remember this, the Lord will render to every man according to
his ways and doings] ah! who is able to bewail this desperate deceit? such as
thus mistake the way, will miss the place they aim at; such as think they mean
well, and do ill, while they think they are on the way to heaven, are going
post to hell; hence Sed aiunt quidam Deum satis habere si cord and animo
suspiciatur. licet actu minus fiat: itaque si salvo metu and side peccare, hoc
est salva castitate metrimonia violare, salva pi^tate parenti vene^um
temperare, s^c ergo. and ipsi salva venia in gehen nam detrudentur, dum salvo
metu peccant, Tertul. de paenit. cap. 5.
an ancient Doctor said well [Such (says he) as can give God their heart,
believe, love and fear him, and yet sin against him (that is, keep their
chastity, and yet violat matrimony) shall in mercy be sent to hell, and with
such a supposed pardon of their sins as they had faith and love to God; as
their sins made no breach upon their love to him, So neither shall their
punishment make a breach upon his mercy toward them.] Ah fool I must not our
faith be evidenced by our works ( Jam. 2.18, 20, etc.) and our love by our
obedience and keeping of his commandments? Ioh. 14.15, 21. Ioh 15.14. 1 Ioh.
2.5. etc. O! if while thou layest hold on Gods mercy and Christ's death with thy
unclean hands, thou would remember, that without holiness none shall see the
Lord (except as a judge coming to take vengeance on them) Heb. 12.14. and that
Christ will become the author of eternal salvation unto such only (though to
all those) as obey him, Heb. 5.9.

We might add to these, several other damnable delusions, as so many branches
coming from the former cursed root, viz. the abuse of Gods mercy, by making
that which is the only rock of safety (to which the ship-broken passenger
should run for his life) a stone of ruin and destruction, against which they
dash their brains; as if a man were so foolish, as to imagine a bridge to be
broader then it is, and in this delusion step aside, the bridge would not keep
him from drowning; so while deluded sinners extend the mercy of God beyond the
bounds he has set in his Word, and thus in their presumption step aside to
their own crooked ways, the mercy of God will not keep them from falling
headlong into the pit of destruction. To continue in sin (says Peccare and de
Dei creatoris clementia praesu^ mere pelago justitiae ejus exponi est, Greg
loc. prius cit.
Gregory) and yet to presume of the mercy of God, is to cast our selves into
the sea of his justice and displeasure. The Lord ere it be long will vindicat
his mercy from such a base abuse, to the everlasting confusion and astonishment
of presumptuous sinners. But we may not insist, only (to our purpose) let such
remember that this delusion is a black mark of a never-do-well, and therefore
does the Apostle abominat it with so much indignation, shall we continue in sin
that geace may abound? God forbid Romans 6.1, 2. and then by several arguments
shows that a child of God will not, cannot make such an inference: And the
Apostle Jude speaking of some who were of old ordained to condemnation,
describes them by this, that they turned the grace of God into lasciviousness,
ver. 4. O! would you then escape damnation, beware least ye be hold to sin,
because God is slow to anger; and least ye add to your iniquities, because the
Lord is gracious and abundant in goodness; and that ye delay not your
repentance, because he is long-suffering and patient. And if thou must needs
tempt God, first take a trial in thy body, or outward estate, before thou
hazard thy immortal soul and everlasting portion; go and waste thy estate and
provision, and see whether the mercy of God will keep thee from begging; and
put thy finger in the fire, and try whether the mercy of God will keep thee
from burning: but if thou will not trust the mercy of God, while thou slightest
the means he has appointed as to these inferior ends, and yet wilt misspend
this day of the Gospel, and slight the ordinances of life (which are thy
portion and allowance, and the talents wherewith thou should trade for
eternity) and yet think it will be well with thee hereafter, if thou will cast
thy soul into the fire of sin, and yet think to escape the burning and torments
of hell, profess what thou will; it is not thy confidence in God, but thy
negligence and want of care for thy soul, that makes thee despise the means of
grace and slight thy duty; and thy body, estate and perishing life is thy idol,
for which thou take more thought then for thy soul and eternal happiness.

9. Earthly-minded, covetous worldlings, are lying under the serpents curse,
(which hardly or never will be removed, Mark 10.23.) Genesis 3.14. First, they go
upon their belly and cannot stand straight nor look up-ward; their heart
cleaves to the earth, and they cannot Colos. 3.2.
set their affections on things above, they only Phil. 3.19.
mind earthly things, and spend all their Joh. 6.27.
labor for the meat that perishes. 2. Dust is their portion and food, they
slight the childrens bread, and undervalue the Rev. 2.17.
hidden manna, and with the swine of the world live upon the Luke 15.16.
husks: and yet those miserable wretches will not want fair pretenses and
plea's, [we must (will such say) live and provide for our families; the times
are evil, and we know not what may fall out, and all we can purchase may be
little enough: what? should we be idle? may we not follow our calling, and
watch on our business? etc.] But, think thou (O worldling) this to be a
sufficient plea for making the world thy idol, and for neglecting the one thing
necessary? Know thou not that the love of money is the Sea the testimonies
of heathens, concerning which the Apostle, apud Reusner. symb. imp. clas. 2.
symb. 36.
root of all evil? 1 Timothy 6.10. and that he who will be rich, (rather rich in
wealth then in grace, for himself rather then toward God, Luke 12.21.) fall
into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition, and pierce them through with many
sorrows, v. 9.10. and is not Christ's verdict of such very terrible? It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God, Mat. 19.23, 24. Ah! this devil of
earthly-mindedness has destroyed many thousand souls, it so fills the heart,
that there is no room left for the Word of God to enter in, but it choaketh the
Word at the very entry, and makes it become unfruitful, Mat. 13.22. this was
it that hindered that people from profiting under Ezekiels ministry, Ezekiel. 33,
(and this is the great obstructer of the Gospel wherever it is preached) They
come unto thee, (says the Lord to the Prophet) and sit before thee as my
people, and with their mouth show much love, and they hear thy words, but they
will not do nor obey them, for their heart goes after their covetousness, v.
31. Hence the Apostle must weep when he thinks on covetous wretches, Phil.
3.18. but what alleth thee, O Paul, thus to bewail such wealthy, well-guiding
and thriving men? Ah! says the Apostle, whatever be their portion of the
world, and whatever be the estimation of the wicked, (who will be ready to
bless the covetous whom the Lord abhors, Ps. 10.3.) yet, they are most
despicable and miserable creatures; for their glory is their Pronunciat
Apostolus gloriam qua nunc sunt inflati, ignominia mutatum iri, Calv. in loc.
shame, and their end destruction, v. 19. and as for their religion, profess
what they will, they are the grossest idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5. their belly being
their god, Phil. 3, 19. Ah! ill and un-wise merchants, who sell heaven for
earth, and your soul and the immortal crown for an empty and perishing trifle;
how has the world thus be-fooled and Gal. 3.1. quasi praestigiis quibusdam
dementes facti, Beza in loc. Quadam veluti magna incantatione, Calvin in loc.
with sorceries, Hammond, ibid.
bewitched you?

10. There is little hope of mockers of piety, haters of God and of his
servants, and who are ready to revile and tear their faithful monitors and
reprovers; I join these, because usually they go hand in hand: for hatred of
holiness, as it flows from enimity against God, So it will beget enimity
against his children and servants and a cursed impatience and rage at their
warning and rebukes.

1. Then, as for haters of God, there be but few who will acknowledge
themselves to be such; but let carnal men profess never so much love to God,
yet (says the Apostle) the carnal mind (and how few can purge themselves of
that) is enimity against God, Romans 8.7. it so much hates God, that it is, as
it were, hatred and enimity in the abstract; and if it be brought to the
infallible touch stone of love, (to which the Scriptures so often app^al) viz.
obedience to his commandments, and if we consider what conscience carnalminded
men make of their ways, the hypocrisy of their profession and empty
complements will easily appear; and many professors and titular Christians will
be found to be in another rank, and to belong to that world of whom our blessed
Lord testifies, (and whether shall we believe his report or their vain lying
words?) that it hates him, Joh. 15.18. But, let such haters of God and of our
Lord Jesus know, to their terror, that their names are written in the catalogue
of those who are given over to a reprobat mind, Romans 1.30.28. and though, for a
time, visible judgments may be withheld, yet, ere it be long, Gods right hand
shall find out all those that hate him, Ps. 27.8.

2. From the former root must spring hatred of the godly and of godliness; as
they who love him that begat, love them also that are begotten of him, 1 John
5.1. So on the contrary, such as hate the Father will not love the children;
and therefore, haters of God must hate the godly, and upon this very account,
because they bear his mage in their heart, and express it in their life and
conversation; and thus, as the bloody murderers at the massacre at Paris, not
finding the famous and learned Martyr, P. Ramus, to show their malice and
hatred of him, pierced his picture, and himself too, (but they knew not that he
was hid behind it) So the wicked, not being able to find and reach the Lord,
they run at his Image wherever they see it, and no thanks to them that God is
not behind the Picture, for they would not spare nor hold their hands. Hence
the persecution of the Saints may well, and by just interpretation, be called
Deicide, and the Lord will one day reckon with oppressors of his people, for
all the wrongs and injuries done to them, as if they had been immediately done
to his holy majesty, according to that word, Zech. 2.8. He that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye; and, Act. 9.45. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? says the head in glory, complaining of the oppression of his suffering
members on earth.

Nay, but will some say, we were not worthy to live if we loved not God; but
for these professors, they are a pack of hypocrites, conceity and troublesome
people, and we cannot endure them. Ans. We deny not, 1. that difference of
opinion may occasion very sharp and hot debates among the Saints themselves;
and, 2. that the godly are more affected with, and displeased at, the sins and
failings of brethren, and of such who have a name that they live, then at the
transgressions of the wicked; because the miscarriages of the Saints do more
dishonor God and wound the holy profession, and put a weapon in the hands of
carnal men, and give them an 2 Samuel 12.14.
occasion to open their mouth and blaspheme: but, 3. that any godly man does
hate another or is grieved, because he is godly, is most false; but let the
wicked pretend what they will, yet this is all their quarrel against the
Saints; for if they would walk loosely, and run with the wicked to the same
excess of riot, and not Heb. 11.7.
condemn them by their holy conversation, they could love them as well as
others, and delight as much in their society; but because the Saints dare not
thus conform, therefore they hate and speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 4.4. Joh.
3.19, 20. Ioh. 7.7. The old Genesis 3.15.
enimity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, does stir
up the wicked against the Saints; and though they would cloak their hatred with
some fair pretense, yet the Lord knows that such are acted by Cains
principle, who slew his brother, because his own works were evil, and his
brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. And whereas such will say, that
notwithstanding they love God, let them hearken to this Apostle, chapter 4.20. If a
man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he, etc. and as
to the state and condition of such a one, we have it described, chapter 2.11. and,
chapter 3.15. He that hates his brother is in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, (that he is running to eternal destruction) because that darkness has
blinded his eyes. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that
no murderer has eternal life. And we will find It is observable, that so many
branches of hatred are there named, and all of them held forth as so many
evidences of a reprobat mind.
maliciousness, hatred, envy, despite, etc. held forth as a character of men
given over to a reprobat mind, Romans 1.28, 29, 30, 31.

As to the other two branches of this black mark, viz. mocking of piety and
rageing at a reproof, they need not be separated; for, as mockers of piety and
of the Saints are the worst of sinners, So they are most obdured, and have
fortified thimselves against all arrows of reproof, and therefore will be ready
to reverberat and send them back against the throwers; these swine will trample
such pearls under their feet, and turn again and rent you, says our Lord to
his disciples, Mat. 7.6. these are the fools that despise and refuse
instruction, and so despise their own soul, Prove. 15.5.32. these be the
scorners that will not hear a warning or rebuke, Prove. 13.1. and it were better
to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps then such brutish fools in their folly,
Prove. 17.12. And thus we may see both their sin and their punishment; the Lord
in his righteous judgment leaves and gives over mockers of piety, and so they
become incorrigible, and cannot endure a reproof: mocking Ishmaels must be cast
out, Genesis 21.9, 10. such barking dogs may not enter the Kings palace, Rev.
22.15. Surely the Lord scorneth the scorners, judgments are prepared for them,
and stripes for their back, Prove. 3.34. Prove. 19 29. the scorner will be
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity cut off, Isa. 29.20. and though
scoffers should call upon God in the day of their trouble, yet he would laugh
at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1.22.30, 26, 28. Ah!
remember the last and sad dittey against the ancient people of God, he waited
long upon them; and though they were a stubborn and rebellious nation, yet he
stirred not up all his wrath, but sent to them by his messengers, rising up
betimes and sending, because he had compassion on them; but when they mocked
his messengers, his wrath arese against his people till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And for such as hate and reproach their faithful monitors,
and will not turn at their rebuke, there is Prove. 26.12.
more hope of a fool then of such obdurate wretches; for he who thus hates and
despises repro^f, shall die and perish in his sins, Prove. 15.10. yea, such as
being often reproved, harden their neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and that
without remedy, Prove. 29.1. and woe to him who lays a snare for him that
reproves in the gate, Isa. 29.21.

O Isa. 46.12.
ye stout hearted and far from righteousness, will ye yet maintain your former
plea, and put Amos 6 30
the evil day far from you? how dreadful and terrible may this point be to
you, if ye were not Ephesians. 4^.19.
past feeling, ye have (no doubt) many times heard of a day of reckoning and
accounts, and that the Lord 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
Jesus will come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that know not God
and obey not his Gospel. Ye have heard of the terrors of the Almighty, of the
extreme an un^conceivable torments of hell, without case or any kind of
mitigation, unto all eternity, that such as are cast into that prison cannot
escape nor come out, but must lie in Rev. 19.15.
the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of the Almighty God for ever and
ever; for then he Isa. 27.11.
that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show
them no favor, etc. But ye have not regarded nor laid those things to heart,
as if ye had not been concerned in such matters; the terrible day of the Lord
has not been a terror to you, secure, bold, presumptuous sinners, who can
defy the devil and know that the Lord is merciful; but now the question is
put home to your doors in this most dreadful case, concerning your final
state; and such evidences are brought as your present condition and bypast
life will afford: (and that no small discovery from thence may be had, you have
heard from the Word of God) And now what say thou, O secure sinner, whoever
thou be, whether man or woman, rich or poor? what answer can thou return? art
thou still stout-hearted and far from fear? may thou not read thy name in
the black roll of them who have the mark of hell and perdition upon their
forehead? do thou not find thy self to be included (ask thy conscience and
deal plainly, and dare thou say that thou art not) in one or more of those
cursed ranks of persons, who are forsaken of God, judicially plagued and
hardened, and therefore devoted to destruction? 1. Have thou not enjoyed pure
and powerful ordinances? and yet, etc. We need not resume the several
particulars, but leaving that to thy meditation, and obtesting thee to reflect
upon thine own heart and ways, and to make a comparison, let us now only warn
thee of thy danger, and that there be more lying under this judicial stroke then
is believed; from whence comes it, that such powerful Ordinances have no
influence, that men will not see though the light of the Gospel does so clearly
shine before their eyes, that neither the sweet promises and consolations of
the Almighty, nor yet his terrible threatenings and judgments do affect? Must
not that sad word, Isa. 6.9, 10. be accomplished in many? would not Pagans
tremble, whilewe sleep? would not the word Act. 2.37.
prick their heart, that cannot pierce our skin? Mat. 11.21.
Tire and Sydon would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, and
behold we continue in impenitency and daily add to our iniquities; if Sodom had
enjoyed this day of the Gospel which we abuse, Mat 11.23.
it would have remained to this day; but if the Lord had dealt with us
according to our ways, he should have, long ere now, Mat. 21.43.
removed the Gospel from us, and given it to a Nation that would have brought
forth the fruits thereof. And what reason have we to fear lest the Lord at
length vindicat the contempt of his glorious Kingdom among us, with such
dreadful judgments, as all who hear may be astonished. If Ministers were asked,
how many in their respective charges had escaped, and were not concerned in any
of these marks of induration and rejection? ah! how should we tremble to speak,
and they to hear the answer that could be given? and how glad might that Pastor
be, who had reason to say, that the fourth ground (as in the parable, Mat. 13.)
were good; yea, or that the tenth part of his flock did walk worthy of the
Gospel? The famous Chrysostom, (who answered his (...) aureum os habens seu
aurea verba ^re su^dens, Scap. in voc. (...).
name, being one of the most eminent Preachers of his time) Quo^ esse putatis
in civitate nostra Antiochia qui salventur? durum ac molestum est quod dicturus
sum, dieam tamen, non possum in tot millibus centum invenire qui salventur;
verum and de his dubito, nam etc. Chrysostom. sermon. 4. ad pop. Antioch.
propounds the like question in a Sermon to the people of Antioch, among whom,
(it would have appeared, looking to his pains and their profession) he had done
much good; How many, in this our great City of Antioch, think ye (says this
zealous Doctor) shall be saved? It will be a hard speech which I must utter,
yet I will speak it, among all the thousands in this place, I cannot find one
hundred that shall be saved. Ah! was not this an uncharitable doom, concerning
so many well-meaning honest folk, that though there was in that great City,
above one hundred thousand persons, (as is thought) yet there should not one
hundred of them all be saved, and so not one of a thousand? was not that a hard
saying? and yet he had too good ground to think and speak so, as there he goes
on to show from the life and works of young and old; and in these lands (where
the Gospel has been as purely and powerfully preached, as ever it was among
any people since the Apostles days) how many Pastors have reason to join with
him in the like regrate and lamentation, and in much anguish of spirit to ask,
with the Prophet, Who has believed their report? and to whom has the arm of
the Lord been revealed? Isa. 53.1. A Minister perhaps is sent to a Paroch to
seek one lost sheep, while not only ninety and nine, but nine hundred are
suffered to wander and perish in their crooked ways; who, though they hear the
Pastors voice, yet never hearken nor return: who would not have thought that
Paul should have met with a good seedtime in Philippi, the chief city of that
part of Macedonia, Act. 16.12. after such an extraordinary and promising
invitation to come and help that people as he got? Act. 16.9. and yet, how
small a harvest did follow, there being, by his ministry in that place,
converted only one merchant woman Lydia, with her family; and with much a do
the jailer: for, first, the earth must quake, and the prison-foundations shake,
and it is doors open, before his stout heart did tremble or would yield and open
to Christ, ver. 14, 15.26.29. And, now a days, how few are they who make
conscience of their ways, and are working out their salvation with fear and
trembling? Ah! do not the wicked lives of many who are reputed good Christians,
their formality in the worship of God, their negligence, neutrality and
indifferency in matters of soul-concernment, their pride, avarice, self-love and
self-seeking make it too manifest, (though there were no such thing recorded in
the Word) that of the Mat. 22.16. Mat. 22.14. etc.
many who are called and hear the Gospel, only a few are chosen and shall be
saved? but ah! who does ponder and lay this to heart? our neighbors and
kins-folk are daily leaving us and going to the pit, and yet we their foolish
Ps. 49.13.
posterity and acquaintance approve and follow their way, and while we see them
die as they lived and perish in their security and vain confidence, we are
ready to say their end was peace, and they died well: and is not this brutish
stupidity an evidence, that we are lying under a judicial stroke? since thus
Mat. 13.14, 15.
hearing, we do not understand, and seeing, we do not perceive nor lay to
heart, that we might escape the like snare, and be converted and healed: and
were there no more but the want of sense and feeling while you hear or read
such a terrible discovery of the lamentable state of so many among you, that
were enough to allarm you; for, had not your hearts been harder then an
adamant, with what terror and pricking of conscience would you have cried out?
Wo's me, I have too good reason to fear, lest I be one of that number who are
plagued and forsaken of God, and who must perish eternally. If there were any
such marks whereby we could discover when men would die or suffer any
considerable loss in their state and outward condition, and if accordingly we
did warn a whole Congregation, that one of them should die in a day or weeks
space, how earnestly would all enquire? yea, would any be at rest till he knew
whether or not he were the man? The disciples were not more anxious when they
heard, that one of them should betray their Master, nor did they more earnestly
ask, Mat. 26.22.
Lord, is it I? is it I? then every one would ask and say, is it I? is it I
that can live no longer? But yet, while not one in a Paroch, but perhaps all
except one, are warned, from the word of truth, of the eternal ruin of both
soul and body, yet, how negligent careless and secure are they? and have we not
then reason to lament and say, ah! desperate sinners, Gal. 3.1.
who has thus infatuated and bewitched you?

But, to say no more to such sleepers, who deserve not to hear one word more
till they be awaked in hell, I would turn me to others, if I knew where to
look: Ah! are there none who will hear or lay their deplorable case to heart?
Ah! must I be silent, or else suppose what I cannot see; and imagine some to be
so affected, awaked and terrified by this discovery, or any such like warning
from whatsoever hand? ah! will none tremble while they see themselves to hing
over the mouth of the pit by a small thread, which may be broken before they
draw their breath? Is there no mourning captive who seeing himself taken and
held by this woeful snare, will in much anguish of spirit, horror and confusion
say, [ah! is there no remedy? though my case seem desperate, yet, is there no
Jer. 8.22.
balm in Gilead? are my wounds so incurable, that the great Physician could not
heal them? are there not bowels in the God of mercy to receive me yet? were it
now in vain to lay out my desperate and hopeless condition to him? would he not
hear if I should call on him? I have (alas) destroyed my self, and hitherto
rejected all his counsel, and therefore it were a just thing with God to laugh
at my calamity, and mock when my fear comes, and to hide his sace from my
prayers] Prove. 1.26.28.

To such as are in this sad condition, I have some few things to say, partly by
way of warning and caution, partly by way of counsel and direction, and partly
for supporting and strengthening Heb. 12.1.2.
the feeble knees, and lifting up the hands that hang down. And, 1. beware lest
thy fear and apprehended danger feed thy lusts and desperate security, and make
thee say, (with them, Isa. 22.13. 1 Cor. 13.2.) Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die; if we must perish, let us take a merry life of it so long
as we may; certainly that were a wrong course for being eased of your fears,
and that which would without remedy bring you to destruction; the premises are
sad and terrible, but the conclusion drawn from thence is mad and desperate; and
thus you bind, as with strong cords, that woeful threatening to your own backs,
and by making it a plea for thy brutish sensuality and desperate contempt of the
means, thou proclaimest thy hypocrisy, and that thy fears were not real but
pretended; and thus makes it appear, that thou indeed art the man who have
reason to tremble and fear, as being caught in the snare out of which thou will
never escape: Ah! but were your fears real, and if you did seriously desire to
be eased of them, you would rather take such a course as the people of Nineveh
did in a case much like to this, they being under a sad and (as it would then
have appeared) most peremptory threatening, yet say they, who can tell if God
will turn from his fierce anger? and for their part, they turned from their
evil ways and humbled themselves before the Lord, crying mightily unto him,
and ye know what the event was, God repented of the evil that he had said he
would do unto them, and he did it not, Jon. 3. But let me tell thee, O secure
and desperate sinner, who wilt be at no pains, and yet complainest of the
terrors of the Almighty, as thou began with the mercy of God, abusing it, and
encouraging thy self from thence to add sin to sin, and to continue in thy
wicked ways, So after thou have served thy turn with that most glorious
attribute, which should have led thee in to repentance, thou now take thy
self to his justice and threatenings, as if these did chase thee away, and hold
thee off from closing with, and seeking after the Lord; while indeed they
should drive thee in to him, and make thee forsake and turn from the evil of
thy doings: But will the Lord suffer infatuated sinners thus to mock his holy
Majesty, and to pervert and abuse those divine excellencies, and to encourage
themselves from thence to continue in their wickedness and rebellion against
him? and were it not a righteous thing with him, to send such fools to hell to
learn wisdom there? that they might become better divines then to bring from
heaven a cloak, pretense, or encouragement to sin (for as sinners in hell know
better the evil and parentage of sin, So they are more sensible of their own
folly) and since at length they have taken themselves to Gods justice and
severity, were it not fit to make them find the power of his justice and wrath
unto all eternity?

But, 2. if thou be indeed awakened, and to purpose pricked in heart, and
ask, what must I do? is there no remedy? I would counsel thee to humble thy
self before the Lord, and to cry mightily for a broken and contrit spirit; thy
case is most sad and dangerous, and thou must not expect to go through without
trouble and difficulty; the imposthume is inveterat, and therefore thou must
suffer the lancet to go the deeper; what ever course the Lord take with others,
who have not so grieved and dishonored him, and though he draw them in with a
word of love, and softly open their heart, as he did Lydias, Act. 16.14. yet if
ever thou be born again, its likely to be by sore labor and travail; all who
are about thee will hear thee cry out of the pangs of thy new birth: and the
deeper the foundation be cast, the building will be the surer and stronger; and
the more sick thou art, thou will be the welcomer to the Physician,

For, 3. albeit thy case be so dangerous, yet it is not altogether desperate;
and therefore thou may seek after a remedy, and must seek the more
diligently; general threatenings though most peremptory and irrevocable (as it
would appear by the manner of expression) yet leave room to the free grace and
mercy of God to pity whom he will; its his royal prerogative to scrape out
whose name he pleases out of the black roll of judgments, either spiritual or
temporal, and that he may magnify the riches of his free grace he will
sometimes lay hold on the worst of sinners, on Manasseh, Paul, the Thief,
Rahab, Mary Magdalene, etc. We needed not have named these, or any such in
stances, for these are well known to such as know little more of the
Scriptures, and it were good for them that they either knew more, or that they
knew not so much, since they make that knowledge a woeful snare to themselves;
for what should be an encouragment, and open a door of hope to penitent sinners
to turn from their evil ways to the living God, they make a ground and
encouragment to continue in their sins, to delay their repentance, and turn
their back on God: To thee then, and for thy use, O mourning penitent and
disconsolat one, are those examples, and (as it were) miracles of mercy
recorded in the Word, that thou should not despair, but lay hold on the sure
word of promise and invitation, come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. whosoever will, let him take, etc.
Rev. 22.17. etc. Is not that a sweet and full Word? is there not room enough
there for to receive thee? is not that a plaster fitted for thy sore? is not
that Word large and comprehensive, both as to persons their condition and
exigence, and as to the circumstance of time? O do not then say, ah! that it
had come a little sooner before the day of grace was past, its too late for me
now to lay hold on mercy when the doors are shut and locked by an irrevocable
threatening; for the day of grace is never so far spent to any sincere
penitent, but he has daylight enough to let him see home; and the door of
mercy always stands open to such, and they shall have no reason to complain
that they came too late and could find no entry: The promises of the Gospel
know no other term, but what time soever a sinner does repent; when I say unto
the wicked, thou shall surely dye, if he turn from his sin, he shall surely
live, and not dye, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15. Ezekiel. 18.27. At what instant I shall speak
cencerning a nation or kingdom, (and why not also concerning a person or
family?) to pluck up, and to pull down and destroy it; if it turn from its evil
ways, then I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18.7, 8.
let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God for he
will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7.

But you will say, I saw in these characters my name written in such legible
letters, that he who runs might have read; my case and condition was so set out
to the life, that no place was left for shifts and evasions, I know my self to
be included in one or more of those cursed ranks, and is it possible for me to
escape that dreadful sentence pronounced against me by the mouth of him who is
truth it self? Ans. But may not the Lord give the occasion with Paul to say, I
who was before a blasphemer, persecuter and miscrable wretch, have now obtained
mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13. see Ephesians. 2.2, 3.4. Tit. 3.3. etc. What? or who can hinder
the infinite bowels of mercy from embracing thee? There is no threatening so
peremptory as to bind up Gods hands, that he may not pity and show mercy to
whom he will nor receive a sincere penitent, Ezekiel. 33.14. etc. And as to those
characters, they hold forth (as we said) grounds of fear, and far more then a
probable conjecture concerning the final state and eternal portion of such as
did come under them; but are not infallible rules, nor a sufficient warrant for
us to pass a peremptory s^ntence against our selves, or others in reference to
the decree of reprobation; we are exhorted to give all diligence to make our
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. but we are no where commanded to make our damnation
sure; there be in the Scriptures infallible marks of the one, but not of the
other, the one is a duty, and our sweet privilege; but the other is left to be
manifested by that final sentence after death; and at the day of judgment,
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.

4. Then art thou convinced and humbled? is sin imbittered unto thee? and dare
thou sin no more? see thou thy need of a Physician, and is Christ precious in
thine eyes? etc. this is a good evidence that the sentence and Colos 2,
handwriting that was against thee, is taken out of the way and nailed to the
cross of Christ; so that now thy name shall no more be found in that dreadful
catalogue of such as are fitted for destruction, for they who are thus left,
and finally forsaken of God, he gives them over to a reprobat mind, Romans 1.28.
and gives them up unto vile affections, and to their own hearts lusts, and
suffers them to walk in their own courses, Romans 1.26. Psalm. 81.12 he gives them
over to be a prey to Satan, and to Ephesians. 2.2.2 Cor. 4.4.
walk according to the course of the world, according to the prince of power of
the air, the spirit that works mightily in the children of disobedience, etc.
Since then this is not now thy case nor course, thou may be confident that by
the grace of God thou have escaped out of that woeful snare, and now what needs
discourage thee? There is no sin nor condition though never so desperate that
can exclude the penitent from mercy; yea, not the sin against the holy Ghost,
which is unpardonable, not because it is greater then the mercy of God, or as
if there were not worth enough in Christ's blood to be a ransom for it, but
because the Lord in his righteous judgment does finally forsake all them who
fall into this blasphemy, so that they shall never repent, nor seek after a
remedy: If then thou do truly repent and turn from thy evil ways, this is a
sure evidence that thou art not thus forsaken, nor judicially plagued; and
therefore be of good courage in following thy duty and seeking after a remedy;
whatever thou have been, none of the sins that thou have committed shall be
mentioned unto thee, nor remembered against thee any more, Ezekiel. 18.22. Ezekiel.
33.16.

But, 5. albeit the Lord, to magnify the riches of his free grace, may show
mercy to the most vile and wretched sinners, and pass by moral civil men, yet
how few are there of the many thousands, who being included in the former
ranks, are lying under that terrible threatening, that do partake of the mercy
of God? You can tell me of Manasseh, Paul, etc. (who yet had not such Though
Paul, if he had been a hearer of Christ and his Apostles, might have enjoyed
extraordinary moans; yet his education and engagement to the sect of Pharisees,
did deprive him of that light, which did then shine among them.
means of salvation as we, nor despised such convincing and soul-converting
Ordinances,) but what are these in respect of the many millions who from time
to time have perished under that sentence and judgment? What be some six or
seven persons among all the men and women of the world (who have been thus
guilty) for the space of four or five thousand years? that is but a poor coal
for thee (O desperately secure sinner!) to blow at; though Alexander and Julius
Caesar did conquer a great part of the world, will thou therefore expect to do
the same? if one in an age or country, who has lived for a while, as thou
still do, has obtained mercy; will thou therefore presume, and think
likewise to be saved? why do thou not then also think, that thou shall not
taste of death, since Enoch and Elias were translated and taken up to heaven?
nay, were it not a strange and admirable thing to see such escape out of the
snare, how would they be affected when they heard their deplorable state laid
out before them? and yet they can hear such a doleful Sermon, and be no more
affected therewith, then the dasks whereon they sit: must not such be past
feeling, and given over to a reprobat mind? and yet not a few of such desperate
wretches, will profess they trust in God, and hope to be saved as well as the
holiest Saint on earth: But whatever be their bold and mad presumption, and how
little soever they regard the faithful warnings they meet with, or fear the
threatenings and terrors of the Almighty, yet, to my observation, I never knew,
nor heard of any in my time, except three or four, who in any eminent degree
came under these characters, that to the discerning of judicious Christians,
met with mercy; and this admirable dispensation toward them, was matter of
astonishment to all who heard of it, except such desperate wretches as made a
cursed use of it, encouraging themselves thereby to continue in their wicked
ways: But let none mistake what we say, we do not, we dare not pass a
peremptory sentence concerning the state of others, especially those whose
guiltiness was not so great, notour and scandalous; and though we know but a
few, who grossly and palpably came under these marks, who did evidence a
sensible and considerable measure of saving repentance, (and in such a case,
when it is real, it will not be small) yet we did not deny, but the Lord might
have a secret work on the hearts of some on their deathbed, which he will not
make so discernable to others, that all may be afraid to follow such a course
of life, and that none might presume and delay to the end of the day: yet,
since none may limit the Lord, Ministers must not turn their back on such, as
if their case were altogether desperate; but they must warn and exhort them,
commiting the event and success to him who can abundantly pardon, and show
mercy when, and to whom he will.

But supposing thee who art thus awakned and pricked in heart, who art sensible
of thy danger, and now on the right way to escape, to be one of that small
number, whom the Lord will make a miracle of mercy; I have a sixth word (and
that a very necessary one) to thee; beware that thou quench not this as former
motions of the Spirit; Ah! let not this storm be like the noise of thunder,
terrible for the time, but of short continuance; and then thou might be
afraid, least there remain no more sacrifice for thy sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, Heb. 10.26, 27. because
(says the Lord) I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not
be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee, Ezekiel. 24.13. If then thou be such a one as is supposed, thou will not
thus draw back, after the Lord has begun to awaken and purge; thou will take
no rest till a saving change be wrought in thee. and till thou lay hold on the
rock of salvation; and then with what enlarged affections will thou admire and
praise the riches of his goodness and mercy, who has pitied and pulled such a
desperate sinner out of the snare: thou will become a new creature indeed, and
all who know thee, will have reason to praise God for thee, and from that time
forth thou will walk humbly, circumspectly and exemplarly: thou will often look
on the skar of thy old wound, and thou will say (with Paul in a like case, 1
Cor. 15.8.9.) I was as one born out of due time, I am the least of all Saints,
that am not meet to be called a Saint, because I, etc. And thus thou will also
resolve (with him, ver. 10.) by the grace of God to labor more abundantly then
others; and thou will often put up this question to thy soul, ah! what shall I
render to the Lord for his marverllous loving kindness toward me? ah! what
shall I do? and what can I suffer for the honor of his great Name, whom I have
so much dishonored, and that I may become a good example to those whom I have
so much, and so often scandalized? thou must, after that, be (in some sort) a
non-such, if thou be such as thou ought to be.

Thus we may see that the present point, though most dreadful and terrible,
yet does not exclude any mourning penitent from pardon. But lastly, that no
obstruction may seem to lie in the way of such, we will speak a word for
clearing that place, Prove 1.26, 27, 28. etc. where the Lord threatens to
reject all their tears, prayers, and endeavors. Ans. 1. some perhaps may think
to elude the present difficulty, by affirming the meaning of that threatening
not to be absolute, but conditional, so that we may not from thence conclude
that any, who was in such a case, ever did, or shall cordially pray to God, and
that he will refuse to answer their effectual fervent prayers; since, only by
way of supposition, it is said, though they should call, yet he would not
answer nor regard their complaint; as the offer of salvation, made to the
reprobat, if they believe and repent, does not import that any such ever did,
or shall repent and be saved; So on the other hand, neither does this
threatening imply, that any, who fall under it, should in truth call upon the
Lord, and he hide his face from their prayers; and therefore, if the Lord pour
out the Spirit of prayer upon thee, this threatening needs not discourage thee;
but thou may be confident, that either thy name is taken out of that
threatening, or that it was never included in it.

But this answer seems not to be satisfactory, 1. because its contrary, 1. to
all the invitations and promises made to the penitent, what ever have been
their former provocations and course of life; 2. those general propositions so
frequently held forth in the Gospel, viz. Act. 2.21.
[whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord Jesus, shall be saved; Mat.
11.28.
all that labor and are heavy laden, may come to Christ and he will give them
rest, etc.] Hence, orthodox Divines do not scruple to yield to the Arminians,
these hypotheticks, [if Judas had repented and come to Christ for rest, he
should have been saved; if Genesis 4.16.
Cain, when he went out from the presence of the Lord, had poured out his soul
before the Lord, he would not have been rejected, etc.] and there is good
reason for such an hypothesis, since it may be reduced to an universal
categorick, and absolute enunciation, viz. [All true penitents and sincere
supplicants, Paul, Peter, etc. were saved.] but that hypothetick, for which
this answer does plead, cannot be resolved in any categorick that is true; nay,
it has not so much as one instance, or particular whereupon it might be built;
for no man did ever seek after the Lord, and call upon him in truth, who did
not meet with an answer of peace. But, 2. if that hypothesis were true, then
every door of hope must be shut against such penitents, for though they should
mourn and cry to God, yet he would not hear nor answer; to what purpose then
should we exhort such to repent and call upon the Lord? there is not a word of
command or exhortation in the Word, that has not a promise, by way of motive
and encouragment, annexed to it; and we need not run to those Scriptures in
which the Lord universally promises, that whenever a sinner shall return
from the evil of his doings, and seek his face, he will receive him graciously;
since the words immediately, both going before and following, viz. ver. 23. and
33, do hold forth with the exhortation, to such as were lying under that sad
threatening, to turn and seek the Lord, a promise and intimation of mercy, if
they should answer his call and invitation; and therefore, though this
threatening be most peremptory, yet it does not exclude a condition, exception
and limitation for the manifestation of the riches of free grace; as has been
shown.

2. Then as to the scope and sense of these words, Prove. 1.26. We Ans. the Lord
there threatens to reject not such a prayer as we have described, and can
plead a promise; and to which we did exhort, but such a prayer as may be in
hell, it being nothing else but a brutish howling, because of some outward rod
and calamity; and though such a complaint be directed to the Lord, (as the
words, ver. 28. do imply) yet the motives being carnal, and their ends selfish,
its no prayer in God's account, though it get the name, and such cryers may be
said to call upon the Lord, yet it is not such a prayer as may lay claim to a
promise; albeit the Lord sometimes, out of his general bounty, may answer such
a cry, and give to such supplicants their request, when he sends leanness into
their soul, Psalm. I deny not that in such public mercies and deliveranees as
the Psalmist there mentions, the Lord may have respect to his Saints and
their prayers, and for their sake do good to a multitude,
106.15, 43, 44. etc. But though thus he may pity his creatures in misery, and
answer their carnal desires, yet for such as are lying under that sad
threatening, Prove. 1. he will Yet neither thus is that threatening so absolute,
but it may (as in Ahab, etc.) admit a condition and exception in reference to
some holy end and design, at which the Lord may aim at in such a dispensation.
laugh at their calamity, and while they thus call upon him, he will not
answer: we have a parallel Scripture, Hos. 7.13, 14. whereas he threatens to
destroy them notwithstanding such carnal devotion, so he tells them, that their
prayers deserved not the name, as not proceeding from an humble and sincere
heart; We unto them, for they have fled from me; destruction unto them, because
they have transgressed against me: and they have not cried unto me with their
heart, when they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and
wine, and they rebel against me. But though the Lord reject such carnal
prayers, yet this needs not discourage thee, who offerest up to him a broken
and contrit heart, a sacrifice which he never did, nor will despise, Ps. 51.17.
Ps. 34.18.

But, since the Saints are ready here to stumble, a word would be added for
preventing their mistake; for, as dogs are ready to snarch the childrens bread,
so the children may gnaw the bones that are cast to the dogs; as the wicked may
lay hold on the promise that belongs not to them, so the Saints on the
threatening which they need not fear; while the Master does frown and is angry
with his slothful and unfaithful servant, the child may tremble; and the hand
lift up with a stone to be cast at the dog, may startle the tender son; though
those who are concerned in this sad judgment and threatening, are not affected
nor awaked while they hear their dreadful doom, yet some of the Lords precious
ones may tremble and fear lest this be their case: therefore, 1. I would have
such observe, that those characters are not to be understood of one or two
particular acts, but of a course, state, trade and continuance in such and such
sins; for, what is the particular sin, into which the Lords chosen ones (yea
and after their conversion) may not fall? 2. That men and women may go a great
length, and come very nigh the curse, and yet escape; there is a certain
measure in finding which the Lord has appointed and proportioned for
spiritual, as well as for temporal judgments; which we can hardly define,
because it is not one and the same to all and every one; and the Lord will use
some variety, and leave us all in the dark here, that on the one hand, none
might presume to continue one day in their sinful ways, nor to add one sin
more to that cursed heap, lest that one sin fill up the measure and bring down
the judgment; and on the other hand, that none should despair, so long as the
Gospel-offer and the means of grace are continued with them; and that others
might be charitable, and not dare to pass a peremptory sentence against any
man, as to his rejection, reprobation and eternal portion. 3. The Saints would
not forget to put a difference between that partial haraness that remains in
the heart after it is renovation and conversion, and that total and universal
hardness of the heart before the grace of God thaw, soften and mollify it; and
that judicial hardness and induration wherewith the Lord in his judgment
plagueth secure sinners, while he gives them up to the lusts of their own
heart; which is yet worse then the former, it being a load above a load: for,
although the godly may complain as of a body of sin and death yet lodging in
them, so of much dullness and indisposition for spiritual duties, and of much
deadness and slightness of spirit, under melting ordinances, and awakening
dispensations; yet they have reason to praise God, (yea even then when they are
thus mourning and complaining) that they are not lying under that total, far
less the judicial hardness of heart, which is both the sin and misery of
cast-awayes, Romans 7.24, 25. And though the Saints may be brought very low, and
not meet with that enlargement in prayer which others or they themselves
sometimes have had, yet the spirit of prayer is not altogether taken from them,
as from those who are judicially plagued and deserted; for, though the wind do
not so blow, nor fill their sails as formerly, yet by a secret hand they are
still carried on in their way, and held in motion; and they may find the spirit
to press and stir them up to their duty, though they do not so sensibly find
his help and assistance in the performance of the duty.

CHAP. III. An exhortation to continue instant in prayer; with an answer to
objections.
ALbeit we might well press this exhortation from what has been here said,
concerning the certainty of success, and the return of prayer; yet we have
reserved this Chapter rather to be the conclusion of the whole Treatise, then
of any one Part: and in it we shall, 1. press, 2. vindicat this duty.

Sect. I. Several motives for pressing the constant and serious practice of
this soul-enriching performance.
Romans 12.12. -- continuing instant in prayer. Luke 18.1. And he spoke a parable
unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray and not to faint.
WHile we divide, and thus compare contemplation with action, we spoil both of
their excellency and perfection; their conjunction is sweet and successful,
but a divorce is sad and grievous; and who would choose either to want his eyes
or his hands? and therefore, though knowledge (especially in matters of
soul-concernment) be one of the most noble perfections whereof we are capable,
as being a part of the divine Colos. 1.10.
Image which we lost in Adam, and shall at length be perfectly restored by him
who said, Rev. 21.9.
Behold, I make all things new. Yet, if it be not rightly improven, if is be
empty, and not accompanied with a suitable practice, action, life and
conversation, it will do us no good, but much hurt; it may puff us up, and make
us boast as if we were non-suches, 1 Cor. 8.1. it may make us idle and
negligent, as if it were enough to know something, and as if they were the best
Christians who know most: thus forgetting, that that the true Israelites Motto
is, homage; our happiness does not (like the empty, mistaken Pagan,
philosophical, speculative dream) consist in contemplation; we are called to
work, knowledge will not do the turn, it cannot make us happy, yea or draw us
out of the category of nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2. but the more we know, if we be
idle, negligent and unfaithful, the worse we are, and our stripes shall be the
more, Luke 12.47. O! ye who would rather be Christians indeed then accounted
such, and who Joh. 12.43. Romans 2.29.
love the praise of God more then the praise of men; would it satisfy you to
know the way to salvation if ye did not walk in it? or to hear and speak much
of God, if ye were strangers to a communion with him, and lived at a distance
from him? And what would it profit you, though you knew all that could be said
concerning the nature, qualifications, excellency and use of prayer, if ye fail
and come short as to the practice of it? This was the scope whereat we aimed
all along this discourse, and in every part of it we labored to hold forth
somewhat for our encouragement, help and direction herein; and therefore, all
must be lost labor to the slothsfull and negligent, and to such as will not
make conscience to continue instant in the performance of this sweet
soul-ravishing and enriching duty. Ah! who is able to hold forth all the
motives and arguments that may serve to stir us up here unto? And now in the
close we shall only name, and briefly hint at, some few things; looking up to
him who only can give the blessing, who only can persuade and enable us to pray
as we ought, and who can help us from fainting in our fervent and frequent
addresses to the throne of Grace.

1. We may (with the 1 Cor. 11.14.
Apostle in another case) appeal to nature it self, does it not teach you to
pray? Ask the Brutes, the Ravens, Lions, etc. Job 38.41. Ps. 147.9. Ps. 104.27.
Ps. 145.15. not as if these unreasonable creatures could know and worship God,
but because nature has taught them so much of this duty, as they are capable
of and can bear; they have some sense of their burdens and wants, they groan
and cry, and desire to be eased; and the Lord hearkeneth to this voice and
says, now the poor creature is crying to me, and I will pity it. Ah! shall the
beasts in their own way cry to God, and will thou be silent? has the Lord
elevated thee so far above these inferior creatures, and fitted thee for the
immediate acts of his Worship and for a communion with himself, and will thou
not serve him accordingly? has he given thee a heart and spiritual soul, as he
has given the Brutes a sensitive appetite and natural desire, and shall they
cry to God with the one, and not thou with the other?

But, 2. reason in man being of a deeper reach then sensitive nature in the
brutes, it not only sees trouble and wants at home, but also can look up to
the right treasure from whence a supply may be had. Thus Ideo apud varias
hominum nationes quicunque no nen aliquod sibi ducevirtute vindicavere, circa
precum crationumque studiase exercucrunt, ut apud Jndos Brachmanae, apud Persas
Magi, inter Graecos Theologi, in Assyriis, Chaldei, etc. Fran. Venet. de harm.
mundi cant. 3. ton. 6. cap. 15 Orare nobis proprium est, ut Plato, Porphyrius,
Jamblicus, and Proclus docents totum genus humanum omni tempore omni loco,
emneque natione divinis precibus ded^tum suit, ibid, cant. 1. to^. 1 cap. 16.
Heathens and Pagans, by the light of natural reason, can not only discern the
eternal Power and Godhead of their Maker, Romans 1.20. but also much of that
duty they owe to him, Romans 2.14, 15. And in the first place, that they should
offer to him the sacrifice of prayer and praise; all men naturally may know,
that they are obliged to render this homage, and pay this tribute of all their
enjoyments to the great King. Hence, Divines acknowledge prayer and praise to
be a branch of that natural worship, which the Law, written on the heart ( Romans
2.15.) by the work of creation, does prescribe: And Hence Phocylides his (...)
(and the Pythagorean verses, their (...)) (...), and Plutarch his (...), is
acknowledged to be a fundamental principle known to all men; (...) (says
Zenophon) (...). And that this general does clearly comprehend our case, none
(I think) will deny.
Pagans themselves do reckon this among the first and most undeniable
principles of their Theology; and though for ordinary they do not improve this
known principle, nor hearken to the cries and challenges of a natural
conscience, convincing them of the neglect, and calling them to go about this
duty, yet in the day of calamity, and when the Lords hand lies heavy upon them,
they will cry to him; the most stupid, stubborn and desperate wretch will then
take him to his devotion. It was well said by one, He Qui nescit orara, discat
navigare.
who cannot pray, let him go to sea, and the storm will learn him this point of
Divinity: when the wind was boisterous and the Pagan Mariners afraid, they will
not only practice, but preach this point with much zeal and tenderness, What
meanest thou, O sleeper? (say they to Jonah) Arise, call upon thy God, Jon. 1.6.

Thus all are taught, and may learn, their duty; but the Lords own people have
many other Monitors and Instructers, they meet with many voices calling and
inviting them to call upon God; where can thou cast thine eyes, but there
thou may behold a Teacher, and hear a voice pointing out the way to the
throne? The Lord does call and invite us to our duty, both by his Word and
Works; but, alas! who has Isa. 6.10.
ears to hear when he speaks? or a heart to consider what he says? And, 1.
there is scarce a line in the Scriptures which holds not forth some one or
other motive hereunto; 1. Mat. 7.7 3.
precepts and commands should chase thee (who art of thy self so weak, and not
2 Cor. 3.5.
sufficient for one good thought) in to him, of whom is all our sufficiency,
and who only can strengthen and enable us both to will and to do.

Joh. 16.23.
promises cry to thee, O make have, do not linger, run to the throne; the
blessing is brought to the birth, and only waits for the midwifery of prayer.
3. Jer. 10.25.
Threatenings should drive thee into the provoked Majesty, to deprecat his
wrath, to cry for mercy, and to beg a pardon that none of those evils thy sins
have deserved may befall thee. Is. 43.21, 22. This people have I formed for my
self, they shall show forth my praise: but thou have not called upon me, O
Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. 5. Every passage of providence
held forth in the Word, should make thee say, Ps. 78.6, 7. etc.
teach me to improve aright what is 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
recorded in the sacred Volumn for my instruction, comfort or humiliation, that
I may fear and reverence thy great Name, and may not become an unfruitful
hearer, etc.

2. All Gods works and dispensations toward thee and the present generation,
do join with his word; 1. all thy wants, dangers, Ps. 50.15.
troubles, difficulties and temptations, yea and all the misery and afflictions
of thy relations and of Gods people wheresoever, Ps. 17.8. Ps. 36.7. Ps. 57.1.
Ps. 63.7.
resting securely under the shadow of his wings in the day of greatest
calamity. 2. All thy mercies and enjoyments personal or public, do summon thee
as to pay the Ps. 50.15.
tribute of praise to the great and liberal Giver, 1 Timothy: 4.4, 5.
prove blessings indeed, and may not be given and continued with us in wrath,
and so become snares and woeful temptations. 3. Ezekiel. 36.37. Mat. 7.7.
complain of our silence, and say, Ah! why do ye thus hedge up, and cast lets
and impediments in the way, by sinning against our Master and Lord, and will
not put to one hand to the work? where is your longing and desiring? will ye
not do so much as cry? a word with the King might do much; ah! know ye not that
he will Ps. 145.19.
fulfill the desire of his humble supplicants? 4. The graces of the spirit, as
they call, 1. by Col. 1.9, 10, 11.
enabling us to go, Mat. 25.27, 28
taken from us, and we become unfit and unable to walk; if thou restrain
prayer, the Lord will restrain the quickening and strengthening motions and
influence of his spirit; and then what deadness and coldness will seize upon
the soul? distempers will then creep on, and lusts will begin to reign and
command: O then! if thou find any fitness and disposition for the work, any
stirring and heat within, fail while the wind blows; if thou que^en the
spirit by neglecting such an opportunity, thou may be put to wait, cry and
Cant. 5.6.
complain before thou meet with such a gale: again art thou indisposed? find
thou much coldness and deadness to have seized upon thee? O then! cry for fire
from heaven to fall upon thy sacrifice; and beg that the spirit of life may
breath upon thee: do not then say, I am weak, and therefore must not venture to
wrestle with the strong and mighty one; thou know not well what thou say,
whilst thou would make thy weakness a plea for running away from the rock of
strength and defense; art thou weak, and is it not the Lord who must Ps. 80.18.
quicken and 1 Pet. 5.10.
enable thee? art thou Mat. 9.12.
sick, and will thou not come to the Physician? art thou Ps. 50.3, 4.9.11.
afraid, and will thou not go where thou may be secure? When thou wal^est
with God and art speaking to him, he is engaged in thy quarrel; who dare offer
violence to any man while he is in the Kings presence? the Saints are never so
secure as while they are most fervent in prayer, and the nearer access they
get, the more safe they are from Satan's temptations; and though even then he
may Zech. 3.1.
assault them, yet he cannot hurt them nor work their ruin; prayer is a main
part of our spiritual armor, whereby we are enabled to stand against the wiles
of the devil, Ephesians. 6.18.11. and is it not better to put on our armor, then
encounter temptations while we are weak and naked? And thus, neither our
weakness nor strength, neither our fitness nor indisposition may be pretended
as a plea for lying by; but both hold forth a strong motive and argument for
drawing nigh to God: Art thou strong and lively, then thou art the more able,
and the more engaged to thy duty? art thou weak and faint, then draw nigh to
the fountain of life and strength? if conversing with the godly be a See Part
3. Chap. 2. Sect. 2.
mean for quickening our graces, far more must fellowship with the Lord himself
work this blessed effect; and therefore prayer (in which after a special manner
we converse with God) is held forth as the best mean of our edification and
building up in the faith, Jude, 20. For as acquired habits are increased by
exercise, So also the habits of grace; and in prayer our faith and other graces
are set a work and exercised, and therefore must also be strengthened, quickened
and increased.

Genesis 4.10.
cry for vengeance and judgments to be poured out upon us; and O! should not
the Echo of that dreadful and lamentable voice alarm us to lift up our voice
like a trumpet, and cry mightily to the Lord to blot our our iniquities, and to
hide his face from their cry? ah! should we be silent while these bosom enemies
night and day, without ceasing, make intercession against us? and since, of our
selves, we cannot outcry them, our voice being so weak that it cannot be
heard, by reason of their noise; let us employ the Mediators help, his blood
can Heb 11.24.
speak, and all the clamours of our sins cannot hinder the Lord from harkening
to what it says.

6. While Satan Mat. 26, 41.
tempts us to restrain prayer, this should provoke us to our duty; 1 Pet.
5.8, 9, 10.
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking to destroy us, should not we fly to
the city of refuge? and ah! whither should the child, when pursued, run, but in
to the fathers bosom?

7. Our calling and holy profession, our vows and manifold engagements to him
in whom we live, Phil. 4.6.
thing, by prayer, supplication and thanksgiving, to make our requests known
unto him; we are Rev 1.6.
Priests, and therefore must daily offer up to our God this spiritual
sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. we are his Joh. 15.15. Ps. 25.14.
Friends and favorites, to whom he manifests his secrets, and shall we not lay
out our condition to him, and acquaint him with our purposes? ah! shall the
Lord so often visit us by his Spirit, by his Word, and by his Works, and shall
he not hear from us? is 2 Samuel 16.17.
this your kindness to your friend? would you deal so with a man like your
self, and will ye thus Deuteronomy. 32.6.
requite the Lord?

Cor. 11.2.
Husband, 2 Cor. 6.18.
Father, Joh. 13.13.
Lord and Master, etc, does engage us to the frequent performance of this sweet
and amiable duty; what? art thou a wife, and delightest not in the presence and
society of thy kind husband, art thou a son, Hinc Academici nonnulli orbos
illos and utrisque carentes parentibus dicebant qui orationibus precibusque
spretis ad superiorem divinamque naturam converti negligebant. Franc. Venet.
cant. 3. ton. 6. cap. 15.
and will thou not draw nigh to thy loving father? what? have thou such a
husband and father, so great and excellent, and yet so kind and condescending,
and dare thou thus undervalue his love? have thou such a master, such a King
and Lord, to whom thou may thus approach, and with whom converse so
familiarly, and will thou not improve this privilege? ah! shall he stoop so
low to thee, and will thou despise thine own mercies?

9. As our relation to God, So also our relation to our brethren and
fellow servants, does oblige us to this; the Jer. 8.20.
harvest is past, and the summer is come, and yet the people of God lie in
Babylon, the Turk and Antichrist tread upon the Lords vineyard, and many
ravening wolves are seeking to make a prey of the Saints, and shall not thy
voice be heard bemoaning their condition? Cant. 8.8.
sister, when she had no breasts, and now when our breasts are full, shall we
forget the elder sister in her widowhood, living in a barren and empty
wilderness? and then, as to our domestic and personal relations, where can we
look, but we may behold some one or other, saying to us (as that Act. 16.9.
man of Macedonia to Paul) come and help us? you have moyen in heaven, speak
for us to the King; your prayers will not be shut out; ye are our friends, and
let us have your help in this time of need.

1 Pet. 2.11.
pilgrims and strangers, and as we are far from home, and live at a distance
from our fathers house, So also from our father; and though he will keep tryst
with us in his ordinances, and allow us a sight of his back-parts, yet how
little of God is seen and enjoyed while we are in this state of 2 Cor. 5.6.
absence and exile? But since our gracious God is pleased in some measure to
descend to us in these, and make (as it were) a visit to his poor despicable
creatures, saying to them, behold me, behold me, oh! how careful should we be
to improve every such opportunity for renewing and confirming our acquaintance
with him, and for knowing and enjoying more of him, that thus the distance in
part may be removed, our peace promoved, and our interest in him the more
secured? frequency in approaching, will bring us nearer, and will beget
familiarity and confidence; O, then from time to time Job. 21 2.
acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace; thereby good shall come unto
thee: O, what familiarity and spiritual boldness, what satisfaction, sweetness,
delight, enlargement, etc. have the Saints found in this ordinance? so that
Clemens Alexandrinus had reason to say (which also with him is acknowledged by
the Jesuit Quare cum tantum sit bonum nostra petitio, merito, Clem. Alex. lib
7. strom. dicebat, plus paratum debere esse bominem petere, and etiam si non
impetret; quam impetrare non petendo: adeo ex imium bonum. est petitio, si
recte fiat. Fran. Tolot. in Joan. 16. v 26.
Tolet) that upon this consideration, we should be more ready to ask, though we
did not receive what we asked; then to have and receive what we desire without
asking: prayer it self being a greater blessing then any outward mercy we can
ask.

11. If thou can, with the Ps. 116.1.
Psalmist, say, I love the Lord, thou will, with him, also resolve to call upon
the Lord as long as thou live. Love is communicative, and must speak with the
beloved, it is impatient of distance and absence, and will break through many
impediments and difficulties, and O! since prayer will open a door, and give
access, so that he is w^thin a cry, and thou may speak to him, love will
say, pray thou must; there will be no place left for debates and delays.

2 Cor. 5.17.
new a creature, of an enemy he is become a son to him who never had a dumb
child, and as, in the natural generation, the child usually comes in to the
world weeping, So in the spiritual regeneration, the man-child is brought forth
with tears in his eyes, and with a cry; the believer must look up to God, and
lift up a prayer to him, and accordingly prayer gets an Jam. 5.15.
epithet, and is called the prayer of faith; these two are inseparable
companions, and not only (like Hippocrates his twins) do they live and die, but
also grow up together, and mutually strengthen and stir up one another; the
first news we hear of believing Paul, Act. 9.11. were, Behold he prays. You
will say, but did not Paul before this time pray? Ans. No doubt, Paul, while a
Pharisee (being so great a zealot) did pray, and very frequently, but there was
no life in his prayers; ye use to give the man's name to the dead corpse, but the
body void of life is not the man, neither is that prayer that is not the prayer
of faith: and prayer is not an empty and fruitless associat, but it brings
meat and provision with it; and it is a monitor and guide, and a sure anchor
which will keep the praying soul from wavering, Jam. 1.6. and as thus they
begin and grow up; So they may be supposed to die together, when faith is
turned into an immediate and blessed vision, and when neither we nor our
brethren shall be exposed to any more wants and trials, prayer shall give place
to incessant praises.

Job, 15.4.
not off fear, thou will not restrain prayer; thou will be afraid to stay too
long out of thy fathers sight, lest he frown; and being convinced of thy
weakness and inability to walk before him in all pleasing, thou will, without
ceasing, Col. 1.9, 10.
pray for grace and strength to do his will, and that thou may become
fruitful in every good work.

must be sensible of thy wants, and that there is nothing at home but indigence
and misery, and many sores and evils, and where should thou go but to the
rich treasure? there is Luke 15 17.
bread enough in thy fathers house, and will thou rather perish with hunger,
then go to him and ask? he is able to Ps. 103.3.
cure all thy sores and maladies, and will thou not run to this great
Physician? Humility will not be ashamed to beg; nay, it is the most noble and
heroic employment to beg from God, not only a Joh. 2.27.
portion for this bodily life, and his blessing with it, but that meat that
endures unto everlasting life: Did ever Caesar or Alexander contend for so
noble a prize? and what honor and privilege is like to this, to be a
supplicant and a favourit of the King of Kings, and to have access to him when
we will, as our father and bountiful provisor?

Luke 15.17.
come to thy self, and have thou laid aside thy soul-deceiving and desperate
folly? if thou have but attained to the first elements of this Christian and
heavenly art, it will send thee to trade where thou may gain most, and will
drive thee from the empty cisterns, and lead thee to the full fountain, it will
teach thee to go to him who has said, Joh. 14.13.
ask of me what ye will, it shall be given you; wisdom has long cried to you
worldlings, discovering your folly, and pointing out the remedy, Isa. 55.1, 2,
3. ah! when will you hearken and obey? when will you be convinced of your
folly, and learn to be wise?

etc.) prayer may add to, and lengthen the lease of thy life (as it did
Hezekiahs, Isa. 38. 1, 2, 5.) Jam. 5.15. But, 2. is hell terrible unto thee,
and heaven thy joy and delight? art thou afraid of the day of judgment? and is
it the one thing thy soul desires to be accounted worthy then, to stand before
the Son of man? O! then hearken to Christ's counsel, watch and pray always,
Luke 21.36.

We need not descend unto particulars, for what is that lust thou would have
subdued? what is that grace thou would have strengthened? what is the
judgment thou would have averted? or what rod or calamity removed? what is
the mercy, whether spiritual or temporal, yea, what the comfort or consolation,
though peace of conscience, (that passes all understanding) joy of the holy
Ghost, and assurance of thy salvation, etc. There is no evil so terrible and
astonishing, that the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous may not remove;
and no mercy so great and excellent, that it cannot procure, by the blood of
Christ, pleaded at the throne of grace, Mat. 7.7. Joh. 14.13, 14. etc. Here is
a large field, where we might reap a plentiful harvest, but we proceed, adding
only one head more, with its several branches.

We have heard how the Lord does call and invite us, by his Word and Works, by
his commands, threatenings and promises etc. by these the Lord points out out
way to the throne, and when we turn Isa. 30.21.
either to the right hand or to the left, we may hear the voice of some one or
other monitor, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it: but though there be so
many who thus lift up their voice Isa. 58.1.
like a trumpet, who cry aloud in our ears, and spare not; yet there is one
voice more, a Ps. 29.4.
powerful voice, and full of majesty, and we would hear what it says: and
thus, 1. the Lord absolutely considered; 2. relatively, and the several persons
of the blessed Trinity; and, 3. the attributes and divine properties do call
and invite us to the constant and serious practice of this duty. Jehovah, who
is, and beside whom there is Isa 43.11.
none else, the all-sufficient and independent being, to whom our goodness and
service Ps. 16.2.
cannot extend, nor any of his creatures be Job, 22.2. Romans 11.35, 36.
profitable, yet he calls for our prayers, 1. as a part of that homage we owe
to him; 2. by way of gratitude, and in testimony of our love to him, and of his
delight in us; then the Lord will have us thereby to testify, 1. our reverence
and subjection to him; 2. our dependence on him; and, 3. our own indigence and
his propriety, that we are beggars and hold all as an alms from heaven; and,
4. that we may thus be the more engaged to improve what we receive for his
honor, and may be the more It is a sure rule ( says Dr. Preston Saint exer:
sermon. 1.) what we win with prayer, we wear with thankfulness.
ready to return to him the sacrifice of praise, etc. but not only, as his
creatures, do we owe to him this point of duty and service, but also as his
favorites, and by way of gratitude; 1. to testify our love to him, and delight
in him; if these be s;incere, a communion with him in this most immediate part
of his worship, must be sweet; when we may thus enter the Kings chambers, we
will rejoice and improve the importunity, Cant. 1.4. Cant. 2.4, 5. 2. He calls
for our prayers to testify his delight in us, and in our work; O, my dove, let
me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely, Cant. 2.14. Poor Saints are ready to complain, and say,
I have no gifts nor parts, and am of no account in the world, and alas! I can
do no service to God in my generation; ah! if thou be poor, should thou not
beg? and though thou be weak, yet thou art not dumb, can thou not then cry,
and importune him who is able and willing to help and strengthen thee? thy
prayers are good service to God, they are great and acceptable sacrifices; the
prayer of the righteous is his delight, Prove. 15.8. Yea, Pagans, by the light
of nature, did come to the knowledge of this point; the divine moralist Plato
tom. 1. Alcibiad. 2. page (mihi) 137.
Plato tells us, that the Athenians observing the gods always to favor the
Lacedaemonians more then them, resolved to consult their Idol Ammon, and to ask
the reason hereof; especially since the Lacedaemonians were careless what
sacrifices and oblations they offered to God; and the Athenians did spare no
cost, and were more frequent and sumptuous in their oblations then all the
Grecians: To whom the Oracle, (or rather Satan transforming himself into an
Angel of light, to those whom he held fast in his snare, if that Author here
relate a history, and do not (as is usual to him) allege this passage in a
parabolick way, and for the application) but the Oracle says, he gave this
response, that the Lacedaemonians good (...), i. e. ( interpret Ficino) bona
verba.
words (which Albeit Plato, by way of dialogue, brings in Socrates, making this
interpretation according to his usual manner; which Ficinus (in his life
prefixed to his works) ascribes to his modesty and gratitude toward his Master
Plato interprets to be nothing else but their prayers) did please God better
then all the worship and costly offerings of the other Grecians: and then he
proceeds in the commendation of this spiritual exercise; and to show, that
God looks more to the inward frame of the heart, then outward performances,
though never so specious; and that it were blasphemous to make the holy Lord
like a wicked usurer, and to think that he can be bribed to hearken to sinners,
and grant their desires because of their hypocritical devotion and great
oblation. I wish that Book called Alcibiades 2. or, of a vow, were translated
in ou and other languages, to the shame of many dead and formal Christians,
that they might go to school and learn from a Pagan much sincerity, zeal and
devotion. But thus we see, that both Scripture and natural reason teach us,
that heart-devotion is the best, and the pouring out of the soul to God in
prayer is more acceptable than any outward oblation; why then should thou
say, Micah 6.6.8.
wherewith shall I come before the Lord? has he not showed thee, O man! what
is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to walk humbly with thy
God, Phil. 4.6.
and in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, to make your
requests known unto him.

2. All the persons of the blessed Trinity do call and invite us; As I live,
says the Ezekiel. 33.11.
Lord, I delight not in your death, but rather that ye turn and live: that ye
would lay down your weapons and submit, that ye would accept the Kings pardon
freely offered to you; that in stead of fighting against me, ye would, Hos.
12.4.
Jacob-like with tears and supplications, wrestle with me, till ye prevailed
and got the blessing: Ezekiel. 33.11.
turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O self-destroying
sinners? And as for all true Israelites who have made their peace with God,
what should discourage them? know ye not that the Father himself loves you,
and will refuse you nothing? Joh. 16.27.23.

Ephesians. 2.13.18. Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2. Joh. 14.6. etc. We may then hearken to his
voice crying and expostulating with us, [Ah! will ye so far undervalue my love?
will ye suffer my blood to be shed in vain? shall I purchase such a privilege
for you at so dear a rate, and will ye not improve it? O come to the Father;
come, I am the Joh. 14 6.
way and shall be your guide, ye shall not mistake; I am the Joh. 10.7.9.
door, ye shall not need to wait and knock long, ye shall get entrance, access
and acceptance.]

Romans 8.27. O! but will the sinner yet say, I am weak and cannot ascend so
high; I am lazy, and am not for so high an employment, I am drowsy, and when
at work in the Kings presence, am ready to fall asleep: Yet, says the Spirit,
fear not, only be willing and obedient, and I will help all thine infirmities;
let all thy weakness and wants be upon me; I will quicken and strengthen thee;
thou shall not want tears and groanings which cannot be uttered, (and that is
the eloquence which the Lord requires, and which always prevails with him)
Romans 8.26. Ps. 51.12. Nay, how often has the holy Spirit knocked and called,
while we were fast asleep and took little notice of his motions? Ah! how often
have we thus resisted him? and when we run, he must prevent us and set us a
work; he must draw on the conference, and say, (though we discern not his
voice) seek ye my face, before we say, thy face, Lord, we will seek, Ps. 27.8.

Lastly, the Lords attributes do call and invite thee to draw nigh to him; 1.
his justice and terrors, his anger and displeasurre cry unto thee, O secure
sinner [what do thou mean? art thou stronger then the Almighty? will thou be
able to bear his wrath? why do thou not then come in, and humble thy self
before him? why do thou not present thy supplications unto him, least I tear
you in pieces and there be none to deliver.] Ps. 50.22, 23. Ps. 2.12.

2. His mercy and tender bowels cry, [Behold me, behold me, I am ready to
embrace thee; the fountain stands open, and thou may draw water, it will
cost thee but a word; oh! call and cry mightily, and thou shall taste its
sweetness; O, lay hold on me, and make peace, and thou shall make peace] Isa.
27.5.

3. His patience and forbearance do call to thee, Oh! [despise not thine own
mercies any longer, do thou not know that thy day is drawing to a close? that
night is coming on, when thou will not be able to work? know thou not, that
the riches of Gods goodness and long-suffering should lead thee to repentance?
Romans 2.4. O, remember, that abused patience will, ere long, give place to
sin-revenging justice; and thou can not promise to thy self one days
respite, this night, O fool, thy soul may be required of thee, Luke 12.20.]

4. His omniscience and omni-presence may be motive enough to set thee a work;
now thy scruples and doubts are removed, thou needst not say, where shall I
find the Lord? and will he hear when I call? for he fills heaven and earth,
he is every where, and from his presence thou can not fly, Jer. 23.24. Ps.
139.7, 8. etc. and all things are naked before him, he knows our very thoughts
a far off, before they arise in the heart, and are known to our selves, Heb.
4.13. Ps. 139.2. etc.

eternity should make thee (as it did many Pagans who had not the light of the
Scriptures, which thou may daily read) mind another life; ah! do thou not
know, that as the Lord lives for ever, So he has prepared for his honest
supplicants 1 Pet. 1.4.
an undefiled and incorruptible inheritance that fades not away? if it be not
worth the asking, its worth nothing: Ah! what Repetebat ( Plato scil.) quotidie
sola aeterna esse vera temperalia vero verisimlia, and quae sensus appetit aut
times nihil aliud esse quam somnia: itaque haec omnia penitus esse contemnenda;
and ut mala vitentur quibus iplenus est mundus ad aeter^a confugiendum. Marsil.
Fi^. in vita Platonis. 33.
fools are we who labor and toil, and spend our time and strength for
perishing trifles? or (as Plato called them) dreams, and will not so much as
once seriously and diligently seek the kingdom of God, and the eternal crown of
righteousness?

6. His omnipotence and fidelity may allure and invite the most stubborn and
unwilling to the frequent practice of this heavenly exercise; he has promised;
and he is able to do great things for his honest supplicants, will ye so far
envy your own happiness as not to become one of those? all of us would be great
and mighty, but alas! few take the right course; for only the praying
Christian, is According to Paul's prayer, Col. 1.9.11.
strengthened with all (...).
might; and thus in some sense may be called Almighty; all his strength is
borrowed and dependent on the first fountain, but thus (though the world
believe it not), he is very strong; nay, says Nihil est homine orante
potentius. Chrysostom. as he is cited by the Author of a treaty of pacification,
page 57.
Chrysostom, there is nothing more strong and mighty then a praying soul;
prayer (says Jenk. ^n Jude 21.
another) has a shadow of omnipotence in it, it sets infinite power a work for
fulfilling thy desires, and Mr. Sam. Clark in his examples, pog. (mihi) 504.
reports that some Princes professed they feared more the prayers of some
Saints, then an army of twenty thousand men.
makes the Church Cant. 6.4.10.
terrible as an army with banners: enemies at length will be forced to put to
their seal to this truth, what ever success and prosperity they may meet with
for a while; when the day of Gods power comes, the Lord will send the rod of
his strength out of Zion, and will rule in the midst of his enemies, Psalm.
110.2, 3, 5, 6. It was said of zealous Luther, potuit quicquid voluit; he could
do what he would; but may not the same be said of every believer? does not our
blessed Lord say as much, while he promises, to give to such whatsoever they
shall ask in his name, Joh. 14.13, 14. Joh. 16.23. etc. But ah! who has
believed his report? who makes not God a liar by distrusting this sure word of
promise? ye will not take Gods word, therefore ye will not pray; ye will not
rest on Gods bond, and therefore ye look on the promises as no great
encouragments to holiness O, if this one word were soundly believed! though
love to God or to our duty did not prevail with us, yet self-love would often
send us to the throne; but you may as well question all the Scriptures, as any
one word or portion of them; and this promise of audience (so often repeated to
cure thy unbelief) must be more sure then all the bonds and evidences in the
world; it being easier for heaven and erath to pass, then one jot or title of
Gods Word to fail and not be fulfilled, Luke 16.17., Mat. 5.18. Hence David's
Which some call Luthers Psalms, because when he met with any trouble or
difficulty, he ran to it as his city of refuge, and was not diseppointed.
confidence, Ps. 46. though the earth were removed, etc. yet he would not fear.
Ah! will thou who art called a Christian, and who would be reputed a
believer, dispute and debate, question or deny any part of the holy Scriptures,
while the devils believe, and give such a full and firm assent to every word
that Isa. 55.11.
proceeds out of Gods mouth? Jam. 2.19.
they believe and tremble, and wilt not thou believe and rejoice, believe and
love, and draw nigh to him in full Heb, 10.22.
assurance of faith. Always, ye who rest in a state of unbelief, and who lodge
and entertain such thoughts as ye will not be able to carry to hell with you,
ye who would say (if ye were not ashamed to speak out your atheism and
unbelief) what a Whether he did vent this blasphemy in his own name, or
expressing the thoughts of too many, we need not enquire; we will not undertake
his vindication who speaks nothing for him self.
blasphemous Pamphleter once said; Qui petit accipiet Jacobus Apostolus inquit:
O si Jacobus Rex mihi dicat idem, Whites Sermon on Dan. 9.25. page 13.
O (said he) if I had the Kings word in stead of Gods; and if King James would
say what the Apostle James said; and would promise to give me whatsoever I
should ask; I should not be such a stranger at Court, as I am in the sanctuary.
I have (I say) to you, O blasphemous Atheists (who thus undervalue the rich
promises of God, and will not be at the pains to plead them at the throne of
Grace, a sad message from the Lord, and a dreadful prayer against you, who
will not pray for your selves; that the Lord would pour out his fury and wrath
upon you; that finding the efficacy of that imprecation, ye might once learn to
believe that the effectual fervent Jam. 5.16.
prayer of the righteous avails much: the words are most terrible, and O! if
they were more pondered by secure Atheists, we shall only offer these four or
five observations which deserve our serious meditation, and shall not now stay
to See the Preface and Part 2. Chap. 2. Sect. 2.
press this exhortation further: And, 1. it would be considered that this
dreadful imprecation is doubled, and set down in two several Scriptures, by
two heavenly messengers, without any considerable variation, either in matter
or words; viz. by the Psalmist (whether David or Asaph, its needless to enquire
now) Ps. 79.6. and by the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 10.25. And I may say (with
Genesis 41.32.
Joseph to Pharaoh concerning his dreams) that this threatening is doubled,
because it is established by God; and God will shortly bring it to pass,
however mockers may slight this sad doom, and put it far from them. 2. It would
be observed, that this threatening is not concerning some outward and temporal
stroke and judgment, but concerning the fury and indignation of him who is of
Job, 37.22.
terrible Majesty, the Ps. 90.11.
power of whose wrath cannot be known till it be felt in hell. 3. That they who
call not upon God are classed, and put in one category with Heathens and
Pagans; what ever be their Church Priviledges and outward profession, yet
truly, and in Gods esteem, such Atheists are not better, but rather worse then
Barbarians. 4. That it shall not excuse them, nor guard them from the stroke of
Gods fury, that they are many, though they be kingdoms and families, though
they be never so mighty and numerous, the Lords Ps. 21.8, 9,
right hand shall find them out, and shall make them as a fiery oven, add he
will swallow them up in his Wrath. 5. That this judgment is denounced
prayer-wayes; certainly the servants of God did not delight in their ruin,
whom they were obliged to 1 Pet. 2.17.
honor and Gal. 5.4.
love as men and brethren; but the Lord having commanded, they must obey; and
must not only foretell the inevitable destruction of those wretches, but also
represent it in a prayer to God, for the greater terror and conviction of those
who should read their own names in that dreadful imprecation. But such as will
not now cry to the Deuteronomy 32.15. 2 Samuel 22.47. etc.
rock of salvation, and Is. 55.6.
seek his face while he may be found, shall ere it be long, cry to the
mountains and rocks to destroy them, fall on them, and hide them from his face,
Rev. 6.16. Now he lovingly inviteth you to draw nigh to him, and offers you the
help of his Spirit, and ye will not come; but nill ye, will ye, in that day of
his wrath, when ye shall not be Rev. 6.^7.
able to stand before him, ye shall be brought before his Tribunal to be
judged, 2 Cor. 5.10. such as in their life derided holiness, and said it was in
vain to call upon God, will then say in vain, (with the foolish Virgins, Mat.
25.11.) Lord, Lord, open to us. O! if thou would know in this thy day the
things that belong to thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes, Luke 19.42.

Sect. 2. Objections answered, and this Queree considered, whether prayer may
be said to move him with Jam. 1.17.
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
Dan. 9.2, 3. I Daniel understood the number of the years, -- that he would
accomplish seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem; and I set my face unto
the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, etc. Jon. 3.8, 9, 10. Let
man and beast be covered with sackcloath, and cry mightily unto God -- And God
saw their works -- and repented of the evil that he had said that he would do
unto them, and he did it not.
THere be scarce any material question and case handled in this Treatise, from
whence we could not gather some one or more objections which might be here
propounded; as, Obj. I cannot pray, I know not what to ask as I ought. Ans. See
where our strength lies, Ans.
and from whence help may be brought, Part 1. chap. 9.

Obj. But I am dull and indisposed, and am not in a fit condition and frame of
spirit to speak with God. Ans.
Ans. How thou may maintain and recover a praying disposition, see Part 3.
chap. 2.

Obj. O! but the mercies I stand in need of are great; and second causes are
far off, and I see little probability of success. Ans. See supports for
strengthening thy faith, Ans.
Part 2. chap. 2. sect. 2. and Part 1. from Christ's intercession, chapter ^. sect,
1. and from Christ's death, chap. 8.

Obj. Ah! but I fear lest I be an enemy, and the Lord prove a consuming fire,
if I should draw nigh to him; and were it not better to stay away, then to cast
my self in the fire? Ans. Whatever be thy fear, yet thou must draw nigh to him
or perish; if thou will come in sincerity, Ans.
there is hope, but otherwise he will come against thee to tear thee in pieces:
See thy duty vindicated, obstructions removed, and encouragements held forth,
Part. 1. chap 5. sect. 3.

Obj. O! but I fear lest the day of grace and the acceptable time be past; and
that it were in vain for me now to seek the Lord. Ans. Ye have this case
discussed, and this plea removed here, Ans.
chap. 2. sect. 2.

Obj. But I cannot call God Father, nor follow that copy Christ has set down,
and according to which every supplicant must frame his prayers, Mat. 6.9. Luke
11.2. Ans. Either thou art a child of light walking in darkness, Ans.
and thy case is propounded, Part 3. chap. 1. sect. 1. page 560. or, thou art
yet in the bond of iniquity, but would fain shake off those grievous fetters,
and then I have spoken to thy case, Part 1. chap. 5. sect. 3. And now let me
only tell thee, though God be not yet thy Father reapse and a part rei, thou
not being as yet begotten, born and regenerated by his Spirit; yet he is thy
Father voto ac desiderio, (and fortasse etiam decreto ac aeterna electione) as
to the longing and desire of thy heart, (and perhaps as to his secret purpose
and decree) otherwise, if thou do not so much as desire to have such a
Father, and to stand under the sweet relation of an obedient son, thou have no
Act. 8.21.
part nor lot in this matter; what have thou to do to take his Covenant in thy
mouth? or to lay hold on any federal relation to him? Ps. 50.16. But, if thou
wish and desire, if that be the one thing thou would ask, if thou were put in
Solomon's case, 1 King. 2.5. wh^t? may thou not thus call him thy Father?
thou have a s^rt of claim by this thy desire, unto that high relation which the
Lord will never challenge nor upbraid thee for laying hold on it, unless thou
forfeit that plea, by 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
returning, with the dog, to thy vomit; for, sincere w^shes and Mat. 5 6.
desires pass as current money in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But not to insist on particulars, which might here be multiplied, if that
labor had not been prevented by handling them in their proper places, (neither
could they have been there omitted, without much confusion and deficiency, and
many needless repetitions here) There is one objection, which like 1 Samuel 10.23
7 Obj.
Saul among the people, is by head and shoulders higher then all the rest; and
it is this, many have what their Job. 21.7.14, 15. Ps. 73.7. qfq Ps. 44 22. qgq
1 Cor. 4.13.
hearts can desire and more, who yet make no conscience to call upon God, but
cast off fear, and restrain prayer before him: and on the other hand, the
Saints for the most part are(f) killed all the day long, and are counted as
sheep for the slaughter: and are (g) made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things: they ask, but receive not; they seek, but find not;
they knock, but it is not opened unto them; what then does prayer avail? and
what truth is there in the many promises that are made to it? Ans. This is that
mountain which blind Atheists cannot look over; Ans.
this is the stumbling block on which they fall and cannot rise again, and
which often has proven a sore temptation, trial and exercise to the Saints;
therefore we spak to it at so great length here, chap. 1. where we show, 1.
that prayer could not want an answer; 2. that no good thing was withheld from
honest supplicants; and, 3. that no good thing was enjoyed but by prayer; and
that the mercies of prayerless souls were cursed, and all the crosses of the
godly were blessed, etc.

We come now to the objections that belong to this place, and we shall only
name these few; Obj.
and, 1. some may object and say, the Lord knows what we stand in need of,
Mat. 6.32. wherefore should we then labor to make our requests Phil. 4.6.
known to him by prayer? Ans.
Ans. We do not pray to God that we might inform him of our wants, but that we
may obtain a supply of our wants; though a father know what his son stands in
need of, yet he will have him to ask, that thereby he may testify his
subjection to, reverence of, and dependence on his father. You will say, but
why then does the Apostle exhort us to make our requests known to God? Ans. 1.
with Zanch in Phi^. 4.6. Cajet. ibid.
Zanchius and Cajetan, that the Apostle speaks not there of simple knowledge,
but of such a knowledge as imports an approbation; and thus Christ in the day
of judgment will say to hypocrites, depart from me, I know ye not. And then the
sense will be [let your requests be such, as that they may be accepted and
approven of God; ask only such things as are lawful and honest.] 2. Its Apud
Zanch. ibid.
answered, that the Apostle there condemns pharisa^cal boasting, as if he had
said [let it suffice, that your requests are known to God; when ye pray, do not
(like the Pharisees) sound a trumpet, Mat. 6.5, 6.] But as to the present
difficulty we would rather answer, 3. that the Apostle, by Per (...).
making known, does not hold forth any kind of information, but a simple
representation and intimation of our requests to the all seeing eye of God,
from whom nothing can be hid, and thus to make known to God, imports only a
communication and laying out of our desires before the Lord: And the reason of
that expression may be, 1. because such a communication and representation
among men does often bring along with it some light and information; 2. because
on our part there is a readiness and willingness that God should know and
search our hearts; but that the Lords omniscience is no discharge, nor
discouragement to pray; but on the contrary a notable engagement and motive
thereto, may appear from that conclusion which our blessed Lord immediately
subjoyneth, Mat. 6.33. (and whom shall we think to reason best? and whether
shall we hearken to his inference, or to that which is held forth in the
objection?) after he had told that our father knows our wants and need, he
exhorts us to Quaerite ore and op^re; preeibus and laboribus.
seek, and shows after what order and manner we should seek; the consideration
of Gods infinite knowledge should strongly draw us in to him; ah! who would not
come to him who knows who we are, what is our condition, and what would do us
good, and who will hear us whenever we call upon him? but what a comfortless
work must it be for poor Pagans to run to their idols, who have eyes but see
not, and ears but hear not, Ps. 115.5, 6, 8.

But again, Obj. 9.
you will say, the Lord has from all eternity appointed and determined what
shall come to pass in time, what he will do unto, or bestow upon the children
of men; and his purposes and decrees are unalterable; and therefore prayer must
be to no purpose; it can neither be better nor worse with us, whether we pray
or not, for Gods purpose what ever it be, must stand, Job. 23.13. Ps. 33.11.
Prove. 19.21. Isa. 46.10. Heb. 6.17. etc. The great moralist Seneca propounds
the same objection in the name of those who pleaded for blind fortune, and an
inevitable necessity in all sublunary events; thus [ Aut futurum est quod
pr^caris, aut non si futurum est, etiamsi non susce peris vota fiet: Si non est
futurum, etiamsi susceperis vota, non fiet. Hu^c dilemmati respondit Seneca
mediam inter ista exceptionem praeteriri futurum (iuquit) hoc est sed si vota
suscepta fuerint; etc.
what ye would pray for, is either to come to pass or not; if it be future,
whether ye pray or not, it must be; and if it be not decreed and to come, thy
prayers will not m^ke it to be.] To which dilemma he answers, that the third
member (which is true) is left out; viz. that it is to come to pass, if thou
pray; and so not to come to pass if thou pray not: and thus (says -- Ita non
est hoc contra fatum, sed ipsum quoque in fato est.
he) our prayers fall as well under fate and destiny as other events. Which
answer being purged from the Pagan dialect, will serve our turn: we must not
separat the from the means, as if the one did not as well as the other, fall
under the counsel and decree of God; and as if his purpose were not as
infallible concerning the means, as concerning the end; concerning thy praying,
as his giving what thou desire. And this objection has no other ground but
these two most gross errors, viz. 1. that the Lord in his eternal counsel has
decreed the end, but not the means; 2. that the Lord has not appointed and
fixed a connection between the means and the end. We will not so far digress as
to show the absurdity of both those principles, but these being rejected as
unworthy to be owned by any who professes himself a Christian, yea, or to know
the first principles of reason; the decrees of God are so far from discharging
us of our duty, that they may be a notable encouragment thereto; and
particularly as to prayer. Thus Daniel knowing, not only that the Lord had
determined the time of Isreal's captivity, but also what that time was, takes
encouragment from thence to pray for the decreed mercy, Dan. 9.2, 3, 16. etc.
And though we had no particular revelation as to the event, yet when we
consider the wisdom and unchangeableness of Gods counsel, we may very
confidently go to the throne of grace, expecting that he (who has appointed
nothing in vain) having put a word in our mouth, will also fill our hands: and
his decree being immutable, and he having appointed prayer to be a mean for
obtaining what we stand in need of, and promised success thereto, we need not
fear, lest he cause us Isa. 45.19.
seek his face in vain. Why then should we vex our selves with unwarrantable
and needless questions concerning Gods decrees? or ask whether he has decreed
to give or withold such a mercy? Thou art beyond thy sphere, and wilt find no
place to rest, so long as thou wanders in this wilderness; the decrees of God
are a depth thou can not fathom, secret things belong unto the Lord our God,
but he has revealed to us our duty, that we may do all the words of his law,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Let us not then be anxious concerning events; the Lord knows
what he will do, and what is best to be done to us and for us; but let us be
sollicitous concerning our duty, committing the success to him who will
withold no good thing from his honest servants, nor suffer one word of
promise to want its accomplishment; let us not then ask what God will do? but
what we should do? and if nothing will satisfy our curiosity until we be
acquainted with Gods secrets, let us then take the right course; let us not
thus begin at the wrong and uppermost end of the ladder, and descend, before we
ascend; it were better and safer to learn from our way and work some thing of
Gods purpose concerning us, then to enquire after our duty in the Lords secret
decrees, which are no otherwise revealed to us, but by his Word and Works. If
then, 1. thou have a promise; and, 2. if thou meet with strength for doing thy
duty, thou may prophecy the event and success (without any hazard of being
accounted an enthusiast) for thou may know, that what ever be the Lords
decrees concerning the futurition of events, yet there is no decree which
needs, 1. discourage thee who art in sincerity seeking his face; or which, 2.
can Its obserable, that a known decree did give no supersedeas from prayer to
Christ though a Son, for in that decree, Ps. 2.6, 7. was included, his kingdom,
and that he should have the utmost ends of the earth for a possession, which
notwithstanding must be asked by him, ver. 8.
warrant thee to neglect the means, and say it were to no purpose to call upon
God; neither, 3. is there any decree in God to cross his promises, or to bind
up his hands from fulfilling the desires of all them who call upon him in truth.

But we like not the work, and any thing will serve for a plea and excuse to
lie by: Ah! is it not lamentable, that such as scarce can speak sense, or to
purpose in any other business, yet will argue with such subtilty, and prove
such egregious sophisters for deceiving and ruining their own souls? certainly
Satan must have no small hand herein: and it does not a little discover our
natural enmity at holiness and the ways of God, that we are so Jer. 4.22.
wise to do evil, and to provide covers for hiding from our eyes the way of
life; while as otherwise we are foolish and ignorant, and have no knowledge to
do good: Is it not strange to hear those persons talk of the decrees of God,
who never yet seriously minded, and know little of their duty; and to bring a
reason from the secret purpose of the most high for them to be idle, and
neglect the means of salvation and to destroy their own souls? Ah! what do such
fools mean? is not their soul of far more worth and excellency then their body,
and the immortal crown of glory then their perishing trifles and worldly
enjoyments? why do they not then first try those desperate conclusions upon
these base and worthless things, before they put their soul and eternal
happiness to such a venture and hazard? why do they not say, what needs us rise
early and go to bed late at night, what needs us till and sow? etc. for if the
Lord has decreed to give us a large and plenteous harvest, it must be so,
whether we be at so much pains and travel or no; and if the Lord has
determined to withold the increase, our labor and pains will not do the
turn: and why should we eat, drink, sleep? for if the Lord has appointed us to
live to such a time, we must live so long, whether we eat or not: and if he
has numbered our days, and the set time of our departure be at hand, our
eating and drinking will not prolong our days; if any, upon this account,
would labor to I remember I have read (or heard) of one who was tainted with
this damnable delusion, who falling sick, and sending for the Physician, met
with this reply, to what purpose should I come? for if it he appointed that ye
shall now die, my coming will not add to your days; and if it be appointed
that ye shall recover, whether I come or not, ye must convalesce and recover of
this disease To whom again he sent, entreating him dotwithstanding to come: who
coming, and the Lord blessing his pains with success, the man was convinced of
his error, and became a penitent: and thus both his bodily and spiritual
disease was healed and cured.
dissuade us from using the means for our bodily life and accommodation in the
world; we could tell them, that it is not for us to meddle with Gods decrees,
but it behooves us to use the means, and to wait upon him (so some will speak
who little mind his providence) for the success; and with what disdain would ye
abominat and mock him who should in earnest reason thus? and yet upon this very
ground ye will become careless and negligent in matters of soul-concernment; as
if it were in vain to take pains for eternal life, and to work out your own
salvation.

But we may to far better purpose retort this argument, and draw an
encouragment to duty from the immutability of Gods decrees, (as has been
already hinted at) and conclude, that if the Lord (who is unchangeable and
immutable in his purposes) has Aquinas meeting with this question after that
he had rejected three erroneous opinions of some ancient Philosophers (which he
had refuted, 1 part, quaest. 22. art. 2, 4. and quaest. 115. art. 6. and
quaest. 116. art. 3.) 1. that humane affairs are not governed by divine
providence; 2. that all events come to pass by a fatal necessity; (both which
make our prayers useless) and, 3. that the divine appointment was alterable,
and might be changed by our prayers and devotion: having, I say, rejected these
dangerous errors, he himself gives a very considerable and satisfactory answer.
Ad hujus evidentiam considerandum est (inquit) quod ex divina providentia non
solum disponitur qui effectus fiant, sed etiam ex quibus causis and quo ordine
proveniant; Inter alias autem causas, sunt etiam actus humani; unde oportet
homines agere, non ut per suos actus divinam dispositionem immutent, sed ut per
actus suos impleant quosdam effectus secun dum ordinem a Deo dispositum; and
simile est de oratione, non enim propter hoc oramus, ut divinam dispositionem
immutemus, sed ut id impetremus quod D^us disposuit per orationes esse
impledum. Thom. 2.2. quaest 83. art. 2. in corp. Si quaeratur an posito
fundamento erroneo, scil. omnia fatali necessitate evenire, D^umque ex
necessit^te naturae agere, recta intu^erius orationem fore inutilem, vid.
Suarez. de ^rat. lib. ^. cap. c. and Franc. Venet. de harmonia -- mandi cant.
1. ion. 1. cap. 16.
appointed such and such means for obtaining such and such ends, and has fixed
such an order and connection between the means and the end; if he, I say, enable
us to do our duty, and if we prove so wise as to follow the right way, and use
the means; we may be confident of the success, and that our labor shall not be
in vain.

But it may yet be objected, that the Lord having freely promised to give what
we stand in need of, Obj. 10. Ans.
and to withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Ps. 83.11. etc.
it seems needless to interpose our prayers and requests. Ans. Albeit the
promises be altogether free, yet the Lord calls for our prayers as a part of
that worship we owe to him; to testify our dependence on him; and to show his
delight in prayer; that we may be fitted to receive, and the more engaged to
improve aright what he gives; and to return to him the sacrifice of praise:
nay, the Lord thereby not only procures our good, (O! what an effectual mean is
fervent prayer to take the heart off the world, to strengthen our faith,
inflame our love, etc.) but provides for our honor also: Oh (says Considera
quanta est tibi concessa faelicitas, quanta gloria attributa, orationibus
famulari cum Deo, cum Christo miscere colloquia, optare quod velis, quod
desideras postulare. Chrysostom. apud Thom. art. cit. ad 3.
Chrysostom) consider, O man! what honor and happiness is conferred on thee
while thou art admitted familiarly to converse with God and Christ, to propound
what thou will, and to ask whatsoever thou desire. O! how would we prize such
familiarity with an earthly King? and what an honor and high favor would we
esteem it? but while we are allowed and invited to this liberty with the King
of Kings, how do we undervalue that admirable mercy and privilege? and as this
heavenly employment of it self is so honorable and excellent, So usually it
brings with it much beauty to him who is employed in it; then the Lord
manifests his glory to the soul, and lets it enjoy, as it were, a heaven upon
earth, then the Cant. 5.1.
honey and the honeycomb is set before thee, and thou art invited to eat; the
soul (says Mr. Hodge apology for the Lords prayer, page 35.
one) of a praying Saint is sometimes in a sort transfigured, and shineeth as
Christ's body on mount Tabor. Ah! from whence should heat and light come, if not
from the Sun? it is no wonder then though such as hide and cover themselves
from its beams, Mat. 4 1 6.
walk in darkness, and sit in the cold region and shadow of death.

But though thus we be obliged to pray, though the honor of our Master and our
own good, do call for diligence herein; yet is the promise no less free then if
there were no such condition required on our part; our prayers are not our
money, nor a price for what we receive: will any man think that we give not
freely to these beggars, who importunatly cry at our doors? and yet there is
here some sort of debt and obligation lying on us to pity those who are in
misery; but there is no obligation lying upon the Almighty to hear us when we
cry: nay, were it not that the promises are altogether free, notwithstanding of
any condition to be performed by us, or any qualification required on our part,
it were in vain for us to pray, or go about any duty, looking to the rich
recompense and reward which the promise holds forth; since though we did all we
can (yea though we could perfectly obey all the Commands) yet are but
unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. when we pay our debt, we do not This truth
has extorted a notable confession from the Jesuit Salmeron in several
particulars, which may serve as so many irrefragable arguments against the
popish doctrine concerning merits and supererogation, primum quod servi sumus,
etc. Vid. loc. Salmer. in evang. Tom. 7. de parab. tract. 30. page 190. vid.
etiam tres rations quibus ibidem probat nos Deo esse inutiles.
oblige the creditor to bestow new favors on us: but ah! how defective and
imperfect are our best performances? Isa. 64.6. I grant, that among men, there
may be so much trouble and travel in seeking and warting on, that an answer may
be too Et sic verum est tritum illud Senecae, nulla res carius emitur, quam
quae precibus empta. Obj. 11.
dear coft by the supplicant; and yet even thus thy supplication does not
profit him to whom thou makes thy adress; far less can our prayers and service
extend to the Lord, Ps. 16.2. if thou be righteous, what give thou him? or
what receives he off thine hand? Job, 35.7.

Lastly, it may be objected, that the father himself loves us, and what need
we then ask any thing from him? his love will cry and prevail, though we were
silent; and thus our blessed Lord tells his disciples, that upon this very
account, viz. because the father loved them he would not, he needed not pray
for them, Joh. 16.26, 27. And upon this same ground we may further argue thus,
thou art, O man, either a reprobat, and an object of Gods hatred, and certainly
thy prayers cannot prevail, for thou not being in Christ, can not obtain
access, Ephesians. 2.18. Ephesians. 3.12. or else thou art one of his elect and precious
ones, and to what purpose would thou pray? would thou move his bowels, and
have them turned toward thee; that is already done, the Father loves thee,
and is more ready to give, then thou to receive; and if he were not, could thy
prayers move and change him? Ans.
Ans. The Lords love is so far from giving a discharge from prayer, that upon
this very account he call s for our prayers, Cant. 2.14. because the Lord loves
us, therefore he delights in our prayers, Prove. 15.8. compared with, ver. 9.
as a tender Neque enim renuens preces nostras differt: sed hac art sedulos nos
efficiens ad semetipsum attrahere vult: nam and pater quamvis benignus, cum a
puero rogatur ahnuit, quasi non volens dare non ut neget, sed ut ille ardentius
petat, and sibi magis concilietur, Chrysostom. apud Jo. Arboreum theosoph. lib.
13. cap. 7.
father, because he loves his child, will have him come and ask; the sons
presence and voice is sweet to him, and therefore he will not at the first
happily give him, but lets him stay and renew his request, and add pleas and
arguments; and therefore though our asking be not the true and proper cause
(albeit it be a mean which his wisdom and love has made choice of) why he
gives, yet he will have us ask as for other reasons, (some of which were
hinted at in answer to the foregoing objection) so especially because he loves
us; neither the Lords promise nor purpose to give, nor his love and fatherly
affection toward us, can hinder the Lord from saying to us, (in reference to
all our mercies, what he said to his ancient people, Ezekiel. 36.37. concerning
the mercies there promised) I will yet for this be enquired of by my people, to
do it for them. It is true, the Lord often We heard the Jesuit Tolet
confessing, that the prime and principal mercies, both in nature and grace, are
previous to our asking, part. 1. chap. 8. page 317. with whom Salmeron joyneth,
tom. 5. in evang. tract. 45. in haec verba, scit enim pater vester quid opus
sit vobis antequam petatis.
prevents us with his mercies, Isa. 65.24, but not to take us off, but the more
to engage and encourage us to pray and praise him.

As to the place, Joh. 16.26, 27. Christ does not there deny that he will pray
for them, that being contrary both to his promise and practice; but he would
there lead his disciples in to the fountain and principal cause of all their
mercies, viz. the eternal love and free grace of God, which did put a
difference between them and others, from which fountain, through his blood, all
our mercies do stow; so that not only our weak and imperfect prayers, but also
his most effectual and powerful intercession is but a mean for obtaining and
conveighing to us those mercies, which our gracious Father, of his mere good
pleasure and love in Christ Jesus, has appointed and prepared for us from all
eternity; as we have shown at length, and vindicated this place, Part 1. Chap.
5. Sect. 1. Page 68. Christ's scope there is not to exclude his intercession,
but to prefer the Fathers love and his death, and to prevent that mistake that
is incident to mourning sinners, ah! (think they) Christ is merciful and
tenderhearted toward sinners, (else he would not have shed his precious blood
for them) but we are afraid lest God prove a consuming fire to us, and pursue
us with his justice: O, but says our blessed Lord, I would not have you (even
after your eyes are opened to see my love in laying down my life for you, and
going to heaven to prepare a place and to intercede for you) so to look on my
death and intercession, and my kindness toward you thus sealed and manifested
by such convincing demonstrations, as to exclude the father and to imagine that
he hated you, and were unwilling to do you good, for (says he) the father
himself loves you: And though I did not intercede for you, yet having elected
you to obtain salvation through my blood, he would show mercy on you no less
then on your forefathers, who had not the benefit of my intercession: the love
of the Father is the first fountain of all our mercies, for though we were
elected in Christ, yet the free love of God (who is Father, Son and holy Ghost)
in order did preceed every thing that can fall under the notion and
consideration of a mean; hence its said, that God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. Joh, 3.16. 1 John 4.9, 10.

And now we may Its observable that all the objections here, may be (as we have
shown) made use of as so many arguments and motives, to encourage us in going
about this duty: where can we then look, and not see some one or other motive
and encouragment? since all that can be alleged by devils or men against this
work, may serve as a mean to stir us up to the diligent performance of it.
retort this and the preceding objection, which are so far from holding forth
a discharge from, and discouragment to pray, that in both we have a notable
encouragment and engagement to this duty; ah! what can more sweetly and
strongly draw a poor indigent sinner to the rich treasure, then the cords of
the free promises? and where is there such a cordial for a fainting soul, that
dare not look up to the throne of grace, as the consideration of Gods mercy and
fatherly love toward us in Christ? and what madness must it then be to make
these become a heavy burden, and so many weights to press us down while we
would lift up our hearts to the Lord, and to make those healing medicines
become deadly poison to us? Ah! had not the Lord prevented us with his free
love and gracious promises in Christ, what warrant had we more nor devils to
draw nigh to God? but now having such a loving Father, such gracious Promises,
and so great a Mediator and Advocat, we may come with boldness unto the throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need,
Ephesians. 3.11, 12. Ephesians. 1.13. Act. 26.6, 7. 1 John 3.1. and 4.10.2. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Heb. 4.16. etc.

As to the question, whether we intended by our prayers to move God? its
commonly answered (and but briefly and in a word) that prayer works a change in
us, but not in God, who of himself is willing to give, if we were ready to
receive; he Isa. 30.18.
waits only that he may be gracious, and 1 Chronicles. 4.10.
bless us indeed, and prayer enlarges the heart, and those pleas and arguments
we use in prayer do serve to strengthen our faith, and to beget such a holy,
humble and confident frame of spirit, as the promise of audience does require,
and which will be ready to receive mercy aright, and to improve them to the
honor of the Giver: and thus prayer is that rope, whereby (as the Jesuit (g)
Salmeron from the supposed Dionysius says) we pull our vessel to the rock, We
do the rather take notice of this allusion, as being owned by a Jesuit, who
otherwise teaches (according to the principles of of the pelagian School) that
God will (concursus scil. in actu primo, seu voluntas qua Deus statuit cum
causis secundis concurrere, etc) is determinable by the will of the creature,
to this or that act Est ergo (inquit) oration que madmodum magnus ait Dionysius
de div. nominib. cap. 3. veluti catena aurea e caelo demissa, per quam qui
ascendunt, videntur quidem cattnam ad se trahere sed revera ipsi potius ab ea
trahuntur in caelum; and dum precamur Deum, 'non ipse sit aptior and paratior
ad nos audiendos; sed nos capiendis illius beneficiis preparatiores. Salm. in
evang. tom 5 tract. 45. prope finem, vid etiam Toletum in Joan. cap. 16.26, 27.
but not the rock to us.

But albeit upon the matter this be a truth, yet not a satisfactory answer to
the question; for clearing of which, we would offer these few considerations;
1. it cannot be denied, that as the exercise of every grace is a mean for the
growth and strengthening of it, and quickening the heart for for a communion
with God, So in a special manner, that spiritual and heavenly exercise whereby
in a solemn way we have access to, and 1 John 1.3.
fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, does not a little
contribute for that end, Ephesians. 6.10. compared with, ver. 18. in prayer not one
but several graces are exercised; and therefore, etc.

2. Its no less certain, that our prayers cannot change him, with whom is no
variablness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. for he is in one mind, and who
can turn him? Job, 23.13.

But yet, 3. prayer is a mean appointed by him for obtaining whatsoever we
stand in need of, Mat. 7.7. etc. So that we may as (yea more) confidently
expect a return to our prayers, as the husbandman the harvest after his
plowing and sowing; and albeit the men of this world who live by sense, but are
strangers to the noble life of faith, can sow in hope but not pray in hope; yet
the generation of the faithful, who have learned to trust Gods Word, know that
it is surer then the seasons of the year, or the word of natural causes
promising success to their labors; and that though the season should
dis-appoint the sower, and the most refined gold be turned to dross, yet the
word of God will abide firm and sure for ever, 2 Pet. 1.23, 25. Ps. 12.6. Ps.
46.2. etc. and therefore such will rather forget to eat their bread, and
neglect the most necessary labor and employment, then forbear to plead the
promises at the throne of grace; nay, a most cruel decree and threatening could
not withold Daniel a for some few days from the throne, but he must pray,
and so often a day, though he should be cast into the Lions den, Dan. 6.7, 10.

Yet, 4. though prayer be such a successful and never-lying mean, though it be
like the fruitful womb that never miscarrieth, and the full breasts that
always yield milk, yet we need not enquire after its virtue and excellency, as
if of it self it had any proportion with, or efficacy for, producing such great
effects; for, 1. its nothing like natural causes which work by their strength
and activity; neither, 2. has prayer any moral causality by way of merit and
deserving; ah! what worth and excellency can there be in it as it is our empty
performance, having much dross and imperfection cleaving to it? but all its
efficacy flows, 1. from Gods ordinance and appointment; he has appointed it
not only to be medium cultus, but also medium impetrationis; not only to be a
means of worship, but also a channel for conveighing to us all the mercy and
goodness the Lord has promised; what ever has the stamp of heaven on it, must
be current money, whatever the metal otherwise be; and thus in baptism we look
over the element, unto the ordinance of God, and from thence expect the
blessing; and thus the weak hand of prayer can bring home abundance of
provision. 2. From the covenant and free promises of God, which, by prayer, we
plead at the throne of grace; prayer lays hold on Gods truth and fidelity,
and therefore cannot be sent away empty; and as the promises are the foundation
and ground whereon prayer is built, So prayer is an object of the promise, the
Lord has once and again given his Word concerning its success and prevalency;
and he will fulfill that Word. 3. From our relation to God as a father, which,
being pleaded in prayer, must prevail; that one word father (said noble Vocula
Pater dicta in cord, est cloquentia quam Demosthenes Cicero, and
eloquentissimi in mundo nunquam possunt exprimere.
Luther) coming from the heart of a son, exceeds the eloquence of Demosthenes,
Cicero, and all the famous Orators in the world. 4. From Gods love to us, and
delight in us and our prayers. 5. From the interest his Spirit has in prayer,
it being his work rather then ours. 6. From Christ's blood, the altar whereon we
offer this spiritual sacrifice, and the price laid down for all our mercies. 7.
From Christ's intercession and concurring with us, etc. See Part 2. chap. 2.
sect. 2.

Hence, 5. albeit the Almighty has no delight in our prayers and performances
upon the account of gain and advantage to his all-sufficient Majesty, Job 22.3.
Job 35.7, 8. yet he not only accepts, but also delights in the prayer of
the righteous, as a part of that homage we owe to him, and as a mean whereby he
may communicate himself and do good to his children, Pro. 15.8. He Micah 7.18.
delights in mercy, and therefore also in every mean whereby, and occasion
wherein, he may exercise this most glorious Attribute.

Hence, 7. since the Lord delights in, and accepts our prayers as means he
has appointed for deriving the blessing to us, since they always prevail and
meet with a gracious answer, we may well say, that they move the Lord to show
mercy upon us and do us good; for albeit in some cases, de Deo etiam vera
dicere periculosum sit, as Austin once said, yet there is no hazard to speak
with the Scriptures, and what is there clearly held forth: and do we not there
read of the moving and sounding of Gods bowels? Isa. 63.15. Jer. 31.20. of his
returning and repenting of the evil he had threatened, and leaving a blessing
where he had begun to smite and curse, Joel, 2.13, 14. etc. And particularly as
to prayer, is it not written, that after Nineveh had cried mightily unto God,
he turned and repented of the evil he had said he would do, and did it not?
Jon. 3.10. And does he not promise the same to every nation and person that
turns at his threatening? Jer. 18.8. Ezekiel. 33.14. etc. And how often do the
servants of God pray that he would turn from his fierce anger, and would turn
to them? as, Ps. 25.16. Ps. 60.1. Ps. 62, 16. Ps. 86.16. etc. And did not Moses
stand in the breach to turn away Gods wrath from his people? Ps. 106.23. And is
it not said of Jacob, that he had power over the great Angel of the Covenant,
and Vid. Calv. in loc.
prevailed and got the victory? Hos. 12.3, 4. May we not from these Scriptures,
and particularly from what is reported of Jacobs wrestling conclude, that the
more zeal and tenderness, the more faith and confidence we express in prayer,
the more strongly and feelingly we plead, the more arguments and motives we
press from his Word, the more we shall prevail, and that the more we are moved
and affected while we pray, the more we do move and prevail with God? And I
think strange that any should scruple to yield to this: but for preventing a
mistake, it would be considered, that it were absured to imagine that the Lord
could be moved or turned from his eternal purpose and decree; thus there is
Jam. 1.17.
no variableness with God, neither shadow of turning; but the Lord is said to
be moved by prayer, 1. because he delights in it, and turns from his anger
and wrath against the supplicant; and, 2. because he changes his work and
dispensation, removing rods and judgments, and bestowing mercies in stead of
these; and thus prayer as his own Ordinance, through the promise in Christ,
moves him and prevails with him.

Thus, 8. it would be observed, that though turning, repentance, etc. be only
improperly and metaphorically attributed to him in whom there is no shadow of
change; yet there is ground for such an expression; 1. because he does those
things which creatures that are mutable do, when they are under these passions;
so that the Potius in di^ino effectu quam affectu.
change is rather in Gods work and dispensations, then in his will and
affections: 2. because what uses to stir up these passions in men, in whom are
some relicts of the Image of God, such grounds and motives have place here: and
therefore, 3. if the Lord were capable of such affections, it might be supposed
that these would beget them in him. Hence we may conclude, that since there is
some sort of motive and occasion, and some effects and consequents of such
passions as they are in men; that something metaphorically and analogically may
be ascribed to God, removing all creature imperfections from him, in whom every
thing, to our weak capacity and apprehension, is a mystery: and therefore, if
any will further ask what Gods turning and repenting does formally, properly
and in it self import? We can say no more, but negatively, that it cannot Recte
Augustine. de trinit. lib. 5. cap. 16. Si Dominus non dicitur, nisi cum jam
incipit habere servum, etiam ista appellatio relativa ex tempora est Deo --
certe ut tuus Dominus esset, aut meus, qui modo esse caepimus, ex tempore
accidit Deo -- quomodo igitur obtinebimus nihil secundum accidens dici Deum,
nisi quia ipsiu^ naturae nihil accidit quo mutetur, ut ea sunt accidentia
relativa, qua cum aliqua mutatione rerum de quibus dicuntur, accidunt; sicut,
etc. quanto facilius de illa incommunicabili Dei substantia debemus accipere,
ut ita dicatur relative aliquid ad creaturam, ut quamvis temporaliter incipiat
dici, non tamen ipse substantiae Dei accidisse aliquid intelligatur sed illi
creaturae ad quam dicitur -- Sic and Pater noster esse incipit cum per ejus
gratiam regenramur; quoniam dedit nobis potestatem filios Dei fieri: substantia
itaque nostra mutatur in melius, cum filii ejus efficimur, simul and ille Pater
noster esse incipit, sed nulla commutatione suae substantiae, Quod ergo
temporaliter dici incipit Deus, quod ant ea non dicebatur manifestum est
relative dici, not tamen secundum accidens Dei, quod ei aliquid acciderit, sed
plane secundum accidens ejus ad quod dici aliquid Deus incipit relative; and
quod amicus Dei justus esse incipit, ipse mutatur, Deus autem absit us
temporaliter aliquando diligat, quasi nova dilectione quae in illo ante non
erat, apud quem nec praeterita tranfierunt, and futurae jam facta sunt. Itaque
omnes Sanctos suos ante mundi constitutionem dilexit, ficut praedestinavit; sed
cum convertuntur and inveniunt illum, tune incipere ab eo diligi dicuntur, ut
eo modo dicatur quo potest humano affectu capi quod dicitur. Sic etiam cum
iratus malis dicitur, and placidus bonis, illi mutantur, non ipse. Sicut Lux,
etc. vid. loc.
import any proper change and alteration in his will or knowledge; for his
knowledge is infinite and can admit no adition, and his decrees fixed and
immutable, and can admit no alteration; Known to the Lord are all his works
from the beginning of the world, Act. 15.18. and his purpose and counsel must
stand, Prove. 19.21. We must not then imagine, that any thing falls out beyond
his expectation, or contrary to his eternal counsel and purpose, or without his
effectual providence: he did appoint and foreknow, and in due time did stir us
up, and by his Spirit assist us, to pour out such prayers as should prevail
with him, and which he would accept, hear and answer; and therefore, there can
be no alteration nor change in him, since all things come to pass according to
his eternal foreknowledge, appointment and immutable decree: yet
notwithstanding, since, 1. he alters his dispensations by those means he has
appointed for that end; and, 2. since he is affected toward men and their
ways, according as he has revealed himself in his Word; the wicked and their
way being an abomination to him, and the righteous and their performances his
delight; we may safely with the Scriptures say, that the prayers of the
righteous prevail, and have power with him, affect, and, as it were, move him.
Hence the judicious Dr. Oration est voluniatis nostra religiosa representati^
coram Deo, ut illo Deus quasi afficiatur, (med. theol. lib. 2. cap. ^.) and ad
illum quasi commovendum, Cas. Consci n. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Ames does well describe prayer to be a religious offering up of our desires to
God, that he may thereby (as it were) be moved and affected. And hence (says
Genera^is finis orationis est, ut Deum quasi afficiamus aut commoveamus. unde
est quod fideles dicuntur precibus quaesi potentia valere a^ud Deum, Genesis
32.28. Hos. 12.4, 5. and quasi certare Romans 15 30. med. lib. 2. cap. 9. 18. in
eo differ^ oration ab auditione verbi, quod ^bi movetur voluntas ^ostra in Deum
^it nos ab ip^o com^^veamur: sed hic terminus motus immediatus est ipse Deus,
ut ipse afficiatur nostris desidertis, Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap. 14 2, Sic Deo
visum est oratio^is vim and effi^aci^m nobis commendare, ut eadem se affici and
quasi commoveri declaret -- Et qui aliquia a Deo precantur, dicuntur
subfidiariam operam confer ad illud efficiendum, 2 Cor. 1.11. med. cap. cit.
19.
he) the Saints are said to strive and have power with God, and to help and
concur for the doing and effectuating what they ask; and as in hearing the Word
our will is moved toward God, so by prayer Gods will is moved toward us. And
why should any scruple to say, that prayer moves the Lord to show mercy upon
us, who are not, and need not be afraid to say, that the Lord is provoked to
anger by, and moved to punish the wicked for, sin? What though our sins deserve
punishment? but our prayers are not meritorious sacrifices; yet that difference
is altogether impertinent, in order to the present case concerning Gods
immutability, which notwithstanding, as it is commonly said that sin does move
and provoke the Lord to wrath, why may it not also be said, that the prayer of
the righteous does move and prevail with him to show mercy? for, as if man had
not sinned, the Lord would not have been angry against him nor inflicted any
punishment; So if the Saints did not pray, they should not receive mercies from
him, but would provoke him to wrath, and to afflict them; but their prayers are
his delight, and a means to obtain what they stand in need of; and therefore,
in some sort, they must (as it were) move and affect him.

Thus objections being answered, and obstructions removed, thou may be
convinced, O man! that there is no hindrance nor impediment lying in thy way,
but what carnal reason would suggest to hinder and discourage thee; if thine
eyes were opened, thou might See how we retorted the several objections
belonging to this place.
discern some motive and encouragement from thence for going about thy duty:
and if objections do furnish arguments and motives, where can we cast our eyes
and not behold some one or other motive and encouragement? We will not resume
the several particulars mentioned, Sect. 1. only let me now, by way of
conclusion, warn thee, that unless thou be a sincere supplicant, thou can not
glorify God nor enjoy him for ever; thou can not serve God, nor work out
thine own salvation; which being joined together, (as they cannot be separated)
are our great business here in the world, and the one thing necessary. If thou
call not upon God, thou art a thief and a robber, in taking and using his
goods without his leave; and say with those wretches, Ps. 12.4. Who is Lord
over us? thou do not acknowledge his propriety in all thou possessest, nor
thy dependence on him, and subjection to him; thou look not upon thy mercies
as talents, and do not resolve to improve them for the Masters use, nor
render to him the sacrifice of praise for what he has entrusted thee with; the
thief uses not to come and render thanks to the owner for what he stealed from
him: if thou cast off prayer thou drawest down wrath, and openest the door that
Gods judgments may enter in; and every business thou put thine hand unto,
and every mercy thou enjoyest, cries (while thou art silent) to the heavens
for a curse and plague to be poured out upon thee, for Romans 8.20, 21, 22.
subjecting it to vanity, and employing it against it is Maker; nay, if thou
do not call upon God, thou art a very Atheist, and profess what thou will,
thou art in one class and rank with the heathen that know not God, and with
them lying under the same curse and imprecation, Ps. 79.6. Jer. 10.25. We read
of some desperate fools and mad atheists, who said in their heart, there is no
God, Ps. 14.1. Ps. 53.1. but what is their mark and that character whereby they
may be known? in both Scriptures they are described to be men that call not
upon God, Psalm. 14.4. Psalm. 53.4. As if the holy Spirit had said, would ye
indeed know who is the heart-Atheist? [he is one who will not seek after God;
who casts off fear and restrains prayer; God is not in all his thoughts.]
All prayer-less souls are bigg with blasphemies; whatever restraint be upon
their mouths, yet their way and course does say, (and a little temptation might
make them speak out) with those cursed ones, Job, 21.15. What is the Almighty
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him?
Such as have no prayers, have no creed; and such as leave Gods door, are ready,
with 1 Samuel 28.7.
Saul, to run to the devils. O! then would thou not have the throne of mercy
become a throne of wrath and indignation unto thee? would thou not have him
whose judgment is true, account thee an Atheist? would thou not become a prey
to every temptation that would drive thee to destruction, and make thee in the
day of distress to run to Satan, thy sworn enemy and soul-murderer; cast out
this dumb devil, let him not possess thy heart any longer, else he will be thy
ruin and damnation. But on the other hand, would thou be happy here, and
eternally hereafter? would thou 1 John 1.3.
have fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ? would thou
Hos. 12.3, 4.
have power with God? would thou have moyen in heaven, and have the Kings
ear? would thou have it said unto thee (as to her, Mat. 15.28.) be it unto
thee as thou will, though thou should ask not (as Mark, 6.23.
Herod once vainly proffered) the half of a kingdom only, but the whole; and
not a corruptible inheritance, but a crown of glory that fades not a way?
would thou be in such a blessed and happy condition? O, then hearken to the
exhortation, Col. 4.2. Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. continue instant in prayer,
watching thereunto with all perseverance.

And now let me, with dying (h) Moses, call heaven and earth to record against
you this day, Deuteronomy. 30.9.
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life; ah! will ye delay, or refuse; is there any question or difficulty
in the matter? is there any comparison between life and death; cursing and
blessing; eternal happiness and everlasting woe and misery? were it not that
sinners are Gal. 3.1.
bewitched, befooled, and infatuated by Satan; would they Isa. 5.20.
prefer darkness to light, and Jer. 2.13.
forsake the fountain of living waters, and hew out to themselves broken
cisterns that can hold no water? Oh! Ezekiel. 33.11.
turn ye, turn ye, foolish self-destroying sinners; why will ye die, while life
is offered unto you, and all that may make you happy and blessed for ever? does
not the Lord to day hold out all his treasures unto thee; and invite thee to
Rev. 3.18.
buy at an easy rate? do but ask, ask what thou will, and it shall be Mat.
7.7. Joh. 14.13, 14. etc.
given thee. O! Luke 19 42.
if thou did know, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes. Ere it be long, this
day of grace and acceptable time will be past; and if then thou be found among
the number of despisers, thou will (but too late) be convinced of thy folly in
contemning thine own mercies; that thou would not be Rev. 3.18.
rich, thou would not be Ps. 16.3.
honorable, and Ps. 32.1.5.
happy, that thou did despise a crown, and would not be a Rev. 1.6.
King and Priest unto God for ever and ever: Act. 13.41.
Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish.

An Alphabetical TABLE.
A
TO pray absolutely what it imports. For what should we thus pray, whether
for such a measure and degree of grace, etc. Page. 214 etc. Whether grace may
be abused. Page. 223 227 No acceptance without the help of the Spirit. Page.
332 There are no theandrick actions. Page. 37 What faith did Adam in innocence
act? Page. 530 We should pray for all men. Page. 260 Christ our altar and
Priest. Page. 324 To pray always what it imports. Page. 668 etc. Whether the
Angels and Saints in glory pray for us. Page. 78 We may not pray to Saints or
Angels. Page. 106 Whether all good flows from the suggestion of good, and all
evil from the suggestion of evil Angels. Page. 362 367 Angels, why called
Seraphims. Page. 446 Whether Angels may be said to pray, and to pray in faith?
Page. 531 The wicked receive nothing in answer to their prayers. Page. 704 721
A delay, or denial, may be a gracious answer to our prayers. Page. 711 Whether
the Lord always answers when he hears prayer. Page. 720 Rules for discerning
an answer to our prayers. Page. 723. etc. The appropriation of works and
attributes to any of the persons of the glorious Trinity, not exclusive, except
in the mystery of incarnation, redemption, etc. Page. 569 Aquinas his empty
speculations. Page. 17 Our assurance, confidence and boldness admits a
latitud. Page. 345 The necessity of attention: the impudence and tergiversation
of the Popish Doctors. Page. 427 The Atheists great prejudice against prayer,
removed. Page. 701
B
Mr. Baxter interpreted. Page. 336 The blasphemy against the holy Ghost
unpardonable. Page. 239 Whether we may pray for such as are guilty of that
blasphemy. Page. 249
C
Calmness after prayer an evidence of faith in praying. Page. 525 There are not
three first causes and principal Agents, but one only. Page. 569 Characters of
such as will never be heard. Page. 763 etc. Of the many that are called, few
only are chosen. Page. 767 Christ's intercession, (see the first Table) Page.
34 etc. Whether Christ's prayer, that the cup might pass, was heard. Page. 70
Whether all Christ's prayers on earth were mediatory. Page. 75 Whether we
should pray to Christ as Mediator. Page. 104 Whether we may ask any mercy in
Christ's name to them for whom he died not. Page. 271 Christ has removed from
us a twofold incapacity of drawing nigh to God. Page. 299 We must ask in
Christ's name, (see the first Table) Page. 301 etc. Some Gentiles knew Christ.
312 Whether the Jewish Church and the Disciples before Christ's death, tendered
up their prayers in Christ's name. Page. 318 When we pray for the Church how
always heard? Page. 486 The Saints prayers, the Church treasure. Page. 295 Why
the Lord will often rather make a compensation, then give to his honest
supplicants the mercy in kind which they asked? Page. 734 In what sense prayer
is said to be conditional. Page. 194 What is asked conditionally is not asked, if
the condition fail. Page. 713 Whether confession of sin be a part of prayer.
Page. 19 Confused knowledge, a medium between ignorance and distinct or more
perfect knowledge. Page. 309 Whether, and in what sense, we should be content
with a small measure of grace? Page. 227 We should continue instant in prayer.
Page. 456 541 Several motives to continue instant in prayer; with an answer to
objections. Page. 791 etc. What copy should we set before us in working out our
salvations? Page. 643 A voluntary covenant the ground of conveighance of all
good to the Saints, from the Father, thorough the Son, by the holy Ghost. Page.
577 Of cursing and imprecations. Page. 664 etc.
D
Popish praying for the dead confuted. Page. 233 Deadness and indisposition in
prayer, it is kinds, causes and cure, (see the first Table) Page. 602 etc.
Deadness excuses not our negligence or ommission of duty. Page. 637 The
decrees of God are not our rule. Page. 816 142 etc. A delay or denial sometimes
a gracious answer of prayer. Page. 711 Why the Lord delays to give what at
length he will give. Page. 736 Satan's design in moving to good. Page. 369 The
desire needs not an interpreter. Page. 23 We should (said a Divine) pray
desperately. Page. 449 Dev^ls and the damned in hell cannot pray, and why? Page.
83 A spiritual disposition necessary in prayer. Page. 409 Whether doubting
believers may pray in faith. Page. 497 Prayer considered as a duty and as a
means. Page. 9
E
The efficacy, effects and fruit of prayer. Page. 2 473 698 What end should we
propose in prayer? (see first Table) Page. 415 etc. An exhortation to pray for
enemies. Page. 273 Whether we may pray for incorrigible enemies and haters of
godliness? Page. 268 Enlargement in prayer an evidence of faith. Page. 521
Whether we may be too much enlarged in prayer? Page. 648 Whether the Saints use
to be more enlarged in private or public. Page. 650 Popish enthusiasme. Page.
648 Euchites confuted. Page. 669 Whether we may pray for any evil either of sin
or suffering? Page. 652 Example a bad rule. Page. 150 The condition of
expediency does not diminish the fullness of the promise. Page. 483 The Saints
experience of the success of prayer. Page. 513 The Popish explicit faith. Page.
313
F
Whether the unconverted may pray in faith. Page. 99 Whether the Saints may
pray for the reprobat in faith? Page. 255 We should especially pray for such as
are of the household of faith. Page. 277 Of the Popish blind faith, with four
degrees of their explicit faith. Page. 313 What faith required in prayer? (see
the first Table) Page. 460 If we walk not as children, we cannot call God
Father. Page. 519 It Is not presumption, but a duty, to call God Father. Page.
559 etc. Five bonds, whereby a child of light walking in darkness may lay hold
on God as a Father. Page. 564 Why Christians most ordinarily address themselves
to the Father. Page. 575 What kind of fear required in supplicants? Page. 435
Fervency required in prayer. Page. 442 Whether it be a mercy to have our formal
and cold prayers answered? Page. 651 729 Of frequency, it is necessity and
fruit. Page. 656 693 It Is foolish to fret because of the prosperity of the
wicked, or the Saints afflictions. Page. 718
G
We know not but the Lord may have mercy on all this generation. Page. 264 272
The Gentiles not left without a testimony concerning Christ. Page. 312 Prayer
considered as a gift and as a grace. Page. 9 The Lord always gives what we
ask in faith or what is better. Page. 477 The Popish glass of the Trinity.
Page. 120 How we should conceive of God when we draw nigh to him in any
Ordinance. Page. 553 etc. We may worship God absolutely, not actually, minding
the personal relations. Page. 581 Whether our prayers may be said to move God?
Page. 822 Papists have made many new gods. Page. 107 Mr. Goodwins assertions
concerning Christ's intercession, considered. Page. 62 Grace, how it should be
asked. Page. 211 The measure and degree of grace must be absolutely desired.
Page. 214 Whether grace may be abused. Page. 223 227 Whether we should submit
and be content with a small measure of grace. Page. 227 Whether grace always
grows till it be perfected in glory? Page. 588
H
Whether we may love them whom the Lord hates? Page. 255 The Lord's style, to
be the hearer of prayer. Page. 510 What his hearing of prayer imports? Page.
703 Four different ways of hearing. Page. 710 The Lord hears to our profit,
when not to our desire. Page. 716 Whether the Lord always answers, when he
hears prayer? Page. 720 When and whose prayer the Lord will not hear Page. 738
763 etc. Whether the habitual intention of the heart be sufficient for offering
up our prayers in Christ's name? Page. 321 Whether Satan has an immediate
access unto, and influence on, the heart? Page. 351 Whether Satan knows the
secrets of the heart, and can turn it? Page. 355 How the Spirit helps us to
pray, (see the first Table) Page. 329 Though we must pray in the holy Ghost,
yet not in the name of the holy Ghost. Page. 301 Holiness of heart expressed in
the life and conversation, is necessary to the acceptance and audience of
prayer. Page. 407 Humility required in supplicants, which is not inconsistent
with, but rather is a ground and foundation of, filial boldness and confidence.
Page. 437
I
Prayer no cloak for idleness. Page. 542 Mental idols and false representations
of the infinite Majesty of God, dangerous. Page. 555 The Jewish Church worshipped
not Angels or Saints. Page. 109 How Gospel-mysteries were made known, and in
what measure to the Jews. Page. 308 Whether they tendered up their prayers in
Christ's name? Page. 318 Many impediments in our way to the throne of grace.
Page. 338 Importunity required in prayer Page. 442 Of imprecations and cursing.
Page. 664 How the Spirit is said to interceed for us. Page. 29 Christ's
intercession, (see the first Table) Page. 34 etc. Saint- invocation a Pagan
dream. 107 By what steps it crept into the Church? etc. (See the first Table.
Page. 108 etc.
K
Why the Lord shows kindness to the wicked? Page. 706 If the Lord give not
the mercy that was asked in kind, he will give what is better. Page. 477 716 We
should pray for the King and all in authority, for the kingdom and place of our
nativity and abode. Page. 275 247
L
Prayer the ladder that reaches the heavens. Page. 329 Whether the Saints, in
prayer, be limited to that duty? Page. 650 Whether we may love them whom the
Lord hates? Page. 255
M
Prayer excludes not the use of the means. Page. 541 What was the least
measure of knowledge in Gospel-mysteries, that was necessary to salvation
before the coming of Christ. Page. 310 Medina, his denying Gods fidelity and
truth, while he would plead for his sovereignty. Page. 503 There is a medium
between a full assurance of faith, and a probable expectation. Page. 345 The
Lords mercy a ground of faith. Page. 500 Papists plead, that by their prayers
they merit an answer. Page. 419 437 Saint- merit the ground of
Saint-invocation. Page. 131 Whether we should pray to Christ as Mediator. Page.
104 A Mediator of intercession should also be a mediator of redemption. Page.
129 The School-distinction of mission not full. Page. 581 Divine motions to
good, distinguished from Satanical, moral and natural. Page. 369 Motives to
pray. Page. 792 Whether our prayers may be said to move God? Page. 822
N
We must ask in Christ's name. (See the first Table. Page. 301, etc. Prayer
necessary. Page. 16 It is one thing to be necessary only because commanded, and
another to be necessary as a mean. Page. 315
O
Whether faith in the object be no less necessary to the success of prayer,
then faith in the subject? Page. 486 How Satan represents objects to the
mind? Page. 353 The Atheists great objection. Page. 701 Objections against
praying answered. Page. 815 Omission of duty not excused by our unfitness and
indisposition. Page. 637 When the omission of duty is culpable and imputed.
Page. 677 We should pray for others. (See the first Table.) Page. 286
P.
Whether a pardoned sin can obstruct and hinder the success of prayer? Page.
742 People obliged to pray for their Pastors. Page. 279 Whether Papists will
have the Paternoster to be said to the Saints? Page. 125 The Pelagian error
concerning prayer. Page. 670 For what persons should we pray? (see the first
Table.) Page. 232 What persons and prayers have met with success? Page. 511
Gods power a ground of faith. Page. 508 Whether Christ interceeds for us as a
common person? Page. 66 Popish devotion ridiculous. Page. 17 Popish
Saint-invocation a Platonic and Pagan invention. Page. 107 Prayer. (See the
first Table.) Why the heavens, earth. etc. are invited to praise God? Page. 76
Preparation necessary; wherein it consists; and what must be done before we
draw nigh to God? Page. 410 Whether a prohibition lays a restraint on us not
to pray for others? Page. 249 Whether the unconverted have a promise to be
heard? Page. 100 The promise a sufficient warrant and ground of prayer. Page.
152 The promises of grace distinguished from the promises to grace. Page. 208
Whether such as are under the spirit of bondage can plead the absoute promises?
Page. 209 Whether must we doubt of the promises when we doubt of the success of
prayer? Page. 469 It is for our advantage that the promise of audience has the
condition of expedience annexed to it. Page. 483 Whether the promises
concerning temporals admit the exception of the cross. Page. 498 How we may
know whether we doubt of the promise, or of our own sincerity. Page. 505
Whether the misbelief of the promises or threatenings be the greater sin? Page.
533 How and what kind of promulgation of the rule is necessary. Page. 148 218
Providence not our rule; how it may be helpful for clearing, etc. Page. 158
etc.
Q
The qualifications of prayer. Page. 400 etc. A word concerning the necessity
of such qualifications. Page. 547 How the Spirit is quenched. (see the first
Table) Page. 594
R
In prayer we should mind our relations. Page. 274 What repetitions in prayer
are fit, and may be used. Page. 687 Whether we may pray for reprobats, known to
be such? Page. 242 246 Whether Judas, knowing his reprobation, ought to have
repented, and prayed for himself? Page. 247 Whether the holy Ghost will dictat
a prayer for a reprobat? and whether Christ prayed for such? Page. 269
Reverence required in supplicants. Page. 435 The Saints have another kind of
right to the creatures then the wicked. Page. 198 The will of God our rule, but
not his decrees. Page. 141 Three things must concur for constituting the rule
of prayer. Page. 147 Rules for discerning the success of prayer. Page. 723 etc.
S
Saint-invocation confuted. Page. 106 Whether Satan can work immediately upon
the will and understanding? Page. 351 Whether Satan knows the secrets of the
heart? (see the first Table) Page. 355 Several Scriptures concerning prayer
paralleled. Page. 12 Whether we may run to the Scriptures, and apply to our
case the passage that first occurreth. Page. 175 Of the season of prayer. Page.
681 etc. When we deprecat sin, we must prevail, as to the particular asked.
Page. 484 How a pardoned sin may be said to obstruct prayer? Page. 742
Sin^e^ity necessary in prayer, and why, etc. Page. 441 How the Spirit is said
to in^erceed for the Saints? Page. 29 How the holy Spirit helps us to pray as
we ought? Page. 328 As the Spirit always abides, so he always works,
though not as to the growth of grace. Page. 587, 588 How far the Spirit
with-draweth his influence, in reference to prayer; and why? Page. 589 How and
wherefore the Spirit is quenched, etc. (see the first Table) Page. 593, etc.
Spiritual mercies always given when asked. Page. 486 The state of the
supplicant considerable. Page. 401 Three grounds of the success and prevalency
of prayer. Page. 300 Several grounds for supporting our faith. Page. 500
T
We should pray for temporal mercies, and how? Page. 182 Arminians and Jesuits
cannot tell what they ask when they pray for temporals. Page. 187 Whether
temporals should be asked in Christ's name? Page. 321 When do temporals become
absolutely good, according to Aquinas his conjecture. Page. 425 Whether we may
pray for temporals with importunity? Page. 452 How should our prayers for
temporals be resolved? Page. 712 We may not be anxious about temporals, though
we should ask them importunatly. Page. 719 The testimony of some practical
Divines, in reference to the qualifications of prayer. Page. 549 The popish
mystical Theology. Page. 645 Whether thanksgiving be a part of prayer. Page. 19
Thanksgiving, in case of a seeming denial, an evidence of faith. Page. 526
Thanksgiving after the Lord has heard our prayers, necessary; what it
imports, etc. Page. 544 What things may we ask in prayer? Page. 179 How much
time should be spent in prayer? Page. 685 The Saints prayers, the Church
treasure. Page. 295 After what order should we direct our prayers to the
persons of the glorious Trinity? Page. 566, etc. Truth and sincerity necessary
in supplicants. Page. 441 The Lords truth and fidelity a ground of faith;
vindicated from Medina his impious gloss. Page. 503
U
What is that vail the Lord has drawn over the heart, for hiding it from
Satan? Page. 356 Saints praying for the unconverted, may plead the promise.
Page. 486 Some causes of our unfitness to pray, with some remedies. Page. 602
etc. Unfitness excuses not our negligence and omission of duty. Page. 637 The
blasphemy against the holy Ghost unpardonable. Page. 239
W
After prayer we must wait for an answer. Page. 535 Wandering thoughts, their
cause, cure, etc. Page. 602 When, and what wandering thoughts hinder and mar
the success of prayer. Page. 644, etc. We must have a warrant to draw nigh to
God, and for what we ask from him. Page. 141 We must watch in prayer, and after
prayer. Page. 453, 539 The Saints weary in, but not of, prayer. Page. 457 The
wicked ought to pray. Page. 86 Some assertions concerning the wicked's
obligation and ability to pray. Page. 88 Whether the wicked may ask in faith,
and plead any promise as having a right thereto? Page. 99, 100 Prayer an act of
the will. Page. 21 Witches say the Lords prayer backwards. Page. 452 Whether
the Lord now works any wonders or miracles? Page. 508 Words required in
prayer, and how? Page. 20 Whether Christ now in prayer utters words? Page. 61
The Word of God how tasted by the unconverted? Page. 388 How the works of the
unconverted may be said to please God? Page. 94 Whether in every act of
worship, we must conceive of God under the personal relations, so that we may
not conceive of him absolutely as the alone Jehovah, first Being and Cause.
Page. 581 Who is the true worthy and invincible man? Page. 696
Z
Zeal required in prayer. Page. 442 Much zeal expressed by Pagans in their
worship. Page. 449
A TABLE of such places of Scripture, as are occasionally explained, vindicated
or illustrated in this TREATISE.
Chapter ver. Page. Genesis. 1.26. 588 2.7. 64 3.6. 612 -- 15. 311 4.4. 402 6.3.
747 12.11, 12. 600 15.1. 2 24.14. 172 32 25. 347 698 42.15. 617 48.16. 117
Exodus 3.14. 556 10.17. 297 20.7. 641 -- 9. 675 23.21. 318 396 28.36, 38. 397
29.39. 679 31.17. 665 32.10. 698 32. 229 258 33.20, 23. 554 34.6, 7. 501 Levit.
9.24. 332 10.3. 641 17.4, 5. 325 Numb. 11.15. 600 14.17, 18, 19. 518 Deuteronomy.
3.26. 742 6.4. 583 8.16. 648 27.14, etc. 666 30.15, 19. 830 32.47. 631 Judge.
5.12. 621 31. 666 6.37. 166 18.24. 598 1 Samuel 1.15, 18. 525 13.9. 375 14 9, 10.
172 16.1. 250 252 17.9, 10. 702 -- 37. 519 2 Samuel 15 7. 371 -- 31. 664 1 King.
8.39. 355 11.7. 624. -- 8. 690 12 13, 14. 742 21.39. 707 24.10, 13. 742 2 King.
2.12. 508 6.30, 33. 610, 655 19.34. 319 1 Chronicles. 21.17. 662 22.16. 543 2 Chronicles.
6.30. 355 26.16, 19. 375 30.19, 26. 415 36.15, 16. 765 Nehem. 6.3. 630 9.1,
etc. 690 -- 3. 693 -- 4. 693 Esth, 4.16, 17. 693 Job. 1.8. 590 2.15, 671 3.3,
600 5, 23, 677 6, 8, 9, 662 9, 11, 710 11, 7, 8, 9, 553 15, 11, 623 21, 15, 830
23, 13, 823 27, 9, 10, 407, 541 685 31, 1, 613 34, 32, 592 38, 41, 793 42, 5,
6, 440 -- 8, 293 Psalm. 2, 8, 59, 264 5, 1, 412 -- 5, 751 6, 4, 319 7, 9, 664
9, 10, 518 10, 17, 410 11, 6, 721 16, 6, 2 18, 41, 744 21, 8, 763 22, 1, 563
25, 10, 715 -- 11, 318 27, 8, 805 -- 13, 526 32, 6, 744 34, 9, 10, 715 35, 13,
490 37, 15, 709 -- 16, 425 40, 11, 319 45, 1, 413 50, 15, 639 -- 16.17, 22. 406
564 51.3, 8, 10, 11, 12, 598 -- 12, 15, 589 -- 17, 789 55, 17, 680 57, 7, 625
59, 2, 747 63, 4, 15 65, 2, 510 66, 18, 408 521, 738 -- 19, 722 68, 28, 685 69,
3. 445 693 -- 22, 708 71, 14, 680 73, 22, 718 77, 4, 612 78, 29, 31, 732 79, 6,
809 80, 10, 11, 595 81, 10, 521 83, 16, 665 84, 11, 479 715 85, 8, 408 535 87,
17, 174 91, 11, 12, 365 95, 3, 742 102, 1, etc. 690 -- 17, 18, 519 106.15, 43,
44, 789 111, 10, 718 119, 71, 75, 658 478 -- 122, 319 -- 164, 680 132, 10, 319
138, 6, 607 140, 8, 665 145, 16, 14 -- 19, 793 Prove. 1, 26, 27, 28, 743 744,
787 -- 32 708 3.31, 34, 765, 710 6, 2, 618 7, 14, 15, 372 10, 22, 201 13, 4,
618 15, 8, 401 701, 803, 820 19, 21 826 21, 1, 360 26, 2, 665 27, 17, 628 28,
9, 332 29, 1, 745 30, 4, 553 Eccles. 3, 1, 11, 677 5, 2, 400 432 -- 13 705 7,
16, 755 10, 1, 645 11, 3, 233 Song. 1, 4, 337 -- 6, 439 2, 13, 14, 682 803, 820
4, 16, 622 5.2, 3, 5, 6, 394 594 7, 5, 6, 682 Isa. 6, 9, 10, 777 11, 9, 264
26.3, 480 29, 13, 14, 432 38, 14, 319 40, 31, 636 43, 11, 557 -- 24, 417 45,
19, 242 467, 698 -- 11, 12, 22, 14 699 49, 14, 15, 563 55, 6, 681 59, 2, 592,
742 62, 6, 7, 696 63, 15, 825 -- 16, 560 64, 5, 638 -- 6, 819 -- 7, 637 Jerem.
10, 25, 809 11, 11, 744 12, 1, 707 15, 1, 251 -- 4, 742 17, 9, 10, 355 759 18,
20, 667 -- 23, 273 825 20.14, etc. 662 29, 13, 642 31, 20, 825 43, 21, 22, 795
48, 10, 640 Lament. 3, 33, 501 -- 41, 542 Ezekiel. 8, 18, 744 14, 14, 251 16, 49,
630 -- 60, 61, 62, 63, 652 441 18, 27, 783 33.14, 16, 783, 825 36, 37, 820 Dan.
3, 25, 27, 357 6, 10, 680 9, 17, 320 12, 3, 491 Hos. 1, 4, 416 2, 6, 7, 657 3,
5, 435 4, 11, 603 6, 3, 554 7, 13, 789 -- 14, 417 12, 3 4, 347 698 -- Joel. 2
13, 14, 825 Amo^. 3, 3, 305 Jonah 1, 6, 794 3, 10, 825 Micah. 7, 18, 802
Zephan. 1, 12, 710 Z^char. 3, 1, 2, 60 7, 5, 416 Malach. 1, 6 562 2, 2, 227 3,
1, 60 -- 16, 628 Matthew. 6, 7, 18 -- 9, 232 -- 13, 477, 654 15, 665 -- 32, 204
7, 6, 765 -- 7, 13 -- 8, 14, 687 8, 29, 370 11, 21, 777 -- 28, 782 -- 30, 371
12, 31, 577 13, 14, 19, 605 -- 15. 745 -- 16, 17, 310 15, 5, 6, 377 16, 25 449
18, 19, 20, 294 19, 23, 24, 761 21, 31, 746 23, 14, 371 29, etc, 746 25, 15,
327 26, 24, 661 39, 42, 70 258, 294, 654, 734 44 634 63, 312 70, 72, 74 590 28,
5 75 Mark. 6.11. 747 12.32. 583 14.61. 312 Luke. 6, 12, 693 8, 28. 370 9 55.
667 11.2. 559 -- 8. 447 -- 13. 349 601 12.16, 19. 709 -- 47. 792 13.8. 56 --
14. 675 15.18, 19. 56 17.10. 819 18.1. etc. 654 668 -- 11. 384 626 19* 14. 758
-- 41 270 21, 34. 610 23.34. 75 -- 42. 574 Joh. 3.16. 516 583, 821 4.23, 24.
430 441 5.19. 569 6 27. 452 8.58. 3^0 9.31. 401 407, 521, 701 10.7. 305 -- 28,
29. 587 12.37. etc. 745 13.2. 353 14.6. 3^5 -- 13, 14. 298 -- 15. 759 -- 16. 29
-- 30. 368 15.5. 403 -- 7. 743 16.7. 29 -- 23. 298 -- 24. 320 -- 26, 27. 68
516, 820 17.1. etc. 690 -- 24. 42 18 38. 536 20.17. 560 Acts. 4.12, 313 --. 29.
664. 5.3. 553 7.51. 748 -- 59. 574 8.20. 666 -- 24. 296 9.11. 800 10.2. 676
13.41. 831 16.14. 781 -- 16, 17. 370 605 Romans. 3.8. 664. -- 22. 318 5.10, 11.
577 6.19. 643 7.15. etc. 647 -- 21, 24. 606 8.7. 331 762 -- 16. 345 -- 20, 21,
22. 829 -- 26, 27. 29 269, 328, 584 712, 805 -- 28. 479 716 9.3. 229 258 -- 22.
708 10.1. 259 11.2, 3. 665 12.11. 542 -- 12. 668 830 15.30. 280 1 Corinthians.
1.26. 748 3.21. 1, 322 8.1. 792 10.31. 672 12.4, 11. 334 13.2. 792 -- 10, 12.
222 531, 554 -- 13. 459 14.15. 431 15.8, 9, 10. 787 2 Corinthians. 3.5. 331 4.4.
353 -- 6. 558 5.11. 660 6.17. 617 8.12. 551 10.4, 5. 383 12, 7. 224.590 -- 9.
477, 722 13.5. 401.494 -- 14. 573, 574 Galat. 3.11. 300. -- 19. 67 4.6. 344
5.8. 372 -- 25. 348 Ephesians. 2.4, 5. 596 -- 18. 298 ^^^ ^^^ 3.20. 317 5.5. 762
6.10.11. 362 -- 18. 335 411, 454, 830 Philip. 1.23. 660 3.10, 11. 626 -- 19,
761 4.6, 7. 7, 476 478, 717, 719 804 -- 12. 16 Colos. 1, 21. 331 4.2. 453 668 1
Thessal. 5.6, 7. 610 -- 17. 409 668 -- 19. 593 674 2 Thessal. 2.10, 11. 752
3.10. 542 1 Timoth. 1.13. 783 -- 15. 340 2.1. 260 262 4.4, 5. 6 2^ -- 8. -- 10.
2 6.9.10. 7^ -- ^6 ^^ 2 Timoth. 1.6. 6 6 2.13. 496 -- 18. 42. Titus. 1.15. 331
3.10, 11. 752 Philem. -- v. 5. 117 Hebr. 1.14. 121 2.16. 533 4.7. 747 -- 13.
631 5.7. 517 6.4, 5, 6. 388 577, 749 -- 17.18. 503 7, 25. 34 9.9. 309 -- 22. 64
10.29. 594 -- 37. 635 -- 38.39. 750 11.6. 99 466 -- 13. 316 12.6, 7, 8. 659 --
1.10. 591 627 -- 14. 759 -- 28, 29. 92 608 13.9. 606 -- 10. 5 James. 1.6, 7. 99
461 -- 8. 444 609 -- 14, 15. 362 -- 17.20. 667, 823 826 2.10. 758 4.3. 418 --
6. 438 607 -- 7, 8. 15 605 -- 15. 358 5.13, 15. 684, 461 486 -- 16. 401 445,
704 1 Pet. 1.13.15. 625 -- 17, 18, 19, 22. 572 2.21. 666 4.4. 764 -- 7. 610
5.16. 709 2 Pet. 1.10. 494 -- 12. 676 2.1. 752 -- 21. 749 3.18. 588 1 John.
2.1. 34, 55 3.8. 530 -- 9. 587 4.^0. 764 5.10. 505 -- 13, 14, 15. 528 550, 698
-- 16. 239 239 250 Jude. -- 4. 760 -- 6. 360 -- 20. 301 Revelat. 1.4, 5. 574
575 -- 6. 5 2.7. 574 3.16. 730 -- 17, 18. 609 5.12. 105 6.9, 10. 81 -- 15, 16,
17. 718 14.10. 718

FINIS.

