SWEET THOVGHTES OF JESUS AND MARIE OR MEDITATIONS FOR ALL THE FEASTS OF OUR
B. SAVIOVR AND HIS B. MOTHER Togeither with Meditations for all the Sundays of
the year.

And our Saviors Passion.

For the use of the daughters of Sion

Divided into two parts.

THE FIRST PART.

By THOMAS CARRE, Priest of the English.

College of Doway.



IHS.

PRINTED AT PARIS, By VINCENT DV MOVTIER.

M. DC. LXV.

TO THE VERY VENERABLE HIS MOST HONORED DEAR LADY MARIE TREDVVAY FIRST
ABBESS Of the English Monastery of Sion of S. Augustins Order established in
Paris.
MADAME
These poor productions of mine, which were bredd and brought out amidst a
multitude of daily distractions, can scarce with justice fly to any other
Patronage, then your La. and your virtuous children, whose instant desires gave
them being, while their piety did not so much, and so earnestly beg them,
as even force them from my poverty. Howeuer, were I free from that just tie,
there is yet another, from which I will never admit dispensation, which makes
these, and all that is in my power, already yours and theirs; to wit the
affection which I owe, and have vowed to your service, that is, your
advancement in virtue. As issuing from that sourse, they cannot doubt of
acceptance. What proceeds from known love and respect, cannot miss to meet
with it mutually in well borne hearts.

If you find them useful for you, I have my design. If they lead you to a
nearer approach with JESUS and MARIE and a more lively expression of their
lives in yours, I have my end, and you the fruit. If finally, you profit by
them, I have my reward.

What effect soever they may chance to have with others, please not to let them
fail to be to you certain testimonies, that my chief desires for myself,
and you are (as I have often intimated to you) that we esteem our selves to
know nothing, here below, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: that is, that we
putt down for a most Catholic and Apostolical truth that the life and
passion of our sweet Savior, is the most approved; the most secure, and best
School of all perfection; since according to your holy Fathers excellent
Sentence Summa Religionis est imitari quemcolimus, the perfection end, and
accomplishment of Religion, is the Imitation of him (Jesus Christ) whom we
worship. In whom I shall ever be.

MADAME Your La. and your Religious daughters, poor unworthy Father and
Servant THOMAS CARRE.

BETHEELEM STABLE Or an entertainment of Jesus. For the daughters of Sion.
A Preparation toward the receipt of Jesus. For Chrismas Eve.
MEDITATION I.
I. POINT.

CONSIDER that when the world was most desperately lost in Paganism,
Idolatry, and in the worship of men, as Gods, and in that of Devils. Yea
while Judea, that choice part of the world, where only the true God was Known
and adored, was ouergrowen with hypocrisy, avarice, ambition, cousenage,
Lying, and innumerable other vices. While all the earth, was depraved,
corrupted, and sunk, in sensuality and all sorts of sin. In a word, while
man, enemy of his own salvation, slept so deep that he thought not of it:
while he was so desperately sick that he felt not his evil; and consequently
neither merited, sought for, nor demanded his cure: then, even then the
eternal God, like a most pitiful father, co^miserating his misery, and
deliberating, as it were, the remedy in the consistory of the most holy
Trinity, resolved that the divine Word should become man, and in his own
person should come to cure man.



2. POINT.
Consider, this resolution being taken, of whom the divine wisdom, and
providence, makes choice amongst all the creatures of heaven and earth, for the
perfecting this great work of the salvation of all mankind. He does not, after
the manner of the world, make choice of the greatest, richest, and powerfullest
princess that might be found on earth, or the brightest Angel of heaven: but,
an Angel is sent from heaven into Earth, to a Virgin named Marie, wife to
Joseph, who lived in a little town of Galilie called Nazareth: to Marie, I say,
an humble, poor, obscure, unknown maid, and she too, married to a poor
Carpenter, Joseph.

while I was a little one I pleased the highest. Great ones he throws down out
of heaven, and out of the chair of Moses: while such little ones are exalted,
and wonders are wrought in them by the alpowerfull hand. May then the love of
worldly greatness, honor, riches, power, for ever vanish from my thoughts. And
may humility, poverty, virginity, be the dear companions of my heart. Since
they be the dear virtues which took my heavenly spouse his heart, and helped
to provide a worthy tabernacle in earth for the king of heaven.

MEDITATION II.
In those days there came forth an Edict from Caesar Augustus that the whole
world should be inroled. And Joseph also went from Nazareth to Bethlehem to be
inroled with Marie his dispoused wife who was with child.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that as our Blessed Lady hyghly commended humility and obedience to
us by her reply to the Angel, saying: behold the handmaide of our Lord, be it
to me according to thy word, so does she here, immediately before his nativity,
press the same again, by promptly complying with the commands of a mortal
man! Caesar commands, and straight ways Joseph, Marie, and Jesus obeyes. Joseph
obeyes Cesars servant; Marie Joseph her spouse, and Jesus, being in Mary's
sacred womb, obeys Marie his mother most punctually. She, being possessed of
the treasure of heaven, and heaven and earthes wonderment, as though she had
been altogether ignorant of Gods high counsel, and of the particular effects
of his providence, gives way to this strict order, without reasoning, without
contradiction, without reserve, humbly, simplely, and promptly, accompagned
with her spouse Joseph, she takes journey to Bethleem.



II. POINT.
Consider the circumstances of this heavenly mystery, by which our Blessed
Lady might have most apparently pretended excuse. He who commanded was Emperor
indeed, but of the earth, whereas she could not obey him, without draweing the
Emperor of heaven and earth into the same subjection. He commanded every one to
repair to the place of their nativity, it is true: but Nazareth her abode, was
distant from Bethleem, the place of her nativity, four days journey: It was
in the midst of winters rigor, and she was big from heaven, and most worthy
to be excused. Yet we hear of no dispute, noe pretense, noe delay.



MEDITATION. I. For, Chrismas Day.
And she brought forth her first begotten son, and swadled him in clothes and
laid him down in a manger, because there was not place for them in the Inn.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER, how, even in the midst of this Heroical act of obedience, the B.
Virgin wrought that great work toward man's redemption for which all
generations call her blessed; for while, through an humble obedience she was
traveling to Beth. To comply whith Cesars commands, her days were fully come
that she should be delivered, and she brought forth Jesus.

If we desire then to conceive Jesus in our hearts; Obedience must be the
herbinger. If we desire to bring forth Jesus to the world, that is, show him
and his ways to our neighbor; it must be by showing them our humble obedience
upon all occasions,

is there any more pleasing in his sight then Obedience; since truth it self
assures us, it is better then a sacrifice. And Christ himself delivers with
his own mouth, (and that in words as full of admiration as comfort to such as
are truly obedient) that the obedient man enters into all it he respects of
neernesse and dearnesse with him, saying: He who does the will of my father
that is in heaven, he it is that is my brother, and sister, and mother. What
could be said either more tenderly inuiting, or more honorably requiting our
obedience?



II. POINT.
Consider how this child of obedience, this first begotten, this Jesus, is
treated, how and where he is lodged by his heavenly fathers eternal
providence. How is he treated? poorly: he is wrapped up in cloutes. How and
where is he lodged? alac meanly in a stable, in a manger. O amaysement!
Eternity not a day old! omnipotence become impotent! Divinity wrapped up in
poor clothes. Is a stable become the Dolphine of heavens Louure; Is this the
wedding room prepared for the marriage of the Lamb? is a manger his marriage
bed?

Inter vbera mea co^morabitur: at least I will lock him up in his unworthy
servants breast.

THE SECOND MEDITATION For the same Day.
Because there was no place for them in the Inn.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER this with amaysement. Jesus leaves heaven to save the world and the
world will not know him: he comes into his own, and even his own receaues him
not. It were little enough, me thinks, that a poor woman, weary with
traveling; and ready within a few hours to be delivered, should find the
ordinary comfort, at least, of some poor chamber in an Inn, of fire, of a
bed. And yet even this is denied the king and Queen of heaven. If there be
place in the town for all others, there is none for them. They must pack away,
and find the rocks of easier access then man's heart. And lodge in them.

For there was noe place for him in the Inn!

II. POINT. Consider that it was not in Judea only that there was no place for
Jesus, but the same straitness reigns over all the world. Change only the
name, and we shall find the story verified of our unhappy country. Is there
any place there for Jesus, where his sacrifices are abhorred, his temples
violated, the solemnity of his house abandoned, and his house it self become
as a stable, or a den of thieves? yea where all the memories of him, and his
very name, begins to be razed out?



MEDITATION I. For S. Stephens day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that it is no wonder that Christ is not known by men, since men have
left to be men, and are turned into the nature of brute beasts; to wit being
placed in honor they understood it not, and thence, they were compared to
brute beasts, and were made like unto them, Yes they aim at nothing but to
feed fatt, to find ease, to lie warm, to wanton it up and down, to generate
and take delight. Are not these things common with men and beasts? And does
not yet man add to these many inventions of wit and Art, to court vanity,
to inuit luxe lust and sin? But lo the wisdom of the eternal father is
lodged in a Cave, to teach ignorant man another lesson: to wit, that felicity
is not to be found in vanity, in carnalitie, in heaps of gold, nay it cries
out, as it were, to all the world by this example. Why do you love vanity and
seek alye? It is not, it is not to be found in these follies. No, my ways are
as far removed from your ways, and my cogitations from your cogitations, as
is heaven from earth.





2. POINT.
cave or stable as the true sohoole of all virtues, where the wisdom of heaven
gives solid lessons of heavenly wisdom; where the eternally begotten, the
only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ, newly come down from heaven, is to
frame in our hearts the impressions of Christianity: mhere the word which was
in the beginning with God, and was even God him self, God of God, true God of
true God, lying now dumb in a poor manger, for the love of poor man, who was
become a brute beast, should speak louder to heauen-beloued Christan hearts
then all the voices of men and Angels.

Is it, that man should wax dumb to the world, while the word appears dumb
in the world? O speak thus, speak thus Dear Lord, to thy poor servant who
gives ear to thee. And, whilst thou speak, let the world keep silence;
and turn as dead to me, as I to it. Let my tongue, and all the tumultuous
people of my interior house, keep silence. Let my heart be silent too, and
only give ear to this one necessary Word, saying: I am thy salvation: for I
am Jesus, thy Savior.

THE II. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
silent word? That very same by which all things were made, and without which
nothing was made, while he himself was not made but was begotten by an
eternal generation, which none is capable to express. That word, from which
all things had being, as from a very Ocean of being. That word, which was
in the beginning, and in the beginning began to work upon nothing, and of it
made all things; created Heaven and earth: for that little word fiat was said,
and every thing began to rise out of the abyss of nothing, and have being,
life, and motion, etc. By this word was said: Let light be made; and it
presently was made, etc.

nothing nothing is made: but this word* which is the Wisdom of heaven,
assures us, that of Nothing all things were made: which while he is sile^t all
the creatures together cry outwith a loudevoyce, we made not our selves but he
made us. O thou light of light! who in the beginning with a word made light in
the world, and now come down into it to enlighten all men, daigne to be a
light to my obscured heart, that it may discern as well the effects of thy
word, as the silence of the ^ame. And clearly see, that as in the beginning
that, made all things of nothing, so this, in time comes to repair all
things made worse then nothing. And as that in the beginning made all things
right, so this in time comes to rectify all things disordered. And grant that
as we see all that we have and are, flowed from thy Bounty; so our firm
resolution may ever be, that all we either have or are, may return to thee
again, by our Justice and gratitude. Fiat fiat.

POINT 2.


dear object to thy contemplation and love, while he was less accessible; of
invisible he becomes visible in flesh, to thine eyes of flesh. And by an
incomparable, and inconceiuable transport of love, he who in the beginning made
man to his own similitude; and likeness, vouchsafes, in time to be made to
the similitude and likeness of man, and to give us power thereby to become the
sons of his heavenly father, the sons of God. The sons of God? the sons
of thy heavenly father? Ah what joy, o Jesus we are thy brothers then: and if
brothers, heirs of God; coheires with thee, o dear savior Jesus Christ.
dilate, dilate my heart, dear child from heaven, the bulk of thy ouercharging
dearness is too large to enter! Ah make me not poor with too much heavenly
plenty; either bestow thy gifts according to my measure, and ability, to
receive them, or enlarge my heart, and enable it to receive them, according to
the proportion in which thou dagniest to bestow them. I poor contemptible
wretch! borne the son of earth, made the son of God, the Heir of God! The
brother of IBSVS-CHRIST! coheire with Jesus! let me, dear child, let me never
more by a degenerous conversation. (In such or such things making reflection
of your greatest imperfections, etc.) stayne the noble family, and the
dignity of the blood and alliance, into which I am addopted by thy
graciousnesse. May I rather dye then ever prove so base and disloyal. Amen.

The first Med for Sanct Ihons day.
PONIT 1.


a whole world upon us, with all the admirable variety of creatures comprised
therein, for our use and service: but incomparably, much more, now that thou
have sent thine own only son, thy son and heir, the king of heaven, equal
to thy self. Those were great indeed yet earthly ones; but this, is even the
best that heaven had to give; here thou did indeed open and bestow
thesaurum tuum optimum, thy very best treasure, so that the mostvastly greedy
heart ca^ neither desire, nor even imagine any thing greater, any thing equal
to it, or even bearinge any proportion with it. A son, in whom, thou wast well
pleased; for a fugitive prodigal servant, in whom thou wast highly offended:
and even while he was yet actually offending thee, then, even then, to putt the
greatest commendations upon thy mercy imaginable, then, Isay, thou sentest him,
(cum adhuc inimici essemus) into abiection and prouertie, into a poor hole of
a rock, to be accompaigned with brute beasts, for that yet bruter beast,
man. I can only stand amaysed at this strange dispensation and dignation of
thine. To send a son for a servant: a saint, yea, the sanite of saints, for a
sinner, a God for man! what a strong hope must this needs beget in the heart of
a sinner? Resolution. I confide in thee then, o my dearest Lord, I depend wholly
on thy mercy, etc.

POINT 2.


down to seek out and save what had perihed. And had not this Way met the
wandringe pilgrim, this truth illuminated the blind man that satt in
darkness, and this life quickened the dying slave that lay under the shadow
of death, he had still erred, remained still blind, and been dead for ever. For
there is noe other name under heaven whereby we ought to be saved. What
obligations then have we to Christ our redeemer? how ought we to love this
word, which teaches us, or putts out this truth a sea-Beacon to us poor
creatures, who are tossed at this huge sea, and proves a light to our feet to
walk in this safe way, Christ; which securely leads to the permanencie of an
un changable and everlasting life, which is his very self. Reso. In this way
then will I walk and run for ever, if thou dear Lord wilt please to draw.
This truth will I embrace for ever, if thou daignest to give perseverance. And
this life of thine will I strive to lead, love. and breath after, till I be
druncke up in life everlasting.

PONIT. 1.
rendered him senseless of all good, being cold, frozen, stupide, without all
feeling of heavenly things; and this divine word, which, notwithstanding the
Cold which he now indures, is indeed a consuming fire, is come down into the
earth with his heavenly fire, and what is his desire but that it should fix
upon those benumbed hearts of ours, and inflame them with his holy and burning
love? For what will ever be able to do it, if this heavenly Prometheus, this
firebringing Messenger be not able to set us on fire? What will be ever
powrefull enough to speak excess of love to men's hearts, and to oblidge them
to love, if the mute eloquence of a God lying dumb, the Word it self left
speechless, in a manger for their love, be not able to do it? And this is the
extaticall loue-language of the divine Word which lies before our eyes this day
in the cribbe.

cold, we rather choose to starve then approach to the fire, that active, sacred,
heavenly fire, which comes not down but to burn, to burn our frozen hearts,
as some times it did those two primitive Hearts with whom he walked in the way
to Emaus, who found their hearts burning while he spoke. And as it did your
holy father then he cried out, as one love sick. What is this that I feel?
what kind of fire is this that warmes my heart? which so sweetly burns, so
secreetly shines, so deliciously seases upon, and inflames my soul with a
dear delight? Ah! this divine Word, is indeed, as David qualified it, ignitum
vehementer, but it was in his meditation that it burnt all out in a flame. But
how should this happen, si nemo recogitet cord, if none heartily think of it?
how should hearts burn, if none apply hearts to the fire?

say, thy will be done. And with your Holy father. Inflame and pearce the very
marrow of my dull heart, with those saueing fires of thine: and let the flame of
thy holy fervor, dry up and consume the peccant humors of my body and mind.

2. POINT.
word, this beautiful saluation-weeping-child, this King, this metamorphized
God of ours. It was the immense and eternal love of the Father and the son,
the holy Ghost, by which he was conceived in the sacred and pure Womb of this
Virgin Mother. It Was love that brought him out, Love that lodged him in this
poor cottage; Love that swadled him in poor cloutes Love that laid him in
this manger: And love of us, poor, lost, miserable, sinful men. Propter nos
homines: for us men, assures faith, and for our salvation he descended from
heaven; For his exceeding great charity with which he loved the World says
the great Apostle.

dilectus men's mihi: the beloved soul of man, is mine? And what should, or can
man reply, but and ego illi Yes dear Lord, thine I am entirely, and thou shall
be mine for ever: my part, my portion, my substance, the one thing which I
only desire, my dear delight in time and eternity. What does this say, but
deliciae meae esse cum filiis hominum. My delights are to be with the sons
of men? And what shall the lost sons of men say, but our dearest delights
are, and shall ever be, to be with the son of God. His love to me, has made
him being the lord and Master, stoop below men, and lie amongst brute beasts:
and shall not my Love to him being but a poor sinful servant, make me, in
true desire, lie under the feet of all men? Thy charity and example does urge
me to love thee, and by thy precept I am oblidged to it, But yet alas who is
able to love thee but by thine own gift. Give then, o Lord, what thou
co^mandest, and command what thou will.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION
Of Humility, Christ's first lesson in the stable.
I. POINT.
of a God, might be raised to the dignity of an Angel, or a God indeed, and
so be published happy for ever by all Nations.





I. POINT.
this narrow manger, this common place of shelter for brute beasts, this ox
and Ass, this eternity not a day old, this disguise or form of a servant,
these infant tears, seem to say to the eye, and by the eye to the heart, which
afterward he shall with his own mouth express in words: Learn of me,
because I am myld and humble of heart: My Little children, Learn of me your God
become a little child, a lesson shutt up from the wise and prudent of the world,
and left to me in my litlenesse to reveal it to little ones, because I am myld
and humble of heart: not in word and exterior comportement only, but in
effect, with heart and affection.

O dear Savior or mylde son of the highest, how low, how low, does thy
humility descend? and withal, how high does thy charity burn up in this
action? O vain man! what will ever be able to work down thy proud heart, if
the humility of a God will not do it? if power become impotent, if strength
grown infirm cannot prevail? Ah what is more strange, more detestable, more
grievously punis-hable, then that when we behold him that is the highest in the
kindome of God, made the least, and lowest, in this kingdom of men; for man's
example and love, man will yet be puffed up and remain high in selfe-esteeme?

THE SECOND MEDITATION For the same day.
I. POINT.
CCNSIDER again the circumstances of the stable, manger, etc. and you will
find that where humility is practiced, her sister Obedience is not far
absent. If Christ by all these things preach perfect humility, it is in
order to Obedience. He humbled himself, being made Obedient says the great
Aplostle. If the stable be poor, Manger narrow etc. he therefore humbly endures
them, because such is his heavenly fathers will. As my father commanded me so I
do. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but his who sent me.
Whence S. Paul pronounces a strange word. Though he was the very son of God,
yet he was to learn Obedience by what he suffered here below, being other
wise, as God, equal to his heavenly father, and as such, could not obey.

The best effects of victory is but peace, and the humble and obedient man,
conquers the hearts of all men, and has peace with all men, yet he inioyes it
especially in his own little world, his own heart, where he continually feasts
and reigns: Christ came not from heaven into this world to do his own will,
but his that sent him; nor come we out of the world into Religion, to do our
own wills, but his will, in theirs, whom his providence places over us.



2. POINT.
Consider, that this stable is not only the school of humility, and
obedience, but of poverty also, since humility is never sure, which loves not
poverty. And where, or how shall we ever learn it, if not of him, who when he
was most rich became poor, that we might be enriched by his abundance? Behold
he is borne of a poor mother, brought out in a poor stable, wraped up in
poor clothes, laid in a poor bed, accompained with a poor ox and an ass;
visited by poor shephards; destitute of all conueniences, of all necessaries.
And yet it is even he who so little stood in need of our assistance, that he
said by the Prophet, If I be hungry I will not tell thee, because the
universal world is mine. And yet it is even he who feeds the birds of the
air, who now is fedd with the milk of a poor Maid.

feeds the birds of the air, could have shewerd down a heavenly provision
of Manna; clothed himself with the sun, and made a thousand celestial
mansions to have lodged in* Yet to teach the world poverty, he would deprive
himself of all ordinary commodity.



THE FIFTH MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that in this stable Virginity is also taught. Virginity which is
never more safe, or even safe indeed, save in the compainie of humility,
obedience and poverty Virginity which found not in earth what to imitate, but
had recourse to the example of the Angels, till Jesus chused to be borne in
Bethleem stable, and to propose himself for the example, and Doctor, and giver
of it. Jesus would be borne, but of a virgin, to putt the highest rate
possible upon virginity. Marie a Virgin was content to bear a son, but he
was to be a God, a Savior of the world. And thence, before, in, and after
childbirth, she remained more pure then an Angel, more pure then an
Archangell, more pure then Cherubin, Seraphim, and only less pure then
purity it self, by which she was made pure, and which too, by singular
privilege, she brought out to save the impure and durtie world.

it not, we cannot have it, or having it, even conserve it! Nay the very good
desires we have of it, are thine too: Give then dear Lord what thou
command, and command what thou will. And thou o mother of purity, the
fruit of whose virginity makes the world happy: to thee we exiled Children
of Eve have recourse, praying to thee with groans and tears to obtain for us
of thy virginal child, true humility of heart, obedience, and love of
poverty, wherein alone we apprehend virginity secure; since even thine own
more then Angellicall virginity had not pleased, had it not been accompaigned
with humility, as a great Father dares afferme. And therefore, Monstra te esse
matrem. Sumat per te preces, Qui pro nobis natus, Tulit esse Tuus.

2. POINT.
himself, and by his examble, will have all his, to tread quite contrary to
it, and to make continual war against it. His poverty exclames against its
riches; his virginal birth cries out against its concupiscences; his humble
obedience decryes its ambition, and pride of life. These are the Christian
documentes, and cries, of this blessed stable.

vanity of vanity and affliction of spirit. They fool, but fill not; they
allure but feed not, they swell but saciate not, upon the word of S.
Augustine, they are paynefull pleasures, and are not like the joys of thy
Lord, believe it they are not, nor bear they any proportion therewith. The bed
of our heart is too strait, it is not capable of both God and the world. If we
be frie^des with it, we must be Gods enemies. And still as we begin to love it,
it begins to leave us: for it quickly passes by, with all its concupiscences.



THE SECOND MEDITATION For the same Day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that blessed school of the stable is still open, and another most
important Christian lesson is to be learnt, which is, unless one renounce all
that he does possess he cannot be Christ's Disciple. The prudence of the flesh
is death, and if we live according to it, dye we must eternally. If we desire
to live to Christ, and with Christ, and follow Christ, we must first deney our
selves, dye to our selves, or our own inclinations; take up our cross and
follow him! this is the condition of our Christian obligation; there is no
mean, Christians must dye to live. This does Christ cry out to our hearts, by
the rigor of the cold which he endures, by his hard entertaynement, by his
scrikes, by his tears, etc. by his humility, obedience, poverty, etc.

We cannot be his Disciples unless we renounce all that we possess. The Goods
of body, of mind, of fortune. Let none deceive himself, this must be done, or
nothing is done; as to our eternal possession. Die we must to all these; dye
we must to self love, self co^ceipt, to our commodity, our humor, etc. and
take up our Cross to follow Christ, according to the blessed example which he
gives us in this infancy of his, in his very first entry into this world.
Nor is it good wishes will do it, but effects. Nor can we pay this duty in
part, but it must be wholly done. Unless ye renounce all that you possess,
all, you cannot be my Disciples.

2. POINT


unless you become little children again, you cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Yeald, yeald then my stubborn heart, yeald thy self to this blessed
example of thy Christ, which by conquering thee will make thee a Conqueror for
ever. Run after thy dear father Christ, as still fearing to fall: tenderly
love thy Catholic mother, and stick close to the chaste breasts of her
counsels: strive to be humble, meek, docile, little sollicitous how thou are
dealt with: be in fine, as a piece of clay in the porters hands: only beseeth
him to make thee a vessel of honor, not of co^tumelie.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION. The comfortes of the stable.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that under the humble weak and young members of this tender babe,
the power of a Divine Majesty is shrewded. It is God that lies sucking at this
Virgin mothers breasts. He is vayled indeed with the poverty of vile
clothes, and endures the hard and narrow manger, but it is mercy which moved
him humbly to it, to thend the lost world might be redeemed. He uses the
strikes of a child, but it is to thend that by them we might avoid eternal
lamentations and gnashing of teeth. He is wrapped in poor clothes, but they
serve to wipe away the filth of our sins. Hes laid in a manger as the meat
of brute-beastes; but he is indeed the fatninge food of men and Angels.

which made thee, who lies before thee. This stable is his holy temple, These
poor apparances which may seem to hide him from thine eyes, deliver him more
tenderly to thy heart, for whose love he lies thus vayled. So that by how much
he descendes lower, by so much, do thy hopes ascend higher. For what may
thou not confidently expect from an alpowerfull Lord so humbled for thy sake?
Fly to him with an humble love, and a perseuerant confidence, and thy
redemption is even at hand. O what mercy do not these abject postures speak?
what consolation do not these tears give? What man can despair for whom a
God weeps?

2. POINT.
Consider that this little child is constituted Judge of Heaven and earth by his
heavenly father, who takes and tears in pieces the hand writings of our
ancient debtes, and mercifully pardonns all our offenses: so that we are freed
from our fears of our first Fathers preuarication, wherein all mortals were
inuolued. Behold that Champion present with us, who frees us from the yoke of
our old Captivity, bringing joy and gladness to the mournful. Cast off thy
yoke thou captive daughter of sion. Thy mylde king is come to abate the pride,
and subdue the tyranny, of his, and our, most furious foe.



(reflecting upon it in particular) which I observe my self subject to. And
run to my mild Judge with an humble confidence, etc.

THE II. MEDITATION For the same day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER a strange and comfortable change of the hand of the highest, he, who
formely spoke only in quality of Lord and master out of the clouds, and out
of fire, saying; I am thy Lord, I am thy God: God is a Lord of revenge, etc. Is
now come down from Majesty, as it were, and comes down to us, and speaks to
us in quality of man, yea the mildest of men. Then did his power appear in
the creation of the world, and his infinite wisdom in the gouuerning of it:
but to us, the benignity and humanity of God a Savior is manifested. He
comes in our nature, in quality of our brother, that he may show, as well his
brotherly, as fatherly affection and pity, to the poor man created by him.

consolamini consolamini, be comforted be comforted my people? I will not the
death of a sinner but rather that he be converted and live. Here is now noe
dreadful Jehovah, noe thunder, noe lightening to terrify thee; but thy mylde
Emmanuell, thy God with thee, a meek, tender, weeping child; our flesh and
our brother who is come to dwell amongst us. Let not the ancient reproach,
(Where is thy God?) be any more a corrasiue unto thee. For even here he is, in
flesh, like one of us, There is now noe need, upon the hearing of his voice,
to hyde thy self with thy first parents: nay his voice is the scrikes of a
tender babe, far more apt to begett pity in man's heart, then to strike it
with dread. He cannot forbear to love his own brethren, his own flesh and
blood, his own bowels.

I. POINT.
Consider that though when I look upon my self, such as I am indeed, poor,
naked, blind, lame, abject and miserable, I have more cause of confusion then
confidence: Yea, when I represent unto my self the multitude, and
greeuousnesse of my sins (which can never be better known the^ by the
gratnesse of the price, which is sent down for their redemption) I find my
self even waighed down to hell, and am ready to despair. Yet the greatness
of the same price too possesses my heart with strong hopes of redemption, when
I observe Wisdom it self imploye the blood of the lamb, the blood of this
tender babe, the son of Marie, and the son of God, to make a precious bathe
for the cure of my leprosy, I cannot despair.

Is he turned some precious thing which formerly thou wast not acquainted with?
Has he got some nobleness of being, which issued not from thine own hand?
Is he not still, dust and ashes, earth, earth, earth, of which thou madst him?
Nay but, dear Lord, has he not added malice to this base matter of which he
was made? Had not all flesh corrupted its ways; so that none did well, not
one? Did not multitudes of crimes and abominations stand up in thy sight, and
cry out for revenge? What proportion is there then bewixt the price and the
thing prized! Betwixt the blood of an innocent son, and a sinful servant?
The blood of a God, and worthless man? O too too dear price! o too plentiful
Redemption! I can find nothing here but amaysement, and o Altitudos. And
conclude with all the gratitude my soul can conceive, that thy friends, o God,
are too much honored: and their Principality too well established, by this too
dear a price,

THE SEVENTH MEDIT.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that when man was so heavy hearted that he could not ascend. The
heart of a God was so gracious that he would descend to him. The earth was too
heavy to mount into heaven, but heaven could find a means to transport it
self, as it were, into earth. For is not this Cave a very heaven indeed,
since God here truly Keeps his residence, and has his quires of Angels
singing about him? Where God is, there is his Court, and where the Court is,
there are the Courtiers; and where the Courtiers are, there is the duty of
Courtiers exercised, to wit they behold and love, they love and behold and
with prone adorations singe Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, holy holy holy. This
stable then is a very heaven indeed. Venite adoremus.

a multitude of the heavenly Army praising God, and saying: Glory in the
highest to God, etc. Let us take a part with them, o my soul, and singe with
the whole endeavor of our heart. We praise thee: we bless thee: we adore thee:
we glorify thee: we give thee thanks for thy great glory. O Lord God! o
Lamb of God! o Son of the Father, who take away the sins of the world,
have mercy on us. Who take away the sins of the world, admit our humble
supplication. Yes dear Lord: For thou alone art holy; thou alone art Lord;
thou alone art the son of the Almighty God.

this or that, etc.) In this Lord, in this son of the Almighty, in this
saving Lamb which takes away the sins of the world, who comfortes me (though
otherwise I be but earth and ashes) I am able to do all things, etc.

THE SECOND MEDITATION For the same day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER who are the first Courtiers who are called to this heavenly Celle,
this earthly Heaven or Court; and we shall find, that it is not the learned,
wise, and rich of the world (that by Christ's example we may learn still more
and more to contemn the same) but tbe poor, humble, simple, vigilant
shephards; who are so separated from the world, that they can hardly be said to
have any commerce with it at all. Christ is sarce yet an hour old amongst us,
and he already begins to set upon the work for which he was sent.. He comes
for man's salvation, and man is presently sent for: yea the poorest of men, (the
poor shephards) to be spectatours of his poverty: to wit the Lamb is borne,
and it is but fitting that the shephards should give their attendance.

to vanity. In poverty, and true simplicity, our soul is safe, and daily
conuerses with God and his Angels. In fine; either have we choysen well (in
this our religious state, etc.) or wisdom it self made a badd choice.

2. POINT.
Gloria be sunge to them both, by the multitudes of his heavenly Quiresters, in
the poor shephards hearing, assuring them and the world by them, of a great
joy in the birth of a savior, who was Christ their Messiah. So that they were
sent with a lesson, taught by an Angel, to glorify and adore their God, in
the form of a poor infant swadled in clothes, and laid in a manger.

peace will follow: Justice and peace. Otherwise we may cry peace, peace, as
long as we will, we shall never enjoy it, while we remain in that impiety
and injustice of robbing God of his Glory.

Gods honor and glory, etc. that I may be partaker of his peace, which passes
man's understanding, etc.

THE VIII. MEDITATION. For new-years-day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that this good news, which the Angels told us these days past, of
the birth of a savior, comes home, this good new yearesday to our uses and
profit: being indeed the best new-yeares-gife that Heaven had to give. For if
he were borne for us, these days past, this present day, he is given to us. He
is ours then by a double title, and that too the best imaginable: By
birthright: nobis natus. Borne for us: And by Deed of free gift: nobis datus.
Given to us.

which Heaven putts upon thee. And do not sell thy self to the earth for an
undervalue. Learn by this a holy pride, know that thou art more worth, then
any thing it has to bestow. Thou were told by S. Augustine, that the
kingdom of Heaven, being to be sold, was just worth as much as thou art; but
me thinks, we may add to that rate, since the king of Heaven is given for
thee. Give thy self, and thou shall have them both. Ah! make-not away this
fair inheritance for a mess of potage, Change not the chaste loves of a
heavenly spouse for the bitter Mandragores of the world. The riches of heaven
is given to thee for thy New years gift; give at least, the poverty of the
earth back again. Da teipsum and habebis. Why do thou stand upon the price?
(strive to have a good answer to this question) and* I hope you will find your
self forced to conclude a good bargain, to begin the year and say*

God is my gift, himself he freely gave me.

Gods gift I am, and now but Cod shall have me.

2. POINT.
Consider that this day, our blessed savior begins to show in very deed he
is ours, borne for us given to us; since he begins to shed his precious blood
for us: for the eighth day is come and according to the law he is to be
circumcised. The lawgiuer is not subject to the law: the son of God cannot be
liable to sin: the son of a virgin, cannot be subject to corruption:
innocence has nothing to do with the marks of a sinner. And yet the poor
innocent lamb without spott, which comes to take away the sins of the word,
will be branded with the infamous mark of a sinner; not for his own, buth for
our sins, sed omnia propter electos says S. Bernard.

God; how ever, to pious eyes, it appears the the greatest mystery and
miracle of love. O heavenly father! this is thine only child, in whom thou
art so well pleased, who is so innocent, immaculate, unspotted. Is it for the
sins of thy people thou have so struck him? O man! how does this action
confound thy pride, and discover thy self to thy self? we easily committ
sin, even in the sight of God: but blushe to appear sinners in the sight of
men etc. Or if we chance to have that humility and justice in us, as patiently
to suffer reprehension, reproach, or punishment, when we see we are in fault;
yet, are their any to be found, who knows what it means to suffer, where we
either indeed are, or at least, where we apprehend our selves innocent? That,
even best, Christians, are content to leave to Christ alone.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. For the same day.
II. POINT.
CONSIDER Virgins, consider Christians, old and young, and all that hope to be
saved by the blood of Christ, what these sacred dropes, which fall from our
Christ, say to our hearts. What do they say (unless our hearts be of stone)
but I will (and beg by this example without example, where noe law obliged,
noe debt was due) your patience, your mortification, your resignation, your
obedience, your humiliation? You call me Abba pater, father, father; and I am
so: show the duty of children then by following your fathers footstepps. You
call me Lord, and I am so: make good then the duty of servants, in
accomplishing the will of your Lord. I will obedience etc. not will-worshippe;
not sacryfices of your own invention, and choice. And this irreuocable will
and Conuenant of mine, I write down in letters of mine own blood, that
louinge children may never forgett it.

but to teach us patience, with what ever might befall us, seem it never so
little suitable to the thoughts we may have of our own innocence.
Mortification, by suffering some corporal pain, be it by our own, or some
other hand; be it by accident, sickness, or otherwise. Obedience, whether to
our superiors as we are bound etc. Or even to every creature for charities
sake, where there appears noe other obligation. And conceive we always hear
Christ, by this example, say unto our hearts: what great matter is it etc. if
you being but dirt and asks, subject your selves to man, for Gods fake, since
I who am omnipotent, became humbly subject to man for your sakes? O dust,
learn of me to obey. Learn of me, o earth and clay, to humble thy self, and
cast thy self, under the feet of all men for my Love.

dilexi v^s: I have loved you. That is, I have, do, and shall love you; since
there is neither time past, nor time to come, with God. I have loved you from
eternity, and thence I am come in time to save you. I do love you in time
present, and thence I give the first dropps of my blood for you. I will love you
in time to come, and will power out my hearts blood for you; in earnest whereof
I now lay down these dropps. I have loved you, and so called you by preventing
grace, while you thought not of it. I do love you, and so assiste you by
cooperating grace. I will love you, and so make my subsequent grace
accompaignie you to the end; and for assurance of this, I now pay down these
dropps.

Let Israel now say that he is good, that his mercy is for ever. Let the house
of Aaron now say, that his mercy is for ever. Come lets love him, lets love
him, we that are redeemed by his blood, because his mercyes are for ever. Let
our tongues publish his love, and mercy; let our hearts love and praise him;
and let our very bowels pronounce, o Lord, who is like to thee! Enable us,
dear Jesus, to understand, descerne, and reverence, with due honor, this
admirable mystery of piety, which is manifested in the flesh, has appeared
to the Angels, is preached to the gentiles, is believed by the world, and this
day, is signed in blood, Venite adoremus.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE. Day after new yeares-Day of the name of JESUS.
I. POINT.
yet to us Christians, the name of our Christ, JESUS, by which he was called
this day, is by iustest right most dear and praiseworthy. For whether we use
the word, Elin, which signifies. God, and is interpreted strong: Elion, which
signifies High: or Adonai, which we interpret Lord: or Saddai which may be
called Almighty, or else, Jehovah, which the Hebrews esteemed ineffable: none
of them intimates so much, and so present consolation to us poor sinners, as
does our myld Emmanuel, which signifies, our God with us: our Jesus, a Savior,
who begins even to power out his precious blood for us.

mellifluous name, as nearer to my eyes and interests, so always nearer and
dearer so my heart. Be that saving and sanctifying name, cherished, and
sanctfied by us poor miscrable sinners, above all other names: because thou, o
dear lamb, who wast slain for me, is most worthy of glory and honor, and
benediction, and all that ever my narrow heart is able to devise etc.

2. POINT.
I have heard these things: Power is Gods, and mercy is thine, o Lord.
According to his Majesty his name is holy and terrible: But this new name,
JESUS, which is given to him in earth, signifies nothing but mildness, mercy
and salvation: for the name of JESUS, says your holy Father, is a sweet name,
a delightful name, a name of dear consolation, and blessed hope to the
sinner. Nay, it does not so much speak comfort, and confirm our hopes, as
even disclose the bowels of the heavenly child's mercy, while he lays down his
blood to take up a name of mercy: For the day was come that the child should
be cir; cumcised, and his name was called JESUS.



Live Jesus live in my poor heart,
Live Jesus there, and nere depart.
THE II. MEDITATION For the same day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that this name of Jesus, was not imposed by Marie, or Joseph, or even
by an Angel, but God the father, who best knew the dignity of it, imposed it
himself by the ministry of an Angel. Nor is it a name pointing out some
propriety only, as those others, Christ, Pastor, Lion, Lamb, Rock, door,
vine, way etc. but it is his own proper name, and properly speaking, that he,
and noe other, comes to deliver the people from their sins.

Christ, our anointed king, it is most true: thou art our Pastor, to bring back
us lost sheep upon thine own shoulders: thou art a Lion of the tribe of Judah,
to conquer for us: thou art the Lamb who take away the sins of the world:
thou the Rock upon which we safely build: thou the Door by which alone we
enter into life: thou the true vine producing wine begetting virgins: thou the
way by which we securely walk toward eternity; but this new name Jesus, is
the only name under heaven, whereby we ought to be saved. Be therefore, Jesus, to
me, and save me. Amen.

2. POINT.
Consider that he had not this name neither, by course or chance, nor yet by
free gift, but he purchaced it at a dear rate, acquisiuit sanguine suo, with
the price of his own precious blood (whence we are rightly called a purchaced
people) and so he begins not to enter into the possession of that name, till he
putt down the first dropps, as the earnest penny. Lo then how properly,
justly, and mercifully for us, this name of Jesus is his.

Nobis natus, nobis datus: borne for us, given to us. But we, though otherwise
his own by the right of creation, are not his but at a dear rate, the price
of his precious blood: for it is true that we were bought, or redeemed, pretio
magno, by a huge dear price, so that the tender Lamb which was slain, has
iustest title to this saueing name, Jesus, which name conteynes all names; is
above all names; yea is indeed, all in all: works all, delivers all etc. And
yet, o singular goodness! infinite love! ineffable mercy! he is ours, he is our
own: borne for us, given to us: all spent upon us. All is ours then: yet we
are his too. Nos autem Christi, but we are Christ's assures great S. Paul. We
Christ's! Christ all ours! o blessed conjunction! What a peruersitie then were
it, to sell away, for moments of pleasure, even what is not our own; which was
purchaced at so huge a rate, to the Devil, Gods and our own, most mortal
enemy!

MEDITATIONS OF the Epiphanie. Or Manifestation of our Savior.
THE FIRST MEDITATION
Of Christian joys in the multiplied feasts of Christ in the Catholic
Church. THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how Gods sweet providence, by the blessed practice of his holy
Catholic Church, goes on, continuing our Christian joys, by the nearly
neighboring solemnities of his Christ; who having been mercifully borne for us
on Christmas Day, and the eight day after, graciously given to us, this
glorious day, is manifested to all the world, in the persons of the three
kings, the first fruits of the Gentiles, wherein we were all comprised.

that Catholic mother: who never cease to allure on her children with milk
and honey, to run after her sweet spouse? Now, says she, he is borne for us:
presently after, he is given to us; and now again, on this blessed day, he is
manifested, and made known to us, and all the world. And thus still by her
multiplied solemnities of Christ, she magnifies our Christian joys: she rowses
up our drowsinesse, and awakes Jesus, who sometimes sleeps in us: that is, she
excites our faith, quickens our hope, inflames our charity, while she renewes
the happy memory of our young Emmanuel, by proposing him again and again to
our thoughts. Be he for ever blessed, who takes us mercifully into the communion
of this happiness. And let us, my soul, never forgette, but always give
hearty thanks, for so great a dignation.

Of Christian joys in the happy beginning of Christ's reign. II. POINT.
CONSIDER what hearty joy we should have (had we the hearts of children, and as
truly desired that Christ's kingdom should indeed come, as we continually
beg it every day in our prayers, saying: thy kingdom come) when we see so
happy an ouerture made by the vocation of the three kings, toward the
advancement and increase of Christ his Church and reign? When we see, I say,
our newborn king of the Jews, not only diuulged within the narrow circuit
of Iewrie by silly shephards, but published, and made known to all nations by
wise kings; so that, generally, all kings and nations have ever since flocked
into his saueing fold, and cheerfully have put down their scepters and
crowns in homage, at his sacred feet.

and the Gentil is espoused. By the faithful Gentil, thy kingdom, o dear
Savior, is dilated over all the face of the earth, and thy reign, shall dure
for ever. And therefore, o all ye nations clappe hands, make iubilation to God in
the voice of exultation: singe ye to our God, singe ye: singe ye to our King,
singe ye: because God is King of all the earth, singe ye wisely. The Princes
of the people are gathered togeither with the God of Abraham, he shall reign
over the Gentiles. Thus did the kingly Prophet teach us Christian Gentiles to
singe, so long ago.

THE SECOND MEDITATION.
Of the vocation of the Gentiles in the three Kings. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that our pious and merciful Lord, not being the God of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles (who will all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth) limits not the riches of his goodness within the
confines of Iewrie, but will have them extended to all the world: so that he
calls not the Jews only in the persons of the shepherds; but the Gentiles
also in the persons of the Kings. If he had promises for those, he is not
without blessings neither for these. If he have Angels in abounda^ce to call
those; he wants not stars to conduct these to his royal presence; testifying
by them both, that he is noe acceptour of persons, but loves Jew and Gentil,
unlearned and learned, poor and rich, and breathes, by the holy Ghost, where
he pleases, subduing what hearts he pleases, to his service.

obsecrations, prayers, postulations, thankes-giuinges to all men: to Jew and
Gentil; to such as are far off, and such as are near hand, to such as are in
the Church, and such as are out of it, to poor and rich, to kings and
Potentates, be they friends or foes, protectours or persecutours: For this is
good and acceptable before God our Savior. (For alas what do we know that we
hate not a brother, while we think only to hate an enemy?) Let us pray, I
say, first for our domestikes in faith, that they may increase in grace, ad
have the gift of perseverance. Next for those that yet believe not, vt ex
nolentibus fiant volentes, that of such as will not believe, they may, by Gods
grace, be made believers, saying with the holy Church, etiam rebels compelle
voluntates, compelle even those rebelliouswills; that obstinacy and blindness
being subdued, Turk, Jew, and Gentil, may be but one flock and fold.

How the kings were called to Jesus. II. POINT.
CONSIDER how the kings came, and we shall presently find that our attentions
are stopped by the Evangelist, with a word inciting to admiration. Ecce, behold,
says S. Matthew, there came sages from the cast to Jerusalem. Nor is it
without wonder indeed, that wise men should leave their country, to come a
great journey, to a foreign land which had nothing common with them. And yet
their errand seems more strange. They came etc. saying: where is he who is
borne the king of the Jews? A demand, which, in likelyhoode, might have cost
them their lives. And yet their motive seems most strange of all; for, say
they, we have seen his star in the east. Should wise men, and Kings, leave
their Kingdoms, upon the only sight of a star, to look out one borne the
King of the Jews, and that in the midst of Iewrie, where another King
already reigned?

O the highness of the riches of the wisdom, and knowledge of God? How
incomprehensible are his judgments, how inscrutable are his ways! What do we
find, I say, but effects of Gods great mercy strangly and strongly working? For
certainly, their journey, their demand, their motive, appear little less then
madnesses in the eyes of men; while yet, in the eyes of God they are effects
of grace, and heavenly wisdom. For the star which they saw exteriourly, was
seconded by the grace which they felt interiourly: and thence they undertook
the journey; the grace of the holy Ghost knowing noe sluggish delays. The grace
which they felt was a powerful and conquering grace, and thence they feared
not to ask for the king of the Jews, even in the face of the Tyrant. The
star which they saw, was the light of faith, and thence they give for their
reason, a thing which reason is not acquainted with, an obscure, yet
conuinceing argument, of things which appear not.

THE THIRD MEDITATION.
How admirable the kings calling was. I. POINT.
CONSIDER again, with wonderment, this strange proceeding of the kings:
Abraham, its true, went out of his country too, his kindred, and his fathers
house, and he was both admirable and praise worthy therein. Howbeit this seems
far to exceed that. Abraham went out, because he was commanded; because he
was promised to have another certain place appointed him; because he had
assurances given by God that he should be magnified etc. But they, had neither
command to go; nor place appointed whither to go; nor stayed they in any
danger at home; nor were they allured with any adunatagious promises abroad:
but contrarily they were as free to stay, as go; they knew not whither they
went, nor whether they should find what they sought. And they were withal so
far from aiming at advantage or security, that contrarily they ran into
apparent danger, and were readier to give then to take, as appeared by the
presents they brought: and yet those sages came to Jerusalem under the
guidance of one only star.

soul, do not so: the neglect of heavenly favors justly irritates the
bountiful Benefactour. If we be not able to go before others by our good
example, lets not fail, at least, to follow them. Run on, run on, by the holy
example of the kings, whither divine inspirations, which continually lay
seidge to our hearts, (as so many heavenly messengers) do lead us. Lets be
faithful in this behalf, and when ere the Bridegroom knockes, lets lay open
our hearts, and leave them wholly at his dispose: neither expecting commands,
nor questioning the manner how: Neither aiming at gaynes, nor fearing or flying
labor, loss nor danger. All is safe and gaynfull enough, where Jesus leads,
and Jesus is looked for.

That the kings proceedinges are our lessons. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that this proceeding of the first fruits of the Gentiles, was to be a
leading lesson to all their posterity. They had their stars, and so have we.
They obeyed their star, and so must we; if we intend happily to find out
Jesus. Our stars are the light of reason, hightened by the light of grace, and
holy inspirations, under our Superiors directions. These we are to follow, nor
do we ever fail in it, but we swerve from the way, or loyter in the way Had
the shephards been ledd out of their own country, they had been misledd, lost
much labor, and mist of Christ. As the kings, if they had stayed in their own
countries, while their star led them out of it to Bethleem, had not found
him. There are many mansions in Gods Kingdom, and he will have us ledd to
them, by the ways he pleases to mark us out. This is his blissed pleasure,
which he pleases to make known to our hearts by frequent inspirations.

by the assistance of his grace, who stands knocking there. My soul, my soul,
is it not by his mercy who made us, that we hope to be saved? Were it nor
reason then, we should follow his counsels which he manifests to us by his
inspirations? And if it be reason to follow them, by what reason do we, or can
we, neglect them?

THE IV. MEDITATION.
That we must cooperate with Gods grace. I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet further: that it is not enough to observe the star with the
Kings, and to hear the knock of the spouse, but we must also with them,
ask, seek, knock at the gate. We must not only, I say, hear the knock or
touch of his holy inspirations at our hearts, but we must mutually knock at
that divine heart of his, by frequent and fervent prayers, crying out with the
King and Prophet, convert me o Lord, and I will be converted: draw me after
thee, and we will run: and, with our Kings, all through the streets of
Jerusalem: where is he, who is borne the King of the Jews: for we have seen
his star, we have heard the voice of our beloved by frequent inspirations,
and to what end, but to lead us to his love?

I am thy salvation; and he has said it so that we have heard it, and have
taken journey upon it: country, parents, friends, with all the fawning
allurements of the world are forsaken. And what is now our expectation? Is it
not our Lord, my soul? Is not he the whole part and portion of our
inheritance? Is not he the whole substance we have left us? Ah! having left
all, by the assistance of his grace, to find him, lets make that our business.
If we suffer our selves for lack of cooperation to be frustrated of that
expectation, in vain behold we the star, in vain began we to run, in vain
do we lead a life which leads, not, indeed, to Jesus, but to death.

How we ought to cooperate with grace in seeking Jesus, by the example of the
Kings. THE II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the Kings are not only diligent and punctual in setting upon
the search of Jesus, upon the first light of faith that appears to them,
expressed by those words of the Evangelist: we saw his star in the east, and
we came: we saw and we came: noe curious disputes; noe sluggish delays; noe
vain respects or interrestes retarding them; but they seek him with great
patience, suffering the labor and incommodities of the long journey of 800.
miles; as also with great resolution and courage, not fearing to inquire for
him in the midest of Jerusalem, saying: where is he who is borne the King of
the Jews?

rejoice in him? But alas! as soon as the labors of a long journey (our life)
in our apprehension, represente themselves unto us: when once temptations, and
dangers, and humane respects, begin to stand in our way, our patience fayles,
our courage forsakes us, we fall to sleep, or murmr; our life is irk some to
us, and we are almost ready to give over our journey in the mide-way. Alas, my
soul, thus it sometimes fares with us. And why? because we seek not our
newborn King, with an entire, but a divided heart, allowing a part of it for
him, and a part for the world, and thence cupiditie taking off from charity,
weak charity finds not his yoke sweet and his burden light, as it is
indeed to true lovers. We will therefore continually pray that he who gave the
will to seek him, would so increase charity, that we may have patience and
courage to find him.

THE V. MEDITATION.
How long we ought to seek him. THE I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet further, that our kingly Guides seek him with perseverance to
the end; putting noe other limite to their inquiry, but the finding him out
whom they seek for. Seek our Lord says the royal Psalmist, while he may be
found, seek his face al ways; not only in the sunshine of prosperity: and
spiritual comfort: but also (and then especially) in the darkness of
adversity, and dryness of spirit: As well while the star shines, as
disappeares. While it shines, and vshers their stepps, they spring on with
speed: while it disappeares they loose not courage, nor leave off their happy
enterprise; but in the absence of their heavenly Guide, they have recourse to
earthly ones demanding of the scribes, where is he who is borne the king of
the Jews?

heat of thy grace, be thou ever blessed. And if it be thy pleasure to
withdraw for a time, the comfort of thy presence, and leave us to trial, be
thou also blessed. If thou do voutchsafe to draw us, we will run in the odor
of thy parfumes: and if it please thee to leave us in dryness and desolation
by thine absence, we will never cease, for all that, to cry out continually?
where is he, where is he, who is borne the king of the Jews. Having still
recourse to Heaven and earth. To earth, by taking counsel of our Superiors,
Directours, and Pastors: to Heaven, with an entire submission, dependa^ce, and
absolute confidence that our Redeemour lives, and will in due time deliver us;
that the star will appear again, and conduct us to the place where the
child is, and multiply our joys, as well as theirs, with a huge increase of
joy, gaudio magno valde.

Where we are to seek Jesus. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the kings find not him (who is borne the king of the Jews) in
Jerusalem, where they sought him, and where, humanely speaking, he was most
likely to be found, in Jerusalem I say, that cherished city, which was
preferred beforre all the Tabernacles of Jacob: nor in the stately Palaces of
Kings, (how ever he was the king of kings, and sought by kings too) but in
an obscure village, but in a poor groate or cave, a resort for brute beasts:
but in a manger; upon a lock of hay, betwixt an ox and an Ass. So found they
the young king of the Jews lodged.

in magnis and mirabilibus supra se, in great and wonderful things which are
placed above our reach? In high contemplations and visions which we are not
capable of? In things most specious and glorious, and best suteing with our
own inclinations and fancies? Whereas our humble king Jesus, is both more
surely, and safely found in poverty, subjection, solitude, and disjunction
from the world: in humble lodginges: mean clothes, poor compaignie: and in
the total abandonnement of our selves, and judgments, into the hands and
directions of Superiors. Thus he exposed himself to be found, by a
graciousnesse which passes the comprehension of man and Angel. Thus the good
Kings find him: Thus seek him, my soul, and we shall not fail to find him,
a God to adore; a king to protect; a man to imitate, embrace, and love.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
Where or in what compagny Jesus is to be sought. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that they found the child Jesus with Marie his mother, says the
Evangelist. Had they sought Marie alone without Jesus, or not for Jesus, they
had mistaken their way indeed, since that she though his mother, is but
otherwise his creature, while they seek the Creator. And had they sought him
who was borne the king of the jews, without, or otherwise then in her company
who was the Queen mother that bore him, they would not so happily have found
him. But in seeking the one they found both. To wit they had always a near
relation. Noe sooner was the son of God determined to be the redeemour of the
world, but Marie is looked upon to be the mother of that son, and savior!
noe sooner was he conceived of the Holy Ghost, but he was conceived and found
in Mary's sacred womb: noe sooner borne, but found at her breasts: all his
life time he was found with her, and at his death she was not separated from
him.

Show thy self then to be a mother, Blessed Lady, let our prayer by thy means
be admitted by him, who being borne for us voutchsafed to be thine. Show us,
show us thy JESUS, that blessed fruit of thy womhe, not after; his exile
only, but even now especially, while we live in this heavy banishment.

That Jesus ought to be sought with piety. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that as the Kings undertook their journey with much diligence and
punctualitie; and pursued it with great patience and resolution; so they
conclude it with noe less piety and religiousnesse. They have left their
Kingdoms, wives, and children, with hopes to find a King, a Savior, a God:
and in the end of their journey they only meet with, to the eyes of flesh, a
poor stable, a poor manger, and a poor maid, with a poor sucking child at
her breasts. But to the eyes of their piety, with which they looked upon
him, they discover a King, a God, under the form of a servant, a man, and
falling down they adore him.

after to admire it, as we worthily do this day! But o the goodness and
mercy and power of God, whose free grace it was which wrought in their hearts
both the will and performance, of this great act of faith! They were not the
keepers of the law and Prophets as were the jews. They had not seen and
heard the admirable works and wonders of his life and passion, whereby he
proved himself both God and man, as we have; and yet falling down they adore
him. O my soul, let never the excessive, and almost incredible, greatness of
the benefit, discredit, as it were, the bountiful benefactour, but by how
much more his love does exinanite him, and make him appear less then himself
in his life and passion, let us by so much more believe, bless, love, and
adore him for ever: because for us it was that he was so low laid, for us the
cribbe, the manger, the hay, etc.

THE VII. MEDITATION.
With what purity of intention Jesus ought to be sought. THE.I POINT.
CONSIDER that the Kings come not only out of their country accompagned with
patience, courage, and perseverance to find him, and religiousnesse and piety
to believe in him, but also with purity of intention (that one necessary
thing without which the best of our actions are spoiled) for his own sake, to
pay him a debt of souueraigne worship due to himself alone We came, say they
(not to find ease, safety orriches, which we inioyed at home: nor to seek new
kingdoms, while we left our own) but only to find the newborn king of the
jews, to acknowledge him to be the king of kings; and our selves, and all
the kings of the earth, to be his vassals, in a word we came to adore him.

then himself. Let us always seek him, to the end we may adore him, that is
to cast our selves at his feet, acknowedging him to be all, and our selves
nothing at all. Ah while we may do all our works for a king, why will we
loose them upon any less worthy object? While all our love is but too little
for him alone, why will we disperse it upon creatures? Heaven and earth can
afford nothing co^tentfull to the good Prophet but God himself. Such let our
resolutions be, my soul, in all our patience, perseverance, and acts of
piety, saying with saint Augustine. Thee I will, thee I seek, thee I hope
for; my heart has said to thee, I have sought thy countenance, Lord, thy
countenance will I seek. Lets fix upon this, if we desire to be happy: lets
aim at noe other thing then this, this alone will abundantly suffice.

How being found he ought to be adored. II. POINT-
CONSIDER how the good Kings make their approches to Christ, and fall down
before him after the true Christian way: not in word and discourse but in work
and truth The Evangelists make mention of noe one word they used. Nor was it
indecde so suitable to use words in the presence of the eternal WORD which lay
speachlesse: nor do they doubt but that he could read their hearts in
presence, which he had powerfully touched at so great a distance. But their
works, by mysterious presents, speak their hearts and errands. By gold they
proclaim a King, by frank-incense they profess a God; by myrre they declare a
man.

silence being the worship of justice. Let the gold of our hearty love, that
burning gold of S. John the Evangelist, publish him the King of our hearts,
over which we wish his absolute reign. Let out fervent sighs, and sobbes, and
incessant breathinges after him, be our frankincense, testifying that he is the
God and Author of our being in whom we live, move, and are, all that we are.
And let the myrre of our mortifications, and cheerful sufferances, declare to
all the world that he is the man that suffered and dyed for us, leaving us an
example of patient suffering, which his blessed will is We should follow. Ah!
thus do; these words of works, and heart, and willing suffering, speak
lowdest, and most effectually in the ears of God.

THE VIII MEDITATION
That the kings history representes ours. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, and in the three Kings history read our own, in their happiness
observe our own felicity. For were we not all dead in sin* which had
dispersed it self over all the veins of mankind? were we not benighted in
infidelity and lay wounded, and impotent, blind, naked, lame, poor and
miserable? were we not borne in a foreign land, far from Bethleem? where
few seek Christ, fewer know or care for him? was not Herod the persecutor in
our way, who pretended to adore him, but indeed hated his memory? Had we not,
by his gift, not only the grace to believe in him, but the courage to be
ready to suffer for him; and the resolution to leave parents, country, and
all that was dear to us, to find him in poverty, obedience, chastity, in a
land which we knew not?

willed or run, but because he would have mercy upon whom he would have mercy.
Say then, my soul, but say it heartily and incessantly with the Psalmist. I will
singe the mercies of our Lord for ever: I will sound out his praise from
generation to generation; and let all the world know by the odor of our life,
our works, and sufferings, how great things he has done to us poor
creatures of his, which he has not done to all nations.

The diverse operations of two Natures in one Person. II. POINT.
CONSIDER the blessed and comfortable mixture of the diverse operations, and
demonstrations of two Natures in one and the same Person. As man he lies
betwixt an ox and an ass, in misery: Yet as God he forgetts not his
majesty: but commands his Angels to call the shephards to adore him: As man,
he is subject to childish scriks and tears. But as God, the Angels singe his
Gloria. As man, he seems neglected, unknown, unconsidered by all Iewrie. But
as God, he strikes terror into all the Jews Herod and all Jerusalem with
him, are troubled at his birth. As man, the Kings find him the King of the
Jews, whom they came so far to seek, in a poor cave, accompanied with a
poor maid, and their eyes read him such as they see him, a poor child. But
looking upon his star their constant guide they conclude him a powerful God
whom the stars obey, and their hearts instantly breath after.

When I am infirm then I am powerful, says the great S. Paul.

AN ENTERTAYNEMENT FOR EASTER.
THE I. MEDITATION.
The I. Christian joy. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that though the great God of all consolation suffers his servants to
fall into afflictions, desolations and sorrows, yet they are not continual.
If there be mourning at night, there is joy in the morning, yea and even in the
mourning too. The dolourous days, past were spent in following our dear
Savior, who suffered death it self for our love, while we looked but on. Or
if we even dyed with him, in our pious desires and resolutions, or seemed to
endure worse then death it self, by our frequent and tormenting temptations,
they will not prove to death, but to Gods glory and our beatitude: they will
produce more plentiful joys in rising with him. For hark, while the tears
are yet in our eyes for him being dead, an Angel assures us he lives, and
lives to dye noe more, but to reign. He is risen, he is not here.

Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya, Christ is truly risen. That he dyed, he dyed but
once, and for our sins: but that he now lives, he lives to God, the life of
glory for ever. His sufferances were but for a time: but his life and joys,
and in him ours too, are for all eternity. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. If he
seemed forsaken, it was but for a moment, and that for our consolation, for our
example, to assure us, that seem we never so forsaken, suffering with Christ,
we shall rise with Christ in newness of life, to a better life, the life of
grace, the life of glory. Alleluia, Alleluya, Alleluia.

II. POINT.
He is risen, he is not here. Noe, for Magdalene and the rest of the good women
who had carefully observed where he was laid: and who, as early as carefully
sought to find him where they had seen him laid, find indeed the monument
open, but miss of their Masters body, nor know they where they are to find it.
Marie spies two Angels, but misses of the Lord of Angels, till she hears
Marie pronounced, and so see's and knows her dear Rabboni who sent her back
(while she sought his dead body among the dead) to be the first preacher to
his brethren, of the glory of his living body among the living.

I go from you, but to return to you, I will not leave you orphants. See the
fruits of a careful attendance, and due perseverance, which meets with more
then it looks for; and finds all, even amidst doubts, distrusts, and seeming
despair; where it feared to have lost all. It finds not Angels only, but the
very God of Angels, truly pious, truly good, the God of all consolation: who
makes the weak ones of the world to confound the strong; a poor desolate
Marie to be first Apostle of the most important point of the faith of Christ
Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

THE SECOND MEDITATION
The 3. Christian joy. THE I. POINT.
CONSIDER that our best friend, our pious Lord, the dearest husband of
ourhartes, who out of a goodness beyond all comparison, died ignominiously these
days past for our love, is this day gloriously risen: The news is certain;
The best beloved mother, the mournful maids, the fearful Apostles, have
all seen him. ^e is risen, he is truly risen, Alleluya. O what joy! what joy!
the poor innocent lamb that we saw barbarously treated and butchered, and
slain, to take away the sins of the world, with laying down his life, is
risen with peace and reconcilement to the world. Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

faith makes thee as sure of it as they were, that thy best friend, thy most
pious Master thy dearest spouse is risen, lives, and reigns. If then thou have
indeed the heart of a friend; the duty and tenderness of a child, the ardent
love of a spouse, rejoice. my soul, rejoice and with exultation pay
benediction and honor, and glory, and power, to the tender lamb, who was
slain for thy love, for ever and ever, Amen.

The 4. Joy. II. POINT.


mankind, to have spent 33. years in a familiar and common manner amongst men:
nay to have spent the last drop of his most precious blood in the view of
all the world, unless he returned to them again in his glorified body, to
make good in effect, that he left them not orphants, but made the wounds, which
he had suffered for them, the loving and palpable arguments of his Resurrection
and presence.

THE THIRD MEDITATION.
The 5. Joy. I. POINT.
Joseph lives, and reigns, not over Egypt only, but even over all the world.
Gods sweet providence, and mild mercy has made use of his bretherens
malice, to magnify his own power, and singular goodness, and even to relieve
their, and all our miseries and wants. Our innocent Isaac lives. Our Jonas is
come safe to the shore. Our saving Noe has passed the flood, and is secure
upon the top of the Mountain.

Joseph lives, and reigns* and has turned the worst of man's malice, to man's
advantage. Our Isaac dies not, but is reserved to afford the world a fruitful
progeny of the faithful. Our Jonas seemed only to be deuowred, but is indeed,
kept safe from shipwreck, to preach gods power, where man's wisdom gave all for
lost. Our Noe is secured from the Deluge, not so much to people the world with
sinners, as Heaven with Saints. Live then and reign for ever, my sweet
Savior, over my soul, and turn all seeming disasters to the advantage of thy
glory.

The 6. Joy. II. POINT.
has made a swift course, and returned with victory. Vicit Leo de Tribu
Iudae. Yes he has wrought wonders, he has killed death, ransaked Hell,
subdued the world, and says to our hearts. Be confident children, by
sufferance, I have overcome the world, and so too, you may, and ought to
overcome it.



THE FOVRTH MEDITATION
That Christ being risen, is to be sought. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that our lately dead Lord is risen indeed, an Angel assures us so;
Surrexit he is risen; nor is there any more doubt to be made of it; yet have
we assurance too by the same mouth, that he his not here, nor indeed can
Magdalens care learn where they have put him. If we love him then, we must
look him, and look him faithfully, not with despayring fear, but with
confidence to find him in his good time; for we are willed not to fear; nolite
timere. Not among the dead, for we are told, be is risen, and dies no more. Not
finally in wordly delights, ease, and security, but in the midst of dangers,
temptations and sufferances, for it is Jesus crucified, that we seek.

Lord and our life lives: we will no longer languish and dye, but I will seek
him, whom my heart loves, without fear: we will pass the watch, which the
Jewish world, the flesh, and the Devil, may set to keep us from our Jesus.
If, happily, where we seek him, we find him not: we will never cease to seek
him, till we find him, and hold him, and lock him up in our hearts.

That we are to seek him by S. M. Magdalens example. II. POINT,
CONSIDER that though it be a most Christian practice, with S. Marie Magdalen
to follow Christ in his life, not to forsake him at his death, to rejoice with
a great joy in his Resurrection; yet it is not enough: we must with her too
use diligence to find him out being risen, In his life, she is weeping at his
feet. At his death, nearest to the Cross and last at his grave: but her
unwearied love leaves not off there, she rests not; She Is up again, vary
early in the morning, whilst it is yet dark, to seek him at his Sepulcher;
it being her absolute resolution and practice, continually to seek, till she
find him whom her soul loves.



THE V. MEDITATION.
How we ought to seek Jesus by the same example THE I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that it is not enough to seek Jesus, unless we seek him as we
ought (truth it self assuring, that some seek him, and find him not, and dye
in their sin.) That is, with diligence, with care, with cost, with undaunted
courage with fervent love, as S. Marie Magdalen sought him.

(you shall seek me and and dye in your sin) spur on our drowsinesse to
seek Jesus as we ought, with the blessed Magdalene; that is, with a timely
diligence, with the whole care of our heart, as being the only necessary thing
neither weighing what it may cost us, nor fearing what may befalle us, while
with fervent love we look for Jesus of Nazareth crucified.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though the Nativity of our Savior, was a day of great Joy to
all the world, because a Savior was borne to it, and our young Emmanuel began
to live amongst us, yet was that Joy mixed with tears, and soon after with
blood, as being the life of a Godman borne to labor and sufferances. And
though the day of the death of Christ was a subject of greatest comfort to all
Christians, yet was it clowded with the tears and lamentations of a God dying.
But this glorious day where in he is resussitated or regenerated to a new life,
is a day of perfect Joy without all mixture of sorrow, a day of exultation and
triumph, when our dead Master is risen to a life of immortality and glory.

Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
We must rise with Christ. I. POINT.
I live I, now not I, but Jesus Christ lives in me. That is, I am moved to
what I do by his grace, according to his example, and for his love.

express our heavenly father, by aspiring to heaven. Lets then show his
impassibilitie by our eauennesse, as well in prosperity as adversity; his
claritie, by making the light of our good actions shine before men: our
agilitie, by our prompt obedience and fervent charity; finally, our subtilitie
by peircing heaven with our hearts, by fervent prayer.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER what kind of life Christ ledd, which brought him to this new life,
this impassible life, this life of glory. And we shall find it was in
poverty, humility, and abiection, in his birth. In labors, in temptations,
watching, fasting, prayer, from his youth. At his death, in extreamities,
contempts, thornie crowns, infamous Crosses, withdrawings of all comforts,
absolute abandonements by heaven and earth.

that wisdom made choice of in his own person, and left us to imitate? Can
we judge it reasonable, or decent, my soul, that while the Master is in
labors, the servant should live at his ease? the Master in poverty, and the
servant in plenty? the Master in the midst of contumelies, and the ^eruant
in honors?

THE VII. MEDITATION.
Of the blessed fruits of Chr. Resurrection. That as well our dying as rising
with Christ are Gods gifts. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that if we have dyed with Christ by compassion, sought him with
diligence, found him with joy, risen with him in newness of life, and striuen
to lead a life conformable, in some small measure, to his, they are nothing
else then so many effects of his free grace; (without which, we are not able,
of our selves, to think one good thought) nothing less then so many new
obligations heaped upon us: obligations, I say, to employ the rest of our time
here below without intermission, as the Angels their eternity above, in
joyful Alleluya's, that is peales of hearty Praises, and thanksgiving for so
great benefits.

Let our Lord be always magnifyed, never my self, in no place my self, how
ever I have profitted, to what degree of virtue soever I may have attained; but
our Lord always. Am I a sinner? let him be magnified, that I may be called to
penance. Do I confess my sins? let him be magnified, that he may pardon
me. Do I live a good life? let him be magnified that he may guide me. Do I
persevere to the end? Let him be magnified, that he may glorify me. Be he
therefore always magnified. Let this always be the just man's profession, and
the profession of all those who seek our Lord.

Fruits of Christ's Resurrection. II. POINT.
CONSIDER, how necessary this Resurrection was to confirm our staggering
faith, to erect our daunted hope, and to inflame our drooping charity. We did
hope said the Disciples, as who should say; but now we have cause to doubt,
and so should we all have said, had not his resurrection been rendered
undoubted. For what did his poor nativity speak, but a man borne in misery?
And what did his death preach, but a man dyeing in torment? But his glorious
Resurrection, by sealing the truth of all the Prophecies, wonderfully hightens
our hopes, and inflames us with the love of him, who through love of us, gave
way to death, from which he had strength enough, in three days to raise
himself.

good the faith of his Deity, by his so powerful, so manifest, and glorious a
Resurrection?

THE VIII. MEDITATION.
Other fruits of our Saviors Resurrection. I. POINT.
CONSIDER as a second fruit of our Saviors Resurrection, a strong and
constant hope of the Resurrection of our mortal body, being first subdued by
death Let the pagan Philosofers doubt, and dispute as much as they will; the
resurrection of the dead, is the undoubted faith of the Christians, after the
resurrection of Christ, and by virtue of the same. For says S. Leo, If we
believe in heart, what we profess with our mouth, in him we are crucified, in
him we are dead, in him we are buried, and in him we rise again.

that we know our Redeemer lives, and in the last day we shall rise out of the
earth, and we shall be compassed again with our skins, and in our flesh we
shall see God, whom we our selves shall see, and our eyes shall behold, and no
other: This hope is, (...) up in our bosom.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, (as the third fruit of this joyful and glorious day) our Blessed
Saviors triumph and reign over all the world, happily beginning at
Jerusalem, and extending it self to the uttermost confines of the same,
thereby making his words, (I have overcome the world) appear in effect. For if
the world had malice enough to have razed his name out of the hearts of men, by
his death upon an infamous Cross; he contrarily, had goodness and power enough,
by the same death, to imprint his memory much deeper in their minds, to
abolish Idolatry, the worshipp of false Gods; and true Devils, and in their
places, to establish the worship of one true God over all the face of the
earth: all which, at this day, with much joy to true Christian hearts, we see
effected.



THE IX. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
Disciples walking to Emmaus, as a Pilgrim, who accompaigned them: to wit;
whether we seek him with Magdalen, or we follow our ordinary employments
according to our state and calling with the Apostles, or we walk betwixt
fears and hopes with the two Disciples, Jesus sorsakes us not; for Jesus also
himself approaching went with them, says S. Luke.

Thou bestowest great blessings upon us, and even caressest us least we might
wax wearied in the way. Thou correctest, whippest, and smitest us, least we
might wander out of the way: whether therefore thou do caresse us, least we
might faint in the way, or thou do chastise us, least we might stray from
the way, thou dear Lord, art always our Refuge.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER with whom it is that Jesus does willingly walk in the way of this
our pilgrimage; with whom he does comfortably discourse, and you shall find,
by the example of the two Disciples goeing to Emmaus, that it is with such as
seriously confer together, or meditate upon those dear passages of the life
and death of our sweet Savior. According to that of the Psalmist, in my
Meditation the fire begins to burn up.

where two or three are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of
them. He will walk with us, he will speak to our hearts, and replenish them
with his heavenly blessings. And we shall confess with the Disciples, that
after Meditation of him, and thereby, communication with him, our hearts began
to burn.

THE X. MEDITATION.
How we may surely know Christ's Presence. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that Christ often-tymes leaves us to sadd thoughts and doubts in the
way, and we apprehend him at a great distance from us, or even lost to us
whiles yet he walks with us; which we may securely discern by what follows,
to wit if our thoughts be fixed upon what past in Jerusalem these days past.
If in contemplation thereof we think upon, and apply our selves to what is
humble, abject, contemptible, and hard to flesh and blood, we may so, I say, be
humbly confident, that Jesus is with us upon the way.

thy eyes being held, as the Disciples were that thou may not see him. He
lives in thy heart, I say, while thy heart, how sad soever, says constantly,
Live Jesus, that is, welcome be the humiliations, abiections, contempts, and
drynesses, which by his permission fall upon us.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that Christ left us not only, in these days past, a blessed example
of sufferance for Christians to imitate, and afterward accompanies us in the
way to comfort us, in the midst of our doubts and desolations, but also
powerfully prouokes us to the same by urging his own example, saying to his
two Disciples, and in them to us all, ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and so to enter into his glory?

right to glory is but the effects and merires of Christ's sufferances.

THE XI. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that if as long as we fail not to apply our selves to the
Meditation of Christ's Passion, he fails not to accompany and discourse with
us in our way, certainly this also must infallibly follow, that such thoughts,
and such company, cannot but prove happy to us, and at Gods good time, turn
all our desolations into delights, so truth foretold us with his own mouth:
you shall be sadd, but your sadness shall be turned into joy. So too in effect
we see it fared with the two Disciples, who confess; that their hearts burnt
with love while he spoke to them in the way.

loves to be loved by us, and so leaves us to increase our desire, and to be
more frequently called upon. He loves us, and so, as says S. Paul, gives us
not only to believe in him, but to suffer for him, and with him. He loves us,
and death it self cannot divide him from us. He goes, as he said, to dye for
us, and after death, returns to us. He will not leave us orfants. In this
very hope shall my troubled soul repose and rest.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that if at any time, Christ seem to leave us, after he has
lovingly walked along with us, opened his Scripiures to us, and inflamed our
hearts, it is but to make us the more earnestly desire his presence, and with
the Disciples even to force him to stay, that he may more abundantly heap
his blessings upon their greedily longeing hearts, saying: tarry with us
because it draws toward night, the day being far spent, and he went in with
them.

tarry, tarry with us, o dear Jesus, because we are sadd in thy absence;
because thoughts arise in our hearts; because we suffer violence; because we
begin to be benighted; and being in darkness, justly fear the Prince thereof.

THE XII. MEDITATION.
I. POINT..
Our Savior, says S. John (the doors of the Place being shutt where the
Apostles were assembled together for fear of the Jews) appeared in the
midst of them, saying, Peace be to you. Consider how great a good this must
needs be, and how dear it ought to be to Christian hearts, which Christ the
Prince of peace, so frequently commends unto them. Before he entered into the
world, peace was made all the world over. Noe sooner was he borne into the
world, but presently after his fathers glory, peace was denounced to men of
good will; All his life long, he preached peace and promised beatitude to the
peacemaker. When he was to depart out of this world, he left peace as an
inheritance, he gave Peace: And now again returning into the world, Peace is
his first prayer or sermon to his dear Apostles, Pax vobis. Peace be to you.

Pax vobis, but say it so, that we may hear it, and love it, and enjoy it.

II. POINT.
his hands, and his side: Oh dear pressing and peircing arguments of a Gods
peirced hands and side, graciousty employed to subdue the bitterness of our
disunited and iarring minds!

Behold his hands, and his side.

THE XIII. MEDITATION.
What this Peace is. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, what Peace it was which our Savior wished his Apostles, and we
shall find it was no other then that which he left them, that which he gave
them his own peace, the peace of God which passes all understanding. I leave
you my peace, I give you my peace; says he by S. John before his departure. My
peace, not that of flesh, but that of the Spirit: not that which is sought in
sensual ease, but the peace of a good conscience, which is found in the
bottom of a clean heart, and is a continual feast to the soul.



How Peace is to be found. II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that if this Peace be Gods Peace, and even the God of peace
himself, according to s. Paul, where are we then to seek it but in God and
from God; as he is the preacher of it, so is he the giver of it too, and even
the gift it self. If we seek that which is his, and even himself, from any
other hand, then from himself, we wilfully delude our selves.

vanity of vanity, and affliction of Spirit.

THE XIV. MEDITATION.
How it ought to be conserved. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that the true way to conserve a constant peace, is to have a
continual care not to violate Justice, since according to the Psalmist, there
is such a conjunction between justice and peace, that they give each other
mutual kisses, and will not be separated. Justice consists in paying every one
what is due unto them Love to God, incomparably above all all things. Love to
our neighbor as to ourselfe; and consequently an absolute hatred against
sin, whereby God and our neighbors are offended, justice violated, peace
banished: He knew it well who said; My bones have no peace before the face of
my sins. There is no peace for the wicked man.

most vex others, are we not more vexed and perplexed ourselves? Have we not
too often been taught this truth by sensible experience? So visibly true is
that, which truth it self pronounced, there is no peace for the impious
person. Justice and peace will not be separated: they are always lodged in the
same breast.

A second means how to conserve the peace of Christ is simplicity of heart,
having our eyes still turned upon ourselves. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the second means to conserve Christian peace, is first
simplicity of heart without dissimulation, fiction or fraud, so that there be
no iarring betwixt our hearts and mouths, which proves afterward a subject of
discord amongst kindest friends, and dearest brethren. Secondly; simplicity in
our proceedings, not troubling our selves about many things, especially such
as concern us not, but employing most care where we owe most duty, about our
own proper actions. Thirdly, simplicity of intention, referring all our
thoughts, words, and works, to the honor of God alone.

simple eye of the soul which gives luster and worth to the whole body of our
actions. By this we conserve a constant peace in our own hearts, peace with
our neighbors, and peace with God. O blessed simplicity, thou great
Peacemaker, be thou for ever the inseparable companion of my heart.

THE XV. MEDITATION.
A third means to conserve Christian peace, is shutting the Doors.
CONSIDER that our Savior blessed the Apostles with the gift of peace, when he
found them together, the doors being shut. The best way to conserve the peace
of our own hearts and amongst our brethren, is to keep the doors of our
souls, that is our senses, shutt. Letts shutt our eyes least they behold
vanity, which will prove affliction to our heart. Let us shutt our eyes, least
they look too curiously into other men's actions which concern us not. Let us
shutt our ears against idle fables, and wordly rumors, which fill our hearts
with vain fancies, and discompose our interior peace. Finally, let us put
awatch over our tongue, least it pernitiously babble out, what the eyes and
ears idly took in.



I. POINT.
CONSIDER that when our doors are thus shut up, and the world by that means
shut out from amongst us, Jesus does more frequently and familiarly enter into
our hearts: for the Evangelist goes on, saying: and after eight days again
his Disciples were within, and Jesus comes, the doors being shut, and stood in
the midst, and said: peace be to you etc. Then he lead us, as he did Thomas,
into the secreetes of his heavenly heart by the hole of his side: and confirms
us in faith by the familiarity of his presence, and makes us absolutely
conclude with the same S. Thomas Dominus meus and Deus meus.



AN ENTERTAYNEMENT FOR THE ASCENSION OF OUR B. SAVIOVR.
THE FIRST MEDITATION.
That it is the Feast of most absolute joy. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that of all the feasts of Christ, this bringes the most absolute and
accomplished joy to all Christians which truly love Christ. The Nativity gave
him to tears, labors poverty and misery. The Circumcision to bloudsheding.
The Epiphanie (how ever he was adored by a few) to the malice of many; but this
wipes away all tears and blood, and makes him to be adored by men and Angels.
And albeit his glorious Resurrection showed him Conqueror over the world,
death, sin and the Devil, yet did it restore him to the world again; but
this restores him to heaven, to the Angels, to his heavenly Father.

saying with a loud voice: The Lamb that was slain, is worthy to receive
power, and divinity, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
benediction, on this most triumphant day, and for ever and ever. Amen.

That it is a confirmation of our faith leaving noe doubt behind it. In their
sight he was cleuated etc. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the rest of the feasts of Christ left still some doubts in the
heavy hearts of men, who are slow in believing. The Angels gloria at the
Nativity was comfortable; but the child's tears, then, and blood in his
Circumcision, little perswayded the Presence of a God. To dye for sinners was an
argument of greatest love, yet it was deemed a folly by many. His
Resurrection, though glorious, and apt to convince, yet was it doubted by the
most, and found some incredulous Thomases who would give credit to it upon noe
less assurance them putting his hands into the wounds of his side; But this
best and brightest of days, leaves noe mistes of doubt behind it, where the
eyes are witnesses of the power of a God, in raising God-man above the clouds.
At this sight we are forced to to cry with S. Thomas Dominus meus and Deus
meus.

the Ascension of our Lord is the absolute Confirmation of our Catholic faith.
The joyful Nativity, indeed, brought the first hopes; the Circumcision gave
the earnest penny in dropps: the sacred passion plentifully paid down more
then the whole debt, in floods of precious blood; the glorious Resurrection
comfortably raised drouping hearts. But this day signs, seals and delivers
the whole Deed of man's Redemption, never more to be doubted of: let us exult
and rejoice in it. Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.

THE II. MEDITATION.
The first fruit of Christ's Ascension. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that if by the first Adam man was banished out of Paradise. By the
second Adam he was restored to Heaven: If by the first he fell lower then man,
by the second he is raised above the Angels Archangells, Cerubines and
Seraphins, being placed at the right hand of his heavenly Father. There is our
nature praised, magnified, adored by all those celestial Courtiers, in the
person, and upon the sight, of that God-man.



The 2. fruit of Christ's Ascension. The raising of our hopes. II. POINT.
CONSIDER to what a high pitch our hopes must needs ascend in the Ascension of
Christ, to see our humane nature, in the person of him, invested in his
heavenly fathers glory. Since in Jesus Chr. as says holy S. Augustine, there
is a portion of the flesh and blood of every one of us; bones of our bones, and
flesh of our flesh. For thy Son our God, did not take upon him the nature of
an Angel, but the seed of Abraham, being made like to us in all things, save
sin alone, witnesses S. Paul.

us. Herein, my soul, let us place our whole confidence.

THE III. MEDITATION.
The third fruit of Christ's Ascension. The sending of the H. Ghost. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that our Jesus (having now absolutely accomplished his Fathers will,
in performing the work for which he was sent, and having put a happy periode
to his painful pilgrimage) has left us; yet we ought to rejoice, since it is
to return to his father: yes, to his father and our Father, to his God (in
quality of man) and to our God. He has left us, but it is expedient for us,
it is to send us another comfortinge Spirit which would not come to us, unless
he departed from us.

If you loved me, says that dear brother of ours, you would rejoice because I
go to my father. That is, to rest after labor, to glory after ignominy;
from the society of men, to that of Angels, from man to God, to your father.
Ah, my soul, let not self love deceive us, we love not indeed Jesus as we
ought, if we love the sweetness of his presence, more then the accomplishment
of his ever best and most adorable pleasure. Nor can we loose by that
disinteressed love, for by that means the God of love, or God-loue (Deus est
Charitas) the holy Ghost, is sent into our hearts.

The 4. fruit of Christ's Ascension. The taking possession of our inheritance
II. POINT.
CONSIDER that if he be gone, and gone to his father and our Father, that
common father of all of us, it is but to take and keep possession of that
common inheritance, which being his own, by birthright, he purchaced for us,
his coheires, at a huge rate, at the price of his own precious blood: for we
have heard himself say by S. John: let not your heart be troubled, I go to
prepare you a place.

our own happiness! Christ was borne for us, he was given to us, he labored
thirty three years in our behalf, he spent his precious blood upon the
purchase of his fathers and our fathers, yea, his own heavenly Kingdom, for
us, and now for a happy conclusion of all, he is gone to take possession of
what he has purchaced for us. Be not troubled then, my soul, but rejoice with
a greater joy then ever, he is gone to prepare us a place, a permanent place, a
place of ineffable delight, of eternal abode in the bosom of his father and
our father. We are not servants but friends but children, but coheirs with
Christ. We are not now pilgrims, we are got home in him We are citizens with
the Saints, and God's Domestikes.

THE IV. MEDITATION
The 5. fruit of Christ's Ascension. The opening of Heaven Gates. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that if Jesus be gone, it is still to be a Jesus to us, still to
advance the work of our redemption. Heaven gates were shutt against man ever
since Adams disobedience; and he (having first past the gates of death, to
break up the brazen gates of Hell) is gone with with power to command the
potentates of that Celestial City to open them, saying Lift up your Gates o
you princes, and be you lifted up, o eternal gates, and the King of glory
shall enter in. That strong and mighty Lord is at hand, who returns from
battle with victory.

He ascended laying open the way before them. Lets but follow our Captain and
the place is ours, Heaven is ours: He has showed us the way. Howbeit we must
walk as he walked, in humility, meekness, obedience, chastity, poverty,
patience etc. Nor must we imagine that malice can ascend with the Author of
goodness: nor luxury and lust with the Son of a Virgin: nor vice, finally,
with the God of virtues.

The 6. fruit of Christ's Ascension. He goes our Advocate into Heaven, and
sends another into the Earth. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that he is gone indeed; for while they all looked on, says S. Luke
a cloud has taken him from the Apostles eyes. But he is gone upon a most
honorable and profitable employment for man. He Is gone to carry up man to
heaven, and to send down God into the Earth (establishing, as it were, a good
intelligence, by a mutual embasie, betwixt heaven and Earth.) Man to God in
heaven, as Advocate to plead for man: and God to man in earth, to teach him all
truth, to inculcate to him again and again, what Christ had already taught;
to inflame our hearts with the holy fire which Christ brought down into the
earth etc.

I am able to plead nothing but guilty, dread Lord, guilty. But my Advocate
has wounds to show, and blood which cries louder then the blood of Abel, and
claymes mercy, as having paid more then my malice was able to contract. As
often as that blood looks redd from the side of that son who is set at thy
right hand, I beseech thee that the spotts of my corruption may be washed away.

THE V. MEDITATION.
The 7. fruit of Christ's Ascension. The presenting of freed Captives to his
Father. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that our most Blessed Savior came down from heaven to to wage war
against the world, the flesh and the Devil: and now he returns with victory
over them all, and bringes back the spoils to the Court of Heaven in tryumphe
(leading Captivity it self captive) that is the captive souls deteyned in
Lymbo Patrum, which he wrested out of a strong hand, and offers them to his
heavenly Father, as the first fruits of his long and painful labors, and
part of the purchase of the precious blood he had plentifully spent.



The 8. fruit of Christ's Ascension. The raising our affections from the Earth.
II. POINT.
CONSIDER that our Blessed Savior is ascended to heaven from which he
descended, to carry up our hearts thither from whence they were fallen by
sin; and to waine our affections from earth, and make them wholye Spiritual:
according to that of the divine Apostle: if you be risen with Christ seek the
things that are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God: mind
the things which are above, not the things which are upon the earth.

our conversation is in heaven.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER finally that since Jesus our dear Lord and Master is returned to
heaven (as we are assured by faithful witnesses, who deliver, by the mouth of
S. John, noe other thing then what they saw with their eyes, what they looked
upon and what their hands had handled of the WORD of life) there is indeed
nothing left us in earth worthy to lodge a Christian heart upon. He is our
true life, and what living is there without life? He Is our treasure, and where
should our hearts be, but where our treasure is? He is our crucified love, and
is not the soul wont to be more where it loves, then where it lives?

Treasure, my Love, my Life, let it not be so; but draw our drowsinesse after
thee, and we will run in the odor of thy sweet oyntements. Give us wings,
dear Lord, and we will fly a pace up after thee, and wholly rest and repose
in thee.

How our Savior went from the Apostles. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that as our B. Saviors life in earth, was wholly spent in testifying
his love to mankind, and in heaping his favors upon the same; so does his last
moment upon earth leave marks of the same goodness. For the Evangelist
represents this good father of ours with his hands lifted up to heaven for us,
and imparting a blessing to us. To wit the Priest for ever according to the
Order of Melchisedech having ended all the bloody Sacryfices in one, would not
depart from his people till he left a blessing upon them.

I will not, I will not dear Lord, let thee go till thou do bless me with
a blessing of pardon for my sins, of peace, of love, of union etc.

THE VII. MEDITATION.
How the Apostles behaved themselves after their Masters departure. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that when the Apostles had beheld their Master mount up in the
greatness of his own power, into the heavens, they stood as things quite
dead to this world, without action or motion, save only that admiration, joy,
hope, and love which boiled up in their mournefull-ioyfull hearts, fixed their
eyes immoueably upon the clouds where their dear Master made his passage,
till two Angels were sent to call them away from that contemplation, to act in
Jerusalem according to their divine Masters order and example.

fervent Saint Augustine, caelum penetrabo mente: my heart shall pierce the
heavens, and in thought I will be always with thee, dear Jesus. For ah! how
sweet it is, to be continually sucking delights from those sacred and sugered
breasts of thy consolation!

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that there the Apostles stayed Prisoners, as it were, to love and
delight, till two Angels were sent to call them away from that sweet
contemplation, to act in Jerusalem according to their divine Masters order and
example. But noe sooner were they called by those heavenly Messengers, but they
obeyed, came down from the mountain, turned their contemplations, and
admirations, into adorations and actions, returning into Jerusalem with great
joy, to praise, bless, preach and magnify his name, in the Temple, and every
where; and to expect the coming of the holy Ghost according to his gracious
promise.

pierce the clouds with him, to strike into that Land of plenty and peace
whither he is gone, and to repose in him for ever. Have you found the honey of
heavenly contemplation? fear not to taste, and take it down, yet so much
only as suffices least perhapps being filled you vomit it up. But does a
voice from heaven, a Superiors command, charity to a neighbor Gods work,
call you from it? ah fail not, delay not to follow; never forgetting that the
God of consolation, ought to be preferred before Gods consolations his good
pleasure, and his work, before the delights and pleasvres he bestows upon us.

PREPARATIONS TO RECEIVE THE HOLY GHOST.
THE FIRST MEDITATION.
The first disposition. The consideration of our own misery. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, as the first disposition to the receiving of the holy Ghost, our
own nakedness, misery, and nothing for if we conceive indeed (as indeed it
is most true) that we are nothing, we have nothing, we can do nothing but
only by the assistance and grace of God, which is powered forth in our hearts,
by the holy Ghost which is given us; how is it possible that we should not make
an earnest application to that good giver of all best gifts, that now that the
comfort of Christ's visible presence is taken from us, he would bestow upon us
that other comforting Spirit.

comforting Spirit which thou art about to send, least he otherwise perish, for
whose safety thy dear son spared not his precious blood.

The 2. disposition, Humility. II. POINT.
CONSIDER, and lets use as a second disposition: rising out of the truth of
the former, as absolute a desire as we can possibly conceive, not to be known
nor esteemed by any: or at least lets desire to be known as we know our
selves, and as God knows us (that is to be poor miserable sinners) not as we
deludingly appear. This, as being a real effect of true humility, is the
best harbinger to prepare a place for this heavenly Guest: for in whom, says
the holy Scripture; will the Spirit of God rest, but in a heart that is mylde
and humble etc.

be paid to thy corruption and sinfulness. Have frequently in heart and mouth,
to thee alone o Lord be honor and glory, to me nothing but shame and
confusion: Because in thy sight I am a miserable sinner, and unworthy of all
respect. But thou, o Lord, have mercy.

THE II. MEDITATION.
The 3. disposition. A holy retreat. I. POINT.
CONSIDER by the B. Apostles example, that the third disposition to receive the
holy Ghost ought to be a sacred solitude or retreat from wordly affairs vain
fears, fruitless sollicitudes; which disorder and take up the house of our
heart which should be wholly kept for the intertaynement of so great a guest. The
world was always, his, and our, worst enemy and hates him. It were not to
receive him worthily to suffer his enemy to prepossesse the place. The design
of his heavenly heart, is, to speak to ours alone, and to make us taste how
sweet our God is. And far unfit it were to mix those pure delights with
the bitter-sweetes the world affords.



The 4. disposition. Our own earnest endeavor. II. POINT.
CONSIDER, for the 4. disposition, that this solitude is not to be spent in an
idle and sleepie expectation without any concurrence of ours; but, contrarily,
by how much the more we are removed from the world in our thoughts, by so much
more are they to be conversant in heaven: for though the holy Ghost be a free
gift, and could not be merited by all the endeavors of men; but proceeds from
the uncompelled and free goodness of the father and the Son, who (the Son)
by his sacred word promised, by his painful Passion merited, and by his holy
prayers prevailed for his coming; yet we see by the example of the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, that we are to make use of our own endeavors before we
have the happiness to receive him indeed, as dispositions to prepare our
hearts against the receipt of so great a Gueste.

Nor would he ever, says sweet S. Augustine, so earnestly exorte us to ask,
if he would not give Let slothful man blush then, since God is more ready to
give, then we to receive. He Is more ready to grant mercy, then we to be
delivered from misery.

THE III. MEDITATION.
The 5. disposition. Prayer. I. POINT.
CONSIDER for the 5. disposition, the primitive and Apostolical way to receive
the holy Ghost, as it is delivered in the first of the Acts. All of them,
says S. Luke were perseuering in prayer. We find the Apostles, to whom the
promise was newly made, praying for the performance of it. We find the
Primitive Christians, and our Blessed Lady her self, at prayer. Nay even our
Advocate while he was yet with us, told us that he would pray to his heavenly
father for us in this behalf, good reason then that we his poor clyents
should join in petition with him, and earnestly pray that that holy Spirit may
be sent to us.

breath after this holy Spirit, saying with blessed S. Aug. Come o thou holy
communication of the Father and the Son, and prepare thine own habitation.
Come and visit the dark retreaites of our distracted hearts. Come, o thou
clenser of sins, and curer of wounds. Come, o thou strength of the weak, and
support of such as are ready to fall. Come o thou teacher of the humble, and
destroyer of the proud. Come purify this self-loue by thy sacred fire:
enlighten this self-iudgement by thy clear light: and break down this self
will of mine, by thine irresistable power.

The 6. disposition. Unanimous perseverance in prayer. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the Apostles, and Primitive Christians Prayer, was accompayned
with unanimity and perseueuerance. It was not slightly and distractedly run
over in a short time but they absolutely made it their business, being shutt up
togeither, even from the Ascension till Pentecoste, or the coming of the holy
Ghost, unanimously and instantly begging and expecting that Best gift.

to his father and our father, at whose right hand he is still pleading for us,
his poor brethren, according to flesh, that he would dispatch down that holy
Spirit of theirs, into our hearts, to thend we may all be but one by love, and
union, with the father and Son and the same Spirit, as they are but all one
in essence and substance; and that our hearts may continue the pure and chaste
Temples of the holy Trinity for ever: Christian hearts thus united, are able
to make a holy force against Heaven, and draw from thence the Spirit of union.

AN ENTERTAYNEMENT FOR WHITSONTIDE OR MEDITATIONS OF THE HOLY GHOST.
THE I. MEDITATION.
That of our selves, without the aid of the holy Ghost we can do nothing. I.
POINT.
CONSIDER, that Man of himself, as of himself, is not able to think one good
thought, but all our sufficiency is from God and what God the Father, by his
power, is able to perform; what the son, by his wisdom to invent, is not
executed and applied unto us, but by the goodness, and love of God the holY
Ghost; whence s. Paul: None can say Lord Jesus (that is, as he ought
profitablY to salvation) but in the holy Ghost.

truths, thine own sufficiency, that is, thy poverty, and mere nothing. We
are not able to work one good work, nor say one good word; nor even conceive
one good thought; but all, even all our sufficiency, is from that great Giver
of all good gifts. So that we may well pronounce with the holy Church without
thy power (o divine Spirit) there is nothing at all sound in Man. If then all
our strength be from him, let all our addresses be to him. If we indeed
acknowledge our own impotencie, let us betake our selves to his omnipotency.
If flesh be weak, let us have recourse to the Spirit. Let love lead us to this
God of Love, and expose our coldenes to the fire which he visibly brings down
from heaven this day, saying; Veni etc.

What the H. Ghost is. II. POINT.
CONSIDER what the holy Ghost is. He is no other thing then the Spirit, that
is, the spiration and breathing of the Father and the Son: for as man's heart,
by his mouth, breaths, or produces a breath, so God the Father by his son,
produces the holy Spirit. Or else, as the soul by the understanding of an
amiable thing, does produce, or breath out love; Love, which is no other thing
then the spirit or breath of the affection, so does the father by the Son,
breath out the holy Ghost, who is no other thing, then a chaste and holy love,
produced and breathed out, by the father and the Son, whose mutual love it
is.

thee. Three divine persons ^n the verity of one Deity, whose mutual love
thou art. O god the holy Ghost, give what thou command, and command what
thou will.

THE II. MEDITATION.
What kind of Spirit the H. Ghost is. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though the holy Ghost be a Spirit, Spiration, or breathing; yet
is it not like that of Man, which is a Spirit which passes and returns not
nor like to the Angels, which are Missionarie and serving Spirits* nor like to
that which our Savior Jesus Christ delivered up, when he said: into thy hands
I commend my Spirit. To wit: his soul. In fine, it is no created Spirit, but
an immense, increated, divine Spirit, intrinsecall to God, yea, God himself,
the third person of the B. Trinity; the same God with the Father, and the
Son; proceeding from them by an eternal, spiration; and therefore, coequall,
consubstantiall, coeternall with them, and equally to be adored and glorified
together with them, as Lord, and life-giuer.

Thy will (that is, that sourse of life, of liberty, of eternal love) be
done in earth as it is in heaven: that by such conformity, resignation, and
adheasion, we may all become but one Spirit with thee.

That the H. Ghost is a heavenly gift. II. POINT.
CONSIDER further, what the holy Ghost is, and you shall find, that he is a
gift, but a gift sent us from heaven, a gift which contains in it the whole
collection of all good things; a gift prepared from all eternity to be
bestowed upon men, better then which, there neither has or shall, or can be
any given, or imagined, even by the wisdom of heaven it self: for it is even
that best gift, that perfect thing, which descended from the father of lights,
with whom there is always a permanent plenty.

Know you not that your members are the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you. And again: The spirit of God dwells in you. Well may we glory in this
obsolute assurance of so incomparable a gift and guest. But forget not, my
soul, what follows: But if any violate the Temple of God, God will distroy
him.

THE III. MEDITATION
The Holy Ghost is a permanent gift. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, of what a permanent plenty and bliss poor man is possessed by the
bounty of this heavenly git, which is accomplished with all perfections It is
a gift, it cannot then be recalled; it is our own nothing being more ours then
what is our own by free gift. Its a free gift, it was not bought, or borrowed,
but freely bestowed. Love then was the cause of it, love, which is an
efficacious wishing well, or wishing good to the beloved.

The power of darkness cannot wrest it out of our hands. The God that gave it,
takes it not away. Non deserit nisi deseratur. He forsakes not, unless he be
first forsaken. Self treachery, at home alone, can hazard it; self
disloyalty, can loose it: hatred for love, by consent to mortal sin, can
drive this Love, this gift, this God out of doors.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER from whom we had this good gift, and we shall find it came from all
the three persons of the holy Trinity: I says the Father, will power out my
Spirit upon all flesh. I will ask my Father, says the son, and he will send
you another comforter. I will send him to you, says he again. And, the holy
Ghost (says Saint Augustine) is so given, as God's gift, that he is also his
own gift; he is both the gift and the giver. All the three persons in the B.
Trinity were employed in man's creation, and all are employed too about his
sanctification. We will come to him, to wit, the father, son and holy Ghost,
and we will take up our Residence with him.

of lights, that good giver of all good gifts, who sent his holy breath or
spirit down upon us. Bless that Lamb of God who by his death, merited that
blessing for us. Bless, in fine, that holy Spirit, who was himself both the
giver and the gift, and graciously came unto us. Be they Blessed, and praised;
magnified and glorified, in the unity of one Deity, for ever. And let our
earthly Trinity, never forgett this mercy. Let our memory faithfully
represent it to ourvnderstanding. Let our understanding continually ponder
ruminate, and deliver it to the will. And let the will embrace, in joy, and
carefully lock up this present of infinite love, with all the love, joy, and
Jubilee of heart, imaginable.

THE IV. MEDITATION.
What we receive indeed when we are said to receive the Holy Ghost. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that by receiving of the holy Ghost, we receive the substantial, or
consubstantiall unity, charity, and sanctity of the father and the Son,
according to S. Augustine. The most firm and indissoluble bond or tie of the
holy Trinity. The sacred kiss of the father and the Son, by their mutual
love from all Eternity, whereby they loved the just, even with the love of
their own heart (says S. Richard de S. Victore) which is the holy Ghost.

become holy, as our heavenly father is holy, and to that purpose the holy
Ghost, the very unity, love, and sanctity, of the Father and the son,
comes down to dwell in us. Ah my soul! Let us never forgett this astonishing,
and oppressing graciousnesse.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, yet further, that it is not the unity, charity, and piety of the
father, and the son, which we receive only, but truly and indeed we receive
the person of the holy Ghost* w^^h grace and charity; nor is he in us by
Essence, Presence, and power only, as he is every where, but in a more dear,
near and intimate manner, as in his Th^one o^ Temple. For do you not know,
says s. Paul that you are the Temple of God, and the Holy Ghost does dwell in
you. And again: Charity is diffused into our hearts, by the holy Ghost, who
is given unto us.

that good God, is present to his faithful, ^ot merely by the grace of
visitation, but by the presence of his Majesty. It is not now the odor of the
balsome that is spredd abroad, but the very substance of the sacred ointment
it self. By which according to s. John, we shall be taught all things. O
great, great and most admirable mystery, which is yet so familiar to us
Christians! O most excellent and incomparable visit, and gift of the proper
person of the holy Ghost! O God what a singular favor is it, to have God, the
true God, really and personally dwelling in our hearts? O what hearts ought
they to be, which have the happiness, to be the Mansion of such an inhabitant?

THE V. MEDITATION.
The excessive love of God, shown to man, in sending the holy Ghost. I. POINT.
CONSIDER with S. Augustine: that God the father moved by mere mercy, sent
his son to redeem his servants: he sent also the holy Ghost to adopt the
same servants into children. He gave his son, for the price of their Ransom;
the holy Ghost, for a pledge and assurance of his love, and reserues himself
all whole, for the inheritance of the adopted. So much did he desire man's
salvation, that he employed not only what was his; but even himself also, to
that effect.

the participation of the divine nature? By the mere mercy of the Father? by
the blood of the son? by the love of the holy Ghost? Do we believe it, I
say? yes yes, we believe it, my soul. We dare not we cannot deney it. Credo
Domine, we believe it, o Lord, yet help our incredulity in this behalf. We
believe it in words, and in heart too; but our actions, our gratitude, our love,
speak it not, confirm it not to the world. For to whom should all the
redeemed slaves actions belong, but to his dear Redeemour? Upon whom should
all his love be set, but upon one that so loves him? And to whom should he
reserve himself wholly, but to the God of heaven who reserues himself wholly
for him?

II. POINT.
CONSIDER what an excessive goodness and charity it is, that this immense, and
infinite Majesty, who walks upon the wings of the winds and sittes upon the
Cherubins; who fills heaven and earth, being assisted with millions of millions
of Angels, would yet daigne to take up his seat in a poor corner of man's
heart; to grace that miserable worm of the earth with his presence, divinity,
and sanctity: and thereby with the participation of his divine nature. Ah!
could we justly weigh man's nothing, and Gods Majesty, we should never be
weary with admiring and tasting the dignity of this great work.

Ah Domine, cognoscam te, cognoscam me. O Lord grant me light to know thee, and
to know my self, that by such knowledge I may happily and gainefully loose my
self in the admiration of thy excessive graciousnesse. For what am I indeed
compared to thee but extremity of misery compared to infinite Majesty? but
nothing, and nothing compared to him who is all in all? But not so much as one
little drop, to a boundless Ocean. And yet this Majesty, is graciously
pleased to take up his Residence in this misery. This All, will lodge in this
nothing. This Ocean, will ouer-flowingly possess, and please himself in this
drop. How happens this to me, that not the Mother of my Lord, but even my
Lord himself comes unto me, resides in me, takes up his dear delights in my
poor heart? Ah, my soul, let our dearest delights be to possess him to
please him, to magnify him, to glorify him for ever.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
Gods excessive love to man. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, how great and ineffable the piety of our Redeemer was toward us,
as S. Augustine observes; who carried man up to heaven, and sent God into
earth: what a care has our Maker to repair his workmanshipp! Behold, a new
medicine is again sent down from heaven! Behold, Majesty daignes again by
his own presence, to visit the sick! Behold, divine things are again mixed
with humane, the holy Ghost is become a succeeding Vicar to our Redeemer; that
what the one had begun, the other by a peculiar virtue, might consummate; that
what the son had redeemed, the holy Ghost might sanctify, what he had
purchaced, he might conserve.

seem to make of us, what rate putt they upon us, while we undervalue our
selves* The holy Trinity may seem to be wh^ll^ employed to save us: while we
are b^ (...) ^ll our selves away, for moments of ^^^nsitorie pleasures, for
vanities, for lies. Our thoughts are languishing after the hope of I know not
what delights which the world promises; while our dearest delight ought to
be, to receive, in hand, more then we are able to conceive. Ah, my soul, what
dearer delight could ever man's heart wish for, then to be deliciously oppressed
with heavenly plenty?

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, the unspeakable honor conferred upon man by the presence of the
holy Ghost. He receives, says S. Basil, a Prophetical, Apostolical, and
Angelical dignity; being, before, but earth and ashes, abiection, and
rottennes. Yea, says he, by virtue of this presence, every holy soul,
becomes a God. Ego dixi Dij estis: I have said, you are Gods, and all sonns of
the highest. For who adheares to God (which is is done by love in the Holy
Ghost) is one Spirit with him.



THE VII. MEDITATION.
To what end the holy Ghost comes. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that the holy Ghost comes unto us, to purge, illuminate, and perfect
our souls; and to reform them to the image and likeness of God, to which they
were made thereby to make them partakers of himself (He being the divine
sanctity) in this life; and disposing them to a more near, and noble likeness
thereof in the life to come, to which every cause strives to produce effects
like to it self: it follows then, that the holy Ghost endeauours to make the
soul, which it does inhabit (which is the sovereign perfection and dignity of
a reasonable creature) fervent, spiritual, holy, and divine.

persiste in our coldness. To render us spiritual, holy, divine, and we
continue, indeuoute, carnal, and earthly. Alas, my soul, is not all this too
too true!

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that the holy Ghost comes to be the Soul of our Soul, and to
furnish us with all things necessary to the perfection of our spiritual life,
even as the soul of our body gives force to the great diversity of the
functions and actions of the senses, and faculties of the said soul, as far
as is necessary to our natural life; for what want we which this Spirit
brings not? If light and knowledge of truth. He is truth it-selfe. If strength.
He is power itself. If heat. He is a consuming fire. Are we sick? he is the
Physician and the Physic. Is the cause of our eternal reconcilement to be
pleaded before the dreadful Tribunal of Gods Majesty? He is our Advocate.
Are we oppressed with temptations and tribulations? he is our comforter, our
Deus and omnia, our God, who is to us, all things.

life, motion, action, and vigor, but from the soul, without which it
remaynes an unprofitable bulk of corruption. Nor is it from the soul, that
the soul lives, remembers, understands, wills, but from God who is the life of
the soul. Nor does it ever live, understand, or will any thing profitably, but
by his grace diffused into our hearts by the holy Ghost. Come, then oh come
then, thou holy Spirit, and be our light, our truth, our fortitude, our fire,
our salve, our Physician and cure. Prove our second Advocate to the heavenly
Father, togeither with that dear Lord of ours, who both merited thy sending,
and graciously sent thee. Prove our comforter in our tribulations, temptations
etc. Prove finally our God, and our all.

THE VIII. MEDITATION
Of the advantages or fruits of the Holy Ghosts Coming. I. POINT.
CONSIDER what huge advantages we receive by the coming of the holy Ghost, adn
we shall find, that thereby we are taken into the participation of all the
blessings, and riches in some measure, which our Blessed Savior possessed in
plentitude and fullness. The Spirit of wisdom, and understanding: the Spirit
of Counsel and fortitude: the Spirit of science, and piety; and the Spirit of
the fear of our Lord. These are the seven lights, or seven Lamps by which
the faithful are enlightened: wisdom, is a light by which we know Superior
things. Understanding, a light, by which we discern interior things. Science a
light whereby we know inferior things: Counsel, a light by which dangers are
discovered; Fortitude, is given to repulse and master them; as Piety to
mollify the hardness; and Fear, to subdue the pride of our hearts.

to walk; and without which, like sensual men, not knowing what belongs to
Spirit, we had wandered in darkness, without either the true knowledge of God,
or ourselves, and had quaked with fear, through want of Fortitude, where there
was nothing indeed to be feared; and for want of Council, had not feared him
whom we ought to fear, who can throw the body and soul into Hell fire.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER the excessive love of God to Man, in the distribution of these gifts;
The very same which were given in their full extent to that flower of the
field which sprung from a sprigge of the stock of Iesse, Jesus Christ, the
first begotten among many brethren, the same, according to each ones measure,
is bestowed upon us too, the younger brethren. We are regenerated and borne
again by the same spirit, says S. Augustine, by which Christ was borne. By
the same spirit, according to faith, is Christ formed in the heart of every one
of the faithful, by which according to flesh, he was framed in the Virgins
womb.

and never enough admired goodness of God! O unspeakable and never enough
considered dignity of Man! Man presented with the same gifts of wisdom,
understanding etc. of which the Son of God was possessed! The Eldest brother
and the younger brethren, assisted with the same helps toward heaven. The
adoptiue children, sharing in the same prerogatives with the natural Son;
having the same Spirit to quicken, move, strengthen comfort, and replenish
them. The same Spirit, I say, to frame Christ in the hearts of Christians,
which framed Christ Jesus in the sacred womb of his Virgin Mother. O my soul,
let us never so far forgett this dearness, this dignity, this transport of
love, as by a degenerous conversation to stoop to things so far below us,
as are all the fugitive toys which the world is able to present us.

THE IX. MEDITATION.
Of the advantages, again of the Holy Ghosts Cominge. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though Mercy had abundantly provided for man's instruction in
all virtue, by the incarnation and holy life of Christ etc. Though wisdom had
admirably invented, and goodness had graciously put down the too too
plentiful price of man's redemption, the precious blood of a God, a most
souueraigne salve to cure the most desperate leprosy; yet had it all profited
nothing, had not the application been also made, by the means of increated
love, the holy Ghost in the Sacrifice, Sacraments, and suffrances of this life.

of our right; we were yet, on our parts, by the assistance of the holy Ghost,
to negotiate upon the talents and riches left us, by the means of our
cooperation in good works and patient sufferance of tribulations, to
accomplish the things that want of the Passions of Christ, as says S. Paul.
All his labors, and actions, and passions are mine, but I must also labor and
suffer with him if I will reign with him. He loved me, that dear lover of
man, and delivered himself up for me. But I must also love him, which none can
do but by the assistance of the holy Ghost.

II. POINT.




THE X. MEDITATION.
In what manner the Holy Ghost came. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that the coming of the holy Ghost was preceded and accompaigned with
a sudden sound (like to a great loud, and vehement blast of wind) which came
from heaven and filled the whole house etc. Thus it is, that the hand of the
highest is wont to work a happy change on the hearts of men.

He powerfully thunders down from heaven, and forces his passage through our
deaf ears, by frequent; fervent, and redoubled inspirations: Rise up thou
that sleep, and rise up from the dead, and Christ will enlighten thee. And
he cries so loud, that howeuer we neglect; we cannot deney that we heard his
call,

I am thy salvation. I am thy exceeding great reward. Life is short and
uncertain, Eternity endless: God is just and dreadful: and who is able to
live in eternal flames? And these words have often cloven to our very heart
roots, and we have found ourselves entrenched on every side, and we have had
nothing to oppose against them, but certain slow and sleepie delays: behold I
will shortly set upon such and such a good work: or subdue such or such a
vice which reigns in me, and shortly it shall be done; And yet, what is
notorious, and we cannot deney, with the Jews, we strive to suppress, and
stifle the grace of the holy Ghost in our hearts; And yet are we still
detayned, by very toys of toys from concluding an absolute league of perfect
friendshipp with the God of our hearts, who lays so close a seige to them.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the holy Ghost had formerly appeared to the world in diverse
forms. As at Christ's Baptism, in the form of a Dove, to teach the followers
of Christ, with what innocence and candor, and with what foecunditie of good
works they are to behave themselves. At his transfiguration, as a bright
cloud, to intimate the shewres of heavenly grace, which he plentifuly powers
down upon us, and the fatherly protection he pleases to take of us. But this
day he appears in fiery tongues, signifying that he comes to establish legem
igneam, a fiery law, a law of love and charity, which were it practiced,
according at it is taught, it were able to set all the world on fire.

divine Spirit) be worthily ever most welcome to me: yet nothing comes so home
to my hearts desire, as these flames of fire which intimate a law of love, and
in that conquering name, ought to subdue all hearts: For what does man's heart
love indeed, but love? What chain of gold, could ever so deliciously draw us,
as the chains of humanity and charity; where beloved force, proves absolute
freedom? Ardeam ex te totus ignis sancte. O holy fire let me be wholly burnt by
thee. O fire which ever burnest, and art never extinguished, do thou inflame
me. O thou light which do ever shine and art never darkened, do thou
enlighten me. O how my very heart desires to be inflamed by thee How sweetly
do thou heat? how secreetlie do thou shine? how delightfully do thou
burn?

THE XI. MEDITATION.
How we may know whether the H. Ghost lives in us. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that the certain keeping of Gods commandments, gives us a
certainty that we love God. And who loves him, certainly remaynes in God, and
God in him. And in this says S. John, we know that he remains in us by the
holy Ghost which he gave us. If then our own hearts reprehend us not of the
breach of Gods commandments we may have a wholesome confidence in his
goodness and mercy, yea, a moral certainty, that we stand in Gods grace and
favor, and that the holy Ghost, does dwell in our hearts.

let him that stands look that he fall not: it is yet in earth that we
possess this in heaven; where the world, the flesh, and the devil continually
surround us. Their snares are laid, and charity is lost in a moment. It is not
enough to have the holy Ghost for the present; but we must further (to be able
to overcome all our temptations) beg the continuance of his presence, virtue,
and power, by our incesant and ardent prayers saying with the good Disciples,
mane nobiscum Domine, stay with us, stay with us, o Lord.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the presence of the cause is never more surely known then by
the effects. And the principal effect which the increated Charity, the holy
Ghost, produces in our heart, is Charity de Spiritu Sancto. And Charity,
says S. Paul, is patient, benign, she enuieth not, she deals not
peruersely, she is not puffed up; she is not ambitious; She seeks nor her
own, she is not provoked to anger, thinks not evil, rejoices not upon
iniquity, but rejoices with the truth, suffers all things, believes all
things, hops all things; bears all things; in fine, she is cheerful,
longanmious, mild, modest, etc.

afflictions, and difficulties (be they corporal or spiritual.) If benign
and mild in words and behavior, not arrogating too much to ourselves, or
seekeing our own advantages. If we envy not the good of others. If our hearts
swell not, nor peruersely oppose our neighbor, but sweetly support him,
entertain a good opinion of him, and hope well of his proceeding; we may
hopefully conclude, that the finger of the holy Ghost is in the work and
sweetly moves, gouernes, disposes all.

THE XII. MEDITATION.
The Holy Ghosts presence gathered by the effects. I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet further the effects of the holy Ghost in the B. Apostles and
Primitive Christians: And the first is that they began to speak with diverse
tongues, according as the holy Ghost gave them to speak: and those tongues
were employed, not to boast nor vant their own knowledge, and give themselves
the glory of it, but to publish the great works of God, to all Nations, and
to speak intelligibly to Partians, Medians etc.

let our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works. Let our
joy, peace, patience, benignity mildness, modesty, the fruits of the holy
Ghost, appear, and infallibly none will be found so great a stranger as not to
understand that language of heaven, and together with us glorify our heavenly
father, who blessed our hearts with those good gifts, with which the world is
too little acquainted.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER as another effect, that joy in the holy Ghost, the new wine of the
Gospel, which so fervently boiled up in the hearts of the Apostles, that they
seemed no more to be themselves, but to be transported, and translated into new
men, to strike the hearers with astonishment, to see those poor rude
fishermen, simple Galileans, who never were suspected of much learning, speak
so powerfully, and intelligibly to the hearts of all present, while yet some
turned it to derision, others ascribed it to drunkenness.

These are affects of new wine. Say they. Yes, says S. Augustine, it is even
so indeed: with this new wine, and this excellent cupp, are the hearts of the
faithful daily inebriated. Thus are they druncke, who for the love of God, and
their souls health, fly their parents and country of their own accord, and
abandonne the parents of their bodies even to find out other new ones of their
souls. Being free, they desire to live in subjection: being noble, they fall
in love with abiection. They prefer abstinence before the delights of full
tables: watching before sweet sleep and poverty before riches. Such effects,
my soul, has it pleased God of his infinite mercy to work in our hearts. So
have we been deliciously drunk with the chaste wine of his cellers, begetting
virgins.

THE XIII. MEDITATION.
More effects proving the Holy Ghosts presence. I. POINT.
CONSIDER as another effect of the holy Ghost, their undaunted courage in
openly preaching the miracles, Resurrection, Ascension and Glorification of
Jesus in the face of his proud persequutours who had but a few weeks before,
put him to an ignominious death. This Jesus, says S. Peter (who was wickedly
slain by you) has God raised up again, where of we are all witnesses. Let
all the house of Israel know most certainly, that God has made this Jesus both
Lord and Christ, whom you crucified. And those undaunted words struck the
hearts of three thousand which were converted that day.

speaks? Do we make it our business to bear out that blessed name (which is
the only one under heaven wherein we must be saved) before the face of the
Tirant, at the peril of our lives and liberties? Do we endeavor to print in
our own hearts, and the hearts of all men, this saving truth, that that Jesus
which died forvs, rose again, ascended into Heaven, and is there gloriously
seated, at the right hand of his heavenly father? know my soul, for certain,
that such blessed effects, issue from the presence of the Spirit of Jesus, the
holy Ghost: and reioce in it with a chaste fear.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER yet another effect of the presence of the holy Ghost, which is a love
to hear the word of God, and a constant adhearing to, and perseuering in
Apostolical Doctrine, frequent Communion, and fervent and unanimous prayer,
with reverence and fear. Such was the practice, of the primitive Christians,
who, as in Acts 2. were perseuering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, in the
communication of the breaking of Bread, and Prayer.

If any, says S. Paul, euangelize to you (were he an Angel) besides that
which you have received, be he accursed. They communicated every day, and shall
we be backward in it, when laudable custom, and conueniencie calls us to it.
They continued unanimously togeither in public prayer. And shall we run into
corners, and more please our selves in our devotions of our own invention?
Noe, noe, it is the public and unanimous prayer of the faithful, that
infallibly peirceth heaven; and leaves our hearts comfortable testimonies, that
the holy Ghost resides therein.

THE XIV. MEDITATION.
The H. Ghosts presence known by the effects. I. POINT.
CONSIDER again as another argument of the H. Ghost, the love of unity of
hearts, and community of our substances. The multitude of believers (the
primitive Christians) had one heart and one soul neither did any say, that
ought was his own of those things which he possessed, but all things were
common unto them; nor was any needy among them. From this blessed union and
Communion did S. Augustine, and the rest of the first founders of religious
orders take the platform of their proceedings. These, says he, were the first
that heard: How good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell in
one: but that fraternall love and union stopped not there, but that exultation
of Charity descended down to posterity. Thence it is that in religious
houses, to this day, there is but one heart and one soul, one celler, one
panterie, one purse, one common design, to love God above all things and their
neighbor as themselves.

mine and thine is heard, those cold words, which are the source of all
dissension. In thee there is a perfect imitation of the B. Trinity, where many
are one; three persons and one only God: many operations but one will, one and
the same Spirit working them all. Many Attributes, but one and the same common
substance. So says S. Augustine, in a Monastery they live so that they all
seem but to compose one man. They are many bodies, but not many hearts. Many
operations, but all guided by one will. Many offices, but all using one common
substance or stock. And all this that Christians may become one by charity,
as Christ and his heavenly Father are one in Deity. If we embrace and love
this unity, my soul we hold Charity, and the holy Ghost certainly dwells in
our hearts.

How the holy Ghost reigns in us. I. POINT.
CONSIDER Finally that the holy Ghost does not only live, but gloriously
reigns in our hearts, as it did in the primitive Christians, when we do not
only willingly, but even joyfully endure contumelies, contempts, temptations,
tribulations etc. for the name of Jesus, yea even glory in them, for the love
of that name; for so did the Apostles Acts. 5. They went from the sight of the
Counsel rejoicing, because they were accounted worthy to suffer reproache for
the name of Jesus. So the Christian Jews suffered the loss of their Goods
with joy, hoping for a better and a permanent substance. And S. Paul; I abound
with joy in all my tribulations. I even glory in them.

in the holy Ghost: this omne gaudium in sufferance with Jesus, Let Us rejoice,
rejoice, and spring with joy, because our reward will be great in heaven. But
rejoice in our Lord, the good giver of this heavenly abundance; the holy Ghost
reigns in us. Marry if we find not this joy, this glory in tribulation, yet
find patience and resignation, with a desire of this, rejoice notwithstanding,
the holy Ghost lives in us. And he that begun this good work will perfect it,
(have we a little patience) and will confirm and establish it, at his good
pleasure; cease not, in the interim, to emulate (how ever we find not ourselves
yet in terms to perform) those better gifts: what we have we have from God,
and what we have from God, comes from the order of his wise providence, one
thus and another thus, according to the measure of Christ's plenitude. Cease not
to ask, to seek, to knock. Truth has promised by the mouth of Ezechiel,
that what is weak, he will strengthen; and what is fatt and strong he will
keep and feed etc.

THE XV. MEDITATION.
How the Holy Ghost is contristated and weakened in us. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that even as the Soul is seen often to languish in the body, by
reason of many infirmities, in such sort, as though indeed it live, yet it
seems to be deprived of lively motion, sense and vigor, so the soul of the
soul, the holy Ghost, is so contristated, as it were, by the multitude of
venial sins, especially if our affection be placed upon them, that it seems
to be deprived of actiuitie; that is, the hearts wherein it resides leave off
to be prompt, fervent, flourishing and fruitful; leading a drooping and
drowsy life, and expecting, in a manner, the first fair occasion to perish.
How do many little sins being neglected kill, says s. Augustine? Marry
many small drops furnish a river; and abundance of sand, though small
grains, sink a ship: the neglect of pumping, causes shippwracke; as well as
the billows which ouerflowe the ship.

what things soever be true, what soever honest, what soever just, etc. what
soever of good fame, if there be any virtue, any praise of discipline: those
things lets think upon, those things let us do. Lets not be strait hearted, and
unwilling, as it were, to be happy. Let Us not limit the holy Ghost, who gives
abundantly, and vpbraides not. His graces are too precious to be refused, or
played with. When we have done the best we can; we may put this down for a
certain truth: We are but unprofitable servants: we have done but what we
ought.

How Charity perishes, and the holy Ghost is driven out of our hearts. II.
POINT.
CONSIDER, that being once got into free trading in venial sins, we begin
to be more familiar with, and less apprehensiue of mortal; to wit, we so
long play with waspes, because their stinges are not mortal, that with our
Mother Eve, we lie open to serpents. Wisdom waxes obscure; counsel is cast
aside fear grows foole-hardie; fortitude fails us, and faith begins to
slumber; But the Devil sleeps not. A pleasant object is cast in our way (nor
is it any more then venial sin.) We fix our eyes upon the beauty of the
forbidden fruit, and feign would we taste of it. Such dalliance begetts
complacence, complacence engagement, engagement procures consent, and by
consent mortal sin has gotten footing in our hearts: Charity perishes, and
the holy Ghost is forced out of his Temple.

and destruction! Ah my soul, if we begin once to give ourselves over to the
dandlings and caresses of the harlot-words like another Dalila (were we even
Samsons) it will straight bereave us of our strength and sight, and
dispossessing us of the holy Ghost, leave us slaves to the devil. Ah, what a
pitiful exchange is here? Be astonished, o heavens, upon this; and o gates
thereof, be you desolate exceedingly: The very Angels of heaven, were they
capable of tears, would weep to see the holy Ghost, with all his gifts and
graces, disloyally turned out of our sinful souls. But to prevent this
desolation of desolations, lets use a timely care. Being already ensnared,
lets by a holy violence, cut, break, tear them in pieces: for, alas! the
best of them are worth nothing, they lead but to death. But are we yet free?
Fly fly then the least apparent occasions of evil, o thou beloved of God.
Flight alone, in this behalf, is a sure victory.

MEDITATIONS OF THE B. TRINITY
THE I. MEDITATION.
That by faith alone we can safely approach to God in this ineffable Mystery.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that though all nations (be they otherwise never so barbarous) have
always unanimously conspired togeither to the professing of some Deity, yea
even many Gods, which they foolishly feyned to themselves. And though all the
things universally, which we see, seem to lead us to the knowledge of some
invisible divinity, whereby they were all made, and conserved: yet should we be
always wavering and without assurance, should we committ our selves to reasons
weak search, not taking Faith to be our guide. Faith which is, says S.
Augustine, the way to Beatitude. Faith without which, says S. Paul, it is
impossible to please God: whence he concludes, that it is necessary to
salvation.

that conuincing argument of things not appearing; that illustration of the
mind by the prime light, which inables our souls to discern spiritual
things, and leads us to adore the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost,
three persons, and one true God, without all hesitation or doubt.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that as faith is altogeither necessary, so is nothing more sure and
comfortable, as relying upon the prime truth which cannot deceive us, or be
deceived. Let Faith, says S. Augustine, march before, and noe difficulty
will dare to oppose, or present it self. There is nothing more sure or better
suited to all sorts of people. For who can want capacity, to give credit to
what truth it self reueales It speaks wisdom to the wise, and yet the
weakest capacities have as much, in substance, as they. It feeds the strong
with solid food; and yet gives milk to children, which nourishes noe less.
Great wits have as much as they can bear: and the weaker sort is able to
digest all they receive. O admirable invention of wisdom it self, which can
so wisely fit it self to all abilities! They are three, says S. John, which
give testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost and these
three are one. To wit one substance, one Deity, one God.

and mouth, I confess, bless, and praise thee, o God the Father; and thee o
God, the only begotten son and thee o God, the holy Ghost, proceeding from
them both. I confess thee, to be one, in essence, substance, power and
Majesty; trine in persons, o one holy, and undivided Trinity! Glory be to
the power of the Father: glory be to the wisdom of the son: glory be to
the goodness of the holy Ghost. Glory be to the Father whence all things
proceed: Glory to the Son by whom all things: glory be to the holy Ghost,
in whom all things: Glory to the Father who created us: glory to the Son
who redeemed us: Glory to the holy Ghost who sanctified us.

THE II. MEDITATION.
What the B. Trinity is. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that having by a sirme faith, made our safe approache; having set
down for a certain and undoubted truth, that there is an unity of Deity, in
the Trinity of persons, and having with our whole heart adored it: we may with
an humble Christian confidence draw yet nearer by contemplation, to discover,
in some small measure, what and how it is. To this effect; look, with S.
Athanasius, upon the sun, and noe sooner shall you have discovered it, but
you meet with a natural kind of Trinity, which leads us to that other. To
wit, we discover the body of the Sun, the brightness, and the heat of it.
All which make but one, and the same Sun, though otherwise distinguished in
themselves. The body of it being the source of light, represents the Father;
the brightness, the Son who is light; and the heat, the holy Ghost, who is
a sacred fire, being but all three one and the same God. The sunneit self is
noe older then the light, and heat thereof, so that were the sun eternal the
light and heat would be noe less eternal, or coeternall.

vt videam, that I may see. Say then again to this little blind world of mine
fiat lux, let light be made, and in that light of thine we shall discover light
indeed. And thou, o son of God, who art true light illuminating all men
coming into this world, leave us not in darkness and in the shadow of death.
And thou, o holy fire, who always burnest, and art never extinguished, burn
my reins and heart, that I may serve thee with a chaste body, and please thee
with a clean heart.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER yet again, without going out of our selves, a perfect image of the
holy Trinity. For look but upon our own soul, and we may observe in it, in
the essence of one and the same soul, three powers or faculties, to wit,
Memory understanding and Will: which have three distinct operations, to wit,
remembrance, knowledge, and Love. Nor is love ascribed to the Memory; nor
knowledge to the will; nor remembrance to the understanding. So that we find in
our soul, in some sort what we believe in God, distinction of powers,
diversity of operations, in unity of essence.

prove so disloyal to him, as to thrust him out being entered; or keep him out
when he pleases to knock by his heavenly inspirations, to lodge in his place,
his, and our own worst enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil, O noe,
but rather let our memory be filled with the multitude of his wonders; our
understanding, with his innumerable benefits, and our will be wholly inflamed in
contemplation of so unspeakable a graciousnesse.

THE III. MEDITATION.
Again what the holy Trinity is. I. POINT.
we must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of those that seek
him. But what is he? The Father the word, and the holy Ghost, and these three
are one. And what is that one? He himself tells us by the mouth of Moses. I
am who am. Say (says he) he that is sent me to you. That is, he is the origin
and sou^se of all being, in himself, of himself, and by himself, without
participation, dependence, or assistance of any other: in absolute plenitude,
without beginning or end.

art, and that thou art he indeed who is. Thou art thine own permanent being
thou art the rewarder of those that seek thee. Thee therefore will I incessantly
seek; thee will I desire; thee will I hope for. My very heart has said to
thee, thy face will I seek. O my soul, what a comfortable inquiry is this,
where the very seeking is better then the finding of all things besides?
Where the aim is a permanent being, noe transitory and fading shadow. Where
what is sought is the rewarder, and the reward Ego merces tua magna nimis, I
am thy exceeding great reward. Whose being, as it never had any beginning, so
shall it never have end.

II. POINT.
Who is. For it is a thing of great comfort to be seeking, where we shall be
sure to find more, then we are able to comprehend. It is safe to be seeking
there, where humble ignorance, is a most safe knowledge. Let him be sought,
says S. Augustine, in whom all things prove safe to us. What is he then, who
is, but a substance without beginning, without end? a simple substance without
any mixture. An invisible, incorporeall, ineffable, and inestimable substance,
essence or nature. A substance that has nothing created in it, nor is
increased by addition of any other thing: nor lessened by any substraction. A
substance, finally, subsisting without any Author, because it self is the
Author of all things.

faith presents us with an humble ignorance, which is true wisdom? Why do we
leave substance, and such substance, to pursue Shadows, which the more we
pursue them, the more they fly us, and in the end vanish? Why do we, I say,
quitte pure and permanent substance, and unhappily suffer our selves to stick
fast in the mire of the depth where there is noe substance? Why, finally, do
we fix our hearts upon nothing, while the Author of all things is proposed
unto us? For what indeed is our expectation, o my soul? is it not our Lord?
and is not our substance with him?

THE IV. MEDITATION.
That, he is every where. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that this Blessed Trinity, being. He who is, is indeed every where.
He is even a sea of Essence or being. He is every where, I say, by the same
essence, by his power, by his Presence, and we, run we whither we will, never
escape out of that presence of his. If I shall ascend into heaven, thou art
there. If I descend into Hell, thou art present. If I shall take my wings
early, and dwell in the extreme parts of the Sea: certes thither also shall
thy hand conduct me, etc. Sings the Royal Psalmist.

Lets humble our selves under the powerful hand of God.

That the holy Trinity is every where, and how. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that he is indeed every where: but how? He is so diffused through
all things in the world universally, that he is not as a quality, but as the
creating substance thereof, governing it without labor, sustayning it, with his
three fingers, or by his power, without burden. He is not spredd abroad all
over by bulk or parts, but is all whole every where, as the soul is in the
body, all in all, and all too in every part thereof. He is all in heaven, all
in earth, at one and the same time; and yet is comprised in noe place, limited
by noe time, but is all in himself, from all eternity. So is the Father,
says S. Augustine, so the Son so the holy Ghost, and so the Trinity, one
God.

It is noe small part of knowledge, and we profit not a little, says S. August.
(while in our lowness we pant after the supreme Deity) If we learn by our
pious endeavors, to know that we cannot know him to the full. And though by way
of admiration, we be forced to say (what is this?) as not understanding it? yet
lets rather rejoice, and love, by not finding him, thus to find him; then by
finding him otherwise, not to find him indeed.

THE V. MEDITATION.
He sees all. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that the holy Trinity is not only every where, but sees all things
too, according to that of S. Augustine: as God is all foot, because he is
every where, so is he all eye, because he sees all things, and S. Paul there
is noe creature invisible in his sight, but all things are naked and open to
his eyes. Hence our Father Abraham walked always in his sight. David conceived
that all his ways lay open to his eyes. Hence Ieremies, Daniels, and the other
Prophets prayers, afflictions, and tears, were powered out in his sight.

huge confusion to the wicked to dare that in the sight of a liueing and seeing
God which they durst not in the sight of a miserable man. In the sight of those
heavenly bright eyes, I say, which are far brighter then the Sun, which noe
doors or walls excludes, which equally discouers the most hidden, and the most
open object. O, my soul, how we are even necessitated to do well, who do all
that we do before the eyes of a just judge who sees all, cries out S.
Augustine with fear and shame.

He works all. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the holy Trinity does, not only, see all the good and bad we
do, but he even works in us all the good we do. All our works thou have
wrought in us. Says the Prophet Isay. But one God who works all in all men.
S. Paul. All natural things, by his common concourse. All supernatural
things, by the assistance of his grace. He it is who does that in us which is
pleasing in his sight: from him our good thoughts; our will and performance;
and all our sufficiency.

but as we acknowledge that we have all things from him, by him, and in him:
so that we run to him with humble thanks for all we have received, and humble
suits for all we yet want, saying with S. Augustine: I sing this hymn of
glory to thee, Holy, Holy, Holy, I inuoke thee, o B. Trinity, beseeching thee
to come into me, and make me worthy to be the Temple of thy glory. I beg of
the Father by the Son; I beg of the Son by the Father; I beg of the
holy Ghost by the Father and the Son, that all vice may be far removed from
me, and all virtue wronght in me.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
That the B. Trinity is all in all. I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet further that the B. Trinity does not only work all, but is
even all in all. According to that of s. Paul, that God may be all in all. He
is wisdom in Solomon, goodness in David, patience in Job, faith in Peter,
zeal in Paul, Virginity in John, and all the rest of the virtues and
blessings in the rest: life, salvation, virtue, glory, honor, peace, the
beginning and end of all good things, and the full sacietie and accomplishment
of all our desires; so that the soul that possesses him, desires nothing but
him, and in him, and for him, whom he confesses to be all in all.

who art all in all, grant me grace truly to esteem my self, such as I am;
nothing at all without thee: and that in thee, comforting, I can do all
things. Our hope, our salvation, our honor, o Blessed Trinity! we inuoke
thee, we praise thee, we adore thee, o Blessed Trinity! Too greedy he is,
whom sufficiency, whom abundance whom all in all suffices not. Thou life,
thou light, thou honor, thou glory; thou plenty, thou peace, thou beginning
thou end, thou sacietie, thou all in all, o Blessed Trinity! Grant that all my
thoughts words, and works, may be done to thy glory, and that I may be made
all to all to gain all.

II. POINT.
which is who is? who is every where? who sees all? who works all who is all
in all? What is he? He is immense, and therefore cannot be measured. He is
eternal, and therefore cannnot be reached to. He is infinite, and therefore cannot
be comprehended. But yet what is he? He is an Abisse of goodness; by which all
that is good, is good: an Ocean of beauty, by which all is fair, that is
fair. He is not wise only, but wisdom it self, nor merciful only; but
mercy it self, nor holy and just alone, but sanctity and justice it self.
Goodness beauty, wisdom, mercy, sanctity, justice, not being diverse
qualities in him, one sole, simple, pure, true God, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

yet he can be desired, he can be ardently coueted, he can be sighed, and
sobbed after. He, all whole, so great, so immense, so infinite, so
incomprehensible as he is, can be inioyed for an endless eternity: and even
in time too (o excessive happiness of a Christian heart!) he may be loved,
praised, adored, glorified, by us poor wretches. All glory, then, all praise,
all strength, all power all magnisicence, all beatitude, all mercy be ascribed
to God the Father, and the Son and the holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen.

decorative woodcut of plants
MEDITATIONS UPON THE BLESSED SACRAMENT.
An introduction to fervent and frequent communicating, and motives to the same.
I. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that whereas it is impossible that any work should be well done,
unless we first well conceive and possess what we are going about, we ought
to know that in receiving the B. Sacrament, we go about the greatest work
that man or Angel is capable of, since we we go to pay to God the worship
of Latria which is properly due to himself alone. To receive him into the
narrow cottage of our heart, whom the highest heavens cannot comprehend. To eat
the bread of Angels, the body of the son of God. This is the quality of the
blessed work we aim at.



THE FIRST MOTIVE. Gods proper worship. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that as this Sacrament and Sacrifice, is the only proper worship
due to God: so have we noe other means to worship him according to his
infinite dignity, but this Sacrament and Sacrifice, wherein God the Son (a
person equal to him) is offered to God the Father. But the desire of our heart
is to serve God in the best manner we can, therefore we must needs frequently
desire this Sacrament and Sacrifice.

And make resolutions accordingly.

THE II. MEDITATION.
THE SECOND MOTIVE Love of union with God. I. POINT.
IF we be the true children of Christ, we desire truly and indeed to be true
Christians, and truly to love Christ. But love leads to neerenesse,
familiarity, and union with the thing beloved, therefore must we desire union.
Nor is there a more near and dear union, then to lodge him in our heart,
which is done by receiving this Blessed Sacrament, we must needs then
earnestly desire often to receive this Blessed Sacrament.

and dear, and blesse-full, and glorious union: if by coldness, neglect, or
carelessenesse, we make noe use of it, what do we but declare to the world
that we have not indeed the hearts of children; we have not the Love of
Christians; w^ remain in a lukewarm condition, which God hates, and reiects.

THE THIRD MOTIVE. Gratitude. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that if we be truly grateful for the innumerably many, and great
benefits which we have continually received, and daily do receive, and expect
still to receive from the hand of God, we truly desire some fit means to show
our gratitude: nor can we find any more worthy, more acceptable, more
effectual then to fall upon the Psalmists conclusion, when he was in the same
care: I will receive, says he, the cupp of my Savior. That is, I will offerre
up Christ to his heavenly Father. I must be careful then, frequently to
communicate.

we remain heavy hearted? how long shall we putt unjust rates upon things,
and weigh benefits in deceiptfull balances? Are we not kindly sensible enough
of the small favors which we receive from me^, and do we not find our selves
more then sufficiently lively in point of requital? is it God alone, who made
the heart, that can find noe favor with it? Must toys from the hand of man be
esteemed, and extolled; and must innumerable benefits from the hand of God, be
still undervalued, fall to the ground, or be received as duties? must we steal
time from time to gratify the one, and let time slide idly by, lent to
complie with the other? could we pretend the want of ability, our excuse were
current before men (though as to God there can never be want, where the hearts
desires are admitted for payment) but while we have the most easy, most
acceptable, most effectual means, and yet not make use of it, make we not our
ingratitude to God, evident to all men?

THE III. MEDITATION.
THE FOVRTH MOTIVE Our heavenly Fathers inuitations. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that if we have the true hearts of children we can never turn a deaf
ear to a loving fathers inuitations (especially where they come home to our
own advantages) but our heavenly father earnestly inuites us; some times by
promises of comfort: come unto me all you that are oppressed and I will
refreshe you: some times intices by hopes of life everlasting: he that eats my
flesh, etc. shall live for ever. And sometimes he incites by pressing
necessity: unless you eat the flesh of the son of man etc. you shall not
have life in you. We must needs then be careful to communicate frequently.

and dye, nor yet can we resolve to run to the food which gives sure hopes of
life everlasting. We see our necessity, and cannot find in our hearts to fix
upon the remedy. To wit we are self murderers, we have not indeed hearts
of children, we are deaf to his inuitations and cries, and to our own
advantages and repose. Alas what a miserable senselessenes is this? solace,
life, liberty, God himself is presented. And yet wearied, dying, inthraled
man, looks upon that unspeakable benefit, as a thing oblidging to loss!

THE FIFTH MOTIVE. The Saints example. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that if our absolute aims and desires be to live in everlasting
joys with the Saints of God in heaven, it were but fitting that we should
begin now in earth to honor them, to rejoice them, and to joy with them; but
that can never be done more highly, more dearly, more joyfully, more
acceptably, or more honorably, then by offering this Sacrament to God in their
honor: with care and fervor therefore let us frequently receive this Sacrament.



THE IV. MEDITATION.
The sixth Motive. Our imperfections and misery. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that what is said by S. James, as it is most true; so we all most
willingly acknowledge it: to wit that we all offend in many things; and our
negligences, imperfections, and omissions can scarcely be numbered. But we are
not, by Gods grace fallen in love with our sins, and imperfections: or
resolve to live in them; but truly desire and labor to be freed from them: nor
is there any thing so powerful to expiate crimes, as this Sacrament and
Sacryfice, of which the Council of Trent affirms: that our Lord being
appeased thereby, grantes grace and the gift of penance; and pardons even huge
crimes and sins. To this therefore ought we to have an humble confident, and
frequent recourse.

liberty, and life run hazard to be lost for a communion, what excuses would
not our negligence find? But to slipp over the occasions of so great and
necessary a good to our selves, where the performance is liable to noe loss,
yea is ledd on with so much facility, and called upon by God, and man, and
laudable custom, what reply can be made to this? We grant we need to be
purged: we find grace not too strong in us: we acknowledge the souueraigne
virtue of the remedy presented And yet must cold cras crases. Be still taken
for payment? Ah my soul! Is a longer lying sick likely sooner to cure the
desease? Lets not deceive our selves, we do not indeed so much desire our
cure, as love our languishment.

THE SEVENTH MOTIVE. True Consolation. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that we all find that this worldly pilgrimage of ours, is long and
teadious. That such as are subject to sin, find the^ selueswearied, and worn
out in the paynefull ways of iniquity. That such as are lovers of virtue, and
strive to approach nearest to God, are not exempt from temptations; nay the
tribulations of the just are many: though the Spirit be prompt, yet the body is
infirm, and does weigh down the soul, and they are forced to cry out
mournefully with S. Paul who will deliver us from this mortal body. We all
then both desire, and need consolation: and in this Sacrament we confess we
may receive the God of all consolation. Ought we not then joyfully, and
frequently have recourse to him therein?

that father of mercyes, and God of all consolation, who comforts us in all our
tribulations. Nor can we ever find God more happily, or more comfortably, then
when we receive him really, and truly possess him. Heaven possesses him not
more truly, where he is the eternallioy and beatitude of all the Blessed By how
much more, then, my troubles and temptations are multiplied, by so much more
will I run to that sourse of solace, that fountain of grace, as the wearied
Heart to the fountains of fresh water.

That we ought to receive the B. Sacrament with reverence, fear, and Love, as
the best dispositions. THE V. MEDITATION.
The I. Motive. Of reverence, and fear, etc. I. POINT.
CONSIDER the greatness of his Majesty whom we are to receive, whose essence
or being is ineffable. It cannot be expressed by any definition because it
transcends or outstripps all things. He Is a bottomless sea, and none is able
to sound it, says Solomon: His judgments are incomprehensible: his ways not
to be found out, says S. Paul, He Is higher then the Heavens, and what will
you do? deeper then Hell, and how should you know him, says Job. And yet he
is that, then which nothing is either greater, or better concludes S.
Augustine, with all the world.

receive, from thy bountiful liberality; o Lord, be so excessive great that
works cannot reach it, that words cannot speak it, that thoughts cannot
comprehend it, or even arrive to it. If sight, taste, and touch be all
deceived in it, and bring in evidence of bread only, what rests but infallible
faith which comes into our aid, assuring that it is God indeed which we
receive, who is so the greatest that he is immensitie it self, and so the best
that he is goodness it self, a vaste Ocean which can never be sounded, and so
leaves us (as it were) in that blessefully vnsatisfactorie satisfaction, that a
Christian heart is capable of more happiness, then it has capacity to
comprehend. Prone laid then in our own incapacitie, and misery, let us fear,
reverence, and love that immense Majesty, which we have the happiness to
receive into our breasts, but have not power to comprehend it.

THE II. MOTIVE. Of fear, etc. II. POINT.
CONSIDER yet the greatness of his Majesty, by the words, and comportments of
the Saints, and Angels, who see and know him. For it is even he, whom that
greatest among the sonns of women feared to touch. It is he, whom the Prince
of the Apostles, through fear put a way from him, saying: Go from me, o Lord,
for I am but a sinful man. It is he, in whose presence the pillars of heaven
quake, the Dominations adore, and the Powers tremble: and in his sight the
Cherubins and Seraphins fall down and hide their faces.

to stoop down from our high thoughts; to look upon our small stature, our
noe ability, our nothing, worthy to appear in his sight; and fourth-with to
lay the doors of our heart wide open, and leave him at the least in the free
and absolute possession of that nothing of ours, whose custom it is, out of
nothing, to work great things. Finally lets for him, and in him, give half
the riches of our hearts (to wit love) to our poor neighbor, and if hitherto
we have defrauded him of that due debt, lets restore, by loving him hereafter
fouretymes as much.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
The III. Motive. Of reverence, etc. I. POINT.
CONSIDER with that veneration and dread we are to approach to the Blessed
Sacrament by reason of the great nobility and dignity thereof, as being
superlatiuely most excellent in all respects. Since it conteynes whole Chr. in
his three substances. His sacred flesh; his reasonable soul; his blessed
divinity. The first (as being conceived of purest Virginal blood, by the
work of the holy Ghost, and being hypostatically united to the divinity) does
far exceed all corporeal substances. The second, as inioying the plenitude
of all virtue and wisdom, exceedingly passes all spiritual creatures. The
third, as being God, infinitely outstripps all things that either are, or can
even be imagined.

in which dwells all the fullness of the Godhoode corporally that is, by the
union of the Deity to the very substance of that soul, and that body, whereby
they become, not figuratively, but really and in very deed God, man, a
humanized God, a deifyed man. Sed quomodo fiet istud? how should this be done?
By what care, by what cost, by what abilities of ours? Alas, my soul, by noe
other means, then by the virtue of the highest; by the assistance of the holy
Ghost, who wrought those heavenly wonders, in the Virgins womb.

THE FOVRTH MOTIVE. Of reverence etc. Our own poverty and nothing. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that if this blessed Sacrament ought to be received with so much
reverence and dread, in respect of the greatness and Majesty of the giver,
and the excellency of the gift; how much more ought the same to be done, if we
look well into the indignity of the receiver. It is not an Angel, a Cherubin
or Seraphin, who is sorted out for this great work; not now an unspotted
Virgin replenished with grace, but even a poor man borne of a woman,
replenished with all the infirmities and miseries imaginable.

Lord who art thou, and who am I? Thou art infinite Majesty: I excess of
misery. Thou purity and sanctity it self: I impuritie, corruption, and
rottenness. Thou my God and all things: I the clay which thou framedst, the
slave which did redeem, and compared to thee, even a mere nothing.

THE VII. MEDITATION.
The 5. Motive. Of reverence etc. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that if my natural poverty and misery (which are punishments, that
the infection of another sin conveyed upon me) administer so just occasion,
of humiliation, fear, and reverence, in the approach to the dreadful
Majesty, which I am to receive: what a huge weight of apprehension, and
confusion, must not my own voluntary, and ordinary sins needs load upon
me? Here we need to use noe amplification, nor exaggeration. Let every one
look into the book of his own conscience and read, and with the whole
humility of his heart say. Peccauimus, inique egimus, etc.

quod non sum dignus, sed amo, I am not worthy, but I do, or heartily desire,
to love. Non sum ignarus, sed amo, I am not ignorant of thy worth, and mine
own indignity, but I love. It is not presumption then, dear and dread Lord,
that leads me, but love. Nor can even that be accomplished in me by mine own
endeavors, but by thy grace, and where should I seek, or hope to find it, but
in thy very self the fountain of all grace? Resolution with all the fear,
reverence, and love then my heart is capable of, I humbly approach unto thee etc.

THE VI. MOTIVE. Of Reverence, etc. II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that if the indignity of the receiver, compared to the Majesty of
the person received, ought to strike us with reverence and fear etc. So ought
it noe less to add to our care and diligence, in making the preparation. Were
a King to entertayne a King, the equality of their persons, might justly
abbate part of the care, because his ordinary magnificence, leads near to
what is due: nay were it some great Lord or Courtier that were to receive a
King, he were at least no stranger to regal state: but when the King daynes to
divert to the cottage of some poor swayne, alas how he is lost, having neither
equality, nor quality, nor skill, nor riches to bear him out. And yet, the
poorest clown is equal to the greatest King, in quality of man, a reasonable
creature, whereas between God and man there is no proportion at all.

what can we do, my soul, but in contemplation of Gods admirable Majesty,
and our own vnspeakle misery, with an humblely confident confusion, cry out
with the Centurion, that we are poor, miserable, unworthy creatures; far,
far unfit to receive such Majesty under our poor roof, unless by his
powerful word (by which he made heaven, and Earth, and all the provisions
comprised therein) he give himself the welcome, pronouncing a blissing of peace
to the poor, ruinous, disorderly house of our heart, saying: pax huic domui,
that so the people of our family, our passions, being quieted, and putt in a
high silence, our poor hearts may sing, a thousand good wishes to him, and call
all the creatures (knowing their own poverty and incapacitie at home) to
join with them to ringe a full peale of praises to his glorious name for ever.

THE VIII. MEDITATION.
What Preparation we are to use. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that one of the best parts of our preparation, is to know and putt
down for certain, that of our selves, we are not able worthily to prepare our
selves. Nothing but fire is able perfectly to dispose wood to receive the
form of fire. Nor is there any thing but God, can dispose man worthily to
receive God. What ever is good in our heart is his gift, as well as the heart it
self. It can indeed wish well, and move toward God, but it is from him, and
by him, and in him. Thou must then, o God, prevent, dispose, purify,
beautify, work all in us; because thou do love us; and thou do love us,
because thou have loved us from all eternity.

prayers to beg of thy goodness to enable us. How this great work is to be
performed we truly know not, yet this we know, that if the holy Ghost descend
upon us, and the virtue of the highest ouershade us, our hearts will be made an
agreeable habitacle to thy Majesty. Cleanse us then o Lord, and we shall be
clean, and pure, as thou command, but give o Lord what thou command, and
command what thou will.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though none but God can dispose man worthily to receive God,
yet will not God work without our consent and cooperation; to wit he
disposes every thing sweetly, according, to the nature of things; he will not
therefore force man's free will, nor work without it, but will have it to run
with him following that. Do thou draw me and we (both) will run. And that of
S. Aug. Unless thou were an operator or woker, God would not be a cooperator.
Hence it is said, convert yourselues to me, and I will turn toward you. Draw
near to God, and he will draw near to you. In vain do we hope any thing
shall be done, unless we contribute our own endeavors to Gods preventing and
cooperating grace, which yet runs before all or endeavors, the will being
prepared by our Lord.

that having done all we can, we are but poor and unprofitable Servants.

THE IX. MEDITATION.
The best preparation, a good life. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, that properly speaking, what is to be done on our part, is,
punctually to complie with our duty And what is the duty of a Christian, but
to live Christianly? that is, to imitate him, whom we worship, Jesus Christ:
to endeavor continually to express his life in ours, according to every ones
state and measure: daily to meditate his holy law of love, and faithfully to
keep his commandments. To such he willingly comes with such he takes up his
Mansion.

He that is not worthy daily to receive, will not be worthy a year hence) But
a constant practice of virtue all the week long; and a perseuerant resolution
to subdue our vicious inclinations, and never to desiste till we have prepared
in our hearts a place for our dear Lord a clean tabernacle for the God of
Jacob.

The necessary preparation. The state of grace. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the immediate, and absolutely necessary preparation, is (if we
will not turn our souueraigne food into poison, and eat our own damnation)
to be in the state of grace: that is, that our consciences are neither
certainly guilty of mortal sin, nor reasonably doubtful of the same, nor
that we live in the nearest or absolute occasions thereof. To which we must add
(if we have the hearts of true Christians; if great advancement in virtue be
our aim, if we desire not only to have life, but to have it more abundantly)
the freeing of our selves of the fantomes and fumes of mortal sin; affection
to venial sin, with our best endeavors to procure in our hearts a hunger and
thirst of this sacred food. For this bread, says S. Augustine, requires
hunger in the interior man.

to be cast out into utter darkness. A pitiful spectacle to God and Angels,
to see death drunk out of the fountain of life. To see poison drawn out of
that sweeter then honey comb. And by wanting the second, howeuer we remain a
live, we do but languish. Our sparing sowing, can but hope for a poor croppe.
The heavenly operation is too much stratened in such narrow hearts. God is not
delighted, where he finds so little delight. Is it possible, my soul, that
where we meet with so good measure, and pressed down and shaken togeither,
and running over, we should so sparingly measure back again That where God
gives himself wholly, man should render himself by halfes?

THE X. MEDITATION.
Not Solicitude, but love disposes, etc. I. POINT.
CONSIDER, and putt down for certain; that use we what care we will; what
solicitous examination, and squeesing of conscience we can possibly imploye,
yet shall we never appear agreeable in our heavenly spouses sight, never be
grateful to the God of virtues, unless we come adorned with his virtues,
especially those which he sent from heaven, to wit faith, hope, and Charity.
Hear S. Benard how much soever you purge your selves; how much soever you
torture and torment your selves; the God of virtues will not come unto you,
unless you be adorned with the virtues.

him a grateful entertaynement; lovingly embraces him, and deliciously feasts
with him, and on him. And humbly and chastely dares enterchange sacred kisses
with him. Nothing but sweet words, as, my beloved is mine, and I am his, is
heard. Lets thus my soul, find out, receive, and entertayne our dear spouse.

2. Point.
Consider that faith, hope, and charity, can never be more profitably, and
agreeably employed, to the making up of a perfectly good preparation, then upon
the death and passion of our dear Savior, who left us himself in this
Blessed Sacrament for a special memory thereof. saint Bernard gives us this
assurance. With such ornaments as these, is our heavenly Spouse delighted, and
gladly enters he into the Bride chamber of the heart, where he finds the
ensigns of his Passion; his Cross, crown, and lance, diligently reflected
upon, and made familiar.

ignominiously dying? Where could hope more firmly ancor, then where it met
with such excess of mercy? Where could charity so delightfully solace it
self, as in the continual memory of a God dying for love? Let our thoughts
then, o my soul, be wholly taken up in the memory of Jesus Christ, and him
crucified.

decorative woodcut of plants
THE INSTITVTION OF the B. Sacrament.
THE XI. MEDITATION.
Of the truth of the real presence.
And while they supped Jesus took bread, and Blessed and broke, and gave to
his Disciples and said: take and eat, this is my body etc. Matt. 26. Mar. 14.
Luc. 22. And. S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11. says. I received from our Lord what I
deliuerd unto you: because our Lord Jesus the night in which he was delivered,
took bread: and giving thanks broke and said: take and eat this is my body
which shall be delivered for you: do this in remembrance of me.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that either these testimonies do manifestly and infallibly conclude
the truth of the realitie of our Saviors presence in the consecrated host, or
else we can never expect any certain truth out of holy Scripture: Nothing is
more unanimously delivered in all Scripture. This is my body says S. Matthew:
This is my body, says S. Mark. This is my body, says Saint Luke. This is my
body, concluds saint Paul. Noe words can be devised, either shorter, or
clearer, to express the same truth. The nature of the business exacted
clearenes; for he gave us an example of what we were to do, in imitation and
memory of him; and again it was a last will (and that some few hours only
before he knew he was to dye for us) wherein all men strive to express
themselves clearly, and sincerely, without all varnish, trope, figure,
equivocation, or mental reservation, as far as may be.

by hisbodie, to understand not his body? to wit, bread? Would the goodness
and wisdom of heaven, in his very last words, have left to his dear Spouse
the Church, an inevitable occasion of error, and perpetual Idolatry, ever
since? Far is it from a Christian understanding, and far be it ever from the
hearts of thy servants, whom thou feedest with thy flesh, which is truly meat,
and with thy blood which is truly drink. We devoutly adore thee, o hidden
Deity, who art truly and really under the forms of bread and wine. Let Us
rather dye then deny, depart from, or entertain the least doubt, of this
certain Truth.

Of the time of the institution.
2. Point.
Consider that our Savior instituted this Sacrament of love, in a time where
most love and tenderness uses to be expressed: to wit, at his last supper with
his Apostles, as the last memory of a dying man: as a pledge of his love,
which he desired to imprint deeply in their hearts. And this too expressed in
words full of love. Desiderio desideraui I have earnestly desired to eat this
Pascall or passe-ouer with you, before I suffer. To wit, the present
apprehension of his paynefull death, is not able to allay the pressings of his
tender love, of which he will even leave himself a pledge.

deed of gift of his body and blood; left for our food? And that too,
acompaigned with dearest expressions love could invent. (...) have exceeding
earnestly desired to eat this Passc^all with you, before my departure. And
wilt not thou then o my soul, fervently approach to this Sacrament, desiring it
with all the desires of thy heart, not receiving it with coldenesse, and out of
custom? etc.

OF THE CAUSES OF THE Institution of the B Sacrament.
THE XII. MEDITATION.
The 1. Cause to leave a Sacryfice, Gods worship.
CONSIDER that Christ did institue this Blessed Sacrament and Sacryfice, that
the holy Church his spouse, might be always provided of a means to offer to
God the highest worshipe imaginable, yea even condign and proportionable to
his own infinite dignity, while a victime of an infinite value is offered to
him, to wit Christ, God and man? and there-for equal to himself; as worthy,
as good, as great as himself, so that nothing either greater or better, can
either be paid, owen, or exacted? nay even be wished for, or imagined, by the
wisdom of heaven it self.

as proceeding from a pure and poor creature, was base and vile, and bore noe
proportion to the great Creator. What does he then do, but bestow a sone;
and that sone, himself upon us in this Sacred Mystery: himself; not whit
inferior to his heavenly father; and by that means inables us to make an
offering of equal worshipe, and to pay more then we could even contract* O too
too rich and happy Christians, if we would know and consider our own worth
and happiness!

The second Cause. To lean us a Legacy of Love. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the second cause of the Institution of this B. Sacrament, was to
testify the greatness of his love to his faithful, according to that of S.
John Jesus knowing that his hour approached, that he was to depart out of this
world to his heavenly father, whereas he loved his who were in the world, he
loved them to the end. Whereby, as in his incarnation he united our flesh to his
divinity by an hypostaticall union, so does he in the Euchariste, unite the
same to the said divinity Sacramentally, and does as it were incorporate it,
and render it divine.



THE XIII. MEDITATION.
Tbe third Cause. That he might remain with us. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that the third cause of the institution of the Blessed Sacrament was,
that so he might leave himself to us, and be always present with us, that we
might familiarly converse and coferr with him; consult him in all our doubts,
have recourse to him in all our difficulties, pressures, temptations and
tribulations; making good in effect that of the Proverbs My delights are to be
with the sons of men S. Fran. It is a great misery, and a lamentable
infirmity, that having him so present, we yet should care for any other thing
in the world.

our nobiscum Deus? our God with us. No other nations have their Gods so near,
as our God is near to us. Thou art always with us, dear Lord, and thou have
the words of eternal life; to whom then shall we go for Counsel, for
comfort, for assistance in all our difficulties; but to thee alone, who have
given us such assurances of thy singular love, and shown in effect, that thou will not leave us Orphants, but wilt gather us together, as the henn gathers
her chickens under her wings? Remain with us then, dear Lord, and we will
stay with thee; nor will we ever depart, or remove our selves from (...) at
blessed protection of thine.

The fourth Cause etc. Toleaue us a representation of his Passion. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that a fourth cause of the inst. of the B. Sacram. was, that by his
last will he might leauevs an Idea, formeor representation of his life and
Passion, which might continually refresh in every one of us the memory of our
Redemption purchaced at so dear a price, as his own precious blood. For while
we look upon the species of the bread alone, the dead body of our sweet
Savior is represented unto our mynds, and by the species of the wine alone, we
are put in mind of the effusion of his precious blood: whence S, Paul: as
often as you eat this bread, and drink this cupp you shall announce, or
declare, the death of our Lord till he come.

represent unto thee, and putt thee in mind of the dead body of thy dear
Master. And this which thou see under the species of the wine alone, to renew
to thee the effusion of his precious blood. And both togeither cry loud to
our hearts as from his sacred mouth, Christians, friends, at least you my
spouses. Remember my bloody sweat. Remember the scorns and contumelies I
suffered. Remember my patience, and humility in the midst of them. Remember my
vinegar and gale, my huge torments, my utter abandonmentes, and for love of
you. As often as you do this, do it in memory of me.

THE XIV. MEDITATION.
The fifth Cause. The exercise of all virtues. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that a fifth cause of the Inst. of the B. Sacrament was, to leave a
continual occasion of the exercise of all virtues. Our Faith is exercised,
while we believe, that a whole God and man lies hidd, and is contained really,
and truly, though inuisiby, under a small host. Our Hope, while seeing him
daily and hourly bestow himself, we cannot despair of obtaining any thing
less then himself. Our Charity, while we look into his open side which is a
furnace of inflamed love. Religion, adoreing him with sovereign worshipe or
Latria; Our obedience and humility, while captiuating our under standing in
obedience to faith, we constantly believe (maugre the suggestion of our senses
and our natural reason) that God lies truly hidd under these slender and mean
accidens of bread and wine.

This is my body. And I embrace his word and adorc him. And whom I adore
present by a goodness which has nothing like to it, how should I not wholly
conside. How should I but hope in him whom I have for a pledge in hand, that
he will himself be my reward for ever. And how should I not love him, who so
graciously stays with me here below; and reserues himself for me above I do
ther-for confess thee present; confide in thee; love and worship thee, o
Lord and stoop down to this admirable mystery of Love, with all the
humility and obedience my heart is able to conceive.

The sixth Cause etc. A memorial to prevent oblivion. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that the sixth cause of this Sacred Institution was to leave a means
to remove the greatest mischeife that can befall a poor creature, which is the
oblivion of his Creator. They forgot God who saved them, says the Psalmist,
their hearts departed from him who made them; And what became of it but
coruption and abomination, corrupti sunt and abominabiles facti sunt. For by
oblivion of God we loose divine grace; wax ugly and deformed by the infection
of sin; and become slaves to the Devil.

we ever be sovnhappie as to forgett, him, in whom we live, move, and have
being? who while we yet were not, raised us to what we are. Who while we
abused that being, and strayed from him, had for us thoughts of peace and not
of affliction thoughts of reconcilement and salvation Can a Mother, says that
Lover of Men, forgett the child of her body and though she should yet would I
never forgett you. Ah how should we forgett him, Isay, who least he might have
been forgotten by us, continues still with us; leaving us noe less memorial
of himself, then himself. O be thou ever blessed, and magnified, my dearest
Lord, And be they ever accursed who forgett thee, who art the fountain of
living waters flowing into life everlasting.

THE XV. MEDITATION.
The seventh Cause: That being fedd with divine food, we might become divine.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that a seventh cause of the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament
was; to thend that being continually fedd and delighted with his heavenly body,
we might be wayned from, and contemn the gliding delights of earthly ones,
with all their paynefull delights and concupiscences; and thereby leading a
spiritual and heavenly, not a terreane life; that that of Saint Paul, may
indeed, as it ought, be verifyed of us. I live, now not I, but Christ lives in
me.



The eight Cause. The continual presence of the Angels. II. POINT.
CONSIDER as an eight cause of the Institution of the B. Sacrament, the
continual presence of the B. Angels of heaven; for as S, Chrysostom says,
Where Christ is in the Euchariste, there are not wanting the frequent troops
of Angels, Ambrose; where this body is, there the Eagles are gathered
togeither, fluttering about with their spiritual wings. I says he, in another
place, the Eagles are about the Altar where the body is.

same Gloria's, Alleluia's and Sanctus, Sanctus Sanctus.

THE XVI. MEDITATION.
Of the excellency of the Blessed Sacrament. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that our Savior Jesus Christ, as a most tender, gracious, and
bountiful father, made a most excellent and admirable will and testament, and
left us thereby a legacy more precious and better then heaven and earth; to
wit, his most sacred body for our daily food, and his Blessed blood for our
drink.



II. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though it were an ineffable dignation; far, passing the
invention of men and Angels, that he who was in the beginning with God, and
was even God himself, should build himself a cottage of our clay, and become
man, like one of us indeed; yet does it far surpass, that again, to see
the same, not only take our humanity, but bestow upon us also his divinity,
conjoined and united with the same humanity, to dwell in us, to take up his
delights, and suppe with us, and even to become our repast and nourishment.



THE XVII. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.


to be chosen to be the habitacles and temples of the adorable Trinity.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER: how God could neither have depressed himself lower, or raised us
higher, then that the bread of Angels should become the poor pilgrims food;
then that the Creator should be the creatures meat; then that he who fills
heaven and earth with the glory of his divine Majesty, should be received and
handled and eaten, by our misery: the highest heavens are not able to comprize
his Magnitude, and yet he will please to inhabit the narrow spaces of our
howses of clay.

but even by the presence 'and application of his own precious body and blood?

III. POINT.
CONSIDER that Christ comes unto us, accompayned with a thousand blessings; for
he brings into the soul that worthily receaues him, what ever virtue he
practiced in his life: all the fruit of his Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension, the beatitude of his most Blessed body; the efficacy of his most
precious blood; and the merits of his most excellent soul; and in a word, all
that ever can be desired, or imagined.



PRAYERS BEFORE AND after receiving.
A prayer of S. Thomas of Aquin before receiving the Blessed Sacrament.
ALMIGHTY and eternal God, behold I approach to the Sacrament of thy only
begotten son, our Lord Jesus Christ; I approach, as one that is sick to the
Physician of life, as one unclean to the fountain of mercy; as one that is
blind to the light of eternal brightness; as one poor and needy, to the Lord
of heaven and of earth? I beseech thee therefore by the abundance of thy
infinite bounty, that thou would vouchsafe to cure my infirmity, to wash
my uncleanness, to enlighten my blindness, to enrich my poverty, to clothe my
nakedness; that I may receive thee, the bread of Angels, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, with as great reverence and humility, with as great contrition and
devotion; with as great purity and faith, with such an intention and purpose,
as is expedient for the health of my soul; grant I beseech thee, that I may
not only receive the Sacrament of our Lords body and blood, but the effect
also, and virtue of the Sacrament. O most mylde Lord, grant that I may so
receive the body of thy only begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
took of the Virgin Marie, that I may be worthy to be incorporated in his
mystical body, and be numbered among the members thereof. O most loving father,
grant that I may at length, behold thy beloved Son, face to face for ever,
whom I now purpose to receive veyled under the form of bread. Who lives and
reigns with thee, in unity of the holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer of Thomas a Kempis before receiving.
MY Lord God, prevent thy servant in the blessings of thy sweetness, that I may
deserve to approach worthily and devoutly to thy holy Sacrament; stir up my
heart unto thee, and deliver me from all heaviness and sloth: visit me with thy
comfort, that I may taste in Spirit thy sweetness, which plentifully lies hid
in this Sacrament, as in its fountain. Give light also to my eyes, to behold
so great a mystery, and strengthen me to believe it with undoubted faith. For
it is thy work and not man's power; thy sacred institution, not man's invention.
For no man is of himself able to comprehend and understand these things, which
surpass the understanding even of Angels. What therefore shall I unworthy
sinner, earth and ashes, be able to search and comprehend of so high and sacred
a mystery?

O Lord, in sincerity of heart, with a good and firm faith, and at thy
commandment, I come to thee with hope and reverence, and do verily believe,
that thou art here present in the Sacrament, God and Man. Thy holy pleasure is,
that I receive thee, and by charity unite my self unto thee. Wherefore I do
recurre to thy Clemency, and do crave special grace, that I may wholly melt
in thee, and abound with love, and hereafter never admit any other comfort.
For this most high and worthy Sacrament, is the health of the soul and body,
the remedy of all spiritual sickness: by it, my vices are cured, my passions
bridled, temptations overcome or weakened, greater grace infused, virtue begun,
increased, faith confirmed, hope strengthened, and charity inflamed and
enlarged.

A prayer after receiving, by S. Thomas of Aquine.
I Give thee thanks, o holy Lord, father almighty, eternal God, that thou
have pleased to saciate me a sinful creature, and thy unworthy servant,
through noe merits of mine, but only by the free gift of thy mercy, with the
precious body and blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ. And withal I
beseech thee, that this holy Communion, may not prove a guilt liable to
punishment, but a powerful mediation for my pardon. Let it be an armor of
Faith, and a shield of a good will to me. Grant that it may free me from vice;
subdue concupiscence and lust, increase Charity, Patience, Humility,
Obedience, and all other virtues; may it prove a strong defense against the
guiles of all visible and invisible enemies: may it perfectly appease all my
carnal and spiritual motions, firmly unite me to thee o thou one only, and
true God, and put a happy periode to my pilgrimage. And voutchsafe, I beseech
thee, to lead me home to that ineffable banquet, where thou with thy Son, and
the holy Ghost, art a true light to thy Saints, a complete sacietie, an
everlasting gladness, an absolute joy, and a perfect felicity. Amen.

A prayer after receiving the Blessed Sacrament by S. Bonauenture.
PEARCE through the marrow, and bowels of my soul, o sweet Savior Jesus, with
the most sweet and wholesome wound of thy love; thy true, clear, Apostolical
and most holy charity: that my soul may continually languish and even melt,
with the love, and ardent desire of thee alone. Let it earnestly covet thee and
fainte away with a longing desire after thy heavenly Mansions; let it desire to
be dissolved, and to be with thee. Grant, that my soul may hunger after thee,
the bread of Angels, the food of holy souls, our daily supersubstantiall
bread, replenished with all sweetness and pleasure, and all the delights found
therein: let my heart always hunger after thee, and feed on thee whom the
Angels desire to behold: and let the very bowels of my soul be filled with
thy delicious sweetness: let it always thirst after thee, the fountain of
life, the fountain of wisdom and knowledge, the fountain of eternal light,
the torrent of pleasure, the plentifulnesse of the house of God: let it always
earnestly covet thee, seek thee, and find thee: let it tend to thee, come to
thee, think on thee, speak of thee, and work all things to the praise and
glory of thy name, with humility and discretion, with love and delight, with
facility and affection, with perseverance unto the end: and thou alone be
always my hope, my whole confidence, my riches, my content, my mirth, my joy,
my rest and tranquillity, my peace, my dear delight, my odor, my sweetness, my
food and refection, my refuge, my help, my wisdom, my portion, my
possession, my treasure, wherein my mind and heart may be always, constantly,
strongly, and immouably rooted. Amen.

Aspirations or prayers before receiving culled out of S. Augustine.
COME, my dear Jesus; come o thou light of my eyes, let me love thee. Come o
thou solace of my heart, let me love thee. Come o thou life of my soul, let me
love thee. O my dear delight; my sweet consolation, my God, my life, my love,
my all. O thou only desire of my heart, let me possess thee alone. O thou love
of my soul, let me embrace thee; o dear celestial spouse, let me enjoy thee.
O sovereign sweetness, and eternal beatitude of my soul, let me lodge thee,
and lock thee up in the center of my heart In that heart, which thou have made
to thy self, and for thy self, and it will not, it cannot rest save in thee
alone.

I love thee, o my dear Jesus, and I am still desiring to love thee more and
more. For in very dead, thou art sweeter then any honey; more nourishing then
any milk; more delicious then all that is delightful. O inflamed Love, who
art ever burning, and art never quenched, do thou inflame me. Let me, I say,
be wholly inflamed by thee, that so I may wholly love thee: For, alas, he loves
thee too little who loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for thee.

Come, dear Jesus, come into my soul, which thou thy self have prepared
toward the receiving of thee, through the desire wherewith it was inspired by
thee. Enter into it, I beseech thee, and make it fit for thy self, that as
thou have made it, and redeemed it, thou may also possess it, and place thy
self as a seal upon it.

Give me thy self, o my God, restore thy self to me, for all things which
are not my very God are nothing to me. I love thee: o my god, I love thee and
if it be yet too little, ah! make me love thee more and more ardently.

Who am I, and who art thou, dear Lord? who am I, I say, that the King of
heaven, the God that made me, should come to visit me? Alas, my Lord, I am not
ignorant, but I love. I am not presumtuous, but I love. I even quake to
approach to thee; but alas without thee, I quite languish and dye. Great
indeed is my misery; yet infinitely greater is thy mercy. And whither, my ever
merciful Lord, should my languishing Soul run from thee, but to thee?

O that I were able to receive thee, with that humility, obedience, love and
fervor that thy Sacred Virgin Mother conceived thee! O that I had the burning
love of an Angel, to receive thee, the food of Angels!

O thou spouse of my soul, come quickly unto me; Come, wound my heart with thy
love. Come take up thy mansion, and repose in my poor breast. Come, sweet
Jesus, come away; delay noe longer; the heart which thou love, is infirm, and
languisheth for thy presence. Come health, come life, come thou only desire of
my soul.

Immediately before receiving, say.

O my soul! behold! thy spouse is coming* Go out and meet him. He is thy
Creator, thy Lord, thy King, thy father, thy Pastor, thy Physician, thy
Crucified Love, Jesus Christ, who lovingly paid down his own precious blood
for thy ransom; and leaves himself wholly for thy food.

Aspirations, etc. presently after receiving.
I Have found thee, I have found thee, whom my heart loves; nor shall thou
depart from me, but lodge between my breasts. I hold thee, I possess thee, I
enjoy thee in this narrow cottage of my heart, whom the heavens cannot
comprehend. O kiss me with a kiss of thy heavenly sweet mouth, my dear
Jesus; for thy breasts are better then the most deliciously parfumed wine. Thy
name is oil powered out: thy voice sweet, thy face comely, and thou art wholly
fair, and desiderable.

O bread of life, bread of Angels, sanctuary of souls! O sweet and secreete
comforter of holy hearts! O heavenly Spouse, o Jesus my dearest love! O riches
of the soul, solace of the afflicted, food of the famished! O my joy, my
glory, and all my Beatitude! Noe other nation had ever their Gods so near to
them, as our God is near to us, who comes himself to feed us with his
glorious body and blood. O unspeakable grace; o admirable favor! o infinite
Charity!

What is this that I feel? what fire is this that inflames my heart? How
sweetly does it hear! How secreetly does it shine How delightfully does it
burn! O Goodness! Goodness! Goodness! so old and so new. Too late, too late
alas have I loved thee! who art indeed my only dear and saciating delight.

Resolutions after receiving.
1. Since, by a mercy never sufficiently admired, I have received God himself,
as a pledge of his excessive love to me. The whole love of my poor heart, shall
be continually imployd to render him love for love. Being daigned with his love
I will noe more stoop down to the love of creatures, but in him, and for him.

2. Since I have received thy self, as a Memorial of all thy wonders, my
memory shall be wholly employed to represe^t unto my thoughts the abismall
humiliations, and sweet Mysteries of thy Nativity: the divine lessons, and
labors and wonders of thy blessed life: the ineffable torments, contempts,
abandonements, and patience of thy bitter passion: the singular dearness of
thy precious blood powered out for me: thy Law of love: thy innumerable benefits
and graces heaped upon me: etc.

3. Since I have had the happiness to be fedd, with the food of Angels, I
will never more so unhappily debase my self as prodigally to feed with swine.
I will not after so noble a banquet, fall upon dunge etc. But rather Angell-like
incessantly, with hunger of heart, feed of that food, and sing his praises:
Pronouncing many times (especially that day.)

My beloved has testified to my heart, that he is mine: and I am his.
His delights are to be with me: and mine shall ever be, to be with him.
I will pierce the heavens with my heart: and in my cogitations I will always
be with my God.
My beloved shall be to me a posie of Myrre, and shall dwell betwixt my
breasts.
Stay with us, o Lord, stay with us, because it grows late.
We perish, o Lord, we perish; and better it is we should not be, then be
without thee, My God, and my all.
A way how to exercise a loving and filial sorrow continually, for the greatest
sins of our life past.
O Dear Jesus! woe is me that ever I did offend thee. Alas, my dearest Lord, it
had been but just, if I had been lost for ever. But thy myld mercy prevented
me. Yes, my soul, it was indeed the mere mercy of our Lord that we were not
consumed Nisi quia Dominus adiuuit me, paulo minus habitasset in inferno anima
mea. Had not our Lord assisted me by his special grace, my soul had been
little less at this hour then inhabitant of Hell. Yet in that mercy I am
humbly confident thou art now with me; because I have conceived a firm purpose
to amend my life in general, and such and such a fault or imperfection in
particular (making a reflection of what fault most reigns in your heart)
remain therefore with me, dearest Father, and I Will remain with thee. And will
not be separated from thee for ever. For alas, my dear Savior, without thee I
am neither able to advance one foot, nor even stay where I am; since in very
deed without thee, I am nothing, I have nothing, I can do nothing. There is
nothing that is good either from me, or in me, or by me. But all good flows
eternally from that vast Ocean of thy essential Goodness. Grant therefore,
dear Jesus, that I may live in thee and to thee, and that I may dye to the
world; and to all its pompes and vanities, and even to all creatures, but in
thee, and for thee. Let my senses dye, which begett bastard desires in me. And
keep my eyes for ever fixed upon my crucified Lord and Love, who is my life,
my health my strength my salvation. I was even wholly plunged in death, and thou
have wholly revived me. And therefore as all my whole life and being are thine,
so I offer up my whole self to thee. Let my whole Spirit, my whole heart, my
whole body and my whole life, live to thee. Yes my dear life! thou have
delivered me wholly, that thou might possess me wholly. Let me love thee dear
Lord, let me love thee, as much as I desire, and as much as I ought O dearest
heavenly Father! what my heart most desires, or desires to desire, is but what
thy heavenly heart most earnestly demands, and most absolutely commands, knocking
instantly, incessantly, at this poor miserable heart of mine; to wit, that I
should love thee. Give then, ah give then, what thou command, and command
what thou will. Amen.

PRAYERS TAKEN OVT OF THOMAS A KEMPIS.
A Prayer for the Love of virtue; and the hatred of Vice.
O Lord God of virtues, to whom every best thing belongs, ingraue the love of
thy most sweet name upon my heart. Plant the roots of true virtues in me, and
make the seeds of holy Mediation, with the vardant freshnes of good works,
increase and sprout up, least I remain idle in thy house, like an unfruitful
tree; but rather tille me as a fruitful olive, and absolutely root out, and
reduce to nothing, whatsoever thou find vicious in me. Grant me grace to
hate my vices, give me force, victoriously to conquer my passions, to mortify
my concupiscences, and to suppress the motions of my pride in me, to appease
anger, to expelle sloth, to detest avarice, to repulse bad sadness, to
contemn glory, to fly honor, and to renounce all earthly consolations; so
that nothing that is terreane, frail, vain, curious, carnal, fawning, harsh,
covetous, base, false, or feyned, may touch, move, entice, catch ensnare, or
seduce my heart.

Grant that I may loath all terreane things, earnestly desire eternal things,
love what ever is good, attain to all virtue, know the prime truth, and enjoy
eternal felicity. Grant that I may meet with a blessed and happy hour of
death; and in the interim continually walk in thy fear and love. Free my heart
from all creatures, and from every thing which might hinder or obscure the
same. Grant that I may be simple, pure, and all glewed to thee, and wholly
adheare unto thee. Grant me true internal, and divine peace, and that I may
possess a quiet mind, deuoide of all perturbation.

Grant, that I may not be viciously affected to any temporal thing: nor
desire to be known, cared for, or be foolishlie loved by men; because they all
seduce, and are seduced, who inordinatly desire, or love any thing out of thee.
Permit me not to draw any one to me by flattery and obsequiousness: but
wisely to remove all men from my self, and securely direct them to thee; and
not to love or look upon any thing in man, or any creature, save what is
thine, and for what they were made.

A Prayer for patience in time of tribulation, and anguish of heart.
O My beloved Lord God, my holy Father, I am not worthy to be comforted, and
visited by thee, but to be chasticed and whipped with sharp stripes. I have
well deserved many afflictions and tribulations, because I have grecuiously
offended, and been vngratful for thine innumerable benefits. I am not worthy,
as are the rest of good faithful Christians, and my devout brethren, to be
recreated with divine consolations, and to be numbered among the heavenly
banqueters But I humbly beseech thee, o my holy Father, my dear and pious
Lord, make me one of the least of thy hyreling, that I may at least be one of
their last servants, whose footstepps I am not worthy to kiss. Let them
enjoy many and great consolations, whom thou love and honor by special
privilege of love. But let it be a great and most acceptable present to me,
who am the least, and most miserable of all, that thou sparest me not, but do
afflict me with manifold contradictions and sorrows.

Give patience, o pious Lord, and let all tribulation and anxietie, be far
more wishfull and welcome to me, then any consolation. And grant that I may
accept of, and suffer this, particularly for thine honor, not out of a desire
of adding to mine own advantage, or hope of a greater reward. Let no gain be
greater to me, then cheerefullly to suffer for thy honor, to desire to be
undervalued, and annihilated even to the ground; and in very deed to be made
subject, and humbly to be thrown down under the feet of all men. O
Sovereign Truth, My God, eternal light, ingraue this into my heart, that I may
wax vile in mine own eyes, and that I may contemn my self, and esteem my
self in this world, as a bannished pilgrim, a poor unknown man, a neglected
solitary person, abandoned by every creature: and that I may no where seek
for hope and solace, save in thy self alone. Nay, grant that I may repute my
self as one dead upon earth, and buried to the world, whose memory is
already long a go past by, and has left no other footestepps, or marks of
it self, save a poor miserable grave, which lies hidd under ground. Grant, o
eternal Wisdom of the Father, that I may frequently and seriously run over
these things in my heart, and continually fix it upon my last things, by a
deep consideration: and so prepare my self for future judgment, running out
before thy face, by prayers and lamentations.

A Prayer to praise God fervently.
MY God, my praise, and my glory? I earnestly desire to praise thee with as
loud a voice, and as devout a heart, as ever any creature praised thee in
heaven or earth. I ardently desire to honor thee, with as great and worthy an
honor, as ever thou wast honored by any Saint in thy Celestial Kingdom. I
wish to venerate and love thee, with as ardent affection, and as amorous a
heart, as ever any devout and perfect person, did, or does love thee in this
world. Let the heat of thy sacred and pure love, be always renewed in me, and
inflame my reins and heart, as a fire descending from above. Let it purify and
burn all my interior parts that nothing of vicious, may remain in me, which
may offend the eyes of thy Majesty. O my God, thou true searcher of my heart,
all my desires are in thy sight, and all my groans, for my manifold defects, to
wit, my Spirit often fails through the want of inward sweetness and charity.
I offer up therefore to thee the desire of my desire, to the honor of thy
name. Receive my hearts desires as a morning Sacrifice, and let my prayers
ascend unto thee, as an evening incense, and please thee for ever. Amen.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. FOR THE CONCEPTION OF OUR B. LADY.
How excellent she was from all eternity in the divine prescience and
Predestination.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER the B. Virgin as she was at the least, or rather, while she yet was
not in nature, nor in the worlds consideration, and we shall find she was even
then great in the divine eyes, and predestination, being marked out to be the
Blessed Mother of the worlds Redeemer. So that what was said of the eternal
wisdom, by eternal birthright, and property, is applied to her by the
wisdom of the holy Church, guided by the holy Ghost, by attribution and
participation. Our Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways.

thoughts, as next after him, thou were from all eternity, the first in his
divine predestination, election, and love. Man's loss was foreseen, and a
Savior was resolved to be sent, and that Savior was to be borne a Son;
which is no sooner said, but we understand a mother, and that mother was to be
Marie, Blessed Marie. Blessed Marie, Mother of that Son, who is God; procure
by thy powerful intercession, that we may be so prevented by his holy grace,
that we may love him incomparably above all things, and thee in him; above all
his Creatures.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER her at somewhat a nearer distance; when she began first to be in the
thoughts and expectations of men; and you shall find holy Patriarchs breathing
after her, and Prophets foretelling her. Witness Moses his burning bush,
which consumed not. Aarons rodd which brought forth flowers and fruit; as says
S. Bernard. Gedeons fleece moystened with a miraculous dew. Hear the Prophett
Daniell, naming her, a miraculous mountain, whence the cornerstone of the
Church was drawn out, without the help of man. Or the Pro phet I say, saying
more clearly: Hear the wonder which I relate: a virgin shall con ceiue.

rodd, this gentle sleece. Let Us approache, I say, to behold this prodigy who
shall conceive, remaining a Virgin; and heartily say unto her: Come, come, o
thou desired of all nations, the dyeing world expects thee. Come, change that
woeful name of Eua, into a joyful Aue, that all generations may publish thee
blessed for ever. Come thou love, thou Dove, thou fair, and let thy sweet
flowers of honor and honesty appear in our Land. Let thy Virgin Earth
sprout out and deliver us a Savior.

THE II. MEDITATION. For the same Day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER her in her Aurora or dawning, as it were, in the happy o mbe of her
Mother, and observe her prerogatives. She was conceived of just and holy
parents, who sprung from Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, and Kings. Her
Conception was announced by Angels, and it was, in it self, miraculous in
that she was borne of a sterile Mother, and so was indeed a child of miracle, a
production rather of grace, then nature. For even before nature had performed
her work, grace began hers, according to that of S. John Damascene; Nature
durst not adventure to runn before the issue of grace, but made a little
stop, as it were, till grace had produced her fruit.

needs prove, whose very dawne is so admirable? O child of grace, pray that
my poor soul may always be prevented with part of that wherewith thine is
so timely replenished.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER with S. Anselme that it was fitting that the Blessed Virgin should
have been endowed with the greatest purity imaginable, under God: nor can it
be doubted but to have been prevented by grace, preserved from sin, and
conserved in innocence, is a greater purity, and easy to be conceived under
God, who is essential purity. And therefore we may piously conclude with the
foresaid Saint, that God bestowed such a purity upon the designed Mother of
his eternally begotten Son, by a singular privilege reserved for her alone.

purity of a Virgin, and the fecunditie of a Mother, in one and the same
subject. And let us most devoutly solemnise her immaculate Conception, that she
may interceede for us to Christ, who are defiled, alas, deformed, and so
generally subject unto sin, that whosoever affirms he is not a sinner, is
concluded, a liar.

THE I. MEDITATION. For the Nativity.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER her in her Nativity, and we shall find it a subject of the greatest
joy that ever the the world had yet met with. It was not now one of the
sinful children of Eua, cursing the day in which it was said, a man is borne:
but one happily inuerting that name into Aua one that was wholly fair, and had
noe spot in her. Yea one; so not a sinner, as that she was wholly borne for
sinners, to bear him who came to take away the sins of the world, without
whom there was no salvation at all for lost man.

Aurora, the languishing world has long, and greedily expected thee. O thou
springing joy of the earthly and heavenly Jerusalem. Peerless honor of thy
race and sex. We poor banished Sonns of Eve fall down at thy tender feet,
with a thousand Aues, We lay open our sighs and sobbs to thine eyes, full of
pity, in this veil, full of tears. Ah! let us profitt by the example of thy
virtues, partake in thy merits, and perceive thy powerful intercession in all
our miseries. O Clement, o pious, o dearly sweet Virgin Marie.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that it is, that Virgin is borne, who is Virginally to bring forth
the Spouse of Virgins. That Virgin is borne, who while she is even so little,
and low, she is agreeable in the sight of the highest. That Virgin is borne
who within a short time shall conceive, breed, bear, and bring forth her
maker. That Virgin finally is borne, who remaining a Virgin, shall prove a
Mother, the Mother of a God.



THE II. MEDITATION. For the same Day.
I. POINT.
Quaeest ista who rises as the dawning of the day, as fair as the Moon, as
choice as the Son, etc.



II. POINT.
Marie of whom Jesus was borne. And though she herself be heard to speak but
few words in the said Scriptures, yet in those few does she preach all
perfection; to wit: the knowledge of God and herself: Gods omnipotency, who
wrought great things in her, and her own littleness and abiection, in whom
such great things were wrought.



THE I. MEDITATION. For the Presentation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that as this child of miracle and grace, this true bird of Paradise,
was wholly made for heaven, so was she to have noe commerce with earth. She that
was elected from all eternity, before all others, to lodge God as in his
living temple, was tymely to be lodged in the Temple of God. She that was
prepossessed and replenished by heavenly blessings, had noe place left for the
world, which she even left before she knew it. So that this Celestial Arc,
(by which all the world was to be saved from the floode) where more then
Solomon would reside, was to be placed in the Sanctuary of the Temple which
Solomon built, and this was performed by her pious parents care, betwixt 3. and
4. years of her Age.

with joy, till the holy Ghost thy spouse come down into the chaste Temple of
thy heart.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER now, o you Virgins consecrated to God, how this most perfect
patroness of Virginity and all other virtues, behaved her self in the
Temple. If you pretend to love her inindeede, fail not to show it by the
imitation of her heavenly life; which was so singularly holy a pattern of all
that is holy, that the lives of the most holy compared to hers, appeared
sinful. To wit the sweet odor of this divine sprigge ascended up into the
sight of God so agreeably that the whole plenitude of grace, which was
distributed to others by parts, over flowingly possessed her divine soul. so
that says s. Ambrose it was her chief study, to offend none, to love all, to
pay respect and honor to her elders, to refuse nothing to her equals. she had
nothing of harsh or displeasant in her looks, nothing of male part in her
words; nothing of unhandsome in her actions; nothing of mincing in her gestures;
nothing of lightness in her gate, nothing of petulant in her voice; so that
her very corporal aspect, was the picture of her mind, and an expression of
her probitie.



THE II. MEDITATION. For the same Day.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER with S. Hierome how blessedly she employed her time. This rule, says
he, she putt down to her self, that from the morning to the third hour she
wholly employed her self in prayer: from the third hour till None she spent in
work, knitting or weauing some thing for the use of the Temple. And after None
she departed not from prayer, till an Angel appeared and brought her meat,
where she praised God without intermission. She spoke with such a
gracefulness, that God was known in her speech. In whose praise least she
might at all be interrupted, if any chanced to salute her, she resaluted them,
with Deo G^atias.

of practicing the same, by the example of the Queen of Heaven, who began so
airely to weaue the active and contemplative life togeither, now praying, now
working, and then praying again, even till Angels came to feed her. Go on in
this happy course, my soul, from prayer to work, and from work again to
prayer, and though the Angels of God come not to thee, the God of Angels will
not fail to feed thee with thousands of dear delights; thy prayer shall be
without intermission, the odours of their sweetness shall flow from thy mouth,
and ^eo Gratias, upon all occasions, shall continue always.

II. POINT.
REPRESENT her yet further to your thoughts out of S. Hieromes and S. Ambroses
expressions of her. ^he was at all times, says S. Hierome, either reading,
Meditating, or praying. Again in watching she was the first, says the one, in
speaking she was the last, says the other, and most studious in reading,
especially the holy Scriptures concerning the coming of christ, which the
frequently redd and embraced. In so much that when her body reposed, her heart
watched, and even often in her sleep repeated what she had read; or, awaking
from sleep, continued the same.

a light to our feet, a cordial to our heart, sweeter then the honey comb.
Let our Meditation be his holy Law and his divine grace our prayer, And of all
the Scriptures let that be most frequently in our hands, mouths and hearts,
which most relate to Christ's coming; life, and Passion; that we may indeed be
set upon no other knowledge, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And in that
blessed peace, that very peace, lets sleep and repose. Happy will that rest
prove, when our eyes are shutt with the sweet memory of Christ and his Law in
our mouth and hearts.

THE III. MEDITATION. For the Presentation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that allthough this blessed young Virgin was possessed and
prepossessed with all the blessings of heaven, and replenished with the
plenitude of grace, yet was not gtace idle in her, or she idle in grace. Grace
is not given to work all alone, but graciously and freely to gain our will;
and in it, and with it, to work all. So that this Blessed Virgin,
notwithstanding all these huge advantages and prerogatives of grace, testified
to s. Elizabeth a holy Nun, that she prepared a place in her heart for God with
labor, continual prayer, ardent desire, profound devotion, many tears, and
much affliction.

None comes to Christ unless drawn by his heavenly father. Yet in vain too,
should the light shine if having light we did not walk in it. If we were so
drawn as we followed it not, we should never arrive. He that made us without
us, will not save us without us. All our Talents are his free gifts, it is true,
but we must negotiate with them, and improve them. We ask because we will, we
seek because we will, we knock because we will, and we are saved because we
will, and yet Gods grace works both the will and performance. Lets add then
our careful concurrence to his sweet drawghtes, and be blessed for ever with
that blessed amongst all women.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that this Blessed Virgigins prayer in particular (though otherwise
full of grace) was for grace; Grace to be able to complie with those two great
Christian duties (The love of God above all things, and of our neighbor as
our self) wherein the whole Law and Prophets consiste. 2. Grace souueraignelie
to hate and fly, all that he hates whom she souueraignly loves. 3. Grace to be
truly humble, patient, mylde, and to be adorned with all the virtues, that so
she might become wholly gracious in the divine sight. 4. Grace finally to be
obedient to the high Priests commandes and ordonnances.



THE FIRST MEDITATTION. For the Announciation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that to this Virgin it was (thus qualified: that is, removed from
the world, and dwelling in her sacred solitude, married to a holy man, but to
be conserved for the Son of the Holy of Holyes, prepossessed and replenished
by heavenly grace, and happily concurring with it by continual application and
fervent prayer, still begging more and more grace) that an Angel was sent from
heaven, with an embasie importing greatest honor to her, and joy to all the
world to wit, to prepare a worthy mariagebedd for the most pure spouse: to
contract the Marriage betwixt a creature and her creator, and so to begin a
happy league betwixt heaven and earth.

corrupting world, and betake our selves to the solitude of our chamber or
celle. There the King of Heaven speaks to our hearts. There we put questions,
and receive answers of what we are to say, and what we are to do. Its hard,
says S. Augustine, to see Jesus amidst a multitude. Our mind must enjoy a
certain solitude. That sight requires a secret place. Marie was alone when
she spoke with the Angel. Alone when the holy Ghost ouershaded her. Alone when
she conceived the worlds Redeemour.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER the admirable contents of this heavenly embasie, at which all heaven
and earth may well stand amaysed, since all their concernements are to be
treated in it. The eternal and only begotten son of the eternal God, is
about to espouse humane nature in an humble maid Marie of the house and
family of David. The lost world wants a Savior, and heaven is resolved to
give one. Gabriel is dispatched to Nazareth, to declare the mystery, and to
announce the wounders to the espoused Virgin. His first word presents her with
plenitude of grace: Hayle full of Grace. Gives the reason of it: Our Lord is
with thee. Assures her she shall coneeiue, and bring forth a son: a great
Son: a Son: who as he is indeed, so shall he be called, and acknowledged
to be the Son of the highest, Jesus, a Savior; and shall reign in the house
of Jacob for ever. And that, therefore, she is blessed amongst and above all
women.



THE II. MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet further, and diligently ponder these precious words, which flow
as heavenly pearls from the mouth of an Angel, which man ought humbly to
embrace, relish, and lock up, not proudly and profanely to control. Blessed
Marie is declared full of grace; nor that, in an ordinary manner as diverse
other Saints were, but according to the measure which Christ sorted out for
his best beloved Mother, who wisely suits his gifts and graces according to
the function, place, and dignity to which he pleases to call every one. The
fountain, the river, the brook, are each one full: so is the Son, the
Mother, and the servant. But the Son, as the sourse and sea whence all graces
flow: the Mother as neerliest joined to, and most abundantly participating of
the said sea: the servant, as placed at a greater distance, in a measure
aggreable to a servant: in fine the servant possesses it but by parts; the
Mother in the whole plenitude, as says S. Hierome.

full of grace; since to speak wirh S. Athanasius, the holy Ghost descended
into thee with all his essential virtues, which he stands possessed of by
title of his divine principality, and therefore thou art most justly styled
gratia plena, as being replenished with the abundance of all the graces of the
holy Ghost. Many, many daughters have gathered riches togeither, it is true, but
thou have outstripped them all, and art enriched with that peculiar grace which
gave glory to the heavens, a God to the earth, faith to the gentiles etc.
Dearest Lady mother daigne to Conueye some dropes of that ouer-flowing grace of
thine, upon my weak and languishing soul.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that if Marie be full of grace, it is noe wonder, since the same
Angel assures her, and us, that our Lord is with her Dominus tecum. Noe says
S. Bernard it is noe wonder that she is full of grace, with whom our Lord is:
not our Lord the Son only, whom she clothes with humanity, but our Lord the
holy Ghost, of whom she conceiues: and our Lord the Father who begott him whom
she conceiues: Nay rather should we wonder that he that dispatched the Angel
to her, should be arrived to her before the Angel, and be found with her by
the Angel.

Lord is with thee, dearest Lady, that eternal and draynelesse sourse of all
graces, and so the fullness of grace, cannot be wanting to thee. Our Lord is
with thee, the Angel is only the Messe^ger of that good news, but the God of
Angels who sent him, preuents him, and is already thy guest. Our Lord is with
thee, I say, nay with us too by thee, o thou Mother of mercy, who broughtest
forth our mylde Emmanuel, that is, our God with us, our Jesus; thy Son; whom
who-euer loves, he is loved by his heavenly father, who with the Son and the
holy Ghost will come unto him, and take up their mansion with him. O excessive
happiness which accreues to us by the means of Blessed Marie!

THE III MEDITATION* For the Announciation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER further, that it is noe wonder that she that is replenished with all
grace, and has our Lord with her, and in her, should be termed blessed
amongst and above all women. Since others have but that by parts which she
possesses in plenitude; and since he that is with others only in a general
manner by Presence power and essence, is with her, in all the fullness of the
Divinity corporally. Whence it is that she inioyes the advantages, and is
freed from the incommodities of all the states of women, to wit of Virgins,
wives, and widows. She has the ioys of a mother, without corruption: the
honor of a Virgin, without sterilitie; the liberty of a widdowe without
solitude. She is therefore deservedly blessed among and above all women.

Hayle Marie full of grace, our Lord is wit thee, blessed art thou amongst all
women, and incomparably above, and before all women: for thou art indeed the
Glory of Jerusalem, the joy of Israel, the honor of thy nation, race, and
sex, for he that is powerful works wonders in thee, and for us poor lost
sinners, by thee. Ah use thy powerful prayers to him, for us now, and in the
hour of our death. Amen.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER the Blessed Virgins bashfulnesse, prudence, and retaynednesse in
speech. She is saluted by an Angel, hayle full of grace, accompaigned with her
Lord and Master, blessed among all women, and yet she fears, even an Angel in
the shape of a man; she resalutes him not, and in lieu of complacence, finds
trouble in hearing so great commendations of her self, and falls a considering
what kind of salutation that might be. She eyes her self as one who was daily
begging for grace and she wonders to hear herself declared full of grace. Her
companions use to be the poorer sort of Virgins, and she admires to
understand she is accompaigned with her Lord and Master. She looks upon her
self as the least of women, and cannot therefore conceive how she should be
blessed amongst all women,

full of grace; blessed amongst all women startled at the presence of an
Angel? while yet we poor frail Creatures, miserable sinners, fear not the
presence of men, where we may have experienced much danger? And when she
returns noe answer, but is troubled at her own praises, even from an Angel,
prudently considering what they might import: shall we vainly fall in love
with the praises which men fawningly bestow upon us; and thereby vnconsideratly
fall into questions, and answers, and engagements, which lead we know not
whither? Ah says S. Ambrose, it is the part of a Vingine to quake and tremble
at every approach of a man, and to fear every word he speaks.

THE IV. MEDITATION. For the Announciation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that while the Angel receives noe return of answer in words, he
sees it in effects. He observes in her a singular bashfulnesse and modesty,
which is the greatest ornament of a Virgin: a chaste fear and trouble to hear
her own praises: a prudent and mature consideration what the words which she
heard might importe, and while he hears noe words, he replies to her
comportments and thoughts, saying: fear not Marie. And why; Not because an
Angel salutes thee, and publishes thee blessed amongst all women, but because
thou art indeed gracious and grateful in the sight of God, and have found
love and favor with him. For, says he thou have found grace with God.

religion reigns in our hearts, and they will depart with edification Let us
thus fear and fly the hearing of our own praises, come they from men or
Angels and we shall infallibly find favor in the sight of God, and his love
will leave us noe cause to fear.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER what grace and favor it was that the Blessed Virgin found in the
sight of God, and you will find that it was a most profound humility,
Angelical purity, prompt obedience, and most fervent charity, by which she
conceived in her womb, and brought out to the world a Son and Savior,
Jesus, according to that which the Prophet Isaye fotetold with admiration and
astonishment: behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and his
name shall be called' Emmanuel: which the Angel confirms and determines to be
her self, saying: behold thou shall conceive in thy womb and bring forth a
Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus.

heart, and to bring him out to the world; Let us then emulate these better
gifts, and strive to imitate this Blessed Virgins humility, purity,
obedience, and charity, which were powerful enough to draw God out of heaven,
and to lodge him in her sacred womb; without these virtues we desire, and
expect him in vane: he that comes to subdue pride will not lodge in a haughty
heart; he that is a pure Spirit, yea purity it self, hates and flies
impuritie. Practice these virtues interiourly and we shall not fail to
conceive him, let the same shine before men, and we bring him out to our
neighbor, and he too togeither with us will run in the odor of those heavenly
virtues.

THE V. MEDITATION. For the Announciation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER how this our B. Virgin neither appears distrustful, nor light of
faith, but behaues her self with all the prudence imaginable: for as at the
first approach of the Angel, she only ponders, and gives noe answer,
according to that of the wise man. Young man speak in thine own cause
scarcely. So at the second onsett she speaks briefly and modestly, according
to the same. If thou be asked twice return a shore answer: or hear holding
thy peace, and ask. So does the Blessed Virgin saying to the Angel: how
should this be done because I know not man, that is, according to Saint
Augustine and other fathers, I am by vow of Virginity in a state of not
knowing man.

leave to do more then man can understand. And where his will appears
certain, doubt not of his power, seem it never so impossible to our
comprehensions.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER how now the B. Virgin having given a testimony that she knows both
how to keep silence and how to speak, there being times for both: that she
was neither distrustful, nor light in believing: that though she believed the
thing, yet she was doubtful of the manner, which she modestly demanded: and
having received assurance by the Angel that is was to be effected by the power
of the highest, and the operation of the holy Ghost, she presently and wholly
yealded up her self to that power, which she knew to be omnipotent, saying
behold the handmayde of our Lord, be it done in me according to thy word,

be it done to me according to thy word. Are heavenly mysteries poposed? Give
ear to them in silence. Is our answer expected? let us replye, without
multiplicitie of words. Remain we still doubtful in the matter or manner?
demand modestly to have the thing cleared, Do we find that the solution
depends upon the power of the Highest? Lets stoop in obedience to faith,
saying be it done to me according to this word: thas is, let that be done in
me, by me, and with me, which is agreeable in the sight of the divine Majesty.
Let me be the humble matter or subject of his divine operations, whether I
understand or understand not: because noe word is impossible to him.

THE VI. MEDITATION. For the Announciation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER the incomparable humility, the firm faith, the prompt obedience,
and admirable resignation of this heavenly Virgin. The Angel declares her the
Mother of God: and she her self, his humble handmayde: The Angel intimates a
mystery beyond the power of man, and she believes that God can do more then
man can comprehend. The Angel seems to deliver impossibilities, that a
Virgin without the knowledge of a man should bring out a God, yet perceiving
that the hand of the highest is in the work, she believes that all things are
possible to God, and affords prompt obedience, and under that powerful hand
absolutely resignes herself to the whole without further discussion, while she
understands not the half, depending up on the divine authority for the rest,
saying: behold the hand maid of our Lord etc.

behold the handmayde of our Lord. She neither knew how, nor when, yet she knew
well (what we all ought to know) that she was wholly his, and so ought to be
wholly at his dispose.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that by how much our Blessed Lady is more exalted, though even by an
Angel; by how much she is made more sure of heavenly prerogatives and graces,
by so much she grows less and less in her own eyes, and be she never so
certain to be the Mother of God, she will still remain the humble handmayde
of her Lord: and for his sake become the servant of his servants; and to make
it good in effects, as well as inwords, she goes with speed into a city of
Judah to visit her cosen Elizabeth.

unless works follows them: for she finds it not enough to have professed
herself to be the handmayd of our Lord, unless in practice, she prove
herself to be the humble handmayde of the handmaydes of our Lord; according to
that of S. Peter: be subject to every humane creature for Gods sake.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. For the Visitation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER with what Blessed and glorious effects, this humble and religious
officiousness of Blessed Marie was accompaigned. Noe sooner had she saluted
her cosen Elisabeth with the ordinary Salutation of the Land Paxtecum, but the
child in her womb sprung with joy, and both the child and the Mother were
replenished with the Holy Ghost. He, begun to preach the presence of his master
by joyful exultations which he could not yet perform by words: and she with
exclamations, to Prophecy, to praise, to magnify, the Mother and the fruit
of her womb, Jesus, who spoke by his Mothers mouth, as S. John heard by his
Mothers ears.

blessed is the fruit of thy womb O glorious effects of Mary's humility!

II. POINT.
BUT consider how the humility which brought her thither leaves her not there,
but leads her to a most Christian acknowledgement and profession of her own
nothing. She hears her self proclaimed with a loud voye blessed above all
women, and the fruit of her womb blessed: blessed as believing what was said
to her by the Angel; blessed as being the Mother of God: and yet amidst those
highest, and withal truest commendations that heaven or earth could bestow
upon a pure creature, she deuestes her self of all, as being of her self
nothing at all, ascribing the whole to the Ocean of all, goodness, saying. My
soul does magnify our Lord.

taken in him, is mere vanity. You (may she seem to say) magnify me above
all women, for my faith, for the fruit of my womb, for the dignity of being
the Mother of God, but I, the while, look over all these privileges to look
upon and laud the author of them all, and my very soul does magnify our
Lord, that is, does publish his greatness, his magnificence, his sanctity,
wisdom and mercy, in all those heavenly gifts of his free liberality.

THE II. MEDITATION. For the Visitation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that it was not with her tongue only that she magnified her Lord by
speaking glorious things of him, or abject things of her self, as that she
was his handmayde, whose Mother indeed she was. Or by her hands and feet,
that is, by her works and labors only, especially those of mercy exercised
upon her cosen Elizabeth; or yet by her memory only, or her understanding or
will alone, but even with her whole soul, that is, with works, memory,
understanding and will, all jointly offered up in one sacryfice of praise and
thanks giving; and that too with huge joy and jubilee of heart, and my very
Spirit, says she, exults in God my child, my Jesus, my Savior.

in Deo salutari nostro: in God our Savior.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER for what it was that our B. Lady so magnified her Lord and Master:
and she herself will give the cause: because says she he has mercyfully
looked upon the humility, abiection, or poverty of this handmayde. That is to
speak with Theophilact while I looked not after him, he looked upon my
litlenesse, and was merciful to me while I sought him not. Ponder this well;
it is not because he hade made her the most illustrious and blessed among all
women, and even greater in quality of Mother of God then the greatest
Cherubins and Seraphins, but because he looked upon her humility and abiection
with the eye of mercy and pity; that is, he approved, loved embraced, and
pleased himself in it, and mercifully prevented her by his grace.

to magnify our Lord, and to rejoice in God our Savior, for that he dayned
graciously to look upon our vileness, abiection, and misery, by which look
or love of his all our happiness was begun.

THE III. MEDITATION. For the Visitation.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER what was the second cause for which our Blessed Lady did so magnify
our Lord, and you will hear her self again show it. Still removing all
praise from her self to ascribe it to the sourse of all Good, because, says
she he that is mighty has done great things to me: as though she should
say; let none be slow in giving credit to this ineffable mystery; let none
admire that I. a Virgin have conceived; for how ever it is in me that this
astonishing wonder is wrought, yet it was not I, but the Almighty God that
wrought it in the power of the most high who ouershaded me. And the whole
reason of the work, is the omnipotent power of the workman, who alone works
great, inscrutable, and wonderful things.

who is mighty has wrought great things in thee, so thou humbly with her too
confess upon whom they were wrought, and by whom: for so thou shall stille
have thine own misery and Gods power, mercy, and bounty before thine eyes: so
shall thou never forgett that he is all, and thou thy self nothing at all;
and yet finding so many benefits, whether of body, or soul, or fortune, freely
bestowed upon thy poverty and nothing, thou will even melt away with
admireing love: and willingly and joyfully spend what soever thou have of life
or ability in continual Magnifying of so good a Lord, and in Spiritual
exultations in so Dear a Savior.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER how hugely great that grace of Gods looking upon B. Mary's abiection
must needs have been, since from thenceforth all generations shall call her
blessed as she her self fears not, to foretell, having first given the honor
of it, to him that was truly the Author thereof. Certainly that aspect or
looking upon, was the effect of eternal direction (according to that, vbi
amor, ibi oculus) and singular election, his look or aspect, only following
his love, since as S. Augustine says, Gods looking upon one by grace, is the
delivering of him from abiection and abandonnement.

Blessed art thou, began the Angel: blessed art thou, went on S Elizabeth: and
from them 16. ages, and upwards, took, and ever since continued the same
song, all the Ancient Fathers being, as it were, at a holy strife which might
take it the highest, and all the Christian world from the rising of the sun
till the setting of the same, having nothing, after Jesus, so frequently in its
mouth as our Blessed Lady, that, being as it were, among them all, her proper
name. whereupon millions of millions, of all sexes, and ages, and conditions,
all the world over, every day, fail not to sing her Canticle, and publish, and
confirm her blessed by all generations.

THE I. MEDITATION. For the Nativity of our Blessed Savior.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER yet how many just reasons concur to oblidge all mankind to
proclaim her blessed for ever. First because she believed 2. Because she was
full of grace: 3. Because she brought out a most blessed fruit. 4. Because the
All-powerfull or Almighty wrought wonderful things in her: 5. Because she was
the Mother of our Lord the King of Glory 6. Because she reserved the purity
of a Virgin togeither with the fecunditie of a Mother. 7. Because neither was
their before her, or ever shall there be after her any like or comparable to
her.

God her Savior, whom she brought out: bless her firm faith: her fullness of
grace; her pure maternitie; her fruit full Virginity. Say, say, my soul,
with the devout Saint Bernard: while the rivers run into the Sea; while the
woods ouershade the mountains; while the stars possess the heavens, thine
honor, thy name, thy praises shall always remain.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that though Blessed Marie were a iustest subject of admiration to men
and Angels, in all the states of her life, as being designed for a work which
passed all their capacities, even to conceive it: yet was she then most
blessefull and blessed when she did not only promise, but present her blessed
fruit. when our God was not only our Lord with her, and in her, but our
Emmanuel or our God with us, by her, when that flower of the field began to
appear in our Land, and her Virgin earth brought out a Savior: when finally
her days were fully come that she should be delivered, and she brought-forth
her first begotten Son, and swadled him in clootes, and laid him down in a
manger.

to bless her, ioyninge with the multitudes of Angels who compass about our
more then Salomons little bed, to sing a Gloria to the child of her womb, and
peace to the world. Then did she place her young Son, our God, visibly
amongst us, and thereby freed us from that ancient reproach vbi est Deus tuus,
where is thy God? Now thou may tell the Devil, my soul that here he is, to
subdue his pride. Thou may tell the incredulous Jews that here he is, to
confound their malice. Thou may tell all men of good will, that here he is, to
break our chains, to cure our wounds, to direct, to protect; to comfort, to
save, the poor banished Sonns of Eve.

THE II. MEDITATION. In the Nativity of our Savior.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that then it was indeed that she showed her self to be a Mother,
when she brought forth to the world her first begotten Son, and laid him in a
manger. Then she was indeed Mother in effect, and Mother of God, and in that
name, and quality, according to S. Thomas of Aquine, the greatest creature
that ever was, or ever shall, or can be made, even by the Almighties power,
since to be the Mother of God, as being joined to a thing of an infinite
perfection, includes in it self a certain infinite dignity.

Thou art the incomprehensible secreete of the divine economie, whom the
Angels desire incessantly to behold. Thou art the admirable lodging of an
humbled God. Thou art that agreeable earth, which made him descend from heaven,
and gave him entry among us. Thou art the treasure of ^he mysteries shut up
before all ages. Thou art the living book wherein the word of the eternal
father was written by the pen of the holy Ghost. Thou art the authentical
Instrument of the peace made betwixt God and man etc. what shall I say? words
fail, my Conceptions are langui hing, and answer not to the ardour of my soul.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER her again in quality of the Mother of God, and as such you will
find that God is truly caro ex carne eius flesh of her flesh: That Word which
in the beginning was with God, and and was God, was in this time made flesh of
her flesh. So that as God the Father can only say, thou art my Son, this day
I begott thee by an eternal generation: so this B. Virgin alone can only
say, I am thy Mother, this day I brought thee forth by a temporal birth.

God gave that very only begotten Son to Marie, who as being begotten of hi
own heart equal to himself he loved as himself, that God and Marie might
naturally have one and the same Son God, who made all, made himself of
Marie, to restore all that he had made. He who could of nothing make all
things, would not without Marie reform the things that were deformed. Ah, my
soul, what an ineffable dignity is this: what helps may not we expect from
one so near to God by so singular prerogatives?

THE III. MEDITATION. In quality of Mother of God.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER her again in quality of Mother, and say: If Mother and that Mother
of the Son of God, then compartner, and comparent, or common parent with God
the Father: if Mother of a most loving and best beloved Son then the best
beloved of Mothers or creatures, and consequently endowed with the best gifts
amongst and above all creatures in heaven and in earth, since love is but a
well wishing, and Gods love gives what it wishes us.

Hence we are an elect generation a kingly preisthoode, a holy Nation, a people
of purchase. Mark these great titles, my soul and learn to value thy self
accordingly.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER her yet again in quality of the Mother of God, and say if the
Mother of God, then her sacred womb was the Blessed Paradise to which our
second Adam was restored, and wherein he was lodged for nine months space for
which time she happily possessed all the riches of heaven; the riches of the
wisdom and k^owledge of God. Finally if the Mother of God, she was the
faithful Guardian of his tender years; the inseparable companion of his
flight into Egypt, and return home. She bore him in her arms, she clothed him
with the work of her hands, and fedd him with the riches of her chaste breasts.

I might find thee my brother, sucking my Mothers breasts, that I might kiss
thee, and that none hereafter might despise me? And that I might discover, with
what faith fervor tenderness, obedience, humility, and charity she
performed those pious offices about thee; that in imitation thereof, I might at
least exhibit some small part of them, to those little ones, my Christian
brethren, whom thou have left me in lieu of thy self, and so earnestly and
effectually commendest to me, saying what ever you do to those little ones you
do to me. We have yet then, my soul, means left us, to keep, to accompany,
to cloth, to feed, our poor brother Jesus.

For the Purification of our B. Lady. THE FIRST MEDITATION.
I. POINT.
CONSIDER that it is a Virgine-Mother who this day presents her first begotten,
being the God of the Temple in the Temple of God: and as such neither child nor
Mother could be subject to the Law of Purification, she, being free from all
spott of sin, or corporal impuritie; he, being purity it self. How is she
moved then to subject her self to that Law, save only to leave us a rare
example of a singular obedience.

the humble and obedient observance of the most just and laudable Laws and
duties under which we live. For do we not, my soul, do we not sometimes
repine at them, dispute them, and seek holes to euade them?

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that this Immaculate Virgin subjected herself to the Law of
Purification, not only to teach us obedience, but also to ingraue true
humility still deeper and deeper into our hearts. She had taught it by word,
when she said, to the Angel who declared her the Mother of God, the handmayde
of our Lord. She taught it in fact, in going to visit one less then herself,
S. Elizabeth. But now she teaches it in an occasion, where honor seems to be
engaged, where her sanctity and purity may be suspected.

selves before our betters, or (being blamed or reprehended for any little
fault) if we do not excuse ourselves, yea with choler? and inventions ad
excusandas excusationes in peccatis, it is much. But to suffer while we are
innocent, especially if our honor and reputation be never so little in
question, is a thing we find not patience to digest. Alas, my soul, we
Christians seem quite to forgett that we are scholars in Christ's and Mary's
school, and what lessons they have delivered us.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. For the Assumption.
That her life was spent in heavenly aspirations. I. POINT.
CONSIDER with many of the holy Fathers, that our B. Lady from her dear Sonns
Ascension to this present day of her glorious Assumption, employed all her time
in heavenly contemplations, fervent eleuations of heart and inflamed
aspirations after her dearly beloved child. How often said she, with more then
a S. Paul's fervor, that she desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ?
How often did she adjure the daughters of Sion to stay her with flowers, to
compass her about with apples, because she languished with love? Tell him,
says she, that I languish with love.

ay me! why is my seiourning still prolonged? Sometimes with S. Paul, Christ is
my life, and death is my gain. Some times again with the fervent S.
Augustine: Live I will not, dye I will, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ.

That her life wasted away like incense in the flames of love. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that Blessed Marie having as truly conceived in her heart the sacred
fire which her Son brought down, as she had conceived him in her Virginal
womb, she continually watched it like a holy Vestall, and did not only keep
it a live, but even added new fuel to it, by every least action of her life,
so that, that holy flame was increased to such a degree that it was impossible
for a humane heart to endure it, without wasting away like incense in the
thurible, to imbalme the world with her heavenly odours.



THE II. MEDITATION. For the Assumption.
That she dyed of Love. I. POINT.
COnsider that Marie must dye then because she was a child of Adam: because she
was the Mother of a God who dyed: because a precious and delicious death will
do her the right to deliver her up to her Son in glory; nor is glory to
be had but by death, she must dye then who brought out life. But as love
brought her Jesus down from heaven, and by love she conceived him, so must noe
other hand then that of love (which is now grown stronger then deathin her)
break the band of mortality, and restore her to her life, her love, her Jesus.

return thou Sunamitesse, return that we may have the happiness to look
upon thee, to crave thine assistance in our necessities. O Marie, thou Mother
of grace, Mother of mercy, protect us against our enemies in our life, and
receive us at the hour of our death. Amen.

II. POINT.
CONSIDER that if love gave the blow, it was the most noble death that ever
creature endured: If love gave the stroke, it was the most deliciously dear
and desired that ever humane heart tasted. And as this death was most noble and
most sweet, so was it attended by the most noble compagnie. All the Apostles)
as witnesses the great Areopagite) by Gods Providence and power, and all the
Primitive Christians about Jerusalem being prefent at it. Yea even Millions of
Angels, and Christ himself. Witness S. I. Damascene with many others.

them. Of delight to behold that diuin-Phenix melting away upon her bed of hoe
nour amidst the odoriferous flames of Sacred love, ready to fly into their
Masters Celestial imbracements. O what Canticles of praises did not they
singe? what actions of grace did they not render?

THE III. MEDITATION.
That her body was free from corruption. I. POINT.
CONSIDER that though a death of love, or a beloved death could separate the
soul from that B. Virgins body which was buried by the Apostles etc. in
Gethse many, yet deaths corruption durst not at all faste^ upon that
incorruptible body which had brought out life. As we deney not, says S.
Augustine, that the Mother of God was subject to the Law of death, so have we
learnt in the Shoole of Christianity, to privilege her from corruption, whose
grace and sanctity was such, that she singularly merited to lodge God in earth.

body of this incomparable Virgin was not subject to corruption, it was not
fitting that that chaste flesh which gave flesh to clothe our humanised God,
should be delivered over to the worms. Though death was her gain, yet had
corruption been her loss. God would not permit, that holy one, who was
vncorrupt in her Conception, in her childbirth, and after her childbirth,
should meet with corruption in her grave.

That her body was assumpted up to heaven by her Son. II. POINT.
CONSIDER that scarcely had this sacred Depositum of her immaculate body
remained three days in the grave after her vital death (witness S. I. Da.)
till he that rose the third day by his own power, came to raise his blessed
mothers body, that her body and soul being united again, he might enjoy his
whole mother, and she him in his glory: Saying to her, rise make haste my
friend: or according to S. Augustine: come from Lybanus my spouse, come from
Libanus, come thou shall be crowned, taking her by the right hand, says he,
and conducting her in pomp and magnificence, according to his good pleasure.

who is this, who comes up from the desert, flowing with delights, and has the
confidence to lean upon her beloved, our King? Let us, my soul, earnestly
beg her intercession, what cannot she prevail for, whom the God of heaven so
much honors?

THE VI. MEDITATION.
How inthronised. I. POINT.
CONSIDER whither this best of Sonns could lead this best of Mothers; but to
the best place that ever creature was capable of, even above the Cherubins and
Seraphins to the Throne of God. S. Augustine is my warantie saying of her. Thou
did pass the Angelical troops, and advance even to the Throne of the
souueraigne King.

Queen, says S. Augustine (seconded by S. Anselme) the King thy Son raised
thee to the the same seat, where he had placed what he took of thee, it being
but suitable to reason, that thou should be there, where that is which was
borne of thee.

How honored. II. POINT.
CONSIDER what honor accrues to her in that Throne of Glory, and we shall
find that she is honored by God the Father, in quality of his dearest
daughter: Of God the Son, as his dearest mother: and of God the holy Ghost,
as his dearest Spouse. Of all the Angels, and Saints of heaven, as the best
beloved Mother of their Master, and the most glorious Queen of their heavenly
Court.



FINIS.
MEDITATIONS FOR ALL THE SVNDAYES IN THE YEAR DRAWN OVT OF THEIR RESPECTIVE
GOSPELLS

Composed by the same Author

THE SECOND PART.

Lex tua meditatio mea est. printer's device(?)

PARIS Printed by VINCENT DV MOVTIER.

M. DC. LXV.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST SUNDAY IN ADVENT.
There shall be signs; in the sun, and the moon and the stars: and in the
earth distress of nations, for the confusion of the sound of the sea and
waves, etc. Luc. 21.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that there are two Aduents, or comings of Christ, intimated in this
Gospel, and celebrated in the holy Catholic Church. The one of fear, when he
shall come in dread full majesty to judge the universal world: to thend that
by whosome fear, the forerunner of wisdom, the hearts of her children may
the better be prepared to receive him by love in his first coming by his
gracious Incarnation, when he comes in humility and infirmity. Nor is there a
better way to secure our selves against his dreadful majesty in that, then by
imitating his abismall humility in this.

humility; knowing with S. Paul, that now it is the hour that we ought to
rise, being called upon by our holy mothers care. Now I say, even now; at this
very hour, because the youngest, the strongest, the wisest of us all, knows
not whether the next hour will be allowed him yea or not.

THE SECOND POINT
CONSIDER the dreadfullnesse of that second coming, by the astonishing
forerunners of it, as they are put down by the pen of the holy Ghost. There
shall b^ signs in the sun, and in the moon, and the stars, and upon the
earth distress of nations through the confusion of the sound of the sea and
waves. Behold the wrothfull judge does not yet appear, and yet the sun is
obscured: the moon refuses to afford its light: the stars fall from the
heavens; the earth quakes: the sea rores; all is in confusion on all sides: to
wit, what was fore told by wisdosme, begins to be fulfilled: The round world
shall fight with him against the senseless: and he will arm his creatures to
the revenge of his enemies.

daigned to love, and which has noe other hope but in thee, perish in thy
anger, mercy, mercy, mercy.

THE THIRD POINT.
CONSIDER further the dreadfulnesse of the same coming, by the wondrous
effects it seems to work in men and Angels. In the Angels; for the heavenly
powers, (goes on our text) that is, the Angels themselves (though otherwise
secure in themselves, and absolutely possessed of beatitude) are moved with a
certain admiration and reuerentiall fear, by the apprehension of the approach
of the wrothfull judge; the exactness of his justice, and the multitudes of
those that are to be judged. And in men, since they shall even wither away,
with a dreadful expectation of what will become of them and the whole world.

will then become of thee, when the very Angels shall quake with fear; the
Angels who are neither guilty of sin or even can sin: the Angels who
always performed the will of their lord: the Angels who are in the sure
possession of his glory. What will become of us, my soul, who are guilty of
so many imperfections, palpable negligences, and heinous crimes (makaing a
short reflection upon the course of our whole lise)



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
And then shall the son of man appear in the clouds of heaven in much power
and Majesty.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that if the signs and prodigies which fore run the coming of the
all-powrefull, all-sceing, and most just, and wroth full judge be so dread
full, with what astonishment, horror, and utter confusion must his presence
needs strike sinful man, his mortal enemy, who crucified him again and
again with his vices and concupiscences, and trod the son of God under
foot? His presence I say, acco^paigned with such daunting circumstances:
Clouds and fogges shall inuiron him, says the Royalle Prophet: and fire shall
stream out before him, and fire his enemies round about, while the mountains
melt like wax before his angry face.

Let my resolution be made accordingly.

THE SECOND POINT.
Begone you accursed of my father into eternal fire, etc.

Begone cursed of my father: but whither? into euerlastaing fire. O horror of
an eternally damning Doom! Ah who shall be the object of this endless wroth?
Who shall be the accursed subjects upon whom this reuengfull sentence shall be
executed? This lies hidd in the abisse of Gods just judgments. But who ought
to be so secure as that he should not freely bestow all his substance to buy
out his pardon? Who would not abandon all pleasures to avoid this eternity of
fire? who would not embrace all pains and pressures, to purchase security
against that day of anger? Yet why art thou sadd, my soul, and why do thou
trouble me? Our God is the God of mercy, and his mercy out-speakes all his
works. we are yet in the time of mercy. He wiskes not the death of a sinner,
but that be should be converted and live. Resolution.

THE THIRD POINT.
But when these things begin to come to pass look up, and lift up your heads
because your redemption is at hand.
CONSIDER, that as the horror of the sentence pronounced against the wicked is
most dismale; so is that which the just shall hear most comfortable and
blisfull: Come you blessed of my father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you
etc. Then shall appear in the face of the whole world, the difference there is
betwixt the just and unjust; the saint and the sinner. Then shall the just
man with excess of joy, lift up his long dejected head, and see his
redemption accomplished.

come, says our Savior, you blessed. But of whom? of my heavenly father. O
rauishing benediction! come receive. But what? nothing that is light and
momentanie, but exceedingly above measure an eternal weight of glory. Come
and receive, a kingdom, an heavenly kingdom prepared for you, purchaced by
the merits of my passion. Come, enter into the joy of your lord. Ah my soul,
should we upon the purchase of this bestow all our time, all our care, all our
substance, we should then repute it as nothing, in comparison of the ineffable
happiness which we shall then be possessed of for ever and ever.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE II. SUNDAY. IN ADVENT.
And when John (Baptist) in prison, had heard the works of Christ etc. Matt.
11.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that though there was none amongst the sonns of women, either
greater, or better, or dearer to the son of God: none more innocent, more
austere, or none employed in a more divine and necessary function, to wit to
forerun Christ, and to preach his coming to the people; none having less
commerce with the, world; yet we find him in persecution, in prison in chains;
to manifest to all men this divine truth: that all they which desire to live
piously in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

or falling out, with the persecutions, temptations, contradictions, and
crosses, (be they of what kind soever) which Gods sweet and ever just
providence, permitts, even strangely sometimes to fall upon us: that
contrariwise, they may even prove matter of joy to us. We are not better then
S. John, more saintly, more innocent, but contrarily miserable sinners; and yet
behold him in persecution, in prison, in chains. We aim at a pious life; and
Truth assures us this is the way, because thou wast aggreable to God; even
there for it was necessary that temptation should try thee. Our design is to
reign with Christ, and to reign with him, we must suffer with him.
Resolution. Say then, be thou ever blessed, o lord. If we have received good
things from thy bountiful hand, why shoud we not suffer evil things? Sit
nomen Domini benedictum.

THE 2. POINT.
CONSIDER, that though they can keep his body captive in chains, yet his
better part is at liberty, his mind is still free and employed about what he
was sent for. He cannot now in person preach to the people; and with that he
has patience, but he can send his Disciples to hear Christ preach, and in that
he fayles not. There is noe restraint; noe want of commodity of time or place,
that can hinder a right heart to go out to seek Christ, to hear him speak
to it, and it to him; to stay with him rejoice in him, and happily in fine
perform its duty.

in all places, times, and occasions.

THE II. MEDITATION For the same day.
Art thou he who is to come, or must we expect an other?
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that S. John's Disciples were sent to Christ to know from him self,
by word of mouth, whether he were the true Messiah or not: but he in lieu of
words makes his works answer the question. Go says he, and relate to John
what you have heard and seen: The blind see; the lame walk; the lepers are
made clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, to the poor the Gospel
is preached etc. This silent answer is more full, more forcible, more
satisfactorie, then words could ever make it: according to that: if you believe
not me, believe my works.

we are Christians, without the help of words, which alone get little credit.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your heavenly father says our divine master. Let our endeavors be
employed to help the blind, the lame, the dumme, and our hearts and purses be
open to our poor brethren, and such works will preach louder, to their
ears, and prove more effectual to convert their hearts, then all the
eloquence of words imaginable.

THE II. POINT.
CONSIDER that though Christ, now a days, does not ordinarily work the
forsaid miracles amongst us corporally and visibly, yet does he daily and
hourly work greater ones spiritually, and inuisibly, in our souls: for have
we not been blind and followed the blind, as well in doctrine as manners, and he
enlightened us? have not our perverse wills been lame to good, and he excited
us thereto? have we not been leprous, and defiled with the infection of sin,
and he washed us in the blood of the lamb? have we not been deaf to his
divine inspirations, and he by his multiplied graces broke through our
deafness? have we not been dead by mortal crimes, and he by his holy
Sacraments raised us to life again. So that while we receive not the same, we
fail not of far greater benefits.



THE FIRST MEDITATION. FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY IN ADVENT.
The Jews sent Priest, and Levites, from Jerusalem (into the Deserte) to
interrogate John. Luc. 1.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that true virtue is of that nature, that the more it hides it self,
the more it comes to be known and admired. S. John ledd a life that little
aimed at any humane estimation. His conversation was rather with wild beasts
and birds then men. His habitation from his youth was a vaste unpeopled Desert.
His habit rough camels hair, his diet locusts. Yet lo, while he hardly
appears a man of this world, the Priests and Levites, are almost ready to
ascribe the dignity of a God to him.

to be truly great? Let us take our rise from our own litlenesse and nothing.
Let us love to be unknown, and to be reputed as nothing. Lets strive to hide
our selves from the eyes of the world, and the eyes of God and his Angels will
be upon us. Our lord is high, yet beholds low things. Let honor seek us, not
we honor: for if we seek it, it flies us. if we fly it, it follows us. Or
if we will needs seek it, let us seek it in God who honors his friends
exceedingly. If we will needs seek it, let us seek it where is true, and is
given to none unworthy of it. So seek it, my soul, and greedily seek it, and
fear not to offend.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER S. John's profounde humility. He was sanctified in his mothers womb.
Lived in the wilderness like an Angel of heaven. Had testimony even from the
mouth of truth it self, that he was sent out before him as an Angel to
prepare his way. Was conceived by the priests and Levites to be the Elias, nor
a Prophet (in theit sense) nor Messiah: never the less he humbly confesses
that he is not Christ, that he is noe more in very deed, but the voice of one
crying in the Desert; that in fine he is not worthy to loose the latchet of his
shoe.



THE SECOND MEDITATION. FOR THE SAME THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT.
Who art thou? Gospel.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDFR, that S. John's humility was not so much grounded upon the examine of
himself, and the dignity he found in himself, who was sanctified in his
mothers womb, as by comparison to the Word (the son of God) whereof he was
the voice, whose shoetye he acknowledged by the light of faith, he was not
worthy to loose. For in that sight he truly believed he was nothing in the
order of nature, but by his gift, who is, because he is: nothing in the order
of grace, and sanctity, but only by participation with him who is sanctity
it self. And therefore in that comparison he truly and justly humbled himself,
and acknowledged himself to be less in substance, worth and sanctity, then a
drop compared to the whole ocean.

being, grace, and glory. We have nothing of all this, but by his free gift:
and without it universal vanity, vniuersa vanitas omnis homo viuens. What
have we which we have not received? And why then do we glory in it, as though
we had not received it. Resolution. Put down therefore this truth for certain
from S. Cyprian and S. Augustine. We must glory in nothing, because nothing
is ours.

THE SECOND POINT.
Let every vallie be filled, and every montaine and hill be made low: because
all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
CONSIDER how S. John goes still on, teaching us a fit disposition to receive
the Messiah, or Savior sent from God by preparing his way, which is done by
leuelling valleys, and throwing down mountains and hills: our leuelling of
valleys consists, in erecting our hearts from pusillanimitie and despair by
the confidence of seeing the salvation of God, or God our Savior, now near at
hand, whom all flesh shall see. And mountains and hills we shall throw down;
by diffidence in our own strength which is mere weakness; by depressing of our
high flowen thoughts; and falling down into the knowledge of our nothing,
with our humbled lord.

mountains of presumption, upon the view of our own virtue? Down with them,
upon the sight of a God humbled, fall down groueling upon him, and protest to
him, since omnipotency is become impotent, as it were, and lies at our Feet,
misery, rottenness, worms meat shall not dare to aspire.




IHS
THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN ADVENT.
Prepare the ways of our Lord.

THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL.


THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, how this voice of one crying in the Deserte, this holy Euangellicall
preacher, S. John, teaches us how worthily to prepare our selves against the
coming of his, and our divine Master, saying: prepare the way of our Lord. And
how does he teach us? First by his example, by an absolute retreat from the
world, to live in a vaste wilderness: by austeritie, in meat, drink, and
clothes. secondly by his preaching the penance which he had first practiced;
admirable humility; and contempt of honor; publikly professing himself to be
nothing.

Unless we do penance we shall all perish togeither. None is fit y prepared
to receive the humble son of the humble mother, but he that fears not to
make public profession of humility and contempt of honors, with S. John,
saying: I am not Christ, I am not Elias: I am not the Prophet whom you seek
nay contrarily, my soul, we for our parts, are poor miserable sinners. We are
not worthy that thou, o Savior of the world, should enter vndter our roofes.

THE SECOND POINT.
The voice of God was made upon John the son of Zachary in the Deserte.
CONSIDER, that it was in the Deserte, that the word of God descended upon this
great Prophet, that is, there it was that he was replenished with divine
inspirations, sacred conferences, and heavenly doctrines: And there it is too,
that we ought to hear our lord as he does promise by O see. I will lead her
(the sinful soul) into the wilderness, and I will speak to her heart.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY. OF ADVENT.
Make his paths straight. Luc. 3.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that the great king of heaven is daigning to come to us; and it is
butt fitting that we prepare his way by making his ways right and straight,
that nothing may hinder his gracious access to our hearts; nothing does more
hinder his coming to us, then our duplicitie and crookedness of heart, our
indirectnesse of intention, for a double tongued mouth he does detest: but
loves to meet with the simplicity of a dove. I know, says David, my God,
that thou prouest the hearts, and love simplicity. Who walks simply, walks
confidently, and our lord protects him, and directs his ways.

redeem us. Not now in Majesty to fright us; but in humility, in
simplicity, in abiection, in the form of a servant, to teach us, in his own
person, to be simple and right, and fearing God. Let every mountain, and hill
then, be humbled; all lightness of heart be subdued; all harshnesse be
banished; all duplicitie be corrected. The humble, mylde, and simple lamb,
will only lodge, in an humble, mylde, and simple breast.

THE SECOND POINT.
Who art thou? the Gospel.
CONSIDFR, that howeuer this question was put by the Pharisees to S. John,
captiously, it may be, or out of some curiosity: yet may it be profitably
proposed to each one of us, for our spiritual advantage. Who art thou? A
Christian, or one honored with the name of Christ. Further, who art thou? An
English Christian Catholic; that is, one, who is not only honored with the
name of Christ, but also blessed for being called to suffer for that name. But
who art thou finally? Not only a Christian; an English Catholic Christian,
but even one, by a singular dignation, called to be the spouse of Christ.

with firm resolution of amendment.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST SUNDAY* AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
Jesus remained in Jerusalem, and his parents knew it not. Luc. 2.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that as it happened here to Marie, and Iosephe, so it chances
often, (not only to sinners by mortal sin) but even to most virtuous and
devout souls, that Jesus some time seems to be lost, while he absents
himself without their knowledge, that is, while he withdrawes for a time the
delicious consolations of his presence, to try whether their love be chaste;
that is, free from self interest, in that they love not for any temporal
commodity, or any spiritual solace, but for his own infinite goodness
alone. Nor can they oftentimes whithout much patience, labor, and sorrow,
find him again.



THE SECOND POINT.
They (Marie and Joseph) sought him amongst their kinsfolks and acquaintance,
and found him not.
CONSIDER that B. Marie the Virgin mother of Jesus, and Joseph his putatiue
father, those two incomparable persons, sought Jesus and found him not: because
they sought him where he was not to be found: to wit, among their kindred and
acquaintance. But they persisted in seeking, and at length found him in the
temple, disputing amidst the Doctors, whither his heavenly Fathers concerns
did call him, as he himself told them, saying: Know you not, that I must be
about those things which are my Father's.

Hear daughter, and see, and incline thine ear: and forgett thy people, and
thy Fathers house; and the King will covet thy beauty. It is not among our
acquaintance neither; for there, if we reflect well on it, he is rather lost
then found. But it is in the Temple we shall infallibly find him: among the
Doctors and preachers of his holy law: in the Temple we shall find him
really present in the B. Sacrament, ready to hear us, and to bestow heavenly
blessings upon us

THE SECOND MEDITATION. FOR THE SAME DAY
I must be about those things which are my Fathers.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that our first duty ought to be paid to God, by attending to the
work wherein we are employed by him, (which we are here taught by our B.
Saviors example) without any regard to parents desires, when they deturne us
from the service to which he calls us. But that being first complied with, we
are in the second place, to return to the duty which we owe to our parents:
following our Saviors example again, who leaving Jerusalem, went down with
them, and came to Nazareth.

Unless one hate his father, and mother, his wife and children, brothers and
sisters, yea and his own life besides, he cannot be my Disciple. When therefore
respect to parents enters into opposition with Gods will and service, we ought
to hate our Father and mother. That is, to kill that carnal affection which
proves an enemy to God. Let us pay that first duty, my soul, to that
almighty father of us all: and then we cannot fail to pay all honor, respect
and love to our dear parents, to obey them, and to be subject to them, in all
tenderness, and filial duty.

THE SECOND POINT.
And he was subject to them: to wit, Marie and Joseph.
CONSIDER, that Jesus, as God, who was begotten eternally by his heavenly
father, could neither be subject to God nor man: because, to speak with S.
Paul, he esteemed it noe stealth to be equal to God the Father, with whom he
was consubstantiall, and coeternall, nor could he as God-man, by any law of
nature, be subject to any man neither: because as such too, he was infinitely
more worthy, more wise, and better, then all men. How was he then subject to
Marie and Joseph? Marry, to give us an example of the greatest humility and
obedience imaginable, freely and of his own accord, he submitted himself to
them both even to the exercising of manual labors, or what else they pleased to
command.

Who is he that becomes subject? and to whom? God to man nor to Marie alone,
but to Joseph too. On every side astonishement? on every side wonders? That God
should obey a woman, is a humility without example. That a woman should
command a God, is a dignity not to be paraelled. Blush proud duste God
humbles himself, and thou exaltes thy self ^od humbles himself to men: and
thou by earnestness to have dominion over men preferrest thy self even before
thy Author.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
A Marriage was made in Cana (a town) of Galilie. Io. 2.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that noe good Christian ought to look upon marriage otherwise then
with estimation and respect: nor should any make nice to honor and countenance
the young married couple with their presence. The state is honorable, and
ordered by Gods providence to fill the empty seats in heaven with saints.
Nay says S. Paul, this is a great Sacrament In fine, our B. Savior, his
Virgin mother, and some of his Disciples, were invited to a marriage in Cana, a
town of Galilie, and they freely daigned to honor it with their presence and
with the first miracle that ever Jesus wrought.

yet better, says S. Augustine, is an humble wife, then a proud Virgin. If
Virgins be more honorable, married women are more necessary. And if those be
the greatest ornaments of Gods Church: The fruitfulness of these, peoples the
Church with those ornaments. Let God be honored in both who wisely distributes
his gifts as he pleases; to one so, and to another so: as God has called
every one, so let him walk says the great Apostle.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER, that though these carnal marriages are both honorable and laudabile,
yet are there other marriages in the Church of God which far out pass them.
Those were graced with the mother of God: these with God himself To those
Jesus was invited: to these Jesus inuites all that will, in those Jesus pleased
to be present: in these he himself is the spouse. In those, water was turned
into wine: in these, is only pure wine which begetts Virgins. Hear S.
Augustine: though such as vow Virginity to God, hold a more ample degree of
honor and dignity in the Church of God, yet are not they without marriage: for
they belong to the marriage with the whole Church, wherein Christ is the spouse.

have damnation, says the Apostle: and the happy state of Virgins, assures
S. Augustine, is more fruitful and fertile: not to have big bellies, but
great mynds: not to have breasts full of milk, but hearts full of candor: and
in lieu of bringing forth earth out of their bowels, they bring forth heaven
by their prayers. Hence issues a noble progeny purity, justice, patience,
mildness charity, followed by all her venerable train of virtues. This is
the Virginns work to be sollicitous of what belongs to God, and to have her
whole conversation in Heaven.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
CONSIDER, yet a third sort of marriage, wherein the whole Catholic Church, that
is, all faithful souls, are espoused to Christ in faith, hope, and charity,
but especially by charity, which as Queen, draws a long with her all the
powers, and affections of the soul, to conform and subject them to the
pleasure of her divine spouse, making but one will and nill, of two wills; to
wit, that of God, and man. And this conformity, says the devout S. Bernard,
mary's the soul to God. Whence results, an ineffable content and pleasure, and
such a heat of divine love; that the soul and all her affections are absorpt
therein.

Satis est Domine, satis est. It is enough o Lord, it is enough.

THE SECOND POINT
CONSIDER yet a fourth sort of Marriage; which is made every day to all kinds
of faithful souls which approach to the B. Sacrament. Wherein we are made one
with that divinely dear spouse of ours not only by charity, but even in
realitie, and in very deed; we are mingled with that sacred flesh of his in
that celestial banquet which he bestows upon us, to show us the excess of his
love Whence S. Christome says: therefore it was that he joined himself with us
and mixed his body into us, to the'nd we might be come one with him, as the
body is joined to the head: for, even as one who powers melted wax, says
Cyrill, into other wax, must necessarily wholly mix the one with the other: so
he that receives the body and blood of our Lord, is so joined with him, that
Christ is found in him, and he in Christ.

quoniam bonus: quoniam in saeculum misericordia eius, that he is infinitely
good, and his mercys are without end.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY. AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
If thou will (said the Leper to our savior) thou can make me clean. Matt.
8.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that the poor Leper had found by a long and painful experience,
that there was noe hope of cure by the power of man; all his own, and others
endeavors, proving ineffectual: and therefore he wisely resolved, in an humble
confidence to have recourse to him, whom he knew by faith, to be able to do
all that he would in heaven, and in earth. By adoration he acknowledges him to
be God: and by his words, he publishes him to be all powerful. He came and
adored him saying: Lord, If thou will thou can: and the present effects
prove that his faith is powerful and grateful to Christ, who graciously
replies I will. Be thou made clean: and forth with his leprosy was made
clean.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER, that there is noe stayne so deeply settled, which Gods power is not
able to fetch out: noe leprosy of body or soul, so inueterate and incurable
which God, with a word, does not cure. Our application or address is only to
be looked to. We must approach to the Lord of life and death, as to one such,
with a lively faith: with an absolute confidence, that with a word, he can
work what he will; his power being only limited by his will; as the faithful
leper plainly expresses: Lord if thou will thou can make me clean.

I will, be thou made clean.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Of the Centurion, or Captain of an hundred Soldiers, who sued to our Savior
for the cure of his seruante.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that we may most justly admire him, whom our Savior the wisdom of
God, seemed to admire (how ever he could not indeed be subject to admiration,
to whom nothing was unknown) His great faith, being but yet a gentile; then
which our Savior testifies, he found none greater in Israel His tender care
of his sick servant, whom he terms his child. His great humility, judging
himself unworthy to have our Lord come to him. His true sense of his power or
omnipotency, who, he knew could cure at any distance, by his word alone,
saying: say but only the word, and my boy shall be healed.

that merciful Lord who first freely gave what he pleased afterward to
admire: for faith is not ours by nature, but is a heavenly light sent from
above whereby he and we are taught, to love and serve the meanest, as our
children or brethren: humbly to defer to our Superiors: to have high
thoughts of Gods omnipotent power: and with an absolute confidence, to fly to
his aid in all our own, and our neighbors necessities. We will therefore, not
so much admire, as strive to imitate the good Centurion, in our approches to
our almighty Lord.

THE SECOND POINT.
I have not found so great faith in Israel.
CONSIDER that our Savior makes well appear, that God is not the God of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles too: For how ever the Jews bragged, that God
was only known in Judah, and that his name was great in Israel: yet Truth
reproaches to them, that he had not met with so great faith in Israel, as he
found in that poor gentile, and with a dreadful minace, leaves them in a
doubtful expectation what might become of them, who esteemed themselves alone
Gods chosen people, with exclusion of all others; saying: many shall come from
east and weste, and shall sit down with Abraham Isaac and Tacob in the
Kingdom of heaven, but the children shall be cast out into exterior
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Blessed therefore; says a holy Father, is the man who is always fearful, and
diffident of himself. Accursed is he who places his confidence in man. If none
know then, who is worthy of love or hate, let us labor the more that by good
works we may make sure our vocation and election: as says that blessed Pope
S. Peter, being taught that wholesome lesson by his own fall.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FOVRTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
When he (Jesus) entered into the boat: his Disciples followed him: and lo a
great tempeste arose, etc. Matt. 8.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that there could never appear more security, then when good
Disciples followed their good Master Jesus; nor hope of a more happy
navigations, then when they were embarked in the same boat with Christ. And yet
lo a great tempeste arose in the sea, so that the boat was covered with
waves, which threatened present shipwreck.

earth. How ever we have the happiness to be Christians; that is, to be
Disciples; and followers of Christ. Though we have otherwise the singular grace
to be Catholic Christians, and to sail in Peter's ship, where Christ is the
souueraigne Pilote, yet storms often arise, and we are ready to perish: and
perish we shall infallibly, unless we fix our whole confidence, as a sure
anchor, in his power, who is able to make the winds and sea obedient to his
orders.

THE SECOND POINT.
The boat was covered with waves, but he (Jesus) slept.
CONSIDER that as our Savior deals here with his dear Disciples, so does he
ordinarily with his dearest friends. The Disciples are ready to sink, while
he, as though he were not concerned in their danger, quietly sleeps. The
faithful soul finds her self surrounded with all sorts of temptations,
which so violently make head against her that she seems every moment ready
to perish. And yet Jesus sleeps: that is, leaves her to her self, ready to be
swallowed up, in those raging storms of her poor afflicted conscience. So
that whether she sinkes or swimmes she scarce knows: because Jesus seems
asleep to her.

Inte Domine sperabo, and non confundar in aeternum.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
The Disciples came to Christ, and wakened him: saying: Lord save us we perish.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that as in the Disciples just fear of perishing, we ought to
apprehend our own danger in times of temptation: so by their example, we may
find security. They trust not to their own strength or skill, but run
presently to Christ for aid: they cry out and awake him: they acknowledge in
his ears the hazard they run; save o Lord, save us, say they, we perish.

wherein alone is our safe sanctuary. Cry out so loud that you may awake him:
that man-louer loves to be importuned, and is won thereby. Tell him, with all
humility, and resignation to his blessed will, the danger you are in, your
fear of falling in your self, with firm hope of standing by his grace,
saying: save, o Lord, save us, we perish.

THE SECOND POINT.
Why are you fearful, o ye of little faith?
CONSIDER as well our Saviors mylde reprehension, as present delivery of his
fearful Disciples. It is not a moderate fear that he reprehends in them,
which is the beginning of wisdom, but their infidelity or lack of confidence
in him, whose power they knew; howbeit tho he reproaches them with their
weakness in faith yet graciously he ryseth up; commands the winds and the
sea; and causes a great calm: bringes safety to them, and makes his power be
admired by all that behold that the winds and sea do obey his commandes.

then, my soul, fail not to confide in him: our faith is indeed weak, and
needs spurringe on. If he now and then delays his succor for a time, expect
him with patience: coming he will come, and not delay for ever. He is the great
Master, and best knows the times and momentes: in his good time he will
deliver us. If we seem to be in danger for a while, it is to redouble our
joys, when we shall see his great power in commanding the winds and seas, and
a sweet calm, and constant tranquillity of mind shall follow.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIFTH SUNDAY. AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
The Kingdom of heaven is ressembled to a man that sowed good seed in his
field. Matt. 13.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that the Kingdom of heaven, or rather the King of heaven, our
Savior Jesus Christ, is compared to a good seeds man: for he it is indeed who
sowed the seeds of heaven in the hearts of his faithful, as well by baptismall
grace (which of sterille and unprofitable that we were, makes us the fruitful
field of Christ) as by his holy word, and heavenly inspirations, by which that
field is continually watered and brings out pure wheat fit for the heavenly
granaries, if through want of vigilancie we permit it not to be ouersowen by
the enemy.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that like as the field of man's heart hade for ever remained barren,
had not this good seed been sowed in it; so would this good seed produce noe
fruit without man's cooperatio^. It is by the grace of God we are that which we
are, as well as S. Paul; yet was not Gods grace void in him: but he labored
more abundantly: and so ought we: because he that made us without us, says S.
Augustine, will not save us without our own consent and concurrence. It is man
that must work his own salvation, yet not he principally, but Gods grace with
him, which makes him freely and profitably work what ere he works.

we have it: for howeuer it is most true that God works in us both the will
and performance: it is true too, that we are saved because we will, nor unless
we will shall we ever be saved. Compelle then, o dear Lord, our rebellious
wills, by thy victorious grace, to the due observance of thy law and good
pleasure.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Did thou not sow good seed in thy field? Whence then has it cockle?
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that the seed which the good seeds-man did sow in the field of
man's soul, was charity, that heavenly root, whence all the virtues have as
well their origin as perfection: whose fruits are joy, peace, patience,
benignity, goodness, longanimitie, myldnesse, faith, modesty; continency,
chastity, and all the rest of the virtues: of all which charity is the
fruitful mother. But the enemy man, to wit the sinner, and the Devil,
ouersowed cockle, that is, cupiditie, whose accursed fruits are uncleanness,
brawles, dissensions, divisions, enmities, contentions, banketings, drunknes,
and the like.



THE SECOND POINT.
When men were a sleep, his (Gods) enemy came and ouersowed cockle.
CONSIDER, when it was that the cockle was ouersowen, and the holy Gospel
tells us, that it was when men were a sleep: that is, when we wax lukewarm,
neither hot nor cold in the service of God, which is a disposition that God
hates: when we grow negligent how things pass in our hearts: when we are not
faithful in complying with our vocation, but carelessly forgett the happy
state wherein we are placed: when we become too confident of our own mistaken
strength which is true weakness: whereupon is begotten in us a certain
slumbering, oblivion, contempt, and auersion from heavenly things. Thus do we
fall into a deadly sleep and the Devil, the while, who sleeps not, but
incessantly roues about seeking whom he may devour, easily ouersowes the
soul, with his hateful cockle.

knew at what time the theife would come, he would watch and not suffer
himself to be robbd. And should we do less to prevent the death of our
souls? What therefore I say to you, I say to all the world, watch, because the
theife Sabalus, or the Devil, will otherwise surprise us while we least
suspect it.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER THE EPIPHANIE.
The Kingdom of heaven is like to a mustardseede. Matt. 13.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that here the wisdom of heaven compares the Kingdom of heaven (that
is the Church, or the faithful who are to reign in that Kingdom) to a
mustardseede: which is, says he, the least, or the least kind, of all the
seeds. What are we to learn hereby, but that to be truly of the number of the
faithful, and to be fit to reign for ever in that celestial Kingdom we
ought to be little, and even the least that may be, in our own esteem, and in
our own desires of being esteemed by others: for knowing indeed our own
weakness, misery, and nothing, with what justice would we have others, who
know us not, to esteem us some thing, contrary to our own certain
knowledge and truth?

virtus Christi. This he does by word and work, at all times and places, in
his birth, life and death. He never taught any other greatness in earth then
to be little. He amongst you, says he, who desires to be the greatest, let him
be the least. Unless you become like these little ones (pointing to the
children) you can not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. You must belike grains
of mustard seed says he here. O says S. Augustine, so great a thing it is to
become little, that had not the great God of heaven taught it us by his own
example, we should never have learnt it.

THE SECOND POINT.
But when it is grown it is greater then all herbs and becomes a tree.
CONSIDER, that from the small beginings of Christ, and his fruitful spouse
the Catholic Church, which appeared so abject and contemptible in the eyes of
the world, that it was deamed a scandal to the Jews, a folly to the Gentiles,
grew so great in the tract of time, that noe wood brought out so fair a tree
for its flowers, for it fruit, for its large branches, which extend themselves
all the world over. So that as far as the sun spreads its light, the light
of the Gospel is spredd, the faithful preach, and dye, for Gods truth,

that son to be lodged in earth? A little cave is prepared for his Louure. Is
he to subdue the world to his heavenly fathers service? He exinanites himself
and becomes a little child. Must this heavenly child have Apostles to send to
convert the world? He makes choice of a little troop of silly fishermen. And
yet by these, and by this conquering litlenesse, the world is vanquished. Proud
Philosophers fall into their netts. Royal Diademes fall at their feet. The
ignominy of the Cross turns honorable, and is planted over all the face of
the earth. O may these examples of prosperous litlenesse, confound our pride;
and convert us.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
So that the fowls of the air, come, and dwell in it.
CONSIDER, that as this tree, sprunge from this small grain or mustardseede
affords a place as well of repose as repaste to the small innocent birds of the
air, not to the great ones, which being more earthly, feed on carrion, and
live by rapine So does the goodly large spredd Tree of the Catholic Church
give as well shelter as nourishement to those birds of Paradise, the faithful
of Christ, who having their thoughts continually above, affecte noe more upon
earth, but a mere liuelyhoode, whereas those that are great in their own eyes,
and heavy hearted, are drouned in earth and earthly cogitations, and can never
be saciated,

whose fruit is sweet to their throat. There those chaste turtles intertayne
themselves with their belowed mates, and singe one to one: dilectus meus mihi,
and ego illi; my beloved is mine and I am his.

THE SECOND POINT.
The Kingdom of heaven is like to a mustardseede.
CONSIDER that the Kingdom of heaven, (which by some Fathers is said to be the
word of God in the holy scriptures) is compared to a mustard seed, and that
most fitly. Look upon a grain of mustarde slightlie, and you shall neither
find sauer, nor taste in it, so is fares also with the word of God, which
looked upon curserily without due reflection, makes small impression in man's
heart. Marry let that small grain be bruised, and a strange fiery virtue is
felt, which affects the brains and draws tears from the eyes. And does not
the word of God, being diligently pondered, bless the heart with a strange
sweetness, above that of honey and the honey comb? And is it not according to
the Prophet, vehemently burning, and delightfully inflaming, and drawing
tears of heavenly delight from our eyes.

where Jesus discoursed with them, of which they said to each other: did not
our hearts ardently burn when he (Christ) spoke to us in the way; and opened
the scriptures to us? Thus fared it with him, who having stripped himself of his
clothes, said, pointing at the bible, it was this book that robbed me. And
thus it will fare with us, my soul, if we do not only read, but seriousy
ponder and ruminate the word of God: for it was in the meditation of it that
the devout David testified his heart was set on fire.

MEDITATIONS FOR SEPTVAGESIME SUNDAY
THE FIRST MEDITATION
Of the great and wonderful benefit of man's vocation to the knowledge of God.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how the Almighty God, that great Master of the family; of the whole
universe, began early in the morning to call workmen into his vineyard, that
is, from all eternity, before time yet was; being moved thereunto by noe other
motive then his own immense goodness, and most just will. According to that of
Jeremy. In everlasting charity hane I loved thee, and therefore have I drawn
thee taking compassion. And S. John; not as though we have loved him, but
because he has loved us: and again: because he loved us first.

non ex operibus. Not to us then o Lord, not to us, but to thine own name give
glory. It was thy charity moved thee to think upon us. Thy all powerful
will drew us out of nothing: thy own graces made us grateful to thy heavenly
eyes. For of him; and in him, and by him are all things. To him be glory for
ever Amen. Must we conclude with S. Paul.

THE SECOND POINT.
He sent them into the vineyard.
CONSIDER how that great God, who out of his infinite goodness and chartie,
had thoughts of mercy for me from all eternity, did in time as his providence
had appointed raise me out of the abisse of nothing, and gave me this noble
being, capable to know, fear, love, and serve him in his vineyard, and to
gain the day penny, that is, eternal felicity.

who inhabites an inaccessible light, whom none knows but fears: nor knows
and fears as being infinitely powerful but he also ought to love, because he
is infinitely good, or good nesse it self: and serve, as being his creature,
whose service is true liberty; and whom to serve is truly to reign. Let us
therefore, my soul, know that this is our whole business; here below to fear,
love, and serve that good God, who without having any need of us, made us, to
enjoy himself eternally.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Having made covenant with the workmen for a penie a day. etc.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, further, how graciously that Almighty maker of all things, dealt
with man, in this proceeding who though he had absolute power over all his
creatures by right of creation, and might ther-for most justly have exacted all
their labors, as they had all their abilities, and even all that they are,
from his free gift, yet would not his goodness make use of his prerogative
with man, by exacting all his labors, as due to him from his slaves, but
pleased to couenante with him for a reward or hire, as with a free man.

too by my free choice and surrender; all my words, all my thoughts, all my
works and by how much more, all being thine own by justice, thou yet daignest
to spur on my slowenesse by hope of rewards: by so much more fervently make
me spring after thee; for pure lou'es sake; because thou art infinitely good and
lovely and unspeakably worthy of the love of all men and Angels.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that English Catholics are not only called to the Knowledge of God,
and to work in his vineyard, but further to a higher degree of honor, to be
the special champions of his truth. To you, (says S. Paul, in the way of
congratulation to his dear Philipians (it is given for Christ not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for him. Thus do Monarkes use to honor
their commanders, when out of the confidence they have of their fidelity,
worth, and valor, putt them in the greatest places and occasions of danger.

and esteem them, all joy with saint James, since S. Chrystome and
Theophilacte assure us, that the gift of suffering for Christ is greater, then
the gift of raising the dead and working of wonderful miracles: for by this
last, say they, I become a debtor to God but by that other God becomes my
debtor, O admirable thing! Its he who gives me the grace to suffer, and yet by
this, he himself be comes my debtor. Let us therefore say, with that admirable
servant of Christ S. Teresa aut pati aut mori, lets either suffer or dye, that
is the sure and royal road which our Captain Christ took to his own
Kingdom.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR SEXAGESIME SUNDAY
The sower went out to sow his seed. Luc 8. And it fell by the way side.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that though the seed which was sown, was noe less then the word of
God (as our Savior himself declares to his Disciples) saying: the seed is
the word of God, in that his divine commentary, yet three parts of it, by the
peruersitie of man, falls fruitless upon the ground to wit, one part of that
good seed, fell by the way side, that is, upon hearts which lie open, exposed,
as a through-fare, to all the rumors, follies, and vanities of the world;
whence its trodden, as it were under foot, and so never getts time to take any
root at all.

God is either proposed to the ear of our body by the preacher, or to the
ears of our heart by divine inspirations, we have noe ears to hear? or else,
that hearing, we hear not, that is we understand not; because our hearts are
already prepossessed and wholly taken up by wordly dreams and imaginations; so
that there is noe place left for the word of God? O what pity it is, to let
that seed of heaven, sent us to produce the fruits of eternal glory, be
negligently lost! Lets therefore empty our hearts of such pernicious toys that
we may truly say: speak, o Lord, because thy servant hears.

THE SECOND POINT
And other some fell upon the Rock.
CONSIDER that an other part of that good seed fell upon the rock, which
having the superficies or outside of some good earth, is capable to receive
the seed, and to make it sprout out too, but yet so hastily, that it takes noe
firm root and thence as soon withers as appears. So it fares with those who
hear and receive the word of God with joy, and are often thetby moved to
compunction, and tears, yet their hearts being rockie it makes noe great
impression therein, and thence upon the first temptation or difficulty, they
easily forgett that they were moved at all.

that conquering grace, which is repulsed by noe hard heart: because therefore it
is given, that the hardness of the heart may be taken away.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
And other fell among thorns, and the thorues grew and choked them.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER finally that another part of the feed fell among the thorns which
stisles the young and tender grouth thereof, and that happens not as in that
seed which falling upon the high way was trodden under foot, and could take
noe root; nor as that which fell upon the rock, which for want of earth could
take noe deep root: but having earth enough to take a deep root, and
produce fruit, it was choked, as our Savior himself interpreetes the
parabole in the same Gospel, by wordly cares and solicitudes, and deceiptfull
riches.

them with delight. Wisdom assures us to be thorns, which prick, wound, and
kill. Who would ever have believed me, says the great S. Gregory, if I should
have interpreted riches to be thorns, since these wound those delight. And yet
thorns they are (says truth it self) since the thoughts of the^ do tear
our minds in pieces with their sharp points; and when they weigh us down to
sin, they draw blood.

THE SECOND POINT.
And other some fell upon good ground, and they yealded fruit.
CONSIDER that the good ground which fayles not to yeald fruit, is the well
disposed heart of man, which by the prevention of Gods grace, has nothing
opposite to that good seed. To wit, it neither lies open to the curiosities
and thronges of the world, but is shutt up within it self. Nor is rockie and
stuborne but supple, mylde, and docile. Nor lastly is it ouerspred with
thorns, that is with riches, honor and pleasures; but contrarily, possessed
with the contempt of them, they being indeed the chokers of all the seed of
heaven, and the sourses of all man's misery.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR QVINQVAGESIME SUNDAY
Jesus said to the twelve Apostles; behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all
things shall be consummate which were written by the Prophets of the son of
man. Luc 18.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how fitly the wisdom of the Church applies this Gospel intimating
Christ's B. passion to this time, wherein we are disposing our selves to enter
into the rigor of a penitential life, thereby to apply to our souls the
merits of the said passion. Fitly, I say, since it seems to say to all
Christian hearts, with the great S. Paul: think diligently upon him who
sustained of sinners such contradiction against himself, that you be not
wearied, fainting in your minds: for you have not yet resisted to blood (as he
did) in fighting against sin. Forgett not then (in the time of your penance)
the consolation which speaks to you, as it were to children: my son neglect
not the discipline of our Lord; neither be thou wearied whilst thou art rebuked
of him: for whom our Lord loves he chastises, and he scourges every child
which he receives.

The soldier, says the devout S. Bernarde, feels not his own wounds, while
he looks upon the wounds of his King. Noe my soul, there is nothing that can
so sweeten that sharpest sufferances, as fixedly to behold the sufferances of
the son of the King of glory; and that, not for his (which were none) but
for thy crimes, for thy love, for thy redemption. Look upon him then in thy
pressures, be they of body, or of mind, and thou shall like them, thou shall
love them, thou shall be delighted in them. What can be so dear to a loueing
heart as to be like its beloved? cost that ressemblance what it will it shall
fall far short of the delight it bringes with it.

THE SECOND POINT
He (Christ) shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and
scourged, and spitt upon etc. and then shall be killed, and the third day shall
rise again.
CONSIDER this description, or prediction; and blush to be found a fainte and
delicate soldier, under so generous and patiently suffering a Captain. Ponder
it well, and be more and more confirmed in the faith of Christ, and the truth
of Christian Religion, against Jew, Turk, or Athist: for what he here
fortells, and afterward performs, was long before foretold by the Prophets,
which could never have been so punctually performed, had not their pens been
guided by the finger of the holy Ghost. Sopho He shall be delivered up to the
Gentiles (to wit Pilate and his soldiers) to be mocked. David speaking in the
person of the Messiah: I was whippt all the day long. Isaye: I turned not my
face from those that spitt upon me wisdom. Let us condemn him to a most
infamous death. Sopho. expect me in the day of my resurrection, speaking in the
person of Christ.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
BY WHOM WAS JESUS TEMPTED
Jesus is ledd by the spirit, that is, the holy Ghost that he might be tempted
by the Devil. Matthew. 4.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that as all Christ's actions and passions, all his words and works,
were for our example, instruction and consolation, so was this in particular,
by a special graciousnesse, for the instruction and comfort of his tempted
servants. He had taught us by his holy word, that the life of man was a
perpetual warrefare, or temptation upon earth; and by his singular goodness,
that he pleased to be with us in temptation; for it was even he, the true son
of God, the wisdom of heaven, the only beloved of his heavenly father who was
ledd out by the holy Ghost to be tempted, to comfort and instruct us in our
temptations, in his own sacred person.

esteem it all joy when you fall into many, and diversity of temptations. The
servant is not greater then the master; its he that has given us an example,
and his will is, that we should follow it: that by this means, his virtue,
humitie, may be obtained, and the necessity of a continual dependence of his
assistance, may be learnt.

THE SECOND POINT.
WHEN WAS JESUS TEMPTED?
When he had fasted forty days, and forty nights etc. the tempter approached
etc. Matt. 4.
CONSIDER, that Jesus, in whom there neither was, nor could be any guilt of
sin, was then tempted, when he was employed in most holy works, and holy
circumstances: to wit, in fasting, prayer, watching; and that too, even in
solitude, in the wilderness, in that sacred retreat of his. To teach us,
that we never ought to esteem our selves secure from the devils assaults, be
we never so well employed; and in the best circumstances imaginable.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME DAY.
How was Jesus tempted?
If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Matthew.
4.
CONSIDER, that the Devil tempted Jesus in three kinds of temptations most
dangerous, and detestable. First with mouinge his heavenly father to work
miracles, as though he had noe other means to feed his people, then by
turning stones into bread: secondly, by despair, in castinge himself down
head long. Thirdly by riches and honors, boldly promising to give all, whereas
indeed he could perform nothing at all, of his proud promise,

try me o Lord and prove me (My dross must be burnt away, to be come pure
Gold fitr for the Tabernacle) whether it be with vain suggestions of desiring
to know more then we ougt to know: or with the ambition of the honors and
riches of this world: or finally, by representations of the most horride
despair in Gods mercy etc. Or the most base impurities imaginable, desiring
only to hear with S. Paul: my grace is sufficient for thee, with resolution
to beg it earnestly, and without intermission.

THE SECOND POINT
How did Jesus overcome the Devil?
Not in bread alone does man live etc. Thou shall not tempt the Lord, thy God
etc. Auant Satan, the Lord thy God thou shall adore. Matthew. 4.
CONSIDER, how our sweet Savior has not only given us an example of humble
patient suffering of the Devils assaults, in almost all manner of temptations,
in all times, places, and circumstances: but he does also, in his own words,
teach us how to make resistance, and how to over come. It is not in bread alone
that man lives: thou shall not tempt the Lord ihy God but thou shall adore him.

Thou shall adore thy Lord thy God, and serve him alone.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
He brought them (to wit Peter, James, and John into a high mountain, and was
transfigured before them. Matthew. 17.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that as all, who are already saved from the beginning of the world,
or shall be saved to the end thereof, were to be saved by faith in Christ, it
was most necessary that the said faith, should be most firmly established.
His humanity, was already made too too credible, by his nativity, by his
tears, by his blood in his circumcision, by his suffering of heat and cold
etc. It only rested then, that his divinity should be made good by some
conuincing arguments: And to demonstrate this, he ascends into the Mount Thabor
with Peter, James, and John, and is transfigured in their sight; that is, he
takes another form upon him (his face appearing as resplendant as the sun)
to give them, and us, a scantling, or foretaste of his glory.

that he is truly the son of the living God, whom we heartily adore.

THE SECOND POINT
CONSIDER that the providence and goodness of God, evidences this most
important truth of Christ's divinity, beyond all exception, by causing it to be
testified by all kinds of most reprochlesse witnesses. By the whole old law in
the person of Moses the Lawgiuer. By the prophecies in Elias, that divine
Prophet. By the new law or Gospel, in Peter James and John: finally by God
almighty himself by a voice out of a bright cloud which ouershawed them (the
Apostles) saying (with much terror to them, who fall down upon their faces)
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
And his face did shine as the sun, and his garments became white as snow.
Matt. 17.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that Peter, James, and John, upon the only aspect of the
transcendant splendor and beauty of Jesus his body, and garments, are so
transported with joy, that they take a present resolution, to build tabernacles
upon the top of Thabor, and to remain there: because Peter, out of the deep
sense of the heavenly delight which he felt, professed freely to that divine
Master of theirs; that it is good for them to be there.

of all other things in those Apostolical hearts, what should not firm hopes
of eternities work in ours? If God bless us with heavenly gustes at our
prayers etc. Let us humble our selves and be thankful for them, as being the
seed of glory. But we must not be too greedy of them, nor resolve to dwell
in them. Jesus must pass from Thabor, over Caluarie before he enter into his
own Kingdom: and so must we Christians too.

THE SECOND POINT.
He spoke with Moses and Elias of an excess.
CONSIDER, that while Peter, James, and John, like men, are so transported with
a small foretaste of glory, that they wish noe better then to live upon the
top of that pleasant hill: Our dear Lord and Master, whose thoughts are
always upon that which tends to the accomplishment of his heavenly fathers
will, is thinking and discoursing with Moses and Elias, of his paineful death
and passion.

aut pati aut mori: either let sufer, or dye.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
And Jesus was casting out a Devil and he was dumb. Luc. 11.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that the Devils dominion was spredd in a manner over all the face
of the earth: Altars were erected, Idols set up: Idolatry, or the worship
of the Devil, reigned in every place: so that his pride grown greater then
his power, he durst attempt upon the son of God (as in the first sunday in
Lent) but in steed of victory he met with confusion. He was overthrown with
the sword of the word of God, without any other arms. But now Jesus, to comply
with, and exercise the Office, of a Savior, being sent to free the world out
of the Devils tyranny, setts upon him by his power and authority, and by
absolute command chaceth him out of the possessed body.

Helper in opportunities, (that is seasonably as he judges fitting) in
tribulation, in temptation, etc. came graciously to his aid: he assaults that
strong one: forces him, by his flight, to acknowledge the power of his
Master, who begins sake his reign, and abate his pride: nor does he this in
his own person only, but even leaves the like power in his holy Church. He
graciously teaches us by his example how we are to behave our selves in
temptation: and shows us in what power we ought to subdue that fierce foe.
Blessed and magnified be he for ever, who has left such power to the sonns of
man!

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that though the Devils taking possession of man's body be not very
common: yet his possession of man's soul is but too ordinary. And how ever, we
perceive it but a little, yet it is far more dangerous, and most absolutely
true. Never are we so unhappy to committ mortal sin, but the Devil takes
full possession of our souls: grace departs: the holy Ghost is turned out of
doors: the Devil becomes our Master, and we his miserable servants and
slaves, over whom he exercises a tyrannical dominion. We become blind to good;
walk in darkness, (not discovering what is fitting to be done) and dumb too,
as to the making profession of what we know to be right.

lost slaves; knowing that there is noe means to fly from him, but to him:
from him offended, to him appeased: saying: have mercy upon me, o God,
according to thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
commiserations: because my misery is exceeding great, and needs noe less a
cure.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall be made desolate, and a house
shall fall upon a house. Luc. 111.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that though we had not had truth it self, which none dare
contradicte, to assure us of this so necessary a lesson: yet common experience
makes it but too sure to very ordinary capacities: The internal divisions
and broils of England, France, Spain, Italy and Flanders, to go noe
further, have often hazarded their utter ruin. And the unhappy misintelligences
of communities, and particular families; have not only disordered them, and
deprived them of the blissings of peace and quiet, but have even exposed them
to public scandal, and desolation it self.

unity of hearts and community of the same purse Noe mine and thine the true
cause of division. This was the Apostles inheritance given them by the holy
Ghost one heart and one soul. This was the song which the Royal Psalmist sung
with such joy, and found so good and delicious, the unanimous cohabitation of
brethren which like a precious oyntement conueyes it self through all the
parts of the body. Power then, o Lord, the love of brotherlinesse and peace
into our hearts that being anointed with the dew of thy spiritual unction, we
may be ouerioyed with the grace of thy benediction.

THE SECOND POINT.
Who is not with me is against me and who gathers not with me does disperse.
Luke 11.
CONSIDER, that the son of God has said it, whose words can never pass. Who
is not with me is against me there is noe mean, noe third way. Noe man can
serve two Masters, God and Mammon. There is nothing that reigns in man's heart
but either cupiditie or charity. What is given to cupiditie is given to that
badd master, the Devil. But what is done for charity, is done for the best of
Masters, our good God; and so we go^ happily with him, and gather with him. If
our hearts say live Jesus, and our actions be done actually or vertually for his
sake, we advance in virtue, and treasure up for heaven. If we fail of this, we
walk not with God, we disperse; the Devil getts a share, more or less
according to the greatness, or litlenesse of our actions.

If it were he, not Baal, or any strange Gods, which created, conserved, and
redeemed us with his own precious blood; let him, not them, souueraignely
reign over us. The bed of our heart is to narrow for two, let our lawful
spouse, the Master of it, wholly possess it. What ever we do, and not for
that for which divine wisdom ordered it to be done (that is Gods honor)
though in its own nature it be good, yet for want of its right end, it falls
short. Concludes S. Augustine.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
Jesus went beyond the sea of Galilee and a great Multitude followed him.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that we never walk more safely, then when we follow Jesus. Never
are we more sure then in his blessed hands. Never better provided for, then
when distrusting in our own providence, ^e let pure love to him, which is
always accompaigned with Prudence, lead us after him: to converse with him:
to receive the heavenly dew of his divine word: and to admire the wonders of
his admirable works; even with the neglect of the whole world beside, as did
this pious multitude.



THE SECOND POINT
I have compassion of the multitude.
CONSIDER that when the pious multitude had once given this ample testimony
(by following him three days in the wilderness) of their love and
perseverance, heavenly wisdom found it seasonable, to give them also a
testimony of his power and goodness, in one and the same miracle: of his
power, in making five loafes, and two fishes extend to the feeding and
saciating of five thousand persons: and of his goodness, by applying the
effects of that power, to solace and nourish that hungry multitude: saying
with compassion, misereor super turbam, that is, my very bowels are moved
with pity, in point of the multitude of those that follow me.

I will not leave you orphants. If I come not presently, expect me, for coming
I will come. Can a mother forgett the child of her own body? And tho she
could, yet I am your foster-father, and cannot forgett you. Ah, my soul, what
expressions can be devised more tender? Our Lord is indeed pitiful and
merciful; patient and exceeding merciful. We have reason to admire his power:
to dread his justice: to venerate his sanctity, to magnify all his
Attributes: yet nothing, nothing comes so home to our uses, as his goodness:
nothing suits so well with our misery, as his boundless mercy.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
Every one took as much as they would and they were filled. John. 6.
CONSIDER, rhat our almighty Master is equally powerful to work his own
design, and our full satisfaction, as well in little as in great matters. If a
world be to be made he rayseth it out of nothing: If thousands be to be fedd
in the wilderness; five loaves and a few small fishes is Matter enough for him
to work upon, and to increase, that small provision, into such a plentiful
store, that he affords every one of them as much as they will, and they are all
filled, and saciated.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER, that though this multitude had just reason as well to magnify his
wonderful power, as to love and embrace his bountiful goodness, in the
stupendous multiplication of a few loaves etc. Yet was but that a poor
shadow, of Gods favors to us Christians, as their obligations also were
incomparably less hen ours. There, five loaves fedd five thousand: but with us
(in the blessed Sacrament) one bread of life descending from heaven, feeds five
thousand millions They received only bodily food and but once; we the true
food of the soul, which gives grace and strength, and leads to eternal
life, and that too as often as we please.

O res mirabilis; o wonder of wonders! A poor and abject servant, eats his
Lord and Master!

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR PASSION SUNDAY
Which of you shall argue me of sin. Io. 8.
CONSIDER the incomparable innocence of our Savior Jesus Christ, who could
stand up undauntedly amongst all the Princes of the Scribes and Pharisees (his
mortal enemies) and provoke their malice to argue or convince him of sin.
Who will, or can, convince me me of sin? They can carpe his best actions they
can revile him: they can calumniate him: they can horribly blaspheame him:
saying he has a Devil in him: but the most impudent among them adventured not
to fix any stayne of sin upon him; nor would he suffer it, as being
altogeither inconsistant with his divinity. There is noe guile framed in thy
sacred mouth.

innocence. They shall find noe guile in thy sacred mouth, nor blemish in thy
actions. We, alas! are they that have sinned: we that have done unjustly, we
that have committed iniquity. We dare not pretend to innocence: but at least,
sweet Jesus, give us thy holy grace humbly to acknowledge our faults, never
laying claim to that which we have noe right to. And if calumnies be putt upon
us falsely, give us courage to neglect them by thy example: unless they be
such, as dishonor our ministry, or office, by which we are made less able
to perform our duties: in which case give us grace to deney them with
simplicity and modesty, without rendering evil for evil, leaving the rest
to Gods sweet providence.

THE SECOND POINT
Do not we say well, that thou art a Samaritane and have a Devil. Io. 8.
CONSIDER, the strange peruersitie, and obstinacy of the Jews: who while they
could find nothing to reprehend in his doctrine: nothing in the truth of his
words: nothing in point of his life and manners, they fall to injuries, and
those most outrageous ones; saying (with approbation of their rash judgment)
Did not we say well, that he is a Samaritane, a base fellow, and has a Devil?
The first accusation he past over in silence, for he was indeed the true
Samaritane, that is, the keeper and sauer of man. But the second, which was a
most horride blasphemy, he would not let pass, but replied to it, in short,
with all the mildness and modesty, that might be, saying: I have noe Devil.

I have noe Devil. Let us thus proceed, my soul, when our most innocent
words or works, are mistaken or carped at, let us pay a mylde replye to truth,
without wrangling. For the rest, our innocence will afford joy enough to our
hearts.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
If I tell you the truth, why do not you believe me? Io. 8.
CONSIDER, that our Savior was not only truth it self which could neither
deceive nor be deceived, which the Jews might in some sort be ignorant of,
but he had used all the means possible to make it appear to them by effects.
He had cured their blind, their deaf, their dumb and lame. He had appeared in
glory, and had the testimony of heaven and earth that he was the son of
God. He had shown his power over the Devils. There was noe guile found in his
mouth, nor offense in his actions, as his mortal enemies, being provoked, made
good by their silence and yet they believe him not.

were but too too credible; thy miracles were innumerable; visible undeniable:
From thy divine mouth flowed honey and milk: thy actions were wholly laudable.
But their malice, their avarice, their ambition, hardene their hearts, and
blinded their understandings. Let us, say they, circumnent that just man, he is
unprofitable to us, and contrary to our works. He is the heir, lets kill
him, and the inheritance is ours. Hence it is, my soul, that the good seed of
Gods truth plainly proposed, and inculcated to our hearts, are stifled in us by
our inordinate desires of honors, pleasures, profitt.

THE SECOND POINT.
If I say the truth why do you not believe me?
CONSIDER, that though the Jews appear, and are indeed hugely blameworthy:
yet I fear, if the proceedings of many of us Christians be well looked into,
we shall be found, noe less guilty: They saw the miracles, yet their malice,
at least, made them conceive that they were done by the power of the Devil:
but we believe without all doubt that they were done in digito Dei. They saw
the innocence of his life, yet misdoubted hypocrycie. We believe him to be
that most innocent person, in whose mouth there is noe guile. They were in
doubt of his Deity. We believe firmly that he is the true son of God.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR PALM SUNDAY
They (the Apostles) putt their garments upon the Ass, and made him (Christ)
sit thereon.
CONSIDER, that the son of God, consubstantiall with his Almighty father,
and equal to him in Majesty and glory, could not by ascending become
greater, or more glorious, since nothing can surpass, or even in any sort
attain to infinity. But what he could not by ascending, he could by
descending and humbling himself, which he did in his birth, in all his life,
in this day of his tryumphe, making his entry into Jerusalem upon a silly
Ass: and therefore God exalted him, and gave him a name surpassing all names, a
name which brings heaven and earth down upon their knees to adore him.

make it his business in earth to decry pride, and exalt humility: and to leave
us in this one lesson, an example of the ruin of the one, and a cure of the
other. Triumphs are used to be made by proud man, in coas^he, on horte, with
Lions and Elephants. By humble Christ upon a poor ass. What more abject then
a silly ass. The only Christian way then to ascend and tryumphe is to
descend. To erect our head into the skeies, without the root humility, is
to seek ruin, not advancement and grouth of spirit.

THE SECOND POINT. FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
CONSIDER, that though our Savior Jesus Christ, be most justly admirable,
adorable, and amiable in all circumstances: in the glory of his heavenly
father; which he is possessed of by the right of his eternal generation: in
his power of workinge innumerable miracles: in his scantlinge of glory on
Mount Tabor etc. Yet never is he more to be admired, adored, and loved by poor
man, nor ever speaks he more tenderness and edification to his heart, then
when for his love, and example, he makes choice of that, which, to the world,
appears most ignominious, poor, and abject, as in this poor entry of his,
he did.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
The Apostles brought an Ass, and made him sit thereon.
CONSIDER, that heaven is not further removed from the earth, then the ways of
the world are dista^t from the ways of God, and man's cogitations from Gods.
Men think their greatness will be mistaken, unless they testify it by the
magnificence of their garments, and their vast traynes of horse and men. The
son of God, contrarily, comes in the name of our Lord with two or three poor
fishermen, mounted upon an Ass, in the only day of his tryumphe, and in that
abiectnesse finds his glory, and even in that is ackdowledged to be the true
Messiah or king.

contre, and seduce us. The world seeks honor by high and glorious ways; and
the more he pursues it, the more it flies him. Christ walks on in humble and
abiecte ways, and it comes to meet him. He is saluted with noe Hosannas in
Jerusalem till he have first humbled himself to ride upon an Ass; nor will he
enter into his birthright in the heavenly Jerusalem till he have humbled
himself to death, and that, the infamous death of the Cross. Let abiectnesse
then, my soul, be thy honor; foolishness thy wisdom, and the infamy of the
Cross thy glory.

THE SECOND POINT.
He went into the Temple.
CONSIDER, that our B. Savior who had taught the Jews that he sought not his
own glory, does here verify the same in effect, both to them and us when
presently withdrawing himself, from the glorious acclammations, Hosannas, and
Benedictus es given to him, as to their true Messiah, and King, he went to the
Temple, there to do his Fathers work, and advance his glory, by casting out
of it, all that sold and bought therein; and the tables of the bankers and the
chaires of them that sold pigeons he overthrew, saying to them: it is written,
my house shall be called the house of prayer etc.

is eaten up with the zeal of that holy house; and how, being the mildest
among the sonns of men, he takes the whippe into his hands, and resolutly
without fear of offending, drives those unworthy negotiatours out of his
Fathers house. Ah, my soul, what may not they then fear who buy and sell
Christ's patrimony in the Church? Ah Christians! what may not we fear, who
believe that we are not only in the Temple of God, but even in the real
presence of the God of the Temple, and yet seem rather by our loose behavior,
etc. to come to affront him, then to adore him in his own house, and presence?

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE SECOND SUNDAY AFTER EASTER.
I am the good Pastor. Ihon. 10.
CONSIDER, that as the son of God was borne for us, and given to us, so he
seems indeed to be all ours, and to come home to all our necessities and
uses: He is not only the way, truth, and life, by which we are to walk to
life everlasting: but looking upon us as weak and straying sheep, who often
leave the way, forsake truth, and are subject to hazard life, by becominge
preys to rauinous wolves, he graciously proves our Pastor, to feed, protecte
and lead us by the ways of truth, to those eternally plentiful pastures of
his in our own Land.

strayed from the way, from truth, from life, and perished. We are indeed
weak creatures, and daily subject to err in many things, and have little
reason to depend upon our failing strength. Howbeit be Gods mercy ever
blessed, we are not as sheep without a Pastor, but we have the good Pastor
to protect us. Let us attentiuly hear his voice; know him, and his ways; and
wholly depend upon him, and his priests, of whom he has said. Who hears you
hears me.

THE SECOND POINT.
A good Pastor gives his life for his flock. Io. 10.
CONSIDER that this Pastor of ours, is the good Pastor indeed, that is, good
by excellency, or infinitely good, which he makes manifest not by words only,
but by many effects: what was cast away he brings again: what was broken he
binds up: what was weak he strengthens: and the sheep which was lost he
seeks, and finds, and graciously brings home upon his own shoulders. Nay
more, the labor of thirty odd years imployd about the care of his flock,
had seemed but little to his love, had he not in the end laid down his life
for the same.

noe not one. And yet while we served him so poorly, there was noe hope of
salvation without his help: nor pardon, nor life for us, but that which he
purchaced by his own precious death. Let me ever love thee, thou dearest
pastor, and purchacer of my soul.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that this good shephard, this heavenly Pastor of our souls, does
conduct, protect, and feed us; not after an ordinary manner, but according to
his divine, superadmirable, and astonishing ways, peculiar and proper to his
divine goodness and wisdom alone; not only with the plentuous dugges of his
heavenly consolations, and foretastes of beatitude, but even with that
supersubstantiall food, his own precious body and blood.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER, that this good; this ineffably good Pastor of ours, does not only
feed us by this admirable means which the Angels could never have dreamt on,
but will also daigne to be fedd by us, in his poor members, our necessitous
Christian brethren: I was hungry, and you gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and
you gave me to drink. Yes says our dear Pastor: verily I say to you, as
long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me.

love, you give to me. O what a comfort it is to a truly loving heart, to have
so easy a way, to render love for love!

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER EASTER.
For a little time you shall not see me, and shortly after you shall see me
again. S. Io. 16.
CONSIDER, that we are all pilgrims traveling toward our heavenly home, and
we shall not miss to meet with all kinds of weather. Now heat, now cold: now
fair, and soon after foul. Sometimes our Savior dilates our hearts with the
abundance of his consolations and we prosperously spring on in the ways of
his commandments: and sometimes again, he retires, and hydes him self from
us, leaving us to desolations and sorrows, and we become troubled, and all our
former force and courage seem to have forsaken us.

He does nourish, cherish, and comfort us, least we might fail in the way. He
does afflict and leave us, least out of confidence of our own strength, we
might err from the way. He gives us consolations to testify to our heart that
he loves us. He leaves us to desolations, to try and make appear whether we
love him. But whether he comfort us, or permit afflictions to fall upon us,
let us still venerate his orders and gracious conduct, because he it is indeed
who is always our refuge.

THE SECOND POINT
You shall lament and weep.

But the world shall rejoice. Ioh. 6.


CONSIDER, that sorrows and joys go here below by turns and times. And
still the best part in appearance is alloted to those whom God least loves; the
world shall rejoice: And the worst, as he always took it to himself, so he
leaves it to his dearest friends. You (says he, to his dear Apostles) you,
shall lament and weep: but your sorrows shall be turned into joys. Whereas
the worldlings joys, and part, shall be with the Hypocrites who have received
their reward.

we are wearied in the way of iniquity, and perdition; and have walked hard
ways: while the just, whom we had in derision, and in a parable of reproach,
are counted among the children of God, and their part and portion amongst the
saints. There are we, my soul, to inioye our permanent possession. There are
our tears to be wiped away for ever, and paid with the inioyment of an
eternal inheritance, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor
has entered into the mind of man.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
Now, indeed you have sorrow.
CONSIDER, that the sorrows which we suffer, are in this present moment, now,
says our Savior; you have sorrow. Now: not the next moment for any thing we
know: things may alter to the better: God may assiste: death may end all: nor
ought a wise man to esteem any thing long which shall have end. But put case
our sorrows and afflictions should neither be lessened nor taken away for the
space of a long life. Yet what is the longest of lives compared to eternity
but a very moment?

an eternal weight of glory.

THE SECOND POINT.
I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice and noe man shall take
your joy from you.
CONSIDER, that though our good God may sometimes seem to leave us, yet he
never forsakes us, but returns again to see us, to rejoice our hearts, and
double and trible our joys (not those of the wicked which are always attended
and vshered out by sorrow: but those of the true Disciples of Christ; Gaudia
Domini, joys in Christ, of Christ, and for Christ) and to give us assurance,
that it shall not be in the power of man to rob us of these Christian joys,
which are properly ours: and none shall take your joys from you.

up in our hearts, whither the tyrants sword cannot reach. He may take our lives
away, but cannot our joys, which live in death, and survive it. Such were S.
Paul's joys, with which he abounded in the midst of all his tribulations. Such
the Apostles, who came rejoicing from before the counsel. Such S. Laurence,
whose joys burnt higher then the Tyrants tormenting flames. Such finally are
those of our Lord and Master, who joy being proposed to him sustained the
Cross. This, my soul is our joy which none can take from us.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FOVRTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER.
I go to him who sent me. Io. 16.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that if we were truly wained from the world, from self love, and
self consolation; we should be so far from having our hearts filled with
sorrow, upon the hearing of the words of Christ (I go to him who sent me) that
contrarily, our hearts would be replenished with joy. That dear Lord of ours,
had perfectly accomplished his heavenly Fathers will, in the work of man's
salvation by puttinge down that dear price of his redemption. What then ought
to be more delightful to the redeemed slave, then to see his gracious
Redeemour return into the possession of his own right; to see him exalted; to
see him glorified?



THE SECOND POINT.
It is expedient for you that I go Io. 16.
CONSIDER that tho not so much the consolations of God, as the God of all
consolations, and the pure love of him, for his own infinite goodness sake,
ought to be the chief Christian motive in all our actions, yet our merciful
God who best knew that man is all earthly, earth, and ledd by self interest,
suits his motives to what we are, always mixing the sweetes of consolations
and our advantage to move us to the love we otherwise owe him. And therefore to
solace the Apostles sadness he says: I tell you the truth, it is expedient
(that is, aduantagious or profitable) for you, that I go: for if I go not the
holy Ghost shall not come to you.

so ever. Let us learn the^ to leave God for God, as here we have occasion,
and undoubtedly the holy Ghost will come, and inhabit our disinteressed hearts,
and bless them with more solid and substantial advantages.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
But if I go I will send him to you. Io. 16.
CONSIDER that whereas the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the son, it
was but convenient that the son should first be seated at the right hand of
his heavenly Father, in the Throne of his glory (according to that: the holy
Ghost was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified) before the holy
Ghost was sent, that he might be jointly sent from them both to poor man, as
that best gift descending from above, consubstantiall, coequall, coeternall,
with themselves, and well becoming their infinite Majesty, and the excessive
love of our dear Savior, by the merits of whose death that perfect present
was purchaced.



THE SECOND POINT.
He (the holy Ghost) shall teach you all truth. Io 16.
CONSIDER, that as the donation, and mission of the holy Ghost, were the
effects, and fruits, of the passion, ascension, and noble tryumphe of Christ,
wherein he ledd captivity it self captive; and in all of them glorified his
heavenly Father; so is that holy spirit sent to glorify the son, by teaching,
clearing, and confirminge in the hearts of the Apostles all that their divine
master had taught them below, and making these heavenly truths, by their
ministry, tho otherwise, as far above the reach of reason, as contrary to
the bent of flesh and blood, powerfully spread themselves all the world over,
and become the familiar and fattening food, not of wise only, but even
Idiotes and children too, whereby they are made more learned, then the proudest
Phylosofer that ever lived.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER EASTER.
Until now you have not asked anything. Io. 16.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that the poor beggar needs noe other inuitation to ask, then the
knowledge and sense of his own poverty, and want; whence the rich of this
world do as little use, as little need, to entreat the beggar to ask an alms
of him. But the riches of heaven, by an ineffable bounty, and graciousnesse,
importunes us, us, as it were, to importune him, saying: until now you have
not asked any thing: ask and you shall receive.

have frequent recourse to a bountiful giver: but now at least being incited
by the reproaches he makes us for not asking, let us hourly run to those
ouerflowing breasts of mercy and grace, least we may seem gratis to loose our
selves. Let us, my soul, ask, seek, knock (that holy violence is grateful
to God) with as much importunity, as we truly find necessity.

THE SECOND POINT.
Amen, Amen I say to you, if you ask the father any thing in my name, he will
give it you. Io. 16.
WHOM WE ARE TO ASK.

CONSIDER, how strong hopes we ought to conceive of obteyning our demand,
where the promise is made in so great a latitude, and where such a son the
wisdom of heaven, confidently sends us to such a Father the eternal sourse of
all goodness, plenty, and happiness, which can never be drayned: to his
Father and our Father: as we are taught by his sacred mouth to believe and
say: Our Father which are in heaven etc.

Thou art my Father; the guide of my Virginity.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Ask the Father in my name. Io. 16.
THE FIRST POINT.
HOW WE OUGHT TO ASK.
CONSIDER that our blessed Savior in these few words, instructs us, not only
of whom we are to ask, to wit of his Father, but, how, or in what manner, to
wit, in his name. If we ask of a Father, and that of an all-knowing,
all-seeing Father: it ought to be done with the reverence, humility,
obedience, love, and confidence of a child. If in the name of a son it ought
to be done as that son used to do it; saying with an absolute resignation:
Father if it may be, if it be agreeable to thy divine will; if it be expedient
for my eternal good; grant this or this etc. If otherwise, not my will but
thine be done.

for none comes to the son unless the father draw them. But let it be in
the name of his son Jesus; since there is noe other name under heaven given
to men; wherein they must be saved. Let us then humbly entreat that heavenly
father, in the name, and by the merits of that most dearly beloved son, be
it for things necessary for the body or soul; but let it still be done with
perfect resignation to his blessed will and pleasure, saying as we were taught
by him; Father if it may be, let this or this be done, or this or this be taken
away. Howbeit not my will, but thy holy will be done.

THE SECOND POINT FOR THE SAME DAY
What we are to ask.
CONSIDER, that what we ought to ask, is to result out of the same words of
our Savior: Ask of my Father, in my name. We must ask then of a loving
Father, we must therefore demand things suitable to his love: his goodness will
not give us a stone in lieu of bread, nor a serpent in steed of a fish: he
will not give us poison because, our folly likes it. We must ask of a Father
who is the King of heaven, we must not then ask earthly trash, which is
unworthy of his bestowing. Finally we must ask in the name of a Savior
nothing therefore which is against our Salvation.

trifles unworthy of his giving. If in the name of a Savior, things then which
most conduce to our salvation: things which he himself taught us to ask: that
his name may be sanctified in all nations! that he may absolutely reign over
all hearts: that his holy will may be punctually performed here below as in
the Court of heaven etc. Let us ask that, my soul, and we shall never be
confounded.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE THIRD SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
And there approached publicans and sinners unto him to hear him. Luc. 15.
CONSIDER, the great mercy and myldnesse of Jesus, who did not only graciously
permit publicans and public sinners to approach to him, to hear his divine
word, etc. but he even proved (by the parable of the lost sheep, which men are
wont to seek with so much care) their Apologist or Advocate, against the
uncharitable murmurings of the proud and vnm ercifull Scribes and Pharisees,
who looked upon them, and him, with disdaigne.

be merciful, o God, to me a sinner.

THE SECOND POINT. FOR THE SAME DAY.
The Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying this man receives sinners and
eats with them.
CONSIDER that a quite contrary spirit appears in these Doctors of the law,
from that of the great Lawgiuer Christ. He comes from heaven, not to call the
just, but the sinner, to penance. They look upon them with indignation, and
murmr against them. He admitts them not only into his presence, and feeds
them with his holy word, but even familiarises himself, and feeds with them:
They keep a loofe off from them, proudly pretending fear to be defiled by
them, while they fear not to be uncharitably censuring both them, and him.

but that which he reprehended in the Pharisees. Noe, but contrarily, he
willed, such as were without sin to throw the first stone at the sinner. True
justice, says S. Gregory, begetts compassion in our hearts, false justice
breeds detestation.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
Who among you etc. does not leave the 99. and go after one that is lost to
find it.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, how our sweet Savior to animate poor sinners to penance, does
not only admit them into his company, eat with them, and plead their cause
against the Scribes and Pharisees; but does further make appear unto them, by
a familiar example (common to them, and all the world) of a shepharde that
leaving ninetie-nine, that is the whole heard, seems to employ his greatest
care to find out, the poor sheep which had strayd from the rest (he makes
appear I say) that this proceeding of his is so little liable to censure, that
contrarily, it is h^ld most laudable, and is ordinarily used by every one.

God sent not his son into the world to judge the world but that the world
may be saved by him. He leaves the ninetie-nine just, that is, the whole
troops of the Angels, to seek after poor man who had strayed, who had
prodigall-like deboistly spent his substance in a foreign land, and without so
strange a mercy had been lost for ever.

THE SECOND POINT.
And when he has found it lays it, upon his shoulders etc.
CONSIDER, again in this parable of our blessed Saviors, that the poor
shephard, did not only willingly leave the ninetie-nine, to imploye; as it
were, his whole self, and his care, to find out that one which was lost, but
having found it, used, all sweetness toward it, not driving or chaceing it
home, but lovingly loading it upon his own shoulders, and being returned home
with it by calling all his friends to rejoice with him.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FOVRTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
The multitude pressed our Savior I. Christ to hear his word. Luc. 5.
CONSIDER by how many ways our Savior Jesus preaches to our souls, and how,
by the example of the pious multitude, we ought diligently to hear it.
Sometimes he speaks privately to our hearts by his holy inspirations. Sometimes
again both to our ears and hearts, by our Superiors, Pastors, Confessors,
and spiritual books. Finally by the good examples of others, by infirmities,
afflictions, etc.

Evangelical pearls which ought to be prised above all our substance. These
the manna which ought to be gathered before the sun set. These the seeds of
glory, which are to produce in our souls the fruits of eternal felicity

THE SECOND POINT.
We have labored all the night, and yet have taken nothing.
CONSIDER, that we often labor much, and advance but little, which happens
either, because we labor by night that is without the light of Gods grace,
being benighted by sin: Or that we depend more upon our own industry; then
Gods gracious assistance: or finally because we labor for things which are
not worth the labor, which are not permanent, which vanish away like a shadow
Such are all earthly things, when they are sought for themselves, not directed
and used to Gods glory.

It is refused to none who seek it as they ought. Distruste in our own force,
which infallibly will fail us. Ask for things which are worthy of Gods
giving; such as tend to our salvation, and his glory: not transitory toys
which he leaves to his enemies; and refuses to his friends, in exercising mercy
toward them.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
When they had done as our Savior ordered them they enclosed a very great
multitude of fishes, and their net was broken.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that Peter and the rest who had labored all night, and caught
nothing, while they wholly depended upon their own industry and skill in
fishing; as soon as they were taught by experience to distruste in their own
endeavors, and to expect Christ's orders and times, with absolute dependence of
his good pleasure, they were so far from laboring in vain, that they
presently enclosed a huge multitude of fishes, and were, in a manner agreably
oppressed with plenty.

Neither he who plants is any thing, nor he who waters, but God who gives
increase.

THE SECOND POINT.
Peter fell down at Jesus his knees, saying go forth from me, o Lord; for I
am a sinful man.
CONSIDER that Peter was so far from ascribing the taking that unexpected
multitude of fish at one draught, either to his own skill, or even to the
great credit he had with Christ, by whose power indeed that wonder was
wrought; that contrarily he enters upon it into himself, by reflection what he
is, and what God is, and humbly falls down at Jesus his feet, giving all the
glory to him, and acknowledging himself to be a poor sinner, unworthy of his
presence.

not to us, o Lord, not to us, but give glory to thine own name: for if we
began well, it was by the favor of his preventing grace: if we advanced it was
by the conduct of his concomitante grace: if we made any considerable
progress; it was he that wrought it in us, who works as well the will as the
performance according to his good pleasure, we being otherwise noe better then
poor sinful men. We are only my soul the happy, free, or voluntary
instruments, which his mercy makes merit to receive afterward a crown of
justice at his heavenly hands.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE FIFTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY*
Matt. 5. Unless your justice abound more then that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
CONSIDER, that the Scribes, and Pharisees, fasted often, to wit, twice a
week; prayed much paid the tithes of all they possessed; gave alms liberally;
were very conversant in holy scriptures, and like great Rabbys interpreted
them to the people: and yet Truth it self, Jesus Christ, who can neither
deceive nor be deceived, threatens us Christians, that unless our justice,
virtue and perfection, be greater then theirs, we shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

mouth; that unless the justice of us Christians, do abound more then that
of the scribes etc. We shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven; what will
become of us, when we fall short even of what they perform? for are not our
prayers cold and full of distractions? Our works of mercy as well corporal as
spiritual very few? our fastes rather suffered, then performed with fervor?
And yet unless our justice surpass theirs there are noe hopes of heaven for
us.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that Christian justice, and perfection, does not indeed consiste in
exterior actions, though otherwise good of their own natures, but take, their
worth and excellency, from the interior intention; because all the beauty of
the kings daughter, the soul, issues from the interior: If the intention,
the eye of the the soul be simple, the whole body of the actions proceeding
from thence, will be beautiful and agreeable. Nor are again every well meant
action Christian perfection, but only ways to it, perfection consisting
absolutely in the love of God and our neighbor.

one necessary thing, charity: from which all our actions ought to issue,
and to her finally to tend: because true Christian perfection, and the
plenitude of the law, is love.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Thou shall not kill, was it said of old: But I (Christ) say unto you, that he
who is angry against his brother, shall be coulpable of judgment.
CONSIDER, how sweet this law of love is (wherein Christian justice consists)
and how dear it ought to be to us all, since it prouides for all our
advantages. It setts not only our life in assurance by saying: thou shall not
kill: but even strives to make our otherwise miserable lives, delightful to
us, by forbidding anger, taunting and deridinge words, and all manner of
vnderualuing one an other, intimated by the words Raca, and fool.



Consider how agreeable this brotherly charity must needs be to our sweet
Savior, since he does not only provide safety, and delight of our life while
we observe his holy Law, according to that how good and delightful it is,
for brethren to live unanimously togeither but even in case of transgression
thereof, for our perfect reconcilement to our brother and him: if thou offerest
thy gift at the Altar and there thou remembrest that thy brother has any
thing against thee leave there thy offering etc. and go first to be
reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shall offerre thy gift.

If any man say I love God, and hates his brother, he is a lier, says the
beloved Apostle. Learn then to love, my soul, whom thy exemplar Christ so
much loves, that he chooses rather to want his own proper worship, sacryfice,
then that thy brother should want thy love. Thy offeringes of thine
austerities, thy prayers, thy communions, will never prove grateful to him, as
long as thou willingly harbors grudging in thy breast against that poor
brother of thine, for whom through love he dyed.

The Meditations for this 6. sunday are the same with the 4. sunday in Lent.
page 100.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Take great heed of false Prophets, who come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves. Matt. 7.
CONSIDER that we often prove false Prophets or teachers to our selves, and
consequently our own seducers, while we use the fawning persuasion of our own
virtue and goodness drawn from outward apparances, from the bark, leaves, or
flowers, that is, from the clothing of sheep. Whereas we are taught by Wisdom
it self that the true and certain decernement of solid from seeming virtues,
is placed in the fruits they produce; that is, the subduing of the great sin
pride; the mortification of our passions. Finally, the vanquishing of our self
love, selfwill, and self interest.



THE SECOND POINT.
Every good tree yealdeth good fruits, and the evil evil fruits. Matt. 7.
CONSIDER, the good or bad fruits of the tree of our heart and thence we shall
be able by the Evangelical maxim, to decerne, whether. If we meet with
grapes and figues, that is with mild and meek thoughts, words, and
comportments, know for certain the tree is good, they are not the fruits of
thorns, and brambles, marry if we are true or false teachers or guides to our
selves while we seek for grapes and figues, we meet with thorns and
thistels, that is with distaynefull bitter and sharp thoughts, words, and
behavior, know that the root is depraved, the fruits viciated they are the
productions of the badd tree, which cannot bring out good fruit.

patient, benign, without envy without peruersitie, not puffed up, not
ambitious, not seeking our own, not provoking to anger, not thinking evil,
not rejoicing upon iniquity, but rejoicing at truth, suffering all things,
believing all things, hopeing all things, bearing all things: and remain
assured thence that our heart is right: and that we are happily tendinge toward
our Beatitude.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Every tree which brings not forth good fruit shall be cut down and cast
into the fire.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that every reasonable creature, of what quality soever, is a vine,
or tree; planted in the vineyearde, or orcharde, of Christ Jesus, against whom
this dreadful doom is pronounced: it shall be cut down, and cast into the
fire) in case it answer not to his expectation, but in lieu of true grapes,
yealde nothing but wild grapes: that is, in lieu of true and solid virtues
think to pay with apparances, and in lieu of the sweet and agreeable fruits
of charity, yeald nothing but bitterness, animosities, and auersions, amongst
the citizens of heaven and Gods domestikes, who should but all have one heart
and one soul.

less then a blessed or cursed eternity. If sour grapes; bitterness of
heart, envy, emulation, dissension, ah then, Truth affirms it shall be cut
down, and cast into the fire. Alas it was not planted so, that such fruits
should be expected from it. It was planted by the hand of God, watered which
the precious blood of Chr. let nothing then but the sweet fruits of
Christianity proceed from it.

THE SECOND POINT
He that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.
CONSIDER, that here the wisdom of heaven, in a few words lays us down the
abridgement of all perfection and the blessed imitation of his whole life and
passion; to wit, an absolute and loving resignation to the holy will of his
heavenly father, as well in all that he did, as all that he suffered. I come
not, says that sweet Savior, to do mine own will, but the will of my
father who is in heaven: the things that please him I do always: not as I
will but as thou will. Fawning words, and Lord Lord may please fools who
desire to be flattered: but the actual complying with the will of God, is
only grateful in his eyes who sees hearts.

thy blessed will be done, my dear Lord and Master; who best knows what is
most behoofull for me. I am most willingly in thy holy hands; turn me, and
wind me, when thou will where thou will, and how thou will, thatthy will and
mine may be but one. Repress in me, o Lord that unhappy liberty, by which I
am able to will any other thing then what thou willest.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE EIGTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
There was a certain rich man who had a Bailife. Luc. 16.
CONSIDER that this rich man was God, the great Maker, and Master of all the
earth: and the Bailife, man, every one of us, be we Masters or servants, rich
or poor; who hold all that we have of that great Landlord: the goods of our
body; the goods of our soul, and those of fortune; all is his, and all
proceeds from his bountiful hand: we have the stewardshippe of them to work
thereby our salvation; but the property remaynes still his.

we are rich, and enriched, and want nothing: since indeed we are misers, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Let us render humble thanks, that
he permitts us, with so much goodness, to make use of what is his, and by the
good management thereof, to treasure up for eternity.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that since we are not masters but Bailifes only, and as such liable
to render account, how much it behoues us to sit down, and observe how we
manage all the parts of our farm And first how are the goods of our bodies
employed, as our health, our strength, our beauty, our five senses. 2. how
those of our mind; as our understanding, our will, our memory. 3. how those
of fortune, as our moneys our Lands etc. Are not the first happly rather
employed to offend then please our good Landlord? Are not the second in lieu
of conuersing above with the Angels, dissipated upon vain curiosities and
follies? And are not the third, in steed of the purchase of heaven, misspent
upon iniquity?

the eyes of men, rendered me disloyal, and disagreeable in the eyes of God?
upon what unworthy objects have mine eyes been frequently fixed? What vanities
etc. have not mine ears been filled with? How ignobly have those noble
endowments of the soul, whereby we approach near to the dignity of an Angel,
been employed upon earth and earthlinesse? how prodigally have we not spent our
means to buy vanity, and sin, which was lent us to feed the poor? Let Us
after this manner cast up our accounts: and we shall find a strange waste we
have made of our Masters goods.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
What hear I this of thee? to wit that thou haste wasted my goods. Luc. 16.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how often our good Landlord cries out to our ears and hearts by his
word, his preacher, and private inspirations, reproching us with the wasting of
his goods, to make us beware before we come to the rendering of the account
indeed: graciously seeming, as it were unwilling to surprise us saying: what
is this I hear of thee? nay, which I see in thee, with an all-seeing eye which
cannot be deceived.

Why do you fall in love with vanity, and pursue a lie? Thy blessed
inspirations were redoubled again, and again, reproching my disloyalty; in
such and such things etc. and I answered those heavenly inuitations, from time
to time with a cold and ungrateful cras cras, to morrow and to morrow which
were extended into months and years. I doubted not but that thy divine eyes
wete still fixed upon me, and yet I feared not, while thou lookedst on, to
mispend and dissipate what I knew was thine.

THE SECOND POINT.
Render an account of thy Bailifeshippe.
CONSIDER that at length our lease which is but for life, with our life is
expired: and infallibly we shall hear: render an account of thy Bailifshippe.
The noise of our unruly passions would not permit us to hear Gods word: his
cries were made to deaf ears: his divine inspirations, the seeds of
beatitude, fell upon rockie or high ways, that is hearts laid open to wordly
vanities, where they took noe root, and behold now, after so much precious
time misspent, we have but a moment left to make our account in, upon which an
eternity of blisle, or woe depends.

of all the momentes of our life, of all in one. What would we not then do, my
soul, to clear our account? And what should we not now do, to prevent so
dreadful an expectation? Ponder it well and make resolutions accordingly.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE NINGTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Jesus drawing near Jerusalem, and beholding it, wept upon it. S. Luc. 9.
CONSIDER the great difference there is betwixt the judgments of men and
those of God. Never did Jerusalem seem to be in a more happy state, and more
justly to rejoice then when they received their King, Jesus Christ,
withioyfull acclamations, and Hosannas, yet never drew it nearer to its ruin
by putting Christ to an infamous death. They, spredd palms and olive branches
out of triumph: he, tears out of compassion.

know what rate we ought to putt upon the joys and iollities of this world,
which are but ordinarily the forerunners of ruin to our souls; and have true
sorrows following them in at the heels. Nay though we receive Jesus Christ
himself into the cities of our souls, with more glorious Hosannas, and
spreading of branches, then with serious discernements of the dread Majesty
we receive, and the true fruits of charity, we are but preparing for: Not
this man (Jesus) but Barrabas: or toll toll crucifige.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that the Jerusalem indeed upon which our Savior wept is our own
ungrateful souls, which often turn the abundance of Christ's singular favors
to our greater condemnation. The greater benefits we receive the greater
gratitude we owe, and the greater punishment shall we undergo if we answer not
to them accordingly. What ought he to have done to his vinyarde his beloved
Jews which he did not do by being borne and living among them, by his
preaching, by his multiplied miracles? And what favors and graces have not we
too received from his holy hand?



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
If thou had known, in this thy day.
CONSIDER, that happly we Christians know but too much to do solitle.
Ignorance may some times excuse, but luke warmenesse, idleness, and negligence
can never. We know what a dear price was putt down at Jerusalem for our
ransom: and what an inestimable reward is prepared for us in the heavenly
Jerusalem. We know what endless torments are threatened if we live not
according to the knowledge, and light of faith we have. We know that this day
is yet ours, an acceptable time, a day of salvation, wherein more may be done
for a since, a tear, a contrite and humbled heart, then can be purchaced by the
prayers of all the saints in heaven, this day of our life being once past.

Tribunal of a wrothfull Judge, and yet while we have but one day we can call
ours, or one present hour according to S. Paul we dare pass it in laughing,
languishing, sleeping, etc. which lead to death: and be like those hazardous
souls who spend their days in delights, and in a moment descend into Hell.

THE SECOND POINT.
Because thou have not known the time of thy visitation.
CONSIDER that our B. Savior declares, that the cause of the utter destruction
of Jerusalem, was, because they did not know, that is, through ingratitude,
obstinacy, and blindness, they acknowledged not the special favor of having
the son of God sent to them in person, to visit them, to make them hear his
sacred word from his own mouth: to work multitudes of miracles in their sight
etc.

the will of his Lord, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And
dare we deney that we know his will to be our sanctity: and that we ought to
be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect? and yet how coldly do we creep
on in that way? Have we not frequently had the honor of his heavenly visites;
heard his sugerred words; and experienced in our dead souls the miracles of
his grace? Ah my soul, let us diligently call to mind the times of those
gracious visitations, with the thankfulness of our whole hearts, and singe
those sweet mercyes for ever and ever.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE TENTH SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
The Pharisie standing prayed thus with himself Luc. 18.
CONSIDER in this Parable the true description of a proud Petitioner, or rather
of one that goes not so much to the Church to pray as to praise himself. He
gave God thanks indeed, but with taking a vain complaceance in his gifts,
esteeming himself so rich that he asked noe more, nay he even insulted at the
poor publicane who asked. He is not like the rest of men (excepting none)
extortioners, unjust, adulterers: nor is he like that publican, wherein he adds
rash judgment to his pride. In fine half the law is but declining from
evil, and all that, if you believe him, he has performed.

Let such as stand look that they fall not. Let our eyes be fixed upon our
own defects, leaving God to judge our neighbor, to whom he stands or falls.

THE SECOND POINT.
I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all I possess etc.
CONSIDER that pride still ascends, and gaynes ground. The Pharisie had
already, in his own esteem, freed himself from all stayne of sin, what
rests for his pride but to preach his own virtues, that so Christian justice
might appear accomplished in him. I fast twice a week, says he, I give
tithes of all I possess, not of the fruits of the earth only, according to
the prescript of the law, but even of all without exception.

nothing of our selves, not so much as think one good thought, but all our
sufficiency is from God: having all-wayes in our mouths with the holy Church:
Deus in adiutorium meum intend: Domine ad adiunandum me festina.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
The Publican standing a far off would not so much as lift up his eyes
toward heaven.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, in this poor Publican, the perfect picture of a true penitent. He
stands a far off, as judging himself unworthy to come near the Altar: he
dares not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven: because shame and confusion
had covered his countenance to have offended so great a Majesty: he knockes
his breast, where sin was conceived and seems to take revenge of himself.
He beseeches God to be merciful to him a sinner, exposing his misery only,
for Gods mercy to magnify it self upon.

what dispositions we ought to bring with us, when we go to sue to the
dreadefull majesty of God for remission of our sins. Nay rather let us
blush, that after so long practice in spiritualitie, we fall short of that
poor sinner: after so much light; so many heavenly inspirations; so many
helps and assistances which he never had. And yet while our eyes lie open to
every distraction, his, with confusion are fixed upon the ground, not daring to
look upon the heavens: he takes revenge upon the breaste wherein sin was
conceived; and makes humbly confessed misery alone plead for mercy.

THE SECOND POINT.
Be merciful to me a sinner.
CONSIDER, the contrary effects of the far contrary proceedings of the
proud Pharisie and humble Publican. The Pharisie came with his heart full
swollen with proud justice, and returned with his hands empty. The publican
came laden with humble injustice; and an empty heart, and he returns with his
hands full, and is justified. The Pharisie preaches his own justice,
innocence, and virtues, and yet returns humbled. The Publican, is so far
from pretending justice, innocence or virtue, that he pleads only his
poverty and sinfulness, and relyes wholly on Gods mercy, and he returns home
exalted.

God always disperses the proud in the conceit of his heart: and exaltes the
humble: Those, he sends away with empty hands: these he replenishes with good
things. For lo the poor undervalued, despised Publican, who found none of
his own justice, but his true poverty and misery to plead his cause,
returns justified: while the Pharisie is sent away with confusion.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XI. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
And they bring to him (Christ) one deaf and dumme. Matt. 7.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, in this deaf and dumme man (cured by our Savior in his passing by
sidon etc.) the miserable condition of a poor soul, which happens often to be
both deaf and dumme too. The greatest commerce that poor man has with
heaven, is either by speaking or hearing. I will speak to our Lord though I be
but dust and ashes. Abraham speak o Lord for thy seruantheares. Psalm: When the
soul falls then into such a lythergie that it neither lists to speak to God
by prayer: nor to hear God speak to it by his preachers, alas in what a
lamentable state it is!

that thou have neither list to pray, nor gust in prayer, nor yet inclination
to hear, or read the word of God, whereby the soul should be strengthend, and
nourished, fail not to testify to thy brethren, by sighs, and sobbs, and
tears, that thou lie sick of the palsy, and art sore tormented. Procure,
at least, some good soul to go thy errand for thee, and signify to our
merciful Savior in what a sadd condition thou art, as did the good Centurion
for his servant. Thus do, and confidently hope for assistance in Gods good
time.

THE SECOND POINT
They besought him (Christ) that he would impose his hand upon him.
CONSIDER, that we are taught by these good people how we ought to behave our
selves toward our distressed brother. They did not only bring him to our
Saviors presence, but they sue for him, and prevail with that God of pity
to touch him with his holy hand and soon after to cure him.

Lord loves that brotherly love! They noe sooner bring this distressed brother
of theirs, and interceede for him, but that merciful heart is touched with
compassion, and blesses them and him with the effects of their labors: and
prayers: for his ears were opened and he spoke right. Let us hence learn
never to fear to leave the dearest deuotious we have, to afforde offices of
brotherly charity to our afflicted brother. What we do to them in quality of
brothers of Christ, we do to Christ.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
And taking him from the multitude apart etc.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that Christ took the Dumme man apart from the multitude, before he
perfectly cured him; to teach us that there is noe better way to cure our
neighbors or our selves, in case of our spiritual deafness and dumnesse,
then to quitt the multitude, and to betake us to some holy retreat. There will
Christ speak loud enough to be heard by the deafest ears: there will he make
the tongues of the dumme speak loud enough too, to be heard by him, there
will the cure be absolutely wrought, the ears being immediately opened, and the
string of the tongue being loosed.

I will lead her (the faithful soul) into the wilderness, and I will speak
to her heart. The wilderness, my soul, where our deafness ought to be
cured, is our chamber or Celle. There the world is silent, and breaks not our
heads with its idle tumults and rumors, but leaves God his turn to speak.
There he breaks through our deafness: saying, not to our ears, but to our
hearts; I, not the world, am thy salvation, and says it so that we hear it.
There it is too, that he makes our dumnesse speak unto him, saying: O dear
Lord thou haste made me to thy self, and for thy self, and thence it is, that
wander where I will, I: am at unrest and even wearied out till I return to
thee. Thou have made my soul capable of thy immensitie, and noe less thing
then thy self, can, or shall ever saciate that large capacity. Da mihi te,
read mihi te.

For this will I day lie cry Thou art my hearts repose
Dark night's my day in thee
In solitude my God's
A multitude to me.


THE SECOND POINT,
He does all things well, making the deaf to hear and the dumme to speak.
CONSIDER the exceeding gratitude of those good people for a temporal benefit;
and that done not to themselves neither; but to their neighbor; while we
hardly take notice of so many spiritual ones done to our selves every day.
They, though otherwise commanded to tell nobody: cannot conteyne themselves,
but they cry it out to every body, with joy and wonderment, freely publishing,
that he does all things well, making the deaf to hear, and the dumme to
speak.

praise, since even they who speak most thereof, may be acounted to be but even
dumb. I am my dear Lord thy redeemed slave; thou haste thundered through my
deafness, and broken my bonds asunder; Let my heart, and my tongue praise
thee, and let all my bowels say; o Lord who is like to thee? say therefore, my
soul, if I forgett thee, let my right hand be forgotten: let my tongue cleave
to my jaws if I do not remember thee; and place thee in the begininge of all
my joys.

THE FiRST MEDITATION FOR THE XII. SUNDAY. AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Blessed are the eyes which see what you see. Luc. 10.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how great a Blessing it was indeed for a company of poor fisher
men to behold God incarnated: fimiliarly to converse with him: to discourse
with him in a friendly manner: to sit at table and eat and drink with him,
to be the hearers of the sacred words which streamed from his divine lips: to
be companions of his labors etc. To see him in earth a mild Emmanuel, whom
the Cherubins and Seraphins adore with trembling in heaven.

come o Lord, and delay not: come and pardon the sins of thy people, come
and save man, whom thou did make of claye. I would to God thou would burst
the heavens and descend: and yet this happiness was not granted them; while
we Christians enjoy that or a greater. For though (as S. Chrysostom
comfortably says) we have not the happiness to be hold his form, and figure;
his apparel etc. Yet we see him, we touch him, we eat him. O my soul, what
a singular honor is this, to be fedd with him, to be united to him; and to be
made one body of Christ, and one flesh.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that tho those good Jews (the Apostles) to whom the son of God was
especially sent, had a benediction of preference, to have seen him in person;
yet was there another, noe less meritorious, left for us poor gentiles of
seeing him by faith, attested by the same Truth: Blessed are they who have not
seen, and have believed: for there, says Gregory, faith has more merit,
where humane reason produces noe evidence.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
What is written in the Law.
CONSIDER that this question of this Doctor in the law: Master what must I
do to possess life everlasting? may putt us in mind, that to appear wise and
careful of our salvation, we often putt questions to God and man, saying: what
are we to do to advance in perfection: to be truly vertuows, to attain to
life everlasting etc. whereas without asking, we know it well enough: for do
not we read in the law? are we not all taught in our Catechism? Thou shall
love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart with all thy soul: and thy neighbor
as thy self.

and in our heart. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy self. Ah, says loving S. August. had it
not been enough to have permitted me the honor of loving thee: but thou must
command it: yea and threaten me, huge punishments if I do it not. Ah dear
Lord were it not the worst of punishments, to be prohibited, or deprived of
that love?

THE SECOND POINT,
Who is my neighbor?
CONSIDER that tho that great Doctor of the law asked a question where he
had noe doubt as he was forced to acknowledge (for he redd in the law and knew
well, that to live, he was to love God above all things and his neighbor as
himself) yet still he has another doubt to putt, to wit, who is his
neighbor? To which our Savior in effect answers; not Jews to Jews only,
but Jews to Samaritons too, and Samaritons also to Jews; that is, according
to S. Augustine, every man is neighbor to every man: for we ought to
understand him to be our neighbor, to whom we owe works of mercy, in his
present or future want: as he too the like to us, in like necessity.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XIII. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY
There met him ten Lepers, who stood a far off, and cried with a loud
voice, saying Jesus Master have mercy on us. Luc. 17.
CONSIDER in these corporal Lepers, how spiritual Lepers ought to behave
themselves to procure their cure. They stay not till they be called; the
horror of what they suffer is a sufficient spur to them. They come in
troops, and waylay him from whom they hope for cure. They stand a far off,
esteeming themselves infectious, and unworthy to approach. They cry out with a
loud voice, without specifying their desire, knowing well that their loathsome
outside speaks that, with more force and pity to their Master Jesus, to
whose mercy they leave themselves.

this promptitude in point of our leprosies, or other spiritual deseases? or
rather do we not use, a quite contrary proceedinge, while we daily hear
redoubled in our ears (loose the bands of thy neck, o captive daughter of
Sion. How long will thou be heauie-harted, and love a lie?) and yet we sleep
on: and yet while we live in a loathsome languishment, we seek some more time
to remain unhappy Do we cry out with loud voices, or rather so low and
faintly as tho we feared that God should hear us, and cure us too soon? a
miserable condition wherein the great S. Augustine sometimes found himself, and
pitifully lamented it. Ah, my soul, if we be so miserable, as not yet to be
in terms to beg heartily for our perfect cure, let us not fail, at least,
to lay open the mass of our universal misery, before the eyes of our most
merciful Lord, to plead for merry.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that we all are weak and miserable enough, to have fallen, or to be
subject to fall into spiritual leprosies, by the infection of sin, which
conueys its poison all over the whole body of our actions: to wit by pride,
envy, hatred, want of right intentions, duplicitie of heart, which depraues all
our best works, and deriues an universal deformity or leprosy upon us.

to stifle this hellish brood, by earnestly begging of the divine mercy, that
humility and charity, those heauen-bred sisters, may quite destroy, Pride,
envy and hatred in our hearts.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
As he saw them, he said: go show your selves to the priests etc. and as they
went they were made clean.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that, with what ever care and diligence we seek for Jesus at what
distance soever we stand a loofe from him out of a sense of our own
unworthiness: how loud soever we cry, and how humbly soever we disclose our
sores, it often happens that we are not presently cured, but are sent to the
preistes to discern betwixt leper and leper, and by that means we are made
clean. It is happiness enough for a poor sinner that he is graciously looked
upon by a Savior and told by him what he is to do for his cure.

my grace is sufficient for thee. Which he received with so much resignation
and satisfaction, that he did, not only suffer his infirmities willingly, but
pleased himself in them, but even gloried in them; because he found indeed
that virtue was perfected in infirmity, and by that means Christ's virtue,
humility, did inhabit his chaste soul.

THE SECOND POINT.
Jesus said, were not ten made clean, and where are the nine.
CONSIDER, that though ingratitude is always odious to God, and man, yet is it
never more sensible, then when many benefits are done freely to many, and that
without any preceedente deserts: especially when it is found in those, who by
preference were loved and caressed before and above all the rest. So it happens
in this days Gospel. Ten were cured; and one only returned to give thanks.
Ten were cured, whereof nine were Jews; his choysen people; amongst whom he was
borne; with whom he conuersed; to whom he preached; before whom he wrought so
many miracles; while yet one only stranger, a poor Samaritane, comes back
with his mouth and heart full of thanks giving.

were not ten made clean? and where are the nine? There was none that
returned, and gave glory to God, but this stranger. Where are the nine? to
wit the Jews whom I mome favored? Where are the nine? to wit the priests
and religious who have yet shared more deeply in my favors? Answer my soul,
and tell where they are. They are the first in dignity. And will they prove
the last in their acknewledgements? They are a regal preistoode; citizens of
the faintes, and Gods domestikes. And shall the gratitude of strangers tear
heaven out of their hands? The unlearned cries out the great S. Augustine,
snatch heaven away from us, while we with our learning walowe in flesh and
blood!

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XIV. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Noe man can scrue two Masters. Matt. 6.
FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that as it is impossible for a man to serve two Masters, so it is
most unjust to serve any more then one. We are wholly his by creation: his by
conservation: and wholly and absolutely his by redemption, wherein he bought us,
his slaves, at the price of his precious blood. To whom then can any of our
services be due, but to him alone who purchaced us at so dear a rate?



THE SECOND POINT.
Noe man can serve two masters.
CONSIDER that our Savior by the impossibility of serving two, inferres the
necessity of serving one master only, and by that one again, he leads us to
his diuiue unity, by which alone we can be made eternally happy with him,
according to that of S. John: Father, as thou art in me, and I in thee, so let
my servants be but one in us. And if one Master, and one servant, by means of
this divine unity, one service, one intention of serving him alone, of louinge
him alone, of adoringe him alone, as being truly his Vassalls.

my beloved may be mine and I wholly his: and that I may esteem it my only
happiness, to adheare to my God, and to love that one necessary thing, the
God of my heart, and my part for ever: whom to serve is truly to reign. O
Jesus bannish from my heart all the loves which divide it betwixt thee and the
world: that it may serve and love thee absolutely, in all times, and places.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Be not careful what you should eat or what garment you should putt on etc.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER how our B. Savior, labors, as it were, by force of arguments to
free us from immoderate care and solicitude about our meat drink and
clothes. And thus he vrges. Your life; and your body which you have by my free
gift, are of more worth, then meat and clothes; if then, I give you what is
greater, why should you doubt of receiving what is less? Again; the fowls of
the air, and the flowers of the field are provided, with feathers to clothe
them, and fitting nourishment to releive them, much more man then (concludes
our Savior) who is the Lord and Master of them all.

a place for our Lord, and a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

THE SECOND POINT.
For your father knows that you need all these things.
CONSIDER that our Saniour goes still on, to break down our solicitude and
self confidence, that our chief dependence may be of his divine providence;
not in our own. First by reason of the little power we have, being not able to
add one inch to our stature: secondly because by that strange solicitude, we
should be like the heathens who seek the same things. Thirdly because thereby
we forgett our own happy condition of being children to an almighty Father,
who knows that we need all these things.

I will not leave you orphants.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XV. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
Jesus went into a city called Naim etc. And behold a dead man was carried
forth. Luc 7.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that though God is justly admirable, and ought most justly to be
admired in all his works: yet it happens almost generally by man's stupiditie
and dullness, that he is more admired, magnified, and praised for things less
admirable, while greater things are past over with little consideration. One
young man is here restored to life, and the whole multitu de who accompaigned
the corpse, magnified God, publishing that a great prophet was risen amongst
them, and that God had visited his people. Thousands are daily restored to the
life of the soul by verrue of the Sacraments of Baptism and penance, and
little notice is taken of it.



THE SECOND POINT.
Behold a dead man was carried forth, the only son of his mother.
CONSIDER that as gray heirs, length of years, and frequent infirmities, do
daily and hourly threaten the old man, that he cannot live long: so frequent
experience ought to assure us, that young men may, and often do, dye soon,
yea in the very flower of their age; as did he here, being the only son of
his mother, whose corpse was carried forth. Wherein all her hopes of a successor
failed: and howeuer he might have fedd himself with the expectation of a rich
inheritance, all that falls to him from his poor mournful mother, mounts to
noe more, then her comfortless tears, which fall fruitlessly to the ground.

the trumpet sounding: Arise, o ye dead, and come to judgment.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Behold a dead man was carried forth etc. accompaigned with a great multitude
etc.
CONSIDER that a day will come (God only knows how soon) when the soul,
which now animates this body, shall be driven out, and the poor senseless
lump shall be left; to be brought forth, as this young man's was, to be
accompaigned to the grave by some number of friends, who happly may bestow
some few tears, or small commendation upon it, before they throw that
vselesse and loathsome mass into the ground, which some times had been
ouerualued at an unjust rate both by our sel-and others, as now it too plainly
appears.

it is decreed in the supreme Court that men shall once dye. That is the
immortal soul shall be separated, from this body of earth, which did
ouerloade itt, and incline it to earthlinesse. This mass of corruption was it,
which we so pampered, so cherished, so adorned, so admired, and loved to hear
admired by others. And lo now a tender mother, will give noe longer lodging to
it, tho it be all that is left of her only child, but brings it forth to be
cast into the earth.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that we read in the Gospel of three sorts of dead bodies, restored
to life by our Savior, which perfectly represent three kinds of souls dead
by sin. That of the Archsynagogues daughter, who was truly dead, but was not
yet carried forth. Representing a soul who consented to mortal sin in
thought, without any exterior action. That of the widows only son who was
dead and carried forth, expressing one who did not only consent in thought,
but performed it in effect. Finally that of Lazarus, who was four days dead,
and began to be corrupted? pointing out the soul which is not only dead by
sin, but even dead and buried, in the badd custom of sinning. All which
not-withstanding our Savior was merciful, and powerful enough to raise to
life.

the Maid is not dead but she sleeps. Or have we been unhappy enough, to
have committed in work what pleased us in thought? all hope is not yet past,
the dead man is not yet buried. God has power enough to say. Young man I say
to thee rise. Or are we happly so extremely miserable, as not only to have
offended in thought, and work, but even to be dead, buried and corrupted, in
a long and dissolute custom of sinning. Enter not yet into despair neither,
Lazarus who stunc ke in his grave is raised to life. God neither wants
goodness, nor power to pardon, so we have resolution, by his grace, to quitte
our ill ways etc.

bitterness of our heart: humble our selves under the powerful hand of God:
and incessantly beg for pardon, for what is past, and grace for the time to
come

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XVI. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
And they (the Parisies) observed him. Luc. 14.
CONSIDER that the Parisies invited our Savior Jesus Chr. to dinner, not so
much out of respect to him, as with a malicious intention to pry into his
actions, and to observe his words, and comportements to censure him. Whence we
may gather that it is not the spirit of a Christian, but the proud and
malicious humor of a Pharisie, to leave the care of our self, (as being in
self conceit above the pitch of other men) to observe the words and actions
of our neighbor (which concern us not) especially those which are the worst,
or by our malice we turn to the worst.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER, that though our B. Savior, who sees into the hearts of men, knew
well enough with what a black design he was invited by the Pharisees, yet he
disdaygned not for all that, to go among them, to do the work of his
heavenly father; by miracles to prove who he was; by wisdom to confound their
craft, and by patience and myldnesse to subdue their malice.

or even knowledge we have, that the peruersitie of others may but make an ill
use of it. By saying and doing what belonges to us, we save our own souls,
which is our greatest duty. And with all we give good example and sow seeds
of virtue for others. In God's good time they will sproute up, and produce
wished effects. God is a hammer which tears rocks a sunder. Let us never
fail to sow and water, leaving the increase to his blessed providence.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
When shou are invited to a marriage sit not down in the first place.
CONSIDER that we are all invited to the marriage of the Lamb: and the way to
arrive happily at it, is, the imitation of his words and works, by whose
goodness we are invited to it. Pride was the great sin he came to decrye.
Affecte not says he the first place: but learn of me who am mylde and humble
of heart. All his life, from the crybbe to the Cross, was humble and abiecte.
He was discribed by his Prophet to be the last of men: Finally he humbled
himself, being made obedient even to death, and the death of the Cross.

humility, of him, who by word, and work, showed himself mylde and humble of
heart, and we shall infallibly find rest and peace to our souls here below,
and eternal repose with him above in glory.

THE SECOND POINT.
Sit down in the lowest place etc.

He that humbles himself, shall be exalted.


CONSIDER that if we did well ponder our own misery, we should need noe
other motive to choose the lowest place. Our own sins we well know; but of
other men's we are always ignorant. We are nothing, but by Gods conservation:
we have nothing, but by his gift: we can do nothing but by his assistance.
This, alone, I say, should be sufficent to humble us; and never suffer us to
prefer our selves before any. Howbeit our good God gives us yet another
motive, which is our own interest, exaltation, and true honor. And for this
we have the word of Truth that can never fail. He that humbles himself shall
be exalted.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XVII* SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
The Pharisees came to Jesus faying Master, which is the greatest commandment
of the law? Matt. 22.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that the Pharisees come togeither to Jesus, which was the true way
to their eternal happiness. But as they come Pharisees; so they return
Pharisees that is, full of pride and presumption. They call him Master, but it
is not to become his true Disciples, but to tempt him, and to pose him. A
learned Doctor among them, asks him which is the great commandment in the
Law; while yet he is ignorant in the lesser; to wit, that he who comes to God
ought to believe that he is: which they did not. So that they were rather
mockers, then Masters, or even good scholars.

Let us approach to God, my soul, as S. Paul taught us, with a true heart, in
fullness of faith; not as the Pharisees did with pride and presumption. Let us
come to him, in simplicity and humility of mind, as poor ignorant scholars
to learn his blessed will: not as great Masters puffed up with our own
knowledge, to tempt and teach him. Lets first believe in him, that he is the
son of the living God; because without faith it is impossible to please him:
and learn of him, to be mylde and humble of heart, and so we shall find rest
to our souls; which in high, and proud questions, can never be found.

THE SECOND POINT.
Thou shall love thy Lord thy God from thy whole heart, with thy whole soul,
and with thy whole mind. This is the greatest and first commandment.
CONSIDER that this commandment of the love of God above all things, is most
justly called the first, and greatest. The first, because it ought to possess
the first place in our heart. The first again; because it ought to be in man's
soul, what the first ^oouer is in the heavens, which gives first motion to all
the rest. And it is the greatest, because its whole aim is summum bonum the
souueraigne Good, the greatest too; because it comprises all Gods Law, and all
the virtues in a most eminent manner.



THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart etc.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER in what manner, and with what measure we ought to love our Lord God.
And we are told by S. Bernard that the measure of loving God is to love him
without measure: from our whole heart; says our blessed Savior, by placing
all our affections upon him. With our whole soul; not permitting any of the
passions to contest with it. With our whole mind; by making choice of the best
means imaginable, to accomplish his blessed will in the most perfect manner
that man is capable off here below.

after him incessantly; and yet humbly acknowledge that we fall infinitely
short of what is due: saying with S. Augustine let me love thee, o Lord, as
much as I wish, and as much as I ought: wherein, that I may not fail, prove,
as the Author of the precept, so the giver of the grace to perform it: give
what thou commandst o Lord, and command what thou will.

THE SECOND POINT.
And the seeonde (commandment) is like to this: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self.
CONSIDER that our B. Savior, had noe sooner established that right of love
which is indispensably due to his heavenly Father, but he falls upon the duty
of his adoptiue brethren to one another, which he also places in love; saying:
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. With this difference
notwithstanding: that the measure of the love of God, is, to love him without
measure: and the measure of the love of our neighbor, is, to love him as our
selves: that, ought to be exhibited to God, because he is infinitely Good: this,
to our neighbor (be he good or badd) because it was commanded us, by an
infinite Goodness.

that there is noe surer way to attain to Gods favor then the love of man to
man. Ama and fac quod vis.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XVIII. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY
Jesus etc. said to the sick of the palsy: have a good heart son, thy sins
are forgiven thee. Matt. 9.
CONSIDER that Gods goodness and bounty is so great, that he often gives us
not only what we ask, but even other things which we ask not, which are
far greater and better. The poor sick of the palsy: aimed only at a
temporal blessing, the cure of his infirmity, and behold he meets with far
more, the remission of his sins, from the mouth of truth, saying: have a good
heart son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

sees we most need. As at other times, in exercising his mercy, he refuses us
what we desire, to grante us things more conducing to our eternal good: being
still equally good, as well in what he gives, as what he denies. If we pray
then day and night and be not heard, as it happened to our blessed Savior
himself, let us rest assured, that what we asked was not for our advantage,
acquiescing therein to Gods wise providence, and desiring above all things to
hear: son thy sins are forgiven thee.

THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that this wise Physician of ours, does not only show his goodness
and liberality in the care of the poor man's corporal and spiritual
infirmities, but manifestes his wisdom also in the manner of the cure: to
wit, he first takes away the cause, which is sin. By sin it was, says the
great Apostle, that death, (and consequently all deseases leading to death)
got first footing in the world: and this woeful cause being once removed from
the soul he proceeds to the cure of the body. Arise take up thy bed, and
go into thy house.

Better it is, says Truth it self; that one of thy limbs perish, rather then
that thy whole body go into Hell fire.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
Certain Scribes say within themselves he blaspheameth.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that as charity and goodness makes the best of all things by a
friendly interpretation: so pride and malice turns all to the worst. Our B.
Savior graciously daignes, as well to cure the infirmities of the sick man's
body, as the wounds of his soul, and the Scribes with their wordly wisdom,
cry out he blaspheames. Whereas less learning then they proudly pretended to,
might easily have fitted them with a better consequence. To wit, none can
forgive sins but God alone: But this man, Jesus, forgiues sins: therefore he is
God, the son of God, the Messiah whom we expect.

makes honey of all she meets with. Lets not judge, and we shall not be
judged: for in vary deed, if we observe it well, we condemn our selves in
the very thing wherein we judge another, while we do our selves the same
thing. Let us learn hereby to be slow in censuring: for we seldom fully
understand the business: as also to have patience to have our best actions
censured by others, who understand them not, since we best know how subject we
are to offend in many things.

THE SECOND POINT.
The multitudes seeing it etc. glorified God who gave such power to men.
THE FIRST POINT.

CONSIDER that while the proud and malicious Scribes turn Christ's best
actions to their own perdition: the simple multitudes turn them to their
advantage and Gods glory. They both hear and see the same things. To wit:
thy sins are forgiven thee: arise take up thy bed and go into thy house.
The Scribes find blaspheamie in it: the simple people, contrarily, Gods power
and wisdom; which they acknowledge with admiring reverence, and glorify him
who gave such power to men.

it is not the viuacitie of understanding, but the simplicity of beleeuinge
which saues the most part of men, says holy S. Augustine, as here we see it
happens with the unlearned multitude. The minds of men have noe sure access
to wisdom, and salvation, unless humble faith first prepare them to reason,
and true knowledge, which pride is not capable of.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XIX. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
A King made a marriage to his son; and sent his servants to call them that
were invited to the marriage. Matt. 22.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that the King who made this marriage, was the King of heaven, who
decreed in his high counsel, from all eternity, that his only begotten
son, should espouse man's nature, and become like to one of us. His servants
who were sent to inuit were the Patriarchs and Prophets first. Then the son
himself, who spoke, by his own mouth: and after that, the Apostles and
Disciples, who were sent into all the earth, to preach. The invited, were men,
dispersed over all the world.

his blessed eternity, in self beatitude, without any want, or possibility
of want of any thing could ever be ours) who I say had thoughts of love for
us, while we yet were not, to make us be, and so to be, as even to be capable
of himself and of the happiness he inioyed from all eternity, And whereas he
had but one only son, he would not have him alone, but sent him down to
make men his adop tiue brethren, to share with him in that eternal kingdom of
his. He sent, I say a son to inuit servants to that same sonns marriage
Banquet, which is to be made in heaven, and to continue for all eternity.

THE SECOND POINT,
CONSIDER how ungrateful man dealt with those who were sent to inuit him (a
thing so honorable to him) to the marriage of a kings only son: and so
aduantagious withal; to wit, not only to feast with him, but to be coheires
with him of his Kingdom. He did not only refuse to come: but even laid
violent hands of those who were sent to inuit? yea of them you kill and
crucify, and of them you scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from city
to city. Nay man's malice went yet further: the Kings only son is sent; and
of him they say; this is the heir let us kill him, and the inheritance will be
ours.

who hears you hears me? Or rather tho we kill them not are we not deaf to
their counsels, and even contemn them? Nay do we not, alas! do we not by
our crimes, crucisie the son of God again and again, and make him a
mockery to his enemies?

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
When the King heard that his inuitation and favors were despised, and his
servants murdered, he was wroth and sending his hosts, destroyed those
murderers.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that as God is most gracious and bountiful in the general
distribution of his blissings and heavenly gifts, so is he most exact and
rigorous in punishing the contempt and neglect of them. He made his goodness
and bounty appear in this, that while there was nothing to move him to
inuit man to his sonns marriage, and in that, to the possession of an eternal
Kingdom with him, but his own infinite goodness: (noe accessions of power or
greatness by poor man, since to infinite, nothing can be added. Noe foresight
of the merits of his works, seeing he knew that noe works, were ever or could
be truly good, but by his gracious assistance) he pleased yet to inuit him.
But when he sees, nothing but hatred returned for his love, he makes his rigor
appear, in sending his hosts to distroye those murderers.



THE SECOND POINT.
Many be called, but few elect.
CONSIDER that this short sentence from the mouth of Truth it self, ought most
justly to stick to the very roots of our heart, and continually to mind us,
that we are to work our salvation with fear and trembling, since God works
in us both the velle and perficere; the will and performance, according to his
good pleasure. Many are called for the sound of the Apostles went out into all
the earth: and yet it is said, who believes our hearing? Many are called, and
give credit to their calling too, yet complie so ill with their vocation, that
Gods name is blasphemed in them. Many again are called, and begin to run, yet
they persevere not to be end; they comprehend not.

Many are called: and of those I have had the happiness to be one. But few
elected: and who is wise enough to know that he is of that number? What are we
then to do, my soul, but to be careful to give ear to the divine call; to
lay fast hold upon discipline, least we might perish in a just way; to make
sure our vocation by good works; and incessantly to pray for perseverance to
the end, that we may so run, as to comprehend.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XX. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
There was a certain Lord, or Prince, whose son was sick in Capharnaum.
John. 4.
CONSIDER that as noe greenesse of years in our infancy, nor vigor in youth,
nor strength in our more riper age can exempt us from the assaults of
infirmities, sickness, and death: so can noe dignity, highth of power, or
principality free us from the same. Well may Potentates Lord it over towns
and nations: but against the deseases which grow upon them; and the approches
of death, the most powerful have noe warrantie, but all conditions of men are
equally liable, to sickness and death, the just punishments of sin.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that it often happens with us, as it did with this afflicted ^ce, that
that which we apprehend to be most disaduantagious, and disasterous to us;
proves the very means which Gods sweet providence makes use of to work both
our temporal and eternal felicity. For who, I pray, amongst us does look
upon sickness with a good eye? And yet had not this young Princes sickness
made his life be despaired of by his father, he had, happlie, never thought of
Christ, never approached to him, never sued for his sonns cure, and so as well
the father as the son had been left to perish in their infidelity.

humbled, I offended: But being once humbled by adversities, I learnt thy
iustifications. I learnt that every punishment, was the punishment of sin. So
that sin brought out pain, pain moved the heart to penance, and penance
covered the multitudes of sin. And thence, bonum est mihi quia humiliasti me.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
The Prince said come down with me before my son dye.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, that this good Prince, in being refused what in formal terms he
demanded, obtained more, then he either, as yet, wished for, or even thought
of. He stood absolutely persuaded, that unless our Savior descended and went
with him to his sick son, the cure could not be wrought. His demand
therefore was that Christ would come down with him. But our Savior though he
went not, wrought the cure notwithstanding at the same time and at that
distance; and thence powerfully persuaded him that he was God indeed, who
could do equally all that he would, as well in absence as presence.

been omnia fecit. Have patience my soul, whether in his wisdom our great God
refuse us either absolutely what we desire or at least in the way we desire it,
and we shall find in the close, that he did all graciously, and to the best
advantage of the faithful soul. Ah should he grant us all our own desires,
we were lost for ever.

THE SECOND POINT.
Go (says our Savior) thy son lives. The man believed the word which was
said to him, and went home.
CONSIDER the great fruits and comforts which accrued to this good Prince, and
all his, by his simple faith, obedience and good example. He believed our
Saviors words, and presently departed And lo, he had not yet recovered his
own house, but his servants came out to meet him, and joyfully assured him
of his sonns perfect health. He examined the time of his recovery, and found
it to be the very hour in which our Savior said: go thy son lives:
whence he and his whole family believed.



THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XXI. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
The Kingdom of heaven is likened to a man being a King, who would make an
account with his servants. Matt. 18.
FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that by the King who would make an account with his servants, is
meant the King of heaven: and by the servant, who ought him ten thousand
Talentes, is represented a sinful soul guilty of many huge crimes; whereof he
is not at all in a condition to disingage himself. And what could such an one
expect from a most just Master but rigor, since he had so unjustly, and
carelessly run into so great arreares? To wit, his Master commanded that he
should be sold, he, his wife, and children, and all that he had.

behold there is noe help for me, in my self. All that I find in my self,
of my self, is an accursed liberty to heap sin upon sin: to contemn the
benignity and humanity of Christ: and finally, to treasure up anger against
the day of anger. Whither then must I betake my self for aid? What means
must I use to shelter my self against the rigor of the most just doom which
I see ready to be pronounced against me? Alas, my soul, there is noe flight
from God but to God: from God offended to God appeased; from his justice to his
mercy. Let then the residue of our life be spent in crying mercy, mercy, mercy
dread lord: acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts, that it was his mercy
alone we were not consumed.

THE SECOND POINT.
But the servant falling down besought him, saying have patience toward me
etc. And his master moved with pity, forgave him the debt.
CONSIDER that though that badd seruant's prodigality or negligence in
contracting so great a debt, had putt him into a certain moral impossibility
of ever being able to pay so immense a sum, and consequently made him most
justly liable to the punishment which was putt upon him: yet was his good
Master so merciful that presently upon his submission and prayer, he was moved
with compassion, and forgave him the whole debt howeuer great it was.

quoniam bonus, quoniam in aeternum misericordia eius.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
This servant found his fellow-seruant who ought him one hundred pence, etc.
and laid violent hands upon him, and cast him: into prison.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, the unmercifulness and cruelty of this naughty servant and in him
lets diligently observe our selves. He ought his Lord an immense sum: to
wit, one hundred and twenty french millions. His fellow-seruant ought him a
trifle only: to wit, one hundred pence. He upon his first submission and
humble suit, found mercy with his Lord and the remission of the whole debt. His
fellow-seruant falls down with noe less submission and humble prayer, and yet
meets with nothing but violence, and uttermost rigor.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: I will have mercy,
and not a sacryfice. And is it not by Gods mercy alone that we are not
consumed? And yet while we hear mercy so highly commended by God: while we so
easily find mercy and pardon for many and great crimes at his holy hand, we can
hardly prevail with our selves to pardon our brother the small fault, he may
happen to committ against us. Let us deal, my soul, as we would desire to be
dealt with. Use mercy and we shall not fail to find it. But judgment without
mercy to him that has not done mercy, assures S. James.

THE SECOND POINT.
And delivers him to the tormenters, till he pay the whole debt.
CONSIDER that when our B. Savior finds that neither his precepts nor
practice, are forcible enough to prevail with fierce man, to do as he would
be done to and pardon one another as we desire to be pardoned by him, he waxes
wroth, and delivers that unmerciful seruante to the Tormenters, until he
repay all the debt. For howeuer what God remitts is truly remitted, nor does he
judge twice upon the same thing; yet the horrible ingratitude and cruelty of
the naughty servant, appeared, in the eyes of his justice, so enormious that
he looked upon it as the whole debt of ten thousand talents: adding withal,
that so also his heavenly father will deal with us, if every one of us forgive
not his brother from his heart.

thou ungracious servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest
me; ought not thou then too, to have mercy upon thy fellow-seruant, even as
I had mercy on thee? But his mercy freely extended to multitudes of offenses
committed against a divine majesty. Should not ours then and from our heart)
reach at least to a few and light faults done against our misery? What
replye, alas! shall we be able to return to this demand?

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XXII. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY
The Pharisees consulted among themselves to intrappe him (Jesus) in his words
Matt. 22.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that though there be nothing more conducing to man's good, then to
have a docile mind to take counsel, and a readiness to advise amongst our
selves before we set upon any things of moment: according to that of the
Proverbs: I wisdom dwell in counsel: and again, salvation is found in much
counsel. So is there nothing more pernicious, then when many heads conspire
togeither to contriue mischeife, to supplante their Christian brother, to tempt
Christ, and persecute Christ in the persons of his faithful, as the Pharisees
and Herodians did by their wicked counsels, in his own person, striving to
surprise him in his words.



THE SECOND POINT,
Master we know thou art a true speaker, and teach the way of God in truth
etc. for thou do not respect the person of men.
CONSIDER that the result of their fraudulent counsels, was merely by
falsehoode and flattery to come to their wicked designs. They call him
master, whom they seek to destroy. They flatter him with the opinion they
have of his veracitie, or speaking the truth, while their true aim is to catch
him speaking false, in saying, that Tribute ought not to be paid to Caesar. And
so make him guilty of treason. They tell him he is noe excepter of persons, to
induce him to speak more freely against Caesar, as being a person who would be
partial to none, not even to the highest power in earth.

and therefore he would have justice done to all men: To whom Tribute, Tribute:
to whom custom, custom: to whom fear, fear: to whom honor, honor. He is
Truth it self, and therefore does deteste a fawning double tongued mouth. Thus
do the wicked misimploy sacred truth to work their malice. But let us, my
soul, strive to make a better use of it. Let us look upon our Christ as Truth
it self, with adoring love. Let us reverently hear him, as teaching the way
of God in truth, and incessantly follow him in the odor of his sweetness.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
Render what is Cesar's to Caesar.
CONSIDER that our Savior by this short lesson teaches all that belongs to
justice betwixt man and man; since justice indeed is noe other thing then
willingly to give every one his own. To Cesars, Kings and Potentates, tributes
and other duties according to law and custom. To Prelates obedience according
to Canons, Rules, and Constitutions! To Parents honor, and obedience according
to Gods Law. To our elders deference and respect: To the poor and distressed
compassion and assistance: and love to all men in general.

give to Caesar what is Caesar's. Do we then defraude the Prince of his just
tributes and impositions; or transgress his penal laws made for the weal of
the Land? We are unjust. Do we fail in obedience to Prelates and Parents
commandes, while they trench not upon Gods part? We are unjust. Do we refuse
respect and preference to our ancients; find the poor noe place in our hard
hearts; have we noe love for our Christian brother? We fail in one half of
the law, Caesar is not paid his part: in a word, we are unjust.

THE SECOND POINT.
And to God the things which are God's,
CONSIDER that if the tribute coin was judged by our Savior Jesus to belong
to Caesar, and therefore ought to be rendered to him, because it was marked with
his picture and inscription; much more does man belong to God, and ought in
all justice to be rendered to him, since he was made by him, to his own
likeness and similitude, conserved by him, redeemed by him. If we live and
move, it is in him. If we conceive a good thought, have a good will, or do a
good work, they are but all effects of his grace and bounty. All that we
have, or are, are truly his, most justly therefore are we bound to render all to
him.

deprive him of any part of our selves, be it our thoughts, words, or works:
because the Arrest is given. To God the things which are Gods. And what have
we, my soul, or what has the greatest of men which he has not received: We
cannot then deprive him of them without robbery: nor glory in them, as our
own without vanity.

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XXIII. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
There came a Prince and adored, saying: Lord my daughter is newly dead, but
come and putt thy hand upon her and she shall live. Matt. 9.
CONSIDER the great peruersitie of man's heart who still putts false rates upon
things, and most loves and labors for that which deserves the less love and
esteem. We may observe in this Gospel as well as in all the rest, prince and
people, poor and rich, Jew and gentile running to our Savior for bodily
cures. While yet we scarce find any have recourse to him in behoof of their
souls; unless it be a weeping Magdalene or a poor humble Publicane with
propitius esto mihi peccatori in his mouth.



THE SECOND POINT.
The girl is not dead, but sleeps.
CONSIDER that we may often seem to the censorious world, and even to our
selves too, to be dying or dead in spirit: whilst in truth, and in the never
failing sight of God, we are in perfect health, and do but only slumber, and
a little forgett our selves. Or else if (being truly dead through infirmity) we
presently run to Jesus for succor, while we are in his hands in whom all
things do live, he being indeed resurrection and life, we cannot be said so
much to be dead, as to sleep for a while, till he interpose his powerful
hand, to raise us to our spiritual life again.

the maid is not yet dead; this infirmity is not to death, but to Gods
glory. But does suggestion begett pleasure, and pleasure procure deliberate
consent through infirmity and ignorance, yet is she not irrecouerably or
finally dead, nor is this vary death to death since presently she has
recourse to Christ for help, who interposeth his hand, and suffers her not to
be bruised in her fall, but teaches her thereby her own weakness and misery;
his power and mercy, by which alone she sees she is able to stand.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY.
And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve years came
behind him.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER, with what dispositions this poor woman came to our Savior. And
first tho we may easily conceive that twelve years sufferance of that wasting
desease had brought her low enough yet she with as much courage of mind, as
weakness of body pressed through the thronge to gettneere Christ; Secondly she
approached with as much modesty, humility, and vnderualuing of her self, as
high conceit of his power and Majesty, before whose face she would not
presume to present her self, but only came behind him to touch him etc.

take a good heart daughter, thy faith has made the safe, and the woman became
whole from that hour.

THE SECOND POINT.
She said within her self, if I shall touch only his garment I shall be safe.
CONSIDER further, two other dispositions which this good woman brought with
her. To wit, a huge esteem of Christ his power, and an unspeakable confidence
in his goodness. The first plainly appears, in that she dares venture her
cure, in the only touching, not of himself, but even of any thing which
touches him; to wit, the very hemme of his garments. And the second is
manifested in these few confident words. If I shall touch only the hemme of
his garment I shall be safe.

we believe, o Lord, yet help our incredulity, and increase this dead faith
of ours. For lo she neither couets to speak to Christ, nor to have him speak
to her: neither to touch him, nor to be touched by him but only in silence to
touch the hemme of his garment, and she is presently cured. O conquering
modesty! O soul speaking silence! Thou haste a more facile access to him who
hears hearts, then the lowdest importunities of those too sollicitous and
perplexed souls, who seem to endeavor, as it were, by force of arms to
obtain their requests. My soul, lets only humbly hope in our Lord and he
will give us the desires of our heart

THE FIRST MEDITATION FOR THE XXIV. SUNDAY AFTER WHITSVNDAY.
When you shall see the abomination of desolation which, according to Daniel
shall appear in the Temple etc. Matt. 24.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that by the abomination of desolation which Daniel foretold, was
meant the deplorable destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus and Vespasianus: and by
that again the dismale conflagration of the universal world in the last day,
when Christ shall come to judge the same in great power and majesty. But by
these two again the day of the accursed eternity is pointed out, where there
shall be weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth for ever. The first is past
with extreme horror and disaster to the incredulous Jew: the second shall
pass with utter consternation both to Jew and gentile: but the third shall
prove the abomination and desolation, indeed, among the damned, and shall
never pass.

shall never have end. I conceive in mind a thousand years. I add to those a
thousand thousand years; yea as many thousands and millions as piles of grass
on the earth, or sands in the sea. And yet I have nothing comparable to
eternity. O Eternity! Eternity! Alas! how rarely thou are considered by
miserable man.

THE SECOND POINT.
When you shall see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place,
to wit in the Temple. etc.
CONSIDER that the abomination of desolation which Daniel foretold, was in
particular the idolatrous erecting of the statues of Caesar, and Adrian the
Emperors, in the Temple of Jerusalem. But the abomination of desolation wherein
we are all more concerned, as being of far more danger to each of us, is that
of the sinners, setting up the Idols of pride, covetousness, luxury in the
living Temples of God to wit, in the heart, wherein the holy Ghost should
inhabit, and reign

peruersitie is this, so to profane the living Temple of the Almighty! Man's
heart was made by God capable of God, for God, in whom a lone it is able to
find rest, while the holy Ghost does inhabit it as his Temple. But alas! what
agreement has the Temple of God with the base Idols we set up? There neither
is, nor can be any consent between Christ and Belial. There can be noe
society betwixt light and darkness; betwixt pride and humble Christ:
covetousness and poor Christ: impuritie and Christ who is purity it self.
Lets use, then, my soul a holy violence, and throw those profane Idols out of
our heart, that God alone may reign in that sacred Temple of his. Least the
worst abomination of desolation might otherwise surprise us eternally.

THE SECOND MEDITATION FOR THE SAME SUNDAY
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that there is nothing either more certain, or more uncertain then
the day of Doom that time of huge desolation. Nothing more certain then that
it shall be; since heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of God, which we
have for it, shall not pass. Nothing again, more uncertain then the time
thereof: for of that day and hour nobody knows neither the Angels of
heaven, but the father alone. If this certainty then cannot but begett a
dreadful expectation in all humane hearts: this uncertainty ought to putt a
continual watchfulness upon our thoughts.



THE SECOND POINT.
CONSIDER that though the day of the general Judgment will as certainly come,
as it is uncertain to all men when that shall be, so that many years may
probably pass before it: yet there is another day of Doom which hanges over
each ones head, and can not be long ere it come: to wit, the last day of
every man's life, is the day of judgment to him; since as S. Augustine says,
in what state each ones last day shall find him, in the very same shall the
last day of the world comprehend him. That every one might continually stand
ready for this, S. John tells us, that now, even now, is the last hour, noe
man being sure of the next.

It is appointed, says S. Paul, to men to dye once, and after that,
judgment. This, my soul, is the day of desolation which every one ought most
to apprehende and watch for, since it is indeed his day of Doom. This at
every moment may surprise us, and that in one moments time. What rests them, my
soul, but that what I say to thee, I say to every one vigilate. Watch, watch
incessantly; for this theife death, may steal upon us when we least suspecte
it. And if then our Lamps be found without the oil of good works and
charity; what shall we have left us, but a dreadful expectation to hear the
door of the heavenly marriage is shut. And what can we hope to meat with by
our importunate crying out Lord, Lord, open to us, but that daunting replye
which causes an eternal separation from the face of God. Amen I say to you I
know you not.

FINIS.
A CHRISMAS CONTEMPLATION WITH A SEARCH INTO THE SOVRSE OF ALL MAN'S HAPPINESS
FOR THE DAVGHTERS OF SION.
O SWEETEST night! my mind I nere can wayne
From thought of thee; in which the heavens; do rain
Huge shewres of grace; the hillockes flow with sweets
And from the mountains, milk and honey sweates,
O sweetest night! my starued soul does dye,
To have a full draught of ty Ambrosie.
Tertulian gravely said: some goods there are
As well as evils, which even oppress, and bear
Us to the ground. The wonders of this night
Are such; to find our God in su^ a plight;
That hardly such a bastard soul is found
Who sends not knees, and heart to kiss the ground.
God threats eternal death; and yet we stand
Stiffe-neck'd, nor bow to that his powerful hand.
He offers endless life, nor are we moved
By hopes nor threats, our God's nor feared nor loved.
By thunderbolts he testifies his ire
He speaks the same by earthquakes and by fire
Yet stupide man, howere he dread the rod
He looks as high, as though there were noe God.
But when the WORDS made flesh, when God's made man,
The high flowen heart, must stoop, do what it can.
Hear your Seraphique Father teach this truth
While he, as yet, lay struggling with his youth.
While tortured thus I lay, quoth he, at length
I had a feeble will to gather strength
Thee to inioye, my God, nor could I find
A way squared out according to my mind
Till I fell down upon thy infancy,
Clad in the weed of our humanity
For then my wind-blowen heart began t'vnswell,
And prostrate on my low laid lord I fell:
Down down proud soul, keep low, it is not meet
That worms should swell, while God lies at their feet.
He biult himself a cotage of our clay,
To teach us lowliness, and how t'obeye.
THAT THE SOVRSE OF MAN'S happiness, is, God's infinite and mere goodness.
BUT stay my muse, before we further go,
Lets find the sourse whence all man's bliss does flow
The sourse is goodness, that vaste Ocean
Which speads ore all, and is shut up from none:
God's natural goodness; which he nor owes;
Nor man can merit, vncompell'd it flows.
So you have seen some fruitful mothers breast
Oreflowe its snowie banks, ere it was pres't
Or sue'd to by the greedy babe. With store
She was oppressed, and could conteyne noe more.
She needs the infants poverty, it again
Needs her abundance: she is richly poor: in pain
On whom t'imploye her store, to whom t'impart
Those milkie streams, the treasures of her heart
OF GODS INFINITE COMMVNIcation within, to the son and to the holy Ghost.
BUT now as greater good has greater bent.
TO impart it self abroad, and to be spent
In larger measures; so goodness infinite
Would infinitely give, if it could light
On suting subjects, but none such being found
Among all things made, his riches do abound
Within at home, to vast infinity
Within the bounds, of the blessed Trinity.
To his sweet son, God does communicate
His goodness, Majesty, his kingly state:
His Essence, Substance; all is perfection,
His Godhood too, wherein those two are one.
And from that boundless sourse again does flow,
The holy Ghost, our God, who does not owe
His being to another. He Is as old,
As Good, as great, as wise, as uncontrolled
As are the Father and the son on high:
They Are equal all and one in Deity.
There Is noe dependence, want, prioritie
Their measure is, a vaste eternity.
Even so the sun noe sooner does appear
But's light is seen, and's heat our hearts does cheer.
The light is found noe younger then the sun,
Nor is the heat after the light begun,
They Are all at once, in time, they are equal all:
Nor this the first, nor that the last we call.
Thus we a glimps, but noe clear light can see
In the order of the blessed Trinity.
Stoop then my Muse, thou take too high a flight,
This is not reash't, by word, by thought, by signt.
Leave search of Majesty; descend below
And what does more concern thee strine to know.
THE COMMVNICATION OF God's goodness in the order of nature.
WHENCE was this thing called man, who is so gract'?
That ore the universal world he is plact'?
He was not ere, much time had passd' away
While the proudest man alive in's nothing lay.
Whence is the worlds great eye, which makes the days,
And glad's the heart of man, whilst it displayes
Its golden beams; depriues the stars of light
And sends the moon to walk her round by night.
Who hunge this earthly ball amidst the air
And richly people'd it? who undertook the care
To have it stocked with all that might conduce
To man's content, for pleasure and for use:
With beasts, with birds, with fruits of every sort
For health, for sickness, nourishment disporte?
Tell whence the roaring Ocean did spring
And whence it had the riches it does bring
To every Port? whilst it the earth surrounds
And where it daignes to touch, the land abound's
Call these, and thousand's more, long to relate
Effects of goodness, the heavens communicate
To thanklesse, careless man: nor is this all,
All these are gifts of nature, poor and small
Compared to gifts of grace. O let these be
The subjects of our souls actiuitie.
THE COMMVNICATION OF God's goodness in the order of grace.
IT was the grace which sprunge from Bethleem stable
Which made man more then man, yea made him able
To soar up to the heavens to imitate
The Angels graceful, blissful, joyful state
By nature's gift it was we were made men,
The lords of all the creatures: but when
Free grace began to work, we did proceed
From men to Angels, yea to God's indeed.
For grace it is which nature does refine:
To wit, it makes us share nature divine.
We groueling lie in sin, nor can we stir,
Till grace come in to our aid; it is by her
We rise, we walk, we run, we comprehend:
She calls us up; conduct's us to the end.
It was not natures strength which brought you hither,
But grace and nature, wrought the work togeither
To leave our parents, nature does not preach
To quitt the land we love, she does not preach
All these are fruits of grace, which makes us love
What nature never licked, did nere approve.
Hence naked men do fight with bull and bear;
And Tyrants wroth; nor sword, nor fire they fear
They scorn the Tyrants fury, and rejoice
That of their nothing wisdom had made choice
To magnify his power, and to confound
The power of darkness. I, their joys abound
Amidst the worst of torment's which do prove
Noe pains to them, but argument's of love.
Noe pains to them, but argument's of grace
Which makes them stand undaunted in the face
Of fiercest foe; to preach God's holy name
B'ing gract' withal to suffer for the same.
Hence tender Mayd's both ease and friend's forsake
And to a choysen geole themselves betake:
Where they foretaste such sweetes of heavenly joys,
That all the world can boast, appears mere toys.
HE COMMVNICATION OF God's goodness in a substantial union by taking upon
him, not the nature of an Angel, but that of man.
THESE gifts are great, these graces admirable:
Yet must not man esteem them comparable,
To that vnparell'd one which we do find
So graciously imparted to mankind,
Where man is joined (o blist communion!)
To's God by a substantial union.
Whence strange extremes are joined, and whence we can
Confirm that man is God, and God is man.
And that the fruit which sprung from Iesses rodd,
Was truly Mary's son; and Mary's God.
Hence man is raysd to all that is great on high,
And God depresse to all man's misery.
He lovingly himself exinanites
And the Master to the seruant's form unites
He meekly humbles himself, and is made
The sinners price, which on the Cross he paid
He Is in a manger laid; he quakes with cold,
That old of years, is now few moment's old.
He scrikes, he sighs, and shewres of silver tears
Gush from his eyes, to wipe away our fears.
He hungers, thirsts, as sonns of mortals do,
And runs to Mary's breasts to stench his woe.
He fears, he flies, he wayles and makes great moan
For stranger-crymes alas! none of his own.
O dearest goodness! dear excess of love
Which streamest from that drainlesse sourse above
Oreflowe this barren heart of man, and make
These charming heauen-growne seeds of grace still take
More life, more vigor, cheerfulness and rooote;
That man may more heauen-suting fruits bring out
All this I do believe, yet help my want
Of faith, o Lord, I find it weak and scant
Else should I fly above with quick address
T'imbrace my Lord, to love his graciousnesse.
What nations ever had their God's so nigh
That they this Christian truth could verify
Here lies my God; here lies my God a man;
A man, a God indeed, as Christians can?
Our blessed Emmanuel, our God with us,
Who favors, loves, and Deifies us thus.
That man dare humbly say of the God of bliss,
Bones of my bones, flesh of my flesh he is.
That man dare say a part of me's above
To plead for more of mercy, more of love.
Since then a part of me is truly there
I Will strongly hope for bliss; farewell despair.
My Lord, my love, my life, command and give
What thou command'st; in love my life shall live:
My life in love shall live; in love shall dye,
Thy boundless mercies ere to magnify.
GOD'S BOVNDLESSE GOODNESS in communicating himself truly and really in the
B. Sacrament.
BUT here is not all, my soul, here is not all.
The gifts we preach, are gifts in general.
But love bursts out, and gives a louder call
And strikes the ears of every one, and all.
Come Marie, Martha, Thomas, Isbell, John
Come all my dearest, come, come every one:
My flesh I had from you, my flesh I give
That I in you, and you in me may live
My flesh I give, my blood, my deity,
To lincke you all in the bands of charity.
Come dearest friends, come dearest children mine
Inebriate your selves of this chaste wine.
Come Angell-like, endeavor still to meet,
Your God in love, live like the God you eat.
For thjs I came, and lived in your poor state
That whom you worship, him you would imitate.
Hark how he calls; If you desire to be
My friends, take up your Crasse and follow me
Do you desire to walk? I am the WAY*
Is It truth you aim at? Truth it self does say
I Am verity. Or is it your suit to live?
I Am endless life, and endless life do give
O then quitt vncoulth ways: hope not in lies,
To find out truth, nor the life that never dies
In fading moments. Ah you seek in vain
To find true life in th'land where death does reign.
THE COMMVNICATION OF THE divine goodness by imparting of his Glory
OUR sea of goodness still streams on, there is
Noe end in it, we tend to endless bliss.
Those gifts of nature, grace, and all the rest
Are gu'in to bring us to eternal rest.
Our joys were great, at the coming of that guest,
Our hearts reioyc'd to lodge him in our breast.
But ah, he will not have us end our story,
Till he conduct us to the state of glory.
So says our faith, to this our hopes are raysd
With this excess our charitie's amays'd.
That goodness free from want, our dust should choose.
To place it is love upon: and kindly loose
Himself on man (Ble'st prodigality!)
By the gifts of his divine Hypostasie.
To be himself companion in his way,
To call him back by grace, in case he stray:
To feed and fatten him, with his own blood.
(O that this happiness were understood!)
To prove in death bis saving sacryfice.
And endlesly to be himself his price.
So says his word: I Will be my self thy hyre.
What more then this can vastest heart desire?
AN APOSTROPHIE TO THE DAMES OF SION.
O Then dear Dames, let the love I daily find
Among you increase, and all your hearts cobind
In one loue-knott; use all your wit and Art
To have but all, one common soul, one heart.
This God command's, this Austine does advise
Do this alone, dear souls, it will suffice.
FINIS.
SINE FINE GLORIA TIBI DOMINE.
MEDITATIONS Upon our blessed Saviors Passion.
THE FIRST MEDITATION.
Of the last supper.
THE FIRST POINT.
CONSIDER that now the blessed time of grace and mercy drawing near (wherein
our sweet savior Jesus Christ had determined to pay man's ransom, not with
the corruptible price of gold and silver, but even with the effusion of his
own precious blood) he graciously daigned, in testimony of true love, to
feast with his beloved Apostles before his departure. See him lovingly
accompany them into the room where they were to suppe; and let us take the
humble boldness to follow him inn, and to receive some of his last words: I
have had an ardent desire, says he, to eat this pascall lamb with you, it
being the consummation of all the ancient sacrifices, and the last I shall
eat. And say to him cordially.

not upon your own merits which are none without his mercys, but run entirely
to his free mercy. Tell him that even your dogs eat the crumbs which fall
from their masters tables, and in that confidence you approach; or else, with an
humble and contrite heart; fall down at his sacred feet, with the mournful
Magdalaine, and make lamentations, tears, and groans more fully speak your
heart.

The second Point.
Consider with what compassion and mildness our blessed savior begins to
comfort his disciples, while he observes them sorrowful and sadd upon the
apprehensio^ of his departure which he fore told them, saying: my dear
Disciles be not sorrowful, let not your hearts be troubled I will not leave
you Orphantes, it is for your sakes that I go. But seeing them yet, some
weeping, some sighing, his fatherly bowels were wholly moved to compassion,
and he spoke to them in these sweet terms; my tenderly beloved sons, my
dear Disciples, be not terrified, be not troubled, behold I am with you till
the end of the world.



THE II. MEDITATION.
Of Christ's humility, and love shevven at his last supper.
Cons. 1
COnsider what is done at that his last supper; look about and you shall see
him rise up from the table, to give by his own example, and in his own
person, that first and most necessary lesson, humility, the ground of our
christian building; and even of all christian discipline, as S. Augustine
esteems it. You shall see the master become all his servants servant; the
virtue of the highest, low laid at his creatures foul feet; him, in whose
name all knees are bowed, kneeling to wash, to dry, to kiss his servants
feet: in fine, the king of glory, so far, as I may say, forgett his glory;
as humbly, officiously and lovingly to fall down even at a disloyal Judas
loathsome feet.

me, what will be ever able to move my proud heart? O my sweet savior even for
thy felfes sake, bestow upon me some scrappe of this wholesome dishe, and grant
me in every occurrence of difficulty, submission, or humiliation, to have
this thy blessed example, lively placed before mine eyes.

Consid. 2.
Consider that notwithstanding that Christ knew by certain knowledge, that his
heavenly father had given all power and authority into his hands, that he
came from him, and went to him; rhat is, that he was endued with fulness of
knowledge, issuing from him by his eternal generation, and returning to him,
to take possession of his own right, yet disdained he not for our example, to
rise from supper, to putt off his upper garment, to take a linen and girt about
him; to putt water into a basine, to wash his disciples feet, to wipe them
with the Iinen which he had put before him.

and am covered with confusion, to behold the abismall humiliation of thy
eternally begotten Son, my Savior, who without rapine is equal to thy
self! O humble Christ how this example of thine does utterly confound the
pride of us Christians* How ever upon the sight of our misery and daily
imperfections, we may a little stoop; yet alas, as soon as we look upon our
knowledge, our power, the honorable relations or dependances we have, how
easily we swel, and despise or slight such as are below us?

THE THIRD MEDITATION
Of Humility.
Cons. 1.
COnsider, how dear this virtue must needs be to our sweet Savior, and how
considerable it ought to be to us Christians, which he so singularly recommends
unto us. It was one of the first he began to teach us, and he will have it to
be one of the last too. That exinanited, or powered him forth in his blessed
incarnation: that lodged him in a stable, in a manger, in poor clothes: that
subicted him to the badge of a sinner in his circumcision: that made him
subject to father and mother in the course of his life: and that subjects him
to his servants while he draws near his death.



Cons. 2.
Consider how the Evangelical pen labors in painting out the particulars,
thereby the deeper to engraue this admirable example of Christ's humility in
the hearts of Christians. Christ rose from supper, says he, put off his
garments, begirt himself with a linen cloth, powered water into a basine, put
himself down at his Disciples feet, etc. and by this means stoppes our
attention upon this wonderful spectacle. To contemplate him who sitts upon the
Seraphins, rise from table, who is clad with glory, putting off material
garments, who showers down rain from the heavens in due season, powering
water in earth. To see him upon earth, who fills heaven: that Master hand which
sustains the heavens, at the feet, the foul feet of a servant, a sinner, a
Judas.

self by pride, and aspiring at thy seat. And this conclusion I am forced to
make, that either I must renounce the faith I profess, and remain unnaturally
ungrateful and stupide; or else, I must absolutely resolve to become humble: to
bestow my felf wholly upon the acquisition of that virtue, which is the sure
foundation of the rest, and that in contemplation of such, and so powerful an
example thereof, as here is placed before mine eyes.

THE IV. MEDITATION.
Of Humility and Charity.
Cons. 1.
COnsider how earnestly our Blessed Savior endeauours to imprint this
wholesome lesson in our hearts, how deeply he seems to digg this best
foundation of a Spiritual life. It was not enough to have given us an example
of it in his own person, but what he had shown in his practice, he would also
preach and press by precept, saying, you call me Master and Lord, and you say
well, for so it is indeed: if then, I being Lord and Master, have (as you have
seen) washed your feet, you also are bound to wash one another feet; that
is, to stand provided in heart at all times, and as occasion is offered, to
perform sometime, any office of Charity, though never so homely and abject;
and that, to persons of meanest quality, far inferior to us, etc.

I a Master did it, therefore thou a servant ought to do it, argues he, I
the wisdom of heaven who am sent to teach thee all truth; therefore, thou who
art nothing but error and ignorance, ought not to fear to stoop! I who am
an infinite Majesty, much more thou who art infinite misery. I who made thee
of a piece of clay, therefore thou whose origin; present being, and outgate is
no other thing but clay, dust and ashes, etc. Ye are therefore to humble
yourselues vrges on our heavenly Master; yes, for I have given you an example
of it, says he, which I meant to have observed, not neglected, that as I had
done to you, so you to one another: for surely, the Servant is not greater then
the Lord, nor one sent greater then he who sent him. O powerful and pressing
conclusion, against which I cannot have one word to mutter! But o dreadful and
oppressing confusion, if in practice I proceed not accordingly!

Cons. 2.
Consider how our sweet savior having thus (in his own person) given us that
so necessary lesson of profound humility, begins now to teach his Disciples,
and in them all Christians, the accomplishement of perfection, charity; saying
Mandatum nouum do nobis filioli: my children, I give you a new commandment:
That you love one another, as I have loved you, and that as I do give my life
for you, so you love one another, even until death; yea those also, who do
persecute and iniure you. Mark how he confirms his learning by his own
example, giving us in testimony of the greatest and dearest love, the greatest
and dearest gift that ever was given; to wit himself to eat. Heaven had
nothing better. God, could invent nothing greater. O strange invention of a
lover, so to depart as yet to leave himself to be enjoyed by his beloved, who
are all faithful souls!

O charitas! o pietas! (says S. Augustine) quis vnquam talia audiuit? who
ever heard the like to this?

THE V. MEDITATION.
Co.
COnsider how being provoked by nothing but his own infinite Goodness, he loved
man from all eternity, and not from eternity; only, but in time also, in
which he brought down into the world the fire of that holy love, for no other
end, then that it should burn the hearts of men: He loved man not in the
beginning only, but even to the end; not merely in life, but even to death:
Aff. O God the love of my heart, and my part for ever, how I desire to desire
thee! how I wish to have this poor frozen heart of mine inflamed with this
holy fire! o holy fire which burns up, and even consumes the sacred heart of
my savior; may some spark of it fall upon the heart of that-sinner, who for
want of that heat is ready to perish and loose it self. 2. Point. Consider
that death could put no period to my Souiours love, it did not only live to
it, but live and reign in it, as a sacred Salamander amidst her flames. He
loved us not, I say, to death only, but through his excess of love, he loved
even death it self for our sakes. I have, says he, a baptism or lauer
wherein to be baptized or washed, to wit the bath or lauer of my blood, and
how am I solicited, pressed, and oppressed, as it were, with a burning desire
of that wishfull hour.

obedience, etc. and as such it was most dear unto him.

THE VI. MEDITATION.
Of our svveete saviors going into the Garden.
Cons.
Having now done supper, you must accompany him into the Garden, together with
Peter, James, and John. Where you shall see the valourous young David lovingly
prodigal of his youthful and delicate body, desirous to begin the battle:
yea drawn on, and animated with a fervent love of man's salvation, go first to
the place of combat, without constraint, of his own accord; mark what kind
of weapons he had provided himself of; no other then humility, charity,
prayer, with a resolution to endure all for the love of us poor creatures. Let
us be always furnished with the like weapons, and the victory is ours.

renderst me perplexed: for I know not whether I ought to joy in thy love, or
sorrow to see love move thee to so great a pain; for an undutiful servants
sake; Joy, to see the book of life begin to be opened, wherein all the
treasures of knowledge and wisdom are contained; or sorrow to foresee the rude
manner of opening it, even at hand And again, thou renderest me confused, when
I reflect upon my-selfe, and find my felfe so backward, yea happly one of the
last and most backward, if any difficulty be to be endured, though for my
just deserts, while I find thee who art altogether innocent, comme first to
the place of pain and sufferance; and this my poverty, dear Lord, I
willingly lay open before the eyes of thy mercy, hoping to be cured of this
spiritual infirmity, by thy souueraigne and omnipotent goodness.

Cons. 2.
But alas, look about you now and you shall see a strange alteration; you
shall see him who, according to his spirit, wished to have all things
accomplished in himself, (which were decreed by the eternal wisdom of God
the Father, and the consell of the holy Ghost) yet according to his tender and
passible flesh, being of a most delicate and noble complexion, begin to have a
horror) through the strong apprehension of near approaching death; and
therefore he begins to sorrow, to fear, and to be irck some; outwardly to
quake in all his members, inwardly to be seized upon by a deadly anguish,
Hark, and you shall hear him impart the abundance of his grief to his best
friends: Tristis est anima mea vsque ad morte^; my soul is sorrowful even to
death: as though he should say, the anguish which I endure, is sufficient to
procure my death. See how the event shows his words most true, for who ever
saw fear cause a bloody sweat burst out from every member?

of affection, shown by a person so infinitely great, to us so extremely little
vile and miserable? how become we so obliuious, as to forgett this memorable
fact? how so ungrateful as not to be willing to correspond by enduring with
patience such diminutiue crosses, contempts, contumelies, contradictions,
temptations and tribulations, a^ Gods wise providence, and fatherly love
permitts to fall upon us; and that too, even for the cure of our sins, which
are so great, and so many?

THE VII. MEDITATION
upon the same subject.
THE FIRST CONSIDERATION.
RVn to him and demand the cause of this his so mortal grief, (and you cannot
be so little kind, nay even so barbarously cruel, as not to ease him, so
far as lies in your power) and I think you shall receive from him, that,
alas, there is no other cause, then that the heavy and numerous burden of
mankinds, and of your own sins, presses so hard upon him, according to his
humanity, that it quite, in a manner, oppresses him, together with the
ingratitude of those, whom he most loves; yea even so much as to take upon him
sin. Ponder the heynousnes thereof, since it appears, too heavy, even for
the shoulders of a God. Weigh also how great your own ingratitude would
prove, if by sinning you should give him, who loves you best, occasion to cry
out; Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem.

Ego, ego dulcissime Jesus, sum tui pl^ga doloris, tu^e culpa occisionis; They
are my sins, dear love, which are the cause of thy so great grief, mine the
guilt, thine the punishment, o strange censure, strange disposition of an
unspeakable mystery! the wicked offends, the just is punished; the guilty
goes scotfree, and the innocent is beaten; man commits, and God endures: how
far, how far, o son of God, will thy humility descend? how far, will thy
charity burn? what end will thy piety have? to what degree of misery and
torment will thy love and compassion lead thee? ah! even for all these, and
for this thy unheard of grief, I beseech thee that thou will permirt rather
whatsoever cruel torment, to take me out of this life, then become so cruel
as to embrace sin, which was caufe of my bestloued his so infinite affliction.

Cons. 2.
Consider what means our sweet Savior uses in this his extreme distress,
learning thence a true behavior in our affliction. And behold pious and humble
Jesus prone laid upon the ground; he to whom all knees are justly bowed, like
a poor man, like a poor sinner, as one left of his heavenly father, to
reconcile us poor men, us poor sinners, to his heavenly father, in a long and
fervent prayer, crying out. Pater si possibile est, transeat a me Calix iste.
Father if it be possible let this cup pass away from me. See him a second,
and a third time, go to the same place, iterate the same prayer, adding that
voice of perfection, non mea sed tua voluntas fiat. Not my vvil but thine be
done. As though he should say, heavenly father, if it be possible let this
bitter potion pass, for my tender nature does altogether abhor it; yet if
without it, mankind shall not be redeemed, not mine, but thy blessed will be
done.

Pater si possibile est transeat a me, etc. That is, if it be thought good to
thy divine goodness, that I should be delivered, of such or such a difficulty
or temptation, which does even to death afflict me, be it so; if not, I do
willingly repose, and rest satisfied in thy fatherly providence, and do freely
pronounce, Viue Jesus, not mine, but thy heavenly will be accomplished. None
can be more wise to know what is most convenient for me, none more loving to wish
me that which thy wisdom sees convenient, and none more potent to perform
that which thou willest and see to be convenient, and therefore freely, and
by best reason I affirm, not my will, sweet Jesus, but thine be done.

THE VIII. MEDITATION
Of the betraying of Jesus.
Cons. 1.
But alas, why do we here delaie? Jesus stands not still in this station;
fear is driven away by love, the ardent desire he has to suffer for man,
has carried him forward, even into the traitor Judas his hands: ay me! look,
for love, look, a barbarous multitude, armed with bills, with staves, wish
swords, with inhumanitie, with cruelty, with diuelishnes: and Judas the first
of the hellish route, besetting the innocent lamb, the harmless joseph; my
love, my spouse, my Jesus, ready to rend, to spoil, to bereave him of his
life.

me me qui feci in me conuertite ferrum Iudaei. Jews, cruel Jews, turn your
fury upon my nocent breast, and permit my Lord and Master to escape, it was I,
it was I, good Jesus, it was I that offended. And thou my sweet Master pardon my
fault, and make me undauntedly to accompany thee through all the difficulties
and disastres of this painful passage, of this time of thy holy Passion.
Trahe me post te Domine, trahe me post te. Draw me after thee dear Lord, draw
me after thee, and let thy mercy never permit me to be so cowardly as to
abandone thee.

Cons. 2.
Consider how mildly this meekest lamb behaues himself amidest this rude
multitude, and first toward that unkind miscreant, that traitorous Judas,
imparting him a kiss of his heavenly fair mouth; and sweetly sayng; Amice ad
quid venisti? friend, Disciple, have I deserved thus at thy hands? (imagine the
like said to every offending soul) was it a fault to have washed thy feet?
to have fed thee with my body and blood? Amice, etc. is it possible that thou
esteemest me at so vile a price as thirty pence? Amice, etc. return home
Judas, return into thine own heart, see whither thou have gone, and against
whom: return with repentant tears, and my grace shall never be wanting.

O ineffable benignity of a Saniour toward a traitorous servant! what may
deserving friends expect, if demeriting miscreants find such amiable words?
what a singular joy may this be to us, o my soul, if we persevere in our
loyalty? what a sure hope, should we by fraud, or frailty chance to fall?
what a great shame not to forgiueour enemies, since never any fault was or
shall be so great: blush, my soul, blush to use such foul words in every
small offense, since the King of glory used no other reprehension to his
betrayour, then, Amice ad quid venisti. Friend to what end did thou come?

THE IX. MEDITATION.
Of the taking of Jesus.
Cons. 1.
COnsider how notwithstanding they had experience of his power more then
humane, in casting them all down with two short words: ego sum, yet did they
not leave off to prosequute their devilish design. Think what his power will
be when he shall come to judge, if goeing to be judged he be thus potent? what
in his reign, if in his banishment his words strike such a terror? But see,
see, now they lay violent hands upon my dear spouse, the rauinous wolves
enter upon the tender lamb. Ay my heart! one pulles his beard, an other fastens
upon his hair, a third lays hold upon his neck; this beats him upon his
amiable face, another binds his sacred hands, and they who could lay no hands
upon him, throws at him blasphemous, and contumelious words: in fine, what did
they not? since, fecerunt in eum quaecunque voluerunt; they did, what ever they
would against him.

Let us here behold, who endures? what, of whom, and for whom: and I think we
shall need no art to move compassion. O amor meus! etc.

Cons. 2.
Follow now your sweet spouse to Annas house (and mark, in the way, the rude
and barbarous behavior which they use toward him, tugging and haling him
forward (while he the mildest of men made no resistance, nether spoke one word)
for alas, his Disciples are already all fled, all; Peter also, who would
rather dye then forsake him. Ay me! what can ever be a subject of more
commiseration then to see so gracious, so loving, so heavenly a master
forsaken of all those, whom lately he had so lovingly cherished, so carefully
comforted, so fatherly fed with his own precious body and blood?

cause us to desist from following our sweet Savior? shall weak woemens
voices deter us? ah dye rather, my soul, dye, then so disloyally forsake thy
love; dye rather, my soul, dye, then so spotr and defile the white garment
thou art now invested withal. Yet alas, S. Peter's example makes us afraid to
boast our love: S. Paul's saying is more safe; omnia possum in eo qui me
confortat; as though he should say, of my self I am able to do nothing: yet I
can do all things in him that comfortes me.

THE X. MEDITATION.
How Jesus was treated in Annas his house.
Cons. 1.
SEe now your potent Lord and loving spouse, humbly standing in bonds, before
that proud sinner Annas, mildely receiving a box on the ear, for no other
fault, then meekely answeringe, interroga eos, etc. ask those that have heard
me. Consider the infinite distance between the giver and the receauer, and you
will not know how enough to admire him. The most potent, the most innocent, the
most loving Prince, to receive a box (a thing disgraceful in itself) from
the hands of one of his own servants, upon no occasion; commanded by none (but
even out of his own malice) while Christ through love, was suffering, even for
him unworthy wretch.

in quam desiderant Angeli prospicere, which the Angels desire to behold, is
exposed to the cruel blow of a vile servant, and that without muttering or
impatience at all.

Cons. 2.
Accompany now your forsaken spouse from Annas to Caiphas, weighing in the
mean time, what a wearisome night he had of it, left alone to himself amidst
a crew of thirsty blood-suckers, in a dark-some night; and all this to marry
himself to you; ah look upon him, look upon him, take now the true
proportion and feature of his divinely fair and gracious face, for alas!
shortly will the hour arrive, that nether form nor figure will be lefe to be
taken neque species illi vltra erit, neque decor. Ah pitious case! See him
then, before whose tribunal all mortals shall stand, standing before a
mortal man, his own creature, to be judged, his hands bound, his eyes cast
down with a gracious bashfulnes, and bashful mildnes.

cause of this doleful Metamorphosis? ah pittious case! But at least, go not
alone, go not alone my dear spouse, draw my sickly and fearful soul after
thee, through the sharp of thy Passion, feign would she follow, but alas she
is frail, alas she fears; Ah trahe me Domine sponse post te, trahe me post
te. Ah draw me after thee, my Lord my spouse, draw me after thee by thy holy
grace.

THE XI. MEDITATION.
How Jesus was treated at Cayphas his house.
Cons. 1.
COnsider how (upon Caiphas disgust, taken upon occasion of our Saviors most
mild answer, Tu dicis, quia ego sum, you say that I am so) they give new
force to their fury, bursting all upon him without pity or compassion, some
beating, some spitting in his face, others with their nails tearing the same,
some haleing him by the hair of the head, some by the beard, others stroke
harder at him with sharp mockes; En Prophetam nostrum, prophetiza nobis
Christ quis est qui te percussit? Lo here our Prophet, Prophecy to us, o
Christ, who was he that struck thee.



Cons. 2.
Follow him now from Caiphas to Pilate, their malice still continuing, or
rather increasing touwards him, think how you take not willingly so much
pains to please him, as these wicked Jews did that night to offend and molest
him. For see, after their false accusations could not move Pilate to sentence
him, they hale him from thence to Herod. Mark herein the full and perfect
abnegation he had made of himself and his own will; giving himself over to
the indiscretion of a Barbarous multitude, to be led to this and that man, this
and that place; to the highest, to the lowest; limitting himself to no one
thing, but indifferently imbraceing all, or any one thing, his heavenly father
permitted to fall upon him; and all this for the love of you.

vt sicut ipse ambulauit, and nos ambulemus: and therefore hereafter we will not
look so much, by whom, what, or for what we suffer, which is to limitt our
patience, to times, and occasions, making ourselves judges of our own cause,
but still have an eye for whom, and by whose example, to wit for how loving a
Lord, how dear a spouse, for how entire and fervent a lover; in fine, for how
great a Kingdom, for how many offenses, if not those which now we are accused
of, at least of our life past, with those of our friends, of our miserable
country: nor is indeed love accustomed to exact reasons; it is reason enough,
that it is for our beloved we suffer; and this we can do, as often as we have
an intention so to do.

THE XII. MEDITATION
How Jesus was mocked at Herodes. and Barabbas was preferred before him.
Cons. 1.
COnsider how at Herod's house our Savior is received with new contempts, and
contumelies: their insatiable malice not being a whitt satisfied with all the
pain they had already put him unto. See them inuest the eternal wisdom of
his father, in a white garment, in manner of a fool; to be led in that
equipage through the populous streets, as a thief or malefactor. See how
humbly, how patiently, and mildely he performs this Procession; and all this
for our sake and example, for love etc.

etc.

Cons. 2.
Consider what a contemptible conceit the wicked Jews had of our sweet
Savior, not only equalizing a wicked rogue, with him, but without all
hesitation and delay, preferring him before him, straight answering Pilat; non
hunc sed Barrabam. We demand pardon not for this man, but for Barabbas. O
strange blindness! o un happy choice; non hunc sed Barrabam; not a loving
Savior, but a damnable villain; not the mildest of creatures, an innocent,
noe; but a nocent, a rogue, a thief. See the judgment of the world, and learn
hence what credit you are to give to it, the treasure of heaven once before
sold for 30. pence, now esteemed at less then nothing, the price of a Rogue:
for hark, they persist in their ungracious choice, crying out with one voice;
toll, toll; Crucifige, Crucifige. Away with him, away with him, Crucify him,
Crucify him.

non hunc sed Barabbam? while this or that fond affection, this, or that light
and momentarie delight, has been deliberately preferred before Gods pleasure;
or at least, these embraced, that neglected; ay me therefore!

THE XIII. MEDITATION
How Jesus was vvhipped at Pilates.
Cons. 1.
ANd now see Barbarous fury armed with authority, Pilat gives him over into
their hands to be scourged, into the hands of vile, and desperate slaves; what
usage may you easily think he had? Marry they bind him with cords to a
pillar (though he had never yet made resistance, no not so much, as in one high
word, or distempered look) they bind him with cords I say (haueing already
stripped him quite naked: I leave it to your consideration, how much contrary
to his virginal bashfullnes) so hard, that they force blood to spring out at
his fingers ends; o God! what a pitiful pain must this needs be in so
delicate a complexion?



Cons. 2.
See now alas, how vnhumanly they tear his delicate and sacred body, not
leaving a place whole for a new wound, see how the blood streams down, nay,
the skin falls off; nay, yet more, pieces of his blessed flesh dropp down; ah
pitiful sight! quo nate Dei, quo tua flagrauit charitas? ah son of God? how
high did thy Charity flame out! behold your spouse with compassion in his
wedding garment, died in rich scarlet die, nor was it any marvel, since as S.
Bonauenture says, he received more then, 5000. wounds; vere vermis erat, and
non homo, opprobrium hominum, and abjectio plebis. He was truly a worm, and
not a man, the reproach of men, and the scorn of the people.

vidimus eum, and reputauimus quasi leprosum: We saw him, we saw him, and we
reputed him as a leaprous person. Ah me* what cruel heart used my love thus? ah
let us run to embrace him: for it is even he. Lets wash his deformed face with
our tears, o sweet Jesus! o loueinge Lord! o dear spouse* my sick heart can
endure no longer to see thee thus abused.

THE XIV. MEDITATION
How Jesus was crowned with thorns etc.
Cons. 1.
COnsider how scarcely yet the torn Jesus, in that his extreme wearines, had
sought out and put on his garments, till behold a new torment, a new contempt
is invented for him, so without end are his sufferings! And what? ah go out
ye true daughters of Sion, and see your true Solomon in the diadem in which
his mother crowned him: in a diadem of thorns, sharp thorns, peircing skin
and skull even to the brains, as S. Bernard says; in a thousand places, says
S. Anselme, judge what an unheard of pain this must needs be. And see, yet to
add scorn to his torment, they put a reed into his hand for a Scepter; nay
with it they beat the sharp thorns deepor in-to his head.

V^ere langores nostros ipse tulit; and infirmitates nostras ipse portauit;
Truly he suffered our languours, and took our infirmities upon him. Ours, even
ours. O my soul, things that he was not subject unto but by his own will. Ah
my heart! see how heaps of gorie blood stand upon his head and temples; see
that fairest face of men or Angels, all disfigured and this for love of us?
Come come all ye souls that are moved by love, come and see a lovers ecstasy;
he has given us this sure argument of love, let us not loose, our affections
upon any less then himself. And thou my poor soul, die rather then be so
ungrateful as ever to let this bloody Picture (which divine love, made so be
painted, for love of us) be blotted out of our hearts.

Cons.
Upon the Ecce homo, behold the man. Consider that when Pilate could neither
find cause of death in him, nor means to save his life (so far was the
implacable rage of the people causeleslie insensed against him) he brings him
out, with a crown of thorns upon his head and a purple garment upon him,
hopeing, by the aspect of a most miserable and despicable person to incline the
most barbarous heart to pity and compassion, saying! Ecce homo, behold the
man: as who should say: look upon one so disfigured that you can hardly find
man in him, and know him to be what indeed he is, were you not told he is a
man. Behold the man, a man of dolours, a man humbled, if ever man were humbled.
Behold the man, nor is he a brute beast but a man; and as such might deserve to
be looked upon with an eye of pity. But noe pity was found for poor Jesus;
for the High Priest and people having seen him, cried out: Crucify him,
Crucify him.

thou then the man, my soul, behold the man, who for thy sake is ready to
power even that out to the last drop. Behold the man, I say, but behold him,
in a quite other manner, with a heart full of veneration, gratitude, and
compassion: resolving firmly, for his love, to be willing to be exposed to
what ever scorn, disgrace, contempt etc.

THE XV. MEDITATION.
Upon the same subject.
Cons. 1.
COnsider, Christian, yet further, and behold this man again and again, the
deeper to imprint this lamentable spectacle in the very bottom of thy heart.
Pilateinuites thee to behold him, a man; and in that he tells thee noe news:
for thine eyes read that in his blood; the most pitiful plight in which thou
discouerest him, speaks him a frail poor miserable man to thy heart, were it
even of flinte. But behold him with the eyes of faith, and thou shall at the
same time see him a God too. And howeuer he appears, at present, a worm and
not a man, by this abismall abiection of his, yet is he no other then thy very
God, who created thee, and is now with all, made an object of contempt to
redeem thee.

my Lord and my God, and with my whole heart fall down and adore rhee.
Beseeching thee even for the same charity and mercy to engraue the sadd idea I
now make of thee, so deeply in my heart, that conceiving a sound sense of sorrow
and compunction, I may never more affect to behold any vain and curious
things, nor eye any lustful or carnal object for ever.

Cons. 2.
Consider how painful, reproachful, and ignominious a procession our Savior
Jesus Christ had of it. He Is taken, and ledd like a thief or malefactor to
Annas, and there receaues a box of the ear. He Is thence haled to Cayphas, and
there is received with reproaches, spitts, blows, and scorn. Thence to the
Council, where he meets with iterated injuries, and foul blasphemies. Thence
to Pilate, where he is laden with false accusations. Thence to Herod, where
he is treated like a fool in a white garment. From thence he is hurried back
again to Pilate, and there a seditious rogue is preferred before him. Thence
he is trayled into Pilats yeard and whipped. Thence by Pilate he is exposed to
the peoples scorn, in a purple robe, and a crown of thorns; whereby not
preuayling to appease the jewish rage, he causes him to be ledd into
Lichostratus, and pronounces sentence of death against Jesus, and his own
conscience.

it self, so dealt withal too, for thy love, for thy example? Endeavor to
print this deeply in thy heart, to have it ready upon accasions, making a
firm resolution, patiently to endure such and such things as are wont to
trouble thee, for Christ his love, that by imitation thou may become like to
thy Master.

THE XVI. MEDITATION.
How Jesus carried his heavy Cross toward Caluarie.
Cons. 1.
COnsider that the sentence is pronounced, not because justice would have it
so, but the people (for Pilate finds him who is judged a just man.) Jesus is
delivered over to their wills, and dye he must. And that of a death both for
the kind, and manner of it, most ignominious, that it might so be suitable to
the rest of their violences. Iewrie knows noe death more disgraceful then
that of the Cross. Upon the Cross then Jesus must dye. Nature knows nothing
more barbarous then to compel a sentenced person to bear the instruments of
his own punishment to the place of execution upon his own shoulders; and yet
a heavy load of a Cross about 15. or sixteen foot long is placed upon the
poor Isaacs back.

Ah my soul what a sadd sentence is this? Thy innocent Jesus, thy spouse of
blood, thy God, must dye. Crucify him, Crucify him, is the general voice of
Jerusalem, and dye he must. It is not only Pilates injustice will have it so,
but his heavenly Fathers mercy has resolved it so in the Court of Heaven; and
his obedient son in earth has charity abundantly enough to perform it. O
what a strange conspiracy is here for the same thing (to wit the death of
Jesus) but by how diverse ends and means and motives? Pilate is lead by
injustice, least he might appear an enemy to Caesar. The people by rage to raze
his memory out of the earth. But God the Father by mercy to save the world,
and to glorify his innocent son. The son by loving obedience to magnify
his Fathers mercy in redeeming man, that man might for ever singe Gods Mercyes.

Cons.
Consider how the meek Lamb, who came to take away the sins of the world,
is ledd out as a sheep to slaughter. He mutters not, he murmurs not, there is
not a word heard from him. Behold the poor, innocent, true Isaac, loadeh with
the wood whereupon he must be sacryficed indeed, not delivered, as was the
other Isaac, by the divine providence. Look but upon the Cross with the eyes
of flesh only, and even as such we shall judge it a too heavy load for a
tender, worn, and wearied man, upon his torn shoulders (and indeed, he
failed in the way, and needed another help) but look upon it with spiritual
eyes, and we shall find it insupportable to any shoulders but those of a God,
since, according to S. Peter, he caries, togeither with it, all our sins
heaped upon the same wood.

spectacle. Jesus the only Beloved son of God with a cross upon his back!
yes my soul, yet such it is to every heart, as are the eyes with which he
beholds it. If impiety look upon it, it appears a great mockery. If piety,
a strange mystery of love. If impiety a plain conviction of ignominy. If
piety, a strong Fortress of faith. If impiety, it scoffs at a king, who in
lieu of his scepter, caries, upon his shoulders, the instrument of his
punishment. If piety, it sees indeed the king of glory carrying the
inglorious cross, on which he will die, but a cross that ever after shall be
adored by kings, and prove the richest otnament of their Diademes. Let it be
ever to us an absolute persuasion of taking up our cross and following Christ.
Let it appear to profane eyes fame or infamy. Christ finds noe way to heaven
but over Caluarie. Noe way to Caluarie but through the contemps of Jerusalem;
and that too, with weak and wearied limbs, and torn shoulders, awe see.

Be it far from us to glory, save only in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ etc.

THE XVII. MEDITATION
How Jesus went out to Caluarie, with his Cross on his back.
1. Point.
COnsider the circumstances of this doleful procession: Jesus setts out
toward Caluarie, with a heavy Cross upon his torn shoulders, which he
rather, trailes then carries a long the streets of Jerusalem. His heavenly
face all swollen with blows, defiled with spittle, gauled with thorns,
covered with goarie and fresh blood, so that he appeared, not so much to have
the face of a man, as even of some monster. On either hand of him, a notorious
thief: Before and behind, worlds of people from all parts, to see this
admirable spectacle, some few with compassion, but the most of them, with
disdain, malice and scorn.

how thou wadest through the greatest circumstances of confusion and scorn
imaginable! How does this huge load, together with this labor, and wearines
of thine, cry out to my heart, and to the hearts of all men, come unto me all
you that are oppressed, and I will refresh you, whilst you see in my
sufferances, the inconsiderablenesse of yours. You are not Masters, but
servants, nor have you yet suffered to blood, to crowns of thorn, to public
contumelies, before whole worlds of people, etc. Say, say, then my soul, I
will follow thee, dear spouse, whither soever thou go, without limitt,
without reserve, without exception of this, or that, befall what will; come it
from what hand soever, by injustice or desert, etc.

Ours Saviors words to the women of Jerusalem.
2. Point.
COnsider what our Blessed Savior says to the good women, who follow him
with tears. Maids, or people of Jerusalem, weep not upon me, but weep
upon your selves, and upon your children. That is, look not so much upon him
who suffers, as upon your-selues, for whom he suffers: nor what he suffers, as
for what. Compassionate tears spent upon our Saviors sufferances, are
certainly good, and agreeable in his divine sight: yet, are they far better
spent upon our own crimes, which were the cause of his sufferances, and
continually provoke his wrath, and even, according to S. Paul, crucify him a
new again.

misfortunes, and sufferances, while our next neighbors, our own poor
souls, lie sick at home, in a dead palsy, etc. vnpittied, unconsidered, left
to ruin; and yet is looked upon by our selves, with dry eyes, as things which
concern us not, or are not worthy of our care, or subjects of our pity. Ah
senseless man, have mercy and compassion of thine own soul, and weep upon
her, and her children.

Our chief care shall alvvayes be about our own defects, etc.

THE XVIII. MEDITATION.
The reason of what our Savior Said to the women of Jerusalem.
1. Point.
COnsider, how our sweet Savior goes on, giving the reason why the women of
Jerusalem, and in them all faithful souls, should not so much weep upon
him, as upon themselves, and their children. For, says he, if they do this
(that is, use this fire of torments) upon green wood, what will they not do
upon dry wood? That is, if the justice of the Almighty exact such rigorous
satisfaction, at the hands of his only son, who is wholly innocent, unspotted,
liable to no faults, but those of miserable man, what may not the sinner
himself, guilty of so many crimes, and so dry, fruitless and barren of all
good works, expect and dread.

Vae, vae, vae illis qui non cogitent cord: woe, woe, woe to those, who think
not of this in their hearts.

2. Point.
Consider, how our Blessed Savior with wearied limbs, has now waded through
public confusion: and is at length by the assistance of a poor gentile, Simon
Sireneus, arrived with his heavy load, at the top of Caluarie, where our
most serious attentions are called to the contemplation of the strangest sight,
that ever heaven or earth yet saw. Not now a burning God on the Mount Horeb,
nor a God amidst thunder and lightning, upon the Mount Sina; nor a God in
glory, environed with light, upon the Mount Thabor; but the same God that
burnt, that thundered, that sent out beams of glory there: here, is nailed to
a Cross, and ignominiously dying betwixt two thieves, upon the top of Mount
Caluarie.

Ibo and videbo visionem hanc grandem I will up to Caluarie, and see this great
sight: for it is not, as some conceived, the frame of the Universe, that is
about to be dissolved, but the very God of nature, which suffers, and is ready
to dye. Dye, then my soul, dye to this world, and to all its concupiscences,
and dye with this dear Lord and Master of thine. Ah my dying Lord! o my
crucified Love! Let my eyes, and thoughts loath their wonted vanities, and fill
them selves full of this daunting object, of a dying God. O my crucified Love!
let me be nailed to the Cross with thee, never seeking to be freed from that
tie: But grant that all the rest of my life in flesh, I may live in the faith
of the son of God, true God, who loved me, and delivered up himself for me.

Never regard among whom thou art numbered, so thy actions be Christian. Love
to be reputed for nothing etc.

THE XIX. MEDITATION.
Of our Christian bloody sacrifice upon Mount Caluarie.
1. Point.
COnsider, how at length, we have met with such a Bishop as we had absolute
need of, as S. Paul says, a Bishop who is holy, innocent, unspotted,
separated from sinners, who having no need to sacrifice for his own sins,
wholly imployes it for the redemption of ours. Behold him ready to perform this
great sacrifice, to his heavenly father, in his own blood: Caluarie is the
vast Temple lying open to the whole world, the Cross the Altar, him self the
Priest and Host, and that infinite charity of his heavenly heart to man, the
fire which burns all into an Holocaust.

able to committ, what Gods mercy was able to expiate. Our sins are great, o
Lord, huge great, we confess it, we plead guilty. But our Priest is holy,
unspotted, innocent, innocence it self. And he is ready, for us poor
sinners, to paie-backe what he took not away; to appease thy wrath, which he
never provoked. Look upon this innocent, obedient son of thine, and pardon
the crimes, and disobediences of thy poor servant, who of himself is
altogether insoluable.

2. Point.
Consider, that whereas other Bishops go richly adorned to the Altar, poor
Christ is turned quite naked to the work, making his public confusion, the
ornament which ought to ravish the hearts of men and Angels, to see their God
and ours, who couers, beautifies, and adornes all things, exposed naked to the
eyes, and scorn, of all the world: to cover our confusion, to hide our shame,
and to recover us again the white garment of original justice, which we lost
in our first father.

gloriously adorned in the eyes of God, Angels, and Men, as when he neglects,
or depriues him self of all ornaments by Christ's example, and for his love.
Never do we so nearly resemble Christ, nor so securely approach to his holy
sacrifices, as when we find our selves turned naked, not only from all
interest, humane respects, selfe-esteeme, and self love; but from our dearest
desires, and best beloved affections, to certain practices of piety, and
advancement in verue, by means of our own choice; whereas our more purified,
and Christian-like desires indeed, ought to be an absolute indifferency and
entire dependence of Gods good pleasure, affecting, that in all things his holy
name be sanctified; his reign be magnified; his blessed will be accomplished,
and glorified for ever, whether by our nakedness, confusion, ignominy, or
good fame.

We will disingage our selves of all other interests, but Gods blessed will
alone.

THE XX. MEDITATION.
Our Savior stripped naked, and putt upon the Cross.
1. Point.
COnsider how this publik confusion was accompaigned with excessive pains: for
the barbarous rudeness, inhumanitie, and cruelty of the soldiers, do not so
much tear off the fleece, as the very skin and flesh of the delicate and
tender lamb, which muttered not against those that shore him, and ledd him to
slaughter. If at the pillar, their inhumanitie inflicted wounds without number,
at the Cross their enraged violence, tears them all into one, while they
snatche off the garment which sticks to the goarie blood of them all.

an object of horror to thine eyes. It is he who was beautiful, far before
all the sonns of men: and behold, he is wholly deformed, all covered over with
wounds, and fresh springs of blood shewre down from every part, and now there
is noe beauty in him nor comeliness. Nay, he is as it were a Leper, stricken
by God and humbled Towitt, we all straied like lost sheep, and this lamb
takes all our iniquities upon him. Let us not then, at least, spare dropps of
guilty tears, where he spends fountains of innocent blood.

2. Point.
Consider how these vile slaves extend the King of Glory (thus naked, thus
deformed, thus fleaed and torn, thus cruelly crowned) upon the ignominious
wood, with as much barbarousnesse and brutalitie, as their devilish malice
could invent; and then with great and rude nails, dig through his hands and
feet: Foderunt manus meas and pedes meos (as the prophet long before had
expressed it) racking out his arms with huge violence, to force them to their
designed places upon the Cross, so that one might count all his bones:
dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea.



I will never forgett these huge torments, but solace my small sufferances in
the same.

THE XXI. MEDITATION.
Our Saviors Prayer upon the Cross: Father pardon them, etc.
1. Point.
COnsider how our high priest, who is now ready to sacrifice himself a torn
and bloody host, such as you have seen him, for the sins of his people,
begins first to offerr up his prayers for them to his heavenly father, saing:
Pater dimitte illis non enim sciunt quid faciunt. Father pardon them, for they
know not what they do.



2. Point.
Consider, that thus it was that our Savior Jesus Christ taught us from the
Cross, even amidst his greatest torments: when the most innocent person that
ever lived, received the most barbarous treaty, that ever malice invented: and
even in such circumstances, this lesson (of praying for our enemies, etc.) he
left us to follow. Observe with shame how we Christians complie with it: Is
our first address to God, when we meet with Crosses, tribulations,
contradictions, etc. Is our first suit for pardon for those that iniure us? Do
we study to find out some excuse for them? or rather, do we not indeed fall
to muttering, and murmuring, and impatience, and even offend God by returning
evil for evil, because others offend us? In lieu of pardoning, or begging
pardon for them, do we not desire, and seek for revenge? Do we not insteede
of extinuating, strive by the sophistry of the Devil, to aggrauate little and
inconsiderable deeds, words, or mistakes? And yet we are not Christ's, we are
not innocence it self, yea, contrarily, we are faulty enough, and as subject
to do, as to receive injuries.



I will pardon such and such a vvrong, in memory of this excessive mercy.

THE XXII. MEDITATION
Of the Jews tauntes, scorns, and blaspheamies.
1. Point.
Consider how their tygerish rage runs still on, against this innocent dying
Lamb which mutters not. The streams of blood which flow down from every
part, gluts not their malice: extreme torments which their rude violence puts
him to, appeases not their fury. It seems not enough to their hellish
madnesses to leave no member without its torture, unless they fill his ears
and heart, with scoffs, and scorns and blasphemies. If he be the king of
Israel, let him come dovve from the Cross, and vvele believe him. If thou
be the son of God, descend from the Cross. He saues others, and cannot
save himself: Vau away with him who destroies the Temple, and within
three days builds it up again.

malice, that madness, be not lodged in thine own heart. As often do thou
crucify him with them, as thou preferrest the concupiscence of the flesh,
concupiscence of the eyes, or pride of life before him. And as often do thou
add new wounds over and above the wounds they inflicted, as often as thou
come down, or call others down by ill example, or counsel, from the
Cross which is putt upon them for Gods glory; or despairest of his power to
be able to help thee in thy greatest Crosses, afflictions, and temptations.
Let sin therefore be most hated, as it is indeed most criminal, and truly
put thy Christ to death.

2. Point.
Consider that though this so hugely afflicted person, is he who is only said
to be free and subject to no restraint; yea he; who alone gives power to others
to tie and untie, has often been tied for our love, and our liberty; as in
the stable in poor clothes: in the garden, and from thence to Annas, Caiphas,
and Herod's howses, in cords; in the Pretorie, to the Pillorie to be whipped;
yet never was my dear Lord, and spouse, so closely and cruelly tied and torn,
as I see him here upon the hard Rack of the Cross, where he neither finds
nor hopes for any case or liberty at all, but that which he must purchase with
the price of his life; when death shall free his afflicted soul, out of his
barbarously tortured body.



My calling is and shall be my happy Cross, to which the consideration of
these cords shall tie me for my Masters love, and honor, for ever: Hic
habitabo quoniam elegi eum: Here will I ever dvvell, because it was mine
own choice.

THE XXIII. MEDITATION.
Of the Princes of the people and Priests blaspheamies.
1. Point.
COnsider, that though all these bodily torments of my dear innocent crucified
Lamb, be inormiously great beyond all measure; yet they are but as it were,
the body of torment, whereas the life and soul of torment indeed, is the
torment of the soul: Those cruel Deicides took him, they bound him, they
haled him, they boxed him, they whipped him, they spitt in his face, they
crowned him with thorns, they nailed him hand and foot to the Cross, they
brought him to the very door of death: but all this was performed upon his
body. But when he hears his Fathers power and love to him called into
question (by the Princes, and Priests, and People, saying: he says, he is the
son of God, in him he is confident: let God now deliver him if he will) then
he cries out that intrauerunt aquae vsque ad animam meam; the waters of
bitterness have entered into my very soul.

fame vilified, blasphcamed, and even torn in pieces. Is this to be followers
of Christ?

He commends his mother to S. John, and S. John to his mother.
2. Point.
Consider, that though the waters of bitterness; and a sense of inward sorrow
had possessed his heart, yet did mildness, filial care, duty, and dearness
still reign therein: for with blubbered, bloody, and dyeing eyes, espying his
mother and the Disciple whom he loved, he said to his mother, pointing at S.
John, behold thy son, and then to his Disciple, behold thy Mother. O how
heavenly love is able to live and reign amidst our greatest anguishes! And
where love lives and reigns, what anguish is able to make us fail of our
duty?

theife that acknowledged him with a repentant heart. In the next place, he
paies the honor which he owes to his parents, and the love which he owes to
his friends, Mother behold thy son: Disciple, behold thy Mother. Thus are we
taught, my soul, to love God incomparably above all things, and to seek his
glory, even before, and above the love of our parents. Next we are to love
and honor those authors of our being; and lastly to love our friends and our
neighbors, as our selves, etc.



THE XXIV. MEDITATION
Of the sorrovves of Jesus and Marie.
1. Point.
COnsider and ponder well the circumstances of this son, and this Mother, and
this standing; and if there be any sense of Christianity, or even humanity
left, our hearts cannot miss to melt with pity. The son, the most lovely
the most loving, the most beautiful child that ever heaven knew: the Mother,
the most graceful, most grateful most loving, and most beloved virgin that
ever the earth produced, or can produce? The son, innocence it self, and
the Mother, the most innocent Lady, that ever the world beheld. And that
virgin Mother stands near the Cross to behold that son, that man, that
God, dying upon that most accursed, and ignominious wood, in all the
circumstances of, greatest torment, and contempt of body and soul imaginable:
dying I say, for her, for us, for those that put him to death for all mankind.

behold it. Ah what swords of sorrow do not pearce her tender heart? Well may
we conceive, she paies the panges of childbirth with huge usury, which she
felt not in his immaculate nativity. She now indeed brings forth Jesus, the
most painful way that ever woeman experienced, since the child must
absolutely dye, and the mother hardly escape.

The sun is eclipsed, the earth quakes, the rocks burst in sunder.
2. Point.
burstes in pieces; the very rocks rend, and all the earth is in a commotion,
to wit, says S. John Chrysostom, the creatures could not endure the wrong
done to their Creator.

vsque quo graui cord? how long, how long will you remain heavy hearted,
and appear less sensible, then the very rocks themselves? O God, vouchsafe
I beseech thee, in virtue of the precious blood of thy dear son, which so
plentifully streams down, either to smite this fleshly heart of mine, with thy
fear, and with thy love, or turn this senseless fleshly heart of mine, into a
very rock, that that rodd of Moses, may draw waters out of it, that these
hammers may bruise and burst it a sunder. Smite o Lord, smite I beseech thee,
this hard heart of mine, with the pious, and powerful dart of thy love, that I
may be sensible at least, among the senseless creatures, and testify that it
is my God that's dying.

I will continually lament the hardness and insensibleness of mine own heart,
as to any respects of God etc.

THE XXV. MEDITATION.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me.
1. Point.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? To wit, our eyes were witnesses
of greatest exorbitancie, and universality of torments, inflicted upon him,
that ever creature suffered, but his own tongue alone was able to express his
inward sense, and sorrow of his soul.

(my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?) speaks only the desparatnesse
of our cause, thou can not forsake that only dear son of thine, nor he
thee? or us, whose suite he is resolved to win, with the loss of his life:
Aspice Deus, and respice in faciem Christi tui.

2. Point.
Let us weigh yet further these stupendous words: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? He complains, not of the excess of the barbarous torments,
crown of thorns nails cruel extension upon the Cross, and effusion of his
precious blood, which he suffers in his body: Nay, he mentions not the
contumelies, contemps, scornful blasphemies, which enter into his very soul,
but to see himself seem to be quite abandoned by his heavenly father, and,
left as a person forgotten, or as one who had no credit or power, in the midst
of his barbarous enemies, and even in the hight of those torments which he
suffers in obedience to his will, and for his glory.

that thou should be so treated? What is thy trepasse? what is thy crime? It
is I, it is I, who am the wound which putt thee to that pain. I the crime
which kills thee. I the sin whereof revenge is taken. I the man which seems
forsaken in thee; who can indeed never be forsaken. Noe, my soul, it is noe
forsaking, but a mystery. Man had forsaken God by sin, and God forsakes man
in Christ, that by Christ, sinnfull man may be reconciled to God. It is noe
forsaking but a doctrine; intimating noe despair, but a rigourous
satisfaction; and is indeed a souueraigne antidote which love presents to our
sick hearts. Ah let us engraue it deeply in the same hearts, and never
forgett, that the desease must needs be hugely great, which will not be cured
but by the abandonnement, torments, and death of the most skillful Doctor, Ah,
my soul, our leprosy was desparatly malignant, which found only the bathe of
the blood of so innocent a child, souueraigne for its cure.

Never to despair of Gods mercy and assistance, seem we never so forsaken.

THE XXVI. MEDITATION
I thirst.
1. Point.


let him come to me and drink, who am the fountain of living water, which
flows into life everlasting. And it is excessive torment, my soul, in my
crucified Love, which has so withered and dried him up. He is oppressed with
the weight of my sins: he is burnt up with my intempetance and riotte, and he
seems to say to our hearts, children give me to drink. And a true sense of
his sufferances, a compassionate heart, a repentant tear, is able to refresh
him: whether it be bestowed upon his own person, or upon any of his suffering
members in his name. Ah then let it never be reproched to our hearts: I was
thirsty and you gave me not to drink, etc.

2. Point.
he saw contemned. My meat and drink, said he sometimes, is, that you
accomplish the will of my heavenly father; and what is his will but your
sanctification or sanctity.



my sanctity, my sanctity his glory.

THE XXVII. MEDITATION.
They present Christ with vinegar etc.
1. Point.


and unworthy Christian; and the story is told and verified of us. For are not
indeed our words, our works, our thoughts mixed with vinegar and gale? And
do we not present them to Christ too, who says: what you do to those little
ones, you do to me. We offer vinegar and gale to Christ, when we mix his pure
love with terreane and inferior motives. We offer gale to Christ, when we
complie with the world, more then with his love. We offer a mixed cup of
vinegar and gale, when we think to serve God and Mammon, to live piously, and
yet follow our own inclinations, passions and pleasures. In fine we offer
vinegar and gale to Christ, when knowing much, we perform but little; knowing
his blessed will, we endeavor not to accomplish the same.

2. Point.
Consummatum est, all is consummated, or ended. All the ancient sacrifices,
types and figures. For here the true Abel is slain by his own brother. The
harmless Joseph is sold to the Ismaelites: The saueing Noe is turned naked
and mocked by his own children: The innocent Isaac is sacrificed by his own
father; being otherwise the same Fathers only hope and joy. So that upon the
Cross we find the accomplishment of them all.

All is accomplished. Our peace, my soul, is near upon the point of being
concluded with his heavenly father. Our salvation is near at hand. O how many
have desired to see what we now see, and to hear the Consummatum est, which we
have the happiness now to hear, and yet saw, and heard it not.



THE XXVIII. MEDITATION.
Of the same subject.
1. Point.
him a worm and not a man, a reproach of men, and out-caste of the people. We
have seen him compassed with calves and dogs, and beseiged by fatt bulls. We
have heard him cry out, my God, my God why have thou forsaken me. Even as it
was foretold by David.

sicut audiuimus, sic and vidimus, that what was foretold we have seen
accomplished? Is it not true that all these testimonies are made but too too
credible, exceeding apparent to all the world? But ah my Jesus, thou dearest
Author and Consummatour of our faith! Is it not true too, that thou did
strugle through strange co^tradictions the while? for my sins, for my
salvation, for the love of me? Ah this consummation was purchaced at too too
dear a rate. If ever I forgett these abismall labors, let my right hand be
forgotten; and let my tongue stick to my jaws, if I ever cease to magnify
these ineffable mercyes of thine.

2. Point.


to dye for his love and honor. He finds ungrateful man paying his love and
labors with injuries, and yet for his love he will lay down his life. This
ought to be the rule of our proceeding. We must not less love and serve God,
because he seems, some times, to leave us in afflictions, in temptations etc.
nor leave off to love our neighbor, because he renders evil for good. Noc: for
our aim and obligation, is, to accomplish the law with Christ, and the
accomplishment of the law is love.

THE XXIX. MEDITATION.
1. Point.
All the mysteries of infirmity, and documents of virtue.

upon thy love to poor man, that could be putt by cruel torments, streams of
blood, and the most infamous death of a God.

2. Point.
propter scelera populi mei percussi eum: for the sins of my people I struck
him: By whom his humanity is left to struggle with his cruel torments, and
to satisfy for those sins of ours, in the very rigor of justice. But now,
having consummated and fulfilled all the figures, types, sacryfices,
prophecies, and even the whole Law: and having punctually observed all his
fathers orders with filial obedience, and admirable humility, even to the
last gasp, he beings to behold him as a tender and loving father; and so
testifies with a loud voice, that it is into the hands of such a father that
he delivers up his spirit. Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum.

my kind Pelican; happily return into its rest. May thou, our too too kind
Prodigal joyfully return into thy fathers house, out of this foreign land
of ours, where thou have spent all thy substance even to the last drop of thy
precious blood, upon ungrateful man; from whom thou meetest with noe better
returns then evil for good, hatred for love, vinegar and gale to drink where
thou art ready to perish with thirst. Ah my soul! my soul! Haeccine reddis
Domino Deo tuo? are these the kindnesses which thou rendrest to thy Lord thy
God? for his love, for his labors, for his blood, for his life, which here he
is laying down for thee?



THE XXX. MEDITATION.
1. Point.
COnsider in this action of Christ (where he commends his spirit or soul into
the hands of his heavenly father) where the true hopes of a Christian ought to
be placed: to wit in the hands, that is, in the will and disposition of our
heavenly father, to be dealt withal according to his good pleasure. Accursed
is that man who places his hopes in man, or in the heaps of his riches which
he must leave behind him; or in the multitudes of his merits, which are none
without mercy, but in Gods mercy alone, which is indeed our merit nor shall
we ever want merit so long as we cleave to that mercy.

mendaces filij hominum. Leave not the care of thy self to such as have noe
care of themselves, much less of thee. Such as thou have found thy self to
others, such, at the best, will others prove to thee. Our dearest friends do
easily forgett us; they will not they cannot go along with us. O how good it
is then, while we have yet time, to make him our friend, above all our friends,
who when they all fail, has as much power as goodness to make good our
trust. Into thy hands then, o dearest father, do I commend my soul. In those
merciful hands of thine, not in my miserable ones, do I repose the whole
confidence of my salvation.

2. Point.
anguish with Christ, when we seem to be forsaken by our God. Yet still by
adhearing to Christ, and by following his foot-stepps; we shall infallibly wade
out of all, and come to a happy consummation with him, and find a loving
fathers bosom laid open to receive our souls.

much that the coheire should be treated like the true heir: the adoptiue,
like the natural son.



THE XXXI. MEDITATION
Christ gives up his Ghost.
1. Point.
(nemo tollit animam meam) none takes away my soul or life: but because he
himself would, when he pleased, and as he pleased. And to what end, but to be
the death of death it self (ero mors tua o mors) I will be thy death, o death.
To ransacke Hell it self (ero stimulus tuus o inferne?) To be Jesus, that is,
a Savior to man; and to leave him the greatest testimonies of love imaginable
by man or Angel. And therefore bowing down his head, he, of his own accord,
delivered up his spirit, or soul.

Nolo viuere, volo mori, cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo. Dye, dye then my
soul to all things which are not his very self. There Is noe living without
life: Christ is my life: mihi viuere Christus, and my Christ being dead, my
life is dead, and dye I must. mihi mori lucrum. I desire to dye that I may see
my Christ. I refuse to live that I may live with my Christ. Ah my dear dead
Master! fcra pessima deuorauit te, the worst of wild beasts has devoured
thee. Ah, my soul, thy sins have slain thy Master. Thy envy sought him:
thy avarice sold him: thy Hypocrisy betrayed him: thy rashness delivered him
up: thy licenciousnesse bound him: thy cruelty whipped him: thine ambition
crowned him: thy sluggishnesse loaded him: thy pride putt him upon the Cross;
thy irreligiousnesse, taunted, scorned, and blaspheamed him: thy
unmercifulness caused his thirst: thy forsaking of God, made him be forsaken
by God: thy disloyalty, disobedience, hard hartednesse, ingratitude for all
his benefits, putt him to death. And thence my Savior dyed. Nay it was God the
fathers mercy which sacrificed him. His Justice exacted satisfaction, and his
mercy found the means, which to effect, he spared not his own only son,
but delivered him up to death for us all. Nay but even Christ himself too,
both accepted the hard commission, and complied with the painful duty, and
willingly offered himself up. If then sin gave the cause, if mercy found out
the means, if transcendant chartiie executed the office by the death of a God:
deteste sin, my soul; extolle that so admirable mercy, and magnify that
boundless charity for ever. And least we who are most concerned may seem
least sensible, let us take a deep share with all the creatures in this
doleful mourning. If there be any sense of man's misery, left in us, if any
gratitude for greatest mercy, if any love for most admirable charity, weep my
soul weep. If thou art a sun, for light, brighnesse, and beauty, far
beyond all the other creatures, eclipse thy glory for a while in lamentations.
If a Temple of God, burst in pieces. If earth and ashes, putt thy mouth into
thy dust, weep in thy ashes, and let thy earth quake to see thy God dye. If
thy heart be even a rock, let it rend in pieces, at least, with the rocks,
laying a close seige to it, make the Cross the hammer, and the nails the
wedges to riue it a sunder. If it be yet harder then the rocks, and be grown
to the hardness of a diama^t which nothing but blood can mollify, oh take the
streams of the innocent blood of the Lamb, and apply it continually till it
relent, and bring out a shewre of tears at the king of heavens funerals, who
dyed for our love.

2. Point.
whether there be any sorrow like my sorrow, cries out our Savior by the mouth
of mournful Jeremy. O all you spouses of Christ then, o all you Christian
hearts, do not slightly pass by, or pass over this saddest sight: but make a
stop; ponder deeply, and feelingly observe, whether there was ever sorrow,
comparable to the sorrow of your dear Lord, and spouse, who lies dead for
your love: deuoyde of all beauty, and comeliness. For we have seen him all
disuigoured and deformed, contemptible, miserable, and the last of men: a worm
and not a man: a man of dolours, and ouerloaden with all the extremity of
miseries. We have seen him like a leprous person, to the eyes of all men,
stricken by God, and made abject.

Beginning without Beginning, (before the Angels yet were) his own souueraigne
joy, and Beatitude. O what a huge distance there is, betwixt that Beginning, and
this ignominious, dolourous, and dismale end! He was there selfe-happie, or
happiness is self: here miserable and ablect. There framinge all things (all
the vaste variety of creatures) of nothing; here, forsaken by all his
creatures, and reduced to nothing: there before the day star, inhabiting an
inaccessible light; here dyinge, and dead, in darkness. O prodigious change
of the Highest, by the hand of the Highest! O daunting disproportion between
such a Beginning, and such an End! O then, at least, lets attend and see,
whether there be any sorrow like his sorrovve.



THE XXXII. MEDITATION.
Our Saviors side is opened by the Lance.
1. Point.
COnsider that as Christ's love, and the jews malice, go on and increase even
till death, so rest they not there, but even out-liue death it self. He is now
subject to noe more pains, his soul being departed, yet he is subject to more
injuries; his dead body is capable of more wounds, marks of more malice in
them, and more dearness in him, to whom nothing happened by accident. Yet thy
malice profits thee not. o cruel Jew. since thou hurtest not him, and thou
profitest me. All things concur to the advantage of those, that love him
whom you hate.

greater then the Jews malice; and his mercy, infinitely out-speaking man's
misery.

2. Point


Dominum nostrum, and Deum nostrum, our Lord, and our God. For by this blessed
wound we get free access to his fatherly tender bowels, and learn the
secreetes of his divine heart. Dominus meus, and Deus meus. Here is my Lord,
here is my God indeed. Here will I enter, here will I adore him; here will I
love him: here will I rest, here will I taste how sweet my God is. Here,
finally; will I safely singe his mercyes for ever.

my beloved is mine so shall my heart replye to him, And I am entirely thine for
ever.

THE XXXIII. MEDITATION
1. Point.
COnsider Iosephe of Arimathias great religion and courrage, who went boldly to
Pilate and demanded the body of Jesus. He might justly have feared to have met
with resistance from the Synagogue; wroth and revenge from the high Priests,
and a shameful repulse at Pilates hands. The cold prudence of the world would
easily have suggested, that the best way, was, to let their fury pass over*
least loss or ruin might have followed, Yet Gods providence (for whose love
he undertook the work) so provided, that neither Synagogue, priest, nor
Pilate, either opposed, refused, or did any thing else to Iosephes prejudice.

if in that name we suffer, we ought not so much to apprehend it the sufferance
of a Cross, as the assurance of a crown.

2. Point.
Consider with astonishment the great power which the divine providence gives
to Pilate (who had indeed noe power over Christ, but what was given from
above) in whose hands the disposal of the body of a God was left. Yes, of
that body which the holy Ghost framed: the Virgin mother brought-forth: the
divinity still inseparably inhabited; Of that body, I say, Pilate, a sinner,
an unjust Judge, an infidel, has power to dispose, and he gives it to Iosephe.

that so left us (if we faithfully follow his foot stepps) will certainly
deliver us, and glorify us. Noe unjust Pilates sencence will be able to hinder
us from delivering up our souls into the hands of a loving father, nor deprive
our body of the happy expectation of a glorious resurrection.



THE XXXIV. MEDITATION
1. Point.
COnsider that God, being Omniponcie it self, wanted not power to have
delivered the body of this dear son of his, out of the hands of Pilate
without his leave. He that was only free among the dead, could easily have
freed himself from the dead, and have risen as gloriously the first day from
the Cross, as the third from the grave. But the Scriptures were to be
fulfilled, his sepulcher was to be glorious. Our Jonas was to remain three
days, and three nights in the bowels of the earth: And his last lesson after
his death, as well as his first before he could yet speak, was to teach us by
his blessed example, an admirable submission, obedience, abandonnement of
himself, into what hands soever.

never desiring to take my self, out of that order and subjection, wherein thy
providence may have placed me. Ita Domine quoniam sic placitum est coram te.
Yes, sweet Savior purely because so it is aggreable in thy divine sight.

2. Point.
Consider that Pilate having been petitioned, gives up the body to Iosephe:
Joseph's care takes it down from the Cross, and bestows a sydon, or fine
white linen sheet: Nicodemus contributes many pounds of ointments, to wit,
mixed mirre and aloes: the body is imbalmed therewith, and wound up in Joseph's
syndon, according to the jews rites. His mournful mother Marie bestows more
hearty sorrow and compassion, then any tongue can speak. or any heart but her
own (that is the heart of a mother, and such a mother, the mother of a God) can
conceive: who as in that name she far surpasses all other creatures, in
dignity, consanguinitie and neerenesse to her son, so also in love, and
consequently in compassion and sorrow. The desolate loving Magdalene and her
companions, their familiar tears: and Joseph putts the adorable body in his
own new Monument, cut in the side of a rock, and shutts it up, with a great
stone.

consepultus cum Christo, buried togeither with Christ, never to rise again,
but with him, in newness of life. O that my heart (as it sympathises too
nearly with this Monument in hardness) had also the rest of its qualities. O
that it were yet in its primitive newness and purity. O that it had never
been prepossessed by any creature. But alas, alas! it fares not so. It has
been too long* and too easily prostituted to the worlds allurements, to the
Devils suggestions. It has been but too too peruious to all approches, and
remained only a rock to thy holy inspirations, to thy heavenly instructions,
to any true sense of thy excessive torments and sorrows.

A PRAYER.
But, o my dear Lord! thou who art a hammer brusing rocks, bruise this hard
heart of mine into true contrition; and smite it with the rodd of thy Cross,
that (now at least, though too late alas!) it may pay down deepest
compassion and sorrovve, with the most desolate Virgin mother: floods of
repentant tears, with those mournful Mary's: and finally, a most manly
courage and resolution, plentiful works of mercy, and the precious
oyntements of frequent and fervent prayers, with the good Joseph and
Nicodemus. But ah! my dearest Savior Christ, my true rock and strength, these
are indeed the resolutions of my heart, but of a vveake and wavering heart
which will effect nothing without thy powerful assistance: grant it o
Lord, for thy precious bloods sake; and let the holes of thy sacred side etc.
lie alvvaies open to my aid and refuge, that there I may securely live and
dye, and even be buried to this wicked world in that glorious TOMB; that so
I may joyfully rise with thee, and to thee, eternally.

Amen.
Jesuit seal IHS


REFLECTIONS, IN form of prayer upon the particular parts of our Savior,
upon the Cross.
To his feet.
I Give thee thanks, my most humble Jesus, for thy incomprehensible love, and
the great pains which thou did suffer in thy wounded feet casting my self
wholly into those holes, togeither with all the sins and delights of my life
past, especially.

My pride, vain glory, and arrogancy.

My self will, disobedience, and irreuerence to thee, and thy vicars.

My impatience, anger and rancour.

My tatling, detraction, and the like: to thend they may be abolished and
expiated by thy precious blood, beseeching thee by thy humility, obedience;
patience, and admirable silence, to daigne to bestow upon me all the same, and
all Such other virtues: that hence forth, by the assistance of thy grace, in
all my thoughts, words: and works, I may be truly:

Humble, reduceing my self to nothing, under the feet of all creatures.

Obedient, renounceing mine own will under thee, and all men.

Patient, most willingly receiving all adversity from thy holy hand.

Moderate in speaking: interiourly, and in high silence; giving ear to thy
words alone: And that all my life long, butt especially at the terrible hour
of my death, my most certain Refuge, may be in those most sacred wounds of
thine.

To his head.
I Give thee thanks my most wise Jesus, for the love and dolor of thy sacred
and most holy head, which was wounded and torn with such excess of cruelty,
and inhumanitie, hyding my infirm head togeither with all my senses, and
powers, as also all my sins and transgressions, in the multitude of those
sacred wounds, in particular.

All obstinacy in sticking to mine own prudence, and judgment, as also the
dissolution and abuse of my senses.

The neglect of thy fear, and the fear and flattery of men.

My indiscretion, and too great want of moderation.

My impuritie of intention, and seeking of my self, and all other vices of the
like nature: to thend they may be expiated by thy most precious blood. And I
humbly beseech thee by thy wisdom, fear, discretion and unspeakable
simplicity, that thou would voutchsafe to bestow upon me those virtues, and
all other of the like kind. That hence forth by the assistance of thy grace, I
may, in all my thoughts, words and works, be truly.

Wise, being united and conjoined to thee, by a disinterressed understanding,
and will.

Piously fearful, keeping an inward and outward watch over my self, least I
might offend thee.

Discreet, making choice of virtue which is placed betwixt two extremes.

Simple and internal, dwelling only in thee, and purely seeking thee alone.
And that all my life long, especially in the agony of death, I may find a most
assured Refuge in thy wounded head.

To his heart.
I Give thee thanks most amiable Jesus, for thy infinite love, and for the
sorrows of thy sweetest heart which was run through with a lance, while thy most
sorrowful mother looked on: deposing, resigning, and plunging my whole heart,
into that fountain of all bless, as also all my sins and transgressions;
especially.

All private and vicious love to created things, of what kind soever, and the
abuse and neglect of thy sacraments and benefits bestowed upon me.

Diffidence, infidelity and error.

Timerousnesse, pusillanimity, and despair.

My carelessness and inconstancy in the things which belong to my state and
calling, and all vice leading thereunto, to be abolished and expiated in thy
precious blood And I beseech thee by that charity, faith, hope, and un
speakeable constancy of thine, be pleased to grant me a share in those and
such other virtues, that henceforth by thy grace, I may be in all my thoughts,
words, and works, truly.

Fervent, still breathing after thee, and loving thee alone with all my
strength.

Full of faith and hope, wholly relying upon thee, as well in prosperity as
adversity.

Constant, aymeing at nothing else by all my earnest endeavors, but my
advancement in virtue.

And that all my life long, but especially at the hour of my death, this
sacred wound, may be my assured Refuge.

To his right hand.
I Give thee thanks, my most just Jesus, for the incomprehensible love and
doulour, which thou did express and suffer by the wound of thy most holy
right hand, casting my self wholly into it, togeither with all my sins and
transgressions, especially.

All my injustice to thee, and thy creatures.

Biternesse of heart, displeasure and envy.

Falsehood, lying and hypocrisy.

Ingratitude to thee for all thy benefits, to thend that all may be abolished
and expiated in thy most precious blood, and beseech thee by thy ineffable
justice, mercy, truth, and gratitude, to please to indue me with these, and
such other virtues: that hence forth by thy grace I may be in all my thoughts,
words and works, truly.

Just, giving every one what is due to them. Merciful, wishing and doing good
to all creatures.

Zealous of thy honor with purity of intention, conforming my self in all
things to thee.

Grateful, rendering daily thanks to thee, and all my benefactours.

And that all my life long, but especially at the dreadful hour of my death,
I may find and assured Refuge in these sacred wounds.

To his left hand.
I Give thee thanks, most strong Jesus; for thy incomprehensible love, and for
the pains of thy left hand, casting my self wholly into it, togeither with all
my offenses, especially.

All my slothfulness, and mispending of time. All impuritie of body and
soul. All intemperance in meat drink and clothes. All covetousness,
unlawful desires and the like: to be abolished and expiated in thy precious
blood. And beseech thee, by thy ineffable power, purity, temperance, and
poverty, to grant me those and such other virtues: that hence forth, by thy
grace, I may be in all my thoughts, words, and works, truly strong, and
diligent etc. Chaste, conseruing my senses, and soul in all purity. Sober,
seeking only necessaries. Poor in means, and mind, wholly relying upon thee.

And that all my life long, but especially at the hour of my death, I may have
my certain refuge in this wound. Amen.

A CONTEMPLATION or Meditation for Good friday.
1. HAVING with what recollection, quiet of mind, and compassion you possibly
can, placed before your eyes three crucified, demand who they are that suffer
in such ignominious wise, especially that one in the midst, who seems to be
the capital criminal: Ask St. John, and he will tell you, that it is the Son
of God, Sic Deus dilexit mundum, vt filium suum vnigenitum daret: St. Paul,
vsque ad mortem, mortem autem Crucis. David, Isaias and other Prophets,
foretold this truth. Ask his mournful mother, Marie, and (if she can speak
for grief) she will mournefully answer you, that alas yes, it is even her
dear son, Jesus, God and man. S. Marie Mag. will tell you the same sadd
truth, that alas I, it is her sweet, and best beloved Rabboni, her dearest
Master, Christ Jesus. Ask the rocks and stones, and in their language they
will answer you; that its the author of nature their Maker and Master, the
very Author of all being and life. Ask the Sun, and it will straight
withdraw it is light, testifying that the true Sun is setting and dyeing to
this world. Nay ask the Jews, and (notwithstanding their endless malice)
even by them you may inform your self of the truth; for look up and you may
read their inscription; JESUS, N. R. I. ask who these two are which hangs by
him, and every one will answer you, they are two thieves.

2. Thieves alas! and together with Jesus, what connection? what to do has
light with darkness? iniquity with justice? ah is it not true? quod cum
iniquis reputatus est. That Jesus our savior is reputed among the wicked,
heavens stand amazed at this strange doom! O my soul loose thy self in
astonishement, in contemplation of the wordls perverse and madd judgment, and
learn to contemn it, since here thou see even innocence it self tainted
with the imputation of wickedness; and after this never find it strange, if
thy resolution be to follow thy Master Christ, to have thy best actions
misconstrued to thy disadvantage and disgrace:

3. JESUS NAZARENVS. This is the testimony of that enemy of his, Pilate, who
delivered him over to this disgrace. And if Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus the son
of Marie; that innocent lamb which was borne in Bethelem stable. who came to
take away the inquities and sins of the world; who had even there his Gloria
sung by the quires of Angels from heaven, in testimony that he was true God:
that word which was in the beginning with God: and was even God himself. In
the beginning, which had no beginning; before time yet began to be, from all
eternity. And yet behold now in time, what monsters time brings forth. He is
reputed, among the wicked.

4. In eternity he esteems it no stealth to be equal with God. In eternity
he is one of those three holy persons, who are equally one God. And in time he
is in a coniu^cture with, and is judged, the chief of the three, wher-of two
confessedly suffer the punishments due to their crimes.

5. JESUS NAZARENVS: If Jesus of Nazareth, let Nazareth, which knows him, give
testimony of him, Nazareth where he was virginally conceived of a poor,
innocent, unspotted, mild Virgin. Nazareth, where he was innocently brought
up and conuersed amongst the inhabitants. For the space of 24. years.
Nazareth, where he appeared a man approved by God, by miracles and wonders, and
signs, which God wrought by him in the midst of it. Let Nazareth speak. Was
he ever found faulty in word or deed? Nay was he not ever found innocent,
unspotted, segregated or separated from sinners? was he not ever found doing
the work of his heavenly Father, solidly and publikly preaching the truth,
exalting virtue, reprehending and subduing vice, and utterly destroying the
kingdom of satan? curing the sick, raising the dead to life, restoring sight
to the blind, making the lame walk, and the deaf hear? And yet it is thought
good to the Jewish blindness, and malice, to repute and place him amongst the
wicked.

6. Pilate, who judged him, and in judging him condemned himself, pronounced
openly that he found no cause of death in him, and left him a testimony of a
just man; And yet he is reputed among the wicked.

7. Ah barbarous, blind, unnatural, and wicked Jew! whilst thou art
contriuing his death by iarring, treacherous, and bought testimonies at
Jerusalem (his native soil, to which he was sent, which he so much loved,
that by tears spent upon it, he expressed the same) Rome, upon a bare relation
sent from hence, is admiring his life. Whilst thou, ungrateful Synagogue,
buyest his blood with bribes, and unjustly placest him amidst two notorious
Criminalls: the Senate is co^sulting to place him amongst the Gods.

8. Ah king of heaven* how becam'st thou an exile in this our veil of tears?
for love. What did inuest thee in our clayie garments, or rather rags? love.
But tell me thou beatie of Angels, how becamest thou so deformed? For love.
What lanced these sacred temples? Love. How became that celestial face,
heavens joy, so gauled and goarie? For love: Ah my heart, what wounded these
hands and feet, which never walked in the ways of sinners? Love. Thou
adornest the field with a verdant green, thou deckest the tree with her fresh
leaves and sweet blossoms; the birds thou couerest with their comely feathers,
and the most contemptible beast with their skins, and how becamest thou then
so without all cover or ornament? For love. Ah my crucified love! how much thou
have oblidged me to love thee! Ah Love! even for this love, inflame my cold
heart with this love. Da mihi te amare quantum volo, and quantum debeo.

9. REX IVDAEORVM. Rex? A King? true; the King of heaven; the King of Angels;
the King of Men; the King of all things; Omnis enim potestas ei data est in
coelo and in terra. For all power was given him in heaven and in earth. But
alas, if a King, how so environed with misery and anguish? how so destitute of
friends and attendants? how so bereaved of all comfort and consolation? how so
deprived of all things that might appease grief, and accompayned with all
things that might augment sorrow? If a King, and the King of heaven, where are
the orders of Cherubines and Seraphins? the rancks of Archangells, Angels?
those Principalities, Powers, Dominations, those mill millium ministrantium
ei, and decies centena millia assistentium ei?

10. Rex Iudaeorum. If a King, where are his Nobles, his favorites, his
Guard-Royall, his Palace, his Chamber of Presence, his Purple, his Gemmes? If
a King, at least why does he not appear a Man? Neque enim species illi est,
neque decor. For he neither has beauty nor comeliness. A Crown he bears
indeed, but that does so augment his pain, as that it does not any way, in
appearance, add to his Regal honor; And was love yet cause of all this? yes,
yes, Sic Deus dilexit mundum, etc. So God loved the world, that he delivered
his own only son. But alas, has Love made this King so prodigal, and
prodigality so poor, that he has nothing left him; nothing to bestow upon a
poor suppliant? ah yes, my soul, yes, there is yet enough left, let us runn
and beg; for behold, his holy arms, are wide open lovingly to embrace us,
and receive us into his favor; o dear sweet imbracements! o how willingly
could I live and dye here? O inueni quem diligit anima mea, inueni nec
dimittam, I have found him whom my heart loves; I have found him, nor will I
let him go. Behold, his head hung down, to bestow upon us that sweet osculum
pacis, that kiss of peace, that gracious favor, which the Spouse cried so out
for: osculetur me, osculo oris sui: let him kiss me with a kiss of his mouth.
See the four sacred fountains of Paradise, stream out Rivers of inestimable
worth, from his wounded hands and feet; every drop whereof, being of more
value then all heaven and earth; and in these Rivers, are we (o my Soul)
permitted to bathe, cure, eternise ourselves. O Sacred fountains! o Ambrosian
springs! dulciora super mel and fauum! sweeter then honey, and the honey comb.
He has a tongue, which in the beginning; said; fiat, be it made; and the whole
Machine of the Universe, was presently raised out of nothing, and with which be
can still say, N. Salus tua ego sum: I am thy Salvation; vel, hodie mecum eris
in Paradiso, or, this day, thou shall be with me in Paradise. And what heart
can wish a richer treasure? a more wishfull, and blissful present? He has
yet a tongue, but it too must not pass without it is torment; For they mix
gale amongst his food, and in his thirst, they present vinegar to drink. He
has yet a tongue entire, and that too must be employed, even amidst his
greatest torments, to plead man's pardon, and reconcilement: Father pardonne
them, for they know not what they do. O miracle of mildness and mercy! The
persecuted becomes the persecutours Advocate, even in the act of persecuting
him The dying Lord, turns his dead, and dying slaves Patron, even while he is
bloodily striking at his heart, Father, He makes his address to him, not so
much in quality of God, whom he knows to be actually provoked to revenge, as
of Father, whose bowels are all mercy, for his prodigal children. Father:
what confidence may not poor sinners conceive, when a father, and such a
father; is sued to, by a son, and such a son? Father, I beg not revenge
for what I suffer, but pardon for those, for whom, and by whom, I suffer:
Father pardonne them: I sue not that the world should be judged for me, but
that it might be cleared and saved by me. Father pardon them I do not plead
not Guilty where I know sin is great, and spread universally over the whole
body of man, and grown to a kind of infinity: but I am his Salvation, and the
price of my blood, which here I lay down is infinite indeed; let grace then,
through my merits, superabound, where sin abounded. Father pardonne them.
It Is pardon I demand, and even in that name, the crime is acknowledged. I
cannot excuse Pilates injustice (which is so much more cryminal, by how much
his own conscience pleades guilty against himself for condemning a person in
whom he found noe guilte) nor the Priests and Princes inueterate malice; nor
the soldiers cruelty; nor the peoples false testimonies, scorns, and
blasphemy. But by how much their crimes are more clear, there pardon is more
necessarily petitioned for: by how much their misery is more desparatly great,
by so much thy great mercy is more absolutely to be implored; have mercy therefore
upon them according to thy great mercy, and pardon them. Pardon them, I say
heavenly Father, for they know not what they do. The penal ignorance which
runs all along through their actions, though it excuses not, yet it much
extenuates their transgression. They know not, they apprehend not, that they
arm their malice against that infinite charity, which flames up so high
amidst the same malice, that all the floodes of their fury is not able to
extinguish it. They know indeed that they putt an innocent man to death, but
they know not that they Crucify the God of glory. It Is enough, my dearest
Lord, thou have powerfully pleaded and wunne poor man's cause, which without
thy plea, and thy price, was irrecouerably lost for ever. Thou art heard for
thine own reverence; and millions shall be given to thy prayers and merits.

11. But ah my soul! is it not true that as this lesson brings comfort to all
Christian hearts, so it loades them with confusion, and fixes shame upon their
foreheades. He couers, in some sort, the Jews crimes and confusion with a plea
of ignorance: for had they had an absolute knowledge, of what they did, and to
whom, they had never crucified the Lord of glory. But we seeing and knowing
by the light of faith (which is a more absolute assurance then any
demonstration, then all humane knowledge can afford) and being bound, and
standing ready in the preparation of our heart to putt down our life for it,
that it was God and man, the very God of glory that they putt to death, we, I
say, make noe difficulty to crucify him again by our daily crimes; to tread
the son of God under foot, and to esteem the blood of the Testament
polluted.

12. We acknowledge that we are taught by the mouth of eternal truth it self
(unless we have renounced all Christianity) and we even see it in his own
example, that we are to return Good, for evil, and we contrarily, render
evil for good: hatred for love, disrespect for good offices; neglect forcares;
ingratitude for greatest obligations. We have seen our Christ, sadd to death,
betrayed, taken, bound, abused, reviled, scorned, boxed, spitt in the face,
whipped, crowned with thorns, blaspheamed, crucified: and we hear him from
the same Cross preach, plead, pray for pardon. And yet we Christians, alas!
who as we take our name from Christ, so should his actions be the rules of our
life, and our conformity to the same rules, the perfection thereof, living as
it were, by the law of contraries, run quite contre. The Master cries for
pardon: the scholar exacts revenge. The masters wisdom and charity finds
ways to cover multitudes of enormious crimes: and the scholars iniquity and
madness, inuents means to make Molehills appear montaines, and to multiply
a few small faults into huge numbers. The master, by a Rethorique brought from
Heaven endeavors to extenuate a visible injury by alleging ignorance, which
though otherwise afected, did in some sort lessen the crime. The scholar by a
Sophistry invented in Hell, strives to aggrauate, even almost invisible
faults, from the place in which it was done, the time, the manner etc. And if
none of these seem vigorous enough, he guesses at the intention of him that
did it, and will needs have it to be such as his Passion has framed it in his
mind. In fine the scholar has neither heart, nor hand, nor tongue, to plead
excuse, to work, or wish well too, even a seeming enemy, though otherwise a
true friend indeed; He will not take the pains to consider, that the
misintelligence was but caused, at most, by ignorance, inconsideration,
precipitation; and to take it at the highest, that it was but man, sinful man,
man subject to all the same deseases, that rather took, then had offense given
him. While the Master neither having hand nor foot free, but only a hartfull
of mercy, and a tongue free and ready to express the same, imployes it to
beg pardon for those wretches which ignominiously murder a God, saying:
Father pardon them, for they know not what they do.

13. Ah my dearest Savior, imploye that divine tongue too, while yet it can
speak, to say to my languishing soul (which truly wishes to love thee) salus
tua ego sum; I am thy Salvation: but say it so that I may hear thee. In fine
let our thoughts return to our dying Master upon the Cross, and behold him
giving himself still over to more and more sufferance for our sake. Or rather
lets hear him (since to strike through deaf ears) he cries out voce magna
with a loud voice, in terms so to the life expressing the extremity of
desolation, that the due consideration thereof, were able to burst, and break
down even a heart of flinte. Deus meus, Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me.

14. Heavenly father look down from thy sublime sanctuary upon thy most
innocent son. It is he, of whom thou gave testimony from Heaven, saying:
Thou art my son, this day I begott thee. It is he, in whom thou have declared
thou art entirely pleased. And yet seem thou to have forsaken him? It is
thou that give courage to the weak ones of the world to confound the strong:
whence they do out-braue death. Yea even a weak Dorothie, a tender Agnes (and
the like) in thee, do play with their torments. And yet is it thought good to
thy divine wisdom to leave thy own, only begotten, dearly beloved son
(that son of thy divine heart, Isaac) deuoyd of all solace, exposed to the
very extremities of torments, monefully crying out My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? What excess of torment must we needs conceive that was,
which could draw words of expostulation from the mouth of a most patient,
obedient and pious child? Why have thou forsaken me?

One of thy prime Prophets, who was the pen which putt down thy truth,
assures us, that being grown old, as then he was, he had never yet seen a
just man forsaken: how then do we hear not the just man only, but even
justice it self crying to thee, why have thou forsaken me? Thou have promised
thine ordinary servants, to bear one end of the yoke with them: to be with
them in tribulation; to deliver them; to glorify them. Why then is thine only
son left to tread the wine press alone? Why does he cry out with a loud
voice, in the midst of a huge tribulation, and yet is not heard? Why is he
ingloriously forsaken by Heaven and earth? He is that first of the
Predestined, of whom it was written in the very head of thy book, that he
should do thy will; why will thou then forsake him, in the very act of
performing it? Hosts and oblations and holocausts for sin thou would not,
nor did they indeed please thee, vvher upon thy tender Isaac said, behold I
come, in the body which thou have fitted to me, and he is now actually
sacrificing himself, upon the Altar, which he brought upon his own shoulders,
and now that the Sacrifice is almost accomplished: that the too plentiful
price of man's redemption is almost laid down, is it thought good, to thy
wisdom and justice, to abandonne the poor, innocent, pious Priest in the
midst of the work? To forsake him, I say, while obedient love has nailed him
so fast, that he has neither hand to defend himself, nor feet to fly. And
thou the while, o praise of Israel, sit safe in thy sanctuary. Whilst he,
a man of dolours, a worm and not a man, is exposed to such jewish cruelty,
that extremity forces, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, from his
sacred mouth. These are the words, says blessed S. Augustine which come from
one solicitous for us, in the midst of his tribulations, and they are words
indeed of tenderness and sorrow: of bitterness and anguish.

16. Ah did we but devoutly and heartily consider with what sense of grief,
with how deep a sighing, and sobbing; with how profound a sorrow; with how
bitter a moning and lamentation, these words burst out their passage through
the lips of our Savior Jesus; had we even hearts of iron, we should be
mollifyed by compunction; hearts of flint, we should be burst in pieces by
compassion; of wood, we should be inclined by reciprocal love; of brass, we
should be melted away by contemplation. And yet the eternal, the
all-powerfull, the all-iust, the all-merciful Father, sitts safe in his high
and sure Sanctuary, and seems deaf to his cries, forgetful of him, forsakes
him. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

17. He murmurs, nor mutters not at his torments; he counts not up the
multitude of the indignities heaped upon him, he makes noe mention of his being
derided like a most vile creature, of his being branded with the imputation of
a Blasphemour, a malefactor, a seducer of the people. He is not touched with
being esteemed, and treated like a very sott; of having a most seditious rogue
preferred before him; of being condemned to a most ignominious death; of being
placed as the ringleader of the thieves; of being mocked and blaspheamed upon
the Cross, by words, by nodds, by signs: as, this is he, forsooth, who
destroys the temple, and within three days space builds it up again. If thou
be the son of God, come down from the Cross, He saues others, let him
save himself. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the
Cross, and we believe him. All this he passes over in silence, he complains
not, he mutters not. Marry when amidst all these, he finds himself forsaken
by his heavenly Father: by a Father most loving, most powerful, and left as a
mere stranger: as one dead to the world: in the very hight of his torments,
this seems to strike home to the heart of a God: and he labors crying, and his
jaws are dried up.

18. O what rock of a heart would not this splitt, to hear a God complain,
that God has forsaken him. My God, my God why have thou forsaken me?

19. But ah my dearest Lord, thou neither art nor can be forsaken by God,
thou who art very God himelfe. Who sees thee sees the father: he never
forsakes thy company, since thou art in him, and he in thee. Both your power,
is equally one and the same omnipotency; thou can now, as ever, call down
twelve legions of Angels to thy succor, and destroy these unmerciful
Deicides who murder thee. Thy heavenly father then forsakes thee not, he only
withdrawes his protection for a time, but never leaves his union, never
slackens his love and dearnesse, since that increated love the Holy Ghost, is
the inseparable band, by which thou art lincked to him, and he to thee; and by
which thou love him and he thee, eternally. He only stopps the springtydes
of supernall consolations, which would other wise over flowingly possess thy
heart with beatitude, leaving humane nature amidst those storms of persecution
and rage, to tugge for it, and tide it out:

20. Nay, my dear crucified Love, thou art, indeed, smitten by him for the
sins of his people, but thou art not forsaken we have thine own word for it.
He that sent me is with me, and has not forsaken me. He will within a short
space, deliver thee and glorify thee. Were thou forsaken by him, thou were
forsaken by thy self too, since thou art one and the same God with him, and
all your outward actions are common. Thou have power to lay down thy life,
and to resume it, at thy pleasure. Thou art thus treated, and sacryficed,
because thou thy self would: Ah, says that loving servant of thine S.
Augustine, who is he who so easily sleeps when he would, as Jesus dyed when he
would? who is he that with so much facility putts off his garment when he
would, as thou put off thy garment of flesh when thou would:

21. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, was noe complainte then, but a
voice of the humanity, which yet was never separated from the Divinity, which
broke out from the excess of his anguish. Noe repining against his heavenly
father, but a lesson and reproach to us, my soul, who see and hear these
abismall excesses, with dry eyes, as not concerned, whereas indeed the whole
concernement is ours, who had been abandonned for ever, had not our dear Lord
for our love, for the love of lost man, dayned to be thus abandonned.

22. A strange lesson, making an absolute demonstration of the haynousnesse of
sin, which can never be better known, then by the inestimable greatness of
the price; and the ineffable strangenes of this abandonnement. But a shameful
reproach, if after the due consideration of this, we live in league with sin;
and thereby crucify again our crucified Love.

23. A lesson pronunced with a loud voice, to strike through man's huge
deafness, to rouse up his ingratitude and insensibilitie. But a reproach if
he remain still deaf to so divine instructions, ungrateful for such heavenly
benefits; senseless of such prodigious torments of a God.

24. A lesson speaking a greater measure of sufferance, and consequently a
greater excess of love, then ever the thoughts of men or Angels were able to
reach too, so that if the rest of his benefits of his Nativity etc. putt a
great weight upon Christian hearts, and press them to love, this seems not so
much a great weight as even an intolerable and insupportable burden, and does
not so much press us to love, as even oppress and bear us to it by a dearly
sweet force. For here indeed God the Father putts the greatest commendation
upon his charity, that even omnipotency, it self was able to putt. While
that Saint of Saints (to whom Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, is sung in his
Kingdom) is abandoned in this direful soil to the excess of torments, and
left dying for a sinner. While he spares not his own only son, but delivers
him up for an ungrateful, ungracious, sinful servant. while finally God is
exposed and left to be murdered by, and for, miserable man. But a most
confounding reproach, if at this moment, we make not strong resolutions, to
deteste and forsake for ever, that tyrannical Monster sin, which putt our
Lord and Master, our best Benefactour, our dearest spouse, to such excess of
torments, that they forced from him. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

25. In so much, that he, the fountain of liueing water, is exhaust, and waxen
dry, and he cries out sitio; think in this you hear him say, it was I that
created the sea, fountains, and all other moistures; it is I that rule the
clouds, and power down rain in due seaon*: It Is I that offered the Nectarian
cupps of eternal beatitude to Angels and Saints; and yet behold, for your
sake, have I not a drop of cold water to cool my exceeding heat. But ask
him and peradventure he will tell you, that his thirst is after another thing, to
wit, Man's redemption; for his meat and drink was to have his fathers will
performed, which was Man's Salvation. Or else, he thirsts after more suffera^ce,
sitio, that is: notwithstanding these horrible pains and desolations, which
you have seen me endure; notwithstanding that the blood of my body is quite
exhaust, yet remains the desire I have to suffer for Man, insatiate and ready
to embrace a thousand deaths.

26. O love which always burnest, and art never extinguished, burn my heart,
burn it wholly, that it may live only for thee, and love only thee, and for
thee. And we my poor soul, have we nothing to offer to our love, our spouse,
in this his extreamitie; have we nothing that may help to quench his thirst?
o yes, his drink, is his heavenly fathers will, and his fathers will is,
whatsoever good we do, or suffer, whether it be a devout thought, a sigh, a
tear, spent in the consideration of this B. Passion; or it is a taunt, a
scorn, an infirmity, a temptation, a reprehension, an affliction corporal or
spiritual, tolerated for his love; or it is a fast, a prayer, a vigill, a
mortification, an act of obedience, a work of Charity, or the like, offered
up in his honor: all this is an agreeable cup unto him; all this does quench
his thirst: and can we be so merciless and unkind, as to offer none of these?
or shall we peradventure be so inhumane and cruel, as to present him with the
contrary, as the barbarous Jews do, with vinegar and gaul? for alas! this
was all the consolation offered him in his exceeding anguish.

27. O vos omnes qui transitis viam, dicite si est dolor sicut dolor meus, o
all you that pass by, say whether there be any grief, like my grief. Dolor,
from all sorts of men, Jews and Gentiles, friends and foes, by my Apostles
absence, and my Mothers presence. Dolor, in my fame, honor, and glory? Dolor,
in Body, and Soul; in every part, in every sense; a planta pedis, vsque ad
verticem capitis; non est sanitas in me. And yet after all this, being
thristie, gaul and vinegar, are administered. Popule stulte, and insipiens
haeccine reddis Domino Deo tuo, o foolish, and brainsicke people! is this the
return which thou make to the Lord thy God? What have I done to thee, or
what fault have I committed, that thou art so cruel toward me? tell me, is
this a fit exchange, for all the benefitts I have done thee? I delivered thee
safely out of Egypt; I caused the sea make way to thy dry passage; I
prostrated thine Enemies; I fedd thee in the Desert with that heavenly food
Manna; I have taken thy nature upon me, and have peaceably co^uersed amongst
you 33. years, haueing left, as it were, for your love, my heavenly Reign;
and is a cup of vinegar and gaul the best present you can find in your hearts
to bestow upon me at my departure? Popule stulte and insipiens haeccine reddis
Domino Deo tuo?

28. Ah! do not so my soul, do not so, but rather wholly offer thy self,
such as thou art, to him; for verily he has offered himself wholly for thee:
and inuit earnestly all creatures to praise him: Laudate Dominum omnes gentes,
laudate cum omnes populi, quoniam (in this act of vnparralled love and mercy)
confirmata est super nos misericordia eius: at least run to him and crave
pardon, his fatherly bowels are easily won to compassion; his loving and
royal heart cannot deny a bowne, we have a good proof of it; for even the
thief his doubtful demand is accorded; and he has already heard, mecum eris
in Paradiso, A great grace and consolation for poor sinners! Demand his
benediction before he go, least we may be after forced to complain with that
faithful Soul, heu mihi Domine, heu animae mea! recessisti consolator animae
meae, nec valedixisti, ingrediens vias tuas benedix^sti tuis, nec affui. Woe is
me! woe is my soul, thou did depart, o thou comfortour of my soul, without
bidding me farewell, and taking thy journey thou gave thy blessing to thy
friends, and I, alas, was not present.

29, And alas! he cannot long now endure, for infinite torment possesses at
once every sense and member; see how the weight of his torn and weary body
vnioynts his arms and shoulders, riueing the holes of his hands and feet, and
hark he cries out, Consummatum est. Heavenly Father the work is done for
which I was sent, my commission is accomplished, my Mission is ended. The
predictions of the Prophets are verified, the types and figures and Sacryfices
of the old law are abolished, the miracles and wonders wrought, the cures
finished, the debt of all mankind well nigh discharged, and an eternal league
made betwxit Heaven and earth, in mine own blood, Consummatum est.

30. Yes eternal Father for what could I have done for my vineyard which I
have not done? I have manifested thy name and truth unto it. I have taught thy
people by word and example, seconded and confirmed by wonders and prodigies. I
have waded through whole seas of indignities, contumelies, and contempts, and a
storm of torments have almost wracked me. There is not one member of my body
left entire: the whole stock of my blood is spent; the conduites wherein it
ran, my veins, are dried up, and my heart, the source is quite drayned, my
jaws are horce with crying, and scarce now is there so much breath left in my
body, as to give thee this short account of my self and my Embasie; in saying
Consummatum est, and so deliver up my soul or life into thy holy hands.

31. Ah my soul, my soul! what have we seen and heard? and what do we now
hear? The soul of thy Savior is ready to be given up for thy sins.
Whither, whither has thy misery and malice, togeither with his mercy and
charity lead thy Lord and thee? Thy malice has run with a stiff neck into a
land of huge disproportion: and his mercy hangs upon the Cross with a humbled
head bowed down to receive thee home with a kiss of peace. Thy malice has
run thee out of breath in sinning: and his mercy in suffering. Thy malice wholly
spends its thoughts upon rebellion against God, and selfe-affliction: and his
mercy upon thoughts of peace and reconcilement. Thy malice imployes its words
in provoking Gods wroth; and his mercy is exercised in petitioning thy Pardon.
Thy malice prodigally powers out the last farding of thy substance, to loose
thy self: and his Mercy more prodigally the last drop of the blood of a God
to save thee.

32. Yes, yes, my soul, it was not thought enough to thy Christ, for thy love,
to have taken thy nature upon him, to have been borne in a stable, laid in a
manger, in humility, abiection and poverty, to have conuersed 33. years
among men, as one of them, in labors from his youth, to have preached and
practiced all sorts of virtues, to have sweat blood, to have been betrayed,
taken, bound, scourged, crowned, calumniated, condemned to a most shameful
death, nailed to a most infamous Cross. But he would also stay there till the
consummation of all, to the last drop of his precious blood, to the last
breath of his body, till he had yielded up his Ghost into his heavenly fathers
hands.

33. Nor is it enough for us Christians to begin well, to run prosperously for
a time, to live in humility, poverty, and abiection, to watch, to fast, to
pray, to practice religious discipline. It is to final perseverance salvation
is promised. It is to the co^summation or end of the work the crown is given.
Looking then upon the Author of our faith, and consummatour, Jesus, be as
prompt to suffer with him, as to adore him, and pray to him. Be still as ready
for the ignominy of Caluarie, as the glory of Thabot. Prefixe noe end to our
labors, caluminies, contradictions, temptations etc. but that of our life.
Prescribe noe limit, to what ever abiection, torment, abandonement, etc. Gods
wise providence, and good pleasure may permit to fall upon us, but constantly
remain in the midst of them, nailed to our Cross with Christ; dying with him,
to the world, to worldly respects, to self interests, to our selves; with him,
I say, who is even a dying: for we have heard Consummatum est.

34. And hark now we hear In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum: into
thy hands, o Lord, I commend my spirit. Ay me! Ay me! my dearest spouse, my
Love, my life, my God is dead! Yes, my soul, he is dead! noe longer can his
weak neck sustain his sacred head. As we have followed him living, and
looked upon him dying, so let us now, for a sad farewell, take our last view of
our dead Lord, who was slaughtered for our love. Alas! he is wholly deformed,
there is neither beauty nor comeliness left, in that Fairest, far beyond the
sons of men. A ghastly palenesse has seized upon his glorious face, whilome
the Angels joy! Wounds, gauls, goarie blood, wholly cover his Virginal body.
All whiteness is fledd from that white Lilie of the vnderualleys, and totus
rubicundus est dilectus meus, and my Beloved is all redd. Be all honor, and
glory, and benediction, and thanksgiving, to that tender Lamb who was
slain for love.

Amen.
AN OBLATION OF the life and Passion of our Savior, for the remission of sin.
O Sweet Jesus, I have, alas, all the days of my life offended thee, and have
been incessantly ungrateful unto thee my dearest Creator, and Redeemour. I
have mangled thy gifts not preserving them entire, nor making a right use of
them, but have hindered thy grace, and still added new faults to the old.
Verily my offenses are exceeding great and many, but yet thy mercy is
infinitlie greater, and without all limite. I confess I am utterly unworthy to
be called thy son, I cannot howeuer but acknowledge thee to be my Father, as
thou truly art, and in thee is all my confidence. Thou art the drainlesse
fountain of mercies, who do not repulse, but wash those stained souls who
fly to thee. Behold, o my dearest refuge, behold, I the very scumme of all
thy creatures approach unto thee, bringing nothing along with me but the heavy
load of my sins, lowly laid at the feet of thy piety, I humbly implore thy
mercy. Pardon me I beseech thee, o my surest hope, and for thy names sake save
me, who believe that noe crimes are so great and enormious, that by the merits
of thy most holy Passion, may not be forgiven.

O sweet Jesus, I offer unto thee, for remission of all my sins, that
admirable charity of thine, which made thee not disdaigne, being the God of
eternal Majesty, to become man: and for the space of more then thirty years
to be molested with many labors, calamities and persecutions. I offer up that
heaviness, that bloody sweat, those hard exigents which afflicted thee in
the garden, when thou prayedst to thy heavenly Father with Knees bowed down to
the ground. I offer that excessive desire of suffering, wherewith thou did
burn when thou wentest voluntarily out to be apprehended by thine enemies. I
offer thy bonds, stripes, contumelies, blasphemies, blows, spittings, and
diverse other kinds of injuries, which thou did suffer all the night long,
in the house of Annas, and Cayphas. All this I offer up to thee, rendering thee
hearty thanks, and humbly beseeching that infinite bounty of thine, and
boundless piety, that by thy merits, thou would fully purify my soul,
render it aggreeable to thee, and conduct it to life everlasting.

O sweet Jesus, I offer up unto thee for all my sins, the unheard of
ignominy which thou did suffer, when being stricken, spitt upon, and bound,
thou were ledd to Pilate, in the morning from Pilate to Herod, and from thence
to Pilate again. I offer that sacred silence of thine, which made thee humbly
hold thy peace at those contumelies and injuries which were offered thee. I
offerre the contempt thou sufferedst when Herod opprobriously scorned thee in
a ridiculous garment. I offer that most cruel pain which thou sufferedst when
they barbarously scourged thee being bound to a Pillar. I offer thee the goarie
marks of thy scourging, and the streams of blood which run down from all thy
sacred members All this I offer thee in thanksgiving, beseeching that immense
piety of thine, that by the merits of these thou would fully purify my
soul, render it pleasing to thee, and conduct it to life everlasting.

O sweet Jesus, I offer unto thee for all my sins, that humility and
patience which thou did show, when clothed in a purple garment, for thy
greater scorn, thou were crowned with thorns and saluted in a scoffing
manner, impiously spitt upon, smitten with a reed etc. and buffeted. Brought
out before the Tribunal, injuriously condemned, and last of all haled out to
Mount Caluarie, bearing thine own Cross upon thy shoulders. I offer that
greiuous toil of thy sacred body, the many weary stepps of thy holy feet,
and the heavy weight upon thy shoulders. I offer thy sweat, thy thirst, and
all the rest of thy torments, which with a most meek and ready heart thou
sufferedst for my sake. All this I offer thee, beseechinge that immense
clemency of thine; that by the merits thereof thou would fully purify my
soul, render it pleasing to thee, and conduct it to life everlasting.

O sweet Jesus, I offer unto thee for all my sins, those most horrible pains
thou sufferedst, when thy wounds were renewed, by plucking off thy garments;
when thy hands and feet were fastened to the Cross; when the joints of thy
body were all dissolved; when thy precious blood came gushing out, as from so
many fountains. I offer these rosy dropps of thy precious blood, that in
effable meekness and benignity, whereby thou did patiently suffer the
intolerable insolences of those who insulted over thee, even whilst thou did
pray for them to thy heavenly Father. All this I offer thee beseeching that
immense piety of thine, that by the merit thereof thou would fully purify
my soul, render it pleasing to thee, and conduct it to life everlasting.

O sweet Jesus, I offer unto thee for all my sins, vanities, negligences, and
distractions, those incomprehensible torments which thou sufferedstw, when
being exposed to such anguishe, destitute of all consolation, thou did hang
in a miserable manner on the Cross betwixt two thieves; and when burninge with
excessive thirst, they gave thee noe thing but vinegar and gale to drink. I
offer that exceeding charity, and gracious mercy, with which inclyninge thy
venerable head, thou rendredst up the Ghost. I offer that saueing blood and
water which flowed from thy pierced side. All this I offer thee; beseeching
that immense clemency of thine, that by the merit thereof thou would fully
purify my soul, render it pleasing to thee and conduct it to life
everlasting.

O sweet Jesus, for the perfect remission of all my offenses, which in all my
life time I have in any wise committed I offer unto thee the whole work of
man's redemption performed by thee. I offer thy Incarnation, thy birth,
conversation, death and Passion. I offer what ever else may have been grateful
to thee at any time, in thy most glorious Mother the Blessed Virgin Marie, and
in those other Saints of thine. O most sweet Jesus I beseech thee, may thine
innocence fully satisfy thy Father for my guiltiness. Shroud in the purest
syndon of thy merits, all my too unworthy, and sinful life; that what is
unclean in me by being conjoined to them, and what is imperfect by being
united to them, may be perfected; that so during this life I may be pleasing to
thee, and hauing-finished the course of this miserable pilgrimage I may
presently arrive home to thee, who art eternal salvation, to glorify thy B.
Name for ever. Amen.

VIVE JESUS A IAMAIS. Dilectus meus mihi and ego illi. Amen.
Jesuit seal IHS



