THE Innocent Mistress.

A COMEDY.

As it was ACTED, by His MAJESTY's Servants AT THE THEATER in
Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mrs. Mary Pix.

LONDON, Printed by J. Orme, for R. Basset, at the Miter within Temple Bar, and
F. Cogan in the Inner-Templelane. 1697.

Names Represented.
Mr. Betterton. Sir Charles Beauclair, first a Younger Brother, married by his
Friends, to a Rich ill-favored Widow, afterward Master of a great Estate, and
in Love with Bellinda. Mr. Verbruggen. Sir Francis Wildlove, his Friend. Mr.
Knap. Searchwell his Man. Mr. Hodgson. Beaumont an honest Country Gentleman,
Friend to Sir Francis: and Lover of Arabella. Mr. Bowman. Spendall a Sharper;
and hanger on to Sir Charles. Mr. Freeman. Lywell, a Rake, Companion to
Spendal. Mr. Bowen Cheatall, a very foolish Fellow; Brother to the Lady
Beauclair. Mr. Harris. Gentil, his Man; an Ingenious Fellow. Mr. Underhill. Mr.
Flywife, alias Allen, a Merchant.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Barry. Bellinda, alias Mariamne, Daughter to the Lord Belmour. Mrs.
Bracegird. Mrs. Beauclair, Niece to Sir Charles. Mrs. Prince. Arabella, a young
Lady, left to the Care of Cheatall's Father. Mrs. Lee. Lady Beauclair, an ill
bred Woman. Mrs. Howard. Peggy, her Daughter, of the same Stamp. Mrs. Lawson.
Eugenia, the Lady Beauclair's Woman. Mrs. Betty, Woman to Bellinda. Mrs. Du
Qua. Dresswell, Woman to Mrs. Beauclair. Mrs. Lassel. Mrs. Flywife, kept by
Flywife, and going by his Name. Mrs. Willis. Jenny, her Maid. Drawers and
Servants.
PROLOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. Verbruggen, Written by Mr. Motteux.
THIS season with what Arts both Houses strive,
By your kind presence, to be kept alive!
W' have still new things, or old ones we revive;
We plot, and strive to bring them first of the Stage,
Like wary Pilot for his Weather-gage.
W' have Every Act, and every week a Play;
Nay, w' have had new ones studied for one Day;
W' have double Duty, and w' have but half Pay.
VV' have scaling Monkies, and w' have dancing Swans,
To match our nimble cap'ring Chairs and Stands:
There Opera's with, and here without Machines:
Here, Scenes well wrought, and there, well painted Scenes;
Castles and Men in the Air, the World l'th' Moon,
Where you, like Swallows fly, but soon you are gone.
W've something every different Taste to hit,
I gad, I think, w' have every thing but Wit;
For w' have full Scenes, and w' have an empty Pit.
Faith, Sirs, we scarce could hope, you here would be
So numerous, though we have a new Comedy.
For there is in Plays, you know, a Reformation
(A thing to which y' have no great inclination)
I fear you will seek some loser Occupation.
From those Lewd Poets all these mischiefs flow;
They, like Drawcansirs, mauled both Friend and Foe.
Would they would been served like their Plays long ago!
All cautious Dons and Matrons hence they scared,
And all this did they do, because they dared.
Yet, that you're hardn'd Sinners they may boast,
The more they lashed you, you seemed tickled most.
But now no Luscious Scenes must lard their Plays:
No Lady now will need to hide her face;
But I Will be hanged if one in the Gallery stays.
To hear ill-natured Truths no more you will sit,
But mortify an inoffensive Wit;
Lord! how still we shall have you in the Pit!
For I dare say, of what m^st pleased our Guests,
Nine parts in Ten were still sheer Bawdy Jests.
Methinks I see some here who seem to say
Gad, e're the Curtain's drawn I Will slip away;
No Bawdy, this cannot be a Women's Play.
Nay, I confess there is Cause enough to doubt,
But, Faith, they say there was a deal cut out,
Then stay and use it gently, some of you,
Since to be maimed you are somewhat subject too.
Spare it, you who for harmless sports declare,
Show that this age a modest Play can bear.
Twice has our Poetess kind usage found;
Change not her Fortune, though she cang'd her Ground,
EPILOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. Scudamore, Written by Mr. Motteux.
SSriblers, like Bullies, sometimes huff the Pit,
Tho their feigned Courage has an Ague Fit;
But oftener, from a sense of their Condition,
An Epilogue resembles a Petition.
Thus they make Mr. Bays his Notion just;
If Thunder cannot save them, Halters must.
Which way to use, I swear, I do not know;
Hussing's too haughty, Cringing is too low.
I Will use the middle way; perhaps 'twill do,
At least, I fancy, it is most liked by you.
Thus then to every Judge of Wit I bow;
(I hope all the Audience think I mean them now).
If so, you will scorn to judge of Woman's Wit;
Though in Wit's Court the worst of Judges sit,
Sure none dare try such puny Causes yet.
Faith, if you're strict, now there is a Reformation,
We Have sworn t'invite the grave part of the Nation;
Rich Sparks with broad-brim-hats and little Bands,
Who Will clap dry Morals till they hurt their Hands;
Nice Dames? who will have their Box as they have their Pew,
And come each Day, but not to ogle you:
No, each side Box shall shine with sweeter Faces;
None but Chains, Gowns and Coi^s shall havetheir Places,
Their Chit-chat News, Stockjobbing, and Law-Causes.
The Middle-Fry shall in the Gall'ry sit,
And humh whatever against Cuckold's Writ.
And City Wives from Lectures throng the Pit:
Their Daughters Fair with Prentice trudge it hither,
And throng as they do Lambeth-Wells this weather.
Then all thus stored, though Money's scarce this Age,
We need not fear to have a Beau-crowded Stage.
So, for new guests we'll change, just as our Beau^
Wear Doyly-Stuff, for want of better Cloths.
ACT I.
Sir Francis Wildlove in his Chamber Dressing. Sir Fran. SEarchwell!


Search. -- Sir.


Sir Fran. Get me some Small Beer, and dash a little Langoone in it; else
'twill go down my burning Stomach ten degrees colder than Ice: I should have
met my old Friend and Collegian Beaumont, who came to Town last night, but Wine
and Women drove it clear out of my Head.


Search. Sir, he is here.


Enter Beaumont. Sir Fran. Welcome dear Friend, I prithee pardon my omission,
faith 'twas business that could not be left to other hands.


Beau. Women I suppose, and that excuse I know a Man of your kidney thinks
almighty.


Sir Fran. Even so well by my Life, I am heartily glad to see you, why thou
have been an age consigned to barren Fields and senceless Groves, or
Conversation stupid and dull as they: How can thou waste thy Youth, happy
Youth, the very Quintessence of Life from London, this dear Epitome of pleasure?


Beau. Because excess of drinking cloys my Stomach, and Impudence in Women
absolutely turns it; then I hate the vanity of Dress and Fluttering, where
eternal Noise and Nonsense reigns; this considered, what should I do here?


Sir Fran. Not much in troth.


Beau. But you, my Friend, run the Career your appetite directs, taste all
those pleasures I despise, you can inform me what humour's most in fashion,
what ruling whim, and how the Ladies are.


Sir Fran. Why faith there is no great alteration, the Money is indeed very much
scarcer, yet what perhaps you will think a wonder, dressing and debauchery
increases; as for the Damsels, three sorts make a Bushel, and will be
uppermost: First, there is your common Jilts will oblige every body.


Beau. These are Monsters sure.


Sir Fran. You may call (...) what you please, but they are very plentiful, I
promise you: The next is your kept Mistress, she is a degree modester, if not
kind to each, appears in her dress like Quality, whilst her ogling eyes, and
too frequent Debauches discovers her the younger Sister only to the first.


Beau. This I should hate for Ingratitude.


Sir Fran. The third is, not a Whore, but a brisk airy, noisy Coquette, that
lives upon treating, one Spark has her to the Play, another to the Park, a
third to Windsor, a fourth to some other place of Diversion; She has not the
heart to grant 'em all favors, for that is their design at the bottom of the
Treats, and they have not the heart to marry her, for that is her design too
Poor Creature. So perhaps a year, or it may be two, the gaudy Butterfly
slutters round the Kingdom, then if a foolish Citt does not take compassion,
sneaks into a Corner, dies an Old Maid, despised and forgotten. The Men that
sit those Ladies are your Rake, your Cully, and your Beaux.


Beau. I hope Sir Fra. Wildlove has more honor than to find a Mistress amongst
such Creatures.


Sir Fran. Gad honest honorable Ned, I must own I have a fling at all,
sometimes I think it worth my while to make a Keeper Jealous, frequently treat
the Coquette, 'till either she grows upon me, or I grow weary of her; then it is
but saying a rude thing, she quarrels, I fly to the next Bottle, and there for
ever drown her remembrance.


Beau. It Is pity that the most noblest Seeds of Nature are most prone to Vice.


Sir Fran. Such another grave Speech would give me a sit of the Colic.


Beau. Well I find it is in vain to tell you my Story, without I have a desire
to be swingingly laughed at.


Sir Fran. Nay, Nay, why so, I Would sacrifice my life to serve my friend.


Beau. To confess the truth, I Am in Love.


Sir Fran. Is that such a wonder why I have been so a thousand times? old boy.


Beau. Ay, but desperately, virtuously!


Sir Fran. There the Case differs, I doubt friend you have applied your self to
a wrong Man.


Beau. Are not you acquainted with Sir Charles Beauclair?


Sir Fran. Yes, intimately.


Beau. Then, in short, his Lady and a Booby Brother of here is have got my
Mistress in their power; she was the Daughter of an Eminent Merchant, one Sir
George Venturewell, who dying left her to the care of my Lady Beauclair's
Father; he proved like most Guardians, a great Knave, forged a Will, which gave
my Arabella nothing, unless she married this two-leg'd thing his Son; some of
her friends contested with 'em, but the Lawyers roguery, through the Guardians
wealth prevailed, and she is again in their possession; the old Fellow is dead,
but the Sister and Brother pretend to manage her.


Sir Fran. Your case is desperate, and I fear Sir Charles can do you but little
service in it.


Beau. Why, he lives with his Wife.


Sir Fran. Yes, modestly, he knows nothing of her concerns, and desires she
should know nothing of his: did you never hear of her Character?


Beau. No.


Sir Fran. She is certainly the most disagreeable of the whol^ Sex, has neither
Sense, Beauty or good Manners; then her humor is so implacable, the hunted her
first Husband into the Indies, where he died, Heaven knows when or how.


Beau. What the Devil made Sir Charles Marry her?


Sir Fr. Even that tempting Devil Interest, she was vastly Rich, he a younger
Brother, since the Estate and Title of his Family is fallen to him, and I dare
swear he would willingly give a Leg or an Arm to be freed from the intolerable
Plague of a Wife, whom no Mortal can please.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Charles Beauclair is coming to wait upon your Honor.


Sir Fran. I am glad on it, I fancy there is a sympathy in your humors, that
will soon excite a friendship, for he notwithstanding the provocation of an
ugly Scolding Wife at home, and the Temptation of a good Estate, and a handsome
Fellow into the bargain, instead of making his life easy with jolly
Bona-robars, dotes on a Platonic Mistress, who never allows him greater
favors then to read Plays to her, kiss her hand, and fetch Heartbreaking
Sighs at her Feet; with her he has obliged his charming Neice to be, almost
always; Faith nothing but the horrible fear of Matrimony before my eyes keeps
me from loving Mrs. Beauclair, she is pretty without affectation, has but just
pride enough to become her, and gravity enough to secure her from Scandal: to
all this add twelve thousand Pounds in ready Money.


Enter Sir Charles Beauclair and Mr. Spendal. Sir Charl. And is not that last
the most prevailing Argument, ha, Frank?


Sir Fran. No, Sir Charles, Chains of Gold wont tempt my freedom from me, but
here is a Gentleman, sixth in the dull matrimonial rode, uneasy if he meets with
interruption, though it throws him on the flowery fields of liberty, he is my
particular friend, and labors under the pangs of disappointed Love, it is in
your power to assist him in his delivery; I know you are compassionate in these
cases.


Sir Char. You may promise for me to the utmost, I am ready.


Beau. Fame reports you a true English Gentleman.


Sir Char. You may Command me, Sir.


Spendal aside to Sir Charles Dear Sir Charles, lend me one Guinea more, the
Estate's Entailed, my Father will die, and I shall get an Hei^ess.


Sir Char. Here take it, and leave lying:


Spend. I Will be with you again at Dinner.


Sir Char. I don't question it.

[Exit Spendal.
Sir Fran. Searchwell, has there been no Letters for me, this Morning?


Searchw. No, Sir.


Sir Fran. Stay you at home, and if there come one, find me out with it.


Searchw. I will Sir.


Sir Fran. Come Sir Charles, shall we to the Chocolate-house, there you shall
here Mr. Beaumont's Story.


Sir Char. With all my heart; hark you Sir Francis, I have an Entertainment of
excellent Music promised me this afternoon, you know I cannot have it at home,
so I have borrowed some Apartments of obliging Mrs. Bantum, the Indian Woman,
and will try to prevail with the Ladies to come.


Sir Fran. Dear Sir Charles Introduce me.


Sir Char. You Will think your hours thrown away in the Company of civil Women.


Sir Fran. Faith I scarce dare trust your Neices eyes, they gain too much upon
my heart. I am always forced, after I have seen her, to have recourse to the
Glass, to secure my self from Romantic Constancy.


Beau. Now you talk of Romances, In Troth I think I Am a perfect Knight Errant,
for besides my own Lady, I Am in quest of another fair Fugitive, by the des^e of
her Father: Have you not heard of the Death of my Lord Belmour's Heir, and
absence of his only Daughter Mariamne?


Sir Fran. Yes, yes.


Beau. The old Lord has given me her Picture, with an earnest Petition, that I
would endeavor to find her; he pressed me so, I could not refuse it, though I
have small probability of my side.


Sir Fran. She Is now a prodigious Heiress, what could be the meaning of running
from all her Friends.


Beau. Too Studious for her Sex, and sell upon the Seducers of the Women,
Plays, and Romances, from thence she formed her self a Hero, a Cavilier, that
could Love and talk like them; whilst her Father without consulting her,
provided a Husband, Rich, but wanting all Scudries Accomplishments, this Man
she called Monster, and finding the Marriage unavoidable, took her Jewels and
what Money was in her Power, and in the Stage-Coach fled to this Populous
Wilderness, if that can be proper, for here we are in Crowds concealed, as well
as in a Desert.


Sir Fran. 'Twas strange.


Sir Char. I pity her, for I hate an Innocent inclination crossed.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, your Coach is ready.


Sir Fran. Allons Gentlemen.

[Exeunt.
Scene Bellinda's Apartment, appears with a Book. Bell. In vain I fly to Books,
the tuneful Numbers give me not a moments ease: In vain I Have strove to walk in
Virtues high, unerring Paths; blind, rash inconsiderate Love, has pusht me from
the blissfull state, and sixth me struggling 'midst ten thousand dangers: Here
sweet Bard, thou suites me well;

Enter Mrs. Beaue. [Opening the Book. My anxious hou^s roll heavily away;
D^priv'd of Sleep by Night or Peace by Day.

Mrs. Beau. Poor disconsolate Damosel, come leave this soft melancholy Poetry,
it nurses your Disease.


Bell. You indeed, like a bright Ray of comfort, shoot through my endlessnight;
where is my dear destruction?


Mrs. Beau. Mr Spendall said he would be here at noon.


Bell. He Is ever here, I feel himbusie at my Heart, and when the wished minute
of his approach comes on, every Artery catches the Convulsive Joy: Do not
thou think me mad?


Mrs. Beau. A little crais'd or so, my dear.


Bell. Bedlam, over this, had been my proper mansion if your sweet Company had
not composed my jarring thoughts, and given the warring Torments Intervals of
rest.


Mrs. Beau. I must confess, tho I am wild to the very verge that Innocence
allows, yet when my Uncle, that dear good man, told me, if ever I meant to
oblige him I must be a Companion, Friend, and Lover of his Mistress. The
proposition startled me, but then I did not think there had been such a
Mistress as my Bellinda, nor Platonic Love in real practice.


Bell. True, my dear Friend, our Love is to the Modern Age, unpractic'd and
unknown; yet so strict and so severe, are rigid Honor's Laws, that though not
grossly, yet we still offend: had not Fate fixed a bar unpassable between us, how
should I'have blessed the accident that brought us first acquainted.


Mrs. Beau. You never told me the Story.


Bell. In short, 'twas thus; coming from the Play, masked with a Young Lady, a
fluttering Fellow seized me, and spite of my entreaties grew rudely
troublesome; I was never used to such Behavior, and it thoroughly frighted me;
Sir Charles being near, saw my unfeigned concern, and generously made the Brute
desist, then led me safely to a Coach, observing where I bid the Coachman
drive, he came to wait upon me, my fair Friend again was with me and 'twas by
her persuasions that I saw him: we found his conversation nicely civil and full
of Innocent delight, I blushed, and fondly thought this man my Amorous Stars in
kindness destined for my happiness, but oh! --


Mrs. Beau. But Oh, he was married, and that spoiled all.


Bell. Therein I only can accuse him of deceit: He kept his marriage a satal
Secret till I had lost the power to banish him.


Mrs. Beau. I prithee dear Bedinda where were thou bred; I Am sure this Lewd
Town never gave you such nice notions of honor.


Bell. My Friendship bars you of nothing but enquiring who I am.


Mrs. Beau. It Is true I beg your Pardon and am silent.


Bell. Only this I Will tell you, Madam, and as a warning never resolve, although
you think it fully in your power, to keep your resolution. Mark it in me, I
that thought to have stood the fairest pattern of my Sex; and would have
blotted all the annals of guilty Love, yet now am lost fonder of my Beauclair
than of Family or Fame, yet know him married, and Divine and humane Laws
against me.


Mrs. Beau. For Humane Laws, I know not what to say, but sure Heaven had no
concern, 'twas a detested match. Ruling Friends and Cursed A arice joined this
unthinking youth to the worst of Women: But no more of this how dye like your
new Lodgings? The House is very large, have you no good Neighbors?


Bell. You know it is not my way to be acquainted; my impertinet maid sometimes
teases me with a relation of a Merchant and pretty Lady; who came from the
Indies and Lodge here.


Mrs. Beau. What are they, Mrs. Betty?


Bett. Nay, my Lady will never hear me out; but I Am sure they are worth any
Bodies observation, he looks like a Surly, Old, Rich Cuff, and she like an
Intriguing Beautiful Jilt, as sine as a Queen covered with Jewels.


Bell. Have done with your Description, I Am sick of 'em both.


Mrs. Beau. Lord, you are so peevish, pray give me leave to ask Mrs ^etty
little more Questions about 'em, what is his name?


Bett. An odd one Madam, they call him Mr. Flywife.


Mrs. Beau. An odd one indeed, and contradicting his Actions when (...) a fine
Dame belongs to him.


Bell. Thou art a little Gossip to trouble thy head with other peoples Affairs;
I heard news of yoh, Madam, the other day, they say you are in Love, for all
your seeming indifference.


Mrs. Beau. Yes, in troth I am a little that way inclined; but my Spark is
indeed too far from your Cassandra rules, his Mistresses are neither Angels nor
Godesses; truly Sr Francis Wildlove is too mad even for me; though the Devil's
in it, I cannot forbear thinking of the Rambler.


Bell. Your Virtue and Beauty may reclaim him.


Mrs. Beau. It may be so; but I doubt he don't like Reforming Enter Sir so well
as to try it. Ha, see who appears comely as rising day Charles. amidst ten
thousand eminently known Bellinda this Heroic is designed for you, though
somewhat barren of Invention, I was forced to borrow it.


Bell. Cheerful, and thy mind at ease, happy Girl.


Sir Charles (taking Bell's hand) My Blessing.


Beil. My Fate, which I should, but cannot curse.


Sir Char. Cousin I Am glad to find you here, you shall help persuade Bellinda
to go abroad; I have promised to bring you both to Mrs. Bantums, I have
provided a trifle of a Dinner, and Excellent Music for digestion; there is only
a Country Gentleman and Sir Francis, I know you love Sir Francis Neice.


Bell. You may be mistaken Sir; grant I did, would you have me meet him? dear
Uncle, don't make me so ridiculous.


Sir Char. I thought Neice you durst have trusted me with your Conduct, my
Friends are no Brainless Beaux, no Lady Libellers, that extend innocent
Favors, and bespatter the Reputations they cannot ruin.


Mrs. Beau. Then you think your Friend Sir Francis a very modest man.


Sir Char. No, my Dear, but your mildest men, if they have sense, as I am sure
he has, know how to treat Women of Honor.


Mrs. Beau. Nay, I Am soon convinced, what say you, Madam?


Bell. I will go; for perhaps, Sir Charles, you think I Have only invented Fears
of being known, but you will surely find, if any Accident discovers me, I shall
be seen by you no more.


Sir Char. See thee no more! yes, I would see thee, though barred by foreign or
domestic Foes; set on thy side Father or Husband, on mine Wife and Children,
I Would rush through all Nature's Ties to gaze on thee, to satisfy the longings of
my Soul, and please my fond desiring Eyes.


Bell. Chide him Beauclair, let him not talk thus.


Mrs. Beau. Before he came you were at it; what can I say to two mad Folks?


Enter Spendall. Spend. Your Servant Ladies. Sir Charles, is it not
Dinnertime? I am as hungry as a --


Mrs. Beau. Horse, I know the old expression; were I my Uncle, I Would as soon
build an Hospital for the lazy, as undertake to satissie thy voracious Appetite.


Sir Char. How have thou of late disobliged my Neice, that she is so severe
upon thee?


Spend. Only told her Ladyship a Truth she could not bear.


Mrs. Beau. A Truth from thee, I rather think I could not hear it.


Spend. I said, a she Wit was as great a Wonder as a Blazing-star, and as
certainly foretold the World's turning upside down; yet 'spight of that the
Lady will write.


Mrs. Beau. Brute! what did I ever write, unless it was thy Character, and that
was so adroit, you had like to hanged your self?


Sir Char. For my sake, Cousin, for bear.


Mrs. Beau. Let him take pett and not come to Dinner to day, if he thinks fit,
it is not I that care.


Spend. No, I will come.


Mrs. Beau. That I would have sworn.


Spend. To give occasion, that you may draw this shining weapon Wit; it will
dazzle the Assembly; if it pierces only me, no matter.


Mrs. Beau. Stuff, pshaw, will you come, Madam, and put on your things?

[Exeunt Ladies.
Sir Char. Dear Spendall, I must beg of you to step to our House, I made my
Wife a kind of Promise to dine with her to day.


Spend. What shall I say?


Sir Char. Say I am gone to Court, she loves the Thoughts of being great, though
most unfit for it.


Spend. But you know you promised to carry her Daughter Miss Peggy with you
next time you went thither.


Sir Char. True; say I Am gone to the Tower: I Am called, say any thing the Devil
puts into your Head.

Bellinda within, Are you ready?

[Exeunt Sir Charles.
Spend. Yes, I shall say what the Devil puts into my Head, but not what you
expect: Am I not then ungrateful? Has he not for several months fed, clothed
and supported me? But what for, to be a mere Letter-carrier, an honorable Pimp
for Platonic Love? He shall find I can employ my Parts better; he trusts me
for his pleasure, and I Will betray him for mine.

Enter Lady Lyewell. Ha, Lyewell! why come you hither?


Lyew. Phough, I saw Sir Charles and the Ladies go out: besides, I want Money; I
did not serve you so, when I was in my Lord Worthy's Family.


Spend. Prithee don't be so surly, here is a Crown for thee, but I expect some
Service for it: Is there ever a Strumpet in your Catalogue so well bred as to
write?


Lyew. All the Whores in Town can scrawl if that will do.


Spend. Let one of 'em send immediately a nameless Letter to my Lady Beauclair,
and inform her, That Sir Charles will be to day at Mrs. Bantums with a Whore,
between three and four, by that hour, lest she come too soon and disturb our
Dinner. Well, the Heiress is coming, I shall make thee amends.


Lyew. Ay, when you marry Mrs. Beauclair.


Spend. Hang her; I hinted Love but once, and she has abused me ever since. I
have no luck with the Wits, now I have better Chase in view, a wealthy Fool, a
Fool the Perquisite of a Sharper. Come with me, and I Will instruct you further.

[Exeunt.
Enter Mrs. Flywife and Jenny.
Mrs. Flyw. O how happy am I, to breath again my native London Air! I vow the
Smoke of this dear Town delights me more than all the Indian Groves: happy too
in meeting with one like thee; thou understand'st Intrigues, art cunning,
subtle, as all our Sex ought to be, who deal with those deluders Men.


Jenn. Then your Ladyship liked not the Indies.


Mrs. Flyw. How was it possible I should? Our Beaux was the Refuse of N^gate,
and our Merchants the Offspring of foolish plodding Cits.


Jenn. Why went you, Madam?


Mrs. Flyw. So great is my Opinion of your Faith, I dare trust you with all my
past life: My Friends bred me at a Boarding-school, and died when I was but
fourteen, leaving me nothing for my Portion but Pride and a few tawdry Clothes;
I was a forward Girl, and bartering what I had not the W^t to prize, a never to
be rec^ver'd Fame was soon maintained in Finery, Idleness, and darling
Pleasure, but the deceitful Town grew weary of me sooner than I expected, and I
sick of that, seeing-other new Faces preferred before me; so picking up some
Moneys, and a handsome Garb, I ventured to Jamaica.


Jenn. Madam, I hear my Master unlock his Study.


Mrs. Flyw. Oh Heavens! and this f^olish Story put Sir Francis Wildlove's
Letter quite out of my Mind. Have you writ as I directed?


Jenn. Yes, Madam.


Mrs. Flyw. Give me the Letter and be gone, I would not have him think us great.

[Exit Jenny. Enter Mr. Flywife. [As Mrs. Flywife goes to put up the Letter
hastily, drops it. Come Fubby, will you go into the Dining Room the Chocolate
is ready.


Mr. Flyw. And you, methinks, are ready too, Madam; beyond Sea 'twas a courted
Favor, dressed seldom, and careless; but since arrived at this damned Town, no
cost, nor pains is spared; Curse upon my doting Folly, that listened to your
Prayers, and s^ight of my Oath and strong Aversion, brought you back to the
high road of Hell.


Mrs. Flyw. Is then my tried Constancy suspected? Did I f^r this deny the
richest Planters of the place, who courted me in an honest lawful way, and
would have parted with their Wealth, dearer than their Souls, to have called me
Wise, whilst I, slighting all their Offers, gave up my unsullied Bloom to you,
only on your protested Love leaving Jamaica, fled with you to a remoter World,
because you said your Circumstance was such, that if you lived with me, your
English Friends must believe you dead.


Mr. Flyw. Well, and what was my Return to all this boasted kindness? You may
remember, Madam, your Cargo was sunk so low, 'twould scarce afford at the next
Ships approach another London Topping; when I without a hated ^ock for Life
poured on ye more Riches than all your Husband-pretenders joined together could
aim at, gave you such a separate Fortune, that indeed I was forced to obey your
Desires in coming into England, lest you should do it without my Leave.


Mrs. Flyw. Well, well, thou art a good Boy, prithee no more wrangling Fubby; I
vow and swear to morrow I Will be as great a Slattern as ever was, if that will
please you, so I will.


Mr. Flyw. Ay, and want to go out to day, for all the gazing Fops to admire,
though I have told you, I cannot appear till I have inquired into my affairs, then
to morrow, if you stay at home with me, Sackcloth will serve turn.


Mrs. Flyw. Lord, you are so froppish, if I was your Wife, sure Fubby, you
would not be so jealous.


Mr. Flyw. My Wife quotha! no, no, I was once bewitched, but I found such a
Plague, that -- No more Wives, I say.


Mrs. Flyw. Well, I Will be any thing to please Fubby; Will you go in? Our
Breakfast will be cold.

[Exit Mrs. Flyw.
Mr. Flyw. (takes up the Letter) I Will follow you.

Ha! what is here? a Sonnet, I Will warrant; her gaping abroad has brought this: A
Letter of her own, only the Hand is scrawl'd to disguise it. (reads) If I were
convinced your Passion was real, perhaps you might have no cause to complain:
(fine advancing Devil) be constant and discreet, you ll find none of our Sex
ungrateful. By thy burning Lust that is a damned Lie, for thou art thy self a
most ungrateful Jilt: I Will catch her now, e're the Devil can be at her Elbow to
invent a Lie, and if one wheedling Tongue does not destroy all my Senses, she
shall feel my Rage.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, the Captain comes to bring you News your Ship is
safe in the River.


Mr. Flyw. Be damned, there let it sink.


Serve. Shall I tell him so, Sir?

[Exit Serve.
Mr. Flyw. Jackanapes, I Will come to him. Is it impossible in Nature to be happy
with or without a Woman? If they are virtuous they are peevish, illnatur'd,
proud and coy;

If fair and complaisant, they please as well:
For then, by Heaven, they are as false as Hell.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Enter Mrs. Flywife and Jenny. Mrs. Flyw. HA, ha, ha! I cannot forbear laughing
at your great concern. Jenn. O madam, if you did but see what a passion my
master was in, you would not be so merry; he was like to beat the Sea Captain,
though he brought him the good news of his Ships arrival.


Mrs. Flyw. Pho, mind what I say, and fear not; I warrant you shall have the
Letter again, and liberty to find Sir Francis Wildlove with it.


Jenn. Madam, he comes.


Mrs. Flyw. Well, well, be sure you do it handsomely.

(Sings. Never, never let her be your Wife.

That was loud that he might think me merry; speak hussy.


Enter Flywife. Jenn. (crying) Pray, madam, search again; I have been a month
of writing on it, and took it out of a Book too; the man has sent me forty,
before I could make shift to answer one till now: Oh! oh!


Mrs. Flyw. Prithee don't tease me, I dropped it, it is gone, I Will write another
for you, since you say the man is for a Husband, and can so well maintain you;
be quiet.


Mr. Flyw. What Is this? faith not improbable, it is not my Damsels hand, now I
have considered on it again.

(Aside.
Jenn. I had rather have lost my best Pe^t coat by half.


Mrs. Flyw. Cease your noise, or leave the Room.


Mr. Flyw. What Is the matter? having no occasion for a Quarrel, will be Money
in my Pocket, I am sure.

(Aside.
Mrs. Flyw. Why Fubby, this foolish Wench, it seems, has a Country Lover, and
beg^d of me to direct a Letter to him, which in troth I have lost, so she
howls, that is all, Fubby.


Mr. Flyw. And I have found it: Come Jenny, to make amends for your Sor^ow,
I Will write the Superscription; Whither is it to go?


Jen. (aside to her Mistress) Madam, Madam.


Mrs. Flyw. O, I think I remember; -- to Jeoffrey Scatterlove, at the Bull-Inn
in Ca^bridge: so seal it and carry it, for these silly Girls never think it
safe, unless they give it into the Post House themselves, but make haste.


Jen. Have I got thee again, my dear sweet Letter?

(kissing it.
Mrs. Flyw. A very raw foolish Girl this, my Dear.


Mr. Flyw. Faith Puggy, there had like to have bin a Quarrel; I was almost
afraid that Letter was a piece of Gallantry of yours.


Mrs. Flyw. Ay, ay, you are always suspecting me, when Heaven knows I am such
a poor constant Fool, I never so much as dream of any man but my own dear
Fubby: Fubby, let I go.


Mr. Flyw. No, no, I Will run away, I will not hear you, I will not hear you.

(Exit.
Mrs. Flyw. Then I ll follow, and I am sure prevail. Oh, had my Sex but half my
Cunning, the deceivers would find themselves deceived; from my Gallants I never
found, but gave 'em killing Charms.

Fools! when we love, our Liberties we lose;
But when beloved, with ease we pick and choose.
(Exit.
Enter Lady Beauclair and Cheatall. La. Beauc. Brother, I say you're a Fool.


Cheat. Fool in your Face. -- -- I Am no more a fool than your self. -- What
would you have a man do? -- Must I ravish her? Don't I know Accessories have
bin hanged! and here you would have me Principal! what, I understand Law, -- I
will not hang for your pleasure.


La. Beauc. Yes, you understand Law -- Do You understand parting with a good
Estate, which you must do if you have not this Arabella? Don't tell me of Ne -- Ne
-- Necessaries, I say you shall marry her.


Cheat. Ay, but the Craft will be in catching, as the Saying is: why, I went
but even now to take her by the Lilly-white H^nd, as the Poet h^s it, and she
threw a whole dish of scalding-hot Tea full in my Face, Dish and all Cousin
Peggy saw her; she called her all the names in Chris^ndom; she will tell ye the
same.


La. Beauc. Ah poor Peggy! ay, she don't love to see you abused; -- were that
Minks like Peggy, you were but too happy. Well -- when will you give Peggy that
Diamond Necklace? The Sparks are almost mad for her, -- she has the Lord knows
how many Sweethearts; there is Squire -- what do you call him?


Cheat. (aside) So, now she is got upon her Daughter's Sweethearts -- she will
never have done.


La. Beauc. There Is Sir John Empty, and Mr. Flutter, and Capt. Noisy, say the
finest things to her, but the Wench is so coy, and my Rogue of a Husband will
let none of 'em come home to her, but calls 'em Fops, and Boars, and the Lord
knows what.


Cheat. O Lord, Boars! Beaux you mean. -- O Lord, Boars!


La. Beauc. Well, she has of all sorts, -- and if there be twenty Women in
company, all the rout is made about her; and the Girl does so blush -- I vow
and swear it makes her look woundy handsome.


Cheat. Ay, you called me fool, but I Will be hanged if ye dan't make a fool of
her, mark the end on it; marry her to some honest Tradesman, that is fittest for
her.


La. Beauc. Pray don't you trouble your musty Pate about her: No, she scorns a
Citizen, she would not have my Lord Mayor's Son; she is a Girl of discretion: I
was married young too, and I looked after all my first Husband's Affairs.


Cheat. (aside) True, till he went the Lord knows whither to be quiet.


La. Beauc. Indeed this young fellow is not worthy the Name of a Husband; I
have a good mind to let the World know what a deceitful piece it is.


Enter Mrs. Peggy, eating Plumb-cake. Peg. Mother! mother!


La. Beauc. What Is the matter Child?


Peg. Here Is Mrs. Arabella does nothing but jeer and abuse me; she says eating
between meals will spoil my Shape, and I snatched a Book out of her hand, and
she said a Primmer was sitter for me.


La. Beauc. I Will never endure this, how dare she affront my Daughter?


Cheat So, I Am like to have a fine life, nothing but scolding and noise; f^r my
part, I Would rather not marry at all: if she is thus randy beforehand what will
she be afterward? In a short time I shall be made Ballads on, and my Picture
set before 'em just like the Summons to Horn-sair.


La. Beauc. Yes, yes, you shall marry her; and we'll tame her too, I Will warrant
you.


Peg. Here she comes, here she comes, as mad as a Turky-cock.


Enter Mrs. Arabella. Arab. Why am I used thus? Your Servants are forbid to
call me either Coach or Chair; Are you my Jailer? You, Oaf, I speak to.


Cheat. Mistress, 'twould be better for you if you had other words in your
mouth, I Will tell you that.


Peg. You shall not gallop your --


La. Beauc. Hold ^eggy, let me speak -- What Is the reason, Mrs. Arabella, you
take this Privilege here? -- You know your Fortune is at our dispose, so shall
your Person be, else you must expect nothing.


Arab. Had I but heard your Characters, I Would sooner have been exposed a Beggar
in this inhospitable World, than ever set my Feet within your Doors.


La Beauc. I Would have you to know our Corecters are honest Corecters; I wish
yours prove so.


Cheat. Don't provoke me, I say, don't.


Arab. Why? you will not beat me, -- I hear there is a sensible Man amongst ye,
I Will appeal to him, if you would let me see him.


La. Beauc. That Is my Husband you mean; -- No, you shall not see him, nor such as
you are, if I can help it.


Peg. What I would you see my Vather-in-law, to tell Lies and Stories to him?
No, no, don't mistake your self.


Arab. Away, you smell of Aqua Mirabilis.


La. Beauc. Oh Impudence! She smell of strong Waters! She hates it. -- Come
hither Peggy, let me smell, thy Breath used to be as sweet as any Cows.


Peg. (aside) What shall I do? I Have been at my Mother's Bottle; I will not come to
satisfy her nor you neither. What ails ye, -- do you know?


Arab. No, don't, Miss. -- Well, since I must have neither Attendance nor
(...), I Will go a-foot.

(is going.
Cheat. Hold ye, hold ye, you are not gone yet, as the Saying is.

(Takes her by the Arm.
Arab. Was ever Usage like this?


La. Beauc. Your Usage has been but too good, let me tell you that; I Will show
you such Usage as you deserve. Hug -- Uggun, -- what a Devil is your Name? I
hate a Wench with a hard Name.

(Enter Eugenia.) Here, lock up Mrs. Flippant in the dark Room.


Peg. (jumping about) Ay, lock her up, lock her up, I say.


Cheat. (grinning in her Face) Yet, Mrs. Bella, be ruled by me, -- give me one
sweet look, and let me take a Honey Kiss, and you shall not be locked up; -- No,
you shall not be locked up, -- but go abroad with me, and have your Bellyful of
Cakes and Custards. -- Shall I? -- Shall I?


Arab. There Is the Kiss; and for a Look, I wish my Eyes were Basilisks.

(Strikes him.
Peg. O Lord, Mother, how she swears!


Cheat. Oh my Chops, my Chops! lock her up; hang her, she is a Fury.


La. Beauc. Abominable! come hither, has she hurt ye?


Arab. Oh Eugenia! last night, when you heard my Story, you, in gentle pity,
wept; -- Assist me now, or I Am lost.


Eugen. Have Patience, Madam, and believe me yours.


La. Beauc. (aside to her Brother) I say, keep the Key your self, I don't like
her greatness with the Maid.


Cheat. It Is locking up, I fear it is against Law, Sister.


La. Beauc. Pho, I fear nothing; -- Are not you a Squire, and rich? -- you're
above the Leaw.


Cheat. Ay; but Knights ha'been hanged, -- I dread hanging -- I tremble always
when I think on it.


La Beauc. Hanged! there is no danger of being hanged; what, -- ha'ye no Courage?


Cheat. Yes, I have Courage, and that she shall find; my Injuries, as I have
read it, steel my Eyes. Mrs Arabella, -- I could swear the Peace against you,
and have you before a Justice; -- but I will spare you the Shame; and punish
you my self: -- Come along.


Arab. Resistance is in vain, -- but I will be revenged, or kill my self.


Cheat. Ay, ay, kill your self, and then I shall have your Estate, without
being troubled with your Person. -- I Will humble you.


Arab. And Heaven punish thee.


Cheat. Don't trouble your musty Pate about Heaven, (as my Sister says) but
come along.


Peg. Away with her, away with her.


Arab. I take Heaven and Earth to witness, I believe you design to murder me.


Cheat. There Is no such Design; besides your Witnesses are not valid, -- I
never heard their Evidence go in any Trial in all my life.


La. Beauc. No, it is not to murder ye, but make ye better: No more words, but
let it be done.

(Exeunt, man^nt La. Beauc. and Peggy.
Peg. I Am glad she is to be locked up, -- for had any Gentlemen come to see me,
she is so pert, her Tongue would have bin running.


Enter Cheatall with a Key, and Gentil and Eugenia. Cheat. Here I have her
double locked, in faith neither Window nor Mousehole in the Room: Gentil, --
fetch my Cloak, -- I Will to my Lawyer Mr. Cobblecase, for my Mind misgives me
plaguily.


Gent. Shall I wait on you, Sir?


Cheat. No, no, stay at home, and if any one asks for Mrs. Arabella, say, She
does not lodge here.


Gent. Yes.


Cheat. B'w'y Sister.


La. Beauc. Your Journey is needless, but you may go if you will; and, do you
hear, ask Mr. Cobblecase to come and dine here, he is a Bachelor. -- You should
always be thinking of Peggy.


Cheat. Well, well.

(Exit.
Peg. O Mother, yonder is Mr. Spendall a coming, -- he is grown very fine of late.


La. Beauc. Ay, if he would leave your Vather's Company, and make out what he
says about his entailed Estate, the man is not to be despised.


Enter Spendall. Spend. My Lady Beauclair, your most humble. Dear pretty
Creature, yours.

[Kisses her.
La. Beauc. Lord, Mr. Spendall, what do you do? -- well, I wonder Peg endures it.
-- I Will vow and swear, Mr. Spendall, Knights presume no farther than to kiss
the tip of my Daughters little Finger, and you make nothing of her Lips.


Spend. How! make nothing of 'em! pardon me, Madam, I put 'em to the use Nature
designed: -- They are as sweet as -- and as soft as -- Gad, I must taste 'em
again to raise my Fancy.


Peg. Be quiet, let me alone, Mr. Spendall.


Spend. (singing) Oh, give your sweet Temptations over,
I Will taste those dangerous Lips no more.

La. Beauc. You're a strange man, -- but come -- sing us a Song of your own --
Husband says you can make Varses.


Peg. But let it be as like that as you can, for methinks that is very pretty.


Spend. (aside) Does the Fool think I shall make it ex tempore? -- however, I
have one pretty near it, as it happens. I Will rather expose myself, than not
endeavor to divert you, Madam.

[Sings, whilst the Mother and Daughter imitate his Gestures. A SONG by Mr. --,
AT dead of Night, when wrapped in Sleep
The Peaceful Cottage lay,
Pastora left her folded Sheep,
Her Garland, Crook, and needless Scrip,
Love led the Nymph astray.
Loose and Undrest she takes her flight
To a near Myrtle-shade:
The conscious Moon gave splendid light,
To Bless the Ravished Lover's sight,
And gain the Loving Maid.
His eager Arms the Nymph Embrace,
And, to assuage the Pain,
His restless Passion he obeys:
At such an hour, in su^ a place,
What Lover could contain?
In vain she called the conscious Moon,
The Moon no succor gave;
The cruel Stars, unmoved, looked on,
And seemed to wink at what was done,
Nor would her humor save.
Vanquished at last by powerful Love,
The Nymph explring lay;
No more she sighed, no more she strove,
Since no kind Stars were found above,
She blushed, and died away.
Yet Blessed the Grove, her happy Flight,
And Youth that did betray
And panting, dying with Delight,
She Blessed the kind transporting Night,
And Cursed approaching Day.

La. Beauc. Thank ye, it is very sine, I Will vow and swear.


Peg. So it is indeed Mother.


La. Beauc. Now, to leave fooling, where is my Husband?


Spend. I know not, I have not seen him these two days. -- Here my Father writes
to me, if I will take up, (that is the old man's Expression) and find a virtuous
Woman with a Fortune, he will give me Threethousand pounds down, and settle
Eight hundred a year, -- and, faith, I am trying to obey' the rich Cuff, and
wean my self from my old Friends and the dear Bottle.


La. Beauc. Ay, you do very well, Mr. Spendall; I should be overjoyed to see
you take up, and perhaps a Fortune may be found: -- I Will say no more -- but a
through Reformation will produce strange matters, matters I little thought of;
-- but I Will say no more.


Spend. Your Ladyship must not say a word of this to Sir Charles, for then
he will forbid me the sight of this dear Creature, whose Charms alone have power
to work the mentioned Reformation.


La. Beauc. No, no, fear not that, I have not so many Friends, to go the ready way
to lose 'em.


Peg. For my part, I don't love Vather so well, to tell him any thing of us.


Enter a Boy with a Letter. Boy. Madam, here is a Penny-post Letter to your
Ladyship.


La. Beauc. To me!


Peg. I warrant it is to me, from some Spark.


La. Beauc. Stand away Hussy, it is durracted to my -- my Lady Beauclair, --
What Is this [stammering at it] Mrs. Banter's the Indian House? -- Read it, Mr.
Spendall, some mischief, I believe. (Spend, reads) Though unknown, I cannot
forbear, in Justice to your Ladyships Merit, informing you, that Sir Charles,
at four a clock, will be with a Mistress, at Mrs. Bantam's; use your
Discretion, but assure your self it is a Truth.


La. Beauc. O the Villain, the Rogue! the confounded Whore! I Will tear his and
her Eyes out; always at home he is sick, his Head aches, and he must lie alone:
Ah, Mr. Spendall, if I should tell you the naked Truth, you would say, he was a
Viilain too; I Have often told him his own with Tears, and the brazenfac'd
Villain has forswore it. My Husband with a Whore! I have no Patience; I Will go
there immediately, and stay till he comes.


Peg. Ay, do mother, and I Will go with you, and help to pull their Eyes out.


Spend. Are you both mad? Why all there love Sir Charles to that degree they would
watch and turn him back, -- you would never conceal your Passion, -- your only way
is to come after the hour, and then you will certainly surprise 'em.


La. Beauc. That Is true; well, good Mr. Spendall stay and comfort me, -- I fear
I shall have my Fits, and then no two men can hold me.


Spend. I would with all my Heart, and esteem my self happy to serve you, but
my Father has sent me twenty Guineas for a Token, and if I don't go this
minute, the man will be gone out of Town, and carry 'em back with him.


La. Beauc. Nay, that is not to be neglected. -- Come Child, we will go to my
Cousin Prattle's, and tell her this News: my Husband with a Whore! -- I cannot
bear it.


Spend. I must seize a Kiss, else I shall faint before I see you again.


Peg. Pish, pish, I think the man's distracted.


La. Beauc. Is this a time. -- and my Husband with a Whore! I wish my Nails
were twice as long for her sake. -- Ah Child, thy Vather was anotherguess man
than this, though he had Faults too. Come away: Your Servant Mr. Spendall.


Peg. Your Servant Sir.


La. Beauc. My Husband with a Whore!

[Exeunt La. Beauclair and Peggy.
Spend. Ladies, your most obedient Slave. -- Thus far Affairs go on as I could
wish. Now if my Lady does but abuse Bellinda, till it come to parting between
Sir Charles and she, then my Miss being out of his Tuition, I fear not her
falling into mine: -- She Is damned silly, I am forced to let all Courtship lie
in Kissing, for she understands a Complement no more than Algebra. -- Well --
her Wealth makes it up. -- Now for Dinner.

(Exit.
Scene Changes to St. James Park. Enter Sir Charles Beauclair, Bellinda and
Mrs. Beauclair.
Mrs. Beau. This Walk in the Park has done me good.


Bell. 'Twas very refreshing.


Mrs. B. Is not this better now dear Bellinda, than reading and sighing away
every beauteous Morning.


Bell Yes, if at each gazer the conscious Blushes would forbear to rise, if I
could look upon this object of my Love and Virtue, not shrink back, it were
true happiness.


Sir Char. My lovely Charmer, let me call this day mine, and oblige you to be
cheerful.


Mrs. B. I warrant ye, by and by we'll be as merry as the -- you know the title
that sticks ahand, Uncle, -- ha, yonder is Sir Francis Wildlove, for Heaven's
sake step behind the Trees, whilst I clap on my Mask, and prole toward
Rosamends Pond, and he, no doubt, pursues.


Bell. You will not sure.


Mrs. B. Indeed, my dear Gravity, I will; that is, with your leave, Sir.


Sir Char. Well thou art a mad Girl, but I dare trust thee, come this way,
Madam.

Exit.
Mrs. B. crosses the Stage, Sir Fran. Wildlove following at a distance. Sir
Fran. What Is there, a Woman well Shaped, well Dressed, Masked and alone! how many
Temptations has the Devil tacked together for a poor frail Mortal, that scarce
needed half a one^ the Handkercheif dropped, a fair invitation, a duce take her
agility, she has been too nimble for me, however I Will venture, -- Madam, by
your remaining, when the whole Army of Beauties are retired, I should guess you
Picceer for a particular prize.


Mrs. B. Then I suppose you have vanity enough to think your well-rigg'd
Pinnace worth securing.


Sir Fran. Faith, Child, I hope you would not find the freight disagrecable.


Mrs. B. Now I could not have thought such a hopeful proper Gentleman, would
have been straggling in the Park this Hour; what, no Lady of Quality, nor Miss
that appears like one to lead out to day, no Assignation? or is 'the plague
upon your fine Cloths, Credit out, and Pocket empty?


Sir Char. Shall I tell you the truth.


Mrs. B. Yes, if you can find in your heart.


Sir Fran. Why then, Faith, I have an Appointment, and that with Ladys, nay,
and Music; yet if you will be kind, my dear Chicken, they shall wait for me in
vain. By Heaven, a charming side face.

(Coming nearer her.
Mrs. Stand off, or I vanish, but tell me what makes you so indifferent to your
first engagement? the Women are Old I suppose.


Sir Fran. Alas, very Buds, my Dear.


Mrs. B. Ugly then.


Sir Fran. Beautiful as Angels.


Mrs. B. What can be the matter?


Sir Fran. Don't you guess? why they are Virtuous. I have a Mistress there,
confound me if I am not damnably in Love with her, and yet could never get my
self in a vein serious enough to say o^e dull, fo^lish, modest thing to her.


Mrs. B. Poor Gentleman, suppose you practiced before you went, and fancied me
the Lady.


Sir Fran. A Match.


Mrs. B. With Arms across.


Sir Fran. And the looks of an Ass, I begin, ah Madam! -- how was that sigh?


Mrs. B. Pretty well.


Sir Fran. Behold the humblest of your Slaves: see the Martyr of your Frowns;
those Arms must heal the Wounds your Eyes have made, or else I dye; they must,
they must.

(Rushing upon her.
Mrs. B. Hold, hold! -- Sir Charles, Sir Charles, here I shall be ravished in
the open Park.

(Unmasking.
Sir Fran. O Heavens! Mrs. Beauclair!


Enter Sir Charles and Bellinda. Sir Char. Why how now Frank, in Raptures
before the face of the World and the Sun!


Sir Fran. Pshaw, I do confess I am caught.


Bell. If you had come to any harm, Madam, you might have thanked your self.


Mrs. B. (aside) No great harm neither, to have a hearty Hug from the man one
loves.


Sir Fran. Madam, I humbly ask your Pardon.


Mrs. B. It is easily granted, 'twas a Frolic of my own beginning.


Sir Fran. This Generosity wholly subdues my wandering Heart.


Mrs. B. Have a care of getting into the dull, foolish, modest Road, Sir
Francis.


Sir Fran. No more of that, dear madam.


Sir Cha. Come, I believe Dinner stays; where is your Friend Mr. Beaumont?


Sir Fran. He Will be there before us.


Sir Cha. Let Us to our Chairs, I dare say the Ladies are tired.


Bell. Truly I am.


Enter Jenny, and pulls Sir Francis by the Sleeve; he steps aside with her.
Jen. Sir, the Lady that came lately from the Indies, whom you have seen at the
Play, sends you this; the odness of the Superscription she will explain to you.


Sir Fran. O the charming Angel! dear Girl, accept my Acknowledgment, and step
behind those Trees whilst I lead my Mother and my Aunt into their Chairs, I Will
be with you in a moment.


Mrs. B. O the wretched Libertine! but to take notice on it would show too much
Concern.


Sir Cha. Sir Francis, where are you?


Sir Fra. Here, at your Elbow, Sir Charles: Madam, may I presume to lead you to
your Chair?


Mrs. B. Yes Sir, though I believe, as your Affairs stand, you could ^bate the
Ceremony.


Sir Fran. The greatest Affairs in Christendom should not hinder me from
waiting on your Ladyship.

(Exeunt.
Enter Jenny. Jen. No faith, they are not of the Shape of motherly and elderly
Aunts: I Will not stay here, but watch where they go, and tell my Lady what a
Rambler she has chose.

(Exit.
SCENE changes to a House. Enter Mrs. Flywife. Mrs. Flyw. So with much coaksing
I have got my jealous Fellow to let me go out this afternoon, on the pretense
of buying things, and seeing an old Aunt, If this Wench would come and tell me
where the mad Spark will be, I Will venture to give him the meeting; have you
found him?


Enter Jenny. Jen. Yes, Madam, but I perceive he is a sad wild man, he was
engaged with two Masks, and would fain have flamm'd me off 'twas his Mother,
but I saw by their Mien and Dress they were young.


Mrs. Flyw. What said he to you?


Jen. Seemed much pleased, but shie: Bid me stay, and promised to return
presently; I thought I should do your Ladyship more service in seeing where
they went, so I dogged 'em to Mrs. Bantam's our Neighbor and housed 'em all
there.


Mrs. Flyw. Very good, and by and by, I Will to Locket's, and send for him, I
fancy I know the Gentleman s humors so well, that he will certainly forsake old
acquaintance for those of a newer date, though he ventures changing for the
worse: he seemed eager and pleased, fierce and fond, and swore my Charms were
unequalled. His swearing indeed signifies but little, the Banquet over,

Yet sure he will meet when Love and I invite,
For Love's his God, and leads him to delight.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Enter Eugenia, followed by Gentil. Gent. WHither so fast. Mrs. Eugenia?


Eug. Stop me not, I am upon an Act of Charity, trying to free the Immured
Lady; -- -- I have been picking up all the Rusty Keys in the house, in hopes to
accomplish it.


Gent. Why you will loose your place.


Eug. Hang my place, -- There Is not one in the Family understands a Grain of
Civility, except Sir Charles; and if he speaks to me my Lady pulls my
Head-cloaths off -- Come I know you don't love that Lubberly. Coxcomb, your
Master -- Even join with me, assist in Arabella's Liberty, and recover her
Fortune, and I dare engage she ll make ours. Besides, to tell you the Truth, I
have received ten Guineas to day, from one Mr. Beaumont, to endeavor her
freedom.


Gent. That Is a most prevailing Argument, I confess. What I do is for your sake
Mrs. Eugenia


Eug. In hopes to go snacks with the Gold. Ha, Gentil! Well, well, stay here
I Will return immediately.

[Exit, and Re-enter with Arabella. It Is done, it is done, is this a Bird to be
concealed in such a dark and Dismal Cage?


Arab. Well thou art a rare Girl. O if thou could but conjure now, and get
the Writings of my Estate for me, sive hundred Pound should be thy own next
moment, Wench.


Gent. Say you so, Madam, Gad I Will turn Devil but it shall be done.


Eug. Why what would that signify to you Fool?


Gent. Well, mind the Ladies business, and let me alone to take care of yours.


Eug. First let us take care of the 'Squire, Gad if I don't manage that Booby,
^ll give you leave to cut my Apron, and make a slobering Bibon't.


Gent. Well, what is your contrivance?


Eug. Why, I Will go in again, pour down a Bottle of Red-Ink I know of, make all
fast, and swear he has murdered ye. A Cross Old Woman lately, to whom he wou^d
give nothing, told him, she read it in his Phys, That he wou^d come to be
hanged; which the superstitious Fool has ever since been afraid of; very
indifferent Circumstances will Confirm that Fear, and bring him to a Compliance.


Arab. My better Angel! It has a Lucky face -- It looks like thee -- but how
must I be disposed of?


Eug. If you please to go to Mrs. Beauclairs, Sir Charles's Neice, she is a
Woman Cheerful, Witty, and Good, and will assist you in every Thing.


Arab. ^e heard so well of her, I dare venture to be obliged to her, come let us
make haste,


Eug. Gentil, get the back door open, and let none of the Servants see us go
out; I Am sure we shall be lucky, because my Termagant Lady will not be at home to
day to disturb us.


Arab. Come then, I long to quit the House I have been so ill used in.

Ex.
Scene changes to the India House. Enter Sir Francis Wildlove. Sir Fran. A Duse
of all ill luck, I have lost my little Ambassadress from my dear Indian Queen,
'twas a Charmer: how can an old Cu^mudgeon have the I^dence to hope he should
keep such a lovely Creature to himself? For a Husband or Cully, I find by her
discourse, she has, and by the Description, she hates him, which is a good step
for me.


Enter Searchwell. Search. Sir, all the Company is coming into this Room, to
hear the Music.


Sir Fran. Gad so, a^e they? then I must wait upon Mrs. Beauclair down. Sirrah,
you are a purblind Dog, not to find the pretty Letter-Carrier.


Search. I think I see a Woman as soon as another, else I Am sure I were not fit
for your Honor's Service. I Will swear she was not in the Park: I searched it
three times over as carefully as I had been to look a Needle in a Bottle of
Hay, and hanged if I did not find it.


Sir Fran. What a Comparison the Puppy has! Do You hear, if you do not find her
out, I shall Discard you for an Insignificant Blockhead, for I am Damnably and
Desperately in Love with her Mistress.

Exit. Sir Fran.
Search. Ah Lard, Ah Lard, Desperately and Damnably in Love with her, and never
saw her but twice at a Play, and then she was in a Mask. Well my Master wou^d
be the best of men if 'twere not for these Whores I am harassed off my Legs
after 'em; the Pox, the Plague, that belongs to 'em, consume 'em all I say.

(Exit.
Enter Sir Charles, Beauclair, Sir Francis Wildlove, Beaumont, Spendall,
Bellinda and Mrs. Beaumont. Sir Char. Ladies, how do you like your small Regalio?


Mrs. Beau. Extremely; for ought I know, Sir Charles, you may rep^t showing me
the way to gad abroad.


Bell. What Opinion, Madam, do you think this Gentleman will have of us, for I
presume the young Ladies in the Country are not so free of their Company?


Mrs. Beau. No, poor Gentlewomen -- They are Condemned to the Government of
some Toothless Aunt or Grannum, visit but once a year, and that in the Summer
season, when the heat covers the Ruddy Lasses with sweat and dust. The Winter
they divert themselves with Blindman's Buff among the serving men; where, too
often, one sprucer than the rest, whispers Love to Miss Jenny, and seduces even
the Eldest Daughter.


Beaumont. Though some have been guilty of those weaknesses, you must not accuse
all.


Mrs. Beau. All who are confined there, never suffered to see the World -- for
granting one more thinking than the rest, who has power and obeys her Father,
in suffering the Addresses of the next adjacent 'Squire, she either dies of a
Consumption (Pi^ng after pleasures more refined) or else overcome with Vapors,
runs melancholy mad.


Beaumont. (to Bell.) Madam you sighed at this pretty Description.


Bell. Did I?


Beaumont. Both her deportment and face confirm my suspicions.

(aside.
Sir Char. You are thoughtfull, Frank.


Mrs. Beau. Would you have him brisker, Uncle? it is but my clapping on a Mask,
and it is done. Sir Francis, do I wrong you, have I not seen you at a Play
slighting all the barefaced Peauties, hunting a Trollop in a Mask with pains
and pleasure; Nay, more for her gaping Nonsensical Banters, neglecting immortal
Dryden's Eloquence, or Congreve's unequalled Wit.


Sir Fran. I own sometimes I divert myself with the little Gypsies.


Mrs. Beau. Ay, and disturb the Audience.


Sir Fran. Faith, Madam, I must speak freely, though you are a Woman of Quality,
and my Friend's Neice, you talk so prettily, it is pity you should not do it
often in a Mask: But then again, you are so pretty, it is pity you should ever
wear one.


Mrs. Beau. I did not design by railing to beg a Compliment; Sir Charles,
where is the Music?

A Song by Mrs. P --, Sung by Mr. Hodgson.
WHen I languish'd, and wished you would something bestow,
You bad me to give it a Name;
But, by Heaven, I know it as little as you,
Though my Ignorance passes for Shame:
You take for Devotion each passionate Glance,
And think the dull Fool is sincere,
But never believe that I speak in Romance
On purpose to tickle your Ear.
To please me then more, think still I am true,
And hug each Apocryphal Text:
Though I practice a thousand false Doctrines on you,
I shall still have enough for the next. [A Dance.

A Dialogue, between two Platonic Lovers: The Words by Mr. Motteux, and set by
Mr. Eccles. He. HOw long must I the hours employ
To see, be loved, yet never enjoy?
Though to curb loose desires I try,
Sure I may wish at least to die?
Dye then, Poor Strephon, wretched Swain;
Nor only live to love in vain,

She. Live, hopeless Lover, while Igrieve
Much for thy Fate, but more for mine;
For mine, my Dear, Condemned to live,
To Love, be Loved, yet never be thine.

He. Oh, See me, Love me, Grieve me still,
Till Love's excess, or Sorrow's kill,
It Is not my self I Love, but thee,
Then I must dye to set thee free.

She. No, Live and Love, though hope is dead;
For it is a Virtue so to Love:
The Gold's refined, the Dross is fled,
The Martyrs thus in Flames improve.

Both. Then let us Love on, and never Complain,
But Fan the kind Fire, and Bless the dear Pain.
For why to Despair should true Lovers be driven?
Since Love has his Martyrs, he must have his Heaven.

Spend. My Lady Beauclair will be here strait, I Will even march off.

[is going.
Sir Cha. What, desert us, Jack! though the Ladies will not drink, you may.


Spend. I beg your Pardon, Sir Charles, -- I have made an Assignation with some
Women of Quality of my Acquaintance.


Mrs. B. Women of Quality! what, your Landresses Daughter, or some pert,
fleering, tawdry Thing of a Shop, vain, and proud to lose what she understands
not, her Reputation; she also brags, she is coming to Quality when she meets you.


Spend. I shall not expose their Names, to convince your Ladyship of their Rank.


Bell. O, by no means debar the Gentleman of his Quality.


Sir Fran. You see the Ladies are willing to dismiss you, Jack.


Spend. I Am their very humble servant.

(Exit.
Immediately after Enter Lady Beauclair, (pushing away a Servant Maid) and Mrs.
Peggy. La. Beauc. Ye lie, ye damned Queen, he is here, -- ha! -- and his Minion
with him! -- let me come at her --

[Leaps, and catches hold of her.
Sir Cha. Hell and Furies! my Wife! -- Madam, why all this Rage? Don't you see
my Neice? the other is a Friend of hers, a Woman of Honor.


La. Beauc. Your Neice is a Pimp, and she is a Whore! I Will mark her -- Sirrah --
Villain! Oh, oh my Fits! my Fits!

(Falls in a Chalr.
Sir Cha. Fly, my Bellinda, from her brutal Rage, whilst I Wedlocks slave stay
and appease this hateful storm.


Bell. It Is but what I ought to have expected; it is just I should be punished,
to prevent my being g^ilty.


Sir Fran. Dear Beaumont, carry this injured Lady off, whilst we bear the brunt.


Mrs. B. Go to my Lodgings, Child.


Bell. Any where, to Death or Hell, if there can be a greater Hell than what
this Bosom feels.


Peg. O Lo. O Lo. I believe my Mother's dead.


Sir Cha. You know the contrary; these Fits are a new Trick Nature has
furnished the Sex with. -- Heretofore Tears and Smiles were the highest part
their Dissimulation could attain.

{All this while Lady Beauclair has been saintly striving, as in a Fit, and now
shrieks out -- Oh! oh!
Mrs. B. Give her some Water.


Sir Cha. Give her some Wine, else you will disoblige her more, to my Knowledge,
than the Fits.


Peg. (aside) And well thought on, -- I Will steal behind and drink a Glass of
Wine, -- my stomach's a cold.

{Goes to the Side-table, whilst they are about the Chair and drinks two or
three Glasses of Wine.
La. Beauc. (starting up) No, Villain, Devil! I Will drink none of your Wine, --
it may be poisoned.


Sir Cha. Oh, you had not lost all your Senses, you could hear, I find.


La. Beauc. Rogue, and I Will make thee seel, I Will tear thy Linen, Hair, thy
cursed Eyes.


Sir Cha. Hold, Madam, as I Am a Gentleman, use me like one.


Mrs. B. Sir Francis, here is an excellent Argument on your side, here is
Matrimony in its true colors.


Sir Fra. No, Madam, her Carriage is not a Satyr on the whole Sex, -- it but
sets off better Wives.


La. Beauc. Yes, you were a Gentleman, and that was all, when I married ye, the
poor third Brother of a Knight, 'twas I brought your Estate; if since by your
Friends death one has fell, must I be abused, sit rah?


Sir Cha. Madam, you have not been abused; you know that I was in my Nonage
married, saw not with my own Eyes, nor chose for my unhappy self; e're I lived
with ye, I possessed an Estate nobler, a larger far than yours, which you have
still commanded; nay, I have often ^g'd ye to Diversions, in hopes it would
have altered that unquiet m^nd, but all in vain.


La. Beauc. Divartions! what Divartions? Yes, you had me to the Playhouse, and
the first thing I saw was an ugly black Devil kill his Wife, for nothing; then
your M^idate King of the Potecari^, your Timon the Atheist, the Man in the
Moon, and all the rest -- N^nsence, Stuff, I hate 'em.


Sir Cha. I need say no more, -- Now, Madam, you have shown your self.


La. Beauc. Shown, what have I shown? send for your Gilflurt to show: I have
shown nothing but a vartuous Face.


Mrs. B. All Virtue does not lie in Chastity, though that is a great one.


La. Beauc. Well Cousin, I Am sorry to see you take such Courses, I would not
have my Peg like you for the Varsal World. Peg, what a Color this Child has
got! fretting for me, I Am afraid, has put her into a Fever.


Sir Fran. Come, Madam, let us compose these Differences; your Anger is
groundless -- upon my Word. Not well, pretty miss! will you drink a Glass of
Wine?

(Mrs. Peggy hickup^.
Peg. No, I thank you, -- I cannot abide it.


La. Beauc. Poor Girl, she never drinks any thing strong, except she is very
sick indeed.


Sir Cha. And she is very often sick, poor Creature! -- about some five or six
times a day. -- Madam, shall I wait on you home? I think we may quit this place
with Shame enough.


Mrs. Peg. (to her Mother, aside) Don't be Friends, for Mr. Spendall sent me
word, he would meet us in the Park, and if Vather goes with us, how shall that be?


La. Beauc. I dan't intend it; -- No, Hypocrite, you shall not stir a step with
me, if thou do, I^ll make a bigger noise below, and raise the House about thy
Ears. Come Peg.

(Exeunt La. Beauc. and Peggy.
Mrs. B. My Aunt's Noise is her Guard, none dare approach her.


Sir Cha. Her going out cannot be more ridiculous than her coming in.


Mrs. B. Sir Charles, Let not your noble Courage be cast down.


Sir Cha. Outrageous Clamours are no News to me; b^ I dread how my Bellinda may
resent it.


Sir Fran. I wonder, Sir Charles, you have Patience to live with this violent
Woman.


Sir Cha. It Is for my Fair one's sake, who, nicely jealous the World would say
she had occasioned our parting, has sworn never to see me more, if I attempt it.


Enter Searchwell. Searchw. (aside to Sir Fran.) Sir, Sir, the Lady you are so
damnably in love with sends word, if you disengage your self from your Company,
she will be at Locket's in half an hour.


Mrs. B. Is it so, i faith?


Sir Fran. (to him) Coxcomb, what need you have spoke so loud? Tell him I Will not
fail to wait on him. Well, Sir Charles, you will to Bellinda.


Sir Cha. No, I Will first go home, and try to stop the farther Fury of my Wife.


Sir Fran. Madam, I had Hopes you would have done me the Honor to let me wait
on you this Afternoon, but it has happened so unluckily, that an old Uncle of
mine, to whom I am much obliged, --


Mrs. B. (aside to him) Oh, I Am your Uncle's Servant. Sir, there needs no
Excuse, your Company being at this time a Favor I neither expect nor desire.


Sir Cha Will you go in a Chair, Neice, or in my Coach?


Mrs. B. A Chair if you please, Sir.


Sir Fran. To that give us both leave to wait on you.


Mrs. B. Pray give me leave to speak a word to my Boy first.. Will.


Boy. Madam.


Mrs. B. Run to my Woman, and bid her come to her Aunts immediately, and bring
me the Suit Sir Charles made for the last Ball, and left at my Lodgings: make
haste, fly.


Boy. I will, Madam.


Mrs. B. Hang it, it is but one ridiculous thing, I Am resolved to do it, I Will
find these Pleasures out, that charm this Reprobate; Money will make all the
Drawers mine.


Sir Cha. I Am ready to go.


Sir Fran. Madam, be pleased to accept my Hand.

(Exeunt.
SCENE changes, Beauclair's Lodgings, Enter Beaumont leading Bellinda. Beaum.
Now, Madam, you're safe in the Lodgings of your Friend, forget the Rudeness
past.


Bell. Forget it! impossible; her Words, like Poisonous Shafts, have pierced my
Soul, and will for ever dwell upon my Memory with endless painful Wracks; yet
look not on me as that vise Creature she has represented, but believe me, Sir,
I engaged my Heart too far, before I knew Sir Charles was married. When I found
my Love unjust, how exquisite the Torment proved, chilled, with Watchings,
Sighs, and Tears, yet 'spight of my Distractions, spite of the rising Damps
and falling Dews, 'twas grown too great to be extinguished, 'till this last
storm has torn it by the Roots to spring no more.


Beaum. Her every word and looks confirms my Thoughts. Madam, this I dare
presume to say, both from his Character and my small Acquaintance, Sir Charles
Beauclair has moral Virtues, to our late English Hero's unpracticed and
unknown; yet if I might advise, you should never see him more, or only to take
an everlasting Leave.


Bell. Your Freedom, I confess, is strange, and your Advice is what I had
resolved on before.


Beaum. None but the lovely Mariamne could with such becoming Majesty have
checked a Stranger's boldness. View well these Lines, and then confess if they
do not the resemblance bear of a soft charming Face you have often by reflection
seen.

(Gives a Picture.
Bell. Ha! my own Picture, one of the effects of my dear Mothers fondness, which
she, dying, left in my Father's Hands; he named me too; then let everlasting
darkness shrond me; let me no more behold the Sun or human kind, forget the
World, as I would be of that forgotten.


Beaum. Turn, Madam, and look upon me as your Friend; if you would still remain
unknown, my Breast shall keep this Discovery silent and safe as Secrets buried
with the dead: Your Father gave me that Picture, with Desires so tender for
your return, that, I confess, they moved me: I undertook the enquiry,
tho'scarce could hope to have succeeded. Since your absence your Brother's
dead; so that your Father, hopeless and childless, mourns, and says your sight
would revive him more than when he first blessed Heaven for your happy birth
and Mothers safety.


Bell. My Brother dead! -- loved Youth! I grieve thy untimely Fate, but thou art
gone to rest' and Peace, whilst I am left upon the wrack: Sir, I read in all
your words a piercing Truth and an unbiased Honor, they have set my Errors
full before me, my fled Duty returns as swift as I will do to this wronged
Parent, hang on his aged Knees, nor ^ise till I have found Forgiveness and my
Blessing there.


Beaum. Though much I wish your Honor and your Fame secure, yet to part such
Lovers, whom this lewd Age will scarce believe there ever were, g^ates my very
Nature.


Bell. Oh! let me not look back that way, but generously assist me on, till that
dear man, who, witness my Disgraces, I value more than all Earth's richest
Treasures. Tell him, lest he should take it ill of you, that I have confessed
my Birth, and have resolved to fly from him and all the World, and in my
Father's House remain as in a Cloister.


Beaum. How will he brook the Message?


Bell. Oh! tell him, Sir, that the pangs of parting will scarce excel those my
struggling Virtue gave at every guilty meeting, for there was Guilt: tell him I
have sworn to die if he pursues. I blush to impose all this on you; but if a
Lover, sure you will forgive my Follies.


Beaum. I Will tell him all, but I must send him too, a parting Kiss, at least,
which must be allowed to such unequaled Love.


Bell. Not till all is fixed for my remove, then I once more will see him, tho
my Heart Strings crack, I Will conquer all these criminal Fires; I have the Goal
in view, bright Honor leads me on, the part is glorious, but, oh! it is painful
too: Let me retire, and tear him from my doting Thoughts, or in the bitter
Conflict lose the use of Thought.

(Exit.
Beaum. How strong are the Efforts of Honor where a good Education grounds the
Mind in Virtue! this unexpected hurry has for some moments banished my dear
Arabella from my Thoughts. O, here comes my Implyment! well, how goes Affairs?


Enter Searchwell. Search. Rarely, Sir; the Chambermaid swallowed the Guineas
as glibly as a Lawyer a double Fee from his Client's Antagonist; she is bringing
the young Lady hither. Eugenia talks of a Contrivance, that ^ou should
instantly appear like a Tarpaulin, pretend to be related to the Lady, and
fright the 'Squire into a compliance.


Beaum. Any thing to serve my Arabella, we will meet 'em, and receive their
Instructions.

(Exeunt.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE a Room in Locket's, a Table with a Flask upon it. Enter Sir Francis
Wildlove and Mrs. Flywife. Mrs. Flyw. WEll, this is a strange mad thing, but my
old cross F^llow will never let me take a mouthful of Air; I am sure you will
have an ill Opinion of me.


Sir Fran. A kind one you mean, Madam; I think you generous, lovely, and all my
Heart desires.


Mrs. Flyw. My Maid is gone the Lord knows where for Fruit; I swear I tremble,
coming into a Tavern alone.


Sir Fran. A Glass of Wine will recall the fled Roses, but here is the Nectar
thirsty Love requires.

(Kisses her. (Mrs. Beauclair bounces in, in Men's Clothes.)
Mrs. Beauc. O pardon and protect me; I Am pursued by Hell Hounds, Bailiffs, and
if taken, inevitably ruined.


Sir Fran. The Devil take thee and the Bailiffs together, for an interrupting
young Dog.


Mrs. Beauc. You look with a Face cruel as they, but sure in those fair Eyes I
read some Pity.


Mrs. Flyw. [aside] A very handsome Fellow, how came you in Trouble, Sir? (to
him.


Mrs. Beauc. Alas, Madam, I was put to an Attorney, but longing to turn Beau,
have half-ruin'd my Master, wholly lost my Friends, and now am followed by the
several Actions of my Tailor, Sempstress, Perruke-maker, Hosier, and a long Et
c^tera; besides, the swingingst Debt my Perfumer; Essence and sweet Powder has
completed my Ruin.


Sir Fra. It Is monstrous to cheat honest Tradesmen in dressing up a Fop;
therefore, unwelcoming Intruder, I desire you would seek your Protection
elsewhere.


Mrs. Flyw. Nay, now you are too severe; the young Gentleman in Liberty may
mend his Fortunes, and live to pay his Debts; he has a promising Face.


Sir Fran. Your Pity, Madam; but hastens absence.


Mrs. Beau. (aside) Will this Fellow, I thought I had so well instructed, never
come?


Enter Drawer. Draw. Sir Francis, a man out of breath says he must speak with
you, on what concerns your Friend's Life.


Sir Fran. The Devil's in the Dice to day; where is he? what is the matter?

(Exit.
Mrs. Beau. (aside) Now Impudence and Eloquence assist me, what have I done? in
seeking to preserve my Liberty, I have for ever lost it; my unexperienced Youth
never viewed such Charms before, and, without Compassion, this Bondage may be
worse than what I avoided.


Mrs. Flyw. (laughing) Meaning me, sir?


Mrs. Beau. Nay, I m a Fool, for Bankrupt in Wealth how can I hope to thrive in
Love, since scarce any of your fair sex, though merit was thrown into the scales,
value a man on whom Fortune frowns.


Mrs. Flyw. (aside) I think it is the prettiest Youth I ever saw, I have Wealth
enough to supply his wants, what should then debar me?


Mrs Beau. So; she eyes me kindly I Am sure.


Mrs. Flyw. Your Looks, sweet Youth, plead powerful as your Language; and to
let you see I value not Riches, the want of which makes you miserable, accept
this Ring, 'twill stop a Creditor's mouth, and pay two or three Ordinaries at
the blue Posts:


Mrs. Beau. Oh wondrous Bounty! thus encouraged, shall I beg another Favor,
that you would fly from hence before that angry man returns, lest I fall a
sacrifice to his Jealousy, and see those charming Eyes no more.


Mrs. Flyw. If my maid would come, -- ha! here she is; sure you have flown.


Enter Jenny. Jen. I beg your Pardon, Madam, I never went, Sir Francis's
Gentleman and I were solacing our selves below, and sent a Porter for the Fruit
till hearing. Sir Francis was gone in a great hurry, he ran after his Master,
and I came up to see what was the matter.


Mrs. Beau. A hopeful Mistress and Maid! deliver me from these Town-Ladies.

(Aside.
Mrs. Flyw. Ungrateful man, on any Pretense to leave me!


Mrs. Beau. Ungrateful! monstrous; had a thousand Friends been dying, they
ought all to have expired e're you have suffered a moments neglect.


Mrs. Flyw. This Flattery's too gross, young Courtier, you must treat me with
Truth.


Mrs. Beau. All is Truth, my Heart, my Life is yours.


Jenn. (aside) Another Spark! sure the Devil's in my Mistress.


Mrs. Flyw. Well Sir, I Will consent to your Desires, and we will go from hence at
the Door toward the Park, there is no danger.


Mrs. Beau. If you are kind, I fear none, Madam.


Mrs. Flyw. Let me find you what you seem, and you shall brave the World, and
scorn your Debts: Jenny, get me a Chair, and show this Gentleman the House
where we lodge, then come in, let him ask for you, if you can prevent your
Master's seeing him do, if not, say it is one you waited upon in his Infancy,
the disparity of Years between you considered, that may pass.


Jen. (aside) Humph, I shall never like him for this Affront. Yes, Madam, it
shall be done.


Mrs. Beau. Your Hand, dear obliging Creature, I hear a noise.


Mrs. Flyw. ^uick, this way: run you before, and pay one of the Drawers for
this Flask of Champaign.

Exeunt.
Enter Sir Francis, Searchwel, and a Drawer. Sir Fran. Ha! gone! so I thought;
eternal Dog, you have been helping in this Contrivance; Did you take me for a
Cully, Spawn of Hell? Have I known this damned Town so long, at last to be
caught with such a gross Banter? speak Sirrah; who was that Impostor that told
me my Friend Mr. Beaumont was taken up for a Jacobite, and the Mobb was pulling
him to pieces?


Draw. As I ever hope to outlive your Anger, and taste again your noble Bounty,
I knew nothing of him.


Sir Fra. Shut the Door, you careless Blockhead, whom I charged to watch and
let no body come up to me: Now sirrah confess, or I Will make that Rogue help me
kick thee into Mummy, for though my Sword's drawn, I scorn to hurt thee that way.


Draw. If I should confess you will kill me, Sir.


Sir Fran. No.


Draw. Truly then, Sir, the young Spark gave me a Guinea to show him the Room
where your Honor was; but for the Fellow that seemed so much concerned, I wish
I may be hanged if I knew of him any thing at all Sir, any thing at all Sir.
Good your Honor break my Head, and forgive me.


Sir Fran. I will not touch thee; Could I expect more from thy sordid Soul?
Gold corrupts Mankind; be gone.

(Exit Drawer.) This unaccountable Jilt has so abused me, I could find in my
Heart to forsake the Gang, and lay a penitential Dunce at the feet of Virtue,
fair Mrs. Beauclair.


Search. I pray Heaven keep you in that good mind.


Sir Fran. Good lack, canting sot, I suppose you was shut up with a Whore,
Rascal, whilst you ought to have been Pimping for me.


Search. Trim Tram, Sir.


Sir Fran How, Impudence!


Search. I meant the Rhyme should be, Like Mistress like Maid; for indeed I was
employed with my Ladies waiting Gentlewoman.


Sir Fran. Was ye so, Rascal? could I but find the young stripling, 'twould be
some satisfaction: Hanged, if I am balked both in Love and Revenge, the cross
Adventures shall be drowned in brisk Champaign:

It Is the dear Glass which cases every smart,
And presently does cure the taking Heart.
(Exit.
Enter Mrs. Beanmont, meeting Dresswell. Mrs. B. Oh Dresswell! I Am glad I Have
met with thee.


Dress. Lord, Madam, I have been in a sad fright for ye; and hunted up and down
this hour.


Mrs. B. All Is well, let us in there, I Will tell you my adventures.


Dress. Then I hope your Frolic has been to your Ladyships satisfaction.


Mrs. B. Yes, yes, I got Sir Francis's Mistress from him, and faith I was
pursuing my Conquest, and venturing to her Lodging, when coming to the House,
it proved that where Bellinda Lodged and the Lady, I suppose, the Merchant's
Wife. I feared I should meet with my Uncle there, and fairly gave the Maid the
drop. Come, I long to change my Clothes, I Am quite tired with wearing the
Breeches; this way.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Francis Wildlove and Searchwell. Sir Fran. Ha! is not that the young
Devil that abused me? he has entered the House, and I Will be with him presently,
walk hereabouts till I come out.

(Exit.
Search. Yes, Sir.


Scene changes to the inside of the House. Re-enter Mrs. Beaumont and
Dresswell. Mrs. B. Are my things ready and a good fire in the Room.


Dress. Madam, they are?


Mrs. B. Peep out and see who knocks;

(one knocks.
Dress. Madam, it is Sir Francis Wildlove, and he seems in a fury.


Mrs. B. Let him in, I Will do well enough with him; now get you gone and fear
nothing.


Enter Sir Francis Wildlove. Sir Fran. So, Sir, I suppose you think matters
have gone swingingly on your side, and have laughed immoderately at the
reflection how those green years have made a Fool of me; but Chance has thrown
me on thee once again, and now for those Feasts of Joy an after reckoning (Dr^s)
must be paid young Gentleman, you understand my meaning.


Mrs. B. Yes, and will answer it, but hear me first, it is to provoke you I
speak: know then, your Mistress was my easy Conquest, I scarce had time to say
one soft thing before she cried, Let Us fly, sweet youth, ever that rough man
returns, and in thy arms forget him.


Sir Fran. She Is a Jilt and for a well-drest Fop would quit a man that saved
her life.


Mrs. B. Then this Ring was presented, I suppose you may have seen it; adorn thy
fair hand, and with ten thousand kisses 'twas whispered, you shall not want for
Gold.


Sir Fran. Though I value her no more than I do thee, yet I will have thy life
for harboring so damned a thought, that I was fitter for your sport. Come on.


Mrs. B. Hold, hold, Sir Francis I Will not pretend to take your Sword, though I
could your Mistress from ye, see my Credentials for my Cowardice.

(puts up her Ring.
Sir Fran. Mrs. Beauclair -- What a blind Puppey am I, twice in one day, that is
hard I faith?


Mrs. Beau. Pray return your Lady back her favor.

(gives him the Ring.
Sir Fran. Madam --


Mrs. B. Nay, look not concerned, upon my word I Will never interrupt you more:
Hug in your Bosom the plastered mischiefs, their blotted Souls and spotted
Reputations, no Varnish can cover over, pursue, overtake, possess, the unenvied
amongst the Painted Tribe most worthily bestow your heart.


Sir Fran. Think ye so meanly of me, my heart bestowed amongst your Sexes
shame! No, Madam, Glorious Virtue alone can reach at that, my loving is a
diversion I can soon ^ake off.


Mrs. B. That Is hard to believe, but I must beg your pardon, I Am in haste to
unrig.


Sir Fran. Hear me a moment, you have seen my frailties, if like Heaven you can
forgive, a truer penitent or a more constant votary no cruel Virgin ever found.


Mrs. B. Have a care of the dull road: Sir Francis, Farewell.

(Exit.
Sir Fran. Go thy ways for a pretty witty agreeable Creature, but if I should
seduce her into Matrimony, I fear the common fate will attend her Beauty,
quickly tarnish and good humor vanish.

(Exit.
Enter Spendall and Lywell. Spend. Ha, Lywell! I am the happiest man alive,
almost out of Fortune's Power.


Lyw. What is it transports you so? some whim, some Chemical delusion, that will
fail in the projection, and vanish into Air.


Spend. Hear me and then with admiration, be dumb; nor dare to contradict my
wit, or Plots again: In short, my Lady Beauclair and Miss, are in open Rebellion
by my persuasion, and to Complete my good Fortune, I have borrowed ten Guineas
of Sir Charles, with the help of which, I Will be married to his Daughter in-Law,
within these two hours.


Lyw. Ha! I begin to think the Devil has left playing at Legerdemain with
thee: and having secured thee, resolves to bestow some of this World's wealth
upon thee.


Spend. Can not thou procure a Templer's Chamber for an hour or two; and
appear with the Gravity of a long Robe?


Lyw. With ease, I know a young Spark that has sine Lodgings there; but by his
old ^ather is kept at short allowance; a Treat or a very small sum will engage
that, and all his habiliments.


Spend. Can thou not put on the grave look of a starcht Councellor.


Lyw. Hum! hum! (...) I Will speak with you immediately -- you se^, Friend, I Am
busy -- How was that --


Spend. Pretty well. Come; about it presently, and I Will bring the Ladies to
you, as my Father's chief Lawyer. Be sure you tell 'em, you have the settlement
of his Estate upon me in your hands, and seem very desirous I should do well.


Lyw. I warrant ye, and sh^n't we have lusty treats, old Boy?


Spend. I thought your Conscience had scrupled the proceedings.


Lyw. O'Pox, my Conscience never tsoubles me, but when Affairs go ill.


Spend. Well, make haste, and doubt not feasting: I must to my Charge, lest
they cool (...) Fools are seldom long resolved, and I know a finer Fellow would
get both Mother and Daughters heart; They Are now in a kindly growing warmth,
and the old one^s Imagination tickled as much with thoughts of darling ^eggy's
Marriage, as ever 'twas with her own, Farewell! be sine you observe your
directions.


Lyw. It shall be done, dear lucky Devil (Coughs) Hum, hum, I shall be perfect
in a Grave Cough; and a hum, of business, by that time you come to my Chamber.


Spend. Hold! f^r I had forgot -- Whereabouts is this Chamber? for I guess your
Worship's Name is not so famous to direct.


Lyw. Come, as we go along I Will tell you.

[Exeunt.
Enter Arabella m^ting Engenia. Arab. So my dear deliverer, how have you
succeeded?


Eug. Oh, Madam, the poor 'Squire's frighted out of the little wit he had, one
Scene more, and the Day's our own.


Arab (...) become of Mr. (...)?


Eug. He Is about some earnest business of Sir Charles Beauclair's, I know not
what it is, but there is a heavy Clutter amongst 'em


Arab. Well, you brought me to the Ladies Lodging, but I believe that is the
only place she is not to be found at, for I have waited in vain with much
i^patience to see her.


Eug. Her Footman's below, and says she will be here immediately.


Arab. Prithee let us into the Chamber first, and you shall give an Account of
the 'Squire's fright?


Eug. I follow you, Madam.

(Exeunt.
SCENE, Sir Charles Beauclair's House. ^nter Sir Charles. Sir Char. Sure the
World's all running mad; or else resolved to make me so; at home I cannot meet
with a sensible Answer; but -- Oh, what touches nearest, the Dear, the cruel,
the charming Maid; Bellinda will not see me how shall I appease the (...) fair,
my Wife too not returned; where will this end? -- Gentil! Eugenia! James.

Within. Sir.


Sir Char. Sir; -- Where, ye everlasting Dormice? will none come near me?

[Exit
Enter Cheatall and Gentil. Cheat. Gadzooks! This Councellor Cobblecase has
talked Law, and drank Claret with me, till my brains are turned topsy-turvy.
Gad, I would not have my Lady-Sister see me now for a King's Ransom, Though --
udsbores! I know not why she should, because she is a little older, set her
eternal Clack a running upon all my Actions.


Gent. Sir, my Lady and Miss are both abroad.


Cheat. That Is well! -- Why, Gentil! here Cobblecase advises me not to look up
the young woman, but to use her kindly, and, Gadzooks! I Am in a plaguey loving
humor -- I Will try her good nature once again -- Hold -- yonder comes Sir
Charles -- My Sister will never forgive me, if I let him see her; He Is a well
spoken man, if I durst trust him, he should solicit for me, but then he is so
woundy handsome, and so amorous, I doubt he would speak one word for me, and two
for himself; as the saying is.


Enter Sir Charles Beauclair, talking to Eugenia. Sir Char. You say -- you will
not injure the 'Squire.


Eug. No, not in the least-she has sworn never to marry him, and the Law will
in time recover her right: Only this way is sooner and cheaper.


Sir Char. The Lady's free, and I Will neither oppose or assist it further -- Ha^
there he stands, how is it Brother?


Cheat. Very well, I thank you, Sir Charles.


Sir Char. Your Servant.

[is going
Cheat. Brother, you never care for my Company! you take me for a Nump-Scull; a
half-witted Fellow, and, udsb^res, would you but have me to the Tavern, you
should find, I could Drink my G'ass, Break my Jest, Kiss my Mistress with the
best of ye -- Flesh! Try old Barnaby Cheatall, at your next Jo^ial meeting.


Sir Char. You're merry, Sir -- But I Am in haste.

(Exit.
Cheat. Udsbores! Women and Wine (both Unwholsom) Pun^sh ye -- There Is a Taste
of my Wit in my ^ursing, as the whole Cargo of the Bullies lies in swearing --
There it is again, I faith! Am not I damnable Ingenions, Gentil? Live and Learn,
Sirrah, and be Hanged, and forget all, as the saying is -- what a Dickins ails
me! Hanging never comes in my Mouth, but a Qua^m comes over my Stomach -- That
cursed old Woman! Did observe how she looked like the Witch, before the last
new Ballad?


Gent. She had indeed, a v^ry Prophetic Face.


One knocks, Gentil opens the Door -- Beaumont Enters, Dressed like a Seaman.
Gent. Who would you speak with, Sir?


Beau. With Mrs. Arabella Venturewell.


Gent. She Is not here.


Beau. Now, by the Cannon's Fire, it is false -- I have come ten Thousand L^gues
to see her -- and will not be so answered.


Cheat. A terrible Fellow! Gadzooks, -- Pray, Sir, what is your business with
her?


Beau. She Is my Sister; that is sufficient for your Impertinence.


Cheat. You, the Lawful Begotten Son of Sir George Venturewell, begging your
Pardon, I believe you are mistaken, Friend, in your Father, as many a man may
be; for Sir George had never any but this Daughter.


Beau. No, ^'m not his Lawful begotten Son, not the weak offspring of --


Cheat. O Lard! what pains he takes to tell me he is the Son of a Whore?


Beau. Born in India; Bred a Bucanier: Sword and Fire have been my
play-Fellows, and Ravishing my Pleasure -- In far distant Worlds I have
scattered my rough Image, and as my Sword has cut off their dull Breed, so my
vigorous youth has left a Race of future Hero's.


Cheat A very terrible Fellow, as I hope for mercy?


Beau. Rich with the spoils of long successful War, I have visited this
Climate in search of Arabella, whom I have often heard my Father mention with
much tenderness, I am directed hither -- Therefore do not raise my Fury with
delays For Cause, or not Cause, if I am Angry, Blood must appease it.


Cheat. O Lard! O Lard! what shall I do? He Will fright me into a Kentish Ague: I
must speak him fair -- Good Sir, all your desires shall be fulfilled, have but
a minute's patience. Come along, Gentil, come along, and help me, entreat her
to speak him fair, or I Am a lost man!

-- I Will wait upon ye in a Twinkling, Sir.

(Exit with Gentil.
Beaum. It works as I could wish, it goes against me to terrify this Fool so
much, but he deserves it.


Enter Cheatall and Gentil. Cheat. Oh! Gentil! what shall I say.


Gent. The Lord knows, I don't.


Beau. Well, Sir, where is my Sister?


Cheat. Alas! I think she is vanished.


Beau. How! do you trifle with my Anger, bring me stories sit for a Baby! Blood
and Thunder! if I Unsheath my Sword, it finds a Scabbard in your Guts! Confess
-- or by the Cannons fire. --


Cheat. I do confess, that thinking of your coming, and knowing her to be a
little wild, lest she should have been out of the way, I locked her up -- But
what is now become of her, by the Cannons fire, the dreadfullest Oath I ever
heard! I cannot tell.


Beau. (aside) I shall never hold laughing.


Enter Eugenia. Eug. Oh! my Conscience! -- My tortured Conscience! -- I cannot
keep it!


Beau. What Is the matter?


Eugen. Oh! I went into the Room, where the Lady was locked up: And there is at
least a Pail full of blood -- all the Water in the Sea will never wash the
stains out -- I believe 'Squire Barnaby and Gentil have killed her, cut her to
pieces, and carried her away under their Cloaks.


Cheat. Oh! Impudence! O Lard! O Lard! Sir, I have not the heart to kill a
Chicken! I always swoon at the sight of my own Blood: speak Gentil, why thou
have never a Cloak -- That Is a strong proof, Sir -- Gentil has never a Cloak.


Eug. Why then it went all under yours -- Besides, Gentil has a large pair of
Trowsers; that I Will swear -- For you made him bring my Lady home half a Venison
Pasty in 'em, (Shrieks out.) Ah! look of their Shoes, they have Padled in it.


Beau. Ay, it is so, and so I Will be Revenged -- Cut thee small as the first
Atoms that huddled up thy senseless Carcass -- nor will I be troubled to bear
thee hence, but stamp thy vile Clay to it is kindred Dust, and leave thee here
for Rubbish?


Cheat. Oh, Sir, upon my knees I beg you would hear me.


Eug. (interposing) Hold, Sir, don't kill the Miscreant, that will bring your
self into trouble; Our Law will hang him, I warrant ye. What made him order her
(being here) to be denied.


Cheat. Ay, Good Sir, let me be hanged! That Is my Destiny! I see there is no
avoiding it -- Gentil -- Beg I may be hanged.


Gent. Pray, Sir, let my Master be hang^d.


Beau. Well, I Will try your Law -- if that fails, this, I Am sure never will. How
must we proceed, Madam?

(puts up his Sword
Eug. I Will go with ye for a Man, with the Staff of Authority, he shall order
him -- The very ^tones in the Street would turn Constables, to seize such a
Monster -- Kill a pretty Lady -- and cut her to pieces -- oh horrid!


Cheat. You are a lying Whore! if I durst tell you so?

(aside.
Beau. You Fellow! come hither.


Cheat. Run, Gentil, run -- Proffer him all I Am worth.


Beau. (aside to Gentil) When we are gone; carry him to my Lodgings; I have
told my Landlady the story, and she is provided for him.


Gent. It shall be done -- Is there no mercy?


Cheat. Ah, Lord, no mercy.


Beau. Well! we'll be with you immediately -- Come, Madam.


Eug. Ay, ay, repent and pray, do 'Squire, do.

(Exit cum Beau.
Cheat. Oh Gentill! That ever I was born! That ever I was born! -- What did he
say to thee, Gentil?


Gent. He would have had me turned evidence against your Worship, and confess
-- But I Will be hanged first?


Cheat. I Would confess, if I thought 'twou'd do me any good?


Gent. What! Confess you murdered her!


Cheat Ay, any thing! any thing! any thing -- Oh Gentil! it must be this Witch
-- she has carried her away, and spilt the blood, that her Prophecy might come
to pass?


Gent. Not unlikely, -- Sir, Sir, I have thought of a thing. --


Cheat. What is it, dear Gentil?


Gent. Suppose you and I run away, before the Constable come, I know a Friend
will conceal you, and then we may hope to make it up, or hear of her -- I cannot
think she is murdered.


Cheat. Nor I neither, except the Devil has don't? But let us away, good Gentil
-- methinks I hear this Magistrates paw, -- this Constable just behind me, his
voice hoarse with Watching, and swallowing Claret Bribes -- Oh, Gentil! if I
should fall into his Gripe!


Gent. Therefore let us hasten to avoid it -- Ah, Sir, this is no time for
Jesting.


Cheat. Too true, Gentil, but wit will overflow! I fear I shall quibble in my
Prayers, and die with a Jest in my mouth -- Come, come! Hanged! O Lard, any of
the Family of the Cheatalls hanged! O Lard, and I the only branch on it? Oh,
Gentil, it is unsupportable.


Gent. Away, away, Sir.


Cheat. Oh that over I should live to see my self hanged.

(Exeunt.
SCENE changes to a Chamber in the Temple. Enter Lywel in a Gown. Lyw. So! I Am
equipped: the young Lawyer snapp'd at the Guineas, and has furnished me
throughout, nay, left his Boy to boot; Gad, I believe he will be famous in his
Generation, he encourages Mischief so readily. Pox! -- would they would come --
I Am weary of Cook upon Littleton.


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, Sir, -- a Gentleman and two Ladies are coming up.


Lyw. It Is they -- you know your Cue.


Enter Spendall, Lady Beauclair, and Mrs. Peggy. Spend. Young Man, is
Councellor Smart within?


Boy. Sir, he is dispatching some half a score Clients, but he will do that with a
wet Finger, and wait on you immediately.


Spend. A witty Whoreson; what, a wet Finger to lick up the Gold, ha! -- Well,
tell him I Am here.


Boy. Yes, Sir.

(Exit.
Peg. Fine Chambers, Mother! and a sine place, I Will swear! (...) Vather would
never let me walk here, zed, 'twan't sit for young Ladies. -- I Will vaw, I like
it waundily.


La. Beau. Here were Counselors not unsit for you, but Husband was never free
you should be seen.


Spend. Now I Am, by Promise, the happy man: my charming Dear, let me beg you would
entertain no other Thoughts. -- Where Is this Lawyer? -- a Moments delay seems
an Age.

(Exit Spendall.
La. Beauc. Well, Daughter, feel how my Heart beats; I Am almost afraid to
venture on him for thee.


Peg. Don't tell me of your Fears, -- now you have put a Husband in my Head, I
will be married, so I will.


La. Beauc. Ah! send thee good Luck! I shall fall in a Fit, I believe, whilst
thou art marrying.


Peg. I fear not marrying, not I.


Enter Spendall and Lywell. Lyw. Well, Sir, I understand the business. -- Your
Father, considering your Extravagance, has done more than I thought sit to tell
ye; but after such a Proposal, you may hear it all -- What! this is the pretty
Creature, I suppose, you are about marrying.


Peg. Yes, Sir.


La. Beauc. Lord, Peggy, you're too forward! I wonder on ye now: -- Sir, she is
my Daughter, and she will be worth Eight thousand pounds, and a better Penny; I
would not have her cast away, Sir.


Lyw. To be thrown into a young Gentleman's Arms with a great Estate, will be a
good Cast, I take it, Madam.


La. Beauc. If I were satisfied in that!


Lyw. Look ye, Madam, I am a man of business, and many words are but
supersluous. -- Hum! hogh! Do You see, here is the Settlement of his Father's
Estate -- Eight hundred pounds a Year, and some Thousands in Money, a well-made
Fellow into the bargain: Let me tell ye, Madam, such Offers don't stick of hand
now adays; you may read the Writings if you please; if you dislike 'em -- look
ye, I have a Match in my Eye for the Gentleman beyond your Daughters; though, I
must own, this young Lady is much handsomer.


Peg. (aside to her Mother) Do You hear what he says now! you will never leave your
Impartinence, as Vather calls it, -- Pray be quiet; I Am satisfied, so I am.


Law. Will you read 'em, Madam?


La. Beauc. (reads) Noverint, etc. -- Nay, Sir, I don't understand lay, -- But
you look like a good honest man, Sir, and I dare take your Word; I wish you had
seen my Daughter sooner.


Spend. (aside) Well said, Mother-in-law -- that is to be in love with every
new Face. -- I must secure the young one, lest she is of the same mind.

(Goes to Mrs. Peggy.
La. Beauc. I Would willingly have him keep his Coach and six -- I think the young
Woman's Face will bear it -- and their Estates, I hope.


Lyw. No doubt on it, Madam, -- a handsome Wife, and a Coach and six, How it
attracts all Eyes, -- the Envy or the Wonder of the Park.


Spend. Well, you may do what you please, but the dear one and I are agreed. --
we will to Church without ye, if ye dispute it any longer.


Peg. Ay, and so we will, I vow and swear, Mr. Spendall.


La. Beauc. For shame, what do you talk on! why, it is past the Cannick hour.


Spend. Madam, all People of Quality marry at Night.


Lyw. That they may be sure to go to Bed, before they repent; a day's
consideration might take off their Appetite.


La. Beauc. Nay, if People of Quality do it, I Am for ye.


Peg. And so I am, I vow and swear.


Lyw. First, Ladies, be pleased to visit my withdrawing Room, I have Sweetmeats
and Trinkets there fit for the Fair sex, which secures me Female Visitants.


Spend. Agreed, we will plunder him.


Lyw. Then we will seek to join this amorous Pair,
And drown in Pleasure Thoughts of future Care.
[Exeunt.
Enter Flywife, pulling in Mrs. Flywife.
Mr. Flyw. Come, prithee Puggy, do. --


Mrs. Flyw. I Am not in humor.


Mr. Flyw. What, don't you love none, Fubby?


Mrs. Flyw. I hate Mankind, would they were in one consuming blaze, tho'I were
in the midst of 'em.

(flying from him, and Exit.
Mr. Flyw. Hum, a consuming blaze; what is the matter now? this is some damned
Intrigue has gone cross: I heard her bid Jenny come into this Room, and she would
be with her: That Is a Queen, I dare swear, at the bottom; I Will creep behind the
Hangings and hear their Discourse.

(Exit.
Enter Mrs. Flywife and Jenny. Mrs. Flyw. To be tricked thus by a Boy, a Booby;
sure this will humble the damned Opinion I have of my own Wi^, and make me
confess to my self, at least, I am a Fool.


Jenn. Ay, your Ladyship was pleased to say, I might pass for his Nurse. Indeed
I believe he has had as good Instructors, for I find he is old enough to be too
cunning for his Benefactress.


Mrs. Flyw. What did he say when you parted?


Jen. Madam, I have told you several times; I no sooner showed him the House,
but he leaped back and seemed surpised; then recovering himself, he said, he
would follow me in: I, according to your Directions, watched carefully, but no
pretty Master came: Nothing vexes me so much, as that the little dissembling
Sharper should get the Ring.


Mrs. Flyw. Pish, I don't value the Trifle three farthings; what is my doting
Keeper good for, unless it be to give me more? But to lose the tempting Youth!


Jen. Pray add Sir Francis Wildlove's Loss to it:


Mrs. Flyw. Peace, Fool; I Am thinking why the House should startle him; ha! is
not here a sine Woman lodges, much retired, that seems of Quality?


Jen. Yes, Madam; I never saw her but once, she is a perfect Charmer.


Mrs. Flyw. It must be so; this is some perdu Devil of hers, that durst not
venture in, for fear his Constancy should be suspected: Pray watch who comes to
her, dog 'em, do something for my ease.


Jen. Madam, I will.


Mrs. Flyw. Get me a Hackney-coach, I Will range the Town over, but I Will find Sir
Francis Wildlove.


Jen. My Master will be mad.


Mrs. Flyw. Then he may be sober again, better he mad than I; if he be angry,
it is but dissembling a little nauseous fondness, and all is well again.

[Excunt.
Re-enter Mr. Flywife. Flyw. Is it so, thou worst Offspring of thy Grannam Eve?
but I Will stifle my Rage, lest without further Proof she wheedles me into a
Reconciliation, take another Coach and follow her, catch her amongst her
Comrades, without the possibility of an Excuse, cut her Windpipe, and send her
to Hell, without the possibility of a Reprieve: Damn her, damn her.

(Exit.
SCENE, Bellinda's Apartment. Enter Bellinda.
Bell. The little hurry of my quick Remove has took up all my Thoughts, and I
have not considered what I am about. See him no more, him whom I could not live
a day, an hour, without! No more behold his Eye Balls, tremble with respectful
passion! -- Hear no more the soft falling Accents of his charming Tongue! view
him dying at my feet no more! -- O Virtue! take me to thee; chase from my
struggling Soul all this fond tenderness: Secure me now, and I Am thy Votary for
ever.


Enter Beaumont. Beaum. Madam, neglecting even my Love, I come to wait on your
Commands.


Bell. Such Thanks as an indiscreet and wretched Woman can return are yours:
What said Sir Charles?


Beaum. He received the Message as Wretches that are afraid to dye, hear the
condemning Voice, or as the Brave the loss of Victory, or the Ambitious that of
Crowns: He begs, that he may haste to plead his Cause, and seems to live alone
upon the Hopes his Love and Innocence may alter your Resolves.


Bell. O stop him, Sir, some moments longer, till I am just ready to be gone. He
has a Friend too powerful within, and I must fly, or I shall never overcome.


Beaum. I Will prevent his coming till you send. Your Servant, Madam.

[Exit.
Bell. Honor and Love, oh the torture to think they are domestic foes, that
must destroy the Heart that harbors 'em! Had my Glass but been my Idol, my
Mind loose, unconstant, wavering, like my Sex, then I might have 'scap'd these
pangs; Love, as passing Meteors, with several fires just warms their Breasts,
and vanishes, leaving no killing Pain behind, it is only foolish: I have made a
God of my Desire greater than ever the Poets feigned: My Eyes received no
Pleasure but what his sight gave me; no Music charmed my Ears, but his dear
Voice: Wracks, Gibbets, and Dungeons, can they equal losing all my Soul
admires? Why named I them? Can there be greater Wracks

Than what despairing parting Lovers find,
To part when both are true, both would be kind?

The End of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE, Bellinda's Apartment. Enter Bellinda. Bell. HE comes, keep back, full
Eyes, the springing Tears! -- and thou poor trembling Heart! now be manned with
all thy strongest stoutest Resolutions; there will be need.


^nter Sir Charles. Sir Cha. Ah! whither shall I throw me? what shall I say? --
Mariamne hangs like Ic^icles upon my Tongue, but Bellinda flows: Oh Bellinda!
-- I charge thee by that dear Name, hear and pity me.


Bell. (coldly) What would you say?


Sir Cha. Why nothing; I do not know that Voice, it has stopped the rising
words, and I must only answer with my sighs.


Bell. Sir Charles, we have both been punished with unwarrantable Love.


Sir Cha. Punished! Have we been punished? -- Now, by all my Woes to come, by
all my Transports past, all thought of my Bellinda, there is not a Pang, a
Groan, but brought: its pleasure with it: Oh! it is happier far to sigh for
thee, than to have enjoyed another.


Bell. You interrupt me when I just begin, -- Grant it true, -- we might have
lived till weary grown of one another, till you, perhaps, might coldly say, I
had a Mistress. -- Now to part, when at the mention of each other's Name ou^
Hearts will rise, our Eyes run over, it is better much than living to
indifferency, which Time and Age would certainly have brought.


Sir Cha. Oh, never, never; though the Bauble gaudy Beauty die, yet Sense and
Humor still remain -- on that I should have doated.


Bell. You cannot guess your future by your present Thoughts; or, if you could,
I am not to be moved forsaking thee; and when I have said that, I need not add
all Pleasures, -- in remote and unfrequented shades I Will pass my solitary
hours, and like a Recluse, waste the remalnder of my wretched days.


Sir Cha. And am I the Cause of this melancholy penance? Must my unhappy Love
rob the World of its fairest Ornament? No, Madam, stay and enjoin me what you
please; condemn my Tongue to everlasting silence; let me now and then but gaze,
and tell you with my Eyes what is acting in my Heart; or -- if you will retire,
permit me to follow, under the pretense of hunting; the Air, a thousand things
I can invent, create new Friendship, caress the whole Country over, to have an
opportunity of seeing you, though at a hateful distance, and surrounded by
severost Friends.


Bell. Ha! is this the awful Love, I thought possessed ye? How fatally I was
mistaken! What! pursue me to my Father's House! fix on my Name a lasting Blot,
a Deathless Infamy, pollute my Native Air with unhallowed Love, where all my
Ancestors have, for Ages, flourished, and left an honest Fragrancy behind! Mark
me, Sir, you know I do not use to break my word. -- If by Letters, Messages, or
the least appearance (though cautiously, as Treasons plotted against the State)
you approach me, I Will fly the Kingdom, or, if that is too little, the World.


Sir Cha. No, it is I have been mistaken. -- Now, by all the Wracks I feel, not
worth a Sigh, a parting drop; no Regard of Tenderness, no Beam of Pity, from
those dear Eyes, nor sidelong Glance to view my sad Distraction! Methinks you
have already left me, and I am got amongst my Fellow Madmen, tearing my Hair,
chained to the Ground, foaming, and digging up the Earth, yet in every smallest
Interval of Sense calling on Bellinda.


Bell. A noble Birth, a censorious World, a mourning Father, all plead against
thee. Oh, talk no more, lest you force my Hand to some desperate Act; and yet
your Words pierce my Bosom with greater pain than pointed Steel.


Sir Char. I see you are resolved on my Undoing, fixed like my relentless Fate;
therefore I Will not urge another syllable, but quietly, as dying Men when Hope's
all past, quit Life and their dearest Friends, for ever, ever leave thee.


Bell. That sad silent Look discovers such inward Worlds of Woe, it strikes me
through, staggers my best Resolves, removes the Props I have been raising for
my sinking Fame, and, blind with passion, I could reel into thy Arms. -- Tell
me, on what are thy Thoughts employed?


Sir Char. On the Curse of Life, imposed on us without our Choice, and almost
always attended with tormenting Plagues.


Bell. Yet we may meet again, in Peace and Joy, when this Gigantick Honor
appears no Bugbear, and our Desires lawfully be crowned. -- It is a guilty
Thought; nor shall I ever dare to form it to a Wish.


Sir Cha. ^ut do thou think we may? [embracing her.]

What! uncontrolled clasp thee thus! Oh, Ecstasy! with wild Fury run over each
trembling beauteous Limb, and grasp thee as drowning Men the dear Bark from
whence they were thrown.


Bell Away, away! What are we doing? Divide him, Heaven, from my fond guilty
Eyes; set Seas, and Earth, and Worlds of Fire between us, for Virtue, Fate, and
Honor, with an united Cry, have doomed, that we must meet no more.

(Exit.
Sir Cha. To raging Seas, Sieges, and Fields of Battle will I fly, Pleasures
and Pastimes to the Woes I feel. Oh, Bellinda!

(Exit.
SCENE Changes.
Enter Gentil. Gent. I could laugh my Heart sore, to see what a condition the
Fool my Master's in; every knocking at the Door is as good as a Dose of Rubarb,
and every Noise makes him leap like a Vaulter. Ha! he is coming, the poor Baby
dares not be alone.


(Cheatall, peeping.) Cheat. Gentil! Is the Coast clear?


Genesis Yes, Sir.


Cheat. Oh Gentil!


Genesis What Is the matter? You look worse frighted than you were.


Cheat. Ay, and well I may; you leave me alone, and I shall grow distracted: I
have I have seen a Ghost.


Genesis A Ghost! what, Mrs. Arabella's Ghost?


Cheat. Nay, I did not stay to examine that; for, as soon as ever I perceived
the Glympse on it, I shut up my Eyes, and felt my way out of the Chamber.


Genesis Where was this Ghost, Sir?


Cheat. Oh! behind the Bed, behind the Bed, Gentil.


Genesis Lord, Sir, 'twas nothing but the Cloak; I hung it there.


Cheat. Was it not? OF my Conscience, I thought it had been a Giant of a Ghost.
-- Hark, hark! what is that?

[he starts. (A Cry without, seeming at a distance.
Boy without. A full and true Relation of a horrid and bloody Murder,
committed on the Body of Mrs. Arabella (...), a young Lady, by one 'Squire
Barnaby Cheatall and his Man Gentil; showing how they locked her up in the
dark, then cut her to pieces, and carried the pieces away under their Cloaks,
and threw 'em into Chelsey-Reach, where, at low Water, they were f^d.


Cheat. O Lard! O Lard! the pieces found, Gentil!


Genesis So it seems, Sir.


Boy. (s^eming farther off) A full and true Relation of a, etc.


Cheat. Nay, now we shall be hanged for certain; not the least Hopes: Oh! oh!
oh!

(Crying.
Genesis Come, Sir, have a little Courage.


Cheat. To confess the truth to thee, I never had any Courage in my Life; and
this would make the stoutest man tremble: Oh!


Genesis I am thinking, Sir, -- why -- we was not at Chelsey-Reach that day.


Cheat. No, no; but, may be, they will swear we was.


Genesis My Lady and Miss hated her, -- sure they have not been so barbarous.


Cheat. Like enough, -- pin-up Petticoats are as convenient as Cloaks, --
besides, my Sister is a Fury; I Have heard her threaten pulling Folks a pieces a
hundred times, and now she has don't. -- We Will even peach.


Genesis What, your own Sister!


Cheat. Ay, my own Mother, to save my self: -- I say, we will peach.


Genesis That Is not so good, for if they prove themselves innocent, 'twill fall
upon us again. -- Hark ye, Sir, there is only Eugenia can witness against us, --
suppose we tried to stifle her Evidence with a swindging B^ibe; I never knew a
Chambermaid refuse greasing in the Fist upon any Account.


Cheat. My dear Gentil, -- if she inclines, my Offers shall be so large, that
for the rest of her Life she shall have nothing to do, but stu^y to ^ake her
Hands white, that she may burn all her Frippery, and be able to spa^ it with
Quality.


Genesis Sir, I ll send her Propositions.


Cheat. (half draws his Sword) Do, but if the stubborn Jade will not compl^,
appoint a private meeting, and stop her Mouth with this -- (...) you understand
me.


Genesis Yes, Sir.

(Aside. I find his Conscience would swallow a real Murder. -- Sir, if you
please, we'll go in and write what you design to offer her.


Cheat. Let us. If you meet her, Gentil, and she is surly, -- Remember, -- ugh,
-- ugh.

(I^ls draws his Sword. [Exeunt.
Enter Sir Francis Wildlove, and to him Searchwell. Searchw. Sir Charles sends
you word, he is ba^e ordering his Affairs, designing with all speed to travel,
and says, he shall never see you more, only to take his leave.


Sir Fran. Hey day! OF my Conscience, this charming little Beaucl^ir has me
under a Spell, and I shall meet with nothing but Disappointments till I submit
to her.


Searchw. Ay, Sir, you would soon find the true Pleasures of virtuous Love, and
a satisfaction in denying your Appetite.


Sir Fran. Preaching Fool, hold you your Peace.


Enter a Serv^nt. Serve. Sir, a Gentlewoman below desires to speak with you.


Searchw. (aside) So, there is no great danger my (...) should Reform, when the
Devil is always at hand with a Temptation in Petticoats.


Sir Fran. Searchwell, wait on the Lady up.


Searchw. Ah Lord!


Sir Fran. Sirrah, I shall break your Head, if you don't leave this canting
trade.


Searchw. I am gone, Sir.

(Exit, and Reenters with Mrs. Dresswell.
Dressw. (aside) This is a mad Message my Lady has sent me with to her Lover;
I Am afraid he will kick me for my News; hanged, he is a Gentleman, and I Will venture.


Sir Fran. Ha! pretty Mrs. Dreswell, this is a favor I never received from you
before; Must I own the Blessing only to your Good Will, or is my Happiness
greater? Did your Lady send?


Mrs. Dressw. I came from my Lady, Sir, but what Happiness you will find I know
not; methinks she has done a strange mad thing.


Sir Fran. What Is the matter?


Mrs. Dressw. She Is married, sir.


Sir Fra. The Devil she is.


Mrs. Dressw. Even so: she said, those that she fancied cared not for her,
therefore she resolved to bestow her self and Fortunes on a secret Lover, whom
indeed her Ladyship owns she never valued, a Gentleman you know, sir, the
worthy Mr. Sp^ndall.


Sir Fran. (walks about enraged) Damnation! that Rake, Bully, Sharper! damn it,
damn it.


Mrs. Dressw. Here Is a Note where they are; she desires to see you.


Sir Fran. Tell her I esteem her so much, I Will cut the Rascal's Throat she has
thought sit to call Husband; I Will do it, Madam, though I Am hanged at the Door;
it is the only wa^ I can express my Love to her now.


Mrs. Dressw. Would I were well gone; I Will tell her, sir.

[Exit.
Sir Fran. Married! and to Sp^ndall! Oh, that I could despise her: Ha! I find
it is worse with me than I thought, what makes this gnaw my Heart so else? My
fellow-Libertines will laugh to see m^ play the fool and kill my self: Oh, I
could tear in piecemeal the Villain that betrayed her to endless Ruin.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, there is another Lady, out of a Coach, coming up
stairs.


Sir Fran. Blockhead, tell her I desire she would break her Neck down again, and
oblige me in riding post to the Devil. My Coach there?

[Throws the fellow down. (Exit.
Servant. O my Nose, my Nose; why what is the matter now? I thought I should
have had a Reward for my News; and so I have, I think. O, my Nose.


Enter Mrs. Flywife. Mrs. Flyw. Where Is ^ir Francis? Did you tell him I was
coming up?


Serve. Yes, and he says, you may go to the Devil, he has spoiled the Ornament
of my face, and flung into his Coach sta^k mad.


Mrs Fly. Much of Passion shows much of Love, my Coach shall follow his, I Will
not leave him so.

[Exit.
SCENE changes. Enter Mrs. Beauclair, Dresswell and a Woman. Mrs. B. I must
confess I am Fool enough to be pleased with Sir Francis's concern? But, Oh, my
Uncle's troubles draws a vail upon my rising Joys, and damps all Mirth: Poor
Bellinda! she sent a Note to tell me her Disorder was such, she could not see
me; with much ado I have persuaded Sir Charles to come hither, for half an
hour, and look into this unlucky piece of Matrimony.


Dress. Madam, they are coming.


Mrs. B. In, in, then?

(Exit.
Enter Lady Beauclair, Spendall, Miss Peggy, Lywell. Lyw. Here give me a Glass
of Wine, Mrs. Bride's long life, and lasting happiness.


M. Peg. Thank ye, Sir, give me a Glass, you.


Spend. To me, my Love?


M. Peg. Yes.


Spend. Yours, for ever.

(Drinks it oss.
Lady B. Lard, Child, you will drink too much Wine.


M. Peg. Pray be quiet, I Will drink what I please; I am Married now, why sure,
I Will have none of your Tutoring, I Cod, I Will long for every thing I see, shall not
I, you?


Spend. I, and have it too, my dear.


M. Peg. I Cod, I Will long for Green Pease at Christmas, so I will.


Lady B. My heart aches, this great concern has made me sick, give me a Glass.


M. Peg. I am Mothers own Daughter, feth I dare confess it now, I always used
to be sick for a Glass of Wine, ho, ho?


Lady B. Sure the Wench is mad

(One knocks.
Spend. Ha, dear Ladies go in, it is some body from Sir Charles, I believe, I
would willingly speak with 'em first.


M. Peg. Ay, ay, let us go in, there is more Wine within.


Lady B. Be sure you make your Estate out plain.


Spend. Yes, yes, hark ye, ^ywell, carry 'em out of Ear-shot, lest it should
prove a Dunner.


Lyw. I warrant; Come Ladies, we'll in, and take a Bumper.


M. Peg. O la, you make me so blush --

(Knocks again.
Spend. Boy, open the door?

(Exeunt.
Enter Sir Francis. Sir Fran. What, grown so great already, that I must wait
half an hour for admittance.


Spend. (aside.) He is come from Sir Charles, I ll speak him fair: Sir Francis
Wildlove, your very humble servant, I beg ten thousand Pardons.


Sir Fran. Keep your fawning, and bestow it on Fools; it is lost on me, and will
be grossly answered. I tell ye, you are a Rascal.


Spend. Poverty makes many a man so, Sir


Sir Fran. A presuming Rascal do I not know thee for the dreg of humane kind,
and shall thy detested Arms receive her Virgin Beauties; life of goodness, Soul
of Honor, Wit, and Sweetness, the only Woman upon Earth I could have loved?


Spend. Sure you design to banter me: Soul of Wit, and Sweetness; the Devil
might had her Sweetness for me. 'Twas her Money I married; faith, Sir Francis, I
always took her for a Fool?


Sir Fran. Prophaner! this last action only calls her Judgment in question, thy
Death is Justice, first to deceive, and then abuse her, draw.


Spend. I will draw, though, Gad, I would have sworn, never to have fought on
this occasion.


Enter Mrs. Beauclair and Dresswell laughing. Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha.


Dress. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Fran. Nay, Madam, I Will not disturb your mirth, but be so calm to wish it
may continue.

(puts up his Sword.
Spend. What Is the meaning of all this? how came Mrs. Beauclair here?


Sir Fran. Are you not married to this Lady?


Spend. No su^ Honor was e^r designed for me: Lard, Sir, I am married to Miss
(...), Lady Beaucla^'s Daughter, my ^ool's within, now I hope I may call her


Mrs. B. I (...), Sir Francis, you Counterplotted me, knew the truth, and only
acte^ this concern.


Sir Fran. No, by (...), nor perfe^ly my own heart, till this severe Trial
searched it; did I dissemble, Madam, your sense would soon discover it, but by
my Soul, I love you truly, and if you dare venture on me, my future life shall
show how much I honor you.


Mrs. B. Can you then leave all the pretty City Wives, which a Man of your
Parts and (...), in a (...) of an hours seige, could overcome? In fine, all the
charming variety of what was pretty, or agreeable in the whole Sex, and he
confined? Oh, that is a hard word to me.


Sir Fran. With more delight than those surfc^ing Joys (that always left a
sting behind 'em) afforded.


Mrs. B. Well, Sir, if you can give me your heart, I can allow you great (...):
but when we have played the Fool and married, don't you when y^u have been
pleased abroad, come (...) surly: let your looks be kind, your Conversation
easy, and tho I sho^d know you have been with a Mistress, I Would meet you with a
smile.


Sir Fran. When I forsake such Charms, for senseless mercenary Creatures, you
shall correct me with the greatest punishment upon Earth, a frown.


Mrs. B. You Will fall into the Romantic style, Sir Francis: Mr. Spendall,
shall not we see your Bride?


Spend. Yes, Madam, and I hope your Ladyship will prove my Friend to Sir
Charles.


Mrs. B. Ay, ay, we'll all speak for ye; had she mist ye, there was no great
likelihood, as the case was, she would have done better.


Sir Fran. Where is the pretty Miss? pray conduct us to her.


Mrs. B. Sir Charles will be here (...), I long to hear my Aunt set out the
greatness of the match.


Spend. This way, Sir.

(Exeunt.
Enter Mr. Beaumont, Arabella and Engenia. Arab. Is this the House, Enge^ia?


Eug. Yes, Madam.


Arab. Well, thou art a lucky Girl, to recover my Writings with such speed.


Eug. Madam, the 'Squire would have parted with a limb, if I had required it.


Beau. Madam, it was your promise, whenever you possessed your Fortune, (though I Am
sure I never insisted on it) you would be mine.


Arab I have no occasion to break my word, Mr. Beaumont.


Beau. Then I am happy.


Arab. Mrs. Eugenia, will you enquire where these Bride-folks are?


Eug. See, Madam, they are coming.


Enter Lady Beauclair, Mrs. Beauclair, Miss Peggy, Sir Francis Wildlove,
Spendall, Lywell. Arab. Will the 'Squire be here?


Eug. Yes, Madam, I told him of his Cousin's Marriage, and he seems pleased his
Sister has been tricked.


Peg. Lard, you, what do you bring one to these folks, they will do nothing but
jeer us?


Spend. Oh, my dear, carry your self civily, and every body will love ye.


Mrs. B. Sir Charles will be here presently to wish you Joy, Madam?


Lady B. So, then we shall have noise enough, but I Will be as loud as he, I Will
warrant him.


Mrs. B. And louder too, or I Am mistaken.


Enter Sir Charles Beauclair. Sir Char. Neice, why have you dragged me to this
unwilling Penance, if the Girl is ruined what is it to me? my thoughts are full
of something else.


Mrs. B. My Uncle, my Father, and my Friend, yet these names do not express
half my tenderness: The best of Guardians and of Men: pray change your thoughts
of Travel, I Will study ten thousand things for your Diversion.


Sir Char. Not Angels Eloquence should alter me; I Will act the uneasy part no
longer, that Woman, the bar to all my Happiness, by Heaven, she is not my Wife:
it is true, the Ceremony of the Church has passed between us, but she knows I
went no further.


Mrs. B. Stay then, and live asunder.


Sir Char. No; so, Madam, you have married your Daughter.


Lady B. Yes, what then? he has a good Estate, when his Father dies, beside the
present settlement, and ready Money.


Sir Char. Poor deluded Women! he has no Estate, nor Relation worth owning, Mr.
Spendall, generous Charity induced me to relieve your wants, you have betrayed
this young woman, but use her well -- I have not much to say -- I suppose they
were both so willing, a very little pains effected the matter.


Lady B. How, Rascal! Devil! have ye married my Daughter -- and have ye
nothing, Sirrah?


Spend. Ask Mrs. Peggy that.


Peg. You make one laugh, I vow and swear.


Lady B. Beast! I don't mean so -- But have ye no Estate, Sirrah?


Spend. No, faith, Madam, not I; my Wife has enough for us both, and what is
matter.


Lady B. Oh, Dog! Come away, Peggy, we'll go to Doctors Commons, and thou shall
be Divorced.


Peg. I will not be Divorced, I Have got a Husband, and I don't care, I Will stay with
him.


Spend. That Is kindly said, and I engage you shall not repent it.


Lady B. Why Counselor Smart, why Counselor Smart, did not ye tell me --


Sir Fran. Hey day, Counselor Smart! why this is a Fellow many degrees worse
than your new Son in-Law. Hearkye Friend, leave this Counterfeiting Trade -- or
you will lose your Ears; Reform, as your Friend has done, and Marry.


Lyw. Hang him, Rogue: He Is a Smock-fac'd Fellow, and Handsome: I shall do no
good with the Women.


Spend. (aside) Go, be gone, Devil, don't disgrace me, I Will meet you at the old
place.

[Exit. Lyw.
Mrs. B. Look what a p^ff the old Lady's in -- Aunt, you always said you would
match your Daughter your self, you did not desire a cunninger head than your
own.


Lady B. Well, Mrs. Flippant! I hope your mad tricks will bring you a Bastard
home at last, and that will be worse.


Sir Char. Nay, Madam, spare my Neice: she ever was most repectful to you, till
you abused her beyond all bearing.


Sir Fran. Mind not a mad Woman.


Enter Cheatall. Cheat. Your Servant Gentiles! -- O La! Sister, I hear strange
news, Cousin Peggy's married to a Sharper, a Rake, a Bully, they say! I told
you so, I told you so! Gadzooks! you would not be warned.


Lady B. Well, Booby! what is that to you, (...) underhead.

(strikes him.
Cheat. Pox take your nasty Fist! you love sighting plaguily.


Lady B. Well, 'twas passion, you may excuse it, when you consider my
afflictions -- To make ye amends, I Will come live with you, and take care of
your Estate, and Mrs. Arabella's.


Cheat. No, no, don't mistake your self, I Will be a stingy Cur no longer, but
drink my Bottle freely, nor sneak out of the Company without paying my Club,
for fear of having my Pocket examined by you.

O Lard! the Ghost! the Ghost.

(Seeing Arabella, runs behind Spendall.
Spend. What, is the man mad?


Mrs. B. You don't understand the whim.


Arab. Come gi' me thy hand, old Boy, we'll be Friends; I am no Ghost, I assure
ye.


Cheat. And -- is not that the Hectoring Spark your Brother, with his
monsterous whiskers pared?


Beau. Not her Brother, Sir, but one who hopes to pretend to the Lady, by
another Title.


Cheat. Oh! I find how matters ha'been carried -- Much good may do you with her
-- Gadzooks, she wa'n't sit for me, -- I Am a Fool, you know, Sister.


Arab. You must grant me one Request.


Cheat. What Is that?


Arab. To forgive Gentil; he is going to be married to Eugenia, but shall have
no Joys without your Pardon.


Cheat. Ay, ay, I forgive him, and leave his Wife to punish him; she has a
Fruitful Invention, let him take care it does not one day fall upon his own
head -- Gentil! I am Friends; and will give thee something toward Housekeeping.


Gent. I thank you, Sir.


Eug. I Am sure, it went to my very heart to fright your Worship so.


Cheat. You are a wheedling Baggage; but it is all well, I Am contented.


Enter Mrs. Flywife, in a fright. Mrs. Flyw. O save me! save me! I Am pursued by
a bloody-minded Monster.


Sir Fran. What Is the matter? is it your Husband, Madam?


Mrs. Flyw. It Is my Tyrant, the Devil it is.


Enter Flywife, his Hanger drawn. Cheat. Nay, hold ye, Mistress, don't ye run
behind me; udsbores, so I may have the sword in my Guts by mistake.


Beau. We'll all protect the Lady.


Mr. Flyw. Protect! damnation; do but hear how vile a thing it is.


Cheat. Hear! what do I hear, and see! why, sure this is our Brother Allen, my
Sister's first Husband, we thought dead in the Indies.


Sir Char. What Is that? speak again, but speak a loud, lest I should only catch
the sound of Happiness, and be deceived.


Mr. Flyw. Has my damned Jilt brought me to a greater plague, my Wife? but I Will
own it to punish her, though I suffer an abominable torment till next fair wind,
the Sea's my Element; once there, I Am free. Well, I confess I have found a Wife
here. Why stare you so? I am not the first has thought the sight unpleasing.


Sir Char. No, no, talk on; all are hushed, as if a midnight silence re^gned.


La. Beauc. Who Is this? Are you my first Husband Allen? And did you pretend you
was dead, rather than come home to me, Sirrah?


Mr. Flyw. Here Is a sine greeting.


Mrs. Flyw. How! your Husband! he is mine before Heaven: Mr. Flywise, will not vou
own me. Fubby?


Mr. Flyw. In troth, I think there is scarce a Pi^ to choose; but you have
disobliged me last, therefore avaunt, Strumpet, come hither, thou natural noisie
Spouse.


Mrs. Flyw. That Shape and Face preferred to me?


La. Beauc. I Will be revenged of her, I Am resolved.

(Flies on her.
Mrs. Beau. I Am all Amazement, Sir Francis; save the Lady, because she was my
Friend; return her Ring, that may help console her.


Sir Fran. (parting 'em) Hold, Ladies, Ladies: March off, here is the bountiful
Present; come, come, I doubt not but you have a private Pocket.


Mrs. Flyw. The Devil take you all.

(Exit.
Mrs. Beaum. What Miracle is this? Madam, leave your passion, and explain it.


Mrs. Peg. Is my own Vather come again? O La.


Spend. Your own Vather come again! O La! Then, I fear, your Portion is not at
your own dispose, Miss.


Mrs. Peg. Good Lord! does that disturb ye?


Mr. Flyw. Gentlemen, now your Wonder is a little over, pray let me ask why all
this Company, and why that Gentleman, whom I know not, appears transported.


Sir Fran. I Will tell you, Sir; 'twas my hard Fate to marry your Lady, before
your death was well confirmed, that kept it some time private, when, before we
came together, a Quarrel, from her uneasy Temper, arose, and I swore never to
bed her; yet, for our Friends and Conveniency's sake, we seemed to live like
Man and Wife. Speak; Madam, is not this true?


La. Beauc. Yes, yes, it is true, the more shame for ye.


Sir Cha. Here, Sir, receive her, and with her a new Date of Happiness.


Mr. Flyw. I guess my future Happiness by the past; but since it must be so --


Sir Cha. Dear Neice, go to my House, and deliver up whatever is that Lady's.


Mrs. Beau. You Will send to Bellinda?


Sir Cha. My self, my self shall be the Messenger;
In my eager Mind I Am already there:
Methinks the Earth's enchanted, and I tread on Air.
(Exit.
Mrs. Beau. So, there is one pleased, I Am sure.


Cheat. Well, Brother, you're welcome home, as I may say: Why, here is Cousin
Peggy grown up and married since you went.


Mr. Flyw. What! Is that Bud come to the Blossom of Matrimony? all by the
Mother's Contrivance; a wise business, I Believe. Sir, I shall make bold to
examine into your Estate before I give my Daughter any.


Spend. Say ye so? and if you give your Daughter none, I shall prove a second
Mr. Flywife.


Mrs. Peg. What Is that, Bold-face?


Spend. Nothing, Child.


La. Beauc. Ay, that is a hopeful Match; I could find in my Heart to lock my
self up, and never see your ugly Faces again.

(Exit.
Mrs. Beaum. Let Us follow, and appease her.


Arab. And as we go, you shall tell me what makes Sir Charles thus overjoyed:


Mrs. Beaum. I will; and when we have done what he desired, we'll go all to
Bellinda's, there we shall find my Uncle.


Sir Fran. Come, Beaumont, let us see the end of this surprising Accident.


Mr. Flyw. How like a Dog a Man looks once escaped!
Forced back into the Matrimonial Noose;
It Is a damned Joy to find the Wife I Would loose.
Exit. SCENE, Bellinda's Apartment. On a Table lies her Hood and Scarf. Sure
some unseen Power holds me a moment longer; ah! it is no Power, but foolish
Love, that shows the paths which carries me from Beauclair, leading to Death,
or, what is worse, Despair.


Enter Betty. Bett. Madam, the Coach is ready.


Bell. I Am coming, be sure you let none have admittance.

[Goes toward the Table.
Bett. I will not, Madam.


Enter Sir Charles Beauclair. Bet. Oh, Sir! my Lady charged you should not
enter.


Sir Cha. Away, you Trifler; where is my Bellinda?


Bell. This is unmanly; not conquer your Desires, nor obey my positive Commands!


Sir Cha. Oh, stay and hear me; let me hang upon your Knees, for I am out of
breath, clasp and prattle over thee, like a glad Mother when she hugs her
firstborn Blessing after the pangs of Death; mine, like hers, is Folly all,
but full of Fondness.


Bell. Oh:


Sir Cha. Sigh not, my Fair; by Heaven I am free from any Chains but thine,
free as thy own clear Soul's from Vice.


Bell. How! what mean ye? oh, rise, and stop my growing Fears, Where Is your
Wife? is she well?


Sir Cha. Think not so basely of me, she is well, and in her Husband's Arms, oh,
my Bellinda! in her Husband's Arms; her first and only Husband, All^n, is
returned.


Bell. Forgetting all colder nicer forms, in thy faithful Bosom let me receive
such News.


Sir Cha. My Life.


Bell. My Soul. (embracing.


Sir Cha. Ha! the transporting Joy has caught her Ros^e Breath, and those
bright Eyes are in their snowy Lids retired: Oh, this is more, much more than
ten thousand words could have expressed. 'Wake, my Bellinda, it is thy Beauclair
calls.


Bell. Do not view my blushing Face, I fear I have offended that Virgin Modesty
by me still practiced and adored; now we must stand on forms, till time and
decency shall crown our Wishes.


Sir Cha. My Goddess, Conqueress, by thee for ever I am directed.


Bell. I know thy honest Heart so well, I do not scruple the truth of what you
have said.


Sir Cha. You need not, Dearest; see, all our Friends come to confirm it.


Enter Sir Francis Wildlove, Beaumont, Cheatall, Mrs. Beauclair and Arabella.
Mrs. Beauc. Joy to my dear Bellinda.


Arab. Permit a stranger to rejoice at the Reward of Virtue and constant Love.


Bell. Pardon my Answers, Ladies, when I confess I scarce know where I am.


Sir Cha. Now I can mind the Affairs of my Friend; Sir Francis, I observe you
very assiduous to my Neice, has she received you for her servant? and are you
resolved on the truest Happiness, Constancy?


Sir Fran. Yes faith, Sir Charles, I am the Lady's Dog in a string, and have
violent pantings toward the delicious Charmer; I hope she will not long deferr my
Desires: But let that black Gentleman I Have so long dreaded do his worst, he
shall not spoil my stomach.


Mrs. Beauc. Ah! those pantings, Sir Francis, I doubt they have moved your
stomach so often, till they have quite took it away.


Sir Fran. A little forbearance, and such a tempting meal --


Sir Cha. [to Mr. Beaumont] You, Sir, too are blessed; I read it in your Eyes,
and see the Lady with ye.


Mr. Beaum. I fear no danger now, but dying of that pleasing Fever called
Rapture.


Cheat. To any man's thinking, these now are going to Heaven ding dong: but
hear me, Ladies; 'faith, all young handsome fellows talk just so before
Matrimony: seven Years hence let me bear of Pantings, Heavings, and Raptures;
no, Gadzooks, scarce Risings then: I shall live a jolly Bachelor, and laugh at
your Indifference, Gadzooks, I shall --


Mrs. Beau. Well said 'Squire; we would bring him along, Sir Charles, I think
him very good-humored to this Lady, and believe his Sister only made him
otherwise.


Sir Cha. I read in every Face a pleasing Joy, but you must give me leave to
think that mine exceeds, raised to unexpected Worlds of Bl^ss, when sunk in
Sorrows and Despair.

Kind Fate, beyond my Hopes, the Weight removed,
And gave me all, in giving her I loved.
(Exeunt.
THE END.
ERRATA.
BY a mistake in the Copy, which was false Folio'd, the Scene in Sir Charles
Beauclair's House, Page 32, should have came in, in the latter part of the
third Act, which ends with,

Cheat. Oh, that ever I should live to see my self hanged.


