Plain Truth, Without Fear, or Flattery. Being a Dialogue between Mr.
Thrivewell a Citizen, and Mr. Sharpwit a Scholar, upon the Road between Oxford
and London,
Sharpwit. MAster Thrivewell well met this Frosty Morning, whether has the
desire of profit drawn you thus early, that you have left the security of your
City, and exposed your self to the danger of an Enemy of such dangerous
consequence.


Thrivewell. Enemy Mr. Sharpwit, what Enemy? I am confident I cannot meet with
so great an Enemy as J have left behind.


Sharpwit. Think you so, suppose you should meet with a Company of Cavaliers,
(as this Country is full of them) that should use you like the poor Publican
amongst Thieves, first Rob you, then wound you, and leave you in the field
destitute of all comfort.


Thrivewell. Truly Mr. Sharpwit J should think it very hard usage, but J
cannot believe that any of the Cavaliers can be so cruel.


Sharpwit Think you so, what think you then of their proceedings at Kingston
upon Thames, Brainford, and Reading, where they were invited into the Towd by
the Jnhabitants, where since their Arrival they have disarmed the Townsmen,
possessed themselves of their Houses, seized their Go^ds, imprisoned their
Persons, and forced the rest to leave the Town, exposing them, their wives and
children to take up their lodging in the open fields.


Thrivewell, J have heard such a report, but J cannot believe it to be true, I
conceive it to be a report formed by a sort of people which we have in London,
which by such reports endeavor to make the Cavaliers odious in the sight of
the world.


Sharpwit, That is your Jmmagination, but by the way, what sort of People are
those.


Thrivewell, J will tell you, they are called Roundheads.


Sharpwit, Why are they so called?


Thrivewell, Nay that J (...) J know no reason for if, but J have heard some
say that they are called Roundheads because they cannot endure the Bishops, for
Common prayer.


Sharpwit, They are those that his Majesty mentions so often in his
Declarations, under the notion of Brownists. And a^^ists and Seperatists.


Thrivewell, The very same they are the only Cavaliers in the Kingdom that I
stand in fear of.


Sharpwit, Why do you fear them? If they be true Roundheads they define to live
peaceably and religiously with all men, which are the only instruments of
Reformation, Why should you fear them?


Thrivewell, You coming from Oxford, cannot I know be ignorant of the great
differences and distractions, which are fallen between his Majesty and the
Parliament.


Sharpwit, Sir to my great grief they are very well known to me, but to your
discourse.


Thrivewell, These differences caused the Parliament to raise an Army, this
Army caused an imposition on us Citizens, that we should contribute toward the
maintenance of the said Army, which for a while was done voluntarily by the
Roundheads, but when their springs were almost exhausted, then they began to
look more narrowly to us, and because that every man should bear an equal
share there was an Ordinance made that every man should pay the twentieth part
of their Estates, which being denied, by the same power they come upon the
Persons so refusing, and the goods of the said persons, to the vallue of the
sum so assessed, for the purposes aforesaid, and this Ordinance being put in
execution by these men which we call Roundheads, both to secure my person and
my estate, I have left London, and am travailing toward Oxford, hoping to enjoy
that liberty there, which is denied me at London.


Sharpwit, Truly Master Thrivewell I am afraid you have leapt out of the
Drying Pan, into the Fire, you have strove to avoid Sylla, and are like to fall
into Caribdis, nay I may make a more effectual and efficacious construction of
this your progression, you have left the Tents of Kedar, and are wandering
toward the Wilderness of the wicked, but pray stay a while, and since you have
given me so free a relation of the estate of London, I will discourse to you
the true condition of Oxford.


Thrivewell, I think my self much engaged to you for so great a courte^^e,
pray proceed.


Sharpwit, Sir you had a great Captain lately left London, and some other great
ones, that is I have heard so, the same Cause left London, and went to Oxford.


Thrivewell, It Is true Sir, I know them very well.


Sharpwit, It will be a discourse sut^able to the season to declare unto you
the manner of their arrival and entertainment; Coming into Oxford, news was
immediately brought unto the Court that such men were privately come to the
City, whereupon there was command given that a messenger should be sent to
fetch them to the Court, and to command them to attend his Majesty's pleasure,
where being come, the cause of their arrival was demanded Answer was made,
that they came to make a tender of their service to his Majesty, being
convinced in their Consciences that their Allegiance bound them thereunto,
hoping that his Majesty would pardon all their former actions, promising
amendment for the future, which was accepted graciously by his Majesty, and
they for the present dismi^, the next day a messenger was sent to them to
demand the Loan of ten thousand pound a man, otherwise they were to leave the
City, now judge whether, it be better to pay the Twentieth part of your estate,
and live in security, or to part withal, otherwise to be exposed to the scorn
and abuse of Welsh and Irish Cavaliers, where you hall not walk the street but
shall be called A Parliament Fugitive, with many other abuses of the like
nature.


Thrivewell, Sir I am satisfied in that particular, but pray resolve me, do not
you think that his Maistie intends to maintain the Protestant Religion.


Sharpwit, I should sin if I should think the contrary.


Thrivewell, why then should he be opposed, against whom do we take up Arms,
wherein lies the danger which is so much feared.


Sharpwit. I will satisfy you in that particular, Arms are taken up against a
pack of knaves (alias Evil Councillors) who have combined together, to
destroy the Religion and Laws of the Land.


Thrivewell, Pray Sir relate the circumstances in each particular.

There is (you know) a great party of Papists, which by all means endeavor to
promote the war, they being bound to endeavor to gain a freedom of
Conscience which they have lost, by the same Law of Conscience, by which we are
bound to defend that freedom of Religion that we enjoy.


Thrivewell. Sir, pray tell me a reason why the Papists may not be suffered to
have freedom of Conscience.


Sharpwit, J will answer you with a question, wherefore were the Israelites
commanded to purge the Land of Jdolatry.


Thrivewell, J am satisfied in that Particular, pray proceed.


Sharpwit, Next there is a great Party of Delinquents, which promote the war,
having no other way to secure themselves from the censure of the Law, but by
fomenting and increasing these distractions, those that are possessed with
malignant spirits, delight to bath themselves in troubled waters as may appear
by a great party now in this Kingdom, which take advantage of the present
distractions, and now live in defiance both of Religion and Law, seperating
themselves from the Metropolis of England, and have took a Journey as far as
Newcastle --


Thrivewell, Jndeed J have heard that Newcastle is full of Papists, nay the
report goes that the Earl of Newcastle has a Popish Army under his command, but
J am hard of belief.


Sharpwit, Believe it Sir it is as frequent with the said Earl to go from his
Army to Mass, as it formerly has been with the Paulonian Singingmen, to reel
from the Alehouse to the quire, and from thence to the Alehouse again, as if
they had made a Covenant with the Devil and might be drunk by Pattent.


Thrivewell, J must confess J have seen much wickedness in some of those
Cathedrall-men, but because some are wicked we must not condemn all.


Sharpwit, Jndeed its the part of a Christian to Judge charitably, but leaving
this discourse, pray tell me the oppinion of those men which you call by the
name of Rounheads.


Thrivewell, Why they are men that cry down the Common Prayer, Episcopacie, and
the now established Chvrch Government, they are all for the maintenance of the
purity of Religion, with many other new opinions, touching which J desire you
to give me your opinion.


Sharpwit, To my best power J shall, as touching the Common Prayer, there has
been many things of late days brought in, and incerted, which are absolute
Popery, the particulaas thereof J will sorbeare to mention, because I hope ere
long the Authority of the Law will purge the Land both of it, and the bringers
in of those abominations. As touching the Bishops, (though it may seem strange
that I should speak against them being a professed Scholar) but J must speak my
Conscience without fear or flattery, they have been the Authors of all our
present distractions, had they been suffered to reign but one three years
longer, we had had Fire and Faggot, as in Queen Mary's days for already
Divines were instructed to preach, Prerogative, and Divine Jurisdiction, the
power of the King over the Subject, nay J heard that on Fuller of affection to
his King then of Loyalty to his Country, in a Court Sermon once, and in many
Sermons to his Parishoers, taught openly this Portion of Law, (for Divinity ^re
it cannot be) that the goods and estates of the Subject were at the Kings
disposal, if necessity re^tred and that the King was sole judge of the said
necessity, and now judge whether this be not the highest degree of Prerogative,
had Ahab been possessed of this rich Jewel he had not made murder the prize of
Naboths Vi^e^ard, it has been such false Doctrines which has procured our
present ^r^e^ling miseries, it has been the Bishops, and their Creatures, (who
like so many faw^ing Spaniels, can sooth and temporize and by Book maintain to
serve their ^uds, and glut their Godless gain, that has raised this storm
in the Sea of the Church, and distracted the Commonwealth, therefore it shall
be my prayer that we may continue free from that Egiptian servitude, which we
have so long lived in.


Thrivewell, Pray Sir resolve me how far does Prerogative extend, what is the
Nature of it.


Sharpwit, J shall be loath to meddle with an edge tool, for fear J should cut
my fingers, for such is Prerogative to be dealt withal, t^e^efore leaving this
discourse J will relate unto you the manner of the Government in France, Jn that
Kingdom there are three degrees or ranks of People, the Prince, the Peers,
and Pesants, the Prince reigns like a Monarcke, the Peers like petty Kings,
and the poor Pesants like to many Tip^s of Egiptian slavery.


Thrivewell, The manner pray relate.


Sharpwit, As touching the King and his Nobles J will omit them, but for the
poor Commons J shall discourse at large, the^e the Tennant or Fa^er cannot
say, (his rent being paid) that the overplus is his own, as the reward of his
tillage, the Labourer that has wrought all day hard, and with the sweat of his
Brow purchased a piece of silver, cannot say that is his own neither, for
happily while he is counting his Cards, an Edict comes from the King, and takes
away a thirds of what he had gotten so hardly, and the question being made
wherefore they do so answer is returned, the King must have it, and this is
Prerogative Royal in France.


Thrivewell, From which good Lord deliver us in England, but leaving this
discourse pray resolve me one thing, heard you not that his Ma^sty had lately a
List of the names of all those persons of Eminency that stand for the King in
the City.


Sharpwit, I can name some of them, the ringleader was one Blackmore, a^ very
pursey Gentleman, but since J have heard that he was very poor, for having
spent his estate in good Housekeeping, he has shut up his shop like a broken
Merchant, and is gone to Sea to ^ave his credit. The next was a ^a^dfore man
with a Crispt Perriwig, his name J have quite forgot, but J and certain he was
a frank Customer, then there was a Capring Just-asse, which (J believe) does
Foster a malignant Spirit, next there was one Baconface a ^ntner, which J hear
say builds Castles in the Air, then there was another that was scarce able to
say Bo^ to a Goose, with many other Bakers and Brewers, and inded of all
Trades, so that J could not but wonder that so many men, seemingly wisemen,
should be so blind as not to disern how they send aid to those that desire to
destroy them.


Thrivewell, Make that apparent.


Sharpwit, Is not Religion the Foundation of the Laws, and do not the Papists
endeavor to subvert our Religion, and if the Religion of a Land be subverted,
are not the Laws infringed, and if the Law (which is the protection of the
Subject) be infringed, do we not lie open to an arbitrary Government, and so
consequently that man that shall any way assist that Party in the promoting of
the Designs which they have now on foot, (their intentions being so apparent)
does as much as in him lies, to destroy the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom,
and so consequently is his own destroyer, for the bringing in of an arbitrary
power, is the first step to destruction; Before the coming together of this
Parliament you had a taste of an arbitrary Government, witness the Ship Money,
with many other things, from which (next to God) this Parliament has preserved
us from, and therefore (considering the benefits we have received by them, with
the continual charge, care, and toil which they undergo for the General
Good, and how (notwithstanding the scandalous speeches of some wicked ones,
that say they aim at Preferment) they might by joining with his Majesty gain
Honor with less charge and more security, if they did not aim only at the
glory of God, and the good of the King and Kingdom) it is the best way in
respect of God, to join with the Parliament in the defense of Religion, and in
respect of your own safety, to assist them in the maintaining of the Laws, for
if the Laws be destroyed, the Liberty of the Subject cannot stand.


Thrivewell, J am converted, and will hencforward practice to be an instrument
of Reformation.


FINIS.

