PLANS APOKALyPSIS.

POPERY MANIFESTED, OR, THE Papist Incognito made known, By way of DIALOGUE
Betwixt A Papist Priest, A Protestant Gentleman, and A Presbyterian Divine.


In Two Parts.

Intended for the good of those that shall read it By L. B. P.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. in Little Britain. 1673.

TO THE Christian, Courteous and Impartial READER.
I Would fain oblige thee in the beginning of my Book, because possibly the
rest will not please thee so well: Therefore instead of a Preface or a short
Advertisement, wherewith usually the Reader is put off, I give thee an Epistle
Dedicatory. This I hope will prove acceptable, in that it is a new device, and
also because thou may have very cheap the Honor of having had a Book
Dedicated to thee. But yet besides I assure thee, that this Book of itself is
worth thy reading; for it will make thee see in their natural shape and
colors, many things which before appeared only under a disguise: and if thou
art a Lover of Truth (as all pretend to be) thou can not but rejoice to see
it come out from under the Cloud, where before it lay hid. And withal, thou
may use it as an Antidote against the Infection of some sugared Poisons,
which many venture to drink of, not knowing their deadly Qualities. Therefore I
require thee, that thou would not fling away the Book as soon as thou
find some things in it, against thy former persuasions or thy present
liking: for oftentimes wholesome Physic is the most unpleasant, and if thou
read through, and then repentest of thy labor, I give it here under my
hand, that I also will repent of mine: but if the Book does work upon thee the
good effect I intended, all the Requital I expect is this; that as thou art
unknown to the Author, so thou would not enquire after him, because he is
unwilling to be known any otherwise than by being

Thy Real Friend and Affectionate Well-wisher, L. B. P.

THE PREFACE.
MAny Learned Books have been written against the Errors of the Church of Rome,
by several worthy Champions of the Church of England, but usually they read
them most that have least need of them, while in the mean time they that have
but little of knowledge are left unarmed against the Crafts and Subtilties of
the Propagators of the Roman Faith. I know there is an inbred Aversion to
Popery in the major part of our People, but Popery is now a word of a very
dubious signification, and means rather what every one dislikes, than what is
so indeed: and it is to be seen in the second part of this Book, that they that
exclaimed most against what they pleased to call Popery; ran themselves into
the worst of Popish Errors.

However, it is not a brutish Hatred or a blind Zeal against unknown Errors can
secure us from them: A man may easily embrace his mortal Enemy, if he knows him
not, or if he meets him under a disguise. Jesuits are Travesty among us, and
so is their Doctrine; they put a strange garb as well upon their Opinions, as
upon their Persons, and I am confident they win more Proselytes by
mis-representing the Popish Religion, than by proving it to be true.

Therefore, that they might no longer be imposed upon, that have not the
leisure or the capacity of knowing what the Papists do really believe, contrary
to that sound and orthodox Doctrine, which is professed in the Church of England;
I have here set down their real Opinions, taken out of their most approved
Doctors and the Council of Trent itself, having transcribed their very words,
without any the least alteration, and then Englisht them as faithfully as their
sense did require: And afterward I have added some of those places of
Scripture which I thought most express against those Errors which our Church
has rejected, as being contrary to Gods Word and the Faith of the Primitive
Church.

Now if any man like those Doctrines of the Church of Rome as they are really
in themselves, and as they stand in opposition to the Word of God, let him
embrace them, if it so please him: but let none flatter himself or be made to
believe by others, that the Popish Tenets I have mentioned are not so bad as I
represent them, for I have used the very Words and Expressions of their own
Authors, which certainly could not be made either better or worse by being
transcribed by me.

Perhaps I shall be censured for having writ my Book Dialogue-wise, and not
well managed the Intrigue; but if they that find fault with this, like the
matter, let them not mind the form, if not, I had as lieve they should dislike
both as but one only. My design was not to make a Dramatic Piece, but to make
my Actors speak truth. This way of writing is easy to the meanest capacities,
and I am minded to imitate at least in the method, that excellent Dialogue,
called the F.D. However if I can profit those that shall read me, I little care
whether I please them or not.

And now if it may be lawful for a Controvertist to moralize a little, give me
leave to tell thee, Dear Reader, that what I have written is not to engage thee
into Disputes and Religious Quarrels: I had rather thou should read The
whole Duty of Man, and the excellent Discourse which that pious Author has
written against Disputes in his Decay of Christian Piety, than this Book of
mine. By discovering the foul stains of those Religions that make show of a
fair and specious outside, my design is not to teach thee how to rail at them,
or wrangle with their followers: But to make thee love and obey that holy
Religion which is taught in the Church of England, and which promises rewards
to her followers, not for hating those that are of different Persuasions, but
for obeying the Precepts of Christ. If thou art an ill liver, no matter what
Religion thou art of, thy recompense shall be according to thy Works; if not,
thy Creed and a Good Life will do thy soul more good than much Knowledge and
Activity in what concerns the Differences among Christians in points of
Religion. And if thou do ask me, why therefore I should meddle with them and
not be wholly employed in the performance of good Works? I answer somewhat like
as Aphraates did Valens, when he came into Antioch to oppose himself to the
then prevailing Error of Arius, and the Emperor asked him, why he had left his
Religious Retirement to come into the City. Niceph. l. 11. c. 2. (...), etc.
When the flock of Christ is in danger of being seduced, it behooves me also to
do my utmost endeavor for its Preservation. And when my heavenly Fathers house
is set on fire, I will by all means endeavor to quench it, and fling water
upon it though it were but one drop.

Imprimatur.

Tho. Tomkyns.

Ex Aed. Lambethanis, December. 13. 1672.

Popery Manifested, AND THE Papist Incognito made known: By way of DIALOGUE
between a Papist Priest, a Protestant Gentleman, and a Presbyterian Divine.
The First Part.
P. SIr, your humble servant, I come to wait you upon a double account, to give
you thanks for the Civilities I have heretofore received from you, and to spend
in the best Company I can, that short time I am allowed to stay in England.


G. I protest Master -- it grieves me that contrary to our inclination we
should be forced to be thus severe against you for to secure the peace of the
kingdom: And were it not that your Religion stands in opposition to the good
and peaceable intentions which I believe some of you may have, I do protest
that I my self would heartily intercede for your staying and living quietly
with us: However you are very welcome.


P. Sir, I know you to be of a very sweet nature, by a long experience, and I
will requite your kindness by praying heartily for your conversion to the true
Catholic Faith.


G. Master -- I thank you for your good will, but I believe if your Prayers be
heard, I shall never be of your Religion, for if it has the truth, yet
therewith ye have mixed so many false Doctrins particular to your own Church,
that it can never be justly called, The true Catholic Faith.


P. Sir, you speak as you have been taught, but did you well understand those
things as you call false Doctrines, I am sure you would be of another mind.


G. Well, we are entered ab abrupto upon a Subject that will help us to pass
away the time, therefore I desire you, my good Friend, for our old acquaintance
sake, to let me know positively the truth of what your Church believes in the
chiefest things we differ from you, as it is taught and recorded by your most
approved Doctors.


P. I will with all my heart, as far as I am able, and that you may not think I
disguise any thing or speak my private Opinions, I will bring the very words of
the Council of Trent, or Bellarmin, or Stapleton, as the Authentic Proofs of
the truth of what I shall say, ask you what you have a mind to know.


G. First, let me enquire of what you believe concerning the Holy Scripture;
for we make it the Ground and the Rule of our Faith, being persuaded that it
conteins all things necessary to Salvation.


P. We are much of another mind, for we hold, that the Scripture does not
expressly contein all that is necessary to be believed or to be done, i.e. that
its Doctrine is defective in what concerns Faith and Morality. Nos asserimus,
Bellar. de Verbo Dei l. 4. c. 3.
in Scripturis non contineri express totam doctrinam necessariam, sive de
fide, sive de moribus.


G. That Is very plain and I believe more than you dare say to those you
endeavor to make your Proselytes. --


P. Nay Sir, before we proceed I must tell you, that I expect you would render
me like for like, and cite the words of Cranmer or Calvin, or whatever Authors
they are you have your Doctrine from, that it may be seen which of us has the
better Authorities for our several Opinions; pray who taught you, that all
things necessary to salvation are contained in Scripture?


G. Our Blessed Savior, who approved the Jews opinion of believing that by the
Scriptures they might have eternal life, and therefore commanded them to search
them. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me. And more expressly S. Paul, who
affirms, that they are able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, etc.
being inspired by God. These two Texts are of more weight with me than the
contrary affirmations of twenty Cardinals. And as for the Authors of our
Religion, we own none besides Christ and his blessed Apostles. Those Doctrines
of our Church which are positive are plainly contained in Scripture, and the
best Records of the Primitive Church, and are owned and believed by you also:
and the negatives which are against your Innovations, can neither be disproved
by Scripture nor the Ancient Fathers, but are generally included in the
positive. All this is to be seen in the learned labors of many of the Reformed
Doctors. I will not make our Discourse so tedious, as to rehearse what they
have said upon that subject, therefore I desire you to be contented with a few
plain Scriptures, which I will bring to authorize our denying those Articles of
your Roman Faith, we have rejected.


P. Well, do so if you will; but let me tell you, that Scripture is not to be
the judge of Differences in Religion; It Is the Pope and Council must decide all
Controversies and declare the true sense of Scripture. Bellar. de Verbo Dei l.
3. c. 3.
Judicem dicimus very sensus Scripturae and omnium Controversiarum esse
Ecclesiam, id est, Pontificem cum Concilio.


G. I don't believe it, for I find that God sends his People to the Law and to
the Testimony to examine the Doctrine of the Prophets; Isa. 8.20.
and I hope the Gospel may as well have the Privilege, that by it we should
examine the Doctrine of the Pope. Christ tells the Saducees that they cried
because they knew not the Scriptures. It is said in the Parable of Dives, Mar.
12.24. Luke 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And it is recorded to
the praise of the people of Berea, that they searched the Scriptures daily to
see whether those things were so. Acts 17.11.
In all these the Scripture is made Judge of Controversies, and by it the
Doctrine of S. Paul himself is tried and examined.


P. But for all that, the Scripture is very obscure and harder to be understood
than the Notions of Metaphysie. Bellar. de Verbo Dei l. 3. c. 1.
Certe si scientia Metaphysicorum difficilior, -- quomodo non obscurissima erit
Scriptura quae de rebus long altioribus agit. And if the People should read
it, it would do them more harm than good, for 'twould be an occasion of their
falling into error about those Doctrines that concern Faith and a good Life. Et
ibid. l. 2. c. 15*
Populum non solum non eaperet fructum ex Scripturis, sed etiam caperet
detrimentum, acciperet euim facillime occasionem errandi, tum in doctrina
fidei, tum in praeceptis vitae and morum. Therefore all men ought to follow the
Decisions of Popes and Councils, that they may be guided in the truth.


G. Nay, I would have the people follow the judgment of the Church they live
in, but I would have them to make use of their Rationality to choose the
Communion of the purest Church, according to the Word of God (and if they have
learning enough) according to the four first General Councils and the Primitive
Christians; and not deny their Reason, and the plain meaning of Scripture and
make themselves blind, that they may be led by those that pretend to
Infallibility and a supreme Authority in things of Faith. As for the Decisions
of your Popes and Councils, it has been observed by learned men of ours, that
they are also subject to mis-interpretation, and that they have not been able
so much as to compose any one of those Differences that have been and are still
amongst you. And indeed, why should not God speak as plain as the Pope in what
is absolutely necessary to be known? Is it because he is not able, or because
he is not willing we should know the truth? But, Friend, whilst you tax the
Scripture with obscurity and make the people think it is a dangerous Book, see
whether you do not give the lie to God himself, who says, Ps. 19 7, 8.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the Testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple, (according to Rome it should have been, making
the simple to err) The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, the
commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eye, (not blinding or darkning
the eye.) Psalm. 119 105.
) In another place, Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
Could any thing be more express against the charge of obscurity? 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
And so, S. Paul says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, in
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, -- lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them. It
seems the Gospel has a light that shines unto men, and the devil endeavors to
blind them that they may not see it: and whether the Pope be not an useful
instrument to that effect, let them judge that are not yet quite blind. Sure if
there was so great a danger in reading the Scriptures, God would not have
commanded his people so absolutely to study his Law; Christ would not have
preached to the multitudes (for his words might be misinterpreted as well
spoken as written) and the Apostles should not have directed their Epistles to
all the people of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. We should rather have been forbidden
searching the Scriptures, and sent to his Holiness to know what we must believe
and do.


P. Sir, you are tedious in your Reasons and Proofs, and whereas I cite only
one of our approved Doctors at a time, and that in few words: you bring me I do
n't know how many places of Scripture. I had rather you would tell me what
Luther or the Church of Geneva have resolved in these Controversies.


G. 'Twould be to no purpose, for we regard not their opinions, nor those of
any private men, but as far as they agree with the truth: Our Church is founded
upon that Catholic and unchangeable truth which God has revealed in the Sacred
Books, and which has been and is still entertained, by all those that own the
Fundamentals of Christianity. Therefore as I have told you, 'twill be the
shortest way for me to back those Doctrins of our Church which oppose any of
yours by the authority of Gods Revelations, his most Holy Word, which is a
sufficient foundation for us to ground our faith upon.


P. As far as I can see, you are run a great way off from us, for we (as many
as own the Pope to be the Head and Monarch of the Church) never mind what the
Scripture says, we follow blindfold the Judgment of our Church, as a most
infallible guide. Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 4.
We believe that neither the Pope, nor the particular Church of Rome can err in
things of Faith. Non solum Pontifex Romanus non potest errare in fide, sed
neque Romana particularis Ecclesia. No Sir, take it from Bellarmin, Bellar. de
Eccles. l. 3. c. 14.
It is absolutely impossible that the Church should err in any thing, whether
it be necessary or not. Nostra est sententia, Ecclesiam absolute non posse
errare nec in rebus absolute necessariis, nec in aliis.


G. And you, Sir, take it from experience, that the Church of Rome could and
has greatly erred in many things (if it be an error to make huge additions to
the ancient Creeds, and to go directly against the Word of God) And though it
be impossible that ever the Universal Church should forsake and deny the saving
truths of Christian Religion, because of the Promise of Christ, Matthew. 16.18.
Yet any one particular Church or Society of Christians, though never so great,
may err, and that in Fundamentals, as we know of some Pseudo-Councils that have
broached or confirmed damnable Heresies. And accordingly the Scripture says,
Romans 3.4.
Let God be true and every man a liar: the Bishop of Rome himself is not
excepted: And doubtless if the Church of Rome was infallible, and the only
guide that can lead us to heaven: God who has revealed to us the way to
happiness, would not have omitted so essential a thing. But instead of a
command wholly to rely on the judgment of the Pope speaking ex Cathedra, we are
commanded to prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2^. ^ Joh. ^.1.
and to hold fast that which is good; and again to try the spirits whether they
be of God; because many false Prophets are come out into the world. Now, how
shall we try them, but by the Word of God? and if we find you do not follow it,
why should we any longer follow you? Find me as many Texts out of Gods Word^ to
prove that your great Bishop is infallible, and that we are all bound to
believe every thing he says, as I have produced already for the Divine
Authority of Scripture, and its sufficiency to bring us unto Salvation, and
then we'll weigh them together, and my faith shall follow the heavier Scale:
But when we prove and demonstrate that you err and go directly against
Scripture, for you to come and say that it is impossible because you are
infallible and free from all error, is to my thinking a very odd and
unsatisfactory answer.


P. Well, if you talk of Scripture till to morrow, I am sure ours is the
Ancient Catholic Church without the which there is no salvation: But your
Religion is a new upstart, you cannot show me where it was and the Professors
of it two hundred years ago.


G. As for the Professors, where they were, and that there were many even in
the highth of Popery is a long Historical labor, but ready done to my hand by
several learned men; the Author of Catalogus testium Verit. Abbot, Usher, Fox,
White, etc. They were in the Eastern and Greec Churches much larger than that
of Rome, they were amongst you, some declared and marty'd for it, some for
peace sake living in the Communion of your Church, and some conceled for fear
of your cruelty, sighing in secret for Liberty and Reformation. But you may
satisfy your self fully in their Books.

As for our Religion, It was where it had been above a thousand years, in the
Holy Scripture. And suppose (what is utterly false) that soon after its being
written all Christian Churches had been so corrupted, as to own fifteen hundred
years together those Errors which now are amongst you; yet still the Scripture
had been the same, as much to be obeyed and followed, as if it had always been
so. 2 King. 22.
When Josiah had sound the Book of the Law, he did not fling it by, because it
had been hid and neglected, during the reign of Manasseh and Amon his Fathers,
but he caused it to be read before all the people, Ibid. 23.
that they might observe what was contained in it. So now we have the Holy
Scriptures read and preached to us, we must not reject them, to follow the
Customs of some of our Forefathers, in whose time they were hid and
disregarded, for they are as much the Rule of Faith, as if they had never been
disowned. But I say farther, that our Religion was in those Churches in the
East and South which never owned Popery; and even amongst you, our Religion was
professed; you believed all along those three Creeds which you and we do still
retein, which contein the Articles of our Faith, but not the new additions
which are particular to Rome: The Popes universal Supremacy and his
Infallibility. Transubstantiation, Worshipping of Images, Purgatory,
Indulgences, etc. These are neither in Scripture, nor in the first Councils,
nor in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, not so much as in your Creeds (an
evident mark of their novelty) but in the late Councils and Constitutions of
the Popes.

We confess indeed that there is an universal Church out of which there is no
salvation, according to that known saying of S. Cyprian, Deum non potest, etc.
He can be none of Gods children, who is not a son of the Church: But that
Church is the Christian not the Roman Church; and to know which is the
Christian Church, or which is the purest of Christian Churches, (for they are
all Christian in some measure that own Christ) we must not consult humane
Histories; for they cannot inform us of that, and if they could we must not
build our faith upon men's report. De Sacra. l. 2. c. 21.
Bellarmin says of humane Histories, Faciunt tantum bumanam fidem cui falsam
subesse potest, that they only beget a human faith which may be erroneous.
Wherefore in the Controversy betwixt us, which is the purest Church, we must
not search old Records and Chronicles, to see which was the oldest, the most
visible or the most large and flourishing Church (that is not the Question, and
if it were, still human Histories cannot be the ground of a Christian Faith)
but we must examine, which agrees best with Holy Scripture (which we all
acknowledge to be the Word of God) for no doubt the true Church wherein
Salvation may be had, is that which holds that Doctrine which God himself has
reveled to Mankind, whatever her condition may have been in times past.


P. There may be something considerable in what you say, but you Heretics have
strange cunnings and subtilties to justify your Opinions; and yet still for
all you have said, you are no better than Rebels against your spiritual
Sovereign, you are Schismatics, undutiful Children, that have forsaken your
Mother the Church. The true and only Church wherein Salvation is to be
obtein'd, guided and governed by the Vicar of Christ upon earth, our holy
Father the Pope. Vna est tantum Ecclesia -- sub regimine unius Christi in
terris Vicarii Romani Pontificis. Bellar. de Eccl. l 3. c. 2.
But pray do not make such a tedious Discourse as you have just now.


G. Good Sir, sometimes short Questions cannot be answered in few words, I
could propose one to you much like that as you put to me, which I believe would
take a great deal of your time to answer, that is, Where your particular
Religion, your sacrificing of the real and corporal body and blood of Christ
for the sins of the living and the dead, your Worshipping Images and Saints,
and making them your Intercessors, your Purgatory, Indulgences, etc. Where was
all that in the time of Christ and his Apostles? Whereabout can it be found in
Scripture or in the ancient Creeds or in the four first General Councils or in
the three or four first Centuries? But I will not put you to so long and
impossible a Task.

As for our forsaking the Communion of the Church of Rome, we were absolutely
bound, and in a manner forced to do it, because of the many errors which had
crept and been brought into it by the Ignorance, Pride, Avarice and Ambition of
the late Popes of Rome and their Partisans; and which were confirmed by your
Church, and defended with that violence, that it was death to any man to speak
in the least against them: Now you know it is a Rule agreed on of all sides,
that he is not guilty of Schism that separates, but he that gives a just cause
of Separation, wherefore I retort the charge upon you, of being Schismatics,
except you can prove by the Word of God, those Doctrins of yours we have
rejected to be Divine and Orthodox, for we have left your Church upon this
account, that you had perverted the truth of God, and added many false opinions
to it, which ye imposed upon the people as if they had been Articles of Faith.
And we find it in Scripture; To. 16.17
Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have learned and avoid them: it is not said, except it be the Church of Rome.
And in another place; Though we or an angel from heaven preach unto you beyond
or over and above (in the Greec (...) in the vulgar praeterquam quod) what we
have preached, Gal. 1.8.
let him be accursed: the Pope himself you see is not excepted. Again, we have
left the Communion of your Church because it was Schismatic itself, in that it
had forsaken the Doctrine taught and believed in the Primitive Church: We have
come out of Rome, to return into the more ancient and universal Church: We have
left the Pope to follow Christ and his Apostles, and we have forsaken you no
farther than you had forsaken the truth. The ancient Creeds, the first
Councils, many good and Fundamental Doctrins we hold together, in these we hold
Communion with you: We reject your Communion only in those new Doctrins which
ye have superadded to the ancient and divine Faith of Christians. And so
likewise we rebel not against the Pope, only we set God above him: I Will still
acknowledge him to be a Bishop and the Patriarch of the West, and perhaps I had
been civil enough never to have disputed his Infallibility and spiritual
Sovereignty (though I find nothing for it in Scripture) had I not found, that
he has really erred, and that very grossly, whence I infer, that therefore his
Infallibility and supreme Authority are Chimeras, mere devices of his own
brain, the which I am in no wise bound to obey, being they pervert and oppose
the plainest truths in the New Testament: As that Christ is now in heaven by
his bodily presence, and not on the Altars; as it is in the Creed, he is
ascended into heaven, from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, and in Acts 3.20. Whom the heavens must contain until the restitution of
all things. That we are forgiven and cleansed by the death and merits of
Christ, not by Purgatory and Indulgences, 1 Job. 1.7. And the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sins, ibid. 2.2. He is the propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. That the
offering of himself on the Cross has fully satisfied for sin, and that his
sacrifice needs not be renewed daily and be offered corporally in the Mass for
the sins of the living and the dead, as you teach and do, Heb. 9.26. But now
once in the end of the world, he has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself, etc. In those things that are evidently against the Word of God we
are resolved to follow Scripture rather than the head of your Church, and we'll
rather for ever break with him, than to suffer him to put out our eyes, that so
he may guide us at his own pleasure.


P. Yea, those be the fruits of translating the Bible and performing Divine
Service in the vulgar Tongues; every one of you can find fault with the
Doctrins and Constitutions of the Church, and talk Scripture from morning to
night; we see among your selves what Disorders it has caused. If your Clergy
had been wise enough to have still retained the Latin Tongue in all their
Ministrations, the people could have disliked and censured nothing, 'twas
sufficient for them to have light enough to follow their guides, more
submission and obedience with less knowledge had done better. Bellar. de Verbo
Dei l. 2. c. 15.
That has been the wisdom of our Church to keep the Scripture and the public
prayers of our Church out of the peoples reach by forbidding them to be read in
any vulgar tongue. Catholica Ecclesia prohibet ne in publico and communi usu
Ecclesiae Scripturae legantur vel canentur vulgaribus linguis, ut in Concilio
Tridentino SS. 22. Can. 9. Sed contenti sumus tribus illis linguis quas Dominus
titulo crucis suae honoravit.


G. Because some men stumble and fall at noonday, must the Sun be charged with
a fault that proceeds from their heedlesness; and would it become one, to say,
that therefore it is safer to grope in the dark, because then people tread more
warily? Or must therefore men's eyes be put out, because then they shall be
willing to be led and to follow their guides. S. Peter says, that the unstable
and unlearned in his time wrested some difficult things written by Saint Paul,
and other Scriptures to their own destruction. Yet he does not say, therefore
let not the common people read them, but rather dedicates his Epistle to all
those that were partakers of the Christian Faith, and exhorts them to grow in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, ibid. v. 18. S. Paul reckons Idolatry,
Heresies and Schisms among the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. but does not any
where impute them to the reading of Holy Scripture: and it has been observed
that the perverseness of men of great Learning has been the cause of Heresies,
and not the mistakes or ignorance of ordinary people in reading the Bible.
However we have a whole Chapter in the New Testament against the speaking in an
unknown tongue as you do in all your Churches: 1 Cor. 15.11.
If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a
Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me: that is the
relation betwixt your Priests and your people, they are Barbarians one to
another, the whole Chapter is to that purpose, and would be too long to be
transcribed. But if Scripture had been silent in this, one would think that
common Reason would have kept men from a practice so absurd and ridiculous,
that a man should present a petition and know not what he asks; and be taught
his duty by words he does not understand, is a strange and incredible thing,
which Reason alone confutes most strongly. And yet for all this, I do hugely
commend the wisdom of your Church in this particular, for that has maintained
the Popes Religion and Credit for some hundreds of years; the understanding of
Mass and Scripture has already proved fatal to his authority, and should once
the rest of his flock be able to compare both together, it is to be feared he
that has rewarded many of his friends with the gift of titular Bishoprics,
might come to be himself a titular Bishop.


P. I see you value an universal Council as little as you do Bellarmin alone,
and have as many things to object against it; I wonder how you dare in any wise
oppose the authority of such an Assembly, and think your Judgment is to be
preferred to theirs.


G. And I wonder how you can call the Council of Trent universal, when there
was none in it of the Clergy of the Reformed Churches which are almost as large
and populous here in the West, as those of the Roman Religion: But especially,
because none of the Christians of Aethiopia, nor of those that are subject to
the Patriarchs of Antioch and Constantinople (whose Jurisdiction is of a far
larger extent than that of the Bishop of Rome) were present at it. Pray did you
never hear, that a great Company of Arrians met once together and confirmed
their Errors and cursed all those that would not embrace it, and called
themselves an Universal Council: just so did that Company of Papists that met
at Trent. But had they been twice as many more, you should not wonder how I
dare oppose them, but rather consider whether what I say be rational or no, and
whether what you call my private judgment be not rather the express words of
Scripture. But pray proceed and tell me what your Church thinks of Images and
Saints, for we are told that you worship them.


P. Yes, Bellar. de San. beat. l. 1. c. 19.
and that very devoutly and to our great advantage by making religious
Invocations to them whether they be men or angels. Sancti sive angeli sive
homines, pie atque utiliter invocantur.


G. Now I wonder too, how you dare do that, for I find that when Cornelius
would have worshipped S. Peter, the holy Apostle took him up, saying, Acts
10.26.
that he himself was a man also. And that when S. John fell at the Angels feet
to worship him, Rev. 19.10.
the Angel hindered him, saying, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants,
worship God. Who told you it is more lawful now? Or that they are not still of
the same mind (for belike the Worship of Latreia was not offered them) and how
can you call on the Saints for help, being you have not yet put them in your
Creed? for S. Paul says, Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And more than so,
he gives us warning against the plausibility of the Doctrine of worshipping
Angels. Col. 2.18.
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping
of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up
by his fleshly mind. I take the practice of our Church in worshipping God alone
to be much safer, for we are bid by our Lord Jesus Christ so to do. Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. It is said
in the Acts, Acts 2.11.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Could you produce
as much for the Worshipping of Saints, we would do it as devoutly as you. But
rather to the contrary, we find that when the Apostles desired Christ to teach
them to pray, not only to pray God, but in general to pray: Luc. 11.1.
he told them, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. there was not a syllable for
the Saints. And S. Paul, when he had said, Heb. 4.16.
That Christ is our High Priest in heaven, infers, let us therefore come boldly
unto the throne of grace, that we may obtein mercy. He does not say, Let us go
to the Saints, that they may obtein mercy for us. Nothing is to be found in
Scripture but what discountenanceth the Practice of your Church in Praying to
Saints: Pray, what reasons have you for it besides the command of the Pope.


P. There may be many, but I can tell you of two very strong ones: First,
Because they know our necessities and the very thoughts of our hearts, and so
can hear our prayers at all times. Bellarmin is express in it: Bellar. de San.
beat. l. 1. c. 20.
Non verum est quod assumitur Sanctos ignorare quod ab illis petimus; nam etsi
dubitatio esse possit, quemadmodum cognoscant, and quae solo cordis affectu
interdum proferuntur, tamen certum est eos cognoscere. And secondly, Because
they are our Mediators and intercede with God for us. Ibid.
Neque est cur timeamus nomen mediatoris transfer ad Sanctos, sicut ad eos
transferimus nomen advocati and intercessoris. And accordingly it was decreed
by the Council of Trent, Mandat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis, Con. Trid. S.
25. Decret. de Inv. Sanct.
etc. omnes fideles instruant de Sanctorum intercessione, invocatione,
reliquiarum honor and legitimo imaginum usu. -- Doceant eos bonum atque utile
esse eos invocare, ad eorum orationes, opem auxiliumque confugere. -- Imagines
Christi and Sanctorum in templis habendas eisque debitum honorem and
venerationem impertiendam. -- Quod, per imagines quas osculamur, and coram
quibus caput aperimus, Christum and Sanctos adoremus and veneremur. The people
must be taught by the Clergy, to pray to Saints, to flee to them for succor
and help, and also for their intercession, to honor their shrines and
relics, to have their images in Churches, and give them their due honor and
worship by kissing of them, and by kneeling and being bare to them.


G. Yes, I know you do so, and burn Candles, and go on Pilgrimages to them, and
offer gifts to them, and a great deal more than I can think of. But the more
shame for you, for were your reasons true, yet they could not justify such
doings, but rather what we all grant and practice, that the Saints should be
mentioned with honor, that the memory of them should be precious to us, and
that we would imitate their virtues, and thank God for all the blessings we
receive from them. And yet it is very improbable, that they should know the
thoughts of all men at once, for it is a thing that belongs to God only, and
seems to contradict these Scriptures: Eccl. 9.6, and 7.
That the dead know not any thing of what is done under the Sun: That God only
knows the heart of all the children of men: 1 Kings 3.39. Rev. 2.23.
And that it is he that searches the reins and the hearts. And as for your
second reason, we deny not but that the Saints glorified may pray for the
Militant Church; only we say that to make them our Mediators and Intercessors,
and to pray by their merits is expressly against these Scriptures: 1 Timothy 2.5. 1
John 2.1, 2. Joh. 14.6.
There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ. I am the way,
the truth and the life, no man comes unto the father but by me (not by the
Saints) If ye ask any thing in my name, Ibid. 13* and 14.
that will I do. If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it, Ephesians. 2.18.
(not if ye ask in the name of the Saints.) Through him we have access by one
spirit unto the father: and lastly, to conclude and show that the Practice of
our Church is well grounded and safe. It is said Heb. 7.25. He (Christ) is able
to save to the utmost those that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them.

As for your representing God in bodily shapes and worshipping the Images of
Saints, it is well the Council of Trent is so express for it, for I am sure the
Holy Scripture does not in the least authorize but rather condemn it. Deuteronomy. 5.8.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image nor the likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, Ib. 4.15^
etc. and in another place, Take ye good heed unto your selves for you saw no
manner of similitude when the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, -- lest ye corrupt
your selves and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, etc. And
that Images should not be worshipped in any wise, Ex. 20.5.
what can be more express than the second Commandment? Thou shall not bow down
thy self to them nor serve them. And now who will wonder that you believe
Doctrins not contained in Scripture, when ye teach and command what is so
directly against it.


P. You fancy that we transgress the Commandments, but we say that we can
fulfill them all, and that some do so, Bellar. de Just. l. 4. c. 13. De Monac.
l. 2. c. 7.
and more than is commanded too, There are those amongst us who are so far from
committing any sin, that they can do more than is required of them by God,
Potest homo facere plus quam Deus praecipit, multo magis potest implere
praeceptum.


G. Very good, so say the worst of our Fanatics, that they are perfect and
without sin: yet I confess, you do not fancy your people to fancy so, that
privilege is granted only to some choice ones and that long after they are
dead, and therein you act with much discretion, as Stapleton faith, Contr. 3.
Quaest. 11.
Summa cum ratione introductum fuit ut Canonizatio per solum summum Pontificem
fiat. For some must be more than just that the Pope may have works of
Supererogation to hoord up, and the people must be kept from that Perfection
that he may have Chap-men to buy those sacred Wares. But God's Amanuenses, who
had none of them to sell, teach quite otherwise, 1 Kings 8.46. Ps. 130.3. Eccl.
7.20.
that There is no man that sins not: that If God should mark iniquities, not
any man could stand: that There is not a just man upon earth that does good and
sins not. In all these there is not so much as one Friar excepted. So the
dearest Apostle of our Blessed Savior tells us, If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. God requires the utmost of
our love, 1 John 1.8.
whatever we do out of love is due, and sure what we do upon other Motives is
not meritorious (in that sense as you take it) Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, Matt. 22.37.
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And our Blessed Lord and Redeemer
has taught all Christians even the most perfect, to say in their daily
Offices, Luke 11.4.
Forgive us our sins.


P. You know how the Fox that had no tail would persuade others to cut off
theirs: I am sure we are told, Beyrling prompt. mor p 337
that you live most unchristian lives, and that ye have an irreconcilable
quarrel against all Good Works: Therefore ye would fain persuade us that no
body can attain to Perfection here, and that Good Works are not meritorious.
But for all you can say, We will believe that they are, and that not only of
temporal blessings, but of life eternal it self and of the highest degree of
glory, by their own dignity. Probavimus bona opera justorum vere and proprie
esse merita, and merita non cujuscunq, Bellar de Justif. l. 5. c. 1. Ibid. c 20.
praemii sed ipsius vitae aeternae. Nos existimamus vitam aeternam, tum quoad
primum gradum tum quoad caeteros, reddi bonis meritis filiorum Dei.


G. We little regard those foul aspersions you cast upon us, the first and best
Christians were made as vile by the Heathen as possibly you can make us;
neither have we any quarrel against good Works. We make them absolutely
necessary to salvation, and we teach according to Scripture, that God will
reward them with eternal life; but to say that they do really and properly
merit it ex condigno, without respect to Christ and the Promise: We dare not be
so presumptuous, especially because of these Scriptures, The wages of sin is
death, To. 6.23.
and the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. It should
have been according to your Doctrine, And the wages of works is eternal life.
Ps. 43.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified: How much less rewarded with the highest degree of eternal glory.
Lu. 17.10.
When ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants: We have done what was our duty to do. But I forget that
you can do more than all that is commanded you, and belike it is that overplus
that makes the Merits of Condignity. S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 1 Cor. 47.
To. ^.18.
That we are not our own, because we have been bought with a price. And in
another place, What have thou that thou did not receive? And lastly that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us. Let any man weigh these Scriptures, and see
whether they favor more your absolute Merits, than our Doctrine of denying our
own righteousness for to rely on Gods merciful Promises in Christ for a reward
to our sincere though imperfect Services and good Works.


P. Well, if we had no Merits of our own, yet we are not left destitute. Oh,
the happiness of those that live in the lap of the Church! that good Mother
will let them want for nothing; if a child of hers is not furnished with
meritoriousness, but has rather many sins to answer for, as it is the case of
a great many, yet he shall not be left without help. She will make over to him
the satisfactions of others, who have suffered more than their sins required.
Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2.
In bonis actibus hominum justorum duplex valor sive pretium assignari potest;
meriti videlicet and satisfactionis; -- Opus bonum qua part meritorium est non
potest alii applicari, potest tamen qua satisfactorium; -- Extat in Ecclesia
thesaurus satisfactionum Christi superfluentium ad quem pertinent etiam
passiones Beatae Mariae Virginis and emnium aliorum Sanctorum qui plus passi
sunt quam eorum peccata requirerent. Satisfactiones Christo and Sanciis
supervacaneae applicari possunt aliis qui rei sunt luendae poenae temporalis,
Ibid. c. 3.
-- Ecclesiae pastoribus anctoritas divinitus concessa est thesaurum
satisfactionum dispensandi, ac per hane indulgentias concedendi; -- Praelati
Ecclesiae dispensare possunt Christi passionem tum per Sacramenta tum per
Indulgentias, passiones vero Sanctorum nonnisi per Indulgentias.


G. Pray give me leave to English it, to my thinking the Doctrine is pleasant;
you shall see how well I relish it: that is to say, That the good Works of just
men have a twofold value, one side of them is meritorious and the other
satisfactory; this last may be given to others, but the first may not: and that
in the Church there is a treasure of the superfluous satisfactions of Christ,
of the Blessed Virgin, and all other Saints, who suffered more than in justice
they ought: Which treasure is disposed of by the Pastors of the Church
according to that authority as God has given them to those who are guilty of
temporal pains, and that with a great deal of Art and Industry, for the Passion
of Christ is given by the Sacraments and Indulgences, but the Passions of the
Saints by Indulgences only. I protest you are witty folks to devise such pretty
things as these; no wonder if you will not be tied to the written Word, when
you are so good at inventing. Honest Novator, were I minded only to point out
all the Impertinences included in this Doctrine, it would confute itself or at
least appear most ridiculous. I would fain know who told Bellarmin, Poena
aeterna commutatur in temporalem quando remittitur culpa. That when the guilt
is forgiven, the eternal pain is changed into a temporal. I know this was
necessary to build upon, the Doctrine of Indulgences and Purgatory, but the
Scripture that has no such Doctrins makes no such distinctions at all, Gal.
3.10.
but says in general, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written in the Book of the Law to do them: No commutation of the
eternal into a temporal pain, he that transgresses deserves the curse of the
law. Ibid. v 1^.
But Christ has redeemed us from that curse. Wherefore there remains no more
satisfactory pains to the penitent sinner. God may indeed visit him still with
Chastisements and temporal Judgments, but who told you that it must be to make
him satisfy for his sins, and if it were, who gave the Pope power to sell the
sinner an Indulgence, and so take off that punishment as he pretends to do? S.
Paul says, that the wages of sin is death; To. 6.23.
but he says in another place, that Christ died for us, and that by that
means, Romans 5.8.
there remains no more wrath to those that are in Christ. But admit there had
been part of the punishment due to sin to be suffered here and part hereafter,
and that so, a twofold satisfaction had been required; yet to say, that Christ
could not satisfy for the temporal pain, would be impious, to say that he
would not, is to speak without book or rather against it; Joh. 1.29.
for S. John says, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world: He does not say, that he leaves part of them to be taken away by the
satisfactions of Saints. S. Paul also, 2 Timothy 2.6.
that he gave himself a ransom for all; and S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24 Romans 8.1.
that his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree; and lastly that
there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ. In all these the
satisfaction of Christ is general, and there is not one place in Scripture that
restrains it to one part of the punishment. But to do you right you do not
absolutely deny, that Christ has also yielded a satisfaction for the temporal
pain, only you will not have him to give it gratis, the Pope must sell it; and
you will not have it to be sufficient of itself, but your own and the Saints
must be added to it. Whereas it is written, Act. 1.12.
That there is no salvation in any other, and that he bore our griefs and
carried our sorrows, Isa. 53.4. and 5.
that he was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, and
that God laid on him the iniquity of us all. Nothing like that is said of any
man, but of them all it is written, That every one shall bear his own burden,
Gal. 6.5.
and that we shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive according to what he has done, not according to what S. Francis
has suffered for him. But pray tell us some more of the care of your Church
for her necessitous Children.


P. Why, if by their carelessness or poverty they have not bought as many
Pardons and Indulgences as would satisfy for the remaining temporal pains,
which the merits and blood of Christ did not take away, there is provided for
them a place of Torments called Purgatory, where they are to suffer until they
have given full satisfaction, or some of their friends have procured them a
Release by Masses or Indulgences or some other way, and after that they are
received into heaven. Those pains of Purgatory are most intolerable and far
greater than any upon earth: this Reason and Revelations and the Fathers have
assured us of. Bellar. de Purg. l. ^. c. 14.
Poenas purgatorii esse atrocissimas and cum illis nullas poenas hujus vitae
comparandas, docent patres, probant revelationes and ratio. And if any one
denies Purgatory thinking that God has so pardoned him by Christ as that there
remains no temporal pains whereby he must satisfy the divine justice either in
this world or in Purgatory; Bellarmin and the Council of Trent condemn him to
burn for ever in Hell. Constanter asserimus dogma esse fidei Purgatorium, Ibid.
l. 1. c. 15.
adeo ut qui non credit illud ad idem nunquam sit perventurus, sed in gehenna
sempiterno incendio cruciandus. Council. Trid. S. 6. Can. 30.
Si quis dixerit culpam ita remitti and reatum aeternae poenae deleri, ut
nullus remaneat reatus poenae temporalis exsolvendae, vel in hoc seculo vel in
futuro Purgatorio, antequam ad regna coelorum aditus patere possit, Anathema
sit.


G. Well done Holy Fathers! curse them stoutly, those Heretics that would put
out that sacred fire which warms you and makes your Pot boil. Now the cheat is
complete, I see your Churchmen are resolved to have money by hook or by crook.
If people have wit enough as not to be persuaded to buy Indulgences while they
live, at least it is hoped that when they are dying, when their Reason is weak
and their fears strong, that they shall be willing to part with those goods
they can keep no longer, to purchase a total exemption from, or at least a
quicker passage through those dreadful Flames, which, they are told, will
torment them God knows how long. And if that should fail, their surviving
friends it may chance will have some pity upon their souls, and buy for them
all those assistances the Church can afford, to help them out of their
miseries; and so dead or alive, they are like to pay for that care your Church
takes for their well-being.

But I wonder that your Clergy, who have power by their Masses and Indulgences
to deliver Souls out of Purgatory as fast as they please, should be so
hard-hearted as to let them lie there, except they or their friends have paid
for their deliverance: And I wonder as much at your Peoples folly, that they
don't make a sufficient provision of Indulgences while they live, for to carry
their Souls straightway to Heaven; being they could get more than enough by
saying some Prayers, or visiting certain Shrines and Churches which have an
extraordinary faculty that way.

But what if the Scripture says, That the Souls of the Faithful when they
depart out of this life do not go into a place of Torments? must we needs be
damned if we believe it before the Pope? In the Revelations, Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them: their own works follow them, not the satisfactory
works or passions of the Friars; and they rest from their labors, and
therefore are not in a place of Torments. Certainly, St. John had been an
Heretic too, but that Purgatory was not found out in his time. I have a desire
to depart, Phil. 1.23
and to be with Christ. 2 Cor. 5.8
We are confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. And our blessed Savior tells the penitent Malefactor,
Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Though it has been, and is still
questioned whether the Souls of the Righteous are admitted into the same
Mansions of Glory as they shall be after the Resurrection; yet that there is
Rest and Bliss in their Receptacles, is certainly taught by these Scriptures:
But there is no mention made of Purgatory in the whole Bible; 1 John 1.7 Ibid.
v. 9.
rather we are told, That the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin:
That, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and that, Heb. 1.3.
Christ by himself has purged our sins; by himself, not by the flames of
Purgatory.

I cannot but commend the modesty of your Clergy, that they have not inserted
their new-devised Doctrines in the holy Scripture, but rather hid the Scripture
from the People: but I do hugely suspect their honesty to persuade men to rely
upon such imaginary things as Indulgences and Purgatory, when the best argument
to prove that they can in any wise benefit the People, is that they bring great
profit to the Church.


P. Yes, I know you would fain bring contempt upon our Clergy: I suppose you
envy their mighty Power, in that they can do more than all Men and Angels
besides. They have the Keys of Heaven and Hell; except they absolve a man, Bell.
de poenit. l. 3. c. 2.
though he be never so penitent, yet he must be damned. Si non essent
Sacerdotes judices nec vere peccata remitterent, nemo periret ex eo solum quod
Sacerdotem reconciliantem habere non posset, sed, etc. Moreover, they have the
power to destroy all the seven Sacraments: Without their intention goes along
with their ministration, the Sacraments are ineffectual and insignificant, and
they are accursed that don't believe it. Bell. de Sacram. L. 1. c. 27.
Sententia Catholicorum est requiri intentionem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia,
ut express sacra Synodus Tridentina. His verbis. Si quis dixerit, Con.
Trident. S. 7. Can. 11.
in Ministris dum Sacramenta conficiunt and conferunt, non requiri intentionem
saltem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, Anathema sit.


G. Indeed if your tale be true, your Priests have a most unlimited Power; and
except they use it aright, the poor people are like to smart for it. It Is a
thing must make them very dear and precious to the Laity, that except they
repent, a penitent sinner he must go to Hell notwithstanding his repenting and
begging for mercy. But sure you forget one thing in their commendation, that
they are as infallible as the Pope; nay more, that they do as well as God know
the hearts of men: for 'twould be a very odd thing if they should absolve a
wicked Hypocrite and send him to Heaven, or send a true Penitent to Hell by
refusing to absolve him. What a dreadful thing must a Priest be amongst you?
and how careful must your people be to please them, when by their only thoughts
they can damn them as fast as they will? If his intention be wanting when he
baptizeth a Child, the poor Creature will live and die a Heathen. If when he
marries he intends it not, Master Bridegroom in stead of a Wife has got none
but a Concubine. In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he may chance to make
the people worship nothing but a Wafer, if he does not intentionally
consecrate. And who knows but that intention might be wanting in the Ordination
of a Priest, of the Pope himself, or of some of their Predecessors? and then
how great are the mischiefs that follow thereupon? Are not those very pious
Doctrines? and don't they well deserve the Councils curse that will not believe
them? Your Clergy-mens Power is indeed much to be admired, that they can get
credit to such stuff as this, and impose so grossly upon the people.


P. No wonder if you are injurious to our Ministers, when you are so to the
Sacraments themselves; making them to be but signs to put us in mind of what
they signify. We differ as much from you in this, as in the precedent Article:
for we are taught by the holy Council, That Sacraments confer Grace to the
Receivers, Conc. Trident. S. 7. Can. 8. Bell. de effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 1.
opere operato, by their own immediate virtue and efficacy. As the fire burns
by its self, (says Bellarmine) not by the dryness of the wood; so the
Sacraments give Grace by their own selves without any disposition or
qualification be required of the Receiver, and not as Heretics say by exciting
faith, etc. Catholici probant Sacramentorum efficaciam non pendere ab ulla
qualitate suscipientis. -- Nam ut ignis urit, Et c. 3.
etc. Et -- ibid. Titulus Capitis tertii, quod Sacramenta ex opere operato
conferant gratiam -- Non ut concio excitando fidem, ut dicunt baeretici.


G. By Mr. Bellarmine's good leave, we derogate nothing from the Ordination or
the Ministrations of Clergymen, much less from the two Sacraments which Christ
instituted; they all really give and exhibit what they signify: by them God
conveys his Grace really and effectually, at all times, and to all Receivers
non ponentibus obicem, that do not hinder their efficacy by their indisposition
and perverseness. But it is very strange that you make spiritual Graces to be
inherent in things material, as if they were their natural properties; and make
those Elements to work upon our souls by themselves more powerfully, than that
very matter that is personally united to them. And it is likely to prove a great
hindrance to Devotion and Holiness, to tell the people, that whatsoever their
preparations or the condition of their Souls be, they shall certainly receive
the Grace offered in the Sacraments: so that if a dying wicked man can but make
the Priest to believe that he has attrition or contrition enough to be in a
capacity of having the Sacrament administered to him, then the Absolution and
Extreme Unction will conjure him up to Heaven by their abstruse and powerful
virtue: And then who would be at the trouble of living soberly, righteously,
and godly, as the Gospel requires, when one may be saved without it? I might
bring Scriptures against this opinion, but it confutes it self; and I believe
the Owners of it will rather mis-represent, than defend it. But sure the
Fathers of Trent were got in an ill mood, when they did curse those that would
not believe, that under the Gospel there is seven Sacraments instituted by
Christ, as they did in the Canons of their seventh Session: for one might look
long enough before he could find any such thing in the New Testament, and they
were not pleased to say when nor where two or three of them were instituted.


P. Cannot you take it upon their credit? and don't you think that as they had
more, so they had better eyes than you? Sure you put a great deal of confidence
in your capacity, and in your senses! That Is the reason I believe that you will
not be persuaded, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the substance of
Bread and Wine is really changed into the very substance of the Body and Blood
of Christ: so that not only under either kind of the Elements, but also under
each the least crum or drop of them Christ is wholly and substantially
contained, his Body and Blood, with his Soul and Divine Nature. This the same
Fathers have taught us, and it shall not be the weakness of your eyes shall
save you from the Anathema they have pronounced against all those that will not
believe it. Council. Trid. c. 4. S. 13.
Sacra Synodus declarat per consecrationem panis and vini conversionem fieri
totius substantiae panis in substantiam corporis Domini, and totius substantiae
vini in substantiam sanguinis cjus. S. 13. Can. 3.
Et alibi. Si quis negaverit in venerabili sacramento sub unaquaque specie and
sub singulis cujuscunque speciei partibus separatione facta totum Christum
contineri, Anathema sit. Si quis negaverit in Sacramento contineri vere,
realiter, and substantialiter, S. 13. Can 1.
corpus and sanguinem una cum anima and divinitate Domini -- ac proinde totum
Christum, Anathema sit.


G. Should they put out my very eyes with their fulminations, I cannot believe
the Gloss as they have made upon the Text of the Institution of that Sacrament.
I believe what Christ said, That the Bread and Wine are his Body and Blood:
after what manner he best knows; I am sure his words are true and real, though
mysterious beyond the reach of our reason. A little modesty had better becom'd
your holy Fathers than thus peremptorily to define things which they themselves
confess to be abstruse; and by their Definitions heap absurdities one upon
another, make a thin Wafer, and every crum of it distinctly to become a whole
and entire Body, so that you receive at a time as many Bodies of Christ as
there is little parcels in the Bread you take. And what becomes of all those
entire Bodies and Souls in your Stomachs, who knows? And how Christ came by
such an infinite multitude of Bodies, when we read but of one that was
conceived by the Holy Ghost in the holy Virgin, and now sits at the right hand
of God, as we say in our Creed? And what will become of them all? whether they
shall be reduced to nothing, or glorified also, after they have been a certain
time in the Stomachs of the Receivers? These and many more Questions, some
whereof very impious, have been and are still disputed amongst your
School-Divines. Why was a Mystery, which should be the object of our faith and
reverence, made a perplexed Riddle, by making the object of our sense gross and
material? Ephesians. 3.17.
The Scripture says, That Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, not by a
corporal presence which requires no faith: as to that manner of presence, Mat.
26.11.
Christ says, The poor ye have always with you, but me ye have not always: And
St. Paul, Col. 3.1.
Seek ye the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God. It is written, Heb. 2.17.
That in all things he was made like unto his Brethren: therefore his Body is
but in one place at once; and where it is, is the object of sense as ours be,
and as we read his was after his Resurrection, when he told his Disciples,
Handle me and see, Luke 24.39.
for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. And the Angels said
when he went up into Heaven, Act. 1.11.
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. These Scriptures are plain and
easy, there is no mystery in them as there is in the words of the Institution
of the Sacrament: therefore he that believes both according as they are
revealed, does certainly better than he that expounds a mysterious Text, so, as
thereby to contradict many clear and plain ones.


P. But then how could Christ be really sacrificed in the Sacrament, if his
Body and Blood was not there? for we firmly believe that in the Mass the very
same Christ who once yielded himself a bloody sacrifice upon the Cross, is
bodily sacrificed without bloud-shedding: and therein, according to the
Apostolical Tradition, is truly and really offered a sacrifice, not only for
the sins, pains, satisfactions, and other necessities of the faithful alive,
but also for those that are dead in the Lord, and are not yet thoroughly purged.
Conc. Trident. S. 22. Cap. 2.
Quoniam in divino illo sacrificio quod in Missa peragitur idem ille Christus
continetur and incruenter immolatur, qui in ara crucis semel seipsum cruente
obtulit, docet sancta Synodus sacrificium istud vere propitiatorium esse, --
quare non solum pro fidelium virorum peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus and
aliis necessitatibus, sed and pro defunctis in Christo, nondum ad plenum
purgatis, rite juxta Apostolorum traditionem offertur.


G. We don't read when Christ instituted the Sacrament, that he offered a
bodily Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead, or instituted such an
one, (though we believe that blessed Sacrament really to be a commemorative
Sacrifice of that which Christ offered upon the Cross, and which was typified
as now it is remembered by real Sacrifices) we don't read of any adoration given
by the Apostles to the Sacrament, but you reach that it must be worshipped with
that highest kind of worship which is proper to God alone. Latriae cultu. Conc.
Trident. S. 13. Cap. 5.
We find the same example and command for the receiving the Wine as the Bread;
but you have wholly taken away the sacred Wine from all but the Ministers, and
withal pronounced a curse to those that should dare to say that ye have not
well done: Conc. Trident. S. 21. Can. 2.
as also to those that should find fault with your not speaking in a vulgar
Tongue, or with your speaking very low part of the Canon, and the words of
Consecration, or with your mixing Water with the Wine, or with your celebrating
Masses in honor of the Saints, Council. Trident. S. 22. Can. 5.
and to obtain their intercession. Si imposturam esse Missas celebrare in
honorem sanctorum and pro illorum intercessione apud Deum obtinenda, Anathema
sit. Si quis dixerit Ecclesia Romana ritum quo submissa voce par canonis and
verba consecrationis proferuntur, damnandum esse, aut lingua tantum vulgari
Missam celebrari debere, Ibid. Can. 9.
aut aquam non Miscendam esse vino in Calice co quod sit contra Christi
institutionem, Anathema sit. In a word, let any one read the Institution of
that blessed Sacrament in the three Gospels, and compare it to what is now done
and taught among you, and if he will but believe his own eyes, he must needs
confess that you have most wretchedly corrupted and deformed it. But against
your pretended sacrificing of Christ for the sins of the living and the dead,
Heb 7.26, and 27.
I Will oppose these Scriptures: Such an high Priest became us -- who needs not
daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and
then for the peoples: for this he did once when he offered up himself. Heb 9.12
By his own blood he entered once into the holy places, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. What need then he be sacrificed any more for sin and
satisfaction, as you teach? At the 26 verse, Once in the end of the world he
appeared, once to put away sins by the sacrifice of himself: the whole Chapter
is against Christ being sacrificed again. Saint Paul says, that the New
Covenant which Christ made with us in his Blood is this, Their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more: and then infers, Now where remission of
these is, there is no more offering for sin. And at the 14 verse, it is
expressly said, That he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And
then what need those daily Sacrifices or Offerings for sin that are amongst
you? Now let your Church boast no more of her infallibility, except she can
first prove that those many clear and express Scriptures which speak against
her new Doctrines are mistaken, or else that God meant by them quite another
thing than what he expressed, and that men are not to believe any thing of
Scripture, though never so plain, until the Pope has determined how far and in
what sense: until that be done, we will, together with the primitive Concils
and Fathers, make the Word of God the Rule of our Faith, and adhere to the
three ancient Creeds, and then laugh at your wilful and confident Assertions,
as we do at that which is called a Woman's reason.


P. You may laugh as long as you will, you can never scorn us so much as we do
you: and for all you are so stout here at home, if you were in those Countries
where there is an Inquisition, they will make you talk after another rate, and
feel that such perverse Heretics as you are deserve to be used as bad as the
worst of Infidels; and that faith is no more to be kept with you, than with
Tirants and public Robbers. Praesens Sancta Synodus ex quovis salvo conductu
per Imperatorem, Council. Constant. S. 19.
Reges and alios saeculi principes, haereticis vel de haeresi diffamatis
putantes eosdem sic a suis erroribus revocare, quocunque vinculo se
astrixerint, Concesso: nullum fidei Catholicae vel jurisdictioni Ecclesiasticae
praejudicium generari posse seu debere declarat. Quominus dicto salvo conductu
non obstante, liceat judici competenti and Ecclesiastico inquirere, punire,
etc. Etiamsi de salvo conductu Confisi ad locum venerint judicii, alias non
venturi. Nec sic permittentem, cum fecerit quod in ipso est ex hoc in aliquo
remansisse obligatum. Fides haereticis data servanda non est, Becan. Inst. tit.
46. S. 51.
sicut nec tyrannis piratis, and caeteris publicis praedonibus. And so I leave
you to the tickling of your own fancy.


G. Nay, good Master, don't be gone yet, and don't be so angry, I Will rather not
laugh at all than lose your company. And the truth is, I could much sooner weep
when I think of the sad Divisions which are betwixt the hearts, as well as the
judgments of Christians. Though I have an aversion to some of your Doctrines,
yet I assure you I have none for you, nor any others that dissent from our
Church. And would to God our different Opinions had not so utterly destroyed
not only Christian Charity, but even Humanity; such bloody and unnatural
Doctrines and Practices as you now mentioned, had never been seen nor heard of.
And for all your sudden passion, I am persuaded you have so much of humane
Nature in your breast, that if you consult your heart upon second thoughts,
you will find in it some abhorrence to those cruelties as have often been used
against dissenting Christians by those that pretended to be better, if not the
best of that name.


P. Truly I confess that in cold blood I should be unwilling to use such
severities against any body; and for my own self, I would not persecute any man
upon the account of Religion. But yet I cannot condemn the practice of our
Church in this: for the Pope, out of the plenitude of that power he has over
all the Christian World, may well dispose of the life of an Heretic that will
not be reclaimed: for he has power to dispose, for the good of Souls, and the
advancement of the Catholic Faith, of the Kingdoms, and the very Lives of all
Princes, if the aforesaid exigencies require it. Cardinal Stapleton after
having disputed against those who granted too large a power to the Bishop of
Rome, asserts this as the most moderate Opinion of the Doctors of the Church:
That in case of mortal sin, especially Heresy, when it is likely to be
prejudiciable to the Church, the Roman Pontiff as being Supreme Pastor of it,
may for its preservation punish any Princes whatsoever; and if it should be
requisite, deprive them of their Kingdoms, either by means of the Parliament,
or Peers and Commons: or in case of necessity, (that is) if it cannot be
effected that way, he may do it immediately by himself, by his own Authority,
by giving his Kingdom to another Prince, or to any the first Catholic
Conqueror. For so (he says) Pope Stephen transferred the Empire from the
Greeks to the Germans, and Pope Innocent the Fourth took the Government of the
Kingdom from the King of Portugal, and gave it to his Brother. In casu peccati
mortalis and maxim haeresis, Stap. contr. 3. de primario subjecto potestatis
Ecclesiasticae quaest. 5. a. 2.
potissimum quando in publicum aliquod and magnum Ecclesiae detrimentum vergit,
Romanus Pontifex tanquam supremus Ecclesiae Pastor, ad ejus conservationem and
punire quosvis principes potest and si rei necessitas exigat regno privare. --
Romanus Pontifex in casu haeresis principem aliquem dominio privare immediata
authoritate potest in casu necessitatis; alioqui non nisi mediata, per populum
aut ordines regni vel Senatum civitatis: at si istud non succedat (qui est
status necessitatis) potest per se immediate procedere, dando illius regnum
alteri Orthodoxo principi, vel primo victori Orthodoxo illud assignando: ut
Stephanus Papa transtulit imperium a Graecis ad Germanos. Innocentius quartus
interdixit regni administrationem Regi Portugaliae fratrem ejus substituens,
etc.

So likewise Cardinal Bellarmine does teach, That though the Pope as Pope may
not usually, yet that as Supreme Spiritual Prince he may for the good of souls
dispose of Kingdoms as he thinks good, take them away from one, and give them
to another. Non potest Papa ut Papa ordinary, etc. tamen potest mutare regna
and uni auferre atque alteri confer, tanquam summus Princeps Spiritualis, si
id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem. For you must know, That in the Church
the Ecclesiastic and the Civil Power are, as in Man, the Spirit and the Flesh;
and that Kingdoms and Governments are not immediately of God, but of Men;
whereas the Power of the Bishop of Rome comes immediately from God. Bell. de
Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 6.
Vt se habent in bomine spiritus and caro sic se habent in Ecclesia potestas
politica and Ecclesiastica -- regna non sunt immediate a Deo instituta, sed ab
hominibus, Pontificatus autem a Deo immediate est institutus. And so, The Pope
has power to dispose of all temporal things belonging to all Christians in
general. Pontifex Romanus in ordine ad bonum spirituale habet summam potestatem
disponendi de temporalibus rebus omnium Christianorum. And according to that
unlimited Power in the Head, the Body of the Clergy enjoys great Privileges:
They are above, or at least equal to King and Princes; and therefore not bound
to obey them, neither by Divine nor Humane right. Ibid.
Respectu clericorum non sunt principes superiores potestates ac proinde non
tenentur clerici principibus parere neque jure divino neque humano, nisi
quantum ad leges quasdam directivas, i. e. non obligatione coactiva. And so,
The Goods and Estates of Clergymen, as well Temporal as Ecclesiastic, are and
ought to be free from Taxes, and all duties to Princes; and they themselves
ought not to be judged by any Civil Magistrate, although they do not observe
Civil Laws. Bell. de Clericis L. ^. c. 28.
Non possunt Clerici a judice saeculari judicari, etiamsi leges civiles non
servent -- Bona clericorum tam Ecclesiastica quam saecularia libera sunt ac
merito esse debent a tributis principum saecularium.


G. Yes, I see your Pope is a petty God upon Earth, his Power is not to be
controlled, and whatever he does, his Almightiness and Infallibility will bear
him out, and make the thing good and just, though it seem never so much
otherwise. But sure in this he is none of Christ's Vicar; the meek and humble
JESUS would not so much as divide the Inheritance betwixt two Brethren, much
less dispose of whole Kingdoms: he paid tribute to Caesar, and acknowledged his
Authority to be from above; and we read no where that ever he gave any such
power to his Apostles, or their Successors, as the Pope pretends to. He told
them indeed that they should be brought and condemned before the Tribunals of
Kings and Princes, but did no where tell them that ever Kings and Princes
should be brought before their Pontifical Chairs to be judged and punished by
them. We read but of one that ever pretended to have the power of disposing of
the Kingdoms of the World, he that said, All these things will I give thee,
Mat. 4.9. And except the Head of your Church will acknowledge himself to be his
Surrogate, he had best show us how he came by the same Power. But this Doctrine
is so contrary to the example and Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it
will be its own antidote: you your selves are ashamed to own it openly; and
when it is known, it is confuted.


P. I see we shall never agree as to particulars; as long as you believe to
have the Scripture on your side, you will never yield to the Authority of our
Church, which you don't think to be infallible. But in general, by your own
Confession ours is the best and the safest Church: for you yield that a man may
be saved in it, whereas we utterly deny the same privilege to yours, Stapl.
contr. 3. quaest. 9. and 10.
the Communion of the Church of Rome being absolutely necessary to the
Salvation of all men. Romanae Ecclesiae Communio omnibus est ad salutem
necessaria. You also grant that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's Successor,
which is a great point: And I believe you will not deny but that there is Miracles
wrought in our Church, which are unanswerable Arguments of the truth of its
Doctrine. These three are substantial points, and will abundantly outweigh all
the petty Objections you can bring against some parts of our Religion. Pray
consider of them at your leisure.


G. To my thinking they require no great consideration, and there is no such
weight in them as you fancy: though you make great use of such wooden
Arguments to seduce the simple, yet to those that have but an ordinary
competency of knowledge they seem very insignificant.

The first is common to you with our Fanatics, they all confine Salvation every
one to his own Sect, and you and they together take advantage of our charity,
in that we don't exclude you out of Heaven, you believe that you only shall
come in it. But, Mr. Novator, don't you trust to our charitable Opinions, we
may be mistaken, for we pretend to no infallibility.

There was two Barques putting out to Sea, both of them bound for Jerusalem;
one was rotten, leaky, and much out of order, but the Master of it was a bold
Man, and of an imposing Spirit; he would persuade the people that it was St.
Peter's own Barque, that it was impossible it should sink, and that all as many
as would not come into it should certainly be drowned, and never come to the
Holy Land: The other Barque was sound and strong, and well fitted for the
Voyage; the Passengers therein would tell those in the leaky one of their great
danger, and exhort them to stop the holes, and put things in better order,
though they did not despair but that some of them might swim to shore upon some
pieces of the Barque. Now, do you think this man's confidence would hold his
sinking Ship upon the Water? or that the compassionates hopes and wishes of the
others would make their own sink? Certainly, uncharitableness is a very unfit
mark to know Christianity and the true Church by. But let me tell you, that we
have no hopes of you as you are Papists. Those Articles wherein you differ from
us, shall greatly endanger, but in no wise advance your Salvation. What makes
us admit of a possibility of your being saved, is, because you hold still the
same Creed with us, and because though you have much shaken and weakened, yet ye
have not quite overthrown the Foundation; that is, Jesus Christ and his saving
merits, which we hope will avail to those of your Church that trust in them,
though they ignorantly believe those things as would make them ineffectual if
understood or relied on.

As for your so much cried up Succession, it signifies no more than this, that
now the Pope is Bishop of the same Town as St. Peter was, or at least a Town of
the same name: for old Rome has been destroyed long agone. But pray, supposing
that St. Peter's Successors were to be the Heads of the Church, who told you
that he did not leave that privilege at Antioch where his Sea was first? How
many Ruptures and Schisms has there been in your Succession? and how many has
there been of your Popes guilty of the greatest Impieties and worst of
Heresies? Your own Authors can inform you; as also, how good and bad, Orthodox
and Heretic Bishops have succeeded one another in all Seas. But make the best
of it as you can, what is it to the truth or untruth of those points we differ
about? Because now (...) sits in the same Chair as St. Peter did, therefore
there is a Purgatory, and men ought to Worship Images, and the Pope is
infallible, etc. A very Logical Inference! as good as that of the man who
because he sat in Tullies Pew, would needs persuade himself and others that he
had Tullies Eloquence.

But there is Miracles daily wrought in your Church by some Saint or other,
(...)! This is something indeed! but it is common to all Religions. Monsieur
Bernier, a man of your Church, will tell you as an eyewitness of it, that the
Turks and Gentiles pretend to the same, and are more persuaded of the truth of
their Miracles, than (I believe) many in your Church are of the truth of yours.
But let me tell you, that Miracles are for Infidels, not for Believers. St.
Paul could not heal Trophimus, to him a beloved Christian, though among the
Unbelievers he could even raise up the dead. We believe the Religion Preached
by the blessed Apostles upon the account of those Miracles they wrought when
they were yet alive; without their Relics and Images work the same wonders,
now, we are persuaded of the truth of what they then delivered. And the truth
is, you are so your selves. You don't pretend your new Miracles to confirm
those Essential Doctrines of the Christian Religion which you and we are agreed
about: Your greatest Miracle-mongers have hardly reported any one Miracle
wrought these five or six hundred years in these parts of the World, to
authorize Christian Religion, or to prove the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity,
or of the two Natures united in Christ into one person, (about which points
were most of the ancient Heresies) or any one Article of the Creed, they are
all to confirm your newfound Doctrines: The Cures as the Saints work upon those
that worship their Images, the appearing of dead Folks to beg for Masses and
Prayers, the return of Souls out of Purgatory to tell how hot the fire is, and
how well worth ones money Indulgences are, the wonders done by your Friars, or
the Founders of their Orders, or of some one who is to be Canonized, and most
of them so ridiculous and so absurd, that I believe the most serious Bigot
amongst you can hardly hold laughing at the reading of your Legends and Books
of Miracles. And so of those three things you so much relied on, the first is
against you, the second signifies nothing, and the last exposes to contempt
those Doctrines it should justify.


P. Well, I did not think that you could say so much for your selves; and I
assure you, I shall hereafter have a better opinion of you than ever I had:
thus much at least shall I be profited by our long Discourse; and now Sir, fare
you well, I thank --


G. Nay, don't thank me, it is I should thank you, for telling me so plainly
those Doctrines of your Church we disagree about, and which usually you so
misrepresent to those of our Religion, that they hardly ever know the truth of
what your Church believes. But pray don't go away yet, I Will help you to that
company as you will like much better than mine: I Will tell you whose it is, when
first I have desired these two things of you: First, that you would consider,
how greatly suspicious it is that your Church maintains those Doctrines we call
Errors, more for their profitableness to her than for any other reasons,
because they all tend to the increasing of her Riches or Authority. The Popes
Infallibility, and his Power of disposing of all the World for the good of
Souls, the exemption of the Clergy from the power of the Civil Magistrate, the
requisiteness of their intention in the administering of your Sacraments; how
powerful, how honorable, and withal how dreadful must the belief of these make
your Church and Churchmen: The Doctrine of Purgatory, of Jubilees, Pardons,
Indulgences, and worshipping of Saints, (the best part whereof is the offering
to them) what Estates, what Riches, what a world of profit does it bring to the
Head, and all the Members of your Clergy? In those points of Christian Religion
that concern not her Interest, your Church is sound and Orthodox, those
beggarly Heresies of the Arians, Eutichian, Macedonians, etc. are condemned and
detested by her as much as ever they were by the first Councils: yours are
Golden Errors, if they are gross and palpable, yet they are profitable and
advantageous. The Pope is none of those mean Souls that will hold erroneous
Opinions merely out of perverseness and obstinacy: Si Jus violandum, etc. si
Religio adulteranda, regnandi causa: if he errs, at least he shall reign by it.
And so now reciprocally, the Popes Greatness is the best argument to maintain
those Errors whereby he got it, the splendour of his own, and the interest he
has in the Courts of several Princes, the dependency all the Clergy has upon
him, the numerous Legions of Soldiers he has quartered in all Abbeys and
Monasteries, and the influence they have upon the common people, his
Inquisitions, and his Ravilliacks, these be the best proofs to evidence the
truth of those Doctrines we have rejected, as well as to uphold his Pontifical
Chair over the Throne of Christian Princes.

The other is, that, remaining in the Communion of your Church, you would think
those the most substantial Articles of your Faith which were delivered by the
Apostles, confirmed by the first Councils, and now believed by you and us
together; and that upon them you would lay the greatest stress of your future
well-being. You cannot but see by what I have objected out of Gods Word against
many of your Doctrines, and by what many learned men have written out of the
best Records of Antiquity, (if you durst read them) that those things in debate
betwixt us are at the best but doubtful; therefore 'twill be more sure to rely
chiefly on what is believed of both parties, our common Symbol or Christian
Creed. You use to say, that yours is the safest Church, because we believe as
well as you that men may be saved in it: And now I use the same reason and say,
that it is better to believe as we do, because you also acknowledge what we
believe to be sound and Orthodox. That the Scripture is the Word of God, and
therefore infallible; That God is the only Object of our Religious Adoration;
That Jesus Christ is in Heaven, and there to be worshipped; That his Blood does
cleanse us from all sin; That he intercedes for us; and, That he will render to
every man according to his works; the Scripture is plain in all this, and you
believe it as well as we: therefore it is much more certain and to be relied on,
than the Popes Infallibility, the worshipping Images, with the worship of
Douleia as you speak, the belief of Transubstantiation, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, the relying on the Merits, Satisfactions and Intercessions of the
Saints, and the Pardons and Indulgences of the Church-treasure. Bell. de
Justif. l. 5. c. 7.
Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae and periculum inanis Gloriae,
tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere. Because of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger
of self-conceitedness, it is safest of all to put our whole trust in the mercy
of God. The like might be said of all other points in question. But why could
not the learned Cardinal say so before, and spare himself the great labo^rs he
took about Purgatory, Indulgences, and the Merits and Satisfactions of our
selves and others? by saying plainly Tutissimum est, it is safest of all to
rely upon Gods mercy: (Certainly in a thing of that moment we should go the
surest way to work.) But pray learn that Lesson of that great Champion of your
Church, and mind what I have said.

Now I Will tell you, if you stay a while longer, I expect Master V. a
Presbyterian Minister, one that will tell you stoutly of the Beast and the
Whore of Babylon, and many other things that will please you as well: I should
be very glad to hear you discourse together, and perhaps 'twill not be
altogether unpleasant to you.


P. Ho, Master V.? I know him of old, I would go many a mile to see him, and to
talk with him: I have of late looked over many of their Presbyterian Books as
they printed in the time of the late War. I Will warrant you I Will make brave
sport with him, if you please but to stand Spectator or Auditor for a while: if
you can be patient enough to hear us, I dare promise you we'll find discourse
enough to entertain your attention.


G. I will.


The Preface.
THe Doctrines and Constitutions of the Church of England, which are rejected
and opposed by the Presbyterians, have been so fully asserted against their
Objections and Innovations, by the labors of several learned men, that it had
been actum agere, to thrust my Sickle into other men's Harvest, to say any thing
in defense of them. I have therefore made it my only business, to discover
their professed Religion, as it has been solemnly taught by the Deeds and
Writings of their greatest Divines: because I observe that they also draw
people after them, chiefly by concealing or misrepresenting of it. I will not
tell thee before hand, that they own the worst of Popish Errors; thou shall
judge of it when thou have made an end of reading this Book. But for fear thou
should think that thou know well enough already what their Doctrines are,
I will assure thee that they disguise them, and cunningly hide their real and
worst Opinions under fair and specious pretenses.

I know I shall be told that I rake into the dust of old stories, and open the
grave of Oblivion, etc. and be called a Liar and a Calumniator, and what else
they please. Veritas odium parit. But I say, that those Authors I have cited,
have never recanted their Errors, nor the Divines of that party ever censured
or disowned them or their Writings; but they still persist to impose upon the
people, and draw them away from the Church, by the same arts and pretenses as
they did at first. And I protest that (though I might) I have not mentioned the
failings of any one man, whom I knew to have repented of them by returning to
his duty: neither have I falsified any of my Quotations in the least, nor made
such severe reflections upon them as one might, but said just as much as I
thought would suffice to make them hang together, and let the Reader see the
cheat. And as for their ill speaking of me, I regard it not: for let it be
never so bad, I am sure they have said worse of better men than either I am, or
pretend to be. If it be objected, That I have brought in a silly Presbyterian,
who speaks but two or three words at a time, and says nothing in his own
defense: I desire it may be considered, that the Papist having the Conclusion
to prove, was therefore to be longest in his Discourses, and that Replies and a
full debate of the points in question had been useless and inconsistent with my
intended brevity. But the truth is, I knew not what my Veterator could have
answered to those proofs that were brought against him, I desire the Reader to
observe, whether they do admit of any pleas or evasions.

And now before I suffer thee to hear the Discourse of my Colloquutors, let me
require these two things of thee: First, That whatsoever Religion thou art
resolved to profess, thou would take heed, that by deluding arts and goodly
pretenses thou be not made to follow those Doctrines and practices which are
hereafter mentioned, and the which if thou art a Christian and a Protestant,
thou can not but condemn as being erroneous and criminal in the highest
degree. And secondly, That thou would not draw poison out of my Antidote, be
uncharitable to those that are, because I have made thee see their errors:
such foul Doctrines as thou shall find in this Book, are never good but at
second hand; and they are mentioned by me with designs of charity, that thou
might avoid them, not to make thee hate or despise the Authors or Abettors of
them. Remember that other men's faults shall not excuse thine: Wherefore let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. In stead of
insulting over them that are misguided or fallen, do thou pray heartily with
the Church, That God would bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived.

Popery Manifested, AND THE Papist Incognito made known: By way of DIALOGVE
between a Papist Priest, a Protestant Gentleman, and a Presbyterian Divine.
The Second Part.
Pr. YOur Servant, Sir, I come to see how you do, and to spend an hour with you
according to my promise.


G. Sir, you are very welcome, I am glad to see you, and I was very impatient
of your coming, as much to enjoy your good company my self, as to procure it to
this old acquaintance of mine, who longed for it as much as I did.


Pr. Ha, I doubt you have too many such acquaintances: I know the man, and am
sorry to see you should keep company with him, an Enemy to Christ and Christian
Religion. Take heed, Sir, Antichrist is of a very seducing Spirit.


Pa. Oh how now, Master! you fall foul upon me already: that is a very coarse
Complement to salute me with the odious name of Antichrist. But I hope you are
not in earnest: for my part I am glad to see you, and desire to shake hands
with you, if it will not defile the holiness of yours.


Pr. Avoid Satan! I would not have so much as your shadow to touch me; and I am
sorry to polute mine eyes with the sight of such a foul object as you are: no,
there ought to be no communication betwixt light and darkness.


Pa. That Is true too: but I Will warrant you, you and I are much of a dye, and I
am not of so dark a color as you think. I dare say, for all your great
aversion to me, your Religion and mine differ but a little; or at least nothing
so much as that of the Church of England, which you think comes very near to
ours. I can make it appear that we of Rome are agreed in many things with the
English Presbyterians, wherein we greatly differ from other Protestants: come,
my good Friend, let you and I dispute the case a little, you shall find that
I Will give you great satisfaction in it.


Pr. These be impertinent brags and paradoxes: I need no satisfaction in the
case, I am sure enough of the contrary: There are no men under the Sun that
hate and abhor Popery so much as we do; therefore you may spare your labor,
and keep your breath for a better use.


G. Pray, Sir, don't shrink, or else you will give him occasion to insult, and me
to be doubtful. Sure after having been these twenty years set about the
extirpation of Popery, you are not afraid of being now proved a Papist. Come,
make him repent of his bold challenge, and make it appear that your practice
and opinions are as averse to Rome as your words and clamors have been.


P. Yet still I stand upon my first ground, you come very near to the Church of
Rome in many things wherein you differ from the Church of England; even in
those things that are counted the worst of our errors.


Pr. I shall quickly confute your false and daring Assertion. And first, your
Church does greatly derogate from the Word of God, and makes it inferior to
her Traditions, and the Determinations of her Popes and Councils. Can you
charge us with any such thing?


Pa. Yes, that I can. You do greatly undervalue the same Divine Word to set up
your Sermons the higher: you persuade your people that that is the only
Preaching, and the true and only Word of God which you deliver out of your
Pulpits; so that your own Discourses are more attended and more regarded than
the Bible it self: And so prevalent is this opinion, that those of your sort
that go to the Parish Churches defer to go in while the Psalms, the Chapters,
and the Epistle and Gospel are reading, as if these were not worth the hearing:
But what is of the man's own making, they will listen to attentively, and
herhaps write it down, and repeat it with a great deal of Devotion. Gods Word
is but a Wooden Dagger with you, it does not reach the heart: but the worst
Sermon in your Conventicles pierces the very soul, and makes the people sigh
and groan, and take on most pitifully: the powerfulness of Preaching indangers
the very heart strings! And so current it is amongst you that your Preaching is
the Word of God, that it is called by the name of The Gospel, and to hear it is
made a Mark of Election. So Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs told the Parliament: Sermon.
print. 1645. p. 2.
When I consider this place [Westminster,] the extraordinary hand of God in
bringing the Gospel to be preached to you here in power, those thoughts
presently arise, there is hope that there are many souls here belonging to Gods
Election; surely many will come in and embrace the Gospel here. And by the
transcribing those sacred Oracles, men were to judge of the condition their
souls were in. Thomas Palmer in a Sermon of his tells the people, 1644. p. 28.
That to hear Sermons, and not write them, is like taking water in a Sieve: You
keep a Shop-Book, (says he) O be persuaded to keep a Soul-Book, that you may
know how your Spiritual Estate stands, (belike those that had much written had
very rich souls) what increase or decrease of Grace you make: this recording of
revealed Truths and Soul-experiences from God, would be of admirable use in
time of trouble. This is the difference in the case, we undervalue Scripture
that we may heed the more the Decrees of our Pope; and you, that you may the
better attend to the dictates of every one of your Sermonizers.


Pr. I know all you can allege will come short of what you would prove,
therefore I don't intend to trouble my self with answering your impertinencies;
it would but make our Discourse too tedious: let this Gentleman be judge
betwixt you and I who are in the right.


Pa. That will be very well: I Will follow your example, and endeavor to shorten
our Dialogue by pleading guilty t every Article: Charge our Religion with what
you will, I Will deny nothing, but show you your own face in that Mirror you
shall reach to me. Come, proceed.


Pr. In your public Worship you use an unknown Tongue which the people does
not understand, and thereby you keep them in ignorance that they may not be
able to discern the errors of your Religion. I am sure you can tax us with no
such thing, for we make all things plain to our hearers, and they are an
understanding and a knowing people, who have more light in spiritual matters
than any people whatsoever.


Pa. You do but fancy so; they are as ignorant as any of us, and they
understand as little what you say: though you speak English, yet you speak an
unknown Language to the people: for you have so spiritualized Religion, that
you have made riddles and mysteries of the plainest of its Doctrines: it all
consists in new-coin'd phrases, and spiritual notions, and fancies, and
secrets. Pray hear what Mr. Francis Cheynell preached before the Parliament:
Sermon. 1646. p. 2. and 3.
God does communicate rare secrets to certain known and chosen men, to Prophets
Prophecies, Christ to his Disciples Gospelsecrets, Doctrinal-secrets, God to
men of public spirits secrets of State; and we have seen such admirable
experiences of Gods mercy in this kind within these five years, that our
Posterity will scarcely believe what we have seen. -- God imparts mysterious
secrets to his chosen people, some secrets to make them his friends, other
secrets after they are his friends, convincing secrets, humbling secrets,
converting secrets. Don't you think that these secrets are as bad as Latin?
Again, (if I may cite the words of one who was somewhat nearer to the Lord than
you) Thomas Brooks in a Sermon of his: 1648. p. 19.
O if God would raise up Parliament Men, and men in the Army and in the City,
and round the Kingdom to more spiritual acquaintance with himself, to more
internal knowledge, we should find that they would do abundantly more
gloriously: for it is want of an internal spiritual knowledge of God that men
are Newters, Apostates, etc. As you would do glorious and honorable things,
look to this, that ye have an internal knowledge and spiritual acquaintance
with God, and this will enable you to do Exploits. -- If you would do
gloriously, keep your Evidences for Glory always bright and shining, soil not
your Evidences for Glory. And p. 20. If Parliamentmen, and men in all the
Kingdom would believe more gloriously, they would do more gloriously for God.
Spiritual internal knowledge and acquaintance, bright Evidences, believing
gloriously! I should think these as hard to be understood by ordinary people as
an Ave Maria: yet doubtless your people must needs be very knowing, when you
find them with Books whose very Titles if well understood would be able to open
the seven Seals: Jos. Caryl Preach. of Lincoln's Inn. 1644.
The Sa^nts thankful acclamation at Christ's Resumption of his great power, and
the Initials of his Kingdom: A Thanksgiving Sermon for one of your Victories at
Selby in Yorkshire, The Thoughts of the Almighty. A Sermon preached before the
Mayor by a Divine of the Assembly, wherein it is like those thoughts had been
revealed to him. John Strickland 1644.
Such Books must needs give great instruction to the people, and the light of
this following Doctrine would questionless expel even an Egyptian darkness! T.
Palmer ibid.
Who would not now desire to close with Christ, and love Christ, and walk with
Christ? yea, who would not be rouled up, and wholly enclosed in Christ?

The many Sermons you printed twenty years agone, are for the most part full of
such insignificant, canting and unintelligible mysteries. Now, I say, it
matters not whether it be English or Latin, as long as the people does not
understand, both will keep them equally ignorant. I note only these two
differences, because they make for us: First, that our Priests understand their
Latin, whereas your Rabbis themselves cannot make sense of many of their
English Mysteries. And secondly, that if our people are ignorant, at least they
are conscious of it, and therefore do follow the Church; whereas your Disciples
when they have got by heart your empty phrases, are so self-conceited of their
great skill in discerning the things of the Spirit, that they judge all others
blind that will not admire them, and will venture to expound the hardest places in
Scripture, and sometimes leave you, and set up for themselves.


Pr. The Canons and Injunctions of your Church, and the numberless Ceremonies
she has appointed, you observe with as much strictness as if they were
commanded by God himself; and so you make your own devices equal to Gods
Ordinances. I am sure we do quite contrary, for we allow nothing to be done in
Gods service, but what he has appointed himself, and we will have Scripture
for the very Circumstances of Divine Worship.


Pa. I remember indeed that five of your Doctors told us in an Apology they
presented to the Parliament, Jer. Bur. Will. Bri. Ph. Nigh. Syd. Sam. Th. Good.
page 10. That they were certain there was in Scripture Rules and ruled Cases
for all occasions whatsoever, if we were able to discern them: But I never
heard that they had found out only so much as enough to determine all the
Circumstances of Gods Worship. However, I am sure you have by far outdone us
in the magnifying and imposing of your own inventions. You told us that if your
intended Reformation (which was doubtless a device of your own) did not take,
Christianity should go near to be lost. The Minister of Ashford in Kent, in a
Sermon before the Committee of that County, informs them of the present danger
of loosing the Christian Religion through all the Churches of the World, Jos.
Poden 1644. p. 30.
if they should be careless and neglect the opportunity put into their hands:
The Lord (says he) has set this as a prize, but we must run for it; this is
proposed as a Crown to the Saints, but we must fight for it: yea, and reason
good: George Gillespie, 1645. p. 17.
for that Reformation was according to the mind of Christ, says a Minister of
Edinburgh to the Commons at Westminster. I confess you have rejected the
ancient Ceremonies of the Church, (all that was not of your devising) as Mr.
Calamy told the Parliament, We that live under the Gospel, know that the
worship of God the more spiritual the more beautiful it is in the eyes of God
who is a Spirit, and that the outward pomp in Gods service is an attire more
fit for the Whore of Babylon than for the modest Spouse of Christ, and that
Music in Gods service though it may please the ears of men, yet it is
unpleasing in the ears of God, (if you will take his word for it.) But what was
of your own inventing, O that is much made of! Your Presbyterian Government was
said to be of Christ's own Institution, F. Cheynel Sermon. 1646. Ep. Dedic. Chapter
Love at Uxb. p. 20.
so the Parliament was taught, and you graced it with glorious Epithets, as in
these lines: God is feeling the pulse of this Nation, looking how we are
affected: me thinks I hear the Lord asking the Inhabitants of this Kingdom,
Will you have your Bishops, your Common Prayer Book? etc. or will ye have the
Gospel in power? a reformation in purity? your Assemblies refined? your
pollutions removed? and the Government of my Son Established in the midst of
you? And so the settling of your Discipline was the settling Christ in his
Throne, as Mr. White has it in the Preface to his Centuries 1643. Let us set
hand and heart and shoulder, and all to advance the Lords Sion to a perfection
of beauty, and to set up Christ upon his Throne. And so another great One of
yours: S. Marshal Sermon. to the Parl. 1643. p. 19.
Did ever any Parliament in England lay the cause of Christ and Religion to
heart as this has done? -- Did ever the City of London, the rest of the
Tribes, and the godly Party throughout the Land, so willingly exhaust
themselves that Christ might be set up? And page 20. Let all England cry, that
our Blood, our Poverty, etc. are abundantly repaid in this, that there is such
a concurrence to set up the Lord Christ upon his Throne to be Lord and Christ
over this our Israel. And the best of it is, that when you had nothing to say
for the antiquity of your goodly Discipline and Directory, you would make it a
Diopetes, a thing fallen from Heaven, or like the Heathen Legislators, received
from God himself, that it might be reverenced accordingly. The same person told
his Auditory: Ibid. p. 20
Here you have a reverend Assembly of grave and learned Divines, who daily wait
upon the Angel in the Mount to receive from him the lively Oracles, and the
pattern of Gods house to present to you. But that which you magnified most of
all, and which was as much your own contrivance as your beloved Directory, was
the Covenant, the blessed Covenant! There is not a Text in Scripture that
speaks of the Covenants God has made with men at any time, but it was applied
to your own by your learned Preachers: Scripture, Sacraments, none of Gods
Ordinances was comparable to it, it was so divine and so excellent: Proofs are
almost needless in a thing so well known, yet I Will bring two or three out of
Mr. Case's Sermons on the Covenant, upon this Text, Th. Case, p. 59.
Levit. 26.25. A wonderful mercy, a high favor may we count it from our God,
that yet such a sovereign means is left us for our recovery and reconciliation.
And then says he, page 61. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? Again, page 19. There are found amongst us so many profane
Ephramitish and Zabulonitish spirits, that do contemptuously reject the
Covenant of God. And page 31. It was no small thing that poor Creatures should
be married to the living God, (by the Covenant) yea, be one with him, yea,
perfect in one. What could you have said more, except you had quite Deified it?
Now therefore in this business, I see no more difference betwixt you and us
than this, that our Constitutions, our Devices, and our Ceremonies, are more in
number, but acknowledged to be of Humane Institution; whereas yours be fewer,
but of a Divine Origin, as you say, either from Scripture or some latter
revelation: but let the quality go for the quantity, and we are agreed: for
it is well known that you were as severe to those that would not conform and
obey, as ever was the Pope of Rome.


Pr. Now you put me in mind of it, have any such thing as a Pope, who pretends
to be chosen by Gods Spirit, and so acted by it, that whatever he says must be
assented to as true, he being altogether infallible? Don't we rather teach,
That God only is free from all error and ignorance, but that no man enjoys
that privilege?


Pa. No, you have no such thing as one only Pope, but you have a great many:
for every Minister of yours pretends to the same Authority, and the same
Privileges; and I believe that is the reason you hate him of Rome so much,
because he will have no fellows, but reign all alone. I know not how it is
amongst you now, but heretofore the Reforming Parliament Men themselves were
chosen by the Spirit, as Mr. Case told them in a Sermon: Tho. Case, 1644. p. 9.
Surely had not the Spirit of the Lord gone forth to a wonder of wisdom and
power in bespeaking the Votes of the people for a major part of men, whose
spirits were above fears and above flatteries, etc. If Parliament Men, much
more Ministers: but I need no inference, the Spirit was poured upon you all in
such a measure, that all ranks of people were endued by it with Heroic, nay,
even Angelick Virtues and Abilities, or else Mr. Case was mistaken; for thus he
said, Ibid. p. ^8
As the Spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, and Jephtah, and David, so has
it been in our conflicts, the Spirit of the Lord has come upon our Noble
General, and all our Commanders, the Spirit of the Lord has come upon our
Gallants, Gentlemen, Young men, faithful Countrymen renowned Citizens: so that
he that was weak among them is as David, and he that was as David, has been as
the Angel of the Lord. And you the teaching Elders, you pray by the Spirit, and
you preach by the Spirit, (wherefore it is I suppose that you call your Sermons
the Gospel, and Gods Word) and if long Prayers and Sermons be a sign of having
much of the Spirit, any of you may vie it with all the Popes of Rome put
together. Nay, and to make the parallel complete, you pronounce Bulls and
Fulminations by the Spirit too, Will Beech Sermon. Licensed by Mr. Cramford, 1645.
p. 10.
Tell them from the Holy Ghost, (says Mr. Beech) from the Word of Truth, that
their destruction shall be terrible, it shall be timely, it shall be total: And
it is more than probable, you would have made Canonical Scripture ere now, had
not the Kings Return somewhat frighted away that Spirit you were so possessed
withal. But in this there is still some difference betwixt our Opinions: for
with us the Pope has the greatest part of the Spirit, if not all of it;
whereas your Ministers are all sharers of it.


Pr. Yet still, for ought you have said, it does not appear that we pretend to
Infallibility, we don't arrogate to our selves the power of interpreting
Scripture exclusively to all others; and before we have declared what the sense
of it is, we don't call it as you do, A Waxen Nose, which may be turned all
manner of ways, and never right till we fix it our selves.


Pa. One thing after another pray, we have done with the Spirit, which is the
cause of Infallibility; we shall now come to the expounding of Scripture, which
is the effect of that cause. And to give you your due, I must needs say that
you have done very much in this; and if you will but go on as you have begun,
you will go near to persuade posterity, that a body may expound Scripture out of
a Scotch Pulpit, as well as out of St. Peter's Chair, and a great deal better:
for besides the Doctrinal part, beyond which Popes could never go,
Presbyterians expound Prophecies, and make Prophecies too. Pray hear some of
them: Jer. Bur. Sermon. 1643. p. 72.
All the Saints in these days should be full of the Spirit, strong in the might
of the Lord, because Jesus Christ is about to pull down that great Enemy of
his, that Man of Sin, and in his Conquest is said to come with Garments dipped in
Blood. Rev. 19.
Do you think any man but he could, have seen that this Nation wallowing in
Blood was the fulfilling of that Prophecy? Mr. Th. Goodwin, who belike had seen
the Pattern in the Mount, being one of the Assembly, made this remarkable
discovery, Th. Good. Sermon. to the Parl. 1645. p. 47. and 48
That it is certain we are now in the last times of those ten Kingdoms of
Europe, of which the Holy Ghost has prophesied, Rev. 17.14. These shall make
War with the Lamb, etc. And where you see (says he) that Jesus Christ has
took footing in any of these Kingdoms by such a way of conquest (reforming) as
in ours it has the second time for greater security, stand that Kingdom shall
till you see Rome down. And yet as mischief would have it, the King being
restored to his right, their second Reformation was turned out of doors before
Rome would down. But here is a Seer come from Edinburgh, who perchance will
have better luck: In a Sermon before the Parliament, after having cited many
Scriptures relating to the time of Christ's coming, and particularly that Hag.
2.8. The Glory of this latter House, etc. he infers, There are very good
grounds to make us think that this Temple is not far off, Geo. Gill. 1644. p.
18.
and that Christ is to make a new face of a Church in this Kingdom, a fair and
beautiful Temple for his Glory to dwell in; and he is even now about the work.
So famous Mr. Bond in the same Auditory expounding the Image in the second of
Daniel, Joh. Bond, 1644. p. 18.
We are come (says he) to the toes of those feet -- the German Eagle is stripped
of her plumes, Papacy drops her Prelatical Feathers continually, so that both
Scripture, Chronology, and common sense do evince, that the Image does stand at
best but on tip-toes, and the time is at hand, and I conceive is present in
which it shall be thrown down, and utterly abolished. Oh the man's modesty, that
he did not cry out (...)! What a pity it is that such quick-sighted Seers have
never applied themselves to writing of Optics? I Will bring but one more, but
have a care of it, for it is one that can bite and sting, if Mr. Coleman be to
be believed, for he told the House of Commons, There is a biting Prophecy, T.
Coleman 1645. p. 33.
Joel has said it, chap. 3. v. 19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall
be a desolate wilderness, etc. Now (says he) how to shelter them (the
Cavaliers) from the sting thereof, I know not: Had not that man great skill in
Prophecies, that could tell that Egypt and Edom meant the Kings Party? So much
for that.

Now it is to be considered, that we call Scripture a Waxen Nose, and so don't
you: Well! But what matters it for calling, if you make it so de facto? Shall
we wrangle about names, when we are agreed in the thing? I dare lay my Nose
against yours there was never a Waxen Nose so distorted and contorted as
Scripture was by you: I could produce so many proofs of it, that I am sure you
would be weary, if not convinced before I had done: but for your satisfaction
here is a few of them. That place in Daniel, In the days of those Kings shall
the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, etc. and
that of St. Matthew, I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon, etc. These
places were brought to prove, that the Presbyterians should overcome all their
Enemies, in a Sermon called, T. Palmer 1644. p. 9.
The Saints Support in these sad times: Let secret Enemies seek to prolong, let
open Enemies plot, prepare, and watch, God will discover the one, disappoint
the other, and destroy them all, Dan. 2.44. Mat. 16.18. And page 19. Saints,
cheer up your hearts, ply God with your prayers, you shall prevail, blessed be
God your Enemies have been on the decaying losing hand a pretty while; they
have in Scotland, that you know, they have lost in England, that you know, and
they shall lose and lose till they have lost all: as much as I have said you
shall find in the Revelations, in the 17 Chapter; you have a large description
of the Whore, and all her Glory; and Chapter 18. and the second Verse, there is
her destruction. Was not that as pat as could be to prove what he intended? So
Mr. Calamy in a Sermon before the House of Commons, speaking of those that
would take Arms against the Parliament, rather than the Government and Worship
they had lived under should be destroyed, Edw. Call. 1645. p. 4.
tells them, My Text confutes this, The times of this ignorance God winked at,
but now commands all men every where to repent, Act. 17.30. Former times were
times of ignorance, and times wherein men's Consciences were oppressed: but now
the times are times of Reformation, God has given greater liberty, and has
sent a greater light in the Kingdom, and now God commands all men every where
to repent: that is, as you see, to destroy that Worship and Government they
lived under.

And in the forementioned Sermon of William Beech, page 9. the 136 Psalm is
applied to those Encounters wherein they had worsted the Kings Forces: O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever: who
remembered us at Knasby, for his mercy endures for ever: who remembered us in
Pembrock-shire, for his mercy, etc. who remembered us at Leicester, for his
mercy, etc. who remembered us at Taunton, for his mercy, etc. who remembered us
at Bristol, for his mercy, etc. but this by the way. I could tell you also how
you used Scripture to countenance your cruelty against the Loyal Party, but you
shall hear of it another time: this is enough at present to show how you have
racked and abused it to make it countenance your wicked follies. We call
Scripture a Waxen Nose, and you make it so; (I suppose out of kindness to us,
to make good what we say) our Church interprets the Doctrinal part of
Scripture, and every one of you not only that, but even the hardest Prophecies
of it.


Pr. Well, but as much Popes as you can make us, we don't deny but that we are
subject to Kings and Princes, as not only your Pope, but even your meanest
Clergy does: we don't say that we can absolve Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance: we don't pretend to have the right of disposing of the Good of all
Christians, and even of all the Kingdoms in the World in order to the good of
souls, as your great Bishop does?


Pa. Why? Do you think when the Pope was as yet weak and struggling for that
Power he has now got into his hands, that he owned any such Doctrines? No,
I Will warrant him: And to my thinking you have shown more courage than ever he
did, for you have assumed that high Authority you speak of, even when you were
not altogether able to maintain it by force, though you ventured very fair for
it: but there are three or four things in what you said that must not be
confounded. And first,

That not only your Ministers, but even your People also are not subject to the
Laws of the Civil Magistrate, except they approve of them, (which is as much as
not at all, will too manifestly appear by those famous, or rather infamous
Books of Rutherford and Prynne, The falsehood of M. Prynns Truths Triumph, 1645.
p. 30. p. 25.
Lex Rex, and The Sovereignty of Parliament. Moreover, we have it in plain
terms, That the general Assembly is subordinate to no Civil Judicature
whatsoever, in a Book called, The readiness of the Scots advance into England.
And Mr. Dury told the Parliament in a Sermon, Settle but the Judicatories of
particular Congregations, and let the Thrones of the whole House of David be
crecied, and you shall find that the fruit of righteousness, etc. Isai. 32.17.
as much as to say, Inthronize a Pope in every Parish, and all will be well.

But secondly, you are so far from being subject to the Laws of Princes, that
you will have them to be subject to yours. This was one of the Propositions
presented to the Assembly at Edinburgh, Art. 8.
1647. None that is within the Church ought to be without the reach of the
Church Laws, and excepted from Ecclesiastical censures, but Discipline is to be
exercised on all the members of the Church, without respect or consideration of
those adhering qualities which use to commend a man to other men: All the Power
the Pope claims over secular Princes, is included in this one Article. When
once the Kirk has decreed that any thing is Antichristian, and must down, or
that some new device is according to the Pattern in the Mount, and therefore
must be established, if the Magistrate dares to oppose it, then cries the petty
Pope, Help ye the Lord against the Mighty, as S. Marshall in a Sermon: S.
Marshal 1641.
Curse ye Meroz for not helping the Lord against the Mighty. Some Politicians
(says he, page 2.) look which side shall prevail, and stand Neuter: but as
Gideon said to the men of Succoth, when they refused to give bread to the
people, Judge. 8.7. -- then will I tear your flesh with the thorns of the
wilderness: so I say to such, if the Lord prevail, he will do them. -- Is it so
indeed, that they are cursed that help not the Lord against the Mighty? Then,
Brethren, as you desire to be freed from this curse, and to obtain a blessing,
be exhorted to put forth your hand now to the help of the Lord. I pray look on
me as one that comes among you this day to beat a Drum in your ears to see who
will come out to follow the Lamb. Here was a Press-Master for the Synod!

Now here what Th. Goodwin said to the Parliament, Tho. Good. 1645.
how that the Saints, ( i. e. the Assembly and their Adherents) must not be
crossed in their humor, under pain of utter ruin; after a long canting to show
that the greatest and highest Interest of Kings and Kingdoms on which their
welfare or their ruin depends, was the dealing well or ill with the Saints, he
gives these reasons for it: 1. Their nearness and dearness to God. p. 40.
2. The interest of the Saints in God the Governor, and the privileges which
they themselves have vouchsafed them by God in ruling and governing this World,
p 42.
and Providence of God therein. And, 3. the interest of Jesus Christ himself,
-- whose design and practice is and has been to break all Kingdoms that do
oppose him, and oppress his Saints. Here Is the Dickins and all (I think) for
Papal Power: But you must understand that all this was proved out of his Text,
Psalm. 105.14. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for
their sakes.

Now, Sir, that your most Godly Party would make a pretty good title to the
Goods of the wicked, if they were in power, Th. Palmer endeavored to clear,
when in the 15 and 16 page of his Sermon he made it his business to prove, that
wicked men who are out of Christ, (i. e. out of their favor) have no proper
right to the Creatures, neither to the Sacraments and Ordinances, nor to those
Creatures that sustain life: And then (says he, page 17.) when the Riches, and
Honors, and Liberty given to the Saints, and Gospel Times so long promised
shall come, then the wicked miseries of the wicked begin, then shall their time
of sorrow and sadness come in: whereby he intimates, that should once the
Saints come to reign, the Wicked would go near to be dealt with as Usurpers of
what they possess, as indeed many of them were when the Saints had power to
plunder and sequester.

As for your absolving from Oaths, I had rather charitably believe that you can
do that too, than judge you guilty of perjury; for either of the two must be,
because many of your Ministers acted contrary to what they had sworn when they
received Ordination or Institution from the Bishop: that you will not deny. And
again, they acted contrary to their Oath of Allegiance, and made their people
do so too, and take an Oath contradictory to that, your holy Covenant: for
though you pretended that it was to make the King happy and glorious, yet 'twas
against your Allegiance, being it was against his will and just Authority: and
besides, that goodly pretense it self was an affronting his Majesty; for you
would make him to destroy the Church, which by his Oath at least he was bound
to preserve and maintain; and you would have wrested his Regal Power out of his
hand, and left him only his Scepter to countenance you. This is called
Protestatio contraria facto, when a man cuts another purse, and swears that he
does him no wrong: but whether you cut or untied the knot whereby you were
bound to act otherwise than you did, I leave it to your choice.


Pr. By and by I shall show that your Citations signify nothing: but supposing
they did, yet that cannot prove what you intend them for, because the Quarrel
betwixt the King and the Parliament, and the War that ensued thereon, was upon
a Civil account: and if the people were in the wrong, it was the Lawyers that
misled them, and not we. But how many Holy Wars has the Pope raised against
Kings and Emperors, merely to establish or maintain that supreme Authority he
claims over them? This alone does overthrow all you have said of your Papal
Power.


Pa. Nay, if you must have more proofs, I Will warrant you I can give you enough:
and therefore to confirm what I have said of your claiming a Pope-like Power, I
shall make it appear that it was you misled the people, and made them rebel,
and that your War was a Holy War upon the account of Religion.


Mr. Leech tells his Auditors in a Sermon, page 22. Jer. Leech 1644.
Who is on my side, let him cast down Jezabel of Rome, down with her Idolatries
and Superstitions, down with her Altars and Images, down with her Rags and
Relics, they be but Jezabels fragments, let them be used as Jezabel was used:
Help, Royal Sovereign, to throw her down; help to throw her down more and more,
ye that are of the Honorable Court of Parliament: Every one that loves the
Lord Jesus Christ, help to throw her down, never let us halt as we have done
betwixt God and Baal. It Is probable that had Royal Sovereign helped to pull down
Jezabel, you had not pulled him down with her: being he proved refractory to
the Church, you judged it requisite in ordine ad spiritualia, to make him feel
that Power of yours he would not acknowledge. Nay, when there were some hopes
of an Accommodation, Christopher Love who died a Martyr for your Kirk, was so
afraid the Holy War should be ended, and Christ not set upon his Throne, (you
know what that means) that Preaching at Vxbridge before the Commissioners, he
made use of another man's words, as he said, to exhort them to go on in fighting
for God: It Is the Sword (says he) not Disputes nor Treaties must end this
Controversy; therefore turn your Plowghshears into Swords to fight the Lords
Battles, to avenge the Blood of Saints which has been spilt. Cursed is he that
does the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed is he that keeps back his
Sword from Blood, Jer. 48.10. Some silly Cavaliers thought indeed that the War
betwixt the King and Parliament was about matters of Privileges, but S.
Marshall told them soundly of their simplicity, in a Sermon before the
Parliament, and Mayor and Aldermen: S Marshal 1643. p. 21.
Noble and resolute Commanders, fight the Battles of the Lord Jesus Christ. --
All Kingdoms except the Malignants in England do now see that the question here
is, Whether Christ or Antichrist shall be Lord or King. -- Go on therefore
courageously, you can never venture your Blood in such a Quarrel: Christ shed
his Blood to save you from Hell, venture yours to set him up upon his Throne.
So Jos. Boden told the Kentish Committee, page 11. Jos. Boden 1644.
That they were fighting for the Lamb against the Beast. And at the 13 page
Besides their wondering after and worshipping the Beast, Rev. 13.4. Have they
not gathered together in Arms and Armies against the Lord, and against his
Christ? (belike they did not give that name to their Parliament Privileges:)
Nay, are they not daily more and more mad and desperate in their mischief
conceived against the Church? Do they not daily beat up their Alarms, and bid
defiance to the people of the most High? -- I would have every Christian stand
upon his reputation, and not discover pusillanimity after such proud
Challengings. What has Antichrist done for them, that they dare be so bold?
And what has not Christ done for us, that we should now in these days of
daring be dastardly, hen-hearted and effeminate? This Sermon was called, An
Alarm beat up in Sion, to War against Babylon; and it well deserves to be
transcribed, but that it is too long. In all these you see we hear of nothing
but the Whore, the Beast, Babylon and Antichrist, which were to be destroyed;
not one word of any Civil matters or differences, if there was any it was
forgotten, your Church-Champions were so intent upon the Lords Work* and it
prospered so well in their hands, that they could think of nothing else. Joh.
Bond, 1644. p. 59.
As Sampson with the Philistines, (says one of the Saints) so let us die with
Babylon: if we cannot outlive Antichrist, and the Enemies of Reformation, let
us adventure our selves to death in the Cause; yea, let us take hold of the
Pillars of the Church of Dagon, of the Temple of Antichrist, and say, Now let
me die with Antichrist, Rome and Babylon. The War was so wholly and entirely
upon Gods account, (as you said) that though betwixt the Inhabitants of the
same Kingdom, yet you would not have it to be a Civil War. It is not a Kingdom
divided against it self, J. Arrowsmith, 1643. p. 69.
(says Mr. Arrowsmith to the Parliament) but one Kingdom against another, the
Kingdom of Christ divided against that of Antichrist; and this Antichristian
Kingdom will rage as much as they can to their power to shed Blood, but the
Lord has them in this Chain, and has sent forth his host against them: They
were not the Parliaments Forces, but the Host of the Lord sent against
Antichrist. Therefore they were so earnestly exhorted never to shrink, but
joyfully to lose their very lives in so good a cause. Mr. Midhope at the
Funeral of Colonel Gold, exhorted the Militia thus: St. Midh. 1644. p. 24.
Noble Commanders, be active for Christ, ye cannot do or suffer too much in his
Cause. -- Lay out your Time, Strength, Parts, your All for Christ; fear no loss
here, ye cannot drive a more gainful Trade. Could any thing more have been said
to the blessed Martyrs? Or did ever the Pope recommend his Croisadoes more
highly?

What has been said, proves it to the full, that you valued your intended
Reformation more than Christianity it self, (which it is no thanks to you if it
was not quite destroyed by these most nefarious and unchristian actings.) Now
two Witnesses more will make it altogether unquestionable, that from the
beginning to the end, that cursed War was raised and fomented to maintain your
new-fashioned Religion, and to bring about your Reformation. Mr. Cheynell told
the Parliament, F. Cheynel 1646. p. 32.
Consider the cries and outcries of the Godly Party of this Kingdom for a
Reformation, they speak plain and tell you, that they have fasted, prayed, and
wept for a Reformation, they have exhausted their Treasures, many of them
ventured their Lives, lost their Limbs, their Blood, their Friends for a
Reformation; you have promised us a Reformation, N. B.
we have paid for a Reformation, you are therefore indebted to us of a
Reformation, we are bound to challenge such a Reformation as will quit cost and
answer the price we have paid, and the pains we have bestowed, etc. And Mr.
Jenisson a Scotch-man in a Sermon at New Castle, Rob. Jen. 1648. p. 29.
The late designs of the Popish and Malignant Party tending to the utter
subversion of our Religion and of our Liberties, occasioned the National
Covenant between England and Scotland, and the joining in Arms for the defense
of their Religion. N. B.
Now I hope it is clear enough that it was you chiefly (if not alone) that
raised and fomented that execrably Holy War, to establish your projected
Religion and Discipline: And if you dare say to the contrary, you must give the
lie to your own Fellow Laborers, for you see I have it from them. So I humbly
conceive that you and I have made it appear that you are not only not subject
to Kings and Princes, but ever in some sort their Superiors; and that when you
judge Religion concerned, you will lose the bonds of Allegiance, make Subjects
to rebel against their Sovereign, and be as active for the Kirk, as ever the
Pope was for the Church: so that in this, you wanted nothing of being right
Catholics, but that you did not fight to advance the holy See, but the holy
Classis.


Pr. It Is well you can make an end at last. I could find in my heart to let you
talk alone, you are so infinitely tedious, especially in your Citations.


Pa. Sir, I know that such grave and serious men as you are, are gifted with a
great deal of patience: but yet let me tell you, that I could be a great deal
more tedious; you have made the subject in hand so copious, that one must write
Volumes that would treat it in its full Latitude. But what have you to say next?


Pr. I say, (being we are discoursing of War) that you Papists are cruel and
merciless to those that differ from you in Religion; as appears by your
Massacres and Inquisitions abroad, and your Persecutions and Plots here at
home: and you make people believe, that in their bloody cruelties against
Protestants they do God great service. I am sure we are quite of another
temper, for we preach meekness and forbearance of one another, and are for
Liberty of Conscience.


Pa. Nay, I know you shall never lack commendation for want of speaking well of
your selves: your words then are all honey, honey-sweet, but the mischief is
that your actions. are in the other extreme as bitter as gall. It Is true, you
are now for forbearance and Liberty of Conscience: but when you had the Power
in your hands, no men ever more strict and severe. You tied your selves by a
solemn Oath, Faithfully to endeavor the discovery of all Malignants and evil
Instruments that should hinder the Reformation of Religion, that they might be
brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment, in the fourth Article
of your Solemn League and Covenant for the Reformation and defense of Religion,
(as you called it:) and so whereas there are but few Inquisitors in the Church
of Rome, you had thousands of them among you; every man that had taken the
Covenant was bound to be one, bound to accuse his own Brother if he were not of
your party. And so it is said of Mr. Case, that he performed this part of his
Oath very conscientiously: as indeed it was his Doctrine in his Sermons on the
Covenant: Case, p. 56
If any one persist to hinder Reformation, be it the man of thine own house,
the husband of thine youth, the wife of thy bosom, etc. thou must with all
faithfulness endeavor the discovery, thine eye must not pity nor spare, Deuteronomy.
13.6, 7, and 8. But I wonder you would speak of cruelty, my last Quotations of
your Authors being so full of it: It seems you would have me make it out that
there is a perfect resemblance betwixt your Church and ours in our Zeal for God
and Religion. Well, you shall be satisfied.

You know the first thing we do to Heretics is to Excommunicate them: so Mr.
Cheynel would have those of the Church of England served, in the Epistle
Dedicatory of his forementioned Sermon, he desires the Parliament, That if
bloody Delinquents come to compound, their Composition may not authorize them
to communicate at the Lords Table. And he tells them at the 44 page There are
some sly Malignants who are too wise to be scandalous, they do not roar like a
Lion, but fret like a Moth; you will be importuned that those men may be
spared, because they are not scandalous in their lives: have you not read of
one, Qui sobrius accessit ad perdedam rempublicam? Must men be spared because
they do not fiercely assault Church and State? It seems their honesty would
signify nothing to excuse them from your persecution, as long as they were not
of your party. Mr. Coleman had found a way of punishing the Bishops in case
they should escape with their lives, which I don't remember to have ever been
used amongst us: T. Coleman 1644. p. 16.
Look to all degrees, (says he to the Parliament) and spare none; and amongst
the rest the Prelates, whose offenses in case they should not be found capital,
that device of sending them to New England transcends all the inventions I ever
met with: as good have cast them with Daniel into the Lions Den. Nay, it was so
much a duty to God to show no mercy to any of the Kings Party, that he had told
them before, page 15. That their ill success in the West was because of their
carelessness in keeping and dealing with Delinquents, and proves it by this
Scripture, 1 King. 20.42. Thus says the Lord, Because thou have let go out of
thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall
go for his life, and thy people for his people. So Mr. Case in a Sermon to the
Court Martial at the 13 page There is no dealing with God now, T. Case, 1644.
God is angry, he seems to ask this once more, Will you stick? will you execute
Judgment? or will you not? Tell me: for if you will not, I will; I will have
the Enemies blood and yours too, if you will not execute Vengeance upon
Delinquents. At the 16 page he tells them, That God would have Judges to show
no mercy when the Quarrel is against Religion and the Government of Jesus
Christ. Those men that would rise up in cursed practices to bring in Idolatry
and false Worship, to depose Christ from his Throne, and set up Antichrist in
his place, etc. such a Generation has Christ doomed to execution, Luke 19.27.
Those mine Enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me. And at 18 page What severity will God expect from you in
these cases, who are called this day to judge for God between the sons of
Belial, bloody Rebels, and an whole Christian Church and State now resisting
unto Blend for Reformation? Let me say to you as God to Moses concerning the
Midianites, Vex these Midianites and smite them, for they vex you with their
wiles, Numb. 25.17, and 18. Behold how the Godly sanctified their cruelty with
pieces of Scriptures, and thereby pressed it as a most indispensable duty! Mr.
Joseph Boden also in his forecited Sermon, page 16. and 18. exhorts the
Committee to do the utmost as they could against the Malignants. God arms them
(says he) with strength against his people, because heretofore and now also
they have and do find too much favor at our hands. I am confident the next
time the Devil gets into the Pulpit he will preach as good Divinity upon this
subject as this man, and many of his Brethren did. It was so essential a part
of your Godliness, and such an acceptable piece of service to Christ, to show
no mercy to the Malignants, that it was the praise of a dead Saint, S. Midhope
p. 22.
(Colonel Gould) That he had been impartially active in punishing Malignants
against the cause of Christ, and therein another Moses. And indeed who would
have showed any love to those ugly Cavaliers, who were Gods Enemies? Remember
(says Mr. Leech before he exhorted those that were on Gods side to throw down
Jezabel) that we cannot be rightly for God, Jer. Leech p. 21.
if we be not against those that are against God: Gods Friends must be our
Friends, and Gods Enemies must be our Enemies. Therefore it was (I suppose)
that your minds were so imbittered against the Malignants, that you breathed
cruelty against them in your very Prayers. Mr. Tesdale one of your holy Synod
exhorting the House of Commons to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, which was
the words of his Text, out of Psalm. 122.6. Israel (says he) and Amalck join
Battle daily: should not therefore Moses hands be lift up in prayer, and Aaron
and Hur help to sustain them, until the Lord has avenged us of our Enemies, of
pray for the peace of Jerusalem? But for a conclusion, hear what Mr. J. W.
Bachelor in Divinity, preached upon a Thanksgiving-day for your Victory at
Hessammoor: p. 10.
Most of them (Cavaliers) are desperately wicked, whom Satan has principled to
make haste for Hell: there is no design so desperate as some of them will not
attempt, though usually they be bulletted and sent out of this life for it, and
sent to meet with such Matches as will keep fire for ever. It seems their souls
found no more mercy at your hands than their bodies did, you sent them straight
to Hell. Whence by the way it is observable, that your Power reaches downward
further than the Popes; for his as yet goes that way no further than
Purgatory. But what a pity it is that you were not of the Church of Rome? What
brave Champions should we have had? And what a loss is it that such fervent
Zeal was spent upon a wrong Cause? But however, right or wrong, it appears that
you made the people believe that cruelty to your Enemies was an excellent piece
of Religion, and most acceptable to God: and so, dear Sir, in this we may also
shake hands.


Pr. You are a lying Calumniator, and it is your custom to load with
reproaches, and the blackest of crimes, those whom you are not able to
encounter with Reason and Arguments: whoever will not dote upon your follies,
you will be sure to defame and slander with your virulent tongues, and you make
the vulgar abhor your adversaries by representing them as monsters.


Pa. Well, I assure you for all your anger, I had the very same thing to say to
you; and if you speak truth in this, we are really Brothers in iniquity: for
you also clapped a most ugly Vizard on your Enemies face, and then brought them
out to be worried by the people: Wicked, Accursed, Popish, Babylonish,
Antichristian, these were the colors you drew them in, as you may see in what
follows. There was a Book printed 1643. by Thomas Watson, called The Cavaliers
Catechism, so foul, that I should be ashamed to mention it, but that you was
not ashamed to print it, or at least to suffer it to be made public: It was
thus: What is your Name? Cavalier. Who gave you that Name? My Seducers and
Deceivers in mine Innocence, wherein I was made a Member of the Church of Rome,
and consequently a Limb of Antichrist, an Enemy to all Godliness, the Child of
the Devil, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Darkness, etc. What Commandments
have you learned, and will you keep? These following, To observe the Will of
his Holiness of Rome, To commit Treason against Kings that oppose him, and To
commit Adultery, Rapine, etc. But there was as bad as this spoken out of the
Pulpit: Steph. Marshal in a Sermon to the Mayor and Aldermen: S. Marshal 1644.
These are miserable and accursed men, these men are Factors for Hell, Satan's
Boutefeus, and as the true Zealots, are set on fire from Heaven, so these men's
fire is kindled from Hell, whither also it carries them. So Mr. Vicars in his
Jehovah-Jireh: J. Vicars p. 6.
I mean to make the godly Reader to see the distress and danger we were plunged
in by the nefarious Plots of Jesuitical Priests and perfidious Prelates, for I
may most justly link them together like Simeon and Levi, brothers in iniquity,
combining and complotting to reduce us to the accursed Romish Religion: the
whole Book is full of the same stuff. And there were Centuries of scandalous
Malignant Priests, printed by the order of the Committee of the House of
Commons, wherein the Episcopal Clergy was charged with the most detestable
crimes and abominations that could be invented. And Mr. White says of them in
the Preface, That they were dumb Dogs, Jo White, 1643.
against whom God had protested for their ignorance, men swallowed up with Wine
and strong Drink, whose Tables were full of vomit and filthiness, Whore-mongers
and Adulterers, who as fed Horses neigh'd after their Neigbours Wives,
Buggerers, that changed the natural use in that which is against Nature, men
unfit to live or to preach among Christians. -- Priests of Baal, of Bacchus, of
Priapus. Pray what could you have said worse not only of us, but even of the
lewdest Turks and Heathen? So Mr. Gill. at Edinburgh in his Sermon to the House
of Commons on Ezekiel. 43.11. And if they be ashamed of what they have done, etc.
says at the 13 page Gillesp. 1643.
The first Application shall be to the Malignants, enemies of the Cause and
people of God at this time, who deserve to have Jeremies black mark to be put
upon them, Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they committed abomination? Mr.
Tesdale likewise in his forementioned Sermon, Balaam may engross the
Promotions of Moab, Tesd. p. 8.
as the temporizing Clergy of late the Dignities of our Church, but upon saucy
terms they must come then and curse Israel. And before at the 6 page he had
joined together, the Atheists, Papist Priests, the Prelates, Irish Rebels, and
the English Traitors, as Sampsons Foxes to destroy the Church and Commonwealth.
Mr. Calamy himself that man of moderation told the Commons, E. Calamy, 1645. p.
26.
If there be any amongst you that favor Malignants because they are your
Friends, though Enemies to God and his cause, this is a great sin to be
repented on greatly: I say to such as the Prophet to Jehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 19.2.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Any body
whom you knew to be a Friend or an Helper to the King, was sure to be a wicked
man for his pains, and to have fine Epithets bestowed upon him; as these:
Beech, 1645. p. 10.
Have not our new Midianites, Assyrians, taking to their assistance the French
Philistines, Welsh Egyptians, Cornish Hungarians, the degenerate Ishmaelites,
and the Renegado English, have not these wrested our lives? etc. Nay, the
Magistrates themselves were not exempt from the sting of your poisonous
tongues. Mr. Case told the Court Martial, Th. Case, 1644. p. 8.
That for many years Robbery, Violence, Murder and Treason, had sat on the
Bench, and not stood at the Bar, etc. And your tongues were so inured to
slander, that you could not so much as spare the first Christian Emperors and
Bishops, who had been the great Propagators of Christian Religion. T. Palmer.
1644. p. 19.
The wicked (says Mr. Palmer) and the Popes and Roman Emperors, have agreed
all along to persecute Gods Saints, that has gone on for above: 600 years,
they have been getting upon the Saints almost all this while, and therefore now
it is no more but just with God to bring their time of losing, etc. Thus you see
the conformity between you and us holds still in this particular of slandering
our enemies; or rather to give you your full due, you have outdone all
Precedents by far, if not Diabolos himself, the Father of Lies.


Pr. I know not whether your Quotations be true: but this I am sure of, that
there is no men under the Sun so humble as the Presbyterians, none acknowledge
themselves so vile before God, and make such soul-humbling confessions of sin:
whereas you magnify your selves as the only people of God; you think there is
no goodness to be found but only amongst you, therefore you exclude all that
are not of your Church out of Heaven: and so puffed up you are with pride, that
you dare talk of your merits, as though you were more than perfect.


Pa. Of Merits and Perfection another time if you please: for the present let
us inquire whether you do not value your selves as highly as we do, and also
shut out of Heaven those that are not of your holy Sect. As for your long
confessions of sins, I confess that I have sometimes admired how they could be
consistent with the good opinion you have of your selves. At first, I thought
that you took a pride in professing much humility, and possibly I was not much
out, for you know you call him the Son of Pride, who calls himself Servus
Servorum: But I remember that heretofore you kept days of humiliation for the
sins of others. Mr. Coleman in a Sermon to the Parliament, after he had told
them how that sins may be punished long after their commission, T. Coleman p.
14.
adds: This particular was taken to heart, when by an Ordinance you called upon
the Kingdom to be humbled for the Blood shed in the Marian persecution: if such
an Ordinance was reprinted, with some additions concerning mixtures in Gods
service, and violence against Gods servants under the Prelatical Tyranny, it
might possibly do much good: whereby it may seem probable, that in your long
confessions you mean other men's sins, and not your own. However, it appears by
what I have said already, that you think your selves the best of men, or to
speak more properly, the holy ones, the elect and chosen people: you engross to
your selves the names of precious, Saints and Godly, others go under the notion
of vile, Looking-Glass for Malignants, p. 2.
ungodly, reprobates. It grieves the Saints (says Mr. Vicars) to see those
miserable Malignants to be so godless and graceless, so bitingly and bitterly
to flout and affront the Lord Christ himself in his holy Members, and his most
glorious Cause. And in his Jehovah-Jireh, speaking of Bastwick, Burton, etc.
brought out of prison, p. 43.
he says, Did not the Lord show himself most strangely in the Mount for the
redemption of all these his beloved Isaacs, and cause his wrath to lay hold on
those Romish Rams who were entangled in the bushes of their Bishoply abuses to
Gods children, and so by his admirable Providence to make them a prey to his
just indignation, in stead of his innocent, his tenderly affected Isaacs, his
beloved Lambs. I believe the Jews never put so many affronts and indignities
upon the accursed posterity of Cham, as you did upon those that were not
enrol'd among your Saints. Jer. Bur. 1643. p. 10.
The Lord has raised up (says Mr. Buroughs) the worst, the vilest upon the
face of the earth, and they have possessed the houses of many of his Saints, the
dearly beloved of Gods Soul. Is not this to the purpose? Nay, it seems, the
blessed Apostles and first Christians were inferior in Saintship to your most
incomparable selves: says Mr. Goodwin to the Parliament: Look upon this Isle
wherein we live, Th. Good. 1645. p. 51.
as it is the richest Ship that has the most of the precious Jewels of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in it. -- Let me use the same Expression as I did
in public twenty years agone, That if we stood at Gods elbow when he bounded
out the Nations and seasons that men should live in, we should not have known
(unless in Christ's) in what Age or in what place we should have chosen to have
lived in, in respect of the enjoyments of the Gospel, and the Communion of
Saints, more than in this Kingdom wherein we live. Now, my loving Friend, don't
you think that we are also well agreed in this, in esteeming our selves highly,
and condemning others that are not of our side as impious reprobates, fit only
for Hell? All the difference lies in this, that we think well of our selves in
that we obey our Church, and hold Communion with her; and you contrariwise make
your excellency to consist in forsaking your Church, and endeavoring to
destroy it.


Pr. You shall repent by and by of the great pains you take for nothing: mean
while I Will give you leave to talk of what Master such an one, and such an one
says; and pray can you find by those your Authors you have so ready at your
fingers end, that we have merits of congruity and merits of condignity, and
that we can give Pardons and Indulgences, (if so be we can get money for them)
Don't we teach that all our righteousness is as a defiled Rag, and that our
best works are rather sinful, than meritorious?


Pa. It may be so: but for all that, I can tell you of one thing that is hugely
meritorious among you, and that is, the advancing of the Cause: the time was,
when you exhorted the people to spend all upon so good a work; S. Marshal 1644.
p. 41.
Lay out your strength, and hearts, and affections for the Lord, go on with all
your might, with all your estates, with all your treasure, whatever you have
let God have it all in his Cause if be need it. And page 43. Who knows how far
the Zeal of any one man may prevail? therefore go on in it to the utmost, let
Offices go, let Wife and Children go, let Estates go, be wholly for the Lord,
and say, What may I do? wherein may I be employed and laid out? what is there
in my head or heart, in my soul or body, in my treasury, shop or house, which
may be of any use for the Lord? Mr. Tesdale in the same manner, p. 15.
Honorable Patriots, Christ is gone forth with his triumphing Army conquering
and to conquer; and if you want Arms, or Money, or Horse for their
accommodation, God is the great Landlord of Heaven and Earth? Art thou then
Gods Tenant? and do thou owe him Knight Service, and Plough-service, and does
he want thy Horse, and shall he not have it? etc. Yea verily, it was so
meritorious a thing to advance the interest of the holy Covenanteers, that that
was called to help the Lord, and people were to do the utmost for it, and then
an hundredfold here, and eternal life besides was the least as they could have
for a recompense. Mr. Bond after a long Exhortation to pull down Antichrist,
Joh. Bond, 1644. p. 60.
and to do for the Lord, in the close of all says, I will recommend unto you
these two especial promises, Mat. 19.29. Every one that has forsaken Houses or
Brethren, etc. and Mar. 8.35. Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
Gospels, the same shall find it. O that they were written over the doors of the
Houses of Parliament! If these places do deceive an active Believer at last,
then let it be written upon my Grave, Here lies that Minister that was
mistaken in his God and Gospel. Was not the acting for the Cause highly
meritorious, when the greatest of rewards were to be got by it? Wherein then
lies the difference? Only in this, That among you it is rebelling against the
King and the Church, but with us it is good works only that merit.


Pr. Well, but then good works consist for the most part in being kind to the
Friars, those good souls who have vowed forsooth to follow the counsels of
perfection, poverty, chastity, and blind obedience, and yet preach themselves
more than Jesus Christ; and in begging about, make people believe that the best
service they can do to God, is to do them good: whereas you see by your own
Citations, that what our Ministers did, was out of Zeal for Gods Cause, to
advance his Honor, and not their own Profit.


Pa. Yea, that was a piece of deceit and craftiness, whereby they out did the
Friars themselves, to call their own, Gods interest, to give specious names to
their own devices, as if God and Religion had been much concerned in the
establishing of them, and to make the world believe, that to pull down the
Church was to pull down Antichrist, and to set them up, was to set up Christ in
his Throne: yet terminis terminatibus, they would speak it out too, that they
and their followers were to be used kindly, and that it was the duty and
interest of the whole Nation to do good to the Saints, and to make as much of
them as they could. I confess you never obliged your selves to obey the
Evangelick counsels, but you went as near to it as any bad Copy can resemble a
good Original: for you vowed to spend your Lives and Estates upon the work in
hand, that was poverty to the height. You vowed to reform the Church according
to the pattern of the best reformed Churches, to extirpate Superstition and
Heresy, and to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and the
Liberties of the Kingdoms. All which I am sure was blind obedience, for not one
of an hundred as took the Covenant understood what these things meant, and were
therefore to follow you blindfold. And if in stead of continency you will give me
leave to put obstinacy, we have found the three Monachal vows in the Covenant:
for you swore never to suffer your selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from your
blessed Union or Conjunction, (as you called it) but zealously and constantly
to continue therein all the days of your lives against all opposition
whatsoever. And accordingly that renowned Champion of yours who died a Martyr
for the Covenant, said on the Scaffold, Mr. Loves Case, 1651. p. 22
I did oppose in my place and calling the Forces of the late King, and were he
alive again, and should I live longer, the Cause being as then it was, I should
oppose him longer. The good man would rather venture Damnation, than break the
Covenant by repenting of his Rebellion against his Sovereign, so binding was
that Holy League which obliged him to be thus ostinate.

But perhaps you will not believe what I have said, that you made the people
believe it was a most meritorious thing to be kind to you, and that you preached
your selves as much as ever the Friars did: if not, at least believe these
precious men. Mr. Dury having observed out of his Text, Isai. 52.11. that God
has vessels belonging to him, tells the House of Commons, Dury, p. 14
God has entrusted some with those his Vessels, and charged them with the care
of them, to look to them, to bear them up, etc. and then having extolled the
Covenant up to the Skies, he says, page 24. This is a new thing in the
Christian Church, there is a special engagement lying upon us all more than
upon other men to bear every one our own vessels, to bear the vessels of each
other, and to bear jointly the Church and Cause of God in our hearts hands and
shoulders. In all the World there is not a Magistracy so eminently entrusted
with such a charge over a people so nearly united unto God as you and the
Parliament of Scotland are. Mr. Buroughs likewise told the Parliament, It has
been the honor of some of you to receive and countenance godly Ministers who
suffered under the Tyranny of Prelates, Jer. Burr. 1645. p. 8.
this Christ has owed you for, and we hope it shall be remembered for good to
you and yours, let not your hearts be changed toward these men. And page 45.
My Lords, you are advanced to high power and honor in a Kingdom where Christ
has as many Saints, (I had almost said as in the World besides) he expects you
should use them kindly. Th. Good. 1645. p. 5. and 6.
And Mr. Goodwin to the House of Commons observes out of his Text, Psalm.
105.14. Here is the nearness and dearness of the Saints to God, they are dearer
to him than Kings and States simply considered, and here is the danger of Kings
and States to deal with his Saints otherwise than well. And then toward the
latter end, page 52. and 53. It is not the having Saints, and multitudes of
Saints, but the using them kindly, that is the interest of a Nation. The Saints
of England are the interest of England, look to and keep this your interest,
namely, maintain and preserve the Saints among you, and make provisions for
them as you would preserve this Kingdom. And then he repeats it again, p. 54.
The Saints of England are the interest of England, write this upon your walls,
and have it in your eyes in all your Consultations, and have respect to the
Saints the whole lump of them, if you will maintain your interest whole and
entire, have regard to the Saints small and great. More could not have been
said to persuade the people to do you good, and in this you are in no wise
inferior to the most self-preaching Monks.


Pr. I scorn your words, we are in nothing like your foolish Friars:
Presbyterians are a serious and considering people, who serve God according to
his Word in spirit and in truth; whereas they mind nothing but their
fopperies, their superstitions and biggotteries, whereby they have made
Religion ridiculous.


Pa. Yes, you would fain make the world believe, that your new-devised
Church Government, and every thing you speak and do, is Scripture, and
according to the Spirit, and truth; and to hear you cry up your Orders and
outward circumstances of divine Service, one would think you had found
Scriptural or spiritual Ceremonies. But when all comes to all it is only this,
that you make Religion and Godliness to consist in rejecting that decent and
instructing Order in Divine Worship which the Primitive Church used, and
transmitted to us, for to follow your irreverent and unseemly manner of
worshipping God according to your own minds. But that you also have done enough
to make Religion ridiculous and fabulous too, is easy to be seen by what I
have said, and shall say further: the many intolerabiles ineptias you preached
in your best-studied Sermons before your Parliament, and printed afterward as
being excellent Discourses, are sufficient proofs that your grave outsides are
inwardly full of emptiness, or something else: and I protest nothing can fully
represent how ridiculous you have made the Public Offices of Religion, as
being an eyewitness of it in your Private Meetings. And had you not besotted
your people by making them believe that what others do is all Popish and
Autichristian, but what you do your selves is Scripture and Gods Ordinance in
purity, they would hiss you out of your Desks, or at least leave you there
alone to enjoy your extravagant humors. I leave it as a conclusion to be drawn
from our whole Discourse when it is ended, that you have made Religion
ridiculous, or rather that yours is a mock-Religion, consisting altogether as
to the exterior of it in new-made Prayers and Sermons, spoken with a certain
piteous tone, and some affected faces and paroxisms of Zeal, such as Mr.
Cheynel was in when he told the Parliament, 1646. p. 4.
I arrest you this day at the Suit of the great Jehovah, for a Debt of ten
thousand talents, nay, millions of millions, and over and above of High Treason
against the three Persons of the ever-blessed Trinity; and then he was in a
Trance, page 24. Ob (says he) I feel, I bless God I feel my self transported
even beyond my self with raptures and ecstasies of love: I could tell you of
Christ-concerning-points, and Soul-concerning-points, of Parliament-repentance,
and Sacrament-repentance, and Bed-repentance, and Shop-repentance, and many
such new-coined phrases, which are none of the least part of the powerfulness
of preaching: And I could tell you of a receipt which is as the extract of a
Book, called, Parliament-Physick for a sick Nation, Licensed by Mr. J.
Cranford, which makes a mock. Physic or Divinity of all Evangelick and moral
Virtues. 1644. p. 112.
A great deal of fopperies and futilities as you charge us with, might be picked
out of the Sermons as you then printed; and I doubt not but the Prayers were
much after the same sort, had they come out in print: and if my Notes deceive
me not, what you preach now is not much better: but I will not say any thing
except what I have under your hands. But this needs not be prosecuted directly
any further.


Pr. What of all this? These be personal failings. I don't know how we are come
insensibly to talk of things that are merely practical, whereas we was to speak
of Doctrinal points. I Will give you but two or three instances more of the wide
difference that is betwixt us, and then let all the world be judge how
impertinent you have been in charging Popery upon us. And first, you make
outward splendour and prosperity to be a mark of the true Church, whereas we
teach according to Divine and Humane Histories, that the Church has her wanes
as well as her fullness, that sometimes she is fain to flee into the wilderness,
and that her Glory may be eclipsed without she does cease to be the true and
only Spouse of Christ.


Pa. Well, I hope you love us never the worse for that agreement as you see is
betwixt us in practical points, for those be the most important. But as for
what you mentioned last, I must confess that after the Kings and the Churches
return to their right, you taught, E. Calamy, 1662. p. 10. and 14
That the Ark of God was in great danger, and very near to be lost, gray hairs
(says Mr. Calamy) are upon the Gospel: I say not that the Gospel is dying, but
that it has gray hairs. I dare challenge any Scholar to show me an example of
any Nation that has enjoyed the Gospel for an hundred years together, now that
gray hairs is to an hundred years, is no wonder. Well, gray hairs are here and
there, and yet no man lays it to heart. But then it is to be observed, that your
Principles and Doctrines do change according to your condition, according as
five of your Brethren told us in their Apology to the Parliament, Th. G^od. Ph.
Nigh, Sy. Symp. Jer. Bur. W. Bridge p. 10.
This principle we carried along with us, not to make our present judgment and
practice a binding Law to our selves for the future. For in the days of your
Power, you then followed God and Providence, every prosperous success of yours
was a mark that yours was Gods Cause, and you his beloved ones. Behold God in
the Mount, cries Mr. Vicars at every advantage you had over the Kings party, in
his Jehovah-Jirch, yea and your prosperity was a mark that you were destroying
Antichrist. Tho. Palmer in that Sermon 1644. dedicated to the Earl of Essex,
Epist Dedicat.
has these brave expressions: God has put you in his own place, God has
graced you with his own Name, Lord of Hosts, General of Armies, God has
committed to your care what is most precious to himself, precious Gospel,
precious Ordinances, a precious Parliament, a precious people, God has called
forth your Exellency as a choice Worthy, to be his General, and the Champion of
Jesus Christ, to fight the great and last battle with Antichrist in this your
native Kingdom. So Mr. Caryl in a Thanksgiving Sermon for a Victory of yours,
Jef Caryl, 1644.
Divine Providence is a leading Cloud to this day, it is ill to outrun
Providence, and it is as had not to follow it. Many things that I have said
before, will clear it enough that you made your good success and prosperity an
argument of your being Gods Church and people, and I shall say more to it anon.
I only add now, that as it is observed, that where Religion has been loosest,
there Fortune has been most worshipped: so when you had broken all natural and
religious bonds, you made use of the prosperous events of your enterprises to
justify the lawfulness of them.


Pr. Well, I see you will make hard shift but you will have something to say. But
can you find that we attribute to the Sacraments the virtue of working by their
own efficacy the grace they signify? (which you call opus operatum:) don't we
rather teach, that nothing but Gods Grace can work any good in us, and that
outward means are useless without it?


Pa. Yes, I do suppose the Sacraments are of no great account amongst you:
whatever is not of your own appointment, is of little use or profitableness,
though ordained by the first Rulers of the Christian Church, or by Christ
himself. But I could tell you of two or three things of your own devising, of
as great force and efficacy as any of our Sacraments; that is, your Covenant,
your powerful Preaching, and your extemporary Prayers; of the first, I have
spoken enough already, how you made it a most precious and soul-saving
Ordinance, and equalled it at least to the Covenants God has been pleased to
make with Mankind; wherefore it was to be taken standing uncovered, and one
hand bare and lifted up, which is more of honor and reverence than you afford
to the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, which you receive
sitting upon your tails, or to any other part of Divine Worship. If any one
will see more of it, let him read Thomas Mokett's Sermons on that subject,
printed 1642. That your Preaching is likewise very powerful, I have evinced
before, in that you call it the Gospel, the Word of God, and make it in a
manner equal to Scripture, as proceeding from the same Spirit, as Mr. Marshal
told the Parliament at a Thanksgiving-Sermon for some good success of yours: S.
Marshal 1643. p. 3.
I should send you home presently, and command all of you not to weep to day,
but to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, but that I have first some banqueting
stuff for your souls, such as God bath brought to my hand: sure they might make
a very soul-refreshing meal on what God himself had prepared! Mr. Palmer also
page 27. How few come prepared to the Ordinances? (your preaching and Praying:)
Who is it that considers the weightiness of the business he is about? that he
is now about a soul-saving or a soul-destroying work? And accordingly in your
Catechizing your Converts, if they be aged, the grand question is, When, and at
what time they were converted? for your Preaching works Conversion, even as
Strong-drink works Madness. When you have taught malicious or ignorant people
to rail at the Church, and to hate it, and those that side with it, then the
powerful Ordinance of Preaching has done the feat! and the man is converted
even as the weak-brain fellow that has lost his reason by too much drinking,
As for your Praying, being it is by the Spirit, no wonder if it works
strangely. Mr. Vavasor Powel, a holy man, The History of his Life, 1671. p. 16.
and well worth to be credited, (though somewhat more Fanatic than you) for
having a most authentic Testimony and Approbation of fourteen of the chiefest
Divines in the Assembly, did by his Prayers cure one Mrs. Watkins of the Parish
of Laningg in the County of Brecknock, p 18.
who for two years together had kept her bed; and one Elizabeth Morris of New
Radnorth, who was troubled with the Falling Sickness and Convulsion-Fits; and
did once in a wet Harvest stop a most fierce rain, p. 19.
in seeking the Lord, and begging for fair weather. This will not seem strange,
if we consider what one of you said, That God had kindled the fervent fire of
Supplication in your hearts. Jehovah-Jireh, p. 31.
Oh how did the Lord before and ever since this Parliament began, stir up and
inflame the fire of supplicating faith, or faithful supplication and fervent
zeal in private humiliation, to seek the Lord in the face of Christ for mercy
and reconcilement to our poor Land! And then how could that fire that came from
the Lord, do less than consume and devour every thing that stood in its way? As
Dr. Owen said to the House of Commons, Joh. Owen 1659. p. 14.
The Adversaries openly confessed, That there was nothing left for them to
overcome, or to overcome them, but the Prayers of the Fanatic Crew. And as Mr.
Coleman said to the same Auditory, We prayed at Nazeby, 1645. p. 16. and 17
they plotted; see what end the Lord has made, come and behold the works of
the Lord. And at Langport and Bridgewater they could not stand, for God was
against them: We prayed, we fought, Th Good. 1645. p. 42.
we conquered: certainly the power of Prayers is destructive. And Mr. Goodwin:
God has given to those his Saints (the Rebels) a Commission to set up and pull
down by their Prayers and Intercessions. Whence by the way might be gathered,
that you have some kindness for us, being you pulled none down but the Church
of England: But possibly the efficacy of your Prayers did not so much as the
reach of your Piques and Muskets. However, you see here is opus operatum with a
vengeance, all the difference is that our Sacraments are of Christ's
Institution, and work Grace only; whereas your powerful Ordinances are of your
own devising, and besides Grace can work destruction.


Pr. And can you find this one thing more about the Sacraments, that we take
the Cup away from the people, as is the order of your Church, positively
against an express Command of Christ, who said, Drink ye all of this? Sure you
will not say we are guilty of dispensing with such an express Injunction of Christ
as you do in this case.


Pa. No, you never took the blessed Cup from the people, but you went very near
to take away from them the sacred Bread and all. You know how seldom and in how
few places that holy Sacrament was administered in your reforming times; and you
know how little regarded still by many of your party, since you could preach
and pray by the Spirit. And yet we are in good hopes that you will comply with us
in this too, for that in another case you can dispense with as absolute a
command of Christ, that is, concerning the Lords Prayer* of which he commanded,
When you pray, say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11.2. But your wisdom has found it
out that 'twas enough to say the sense of that Prayer, without repeating the
very words; and then if you should use it, the people might be brought to
believe that a set Form of Prayers is lawful according to so great an example,
which might be a great prejudice to your more spiritual way of praying. And so
you know our Church has also many wise reasons for not obeying Christ in this
particular. Hereby it appears that you can as well as we make bold with an
express Law and Ordinance of Christ in what concerns the Worship of God; and
what matters it though it be not in the same matter? they that can in one, can
in all when they shall think good.


Pr. I should laugh if you could make it out too that we have amongst us
Miracles and Legends, as I am sure you have a great many to prove your new
Religion by. Come, try your skill: I don't despair but one day you will find out
the Quadrature of the Circle, or the perpetual motion, you are so ingenious and
so good at making discoveries.


Pa. I cannot tell what I shall do for the first, but I am sure for perpetual
motion the world is beholding to you for the finding of it out: for when you
taught the people that nothing must be done in Divine Worship but what is
commanded in Scripture, and that therefore the Liturgy was to be put away: they
finding that the order appointed in the Directory was no more to be found in
Scripture than the other, took it away too; and so your Thorough-Reforming by
such an unlimited Principle, set a Wheel a going, whose motion it is likely will
be perpetual. You reformed the first Reformation, others reformed yours, and
others that, and so on it went, and I believe will go as long as there is any
brains in Schismatick-heads to keep on the Circulation.

But it is a thing so plain that you also have Legends and Miracles to persuade
the people of the Diviness of your new-contrived way of Worship and Discipline,
that my making of it appear will deserve none of your commendations. I could
tell you of a secret way of whispering Legends, fine well-made stories of
Bishops and Priests, when the Brethren meet together: but possibly those that
don't know you so well as I do, would not believe me, therefore I Will instance
in a few of a great many that are upon record. p. 8.
Mr. Vavasor Powel saw several times the Devil appearing to him, sometimes
stamping upon the Chamber-floor, and sometimes blowing a strong cold wind upon
him, and several other ways: once it was revealed to him that he and two of his
friends should be wounded in the Island of Anglessy. p. 17.
And another time, he being in his bed, p. 130.
there appeared to him a bright shining light, and in the light a speckled
Bird, which bad him read Mat. 3.2. Mr. Cook likewise (no Divine I confess, but
yet a man that well deserves to be credited for being an holy Covenanteer)
going over into Ireland, and meeting with a great and fearful storm, which
frighted him to some purpose, God (as he says) put in his mind the chief
places in Scripture concerning the Seas; and then it follows, I pressed my dear
Christ not to drown us, for, said I, we fight for thy Kingly Office: throw the
Egyptians and all thine implacable Enemies in the midst of the Sea, but let us
be preserved. Yet for all his fear and danger, he fell asleep, and then, as he
says page 6. he saw a large Room, in the midst whereof was a long Table, and
upon that Table an ordinary Carpet, two Candles, two Trenchers of Tobacco, and
some Pipes: in the Room there was a man of a middle stature, his hairs were
white and curling at the end, but the hair of his upper lip was brown, his
clothes were of a sad color, and upon his head was a Cloth-broad-brim Hat, and
he told him be waited upon Jesus Christ, and carried him to his Master, who
told Cook that he should not be drowned, hearing that he belonged to the
Protector, (Traitor) and other strange things which yet proved true in the
event. Here be as you see most miraculous Visions, the particulars whereof are
related with such exactitude, that I believe none but Malignants ever doubted
of the truth of them. But I must not relate particulars, my Book it self should
be a miracle in bigness: if you please to read the Mirabilis Annus that was
printed in 1662. there you shall find as the Author says, many signal and
miraculous judgments and accidents befallen those that have molested the Godly
for Nonconformity. And also Mr. Vicars Looking-Glass for Malignants, will
furnish you with many wondrous stories of the terrible and most dreadful
judgments that befell the Malignants from 1640. to 1643. when the Book was
printed. These Books for Miracles and fine Tales may deservedly be ranked among
the most fabulous Legends that ever were printed: and though it is likely the
Authors did not believe them, yet they served your turn: Those pious frauds won
more Proselytes to your side than any thing else next to your Weapons: all the
difference is this, that our Miracles are wrought by the Saints, and yours for
the Saints.


Pr. And so you cunningly insinuate that we have Saints as well as you: What,
don't you know we will not so much as call Peter and Paul Saints, we are so far
from praying to them, or keeping days in their honor? Prove it if you can that
in this particular your Doctrine and ours has the least resemblance, and then
without instancing any more, I Will make it appear that you have taken a great
deal of labor to little purpose.


Pa. What! I have mentioned your Saints forty or fifty times out of those of
your Authors whose words I have cited, and now you speak as if you had none at
all. Why man, there is no people under the Sun that owns so many as you: it is
true, you will not call the blessed Apostles and Martyrs by the name of Saints,
that would be Popery and Superstition: but you will call your selves so very
freely and humbly, and without any scruple, for it seems that is your due, and
not theirs: any one that would throw a stone against the woman surprised in
Adultery was ipso facto made a Saint, contrary to what happened in the Gospel;
I mean, that every one that would help to throw down the Whore and Jezabel, (as
you called the Church) were thereby immediately Canonized: so that the worst of
Fanatics who helped to do the work, have still retained the Saintship you
bestowed upon them, though since they have departed from you. As Thomas Brooks
in a Sermon dedicated to Sir Tho. Fairfax, 1648. p. 15.
To do gloriously is to appear for the Saints, and side with the Saints, let
the issue be what it will: O it is a base thing in those that have appeared and
sided with the Saints, now to prove treacherous, and let the poor Saints shift
for themselves. And so before that in 1646. Mr. Cheynel instructed the
Parliament concerning the Saints in this manner: I am so far from endeavoring
to persecute Saints, p. 37.38. etc.
that I humbly desire that we would all study how to make more Saints: Oh it
will be a comfortable work to gather and order Saints of our own making. Nay,
though some of the Saints were froward, and perchance unruly, yet because they
helped to do the work of the Lord, they were not to be blotted out of the
Calendar, for he says a little before, Saints must not be persecuted though
they be peevish, nay desperate. -- I must not out of a sullen humor deny a
peevish Saint the right hand of fellowship. But enough of this you shall find
scattered up and down this Book.

Now as for your keeping of days for the old Saints, I confess you are not for
that, neither do you keep any for Christ, that would be you know what. But you
know also that when the designs of the new Saints were blessed with success,
there was by Authority a day kept in remembrance of it with much solemnity. So
it seems the destroying of the Kings Forces was a mercy great enough to make a
Holy Day of it: but it would be Idolatry to do the same in remembrance of those
precious mercies the Church receives from what Christ did and suffered for her,
and his holy Apostles after him. As for praying to the ancient and despised
Saints, it would be to no purpose, your new ones having got their place, and
belike their power too: we have seen already that your prayers are effectual
beyond what their intercessions could be, which is the reason I suppose that
when any amongst you is going a Journey, or has some other design in hand, or
feels the want of any temporal or spiritual thing, he desires the prayers of
the Saints in your Conventicles. So there appears to me no other difference in
the case, but that our Saints are dead, and Canonized by the Pope, whereas
yours for the most part are alive, and of your own making.

Now I hope I have satisfied you, and made it appear that you come much nearer
to Popery than the Church of England, which by your own confession has nothing
common with us that is bad but a few Ceremonies, and this of order, which don't
much concern Religion, and which (according to your Chronology) were in the
Christian Church long before Popery: whereas you own both in belief and
practice many of the Popish Doctrines which are counted the worst of our
errors, only you disguise them a little, and put them in a Presbyterian Garb.


Pr. Worthy Sir! you might have spared your great pains, for all you have said
will not persuade any one man that we have any good will for the Papists, it is
too well known that there is an irreconcilable antipathy betwixt them and us.
No, we detest those opinions and practices of yours which you would persuade
the world we approve and imitate, and we agree with you in nothing that other
Protestants disagree in.


Pa. Yes, we do, we both hate the Church of England, I am sure we are agreed in
that, except you have gone beyond us; as I remember Mr. Love said when there
was an overture for peace, At Uxbridge.
page 42. Is it likely to have peace with such men as these? -- We can as soon
make fire and water to agree, I had almost said reconcile Heaven and Earth. But
there is enough said already to prove that. As for your disclaiming friendship
with us, it only persuades me that you are of those generous Friends who oblige
people behind their backs, without desiring that any notice should be taken of
it: for to use Mr. Loves words, page 22. When ^ou had put down the Pests and
Plague-sores of the Kingdom, Episcopacy and Common Prayer Books, you thereby
advanced our interest greatly, and did us a notable piece of service; for then
you left no visible Church, no known Rules of Doctrines, no set form of
Government and Discipline: so that whilst your tedious Rabbis were hammering
in their brains the new form of a future Church, according to their several
fancies, or according to the Pattern in the Mount, the people were fain to
betake themselves, some to the Communion of our Church, as not a few did, and
other some to Madness an^ Enthusiasm, as did a great many more. And besides,
the scandal which you brought upon the first Reformation by your fine doings
was so great, that (thanks be to you) it has persuaded a great many that there
is no safety but in the Church of Rome, where there is a constant union and
order. So we find a Book printed in 1652. called, A Beacon set on fire, or an
Information of the Stationers to the Parliament concerning the great
advancement the Papists made, and the many Books they printed, as also the many
blasphemous Books which others put out. And in the seasonable Exhortation of
the London. Ministers 1660. they tell us page 10. That all manner of
blasphemous and horrid Opinions were openly written and published, that there
was in many Atheism and contempt of Religion, in others Skepticism and
Ireesolution in many, and that some were grown to that height of wickedness as
to worship the Devil himself. And there they complain also, That some by their
backsliding and apostasy fell from the truth to Popery, as being the only
Religion wherein unity and order was retained. All which how naturally they
issued from your late doings, and how much the Pope and Devil were beholding to
you for, I leave to your own conscienciousness to consider. And one thing more
that makes me believe that you have more kindness for us than you own by words,
is, that you destroyed the King and the Church of England by the same means
that were appointed by Campanelia a cunning Politician, and a great Enemy to
Protestants, page 160. The English Bishops (it should have been Puritans) are
to be exasperated and put into fears and jealousies, by telling them that the
King of Scotland (King James) turned Protestant out of hope, but that he will
quickly return to the former Religion when he is established in the English
Throne. (The same advice is also lately given by the Marquess de C. in his
Politic de France, in that Chapter that treats of England.) That counsel was
followed by you, and proved successful; the outcry whereby you raised the
people against our late martyred Sovereign was Popery, Rome, Babylon: therefore
after all this, judge you whether we must not be very ungrateful if we did not
ingenuously acknowledge that we are highly beholding to you.


Pr. All that signifies nothing: for we differ from the Church of England only
in some few Ceremonies, being agreed as to the Essentials both of Doctrine and
Discipline. We honor the first Reformators of this Church, and we are
perfectly agreed with the reformed Churches beyond Sea, which we love and
reverence, and desire to imitate: and when you have said all you can, this will
be truth still, and I am sure will be believed so to be by all rational men.


Pa. I know that one of your Brethren, an ancient Sophister, in his last
scribbling against Doctor Durell, speaks as if there was hardly any difference
betwixt you and the Church of England: Bonasius Vapul. 1672. p. 80.
It may be worth (says he) the consideration of those who are in Authority
whether they may not enjoy Ecclesiastical Preferments who differ from their
Brethren only in some few points of Discipline; for as to the Essentials of
Discipline, I am not so quick-sighted as to find that we disagree, etc. But if
it be so, the more wicked you, who have made crimes and enormities of a few
indifferent points of Discipline. What, was it the terderness o^ your
Consciences that made a few Ceremonies to be Popery and Antichristianism? so
that upon their account you must call upon the people in Sion to war against
Babylon. Either you are the greatest Cheats in the World, or else you differ
from your Church at least in those points wherein (as I have shown) you come so
near to us: choose you which you please. As for your loving and honoring the
reformed Churches beyond Sea, and the first Reformators of this, I find no such
thing in your Books, but rather that you loved and honored your selves far
beyond them all. Mr. Dury in his Sermon to the Parliament upon these words,
Depart ye, etc. Isai. 52.11. is pretty plain in it: p. 5.
I chose these words (says he) because the destruction of Babylon and the
deliverance of the Church out of it, is the great work which God intends to
accomplish by the Gospel in these latter times, and because of the relation
wherein we do stand to it, for I conceive that God is not only working out our
deliverance to bring us out of Babylon at this time, etc. Where could you have
been worse than in Babylon before the good men in King Edward the fixth's time
had done any thing toward a Reformation? So you may hear him say at the 25
page None of all the Magistrates or Ministers of other Nations have ever given
such an answer to this Call (to come out of Babylon) as you and we of the
Ministry and this people have done, for we have undertaken the Cause in the
full extent thereof, therefore we are in this employment nearer unto God than
any others, and he is more interest in us and in Scotland than in any other
Nation whatsoever. Two Witnesses more I hope will make the thing credible. Mr.
Boden in his Sermon Revel. 18.6. Reward her as, p. 9.
etc. says, It Is no wonder that our forefathers did little or nothing against
the Beast and the Babylonians, for their eyes were blinded they could not see
to work, much less to fight; but that we having clear visions and full
discoveries made of the Beast and her abominations, should sit still and be
careless, and suffer her for ever to play her beastly pranks, is a most deadly
shame and stain unto us. And Mr. Tho. Goodwin in his foresaid Sermon, Others
had had the honor in the first Age of reforming, p. 52.
and we had been like blear-eyed Leah; yet since, we have been abundantly the
more fruitful of Saints, faithful and chosen. And indeed the truth is, you went
so far beyond all other Reformers, that you might well despise them, as having
done their work very imperfectly to what you did.


Pr. I took you to be but a Priest, but I doubt you are a Jesuit too, for you
can turn other men's words to what sense you please: I believe those good men
meant no such thing as the interpretation you give to their words. But whether
they did or no, it is nothing to us, we pin our faith upon no man's sleeve; if
they have said or done any thing amiss, we utterly disclaim it. We own the
Kings Supreme Authority, and we own the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
to prove the contrary by particular men's words, (as you have endeavored to do)
is altogether lost labor, because their Opinions is not the Rule we follow. So
that all your Quotations evince nothing of what you intended, and you well
deserve to be laughed at for having taken such a huge deal of bootless pains in
repeating other men's words.


Pa. Very well! it is but making up your mouth, and wiping of it, and looking
very demure, and then you have done nothing; and so you think you can abuse the
world everlastingly. But stay, Sir, dear-bought experience has taught us, that
your goodly words are little to be trusted; and you have approved your selves
such incomparable Jugglers, that we will see what you tell us before we believe
it. In the highest of your Rebellion you were for the King forsooth! much more
now he reigns: Th. Palmer was Minister of the Army raised for King and
Parliament, as he styles himself in the Title of his Sermon 1644. Mr. Beech at
the Siege of Basing was fighting for the King, page 24. We honor the King, we
fight for him, we resolve though it cost us our lives we will have his love and
his presence again: And John Arrowsmith before the House of Commons calls him
his Dear Sovereign: 1613. p. 13.
They (says he) that brought our King into this Civil War, are a Generation of
scornful men that laugh at our Builders, as Sanballat and his Accomplices did at
Nehemiah, What is this thing as ye do? will ye rebel against the King? a
Generation which can neither find in their hearts to afford a good word of
advice to our Dread and Dear Sovereign, etc. But it is more than probable that
by a worse than Jesuitical Equivocation, you meant only a notional King, the
workmanship of your deceitful Brains: for so we find a cunning distinction
between the King and the Kings Person. Tho. Case in his Sermon to the
Court Martial on 2 Chronicles. 29.6, and 7. And Jehoshaphat said unto the Judges,
Take heed what ye do, etc Tell them, That though they had not a Jehoshaphat to
give them that charge in his personal capacity, yet they had him in his
political capacity. So Robert Austin D. D. printed a Book intending to prove,
1644.
That by the Oath of Allegiance the Parliament was bound to take up Arms,
though against the Kings personal command, for the just defense of the Kings
Person, Crown and Dignity. So you might be sure by such means ever to be for
him, and have him of your side whatever you did: for so Mr. Buroughs proved by
the same art, page 27. That his most Loyal Party was not fighting against the
King, but for the King, for the preservation of true Regal Power in the King
and his Posterity, and to rescue him from the hands of evil men, who were his
greatest Enemies. And he said page 57. That the Saints and most Religious had
ventured their Lives, Fortunes, Children, and all for the safety of the King.
One would have taken him then for a great Royalist, but that there was an
unlucky Equivocation in the case, The Scripture (says he page 28.) bids us to
be subject to the Higher Powers, it does not bid us to be subject to the will
of those who are in highest places. But two or three specious words served the
turn, this was chiefly to seduce the Kings own Friends if it were possible:
Those that had a Loyal Soul, here was a bait for them, you were fighting for to
make the King great and glorious, though 'twas against his will, and for his
Authority against his Person, and he was on your side in his Political, though
not in his Personal capacity, and so if they loved the King, they might join
with you; and no doubt but those goodly pretenses deluded then many a
well-meaning Soul. But then if people were not for the King, to be sure they
would be for the Lord, and upon that account they might and they must join with
you, for you were fighting the Lords Battles, warring for Sion against Babylon:
this was the grand cheat whereby the Nation was deluded. Had the
Parliament-Officers gone about and told the people that the King encroacht upon
their Privileges, and acted against the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the
generality of men was not so well read in the ancient Statutes and Charters of
this Realm as to know whether it was so or no; and so it is likely they had been
very slack in engaging in a doubtful general. But you knew well enough that the
people would fight for God, therefore you made him a party in the case, and
then called upon them to help the Lord against the Mighty, to help to thrown
down Antichrist, and to set up Christ; and those that came to your call, were
rewarded (besides the holy Plunder) with good words, flatteries, high and lofty
titles; they were the Saints, the Godly, the Chosen, the Lambs Followers, and
the precious Ones, and so you made them active in their wickedness by making
their deluded Consciences to warrant their accursed doings. Though the way was
besprinkled with blood, yet that the people might not be deterred from doing
Gods work, T. Palmer, p. 13.
they were told that God had seen it good to bring Christ into the Kingdom that
bloody way; and then who would be afraid of bloudshedding upon such an account?
But this has been sufficiently proved, when I spoke of your cruelties, and
made it appear that the War was Religious and not Civil, and that for the good
of Souls you may do what you lift as well as the Pope.

Now I desire only to mention a few more of your juggling tricks, and then I
shall endeavor to say somewhat in defense of those Authorities I have cited
out of your Books. p. 1* and 13
Mr. Palmer resolves that grand Query, How shall I know that the Parliaments
Cause is Gods Cause, and those that join with them more Gods people than on the
other side? in this manner: Alas, it is the plainest thing in the world, look
to the words of Christ, John 10.5, and 44. My Sheep know my Voice, etc. Now do
but consider which of the newraised Forces come nearest to this Rule; who is it
that submits to the Word and Rule of God? who set up the work of Reformation?
who is desirous to preserve the people of God? Was not he an excellent Casuist
to make your pretenses and doings an argument to prove that your War against
the King was just? Much like him that said it is and has been the design and
practice of Jesus Christ to break all Kingdoms that oppose him, Th. Good. 1645.
p. 43.
and oppress his Saints: As much as to say, that God pulled down the King,
because he oppressed Christ, and did not favor the Saints: by which Rule the
best cause is condemned if it be unsuccessful, and welfare the Turk and all
the wicked as long as they prosper: according to this we have seen before that
Providence was your Guide and Captain, it led you, and did all things for you,
and so it came to pass that the worst of your doings were charged upon God.
Jehovah-Jireh, page 65. The Prentices and Porters were stimulated and stirred
up by Gods Providence thousands of them to petition the Parliament for speedy
redress. And Mr. Will. Jenkins in his Conscientious Queries and Submission to
the then present Power 1651. uses only the Turkish Argument of good success to
prove that the prosperous Rebels were to be obeyed as lawful Superiors, and
that by charging all that had been done upon God and Providence, page 2.
Whether the stupendous Providence of God manifested among us in the
destruction of the late King and his Adherents in so many pitched Battles, and
in this Nations universal forsaking of Charles Stuart, and the total overthrow
of him and his Army; whether by these Providence God has not plainly removed
the Government from Charles Stuart, and bestowed it upon others, as ever he
removed and bestowed any Government by any Providence in any Age? Whether a
refusal to yield Obedience and Subjection to this present Government, be not a
refusal to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, and a flat
breach of the fifth Commandment? Therefore he says in his Humble Petition,
That he looks upon it as his duty to the then Authority to yield all active and
cheerful Obedience in the Lord, even for conscience sake: as though their
prosperous wickedness could give them a just title to their Usurpation. Another
would have it believed that the Saints were victorious, because of Christ being
with them, and their having a Commission from him to act as they did, Joh. Owen
1659. p. 22.
saying, That the Saints and the seeret ones shall work destruction, and that
this feeble Generation shall be as a Lion from the presence of Christ amongst
them. Christ (says he) assigns that to them which is his own proper work: let
men take heed how they provoke this Lion, for then be will not lie down until
he cat of the prey, and drink of the blood of the slain. As though it had been
by the order and power of Christ that the Lion or the wild Beasts had filled
all the Nation with blood and slaughter. Then in stead of teaching the people
to obey the Precepts of the Gospel, Charity, Humility, Meekness, Obedience to
the King, etc. you would have them mind the secret intentions of God, and set
forward that work which his Providence had begun, as you said, which was called
Generation-work, a phrase and a Doctrine still in use amongst you. It is the
duty of the Saints (says one) to observe what the way of God is in the time of
their Generation, J^r. Burr. 1643. p. 2.
to see what Name of God is most conspicuous in his administration, and
accordingly to sanctify that Name of his. Nothing can be more pregnant with
delusions and evil consequences than this. Afterward when in the carrying on
of the designs in hand the Kingdom was filled with blood and confusion, that
the people might not see how they were gulled, you fell to prophesying,
promising them much happiness, with many secret and glorious things after all
their trouble, so says the same Author, ibid. page 6. We shall see at last
that the mercy God intended for us was worth all the troubles and blood, etc.
God has many Promises to his Church to accomplish, many Prophecies to fulfill,
many glorious things to declare, many Mercies for his Saints to bestow; and
these stirs among us will make way for all. And so Mr. Bond tells the
Parliament, Joh. Bond, 1644.
That the present work of Salvation and Reformation they had in hand, was
carried on in a mystery, was a shadowed masterpiece, altogether made up of
stratagems, paradoxes, and wonders, and so the comfort is, it shall be a great
Salvation, a Salvation from Babylon. But this will suffice at present to show
that the people was deluded more ways than one; and to give a warning to the
following Generation, that so they never be drawn into Rebellion by the same
arts and pretenses as their Fathers were.

It would be endless to rehearse all the equivocations, jugglings, and deceits
as were used to seduce the people: next time we meet perchance you shall hear
more of them. What I have said now is enough to prove that your words signify
nothing but what you please, that your dissimulations are deep and specious,
and that you never want arts and evasions to plead innocence, and salve your
credit after the foulest doings and miscarriages. Now you differ but a very
little from the Church of England, and you are for Obedience to the King,
whatever some of you may have said or done heretofore. Very good! That Is as
much as to say, That do you what you will, you are resolved ever to be in the
right, and never to acknowledge your selves faulty in the least, for fear of
losing the repute of Infallibility. But let it be considered, 1. That I have
proved what I charged upon you, not by the words of the obscure and ordinary,
but of the most famous men of your Party, who must needs have known the Tenets
and Doctrines of your Sect, and who were then and are still now cried up and
followed by your Disciples and Admirers. 2. That those words of theirs I have
cited, were not taken out of Libels or profane Books, nor were spoken
heedlesly in the heat of dispute, but are to be found in their Sermons, and
were delivered out of their Pulpits in the powerfulness of Preaching, as being
the Word of God. 3. That those Sermons were not preached in Country-Towns, or
to ordinary Congregations, (where any stuff preached after the tone and manner
in use among you had been as good as the best) but almost all of them before
the Parliament, where none but great men were admitted to preach, and where, to
be sure, they preached none but their best Sermons: and moreover, that those
Sermons were printed with the names of the Authors, and with License and
Approbation. 4. That it is more likely they would then deliver their true
Opinions, and speak out what was in their hearts, when they had the power in
their hands, and were free to speak what they pleased, than now they are under
fear and restraint, and are fain to conceal or dissemble what they would then
openly preach and proclaim. 5. That they not only preached Sermons, but they
and their Disciples lived Sermons also; your practice and Doctrine agreed
excellently well, what was preached was acted, there was none of their good
Instructions lost, you approved what they said by doing accordingly, and you
generally owned by a practical belief those Doctrines I have set down as yours
out of your most approved Authors.


Lastly, It is manifest by my Quotations, that your Ministers rendered the last
King odious to his people, and preached him out of his Throne and Kingdom: but
it is no where to be seen that they ever preached this King into the favor of
his people again, or used their powerful eloquence to have him restored to his
Right. And since his return, though you have given over printing, yet most of
you have kept up the Faction, and in stead of crying peccavi, have still
endeavored to weaken the Church, and draw Disciples after you; and your Synods
have never disclaimed those men who by their Preaching had kindled up the late
Rebellion, and the Preachers have never recanted their former Opinions, but
either justified or disguised them: nay, many of them own still the Obligation
of that infamous Oath called the Covenant, whereby they acted and warranted all
their wickedness. Therefore though the people may be excused having been
deluded and imposed upon, yet you the Ministers and Heads of the Faction can
never (with all the wit you have) plead any thing that can justify you from
owning the worst of Popish Errors.

Now let our Judge speak if he pleases.


G. I confess I am somewhat amazed at what I have heard: I never thought so
much could be said for proving a Conformity betwixt Papists and Presbyterians
in so many points: but yet I will decide nothing, nor make any reflections upon
what you have said: I Will rather transcribe and print your discourse, and leave
the Reader to think and to judge as his own discretion shall advise him. Only
seeing that you are most chiefly agreed in denying the King that Supreme
Authority which God has given him, and pretending a certain Power and
Jurisdiction over him, in ordine ad spiritualia, for the good of souls, or to
phrase it aright, for to advance Gods Cause, and to set up Christ: I shall set
down some Texts of Scripture which plainly evince the contrary, and then desire
all Christians to yield a cheerful and loyal Obedience, until they have been
told from Heaven that the Pope or Classis are empowered from God to act
contrary to his Word in this particular.

First, For the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate over all that live in his
Dominions, read Romans 13.1, and 2. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, for there is no power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of
God: whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. -- v. 5. Wherefore
ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Here you
see that neither Pope nor Puritan is excepted, but every soul is to be subject:
this was written when the Higher Powers were Heathen, bloody Persecutors of
Christianity, who endeavored to destroy the Gospel, and yet for all that, they
must not be rebelled against, and their Authority must not be resisted:
Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation: and therefore we must be subject
to them, not only for fear of their anger, but also for fear of Gods, not only
for wrath, but also for conscience sake. In Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind (says
the Apostle) to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates,
to be subject to every good work. You see that good works and obedience to
Magistrates are joined together, and appointed to be equally pressed upon the
people by the Exhortations of Christ's Ministers. In the 1 Pet. 2.13, etc.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of men for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him:
-- for so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men; as free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God. -- Fear God, honor the King. You
see it is the will of God that with well-doing, (that is) by obeying the King
and his Governors, we should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, who
thought that Religion freed them from the yoke of subjection: and that we
should not make Christian liberty a cloak of maliciousness, a pretense of
Disobedience and Rebellion; but as servants to God, honor the King, and submit
our selves to him for the Lords sake. Therefore it is a great impiety and
hypocrisy to pretend Gods cause and interest for rebelling and disobeying,
when he bids us for his sake to obey and to be subject.

2. That none must presume upon any account whatsoever to rebel against the
Sovereign or Supreme Governor, read Number. 16. at the 3. v. you shall find that
Korah and his rebellious crew pleaded that the people was the Lords people, and
that they were holy every one of them; and therefore (say they) to Moses and
Aaron, Why lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? But at
the 32. v. The earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all that appertained to them. And by that dreadful and unheard of judgment,
God manifested how much he detests Rebellion, that following Ages might beware
of the heinousness of that crime. So in 1 Samuel 24.5, and 6. David's heart smote
him because he had cut off Saul's skirt, and he said to his men, The Lord forbid
that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords Anointed, to stretch
forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Lords Anointed. And c. 26. v. 9.
David says unto Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? David was then Anointed King, he
was persecuted wrongfully by Saul, Saul was rejected of God, and he had most
barbarously put to death the Priests of God, and their whole families; and yet
because he was King over the people, Who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lords Anointed and be guiltless? God as you see allows no pretense at all for
Rebellion, for that as I have shown you Kings have their Authority from him, By
me Kings reign, says the Divine Wisdom, Prove. 8.15. and therefore Solomon
joins God and the King together, as the objects of our respect and obedience,
Prove. 24.21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and so Eccles. 8.2. I
counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of
God.

3. We are not to speak evil of the King, but rather to pray for him: in 22.
Exodus 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, (that is, Supreme Magistrates) nor
curse the Ruler of thy people. Job 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? and to Princes, Ye are are ungodly? So it was witnessed against Naboth
by his false accusers, That he blasphemed God and the King, 1 King. 21.13. and
then he was stoned to death. Whereby it appears, that in Israel it was one of
the greatest impieties to speak ill of the King. As also it is commanded by
Solomon, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, etc. And
you may see what a black character the Apostles set upon those that despise
Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, in the Epistle of Saint Jude and in 2
Pet. 2.10. Now that it is our duty to pray for the King, we have these
examples, 1 Samuel 10.24. when Saul was anointed, the people cried, God save the
King; and so likewise when Solomon was anointed, 1 King. 1.39. But what need
any more than this precept of St. Paul? 1 Timothy 2.1, and 2. I exhort therefore
that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority: -- for it is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

Lastly, That we are to pay Tribute to Kings and Sovereign Princes, read Romans
13.6, and 7. For this cause pay you Tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. If the Heathen Emperors were Gods Ministers, and
therefore to receive Tributes and Customs, much more the Christian Kings that
now reign over us. Moreover, we have the example of Christ himself, who when he
had not wherewithal to pay that Tribute which the Roman Kings had imposed upon
the Jews, was pleased to work a miracle for to get money to pay it withal, Mat.
17.24. etc. He that was and is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the God of
Heaven and Earth, pleaded no exemption from paying Taxes, but bound this duty
upon all his followers by his own example, and thereby confirmed also that
precept which he gave us, (when the Jews asked him whether it was lawful to pay
Tribute to Caesar, Mat. 22.21.) of rendering to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, as well as to God the things that are Gods.

Now therefore let no Christian dare to go against these so many and so plain
and express Scriptures in disobeying or resisting his King and Sovereign under
pretense of Religion, or of removing evil Counselors, or of fighting for the
Kings Authority against his Person, or because the Pope or the Presbyterian
Synod enjoin him so to do, for the good of souls, for the cause and interest of
Christ and the Gospel: for you see that God makes no reservations, and allows
of no distinctions or equivocations, but bids every soul to be subject, and
threatens damnation to any that shall not. And now, Sirs, I leave you to
meditate upon what you have heard, and I heartily wish it may do you good.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the first Part.

PAge 4. line 25. for cried, read erred. P. 11. l. 11. f. falsam, r. falsum. P.
22. l. 5. f. fanfie, r. suffer.

In the second Part.

In the Preface, P. 3. f. are, r. err. Page 11. l. 19. add. we. P. 16. l. 7.
add lost. P. 26. l. 12. f. ever, r. even. P. 39. l. 25. f. then. r. them. P. 50
l. 7. r. did reach no further than the end of. P. eadem, l. 27. add it is. P.
64. f. general, r. quarrel. P. 72. l. 8. f. subject, r. ready.


