The Beau Defeated: OR, The Lucky Younger Brother. A COMEDY.

As it is now ACTED By His Majesty's Servants at the New Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LONDON, Printed for W. Turner at the Angel, at Lincolns-Inn-back-Gate; and R.
Basset at the Mitre, against Chancery Lane in Fleetstreet.

TO HER GRACE THE Duchess of BOLTON.
MADAM,
WHen the Curious hand of Nature draws Perfection, when Beauty like yours
appears, all are inspired with Wonder and Delight, every Heart is filled with
Pleasure, because every Heart is full of you; Pardon my Ambition, Pardon the
daring of a Pen, too weak to Copy inimitable Graces; but if none may aim at
your lovely Picture, unless they have Power to do you Justice, your Praises
must be left unsung, and you for ever adored in Silence.

I own the following Play claims not the least Merit to such a Glorious
Protection, but that is all I have to boast, all the reward my Towering Fancy
covets, is centred in my Illustrious Patronesses; this will to after Ages make
my Trifle Sacred, when they behold prefixed such Names, whose Virtues
Historians, Poets, and never dying Fame shall join with me to Eternize.

The Play is partly a Translation from the French; what I added, if it had not
the power to please, had no Immodesty to offend, which I hope will be an
atonement with your Grace, for other Defects in my Younger Brother; I would
have persuaded the World to prize Desert, before the Gifts of Fortune, but the
major part are too sordid to like the Example, few are so truly Noble to fix
without Intrest, which makes so very few truly happy in their Choice.

I would have deferred Addressing to Your Grace, till I had aimed at an
Offering more Worthy, but my Charmed Eyes being lately blessed with the sight
of You, have let into my mind such a Beautiful Idea, that I lived in pain till
I expressed my Admiration.

To be Great and Good, and Exquisitly Fair, are the happiest Epethets Fate
bestows on Mortals; that they are justly Your Graces due* will, I am sure, be
confirmed by an Universal Voice; and that you may Live long to adorn the
Titles, whose Luster receive addition from that Beauteous Fame, is the Eternal
wish off

Madam, Your Graces, most humble, and most Obedient Servant, Mary Pix.

Dramatis Personae.
Sir John Roverhead, A Beau, Elder Clerimont, a Country Squire, Younger
Clerimont, Belvoir, his Friend, Mr. Rich, a Citizen, Chris. Servant to Sir
John. Toby and Jack. Servants to the two Clerimonts. Mr. Bowman. Mr. Trout. Mr.
Verbruggen. Mr. Thurmond.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Bracegirdle, Mrs. Barry, Mrs. Bowman, Mrs. Prince Mrs. Willis, Lady
Landsworth, A Rich Widow of the North. Mrs. Rich, a Fantastic City Widow. Mrs.
Clerimont. Lucinda, Niece to the Widow Rich. Her Governess. Gamesters. Lady la
Basset and Mrs. Trickwell,
Mrs. Fidget, Landlady to Younger Clerimont. Betty, Mrs. Rich's Maid.
PROLOGUE Spoke by Mr. Bowman.
YOur Servant Ladies fair -- And how I pray,
Like you my Dress and Garniture to Day.
'Faith I Have survay'd my self from Top to Toe,
And find I make a most Accomplished Beau.
If all these Charms, to win a Fortune fail,
I Will leave Champagne, and drown my shape in Ale;
What care I if I Am bigger than a Whale?
But why should I despair of being Blessed.
Can Female Heart withstand a Man thus Dressed?
As I was lately Walking in the Mall,
Heavens! how the Ladies flocked about me all.
I Will vow they came so Termagantly Fierce on,
I feared some strange designs upon my Person.
Says one, and faith the Nymph was well enough,
Mind, with what Air and Grace he takes his Snuff,
The second cried, and pray observe his Muff.
My Sword-Knot charmed the fancy of the third,
Poor simple thing she scarce could speak a Word.
And, I replies the fourth, Alas! am Slain,
With the Celestial motion of his Cane.
The Fifth was strangely smitten with my shape;
Nay hold, I cried, you wont commit a Rape?
For mine, and for your own dear sakes be quiet,
Or Ladies I Will endite you for a Riot.
But hold -- there is something I was begged to say,
In favor of our modest Authors Play.
He hoped you would like -- but Ha! the Bird is Flown,
[feeling in his Pockets.] No matter, I Will say something of my own.
Know then, our Comedy first came from France,
Which here perhaps, its Fortune may advance.
Ladies, be you as kind as you are pretty,
And you Gallants as merciful as Witty:
Then may both Stage and Poet hope to thrive,
It Is by your Bounty both are kept alive.
EPILOGUE Spoken by a Boy.
Custom in England makes poor Poet scrape,
In hopes by that Damnation to escape.
But we our Plot have fetched from Foreign Nation,
And there such scraping is no ver good Fashion.
Therefore our Author armed with French Assurance,
No Pardon Asks, and owns no ill performance.
But hither sends me a la mode de France,
Messieurs and Dames, to treat you with a Dance.
After the Dance.
Ma foi, -- taking Breath.
I have exhausted quite ma respiration,
To please the Ladies, sur ma reputation.
I Would please the Fair, though I were sure of Dying,
I hope I have not strained my back with Trying.
Come then ye Beaux, your gayest Smiles put on.
'Twill spoil those dear bewitching looks to Frown.
Alas, why should you your ill nature show?
Starving of us, will nere advavantage you.
A Dam' sell once attacked by Flesh and Blood,
By this one Argument her Spark withstood;
You Will ruin me, and do your self no good.
Then let our Theater your favor find,
It Is for your Honor, Gallants, to be kind.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Rich with Betty, her Maid. Betty. What Is the matter, Madam? What
has happened to you? What has any body done to you?


Mrs. Rich. An Affront?... Ah! I die: An affront!... I faint: I cannot speak. A
Chair quickly.


Betty. [Giving a Chair.] An affront! to you, Madam, an affront! Is it possible!


Mrs. Rich. But too true, my poor Betty. Oh! I shall dye. To disrespect me in
the open Street! What Insolence!


Betty. How, Madam! Not to show respect to such a person as you? Madam Rich;
the Widow of an honest Banker, who got Two Hundred Thousand Pounds in the
King's service? Pray, Madam, who has been thus insolent?


Mrs. Rich. A Duchess; who had the confidence to thrust my Coac^ from the
Wall, and make it run back above twenty yards.


Betty. A very impertinent Duchess. What! Madam, your person shining all over
with Jewels, your new gilt Coach, your dappl'd Flanders with long Tails, your
Coachman with cocking Whiskers like a Swiss Guard, your six Footman covered
with Lace more than any on a Lord-Mayor's day? I say, could not all this
imprint some respect in the Duchess?


Mrs. Rich. Not at all. And this beggarly Duchess, at the end of an old Coach,
drawn by two miserable starved Jades, made her tattered Footmen insult me.


Betty. S'life! where was Betty. I Would have told her what she was.


Mrs. Rich. I spoke to her with a mien and tone proportionable to my Equipage;
but she, with a scornful smile, cried, hold thy peace, Citizen, struck me quite
dumb.


Betty. Citizen! Citizen! To a Lady in a gilt Coach, lined with crimson Velvet,
and hung round with a gold Fringe.


Mrs. Rich. I swear to thee, that I had not the force to answer to this deadly
Injury; but ordered my Coachman to turn, and drive me home a full gallop.


Betty. But, Madam, pray consider things rightly, and take this as it was
intended; for, I conceive, it was not against your Person, but your Name, that
this Affront was designed; and why do you not make haste to change it?


Mrs. Rich. That I have resolved; but I quarrel daily with my Destiny, that I
was not at first a Woman of Quality.


Betty. Well, well, Madam, you have no great reason to complain; and though you
are not as yet a Woman of Quality, you are at least very rich; and you know,
that with money you may buy Quality, but Birth very often brings no Estate.


Mrs. Rich. That Is nothing; there is something very charming in Quality, and a
great Name.


Betty. Yet sure you would think your self in a worse condition, Madam, were you,
as many great Ladies in the World are, who want every thing; and, in spite of
their great Name, are known, but by the great number of Creditors, that are
bawling at their Doors from morning till night.


Mrs. Rich. That Is the modish Air, it is that distinguishes the People of
Quality.


Betty. Methinks, Madam, it is a great satisfaction, to dare to go out at the
great Gate, without being in danger of having your Coach and Horses seized by a
troop of Sergeants: What would you say, if you were obliged to return home in a
filthy Hack, as several of Quality have done?


Mrs. Rich. Ah! would to Heavens, that had happened to me, and that I were a
Countess.


Betty. But, Madam, you don't imagine --


Mrs. Rich. Yes, yes, I do imagine, and I had rather be the beggarliest
Countess in the Town, than the Widow of the richest Banker in Europe. Well, I
am resolved; and, I will be a Countess, cost what it will; and to that intent,
I Will absolutely break all commerce with those little Cits, by whose Alliance I
am debased; and first I Will begin with Mr. Rich.


Betty. Mr. Rich, Madam, your Brother-in-Law?


Mrs. Rich. My Brother-in-Law! my Brother-in-Law! thou simple Wench! prithee
know better!


Betty. Pardon me, Madam, I thought he had been your Brother-in-Law, because he
was Brother to your Deceased Husband.


Mrs. Rich. That Is true, my Husband's Brother, but my Husband being Dead, Fool,
Mr. Rich is now no more Kin to me than my Footman; nevertheless the Fellow
thinks himself of Importance, and is continually a censuring my Conduct, and
controuling my Actions: Nay, even the little Minx his Daughter, when we go in
my Coach together, places her self at the end by my side.


Betty. Little ridiculous Creature!


Mrs. Rich. But that which Angers me the most, is, that with her little
smiling, mimicking Behavior, she attracts the Eyes of the whole Town, and I
have not so much as a Glance.


Betty. What a Foolish Town is this! because she is young and pretty, they take
more notice of her than you.


Mrs. Rich. It shall be otherwise, or I Will see her no more.


Betty. Nay, your Ladyship will Humble her, for of late you rarely suffer her
to come near you.


Mrs. Rich. Well, I will have a Title, and a Name, that is resolved; a Name that
shall fill the Mouth.


Betty. Ah! Madam, a great Name will become you extremely; but a Name is not
sufficient, I believe you must have a Husband too; and you ought to take care
what choice you make.


Mrs. Rich. I know the World well enough, and have in my Eye one of the most
Accomplished Gentlemen in the Town.


Betty. How, Madam, already made your choice, and I know nothing?


Mrs. Rich. Sir John would not let me tell thee.


Betty. What, Sir John? Sir John Roverhead of Roverhead Castle?


Mrs. Rich. He himself.


Betty. Why, Madam, speak seriously, is it Sir John Roverhead you design to
Marry?


Mrs. Rich. Prithee where is the wonder?


Betty. Why pray consider, Madam, Sir John is not worth a Groat.


Mrs. Rich. I have sufficient for us both, and there is Justice in what I
design. Mr. Rich did not get his Estate too honestly; and it is some kind of
Restitution, to raise up with what he has left me, one of the Ancients Families
in the North.


Betty. Oh! since it is a Marriage of Conscience I have no more to say.


Mrs. Rich. Betty.


Betty. Madam.


Mrs. Rich. Prithee what is thy Surname.


Betty. Has your Ladyship forgot.


Mrs. Rich. Do imagine it worth a place in my memory?


Betty. Cork, Madam.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, filthy! from henceforth let me call thee de la Bett; that has
and Air French, and agreeable.


Betty. What you please, Madam.


Mrs. Rich. De la Bett, whatever Bills the Mechanical fellows, little Trades
people bring ye, let 'em wait, let 'em Walk for it, and watch my Lever, but if
Monsieur comes that brought the prohibited Gloves, l'eau de fleur d'Orange, and
the Complexion, you understand me, give him his price, and ready Money.


Betty. Yes, Madam.


Mrs. Rich. And do ye hear, put a Hundred Guineas in the Embroidered Purse for
Bassett.


Betty. Bless me, Madam! have you lost all that I put in yesterday Morning?


Mrs. Rich. Impertinence! I am sufficiently recompensed in Learning the Game,
and the Honorable Company I am admitted into.


Betty. Indeed, Madam, the Footmen say, Mrs. Trickwell is a perfect Female
Rook, lives upon Gaming, nay, and keeps out on it, they say, and they can tell.


Mrs. Rich. Hold your tongue, she is a Woman of Quality, knows every body at
Court, all their Intrigues, is as deep in Affairs, and keeps as many Secrets,
as Maintenon, I Will be sworn; ma foie. What a word was there! But, as I was
saying, she has told me, and half a dozen Ladies more, Secrets six hours
together; and such Secrets, de la Bett, let me die, were we not Women of
discretion, might reach the Lives, or eternally disgrace, of some that shall be
nameless.


Betty. They are very happy, if they are in her power.


Mrs. Rich. Peace, has no body sent a How-de-yee yet?


Betty. No.


Mrs. Rich. It Is my horrid Custom of getting up fo early in a morning.


Betty. Madam, it is past Twelve.


Mrs. Rich. And I dressed, and have been abroad, Abominable! I charge ye to
morrow don't bring my Clothes till past Two, if I am so mad to call for 'em.


Betty. Wont your Ladyship inquire after my Lady Landsworth's health, methinks
you neglect her, though she is rich, gay and beautiful, and honors your House
with her choice of it whilst she is in Town.


Mrs. Rich. Honors! Who art thou speaking to, Sweetheart? I do not like her,
she wont play; nay, will sit ye two hours together and speak ill of no body;
she is not fit for the conversation of Quality.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Madam, Mrs. Trickwell, and another Lady, is come to teach
your Ladyship, Shombring, I think they call it.


Mrs. Rich. Ombre, Sot, I shall be rid of thee, thou fragment of the shop. De
la Bett I Will go to them, if Sir John comes, call me, not else.


Exit Mrs. Rich and Boy. Enter Lady Landsworth. Lansworth. My dear Mrs. Betty,
I Am glad to find thee alone.


Betty. Your Ladyship does me too much honor.


L. Lands. Thou art so discreet and obliging, I cannot love thee too well.
Where Is thy impertinent Mistress?


Betty. Gone to learn Ombre, with a hundred Guinea's in her pocket.


L. Lands. Ha, ha, ha, her pride, ill nature, and Self-opinion, makes her
Follies unpitty'd. I Would fain be rid of the nauseous conversation this House
abounds with.


Betty. Indeed my City Lady turning Courtier, has a hopeful stock of Teachers;
Mistresses grown old, and then forsaken, who, in the tatters of their
Prosperity, pass upon her for decayed Quality, Female Gamsters, and Fools in
abundance.


L. Lands. They are affected without beauty, or good cloths, though that alone's
enough to spoil one that had both; their mirth is insipid, and their raillery
abusive, and yet not poinant. For my part, I Have almost lost my gay humor for
fear of being like 'em; if I continue here one Week longer I shall 'en exchange
the Town, where I expected such pleasure, for my old Yorkshire retirement.


Betty. Could you but get Mrs. Clerimont to ye, Madam, she would immediately
introduce you to the Beau Monde, where Wit, Gallantry, and good Breeding, are
emulators. You say she is a Relation.


L. Lands. She is so at a distance, but you see all mysending will not prevail
with her to come at me, nor appoint a time when I shall wait upon her; what can
be the reason?


Betty. I know not, unless it is being here; for truly I fancy, though my Mistress
is fled to Covent Garden, she is as much despised by the real Quality, as she
is cajoled by the Pretenders to it. You say you are not acquainted with Mrs.
Clerimont though related to her: So perhaps she guesses you of our Stamp, and
avoids ye. For Heavens sake, Madam, how came ye hither?


L. Lands. Why, I Will tell thee, Betty, I was married a mere Baby to a very old
Man, who, in his Youth, having been a Debauchee, and dealing only with the
worst of our Sex, had an ill Opinion of all, kept me like a Nun, broke off all
commerce to London, or indeed with any body, not excepting Relations.


Betty. And could you endure this?


Lady Landsworth, Most patiently; never found fault with his Woollen Shirts or
Night Caps, lay all Night to the Music of his Cough, or the rattling of his
Ptisick, writ nothing but Receipts, scarce ever opened my Mouth, but out came,
how do ye do, my dear; did the Sirrup I made last please ye?


Betty. Your Ladyship was a Miracle.


L. Landsworth. And what do you think I got by doing thus?


Betty. I don't know, but I Am sure you deserved a great Deal.


L. Landsworth. Even Three Thousand Pounds a Year, besides Money, Plate, and
Jewels. This Mrs. Rich's Husband was my old Man's Banker, and once I saw her in
the Country, besides she had money of mine in her hands, so to her, and this
dear Town I came; resolving to perticipate all the innocent Liberty my Youth,
my Wealth, and Sex desires.


Betty. Ah, Madam! had our Sex but your forbearance, they might all be happy.


L. Landsworth. I am of the mind that Fortune offers every mortal their share
of satisfaction; but if they pluck the green Fruit, forestal her purpose, or
miss the ripened moment, they rarely have another prospect.


Betty. Right, Madam, and is it not the same in Love? If a Lady refuses the Man
she likes, all her Adventures in that kind prove awkward and unlucky after it.


L. Landsworth. Say thou so, Mrs. Betty; well I am resolved to indulge my
Inclinations, and rather than not obtain the person I like, invert the Order of
nature, and pursue, though he flies.


Betty. Impossible, one glance of yours subdues the proudest Love-defier of
them all.


L. Landsworth. Pho, you flatter; but seriously my dear Confidant, being once
condemned to Matrimony without ever asking my consent, now I have the freedom
to make my own choice, and the whole World the Mart.... I have the oddest
Whimsies.


Betty. Then your Ladyship intends to venture on a second Marriage?


L. Landsworth. Truly, Mrs. Betty, I believe so, why should we dissemble when
we are alone? -- but such a Husband I would have.


Betty. What sort of a Husband? let us hear the Marks? that I may try to find
the Man.


L. Landsworth. He should be Gentile, yet not a Beau; Witty, yet no Debauche;
susceptible of Love, yet abhorring lewd Women; Learned, Poetical, Musical
without one Dram of Vanity; in fine, very meritorious, yet very modest;
generous to the last degree, and Master of no Estate; mightily in Love with me,
and not so much as know I am worth the Clothes I wear.


Betty. Ha, ha, ha, to your Romances again Lady fair, it is only there you can
converse with those Heroes, this Town affords no such, I can assure you: Modest,
Meritorious, and Genteel, ha, ha, ha, your Pardon, Madam, why such a Wight
would not get his daily Bread, not Rags to cover his Nakedness; it is Frontless
Impudence makes the Grand appearance, and carries the World before it.


L. Landsworth. I suppose I shall increase your Laughter, when I tell you I
fancy I have found the Man.


Betty. Madam.


L. Landsworth. You know, thoroughly tired with the Impertinence within, and not
being fitted to give or receive Visits, I have often rambled with my Woman
Incognito -- and have done the strangest things.


Betty. What, for Heavens sake?


L. Landsworth. Even lost my Heart; in Love, Mrs. Betty, desperately in Love.


Betty. With whom, Dear Madam?


L. Landsworth. Oh, a pretty Gentleman, who has all those accomplishments I
desire writ in his Face, as plain as --


Betty. The Nose in it, I warrant.


L. Landsworth. Yes truly, for all your jesting: I sat by him in the
Playhouse, and discovered his Sense as taking as his Figure.


Betty. But where was his modesty, when he attacked a Mask?


L. Landsworth. That Is your mistake, 'twas I gave the onset, nay, went farther,
appointed him a meeting there again, enjoined him not to dog me, nor endeavor
to learn who I was, which he punctually obeyed.


Betty. And you performed your Assignation.


L. Landsworth. Yes indeed, last Night; and to try his Generosity, when the
Doorkeeper came into the side Box for Money, I seemed in a great fright, and
said, I had left my purse at home, he immediately offered me a Guinea, which
though I accepted, by the melancholy Air of his Face, I guessed it had not a Twin
Brother.


Betty. Bless me, Madam! that pretense, and taking his money, made you look like
a Woman of the Town.


L. Landsworth. So I designed: I forced him to tell me his Name and Lodging,
ever I Would accept the favor, and now I have a Game to play, wherein you must
assist me.


Betty. In what ever you desire. Oh! Madam, Sir John Roverhead is just upon us.


L. Landsworth. What luck is this! is there no avoiding the Fop?


Enter Sir John Roverhead, and Chris. his Man. Sir John. Ha, Chris.! the
beautiful wealthy Widow of the North.


Chris. Why, Sir, she is not Mrs. Rich.


Sir John. Sagely discovered, but she is better, Mr. Wisdom, more desirable, and
deeper in my Affections.


Chris. Your Pardon, Sir, I have done.


Sir John. Stand back*


[adjusting himself to Chris. L. Landsworth. What postures the thing uses, to
make it more ridiculous than nature first designed it.


Sir John. Now to be florid. [To Chris.] Sure some auspicious Planet ruled to
day, for every Star is witness, how often, when I have made my Visit here, I
have sighed to see your Ladyship, --


L. Lands. Still taking Coach, or Chair. Have I not helped you out, Sir?


Sir. John. Lord, Madam, such beauty, Wit and Dress what Man can bear?


L. Lands. Such affectation, folly and nonsense, what Woman can endure?

Exit.
Sir John. Ay hey, Mrs. -- Betty, what is the meaning of this?


Betty. The effect of her Country ignorance.


Sir John. It must be so, for I think Chris, I am nicely Dressed to day.


Chris. Ay, but perhaps she likes the Inward-man.


Sir John. She Is a fool, that is certain. But, Mrs. Betty, I hope my Affairs
stand well with your Lady; this was but a trifle whom I addressed too with my
universal Gallantry, which had she received, I should have laughed at; my Valet
knows it is my way to all that make an appearance.


Chris. Under Fifty.


Sir John. Or above, if they make an appearance.


Betty. Ay, Sir John, it is you alone have the bewitching way, Court all the
World, and catch my unweary Mistress by the by; because it is like Quality. Sir
John. Like! that is degrading; I Would be an original, like nothing.


Betty. Nothing sure can be like you.


Sir John. A witty Baggage this, we must engage her.


Chris. Withal my heart, secure you the Mistress, and let me alone for the
Maid. Sir John. Well, but Mrs. Betty, after this idle chat shall we crave leave
to see your Mistress.


Betty. You may, and you only; she is at Cards.


Sir John. I protest thou art charmingly dressed, and pretty, I vow; what
Design have you to day?


Betty. Is it to me you speak, Sir?


Sir John. To whom else?


Betty. I thought, like a Poet you were repeating, and designed the Complement
for the next of Quality you met.


Sir John. Fie, fie, let me dye if you are not the prettiest, amiable Creature
I know: Prithee who makes thy Mantoe's; how modestly the little Creature
dresses her Head too!


Betty. Ha, ha, ha, this is excess of French breeding: But, Sir John, you
forget my Lady expects you.


Sir John. I shall ever forget her when I look upon thee, my Life, my Soul, She
threw by her Knotting in haste -- [Sings.] ho, ho, ho, come along Chris. I Have
shot her flying. And caught me about my well shaped wast -- [Sings.] ho, ho, ho,

Exit. Singing.
Betty. So, this is the high top Fool in my Lady's equipage, the favored Fool,
and she has enough in her Train to give a Man of sense the spleen but to hear
her Catalogue. Well, since Fortune has thrown me into this Chambermaid
Station, I Will revenge her Cruelty, and plague her Favorites.

No (...) by me shall ever successful prove,
My Plots shall help the Man of Sense in Love.

ACT II.
Enter Belvoir meeting Jack. Belvoir. HOw now Jack, is thy Master within?


Jack. No, Sir.


Belvoir. No, Sir; Let me come Morning, Noon, or Night, still I am answered,
No, Sir; 'twas by accident I found his Lodgings, and I plainly perceive he is
denied; this is most injurious to our former Friendship, quite contrary to the
Contract made when we were fellow Students, when I was only Clerimonts, and
Clerimont Belvoirs.


Jack. Ay, Sir, my Master's strangely altered; but I dare not tell.


Belvoir. Come, for once I Will tempt thee to a breach of Trust, I may do him
service; I hear his Father's dead.


Jack. Ah, Sir! that is his grief, the very fountain of his Discontment.


Bell. Trust me Jack, few Young Gentlemen use to break their Hearts for such a
Loss.


Jack. Yes, if they are Younger Brothers, and left not worth a Groat; 'twill go
a great way with them, a great way indeed, Sir.


Bell. But he was the Old Lord's Favourit, who had Land enough without entail
to make my Clermont happy.


Jack. Alas! Mr. Bellvoir, I find you know not our Story.


Bell. Not the particulars, only what I Have heard from fame; if thou believe
me thy Masters Friend, hide nothing from me.


Jack. I do, so notwithstanding his Commands, you shall hear our misfortunes.
You know my Master's Elder Brother, is a perfect Squire, on my Conscience the
product of two Virginities, such an unaccountable Blockhead, that though he gave
the assured proof of spending his Fathers Estate, and did it so ungenteely,
that he was despised by Men of Sense, shunned by all but the unthinking Rabble,
Rediculous even below Lampooning.


Bell. Why Jack, the Town improves thee beyond the University, thou grow'st
Witty.


Jack. No, it is the Approach of Poverty whets my Spleen; I gad if I am reduced
to Rags I Will spare never an Elder Brother of them all, though he were a Prince.


Bell. A well a day, for the poor Gentlemen in gilt Coaches. But proceed to the
matter, good Friend John.


Jack. Why this Dunce, I think I called him before, shatter Brains. --


Bell. Hold.


Jack. Whose sole delight lay in his Kindred Hounds, who for his Hunting
Companions, entertained all the Lubbers of the four adjacent Parishes, till the
Country was going to Petition the Parliament for Laborers; this Monster of the
Woods, this --


Bell. Well what of him.


Jack. Has got every Penny of my Old Lord's Estate, whilst my Master, the most
deserving of his Race, (though I say it that should not) is left to Starve, Rob,
Drown, or what he pleases.


Bell. But how came this to pass, Jack, ha?


Jack. Why that damned jilt Fortune, or her left handed Daughter, as blind as
she, Chance.


Belvoir. A mischance upon my word.


Jack. A confounded one. My old Lord lay long Bedridden of the Gout, and the
Wight I have described, lived in an Estate some few Miles distant, one day
Hunting that way, he bethought himself, and made his sick Father a Visit; but
knowing he could not sit a moment without talking to his beloved Jowler,
Ringwood, etc. takes the whole Kennel along with him into the Chamber, whilst
the the other Kennel below (I mean the Peasants) were so sharp set, they scarce
left my Lord an unmaul'd Dish to come to his Table.


Bellvour. Horrid, filthy Brutes!


Jack. In fine, this so exasperated the old Man that in a rage he burnt his
Will, designing to leave my Master whatever was in his power; but the malicious
Fates decreed it otherwise, for that very night the angered Father died
suddenly, and all his Wealth fell to that soft-headed Fool in one Swoop; and
the De'il, I say, do him good with it.


Belv. Pho, there must be application made to him, Jack, this must not be
suffered.


Jack. To his Huntsman apply then, for he is his only Oracle.


Belvoir. Their's Mrs. Clerimont in Town his first Cousin, a vast fortune, and
one who has a larger share of Wit and Goodness; she shall be consulted. What, a
young Gentleman shall never droop for missing a paltry Fortune.


Jack. Dear Sir, do your best. But now I beg of you to be gone; I hear him
coming, and he will be in such a Passion if he discover I have been talking to
you, or told he was at home; for it is his humor to hide from all his Friends.


Belv. Well, I Will not cross him now, but certainly find out some way to assist
him. Farewell. honest Jack, be sure you prove faithful and kind to him.


Jack. Upon my veracity to my uttermost. I only wish to serve him --

Exit Belvoir. [Jack stands out of sight
Enter Clerimont in Mourning. Cler. Mine Is not the Mourning of an Heir; Oh! my
Noble Father sure I should have grieved enough for thee, for thy unspeakable
loss, without additional Calamities: What will become of me; must I wait at
proud Men's doors, and cring for an admittance? Can I flatter the puffed up Lord,
and fawn for a vile Office? Debase my immortal Soul to feed this moulding Clay?
It Is impossible, it is more than Man can bear!


Jack. sir.


Cler. What.


Jack. I thought you called.


Cler. Thou art too officions; I have advised thee often to leave me, and seek
thy fortune where the Goddess smiles, I am a Wretch that now is sinking lower
than his own dispairing Thoughts can frame.


Jack. Lord, Sir, is this all the Philosophy you have learned, think I am the
best proficient, starving frights not me half so much as parting; faith, though
the World is crowded with knaves that an honest Gentleman can scarce breath,
I Will jostle stoutly but you shall have Elbow room.


Cler. Poor Fellow! thou differest from the common Tribe of Servants; they fly
Poverty worse than Infection; or else with saucy Impuence insult.


Enter a Coachman with a Letter. Coachman. Is this Mr. Clerimont's Lodging?


Jack. Well, and what then, how came you here without calling me? What Is your
Name, and what is your Business?


Coach. Not with you, Sawce-box.


Jack. How, Sirrah!


Cler. Peace; my Name is Clerimont*


Coach. Then, Sir, there is a Lady in my Coach has sent you this, she says it
requires no Answer.


[Gives a Letter and goes off. Cler. Ha, Gold! fly Jack, call him back.


Jack. [Pulling in the Coachman.] Heark-yee, you Sneak-nose, Hounds-face, you
have Affronted my Master.


Coach. Why, fool, I brought him Money.


Jack. I thought so, ye Pimp, he scorns it.


Cler. Here, return this back; tell the Lady she mistakes the Man, and I Will
wait upon her where she appoints, and convince her that she does.


Coach. Gad, a notable Mistake.


Cler. Rascal, no fingering. Follow you, and take the Number of his Coach; if
you are not honest, Sirrah, I shall find a time to cut your Ears off.


Jack. I Will watch him, I warrant. Bring Money to my Master! Sirrah, get you
gone.


Coach. Sure they are all distracted!


Cler. From my Mask in the Playhouse: By my Life a very Harlot: How few in my
Circumstances would refuse these offers; but my Nature's quite otherwise, I
cannot be obliged where I contemn, nor live so vile a way: Not but the
temptation's doubly baited, Profit and Pleasure; for though the Baggage is loose
as the wanton Winds, yet she is Witty beyond her Sex: What a medley's here.

[Reads. When I tell ye I am in Love, by that modest Air, and down cast Look of
yours, I guess you will think me mad, and expect (according to the Damsels in
Romance) I should have a Fit of Sickness, been at the Point of death, ever made
the discovery: But Women of my Character are not so nice. I am a Mistress, have
abundance of Money, if you have but little, a wise Man may pick comfort out of
this. I send you a Token, as an earnest of my future favors; agreeable to your
wonted Obedience come not to the Coach, but meet me at Four in the Park, and
thank me with your Acceptance. Ha, ha, ha, ha, I see the Devil's not wanting on
his part, he'de have me a greater Sinner ever I come to despair. The Postscript
is the same mad stuff.

You shall know me by an affected motion in my
Walk, and a Bell toss with my head, humph!

Enter Jack. Jack. The Lady's gone, Sir, and the Money too: Gad, Sir, though to
please you, I was in a passion, yet my mouth watered plaguily at the Gold.


Cler. What said the Creature?


Jack. The Creature! Gad she was an Angel. She pulled off her Mask, I believe,
to laugh freely, for she burst out vehemently; and when the Man said you would have
none on it, she gave her self a swing, and cried, the more fool he, drive on
Coachman.


Cler. So merry! but it is her time whilst Youth and Beauty lasts; she will have
Years enough of Sorrow.


Jack. Sir, my Landlady's a coming, you have used her so to sack and Chocolate
in a morning, that she will never fail you.


Cler. Pish, I am sick of her Impertinence.

Enter Mrs. Fidget. Good morrow Mr. Clerimont; good Lord, still walking with
that melancholy air! Well, well, were I such a pretty Gentleman, I Would defy
Fortune.


Cler. Prithee, Landlady, what would you have me do; if you think the Ladies
will like me so well, take my Picture and hang it out at your Belcony; even
make your best of me, if that will content ye.


Mrs. Fidget. Fie, fie, you might have private Chamber-practice enough, if you would
give your mind to it: Used my life, if the young handsome Fellows were like you,
there would never have come so many of them to their Coach and Six. Let me tell
ye, Mr. Clerimont, if I thought you had been of this reserved Humor, I Would not
have let my Lodgings to you. I used to have Women of Quality to my fine
Gentlemen, and Suppers dressed in my House have lasted my Famy a Week; besides
that put into my hand that shall be nameless, else I had never lived in the
Credit you see me in these Twenty Years in the Parish.


Cler. Good Mrs. Fidget.


Mrs. Fidget. [Nay you shall hear me.] Brought up my Daughters as I have done:
As fine Women, though I say it, as any that adorn Covent Garden Church.


Cler. Church! I should rather have thought they would adorn the Playhouse.


Mrs. Fidget. Now out uponyou, Mr. Clerimont, my Daughters are never seen at
the Playhouse; I bring them up in the fear of Heaven.


Jack. Yes, and they are both Married in the fear of Heaven too: For neither of
them troubled the Church in that Affair, as I have been told.


Mrs. Fidget. Well, Saucy-face. But, Mr. Clerimont, what I have said is all for
your good, and I hope you do take it into your Consideration: For truly to day
^here came a very pretty Lady, and notwithstanding your Order, I sent up the
Coachman: I am willing to bring you to Preferment.


Cler. Bring me to the Pox, and the Devil --


Mrs. Fidget. Marry gap, is this my Thanks!


Cler. I tell ye, I am tired of these morning Lectures, and if my Lodgings
cannot be free from noise and impertinence, I must quit them. Follow me, Jack,
I Will take the air.


Exeunt. Mrs. Fidget. So out of sorts, and gone without giving me my
Mornings-Draught: Why, Master John, Master John, give me the Key of the
Closset, I must rummage it for a Dram of the Bottle: Udsflesh I shall not be in
humor again this half hour, the Man's a fool, I think.

When Beauty courts the charming Pleasures shun,
Be virtuous, though he is sure to be undone;
He Is mad, Udsflesh! I Would sooner turn a Nun.
Exit.
Scene draws and discovers Mrs. Rich, Mrs. Trickwell, and Lady la Basset,
Rising from Play. Mrs. Trickwell to Mrs. Rich. I protest your Ladyship plays to
a miracle; but I would not have had you ventured Money yet.


Mrs. Rich. Oh pardon me, Madam, I should not have minded it else. But do you
think I shall ever be capable?


La Basset. Why, you are perfect already; a wonderful apprehension.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, fie! My Lady la Basset, you compliment in reality; may I hope
to play at Court? I have a great ambition to play at Court: Oh my Stars! I
should torment our City Ladies to death, to talk of Honors done me at Court.


La Basset. Yes, yes, you shall be introduced, and honored at Court, I Will
promise ye, or my Interest fails me; and for setting it out let me alone, I Will
make their Ears tingle, I faith.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, my dear, dear Lady Basset, let me embrace ye, the very
conception on it is felicity to the highest degree. Mon Dieu! How we'll teaze
the little City Creatures.

Enter Mrs. Betty. Madam, Sir John Roverhead is come to wait on you, and has
got some Music to entertain your Ladyships.


Exit Betty. Mrs. Rich. Oh Heavens! That Master of Accomplishments! Instruct
me, dear Ladies, how to receive him.


Lady Basset. Seem in a Cabal, then burst out a laughing, and let fall some
misterious Words that tend toward Scandal.


Mrs. Rich. Good! ridiculous to the highest degree, that ever a Woman of her
Quality should make such a faux pas, the Town will ring on it: Oh, my Stars!
It Is something so odd, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Trickwell. Transportingly foolish! Yet it makes me laugh, ha, ha, ha, ha.


La Basset. Who can forbear, ha, ha, ha.

Enter Sir John. Pardon, Ladies, the interruption; may I participate; I dye to
laugh in consort with Women of your Wit and Merit.


Mrs. Rich. Oh fie! Sir John, it is a secret upon my word; we must be tender of
our own Sex; you are but too well acquainted with our weakness; Scandal of an
hour old is as much out of date with you, as a Gazette in the Afternoon to the
Sots that hunt foreign News.


Sir John. News! gad Madam, there is no such thing, there is nothing new under
the Sun; the World is a continual round of nauseous repetition; in the last
Generation, and this, young Girls were mad for Husbands, then mad to get rid of
'em; Sharpers, had their Cullies; Gamesters, their Fools; Physicians killed
their Patients, and were paid for it; Lawyers got Estates, and their Clients
were undone with Suing for 'em; Courtiers Promises, and Bullies Oaths, ever
made a great Noise, and signified nothing.


Mrs. Rich. Satirical, I vow! Why, you are in a mortifying way, Sir John.


Sir John. Indeed scarce sit to appear before your Ladyship: I have had a
Billet-doux from a Woman of Sixty, which has given me the Spleen to that
degree, I could our-rail a Hypocritical Fanatic.


Mrs. Rich. Sixty! Pleasant, I protest.


Sir John. She Is a walking Memento mori; I have suffered some time under the
persecution, and in bitterness and Gall, instead of Ink, have wrote a Stanza,
to show how awkardly an old Woman makes advances.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, dear Sir John, let us have it.


La Basset. We are all Petitioners.


Sir John. You shall Command me, Ladies.

SONG by Sir John.
DElia tired Strephon with her Flame,
While languishing she viewed him,
The well dressed Youth despised the Dame
But still old Puss pursued him.
Some pity on a Wretch bestow,
That lies at your Devotion:
Perhaps near Fifty Years ago,
Some might have liked the Motion.
No Heart like mine did ever burn,
I Am rich too, I Will assure you;
And I must tell you in return,
You're uglier than a Fury.
If you, proud Youth, my Flame despise,
I Will hang me in my Garters:
Why, then make have to win the Prize,
Among Love's foolish Martyrs.
Can you see Delia brought so low,
And make her no Requitals?
Delia may to the Devil go
For Strephon, stop my Vitals.
I Will be as Constant as a Dove,
And always we will be Billing:
No more damned Stories of your Love,
Your very Breath is killing.
These Eyes for you shall learn to shine,
That twinkle in their Sockets.
I Will never in a Cellar dine,
When I may go to Lockets.
What in my Charms and Youth I want,
I Will make it up in Duty.
Prithee leave off this foolish Cant,
I Will stoop to naught but Beauty.

After the Song Mrs. Trickwell to Mrs. Rich, aside. Mrs. Trickwell. Did you
observe how my Lady la Bassett Eyed Sir John?


Mrs. Rich. Yes, and am pleased with it: I would not have a Fellow pretend to
me, that all the Fine Women in Town are not fond of. Our Thanks in abundance,
it is wonderful pretty.


To Sir John. Sir John. Your Pardon, harsh, and untunable, like the Subject.


Enter Mrs. Betty. Betty speaking to Mrs. Rich aside. Mr. Rich will not be
answered, Madam, I had much ado to keep him out here.


Mrs. Rich. Ladies, let me beg you would take Sir John into the Drawing Room,
and entertain him a moment. A hideous Citizen will tease me about a little
Business, but I Will dispatch him in the third part of a Minute, and rejoyn the
Agreeable Conversation.


Sir John. We shall wait with Impatience, Madam.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Mr. Rich, meeting Mrs. Rich and Betty. Betty. There
he walks, Madam, he would stay in spite of me.


Mrs. Rich. Ah, Mr. Rich! What design brings you hither? Your Absence this Day
would have been very obliging; but since you are here, let us finish pray as
soon as you can. Well, what is the Business?


Mr. Rich. Hey-day! What Is this? Good Madam Rich, my Sister-in-Law, how
despisingly you talk? Hark ye, hark ye, this Behavior does not become ye; and
without telling you what relates to me, you will one Day repent of your
ridiculous way of living, and carriage.


Mrs. Rich. An Elbow-Chair, Betty, I foresee Mr. Rich intends to Talk me to
Sleep.


Mr. Rich. No, Madam, on the contrary; for were you in your right Senses, what
I have to say would most terribly keep you Awake.


Mrs. Rich. You strangely concern your self with my Conduct.


Mr. Rich. And who will concern himself, if I don't? You are my Daughters Aunt,
Widow of Paul Rich my Brother, and I will not have it said upon the Exchange,
That my Brother's Widow, and Daughters Aunt, is run stark Mad.


Mrs. Rich. How Mad! You lose all Respect, Mr. Rich; but I shall find a way to
get rid of you, that I may hear no more such Sottish Unmannerly Language, to
which I scorn to answer.


Mr. Rich. Oh! 'Slife, Madam Rich, you ought to get rid of all your Ridiculous
Airs of Quality and Greatness, that you may receive no more Affronts equal to
this Days.


Mrs. Rich. You ought not, Mr. Rich, to reproach me of that, where I am only
exposed, because I Am thought your Sister-in-Law; but there is an end of that,
Mr. Rich, I Will have it published in the Gazette, That since my Widowhood, I am
no more your Sister, and so I renounce you for my Brother-in-Law, Mr. Rich; and
since hitherto my Expenses, my Noble manner of living, and what I every Day
practice, could never correct the fault of having once been a Citizen's Wife. I
do now pretend --


Mr. Rich. Zooks, Madam Rich, it is the best part of your History, that Name of
Rich; and had it not been for the good Conduct of the poor Deceased, you had
not been in a Condition for so much Pomp and Greatness. I would fain know --


Mrs. Rich. Courage, Courage, Mr. Rich, you do well, talk on, talk on, it is
your last time.


Mr. Rich. I would fain know, let me tell you, if it would not be more decent
for you to have a good grave Coach, lined with an Olive-colour'd Cloth, a Lean
Coachman in a Dark-brown Coat, a little Modest Boy with short Hair to open the
Door, and a pair of gentle Geldings, than all this sumptuous Equipage, that
makes People inquire who you are; these modish prauncing Flanders, that dash
the Industrious People that walk; and all that useless Numerous Train, which
makes you despised by the People of Quality, envied by your Equals, and cursed
by the Mob: You ought, Mrs. Rich, to retrench all this Greatness and Folly with
which you are surrounded.


Betty. But, Sir -- What Is the matter with you, Madam?


[To Mrs. Rich, who Coughs and Spits. Mrs. Rich. I take Breath, Betty, Is not
Mr. Rich come to his second Point?


Mr. Rich. No, good Mrs. Rich, and I return still to the Equipage.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, the long-winded tiresome Man!


Mr. Rich. Among the rest, what do you do with that huge Bulky Coachman, with his
Curling Whiskers like a Dutch Mastiff's Tail? 'Zbud he looks as if he belonged
to the Czar of Muscovy.


Betty. But, Sir, would you have my Lady turn Barber, and shave her Coachman?


Mr. Rich. No, but she may turn him away, and take another.


Mrs. Rich. Well, Sir, one Word's as good as a thousand, I pretend to live as I
please, and will have none of your Council; I laugh at you and all your
Reproofs; I am a widow, and depend on no Body but my self. You come here and
control me, as if you had an absolute Authority over me. Oh, my Stars! What
rudeness are you guilty of? But it is your City breeding.


Mr. Rich. Still abusing the City, it is a shame, Mrs. Rich, a burning shame. I
tell thee, thou proud vain thing, thou gilt Ginger-Bread; the City is famous
for Men substantial in their Persons, their Purses, their Credits, when your
Limberham'd, this end of the Town Beaux, are the half product of Nature,
wretchedly piec'd up by Art, weak in their Bodies, their Brains, their every
thing; and Udsbones! They have no more Credit, than they have Religion; whilst
as I said before the City is famous for --


Mrs. Rich. Cuckolds: Good Mr. Rich take my Advice, and take breath; you have
outdone one of our Holders-forth, upon my word ye have.


Mr. Rich. [Mimiking her.] Upon my word ye have; What an Affected Tone's there?
Gadzooks my Brother Rich was a Fool.


Mrs. Rich. That Is no wonder; most Citizens are.


Mr. Rich. Yes, to their Wives, ungrateful Cockatrice; and he Blind --
Credulous Man, to pretend to leave my Daughter a Fortune to your Management,
forsooth: Gadzooks, I had rather he had left her never a Groat.


Mrs. Rich. So had I; there we agree once, put it down, Betty, for a Miracle.
Oh! Is it done? Have ye said all? Will you go out of my House, or must I go?
Upon my word I have Company waits for me, that are a thousand and a thousand
times more engaging; Will ye believe me, or no, Mr. Rich?


Mr. Rich. What Company? Fools, I warrant 'em.


Mrs. Rich. He must be convinced: Perhaps, Betty, that will drive him hence,
open the Door.


Scene draws and discovers Sir John, Lady Bassett, Mrs. Trickwell, and Vermin a
Footman. Mrs. Rich continues. Oh! I am just suffocated with Impertinence,
expiring under the heavy load of Nonsense: Dear Lady Basset revenge me,
redicule that lump of the City till he Frets himself into shape; I Will introduce
ye: Look ye, Sir, this is the Honorable Lady Basset, this is the Ingenious
Mrs. Trickwell; the Gentleman I leave to speak for himself.


Sir John. I am, Sir.


Mr. Rich (roughly.) And what are you, Sir?


Sir John. Why, your humble Servant, Sir, that is all, Sir.


Lady Bassett. I vow he nods like the Statue in Don John, ha, ha, he he.


Mrs. Trickwell. And looks like --


Mrs. Rich. A Citizen, and that is rediculous enough of all Conscience, he, he.


Mr. Rich. (Mimiking.) Good lack, he, he, he: Gadzooks you are a parcel of
Tawdry Insignificant Butterflies; if ye provoke me, I Will draw your Pictures
with a vengeance.


Sir John. Dawley has done mine at length already, much more to my
satisfaction; it hangs as Court in a Dutchesses Bedchamber, Citt.


Mr. Rich. The Devil it does? the Mop that cleans it set upright, and good
Drapery, would be a better Figure.


Lady Bassett. Filthy Simile.


Mrs. Trickwell. Why, m' Amie, this is the Reverse of Sir Courtly; a second
Surly, I protest.


Mr. Rich. Thou wretched Woman, whom I justly shame to call Sister, these are
things that live on thee, prey on thy very substance, and have no more Worth,
or real Quality than the Ornament of Pageants: Look, here is the Equipage of
one, those lank Cheeks are to be filled out at thy Table; (pulls Vermin
forward) and thy Pocket ^ook'd at Games thou do not understand, for Rigging.


Lady Bassett. Now out upon ye; stand back Vermin; see if the ill-natured Man
has not quite dashed the Boy? It Is the filthy Taylor's fault.


Mr. Rich. What, he will Trust no longer.


Sir John. Fie, Mr. Rich, this is prodigiously abusive, upon my Honor; I
presume you have never been at the Court.


Mr. Rich. Nor you at the Camp, which now is the only way to make a perfect
Courtier: I tell thee, Fop, if thou art known there, it is only for thy Folly;
thy Reputation lies in ruining others, which thou do infallibly, by being
once in their Company; and thy chiefest accomplishment is taking Snuff with a
Bell Air, Patching, Painting, Powdering like a Woman, and squeaking like an
Eunuch, Gadzooks.


Sir John. Sir.


Mr. Rich. Look ye, if you are offended, or think the Ladies so, as much a
Citizen as I am, I wear a Sword, and follow me ye Caper-cutter if ye dare.


Sir John. Some Colonel of the Train-bands, I warrant; I Will not disorder my
Dress. I am weary of this fulsome stuff; to the Park my Angels, and let us
breath a little.


All. Ay, ay, to the Park, to the Park.


Mrs. Rich. Withal my heart to the Park: Lacquies, is my Coach there? But my
House is at your Service: Cool your self sweet Sir John, whilst we laugh at
this Adventure; shall we not Lady Bassett?


L. Bassett. I cannot help it.


Sir John. Nor I upon my Honor.


[Exeunt. Laughing. [Manent Mr. Rich and Betty. Mr. Rich. Why what the Devil's
here to do, Betty?


Betty. My Mistress is run stark staring Mad, but I humor her Distraction till
we can find a way to cure it.


Mr. Rich. Prithee let us in and consult; I placed thee here for that purpose,
and trust in thee.


Betty. I will ever prove faithful, Sir.


Mr. Rich. Two powerful Fiends, Lust and Ambition reign
In this Rich, Buxom Widows sickly Brain;
To lay them both, a Husband must be had,
Beauxish and Young, with sounding Titles clad;
But that shall be your Care and mine, 'ygad.

ACT III.
Enter Mrs. Clerimont and Belvoir. Mrs. Clerim. THis is strange News you tell
me of my Cousin; I heard indeed the Unhappy Accident of his Father's Sudden
Death, but thought he had been still in the Country.


Belvoir. No, he lives in Town retired, shuns all his Acquaintance; his Noble
Mind surmounts his Fortunes, and he disdains to be obliged; it affects me
strongly, for I loved him with such a Passion; loved him, that I thought till I
beheld your Beauteous self, it could never have been exceeded.


Mrs. Clerimont. When I reflect how cold our present Friendships are, I needs
must own it is nobly Generous in you to seek and serve him in this Distress; nor
shall my Assistance any way be wanting, let us but find the means.


Belvoir. First we must endeavor to see him, reconcile him to the World, and
try to cure his Melancholy.


Enter Lucinda. Lucinda. Madam, there is a Gentleman below who says his Name is
Clerimont.


Belvoir. Clerimont!


Lucinda. He seems of some far Country by his Dress and Attendance.


Mrs. Clerimont. On my Life the Elder Brother: This may prove lucky, bring him
up: Come, Sir, we will have some contrivance how to make the Younger easy.


Belvoir. Such Goodness and Ingenuity as yours cannot fail, when it is employed
for Merit.


Enter the Elder Clerimont and Lucetta, followed by Toby leading two Hounds
coupled. Cler. [Speaks entering.] Nay, Sweetheart, dant fear your Rooms, my
Dogs have been in Ladies Chambers before now, my Lady Mother would let 'em lie
on her Bed rather than cross me: Love me, love my Dog, as the Saying is* Come
along Toby.


Mrs. Cler. What a Scene is here!


Belvoie. Exactly as Jack described him.


Elder Mr. Clerimont. Servant Couz: Do ye see I am come to Lounnon: he it is no
matter for Ceremony; I ha just now been bussing Jewel, might-hap you dant care
to be kissed after the Dog.


Mrs. Cler. You are in the right on it, it is not material.


Elder Cler. I have a free way, Couz, you must excuse me.


Mr. Cler. Oh, you are very welcome.


Elder Cler. No for matter o'that I shant trouble you, I shall lie in my Inn.
Here Is Toby, my Huntsman, he would a main mind to see Lounnon, so I did it to
please the Booby; ha Toby.


Toby. Ne, ne Master, dant; lay it awl upon me; an any bad chance should
happen, you were as forward as I, else we'd never a come; you are a little too
stubborn, by the Mess.


Belvoir. Well said Toby; Toby has a free way too, I perceive, Sir.


Elder Cler. Yes marry I allow it him: He is a rare Huntsman. Show thy parts
Toby, hallow, hallow, Toby.


Toby. Holla, holla, holla, etc.


Mrs. Cler. Oh! it is mighty well. But, good Cousin, it goes quite through my head.


Elder Cler. Might hap so, you are used not to it. Ha boys! He Will make the
Woods ring y-faith.


Belvoir. It Is much better there, I believe.


Elder Cler. Good Lord! it offends your tender Ears, does it? I warrant you are
one of the Zilken Sparks a rough-Wind would blow to pieces. Pardon me Couz, I
must be merry.


Mrs. Cler. O! the Gentleman will take nothing ill from a Relation of mine.


Elder Cler. Midhap he is your Husband, or midhap he is your Sweetheart, for
he creeps main close to ye.


Belvoir. I am the humblest of the Lady's Servants.


Elder Cler. Oh ho! her humble Servant, that is all one; in our Country they
call 'um Sweet-hearts, or Suitors; it is e'n all one.


Mrs. Cler. Pray Cousin, give me leave to ask you if you are married yet, or
not.


Elder Cler. No, by my tackings, I ha e'n more Wit than that comes to; I
learned so much by my Dogs.


Mrs. Cler. By your Dogs?


Elder Cler. Aye, by my Dogs: See this Couple now how they lear, how spitefully
they look at one another. I tell thee Couz, this is Jewel, and this is Beauty;
the Bitch is Beauty, do ye mark me; Couz* there was not two Dogs in the whole
Pack loved like these two, they played together like two Kittens; nay, for all
they are Hounds, one would not eat without the other, and now they are joined
their hate is the same; one snarls, the other bites, one pulls this way, the other
that; Gadzooks! they would either venture hanging to be parted; therefore no
coupling for me, I say, ha, ha, ha, ha, Couz.


Mrs. Cler. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Toby. Nay, by the Mess this is true, Master has spoken all at once; Master's a
shroud Man, foth and troth.


Elder Cler. Well, but Couz, I come to Lounon a purpose to see Sports we have not
in the Country, and to spend my money, de ye see.


Mrs. Cler. What Diversions are you for?


Elder Cler. Why look ye, I Would vain see a good Bear-baiting, and I Would see the
Tigre, Ah! that is a parlous Beast; we will see the Tigre, shall not we Toby?


Toby. Aye Udslid, though I shall be a little avraid.


Belvoir. You would not have the Lady carry you to those Places, I hope?


Elder Cler. Aye, why not, Sir? They Will see I Am a Country Man, and that wan't
disgrace her, besides I have Four thousand pounds a Year, for all I wear my own
hair, Monsieur Perriwig.


Belvoir. The more's the pity.


Mrs. Cler. Peace, Mr. Belvoir, we shall lose our design else. Cousin, it is
impossible for me to go to the Bear-Garden; if you will oblige me, you shall spend
this day with me, and participate of the pleasures I take, to morrow some
fitter Companion shall show you what you like better.


Elder Cler. A match! I dan't pass upon it, if I do throw away a day with you.


Mrs. Cler. We Will first to the Park; and then in the Afternoon to the Play.


Toby. Ay, d'ye', Master, do ye; Udslid, I ha longed to zee a Play, ever since
I zaw the Poppet-shew at our Vare.


Elder Cler. Come, my poor Dogs! Evads, Coz. you will scarce think it, I Would as
lieve kiss this poor Creature, as ever a Lady in Christendom -- I Am sure her
Breath's as sweet; they will not like London; we must hasten down again, Toby.


Toby. Ay, Master; when we have zeen a little; here is rare vine Voke!


Mrs. Cler. Lead, Mr. Belvoir.


Belvoir. We shall be the Sport of the Park.


Mrs. Cler. No matter; my Cousin shall Gallant me.


Elder Cler. Come on, in faith! Follow, Toby!


Scene the Park. Enter Lady Landsworth and Mrs. Betty. L. Lands. He refused it,
my best Confidante! Nobly despised the shining Gold! By all my amorous Stars,
he has bravely won my Heart! Panting and warm I feel him there! Oh! the dear
God of my desire.


Betty. In Raptures, nay, then you are lost indeed! Ha! here comes my Lady, and
her worthy Train!


Enter Mrs. Rich, Sir John, etc. Mrs. Rich. My Lady Landsworth! Let us only
make our Honors en passent -- Mon Dieu! I did not think it had been in her -- I
protest to a Miracle!


[ Mrs. Rich Courtsey's to L. Landsworth, with ridiculous Airs. L. Landsworth
mimicks her. Sir John. Shall we not Address?


Mrs. Rich. No, no, no, no. Away to the Mall.


Sir John. Ah me!


[Looking amorously on L. Landsworth. L. Lands. There Is a Foil to my Hero! What
a languishing Air the Fop put on! When such Stuff as that enters into my
Thoughts, I shall turn Girl again, and play with Babies.


Mrs. Bett. See! Who walks there in Mourning!


L. Lands. Bless me! You made me start: It Is he! Yes; that is the shape, where
manly Majesty's Triumphant! Who would not be in love with Sorrow, when they see
it in that Face: Who would not long to remove the Cause; and dress it up in
charming Smiles: Forgive me, Virtue! Forgive, me Love, if I a little farther
make the Trial -- Now to disguise my Face and Heart --


[Clasps on her Mask, and walks carelessly off.] Enter Clerimont and Jack. Jack.
Do ye think ye shall know her, Sir?


Cler. Know her! It Is impossible to mistake! Gay, as the gaudy Sun, or distant
flowery Fields! She moves like Air, and throws her Charms around; But, be not
caught my Soul! She is, what I would still abhor -- a Name, would blacken her
Lilly'd Bosom, and wither all the Roses that spread that face of Beauty!


Jack. But, Sir! If she has a World of Money, Sir, --


Cler. Peace, Fool!


Jack. I have done, Sir! But abundance of Money covers a multitude of Faults --
That Is all, Sir!


Cler. Blockhead! -- Why so fast, fair Lady? At this rate, by that time a Man
has over-taken ye, he will have lost the Breath he should employ, in saying fine
things -- Will ye not stay?


L. Lands. Not stay! Yes, stay an Age; fixed never to remove: An everlasting
Monument of Love. I know you dote upon Heroique: I have been Reading three
whining Plays this morning, that I may Love in your strain.


Cler. For Heaven's sake, tell me truly, what thou art; for, sure, there is
something in thee I so love and hate, that, were my Fortune kind, I shall never
be happy more.


L. Lands. I Will tell ye, with a truth equal to the freedom I use; (for sincerity
is all the Virtue I pretend to.) It was my first Fate to be kept by an
Alderman, but he was formal, stiff, and too suspicious for my humor; so I fled
from him into the Arms of a brisk, airy, young Colonel; then the Days were
spent in Revels. When he went to Flanders, I Campaign'd it too; but, ah! as I
had dressed my fluttering Hero up, like any Bridegroom, a saucy Bullet came and
spoiled the work of Tailers, Milleners, and fifty Trades besides: Down dropped
the Beau.


Cler. You speak this without any Concern.


L. Lands. Alas! grieving for the Dead would spoil us for the Living. Now,
I Am a Perquisite of a Country Gentleman; a Man of Gravity, and one of the
pious Senators; a great Stickler against Wenching and Profaneness. He allows
me Wealth enough, and Liberty enough. Besides him, I have two or three
Interlopers, each fancying himself my Particular, when, for my part, I care nor
a straw for any of 'em. But, ah! amongst my numerous Lovers, I know not how,
Myrtillo has crept too near my Heart; -- That Is meaning you, Sir.


Cler. The Relation freezes up my Youthful Blood, and checks Desire with
horror! Does none tell thee what a Wretch thou art?


L. Lands. None. They call me Goddess, Angel, and court me with unbated Fires;
the first, the very earliest Product of the Year, Dainties sit for Queen's
Tables, still load the Board; far fetched Wines, such as unbend the Soul from
Cares, and lock up every Thought that would disturb us; -- yet amidst this
flowing plenty; amidst this Crowd of Flatterers, my awkward Fancy sickens at
their offered Loves; loathes their soft Indearments, and builds its sole
happiness in manly roughness like Yours.


Cler. Thou art one of Nature's Favorites; formed when she was gay, and decked
in her own Smiles; yet me you cannot charm; there is a Rustic, out of
fashion-grace, a modest Innocence, which only takes my Soul; nor can I value
Favors, that may be bought with any other Price than Love.


L. Lands. [Aside] He speaks, as my own Heart had Coined the Words: I would not
be too Credulous: Believe me, Sir, I am not used to Woo, or be Refused; but, I
perceive when once we Love, we quit our Pride; I can bear Reproof from you; and
rather than not see ye; see you still to chide me.


Cler. No. I must fly, if I Would be safe; I cannot boast a Virtue Stoiceal
enough, to behold you with Indifference; those Eyes were made to Conquer! Oh
pity, that they scatter Contagion only! I could crawl low as the Earth to touch
that beauteous hand; but when I reflect, a senseless Fop, for some vain Present,
may riffle all those Sweets; then, I could eat my Lips, ever join 'em to
Infection -- Farewell.


L. Lands. Stay but some Moments longer; I have a few things more to offer;
hear 'em; perhaps I never may trouble you again.


Cler. I shall be Fooled at last; believe her Love; trust her, and be undone!
-- What would ye say?


L. Lands. Come this way, lest we are observed.


[They walk backward. ( Jack and Betty come forward.) Jack. Is thy Lady so
plaguey Rich, say thou Damsel?


Betty. Rich! Why she values a Hundred Pounds, no more than I do a Brass
Farthing -- She makes nothing to present a Man, she likes, with a Coach and Six
-- and your Master here, with his puling Modesty, will stand preaching Morals,
till he has balked her Fancy, and then 'twill be in vain to cry peccavi; for
she, like Opportunity, when once she turns her back, leaves no grasping hold.


Jack. Hark ye, my Dear, can ye keep a Secret.


Betty. As well as any of my Sex; according as the Nature of the Secret is; if
'twill make no mischief; take away no Body's Fame: In short, if 'twill do
rather Good than Harm to divulge it; ten to one but it goes no farther for me.


Jack. Well, that is ingenious; and I Will trust thee. This Master of Mine is the
veriest Libertine the whole Town affords; has tired Vice in every one of her
shapes; and now, fortsooth, for variety, turns Hypocrite, that he may find
their pleasures out.


Betty. Ha! is it possible?


Jack. True, upon my honor; though he would kill me should he know I discovered it;
and deny all, with a Face as grave as a Phanatick -- Oh! He Is a rare Mimick.


Betty. But, how shall my Lady be convinced he is such a Rake, if he will deny't?


Jack. Our Landlady sells China, bring her thither; my Master will never know:
She Will tell you as much -- (Aside.) I can make my Landlady say what I will. --
Well Jack -- thy Brain shall still secure this Cargo.


Betty. If she thinks it worth her while to inquire, I Will tell her -- Look they
are Parting.


Jack. Udso, so they are indeed -- I must after; ply him, my Dear, and I Will ply
thee.


[ Exeunt Clerimont and Jack. L. Lands. Oh my dear Betty! how shall I express
my Joys! Sure, such a Man no Age produced before! He Is the Phaenix of his Kind!


Betty. I wish he prove so.


L. Lands. Why?


Betty. Hush! here comes Mrs. Clerimont, you have so often sent to.


L. Lands. Ha! dear Betty, tell her who I am. -- Now for an Air of Gravity, and
quite another humor, than what I have shown to her Namesake, lest they should
find me out by description.


Enter Elder Clerimont, Belvoir, and Mrs. Clerimont. Mrs. Cler. -- is it?
Cousin, your most Humble [Betty whispers Mrs. Clerimont.] Servant -- I ask your
pardon a thousand times, for my neglect to wait on you. I have designed it
every Day; but --


L. Land. No Excuse, good Madam; Ladies in this Town have too much Business on
their hands, to throw an hour upon a Thing so insignificant, as a Country
Relation; one so remote too, that only claims that Honor by Marriage.


Mrs. Cler. Nay Madam --


L. Land. Besides, had you given your self the trouble, 'twou'd have been but
one, I am sure; for my Conversation is only praises of the Country; raving at
every diversion here, because I understand it not; my discourse leaping
perpetually into Yorkshire, and talking for ever of my Turkies, my Dairy, and
so forth.


Betty. [aside] Hey! What Maggot's this? -- then am I the most deceived in the
appearance of a Woman, that ever I was in my Life.


Eld. Cler. A Shroud Gentlewoman this! I like her mainly: pray Mrs. what made
you come to London then?


L. Land. Truly, Sir, 'twas business, Moneys left in Banker's hands, by my Dear
Husband Deceased -- Oh!


Eld. Cler. Good Soul! she Weeps! so Young, and Weep for a Dead Husband? Good
Soul!


Mrs. Cler. Melancholy Suits ill with such Charming Youth: Cousin, you have
been Unfortunately by your Affairs driven into a House, the Rendezvous of Fops,
and senseless Cocquets, who have entertained you with pleasures so insipid,
they have given you a disgust to those more refined, that will reconcile you to
the Pretty Epitome of our English World the Town.


Eld. Cler. Marry gap! dan't spoil the Genltewoman, Coz, Mahaps she likes the
Country best, why so do I; no offense, I hope Coz.


Bell. We must not suffer so fair an Enemy. The Playhouse, Hide-Park, every
thing shall contribute to force a kinder Opinion from you.


L. Lands. I have seen it all, and despise it: At the Theater, am tired with
the double Acted Farce on the Stage, and in the side Boxes; the Noisy Nonsense
of the Pit; the Impudence of the Orange Women renders the whole Entertainment
to me, a disagreeable Medley: Then, for Hide-Park, that is Madness in
perfection; and the poor Lunatic that runs an eternal Circle in his Bedlam
Apartment, has, in my Judgment, equal Pleasure.


Mrs. Cler. Oh fie, my Lady Landsworth, this cannot be your real thoughts.


L. Lands. To a Tittle, I assure ye.


Eld. Cler. I fackings, the young Woman speaks rarely: why Toby, she has run
down the Lonnoners -- Toby! a Lard! where is Toby and the Two Dogs? So ho, so
ho!


Mrs. Cler. Peace, good Cousin; I believe they are at the Park-Gate.


Eld. Cler. O my Man? my Dogs? where are they? I shall run Mad! So ho, Toby!


L. Lands. Mrs. Betty, let us steal off; I think I have dissembled enough for
one Day.


Betty. And I hear you have been met with too -- I follow Madam.


[ Exeunt. L. Landsworth and Bety. Elder Cler. Why Toby! I say Toby! Speak to
thy nown Master, Toby!


Bell. Come, Sir; we shall find 'em out.


Elder Cler. Ah never, I fear: Toby, Toby!


Enter Toby, with his Head broke. Toby. What ails ye to Baul so? Do You zee how I
have been served! I went to come in with my Hounds, and an ugly Fellow in Red
knocked me down, and took the poor Curs from me.


Eld. Cler. Ay ye Coward! where was the Quarter-staff?


Toby. Why, he had a Sword; zee how my Head's broke.


Eld. Cler. I had rather thy Neck were broke than my Dogs lost.


Toby. Zome wiser than some: Zo had not I -- goa out yonder, and ha'um again for
a Tester.


Eld. Cler. Go then! Farewal, Cos, You never bring me hither again I'se warrant.


[ Exeunt Eld. Cler. and Toby. Mrs. Cler. Let Us after, we must not part thus;
and as we go, I Will tell ye my Opinion of my Lady Landsworth.


Betty. I confess she is past my apprehension.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir John Roverhead and Chris. Sir John. With much ado, I have
broke from the Widow; I appointed to meet here the prettiest Rose-bud; if her
Fortune equals the Widow, she secures me.


Chris. Ah Sir! I wish the common Fortune-Hunter's Fate be not yours, to take
the worst at last.


Sir John. Fool! that Genius that raised me to this, will, no doubt, preserve
me conspicuous; the Ornament of the Town, and Idol of the Ladies. You must know
Dunce, I love the Young Creature, I am to meet now; and I Would Marry the Widow.


Chris. Why then I should think you liked her.


Sir John. Incorrigible Sot! I hate her as the Devil -- but has she not Five
Thousand a Year? let that, for ever, stop thy Mouth.


Chris. Then it is the Five Thousand a Year you would Marry -- I have done, Sir, I
have done.


Sir John. She comes; remember I am the Lord -- the Title will strike an awe
into her, and make her refuse me Nothing.


Enter Lucinda, and Governess. Luc. But do you think he will come, Governess?


Gov. I hope his Lordship will.


Luc. His Lordship! that sounds purely: I vow my Aunt will Love me, when I am a
great Lady -- look -- here he is Governess -- Oh Gemini! it is a dear Man.


Sir John. My little Angel! this was kind! the place appeared Gloomy as Shades
beneath, till your bright Eyes, exceeding the Stars, created a double Day.


Luc. O la! What fine Words he has! Sir -- My Lord I mean -- I am a foolish
Girl, and know not how to answer, but I am Young, and not unapt to learn.


Gov. Nay, I Will say that for Miss -- she was ever as forward as the best of 'em.


Sir John. Pretty Innocence! She shall not want Instructions Modeled by me,
the World will own her perfect.


Gov. And truly, my Lord, she has enough to pay her Teacher.


Sir John. Hold, hold! Name not Wealth; it is a Dross I despise,


Luc. Fie, Governess! Do you think his Lordship Values Money?


Sir John. Not I, upon my Honor.

(Aside to) Chris. Get it out of the Old One, what she is worth; lest it prove
not worth my while to follow her any longer.


Chris. Yes, Sir, yes.


Lucind. Now, my Lord, the reason why I have a mind to be Married, is, because
I may have a little more freedom. I never go any where now, but that Old
Woman's at my heels; and I have heard 'em say, Wives go where they will and do
what they will.


Sir John. So shall thou, my dear Miss -- [Aside.] Marry, quotha; more Words
than One to that Bargain.


Luc. But when will you meet me here again then, and Run away with me? For I was
told, I should be Run away with: They say, most Fortunes are.


Chris. to Sir John. Sir -- Twenty Thousand Pounds, when she is at Age.


Sir John. (Aside) Very well! Gad I Will Marry her; by that time, I shall have
spent it; broke her Heart; and be ready for another -- My dear Blossom, how
happy am I to have gained your Affections! Though it is no wonder; for the
Universality of Women dye for me.


Luc. For my part, you spoke to me, for that I like ye; else, truly Mr. --
(pish, my Lord --) I see as fine things walk here, as you.


Sir John. Oh fie!


Chris. This is true Nature, a Baby indeed; she has not yet learnt to Dissemble.


Sir John. Can ye get out in a Morning, my Dear?


Luc. Yes, any time; I am left wholly to my Governess, and you won her heart,
the other Morning with some Sack; promise her some more, and she will bring me, I
warrant.


Sir John. There Is that will buy Sack: Will ye bring Miss to Morrow, by
Five-a-Clock?


Gov. Yes, yes, she shall wait on your Honor, no Body minds us* at Home: But
we will serve them a Trick.


Chris. Sir, Sir, Mrs. Rich, and the Company you left, are just coming into
this Walk.


Sir John. My Dear, Dear, farewell! -- One of my Relations, that I dare not see
-- Farewell this Instant -- keep these Verses to remember me; and to Morrow --


Luc. Oh Gemini! If I forget, I Will be hanged -- I shall not sleep all Night for
thinking on it. Good b' ye' -- Is he not a pure Man, Nurse?


[ Exeunt Sir John and Chris. Gov. Ay, marry is he -- they shall not think to
thrust us up in a Garret; we will have Money, and good things, as well as your
proud Aunt, and her Folks.


Luc. Oh la; Mum! here is my Aunt and all they upon our Backs; what shall we say
now.


Enter Mrs. Rich, Lady la Basset, and Mrs. Trickwel. Mrs. Rich. This was
furiously odd; to desert us only with the Whim to show us Airs in Bowing, when
we meet.


Luc. Oh la! [furiously] there is a hard Word! I Will learn my Aunt's Words that I
may appear agreeable to my Lord -- furiously -- remember, Governess!


Mrs. Rich. Mrs. Tickwel, I am sick of the Park; here is neither the Beaux nor
the Bellemond. Really when Sir John's gone we search in Vain for Gallantry or a
good appearance.


La Bass. I wonder how he durst quit the place, when I was here.


Mr. Rich. You!


Mrs. Trick. Upon my Life, Madam, the Ladies are all Mad for this miracle of a
Knight: I wish your Ladyship had him fixed in the Matrimonial Noose, that the
rest may burst with Envy.


Mrs. Rich. Fear not Mrs. Trickwel, I have him with a double Chain; Love and
Interest -- ha! This Impertinent Girl here!


Lucind. Pray don't be angry, Aunt.


Mrs. Rich. In the first place, leave off that word Aunt; and make use of
Madam: Or, stay at home with your Father.


Lucin. But Aunt, since you are my Aunt, Why may I not call you Aunt?


Mrs. Rich. Why, I being a Woman of Quality, and you but a Citizen's Daughter,
I cannot, in decency, be your Aunt, without degrading my self in some measure.


Luc. Oh, good Aunt, let not that concern you, For I shall be a Woman of
Quality too in a little time.


Mrs. Rich. What says the Girl?


Lucin. It Is in my power to be as great a Lady as you, Aunt, at least.


Mrs. Rich. Child!


Lucin. I am acquainted with a Lord; the handsomest. and most obliging in the
World. I have met him several times in the Park; and he will Marry me when I
please -- therefore never trouble your self, Aunt, about my Quality.


Mrs. Rich. And what is this Lord's Name?


Luc. They call him my Lord Fourbind; he is very Rich, and of great Quality, for
he told me so.


Mrs. Rich. Truly, Niece, I am very well pleased, that, notwithstanding the
mean Education your Father bestowed on you, you have thoughts worthy the honor
I do you, of suffering you to be my Niece; and you are obliged to me, and my
Conversation for this.


Luc. I have another Obligation to desire, Aunt.


Mrs. Rich. What is that?


Luc. To Marry as soon as it is possible, if you please Aunt, the Gentleman you
Love, that it may Countenance my Marriage with him I Love; that when my Father
would chide me, I may answer him, I have not done worse than my Aunt.


Mrs. Trick. You Are in the Right -- what a terrible thing is Example!

(Aside.
Lucin. But my Aunt must make what have she can; my Lord Fourbind, my Lover, is
most furiously impatient.


Mrs* Rich. Ah! Mrs. Trickwel! Now can I be revenged of Mr. Rich! His Daughter
is in Love with a Courtier, and a Courtier with her; and she is Distracted to be
Married to him -- if the Father and Mother would but dye with Vexation, I
should be rid of troublesome Creatures.


Mrs. Trick. But, Madam, are you resolved to assist your Niece in her Design;


Mrs. Rich. Certainly. And I would not for a Thousand Pound, lose this
excellent occasion of sending Mr. Rich. to Bedlam.


Mrs. Trick. That is very charitable, truly.


Mrs. Rich. Come Ladies; let us home to Dinner; this News has pleased me.

My Niece, and I, will the Example lead,
Teach City-Dames the way to mend their Breed,
Choose for our selves; let our dull Parents pray;
Devoutly Cheat; each others Lives betray:
And whilst they Drudge, we will briskly throw away.

ACT IV.
Enter Younger Clerimont. Cler. WHat a Wretch am I! Forsook by Fate; abandoned
to Want and Misery; my Soul denied to use her Faculty; no generous Power to to
help the Afflicted; and, as if this were not enough, my Virtue too, the last
Stake that I could boast of, is going! I love this vicious Creature, in spite
of all her Crimes. Her Charms have won my Heart. Begone, thou ^oft Intruder;
thou effeminate Passion, only sit for lazy Minds. Have I not Wracks without
thee, to keep me waking? God's Death! What a Dog I am! Going to be kept by a vile
Prostitute! her Drudge; unkennell'd for a Fop, Lord, or some wealthy Fool; sent
to my Post of Watching! Confusion! I Will not endure it!


(Walks about Distracted.) Enter Belvoir, Mrs. Clerimont and Jack. Jack. There
he is; I must not be seen.


Bell. My dearest Friend! my Clerimont! What have I done to merit this
Unkindness? Why do thou shun those Friends, who fondly Love thee? This Lady,
your Relation, begs to Serve ye.


Cler. Alas! I am Infectious! The detested Plague Poverty's upon me! The meagre
Fiend approaches fast, with her Attendants, Starving and Rags! She Will render me
so odious, I shall fly, if possible, my self!


Mrs. Cler. Better Fortune waits to Crown your Virtues; believe me, Cousin, it
does: Your Brother's in Town; at my House; send to him.


Cler. What, to be Answered as I was last: If I would be his Bailiff, I might
eat: Curses, I Would sooner feed on my own Flesh! Sue to him, who never knew
Humanity!


Bell. Well; grant him a Churl; there are a thousand Ways besides to advance
your Fortune.


Cler. None, but such as I despise.


Mrs. Cler. Allow me one Request; give me your Company this day, and submit to
my Contrivance; I have Thoughts at work, that may produce your future peace.


Bell. My Friend, I am sure, used to have more Complaisance, than to deny a Lady.


Cler. I am at your dispose; but remember, Madam, nothing shall tempt me for
Bread to do an ill thing.


Mrs. Cler. Nor would I offer it.


Bell. Come with us then; and shake off these melancholy Looks.


Cler. Impossible! -- Jack:


Jack. Sir?


Cler. Stay you at home; and, d'ye'hear -- if any Messages come.


[Whispers. Jack. I shall, Sir.


Mrs. Cler. Come, Sir, uncloud that Brow; we will not leave you in Despair* though
we found you so.


Cler. Your kindness comes too late:

For if ye could the weight of Fate remove:
I Am Dashed again; and Cursed with guilty Love.

Execunt. Jack. Landlady! Landlady!


Enter Mrs. Fidget. Mrs. Fidg. Why, how now Impudence! Do You think you are in an
Alehouse?


Jack. I humbly beg your pardon, Sweet Madam Fidget.


Mrs. Fidget. Well, it is your Ignorance, I excuse it: What Humour's your
hopeful Master in now?


Jack. O these were his Relations, I hope all will be amended: But, Landlady*
humph, Madam, there is a Plot you and I must carry on for his good.


Mrs. Fidget. With all my heart, I love a Plot extremely, I was ever good at
Plotting: But, dear Brother Plotter, let us do nothing rashly.


Jack. What, a Glass of Sack first; ye shall have it, ye shall have it.


Mrs. Fidget. Truly, it helps Invention.


Jack. Come here is prosperity to our honest Endeavors.


Mrs. Fidget. With all my Spirit.


Jack. 'Tother Glass to the Success.


Mrs. Fidget. Agreed; now let me know it.


Jack. There Is a Lady in Love with my Master.


Mrs. Fidget. What, she that called in the Coach?


Jack. The same.


Mrs. Fidget. By my troth! a lovely Woman; that there may come no worse news to
England; fill my Glass, Sirrah.


Jack. Now this Lady is not a Whore, nor a Married Woman, nor a Widow, nor a
Maid --


Mrs. Fidget. I understand ye.


Jack. Do You, faith; why, what is she, say you?


Mrs. Fidget. A kept Mistress, fool.


Jack. Right, egad; well, these Londoners are plaguey sharp, we should never
have guessed in the Country: This Damsel is worth Thousands, and she would fain
throw away some upon my Master: he, modest Fool, (begging his pardon) he will
none on it, forsooth. So I, being cunning, have found out her Humor by her
Appurtenance, her Waiting Gentlewoman, and Lied my Master into her good Graces;
told her he was a mere Debauche; she partly believed me, but comes to you to be
confirmed; if you can lie, Landlady.


Mrs. Fidget. Mistrust me not, Jack, I warrrnt ye; but if he will not stand to it,
what signifies our Promises.


Jack. Oh, 'twill create a longer Acquaintance, and truly I Will get some Money
out of her, if he will not; we must not perish; nor will I forsake him.


Mrs. Fidget. Well, I Will do my best in an honest way.


Jack. Hark, a Coach stops, bring 'em up to show your China, and I Will be there
to confirm what you say.


Mrs. Fidget. I run.

(Exit Mrs. Fidget.)
Jack. It Is a delicate Age, by Gingo, when the Rake is the fine Gentleman; and
the fine Gentleman is the Lady's Favorite, egad. Mum, she comes.


Re-enter Mrs. Fidget, with Lady Landsworth and Mrs. Betty. L. Lands. Where
do you Lead me, Madam.


Mrs. Fidget. O, I always keep my best China in my Chambers.


L. Lands. This looks like a Gentleman's Lodging.


Mrs. Fidget. It Is so, but he is very rarely in 'em; he lay Abroad last night,
and sent word he should not be at home till Twelve this night. I have a sad
hand with him; here is his Man at home, if any of your Misses should send to
him; he has forty Ladies, I think, after him. I must give him Warning, my House
will be Scandalous else; though it is a good natured Wretch, and can look as
demure, I warrant, when a body chides him as any Saint; nay, to some he will
carry himself like one too.


L. Lands. (Aside to* Betty.) O horrid, let us be gone, my Ears are blasted!


Betty. I could have told you as much, but durst not; you seemed to be well
assured.


L. Lands. Dissembling Wretch! yet I will see him once again, then in my own
freedom be safe, innocent, and far from this bewitching Town, pass my days
serenely; nor think of false Mankind, nor trust; and therefore be deceived no
more. ( to Jack.) Well, then there is no probability of seeing your hopeful
Master to day.


Jack. Yes, Yes Madam, I can find him in a minute, when the Summons is to a
fair Lady.


L. Lands. That Is well, thou art a diligent Servant.


Jack. Aye, Madam, though I say it, I am fit to be e're a Gentleman's Pimp in
England, and that is a bold word, now.


L. Lands. Excellent Office; pray, Mr. Pimp, then do me the favor to tell your
Master, I Will be here at Five-a-Clock, to look on some China.


Jack. It shall be done, Madam.


Mrs. Fidget. If he forgets, fear not Madam, I Will remember.


L. Lands. No doubt on it, you have a noble Vocation too, I suppose, though it has
but a course Name; come Betty, farewell, at night I Will choose some China.

[Exit L. Lands.
Fidget. You are very Welcome, Madam.


Jack. What think ye now, Madam Fidget?


Fidget. Faith, I know not what to think, her Looks were cold and scornful.


Jack. Pho, Pho, she is as wanton and warm as er'e a one of your Daughters,
after a zealous Fit of Devotion.


Fidget. Impudence! how dare you mention my Daughters so irreverently.


Jack. Nay, no harm; come let us in, and take a Glass to clear our
Understanding, and ripen our Plot.


Fidget. You are an unlucky Dog, I see it in your Face, and will never bring it
to any thing.


Jack. Thou art Old enough to be a Prophetess, only Truth and you were at
mortal Odds, ever since you eat Chalk and Tobacco pipes.


Fidget. Thou art a Rogue, but Sack shall atone.


Jack. Come then.


Exeunt. Scene change to Mrs. Rich's House. Enter Mrs. Rich, Lady La Basset and
Mrs. Trickwell. Mrs. Rich. Here, Fellows, stand at all your several Posts, and
let the World know I am at home: I will appear in State.


Mrs. Trick. Why does not your Ladyship establish your Visiting-days?


Mrs. Rich. I have Mrs. Trickwell, and the rude Town takes no Notice of 'em;
would you believe it, I have sat ye five, six hours, and not a Soul, but an
illbred Citizen's Wife, whose unconscionable Visit lasted the whole time, and
her whole Discourse, let me dye, of the awkward Brutes, her Children: A my Soul
they were begot by her Husband, the things were so ungenteel.


Mrs. Trick. Ha, ha, ha, ha, what a prodigious deal of Wit your Ladyship has.


Mrs. Rich. So amongst our selves, I think too; yet would you believe that
illmanner'd Oaf, my Husband's Brother, had the confidence to tell me the
envious World said I was a Fool, my Lady Basset, a Fool, would you believe it;
I say, that Parts, and sheer Wit, could be so malign'd.


La Basset. It Is a censorious World. (Aside.) I begin to hate her, though I win
her Money, now she is likely to get Sir John from me.


Enter Lucinda. Lucin. O Mame, your La' Ships humble Servant.


Mrs. Rich. So, that is pretty well; give your self Airs, Child, When I admit ye
into my Company: Umph! pluck up your head: What! no motion with your Fan: Ah,
it is awkward, but sure, by my Example, she will learn.


Mrs. Trick. To be redicuous. (Aside.) Mind your Aunt, Miss, if you would be the
Emblem of Perfection.


Mrs. Rich. Fie, fie, Mrs. Trickwell, you flatter me.


Lucin. O la, I cannot make my Fan do like my Aunt's.


Mrs. Rich. O my Stars! she will make a horrid Person of Quality: But prithee,
Neice, how do thou know this Lord loves thee, hey.


Lucin. Oh Mame, he has told me so, and my Governess says it is unmannerly not
to believe a Lord; besides, he makes Verses on me.


Mrs. Rich. Verses, O my Stars! what a Theme he has chose; let us see 'em.


Lucin. Here, Aunt, they be pure Verses; there is a hugeous deal of Love in 'em.


Mrs. Rich. (Reads.) I love you, charming Fair one, more
Then ever Mortal loved before.
And though, to my surprising Joy,
The little, wanton, bearless Boy
Has heard my Prayers, and made you feel,
The amorous sharpness of his Steel;
Confusion seize me, if my heart,
Don't with a mightier Passion smart.

La Bass. What do I hear! (Aside) And have you the Impudence to say this Poetry
was designed for you!


Lucin. Mame! --


Mrs. Rich. Monkey, the Girl has stolen 'em out of my Cabinet.


Lucin. Aunt --


Mrs. Rich. Hold your peace, be gone, and let me never see that young
bewitching Face again.


La Bass. I can hold no longer, the Verses belong to me.


Lucin. The Verses belong to you! that is furiously impossible, as my Aunt says;
how should my Lord know you, to make Verses of you; you may look high indeed,
but not so high as a Lord, sure.


Mrs. Rich. But my Stars that is well enough; have I not bid ye go, ye little
Impertinence; there must be some Mistake.


Lucin. There must so, Mame, I warrant your Lover has begged 'em of my Lord,
and given 'em you.


Mrs. Rich. Unlucky Creature, will ye go?


Lucin. Yes. I Will find my dear Lord, and ask him: Not that I care for the
Verses, so I have the Man.

Exit.
Mrs. Rich. What a Confusion I am in; if I break with Lady Basset, she may
expose my foibless to the whole Town; and to brook a Rival --


[Walks disturbed. Mrs. Trick. Observe how Mrs. Rich is disturbed; here we
shall lose a Bubble for your foolish Love affair.


La Bass. Confound her! have I kept Sir John, and run all the Risques in the
Universe to maintain his Port, and shall he dare Address without my Leave.


Mrs. Trick. 'Twas ever so, Lady Basset; we little Ones dote upon the handsome
Footman first; make a hard shift to Equip him, then some topping Dame swoops
the dressed up Fellow, and he forgets his Original.


La Bassat. I Will lower his Top-Sail! and make him know he is mine, and only mine.


Mrs. Rich. Is it any happy thing we know* my Lady! that has the Honor to be
yours, and only yours.


La Basset. Yes verily, a thing you are fond off, and to convince ye how vain
all your hopes are, know he Sacrifices all his Fools to me! here is a List of
'em, chaw upon it and Farewell!

[Exit.
Mrs. Rich. Mondieu! she has won three Hundred Pound of my Money, and now she
Picks a Quarrel with me. Civil I protest.


Mrs. Trick. Ungrateful Wretch! should I forsake my Friend!


Mrs. Rich. Never whilst they have Three Hundred Pound left! it is against the
Rule of Prudence.


Mrs. Trick. Alas Madam, what do you mean?


Mrs. Rich. Your Pardon Mrs. Trickwell! I mean nothing; I am angry with the
whole World, will Indulge my ill Nature, and never bless 'em with a smile again.


Mr. Trick. I thought your Ladyship would have allowed your Lover to have been
beloved.


Mrs. Rich. But not to Love, 'there's the Destinction. To increase my spleen,
let us see what this Fury has left!

[Reads.] A List of the Fools that dote on my proper person. So. Dorimene the
Back-biter, at the Gilt-Post in Twatling Square; Very well.

The Rich Amorous Banker's Widow, removed from behind the Exchange, at the
Citizens Folly, into Covent Garden. Oh! how I hate my self, for having loved
him.

Miranda the Gilt in Scotland-yard. Arabella the Affected* in Pride Lane, at
the Dressing Box.

The Lady Hazard, under the Doctors care in Covent Garden, at the Magdalene*
He Is a Monster.

The Fat Marchioness, with her Shinning Face, near the Red-House in
Plaisterstreet. Villain, I Will see him no more. Betty.


Betty. Madam.


Mrs. Rich. It Is resolved on: I Will see Sir John no more.


Betty. I believe I hear him.


Mrs. Rich. Whither do you go?


Betty. I Am going to meet him, Madam, to tell him you will see him no more.


Mrs. Rich. No, no, Betty, let him come in, I will confound him, and see with
what Impudence he will justify this List.


Betty. Here he is, Madam.


Enter Sir John. Sir John. Ah! are you there, Madam? you cannot imagine my
impatience till I see you?


Mrs. Rich. From what quarter of the Town come you, Sir? from Twatling Square?
or Covent Garden? or is it the Rich Amorous Banker you left last?


Sir John. I know not what you mean, Madam!


Mrs. Rich. Not what I mean, perfidious Man?


Sir John. Upon my Honor, Madam, I do not understand you.


Mrs. Rich. See the Obliging List of your Fools Sir.


Sir John. Ha, ha, ha, and has this discomposed your La'ship; only a Frolic at
my Lady Jeerwells: We were all set to abuse our Friends; a Lady put down her
List, and writ me the Leading Coxcomb, at which we laughed for half an hour. I
never knew your Ladyship so out in the practice of Quality in my whole life:
Why, the Wit of the Age lies in Abuses. I warrant ye, there is my Lady Toss^um
did a thousand rediculous things, and at last cried for very Vexation, that
none of the Scriblers would put her in Rhyme Dogrel.


Mrs. Rich. I fear I Am in the wrong, Mrs. Trickwell.


Mrs. Trick. I fear so to; Sir John is nice, at these things extremely nice.


Mrs. Rich. Aye, but the Verses, Mrs. Trickwell.


Mrs. Trick. The Verses, Sir John, the Verses.


Sir John. Why, that was the very Adventure I was coming to laugh with your
Ladyship about: I must confess I was indiscreet enough to communicate; my Heart
and Tongue being full of my Passion, I went, Madam, to the Chocolate-house,
where I met five or six Wits; Yes, Madam, five or six; and let not that
astonish you, for we live in a very fertile Age for Wits.


Mrs. Rich. And what then, Sir?


Sir John. What then, Madam? Why, they told me, how that my Lord Four^ines had
given these Verses to a Citizen's young Daughter; that Mr. Flutter had sent
them to a She Friend of his; that, Sir Richard Welbred had obtained favors
from his Mistress by these Verses, ha, ha, ha, ha. Is not this diverting, Madam?


Mrs. Rich. So, I suppose, you are extremely vain, and pleased to see your
Works thus Universal.


Mrs. Trick. As we are, Madam, we leaders of the Town, and fronters of the
Boxes, when we find a Fashion begun by us, awkardly aimed at by all the little
Pretenders to Dress.


Sir John. When, alas, borrowed Wit, like borrowed Clothes, sits none but the
Owners: To you, and you alone, the Song is a propos; my Heart is only sensible
of so much Fire, your Eyes have only power thus to inspire.


Mrs. Trick. How full of Tenderness is all Sir John says. (Aside.) I shall
deserve the Five hundred Pounds, Sir John.


Mrs. Rich. I grant his Expressions are full of Douceurs; but then he wan^^
Sincerity and Truth, Mrs. Trickwell.


Mrs. Trick. Truth, in a Compliment, or Courtier, oh fie Madam! it is against
the Nature of the thing.


Mrs. Rich. Why, de la Bet, how charmingly contrary is this to my
City-education: But can thou believe Sir John's in love with ought but that
dear Shadow of his, which he is Caressing so passionately in the Glass.


Betty. I dare swear that is his Idol; but your Ladyship will not hear me.


Mrs. Rich. Yes Betty, I shall take a time, for I am vexed, but scorn to show
^^*


Betty. Madam --


Mrs. Rich. Peace, see, and admit 'em.

Exit Betty.
Sir John. [Setting his Wig in the Glass.] Pax of this ill-favored Curl, how
many Hairs it exceeds his fellows; this Monsieur Cheuruex is a Booby, Demme.


Mrs. Rich. How Concerned Sir John is, in his Justification, Madam.


Mrs. Trick. (Aside.) This Fool will lose his Opportunity, and I my Money: the
Glass robs us of your Conversation, Sir John*


Sir John. No, it is the Lady robs me of my self; I am perpetually studying new
Airs only to please her.


Enter Betty. Betty. Madam, Mrs. Clerimont, and a world of Company to wait on
you.


Mrs. Rich. Oh my Stars, and are the Indian Curtains drawn, the Wax Candles
ready, the Keys with the gold Strings in the Cabinet-doors.


[Enter Fo^^^^^. Betty. Yes, Madam, all is in order.


Mrs. Rich. Why, Tam, Ralph, Waitwell.


Betty. So, the Fit of Vanity returns, (Aside.) they are, Madam, where you
Commanded 'em.


Mrs. Rich. Oh Heavens! now Sir John should be caught saying fine things to me,
and he is practicing Grimaces in the Glass.


Mrs. Trick. Sir John, here is Visiters to the Lady.


Sir John. Ha! where? Be near me Chriss. we will receive 'em.


Mrs. Rich* Shall I be laughing, or in a Passion, or how, dear Mrs. Trickwell*
quick, quick, your Instructions: Some say I become a Passion rarely.


Mrs. Trick. In no Passion, I beseech you, Madam, but that of Joy to see your
Friends: Look, they are here.


Mrs. Rich. Well, I Will be advised; but my City Neighbors sed I chid my Maids
with such a Grace, they would have given all the World to have done like me.


Enter Belvoir, Elder Clerimont, Mrs. Clerimont and Toby. Eld. Cler. A near
place this, Toby; but our House in the Country was nigh as hansome, till the
Hounds, and my Hunts-folks tore it about.


Toby. Aye Master, but ye had not near so much Earthen Ware, that ye had not,
ad our Mopsa would make rare work we it; Udsnigs she would.


Mrs. Cler. Why, Mr. Bellvoir, I am balked in my design of my Visit; I
intended to have brought the Younger Clerimont, and the Lady Landsworth, to an
interview; and his Man has Whisked him away just as we came out of the Coach.


Bell. We must on now, there is no retreating; they look as if they had been
setting themselves this hour.


Mrs. Cler. I have a sudden whim, prithee assist.


Bell. What is it?


Mrs. Cler. I Will make my Lubberly Cozen pass upon that Fantastic Creature, for
a Beau in disguise.


Bell. That Is an odd fancy indeed, surely it is impossible.


Mrs. Rich. Sir John! is this the Mode of the Wits, to come into ones House,
ann find all the Discourse among themselves.


Sir John. I am in a Maze, Madam! let us Accost 'em.


Mrs. Rich. If you please give me leave Sir John, what Honors are these ye
heap upon me, Ma'me; to receive a Visit from the Charming Mrs. Clerimont!


Mrs. Cler. Charms and Perfections, loose their Signification, when applied to
any, where Mrs. Rich is by.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, Madam --


Eld. Cler. Aye, Toby, here is Words; I brought thee in to learn a little.


Toby. Udsnigs, it is rare, Master.


Sir John. Mr. Belvoir, I cast me at your Feet.


Belvoir. Sir John, I kiss your hands.


Sir John. [To Cler.] Sir, I am Yours.


Toby. Nouns, what is he a going to do, unbuckle Master's Shoe.


Eld. Cler. What a plague; ye have run your Mop in my Face, and e'ne choked me
with your Powder.


Sir John. A hey! the meaning of this, my dear Belvoir?


Belvoir* An uncommon Fancy, Sir John, you cannot find out, I perceive.


Sir John. Poison me, 'twas the oddest Reception! for Pluto's sake, what is he?


Toby. What is he? Why he is my Master, Udsnigs! dant provoke en, he will have a
Game at Fifty Coffs we ye, as well as e're a Man in Vorty Mile on him.


El. Cler. Let'n a lone Toby, it is another Oath Libken Souls, a high Wind, or a
Shower firights into Fits of the Mother: I despise en.


Mrs. Rich. Oh my Stars! who has your Ladyship got with ye?


Mrs. Cler. Let me beg your private Ear; that Man is the greatest Nicest Beau
in Christendom.


Mrs. Rich. Ye amaze me Madam.


Mrs. Cler. Very true upon my Word. That fellow there, that looks so like a
John^a Nokes, is the Jemmest Valet; a Countess has been in Love with him.


Mrs. Rich. O my Stars, can I believe you?


Mrs. Cle. You may, no Creture knows it but my self, I beg ye keep it a secret,
especially from Sir John, or murder will ensue.


Mrs. Rich. I engage, oh I love a secret extremely, but what could be the
occasion?


Mrs. Cle. A Lady affronted him, and he swore never to address again, but in
this strange disguise, because his Mistress chose his rival only for having his
Wigg better powdered, he will not alter this behavior, nor dress, till some
other Lady makes him amends. He Is my relation, I wonder you cannot perceive some
Airs of greatness through those Clouds.


Mrs. Rich. Not I, I protest, but the more naturally he does it, he shows his
parts the more.


Mrs. Cle. He calls his Gentleman Toby. Could you think one bred a Page had
power to put on such a shuffling Gate?


Mrs. Rich. It Is a diverting whimsie now one knows it; He, he, he!


Sir Joh. Will Not ye give me leave to laugh with ye, Ladies, at those strange
figures? I beg it of ye, for I am ready to burst.


Mrs. Rich. It may be dangerous, Sir John, and I advise you to keep your
countenance. How pretty it is to know a thing the rest of the Company does not?


El. Cle. Come Cuz, what must we do next, we have stared about us long enough,
Madam. Ha'yee never a Smoking Room, and a Cup of hearty March, ha --


Toby. Ay fackins, had Master and I been at e're a Gentleman's house in the
Country, by this time we had been half Seas-over, Udsnigs.


Mrs. Rich. Rarely performed I vow.


Mrs. Cle. Now must I keep up the humor, and pretend to direct him. Fie
Cousin, talk of drinking before Ladies, you should entertain them with fine
Conversation and Songs.


El. Cle. I dan't pass, and I do gi' ye a Song; come a Hunting Song.


Sir Joh. Ridiculous.


Mrs. Rich. Better and better, by my Stars.


Sir Joh. She seems pleased.


(to Mrs. Trick. Mrs. Trick. I am in the dark.


Mrs. Rich. Excellent.


Sir Joh. Excellent! abominable.


Mrs. Cle. Now if you please, Madam, we'll pay a Visit to my Lady Landsworth;
my Cousin said he would return.


Mrs. Rich. Withal my heart, I believe she is not at home, but the opportunity
will show my apartments.


Sir Joh. Madam, my hand.


Mrs. Rich. Your pardon Sir John, this Gentleman's a stranger.


Sir Joh. Preferred to me!


El. Cle. Stand by, Muskcat, you see the Gentlewoman likes ye not.


Toby. Well done, Master, egad, he will put by a hundred such Limberham'd Beaus
as you, egad, he will cram 'em in a Mouse-hole, I fakings.


Mrs. Cle. Ah poor Sir John, even take that tattered Frigate and be content.


Mrs. Trick. Lets follow and find out the meaning.


Sir Joh. Ye Gods, and Goddesses; Hell, Devils and Furies, I Will be revenged.


Toby. Ha, ha, ha, what strange Oaths he has?


(Exeunt. SCENE Change to younger Cleremont's Lodgings. Enter Clerimont and
Jack. Cle. Where is she! how my desires are changed! Triumphant Love prevails,
a thousand fires shot from those fair Eyes have warmed me; a thousand Arguments
pleading all for Pleasure, lead me on, the Lord within plants and heaves my
bosom, whilst circling tides roll round a pace, and give tumultuous joys.


Jack. Ay marry, Sir, now you look and breath another Man, good fortune is your
slave, she always waits upon the bold.


Cle. And what know I but the coy Dame, who hides her Face at the least word a
wry, and blushes to be gazed on, has in her heart looser fires than my gay
Mistress. How many an honest wretch that asked would swear his Arms infolded a
Lucrece, yet truly hugs in the dissembled Saint, a vile Jilt?


Jack. Right, Sir, right; oh I could burn my Cap for joy to see you thus.


Cle. She Is coming, and seems in busy talk, let us not disturb her.


Enter Lady Landsworth and Betty. Betty. As soon as ever my Lady was engaged, I
fled to over-take ye, Madam.


La. Lands. 'Twas kindly done, Yonder he stands, methinks I hate him, now he
has lost that modest sweetness which caught my unwary Soul, his looks are wild
and lewd, and all I ever feared in men appears in that deceitful face: I would
I were away.


Betty, Nay, Madam, make this last trial, since you have gone so far.


Cle. May I yet approach.


La. Lands. You may, I do remember when we parted last, 'twas on odd terms,
nature seemed reverst, you fled and I pursued in vain, I practiced all my
Charms, and tried my utmost Art in vain, your Virtue like the Mountain Snow,
the nearer I advanced congealed the more, and in the bloom of youth, rigid and
cold as frozen Age, you awed me with severity. Are ye still thus resolved?


Cle. Oh no, I am altered quite, my very Soul's on fire, do not my Eyes speak
for me? I languish, burn and die.


La. Lands. Then we have conquered, and like Libertines we'll rove, tire every
Pleasure, tread rounds of joy, the Insipid world shall wonder at, but never
know to taste.


Jack. Nay, we shall live a delicious life that is certain, ha my dear Damsel.


Betty. Peace, and mind your betters.


Cle. What musick's in that voice, it dances through my ears* and puts my heart in
tune: not painted Cherubs, not the first dawn of cheerful day, or opening
Spring is half so pleasing. Oh thou art Rapture all, and all Divine, down at
thy loved sight each Sense drinks deep draughts of joy.


La. Lands. Throw off these mourning weeds, and let me dress thee extravagant
as my desires, like a Queen's favorite, for I would be profuse.


Jack. Lard, Lard, how fine we shall be.


Cle. If there must be profusion, let it be in Love; there lay out all thy
Stock; let days and nights and years serve only to count the acts of Love.


La. Lands. Yes, and teach us to deceive my Keeper, his Purse must help our
Riots, his Credulity supply our Mirth.


Cle. Ah, why have dashed my rising Ecstasies with the detested thought that
thou art shared, but in thy Arms I Will lose the goading torment; in those
blissful moments I Am sure thou art only mine, my Life, my All


(Embraces her. La. Lands. Stand off, thou Monster, viler, worse than Man, let
thy Contagious breath infect at distance. I will remove thee from my sight, and
from my Soul, as far as thou art gone from Honor, Truth and Honesty.


Jack. Here Is a turn ye Gods, why what is the matter now?


Cle. Madam --


La. Lands. Speak not, nor dare to stay me, for I Will leave thee like thy good
Genius in thy distressful hours, never to return. Oh I could Curse my self, my
Follies, to believe there was Virtue in thy Sex, thou vile dissembler: May it
return upon thee; dissembled be thy Joys; dissembled be thy Friends; above all
may thy Mistress prove the Abstract of Dissimulation.


Cle. Hear me but speak.


La. Lands. No, have thee to some Mart of Luxury and Shame, Preach there, but
defile my ears no more; away, my Friends, away,

Let Us fly that wretch, fly ^im and all mankind:
Now for the Cursed pursuer leave a track behind.

( Ex. La. Lands. and Betty. Cle. What Is the meaning of all this?


Jack. Mad, Sir, raving Mad.


Cle. Can she be honest?


Jack. Impossible, had she the roguish Lear, the Tip, the Wink, the every thing.


Cle. Peace raskal, she is, and not the world shall hide her from me.


Jack. Now must we go upon Knight Errantry; nay heaven be praised, we are as
poor as Knight Errants already.


Cle. Fly, Search, Inquire.

She cannot, must not long remain unknown,
She Will be discovered by her Charms alone,
I Will find, I Will claim, I Will seize her for my own,
Breath at her feet my Vows, nor thence remove,
Till I am blessed with her returning Love.

ACT V.
Enter Clerimont, Mrs. Fidget and Jack. Cle. SUre 'twas all a Dream, I neither
saw nor liked, nor loved; it was a Dream, the Gaudy Vision's vanished, and I am
waked again to my calamities; or grant it real, what had I to do with Love?
Loves the gay Banquet of luxurious hours, he shakes his golden wings, and flies
detested Poverty, To downy Couches, under gilded roofs he flies, There lays his
wanton head, there revels in the fair ones Eyes.


Jack. Sir, Sir.


Cle. When the poor join they hardly taste a night of Peace: Strife traces
Hymen's steps so close, the haggard thrusts between at Bed, at Board and drives
the gentle God away. Oh! my distracted thoughts: Why do ye follow me? Is misery
denied the privelege to be alone?


Mrs. Fid. Ah, Sir, it is that unlucky dog your Man has done this.


Jack. Hist!


Mrs. Fid. Nay, it shall out.


Cle. What has he done? Speak!


Mrs. Fid. Why, Sir --


Jack. Peace, I say, ye ungrateful Cockatrice; now will not all the Sack I have
ramm'd down that unconscionable throat keep this poor secret in, tho upon my
word, I meant it for the best: Believe that, I beseech you, Sir?


Cle. What Is the matter? What have ye said?


Mrs. Fid. Ay, said, there ye have hit it: he has said enough, by my troth.


Jack. I am sure you always say too much.


Mrs. Fid. Say ye so, Sirrah, know then, Sir, that hopeful Rogue gave ye such a
Character to the young Gentlewoman, 'twou'd have frighted the Devil.


Jack. And what said you, Mrs. Dalilah?


Mrs. Fid. Even the same, by thy instigation, thou Tempter.


Jack. Keep that name to your self, it belongs to you, Woman: I thought, Sir,
she loved nothing but a Rake, a Madman. I did all for the best, indeed I did,
Sir.


Cle. No matter; it is the malice of my Fate, which would have found an
Instrument, had thou been silent.


Mrs. Fid. Come, hang Melancholy, and cast away Care; my mind gives me, this
Damsel will wheel about again: I never yet knew Man or Woman weary of an
Intrigue, when 'thas gone no further than yours has done.


Jack. Right: There ye are in the right, In Faith, Landlady.


Mrs. Fid. Well, sauce, you will never leave your Impudence. Landlady; Blockhead!


Jack. Thank ye, Madam.


Enter Belvoir. Bell. Still with folded arms and looks of sorrow. I come to
cheer thee, my Friend; to make thee laugh, to give thee lasting joy.


Cle. Impossible!


Bell. Thy Brother is fallen in Love with the fantastical Widow Rich; her Wealth
and Beauty has Charmed him: Ye know that he is possessed of a great Estate. He
never had management enough to be master of Money, and hearing the Widow has so
much he is distracted for it; whilst she takes him for a Beau in Masquerade, is
wonderfully pleased; and, I believe, will be a Match.


Cle. And what is all this to me?


Bell. Oh! much to your advantage; for he has promised Mrs. Clerimont, if she
can bring this Marriage to pass, he will resign that part of the Estate to you,
your Father in his life time had designed ye.


Cle. There thou speak comfort that suits my wishes, for I would fain
Travel, but want the means.


Bell. Travel!


Cle. My Friend, it is not Wealth can make me happy now.


Jack. Ah, Sir, but Wealth's a good stroke: I see Providence has not quite
forgot us.


Bell. Whatever you have resolved, I beg ye to go this moment with me to Mrs.
Clerimont's: A busy minute now is worth a lazy year.


Cle. Do even what you please with me.


Bell. Come on then.


Mrs. Fid. Good luck attend ye.


(Exeunt. SCENE, Mrs. Rich's House. Enter Mrs. Rich, and two Footmen. Mrs.
Rich. I design a Ball to night, sots, and would have, if possible, you Rascals
clean; and you, do you hear --


Enter Lady Basset and Vermin. La. Bas. I Will fright this little pretender to
Quality, till she either quits Sir John, or buys him of me at a good round
rate; he has made many a penny of me, now it is time to retaliate. Madam, send
off your Footmen; I would speak with ye alone.


Mrs. Rich. Madam!


La. Bas. Be gone, Scoundrels, or I shall drive ye hence.


Mrs. Rich. Fellows, be near me, I know not what her design is.


La. Bas. My design is honorable.


Mrs. Rich. Heavens! What can she mean?


La. Bas. Base Coward, are ye afraid?


Mrs. Rich. Afraid, Madam: I! I --


La. Bas. Come, no dallying; you have robbed me of Sir John: I demand
satisfaction.


Mrs. Rich. O my Stars! This is extravagant to the last degree. Alas, Madam,
what satisfaction can a Lady give to a Lady.


L. Bas. I Would have thee fight. Dare you set up for Quality, and dare not fight,
pitiful Citizen: It Is for thy honor; it is modish too, extremely French, and
agreeable to thy own phrase. I Will have thee fight, I say:


Mrs. Rich. What need I, when I have Conquered already: Can I help the power of
my Eyes, or Sir John's sensibility. My Stars, this is prodigious! What Weapon
must we use in this unusual Combat, hey, Madam?


La. Bas. Do You make a jest on it. Sword and Pistol, Madam.


Mrs. Rich. Oh, Heavens! I swoon at the sight of either.


La. Bas. Thou art the Offspring of an Alderman, I of Quality: I can Fight,
Ride, Play; equal the Men in any Virtue or Vice. Thou little Creature, yield,
or sa, sa -- Thus for Sir John: Sa, sa.


Mrs. Rich. The Woman's mad: Will ye come in my house and murder me?


La. Bas. Look, is this a Jest?


(Draws a Pistol. Mrs. Rich. Murder! Murder. Jack! Geffery! George! Help! Help!


Enter Mr. Rich. Mr. Rich. Hey day! What Is the House turned into a perfect
Bedlam, learning to fence, Madam Whimsical?


Mrs. Rich. Oh, Brother, save me from that furious Woman, and I Will submit, for
the future, to your Conduct.


La. Bas. (aside.) Curse on him; this is a sensible Fellow, and my design's
lost.


Mr. Rich. And what are you, a Lady Errant, and this the 'Squire of the body:
He looks as if he had lived upon Adventures indeed.


La. Bas. No matter what I am. I am mad.


Mr. Rich. I believe so.


Mrs. Rich. I shall not recover the fright this twelve month.


La. Bas. She would bea Woman of Quality, and dares not fight: By the honor of
my Ancestors, I Will go find out Sir John, and if he does not change his
resolution, he and I shall dispute it. Come along, Vermin.


(Ex. La. B. and Ver. Mr. Rich. Ha, ha, that would be a pretty Combat, in
troth; he dares not fight a Man: This Woman will be an excellent match for him.
Do thou yet see thy folly, thy own, and thy Instructor's folly: These things
teach thee to appear like the truly Great. Alas, mistaken wretch, they are as
far from noble Natures, as light from darkness.


Mrs. Rich. I do begin to find my error, and am mending my Conversation; yet
think not, though ye have humbled me, you shall ever bring me back to the City
again* No, I have still spirit enough to defy the City, and all its works. By
my Stars, I Will never endure a greasy City Feast; a set Custard is my aversion
of all aversions, as Olivia has it.


Mr. Rich. It Is impossible to turn the Current of a Woman's Will, though it
perpetually runs the wrong way.


Enter Mrs. Betty. Bet. Oh, Madam, such a piece of Treachery, such
Perfidiousness have I discovered.


Mrs. Rich. In whom? My Stars, this is a day of wonders!


Bet. Even Sir John, going from your Ladyship in a huff, because you smiled
upon the worthy Gentleman in disguise; met your Niece; she flew upon him with a
violent Exclamation, My Lord Fourbine, yours entirely. He answered in a
passionate tone, Ah mon cher, I die for ye.


Mr. Rich. My Daughter!


Bet. Yes, your Daughter; and together they whisk'd cross the Gallery, to
Misses Apartment: I left 'em there, and came to inform your Ladyship.


Mrs. Rich. It Is all Confusion and Amazement!


Mr. Rich. I am destracted! my Daughter: I Will kick him, burn his flaxen Wigg,
dirty his white Coat, knock out his butter Teeth, wring off his Nose, and spoil
him for being a Beau for ever.


Mrs. Rich. Whilst I conceal my self in one of the Closets, if this be true,
Betty, I have such a revenge shall make the Town ring on it.


Bet. Do, Madam. (aside to Mr. Rich) Now, Sir, now is the time to clear the
house of the Locusts, these swarm of Fools.


Mr. Rich. Set all thy wits at work, my good girl. Come, show me this happy
couple, I shall spoil their mirth I'gad.


(Exeunt. Enter Sir John, Lucinda, Chris, and Governess. Sir Joh. Beyond my
wish! Mrs. Rich's Niece, the World shall applaud my revenge: But, my dear, are
you sure none of the Family will interrupt us.


Lucin. No, no, they mew me here eternally with that old Woman; my Aunt hates a
younger face than her own should appear where she is: I am not such a Child but
I can find that. Come hasten, Governess, pack up all my Jewels; we'll steal out
at the backdoor, bid adieu to my sweet Aunt, till my dear Lord and I visit her
in a Coach and Six.


Sir Joh. That Is my Cherubim, help Chris, help, I long to be gone.


Chris. My Lord, we'll ha down in a twinkling.


Lucin. But look you my Lord, I must tell you my mind in two or three words
before we go, what you must trust to. Do you see I am not furiously in Love; as
my Aunt says, I run away only for more Pleasure, more Liberty, etc. I will go
every day to the Play, or else to the Park; and every time I go to the Park, to
the Lodge, to Chelsey: In fine, where I please, or as I run away with you, I Will
run away from you, sue for my own Fortune again, and live as I please: What I
have heard how Ladies with Fortunes do.


Sir Joh. A young Gypsy this, who'd have thought it had been in her, (aside.
Mon cher ame, you shall have your will.


Lucin. That you must expect, my dear Lord, for had I loved obedience I had
still obeyed my Father: And she that begins with her Father generally makes an
end with her Husband; but that is furiously modish, and therefore so much the
better. Quick, quick, good Governess, and then ahey for disobedience.


Enter Mr. Rich and Betty. Mr. Rich. And then ahey for disobedience, Who is
this, my Daughter, with her ahey for disobedience?


Lucin. O gemini, my Father! what shall I do now! well, I Will even turn sides,
take my Father's part, if he is uppermost, and rail at my Lord furiously.


Mr. Rich. Art thou the flaring Fop my hopeful Sister's fond on, descended from
thy Duchess Bedchamber, to steal my Daughter?


Sir Joh. I am a Gentleman, Sir, and expect to be used like one.


Mr. Rich. It Is false, thou art not, I have traced thy Original, and found thou
art none.


Lucin. O la! not a Gentleman, why he swore to me he was a Lord, out upon him.


Sir Joh. Well said Miss, I find we may even be marching, for any friends we
have here. Thou unpolished thing, I answer thy Affront, with my Mein, my Dress,
my Air, all show the Gentleman, and give the lie to thy ill mannered Malice.


Mr. Rich. Defy me, thou thing equipped! Can thou justify the worst of
Thefts, stealing my Child? Draw.


Sir Joh. Your Pardon, Sir, not before the Lady, I may discompose her, perhaps
the sight of a Sword may fright her into a fit.


Lucin. O la, don't let me hinder ye.


Mr. Rich. Art thou not a Fool?


Sir Joh. A Fool, alamode, Sir.


Mr. Rich. A Coward.


Sir Joh. I am a Beau, Sir.


Mr. Rich. All sound and no Sense.


Sir Joh. I sing tolerably well. For who would in a Cellar Dine, when he may go
to Locket's.


Mr. Rich. Thou trifling Coxcomb, all Wig and no Brains, begone this very
Instant, or I Will lead thee thus by the Nose, I Will lead thee to a she Fop of thy
acquaintance, Coxcomb, I will, therefore make use of thy Heels.


Sir Joh. Egad, this is very uncivil.


Mr. Rich. I meant it so.


Sir Joh. I Will Lampoon thee, till your Friends shall fly ye, your Neighbors
despise ye, and the World laugh at ye.


Mr. Rich. I believe your Wit's as dangerous as your Courage, be gone, Insect.


Lucin. Pretend to be a Lord, and baulk a young Woman's expectation!


Bet. Ah poor Sir John, ha, ha.


Sir Joh. Has she been a spectator, I shall be jear'd to death, I will study a
revenge shall make you tremble, I will, thou barbarous Cit.


Mr. Rich. Go set your Perriwig to rights fop, ha, ha.


Sir. Joh. Curses, Curses, Ah I shall Choke.


Mr. Rich. Farewell fool; you, Madam, I (Exit. Sir John) shall find a time to
discourse with; dear Mrs. Betty, take her into your care, whilst I turn this
old Limb of Iniquity out of doors; here you had a mind to run away, now I
desire you to walk about your business. Be gone thou unnecessary evil.


Lucin. Let her go, I say, she seduced me I Am sure.


Gov. Oh, fie, fie, Miss.


Mr. Rich. Begone, 'twas her canting deceived me; what care we ought to take
whom we set over our Children. Enter Mrs. Rich. So Madam, are you satisfied.


Mrs. Rich. Rage, Spite, Shame and Resentment at once torment me, so base a
Coward, my Stars, I shall go Mad.


Mr. Rich. Dear Sister, let your Stars alone, and learn to shun folly,
wheresoe'er you find it.


Mrs. Rich. Then I must shun you, my self and all the World. You have a set and
formal folly, I a vain and airy folly, but he the basest, most betraying folly.


Mr. Rich. Then redeem your Judgment, and stop Censorious mouths, by accepting
Mrs. Clerimont's Kinsman, whom your Woman tells me has a plenfull Estate, this
will turn the Laughter of the Town upon Sir John, and leave you in happy
Circumstances.


Mrs. Rich. I will do something, something to plague that fellow.


Bet. Here comes the Lady, I believe to plead in her friends behalf.


Enter Lady Landsworth and Mrs. Clerimont. Mrs. Cle. Ah, Madam, such a
misfortune.


Mrs. Rich. The whole deceitful world, by my Stars, I think is full of nothing
else.


Mrs. Cle. But this, Madam, your bright eyes create.


Mrs. Rich. I my eyes, that is pleasant.


Mrs. Cle. The strictness of his Vow racks him, for he knows a Lady thus
Accomplished, can never like him as he appears.


La. Lands. Indeed I pity him.


Mr. Rich. Pray Ladies, what is the Case?


Mrs. Cle. Alas! Sir, a Cousin of mine who wants not the goods of Fortune; but
lies under an obligation to seem the greatest Clown in the Universe, till fate
has made him reparation for the affront he received, when all his study was
Dress and Conversation.


Mrs. Rich. And has he a good Estate?


Mrs. Cler. Four thousand a year I assure ye.


Mr. Rich. Gadzooks, what matter is it where ever he is Dressed, as ye call it,
again or no.


Mrs. Rich. Yes, yes, that is material upon my word, Mr. Rich.


Mrs. Cler. Would you consent to marry him* for so far his Oath extends;
believe me, Madam, he would soon break forth to your amazement.


Mrs. Rich. I profess Ladies, you give me such an Air of blushing, when I
reflect on what ye are tempting me to.


Mrs. Cler. I profess Mame, it is a very becoming Air.


Mrs. Rich. My Stars! 'twill sound so odd.


Mrs. Cler. 'Twill surprise the Town so prettily.


Mr. Rich. Zooks, it is the best thing to piece up your fantastical Character;
'twill surprise the world indeed to see you do a wise thing.


Mrs. Rich. Speak not you, Sir, for I yield only to the Ladies. Well, where is
the Gentleman?


Mrs. Cler. Languishing within, Madam; condemned to silence, least his rough
hewn expressions should offend.


Mrs. Rich. De la Bett, a pen and Ink, perhaps I may expose the Knight, and
satisfy your friend. Your pardon for some moments; come with me Niece.


Lucin. Yes, Madam, pray let us be revenged on this sham Lord, you cannot think
what a liar he is.


Mrs. Rich. Your Servant.


Mrs. Cler. Yours.


(Exit Mrs. Rich. and Lucinda. La. Lands. Follow Dear De la Bett, as thy Lady
has it, and now show thy Master Piece.


Bet. I lay my life it is done, I see in her Eyes.


Mr. Rich. In hopes on it, I Will get a parson. This Widow married, my affairs are
prosperous, and my Daughter and her Fortune return to me.


Mrs. Cler. Hasten, good Sir, for this fair Lady and I have a little business
of our own.


Mr. Rich. More Weddings, I hope, then we'll have Dancing in abundance; come
honest De la Bett, I promise thee a new portion to thy new name.


Bet. I Will endeavor to deserve it, Sir.


( Exit Mr. Rich. and Betty. Mrs. Cler. My Charming Cousin, have not I found a
pretty employment, to turn general Match-maker?

But for the younger Clerimont, I own I could do any thing.


La. Lands. I should dissemble worse than I thought he did, not to say I Am
pleased to find his Character what I so heartily wished it.


Mrs. Cler. To convince ye thoroughly, I have sent for his Landlady, whose odd
account of him must proceed from folly, or malice: O here she comes!


Enter Mrs. Fidget. Mrs. Cler. Your Servant, Madam, 'twas not for goods, as I
pretended I gave you this trouble, but to ask after the deportment of my
Relation, Mr. Clerimont, your Lodger.


La. Lands. The wild, mad Spark, that scarce ever lies at home: you know me,
Madam, I suppose?


Mrs. Fidg. Yes, yes, Madam, in verity I must beg your pardon, I did belie the
Gentleman, abominably belie him.


La. Lands. What provoked you to it?


Mrs. Fidg. Truly, Ian, I contrived it, thinking it would please your Ladyship.


La. Lands. Ian, pray who is Ian?


Mrs. Fid. My Friend and his Footman.


Mrs. Cler. My Cousin, I am sure was always accounted a very modest, sober
Gentleman.


Mrs. Fidg. Modest! udsflesh, he has not his peer in the whole Town; by my
fackings, he is a little too modest, that is his fault.


Mrs. Cler. I dare affirm he is truly noble, not in these straights of Fortune
would he quit his Honor, to be Great, or his Integrity to be Rich.


Mrs. Fidg. Or his Religion to be thought a Wit.


La. Lands. Enough, Ladies, I am fully satisfied; only to his Love, if I have
made any impression.


Mrs. Cler. That this moment you your self shall be judge of; he is coming, if*
you please to retire you shall over-hear me sound his inclinations.


Mrs. Fidg. Aye, there he is, Heaven bless him, he is a sweet young man.


La. Lands. Come with me Mrs. Fidget* Now Clerimont,

If thy heart does with generous passion burn,
Than I with joy will love for love return.

(Exit La. Lands. (and Mrs. Fidget. Enter the younger Clerimont, Belvoir and
Jack. Bell. I have brought him, Madam, but I am ashamed to say with what
reluctance, he flies even you, you the fair contriver of his Auspicious
Fortunes.


Cler. I am sure, I am ashamed to see you take such pains about a thing not
worth your care.


Mrs. Cler. When the good suffer, the virtuous part of humane kind are all
concerned. When we suffer by our fate, and not our faults, Heaven always makes
the trial short, and shows an easy way for our deliverance.


Cler. In vain you sooth me with your friendship; did you fully know me, you
would know, there scarce is left a room for hope.


Mrs. Cler. Suppose there is a Lady in love with you, surrounded thus as you
are with your misfortunes; suppose her Chaste, and Rich, and Fair, who tho her
eyes never yet encountered yours, by my description, doats upon a Character so
singular and different from your wild Sex.


Cler. Were she as fair as Women would be thought; as virtuous as they were of
old, e're 'twas fashionable to be false; had she Wealth would satisfy the
Vain, the Miser, the Ambitious; so far am I from once consenting to what your
kindness has proposed, I would not to rid me of half my Sorrows, so much as see
her.


Bell. Ah, my friend! this must be some prepossession; you already are in Love.


Cler. It is enough to say I am a fool, must search the world and know it
better, e're I pretend to speak my thoughts. If, Madam, from my Brother ye can
procure my Father's first design, I shall own my self eternally obliged, and
trouble ye no more.


Mrs. Cler. I sigh to say it is not in my power, since you refuse the
advantageous offers of the Lady's love.


Cler. Then all I beg, is that ye would inquire for me no more. There is no
warding the blows of Fate; the wretch that is doomed unfortunate, no Arm of
Power can save.


Bell. But you look through despair. Believe me, friend, it is a false Glass,
Fortune has a fairer Face to show you.


Mrs. Cler. That pleasing task be mine, Madam, you here the Gentleman is
obstinate, but now, Sir, if you are not charmed with this appearance, you have
a relish different from the universal World.


Re-enter Lady Landsworth, and Mrs. Fidget. Cler. Ha! it is she! it is she! here
let me fix, thus let me clasp my Bliss, thus for ever, secure my only valued
treasure!


Jack. Ay, it is she, it is she, egad, and my Landlady too.


Mrs. Fid. Yes, Manners, your Landlady too:


La. Lands. And dare you venture upon me, after the Alderman, the Colonel, and
the Senator?


Cler. My Eyes should have contradicted all other Senses; sweet Innocence is
writ in that dear face, and Virtue in her brightest Characters.


Mrs. Cler. Virtuous and Great, the Charming Widow of Sir John Landsworth: Her
Husband formerly, I believe you have seen. What could you ask of Fate more,
than to love and be beloved by her?


Cler. And have I been repining, when the bounteous Heavens were pouring such
lavish Blessings down? Oh! my ravished Soul! My first, my only dear!


La. Lands. It Is wondrous pretty, when Love's soft passion first invades our
breast, it brings a thousand Charms, a thousand Joys, unknown before; but ah!
too often in your Sex, rolling time, or some newer face, puts out the kindly
flame, and the forsaken Fair is left to live, and languish on the kind Words
which she will hear no more. What can secure me from such a Fate? Not even your
present thoughts, for they may change.


Cler. Never, my Charmer, never! To look on thee secures a heart like mine from
roving: To hear thee talk, will fix me for ever in the Chains of Love. But, oh!
to have thee all; there words cannot aim, there breath is lost in ecstasy.


Mrs. Cler. Here Is a world of fine things; though I am a little of the Lady's
mind, 'twill scarce hold out seven years.


Bell. So, there is two in perfect happiness. I hope, Madam, you that were so
Compassionate to others, will not your self be cruel, but reward my constant
vows, nor let me longer sigh in vain.


Mrs. Cler. Mr. Belvoir, I have allowed you too long a favored Lover in honor
to go back; we are as good as married already.


Bell. No, my dear Angel, the greatest sweet's to come!


Mrs. Cler. Ay, and the sour too, that is the worst on it. Look, here is another
happy Couple.


Enter elder Clerimont, Mrs. Rich, Mr. Rich, Lucinda, Betty and Toby. Mrs.
Rich. Well, Ladies, what do you think I have been doing since I went out? by my
Stars! a world of business; and that is a thing I hate, writ a Billet-doux to
the Beau in appearance; married the Beau in a disguise; given occasion for
forty Stories, and fifty Lampoons, ha, ha, ha! I have done it all in a humor,
by my Stars!


Mrs. Cler. Even carry it on, Madam; never have a grave fit and repent, I say.


El. Cler. Yes, faith, I Am sped, and all of the sudden; she is handsomer trath,
than our Sh'riff's Daughter. How they will stare, Toby, when she shows her paces
through our Alley, to the great Pew. Brother Charles, how came you here? Well,
I Have gin the Writings into Cousin's hands: Udslids, does that pretty Lady
belong to you? Why, this is a rare place for handsome Women, by my troth.


Mrs. Rich. Come, Sir, the Transformation has been Comical enough, but now I
beg you to reassume your former Mein and Dress, and let me make as great a
sacrifice to you, as the Lady made of you.


Mrs. Cler. Oh, dear Belvoir, say something to keep in my laugh, or I Am undone.


Bell. I dare not lift up my eyes, nor scarce open my lips to let my words out.


Mr. Rich. I confess, my Gravity is put to the Test now.


Mrs. Rich. Come, Mr. Clerimont, will ye hasten; pray dress immediately,
because I expect Sir John this moment.


El. Cler. Yes, fags, I Will dress, as soon as I can get my Clothes made; and
since I Am Wed, I Will bestow more money than I thought, by five pound.


Mrs. Rich. Nay, now the humour's tiresome, here is only Friends.


Bet. Oh, Madam, I shall break my Lace.


Cler. What Is the meaning of all this?


La. Lands. The tittering Damsel behind ye, can tell.


Mrs. Rich. Come, I would not for a thousand pound Sir Jan should find you
thus; this is carrying the Jest too far. Speak to him, Madam.


Mrs. Cler. Indeed, Madam, I fear it must go a little farther; for, to tell ye
the plain truth, he has the Estate I mentioned, and is my Relation; but for the
Accomplishments you expect, they are yet to learn, upon my word.


Mrs. Rich. How! I Am undone! What, no Conversation, no Judgment in Dress, no
Mein, no Airs!


El. Cler. Prithee, Cuz, what is that same Airs, do you see? I Would willingly please
her, now I have her, do you see.


Mrs. Cle. Airs: Why, it is a foolish Word, used by those that do understand it,
and those that do not; it is what is pretty, when Nature gives it; and what, when
affected, spoils all that Nature gives beside.


Mrs. Rich. Oh! I shall go mad. Is that an Object fit to please a Woman nice as
I am?


Mr. Rich. Come, Sister, a long Periwig, an Alamode Steenkirk, etc. has made a
worse Face a perfect Beau e're now: Consider, he has some thousands a year.


El. Cler. Ay, marry have I: Nay, udslid, I have a Title too; I value no more,
do you see, killing a Man, than I do killing a Mouse; for I Would take up my Patent,
be a Lord, and be tried by my Peers.


Bell. Thy Peers! Where would find 'em?


Mrs. Rich. Oh, my cursed Stars! First a Citizen's, and then a Country
'Squire's Wife. Ah! I shall never endure him, that is certain.


El. Cler. Mid hap so, and mid hap ye may; I shall not cross ye mich. All the
Hunting season I Will be in the Country: and you shall hunt Pleasures here in
Town. Ge me a little of your money to pay my debt, and I will not trouble you,
do you see.


La. Lands. Well said, Mr. Bridegroom: Come, Madam, few Beaux would be more
Complaisant.


Bet. Madam, Sir John --


Mrs. Rich. Mountains cover my shame! What shall I say now?


La. Lands. Say! laugh at him, as all the World ought.


Mrs. Cler. Believe me, Madam, ye have made the better choice.


Mr. Rich. A thousand times.


Enter Sir John, and Mrs. Trickwell. Mrs. Trick. You bring me here to see you
Triumph, I can never believe it; you have some trick put upon you, Sir John.


Sir Joh. Have I not her own Note, that spite of her Jealousies, and her
Brother's Tyranny, she will this day be married.


Mrs. Trick. She does not say to you. Ha! What a World of Company is here?


Sir Joh. The Brother, and the young Gypsy his Daughter: I Will be gone.


Bell. Nay, no retreating, Sir John, you must, at least, wish the Lady joy.


Mrs. Rich. Sha, my design's broke, my Plots spoiled, can I Triumph at his
defeat, and show that awkard figure?


Sir Joh. Madam, your Summons brought me hither, I hoped to Joys.


Mrs. Rich. I hate you, and all mankind.


Lu^in. So do I; ye sham Lord, ye brag, ye bounce ye --


Bell. Enough, good Miss. Sir John, I perceive you must search for new
Gallantries, here the Ladies are provided for, except this little one, who
seems to have no inclination.


Sir Joh. Pax take ye all; they were fond, I Am sure.


Mr. Rich. Come, ye young Coquette, your Education shall be altered, I assure
ye, it is even high time.


Mrs. Trick. Well, I believe my booty with yonder fantastical Lady is at an
end, so I Will steal off unobserved.

( Exit Mrs. Trickwell.
Enter Lady Basset. La. Bas. Where is this Villain, This false, ungrateful
Villain?


Sir Joh. So; another outcry?


La. Bas. Yes, Traitor, and a just one: Know all, this was but a Servant in Sir
John Roverhead's Family; I dressed him in these borrowed honors, knowing Sir
John never came to Town. I taught him the Modes and Manners here, and he has
rewarded me with Inconstancy.


Sir Joh. Hold, hold; not so fast. How came you to be the Honorable, the Lady
Basset: I think 'twas I dubbed ye. As I take it, ye were but the cast Mistress
of Sir Francis Basset, when I found ye.


Mr. Rich. See, Sister, how the Quality you were fond of, expose one an other.


Mrs. Cler. And seeing this, be reconciled to your new Spouse, who is of a
noble Family, and I promise to introduce ye to Persons of Merit and Honor.


La. Lands. We shall all be fond of ye, for, of your self, you are Charming and
Sensible: It Is only these Wretches have rendered ye ridiculous.


Mr. Rich. Come, give him your hand, it is a gentle punishment for so much
vanity.


Mrs. Rich. Well, since my malicious Stars have thus decreed it; but, do you
hear, I expect to have your Estate in my power, and that same Title you talk
off looked into.


El. Cler. ^^ackings and so you shall; but must not I have your fine parson in
my power too? ha!


Mrs. Rich. Has the Thing sense enough to be in Love?


Cler. Now, I hope, all is well, and I have prevailed with my Landlady to give
ye a Song.


La. Lands. Do, good Mrs. Fidget?


Mrs. Fid. Any thing to divert ye.


Toby. And ad^d, after that, I Will give 'em a donce.


Bell. Well sed, honest Toby.


Mrs. Rich. Sir Jan, will ye participate our diversion, or employ your time in
reconciling your self to this enraged Lady.


Sir Joh. Shame, Disappointment and Disreputation light upon you all; would all
the whole Sex were upon Salisbury Plain, and their rigging on fire about their
Ears.

(Exit Sir John.
Mrs. Cler. And that is the dreadful Curse of a defeated Beau. Follow, Madam,
and put him in a better humor.


La. Bas. Hang him, as I would my self, you, and all the World.

(Exit Lady Basset.
Bet. A fair riddance.


Cler. Now the Song, and then the Dance.


Mr. Rich. Now, Sister, and Daughter, to you I chiefly speak, let this days
Adventure make ye for ever cautious of your Conversation; you see how near
these pretenders to Quality had brought you to ruin: The truly Great are of a
quite different Character.

The Glory of the World our British Nobles are,
The Ladies too Renowned, and Chaste and fair:
But to our Citizens, Augusta's Sons,
The Conquering Wealth of both the India's runs;
Though less in Name, of greater Power by far,
Honors alone, but empty Scutcheons are;
Mixed with their Coin, the Title sweetly sounds,
No such Allay as Twenty Thousand Pounds.

THE END

