THE Deceiver Deceived: A COMEDY, As it is now ACTED by His MAJESTY's Servants,
AT THE THEATER in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LONDON, Printed for R. Basset, at the Mitre in Fleet Street, near Temple Bar.
School.

TO Sir ROBERT MARSHAM, Knight and Barronet.
WHat shall I say, or how excuse my Boldness, in venturing to make so mean a
present, and without permission too; I am full of fears, tho hitherto I have
still run the same risque, and always found my Friends so good both to forgive
and accept my worthless trifles: Nay even her Royal Highness showed such a
benign Condescension, as not only to pardon my ambitious daring, but also
Encouraged my Pen, why then should I fright my self with the apprehension of
your Frowns and Anger, when at the same time I know you to be the most Generous
and best tempered Man in the World.

I look upon those that endeavored to discountenance this Play as Enemies to
me, not that, and had the Play been never ^o good they would have showed their
Teeth: Yet sure, if you be so Noble to protect it, their good manners (that is,
if they understand any) tho their spite remains will make 'em cease to Cavil at
the Work, when such a worthy name Adorns the Frontispiece. I must not trouble
you with the little Malice of my Foe, nor is his Name fit to be mentioned in a
Paper addressed to Sir Robert Marsham, he has Printed so great a falsehood, it
deserves no Answer; yet give me leave without being thought Impertinent or
Prolix, to say I now am pleased and treated by those who please every Spectat^r
with a Candor and Sweetness not to be expressed.

If I followd my inclinations, I should now proceed to recite those Virtues
which all the happy World that have the Honor to know you daily see, but that
I am sure would be the way to offend, for you scarce hate Vice more than to hear
of your Merits, therefore I shall only add, as you are Happy in your Lady,
Happy in your Children, which are Lovely and Hopeful as an Indulgent Parents
wish can form; Happy in Fortune, Capacious like your Soul; Happy in your
Friends, who love you even to Fondness: That Heaven may continue all these
Blessings many succeeding Years, is the earnest and daily wish of,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant. MARYPIX.

PROLOGUE, spoken by Mr. B^wen.
Deceived Deceiver, and Impostor (...)!
An Audience and the (...)!
All trick and cheat! Pshaw, it is the D^vil and all,
I Will warr'nt ye we shall now have Cups and Ball;
No, Gallants, we those tricks don't understand;
It Is the other House best shows the slight of hand:
Hey Iingo, Sirs, what is this! their Come^y?
Presto be gone, it is now our Farce you see.
By neat conveyance you have seen and know it
They can transform an Actor to a Poet.
With empty Dishes tho^'ll set out a Treat,
Whole Seas of Broth, but a small Isle of Meat:
With Powderle-Pimp of Dance, Machine and Song,
They Will spin^ye out short Nonsense four hours long:
With Fountains, Groves, Bombast and airy Fancies
Larded with Cynthias, little Loves and Dances:
Which put together, makes it hard to say,
If Poet, Painter, or Fiddler made the Play.
But hold, my business lies another way.
Not to bespeak your praise by kind persuasions,
But to desire the favor of your patience.
Our Case is thus:
Our Authoress, like true Women, showed her Play
To some, who, like true Wits, stole't half away.
We Have Fee'd no Council yet, tho some advise us
TO indite the Plagiaries at Apollo's Sizes?
But ah, how they would out face a Damsel civil:
Who Have impudence enough to out face the Devil:
Besides, should they be cast by prosecution,
It Is now too late to think of restitution;
And faith, I hear, that some do shrewdly opine
They Trade with other Muses than the nine.
I name no names, but you may easily guess,
They that can cheat the Devil can cheat the Flesh.
Therefore to you kind Sirs, as to the Laws
Of Justice she submits her self and Cause,
For to whom else should a wronged Poet sue.
There Is no appeal to any Court but you.
A Dialogue in the fourth Act, between Mr. Bowman and Mrs. Brac^girdle: The
words by Mr. Durfey and set by Mr. Eccles.
He. WHen will Stella kind and tender
R^compense Fidele amor,
You min heart have made me render,
If yours come not in retour
Blank despair I cannot defendre
No, no, no, I cannot defendre
Grie^ m^st kill tout les jours

She. How can Damon love another
Who believes himself so fine,
He may talk and keep a pother.
But to change can never incline
So much Charm must slight all other
Ay, ay, ay, must slight all other,
He believes himself so fine.

He. Then adieu false Esperanza,
Tout le plasire de beau jours
Stella's heart keeps at a distance,
And disdains le cher effort,
She mon Ame will ne'^^ advance,
No, no, no, will never advance
Cruel death then prend mon cor.

She. You a Beau and talk of dying
It Is a Cheat I Will never believe,
You Have such life in self enjoying
Death's a word you cannot forgive
Go, improve dec^it and lying
Ay, ay, ay, but name not dying,
That Is a Cheat I Will never believe.

CHORUS
He. When will you prove me to know
The truth of a passionate ^eau.

She. How shall I prove you to know
The truth of a flashy Town- Beau.

He. By the groans and the tears of the wretch.

She. By his Paint, and his Powder and Patch.

He. By his Mouth, and his very good Teeth.

She. By his Sighs, and his very bad Breath.

He. By his Eyes, and the air of his Face.

She. When he ogles and looks like an Ass.

He. Morbleu ma cher each part my truth will show.

She. Mon for, mon fou I never can think so.

He. Morbleu, etc.

She. Mon fou, etc.

A Dialogue in the fifth Aact, between a Boy and a Girl, and an Old Man.
Written by Mr. Motteux; set to the Music by Mr. J. Eccles.
Enter Girl. Girl. WHy do I sigh and tremble so?
Why does my Color come and go,
When here young Strephon is?
Is this to Love? how shall I know?
When he would kiss me, I say, No, no, no, no, no.
But yet I let him kiss.
II.
I wish the pretty youth to see,
And yet I fear near him to be;
He pains yet pleases so.
Shall I refuse, or else deny?
I fear I hardly shall say, Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie.
Were none but he to know.

Enter Boy. ^oy. Oh! how do you do, Miss? I hope I^don't scare you.
^lethinks I Have no Pleasure, but when I am near you.
I don't know what ails me, but when you appear,
I feel something so pretty that tickles me here.

Girl. Oh! Dear! so do I: Well, I Am glad you are come;
Yet I start, and I blush, when you enter the Room,
Just like our Maid, when she meets with your Groom.

Boy. Let Us do as they do; seem shy, and I Will kiss.

Girl. Oh! Law! what would Mother say should I do this!

Boy. Hush, Fool! you must, like her, say nothing, yet kiss.

Girl. Nay, don't you, be quiet! Grandfather is by.
Don't let me alone -- see! My head's all, awry.

Boy. I Will buss you.

Girl. I Will scratch you.

Boy. I care not a pin.

Girl. Nay, now the Folks see you.

Boy. Then let us go in.

Both. Then let us go in.

Enter Old Man. Old Man. Why, Sirrah! Why H'us wife! how dare you do this?
I Will get a good Rod, I Will teach you to kiss.

Boy. Is there any harm in it

Girl. Oh, pray do not Scold.

Boy. We Are not so much too Young as you be too Old.

Old Man. Stay till you be Married.

Boy. Pray Marry us then.

Girl. They say when we are Married we are Women and Men.

Old Man. It Is time you should wed, if already you long.
We Are quickly too old, but we are never too young.
All Three. It Is Time you should Wed, if already you long;
We Are quickly too Old, but we are never too Young.

(Ex^unt*. Persons Represented.
Mr. Be^terton, Melito Bondi, A Senator of Venice, who Counterfeits b^indness
to avoid being President of Dalmatia. Mr. Arnold, Gonsalvo, Another Senator.
Mr. Hodgson, Count Andrea, Gallant to Melito Bondi's Wife. Mr. Verbruggen,
Fidelio, A noble Venetian decayed in his Fortunes. Mr. Bowman, Count Insulls, A
Rich Merchants Son of France, pretending to Ariana. Mr. Bowen, Gervatio,
Steward to Melito Bondi. Mr. Trafuse, Actwell, A Cunning Fellow. Mr. Knap,
Heardouble, and Two Informers. Mr. Watson, Strechwell. Boy, and Attendants.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Barry, Olivia, Bondi's Wife. Mrs. Bracegirdle, Ariana, His Daughter. Mrs.
Lee, Lady Temptyouth, Mrs. Prince, Lucinda, One she brings up. Mrs. Silvia,
Oliva's Woman. Mrs. Beatrice, Ariana's Woman. Mrs. Tistewell, Lucinda's Woman.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Seignior Melito Bondi, led by a Boy. Bondi. LEad me to my Chair, then
send Gervatio hither.


Boy. Yes, my Lord.

(Exit Boy.
Bond. This Morning I Have out-^isen the Sun, to scourge that Dog whose cursed
Contrivance brought the Mischiefs which destroy my Sleep: Oh! here he comes,
the Coast is clear, and I Will secure it so.


Enter Gervatio. Gerv. Good morrow to your Lordship; what does your Lordship
mean?


Bond. What did you mean, Rascal, to make me mad, horn mad, with this
counterfeiting Blindness? but I can see your Plots, you Pander, and you shall
feel my Rage.


(Ca^es him. Gerv. Thus faithful service ever is rewarded; Will ye but hear me?


Bond. No, I Have seen too much; you will make me deaf next, I suppose, sirrah, and
then set the World upon abusing me that way, Villain.


Gerv. Hold and hear what I can urge, or I Will raise all the House, and lay the
Imposture open.


Bond. Well, I will hold, not out of any kindness, but that I Am out of breath.


Gerv. If I am not revenged on ye, ye old Don, I Will be hanged.

(Aside.
Bond. Well, what have you to say, Sir?


Gerv. Look ye, my Lord, in the first place I Will go close to the Door, and if
your Lordship offers to move or stir your Cane, I Will fly out, and this minute
proclaim in Venice, that --


Bond. Hold, I am quiet.


Gerv. Then how have you the face to use me thus? Am I not privy to all your
Extortions and Briberies? Have I not carried the tempting (...) that corrupted
Knaves, and excused your self from greater? Have you not (...) a taxing power,
though for the good of the Commonweal, was worse than a luxurious Tyrant, wh^
thought of nothing but his Pleasures? Nay more, if the Grand (...) would let
you enjoy your Wealth, you had as live have him for your Head as his Holiness.


Bond. Well, good Gervatio, thou do know my Failings, but it is ^he ill
consequence of this blindness puts me in all these passions.


Gerv. Does not your Conscience (but I have forgot, you have ^one, (...) would)
fly in your Face, for abusing me on that account? Did not you, when the old
President of Dalmatia died, come to me, Oh! dear ^^rvatio, ^'m undone! my turn
is next to that chargable Post, I shall lavish all the Wealth my whole ^ife has
been scraping together! Then you coaxed me, Thou art ingenious, think some way
I may be mist, and I Will make thy Fortunes.


Bond. Nay, this is true.


Gerv. Is it so? I almost lost my Eyes in reality in poring over old musty
Stat^tes; there I found nothing but some natural Incapacity could exempt the
rich Nobles in their turns: Accordingly I advised you to counterfeit Blindness;
you did it; succeeded, Ma^ti^o Cornaro is chose in your place, and I am
cudgel'd for my (...).


(Bowing. ^^nd. Ah Gervatio, thou have told the Sweets and Profits of the
story, but left the bitt^r sting out. Whilst the Duke and Senate believed my
Blindness, and I escaped that hateful Office, my Wife and Daughter do so too at
home, my Wi^e with ogling Eyes just at my Nose, ^iews her Gallant, and the
young Gypsy lets that Bankrupt's Son, Count Fidelio, steal her Hand: This
makes me mad, and wish I were blind indeed.


Gerv. For this I also provide a Remedy: You know by my care the Ladies are
almost always with you else; I watch 'em, let 'em look on, squeeze Hands,
they will ^^arce venture to make you a Cuckold or a Grandfather. Beside, my
Diligence goes farther; this day the Girdle of St. Sylvester comes your tutelar
Saint, for you will have a Saint too, though to my knowledge all your Religion
lies in filling your Bags. But, as I said before, to day the wonderful Gir^le
comes, and will get credit, for I dare swear you see immediately after the
operation.


B^nd. Well, thou art a Wag; co^^^, take care of my Wife and Daughter till I
dare own I perceive 'em again, and I Will make amends for my Blows; faith
Gervatio *it was hard last night to see a Man kiss my Wife half an hour together
before my Face, and when I called, the Baggage would take off her Lips and cry,
How do my D^^r? Then my Daughter, you know, I design for my Lord Insuls, Son
to the rich French Merchant Monsieur Opulant, who by his Industry has purchased
three (...) ^udding ^rench Beaux Estates.


Gerv. For a Son that as like a Jack Pudding Beau will spend it, to my
knowledge.

(Aside.)
One knocks. Bond. Here, here, to my Chair, quick, quick, open the Door.


Enter Seignior Gonsalvo. Gonsal. A happy Morning to my Lord.


B^nd. (...) Voice, I think; Gervatio, conduct me to salute him.


Go^s. By no means, my Lord, your condition excuses Ceremony, at all times
(...); the Duke comme^ds him to you, he with much pains has got a famous (...).


B^nd. The Devil he has.

(Aside.
G^rv. Now I thank thee Fortune, thou have revenged me.

(Aside.
(...). Unwilling to lose the Advice of such a Pillar of the State, has took
true p^ins (...) expe^ienc'd Man.


^o^d. I am much beholden to his Princely Care; but, my Lord, I look on this
Affliction (...) from He^ven as a Judgment, and hope by Penitence to obtain
from thence a Rem^dy: You must^know, my Lord, I beyond measure coveted the
Presi^ent of Dalm^^i^'s place, nothing but that would suffice my Ambition; nay,
Heaven forgive me, I often wished his death.


(...). Oh, mercy upon me, was there ever such a Dissembler!

(Aside.
^ond. Now ma^^ the end: Just as the old President died this Darkness fell upon
me; I have no Hopes in human Aid, but my own dear St. Silves^er methoughts, in
a Dream, expressed, his sacred Girdle might do me good.


Gons. The Dream is not to be neglected, nor the Duke's Goodwill to regain the
loss or precious sight, both may be tried, in the Afternoon I Will wait upon
you^with the famous man, in the mean time I am your Lordship's servant.

( Exit Gonsalvo.
Bond. So Gervatio, what think you of your project now? I shall have a
pragmatical fellow poke my Eyes out indeed.


Gerv. Fear nothing, my Lord, I Will do well enough with him. If I don't sit you
Seignior for your drubbing, you shall call me John a Styles.

(Aside.
Bond* Gervatio, lead me into the green Room, and see if my Wife and Daughter
are up, send 'em to me.


Gerv. It shall be done, my Lord.


Bond. Oh this damned O^nlist, Gervatio!


Gerv. Pho, pho, I Will banter him out of his senses.


Bond. Give me thy Hand, lest any of the Family should see us.


(...). Scene draws, Ariana dressing, and Beat^ice* Aria. Have done trifling,
I Am well enough.


Beatr. You are indeed charmingly pretty, Madam.


Aria. How nauseous it is, and yet how natural it is to have our Women slatter
us. Well Beatrice, here is a wonderful alteration since my Father's Blindness, I
can put on a new suit every day, and my Jewels, laid up only for the Festival
of St. Mark, may be worn now without a chiding.


Beatr. These are great privileges, Madam, yet it is a sad thing to think how
suddenly my Lord was struck blind.


Aria. I swear so it is; but then remember, Beatrice, how he forbad Count
Fidelio to think on me, though his Father was of Birth noble as mine, despised
that Dross my Father makes his God, and left his Son only a liberal Education
and innate Courage, which appears unknown to most of our Venetians.


Beatr. My Lord dares not deny him the House, because he is of the ancient
Nobility, and he has been an hour walking in the Garden, waiting your coming
down, and then, I suppose, gives my Lord the good morrow.


Aria. Well, it is a mischievous Rogue, he has so many Tricks before my Father,
yet cannot I forbear joining, nor scarce keep the Laug^ in.


Beatr. Confess Madam, are you really sorry at the Darkness has overtaken your
Father?


Aria. Why truly, Beatrice, I always say my Prayers for his Eyes restor^tion
the last thing I do, that is, just when I am falling asleep.


Enter Silvia. Silv. Madam, my Lady sent me to tell you, your Father expects
you with her presently.


Aria. I Will wait upon her, Silvia.

( Exit Silvia.) That Mother-in-law of mine is a hopeful young Gentlewoman too;
she takes Opportunity by the Forelock, and makes all the haste she conveniently
can to give my old Dad Horns instead of Eyes: Am not I a wicked Jade to wink at
this? Why, I don't know, if I should betray her, she would serve me the same sauce;
besides, my Father married the young Creature the perfect Venetian way, only
for her Portion, never saw one-another beforehand: I cannot but think what a
fright she was in, to behold an old Man with a grizled Beard instead of a brisk
young fellow. Well, I hope Heaven makes Allowances for such a case, and my
Guilt will not be great for guessing at it.


Beatr. Your Ladyship considers what may befall your self another day, Madam.


Aria. God forbid Wench, I hope to marry my dear Fidelio, and that Woman that
takes a Man for Love deserves to be disgraced here, and damned hereafter, if
but her Inclinations wayer, and she in Thought abuses him.


Beatr. Ay, but Madam, if your Father's choice, my Lord Insuls should be forced
upon you.


Aria. Hang him, per^um'd Poltoon, I hate him worse than a Nunnery, where they
wear Hair Smocks.


Beatr. He comes this Afternoon to make his second visit; my Lady Temptyouth
says he is a fine Gentleman.


Aria. He is indeed fit for her use: Well, it is a strange thing a Lady of her
quality should give her self the trouble, now she has passed the beaten Road of
Wickedness her self, to draw others in. My Mother has a good Friend of her; I
know my Father hates her, but his dear Interest prevails, she helps him to the
purchase of many a Prodigal's Estate.


Beatr. Madam, you forget my Lady stays.


Enter Donna Olivia. Aria. She Is here.


Oliv. How does my pretty Daughter to day? But why do I ask? you look fresh and
fair as the new-blown Rose.


Aria. When your Ladyship consults your Glass you will find a brighter, Madam.


Oliv. Fie upon you for a little Flatterer, what your Mother!


Aria. It Is true, the Law calls you my Mother, but the World must be blind as
my father, if they did not take us for Sisters.


Oliv. Well, your Father's Blindness is a dreadful thing, Ariana; why, he will
never suffer us to be out of the Room.


Aria. There is no Convenience but has its Inconveniency, Madam.


Oliv. That's true; come, we must to him.


Exeunt. Scene draws, and discovers Bondi in a Chair. Bond. I have a fine
melancholy Life on it, thank my Stars; but should I discover my self before this
arch Rogue has brought matters about, I must be the laughing stock of Venice,
besides paying a swindging Fine for deceiving the Duke and Senate in putting
off the Government. -- Boy.


Boy. My Lord.


Bond. Are not the Women ready?


Boy. My Lord, they are entering.


Enter Olivia and Ariana. Arian. Your Blessing, Sir.


Bond. Formality, I believe you mind your topping more than my Blessings, or
Heavens either.


Oliv. How are your Eyes, my Lord?


Bond. Not clear enough to see into your Heart, my Lady.


Oliv. Still angry!


Arian. Truly I hope purging my Father's Choler does him good, else surely he
would never practice it so often, but that he finds benefit by it.


Bond. Baggage!


Arian. Nay, I am out of the reach of your Cane, Sir; come, I would ^ain say
something to divert ye, the Spleen is very hurtful to your Eyes.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Madam, my Lady Temptyouth is coming up.


Bond. That everlasting Tattler, I would retire and shun the noise, only my
being here perhaps may in part hinder your luscious Imagination from being
tickled with all the Intrigues of the City.


Enter Lady Temptyouth. La. Tem. Good morrow, my Lord; good morrow my sweet
Buds of Beauty.


Bond. Pray, my Lady Temptyouth, don't put my Wife in amongst your Buds of
Beauty; if she is not five and twenty, she ought to appear like fifty, that is
sit for her, and would please me best.


La. Tem. Lord, you're so captious: Well, I swear your Wife looks very handsome,
it is for your sake she dresses, it is to look amiable in your Eyes.


Bond. Ay, now you have hit it.


La. Tem. Pox on him, I had forgot his blindness. (Aside) I mean, she used to
do; now, poor Lady, she is like any Slattern. Here Is my little Ariana appears as
she had not looked in a Glass to day.


Aria. Bare two hours I assure you, Madam.


Bond. Well said Pride, I have a good mind to have all the Glasses in the House
broke; no, sold I meant.


(Pausing. Aria. My Lord, my Actions never disobey you, pray allow me a little
freedom in speech.


Bond. She that is so free of her Tongue, commonly is as free (...)


La. Tem. Oh hold, my Lord, an immodest word, nay, any hint, though never so
darkly, tending that way, drives me out of ^he Room.


Bond. Your Ladyship has then a quick apprehension.


La. Tem. Yes, I vow, my Lord, at a Play, when no Woman of Quality else has
found out a ^eastly wrapt-up thing, I have not showed my Face in a quarter of an
hour.


Bond. Oh wondrous modesty!


La. Tem. My Lord, Count Dresswell has a Bank Note of Five hundred pound, he
cannot stay till the Bank pays, and would part with it for two hundred and fifty
ready Money; will your Lordship meddle with it?


Bond. Let him send it to Gervatio, and he shall have his Money.


La. Tem. I am always studying for your good; Lord, your Lady stands like any
Statue, I beg your pardon, I must rouse her* My Dear, Count Andrea dies for
you; I swear ^e was in such a condition, I could not forbear bringing this
Letter from him. But may your Laughter be trusted?


(Takes her a one side. Oliv. With my Life, or what is dearer, my Honor.


La. Tem. Well, I swear he talks so passionately of ye, says such warm
extravagant things, he sets my old Blood a glowing like dying Coals blowed by a
strong pair of Bellows.


Bond. What Is this long whisper, m^ Lady?


La. Tem. Only a Receipt for your Eyes, my Lord.


Bond. Then why may not I hear i^?


La. Tem. There Is something so nauseous 'twill set you against using it. Read
your Letter, Child.


Bond. What paper is it that ru^^els.?


La. Tem. Why, the Receipt, Simpleton: This man is so mistrustful. Well, but
Child, I can^t let this precious Receipt go out of my Hands for a thousand
Worlds.


Oliv. I beg your pardon, Madam, then I Will copy it; nothing shall be neglected
by me that will help my Lord. A Pen and Ink there.


Bond. A ^e^ter from her G^llant, and she^s a going to answer it; Hell and
Fury! I cannot hear it, nor can have remedy.

(Aside storming.
La. Tem. Heavens! what is the matter?


Bond. My Eyes smart intolerably.


La. Tem. Fretting, fretting; Lord, you must be p^tient. Madam, I beg you^d be
as quick as you can, for I Am in haste.


Oliv. Your Ladyship sees I Am about it.


Bond. Ah the Devil, and I see it too, and be hanged to ye.
(Aside. When you have done, Gervatio shall read it to me.

Oliv. Gervatio is my mortal Enemy, what shall I do now, Madam?

(Aside.
La. Tem. Pho, pho, write a scrip of paper good for the sight, put in
Eyebright, White-Rose-water, and whatever comes in your Head.


Bond. Here Is mighty Consultation about this damned Receipt.


La. Tem. I tell you, my Lord, if you fret thus you will never see again.


Bond. No matter, wo^^d I could see what I wish.


La. Tem. What Is that?


Bond. The conflagration fall upon the Women first, and leave the Men by
themselves an Age longer.


La. Tem. Then they would be the nastiest, most helpless Creatures; ha, ha, ha.


Enter Boy. Bo^. Count Fidelio to wait upon your Honor.


Bond. Count Fiddlestick; Why did you not say I was busy?


La. Tem. Well, I vow, my Lord, if you are thus froppish, all your Friends will
forsake ye, a dark Room will be sit for you.


Bond. Friendship, there is no such thing, Nature laid the Ground work of Enmity
i^ every Mortal; indeed in some it is spiced over with Dissimulation; I hate
this man, and yet must speak him fair.


La. Tem. Why do ye hate him?


Bond. That Is a Secret.


Aria. Which I can guess at.

(Aside* Enter Fidelio. Now my turn's a coming.


Fid. Your Lordship's humble Servant; how does your Lordship to day?


Bond. Well in health, my Mind is like my Sight, oppressed.


Fid. I am sorry for it.


Oliv. Madam, there is your Receipt with Thanks.


La. Tem. I wish it may do him good.


Bond. Yes, yes, I shall feel good on it, methinks my Horns are sprouting
already.

(Aside.
Aria. Madam, cannot you engage my Father in a little Discourse, whilst I talk
with --

(Aside to Lady Temptyouth.
La. Tem. That young handsome fellow, thou art a Rogue; I Will do it, I warrant ye.
Well, you say you will have the Bank Bill, my Lord.


Bond. I told you so once already.


La. Tem. Lord, you are so short one cannot speak to ye, All this while Count
Fid. courts, kn^^ls, and talks to Ariana.
tho it is for your own good: I believe Count Dresswels Estate too, you may make
a good hole in it if you will.


Bond. His Villa is very pretty, upon that he may have what Money he pleases.
Damnation!


(Bondi sees 'em. La. Tem. What Is the matter with the man? I swear you made me
start, why you turn your Head about as if your Eyes were of use.


Bond. I shall be discovered strait, was ever punishment like mine?

(Aside.
Oliv. You are very uneasy, my Lord, can I do any thing for you?


Bond. Yes, make me worse, I seldom ever knew a Wife bring Quiet or Content to
her Husband.


Oliv. This is my usage ever.


La. Tem. I wonder you are not ashamed, for a surly Devil; see, pish, you cannot
see how the poor Lady weeps.


Oliv. Ay, he is blind, and I believe he designs to make me cry my Eyes out to
be like him.


Bond. Oh the Devil! at this very minute she can scarce hold laughing. (Aside)
You are very merry Daughter.


Ariana claps her Fan on Fidelio's Shoulder. Aria. I only dropped my Fan, Sir.


Bond. My Lord Fidelio, how went the Votes in the Senate yesterday concerning
the new Levies?


La. Tem. Fidelio! why he is gone, my Lord, he only gave you the good morrow,
and passed through the Room.


Aria. That Is well enough, I Will swear.


Bond. This is abominable, but I must endure it.


Aria. Thou art a dear Angel; but, my Lady, could not you contrive to get my
Father away? this Gentleman has earnest business with me.

(Aside. to L Tempr.
La. Tem. Well, well, I Will try at that too; but which way? Gad, I Have got a
Bottle of Orange-water in my Pocket, I Will make the old fool believe it is
something good for the Eyes, 'twill do him no hurt, only make 'em smart a
little, that perhaps will induce him to lie down.

(Aside. My Lo^d, can you forgive me when I own I am the greatest Beast in the
World?


Bond. I always thought you so. (Aside) What Is the matter, Madam?


La. ^em. Here Is a Bottle of precious Water, given me by the Duchess, to be
applied at all times, and I quite forgot it, I swear; I have such a respect for
(...), that at every place I am picking up something.


Bond. Yes, Gallants for my Wife.

(Aside) Madam, I Will have none of your old Women's Medicines.


La. Tem. By your leave, my Lord, but you shall, I know the goodness on it.


Bond. I tell you I will not.


Oliv. Pray, my Lord, be ruled.


Bond. True Wife, though she cares not if I was deaf as well as blind, yet be
sure to be for any thing I am against.


La. Tem. Come, come, don't tell me, I swear you shall wash your Eyes with it.


Bond. I swear I will not.


La. Tem. By Heavens you shall, now I Have sworn again, I Will see who will be master.


Bond. A Pox take ye; He struggles in the Chair, and the stings the Bottle of
Water in his Face.
Oh the confounded pain! Boy, here lead me to my Couch; I must even send
Gervatio to watch 'em, that Woman will be the death of me.

(Aside)
Exit lead. La. Tem. Ha, ha, ha. So Ladies, what do ye think of me now?


Oliv. Oh, you are the best of Women.


Aria. Heavens! yonder is Gervatio a coming, he is our mortal Foe, my Father has
sent him, he had as good have staid himself.


La. Tem. Let me alone, I Will send him away, I Will lay a Wager.


Aria. Fidelio, step behind the Skreen, whilst my Lady trys her Power, he^l
tell my Father you are with us.


Fid. I will, Madam; dear Lady Temptyouth, if thou can effect this, I Will have
thy Statue made in Brass.


La. Tem. Brazen-face! could you think of no other Metal? go, be gone.

Enter Gervatio. Your Servant, good Don Gervatio, you are come luckily to
receive my Instructions, you must immediately carry to my Lord Dresswell Two
hundred and fifty pounds, and take his Bank Note for ^ive hundred.


Gerv. Your pardon, Madam, my Lord sent me to stay here.


La. Tem. And your pardon too, Sir; I am sure your Lord would not lose such a
Bargain; and he must have the Money presently, or he will sell it to somebody else.


Oliv. Indeed I heard your Master say he would have it.


Gerv. He Is a Prodigal, and may give me something out on it: here is no Men, what
should I stay for? (Aside.) Well, I Will carry it presently.


La. Tem. Presently, nay, you must go now, this very Instant, now.


(Thrusting him out. Gerv. What, does your Ladyship intend to ravish me?


La. Tem. When I thrust thee from me, Fool. Come, good Gervatio, make haste,
because I undertook my Lord's business, and I love to go through stitch with
any thing I meddle with: Be speedy, come, I may do ye a Kindness another day.


Gerv. I must be gone, there is no disputing with her.

Exit Gerv.
La. Tem. Appear absconding Knight, appear.


Fid. Be gad, my Lady Temptyouth, you have charmed me so, you shall have a Kiss
with as much Ardour as if you were but sixteen.


La. Tem. O sweet young Gentleman, Heavens bless him! You are happy, Madam:
Come, I must do more for you yet, Time's precious; my Lady Olivia Bondi, let
you and I go into the Garden, and consult about that Receipt.


Oliv. You Will find what I have done in it is to your satisfaction. Daughter,
your Servant, I Will keep your Father from sending for you as long as I can.


Aria. Madam, I am yours and my Lady Temptyouth's most humble.


Fid. I am her Slave.


La. Tem. Well, you are a couple of dear Kittens, bless you both.


( Exit with Olivia. Aria. My Lord, you have talked of Flames and Fires, and
Darts, and the Devil and all, but how shall I be convinced it is not the Hundred
thousand pound I am like to be worth kindles these Fires and Passions?


Fid. Why faith, Madam this way; let us marry without your Father's Consent, and
he will turn us out of doors, then I Will beg for ye, fight for ye, starve for ye,
dye for ye.


Aria. Thou art an honest Lad, but I don't like starving, 'twill be apt to take
away all your Appetites, and you will not care for me.


Fid. Oh no, my Love to thee is implanted in my Soul, and were my youthful Arms
reduced to very Bones with the worn Skeleton, I should hug thee to my Heart, as
my chiefest Blessing and divinest Treasure.


Aria. It Is pretty to hear a young fellow one loves talk thus, but this wont
do, Love and Plenty crown the circling Year with Pleasure, but where either's
wanting, Content scarce ever appears. Is it impossible to get Gervatio to our
party? He is cunning, and can rule my Father.


Fid. I Will try; but, Oh! --


Aria. You want a Bribe; come, be not ashamed of your poverty, since your noble
Father wasted his Fortunes in being always in Arms for the defense of his
Country against our common Enemy the Turks, the ungrateful Senate ought to have
took you to their care; but since neglected, accept of this without a blush.


(Gives a Purse. Fid. Bound by innumerable Charms, by Obligations
unaccountable, when I cease to love thee, may Heaven and all my Peace of Mind
forsake me.


Aria. Try Gervatio, tell him that I Will for ever be his Friend.


Fid. Madam, I will with joy, and urge whatever eager love can to my Soul
suggest.


Enter Beatrice. Beatr. Madam, my Master raves for you like one mad.


Aria. Then I must go.


Fid. My Lord Insulls, that Rival; but why name I him? I know your noble Soul
despises him.


Aria. Rest in that secure, I loath the man, my Father's power shall force my
Death sooner than Consent: farewell.


Fid. It Is Death to part, though but for a moment; Is there a time, is there that
white day in Fate when I shall call thee Wife? let others scoff, think the
Matrimonial Bonds uneasy, term it

A Hell, a Pit, an endless painful Snare,
The Heaven I covet is to wed my Fair.

Exeunt severally. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Scene changes. Enter Olivia and Lady Temptyouth. Oliv. WEll, your Importunity
and the Count's has prevailed, I Will vow I blush to think on it, through a
backdoor into the Garden, the hour that my Husband sleeps, a young Gentleman;
faith, Madam, it is very scandalous.


La. Tem. Fiddle f^ddle, scandalous! if you have the Pleasure, much good may do
the World with the Scandal.


Oliv. You Will stay with me, Madam.


La. Tem. Yes, yes, Madam; I left my poor Girl at home not well on purpose to
come.


Oliv. What kin is that young Lady to you, Madam?


La. Tem. Her Mother was my Friend, to tell ye the truth, she is a Bastard, I
have bred up several, and helped 'em all to good Husband, or Gallants, which is
better.


Oliv. A charitable Lady you are. Hark! I hear a noise, it is he, I swear I
shall ^^sh to death.


La. Tem. I never heard of anybody died of that Disease; here is the man, look
what a well built person it is.


Enter Count Andrea. And. Ladies, your Servant.


Oliv. Did you come in (...) observed, my Lord?


And. Yes, Madam; but ^^ve had a little misfortune, I Have broke the Key in the
Door, and know not how I shall get out again.


La. Tem. Here Is a Fool now is taking care to get out before he is well in,
mind your business, I Will get ye out, I warrant ye.


And. Pardon me, Madam, it is my dear Olivia's Honor I am careful of; for my
self, I Would wade ten thousand Dangers only to touch this beauteous Hand.


La. Tem. Why that is well said, kiss it now, or else you do nothing.


And. A thousand and a thousand times.


La. Tem. Well, I Will in, and watch the old man's motions.


Oliv. You will not leave me, Madam.


La. Tem. Indeed but I will, I cannot stay a moment longer.

Exit Lady Temptyouth.
And. Shall we waste the time in talk, Olivia? Need I tell thee how much I love
thee? Wast thou not torn from my longing Arms by an inhuman Father, and given
to the withered ones of richer Bondi? Yet though I am denied whole Draughts of
Love, I Will snatch the precious Cordial when the blessed minute gives it, and
devour it eagerly.


(Embracing her. Oliv. Away, my Lord, think whose I am, think of my sacred Vow,
I dare not break it.


And. Your Vows first were made to me, no matter whose you are, this hour is
mine, and shall be spent in richest Love, Love that has so well revenged my
Cause, and as your cruel Lord snatched her from these ^ond Eyes, so Fate has
now deprived him of his own, he only cannot view your unequal Charms, which
dart on every wishing gazer Joy.


Oliv. If Judgments do hang upon my wretched Lord, shall I by Falsehood wound
deeper than his Fate?


And. Who ever cries out of pain they neither feel nor apprehend? Think Olivia,
my Olivia, for I will please my self, and call thee mine; think the vast
Charity, the mighty Kindness, that saves my Life, and hurts not Bondi.


Oliv. The Man is mad, to b^d a Woman think; no, talking Deluder, when we think
we never yield. Now I have thought on the fatal consequence, and resolved from
this minute to grow wise; that I have took the opportunity of my Husband's
blindness, and seen you often, was due to your injurious Wrongs; for witness
those Stars that smiled not on our plighted Faiths, I ever ^ound you constant,
and I loved you for it.


And. Oh sweet Confession! and if you love me, will you not bless me too? the
Argus Eyes of Jealousy are useless, the watchful Dragon that should guard the
golden Fruit now sleeps for ever.


Oliv. But Angel, Honor is still awake, that secures my beating Heart, yet I
will fly the charming sounds that are familiar there, but do not follow me, I
charge ye, do not, lest ye meet the everlasting Anger of my Eyes.

Exit.
And. Not follow thee, when my Veins are all on fire! yes,

Through every Path of this delightful Grove,
Till my warm Sighs her Honor shall remove,
And fill her panting Breast with yielding Love.
^xit*
Scene changes to the inside of the House. Enter Gervatio, a Servant to him.
Serve. Seignior Gonsalvo sends word, the Oculist is sick, and cannot come till
to morrow.


Gerv. Hum, -- then my Revenge is lost, for the Girdle comes before that time.
Did not I see Actwell cross the Court just now into the Kitchen?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Gerv. Call him to me.

Exit Serve. That fellow that plays tricks for his Victuals, perhaps, for a
Pistole, may do my business; my Lord knows him not.

Enter Actwell and Servant. Leave us.


(To the Servant) Exit Servant. Actw. What Is to be done now? What am I sent for
to Master Steward?

(Aside.
Gerv. Actwell, my Lord, was to have a famous Oculist come to day, and he just
sent word, he cannot; 'twill put my Lord so damnably out of humor, there will
be no enduring it; cannot you pretend to be the Oculist, get a Launcet, look
into his Eyes, talk Nonsense, make him believe you will do Wonders, but when it
comes to the upshot, I Will enter, and prevent your touching him? You must say
you came from the Duke and Gonsalvo; I Will give thee a Pistole.


Actw. I thank you, Sir, I am daily obliged here, I believe I could do it well
enough, only I don't understand those damned cramp words those Quacks have.


Gerv. O say any thing; half an hour hence come to the Wardrobe, I Will give you
an old-fashioned Cloak, that you may look like an experienced man full of Years.


Actw. I will, Sir; the Film, the Tenders, the Devil, I Will look into a Book of
Anatomy, and get some terms from thence; I will be sure to wait upon you, Sir.
This was happy for poor Actwell.

Exit.
Gerv. To fright him, is that all for such an intolerable caring? Gad, if the
Devil was not wanting in a Temptation, I could do him a greater Mischief.


Enter Fidelio. Fid. Your Servant, Don Gervatio.


Gerv. Sir* my Lord's asleep.


Fid. It Is you, not your Lord; I am come to -- but e're I tell my Suit, receive
this Purse, a young Lady's present.


(Gives the Purse. Gerv. You banter me.


Fid. Indeed I don't Gervatio, you can see, though Melito Bondi's blind and might
have seen, I live but for Ariana's sake, the kind Maid meets my Flames, and
generously returns 'em; my wretched Fortune hinders me from following the way
my Love proposes, taking her my only Blessing from her Father; it is in your
power, Gervatio, to assist us in making up, if but a moderate fortune, you can
persuade, decoy, do any thing with the old man,


Gerv. The Temptation I wished for is come. (Aside) My Lord, your Offers are
made in a happy time, for I was just designing to wait on the young Lady, and
proffer her my Service.


Fid. Are you real?


Gerv. By all that is good I am, my Master has beat me into a right
understanding.


Fid. What shall we do with this Lord Insuls, Gervatio?


Gerv. Why, as he is made of Cork, we will set him a floating, and return him to
the rest of the mercurial Gentlemen in his own Country. Well, my Lord, leave
your Affairs to me, and if I don't bring Ariana to your Arms, and more Bags
than three Men can carry, my Ears shall be at your mercy.


Fid. Well, thou art a dear Rogue, and shall command my Fortunes.


Gerv. My Master rings; trust to me, and be happy.


Fid. Your Servant.


Gerv. Yours.


Exeunt severally. Scene draws, and discovers Bondi a rousing from a Couch, a
Boy with him. Bond. Where Is my Wife and Daughter?


Enter Lady Temptyouth and Ariana. (...) ^em. Here, here, my Lord. Well, I
believe your Wife is the best of Women, we three have been all at work in the
outer Room, and I Will swear poor Olivia (...) in upon you twenty times, she is
so fond, for all you are a naughty man, and use her so barbarously.


Aria. Well said Telltruth.


(Aside. Bond. Here Is a Tale of a Tub indeed, where is she now?


La. Tem. I fancy gone to take a turn in the Garden.


Bond. Boy, go call her.


La. Tem. What Is the Boy a Fool? It Is not convenient for him to go, he shall not
go.


Bond. Heyday! my Lady Temptyouth, are you to order every thing in my House?


La. Tem. I will order things when Decency requires; look, to end Disputes,
here the good Lady comes.


Enter Olivia. Oliv. I heard the Bell had rung, and hastened to my Dear.


Bond. My Devil.


Oliv. Such Answess would make a Woman mad.


La. Tem. You have got a pure color, Olivia.


(Aside to Olivia. Oliv. Pho, walking apace.

But, my Lady, how shall I get him out, there is no opening that Door, and the
other way lies through this Room?


La. Tem. Why, what is he afraid on, is not my Lord blind, where is the Fool?


Oliv. Speak softly, walking at the Door.


La. Tem. Let me come by; Who have we here? my French Tailor has followed me
hither about the Girl's Stays; Oh the Impudence of these Countrymen! Monsieur,
go to my House again, I Will come home presently.


C^un^ Andrea passes over the Stage, and kisses Olivia's Hand. Andr. Pardon a
moy, Madam.


La. Tem. Pardon a moy kether, rude ^rute! I Am sure I am not like most Quality,
I owe him nothing.


Bond. Count Andrea, my Wife's first Love! Oh, the Garden, the Devil! cursed,
cursed Gervatio.


La. Tem. What mean these starts of Passion? do you want Gervatio?


Bond. I want a Halter.


La. Tem. Would you had one then, you're cross enough to deserve it.


Bond. Somebody, I Am sure, does.


Enter a Servant. Serve. M^ Lord Insuls is just arrived.


Bond. Let me desire all this Company, except my Daughter, to retire, I Have made
up the business with my Lord's Father, there wants nothing but a Visit or two,
which formality requires: Come, Mrs. Crooked-rib, will you walk into the next
Room?


Oliv. I Am ready to wait on you.


Aria. Oh, my Lady Temptyouth, now my Plague's a coming.

(Aside.
La. Tem. Have Patience, Child, and I Will send Fidelio to thy aid.


Bond. Do You hear, Mistress, receive this Lord as the man I have unalterably
resolved shall be your Husband.


Aria. Yes, Sir.


Bond. yes, Sir; what a tone's that in! I think you're but too well, an Estate,
a Title, and an handsome fellow.


Aria. Pray add an empty Pate.


Bond. Goodlack, Mrs. Flippant, any other Woman would have leapt at him; upon
my Blessing use him as he deserves. Come, my Lady Temptyouth.


Exeunt all but Ariana. Aria. As he deserves, that is to be cudgel'd. Now I had
rather have the Visits of fifty Gossips from a drunken Christening, than the
Plague of this Prince of Fops: Hang it, I Will bridle my Inclination, let him run
on with his Vanity, then burst my Sides with laughing at him.


Enter my Lord Insuls, with several Attendants. Ins. This is prodigiously
opportune, by the Muses, to find your Ladyship alone, Powderwell, adjust my
Garnature, I beg your Ladyships Pardon, that I do any thing of this kind before
your Ladyship; but there was an uncivil Wind, as I passed the great Court, has
blown me into the very disabilee of the vile Mob.


Aria. I cannot perceive an Error in your Lordships Dress.


Ins. Your Ladyships very humble Servant, by the Muses, I am all in confusion;
I beg your Ladyships Pardon (takes out his Pocket-glass.) For this freedom
before you, but it is that I would not appear negligent in your Ladyships
presence.


Aria. What a nauseous Fool it is.

(Aside) My Lord, methinks you're very well.


Ins. It Is your goodness, Madam, poison me if I don't look like a Carrman; I
look most abominably, by the Muses: Was your Ladyship never in France, Madam?


Aria. No, my Lord.


Ins. There a Man will keep his Chamber three days, if his Complexion is out of
order; they are not arrived to that nicety of Perfection here.


Aria. It Is pity your Lordship does not instruct our young Nobility.


Ins. I am not sparing of my Advice, Madam; some I find very tractable, there is
my Lord Dresswell has consulted my Judgment in laying out above a brace of
thousand pounds in Clothes, I believe the World, especially the Ladies, will
own it is to his advantage.


Aria. Yes, and a good help toward spending his Estate, which, I Am informed,
will be gone before he is five and twenty. (Aside.) None doubts your Lordships
skill in those Affairs.


Ins. But of all the moving lumps of Earth, commend me to the English, those
awkward Imitators, by the Muses, Madam, there is scarce one in ten understands
the Dress, the Dancing, the Singing, those chief parts of a Man of Quality; the
Duce take me if I was not afraid they had infected me, and when I returned into
France, lived a whole month retired, had all my Masters, practiced every Coupee
before I durst appear among the Ladies; yet, by the Muses, I know not how long
I shunned my self; methought I had the Brutal Plague upon me. I beg your
Ladyships Pardon for troubling you with a description of the dull Northern
fellows.


Aria. Every thing your Lordship says is agreeable, I observe very pretty
Asseveration you have, by the Muses.


Ins. Does your Ladyship like it? Indeed I think it sounds better in the mouth
of a Man of Quality than Damn me, Rot me, and such Porter-like Expressions.


Aria. Oh, better much, my Lord; I have a shrewd suspicion you that mention the
Muses so often have a familiar acquaintance with 'em, and write.


Ins. I write like a man of Quality, to please my self.


Aria. I dare swear 'twill never please anybody else. (Aside) Wou^d not your
Lordship oblige me with the sight of some entertaining Poetry?


Ins. By no means, I beg your Ladiship's Pardon, 'twill sp^il Conversation, I
can send your Ladyship several gilt Quires scribbl'd over, if your Ladiship's a
lover on it; most of what I write is Satyr upon ill dressed fell^ws, and then, by
the Muses, the nauseous Subject makes me so sick, I cannot forl^^^r being
spiteful too, and criticize upon what others write.


Aria. That Is the fault of all great Wits, methinks their good Nature should
balance their Judgment.


Ins. Good Nature, Madam, why that is only the civiler word for a Fool: If your
Ladyship did but see in France how the poor Poets at a new Play sneak, and
would cr^ep into an Augur-hole; when I come in, by the Muses, I have often
wished my my self a Woman, that I might have gone in a Mask, and not frighten
the little Dogs (that write for Bread) out of their Wits.


Aria. D^es your Lordship never write Plays?


I^s. Yes, often, but I could never get either of the Houses to play one.


Aria. What Is the reason of that?


I^s. Cannot your Ladyship guess?


Aria. No, I protest.


Ins. It will favor too much of Vanity to tell yo^.


Aria. Pray, my Lord, you have set me a longing.


Ins. I must run the risque of every thing, rather than deny a Lady: Then
truly, Madam, I believe they think, and that wisely, should they once play a
Play of mine no other would ever be received afterward, and, you know, a man
of Quality cannot be their Drudge.


Aria. Very true, that is a substantial Reason.


Ins. But, Madam, I know not how you have betrayed me into these things, when I
designed to have employed my minutes much more agreeably, in telling your
Ladyship, I adore you to an infinite degree.


Aria. His Courtship will be worse than all the rest of his Nonsense, Heaven
send me a deliverance. (Aside) My Lord, a person of your merit cannot value one
so unpolished, Nature has neglected me, and I have neglected Art.


Ins. Oh ^ie, Madam, this is Blasphemy, they are both Rivals in your
Perfections. But were it what you say, which I positively deny, by the Muses,
when I have the Honor to call you mine, I say, if you did want Instructions,
the rectitude of your Dress should be my care.


Aria. Rude Fool, I have no patience.

(Aside.
Ins. Madam, you seem uneasy.


Aria. It Is want of Breeding then.


Ins. Gad, I believe so too, for I never saw a Woman in my company so before.
Madam, you I break your Fann.

(Aside.
Aria. No matter, it is paid for.

I can act the dissembling part no longer.

(aside.
Ins. She Is strangely altered, jealous she cannot keep me to her self, her
Fancy's at work; there is nothing out of order in my Wig sure.


(Pulls out his Glass. Enter Fidelio. Aria. Oh Fidelio, do something, do any
thing to that Animal, and let me be gone, for I am teased to death.

Exit Ariana.
Fid. Gad, I know not what to do but affront him; flatter him I cannot, it is not
in my Nature.


Ins. Every Hair, I protest, is in as perfect Symmetry as my Features, as I was
saying, Madam.


Fid. As I was going to say, Sir.


Ins. Sir! hey, what rude Brute have we here? (Aside. Friend, would you speak
with my Gentleman, or the Groom of my Chambers? there they stand both.


Fid. There let 'em be damned both; no, it is you, Essence and no Brains, I
speak to; Shadow of a Man, vainer than Woman, emptier than the Plumes thou
wear'st. Thou thing, do thou pretend to court that Lady which went out just
now?


Ins. If the Lady went away, I suppose she kn^w you better than I, and avoided
so rough a fellow.


Fid. Insolent!


Ins. Something near my Name, though still without my Title.


Fid. Well, Sir.


Ins. Barbarous!


Fid. Did you not receive a Letter signed Fidelio, which told you my Birth was
noble as the first Ven^tians, though my sunk Fortunes were now my ^oe, yet
Arian^, that all-generous Maid, through my dejected Poverty smiled on my
const^nt Love, and gave me Hopes* I begged ye to desist, else let you know, that
my Life must first be had before the glorious Pri^e; read you not that Letter?


Ins. Something I do remember of such a Paper, but I saw it was a Man's Hand,
and gave it my Val^t to peruse, and asking him if there was any thing in it to
divert me, he said, No; so I never thought on it more.


Fid. Now you have heard the Contents, pray dismiss your numerous Attendants,
and meet or go with me to the Field that lies behind the Lemon-Grove, where
this Dispute shall instantly be ended.


Ins. What Is the man mad? wo^'d ye have me ^ight in this Wig?


Fid. Why not?


Ins. Oh Heavens! any thing toward a violent motion would raise such a D^st
out on it, I should be killed in a mist.


Fid. Pho, pho, we'll call at my Lodgings, and you shall put on one of mine.


Ins. Poison me if ever I heard the like, prithee where do think I was bred?
wear another man's Wig, when the best Barber in Venice knows, that after he has
altered, amended, reformed, and modeled a new Wig for me half a Year, it is
with much persuasion I try it.


Fid, Here Is a deal of Nonsense, come, what a pox must we do then, for ^ight
you I am resolved, or kick and post you through the Streets of Venice.


Ins. By the Muses, I know not what to say; in France I have a Campaign for the
bloody purpose, it is so necessary, yet so becoming, several Mars^als of (...)
have been ready to pull me to pieces for it; there I have also sighting Shoes,
sighting Gloves, sighting Sword, etc. and, in ^ine, can in a moment be equipped
(...) Traveling now like a Man of Quality, and to obtain my (...), I le^t my
Warlike Habiliments behind; if you will have Patience, I Will send post for 'em.


Fid. Incorrigible Fool! No, Sir, I give you but till to morrow to answer me,
and that you may be sure not to forget the Affront, there is a Remembrance upon
your Nose, [(...) him by the Nose] and another upon your backside. [kicks him.
and a warm one for your Cheek.


[gives him a box on the ^ar. Ins. Well Tarpaulin, Monster, half Fish half Man,
I Will be revenged, I will Villain, there is those shall punish ye; hey my
Attendants.

Exit Lord Insuls.
Fid. Now this fellow goes directly to my Ariana's Father; sure her Love will
inspire me to counterplot one Rival-fool.

By Force or Wit his Claim he shall decline;
If Heaven is just, the Virgin must be mine.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE draws. Bondi sitting in a Chair. Enter Ariana, near the Audience. Arian.
HUmph, my Father here already! I did not think he had been come into this Room;
he cannot see me, and I will steal softly through, he ^han't hear me neither.

(Aside.
(As she is about the middle of the Stage.) Bond. Who Is there?


Aria. What shall I do now? I Will counterfeit Madge the Dairy-maid's Voice, for
if he knows me, I shall not get from him the Lord knows when.

(Aside. (Speaks broad.) It Is I, my Lord, I did not think any of the Gentry had
been come into this Parlour, so I went this way to serve my Pullein; Ise
warrant Ise come no more here.


(Runs stamping off, Bondi throws h^ Cane after her. Bond. Oh, dissembling
Baggage! Are all blind men served thus? Two such Women as my Wife and Daughter
are enough to make twenty Men mad.


Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord, some Company from the Duke, and with them the
famous Oculist Gonsalvo spoke of.


Bond. So, now my greatest Misfortune is falling upon me. (Aside. Call my
Family together, and go to Gervatio, bid him, as he values his Life, consider
what I said to him, and hasten to me. (Exit Servant.) The Imposture known, Boys
will hoot me out of Venice; then, to have an unskilful Man put me to
intolerable pain, perhaps real Blindness, (Stamps) Oh! I shall go mad.

Enter Olivia, Actwell dressed like a Doctor, and several others. I know not a
Face of those, sure my Friends are afraid to come, the Operation is so
dangerous.

(Aside.
Oliv. How do you, my Dear, were you in a passion just now?


Bond. I found by Instinct you were near me, and that made me Horn mad.


Oliv. Humph, I am a Fool to speak to you at all.


Bond. You are a Fool, a gross one, because you dissemble poorly; but, blind as
I am, I can see through it.


Oliv. What does he mean? he cannot be jealous of Count Andrea, because he never
saw him. (Aside.) Well, my Dear, I consider your Condition, and will bear with
your peevish Hamor. Here Is some Gentlemen, and a famous Oculist, sent by the
Duke, to look into your Eyes.


Bond. Peace, Scriech-owl, I am in pain enough already.


Oliv. I hope he will give you ease, my Lord.

Sir, please to look into my Husband's Eyes.


Actw. Fear not, my Lord, putting your self into my Hands, should I, or some of
those Gentlemen that have traveled with me, recount the Wonders I have done,
you would rejoice at your good Fortune in meeting with me. There Is the Emperor
of Germany's Aunt, threescore and ten, was led about stone blind twenty Years;
I came, and in a few weeks time made so perfect a Cure, that she has since
worked her Nephew a Point Cravat. I take out Specks where no body else can see
'em.


Bond. That will be my Case.

(Aside.
Actw. Oh, the sweet Duke of Tuseany! what a Film did I clear his Eyes of! the
Good of Mankind prevailed with me, or else 'twas hard to get from him.


Bond. Mr. Doctor, I don't doubt your Skill, but I had rather wait the Will of
Heaven for the restoring my Sight.


Actw. By your Leave, my Lord, I am Heaven's Instrument, and here is the Duke's
Command to do my best for you. Gentlemen, draw near, and hold him in the Chair,
while I look in his Eyes.


Bond. I shall be murdered here.


(Struggles. Oliv. Pray, my Dear, be ruled.


Bond. Iezabel!


Actw. Ay, ay, here it is, a huge Speck, just growing on the Ball of his Sight,
the worst of black Catarachs, but I shall out with him: let us see, how is
the other Eye? Oh Lord, further gone! Well, you may bless your Stars that you met
with me as you did, or else you had never seen in this World again.


Bond. I am contented with my present condition, and desire to speak with the
Duke before you meddle with me.


Actw. My Lord, your condition is a desperate condition, and the Duke shall see
some of my Art before you speak with him.


(Looking out his Instruments. Bond. Oh the Devil! I shall be ruined, where is
this Dog Gervatio?

(Aside.
Actw. When I have couched your Eyes, my Lord, you must lie upon your Back for
six weeks, and b^ fed with nothing but a Feather.


Bond. Oh!


Enter Ariana and Fidelio. Aria. Why you used him most inhumanly, I fear he will
complain to the old Gentleman. Heyday, what have we here, my Father in the
hands of the Philistines? Stay, don't you speak till some time after me. What Is
the matter, Sir?


Bond. So, here is another of my Comforts, with her Beggar at her Tail. (Aside.)
The matter! here is a Fellow will mangle my Eyes whether I will or no.


Fid. Can I serve you, Sir?


Bond. Yes, if you I beat that fellow.


Actw. How! beat me, that have the Badges of all the Princes of Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America! Come, come, I find my Lord's mad; pray, Gentlemen, help me
to bind him in his Chair.


Bond. Murder, murder! then, to tell you the truth, I am not blind.


Gervatio entering. Gerv. Nay, then it is time for me to appear.

(Aside.
Bond. I tell you I am not blind.


Actw. Pho, pho, this is only his fear.


Oliv. Nothing else, you may assure your selves.


Aria. Well s^id, M^ther, I think you may be pretty confident on it, for no man
that could have seen would have had Patience to have born what you have acted
before his Face.


Gerv. Make way there, let me come at my dear-lov'd Master, the sacred Girdle
of St. Silvester, brought by two holy Men, is just arrived; a new unusual Light
struck through the Hall, and I could see as if I had ten pair of Eyes, so light,
so glorious was the place; it is lodged i'th'Chappel, whither the Priests desire
you all to repair, and invoke the power of the Saint.


Actw. A Pox of those Miracles; do you hear, if your Saint does you no good,
don't send for me, for, by Beelzebub, I Will not come at ye.


Gerv. R^^ely performed, I Will speak with ye by and by.

(Aside.
Exit Actwell. B^nd. Thy Hand, Gervatio, I tremble every Joint of me; thou art
a Rogue, but I forgive thee. Come, Gentlewomen, though I believe your Prayers
signify but little.


Exeunt Bondi and Gervatio. Aria. Madam, what think you of this miraculous
Girdle?


Oliv. I don't use to have a great Opinion of those things, but we shall see
what Wonders this will do.


Fid. I think the whole Story is all a Wonder.


Oliv. When your Father cried out, he was not blind, I was terribly frighted.


Aria. I believe you was, Madam.


Fid. I Will try to engage Gervatio farther in our Interest, then we shall know
all.


Aria. Come, come, if we stay longer, I Am sure we shall be missed.


Exeunt. Scene changes to my Lady Temptyouth's House, Lucinda at a
Dressing-Table. Enter Lady Temptyouth. La. Tem. How is it, my Blossom? Let me
see, has not sitting up at the Ball last night spoiled thy Complexion? No, not
a bit: Oh, I could kiss thy pretty Eyes out.


Lucin. How can your Ladyship tell my Complexion is not spoiled? I have got
both my white and red on, Madam.


La. Tem. Oh, that is nothing Chicken, there is a Vivacity strikes through, and
thy pretty Eyes are as sprightly, as if thou had drank Nectar this Morning.
Come, what Conquests did you make last night? You know there lies my Pleasure,
to hear of your Victories.


Lucin. There was my Lord Dresswell said a thousand foolish things to me.


La. Tem. Pho, hang him, he is going down the World, he is neither ^it for
Husband nor Cully; think not of him, I charge thee, Lucinda.


Lucin. I shall never think of any without your Ladyships directions.


La. Tem. That Is my good Girl; well, but was there none else?


Lucin. Yes, there was the Duke's second Son, he only blushed when he came near
me, trembled when he touched my Hand, danced with such concern, that I thought
he would have fallen.


La. Tem. Ha, ha, ha, the Fool's in love, I Will put him down in my Table Book,
he may prove considerable.


Lucin. As for the rest, some swore they hated me, others I was not pretty; so
through a Medley of Confusion every one endeavored to express their Admiration.


La. Tem. Thou art a dear, dear Charmer; well, I swear I love thee better than
any of the little Creatures I ever brought up before.


Lucin. I thank my best Mother.


La. Tem. Nay, thy own Mother was a pure good Woman, only her barbarous Friends
turned her out of Doors for having such a pretty Rogue as thee: I kept her,
poor Lady, till she died.


Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lady Olivia Bondi sends to tell your Honor, That
St. (...) wonderful Girdle has restored my Lord Bondi's Sight, for which, at
present, they are paying their Devotions this Afternoon, the Duke's Music,
Balls, and all Divertisements (...) will af^ord, (...) my Lord Bondi's House;
the Ladies desire your Honor's company, and the (...) Lucinda's.


La. Tem. We^l wait upon them, our Service to the Ladies. (Exit Servant. Poor
Olivia, her (...) Husband's seeing will be but bad for her and Count Andrea:
^^ang't, it is setting our Inventions a little more upon the stretch, and we
shall outwit him still. Ha! I have a Thought come into my Head for thy
advantage, Lucinda. Here, (...), bring my Girl's best Head, and all her Jewels.
Oh, Lucinda, if thou can play one part to a Masterpiece, I don't doubt making
thy Fortunes for ever.

Enter Tifflewell^ with the things. Ah, Tifflewell now show thy utmost Art, and
make thy Mistress charming as an Ang^^.


Tiff. I warrant ye, Madam, such a piece of Youth and Beauty to work upon, and
fine Clothes, let me alone to make an Angel of her.


^a. Tem. If thou can but humor it.


(...). Give me Instructions, Madam, I am not accounted backward.


La. Tem. No, no, you are a dear forward Girl as Heart can wish; this would
oblige our Friends* prove an everlasting Provision for your self, and ravish me
with Joy.


Lucin. But yet you will not tell me what it is.


La. Tem. Dear Tifflewell, put another Jewel here.


Tiff. Pray your Honor let me have my own Fancy first.


^a. Tem. Lucinda shall sing, and Lucinda shall dance, and if they two, both in
perfection, will not charm him, the Devil's in it.


Lucin. Sing and dance, is that all? I have done that often enough to no
purpose already.


La. Tem. Yes, yes, thou shall do more than that, my dear Chicken, cannot you
put on a world of Affectation?


Lucin. With all the ^ase in the World: Alas, Madam, It was born with me, and I
have as much ado in some measure to overcome it, as I have my Inclinations
toward the eating green Fruit.


La. Tem. Affectation is a mighty Art, my Dear, and those pretty Eyes must be
managed a thousand several ways, severe, languishant, ogling, darting their
Beams, cast around, and i^ they chance to meet, a Lover's thrown with wondrous
haste and modesty into your snowy Bosom.


Lucin. My Eyes, dear Mother, ever were at my Command, but never let Fools in
them read my Heart: Thus I have looked upon the man I scorned, thus on him I
would not have believe my Love impossible, though hard, to gain; kind and coming
Looks I seldom use, I Am not arrived at that Age yet.


La. Tem. Dear Girl, your Aptness prevents the Care I would have undergone in
your Directions, but you must be very sure to rail, commend neither Man nor
Woman, ^ither in their Persons or Dress, except my Lord, to whom you are all
the while addressing.


Lucin. I am glad it is a Lord, for I hate to take pains about a fellow that has
no Title.


La. Tem. He has not only a Title, but an Estate, and every thing I could wish
for thee; Are you quite ready?


Lucin. Yes, Madam, do I look killing?


La. Tem. Like a Cherubim; come along.


Exeunt. Enter Count Andrea and Olivia. Andr. Oh my Olivia! Bondi's Sight
restored deprives me ever of the Light of those dear Eyes: I never believed
those Miracles told by canting Priests, now Heaven, to punish my Incredulity,
has sent one that robs me of all my Bliss, and nothing but the crowd, the noise
of this wondrous Girdle brought, could have gained my Admittance now.


Oliv. My Lady Temptyouth is our Friend; beside, these warm Desires will soon
grow cool, and then you will be glad of an Excuse.


Andr. Never, Olivia, never; my Youth, my Life, my Fortunes, all are dedicated
to thee.


La. Tem. [within] I say, my Lord, you shall not press into your Ladies Chamber
till she has word we are here.


Bond. [within] Sure this Woman intends to vex me stark mad.


Oliv. Oh Heavens, my Husband! what shall we do?


Andr. I Will get into the Closet.


Oliv. Alas, he has the Master-key.


Bond. [within] It Is but in vain, Heaven has restored my Eyes, and I will see
what is done in my House.


Oliv. Good my Lord, under my Toylet, quick, quick.


Enter Lady Temptyouth, Bondi, and Lucinda. La. Tem. And what would you see
now, your good Lady all alone, returning Heaven Thanks, I dare swear, for the
wondrous Blessing you have received.


Bond. I Am sure I saw the glimpse of a Man follow her to her Chamber.


Oliv. A Man with me!


La. Tem. Pho, Child, it is Jealousy, he takes thy Shadow for a Man.


Bond. I Will look into this Closet, but not enter it, lest you juggle him from
under your Petticoats.


[Olivia makes signs to Lady Temptyouth, that he is under the Toylet. La. Tem.
Come, is your Maggot over? will you down into the Dining Room, hear the
practice of Music, and my Lucinda shall give you a Dance.


Bond. Dancing be damned, I Would as live see a Monkey leap from Tree to Tree.


La. Tem. Not even his Eyes again will put this man into a good Humor. Well, I
hope we have a noble Entertainment, according to the old Proverb, a Miser's
Feast is always the best; will ye go down, or no?


Bond. No, I Will dine here.


La. Tem. Seem willing, madam, it is the only way to prevent him.

(Aside.
Oliv. With all my Heart, for I hate much Company: Here Diego, and your fellow,
carry this Table to the Dressing-room-door, a-top of the back Stairs, there
Sylvia can thrust it in, and bring the Side-board hither.


Enter (...), who carry off the Table, Lady Temptyouth going by the side. La.
Tem. Have a care you drop nothing.


Di^g. (...).


Bond. You are wondrous forward, perhaps I will not dine here when all is d^ne.


Lucin. (...) the old Gentleman does not know his own mind.


Bond. (...), are you settled in yours?


Lucin. If I am not, my Lord, my Years excuse it.


(...). One of your bringing up, my Lady Temptyouth, I suppose, because she is
so brisk.


La. Tem. I Am not ashamed to own her; yes, it is my dear Girl.


Serve. An^t ^lease your Honor, my Lord I^sulls desi^es to speak with you, on
very earnest business.


Bond. I believe I may dare venture to go, for my Gipsi^ would never have been
so-willing I should have di^ed here, if the Coast had not been clear. (Aside)
Show me where he is.


(Exit with the Servant. Oliv. So, he is gone, I hope the Count is safe.


La. Tem. Yes, yes, I saw him slip down the back-stairs as soon as ever the Men
were out of sight.


Oliv. How do you do, pretty Lady, I scarce dare speak to you before my
Husband, he is so peevish.


Lucin. Peevish, indeed I never saw such a cross old man in all my life.


Oliv. What would you do, my Dear, if your pretty Youth was confined to such an
one.


Lucin. O, I Would quickly send him to Heaven in a String; I Would have half a score
Gallants; Madam, if I did not ^eaze him to that degree, that in a months time
he went to sleep with his Fathers, hang me for a Fool.


Oliv. Thou art a Mad-cap.


La. Tem. Let us go down, for I have a Design upon that Lord Insulls, which
I Will tell you as we walk.


Oliv. I am ready to wait upon you.


Exeunt. Scene Changes. Enter Bondi and Lord Insulls. Bond. Was ever such
Impudence, such Disobedience practiced under one's own Roof? Mercy on me! what
will this World come to? A wanton Wife and an undutiful Daughter! the Plagues
of Egypt were mere ^lea-bitings to them.


Ins. Nay, I thought your Lordship was not privy to the Aff^ont, because I knew
your Lordship first proposed the Match; indeed never man of Quality was so
abused; I would have fought the fellow, but that I feared, by his Carriage, he
was a Scoundrel, and would disgrace my Sword.


Bond. Oh, it is a vile Wretch, but I Will be so revenged on him. My Lord, if yet
you think my Daughter worthy, the Ball just ended, a Priest shall make her
yours for ever, though indeed she ought to expect your Scorn and Hatred.


Ins. My Education taught me never to bear Displeasure against the fair Ladies,
I shall wait with much Impatience and Joy till you summon me to the fair one.


Bond. My Lord, I beg you would go to the Company, whilst I send for my
Daughter, and give her a Lesson, for I fear she was at the bottom on it. Call
Ariana.


(To a Servant. Ins. I will leave ye pray be not too severe upon the Lady, I
have a great respect for her; but for that rude fellow, by the Muses, he
deserves kicking and pumping.

Exit L. Insulls.
Enter Ariana. Aria. Did you send for me, Sir?


Bond. Yes, Mrs. Manybetters, and none worse; how you are tricked up! the
Dancing, not your Father's Sight restored, is your Joy: Are not you a
Cockatrice? dare you look me in the Face after what you have done?


Aria. Done, my Lord!


Bond. Yes done, Minx, you and your beggarly Bravo abuse a man of Quality,
Fortune and Honor.


Aria. Has the Baby been to tell its Tale then?


Bond. Do You make a Jest on it Huswife? Hear what I say, and mark it: This night
thou shall be my Lord Insulls Wife, or else, by Heaven, I Will turn thee loose
into the wide Streets of Venice, stripped of all Means, all Comforts, there to
get thy Bread amongst thy fellow-prostitutes, but never own thee for my
Daughter more.


Aria. These are cruel sounds, they strike through my soul, and dead my sense.
Oh, Sir, hear your only Child; you used to say you loved me, if I have lost
that Blessing, let Compassion plead, heap on me all punishments, spare me but
in this; let not my Youth be condemned to what I loath, to such a Fool, a
Blockhead, Coward.


Bond. Rebellious Witch!


Aria. Consider, Sir, you force me on the Road to Hell, for my strong Aversion
needs must lead me on to Murders, Adulteries, or such horrid Crimes that will
surely plunge me there.


Bond. Let go, stand off, for as I have a Soul, this night you are married, or
ten thousand real Mischiefs shall befall thee.

Exit Bond.
Aria. Mischief is already on me, lasting Mischief, fixed for Life, a Hus^and
whom I shall ever hate and all the World will still despise, all my ch^erful
hours are for ever fled, Fate has not one in store: Then let their Revels shake
the House with noisie pleasure, fixed on this wretched Earth, so stupefied I Will
grow, till I can work my melancholy Thought to fancy I Am a piece on it.


Enter Gervatio. Gerv. What Is here, my charming young Mistress on the Ground,
she that used to enliven all the World, now, when there reigns a general Joy,
sunk in Sorrow? ^ise, d^ar Madam, rise.


Aria. Never.


(Lifts her up. Gerv. I^ll try that; come Madam, what is the cause of this
dejection? did I not receive from you a noble Present? Come, pray believe me
yours, and tell me what is the matter.


Aria. If I durst trust thee, but it is no Secret; my Father has sworn I this
night shall wed Insulls.


Gerv. And you had rather have Fidlio.


Aria. Rather, oh, there is no comparison


Gerv. Smile then and you shall; but, (...), I Will do nothing without you are
merry.


Aria. Were I rid of the fear of Insulls, I could leap over the Moon.


Gerv. Let me see, does not this Lord Insulls pretend to Poetry?


Aria. Most intolerably.


Gerv. And is he not vain upon it?


Aria. As all Wou'd-^e-wits are.


(...). Then, dear madam, let your Troubles end, and be as brisk as your sweet
natural Temper incites, I warrant your Lumber of a Lover safe enough from
disturbing you when the Ball's done.


Aria. O that I could believe thee*


Gerv. You Will believe me when by my sole contrivance the Parson has conjured
you between a pair of sheets in Fidelio's Arms; ah! methinks I see you laid on
the delicious Scene.


Aria. Go, you are a Talker: Then I am to know nothing of your plot.


Gerv. Not till you hear of the success to the Company, sweet madam. Yonder the
Hall's as full as it can hold, the Musick's a thrumming, the Gallants are
ogling, my Lady Temptyouth as busy as a Be, there wants nothing but you to
crown the Assembly.


Aria. I Am gone; remember, if you ^ail my Heart's broke.


Gerv. Let your Heart be as light as your Heels, and fear nothing, fair Lady.


Aria. Take this and be careful.


^ives him Money, and exit. Gerv. I would not be old Bondi's faithful Fool again
for the World, there is some delig^ a Gus^o in serving these young generous
souls: Well, Brains, if ever you would do (...) service, let it be now, help me to
ba^lk this foolish Lord.

Fix soft Ariana where her Wishes tend,
So she secures a Lover, I a Friend.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
SCENE a Hall. Wherein is Bondi, Count Andrea, Lord Insulls, Fidelio, and
several other Gentlemen; Olivia, Ariana, Lady Temptyouth, Lucinda, with many
other Ladies. Bond. COunt Andrea is your Guest, I suppose.


( to Olivia. Oliv. My Lord!


La. Tem. No, he is my Guest, sure for the many Estates I have helped you to
for half the worth of 'em, you may allow me to bring one Friend.


Bond. Your Ladiship's always my Friend, I thank you. Come, why don't this
Dancing go on? if your Heels would wag, it is to be hoped you would be tired and
have done once.


SONGS, and a DANCE by Lucinda and a French Beau. Ins. ( to Lucinda) Heavens,
Madam! I have seen nothing so ravishly ^ine, nothing like it, by the Muses;
since I left Versailles, 'twou'd be impertinence to the highest degree to ask
if your Ladyship was not bred in France.


Luc. Oh, the Paradise of the World bred there, my Lord: Yes, my Mother was so
nice she had me nursed in France; I warrant she would not a let me sucked any
other than French Milk for a Principality.


Ins. A witty Woman, by the Muses, and charmingly pretty: Then your Ladyship
understands the French Freedom and Gallantry? According to those Rules, pray
Madam, number me amongst your humblest Servants.


Luc. With all my Heart, there is a Favor to distinguish you. (Gives a Ribbon.
No more words now we are observed.


La. ^em. Well done, my Lucinda, she is at him, in faith, my Maidenhead to an
Eggshell he is her own. (aside.) To Ol^v.) This is dull doings, Madam, I wish I
could part the Company, send those Gravities to tope their Noses, and get our
selves a little freedom.


Oliv. I wish you could, Madam; poor Ariana has not spoke a word since she came
into the Hall.


^a. Tem. I Will try: Well, now I vote that the Gentlemen and Ladies that have
danced retire into the drawing Room, and recruit with Sweetmeats and cool
Wines, and the old Do^s take up their Smoaking-room, and drink lusty Chiaux,
Bagrag, and the warmest Wines my Lord Melito Bondi's Cellar affords.


Andr. Spoke like an Oracle.


Bond. Spoke like a Devil, putting all the young ones together; but this is the
last day of her Reign, for I Will forbid her my House, though I lose Ten thousand
Crowns a Year by it.

(Aside.
An old (...). I like the motion well, for, by my holy Dame, I am tired with
seeing nothing but hip hop, hip hop.


La. Tem. Come, come, you as becomes you, your Age and Quality first.


(Driving out the old Men. Bond. The Devil take thee.

(Aside.
(...). Tem. Now pair all, and follow your Leader.


(...). I'^e let A^iana see I stomach the Affront.


To ^^cin.) Madam, may I crave the honor of your Hand?


Luc. Yes Gallant, it is at your service.


( Exeunt omnes but Fidelio and Ariana. Aria. Did you see my Fool strut by with
Lucinda? Now he is vain enough to fancy I will be jealous.


Fid. He is not worth a Thought.


Aria. Alas, you know not how formidable he is; my Father, with the dismal'st
Threats that Man could utter, has sworn to marry me to him this very Evening,
as soon as the Ball is over.


Fid. Hell and Furies! I^ll cut his Throat immediately.


Aria. Hold, hold, Gervatio with much assurance promised me a deliverance, have
a little patience, such desperate Attempts will ruin all.


Fid. Do think I Will stand by and see thee lost?


Aria. Nor will I tamely yield; but now let us be calm, and the Company,
methinks I have great Faith in Gervatio's Promises.


Fid. And I have Faith in thee; but, oh, if power should overcome madness,
Despair and Death would seize me.


(Lady Temptyouth pe^ping. La. Tem. Where are you, Chickens? Come hither, or
spite of me, the old man will ro^ze ye.


Aria. We come.


Exeunt. Scene changes. Enter Gervatio, Stretchwell, and Heardouble. Gerv. Mr.
Stretchwell, and Mr. Heardouble, you understand your business.


Stretch. Ay sure, or else we spent our Lives to very little purpose.


Gerv. Well, here I plant ye, and bring the Lord Insu^ls; if he owns he made
the Libel called The present state of Venice, you know what you have to do.


Heard. Yes, yes, truss him up for Treason.


Stretch. Hurry him away to Prison without Bail or Mainprise.


Gerv. Right, behind those Hangings conceal your selves, I Will bring him as soon
as possible.


Stretch. His business shall be done I Will warrant thee, old boy.


Gerv. And you rewarded.

Exit Gervatio.
Heard. Well, Brother, we are a great Prop to this State, Verice had long ago
moulder'd into its watery Foundation, if we Informers had not supported it from
ten thousand Treasons.


Stretch. Do think think this Lord Insulls is guilty or not?


Heard. What matter is it? he is rich* and we will fleece him.


Stretch. I hate a poor Dog, that pretends to be in a Plot.


Heard. Impudent Varlets! when they have not Money enough to pay their Fees, they will
undertake to turn Governments upside down.


Stretch. Hark, I hear a noise, to our Posts.


(They abscond. Enter Lord Insulls and Gervatio. Gerv. My Lord, I humbly ask
your pardon, for drawing your Honor from the bright Assembly, but I understand
you are in a fair way to be Heir-apparent to all my old Master's Wealth: I have
been a long and faithful Servant here, and may prevail with old Bondi to drop
more Bags than he designed.


Ins. Honest Gervatio, thou art kind, but the young Lady uses me most scurvily,
by the Muses, she must expect, wh^m I am her Husband, that in return of her
scorn I treat her with Indifference.


Gerv. She deserves it; good Heavens! slight such Worth as yours!


Ins. Nay, by the Muses, Gervatio, without boasting, I may say, all the Courts
in Christendom have admir^d my Person, Parts, and Dress.


Gerv. No doubt, my Lord, your Lordship has such an Oath, sets my mouth all on
Water, by the Muses: Oh, I had a devilish smatt'ring at 'em in my Youth, but
hard Fate threw me upon Units, Tens, and the Gargon of Accounts, when I longed
to have been rhiming: I am sure your Honor writes, O that I could be so happy
to peruse some of your incomparable lines.


Ins. What I write is all light Satyr, if your Fancy's that way, I can send you
Reams of covered Paper.


Gerv. Is it so light Satyr, ^'^aith? ha, ha, ha, nay, then I smell a Rat
indeed, they sed 'twas a (...).


Ins. What (...)


Gerv. As i^ you did not know, that exquisite, elaborate, most ingenious piece,
(...) 7. (...) of (...), wherein the Satyr is so winning, so instructive, so
reforming, as I may say, that the Duke is pleas^d with it to that degree, he
has promised his ^air Daughter's Pict^^e-set round with Diamonds, in a Gold
Chain that g^^s fifteen times about the Neck to the Man that will own himself
the Author.


Ins. He, he, he, does that Trifle make such a noise? Alas, I have writ Five
hundred better than that.


Gerv. Impossible, b^t we owe this to your Lords^^p, I Am sure.


Ins. Yes, the Lines are mine, but I ca^e not to expose my Name, I want not the
Duke's Present, Gervatio


Gerv. No, my Lord!


(Both the I^^ormers run out, and clap two Pistols to his Head. Ins. What Is the
matter, Gentlemen?


Stretch. Hold your Tongue, Sirrah, make no noise nor resistance, if you do,
one of these sends your Poetical ^^ains into the Air immediately.


Heard. Here Is a Rogue for ye, Brother! he ^ed he had made Five thousand Libels
on the Duke and Senate.


Stretch. Ay, ay, he shall have his Reward, a Halter instead of a Gold Chain.


Ins. Why Gentlemen, to tell you the truth, I did not write the Verses.


Stretch. Every Malefactor can deny his Crime.


Ins. Oh (...)! what is the meaning of all this?


Gerv. Heavens! my Lord, I am as much amazed as you, these fellows have
betrayed me, they told me the Poetry was adored by the Duke and Senate, and I
should have a swindging Reward if I could discover the Author; my business was
always to ^et Money, my Lord, and I hoped to have done my self a Kindness and
your Lord^hip an Honor.


Ins. Yes, you have honored me, I t^ank ye, put me in a fair way to be hanged:
Good Ge^tlemen, remove these horrid Instruments of Death a little further, they
put my P^ruke quite out of the curl* and my Body in such violent sweats, I
^han't be able to come near the Ladies again this ^ortnight.


Heard. Oh, there is no Ladies where you are a going, come along.


Gerv. Fe^r not, my Lord, I Will get you Bail.


Stretch. How, going to whisper the Prisoner! here is anoth^r Fiddle will make
ye dance farther off.


((...) out another Pistol. ^erv. O lord, O lord, I never could endure the Nose
of Beelzebub ag^^^st my pre^ious person.


(runs (...). (...). Come, let us have him the back way, le^t he alarm the (...).


Stretch. Shall we put him in the D^ngeon?


Ins. Good Gentlemen, consider my Ball-clothes.


Stretch. Here Is a Fellow taking care of his Clothes when his Life is in danger.


Heard. Well, Brother, according as his pockets are lined, he shall be used.


Stretch. Ay, ay, away with him.


Ins. Pray leave haling me, I Will go quietly.


Stretch. You Would best.


Exeunt. Scene draws, and discovers Olivia, Lady Temptyouth, Ariana, Lucinda,
Ladies; Andrea, Fidelio, Gentlemen; a Side-table, with Wine. Aria. Madam,
shall not we beg a Song of the charming Lucinda?


La. Tem. Not till my Lord comes, I have told ye my design.


( Aside to Ariana. Aria. And I like it extremely.


Enter Bondi, the old Senator, and a Priest. Aria. Heavens! look Fidelio,
what^s that stalks behind my Father, a Priest?


Fid. The Devil it is.


Aria. I fear there is mischief's toward.


Bond. As the day has passed in Joy, so, I hope, 'twill have a joyful end, for
I design before all these Witnesses to marry my Daughter, the young Lord
Insulls is the Bridegroom, his Father and I long ago concluded it, only my
Infirmity deferred the matter.


Old Sen. Ay, let us have a Wedding, the thoughts on it makes my old Blood dance.


Andr. Rather the strong Wines work upon your weak Brain.


La. Tem. The Devil! all my design's ruined, and poor Ariana's Heart broke:
fiddle faddle, my Lord Bondi, this is nothing but thriftiness, now the
Fragments of the days Revels must serve for the Wedding Supper; no, no, old
Gentleman, don't mistake your self, we^l have another Festival for dear
Ariana'^ Marriage.


Bond. My Lady, you have a large rule in my Family, but in this Affair, upon my
word, I Will be Master.


Fid. My Veins with kindling Ruge are all on fire, what shall I do, my Ariana?
I Will meet and stab him as he enters.


Aria. Have a moments patience, he appears not yet.


Lu^. What, must I lose my new Servant, Madam?


(To L^dy Tempt. La. Tem. So it seems, Child.


Lu^. A welladay! but hanged, while Fifteen has not overtaken me, I^ll never
spoil my Face with grieving.


Oliv. If I have any power, my Lord, I beg you would oblige your weeping
Daughter, in delaying this unwelcome Match.


^ond. Rest assured you have no power with me, and all you say against it
hastens my Resolves; use your Prayers and your Commands where you bestow your
Charms, I am cold, as I have ever found your Love.


Oliv. This should be Jealousy, but what can give him Ground for a Suspicion?

(Aside.
Enter Gervatio. Gerv. O, where is my Lord?


Bond. Here; what is the matter?


Gerv. Oh, my Lord, the worst News, the saddest Accident! Oh! my Heart will
break for the poor Gentleman.


Bond. What Gentleman? explain thy self.


Gerv. Gentleman did I say? no, no, not a Gentleman neither, it is a Lord.


Aria. My Heart bodes Comfort.


Bond. Torture me no longer, dear Gervatio.


Gerv. That hopeful Sprig, oh! I cannot get it out, my Lord Insulls.


Bond. What of him?


Gerv. Alas, the overflowings of his Wit has undone him: In short, my Lord,
some base Trappanners, Informers, of which this State swarms, sent for him from
this Company, and got out of him, that he made that cursed Libel, The present
state of Venice, which has so exasperated the Duke and Senate, that they have
resolved to hang the Author.


Bond. Hang him!


Gerv. Ay, hang him, Sir; my Bowels earn for the young Bud of Quality.


Bond. What a Devil had he to do with Poetry, that Leprosy of lazy Minds, that
Weed of Nature? Had he not Estate and Title? must he covet the Begger's Entail,
Parnass^s Lands, and be damned to him? Plague consume all the rhiming Fops in
Christendom.


Gerv. What, your worthy Son-in-law!


Bond. He makes me mad.


Fid. I could worship thee, Gervatio.


Bond. I must be rude, and desire the Company to break up, whilst I go and try
my Interest to release this jingling Coxcomb.


The Gent. My Lord, we are all your humble Servants.


Gerv. You two go round, and you will find the backdoor of the Garden open;
when my Master's gone I'l^ call ye.


( Aside to Andrea and Fidelio. Andr. We Will be ready.


Bond. (to the old Senator) Come, Brother Senator, your company may be useful.


Exeunt all but Olivia, La. Temptyouth, Ariana, Lucinda, and Gervatio. Gerv. So
Ladies, how do you like my Contrivance? Bondi may stir, but the duce a bit will
he get his Lordship released to night, and to morrow I have another Plot, which
I hope makes my fair Mistress happy.


Aria. Thou art my better Angel.


La. Tem. But my Ariana, will not you give me leave to free my Lord, provided I
take care he never troubles you with love again?


Aria. Ay, get him into the Bonds of Matrimony with Lucinda, and free him from
his Prison as soon as you please.


Oliv. Methinks it is pity the pretty Creature should be condemned to such a Fop.


Lucin. Oh, a rich Fool was alwa^es my desire, that I might show my Discretion
in managing him and his Estate.


Oliv. Nay, if you are pleased I am.


La. Tem. Come Child, we have many Irons in the Fire, there is not a Senator but
I have done a good turn for some time or other, and therefore I fear not
succeeding.


Exeunt La. Temptyouth and Lucinda. Lucin. Your Servant, Ladies.


Oliv. Yours.


Fidelio peeping. Gerv. Come in Gentlemen, the old Enemy's gone.


Enter Count Andrea and Fidelio. Fid. Let me embrace thee, thou Soul of
Ingenuity and Goodness.


( To Gerv. Oliv. Indeed Gervatio has proved just contrary to my Expectations;
I hope as he has freed Ariana, if I crave his Friendship, I may obtain it; I am
sure you know what moves my Lord to use me so intolerably, that I can never
meet a civil Answer.


Gerv. I own I know the Cause, but dare not tell ye, lest it startle ye too
much.


Oliv. No, Gervatio, prithee speak, for his brutal Carriage is past enduring.


Gerv. Then, Madam, my Master was never blind, pretended it, only to avoid the
being President of Dalmatia; consider if you have urged him.


Omnes. Not blind!


Oliv. Then I am lost.


(Swoons. Andr. Look up, Olivia, Danger shall never reach thee whilst this Arm
can weild a Sword.


Aria. Madam, your Apprehension is too timorous.


Fid. All here are your ready Friends.


Oliv. Oh, it is impossible, my Ruin is inevitable, the innocent Freedom I have
given this young Lord, my Virgin Love, before my Husband Bondi, will be punished
with nothing less than Death, Italy produces no milder Vengeance for suspected
Wives.


Andr. Harbor not a Thought so terrible; rather than be punished guiltless,
fly. Venice with your faithful Slave; to break forced Vows Heaven can never
hold a Crime, my Life, and whatsoever I am Master of, is yours.


Oliv Alas, how wild you talk! five noble Brothers adorn my Family, who would
p^^sue my guilty Steps, and piecemeal on this wretched Body hew out my Honors
Stains and their Revenge.


G^rv. Faith Invention pours on me like a Deluge, for your Protection and
endless Favor, I Will undertake to bring ye both off.


Oliv. Impossible.


(...). What a mad Risque o^r Sex runs when we plunge in real Guilt! what
Pangs, what Agonies, what Terrors are the fatal Consequence!

(aside.
A^dr. Have thou Reason, Gervatio, for what thou say?


Gerv. I Will serve you all, and, I do not doubt, successfully.


(Bondi within) Bond. Which Room is the Family in?


Oliv. I tremble, there is my Lord.


Gerv. Away, Gentlemen, into the Garden again, stay in the Grotto, I Will be with
ye presently, and tell ye all my Designs.


Exeunt Andrea and Fidelio. Fid. We'll wait you there.


Gerv. Good Ladies, to your Closets, I would talk with my Lord alone.


Oliv. Come, dear Ariana, thou art happy in prospect of thy love; if mine had
been my Lot, these Mischiefs never had happened.


Aria. I wish your mind at peace.


Exeunt Ladies. Mane^ Gervatio. Gerv. God I have undertook Hercules's labor,
but the greator the Undertaking, the greater the Glory in the performance.


Enter Bondi. Bond. Oh Gervatio! there is no freeing of this Fool to night;
where is my damned, Wife and Daughter?


Gerv. Gone to undress themselves.


Bond. There Is no body with 'em.


Gerv. None but these Utensils, their Chambermaids.


Bond. Gervatio, I hitherto have trusted thee with all the Secrets of my life,
shrink not back when I disclose the greatest: My Wife has certainly abused me,
her Relations are so numerous, that to expose her I should run ten thousand
hazards therefore I have resolved silently and secretly to take her off by
Poison, to stop my Shame and her future Sins.


Gerv. If it be so, my assistance shall not be wanting, but, Sir, the Case is
weighty, the Breath of life blown out, Repentance cannot kindle the dead Coal
again.


Bond. That Is true, but I am by all her wanton Carriages convinced, besides a
thousand Circumstances, she is guilty.


Gerv. Well, more to confirm your Suspicion, I must confess I heard 'em appoint
a meeting in the Garden about some three hours hence.


Bond. Oh, damn 'em, damn 'em.


Gerv. From the Balcony we may overhear and discovet new Cause for your
Revenge, or else find her innocent.


Bond. Innocence! it is not in the Sex, Eve lost it when she lewdly listened to
the Fiend, and entailed her guilt on her Posterity.


Gerv. Have patience, and your own Ears shall either acquit or condemn her.


Bond. Nay, my Eyes have seen enough already. Well, Gervatio, I trust to thee,
and will be ready when you call me.


Gerv. Your Lordship ever found me faithful.

Exit Bondi. If I do deliver these Ladies from all their Fears, I ought at
least to be esteemed a Knight Errant, and have it inscribed upon my Tomb; Here
lies a most puissant Hero: ^ox on it, what will rhyme to Hero? No, it shall be
thus: The generous Gervatio here lies dead,
To whom for Aid distressed Damsels fled.
Ay, ay, that will do: Now for my Garden-Sparks, my Instruments are Lords.

Exit*
The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE a Garden. Bondi and Gervatio appear in the Balcony, a Curtain to draw.
Bond. THey are not come yet, but I Am sure they will, for my Tormentor seemed
very uneasy, and full of ^hought.


( Olivia and Andrea meeting. Gerv. See, my Lord, they both appear.


Bond. Contagion seize 'em, Mildews and Blasts destroy her Beauty, stamp her
Face as deformed as her Soul, for, a Plague on her, she is too handsome now.


Gerv. ^ay, my Lord, if you are thus passionate, they will hear us.


Bond. Hist, I have done.


Andr. Madam, I come to wait on your Commands, which, how strange soever,
blindly I obey.


Bond. A Pox of your Complaisance.


Gerv. Pray, my Lord, be silent.


Bond. I am, I am.


Andr. When your Duty to your Father took you from my Wishes, and gave you to
the noble Bed of Bondi, great were my pangs; I struggled hard to conquer Love's
fierce Fires, and turn 'em into Friendship's lambent Flames; strong was the
Contest, yet I overcame, and now can boast a Friendship to you and your Lord.


Bond. Pho, this is Dissimulation.


Gerv. Hear 'em out, I am sure they see not us.


Oliv. I knew your Friendship pure, else I had never trusted you so far; but my
Designs are ended now, and my Lord grows very peevish; lest your coming should
offend him, I beg you would forbear the House, or any Opportunity of speaking
to me.


Andr. Madam, I will even in this fulfill your pleasure; but you was pleased to
promise, when you made that odd Request, I would in appearance seem your
Gallant, that you would some time tell me the reason of that innocent Dece^t.


Bond. How Is this?


Oliv. I did, but it is a Secret, and I must have your Word and Honor, that
neithe^ Friend nor For extort it from you.


Andr. I give you both, nay, upon my Soul I will not utter it.


Oliv. Then know my Lord was never blind.


Andr. How!


Bond. Ha, Gervatio?


Gerv. Sure she is a Witch.


Oliv. What is hid from loving Eyes? though all the world believed it, I
perceived the contrary, and often urged my Husband, though not plainly
contradicting what he said, yet round about he might perceive I guessed at it.


Gerv. Did my Lady ever hint she thought you not blind?


Bond. At first she was damned inquisitive, which I still thought she did for
her security in sinning.


Gerv. It sounds like truth: But hush, they go on.


Oliv. Methought I had no Comfort of my Life, whilst my dear Lord but seemed
under that Affliction; besides, Heaven knows, I feared a real Judgment might
befall him for his Counterfeiting, and so I played a thousand tricks with you,
thinking his Love so strong that he could not bear to see, and pretend not to
see another invade his right in me? This is the story, and this was my design,
but my Lord by his own Contrivance now is himself again, and I renew my request
to see you no more, for considering past Actions, your sight makes my Husband
uneasy. When I find him in a good humor I will acquaint him with my guiltless
project.


Andr. And if he is not displeased I may hope to continue in the Enjoyment of
your Friendship.


Oliv. Of that hereafter, but my Lady Temptyouth I resolve to avoid, because
she knew not the bottom of my design, yet was so free to forward it, my Lord
your Servant.


Andr. Madam, yours; on this fair hand let me wish you everlasting Happiness.


Oliv. Remember it is your parting kiss, and this indeed your eternal leave.

(Speaking softly.
Andr. My Love must mitigate that rigor, besides, our Friend Gervatio has
Employment for me in the House.


Oliv. By all my dangers (which I hope are past) I will no more endeavor or
consent to see you. Farewell.


(Exeunt severally Gerv. What think ye now, my Lord?


B^nd. Faith, I know not what to think, were I fare you have not betrayed me,
there may be some truth in it.


Gerv. Who I, my Lord? Upon my life not I, why your Lordship knows I never
could abide the Ladies; how many times have I made you angry with 'em. I Am sure
they hate me.


Bond. That Is true; if she forbears his sight I Will forbear my revenge, though the
Letters and the Ki^^es grumble in my Gizard still.


Gerv. Pshaw, only to carry on her Plot.


Bond. Well, I Will believe it if I can, 'twill be most for my ease I am sure --
Come let us in, I Will write to the Duke for this Scribbling Lord, though in troth I
am almost ashamed to appear in it.

( Exit Bondi.
(...). Go thy ways Don (...); my drubbing will be revenged at last.

(Exit.
SCENE, a Prison. Enter to Lord Insulls, Lady Temptyouth, Lucinda, and a
Keeper. La. Tempt. You see my Authority.


Keep. Yes, and obey it; the Prisoner is at your Service.


La. Tempt. My Lord, your Lordship's humble Servant.


Ins. O Heavens! your Ladyship and that brightness see me in this vile
Condition, I don't believe I have a Grain of Powder in my Wigg, the Villains
that took away my Papers took my Mirror also, because 'twas set in Gold, now I
could wish my self in the darkest Dungeon rather than appear such a Brute
before those resistless Eyes.


La. Tempt. Alas, poor Girl, I am sure she never did any thing of this Nature
before, but she received such a vast respect for your Lordship; your behavior
carries in it a shining Complaisance so much above our dull Venetians, that no
wonder it touched a tender Breast.


Lucin. I would serve the French if I met with any of the Nation in the Person
of a Labourer or Beggar, and sure when a Cavalier is in Affliction, who may
justly beast of all the Accomplishments of mankind, 'twill excuse my breaking
the strict rules of Decency in giving him a visit.


Ins. I am Transported, such sounds are only fit for Angels to hear, Mortals
cannot bear the Joy.


La. Tempt. Nay, she has brought you a Present too, and I hope a welcome one,
your Liberty.


Ins. No, the Lady has brought me everlasting Chains, by the Muses (Confound
the Oath, I cannot leave it) I Would not leave 'em to be free as Air.


Lucin. What means your Lordship, I am sure I begged your Freedom heartily of
my Uncle, the Duke.


Ins. But your Eyes teach my Heart the pleasing Bondage, which I desire to
Triumph for ever. G^d I say abundance of fine things.

(Aside.
Lucin. Your Lordship forgets, it is not Ariana you are talking to.


Ins. No, if it were, every word should stick in my Throat, she a dull
Insensible, no Mein, no Air, no Song, no Dance, nothing agreeable.


La. Tempt. Oh, the abominable Fool! how he describes the prettiest Creature
Nature ever made.

(Aside.
Lucin. Your Lordship cannot be in earnest.


Ins. By the Inferna^s, (Ay, they will do me less harm than the Muses) But vast
Fortune if I had married her, which now I never will: 'Twas for her that my
Equippage might have been the finest at the Court of Versailles: My Coach drawn
by six Barbs, six Blacks to every Horse. The poor Creature my Wife I Would have
confined to the Country with a pair of broken winded Jades and an old Fashioned
Chariot.


^ucin. I don't like your usage of a Wife my Lord.


Ins. She has used me ill and deserves such a return, but if your Ladyship
would think me worthy, Heavens! you should shine the Glory of Versailles; The
Barbs be yours, and I the humblest of your Slaves.

How fine is that, the Prison sure inspires me.

(Aside.
La. Tempt. Nay, I cannot excuse Ariana, for I doubt she had more than a Finger
in this troublesome business, but my Girl's too young to think of Love, though I
wish she had never seen your Lordship; I know not what time may produce.


Ins. Pardon my Presumption; I had not broke upon the Lady so abruptly, but I
am pressed upon by Fate, my Father to morrow arrives at Venice expecting me to
marry Ariana? Could I have hoped such Happiness as to have changed my Destiny
and fixed here where all my wishes tend, my Father might storm, but 'twou'd not
be in his power to alter it.


Lucin. Oh Heavens, such a concern ventured on so suddenly would kill me with
the Apprehension.


La. Tempt. Come, let us leave this detested place and go to my House, there
we'll consider further.


Ins. I wait on you, Madam, with unexpressible thanks for this Favor: I hope I
shall hear of my people, that I may once again appear like a Man of Quality;
not like a Rat shut up in a hole. I profess I am scarce fit to touch that fair
hand.


La. Tempt. But indeed you are, my Lord! Lucinda.


Lucin. My Mothers Commands, my Lord.


(Gives her hand* (Exeunt SCENE changes to Bondi's House. He at his Table
Sealing Letters, two Servants. Bond. This to the Duke, this to Gonsalvo, I hope
they will consider my Lord's a Fool, and release him: He make the Libel! I found
by his discourse he made it no more than I did. (Exeunt Servant^ He Is foolish
it is true, but then he is rich and the fitter for a Husband.


Enter Olivia, and Ariana weeping. Aria. Oh, Sir!


Oliv. O^, my dear!


Bond. What Is the matter with the Women?


Oliv. Alas, do you hear no noise in the House?


Bond. Noise, what noise, not I.


Oliv. Why all your Movables are seizing: Two Priests with Officers walk over
the House, nor will they be controlled, proudly they march along and break open
all the Locks, set down your Plate, your rich Hangings, and every thing of
Value, my dressing Plate that was my Maiden Treasure, that is down too; Oh, oh.


Ari^. Nay, as much as my ^old Bodkins, and all the Jewels I have on: I shall
be a (...) Luss now! Oh, Heavens.


Bon^. Ye amaze me, what can be the meaning on it?


Aria. They' ll tell no body, but seem to have great Authority.


Bond. I am at my Wits end. Where Is G^rvatio?


Enter Gervatio. Aria. Here comes the sorrowful Man.


Gerv. Oh, that ever I should live to see this day! such Havoc, such Waste
there will be of my dear Masters Goods, would I were dead out of the sight on it.


Bond. Why Gervatio, is all the World mad? What is the reason of all this
Outrage?


Gerv. I know not, but your Enemies are at my heels, I suppose they will acquaint
you: Here they come, my Lord.


^nter Count Andrea, and Fidelio, disguiss'd like Friars, and their Servants
like Officers. Bond. Has Heaven nothing but Afflictions for this aged Head!
Reverend Fathers what have I done to deserve such Usage.


Andr. Offi^ers give us the Inventory and retire: We will yet, respecting his
gray Hairs, conceal his sh^me and crimes as much as possible: Brother will you
lay the Enormous fa^it open before his hardened Soul.


(Exeunt Officers and Ladies. Fid. Your Eloquence will do it more ^eelingly
Brother.


Andr. Excuse me, indeed your Capacity is largest.


Fid. Pardon me, I am weak, very weak, compared to you.


(Bowing to one another. Bond. Ah, the Devil take ye both and your Ci^ilities.

(Aside.
Andr. Then according to my poor Ability.


Bond. How I am tortured.

(Aside.
Andrea Coughin^ and H^^^ing. Melito Bondi, Thou stand'st accused before the
Duke and Senate, and his Holinesses Nuncio, for such a grand Deceit, for a
Crime of such a Nature, so black in it is Root, so wide in i^s Branches, the
Parent a lie, the Daughter's Hypocrisy, Dissimulation to the highest degree
even to Pe^jury: Brother be pleased to discuss.


Bond. What will become of me.


Fid. Well, may thou tremble, old man, who durst affront Heaven in
Counterfeiting blindness.


Bond. Ah, Lord!


Gerv. Ah, we are all undone.


Fid. But as one Crime seldom fails to pull a greater on, in thee, lost man, we
find the dire proof of all that is ill; to restore this sight which Heaven knows
was never lost, Silvester's Sacred Girdle must be fetched, and a Miracle
pretended; but know the Saint needs not by your studied lies, addition to his
well established Glory, since the cursed falsity has been broached, he has
roused him in his Peaceful shrine and waked the Convent with his cries,
Bondi's a dissembler, Bondi has done me wrong, Bondi must be punished.


Bond. Worthy Fathers, behold at your Feet a Penitent, have pity on my lost
Estate.


Fid. Rise, and hear us out? Brother, proceed.


Andr. For this Crime the Senate have decreed, the Nu^cio too concurring, that
thou Melito Bondi be straight Divested of thy Lands and rich Possession, thy
Movables, thy Debts, and whatsoever's thine Con^iscated to the State, thy self
still to remain a Prisoner for life.


Fid. The doom is mild and merciful, if thou had fallen where the Inquisition
Reigns, through what variety of Torments must you have past, and for
conclusion, died: Brother, will you urge any thing further.


Gerv. Good Reverendissimo's, let me beg you cease, see my poor Master is just
expiring under the severity of your censure: your selves, I am sure, want
refreshing too.


Fid. Truly my Spirits are exhausted.


Andr. I do perceive mine evaporate.


Gerv. Within I have prepared something to sustain nature.


Bond. Let me entreat ye Fathers to accept it.


Andr. Shall we venture to eat the Viands of the Hypocrite.


Gerv. For that matter I Will be your taster, pray walk in.


Fid. My Stomach calls upon me to venture: Old Gentleman, we shall quickly
return and examine your Papers.


Bond. What you please, I am humbled to any thing.


Fid. ( Complementing about the way) Nay Brother, that will not do.


Andr. Upon my Veracity you shall.


Fid. By my order I will not.


And. That Is Sacred; then I must.


(Exeunt Gerv. and Friars* Re-enter Oliva and Ariana. Oliv. How have you come
off, my Lord.


Bond. ^'en stripped of all, naked in my old age, as when I first peept in this
wic^^d world.


Aria. Ah me, Unfortunate.


Bond. Unfortunate indeed, bred high and not worth a Dram, I doubt that
handsome Face will tempt you to make the best on it Ariana, and rather than live
poorly Sacrifice thy virtue.


Aria. Think better of me, I Will die first.


Bond. Why, that is well said, as for my Wife, she I fear, has learnt her Trade
already.


Oliv. Why must I suffer all these unkind suspicions?


Bond. Nay, I forgive thee, be it how it will, and thou shall not hear of it any
more from me.


Oliv. Shall we go and intercede with these cruel Men.


Aria. I kneel, and beg, and pray as long as I can speak for my poor Father.


Bond. Ay, you are wondrous kind.


Oliv. Come, let us try our power.


Bond. Hold, ye Fools, did ye ever know or hear of an Italian Priest let go his
prey; no, no, my long hoarded Wealth is got into Hucksters hands, I may even
bid farewell to all my possessions.


Enter Gervatio. Oh, Gervatio, my Fo^s I know are still innexorable, and my
ruin resolved.

Gerv. Yonder they are Nuckle deep in Sweetmeats, and have the best Wines the
world affords before 'em, yet I perceive no signs of mollifying: My Lord, I
would in private tell your Lordship what I have thought on.


Aria. If you please, Madam, we'll in and do all we can wish for my ^a^her's
deliverance.


Oliv. Ay, most heartily.


( Exeunt Oliva and Ariana. B^^d. Ah, Gervatio.


(Looking sorrowful upon one another. Gerv. Alas, my Lord.


^^nd. But who may I thank for all this, who was at the bottom of the blind
Contrivance that has ^uined me.


Gerv. And pray who would have thought a dead Saint would have distur^^^
himself with telling tales.


B^nd. Ah, I rather fear 'twas living Devils, it is no matter, I have resolved
in (...) Afflictions to submit to every thing, and neither quarrel nor
complain, though I discover thee and the Wife of my Bosom, two Serpents.


G^rv. A resigning Will is a great blessing; for my own part, I am sure the
Innocence of a Dove is upon me, toward your Honor, even at this time, when
you are suspecting me, my poor Brain is in Labor for your good.


B^nd. There Is neither help nor hope remain.


G^rv. Yet we may make the best of a bad Market.


(...). My folly appears so plain, I am ashamed to apply my self to the Duke
(...) Senate.


Gerv. I meant not so, that must be done he rea^ter, but you know my Lord,
these Harpies have not yet examined your Papers, I am sure they are tied^ by
the Teeth for stirring one while: now if you dare trust me I can take out Bonds
and Mortgages, to the Sum of fifty thousand Crowns, get it settled first upon my
young Lady Ariana, yet not let her know it, then it can give her no
encouragement for disobedience.


Bond. I thank thy care, Gervatio, and will instantly put them into thy hands,
but, do hear, let the Lawyer put in some doubtful Clause, that if I should
by any means escape, I may re-asume my Right and Title to it again.


Gerv. I warrant you, my Lord, though her name secures it from the Law, she shall
be never the better for it.


Bond. Come, make haste.


Gerv. My Lord, that way you will meet the Mo^bi^es.


Bond. (starting) My W^es distract me, I scarce know where my Closet is.


(Exeunt. Enter Oliva and Ariana. Aria. So, Gervatio has worked him to his
Ends, it is a lucky fellow I protest, I hope Heaven will forgive me for
consenting these tricks should be played with my old Father, since my end is
honest and for the sake of my Fidelio, who merits more than I can obtain for
him.


Oliv. Why, the Sparks did it rarely, but I am sorry Count Andrea has an
opportunity of seeing me again.


Aria. Pho, there is no harm in his sight, you should not fall too hastily from
one degree to another.


Enter Count Andrea and Fidelio, in their own Clothes. Here comes the
Reverendissimo's, as Gervatio called them: Does the Wheel of Affairs run smooth.

Fid. Upon Carpet ground my life, Gervatio has picked all the best of the
Bonds, Mortgages, etc. and is gone to an Eminent Lawyer with 'em.


Aria. What have ye done with my Father.


Fid. Made bold to imprison him in his own Closet, where he must remain during
our Royal Pleasure, and now, Madam, it rests wholly in your generous breast to
complete my Happiness; Gervatio has secured the Chaplain ours, if you consent
not to what indeed makes me giddy with the vast Joy, giving me your Beauteous
self, this very moment some sinister accident in all probability will ruin our
designs.


Oliv. Nay my dear Ariana you have gone too far now to shrink back, come we'll
be witnesses.


Aria. Well, Fidelio, I will venture on this B^g-bear-Marriage, but if thou
should prove ungrateful after all my obligations, what punishment do thou
deserve.


Fid. To be despised by the World, proclaimed a Coward; and what is yet greater
be hated by yo^.


Andr. Whilst I behold another's Happiness, my wretched self am banished for
ever from what my soul admires.


Oliv. How do ye know it is for ever young Gentleman? I may out live my Lord,
then a brisk Widow weighed down with Bags, oh, it is an excellent Cordial for
the younger branch of a Family.


Andr. Ay there is comfort in that thought, if you would in the mean time allow
me to see you; nothing less will preserve my life till the rich Cordial (...).


Oliv. To preserve my own I must deny that, for Gervatio tells me, my Lord was
growing up to great extremities; your forbearance of any sort of address, ^
shall esteem as a proof of your affection, but whilst we are idly talking here,
Fidelio views us with impatient Eyes, and longs to have his Joys secu^ed; the
Marriage over, I must beg your Lordship to retire, I would not have my Husband
see you for the world.


Andr. However unwilling, those commanding Eyes tell me I must obey.


Fid. Come, Ariana,

The Priest our hands, but Heaven our hearts shall join,
And endless raptures Crown me when I call thee mine.

(Exeun. Enter Lady Temptyouth, Lord Insulls, and Lucinda. La. Temp. Well I
never thought any Mortal could have prevailed with me to have parted with this
dear Girl at so short warning, and without more consideration, but your
Lordships merit is irresistible.


Ins. I am blessed in possessing her, punish me with the beastly Garb of the
Vulgar, if I would be unmarried to be an Emperor. This visit is in Triumph to
let proud Ariana see what an excelling Beauty has made me happy. O my dear
Cherubin, I cannot but think how the Court of France will admire my choice.


Lucin. Shall you like that.


Ins. Covet it; I hope, Madam, you will rob the Ladies of all their Sparks, and
the whole Gallantry of the Court be made to you.


Lucin. Nay, if your Lordship Glories in my Conquests, fear not, they shall be
numerous, I never failed when I endeavored it.


(...). That Is tr^e, for my hearts your prize, which, by the Muses, is a Trophy
not to be despised.


Enter Gervatio, with Parchment in his hands. La. Temp. Gervatio, where is the
Ladies.


Gerv. Faith, Madam, my young Lady is commiting Matrimony, I believe, that
sweet meat that is commonly attended with sour sauce.


La. Temp. Is she so, much Joy I wish her.


Gerv. I must to my old Master, get him to set his hand to these, and then I
think this head has brought wonders to pass.

( Exit Gerv.
Ins. Who is my Rival, some ill-drest Fellow I^ll lay my life on it.


Lucin. Even that robust piece of rudeness that accosted your Lordship so odly,
Count Fidelio.


Ins. He, he, he, they are well matched, by the Muses, I believe neither of 'em
understand the French way of dressing so well as the Groom of my Horses, he,
he, he.


Lucin. Ariana always ridiculed it, which has often broke Friendship between us.


Ins. Heavens, if I had married her, what a world of labor would it have cost
me to have modeled her for the drawing room at Versailles, whilst you, my
dear, at first sight will appear the abstract of Perfection.


Lucin. My Lord, you make me blush, but I shall now take unusual care in my
dress, that your Lordship may think me agreeable.


Ins. Happy man, happy man, as ever put on the yoke of Matrimony.


Enter Oliva, Ariana, and Fidelio. Fid. Ha, my Lord Insulls, your very humble
Servant, this is too transporting an hour to remember anger, now the dear
Ariana's mine, our Quarrel dies.


Ins. I wish you Joy with her, I am provided as much to my satisfaction, be
pleased to know the Duke's Neice for my Wife.


Aria. Lucinda, the Dukes Neice.


La. Temp. ( Aside to Ariana) Hold dear Ariana, spoil not this day's Mirth with
a discovery, he will know it soon enough; besides, I Will make thee, poor Girl,
worth more than that Fool deserve.


Aria. I beg your Pardon, I am dumb.

Madam, we must humor the greatness it seems.


(to Oliv.) Oliv. With all my Heart.


Ins. This is their Venetian breeding to whisper half an hour: Poison me, my
dear, if the very sight on it is not enough to spoil a Man.


Oliv. Joy to your honor, I thought you would not have ventured to have
changed your condition so suddenly.


Ins. Your Ladyship might consider the Man, and that would take your Wonder off.


Fid. Was ever any such Vanity.


En^^ Bondi, and Gervatio. Bond. Then you say you have obtained I may walk about
my House till further order.


Gerv. Yes, my Lord.


Bond. (^ees the Company) Heyday, who h^ve we here, nothing but meeting and
revelling, this is a time indeed for Mirth!


Ins. Old Gentleman, I am married, but not to thy Daughter, and for that r^a^on
w^ll be merry in spire of thy b^^d.


Fid. (Ariana kneeling) And I am married to her, and for that happiness shall
be for ever jo^full.


Bond. Tri^k'd, Ruined, Und^ne; hold, not ruined neither, he has ^e'er a (...),
nor none he shall have.


Gerv. Then I must interpose; if you have no Bowels for such a sweet young
Couple, I have had; my Lord Fideli^, here is the value of fifty thousand Crowns,
come, that will make a shift till the old man pops aside, or something better
happens.


(...). Betrayed by (...), I will run mad, I will grow distracted quickly.


Oliv. My Lord, if you did but see how ill such starts of passion suit your
age, sure you won'd forbear.


Fid. Think, my Lord, my want of fortune may be made up in tenderness toward
your Da^ghter, and duty toward your self.


La. Temp. Come, come, my Lord, the Senate, no doubt, when they see him married
to Arian^, will honor him with places of trust and profit, a rising Man seldom
wants a ^and to help him higher.


Bond. Let me consider, all in this room have been my Foes, I think, every
individual Person, for what cause, even because I have been a cross stingy old
Captious fellow, but henceforth I Will throw it away as fast as the best of ^e;
Alas, I had forgot, I have nothing but Misfortunes, and am a wretched Prisoner
Cond^m^ed to Shame and Poverty.


Gerv. All those afflictions I Will take off upon condition you will forgive your
worthy Son and Daughter.


Bond. Do this, and we all are Friends.


Gerv. Then my lord, be satisfied, the Duke nor Senate know nothing of your
deceit, 'twas only a Contrivance of your humble Servant to oblige this young
Lord and my Charming Mistress.


Bond. Well, thou have proved a great Rogue, but I Will keep my word.


Fid. Then I hope we shall not kneel again in vain.


Bond. No, take my Blessing, and as you prove, an Addition to her Fortune.


Fid. I have all my heart (...).


Aria. And my future life shall make amends for venturing once to disobey my
Father.


La. Temp. Now all is well, I hope the Music I ordered will come that we may
conclude our Joys with a Dance.


Ins. By all means, let us have Music that I may have the pleasure to see my
Lucinda trip like a Fairy.


Oliv. My Lord, as this is a general Jubilee, I hope I shall partake it, and
heart burnings being laid aside we henceforth may live more quietly.


Bond. Yes, yes, according to your deportment, thou have been! Uh, uh, but I
have promised to say no more.


Fid. Gervatio, I will always call thee Friend, and serve thee with my Life and
Fortunes.


Aria. Nor will I forget to esteem and reward thee.


Gerv. I hope you will say I have proved a well-meaning man to all, and my old
Master forgive me.


Bond. Aye, aye, that I will for fear thou should play me any more tricks.


Lucin. Here Is the Music.


Dance Bond. Now let us in and taste a Glass of Wine, I want some comfort after
all my frights.

And may my Fate to each a warning give,
How they ever love or practice to deceive;
For though they prosper and their Cheat's believed
With ease you see deceivers are deceived,

THE END.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Miss Bradshaw.
I Am sent a small Embassadress for Grace,
If there was power in such a Childish face:
Who knows but artless innocence may move,
And looks unpractic'd sometimes catch your Love.
Suppose it so, it is now, alas, too late,
Your liking me wards not the blow of fate.
A begging Epilogue's a despairing Case;
It Is asking mercy when the doom is past.
Part of this Play though stolen was lately shown,
And what was once exposed to this Lewd Town
Tho 'twere improved with you 'twill scarce go down.
^et 'twould ^e nob^er not to be sever^,
And what has been unjustly rifled spare;
For my sake use her kindly once again,
Pray do, you good natured, ^ine, pretty Men,
Come, I shall grow a Woman e'er't be long,
It Is but a little while we are too young;
And if Heaven on my youth does Charms bestow,
I Will layout all the s^^ck in pleasing you.
Let our wronged Author in your Favor shine,
And when you wish it, you shall not ^ail of mine.
EPILOGUE:
Designed for Mr. Verbruggen.
NOw Britain's raging Wars are at an end,
Caesar adorns the Throne he did defend;
Eternal Peace is fixed, and all things smile,
To Crown the happy blessings of our Isle:
From hence, we have encouragement to expect,
The Stage with nobler offerings shall be decked;
For in past Ages Peace did Wit create,
And Poets flourished equal to the state.
'Twas when the great Augustus ruled in Peace
And all mankind from him enjoined sweet ease:
Ovid's soft genius first began to please.
'Twas then the Lyrick Horace, Son of Fame,
Compiled his works, immortal as his Name,
Soft ^ase and quiet fancy did in^use,
And Rome's blessed state gave Birth to Virgil's Muse.
Oh, may our state like that produce such Men,
That from the crop of their luxuriant Pe^,
Succeeding Ages may for ever glean.
Critics their nature then shall alter quite
And what they fain would damn shall praise in spite.
Poets no more in humble lines shall sue
And creep and cringe to steal applause from you,
Nor beg for Favor where no Favour's due:
No more shall sense in fus^ian lines be lost,
Nor dullness flourish at the Actor's cost.
Authors shall write with fancy unconfined
To Copy Nature and reform Mankind,
Then Wit and sense shall here for ^ver dwell,
And Britain's Stage shall Athen's far excel
FINIS.

