THE Theater of MUSIC: OR, A Choice COLLECTION of the newest and best Songs
Sung at the COURT, and Public THEATERS.

The Words composed by the most ingenious Wits of the Age, and set to MUSIC by
the greatest Masters in that Science.

WITH A THEORBO-BASS to each Song for the Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

ALSO Symphonies and Retornels in 3 Parts to several of them for the Violins
and Flutes.

THE FIRST BOOK.



LONDON, Printed by J. Playford, for Henry Playford and R. C. and are to be
sold near the Temple Church, and at the Middle Temple Gate, 1685.

To Dr. JOHN BLOW, Master of the Children, and one of the Organists of HIS
MAJESTY'S Chappel-Royal. AND, TO Mr. HENRY PVRCELL, Composer in Ordinary to His
Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Chappel-Royal.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS being the first Essay of our in this kind, and being particularly obliged
to you for your Assistance herein, (in perusing several of the Songs of this
Book before they went to the Press, whose Authors we could not so well apply
our selves to, and adding Thorow-Basses to such as wanted them) we presume
farther on your Generosity, and beg the favor of you to patronize these our
Endeavors; and also to give us leave to acknowledge our selves, (as in
Gratitude bound)

Your obliged humble Servants, R. C. H. P.


To the AUTHORS in general of the following Musical Compositions.
GENTLEMEN,
I Hope the care we have taken, in endeavoring to get the most correct Copies
of the following Songs, has rendered this Collection as perfect as any of those
five Books already printed: However, if some small Errors shall be found (though
we hope the contrary), as we dare not pretend to Infallibility, so we hope you
will not attribute them to our neglect, but rather to our unhappiness, in not
having an opportunity of communicating several of these Songs to the Authors
themselves before they were printed off, as well as to the common Infirmity of
the Press. For, though most of these were printed from the Authors own Copies,
yet several of them were only Transcriptions, but those, such as we thought
likewise faithfully done. To prevent the hazard for the future of printing a
Song contrary to the Author's own Composition, we become Petitioners to you
(which we hope in justice to your selves you will easily grant), That when you
have made any new Songs, you will be pleased to leave Copies of them under your
own hands, either at Mr. John Playford's Shop in the Inner Temple, or at Mr.
John Carr's Shop at the Middle Temple Gate, and then we do faithfully promise
forthwith to print them from such Copies, whereby you may be assured to have
them perfect and exact. This, as it will prevent such as daily abuse you, by
publishing your Songs lame and imperfect, and singing them about the Streets
like ordinary Ballads; so it will particularly oblige,

Your Servants, R. C. H. P.


A TABLE of the SONGS contained in this Book.
A.
A Curse on all Cares Page 10 A Pox of dull Mortals 12. Awake, Oh Constantine!
awake, 14 Ah Phillis! cast those thoughts away 26 Ah Phillis! had you never
loved 29 As May in all her youthful Dress 34 All my past Life is mine no more
58
B.
Believe me Jenny, for I tell you true. 11 Bright was the Morning, and cool the
Air 28 Break, Cupid, break thy feeble Bow 48
C.
Come, come away, let us to the May Pole go 54
F.
Farewell all Joys, when he is gone 21 Fancelia's Heart is still the same 35
Fly from Olinda, young and fair 38
G.
Go tell Amintor, gentle Swain 30
H.
Hard Fate! that we have Eyes to see 6 Hark! I hear the Ecchoing Nation 18 How
sweet is the Passion of Love 41 How blessed is the Passion 49 Happy as Man in his
first Innocence 62
I.
I never saw a Face 'till now 1 Jenny my blithest Maid 16 If absent I from
Phillis am 33 If Love did make his chief Abode 50 If I live to be Old Ibid. In
vain we dissemble 61
L.
Long by Disdain has Celia strove 36 Love, Love's the dear talk 43 Love is now
become a Trade 45
M.
My Heart, when ever you appear Page 31 My Life and my Death 32 Madhin, why
does Love torment you 52
O.
Oh! why did e're my Thought aspire 4 Of my dear Celia's Sight depriz'd 8 Once
my Shepherdess was true. [A Dialog.] 64
P.
Pleasure by Angels unenjoy'd 27 Phillis and Strephon. [A Dialogue.] 73
R.
Rebellions Fools! that scorn to bow 20
S.
See how fair Corinna lies 2 Such loy Kisses Anchorites that live 17 Shot from
Orinda's brighter Eyes 23 Say my Heart, what shall I do 40 Septimnius and Acme.
[A Dialogue.] 68
T.
To hollow Rocks, and far-sought Plains 8 There never was Swain so unhappy as I
13 'Twas in a dismal Cypress Grove 15 Too high, Oh Cupid! cries the Swain 22
Tho you may boast you are fairer than the rest, 25 The Pleasures that I now
possess 42
W.
When absent from the Nymph I love 5 When Lucinda's blooming Beauty 7 When
Celia wept, the Heaven wept too 37 When absent from my fair Corinna I 39 Why
should all things bow to Love 46 Weep all ye Nymphs, your Floods unbind 47 Who
can resist my Celia's Charms 58
Y.
Ye happy Swains, whose Nymphs are kind 24 Ye Virgin-Power's, defend my Heart
44
ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now in the Press a most excellent Musical Entertainment, to be
performed at the Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's day next, Nov. 22. 1684. The
words made by the late ingenious Mr. John Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the
Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set to Music, in two, three, four, and
five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the Children, and one of the Organists,
of His Majesty's Chapel Royal.

Likewise at John Carr's Shop may be had, the Musical Entertainment for last
St. Cecilia's day. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fishburn, and set to
Music, in two, three, four, and six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcell, Composer in
Ordinary to His Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Majesty's
Chapel Royal. Also,

An Essay to the Advancement of Music, by T. Salmon. Price 2 s. The Vocal and
Instrumental Music in Psyche, with the Instrumental Music in the Tempest. Price
2 s. Melothesia, or Rules for playing a continued Bass on the Harpsichord.
Price 3 s. Tripla Concordia, or new Airs in three Parts for Treble and
Bass-Viols. Also all sorts of Musical Instruments and Strings.
The three following Songs in the Disappointment, or The Mother in fashion.

Ritornel.
^

SONG.
^ I Never saw a face 'till now, that could my Passion move, I liked, and
ventured many Vow, but durst not think of Love; 'till Beauty, charming ev' --
ry Sense, an ea -- sie Conquest made, and showed the vainness of Defense, when
Phil -- lis does invade.

II.
But ah! her colder Heart denies;
The thoughts her looks inspire;
And while in Ice that frozen lies,
Her Eyes dart only fire:
Between Extremes I am undone,
Like Plants to Northward set,
Burnt by too violent a Sun,
Or cold for want of heat.
Capt. Pack.
Ritornel.
^

SONG.
^ SEE how fair Cor -- ri -- na lies, kind -- ly call -- ling with her Eyes, in
the tender moment prove her; Shepherd! why so dull a Lo -- ver? prithee! why so
dull, so dull a Lo -- ver? In her Blushes see your Shame, Anger they with Love
pro -- claim, you too cold -- ly en -- ter-tain her; lay your Pipe a lit -- tle
by, if no o-ther Charm you try, you will ne-ver, ne -- ver gain her. While the
hap-py Mi -- nute is, court her, you may get a kiss, may be favors that are
greater; leave your Tune, and to her fly, when your Shep-her-dess is nigh, can
you pass your time no better? Dull A -- min -- tor! fie! Oh fie! now your
Shep-her -- dess is nigh, can you pass your time no better?

Capt. Pack.
Symphony to the following Song.
^

SONG.
^ OH! why did e're my Thoughts aspire, to wish for that no Crown can buy? It Is
Sa-cri-lege but to de -- sire what she in ho -- nour will de -- ny: As In --
dians do the Ea -- stern Skies, I at a di -- stance must adore the brighter
Glories of her Face, and never, ne -- ver dare pretend to more; as Indians do
the Eastern Skies, I at a di -- stance must a -- door the brighter Glories of
her Face, and never, ne-ver dare pretend to more, and ne -- ver, ne -- ver dare
pretend to more.

Mr. Robert King.
^ WHen ab -- sent from the Nymph I love, I Would fain resolve to love no more;
though reason would my Flame remove, my Lovesick Heart will still a -- door. My
weak Endeavors are in vain, they vanish soon as they return; I by one look re-
lapse a -- gain, and in a ra -- ging Fever burn.

II.
To Rocks and Trees I sigh alone,
And often do my Passion tell;
I fancy that they hear my moan,
And Echo back, You love too well:
Forbear your Passion to pursue,
Or it will end in misery;
The Nymph's in love, but not with you,
If this will not do, despair and dye.
Mr. Tho. Farmer.
^ HArd Fate! that we have Eyes to see, yet not a -- void our Mi -- se- ry! I
knew, to love her were my Bain, much more to tell her of my Pain: Nay, after
this hard Combat tried, and when with Com -- ple -- ments de -- ny'd, not then
to have power to give it over, was e -- ver Wretch so cursed be -- fore.

II.
Yet who would grudge to bear this weight,
Would she, alas! commiserate;
Who would refuse whole days of Care,
To dream all night of Love and her?
I would a Purgatory bear,
That might be overcome by Prayer;
But this Eternal Round of Woe,
None but the Damned should undergo.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
^ WHen Lu -- cin -- da's bloo-ming Beauty did the wondering Town sur- prise,
with the first I paid my Du -- ty, fix -- ing there my wandering Eyes: Her kind
Spring each hour dis -- clo-ses, Charms we no where else can trace; gay -- er
than the Blush on To -- ses, are the Glories on her Face.

II.
She alone the life of Pleasure,
Makes the Park, and makes the Play;
Scattering her amazing Treasure,
Gives her Slaves a Golden day:
You whose Thoughts are too aspiring,
Hope not she will ease your Care;
I have learnt to live admiring,
Love is vanquished by Despair.
Mr. Grabue.
^ OF my dear Ce -- lia's sight deprived, my self I seem to have survived; my
Heart to her long since is fled, and all in me but Grief is dead: In-fer-nal
Spirits thus remain, and know they live but by their Pain.

II.
And yet the lovely Nymph no doubt,
Allows not me one careless Thought;
Whilst circled in the adoring Crowd,
That of her Charms complain allowed:
My Sighs do fall undistinguished there,
And dye e're they arrive at her.
Slow Time.
^ TO hollow Rocks, and far-sought Plains, where naught but deepest Silence
reigns; or to some gloomy Cypress shade, for wretched Lovers on -- ly made;
will I my end -- less Sor -- rows bear, more, more re-gar-ded far than here;
there sigh and groan, whilst Ec -- cho's all a -- round, in a sad note my
Love's great Name shall found. Then in soft words will I, when all a -- lone,
to some far kinder Nymph my Griefs bemoan; then in soft words will I, when all
a -- lone, to some far kinder Nymph my Griefs bemoan.

II.
Scarce did I feel a Fire to move,
But now, Oh now! must leave my Love;
No more her Morning Blushes view,
A sweeter Red never Nature drew;
Nor see (which above all I prise)
Those killing Glances of her Eyes:
Then whilst I swell with pregnant thoughts of Love,
Such mournful Thoughts never Gods themselves shall move;
On some soft Bank, whilst Beasts stand wondering by,
I Will lay me down, I Will lay me down and dye:
On some soft Bank, whilst Beasts stand wondering by,
I Will lay me down, I Will lay me down and dye.
Mr. Charles Taylour.
^ A Curse on all Cares, and po-pu-lar Fears, come let us to the Bell, for their
Wine there drinks well; there take off our Glass, nay, it shall not one pass:
{vocal join} Chorus. For we will be dull, and heavy no more, since Wine does
increase, and there is Claret good store.

II.
Come fill up your Wine,
Look fill it like mine,
Here Boys, I begin
A good Health to the King;
Jack, see it go round,
Whilst with Mirth we abound:
Chor.
For we will be dull, and heavy no more,
Since Wine does increase, and there is Claret good store.
III.
Nay, don't us deceive,
Why this will you leave?
The Glass is not big,
What-a-pox, you are no Whig;
Come drink up the rest,
Or be merry at least:
Chor.
For we will be dull, and heavy no more,
Since Wine does increase, and there is Claret good store.
Mr. Charles Taylour.
A. 2 Voc.
^ BE -- lieve me Jenny, for I tell you true, these Sighs, these Sobs, these
Tears are all for you; can you mis -- trust -- full of my Passion prove, when
ev'-ry A -- ction thus proclaims my Love? Is It not enough, you cru -- el Fair,
to slight my Love, neglect my Pain? At least, that ri -- gid Sentence spare;
nor say, That I first caused you to Disdain.

II.
No, no, these silly Stories will not suffice,
Fate speaks me better in your lovely Eyes;
Let not Dissimulation's baser Art,
Stifle the busy Passion of your Heart:
Let, let the Candor of your Mind,
Now with your Beauty equal prove;
Which I believe never you designed
The Death of me, and Murder of my Love.
Mr. Charles Taylour.
A. 2 Voc.
^ A Pox of dull Mortals of the grave and precise, who past the De- light we en
-- joy each night, give Counsel, in-struct us; to be counted more wise; when
Nature excites, and Beau-ty invites, let us follow, let us fol -- low our own
Appetites.

II.
The brisk vigor of Youth, and fierce heat of our Blood,
The force of Desires
Which kind Love inspires,
Are too powerful Motives, and cannot be withstood:
If Love be a Crime,
We Are yet in our Prime;
Let Us never grow wise, and repent e're our time.
III.
Then we'll boldly go on whilst we are lusty and strong,
Whilst fit for the Task
Of a Vizard Mask,
And still be as happy as still we are young:
Whilst the impotent Sot
Rails, curses his Lot,
And being past his Pleasures, would have 'em forgot.
Mr. Charles Taylour
^ THere ne -- ver was Swain so un -- hap -- py as I, I sigh, (...) door, Ah
Phil -- lis! I cry, if you will not love, your Damon must dye; but still all in
vain, she regards not my Pain, when I hope for a Smile, I meet her Disdain; but
still all in vain, she regards not my Pain, when I hope for a Smile, I meet her
Disdain.

II.
My Pipe I sorget, my Sheep go astray,
The Wolf and the Fox with my Lambs run away,
And I am the talk of the Village they say:
The Nymphs all agree,
That Phillis is she,
And Love is the thing that has quite undone me.
Sen. Baptist:
A Song in the first Act of Constantine.
^ A -- Wake, oh Constantine! a -- wake, or in thy Sleep the prospect take;
here in this hollowed streaming Gold, the prospect of thy Life behold: This
Emblem of a bleeding Love, shall both thy Cross and Triump prove; for a -- las!
it is decreed by the Heavenly Doom, to purge thy past Crimes there is a Torment
to come. Yet after the Storm, be- lieve in me, no more disturbed thy Thoughts
shall be, but all se -- rene as breathless Sea.

Chorus in three Parts. ^ AND still thy Handmaid Victory, where e're thou go
shall wain on thee, and all shall end in Harmony.

Mr. Tho. Farmer.
^ It Was in a dis -- mal Cypress Grove, wherein the God of Day, I vain still for
Admittance strove, to dart one gentle Ray; where Strephon full of Anguish;
sought to ease his burdened Mind, by tell -- ling of his trou-bled Thought
un-to the careless Wind; by tell -- ling of his trou-bled Thought un -- to the
careless Wind.

Sen. Baptist.
A SCOTCH Song, made to a new Playhouse Tune.
^ JEn -- ny, my blithest Maid, prithee li -- sten to my true Love now; I am a
can -- ny Lad, gang a -- long with me to yon -- der Brow: Aw the Boughs shall
shade us round, while the Nightingale and Lin -- net teach us, how the Lad the
Lass may woo, come and I Will show my Jenny what to do.

II.
I ken full many a thing,
I can dance, and I can whistle too;
I many Song can sing,
Pitch the Bar, and run, and wrestle too:
Bonny Mog of our Town
Gave me Bead-laces and Karchers many,
Only Jenny 'twas could win
Jockey from aw the Lasses of the Green.
III.
Then lig thee down my Bearn,
Ize not spoil thy gaudy shining Geer;
I Will make a Bed of Fern,
And I Will gently press my Jenny there.
Let me lift thy Petticoat,
And thy Karcher that too hides thy Bosom;
Show thy naked Beauty's store,
Jenny alone's the Lass that I adore.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
^ SUch I -- cy Kisses, An-cho rites that live se -- clu-ded from the World,
from the World, to dead Sculs give; and those cold Maids on whom Love ne -- ver
spent his Flame, nor know what by de -- sire is meant: To their ex -- pi-ring
Fathers such be- queath, snatching their flee -- ting Spi -- rits in that
Breath. The ti -- me -- rous Priest does with such fear and nice De-vo-tion,
touch the ho -- ly Sa -- cri -- fice.

II.
Fie Chariessa! whence so changed of late,
As to become in Love a Reprobate?
Quit, quit this Dullness fairest, and make known
A Flame unto me equal to my own:
Shake off this Frost for shame that dwells upon
Thy Lip, and if it will not so be gone,
Let Us once more join our Lips, and thou shall see,
That by the Flame of mine 'twill melted be.
Mr. John Roffey.
^ HArk, I hear the Ec-choing Nation, Monarchy's and Charles's blessed Restau-
ration; sets Fame's Trump a soun -- ding, and all Hearts a rebounding; see all
Knees a- doring, and the proud Eagle soaring over the Head of great Charles,
our dread Sovereign crowned: See Ga-ny-med yonder, for the God of the Thunder
fills up a full Bowl there, and from each Loyal Soul there, the Im -- pe-ri-al
Health in blessed Nectar goes round. Bid the shining God of Day his glo -- ri --
ous Chariot stay, to pay his just Homage to that happy Morn', when
The Illustrious CHARLES of Great Britain was born: Bid him stop his burning Car,
to view his Ri -- val Star; great Charles his bright Phospher, the Star at high
Noon, that could outlook the Day, and out -- face the Sun.

II.
But to make our Joys compleater,
And this great Day's solemn Triumph still greater,
Whilst Casar we sing to,
Let Great James Fame take Wing too,
Whilst Poets and Story
Shall unite both their Glory,
And chant the loud Praise of a Race so Divine;
Our Cannons shall roar all,
And proud Mortals adore all,
And with the Loyal Britains,
The kind Nereids and Trytons,
To their Ocean's great Lord shall his Admiral join.
See, the glad long widowed Main
Welcoms home her James again;
And so when Omnipotent Birthright had given
To Jove the vast Empire of Earth, Sea, and Heaven,
When he sound the mighty Load
Too big even for a God,
He gave his great Brother the Storms and the Seas,
Whilst dread Jove and Neptune the whole World obeys.
III.
See Imposture and Delusion*
Titus and his Crew are brought to confusion,
Against Thousands and Millions
Of Whigs, Rebels, and Villains;
The Conquest is won Boys,
The Herculcan work done Boys,
The vanquished Phanatical Hydra's quite damned:
The black Bills and Spanish
Bloody Pilgrims all vanish;
Whilst Perjurers and Traitors
Into Dungeons and Fetters,
With their bugg'ring, bug'ring Savior lie crammed.
Bold Sedition shall no more
Disturb our Halcyon Shore;
No Factious cursed Sentes shall inflame the World,
Those Phaeton-Drivers to Damnation are hurled;
Through a Race of endless Years,
Shall dance the jocund Spears,
With Union and Order the whole Globe shall roll,
While Charles his bright Wain shall drive round the Pole,
^ REbellious Fools! that scorn to bow beneath Love's ea -- sie sway; whose
stubborn Wills no Laws al -- low, dis-dai-ning to obey: Mark but this wreath of
Hair, and you shall see, none that might wear such Fet -- ters would be free;
none that might wear such Fet -- ters would be free.

II.
I once could boast a Soul like you,
As unconfined as Air;
But mine, which Force could not subdue,
Was caught within this Snare:
And (by my self betrayed) I for this Gold,
A Heart that many Storms withstood have sold.
III.
Now Beauties, I defy your Charms,
Ruled by more powerful Art;
This mystic Wreath which crowns my Arm,
Defends my vanquished Heart:
And I subdued by one more Fair shall be,
Secured from Conquest by Captivity.
Mr. John Roffey.
^ FAre -- well all Joys! when he is gone, that filled each hour with Pleasure;
to Waves and Wind, not half so kind, I must re -- sign this Treasure: Whilst I
with pensive Look, and Tears, this cru -- el Absence mourn; with moving Sighs,
and panting Fears, court them for his re -- turn.

II.
That happy Minute when it comes,
Will satisfaction give;
Though I endure,
I Am then most sure,
In lasting Love to live:
In my Alexis God-like Mind,
None can destroy that Bliss;
He must be faithful, true and kind,
And I for ever his.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ TOO high, oh Cu -- pid! cries the Swain, you have forced my mounting Fire, to
reach that Sphere I hope in vain, toward which it does aspire: In Har -- mo --
ny, since ev' -- ry one of the Gods delight does take, oh why, oh why should
Love a -- lone such dis -- pro- portion make! Oh why, oh why should Love a --
lone such dis -- pro -- por -- tion make. Where e're the beauteous Nymph does
come, my Feet all joy -- full still; as constant as her Shadow roam, against her
Master's will: My Eyes from ga -- zing never refrain, up -- on the charming
Fair; Cha-me-lion-like, they feed my Pain with no-thing else but Air;
Cha-me-lion-like, they feed my Pain with nothing else but Air.

Sen. Baptist.
^ SHot from Orinda's brighter Eyes, the Lightning pierced my kindling Breast;
from whence a stubborn Flame does rise, a Flame no more to be suppressed: It
spreads and rages in my Soul, to such a head the Tyrant's grown; he sau -- ci
-- ly without control, burns all that does oppose him down.

Dr. John. Blow.
^ YE happy Swains, whose Nymphs are kind, teach me the Art of Love; that I the
like suc -- cess may find, my Shep -- her -- dess to move: Long have I strove
to win her Heart, but yet a -- las! in vain; for she still acts one cru -- el
part, of Ri -- gour and Disdain.

II.
Whilst in my Breast a Flame most pure,
Consumes my Life away;
Ten thousand Tortures I endure,
Languishing night and day:
Yet she regardless of my Grief,
Looks on her dying Slave;
And unconcerned, yields no Relief,
To heal the Wound she gave.
III.
What is my Crime, oh rigid Fate!
I Am punished so severe;
Tell me, that I may expiate,
With a repenting Tear:
But if you have resolved, that I
No Mercy shall obtain;
Let her persist in Tyranny,
And cure by Death my Pain.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ THO you may boast you're fairer than the rest, and brag how ma -- ny
Triumphs you have gained, yet shall your Beau -- ty never my Soul mo -- lest,
since by your Sex I Have been so much disdained: He who is of -- ten dri -- ven
to Despair, becomes at last re- gardless of the Fair.

II.
Know Celia then, I Will scorn as well as you,
And never more to Womankind submit;
Your Tyrant-Graces cannot my Heart subdue,
Nor can you conquer with your powerful Wit:
I Am now secure from all Love's cruel Harms,
And have prepared against them Counter-charms
III.
They who have followed long Love's idle Trade,
And do on all they see dote and admire;
Will, when repulsed, find Passion quite decayed,
And so contemn what once they did desire:
This common Tale, alas! few can prevent,
We first must sin, before we can Repent.
Mr. William Turner.
^ AH Phillis! cast those Thoughts away, of Honor and Discretion; such foolish
words of old might sway, but now they are out of fashion: De -- fer -- ring
Time, both ruins quite the Chemist and the Lo -- ver; the hap -- py Moment
which they slight, they ne -- ver can re-co-ver. Then let us be happy while we
may, no more defend your Treasure; since Life makes so much have away, let us
spend it all in Pleasure.

Mr. John Lenton.
^ PLeasures by An -- gels un -- en -- joy'd, on Glo -- ri -- a -- na's Smiles
do wait; she is Heaven's Glo -- ry, Nature's Pride, her Sex -- es En -- vy our
Delight: Life and Death on her depend, the Fates her Smiles and Frowns attend;
in her all Per -- fe -- ctions meet, her Beau -- ty's not more charming than
her Wit; in her all Per-fe-ctions meet, her Beauty's not more charming than her
Wit.

II.
Love sits with Triumph in her Eyes,
Fitting for every Look a Dart;
Which from her swift as Lightning flies,
And never fails to wound a Heart:
Every motion does inspire,
Endless Passion, strong Desire;
What other Beauties give and claim,
Is, like themselves, a false decaying Flame.
III.
Love in one moment greater grows,
When by those lovely Charms conveyed;
Then what from years of Worship flows:
When by another's Beauty made:
All those Pains Despair attend,
Can never my hopeless Passion end?
There Is joy in suffering caused by you,
More than the happiest Lover e're knew.
Dr. John Blow.
^ BRight was the Morning, and cool the Air, se -- rene was all the Sky, when
on the Waves I left my Fair, the Cen -- ter of my Joy; Heaven and Nature smi --
ling were, and nothing sad but I. Each Rosy Field its Odor spread, all
fragrant was the Shore; each Ri -- ver God rose from his Bed, and sigh -- ing
owned her Power; curling their Waves they decked their Heads, as proud of what
they bore, as proud of what they bore. Glide on ye Waters, bear these Lines,
and tell her how oppressed; hear all my Sighs, ye gentle Winds, and waft them to
her Breast: Tell her, if e're she prove un -- kind, I ne -- ver shall have
rest; tell her, if e're she prove unkind, I ne -- ver shall have rest.

Mr. William Turner.
^ AH Phillis! had you ne -- ver loved, your Hate I could have born; con-
ten-ted-ly I could have proved the Object of your Scorn: But you were once as
soft as kind, as yielding Virgins be; Gods! that that Face should have a mind,
stained with In-con-stan-cy.

II.
No Tongue can tell the Joy
Your kindness did create;
But the sweet Rapture you destroy,
With sudden causless Hate,
So have I seen the Rising-Sun
Promise a glorious Day;
But soon o'recast, the brightness gone*
Did to rough Storms give way.
Mr. William Turner.
^ GO tell A -- min^^or, gentle Swain, I would not dye, nor dare complain; thy
tuneful Voice with Numbers join, thy Voice will more prevail than mine: For
Souls oppressed, and drowned with Grief, the Gods ordained this kind Relief;
That Music should in Sounds convey, what dying Lovers dare not say.

II.
A Sigh, or Tear, perhaps she would give,
But Love on Pity cannot live;
Tell her, That Hearts for Hearts were made,
And Love with Love is only paid:
Tell her, My Pains so fast increase,
That soon they will be past Redress;
For ah! the Wretch that speechless lies,
Attends but Death to close his Eyes.
Mr. Robert King.
^ MY Heart, when e -- ver you appear, does something so de- light -- full find;
that had I no al -- lays of Fear, my Joys could not be more sublime: Had you
less Beau -- ty in your Eyes, my Love and I might live in Peace; in them such
power of char -- ming lies, our Ri -- vals every day increase.

II.
But though a thousand Hearts there be,
To you their Adoration owe;
In this you are as poor as we,
You have but one you can bestow:
It Is this that gives me all my Care,
Whilst trembling for my Doom I stand;
It Is this that racks me with Despair,
For fear I should not be the Man.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ MY Life, and my Death, are both in your power, I ne -- ver was wretched
'till this cru -- el hour; sometimes, it is true, you tell me you love, but
a-las! that is too kind for me e -- ver to prove: Could you guess with what Pain
my poor Heart is op- pressed, I am sure my A -- lex -- is would soon make me
blessed.

II.
Distractedly jealous I do hourly rove,
Thus sighing and musing, it is all for my Love;
No place I can find that does yield me Relief,
My Soul is for ever entangl'd with Grief:
But when my kind Stars let me see him, (oh then!)
I forgive the cruel Author of all my past Pain.
Mr. William Turner.
^ IF ab -- sent I from Phil -- lis am, and judge my Me -- rit by my Love;
strait I resolve to own my Flame, and hope I may suc -- cess -- full prove: But
when her Beauty I behold, and each sur -- pri -- sing Charm admire; I think a
Monarch were too bold, if he did to her Love a -- spire.

II.
Then quite despairing of my Fate,
I all amazed and silent stray;
Nor dare, so much I dread her Fate,
One Sigh and tender Look betray:
Thus they who most their Alms deserve,
Ashamed to beg, unpitied starve;
While often with Calls, and clamorous Grief,
The saucy Beggar gets Relief.
Mr. Robert King.
^ AS May in all her youth -- full Dress, my Love so gay did once appear; a
Spring of Charms dwelt on her Face, and To -- ses did in -- ha -- bit there:
Thus while the En-joy-ment was but young, each night new Pleasures did cre --
ate; har- monious words dropped from her Tongue, and Cu -- pid on her Forehead
sat.

II.
But as the Sun to West declines,
The Eastern Sky does colder grow;
And all its blushing Looks resigns,
To the pale-faced Moon that rules below:
While Love was eager, brisk, and warm,
My Cloe then was kind and gay;
But when by time I lost the Charm,
Her smiles like Autumn dropped away.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ FAn -- ce -- lia's Heart is still the same, hard and cold as Winter's
morning, though my Love is e -- ver burning. Yet no Frowns or Smiles can e -- ver
melt her Ice, or cool my Fever, melt her Ice, or cool my Fever.

II.
So long I talk and think of Love,
All the Groves and Streams can name her,
All the Nymphs and Eccho's blame her.
If she keeps her cruel fashion,
Naught but Death can ease my Passion.
III.
Of all the Charms that Lovers have,
All the Sighs, the Groans, the Anguish,
All the Looks with which I languish,
Moves not her to any feeling,
Beauty takes delight in killing.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
A. 2 Voc.
^ LOng by Disdain has Ce-lia strove, to con -- quer Stre -- phon's Long by
Disdain has Ce -- lia strove, to conquer Stre -- phon's hopeless Love; but
still in vain, in vain she strives, amidst a thousand Pains it lives: To
hopeless Love; but still in vain, in vain, etc. sierce un-qui -- et Cares a
prey, his Love grows as his Hopes decay; but still with Prayers, and Tears, and
Vows, his fair Tor-men-tor he pursues. But ah! how can she give Despair, since
she so chaming is, and fair? Still her sharp Answers But ah! etc. shall be
born, her Eyes more force have than her Scorn.

All ways, all times, the Wretch has tried,
In her best humors been denied;
When pity did good Nature aid,
With all the tenderness it had:
When Reason against Fancy strove,
With powerful Arguments for Love;
Such Love as she must needs esteem,
And like, had it not come from him.
Dr. John Blow.
Very Slow.
^ WHen Ce -- lia wept, the Heavens wept too, and called it sym -- pa- thies;
but 'twas because they could not weep such Pearls as her bright Eyes: Straitway
she dried her dew -- ey Cheeks, they smiled to look like her; but ah! their Con
-- test was as weak, as Darkness to a Star.

II.
Cease, cease your Emulation then,
Fond Spears, be ruled by me;
Strive to preserve your Gods and Men
By Contrariety:
Smile when she weeps, to dry those Streams;
Lest (deluged) Men expire;
Weep when she smiles, to cool those Beams,
And save your selves from Fire.
Mr. John Lenton.
^ FLY from O -- lin -- da, young and fair, fly from her soft en -- ga -- ging
Air, and Wit in Woman found so rare. Though all her Looks to Love advise, his yet
un- conquered Heart de -- nies, and breaks the pro -- mise of her Eyes.

II.
Wast not your Youth in coy Disdain,
Hope not your Beauties pleasing Reign,
By ways of Rigor to maintain.
If we to Kings Obedience owe,
Or to the Gods with Incense go,
It Is for the Blessing they bestow.
Mr. Robert King.
^ WHen absent from my fair Co-rin -- na I, to ease my Grief, fall into Po -- e
-- try; courting Enjoyment from a gen -- tle Muse, 'till by Di- straction I my
Fancy lose: So wret -- ched Men that sun -- dry Medicines try, as often en --
crease as cu -- re their Ma -- la -- die. Cru -- el Powers! that wound with such
delight, affording Love to make us perish by it! Else, why this distance should
they place between conquering Co-rin-na, and her vanquished Swain? The frown of
Fortune often our Bo -- dies parts, it is Death alone di -- vides u -- ni -- ted
Hearts.

Mr. James Heart.
^ SAY my Heart, what shall I do, Love or hate her, which of the two? say my
Heart, what shall I do? Thus through doubtful untrac'd ways, tread we Love's
am- bignous Maze: Let us move then, let us move, where -- so -- e -- ver led by
Love. It Is true indeed, she is coy and proud, proud as all the beauteous Crowd;
it is true indeed, but It Is true indeed, she is coy and pro -- ud, etc. it is as
true, she is gay, young, lovely, wit -- ty too; mo -- ve thy -- there then, my
Heart, let us move, I am resolved, resolved to love.

Mr. James Heart.
^ HOW sweet is the Pas -- sion of Love! how gay is the Joy of the Soul! how
pleasing those Fa -- vours do prove, whose kindness does Fortune control! Her
Eyes that with In -- flu -- ence shone, obtained such a So -- ve-reign Power;
th'exhal'd out my Soul like the Sun, when it draws up the Dew from a Flower.

II.
Let no Man believe he is wise,
By applauding the Musical Sphere;
But turn his Ear to her Voice,
And all that is Charming is there:
My Heart in the Paradise Land,
Within her sweet Bosom, I lost,
And with every touch of her hand,
I was ready to give up the Ghost.
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
Symphony to the following Song.
^ THE Pleasures that I now possess, for Em -- pire I would not for- sake; A --
min -- ta's Eyes my Joys increase, from ev' -- ry Look new Life they take: Her
Beauty like an A -- pril Sun, makes Love spring up in ev' -- ry part; the
Conquest that her Charms be- gun, her Wit has roo -- ted in my Heart.

II.
While her soft Smiles forbid Despair,
No restless Thoughts torment my Mind;
For France nor Flanders I prepair,
But how to make her yet more kind:
The greatest Hero owes that name,
To Slaves who have his Laurels won;
I choose yet as a nobler Fame,
To live or dye for her alone.
Sen. Baptist.
^ LOve, Love's the dear talk that usurps all our hours, which fast though they
fly by All -- migh -- ty Powers, I feel it is not Time, but Co -- rin -- na,
devours. With fu -- ry she hurries my Blood through each Vein, with gushing sad
Tears I un -- pi -- ti -- ed complain, no Heaven's like her Eyes, and no Hell
like my Pain.

Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ YE Vir -- gin Powers, defend my Heart from amorous Looks and Smiles; from
saw -- cy Love, or ni -- cer Art, which most our Sex beguiles: From Sighs and
Vows, from aw -- full Fears, that do to pi -- ty move; from speaking Silence,
and from Tears, those Springs that wa -- ter Love.

II.
But if through Passion I grow blind,
Let Honor be my guide;
And where frail Nature seems inclined,
There six a Guard of Pride:
It Is fit the price of Heaven be pure,
And worthy of its Aid;
For those that think themselves secure,
The soonest are betrayed.
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ LOve is now become a Trade, all its Joys are bought and sold; Money is a Fea
-- ture made, and Beau -- ty is con -- fined to Gold: Courtship is but terms of
Art; Portion, Set -- tle -- meant, and Dower, soften the most ob-du-rate Heart,
the Lawyer is the on -- ly wooer. My Stock can never reach a Wife, it may a
small Re- tai -- ling Whore; let Men of Fortune buy for Life, a Night's a
purchase for the Poor.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
CHORUS to the following SONG.
^ WHy should all things bow to Love, Men be -- low, and Gods above, why should
all things bow to Love; Death and Fare more aw -- full move, Death be -- low,
and Fate a-bove, Death be- low, and Fate a -- bove. Mortals, Mortals, try your
skill, seeking Good, or shunning Ill, Fate will be the bur -- den still, will
be the burden still, Fate will be the bur -- den still, Fate will be the burden
still.

^ WHy should, etc.

^ WHy should, etc.

^ WHy should all things bow to Love, Men below, and Gods a -- bove, why should
all things bow to Love, Death and Fate, and Fate, more aw -- full move, Death be
-- low, and Fate a -- bove, Death be- low, and Fate above: Mortals, Mortals,
try your skill, seeking Good, or shunning Ill, Fate will be the burden still,
Fate will be the burden still, Fate will be the bur -- den shall, Fate will be
the burden still.

SONG.
^ WEep all ye Nymphs, your ^loo -- ds unbind, for Strephon's now no more; your
Tresses spread be -- fore the Wind, and leave the ha -- ted Shore: See, see, up
-- on the craggy Rocks, each Goddess stripped appears; they beat their Breasts,
and rend their Locks, and swell the Sea with Tears.

II.
The God of Love that fatal hour,
When this poor Youth was born,
Had sworn by Styx to show his Power,
He Would kill a Man e're morn':
For Strephon's Breast he armed his Dart,
And watched him as he came;
He cried, and shot him through the Heart
Thy Blood shall quench my Flame.
III.
On Stella's Lap he laid his Head,
And looking in her Eyes,
He cried, Remember when I am dead,
That I deserve the Prize:
Then down his Tears like Rivers ran,
He sighed, You love, it is true;
You love perhaps a better Man,
But ah! he loves not you.
Dr. John Blow.
^ BReak Cupid, break thy seeble Bow, and burn thy use -- less Darts; what
Pow-er does thy Godhead show, in woun -- ding sin -- gle Hearts: Each Mortal
Hand can do the like, their Shafts as sure -- ly fly; but distant Marks at once
to strike, that is pure Di -- vi -- ni -- ty. Then mighty Love, to show thy Art
and Power is all Di-vine; strike through my Breast, Bell -- lin-da's Heart, and
through Bell -- lin-da's Mine.

Alex. Damascene.
^ HOw blessed is the Passion, when guarded with Discretion! that in the pos-
session no Fears can an-noy us? Like the Gods, we our Pleasure enjoy at our
leisure, and love without measure, for who can destroy us? Like the Gods, we
our Pleasure enjoy at our leisure, and love without measure, for who can
destroy's? When secure in thy Arms, and Treasure of Charms, like an ab -- so --
lute Monarch I Will be; no Power shall e -- ver so just a Pas -- sion fe -- ver,
but I will be happy to E -- ter -- ni -- ty.

Alex. Damascene.
^ IF Love did make its chief Abode on fading Cheeks and Eyes, I Would spit up --
on the tri -- fling God, and all his Arts, and all, and all his Arts despise:
No gaudy (...) should shake my rest, none of the sil -- ly Fair should have
Do-mi-nion in my Breast, nor find, nor find a -- n entrance there.

Alex. Damascene.
The Old Man's Wish.
^ IF I live to be old, for I find I go down, let this be my Fate in a Coun --
try Town; may I have a warm House with a Stone at the Gate, and a cleanly young
Girl to rub my bald Pate. CHORUS. May I govern my Passion with an ab -- so --
lute sway, and grow wiser and bet -- ter as my Strength wears away; without
Gout or Stone, without Gout or Stone, by a gentle Decay, by a gen -- tle De-
cay.

II.
In a Country Town by a murmuring Brook,
With the Ocean at distance on which I may look;
With a spacious Plain, without Hedge or Style,
And an easy Pad Nag to ride out a Mile.
Chor. May I govern, etc.
III.
With Horace and Plutarch, and one or two more
Of the best Wits that lived in the Ages before;
With a Dish of Roast Mutton, not Venison nor Teal,
And clean, though course, Linen at every Meal.
Chor. May I govern, etc.
IV.
With a Pudding on Sunday, and stout humming Liquor,
And remants of Latin to welcome the Vicar;
With a hidden Reserve of Burgundy Wine,
To drink the King's Health in as often as I dine.
Chor. May I govern, etc.
V.
With a Courage undaunted may I face the last day,
And when I am dead, may the better sort say,
(In the Morning when sober, in the Evening when mellow)
He Is gone, and leaves not behind him his Fellow.
Chor. May I govern, etc.
Dr. John Blow.
An Address to a kind Lady.
^ MAdam, why does Love torment you, cannot I your Grief remove? Or is there a
-- ny can content you, in the sweet Delights of Love? Oh! no, no, no, no; oh!
no, no, no, no. If I should chance to crave the favor, which your Lips in --
vite me to; would you not think it a light be -- ha -- viour, for to take a kiss
or two? Oh! no, no, no, no; oh! no, no, no, no. Fair one, made of Beauty's
wonder, if I presume your Breast to touch; or if I attempt a lit -- tle under,
would you not think it too much? Oh, no, no, no, no; oh! no, no, no, no. Once
more on-ly let me try you, then my Joys are fully sped; if all this night I
should lie by you, would you keep your Maider-head? Oh! no, no, no, no; oh! no,
no, no, no. Could a -- ny other please you better, prithee tell mee're I go? Or
e -- ver was a Night spent sweeter? Or e-ver were you tickled so? Oh! no, no,
no, no; oh! no, no, no, no.

Senior Petro Reggio.
A Pastoral Song upon a Ground.
^ COme, come a -- way, let us to the May Pole go, and see what Lads and Las --
ses there may dan -- cing be; Tom pro -- mis'd to meet me there with pretty
Molly, Ralph with Bess, John with Joan, to be ve -- ry jol -- ly; and ma -- ny
more such pretty harmless Swains, that take delight, take delight to trace the
Plains: Then a- way, then a -- way let us go to the place named, for Shame still
attends Sloth, and ought to be blamed; make have to see how they trip it to the
Tabor, and how they labor, the little Birds in Consort chanting, there is
nothing now but thou and I are wan -- ting to crown the Day; make have away,
Phoebus leads the Dance, and calls, Come follow me, for I ad- vance; and calls,
Follow me, I advance. The Key changes. You're welcome, fair Couple, to this
Rural Band, let us have a Song, but first join hand in hand: Blessed be the day
that affords us such weather, let us re -- joyce now we are come to -- ge --
there. Let the fame of our Mirth as- cend to the Court, Phoebus, tell the La --
dies how we sport: How in -- no -- cent and harm- less are our Pleasures,
without sus -- pi -- cion of our Vir -- gin Treasures. Stay, go not a- way,
their Deeds are such, they care not much to partake of a -- ny Light, but what
themselves do make; our Wastcoat green, our Ruddy Face, sheltered beneath a
Straw Bongrace, is as good as the Hood they wear, we are as ho -- nest, we are as
fair: They have their Coaches, while we do foot it here without Reproaches.
Fresh Air's our Blessing, ne mock Caressing, our Swains are wholesome, but theirs
are fulsom. And why if we say I, when courted, they will believe us, we have no
cause to fear that they will deceive us; when they have protested, they ne-ver leave
us, to Languish as gay La -- dies do, when they have done all they can, there is
no return but Woe.

Mr. William Gregory.
Words by the late Earl of Rochester.
^ WHat cru -- el pains Co -- rin -- na takes, to force that harmless Frown;
when not a Charm her Face forsakes, Love cannot lose his own: So sweet a Face,
so soft a Heart, such Eyes so ve -- ry kind; betray, a -- las! the sil -- ly
Art Virtue had ill designed.

II.
Poor seeble Tyrant! who in vain
Would proudly take upon her,
Against kind Nature to maintain
The affected Rules of Honor:
The Scorn she bears so helpless proves,
When Passion pleaded to her;
That much she fears (and more she loves)
Her Vassal should undo her.
Mr. Snow
^ ALL my past Life is mine no more, the fly -- ing Hours are gone; like tran
-- si -- to -- ry Dreams given over, whose I -- ma -- ges are kept in store, by
Me -- mo -- ry a -- lone.

II.
What ever is to come is not,
How can it then be mine?
The present Moment's all my lot,
And that as fast as it is got,
Phillis is wholly thine.
III.
Then talk not of Inconstancy,
False Hearts, and broken Vows;
If I by Miracle can be,
This long-lived Minute true to thee,
It Is all that Heaven allows.
Dr. John Blow.
This and the following Song are sung in the Play of the Duke and no Duke.
^ WHO can re -- sist my Ce -- lia's Charms? her Beau -- ty wounds, and Wit
disarms; when these their migh -- ty For -- ces join, what Heart's so strong
but must re -- sign? Love seems to pro -- mise in her Eyes, a kind and la --
sting Age of Joys; but have a care, their Trea -- son shun, I looked, be-
liev'd, and was un -- done, -- done. In vain a thousand ways I strive, to keep
my fain -- ting Hopes a -- live; my Love can ne -- ver find re -- ward, since
Pride and Ho -- nour is her Guard; my Love can ne -- ver find re -- ward, since
Pride and Ho -- nour is her Guard.

Sen. Baptist.
^ AH poor O -- lin -- da! ne -- ver boast of Charms that have thy Free -- dom
cost, they threw at Hearts, and thine is lost. Yet none thy Ru -- ine ought to
blame, his Wit first blew me to a flame, and fans it with the Wings of Fame,
and fans it with the Wings of Fame.

II.
In vain do I his Person shun,
I cannot from his Glory run,
That Is Universal as the Sun.
In Crowds his Praises fill my Ear,
Alone his Genius does appear,
He, like a God, is every where.
Mr. Robert King.
^ IN vain we dis -- sem -- ble, in vain do we try to sti -- fle our Flame, and
check our Desire; in vain do our words our Wishes de -- ny, there is no con-
cealing of Fire: Tho ' we are haughty and scornful, the quick-sighted Lo -- ver
the Ar -- ti -- sice soon may dis -- co -- ver; when frowning, the Courtship we
seem to despise, strait with a Smile our Threats we beguile, in -- vite with
our Looks, and speak Love with our Eyes.

II.
Though custom we suffer our Fancies to awe,
And Fashion and Mode over Nature preside;
Though to our Actions dull Honor gives Law,
Our Thoughts their vain Sway do deride:
Though we bid 'em be gone, still we fear lest we lose 'em,
Why have we Charms unless we use 'em?
Believe not our No's, they are all a deceit,
Faint's our denial,
When put to the Trial,
For Beauty and Life without Love are a cheat.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ HAp -- py as Man in his first In -- no -- cence, for A -- ges past as happy
I have been; and thought of nothing but my Flock's defense, 'till bright Myr-
til -- la, bright Myr-til -- la, came up -- on the Green: It was one Evening
when the Sun was set, and all the Nymphs and Shepherds met to play; a -- las! I
do not know what ails me yet, but my poo -- r harmless Sheep are gone a --
stray. All night I kept Myr -- til- la still in view, and a -- sk'd my fellow
Shepherds, a -- sk'd my fell -- low Shepherds the next day, if a -- ny Ty --
dings of my Sheep they knew; but they, they an -- swer'd me, they answered me,
Myr -- til -- la, Soft. they, they an -- swer'd me, they answered me, Myr --
til -- la. Loud. Myr -- til -- la is the on -- ly sound I hear, Soft. Myr-til
-- la is the only thing I see; Loud. Myrtilla is the cause of my Despair, Soft.
Myrtilla! Loud. O -- h Myr- til -- la! pi -- ty me, Soft. pi -- ty Loud. me,
Soft. Oh! Loud. Oh! O -- h Soft. Myr-til -- la! pi -- ty me.

Mr. James Heart.
A Dialogue between DAMON and PHILLIS.
Damon. ^ ONce my Shepherdess was true, e're she my new Ri -- val knew; oh my
Chlo -- e! then we were all we wished, a happy Pair; all we wished, a happy
Pair: Peace of Mind so refined, sure on Earth was ne -- ver known; never ad --
mi -- ring, nor de- si -- ring a -- ny Hea -- ven but our own.


Phillis ^ When I on -- ly had your Heart, I loved true -- ly with -- out Art;
then my Charms you how -- er -- ly swore, taught false Stre -- phon to A --
door: I believed you, never deceived you, ah! had you but been so true; how you
blessed me when you kissed me, kissed me, then be -- tray'd me too; how you
blessed me when you kissed me, kissed me, then be -- tray'd me too, then be --
then betrayed me too.


Damon. ^ But if Strephon's wandering Heart, he at length call home a -- gain;
Soft. he at length call home a -- gain; from new Charms could you depart, to
your own, to your own re -- pen -- ting Swain? from new Charms could you de --
part, to your own, to your own re -- pen -- ting Swam?


Phillis ^ Were he brighter than the Day, or fairer than the Milky way; in --
to thy Arms, in -- to thy Arms would I run, and quit him, quit him all for
thee; into thy Arms, in-to thy Arms would I run and quit him, quit him, all for
thee, for thee, for thee, and quit him, quit him all for thee, for thee, for
thee.


Chorus together. ^ THen let us have, then let us have, Love's Sweets to taste;
whilst all the Powers a -- bove do wish, do wish to know, to know, envying our
Love, the Almighty Joys true Lo -- verse take, true Lovers take below; the
Almighty Joys true Lovers take be- low; the Almighty Joys true Lovers take be
-- low; the Almighty Joys true Lovers, true lo -- verse take below; the Almighty
Joys true Lovers, true Lo -- -- verse take below.

^ THen let us have, then let us have, Love's Sweets to taste; whilst all the
Powers a -- bove, do wish, do wish to know, envying our Love, the Almighty Joys
true Lovers, true Lo -- verse take below; the Almighty Joys true Lovers, the
Almighty Joys true Lovers, true Lovers, the Almighty Joys true Lovers, the
Almighty Joys true Lovers, true Lovers take be -- low; the Almighty Joys true
Lovers, true Lovers take below.


Senior Baptist.
SEPTIMNUS and ACME: A Dialogue Set by Dr. John Blow.
SYmphony.
^

A. 2 Voc.
^ WHilst on Sep -- tim -- ni -- us's panting Breast, meaning nothing less than
Rest; Acme leaned her lo -- ving Head, the pleased Septimnius thus said, the
pleased Septimnius thus said:

^ Hilst on Sep -- tim -- ni -- us's panting Breast, meaning nothing less than
Rest; Acme leaned her lo -- ving Head, the pleased Septimnius thus said, the
pleased Septimnius thus said:

Septimnius alone. ^ MY dearest Ac -- me! if I be once a -- live, and love not
thee, with a Passion far above all that e're was called Love; in a Ly -- bian
De -- sert may I become some Lyon's Prey! let him, Acme, let him tear my
Breast, when Acme is not there; let him, Acme, let him tear my Breast, when
Acme is not there.


CHORUS. A. 3. Voc. ^ THe God of Love stood by to hear him, the God of Love was
always near him: Pleased and tickled with the Sound, sneez'd aloud, and all
around; the little Loves that waited by, bowed, and blessed the Au -- gu -- ry.

^ THe God of Love stood by to hear him, the God of Love was always near him:
Pleased and tickled with the Sound, sneez'd aloud, and all around; the little
Loves that waited by, bowed, and blessed the Au -- gu -- gy.

^ THe God of Love stood by to hear him, the God of Love was always near him:
Pleased and tickled with the Sound, sneez'd aloud, and all around; the little
Loves that waited by, bowed, and blessed the Au -- gu -- ry.

VERSE. A. 2 Voc. ACme enflamed with what he said, raised her gentle bending
Head; and her purple Mouth with joy, stretching to the de-li-cious Boy; twice,
and twice, could not suffice, she kissed his drunken rolling Eyes; twice, and
twice, could not suffice, she kissed his drunken rolling Eyes.

^ ACme enflamed with what he said, raised her gentle bending Head; and her
purple Mouth with joy, stretching to the de-li-cious Boy; twice, and twice,
could not suffice, she kissed his drunken rolling Eyes; twice, and twice, could
not suffice, she kissed his drunken rolling Eyes. Retornels.

Acme alone. ^ MY lit -- tle Life, my All, said she, so may we e -- ver
Servants be to this best God, and never re -- tain our ha -- ted Li -- ber --
ty again: So may thy Passion last for me, as I a Passion have for thee; greater
and fiercer much then can be conceived by thee a Man: It reigns not on -- ly in
my Heart, but runs like Life through every Part.


CHORUS. A. 3 Voc. ^ SHe spoke, the God of Love, aloud, sneez'd again, and all
the crowd of little Loves that waited by, bowed and blessed the Au -- gu -- ry.

^ SHe spoke, the God of Love, aloud, sneez'd again, and all the crowd of
little Loves that waited by, bowed and blessed the Au -- gu -- ry.

^ SHe spoke, the God of Love, aloud, sneez'd again, and all the crowd of lit
-- tle Loves that waited by, bowed and blessed the Au -- gu -- ry.

A Dialogue betwixt PHILLIS and STREPHON.
Phillis. ^ AH! what can mean that ea -- ger Joy, transports my Soul when you
appear? Ah Stre -- phon! you my Thoughts employ, with all that is charming, all
that is dear: When you your pleasing Sto -- ry tell, a Tenderness in -- vades
each part; and I with Blushes own I feel something too mel -- ting at my Heart.


Strephon. ^ Ten thousand Wishes, Joy -- es, Desires, seize on me still, when
thee I view; Ah! may but thine be re-al Fires, as mine shall be so -- r e --
ver true. My Heart, like thine, is soft and kind, 'twould sain, but yet it
cannot speak; I sigh, and leave my Words behind, for Love that ca -- n be told
is weak.


Phillis ^ Each Sigh my Reason does sur- prize, and I at once both wish and
sear, my wounded Soul mounts to my Eyes, as it would part -- tle Sto -- ries
there. Take that Heart that needs will go, but Shepherd see it kindly used; for
who such Pre -- sents would be -- slow, if this a -- las! should be abused?


Strephon. ^ If Sighs or Tears thy Pi -- ty move, or if thine Eyes thy Love
confess; thy Sighs do make me dye for Love, and sure mine Eyes betray no less.
Thy charming Heart with joy l'le take, a Gift I love, because it is thine; I Will
use it gently for thy sake, A -- h! Ah! be but thou as kind to mine.


^ Chorus together. Now all ye listening Gods above, bear witness of our mutual
Love; on your gay Wings the joy -- full Tidings bear, to ev' -- ry bright In --
ha -- by -- tant of the Air: Tell'em, in all their blessed Cabals, they see
nothing so happy, so beloved as we.

^ Now all ye listening Gods above, bear witness of our mu -- tual Love; on
your gay Wings the joyful Tidings bear, to every bright In-ha-bi-tant of the
Air: Tell 'em, tell'em, in all their blessed Ca -- bals, they see nothing so
happy, so beloved as we.

Mr. J. Heart.
FINIS.
MVSIC Books Printed for John Playford, at his Shop near the Temple Church.
THe Psalms in Meter, as they are sung in all Parish Churches, with the proper
Tune to every Psalm, composed in three Parts, viz. cantus, Medius, and Bassus,
and printed in a small Volume, convenient for to carry in the Pocket to Church.
Price Loun l 3 s. 6 d. A brief Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal
and Instrumental, by J. Playford, newly Reprinted with Additions of the Art of
Descant, or Composing Music, of two, three, and four Parts; in Octavo. Price
boun l 2 s. The Musical Companion, containing variety of Catches of Three and
Four Parts; and also several choice Songs, Airs, and Dialogues, of two, three,
and four Parts, in one Volume in Quarto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. Catch that Catch
can, or the Second part of the Musical Companion, being a Collection of new
Catches never Printed before. Price 1 s. 6 d. Music's Recreation on the
Lyra-Viol, containing variety of new Lessons newly Reprinted with Additions.
Price stitcht 2 s. The Dancing Master, or plain and easy Rules to dance
Country Dances, with the proper Tunes to each Dance to play on the
Treble-Violin, newly Reprinted with 25 new Dances never printed before. Price
bound 2 s. 6 d. Music's Handmaid, containing choice Lessons for the Virginals
and Harpsichord, newly Reprinted with Additions of plain and easy Rules for
Beginners to understand the Gamut, and the Notes, there by to play from the
Book, all engraven: on Copper Plates. Price: 2 s. 6 d. The Pleasant Companion,
containing new Airs and Tunes for the Flagelet, with plain Instructions for
Learners; with new Additions. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. A Tutor to the Violin, or
Apollo's Banquet, containing a Collection of new Airs, Theater-Tunes and
Jiggs; to which is added. the Tunes of the French Dances, as they are used at
Court and Dancing-Schools: Also plain Instructions for the understanding the
Gamut, and Notes for Tune and Time on the Violin. Price 1 s. 6 d. The
Delightful Comanion, a new Book of Lessons and Instructions for the Recorder or
Flute; Engraven on Copper Plates. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Division-Violin,
containing several select Divisions upon a Ground to play on the Treble-Violin;
all Engraven upon Copper Plates. Price 2 s. 6 d. Likewise there are sold all
sorts of curious Prints, English, French, and Dutch, either in Frames or in
Sheets, very ornamental for Closets or other Rooms.
In the Title Page of this Book, instead of Theorbo-Bass, read Thorow-Bass.

THE Theater of MUSIC: OR, A Choice COLLECTION of the newest and best Songs
Sung at the COURT, and Public THEATERS.

The Words composed by the most ingenious Wits of the Age, and set to MUSIC by
the greatest Masters in that Science.

WITH A THOROW-BASS to each Song for the Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

ALSO Symphonies and Retornels in 3 Parts to several of them for the Violins
and Flutes.

THE SECOND BOOK.



LONDON, Printed by J. P. for Henry Playford and R. C. and sold by Henry
Playford near the Temple Church, and John Carr at the Middle Temple Gate, 1685.

A TABLE of the SONGS contained in this Book.
A.
AH! tell me no more Page. 25 Ah! tempt me no more 29 As I gazed unaware on a
Face so fair 45
B.
Behold the Morn' Dawns 9 Beneath an unfrequented Shade 30
C.
Cupid the slyest Rogue alive 2 Come all ye tender Nymphs 5
H.
Have Charon, have, [A Dialogue.] 47 Hail Albion, hail, 52
I.
If Grief has any Power to kill 1 In vain she frowns 7
L.
Long have I lived from Passion free 17 Love thee 'till there shall be an end
32
M.
Methinks I see as well as hear 22 Musing on Cares of Human Fate 44
O.
Oh! be kind! [A new Dialogue.] 37
P. Page.
Phillis, talk no more of Passion 28 Phillis, be gentler, I advise 43
S.
Soft Notes, and gently raised 14 Should I once fall in Love 18 Strife, Hurry,
and Noise 26 Since Sylvia's too so fickle grown 27 Since my Mistress proves
cruel 36
T.
The poor Endymion loved too well 8 Tune your Lute, and raise your Voice 10
They say, you're angry 20
V.
Unjust Climena does complain 23
W.
When, lovely Phillis! thou art kind 4 When first Dorinda, your bright Eyes 6
Within a solitary Grove 11 When I see my Strephon languish. 12 Would you know
how we meet 19 When closely embraced in the Arms 24 Within a Grove not far from
whence 26 While Thirsis wrapped in Downy Sleep 46
Y.
Ye Powers that rule the World 34
MUSIC Books sold by John Carr at the Middle Temple Gate.
THE Musical Entertainment performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's Day,
Nov. 22. 1683. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fishburn, and set to Music, in
two, three, four, and six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcell, Composer in Ordinary to
His Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.
The second Book of the Musical Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on
St. Cecilia's Day, Nov. 22. 1684. The Words made by the late ingenious Mr. John
Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set
to Music, in two, three, four, and five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the
Children, and one of the Organists, of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal. An Essay to
the Advancement of Music, by T. Salmon. Price 2. s. The Vocal and Instrumental
Music in Psyche, which the Instrumental Music in the Tempest, Price 2
Melothesia, or Rules for playing a continued Bass on the Harpsichord. Price 3
s. Tripla Concordia, or new Airs for three Parts for Treble and Bass-Viols.
Easy Lessons on the Gittar for young Practitioners, Single, and some of 2
Parts, by Signior Francisec* Also all sorts of Musical Instruments and Strings.
MUSIC Book sold by John Playford, at his Shop near the Temple Church.
CAnticum Sacra, Hymns in Latin for Two and Three Voices to the Organ, by Mr.
R. Dearing. Price stitcht 3 s. 6 d. Canticum Sacra, A new set of Divine Hymns
and Anthems, some in Latin and some in English for Two Voices to the Organ,
Composed by several Eminent English Masters. Price stitcht 3 s. The Psalms of
David, and other Sacred Hymns, according to the common Tunes sung in Parish
Churches, Composed in 4 Parts, by John Playford, and printed in Folio, proper
both for public and private use. Price 3 s. The Treasury of Music, in Folio;
containing three several Volumes of Select Songs, Airs, and Dialogues, for one
Voice to the Theorbo-Lute, or Bass-Viol; composed by Mr. Henry Laws, and other
eminent Masters. Price bound 10 s. The Psalms in Meter, as they are sung in all
Parish Churches, with the proper Tune to every Psalm, composed in three Parts,
viz. Cantus, Medius, and Bassas, by John Playford, and printed in a small
Volume, convenient for to carry in the Pocket to Church. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.
Music's Recreation on the Lyra-Viol, containing variety of new Lessons newly
Reprinted with Additions. Price stitcht 2 s. Choice Airs, Songs, and
Dialogues, being most of the newest Songs sung at Court, and at the public
Theaters; composed by several Gentlemen of His Majesty's Music, in Five
several Volumes in Folio. The Musical Companion, containing variety of Catches
of Three and Four Parts; and also several choice Songs, Airs, and Dialogues,
of two, three, and four Parts, in one Volume in Quarto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.
The Second part of the Musical Companion, containing a new Collection of merry
and Loyal Catches, and other Songs, of two and three Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d. A
brief Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, by J.
Playford, newly Reprinted with Additions of a Third Part, containing the Art of
Composing Music, of two, three, and four Parts. Price bound 2 s. The
Division-Violin, containing a choice Collection of Divisions for the
Trable-Violin to a Ground-Bass, all fairly engraven on Copper Plates, being of
great benefit and delight for all Practitioners on the Violin, and are the
first that ever were printed of this kind of Music. Price 2 s. 6 d. Music's
Handmaid, containing choice Lessons for the Virginals and Harpsichord, newly
Reprinted with Additions of plain and easy Rules for Beginners to understand
the Gamut, and the Notes, thereby to play from the Book, all engraven on Copper
Plates. Price 2 s. 6 d. The Pleasant Companion, containing new and pleasant
Airs and Tunes for the Flagelet, with plain Instructions for Learners, newly
Reprinted with Additions. Price 1 s. 6 d. Musick's Delight, containing new
Lessons for the Flute or Recorder, with Instructions for Learners. Price 1 s. 6
d. The Dancing Master, or plain and easy Rules to dance Country Dances, with
the proper Tunes to each Dance, is new printed; with 45 new Dances never
printed before. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. There is newly printed a new Edition of
the Violin Book, Entitled, Apollo's Banquet (first Part), containing new
Airs, Theater-Tunes, Horn-pipes, Jiggs, and Scotch Tunes. The second part of
this Book contains a Collection of French-dancing Tunes, used at Court and in
Dancing-Schools; as, several new Brawls, Corants, Bore's, Minuets, Gavots,
Sarabands, etc. Most of which are proper to play on the Recorder or Flute, as
well as on the Violin. Price 1 s. 6 d.
Other Books lately Printed, and sold at the same Shop by Henry Playford.
The Antidote against Melancholy, compounded of merry Ballads, pleasant Songs
and Catches. Price bound 1 s, 6 d. The second Part of the Antidote against
Melancholy, compounded of merry Tales, witty Jests, and ridiculous Bulls. Price
bound 1 s. England's Black Tribunal. containing the whole proceedings of the
Trial of King Charles the first, together with his Speech upon the Scaffold,
Jan. 30. 1648. To which is added, a full Relation of the Sufferings, and manner
of putting to Death all the Loyal Nobility and Gentry, who were inhumanly put
to Death for their constant Loyalty to their Sovereign Lord the King, together
with their several Dying-Speeches at their Execution, from the year 1642, to
the year 1658. Price bound 2 s. The History of that unfortunate Prince King
Edward the Second, and his unhappy Favorites Gaveston and Spencer; written by
the Right Honorable Henry Lord Viscount Faulkland. Price bound 1 s. The Psalms
of David in Meter, by the Right Reverend Father in God Henry King, late
Lord-Bishop of Chichester, proper to be sung to all the common Tunes used in
Parish-Churches, and designed for public Use. Price bound 2 s. The Vision, a
Pindarick Ode, occasioned by the Death of our late Sovereign King Charles the
Second, by E. Arwaker, M. A. The second Part of the Vision, a Pindarick Ode,
occasioned by Their Majesty's happy Coronation, by E. Arwaker. M. A. A
Pindarick Ode on the Sacred Memory of our late gracious Sovereign King Charles
the Second; to which is added another Essay on the same occasion; by Sir F. F.
Knight of the Bath. A Poem on the Sacred Memory of our late Sovereign, with a
Congratulation to his present Majesty. By Mr. Tate. A Pindarick on the Death of
our late Sovereign, with an ancient Prophecy on His present Majesty. By Mrs
Behn. A Poem humbly dedicated to Her sacred Majesty Catherine Queen-Dowager, on
the Death of her dear Lord and Husband, King Charles the Second. By Mrs. Behn.
A Pindarick Poem on the Happy Coronation of His most sacred Majesty James the
Second, and His illustrious Consort Queen Mary. By Mrs. Behn. Price stitcht 6
s. Which seven foregoing Poems may be had singly, or in one Volume. Also all
sorts of Ruled Paper, and Ruled Books for MVSIC of several sizes, are to be
Sold at the same Shop. Likewise there are sold all sorts of curious Prints,
English, French, and Dutch, either in Frames or in Sheets, very ornamental for
Closets or other Rooms, and all sorts of Massy-Tincture Prints.
^ IF Grief has a -- ny Power to kill, I have re -- ceiv'd my Doom; the Tyrant
has de -- clar'd his will, my Time's not long to come; So close he has be-
sieg'd my Heart, no mo -- ment's case I find; in vain I strug -- gle with the
Dart, that galls my tor -- tur'd Mind.

II.
Nor do I beg for a Reprieve,
I Am not so fond to live;
Nor will I any longer grieve,
Will you one Smile but give.
Your Mercy then should to my Heart
An easy Death convey;
I Would then defy the power of Smart,
And melt in Joys away.
Mr. Hen. Purcell.
^ Cupid, the slyest Rogue alive, one day was plund'ring of a Hive! but as with
too too ea -- ger have, he strove the Li -- quid Sweets to taste: A Be
surpised the heed -- less Boy, pricked him, and dashed the ex -- pe-cted Joy.
The Urchin when he felt the smart of the in -- ve -- nom'd an -- gry Dart, he
kicked, he flung, he spurned the Ground, he blowed, and then he chafed the
wound; he blowed, and chafed the wound in vain, the rub -- bing still increased
the Pain. Strait to his Mother's Lap he hies, with swel -- ling Cheeks, and
blub -- ber'd Eyes, cries she, What does my Cupid ayl, when thus, thus, he told
his mourn -- full Tale: A lit -- tle Bird they call a Be, with yellow Wings,
see, see Mother, see, how it has go -- r'd and wounded me! And are not you,
replied his Mother, for all the world just such a -- no -- there, just such a-no
-- there peevish thing, like in bulk, and like in Sting? For when you aim a
poisonous Dart against some poor un-wea -- ry Heart, how lit -- tle is the Ar
-- cher found, and yet how wide, how deep the wound.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
A. 2. Voc.
^ WHen love -- ly Phil -- lis thou art kind, naught but Raptures fill my Mind;
it is WHen love -- ly Phil -- lis thou art kind, naught but Raptures fill my
Mind; it is then I think thee so Divine, t'excell the migh -- ty Power of Wine:
But when thou in- then I think thee so Divine, t'excell the migh -- ty Power of
Wine: But sults, but when thou in -- sults, and lau -- ghs at my Pain, I wish
thee a- when thou insults, and lau -- ghs at my Pain, I wish thee a- way with
sparkling Champaign; so bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother, and drive
out one way with sparkling Champaign; so bravely contemn both the Boy and his
Mo -- there, and God, and drive out one God by the Power, by the Power of a --
no-ther. drive out one God, and drive out, and drive out one God by the Power
of a -- no-ther.

II.
When Pity in thy Looks I see,
I frailly quit my Friends for thee;
Persuasive Love so charms me then,
My Freedom I Would not wish again.
But when thou art cruel, and heeds not my Care,
Straight with a Bumper I banish Despair;
So bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother,
And drive out one God by the Power of another.
Mr. Hen. Purcell.
^ COme all ye ten -- der Nymphs, and learn of me, to shun a wretched Fate;
take heed how you dis -- sem -- ble Scorn, or too well coun -- ter -- feit your
Hate: The charming Swain his Pow-er knew, and to my wounded Heart he did a
generous Pi -- ty show, a mu -- tual Flame impart. But I, un -- hap -- py I,
with Scorn and Pride, think -- ing to hide the blush -- ing Pain; too far the
fic -- kle Lover tried, with fooling bo^st what I Would have died to gain.

Mr. Tedway.
^ When first Do-rin-da, your bright Eyes, had made my Heart your Slave; how
vainly sou -- ght I to disguise the Tortures that you gave: Durst hardly call
my Fate unkind, or to my self complain; for fear some, bu -- sie list' -- ning
Wind should o -- ver -- hear my Pain; for fear -- some bu -- sie list' -- ning
Wind should o -- ver- o -- ver -- hear my Pain, Pain.

II.
Your Beauty did my Passion awe,
So great your Merits were;
That all around I nothing saw,
But prospects of Despair.
Fond Heart! I cried, hide, hide thy love,
Thy too bold Thoughts reclaim;
But all in vain (alas!) I strove,
To hide a raging Flame.
Signior Baptist.
^ IN vain she frowns, in vain she trys the Darts of her dis -- dain -- full
Eyes; she still is Charming, still is Fair, and I must love, though I de --
spair: Nor can I of my Fate com -- ply, or her Disdain; who would not dye, to
be so sweetly slain.

II.
Like those who Magic Spells employ,
At distance wounds, and does destroy;
She kills with her severe Disdain,
And absent I endure the pain.
But spare, oh spare your cruel Art!
The fatal Dart
Stabs your own Image in your Lover's Heart.
Capt. Pack.
A. 2. voc.
^ THe poor Endymion loved too well a Nymph too chaste and fair; whose Eyes had
known the way to kill, and to procure Despair: For she had all her Sex -- es
Pride, and all her Beauties too; and ev' -- ry amorous Swain defied, when e're
they came to woo.

II.
Ha! see the Lovesick Youth would cry,
What Griefs my Bosom wears?
My Sorrows in my Sighs descry,
And Passion in my Tears:
Yet she regardless saw him weep,
Not minding his deserts;
Which struck his wounded Breast so deep,
At last it broke his Heart.
III.
And now upon her guilty Head
The Sin of Murder lies;
And shrinks, and starts to see him dead,
And Pity fills her Eyes:
Ah! see what Creatures Women are!
She love now more and more;
Does sigh and languish, and despair,
For him she scorned before.
Mr. David Underwood.
A Marriage SONG.
A. 2. Voc.
^ BEhold the Morn' dawns, the Lark has sung, E-ter-nal be your Bliss; con-
tinue always young, and every day you wake your Love like this, Soft. and every
day you wake your Love like this: And con-sum-ma-tion, with the Ri -- sing Sun,
be lo-ving -- ly performed, as now be -- gun. But hush! the Bride's asleep!
forbid the Morning Cock to crow so loud, di- But hush! but hush! the, etc.
sperse the bu-sie Crowd, for fear too ear -- ly waking make her weep, but
what is now lost they could no longer keep.

II.
Advance once again, and softly sing, and with a murmuring Tone
Such Pleasure to 'em bring, that to our Voices they may dream alone;
And gently waking, let Love's Charms renew,
As Trees that Blossoms and ripe Fruit do show.
But hark! the Crowd return!
Let us conclude our Harmony with this delightful hearty Wish;
That still increasing Joys may always burn,
And in Love's part, may Anchor every Morn'
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ TUne your Lute, and raise your Voice, touch each Note that is soft and
moving; warm her Heart that is cold as Ice, make her feel the Joys of Loving.
Tell her, how she has mis -- spent all the Hours that Nature gave her; tell
her, Beau -- ty is but lent, and this moment it may leave her: Show her how the
Streams of Love gent -- ly flow with end -- less Pleasure; tell her, how the
Gods a -- bove va -- lu'd Love their on -- ly Treasure.

Mr. Robert King.
^ WIth -- in a so -- li -- ta -- ry Grove de -- spai -- ring Sap -- pho sat;
lamenting of her ill-plac'd Love, and cur -- sing of her Fate: In vain, said
she, I would conceal the Conquest from his Eyes; my Looks, a -- las! too plain
reveal, what I would fain disguise.

II.
Away my Eyes! would you betray,
The weakness of my Heart!
To one that will not Love repay,
Or e're regard my Smart:
But yet how often has he sworn,
That he would constant prove!
How often with Tears did he implore
My Pity, and my Love.
III.
But he, like a proud Conqueror,
Who in his way subdues
Some Towns, with his resistless Power
Fresh Conquests now pursues:
Then Sappho, give thy Sorrows over,
And be thy self again;
And think on that vain Man no more,
That could thy Love contemn.
^ WHen I see my Strephon languish, with Lucinda's Charms oppressed; when I see
his Pain and Anguish, Pi -- ty moves my ten -- der Breast: Sighs so often, and
Tears so moving, who can see, and hold from Loving? Sighs so often, and Tears so
moving, who can see, and hold from Loving.

II.
Strephon's plain and humble Nature,
Moved me first to hear his Tale;
Strephon's Truth by every Creature,
Is proclaimed through all the Vale:
There Is not a Nymph that would not choose him,
Why should I alone refuse him?
There Is not, etc.
Mr. Robert King.
A Seranading SONG.
SYmphony for two Flutes.
^ ^

^ SO -- ft Notes, and gent -- ly raised, lest some har -- sh sound the fair Co
-- rin -- na's Rest do rude -- ly wound; dif -- fuse a peace -- full Calmness
through each Part, touch all the Springs of a so -- ft Vir -- gin's Heart: Tune
ev'-ry Pulse, and kin -- dle all her Blood, and swell the Tor -- rent of the
living Flood; gli -- de through her Dreams, and over her Fan -- cy move, and stir
up, stir up all the I -- ma -- ges of Love. At this Close play the Triple of
the Symphony, and then go on. Thus fee -- ble Man does his ad -- van -- tage
take, to gain in Sleep what he must lose a -- wake; when Night and Shades shut
up Co -- rin -- na's Charms, then, then is the prop'rest time to take up Arms:
But Night and Shades her Beau -- ties cannot con -- ceal, Night has pe- cu --
liar Gra -- ces to re -- veal. [Flute.]

Chorus.^ TEn thousand thousand Raptures do attend, ten thousand thousand, ten
thousand thousand Raptures do attend this time, too strong for Fancy, too
strong for Fancy, and too full, and too full, too full for Rhyme; too strong
for Fan -- cy, and too full for Rhyme.

Chorus.^ TEn thousand thousand Raptures do at -- tend, ten thousand thousand
Raptures do attend, do at -- tend this time, too strong for Fancy, too strong
for Fancy, and too full, and too full, too full for Rhyme; too strong for Fan
-- cy, and too full for Rhyme.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ LOng have I lived from Pas -- sion free, of Love the charming De -- i -- ty;
'till conquering Beau -- ty, Oh hard Fate! has made me yield to a restless
State: With wan-de-ring Thoughts my Heart's oppressed, Day brings no Comfort,
Night no Rest.

II.
The silent Swans on murmuring Streams
Live free and easy without pains;
When by each side they gently move,
Live Hearts united with true Love:
But I a wretched Soul must be,
Deprived of her I fain would see.
III.
Go, restless Thoughts! tell her, that I,
Being absent from her, now must dye;
I strove this Passion to remove,
But the more I endeavored, more I loved:
When she appears, too true she will find,
Beauty has charmed my Reason, Love my Mind.
Mr. Robert King.
^ SHould I once fall in Love, as I hope I never shall, grant, ye Gods, to my
lot such a Mistress may fall; nei -- there Ug -- ly, nor a Beauty, more handsome
than good, my E -- qual in For -- tune, in Ho-nour and Blood: Not too ea -- sie
when courted, by yielding with Honor, such, such may she prove, or else a
plague on her. May she have enough Wit to make sport with pert Fools, may her
Virtue sit free, not a Slave to stiff Rules; that when Cob comes to see me, she
will not stick to make one, at a Glass, or a Catch, or to lau -- gh at a Pun:
Such, such would I choose me, for better, for worse, and when the Wife's done,
may she prove a good Nurse.

A new CATCH.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WOuld you know how we meet over our jol -- ly full Bowls? As we min -- gle
our Liquors, we min -- gle our Souls; the Sweet melts the Sharp, the Kind
sooths the Strong, and no-thing but Friendship grows all the Night long: We
drink, laugh, and ce -- le -- brate ev' -- ry De -- sire, Love on -- ly re --
mains, our un- quen-cha-ble Fire.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
The Rich RIVAL.
[Mr. Cowley's words.]
^ THey say you're angry, and rant migh -- ti -- ty, be -- cause I love the
same as you, a -- las! you're ve -- ry rich it is true; but pre -- thee [Where
this mark * is over the Note, are to be sung Demiquavers.] Fool! what is that to
Love and me? Your Land and Mo -- ney let that serve, and know you're more by
that than you deserve. When next I see my fair one, she shall know how worth --
less thou art of her Bed; and, Wretch, I Will strike thee dumb and dead with no
-- ble Verse, not un -- der -- stood by you; while thy sole Rhet'rick shall be
Jointure and Jew -- else, and our Friends a -- gree. Pox of your Friends that
dote and do -- mi- near, Lo -- verse are bet -- ter Friends than they, let us
those in o -- there things o- bey, the Fates and Stars, and Gods must go -- vern
here: Vain name of Blood! in Love, let none ad-vise with a -- ny Blood, but
with their own: It Is that which bids me this bright Maid a -- door, no o --
there Thought has had ac -- cess, did she now beg, I Would love no less; and were
she an Empress, I should love no more. Were she as just and true to me, ah, sim
-- ple Soul! what would become of thee!

Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ MEthinks I see, as well as hear, the Charming Notes, that striking Ear; and
from your Touch those Spirits rise, that play and sparkle in your Eyes: While
all the Graces dancing round your face, inspire and a -- ni -- mate the sound.

II.
To like the alluring Siren, you
Enchant with Voice and Beauty too;
And the Devoted Lover move,
To perish in a Sea of Love:
Who hears and see repent too late,
He may bemoan, but cannot avoid his Fate.
^ UN -- just Cli -- me -- na does complain, that I a -- no -- there prize; she
on -- ly in my Breast would reign, that is, would Ty -- ra -- nize: Let who
will be con -- fined to one, and pay his Vows to her a -- lone, I Will be mo --
no -- po- liz'd by none.

II.
It was not thus in Days of old,
Our Fathers had more sense;
They took unto 'em who they would,
And thought it no offense:
Tell me ye sprightly Sons of May,
Who gave our Charter thus away,
And why are we less free than they?
Mr. John Roffey.
^ WHen close -- ly embraced in the Arms of my Dear, the Raptures of Joy spoke
E -- li -- zium was there; I fainted, I died, yet her Smiles, and the Sight I
found in an Hour a whole Age of Delight: One mo -- meant I wounded, the next I
survived, in her Presence I lived, in her Absence I did; but li -- ving or die
-- ing I felt the same pain, 'twas the Pleasures of Love did the Vi -- cto --
ry gain.

II.
What streams of Compassion when dead in her Arms,
To cherish my Vitals did flow from her Charms!
The issues of Sweetness from Nature did flow,
And Innocence guarded her Virtues below:
Methink still I see the bright Beams of her Eyes,
Which so conquered my Reason, and made me her Prize;
Her Blushes so bashful, her timorous Desires,
Imposing new Flames to my vigorous Fires.
III.
But now, fair Amyntas! my Love is beguiled,
And only for loving of me is exiled,
Unto some wild Desert of hopeless Despair,
Where every Enjoyment is echoed by her:
Yet still on the height of Amyntas I live,
And what Hopes will not grant me, my Wishes shall give;
Till Time when all Lovers once hid shall disclose,
And restore me unto her to take my Repose.
Mr. David Underwood.
^ AH! tell me no more that O -- lin -- da's too low, to pos -- ses a -- ny
room in my Mind; if For -- tune has par -- tial -- ly rendered her so, must
Love be un- just, or un -- kind?

II.
Love truly is blind when by Fortune it is swayed,
Which too often does Merit despise;
But if Love shows respect where it ought to be paid,
It Is Fortune, not Love, that wants Eyes.
III.
But where can the mighty Disparity be,
Since we both have Affection alike?
In Love, as in Death, undistinguished we lie,
For they level whatever they strike.
Mr. Francis Forcer.
^ STrife, hurry, and noise (that fills the lewd Town) sure at last it is time
to give ov-er; and in the dear Shades of the Country alone, blessed Quiet and
Ease to re -- co -- ver. Foolish Hopes, i -- dle Fears, and restless Desires,
are the bu-sie Man's restless Attendant; what he vainly pursues, the Mind that
retires, al -- rea -- die is come to the end on it.

Dr. J. Blow.
^ WIth -- in a Grove, not far from whence, Sheep and their Lambs a nib -- ling
paced, I saw the Shepherd and his dear Cla -- rin -- da, close by him embraced.
His Arms a -- bout her Neck and Wast, she vowed she loved, but durst not taste.

II.
Fairest Clarinda, why so coy!
For I do swear by all that is good,
You need not fear a harmless Boy,
I would not hurt you if I could:
She sighed, and then turned up her Eyes,
Do what you will, I cannot rise.
^ SInce Syl -- vi -- a's too so fic -- kle grown, to scorn what once they
seemed to love: From Women's Charms then sure I Am free, for Jilts they are, and
e're will be.

II.
They seemed to love what most they hate,
And speak the worse of him they love;
Sure it is not Choice, but their cursed Fate,
To do what still they disapprove.
May he that loves 'em jilted be,
And when too late, his Folly see,
^ PHil -- lis, talk no more of Passion, words alone want Power to move; she
that shuns a fair oc -- ca -- sion, never, never should pretend to more. Honor
that so often you mention, Love pos -- ses -- sing once your Mind, a -- las! is
but a vain pretension, Women use that will not be kind. Your dai -- ly seeking out
Ex -- cu -- ses, shows too much De- ceit and Art; in Love who Mar-tyr -- dom re
-- fu -- ses, lives an A -- theist in her Heart: Fame and Honor will deceive
ye, none did e're un -- cen -- sur'd go; therefore, gentle Maid, believe me,
Love's the greatest good we know.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ AH! tempt me no more when the Mi -- nute is past, the Rapture of Love is too
Sa -- cred to last; de -- fects in our Na -- ture shows plainly by these, the
Gods for themselves keep so per -- fect a Bliss: The charming Convulsion our
Senses con- troul, and Hea -- ven's the Union of Body and Soul.

II.
Then Lovers love on, and get Heaven betimes,
He that loves well attones for the worst of his Crimes;
Jove locks up his Gates on the Sordid and Base,
But the generous Lover is sure of a Place:
Let the Nymph to her Paradise never doubt the way,
When her Lover can open the Door with his Key.
Mr. Alex. Damascene.
Symphony to the following Song.
^

SONG.
^ BE -- neath an un -- fre -- quen-ted Shade, for Wret -- ches a Re- tire --
meant made; poor Da -- mon lay, and e're he died, complaining, com- plai --
ning, thus to Phil -- lis cried: Ah! could you feel but once what Pain the
Wretch endures, that lo -- ves in vain! Pi-ty, pi -- ty, the tender Heart would
move, and make you strive, and make you strive t'ad -- mit my Love. The Sweets
of good Humor, with those of your Eyes, have ta -- ken a for -- ti -- fi'd
Heart by sur- prise; the sharp -- est attacks could ne -- ver yet move, to
sub-mit to the Pleasures of Beau -- ty or Love: I ne -- ver will yield, yet a
-- las! it is in vain to conquer my Love as her Hate and Disdain; if I find her
se -- vere, though ne -- ver so fair, I'ie quit all the Thoughts of those
Pleasures in store, and turn to that Freedom I lived in be -- fore.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
For a Bass alone.
^ LOve thee 'till there shall be an end of mat -- ter, so long 'till Courtiers
leave in Court to slatter; while empty Courtlings shall laugh, jeer, and jibe,
or 'till an old lean Judge re -- fuse a Bribe: 'Till young Men Women hate, I
will love thee, 'till greedy Lawyers shall renounce a Fee; and 'till de -- cre
-- pid Misers Mo-ney hate, or Statesmen leave to juggle in a State. While
Priests Ambition troubles Commonwealth, 'till Whores grow Chaste, and Thieves
forsake their Stealth; 'till Tradesmen leave to Co -- zen, or to Lie, 'till
there is a worthy Flat -- te -- rer, or brave Spy. 'Till ho -- nest valiant Men
can be afraid, 'till Kings by Favorites are not betrayed; 'till all
Impossibles do meet in one, I love thee Phillis, I love thee Phillis, I love
thee Phillis, and love thee a -- lone; I love thee Phillis, I love thee
Phillis, I love thee Phillis, and love thee alone; I love thee Phillis, and
love thee alone.

^ YE Powers that rule the World, must I still be pursued by such cru -- el
strokes of De -- sti -- ny? What hopes in store for that poor Wretch, that lo
-- ving more than a -- ny e're be -- fore, becomes a fa -- tal Prey to the ru
-- ral Power, and by their Charms, feels a fresh Death each Hour? But if in
time that frozen Heart could melt, where on -- ly Thoughts more cold than Ice
have dwelt; could Pi -- ty then take place, and Smiles pos -- sess, that plea
-- sing Face that Frowns do now disgrace: Change then but by de -- grees, lest
the sur -- pri -- sing Joy prove e -- qual to De- spair, and as soon de --
stroy. A -- las! the Ma -- lice of my Stars is too plain, they would con --
trive her Love worse than her Dis -- dain; a flattering Ray of Hope my Death
but to de -- lay, and as soon to be -- tray; for such pro -- di -- geous Bliss,
transporting Joys! who can, of this side Heaven, be -- lieve reserved for Man?

Mr. Thomas Farmer, B. M.
^ SInce my Mistress proves Cru -- el, my Suit I Will give over; no more will I
Lan -- guish, will I Court, or A -- door; and no farther Expect, or her Fa --
vours implore: But the force of her Charms I Will boldly de -- fie, no lon -- ger
will wait, if she will not Comply; for I Will love none but those, who are as will
-- ling as I.

II.
He Is a Fool that desires what he cannot obtain,
Or continue to love, when he knows it is in vain;
There are no such Endearments I find in Disdain:
For the force of her Charms I Will boldly defy,
No longer will wait, if she will not Comply;
For I Will love none but those, who are as willing as I.
III.
Were she kind and consenting, I Would love her as well,
None in Faith, or in Honor, my self should excel;
A kind Beauty is Heaven, but a froward one Hell.
And the force of her Charms I Will boldly defy,
No longer will wait, if she will not Comply;
For I Will love none but those, who are as willing as I.
Mr. John Goodwin.
A DIALOGUE sung in the PLAY of Sir Courtly Nice.
Symphony.
^

Man. ^ OH! be kind! my Dear, be kind! whilst our Loves and we are young; Oh!
be kind! my Dear, be kind! whilst our Loves and we are young: We shall find, we
shall find, Time will change the Face or Mind. Both will not con -- ti -- nue
long. Oh! be kind! my Dear, be kind! both will not con-ti -- nue long: Oh! be
kind! my Dear, be kind! both will not con-ti -- nue long: Oh! be kind! my Dear,
be kind!


Woman. ^ Oh! I love, and fear to lose you, therefore it is I must re-fuse you:
When I Have yielded you my Crown, you will no more Obedience own, you will no more
O-be-dience own; no, I love, and fear to lose you, therefore it is I must re --
fuse you.


Man. ^ The Fair by Kindness reign, by Cru -- el- ty de -- stroy; the Fair by
Kindness reign, by Cru -- el -- ty destroy. If you can Charm with the Pain of
Love, then what can you do, can you do with the Joy? The Fair by Kind -- ness
reign, by Cru -- el -- ty de -- stroy.


Woman. ^ I fear to yield, but cannot de -- ny.


Man. ^If you do not, I shall dye.


Woman. ^So shall I:


Both. ^So shall I.


CHORUS. ^ THn come to Joy, come to Joy, come to Joy, better love than we
should dye; better love, better love, than we should dye. Come to Joy, come to
Joy, better love, better love, than we should dye. Come to Joy, come to Joy,
come to Joy, come to Joy.

^ THen come to Joy, come to Joy, come to Joy, better love, better love, than
we should dye; better love than we should dye. Come to Joy, come to Joy, come
to Joy, come to Joy, better love, better love, than we should dye. Come to Joy,
come to Joy, come to Joy, come to Joy.

Mr. Robert King.
^ PHil-lis, be gent -- ler, I ad -- vise, make up for Time mis- spent; when
Beau -- ty on its Deathbed Iyes, it is high time to repent. Such is the Ma --
lice of your Fate, which makes you old so soon; your Pleasure e -- ver comes
too late, how ear -- ly e're be -- gun.

II.
Think what a wretched thing is she,
Whose Stars contrive in spite;
The Morning of her Love should be
Her fading Beauty's Night:
Then if to make your Ruin more,
You Will peevishly be coy;
Dye with the Scandal of a Wh --
And never know the Joy.
Mr. Thomas Tedway.
^ MU -- sing on Cares of Humane Fate, in a sad Cypress Grove; a strange
Dispute I heard of late, 'twixt Ver -- tue, Fame, and Love: A pensive Shepherd
asked Advice, and their O -- pi-nions craved; how he might hope to be so wise,
to get a Place be -- yond the Skies, and how he might be saved.

Nice Virtue preached Religion's Laws,
Paths to Eternal Rest;
To fight his King's and Country's Cause,
Fame counseled him was best:
But Love opposed their noisy Tongues,
And thus their Votes out-brav'd;
Get, get a Mistress, Fair and Young,
Love fiercely, constantly, and long,
And then thou shall be saved.
^ Swift as a Thought, etc.

Chorus. ^ Swift as a Thought, the a -- mo -- rous Swain to Syl-via's Cot --
tage flies; in soft ex- pressions told her plain the way to Hea -- ven -- ly
Joys: She who with Pi -- e -- ty was stored, de- lays no lon -- ger craved;
charmed by the God whom they adored, she smiled and took him at his word, and
thus they both were saved.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
A SONG in the Play of Sir Courtly Nice.
^ AS I gazed un -- a -- ware on a Face so fair, your cruel Eye lay watching
by, to snatch my Heart, which you did with such Ar -- t, that a- way with it you
run, whilst I looked on; to my Ru -- in and Grief, stop Thief, stop Thief; to
my Ruin and Grief, sto -- p Thief, stop Thief, stop Thief, stop Thief, stop
Thief.

Mr. Robert King.
A Pastoral Coronation SONG.
^ WHile Their -- sis wrapped in Downy Sleep, pleased with sweet Fancies lay; the
Graces constant watch did keep, and Cu -- pids rou -- nd him play: 'Till crowds
of Nymphs and Swains around, his ten -- der Ears invade; with In -- vi -- ta --
tions to be crowned, in this sof -- t Se -- ra -- nade.

II.
Arise, thou lovely charming Swain!
Uncloud those glorious Eyes;
And shine upon the longing Plain,
Ah! charming Youth, arise:
See where thy joyful Subjects stand,
Each Nymph a Wreath has made;
Each Swain has Laurels in his hand,
To crown thy lofty head.
III.
In have the wondrous Shepherd rose,
No dawning Morn' so fair;
No blooming Flower did e're disclose
A show or scent so rare:
The adoring Throng with eager pace
Their welcome Sovereign meet;
And on his Head their Garlands place,
Themselves beneath his Feet.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
A DIALOGUE betwixt Oliver Cromwell and Charon.
Noll. ^ HAVE Charon, have, it is Noll commands thy Speed; Charon, I Am he that
made three Kingdoms bleed.


Charon. ^ Proud Soul, so black's thy Guilt, I know thee well, thou do those
Shades in Color far ex -- cell, and seem a Beauty-spot to whiten Hell.


Noll. ^ Dear Charon, have, vast Streams of in -- jur'd Blood pursue, and
horrid is its Cry, and dreadful is its Hew.


Charon. ^ Stay, stay, how guil -- ty must thou be, who chusest Hell for
sanctuary; thy weighty Crimes will never let thee float, but singly thou will
sink my mighty Boat.


Noll. ^ Cha -- ron, no more de -- lay, you now presume too far, re-mem-ber,
re-mem-ber, what I was in War; did Charles, and shall not I pass over the Lake?


Charon. ^Weak Shade! thou art too bold, and do mistake; still different ways
great Charles and thou did move, thy Course was downward, still His still a
-- bove. I saw him ascend, whilst Angels stooped down to present a new Throne,
and the loss of his Head to re-pay with a huge double Crown. Look yonder! I saw
the bright Troop on the wing, and as they did fly, so spotless and bright was
the King, that Him from his new Brother-Angels I could not desery. Then opened
wide E -- li -- zium's radient Gate, and in they flew in gay Triumphant State;
and then, so well God and Man the Martyr did love, good Men wept be- low,
Saints re -- joye'd all a -- bove, Saints re -- joye'd all a -- bove.


Noll. ^'Twas brave! and by the Praise thou'st given, thou'st made me what I ne
-- ver was, in love with Heaven! But Charles from his Stat shall remove, though
Heavens slight mine, and his Actions approve; as once up -- on Earth, I Will
Dethrone him a -- bove; I to E -- li -- zium hence will go.


Charon. ^ No, Tyrant, no, to Dens full of Horror thou headlong must fall, and
with Fu -- ries as black as thy Treasons must dwell, Slow. and there as little
Mercy as thou shewd'st must feel.


CHORUS sung by three Furies. ^ DRag him down, drag him down to the Abyss, let
Flames and vast Ser -- pents a -- bout him still roll, and as he does pi -- ti
-- less, pi -- ti -- less howl, he does pi -- ti -- less howl; let the Flames e
-- ver scorch him, and at him in scorn, let the Ser -- pent still hiss, Drag
him down, and make the Wretch know, proud Tyrants on Earth shall be Slaves here
be -- low.

^ DRag him down, drag him down to the Abyss, let Flames and vast Ser -- pents
a- bout him still to -- ul, and as he does pi -- ti -- less, pi -- ti -- less
howl, he does pi -- ti -- less howl; let the Flames e -- ver scorch him, and at
him in Scorn, let the Ser -- pent still hiss, Drag him down, and make the
Wretch know, proud Tyrants on Earth, on Earth, shall be Slaves here be -- low.

^ DRag him down, drag him down to the Abyss, let Flames and vast Ser -- pents
a- bout him still to -- ul, and as he does pi -- ti -- less, pi -- ti -- less
howl, he does pitiless howl; let the Flames ever scorch him, and at him in
Scorn, the Serpents still hiss, still hiss, Drag him down, and make the Wretch
know, proud Tyrants on Earth, on Earth, shall be Slaves here be -- low.

Mr. Henry Hall.
A Round.
^ HAIL Al -- bion! hail all hail! at -- tend the Throne, and him that sits
there -- on. Hail Albion! hail! thy faithful Friends prevail, and Foes lie
truckling down. [Hail Albion! hail! etc.] The sul -- len Clouds di -- sperst
the Clouds of groundless Doubts and Fears, the ri -- sing Sun appears. [Hail
Albion! hail! etc.] The Warlike JAMES as active in his Sphere, as does from
hence such Beams dispense, as gives new Life and Vigor all the Year. End with
the first Strain.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
FINIS.
THE Theater of MUSIC: OR, A Choice COLLECTION of the newest and best SONGS
Sung at the COURT, and Public THEATERS.

The Words composed by the most ingenious Wits of the Age, and set to MUSIC by
the greatest Masters in that Science.

WITH A THOROW-BASS to each SONG for the Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

ALSO Symphonies and Retornels in 3 Parts to several of them, for the Violins
and Flutes.

THE THIRD BOOK.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Playford and R. C. and sold by Henry Playford near
the Temple Church, and John Carr at the Middle Temple Gate, 1686.

A TABLE of the SONGS contained in this Book.
A. Page.
AH Phillis! why are you 22 A Grasshopper and a Fly 28 Adieu dear Object of my
Love's excess. 46 Ah cruel Beauty, could you prove 48
C.
Cynthia with an awful Power 11 Come dear Companions 14 Celinda would her Heart
bestow 52
F.
From drinking of Sack by the Pottle 4 Farweel bonny Wully Craig 22
H.
How powerful is the God of Love 38
I.
I saw fair Cloris all alone 20 Is my Clorinda yet in Nature's state 26 In a
dark shady Cypress Grove 34 If mighty Wealth that gives the Rules, 49 In
Courts, Ambition kills the Great 53
L.
Long, long had Phillis Strephon loved, 1 Look down, look down, fair Saint, 2
Liberty's the Soul of Living 10 Lovely Laurida! blame not me 41 Let the vain,
let the vain Spark 45
O.
Oh Mother! Roger with his Kisses, [Set by Mr. Akeroyd.] 25 Oh! that I had but
a fine Man 27
P.
Pride and Ambition 8
S.
Sylvia, it is true, it is true you're fair 18 Shun a vain Pretender's story 24
T.
There is one black and sullen hour 6 Tell me what a Thing is Love 7 That I
might dream thus 13 The Nymph that does expose to Sale. [The Key is a Flat
Third.] 17 The ambitious Eye that seeks alone 32 There Is such Religion in my
Love 42
W.
When first I passed the happy Night 12 Whilst Strephon in his Pride of Youth,
21 While Orpheus in a heavy strain 30 Whilst Cynthia sung 33 Why so averse is
Laura's Mind 37 When my Kids and Lambs I treated 40 Whilst you court a damned
Vintner 44 Where art thou, Ged of Dreams 54 Why this talking still of Dying 56
Y.
Your haughty Wish, proud Swain, 9
MUSIC Books sold by John Carr, at the Middle Temple Gate.
THE Musical Entertainment performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's Day,
Nov. 22. 1683. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fisnburn, and set to Music, in
two, three, four, and six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcell, Composer in Ordinary to
His Sacred Majesty, and one of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.
The second Book of the Musical-Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on
St. Cecilia's Day, Nov. 22. 1684. The Words made by the late ingenious Mr. John
Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set
to Music, in two, three, four, and five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the
Children, and one of the Organists, of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal. An Essay to
the Advancement of Music, by T. Salmon. Price 2 s. The Vocal and Instrumental
Music in Psyche, with the Instrumental Music in the Tempest. Price 2 s.
Melothesia, or Rules for playing a Continued Bass on the Harpsichord. Price 3
s. Tripla Concordia, or new Airs for three Parts for Treble and Bass-Viols.
Easy Lessons on the Gittar for young Practitioners, Single, and some of two
Parts, by Signior Francisco. Also all sorts of Musical Instruments and Strings.
MUSIC Books sold by John Playford, at his Shop near the Temple Church.
CAnticum Sacra, a new Set of Divine Hymns and Anthems, some in Latin, and some
in English, for two Voices to the Organ; composed by several eminent English
Matters. Price stitched 3 s. 6 d. The Psalms of David, and other Sacred Hymns,
according to the Common Tunes sung in Parish Churches; Composed in 4 Parts by
John Playford, and printed in Folio, proper both for public and private use.
Price, s. The Psalms in Meter, as they are sung in all Parish Churches, with
the proper Tune to every Psalm, composed in three Parts, viz. Cantus, Medius,
and Bassus, by John Playford, and printed in a small Volume, convenient for to
carry in the Pocket to Church. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. Musick's Recreation on the
Lyra-Viol, containing variety of new Lessons, newly Reprinted with Additions.
Price stitcht ^s. Choice Airs, Songs, and Dialogues, being most of the newest
Songs sung at Court, and at the public Theaters; composed by several Gentlemen
of His Majesty's Music, in Five several Volumes in Folio. The Musical
Companion, containing variety of Catches of three and four Parts; and also
several Choice Songs, Airs, and Dialogues, of two, three, and four Parts, in
one Volume in Quarto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. The Second Part of the Musical
Companion, containing a new Collection of Merry and Loyal Catches, and other
Songs, of two and three Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d. A brief Introduction to the
Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, by J. Playford, newly Reprinted
with Additions of a Third Part, containing the Art of Composing Music, of two,
three, and four Parts. Price bound 2 s. The Division-Violin, containing choice
Collection of Divisions for the Treble-Violin to a Ground-Bass, all fairly
engraven on Copper Plates, being of great benefit and delight for all
Practitioners on the Violin, and are the first that ever were printed of this
kind of Music. Price 2 s. 6 d. Musick's Handmaid, containing choice Lessons
for the Virginals and Harpsichord, newly Reprinted with Additions of plain and
easy Rules for Beginners to understand the Gam-ut, and the Notes, thereby to
play from the Book, all engraven on Copper Plates. Price 2 s. 6 d. The Pleasant
Companion, containing new and pleasant Airs and Tunes for the Flagelet, with
plain Instructions for Learners, newly Reprinted with Additions. Price 1 s. 6
d. Musick's Delight, containing new Lessons for the Flute or Recorder, with
Instructions for Learners. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Dancing Master, or plain and
easy Rules to dance Country Dances, with the proper Tunes to each Dance, is
new printed; with 45 new Dances never printed before. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.
There is newly printed a new Edition of the Violin Book, Entitled, Apollo's
Banquet (first Part), containing new Airs, Theater-Tunes, Horn-pipes, Jiggs,
and Scotch Tunes. The second Part of this Book contains a Collection of
French-dancing Tunes, used at Court, and in Dancing-Schools; as, several new
Brawls, Corants, Bore's, Minuets, Gavots, Sarabands, etc. Most of which are
proper to play on the Recorder or Flute, as well as on the Violin. Price 1 s. 6
d.
Other Books lately Printed, and sold at the same Shop by Henry Playford.
THree several Books in Folio, entitled, The Theater of Music, containing
Songs and Dialogues sung at Court and public Theaters: Composed by the best
Masters. A late Voyage to Constantinople, by Joseph Grelot, a Baron of France,
and newly Translated into English; in which is a Description of the Turkish
Government; their Religion, Customs, and Manners also, which was never related
by any Traveller before; the inside and outside of the ancient Fabric Sancta
Sophia, and other Mosques now in Constantinople; all fairly described and
engraven in 18 Copper Plates Price bound 3 s. 6 d. England's Black Tribunal,
containing the whole Proceedings of the Trial of King Charles the First,
together with His Speech upon the Scaffold, Jan. 30. 1648. To which is added. a
full Relation of the Sufferings, and manner of putting to Death all the Loyal
Nobility and Gentry, who were inhumanly put to Death for their constant Loyalty
to their Sovereign Lord the King, together with their several Dying-Speeches at
their Execution; from the year 1642, to the year 1658. Price bound 2 s. The
History of that unfortunate Prince, King Edward the Second, and his unhappy
Favorites Gaveston and Spencer; written by the Right Honorable Henry Lord
Viscount Faulkland. Price bound 1 s. The Psalms of David in Meter, by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry King, late Lord-bishop of Chichester, proper to be
sung to all the Common Tunes used in Parish-Churches, and designed for public
Use. Price bound 2 s. Wit and Mirth, an Antidote against Melancholy, compounded
of witty Poems, merry Ballads, pleasant Songs and Catches. Price bound 1 s. 6
d. The Merry Companion, or the Second Part of the Antidote against Melancholy,
compounded of merry Tales, witty Jests, and ridiculous Bulls: To which is
added, several delightful Histories, Tales, and Novels, some of Comical, and
some of Tragical Adventures. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. There is also several
Pindarick Elegies on the Death of our late King Charles the Second; and also
several excellent Poems upon their present Majesty's Coronation, by E. Arwarker
M. A. Mr. Tate, Mrs. Behn, and others; and may be had singly, or in one Volume.
Also all sorts of Ruled Paper, and Ruled Books for MVSIC of several sizes, are
to be sold at the same Shop. Likewise there are sold all sorts of curious
Prints, English, French, and Dutch, either in Frames or in Sheets, very
Ornamental for Closets, or other Rooms; and all sorts of Massy-Tincture Prints.
^ LOng, long had Phil -- lis Stre-phon loved, and kept her Flames hid in her
Breast; but the Concealment fa -- tal proved, and robbed the Nymph of all her
Rest: But yet, a -- las! the Fire she brake, for Cu -- pid forced her to con --
fess; and much she blushed, but lit -- tle spoke, but yet enough to make him
guess.

II.
With foolish Pride, and much Disdain,
Her Words he heard, her Blushes viewed;
Laughed at her Tears, and mocked her Pain,
At once both Absolute and Rude:
Not that he could the Maid forsake,
He loved her too too well he knew;
But from a Pride that all Men take,
To hear a Virgin Court and Sue.
Mr. Ric. Brown.
A SERENADE SONG.
^ LOok down, look down fair Saint, and see a rest -- less Lover's Care! whose
Heart was 'till this moment free from Beauty's char -- ming Snare: Look down,
look down fair Saint, and see a rest -- less Lo -- ver's Care! But now a --
las! it flies to you, and round, and round the Street all Night I rove; ah then
look down! ah then look down, dear Soul! dear Soul! and view the Vi -- ctim of
Al -- migh -- ty Love. Like Spirits we wander in dead time of Night, Huz- z --
a! Huz -- z -- a! we roar, and we sight; at last the Watch comes to op -- pose
our Delight. Charge! charge! Hey! now we scour through 'the Bill-men in Flannel,
and down drops a Con -- sta -- ble in -- to the Kennel.

^ Look down fair Saint, and see a rest -- less Lover's Care whose Heart was
'till this mo -- meant free from Beauty's charming Snare: Look down fair Saint,
and see a rest -- less Lo -- ver's Care! But now a- las! it flies to you, and
round, and round the Street all Night we rove; ah then look down! ah then look
down, dear Soul! and view the Vi -- ctim of Al -- migh -- ty Love. Like Spirits
we wander in dead time of Night, Huzz -- a! Huzz -- a! we roar, and we sight;
at last the Watch comes to op -- pose our Delight. Charge! charge! Hey! now we
scour through the Bill-men in Flannel, and down drops a Con -- sta -- ble in --
to the Kennel.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ F -- Rom drinking of Sack by the Pottle,

^ Preng preng-ta, preng preng-ta, preng, preng.

^from breaking a Constable's Noddle,

^ Preng, preng.

^his Noddle,

^ Preng, preng.

^his Nod -- dle; from Bullies that would have been Roaring, been Roaring, from
Bullies that would have been Who-ri -- ng; I have brought here a noise of mer
-- ry, mer -- ry, mer-ry Boys, sweet Ladies, to hin -- der your snoaring, sweet
Ladies, to hinder your snoaring.

^ Preng preng-ta, preng preng-ta, preng, preng.

^Hark! how the Strings jarr, when I thrum my Git -- tar!

^ Preng preng-ta, preng preng-ta, preng, preng.

^Hark! how the Strings jarr, when I thrum my Git -- tar!

^ Preng preng-ta, preng preng-ta, preng, preng.

^Ah! prove not my Foe! here I Languish be -- low; to my Sleep I would go, hey
ho; to my Sleep I would go, hey ho; to my Sleep I would go, hey ho.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ THere is one black and sul -- len hour, which Fate de^reed our Life should
know; else we should slight Al-migh-ty Power, rapt with the Joys we find below.
It Is past, dear Cynthia! now let Frowns be gone, a long long Penance I have
done; a long long Penance I have done, for Crimes a -- las! to me unknown.

II.
In each soft Hour of silent Night,
Your Image in my Dreams appears;
I grasp the Soul of my Delight,
Slumber in Joy, but 'wake in Tears.
Ah faithless charming Salnt! what will you do!
Let me not think I am by you!
Let me not think I am by you
Loved worse, loved worse, for being true.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ TELL me what a thing is Love, O ye Gods that live above! you in wan -- ton
Plea -- sres rove, and all its se -- cret Joys do prove; whilst we poor Mortals
here be -- low, scarce a part of it do know; but la -- vish out a Life in vain,
and naught but Scorn for Love we gain.

II.
Why was Man cut out by Fate,
Capable of better State?
And why was Woman made his Mate
To help him, yet his Toils create?
If we were made the Lords of all,
Must we to our Subjects fall;
And cringe to that which is our own,
By right of our Creation?
Mr. James Hawkins.
A. 2 Voc.
^ PRide and Am -- by -- tion, and Pee-vist-ress too, nay all the whole Sex --
es Le -- gion of Ills, I Would meet in a Woman, I Am doomed to Woe, so Wit, damned
Wit, not the Ca-ta-logue fills: To themselves it is a Plague, to us it is worse,
but poisoned with Learning is Curse up -- on Curse.

Mr. James Hawkins.
^ YOur haughty Wish, proud Swain, I guessed, so well the lo -- ving Hu -- mour
feigned; you took the Bait with ea -- ger have, swelled at the Prize you
thought you would gained; Blessed your a -- ven -- ging Stars, that gave you power to
Tri -- -- umph where you once was Slave.

II.
In Love, it is as much Policy
As in Battle pitched in Field;
Not to assault the Enemy,
But fly, and seemingly to yield,
And when they too secure do grow,
To rally back, and captivate the Foe.
III.
Thus when the formal Siege you laid
Against the soft and beauteous Fort,
You did suppose I was betrayed,
And thought to make my Love your Sport:
Yet know, ungrateful Swain! that I
Your Arts can bassle, and your self defye.
Mr. James Hawkins.
The two following Songs sung in The Commonwealth of Women.
^ LI -- ber -- ty's the Soul of Living, every hour new Joys receiving; no
sharp Pangs our Hearts are grieving, Li -- ber -- ty's the Soul of Living: Here
are no false Men pre-su-ming, Youth or Beauty to its Ruin; murmuring Sighs,
like Turtles cooing, nor the bit -- ter Sweets of wooing.

CHORUS. ^ Then since we are doomed to be Chaste, and Lo -- ving is counted a
Crime; and do what we can, not to think of a Man, but make the best use of our
Prime.

^ Then since we are doomed to be Chaste, and Lo -- ving is counted a Crime; and
do what we can, not to think of a Man, but make the best use of our Prime.

Mr. Sam. Akeroyde.
^ CYmbia with an aw -- full Power, on all Hearts extends her sway; Did the
Ea-stern Natives know her, they would less prize the God of Day: On her Brow Night
sha -- die lies, whilst Morning breaks from her fair Eyes; on her Brow Night sha
-- die lies, whilst Morning breaks from her fair Eyes.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ WHen first I passed the hap -- py Night, in Char -- ming Pleasure's swift
Delight, in those dear Arms of thine; what trem -- bling Joys sur -- prized
that Heart! which when, a -- las! we were to part, never felt a Grief like
mine, never felt a Grief like mine

II.
When Charms, which others only see,
Were given entirely up to me,
To view, to touch, to taste;
But oh! how grieved, how pained, how sad,
How the remembrance makes me mad
I am to know them past!
I am, etc.
III.
Ah! nothing can express how sweet,
'Twas with my Lips with thine to meet!
And none can tell the pain
Which I poor Lover must endure!
Unless thou will complete my Cure,
And give thy self again.
And give, etc.
Mr. Richard Brown.
^ THat I might e -- ven dream thus, That some Power to my E -- ter -- nal Rest
would grant this hour; so will -- ling -- ly deceived, I might possess, in
seeming Joys a re -- al Happiness: Death! I would gladly bow beneath thy
Charms, so thou could bring my Doris to thy Arms; that thus at last made
happy, I might prove in Life the Hell, in Death the Heaven of Love.

Mr. John Roffey.
A. 2 Voc. Cantus and Bassus.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ COme dear Com -- pa-nions of the Arcadian Fields, let us, let us com- bine
to countermine, the Plots our Female Con -- ver -- sa-tion yields; we will bre --
ak their Fetters, we will bre -- ak their Fetters from their Charms, be free, and
re -- gain Man his lo -- ng, lo -- ng lo -- st Li -- ber -- ty. 2. Beauty your
Empire now, now, now, is in its wain, we will never, no never, never more, never
more your Shrines a- door, since you delight t'as -- so -- ciate with Dis --
dain: Had you been kind, I would have worshipped, I would have worshipped still,
but your chief Glo -- ry is your Slaves to kill. So law -- full Princes when
they Ty -- rants prove, themselves a- buse, and Pow-er lose, their Strength de
-- pen -- ding, de -- pen -- ding on their Subjects Love; for Love o -- bli --
ges Duty more than Fear, for Love o-bli-ges Duty more than Fear, more than
Fear, all hate the Government that is too severe; all, all hate the Government
that is too severe.

The singing Bass to the foregoing Song.
A. 2 Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ COme dear Com-pa-nions of the Ar-ca-dian Fields, let us, let us combine to
counter- mine, the Plots our Female Conversation yields; we will bre -- ak their
Fetters from their Charms, be free, and regain man his lo -- ng, lo -- ng lost
Li-ber -- ty. Beauty your Empire now, now, now is in its wain, we will ne -- ver,
no never, never more your Shrines adore, since you delight t'associate with
Disdain: Had you been kind, I would have worshipped, I would have worshipped
still, but your chief Glo -- -- ry is your Slaves to kill. So law-ful Princes
when they Tyrants prove, themselves abuse, and Power lose, their Strength
de-pen-ding on their Subjects Love; for Love o -- bli -- ges Duty more than
Fear, for Love o -- bli-ges Duty more than Fear, all hate the Government that
is too se -- vere; all, all hate the Government that is too severe.

^ THE Nymph that does expose to sale, the soft Endearments of her Love, can ne
-- ver over my Heart pre -- vail, nor the least In-cli-na-tion move: It checks
that ri -- sing Transports of Delight, and palls the siercest Lovers ap -- pe
-- tite; and palls the fire -- cest Lo -- verse Ap -- pe -- tite.

II.
But Sapho, full of all the Charms
That ever beauteous Maid adorned,
Resigned her self into my Arms,
And proffered Presents nobly scorned:
She thought her Favors bore a price so high,
'Twas great to give, what Empires could not buy.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
A. 2 Voc. Cantus and Bassus. CANTUS.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ SYlvia, it is true, it is true, you're fair, more, more than other Women are,
it is true, yet that is no plea to be se -- vere: Think not those Eyes, 'cause
they conquer so much, and so much do surprise, never e -- ver in -- ten -- ded
to Ty-ra-nize; for Beauty was ne -- ver, was ne -- ver designed for a Grace to
that Face, and a Torment and Cure to my Mind: To Consent and En-joy-ment it
rather should move you, for were you not handsome, who the Devil would love you,
for were you not handsome, who the Devil would love you. CHORUS. Then since
you're by Nature framed sit for the Sport, be kind and com-ply-ing, be kind and
complying, never re- suse when we Court; your Scorn, and your haughty Disdain,
prithee cease! and since you have the Charms, have the Will too to please: For an
in -- so -- lent Beauty is naught but Disease, for an in -- so -- lent Beauty
is naught but Disease.

The singing Bass of the Chorus. THen since you're by Nature framed fit for the
Sport, be kind and complying, nor re- fuse, nor refuse when we Court; your
Scorn, and your haughty Disdain, prithee cease! prithee cease! and since you have
the Charms, have the Will too to please: For an in -- so -- lent Beauty is
naught but Disease, for an in -- so -- lent Beauty is naught but Disease.

A. 2 Voc. Cantus and Bassus. CANTUS.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ I Saw fair Cloris all a -- lone, when feathered Rain came soft -- ly down;
and Jove de-scen-ding from his Tower, to court her in a sil -- ver Shower: The
gen -- tle Snow flew in her Breasts, like little Birds, like Birds in -- to
their Nests: But o -- ver-come with whiteness there, for Grief dissolved, for
Grief dis -- solved in -- to a Tear; which fall -- ling down, which falling down
her Garment Hem, to de -- ck her Fro -- ze in -- to a Gem.

The Singing Bass.
A. 2 Voc. Cantus and Bassus.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ I Saw fair Cloris all alone, when feathered Rain came softy down; and Jove
descending from his Tower, to court her in a sil -- ver Shower: The gen -- tle
Snow flew in her Breasts, like lit -- tle Birds, like little Birds, in -- to
their Nests; but o -- ver -- come with whiteness there, for Grief dissolved,
for Grief dissolved in -- to a Tear; which falling down her Garment Hem, to de
-- ck her, to deck her Froze in -- to a Gem.

^ WHilst Strephon in his Pride of Youth, to me a -- lone prosest, dissem^led
Passion dressed like Truth, he triumphed in my Breast: I lodged him near my
yielding Heart, denied him but my Arms; de -- lu-ded with his pleasing Art,
transported with his Charms.

The Wanderer now I lose, or share
With every lovely Maid:
Who makes the Hearts of Men their Care,
Shall have their own betrayed:
Our Charms on them we vainly prove,
And think we Conquest gain;
Where one a Victim falls to love,
A thousand Tyrants reign.
Sen. Alex. Damascens.
A new SONG sung by a FOP newly come from France.
^ AH Phillis! why are you less ten -- dre, to my de-spai-ring Amor! your
Heart you have promised to ren -- dre, do not de -- ny the Retour: My Passion I
cannot de- fen -- dre; no, no, Torments increase tous les Jours.

II.
To forget your kind Slave is cruelle,
Can you expect my Devoir,
Since Phillis is grown infidelle,
And wounds me at every Revoir!
Those Eyes which were once agreeable,
Now, now, are Fountains of black Des espoire.
III.
Adieu to my false Esperance,
Adien les Plaisirs des beaux Jours;
My Phillis appears at distance,
And slights my unfeigned Efforts:
To return to her Vows impossible,
No, no, adieu to the Cheats of Amor.
A new Scotch SONG.
^ FArweel bonny Wully Craig, farweel to au thy bro -- ken Vows to me; thou
wast a love-ly Lad, when on the Grass thou tempted'st me: Full often have I dried
mine Eyn, when by my seln to mil -- king I have gean; often have I gift the
Green, where Wully vowed to be my Swain. Sea neat was my conny Lad, with new
Russet Shoon, and Holland ^and; but now ^e's won his way, with Maidenhead, and
Leve and au: His Locks were sea finely seam'd, and shone as bright as a -- ny
in the Land; but now he is won his way, with Maidenhead, and Leve and an.

II.
Ise ene thraw away my skeel,
And gang ne mere to yonder fatal Erow,
Where I was pleased sea weel,
But now I feel mere ner others do:
He took me by the wulling hand,
And vowed to Hea'n how he wad constant be,
When levingly we laid
Under the shade of the Wullow-tree.
III.
But ah! when the Loon had deun,
He nothing mere of Love could show;
But now he is won his way,
With Maidenhead, and Leve and au.
My Weam now begins to fill,
And seun the bonny Bird will crow,
Though he has won his way
With Maidenhead, and Leve and au.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ SHun a vain Pre-ten-der's Sto -- ry, which does Pride not Love di- sco --
ver; Beauty's robbed of all its Glory, when Va -- ni -- ty creates a Lover: He Will
be con -- stant in pur -- su -- ing, 'till it is said, he is pos-sest; then be
pleased at your un-do-ing, Proud the World believes him blessed; then be pleased
at your un -- do -- ing, Proud the World be -- lieves him blessed.

Senior Alex. Damasceno.
^ OH Mother! Roger with his Kis -- ses almost stops my Breath I vow! why does
he gripe my Hand to pieces, and yet says, he loves me too? Tell me, Mother,
pray now do, pray now do, pray now do! tell me, Mother, pray now do, pray now,
pray now, pray now do, what To -- ger means when he does so? For ne -- ver stir
I long to know.

II.
Nay more, the naughty man beside it
Something in my Mouth did put;
I called him Beast, and tried to bite it,
But for my life I cannot do it.
Tell me, Mother, pray now do, * *
For never stir I long to know.
III.
He sets me in his Lap whole Hours,
Where I feel I know not what;
Something I never felt in yours,
Pray tell me, Mother, what is that?
Tell me, Mother, what is that?
For never stir I long to know.
^ IS my Clo -- rin -- da yet in Nature's State! what greater Joy, or Grief to
me! Live, live Clo -- rin -- da, 'till I hate, and I Clo -- rin -- da still
abhorred by thee: Thou art all Joy, I am by De -- sti -- ny all Grief, all
Sorrow; none to pi -- ty me! dear Clo-rin-da, not a Soul but thee! Oh! had I
time to write the turns of Time, to vent my Passion in such a Rhyme, as could
all Hearts to mine in sympathy melt quickly down, but none but thee, Clo --
rin-da, pities me! Thou glv'st me thine, I thee my Pi -- ty give, let us pi --
ty one a -- no -- there, whi -- lst we live.

Mr. Sam. Akeroyde.
^ OH! that I had but a sine Man, a sweet Man, a dain -- ty Man, and a spi --
cy one, for now I lie by my self all alone, and the cold Sweat comes me upon,
and a- lack, for my Love I dye! and if I dye, why then I dye. Daughter, why
should thou de- sire for to wed, and have neither Pot nor Pan? Oh Mother,
take you no care for that, so I may but have a Man; a sweet Man, a sine Man, a
dainty Man, a delicate Man, and a spi -- cy one, etc.

Mr. Pelham Humphrey.
An ALLIGORY.
^ A Grass-hopper, and a Fly, in Summer hot and dry, in ea -- ger Ar -- gu --
meant were met, a -- bout, a -- bout Pri -- o -- ri -- ty: Says the Fly to the
Grass-hopper, From mighty Race I spring, bright Phoebus was my Dad it is known,
and I eat and drink with a King. Says the Grass-hopper to the Fly, Such Rogues
are still, are still preferred; your Fa -- there might be of high Degree, but
your Mother was but a Turd, a Turd, a Turd.

CHORUS. ^ SO Re -- bell Jem-my Scot, so Re -- bell Jem -- my Scot, that did to
Em -- pire soar; his Father might be the Lord knows what, his Father might be
the Lord knows what, but his Mother we knew a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore,
a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore; his Fa -- there might be the Lord knows
what, but his Mother we knew a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore.

^ SO Re -- bell Jemmy Scot, so Re -- bell Jem -- my Scot, that did to Empire
soar; his Father might be the Lord knows what, but his Mother we knew, his
Mother we knew a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore; his Father might be the Lord
knows what, but his Mother we knew, but his Mother we knew a whore, a whore, a
whore, a whore.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ WHile Orpheus in a hea -- vy strain, and dole -- full Accents did complain,
that his Eu -- ri -- di -- ce was slain; the Trees to hear, ob -- tain'd an
Ear; the Trees to hear, ob -- tain'd an Ear; which when the Harp was dumb, grew
deaf a -- gain; which when the Harp was dumb, grew deaf a -- gain. If Wood can
speak, a Tree may hear, if Wood can Sor -- row e're en -- dear, a Tree may drop
an Amber tear; if Wood can tell true Grief so well, the Cypress may be- moan
the Bier; if Wood can tell true Grief so well, the Cypress may be- moan the
Bier, the Cypress may bemoan the Bier. The standing Nobles of the Grove,
finding dead Timber speak and move, the sa -- tal Ax be -- began to love; and
envied Death that gave such Breath, as Tunes the Voi-ces of the blessed a --
bove, as Tunes the Voi -- ces of the blessed a -- bove.

Mr. George Heart.
^ TH'am -- by -- tious Eye that seeks a -- lone, where Beau-ty's Won -- ders
most are shown; of all that bounteous Heaven displays, let him on bright A --
lin -- da gaze, and in her high Ex -- am -- ple see, all can admired, or
wished for be.

II.
An unmatched form Mind-like endowed,
Estate and Title, great and good;
A Charge Heaven dares to few admit,
So few like her can manage it:
Without all Blame, or Envy bear,
The being witty, great, and fair.
III.
So well those murdering Wcapons weild,
As first her self with them to shield;
Then slaughter none in proud disport,
Destroy those she invites to Court:
Great are her Charms, but Virtue more,
She wounds no Hearts, though all Adore.
Mr. George Heart.
^ WHilst Cynthia sung, all an -- gry Winds lay still; and Ze -- phi -- rus
with a gen -- tle Gale, did soft -- ly swell the trem -- bling Sail; Cynthia!
whose Voice, as well as Eyes, can kill: Charmed with the Ma -- gick of her
Tongue, the wan -- ton Wa -- ters danced a -- long; each lit -- tle Bil-low
strove to stay, though Nature for -- ced it a- way: Precedent Waves then
foll'wing ride, and all to -- ge -- there blame the Tide.

II.
From Rosy Mouth she breathed the perfumed Sound;
The mournful Attick Philomel,
Never did warble half so well;
Whilst mocking Eccho's babble it around,
Never in so sweet a Tune as this,
Upon the Banks of Thamesis,
Did silver Swans, about to dye,
Grace their mournful Elegy:
Dear Cynthia! they are excelled by you,
In Sweetness, and in Fairness too.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
A. 2. voc. Cantus and Bassus.
[Words by Mr. Abraham Cowley.]
^ IN a dark sha -- die Cy-press Grove, where naught but dis -- mal thoughts of
Love, no plea -- sant, nor no cheer -- full Ray, did e're ad -- mit -- tance
find; the me-lan-cho-ly Stre -- phon lay, thus, thus, thus sigh -- ing to the
Wind; the me-lan-cho-ly Stre -- phon lay, thus, thus, thus sigh -- ing to the
Wind: Ah! do not, Strephon, think to find, a Cure for thy tortured Mind, there
amongst those whom Fate has blessed, with kind and yielding Charms: Where every
Night each Swain does rest, se- cured by Love from harms; where every Night
each Swain does rest, se -- cured by Love from harms. Cease, wretched Strephon!
cease to grieve, do thou like o -- there Shepherds live; free from all Care
there hours are passed, free as the Flocks they keep; Dances and Songs there
Days do wast, there Nights they pass in sleep; Dances and Songs there Days do
wast, there Nights they pass in sleep. Sad is thy Fate, since thou a -- lone,
in- constancy surpassed by none, has fixed thy Heart, where no return can e're
ex -- pe -- cted be: Yet for my Ce-lia's love, to mourn shall pleasure be to
me; yet for my Ce-lia's love, to mourn shall pleasure be to me.

^ In a dark sha -- die Cy -- press Grove, where naught but dis -- mal thoughts
of Love, no pleasant, nor no cheerful Ray, did e're ad -- mit -- tance find,
did e're admittance find; the me-lan-cho-ly Strephon lay, thus sigh -- ing to
the Wind, the Wind; the me -- lan -- cho -- ly Strephon lay, thus, thus
sigh-ing to the Wind: Ah! do not, Strephon, think to find, a Cure for thy
tortured Mind, there amongst those whom Fate has blessed, with kind and yielding
Charms: Where every Night each Swain does rest, se- cured by Love from harms;
where every Night each Swain does rest, secured by Love from harms. Cease,
wretched Strephon! cease to mourn, to mourn, do thou like o -- there Shepherds
live; free from all Cares there hours are passed, free as the Flocks they keep;
Dances and Songs there Days do wast, there Nights they pass in sleep; Dances
and Songs there Days do wast, there Nights they pass in sleep. Sad is thy Fate,
since thou a -- lone, in- constancy surpassed by none, has fixed thy Heart,
where no return can e're ex -- pe -- cted be: Yet for my Ce -- lia's love, to
mourn shall plea -- sure be to me; yet for my Ce -- lia's love, to mourn shall
pleasure be to me.

Mr. James Heart.
^ WHy so averse is Lau -- ra's Mind! why still to Dae -- mon's Grief un --
kind! Less has her gen -- tle Na -- ture shook, for soft her Heart is as her
Look: Re -- len -- ting, grateful, just is she, and good to all the World but
me.

II.
Could serving long, or suffering much,
This ever-scornful Beauty touch;
Could faithful Love her favor win,
I blessed above all hopes had been,
But vain is worth, I see too late,
Hearts are like Crowns, bestowed by Fate*
Mr. Robert King.
^ HOw powerful is the God of Love, whilst he maintains his Sa -- cred Rights!
the Days with mighty Pleasure move, and full of Raptures are the Nights, and
full of Raptures are the Nights; the Days with mighty Pleasure move, and full
of Raptures are the Nights, and full of Rap -- tures are the Nights: But if he
stand in awe of Honor's nicer Law; if his own Power he weakly gives a -- way,
he for -- feits all the Reverence tha -- t we pay; if his own Power he weakly
gives a -- way, he forfeits all the Reverence tha -- t we pay. It Is true, in
Fea -- verse we submit, and drink not in the burning Fit; yet now and then a
Cordial we may taste, to eat is danger, to eat is danger, but it is death, it is
death, it is death to fast. But since a Fea-ver of the Mind no Ab -- sti --
nence can ease, since I despair a Cure to find, be to your dying Pa -- ti --
ent kind, and hu -- mour my Disease; since I de- spair a Cure to find, be to
your dying Pa-ti -- cit kind, and humor my Dis -- ease.

Senior Baptist.
^ WHen my Kids and Lambs I treated, and to Mountains did invite; with clean
Straw their Hur -- dles she -- ted, where they might re -- pose all Night:
Then free from Care I lived at pleasure, 'till my Le -- lia take her flight; I
at the loss of such a Treasure, all my o -- there, all my o -- there, all my
other Flocks did slight.

II.
Through each Grove and Wood I ramble,
Yet can never quit my fear,
Birds, methinks, in every Bramble,
Whistles Lelia in my Ear:
But I upon my headless Rover,
Never once can fix my Eye;
Which makes me now thus often over,
Lelia, Lelia, Lelia, cry.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
A.2.Voc.
^ LOvely Lau -- rin -- da! blame not me, if on your beauteous Looks I gaze;
how can I help it, when I see something so charming In your Face! That like a
bright un -- clou -- ded Sky, when in the Air the Sunbeams play; it ra -- vi
-- shes my wondering Eye, and warms me with a pleasing Ray.

Mr. John Courtiville.
^ There Is such Re -- li -- gion in my Love, it must, like Ver -- tue, have Re
-- ward; and Strephon's Faith will from a -- bove, though not be -- low, find due
Regard: Tell me no more of Friends or Foes, that hindered what your Heart de --
signed; no Pa -- rents can your Love di -- spose, no more than they be- get
your Mind. The CHORUS.

II.
Great Love! the Monarch of our Wills,
When I am lost by your Disdain,
Will damn that Scorn your Lovers kills,
To be your fatal Beauty's Bain:
You, like a Be, has stung my Heart,
Yet there the Avenging Dart does lie;
Which gives you in my Fate a part;
And you are undone as well as I.
CHORUS for two Voices. ^ KInd Heaven no Peace to the Perjured allows, in
Fate's gloomy Book keeps account of all Vows: And Jove that does view the false
and the true, knows who kept her Promise, and who deceived, who will swear by
the Skies, and Ga-ni-mede's Eyes, no Woman that mingles Affection with Art, and
here in the fares of the World plays a part; shall e -- ver hereafter, shall e
-- ver hereafter, shall e -- ver here -- af -- ter break a fond Heart, shall e
-- ver here -- af -- ter break a fond Heart.

^ KInd Heaven no Peace to the Perjured allows, in Fate's gloomy Book keeps
account of all Vows: And Jove that does view the false and the true, knows who
kept her Promise, and who deceived, who will swear by the Skies, and
Ga-ni-mede's Eyes, no Woman that mingles Affection with Art, and here in the
fares of the World plays a part, shall e -- ver hereafter, shall e-ver, shall e
-- ver here -- af -- ter break a fond Heart, shall e -- ver here -- af -- ter
break a fond Heart.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
The two following Songs in The Devil of a Wife.
For a BASS alone.
^ WHilst you court a damned Vintner for such na -- sty Liquor, as worse was
never swallowed by dull Country Vi -- car, and the in -- so -- lent Ras -- call
still draws what he pleases; while, Boys, you may kick 'em, when Masters
entreat 'em, from Draw'rs you up in -- to Al -- der -- men beat 'em; but they
get your Money, and you get Dis -- ea -- ses.

For two BASSES.
^ LET the vain, let the vain Spark

^ Let the vain Spark, etc.

^consume his Store, in keeping an ex- pensive Whore, for o -- there is to em --
ploy: For all those Snares and Baits he pays, which he for o -- there Gallants
lays,

^ and he must least,

^ and he must least, must least en -- joy.

^must least en -- joy.

II.
Keep Whores then, as Perfumes you wear,
Of which, your selves have the least share,
Of others Claps partake:
Your Bodies bring to the Surgeon's hands,
And to the Scriv'ners all your Lands,
And give her your last Stake.
III.
While with Reason we bless the Fate
That brings us to the Marriage state,
The only happy Life:
The chief Enjoyment in a King,
No Wealth nor Power such Joy can bring,
As does a Wife, a tender Wife,
IV.
There can be no true Friend beside,
So often does Interest divide,
But they are so conjoined:
By this most sacred Rite are grown,
That they are not one Flesh alone,
But they are both one Mind.
^ A -- Dieu, dear Object of my Love's ex -- cess, and with thee all my hopes,
all my hopes of Hap -- pi -- ness! Adieu, adieu, a- dieu, dear Object of my
Love's excess, and with thee all my hopes, all my hopes of Happiness, and with
thee all my Hopes of Happiness; a -- ll my hopes, my hopes of Happiness! With
the same servent and un -- chan -- ged Heart, which did its whole self once to
thee impart. I to resign thy dear Converse submit, since I can neither, neither
keep, nor me -- rit it. I ask no inconvenient Kindness now, to move thy
Passion, or to cloud thy Brow; for thou may sa -- it is -- fie my coldest plea,
by some few soft, soft remembrances of me, by some few soft remembrances of me,
by some few soft re -- mem-bran-ces of me. May no Minutes Trouble thee possess,
but only to en -- dear the next hours Happiness. May thou, when thou art
from me removed, be e -- ver bet -- ter pleased, but ne -- ver worse be --
loved.

Mr. James Heart.
^ AH, cru -- el Beauty! could you prove more tender, or less fair; you nei --
there would provoke my Love, nor cause me to despair: But your dissembling
charming Eye, my ea -- sie Hope beguiles; and though a Rock beneath does lie,
the tempting Sur -- face smiles.

II.
To what your Sex on ours imposed,
My humble Love complied;
And when my Secret I disclosed,
Thought Modesty denied:
Yes sure, said I, her yielding Heart
Partakes of my desire;
Though nicer Honor feigns this Art,
To hide the rising Fire.
III.
Again, your Hand my Suit I told,
And slighted Vows renewed;
Yet you insensibly were cold,
And I but vainly wooed:
Then for returns of Scorn prepare,
Or lay that Frown assde;
Affected Coyness I could bear,
But hate insulting Pride.
Mr. Snow.
An AIR.
^ IF mighty Wealth, that gives the Rules to vicious Men, and chea -- ted
Fools, could but preserve me in the Prime of bloo -- ming Youth, and purchase
Time; then I would covet Riches too, and scrape and cheat as others do; then I
would covet Riches too, and scrape and cheat as others do: That when the Mi --
ni -- sters of Fate, pale Death was knocking at the Gate, I Would send him loaded
back with Coin, a Bribe of rich -- er Dust than mine; I Would send him loaded back
with Coin, a Bribe of rich -- er Dust than mine; I Would send him loaded back with
Coin, a Bribe of rich -- er Dust than mine. But since that Life must slide a --
way, and Wealth cannot pur -- chase one poor Day; why should my Cares en --
crease my Pain, and wast my Time with Sighs in vain, and wast my Time with
Sighs in vain.

Second Part. Since Riches cannot Life sup- ply, it is a useless Po -- ver --
ty, it is a use -- less Po -- ver -- ty; Since Riches can-not Life supply, it
is a use -- less Po -- ver- ty, it is a use -- less Po -- ver -- ty. Swi -- ft
Time, swi -- ft Time, that cannot be bought to stay, I Will try to guide the gent
-- lest way, I Will try to guide, to guide the gentlest way. With cheerful
Friends brisk Wine shall pass, and drown a Care, drown a Care in ev' -- ry
Glass: Sometimes di -- ver-ted with Love's Charms, the Cir -- cle made by Ce --
lia's Arms; sometimes di -- ver -- ted with Loves Charms, the Cir -- cle made
by Celia's Arms.

Dr. John Blow.
A. 2. Voc.
^ CE -- lin -- da would her Heart bestow, but would reserve her Gold; she will so
-- li -- ta -- ry leave it so, Ce -- lin -- da's growing old; she will so -- li --
ta -- ry leave it so, Ce -- lin -- da's growing old.

II.
Now if she vows to give but one,
Sure that must be her Store;
Grant me, Celinda, that alone,
And I Will thy Years adore.
Mr. James Heart.
^ IN Courts; Am-bi -- tion kills the Great; in Cities, strive for needless
Gain; some do in Battles meet their Fate, but I by Love, by Love, am slain:
Phacton by Thunder, Thun -- der died, Pro -- me -- theus by the Vultures Pain;
this doomed for Stealth, and that for Pride, but I by Love, by Love am slain.

II.
Let noisy desperate Fools be brave,
And build up Trophy's to the Sky;
My only Wish, ye Gods, I have,
When at Clorinda's Feet I dye:
When I, like some, to Greatness born,
To Fame and Empire raised up high;
That Fame, that Empire I would scorn,
And at Clorinda's Feet would dye.
Mr. Robert King.
^ WHere art thou, God of Dreams! for whose soft Chain, the best of Mankind e
-- ver do complain; since they affect to be, thy Captives before Li -- ber --
ty, unkind and disobliging De -- i-ty: He flies from Princes, and from Lovers
Eyes, yet every night with the poor Shepherd lies, yet ev' -- ry night with the
poo -- r Shep -- herd lies. Show thy self now a God, and take some care of the
Distressed, Innocent, and Fair; to rest, to rest, dispose the pi -- tied Maid,
her Eye -- lids clo -- se, gently as Evening Dews shut up a Rose: Then bear in
si -- lent Whispers in her Ear, such pleasing words, as Virgins love to hear,
as Vir -- gins love to hear.

Senior Baptist.
^ WHY this talking still of Dying? Why that dismal Look and Groan? Leave, fond
Lover! leave your sighing, let these fruitless Arts a -- lone: Love's the Child
of Joy and Pleasure, born of Beauty, nursed with Wit; much a- mis you take your
Measure, this dull winning-way to hit.

II.
Tender Maids you fright from loving,
By the Effects they see in you;
If you would be truly moving,
Eagerly your part pursue:
Brisk and gay appear in wooing,
Pleasant be if you would please;
All this talking, and no doing,
Will not love, but hate, Increase.
Mr. Robert King.
FINIS.
THE Theater of MUSIC: OR, A Choice COLLECTION of the newest and best SONGS
Sung at the COURT, and Public THEATERS.

The Words composed by the most ingenious Wits of the Age, and set to MUSIC by
the greatest Masters in that Science.

WITH A Thorow-Bass to each SONG for the Harpsichord, Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

The FOURTH and LAST BOOK.



LONDON, Printed by B. Motte, for Henry Playford, at his Shop near the Temple
Church, 1687.

In COMMENDATION of this BOOK.
OH for a Muse Divine, such Sacred Skill,
As does the Immortal Seats with Anthems fill!
That justly (Music) might thy Praise rehearse,
Apollo's self must give those Numbers force,
The God of Music is the God of Verse.
What Charms, alas! can our dead Rhimes impart,
Without th'inspiring Great Musician's Art?
But when the Vital Air his Genius gives,
The Tuneful Stanza from that moment lives.
Had never Orpheus Music understood,
His Rhimes had failed to charm the stupid Wood:
The senseless Stones, had never obeyed his Call,
Nor (...) themselves into the Theban Wall.
Then let our nobler Bards this Subject choose,
The Praise of Music best deserves their Muse.
Why should some vain Cocquet employ your Flame,
Or why some undeserving Fatron's Name?
Exposed in both Attempts to this sure Curse,
She jilts your Passion, and he bilks, your Purse.
Mark but the upshot of your flattering Trade;
For after all the Daubing you have laid,
They get no Fame, but you are Scandals made.
Not all your Arts the World's just sense can Null,
For that will still believe --
Your Miss a Dowdy, and your Patron Dull.
Nath. Tate.

LICENSED,

Rob. Midgley.
October 23. 1686.
TO ALL Lovers and Understanders OF MUSIC.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS Fourth and Last Book of the Theater of Music, or, A New and Choice
Collection of Songs and Dialogues, will (I doubt not) be very acceptable to all
knowing Gentlemen in the Skill of Music, for several Reasons I here mention:
First, That most of these Songs and Dialogues were Composed by the Eminent Dr.
John Blow, and Mr. Henry Purcell, my ever kind Friends, and several other able
Masters, from whom I received true Copies, which were by them perused, before
they were put to the Press. Secondly, That here is added two excellent Songs
long since out of Print, viz. go Perjured Man, set by Dr. Blow; and that
Dialogue, When Death shall part us from our Kids, set by Mr. Matthew Lock;
which two are here (with much Care) exactly true printed, by the Diligent Pains
of my Father Mr. John Playford, whose known Skill for printing of Music, our
Nation is not ignorant. And lastly, This excellent Book may be joined and bound
with the three former, will make a complete Volume: Notwithstanding all this
Care and Pains, I must expect some of our New Pretenders to Publish and Print
Music, will be disparaging this Book, thereby to gain Credit and Custom to
their own: But I pass them over in Charity, with Go on and Prosper; not
doubting, but this (when it comes to the hands of Judicious Gentlemen, and
Understanders of Music) they will find the difference; to whose Judgments I
submit, and shall always endeavor to express my self,

GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant, Henry Playford.

A TABLE of the SONGS and DIALOGUES contained in this Book.
A.
AS in those Nations where Folio. 2 Ah Strephon! that I were 12 Ah Clorinda!
cannot I move you 21 Amidst the Shades, and cool 62
B.
Brisk Claret the Prince of Wine 6
C.
Corinna, with Innocence 4 Come all ye pale Lovers that sigh 53 Cease Anxious
World. [A Ground.] 60
D.
Dorinda, since your Charms 22
F.
Fill the Boul with Rosy Wine 32 Fill me a Boul, a mighty Boul 52 Fair angry
Nymph, this Pride is lost 42
G.
Go, Perjured Man 82
H.
How lovely's a Woman before she is 8 How sweet is the Air and refreshing 24 How
often did Love assault young 39 How I have served, how just or true 64 Hence,
fond Deceiver. [A Dialogue.] 86
I.
In a Desert in Greenland. [A Dialo] 10 I loved young Phillis, fair and gay 11
In the Evening Dawn 18 I love, but dare not hope to be 25 I love, and am
beloved again 29 In vain I strive against my Fate 30 I yield, I yield, Divine
Althea 35 I Will sing of Hero's, and of Kings 54 I little thought, thou fond
ungrateful 66 In some kind Dream upon a Slumber 69
L.
Long wrestling with an Angel's form Folio. 17
M.
Must I ever sigh in vain 23
N.
No Being is exempt from Love 51
O.
Often am I by Women told 9 Oh Solitude! [A Ground.] 57 O Love! that stronger art
than Wine 84
P.
Proud Strephon, do not think 15 Phillis, I must needs confess 44
R.
Return, fair Princess 26
S.
Since the Spring comes on 45 Some Wine, Boys, some Wine 48 Strephon was young,
unused to love 56
T.
There is no Beauty can compare 6 Tell me, ye God, why do you 14 The sweet
Melina's Eyes 36
V.
Under a Shade in Flowery June 28
W.
When first my Shepherdess and I 1 When you have broke that tender 13 Why
should Clausa, young and fair 16 Wine, Wine in a Morning 20 When I see my
Strephon languish 31 When first Amyntas su'd for a kiss 50 When I drink, my
Heart's possessed 72 When Death shall part us from our 78
Y.
Your Gamester provoked by his losses 5
^ WHen first my Shep -- her -- dess and I, en -- joy'd with mutual Love; she
would a thousand Deaths to dye, before she false would prove: Then in a coo --
ing Tone she cried, My Damon, still prove true! May Damon dye, I soon replied,
when e're he loves not you.

II.
But oh! too soon Myrtilla came,
By chance into the Plain;
Aminta then was not the same,
For all her Vows were vain:
Yet with fresh Charms she did renew
The Vows, my Eyes to blind;
I wished, but could not think them true,
She being of Womankind.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
A. 2. Voc.
^ AS in those Nations, where they yet a -- door Mar -- ble and Cedar, and
their Aid implore; it is not the Workman, nor the precious Wood, but it is the
Worshipper that makes the God. So cru -- el Fair! though Heavens have given you
all, we Mor -- tals Beauty, or can Virtue call; it is we that give the Thunder
to your Frowns, Darts to your Eyes, and to our selves the Wounds: But for our
Love, which proudly you deride, vain were your Beauty, and more vain your
Pride; all envied Beings which the World can show, un -- to some mea -- ner
thing their Greatness owe. Sub -- jects make Kings, and we the numerous Train
of hum -- ble Lo -- verse, con -- sti -- tute the Reign: This on -- ly
difference, Beauty's Realm can boast, where most its Fa -- vours it en -- sla
-- veth most; and they to whom it is most in -- dull -- gent found, are al --
ways in the su- rest Fetters bound.

Mr. William Turner.
^ CO -- rin -- na, with In -- no -- cence, Beau -- ty, and Wit, ev' -- ry
Sense does in -- vade, and my Reason persuade, and with Pleasure compells me my
Freedom to quit; though my Tongue has pre -- ten -- ded to serve and a -- door, I
find my Heart never was in earnest before: But so bright are her Charms, all my
Hope, I distrust, my want of Desert makes my Jea -- lou -- sie just; if the
Joys her Eyes promise I never must ob- tain, let 'em quickly de -- ter-mine my
Doubts by Disdain, I am never of those Fools who can sigh and complain: But if
she can betray me my Fate, let me meet, let me live in her Arms, or dye at her
Feet.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ YOur Game -- ster, provoked by his Loss, may forswear, and rayl against
Play, yet can ne -- ver for -- bear; de -- lu -- ded with Hopes, what is lost
may be won, in passion plays on, 'till at last he is undone.

II.
So I, who have often declaimed the fond pain;
Of those fatal wounds which Love gets by disdain;
Seduced by the charms of your Looks, am drawn in,
To expose my poor Heart to those Dangers again.
III.
Clarissa, I live on the hopes of my Love,
Which flatters me so, that you kinder will prove;
In some lucky Minute I hope to enjoy thee,
And rout all your Forces in Arms to' destroy me.
IV.
My Fortune I hope is reserved for this cast,
To make me a saver for all my Life past;
Be lucky this once, Dice! it is all I implore,
I Will gladly tie up then, and tempt you no more.
Mr. J. Reading.
^ THere is no Beauty can compare with Divine Ce -- lia, lovely, fair; from
those bright dazzling Suns, her Eyes, fond Li -- ber -- ty af -- frigh-ted
flies: And Love it self en- thrall'd remains, a Captive in her Golden Chains.

II.
Her Voice so sweet, that Mortal Ears
It charms, like Music of the Spears;
Enquire not for a greater Bliss,
She Is a Terrestrial Paradise:
Cupid resigns his Shafts to her,
Whose Beauty is Love's Conqueror.
Mr. Robert King.
A Song in Commendation of CLARET.
A. 2. voc.
^ BRisk Claret's the Prince and the Topper of Wines, the Soul of the Poet, and
Life of his Lines; there is none but adores thee that understands, Drinking, for
nothing like Claret helps Writing or Thinking: Who e -- ver a -- buse thee,
we will sing in thy Praise, we will ne -- ver re -- fuse thee, who e -- ver
gain-says; we dai -- ly will drink thee, our Veins to re -- ple -- nish, let
Whores and their Cullies drink White Wind and Rhenish.

^ Brisk Claret's the Prince and the Topper of Wines, etc.

CHORUS. A. 3. Voc. ^ We dai -- ly will drink thee, our Veins to re -- ple --
nish, let Whores and their Cullies drink White Wind and Rhenish, let Whores and
their Cullies drink White Wind and Rhenish.

^ We dai -- ly will drink thee, our Veins to re -- ple -- nish, let Whores and
their Cullies drink White Wind and Rhenish, let Whores and their Cullies drink
White Wind and Rhenish.

^ We dai -- ly will drink thee, our Veins to re -- ple -- nish, let Whores and
their Cullies drink White Wind and Rhenish, let Whores and their Cullies drink
White Wind and Rhenish.

Mr. John Reading.
^ HOw lovely's a Woman before she is enjoyed, when the Spirits are strong, and
the Fancy not cloyed! we admire ev' -- ry Part, though ne -- ver so plain, which
when thoroughly possessed, we quickly disdain.

II.
So Drinking we love too, just at the same rate,
For when we are at it, we foolishly prate
What Acts we have done, and set up for Wit,
But next morning's Pains our Pleasure do quit.
III.
But Music's a Pleasure, that tyres not so soon,
It Is pleasant in Mornings, it is welcome at Noon;
It Is charming at Nights, to sing Catches in Parts,
It diverts our dull Hours, and rejoices our Hearts.
IV.
But Music alone, without Women and Wine,
Will govern but dully, though never so fine;
Therefore by consent we will enjoy them all three,
Wine and Music for you, and the Women for me.
A. 2 Voc. Cantus and Bassus.
(Words by Mr. Cowley.)
^ Often am I by the Women told, poor Anacreon, thou grow'st old! look how thy
Hairs are fall -- ling all, poor A -- na -- creon, how they fall! whether I grow
old or no, by the effects I do not know: This I know without be -- ing told,
it is time to live, if I grow old; it is time short Pleasures now to take, of lit
-- tle Life the best to make, of little Life the best to make, and manage
wisely the last Stake.

^ Often am I by the Women told, poor Anacreor, thou grow'st old! look how thy
Hairs are fall -- ling all, poor A -- na -- creon, how they fall! whether I grow
old or ^o, by the effects I do not know: This I know without be -- ing told,
it is time to live, it is time to live, if I grow old; it is time short Pleasures
now to take, of little Life the best to make, the best to make, and manage
wisely the last Stake.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
A DIALOGUE betwixt Philander and Sylvia.
Philander. ^ IN a Desert in Greenland, where the Sun never casts an Eye, in
con- tempt of all the World, I could live with thee my Joy.


Sylvia. ^ On the Sands of scorched Assric, where the Sunburned Natives fry;
blessed with thee, my dear Philander, I could me to live and dye.


Philander. ^ No Nymph, with her sly sub -- tle Art, e're shall have power to
steal my Heart; thou art all in all in every part, each Vein of me shall e --
ver be panting for love of thee.


Sylvia. ^ No Swain, with his Wit, Wealth, or Art, e're shall have power to
storm my Heart; thou art all in all in every part, each Vein of me shall e --
ver be panting for love of thee.


Mr. William Aylworth.
^ I Loved young Phillis, fair and gay, her Beauty blooming, fresh as May;
then, oh then! I loved her so, I did all o -- there Joys forego: But now, a --
las! her Beauty's gone, and with it too my Heart is flown. But this my only
comfort is, I often, of -- ten, told her this, a certain truth, which now she will
prove, That none, when Beauty's gone, will Love.

Mr. John Roffey.
^ AH Strephon! that I were but sure, thy Love, like mine, could still endure;
that Time and Absence, which destroys the Cares of Lovers, and their Joys,
might never rob me of that part, which you have given me of your Heart; others
unenvied might possess, what e -- ver they call Happiness.

II.
If we, like Turtles, could retire,
With equal constancy and fire,
And in some cool and lovely Grove,
By lasting heighten still our Love;
How gladly could we banish thence
The busy World's Impertinence!
And all the time we have to spare,
Make Love our Business, and our Care.
Mr. John Roffey.
^ WHen you have broke that ten -- der Loy -- al Heart, which so ma -- ny years
did faith -- full to you prove; which for your sake endured Love's cru -- el
smart, and when you scorned, made no re -- turn but Love: You then, perhaps,
will to Com -- pas -- sion bend, when I Am to De -- sti -- ny become a Prey; and
then you will ease your Lover and a Friend, you have too pro -- di -- gal -- ly
thrown a -- way.

II.
Then that soft Nature Women always share,
Will be as much your Bane, as Love was mine;
You Will sigh in vain, and drop a fruitless Tear,
And at th'irrevocable Loss repine:
My Love before those Eyes shall still appear,
Which gave its Being, and did ruin me;
And you, who never could love, shall always fear,
This Vengeance shall attend your Cruelty.
Mr. Snow.
^ TELL me, ye Gods, why do you prove so cruel, so severe, to make me burn in
flames of Love, then throw me in Despair? Tell me, what Pleasure do you find,
to force tor -- men -- ting Fate; to make my Syl -- via first seem kind, then
vow perpetual Hate?

II.
Once gentle Sylvia did inspire,
With her bewitching Eyes;
Often with a Kiss she would fan that Fire,
Which from her Charms arise:
With her Diviner Looks she would bless,
And with her Smiles revive;
When she was kind, who could express
The Ecstasies of Life?
III.
But now I read my fatal Doom,
All hopes now disappear;
Smiles are converted to a Frown,
And Vows neglected are:
No more kind Looks she will impart,
No longer will endure
The tender Passion of my Heart,
Which none but she can cure.
IV.
Ah cruel, false, perfidious Maid!
Are these Rewards of Love?
When you have thus my Heart betrayed,
Will you then faithless prove?
It Is pity such an Angel's Face
Should so much perjured be;
And blast each captivating Grace,
By being false to me.
V.
Return, return, e're it is too late,
The God of Love appease;
Lest you too soon do meet your Fate,
And fall a Sacrifice:
Despise not then a proffered Heart,
But mighty Love obey;
For Age will ruin all your Art,
And Beauty will decay.
^ PRoud Stre -- phon! do not think my Heart so ab -- so -- lute a Slave, nor
in so mean and servile State; but if I say, That you're ingrate, I Have Pride and
Power e -- nough your Chains to brave.

II.
I scorn to Grieve or Sigh for one
That does my Tears neglect;
If in your Looks my Coldness were,
Or desire of Change appear,
I can your Vows your Love and you reject.
III.
What refined Madness would it be,
With Tears to dim those Eyes;
Whose Rays it Grief does not rebate,
Each Hour new Lovers might create,
And with each Look gain a more glorious Prize.
IV.
Then do not think with Frowns to fright,
Or threaten me with Hate;
For I can be as cold as you,
Disdain as much, and proudly too,
And break my Chains in spite of Love or Fate.
Mr. Snow.
^ WHY should Clausa, young and fair, her self a Foe to Love declare? Why
should such Charms as hers be given, to one that is more deaf than Heaven, to
one that is more deaf than Heaven.

II.
Prayers and Tears will there prevail,
But here our best Endeavors fail;
To her each Shepherd sighs in vain,
Whilst she is regardless of their Pain,
{vocal join} Whilst she is regardless of their Pain.
III.
Passes her pleasing Hours away,
With a Contempt of all they say;
Thus poor neglected Strephon lies,
Falls to her Scorn a Sacrifice;
{vocal join} Falls to her Scorn a Sacrifice.
Mr. Snow.
^ LOng wrestling with an An -- gel's form, I Have almost weathered out the
Storm; and made the bright Au re -- lia yield, to pi -- ty one her Frowns had
killed; But pi-ty beaming from her Eyes, has made the Wretch, though dead, to
rise; but Pi -- ty beaming from her Eyes, has made the Wretch, though dead, to
rise.

II.
All her Words express her kind,
All her Actions speaks her Mind;
Ten thousand ways she Love betray,
And to her Strephon Heaven display:
Happy I died, since from my Dust
I rise to the Honor of the Just.
Happy I died, etc.
Mr. Courtiville.
^ IN th'Evening's Dawn, when Nymphs and Swains fold their Flocks up- on the
Plains, and then re -- tire in -- to the Grove, to Dance and Sing, and talk of
Love; there a -- lone Strephon sat, and thus he did be -- moan his Fate: Why,
oh why should Phil -- lis be to all the World so gay and free, and yet so cold,
and yet so cold, so wondrous cold to me; Soft. and yet so cold, and yet so
cold, so wondrous cold to me? The Nymph who now was set among Swains and
Nymphs, a mer -- ry Throng, with ma -- ny Lo -- verse by her Side, the me -- lan
-- cho -- ly Stre -- phon spied; she rose and left the Crowd, and thus ac --
costs the Swain a -- loud: O Strephon! sure that Nymph, said she, must hap --
py, ve -- ry hap -- py be, that can provoke, that can provoke such se -- rious
Thoughts in thee, that ca -- n provoke such se -- rious Thoughts in thee.

Mr. George Heart.
The WHET.
A. 2. Voc. Cantus and Bassus.
^ WIne, Wine in a Morning makes us youthful and gay, like Wine, Wine in a
Morning, etc. Eagles we soar in the Pride of the Day, Gouty Sots of the Night
on -- ly find a De- day; Gouty Sots of the Night on -- ly find a De -- cay.
It Is the Sun ripes the Grape, and for Drin -- king gives Light, we i -- mi --
tate him when by Noon we are at height; we i -- mi -- tate him when by Noon
we are at height; they steal Wine, who take it when he is out of sight.

Mr. George Heart.
^ AH Clo -- rin-da! cannot I move you, when you're Conscious that I love you!
Can you, when so Fair, be Cruel, to re -- turn me a De -- ni -- al! If you do
not soon Re -- lieve me, Fate will then de -- prive you of me; and you will ne --
ver then re -- co -- ver, af -- ter Death, your Breath-less Lover.

II.
Could I, Thyrsis, but believe ye,
And presume you would not deceive me;
I would ease you of your Anguish,
And should hinder you to Languish:
But you Men are so deceiving,
And addicted so to Lying;
That I will not, cannot love you,
But first try you, and then prove you.
Mr. Th. Hawney.
^ DO -- rin -- da, since your Charms de -- cline, in vain you bid me love you
more; when Beau -- ties cease to be Divine, it is I -- do -- li -- zing to
Adore: Your Eyes, that once with powerful In -- flu -- ence, loves richest
Fruits pro -- duc'd up -- on my Heart; now with di vi-nest Light their Beams
dispense, and fail to wound with all the helps of Art, with all the helps of
Art.

II.
Yet out of Gratitude I strove,
When Passion could no longer last;
To guild the Failures of my Love,
And Art, the Pleasures past:
But your too-curious Sense discerned the Cheat,
Concealed in the disguise of Labored Joy:
And in the midst of Love's mysterious Treat,
A nice Disgust did all your Bliss destroy.
Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ MUst I e -- ver sigh in vain? Must I suf -- fer endless Pain? Trembling at
your Feet I languish, hear my Grief, oh see my Anguish! Must I e -- ver sigh in
vain? Must I suf -- fer endless Pain? All my Actions shows I love you, oh, be
kind! let Pi -- ty move you! Must I e -- ver sigh in vain? Must I suffer
endless Pain.

Senior Baptist.
A. 2. Voc. Cantus and Bassiu.
^ HOw sweet is the Air, and refreshing, comes over the Neighboring Plain;
this e -- ver was coun -- ted a Blessing, amongst o -- there Enjoyments or
Swains: It swee -- tens our Humors, which glide in our Veins, like Streams in
the Channels, and sof -- ten our Strains.

^How sweet is the Air, etc.

{vocal join} Chorus. ^ Whilst we sing by a Fountain sur -- roun -- ded with
Hills, and the gen -- tle Nymphs Ec -- cho's does keep up the Trills.

^ Whilst we sing, etc.

II.
Sometimes in a Grove, as delighting,
We sit by our Sweetings in Bowers;
Fine Roundelays to 'em reciting,
Whilst making us Garlands of Flowers:
As loving as Turtles we pass the soft Hours,
No Shepherd is sullen, nor Schepherdess low'rs.
Chorus. Whilst we sing, etc.
III.
Then Laura, leave off your Despising,
Those Freedoms the Village allows;
Town-Gallants with finest devising,
Cannot make you so happy a Spouse:
Like Shoots in the Spring our Passion still grows,
Our Flocks are not blither, which wantonly brows.
Chorus. Whilst we sing, etc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ I Love, but dare not hope to be, the least beloved a -- gain; yet ne -- ver
well, but when I see the Ob -- ject of my Pain: But I must ab -- sent be for
Years, yet languish for my Love; and my Desires must quench in Tears, 'till
Death does them remove.

II.
I to some Cave will now retire,
And all but her despise;
I nothing more than Death desire,
When banished from her Eyes:
The shady Groves shall Echo round,
Belinda I adore;
But, oh! too soon they will resound,
Despair, and think no more.
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ RE -- turn, fair Princess of the blooming Year! For you we Lan -- guish, and
for you we Long; you heighten our Mirth, and en -- li -- ven our Song; you on
-- ly our drooping Spirits can cheer: For you imprisoned Nature do Re- prieve,
you all Crea -- tures do Relieve; though their Pining, and Declining, you can
Life and Vigor give; though their Pi-ning, and De -- cli -- ning, you can Life
and Vigor give. Oh, the Joys that do attend you! Oh, the Charms that still
commend you! For your Absence here we mourn; here we Languish, all in Anguish,
'till those happy Days return. Oh, the Joys that do attend you! Oh, the Charms
that still commend you! Though we now are cold and fainting, though we are spi --
rit -- less and panting; if you visit once our Clime, then we will Chant it, and
Gal -- lant it, and with joy adore your Shrine; then we will Chant it, and Gal --
lant it, and with joy a -- door your Shrine.

Dr. John Blow.
^ UN -- der a Shade in flow -- ry June, I and dear Phillis lay; where we such
Plea -- sures did en -- joy, no Tongue can e -- ver say: She full of Charms,
and I fast locked within her Arms, did Love, and Sigh, and Kiss the Time away.

II.
Young Coridon by chance came by,
A true and harmless Swain;
Who for a Cruel Nymph did dye,
And there did thus Complain:
Must all but me
Be blessed in Love, and happy be?
Ease, ease, good Gods! come ease me of my Pain!
III.
Ah happy Damon! happy Man!
Whom Charming Phillis loves;
How pleasantly the time they pass,
Within you shady Groves!
Tho slighted I,
For Fair, but Cruel Sylvia dye:
Bless them, good Gods! oh bless them from above!
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ I Love, and am beloved again, I care not who does know it; I am a constant
faith -- full Swain, and be'nt ashamed to show it: For since my Sylvia merits
more, than Mortal Man can give her; I will e-ver her Adore, and ne -- ver, ne
-- ver leave her.

II.
Though Cruel Fortune seem to frown,
And threaten me with Danger;
While in my Sylvia's Arms I lie,
I Will laugh at all her Anger:
In spite of her I Will happy be,
Possessing such a Treasure;
Whilst Gods above do envy me,
And wonder at my Pleasure.
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ IN vain I strive against my Fate, to conquer all your Charming ways; which
makes me love, when I should hate, and wish with you to spend my Days: But, oh!
if all my Fears are true, and you in -- con-stant prove to me; I Would better dye
than trou -- ble you, and date my Ease from Mi -- se -- ry.

Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
^ WHen I see my Stre -- phon Languish, with Love's migh -- ty Cares oppressed;
when I see his Tears and An -- guish, Pi -- ty warms my stubborn Breast: Sighs
so soft, and Tears so moving, who can see, and hold from Loving? Sighs so soft,
and Tears so mo -- ving, who can see, and ho -- -- ld from Loving?

II.
Strephon's plain and humble Nature,
Won me first to hear this Tale;
Strephon's Truth, by every Creature,
Is proclaimed through all the Vale:
Not a Nymph that would not choose him,
Why should I alone refuse him?
III.
All Ingratitude, they tell us,
Bears of Ills the blackest Dye;
Why should Virtue then compel us
To be wicked, and deny?
Thus my Love with Honor's pleading,
Thus my Love for Strephon's bleeding.
Senior Baptist.
A. 2. Voc. ALYVS.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ FIll, fill, fill the Boul with To -- sie Wine, fill, fill the Boul with To
-- sie Wine, with Rosy Wine, a -- rou -- nd our Temples, a -- rou -- nd our
Temples Roses twine; and let us cheer -- full -- ly awhile, and let us cheer --
full -- ly awhile, like the Wine and Roses smile, like the Wine and To -- ses
smile: Crowned with To -- ses, we contemn, Gy-ges wealthy Di -- a -- them;
crowned with Roses, we contemn, Gy -- ges wealthy Di-a-dem. To day is ours, to
day is ours, what do we fear? What do we fear? To day is ours, what, what, what
do we fear? To day is ours, is ours, we have it here; let us treat it, treat it
kind -- ly, that it may wish, at least with us to stay; let us treat it kind --
ly, that it may wish, at least, with us to stay: Let Us ba -- nish Business, ba
-- nish Sorrow, to the Gods be -- long to Morrow; let us ba -- nish Business, ba
-- nish Sorrow, to the Gods be -- long to Morrow.

[Mr. Cowley's words.
The Singing BASS follows in the next Page.
^

A. 2. Voc. The Singing BASSVS to the foregoing Song.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ FIll, fill the Boul with To -- sie Wine, fill, fill the Boul with To -- sie
Wine, the Boul with To -- sie Wine, a -- rou -- nd our Temples To -- ses twine;
and let us cheer -- full -- ly a- while, like the Wine and To -- ses smile, like
the Wine and Roses smile: Crowned with To -- ses, we contemn, Gy -- ges wealthy
Di -- a -- them; crowned with Roses, we contemn, Gy -- ges wealthy Di-a-dem. To
day is ours, is ours, what do we fear? To day is ours, what do we fear? what,
what do we fear? To day is ours, is ours, we have it here; let us treat it,
treat it kindly, that it may wish, at least, with us to stay; let us treat it
kind -- ly, that it may wish, at least with us to stay: Let Us banish Business,
ba-nish Sorrow, to the Gods be- long to morrow; let us ba -- nish Business, ba
-- nish Sorrow, to the Gods belong to Morrow.

^ I Yield, I yield! Divine Al -- thea, see! how prostrate at thy Feet I bow;
fondly in love with my Cap-ti -- vi -- ty, so weak am I, so mighty thou: Not
long a -- go I could de -- fie, armed with Wine and Company, Beauty's whole
Ar-til -- le -- ry. Quite vanquished now by thy mi-ra-cu-lous Charms, here fair
Al-the -- a! take my Arms; for sure, he cannot be of Humane Race, that can re
-- sist so bright, so sweet a Face.

Mr. John Roffey.
^ THe sweet Me -- li -- na's Eyes so wounds my Heart, that thence the Pains
dif- fus'd through ev' -- ry Part; and I no more can live, if she is un -- kind,
ye Gen -- tle Powers, let me some Pi -- ty find! I at your Altar humbly tell my
Grief, Oh let her, let her of -- fer some Relief! Oh let her, let her of -- fer
some Relief! Did she but know my Love, she would make me blessed, such Love as mine
might thaw a frozen Breast, much more Melina's, whose sweet Humour's such, that
Pen nor Tongue can ne -- ver Praise too much: Deal kindly with your poor un --
hap -- py Swain, let me not love, let me not beg in vain; let me not love, let
me not beg in vain. I have more va -- lue for her pleasing Smile, than the va
-- st Treasures of this Wealthy lsle; one gentle Look from fair Me -- li --
na's Eyes, I do much more than the rich In -- dies prize; I do much more, much
more, I do much more, much more than the rich In -- dies prize; I do much more,
much more than the rich In -- dies prize. Ah charming Fair! it is Love for Love
you owe, no greater Blessing I desire to know; my Love is fixed, it never shall
re -- move, I Will be Me -- li -- na's Martyr, or her Love, or her Love; I Will be
Me -- li -- na's, I Will be Me -- li -- na's Mar -- tyr, or her Love. Yet should
Me -- li -- na cherish my De -- sire, and blow my Dying Em -- bers to a Fire;
so bright, and so devout, that Flame should be, as might appease an an -- gry
De -- i -- ty.

Mr. James Heart.
^ HOw often did Love assault young Strephon's Breast, yet in his Heart, in his
Heart could gain no In -- te -- rest? When thousand, thousand, thou -- sand
Beauties took the Field, when thousand Beau -- ties took the Field, and made as
ma -- ny Lo -- verse yield: He saw the Light, but selt no heat; he saw the
Light, but felt no heat, with a -- ll their Lambent Fire be -- set. This great
Success, this great Success, made the bold Youth despise, all the Charms, all
the Charms, the Cha -- rms, that could from Beau -- ty a -- rise. Love highly
in -- cens'd in Am -- bush does lie, to tame the proud Rebel that his Power
does de -- ny; Love highly in -- cens'd in Ambush does lie, to tame the proud
Rebel that his Power does de -- ny, to tame the proud Rebel that his Power does
deny. And now the fa -- tal Hour is come, wherein the Swain receives his Doom:
He sees, he burns, he sighs, he dies, slain by his Ce -- lia's darting Eyes;
for he that in great War prevails, often in sin -- gle Du-el fails. Happy is
Strephon in this his true Passion, the Nymph on his Pain at length had
compassion: In her soft Charms he en- joys such a Treasure, there is nothing
that is Mortal can e -- qual his Pleasure; in her soft Charms he en -- joys such
a Treasure, there is nothing that is Mortal can equal his Pleasure, Soft. there is
nothing that is Mortal can e -- qual his Pleasure.

Mr. James Heart.
^ FAir angry Nymph! this Pride is lost, this Scorn, these Frowns suc-cess --
less are; when Thun -- der, when Thun -- der from the Cloud is tossed, we grow
de -- vou -- ter than we were; If Heaven in Smiles were always dressed, we should
neglect the Power of Fate; Danger, and fear to be op -- pressed, it is that which
makes De- votion great; Danger, and fear to be op -- pressed,'it is that which
makes De-vo -- tion great. Let your Eyes with Lightning blast, let your Brow
to Thunder turn; content, and pleased, I Will breath my last, and rather than not
Love, I Will burn: Let your Eyes with Lightning blast, let your Brow to Thunder
turn; content, and pleased, I Will breath my last, and rather than not love, I Will
burn. With Beauty, as with Heaven, we find, the Zealous al -- ways best
succeed; Love, and the Gods, are still most kind, to those that for their Faith
will bleed; still most kind, to those, to those that for their Faith will bleed.

Mr. James. Heart.
^ PHillis, I must needs confess, that I am sic -- kle grown of late; and now
to Ce -- lia's Charms address, that Love, which yours did first cre -- ate: Not
that I think your Beau -- ty less, than here is, who does my Heart possess, than
here is, who does my Heart pos -- sess; but it is the Will, the Will of Fate, but
it is the Will, the Will of Fate.

II.
Though you may think the Practice strange,
I Will justify the roving Flame;
Nor fear the amorous God's Revenge,
Since I still love, though not the same:
For though my Heart does hourly range,
He loses nothing by the Change, *
Since I still play, still play her Game.
Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
A PASTORAL SONG.
By Dr. Blow.
^ SInce the Spring comes on, and the teaming Earth, gives Plants and Flowers a
kindly Birth; since all things in one great de -- sign, of Gay -- e -- ty and
Mirth com- bine, of Gay -- e -- ty and Mirth combine: Why should not we as gay
appear, and meet with joy the blooming Year, the bloo -- ming Year? Why should
not we as gay ap -- pear, and meet with joy, and meet with joy, the bloo -- --
ming Year, the bloo -- ming Year? Come then to the Gods of the Hills, and the
Lawns, the Sylvia's, the Satyrs, the Nymphs, and the Fawns; with all
De-vo-ti-on we will Altars erect, and sacrifice free-ly of what they protect, and
sa -- cri -- fice freely of what they protect. To Flora first, an Offering of
her own fragrant wreaths we will bring; to Flora first, an Offering of her own
fragrant wreaths we will bring; and then for Pan, take from his Dam, some frisking
Kid, or wanton Lamb; and then for Pan, take from his Dam, some frisking Kid, or
wan -- ton Lamb, some frisking Kid, or wanton Lamb. Nor shall it be the least
of our Care, that Cupid, in all we perform, have a Share. A Tide of Love now
fills our Veins, and over all o -- there Pas -- sions reigns; a Tide of Love now
fills our Veins, and over all o -- there Passions reigns. This therefore is the
Season, the Amorous to en- joy, since Nature commands our Reason, our Dictates
to obey: With Mirth, and Rural Innocence, each Shepherd does Ca -- ress his
Mate; none e're shall give, or take Offense, but Birds and Lambs will i -- mi
-- tate.

A Tavern-Club Song.
By Mr. Snow.
A. 2 Voc. Altus and Bassus, with a continued Bass.
Tim: This Drink is rare, and somewhat Divine, thank Wilson and Holms, and
Holms, that provides us such Wine: Then drink, drink ho, drink, then drink,
drink ho, drink, and off with the Stoop, and still as we drink, and still as we
drink, let us hollow and hoop. A -- no-ther Health, a-no-ther Health, a Health,
a Health to the Head of the Feast, and let him be happy, be happy, when Mil --
-- lons, when Mil -- ons are turned in -- to Clay.

Tim: This Drink is rare, and somewhat Divine, thank Wilson and Holms, that
provides us such Then drink, drink ho, drink, and off with the Stoop, and still
as we drink, let us hollow and hoop. A -- no-ther Health, a Health, a Health to
the Head of the Feast, and let him be happy, be happy, when Millons, wn Mil --
-- lons, when Mil -- lons are turned in -- to Clay.

^

A new Song, to a Scotch Tune.
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ WHen first A -- min -- tas su'd for a Kiss, my innocent Heart was tender;
that though I pushed him a -- way from the Bliss, my Eyes declared my Heart was
won; I fain an artful Coyness would use, before I the Fort did surrender: But
Love would suffer no more such Abuse, and soon, a-las! my Cheat was known. He Would
sit all day, and laugh and play, a thousand pret -- ty things would say; my
Hand he would squeese, and press my Knees, 'till far-ther on he got by degrees.

My Heart, just like a Vessel at Sea,
Would toss when Amyntas was near me;
But ah! so cunning a Pilot was he!
Through Doubts and Fears he would still Sail on:
I thought in him no danger could be,
So wisely he knows how to steer me;
And soon, alas! was brought to agree,
So wast of Joys before unknown.
Well might he boast his Pain not lost,
For soon he found the Golden Coast;
Enjoyed the Oar, and 'tach'd the Shore,
Where never Merchant went before.
^ NO Be -- ing is exempt from Love, why then a fault in me? From ev' -- ry In
-- sect, up to Jove, they love, and yet are free: Nature no stricter. Law
designed, than what our Passions make; the Gods left Na -- ture un-con-fin'd,
that we might freedom take. Then why, too cru -- el Law! a Slave must Virtuous
Women be? It Is on -- ly Virtuous to be brave, to love, to love at li -- ber --
ty.

Mr. Tho. Farmer, B. M.
The Words by Mr. Oldham.
Set by Dr. Blow.
^ FIll me a Boul, a migh -- ty Boul, large as my ca -- pa-cious Soul; fill me
a Boul, a migh -- ty Boul, large as my ca-pa-cious Soul: Vast as my Thirst is,
let it have depth enough, to be my Grave; I mean, the Grave of all my Care, for
I de -- sign to bu -- ry't there. Fill me a Boul, a mighty Boul, large as my
ca- pacious Soul; fill me a Boul, a migh -- ty Boul, large as my ca -- pa --
cious Soul; Let it of Silver fashioned be, worthy of Wine, worthy of me; worcester --
thy to a- dorn the Spheres, as that bright Cup a -- among the Stars. Fill me a
Boul, a migh -- ty Boul, large as my ca -- pa cious Soul; fill me a Boul, a
mighty Boul, large as my capacious Soul.

^ COme all ye pale Lo -- verse that sigh and complain, while your beau-ti --
full Tyrants but laugh at your Pain; come practice with me, to be hap-py and
free, in spite of Inconstancy, Pride, or Disdain: I behold, and I love, and the
Bliss I en -- joy, no Rival can lessen, or En -- vy destroy.

Mr. Alphonso Marsh.
A Song out of Mr. Cowley.
Set by Mr. John Jackson.
^ I Will sing of Hero's, and of Kings, in mighty Numbers, mighty Things; be-
gin, my Muse! but lo! the Strings to my great Song re -- bell -- lious prove,
the Strings will sound of naught but Love, Soft. the Strings will sound of
naught but Love. I broke them all, and put on new, it is this, or nothing sure
will do; These sure, said I, will me o -- bey, these sure He -- to -- ick Notes
will play: Strait I be -- began with Thun -- dring Jove, and all th'Im -- mor --
tal Powers but Love. Love smiled, and from my'nfeebled Lyre, came gentle Airs,
such as inspire melting Love, and soft De -- sire; fare -- well then He -- ro's,
fare -- well Kings, and mighty Numbers, mighty Things, Love tunes my Heart, Love
tunes my Heart, just to my Strings.

CHORUS. A. 3 Voc. Altus, Tenor, and Bass. Soft. Love tunes my Heart, my Heart,
just to my Strings.

Soft. Love tunes my Heart just to my Strings.

Soft. Love tunes my Heart, my Heart, just to my Strings.

^ STrephon was young, un -- used to love, at first with Fears possessed; but he
for Conquest on 'em strove, and was with Conquest blessed: So th'untry'd Captain
in the Field, well pleased at first to fly; when warmed a little, scorns to
yield, but there resolves to dye.

II.
None ever saw, but felt Surprise,
Conversed, but found a Pain;
None but would venture Ease, and Eyes,
To view the Nymph again:
Such Charms must sure some Pity give,
But Should her Powers destroy;
May this be told to those who live,
That Strephon died with Joy.
Senior Alexander Damascene.
Solitude, A Ground:
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
Words out of Madam Philips's Works.
^ OH So-li-tude! my swee -- test Choice! Oh So-li-tude! Oh So-li-tude! my swee
-- test, sweetest Choice! Places de -- vo -- ted to the Night, remote from
Tumult, and from Noise, how ye my Rest -- less Thoughts delight! Oh So -- li --
tude! Oh So -- li -- tude! my swee -- test, sweetest Choice! Oh Heavens! what
Con -- tent is mine, to see those Trees, which have appeared, from the Na-
ti-vi-ty of Time; and, which all A -- ges have remitt'd, to look to day as
fresh and green, to look to day as fresh and green, as when their Beauties
first were seen? Oh! Oh how a -- gree -- a -- ble a Sight these hanging
Mountains do ap- pear, which the unhappy would invite, to fi -- nish all their
Sorrows here; when their hard, their hard Fate makes them endure, such Woes,
such Woes, as on -- ly Death can Cure. Oh! Oh how I So -- li -- tude Adore! Oh!
Oh how I So -- li -- tude A -- door, that E -- le -- meant of no -- blessed Wit,
where I have learned, where I have learned A-pol -- lo's love, without the
pains, the pains, to stu -- die it: For thy sake I in love am grown, with what
thy fan -- cy, thy fancy, does pursue; but when I think upon my own, I hate it,
I hate it, for that reason too; because it needs must hinder me, from seeing,
from seeing, and from serving thee. Oh So -- li -- tude! Oh how I So -- li --
tude Adore!

A Song on a Ground;
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
Words by Sir George Ethridge.
^ CEase, anxious World, your fruit -- less Pain; cease, cease, cease, anxious
World, your fruit -- less Pain, to gra -- sp for-bid-den Store; your stu-dy'd
La -- bours shall prove vain, your Al -- chy -- my unblest; whilst Seeds of far
more pre -- cious Ore, are ripened, are ripened in my Breast: My Breast, the
Forge of hap -- pi -- er Love, where my Lu -- cin -- da, my Lu -- cin -- da
lies; and the rich Stock does so improve, as she her Art employs; that ev' --
ry Smile and Touch she gives, turns all to Golden Joys. Since then we can such
Treasures raise, let us no Expense re- fuse; in love let us lay out all our Days,
how can we e're be Poor? How can we e're be Poor? How can we e're be Poor, when
ev'-ry Blessing that we use, begets a thousand more? When every Blessing that
we use, be -- gets a thousand more? Soft. When every Blessing that we use,
begets a thousand more.

A Song set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ AMidst the Shades, and cool re-fre-shing Streams, where Lovers ease their
panting Hearts in Dreams, poor Damon lay; his Grief, his Grief, so sad -- ly
printed in his Face, his Looks disturbed the Pleasures of the place: In hol --
low Notes he sung his wretched Fate, his hopeless Love, and his A -- min-ta's
Hate; the trem -- bling Birds about him throng, li -- sten, and murmur at his
Song, which hindered their sweet Strains so long, which hindered their sweet
Strains so long. But straight with charming Notes, they stretch their war --
bling Throats; and all with one Consent and Voice, invite the Shepherd to
rejoice: But straight with charming Notes, they stretch their war -- bling
Throats; and all with one Consent and Voice, in -- vite the Shepherd to re-
joyce, in -- vite the Shepherd to rejoice. But what can his sad Soul inspire,
his Heart so much by Grief oppressed? A Sigh (alas!) breaks from his Breast,
which frights the harm -- less Birds, and damps the cheer -- full Quire.

A Song set by Dr. Blow.
The Words by Colonel Salisbury.
^ HOw I have served, how just or true, I need appeal to none but you; for all
my Thoughts from you took Birth, my sole Di-vi -- ni -- ty on Earth: Nor does a
Wish, which upward flies, petition from Heavens Deities, ought but to fall your
much-loved Sa-cri- fice. When Tongue grieved, Accents can no more impart, and
Sighs lament ex -- piring Heart; when Anguish'd Soul in strong Convulsion lies,
and rapid Tears o'reflowing melting Eyes; then, then Cla -- ri -- a -- na,
you will find, and grieve, a fleeting Life no Power can retrieve; nor gain, from
Fare, a Mo -- meant of Reprieve.

CHORUS. A. 3 Voc. Altus, Medius, Bassus, and Continuo Basse.







A Song on Ingratitude,
Words by Mr. Cowley.
Set by Dr. Blow.
^ I Little thought, thou fond ungrateful Sin! when first I let thee in, and
gave thee but a part in my un -- wa -- ry Heart; I lit -- tle thought, that
thou would e're have grown, so false, or strong, to make it all thine own:
At mine own Breast, with care I fed thee still, letting thee suck thy fill; and
dain-ti-ly I nourished thee, with i-dle Thoughts, and Poetry! What ill Returns
do thou al- low? I sed thee then, and thou, thou do starve me now. There
was a time, when thou wast cold and chill, nor had the power of doing ill;
in-to my Bosom did I take, this fro -- zen and be-num-ed Snake, not fearing
from it a -- ny harm; but now it stings that Breast which made it warm. What
cursed Weed's this Love! But one Grain sow, and the whole Field 'twill o --
ver-grow; straight will it choke up, and de- vour, each whole -- some Herb, Soft.
each wholesome Herb, and beauteous Flower! Nay, unless something soon I do,
'twill kill, I fear, 'twill kill, I fear, my ve -- ry Laurel too. But now all is
gone, I now, a -- las! I now, a -- las! com- plain, declare, protest, and
threat in vain; since by my own un -- forced Con- sent, the Traitor has my Go
-- vern -- meant, and is so set -- tl'd in the Throne, that 'twere Re -- bell --
lion now, 'twere Re -- bell -- lion now, to claim mine own.

A Song:
Words by Sir George Ethridge.
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
A. 2. Voc. Altus and Bassus, and Continuo Basse.
Lu- cyn -- da, all I beg, re -- veal; breath gent -- lest Words in -- to her
Ears, words full of Love, words full of Love, but full of Fears; such words as
may prevail, like Prayers from a poor die -- ing Martyr's tongue, from a poor die
-- ing Martyr's Tongue, by the sweet Voice of Pi -- ty sung. Touch, touch with
the Voice the more in -- chan -- ting Lute, touch with the Voice the more in-
chan -- ting Lute, to make the Charms strike, strike all Re -- pull -- ses mute:
These may in -- sen -- si -- bly impart, these may in- sen -- si -- bly impart,
my tender Wishes to her Heart, and by a sym-pa -- the-tick force, so tune its
Strings to Love's Discourse; that when my Griefs com -- pell a Groan, Soft. her
Sighs may Ec -- cho, Ec -- cho to my Moan.

Lu- cyn -- da, all I beg, re -- veal; breath gent -- lest Words in -- to her
Ears, words full of Love, full of Love, full of Love, but full of Fears; such
words as may prevail, like Prayers from a poor dying Martyr's tongue, from a
poor dying Martyr's, Martyr's to gue, by the sweet Voice of Pi -- ty sung, of
Pi -- ty sung. Touch, touch with the Voice, touch with the Voice the more in --
chan -- ting Late, the more in -- chan -- ting Lute, to make the Charms strike,
strike all Re -- pull -- ses mute: These may in-sen -- si -- bly impart, these
may in -- sen -- si -- bly im- part, my ten -- der Wishes, tender Wishes to her
Heart, and by a sym-pa-the-tick force, so tune its Strings to Love's Discourse;
that when my Griefs com -- pell a Groan, Soft. her Sighs may Ec -- cho, Ec --
cho to my Moan.

^ ^

A. 2. Voc. Altus and Bassus, and Continuo Basse. A Song,
Set by Dr. Blow.
dow -- n, down, down, down, down with the Stream, they all sink, and dow -- n,
down, down, down, down with the Stream, they all sink. Harpsi-hord. The God I
enjoy with the Wine, and my Humor grows more Di -- vine; like Bacchus, with
fresh To -- ses crowned, with fresh To -- ses crowned, the fragrant O -- dours
stea -- ling rou -- nd: Thus, thus I tri -- umph a -- bove all Strife, thus I
tri -- umph, and sing the sweetness of this Life, Soft. and sing the sweet-
ness of this Life. When I drink with Glasses full charged, my Spirits grow
free, and en -- lar -- g'd; when I drink, my Spirits grow free, and en- larg'd,
grow free and en -- larg'd. Among Troops of Beauties I play, and raised a --
bove thoughts of De -- cay, and raised a -- bove thoughts of De- cay. When I
drink, I sing the soft Charms of Ve -- nus, and clasp in my Arms my Mistress,
who then seems to me a Goddess too, as bright as she; who then seems to me a
Goddess too, as bright as she. When I drink, when I drink, they had- vantage I
find, from Trou -- bles, from Troubles, to shelter my Mind; this, this is the
Blessing alone, this, this is the Bles -- sing a -- lone, that we that live can
call our own. You that seek more, tell me but why, tell me, tell me but why,
since all a -- like must one day dye; all, all, all a -- like must one day dye?
You that seek more, tell me but why, since all alike must one day dye; all,
all, all, all alike must one day dye; all, all, all, all alike must one day dye.

Cares grow becalmed when I drink, and dow -- n, down with the Stream, they all
sink: my Cares grow becalmed when I drink, and down, down with the Stream, they
all sink. The God I enjoy with the Wine, and my Humor grows more Di -- vine;
like Bacchus, with fresh To -- ses crowned, the fragrant O -- dours stealing
rou -- nd, stealing round: Thus, thus I tri -- umph, I tri -- umph, I triumph a
-- bove all Strife, and sing the sweetness of this Life, Soft. and sing the
sweet- ness of this Life. Harpsichord. When I drink with Glasses full charged
my Spirits grow free, and en -- lar -- g'd; when I drink, my Spirits grow free,
and en- larg'd, grow free, and en -- lar -- g'd. Among troops of Beauties I
play, and raised above thoughts of Decay, and raised a -- bove thoughts of De-
cay. When I drink, I sing the soft Charms of Ve -- nus, and clasp in my Arms my
Mistress, who then seems to me a Goddess too, as bright as she; who then seems
to me a Goddess too, as bright as she. Harpsichord. When I drink, when I drink,
they had- vantage I find, from Trou -- bles, to shelter my Mind; this, this is the
Blessing a -- lone, this, this is the Blessing alone, that we that live can
call our own. You that seek more, tell me but why, tell me but why, since all a
-- like must one day dye, since all a -- like, all, all a -- like must one day
dye; all, all, all a -- like, all, all a -- like, all alike must one day dye;
since all a- like, all, all a -- like must one day dye; since all a -- like,
all, all alike must one day dye.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The Words made by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.
A Dialogue. Thirsis and Dorinda.
Set by Mr. Matthew Lock.
Dorinda. Thirsis, prithee do! whither thou and I shall go?


Thirsis. E -- li -- zium.


Dorinda.


Thirsis.


Dorinda. E -- li -- zium?


Thirsis Milky-way does lie; it is a sure, but rugged way, that leads to E --
ver-la-sting Day:


Dorinda.


Thirsis. Nymph, for Fire has no Wings, yet does aspire, 'till it hit against
the Pole; Heavens the Cen -- ter of the Soul.


Dorinda. Elysium, how do they pass E -- ter -- ni -- ty away?


Thirsis. Lightfoot we may give away: No Oat-pipe needful, There thy Ears may
sleep, with Music of the Spears.


Dorinda. talking of E -- li -- zi -- um.


Thirsis. May.


Dorinda.


Thirsis. Do-rin-da! why do cry?


Dorinda. true, by bidding with me all adieu.


Thirsis.


CHORUS both together. Dorinda. Clo-ril-lo charge of the Sheep, and thou and
I Will pick Poppies, and them steep in Wine, and drink on it e -- ven 'till we
weep, 'till we weep; so shall we smoothly pass a -- way, a -- way, a -- way, a
-- way in Sleep.


Thirsis. Clo-ril-lo charge of the Sheep, and thou and I Will pick Poppies, and
them steep in Wine, and drink on it e-ven 'till we weep, we weep; so shall we
smoothly pass a -- way, a -- way, a -- way, a -- way, a -- way in Sleep.


^ ^ ^

A. 2. Voc. Altus and Bassus, and Continuo Basse.
Set by Dr. John Blow.
where is now the color, form, and trust of Woman's Beauty? And per- haps with
rude, with rude hands, perhaps with rude hands, rifle the Flours which the
Virgins stru'd. Know I Have prayed to Pi -- ty, that the Wind may blow my Ashes
up; know I Have prayed to Pi -- ty, that the Wind may blow my Ashes up, may blow
my A -- shes up, and strike thee blind.

co -- lour, form, and trust of Woman's Beauty? And perhaps with rude hands,
with rude hands, and perhaps with rude hands, ri -- ^le the Flours which the
Virgins strewed. Know ^ve prayed to Pi -- ty, that the Wind may blow my A --
shes up; Know I Have prayed to Pi -- ty, that the Wind may blow my A -- shes up,
and strike thee blind; that the Wind may blow my A -- shes up, and strike thee
blind.

^

The Song in Madam Bhen's Last new Play, sung by Mr. Bowman.
Set by Dr. John Blow.
^ O Love, that stronger art than Wine! Pleasing De -- lu -- sion, Witchery
Divine; wont to be prized above all Wealth, Disease that ha -- s more Joys than
Health: Though we blaspheme thee in our Pain, and of thy Ty-ran-ny complain, we
all are bettered by thy Reign, we all are bettered by thy Reign; what Reason ne
-- -- ver can bestow, we to this useful Passion owe. Love wakes the Dull from
sluggish Ease, and learns a Clown the Art to please; humbles the Vain, kindles
the Cold, makes Misers free, and Cowards bold: It Is he reforms the Set from
Drink, and teaches Airy Fops to think; it is he reforms the Sot from Drink, and
teaches Ai -- ry Fops to think. When full brute Ap -- pe -- tite is fed, and
choked the Glutton lies, and dead; thou new Spirit do dispense, and fi --
ne, the gross de -- ligh -- ts of Sense; Virtue's un-conqu'-ra-ble Aid, that
against Nature can per- swade; and make a To -- ving Mind retire, with -- in
the Bounds of just De -- sire; Chearer of Age, Youth's kind unrest, and half
the Heaven of the blessed, and half the Heaven of the blessed.

These Words by Mr. Ousley.
A Dialogue. Love and Despair.
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
Despair. ^ HEnce, fond De-cei -- ver! hence, be gone! hence, and some te-mer
Captive find; since Hope, thy best Companion's flo -- wn away, why ling --
'rest thou behind? Naked at first, and blind thou were, 'till blinder I allowed
thee part, in my un-wa -- ry hospi- ta -- ble Heart; but now you are so un --
ru -- ly grown, you needs will make it all your own, and in my vanquished
Breast will Ty -- ra-nize alone.


Love. ^ Cease, cease, poor mis- taken Wretch! and know I Will seck some braver
nobler Breast; to some more generous Heart I Will go, that will not blush to own
its Guest; blind though I was, my aim was sure, yet will not thy coward Heart endure
the hap -- py wound, nor wait, nor wait the happier cure?


Despair. ^ Too long have I en -- dur'd the wound, too long indulged the ra --
ging Pain; 'till I by sad experience found, the wound too sure, the cure too
vain: Then mighty Love, for such thou art, withdraw thy fa -- tal certain Dart,
or else to both a mutual Flame impart, and warm Do- rin -- da's Breast, as thou
have fired my Heart.


Love. ^ If then thou would vi -- cto -- rious prove, and with success thy
Wishes crown, with bold as -- su-rance speak thy Love, and make thy gen' --
rous Passion known; when Beauty calls, to whine and dye, is Cowardice, not
Modesty: You by pale asking teach her to deny; and by your faint pursuit,
encourage her to fly.


CHORUS. Phil-lis's Scorn you complain; in vain do you talk, in vain do you
talk, of Darts, and of Fire, sigh, languish, la -- meant, and ex- pire, since
the Nymph dares not grant what you dare not desire: Whilst the brisk ea -- ger
Lover at his Prey bold -- ly flies, and takes the glad Captive, and takes the
glad Captive by well -- com surprise.

Phil-lis's Scorn you complain; in vain do you talk, in vain, of Darts, and of
Fire, sigh, lan -- guish, la -- meant, and ex- pire, since the Nymph dares not
grant what you dare not desire: Whilst the brisk ea -- ger Lover at his Prey
bold -- ly flies, and takes the glad Captive, and takes the glad Captive by well
-- com surprise.




FINIS.

