NIL NOVI.

This Years Fruit, From The last Years Root.

The Soldiers Posture, To the Right, to the Left, Faces about, As ye were.

The Royal Maxim, No BISHOP, no KING.

The First Fruits of New Prelates, amounting to as much as the Tithes of Old
Bishops.

All summed up in an Impartial Relation of the Partial proceedings, and
unrighteous rumors raised against HENRY PINNEL, Concerning his endeavoring to
get a Parsonage.

Occasioning a sudden glance upon the True Resurrection, present Perfection,
and perfect Obedience. Written in a Letter to a Friend.

Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil,
Psalm. 56.5. Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. Truth fails,
and he that departs from evil, is accounted mad, Isa. 59.15. Pure Relion is
-- to keep himself unspotted from the wo^ld, Iam. 1.27. London, Printed by J.
C. for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard, near the great
North-door, 1654.

To him that cannot, or will not read without prejudice.
READER,
STumble not at the threshold, and carp not at the Complement, that I salute
thee with a Letter to an Epistle, or an Epistle to a Letter. There are but two
things that can cast me under thy censure; either what I have said, or what I
have not said. What I have said peradventure thou will interpret as too
satirical and rigid, arising from passion, too tart and harsh for a meek and
quiet spirit.

I confess I have written in passion, yet not without affection; with much
hatred, but more love. The greatest fault I find with my self, is want of
hatred as much as of love; proportionable to the one should be the other: as is
our love to good, so is our hatred to evil. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.
Ps. 92.10. Io. 2.15, 17
When I consider the zeal that Christ had for ^od, and his in ^^^ation against
sin, I am ashamed to be so mild and dull; ^^^^on laedere possit idem.
give me the knife that will cut my meat and my enemies throat too. The depth
of hatred is in the height of love. David a man after Gods own heart, had the
greatest detestation and abhorrency against evil. I hate all false ways, with
a perfect hatred, Psalm. 119. v. 104. and 139.21, 22. A complete hatred of evil,
is not without an absolute love to good. He that had seen the Anatomy of Christ
upon the Cross, (...). 12.^0 (...). 20.27.
and looked in at the hole which the spear made in his side, and with Thomas
had thrust his hand of Faith into the inside of his Savior, might see and
feel, that (as in other men) his Gall stuck fast to his Liver. Love has its
root in the Liver, Anger it is rise from the Gall; the sweeter the one, the
bitterer the other. Who can love or hate like God? In the natural man,
Physicians say, that,

-- Fell concitat iras
-- Cogit amare jecur,
As hatred in the Gall does breed,
Love from the Liver does proceed.
The wise God has made us wonderful Types of our selves, Psalm. 139.4.19, etc.
that as we are in the natural man, so we should be in the spiritual, not
without Liver and Gall; greedily sucking into us his blood of life and love of
all good, and zealously breathing out hatred and bitterness against all evil;
reserving every vessel for its proper use in the house of our Lord, whether for
honor or dishonor; the Liver for the person, the Gall for his evil practice;
love to all our enemies, hatred against all enmity: it is hard, b^t not
impossible, to divide the sinner from the sin; Christ could do so, and did,

Who from his foes drank Vinegar and Gall,
Cried, like their friend, Father forgive them all.
The cross of Christ sucks up all the curse against the creature, and pours out
all the vials of vengeance upon the enmity of the carnal man. I am finishing a
short course, and would have no other mark in my eye but this: My day of Audit
is at hand; all my care is to cast my account clear, and to give it up with
comfort. I like even reckoning with all men, and love not to be at odds with
any but the Devil, the World, and my Self. Flattery dies more in debt then
Severity. Without superstition or formality, I put that piece of the old Letany
into my daily prayers, and heartily say, That it may please thee to forgive my
enemies, persecuters, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts: And I beseech
thee good Lord to hear me.

If thou blame me for what I have not said ( viz. as more full, touching the
Resurrection, Angels, Perfection, and Obedience) know, that I never intended a
voluminous Treatise of any of those points, but a short solution to such
objections that were made against m^ (...) refer^^^ to some (...) profession of
my faith concer^ing the rest. And though my faith be true, yet is it not full
in these (...). I know them but in part, and therefore c^nnot perfectly make
them known. There be others that know more, expect more from them. I would not
be altogether idle with my talent; thou have part of the ^^^^^vement, as much
as I think fit at this time. I ^^^n I may be more able to impart, and thou more
fit an^ ^^lling to receive more abundantly hereafter. In the mean time let us
both do what we know, and follow on to know more then we yet do, till we come
to the unity of faith, the perfect man in Christ Jesus: In which progress, I
wish thee as much prosperity, and as good success, as I desire and hope to have
bestowed upon

Thy fellow-traveller, faithful unto thee in the Love of our Lord. H. P.

To my Honored Friend Mr. T. T.
Dearest Sir,
WHile I labor to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man, I
cannot keep my conversation from the slanderous imputations, even of men
pretending unto godliness; it is a task too great for me, to preserve my self
from the secret shot and bitter darts of lying lips and a false tongue: yea,
Luke 5.26.
I should be sorry to have such a profession, or conversation, that all men
would speak well of. If ye find me dabling in the guzzel, and see my hands and
face besmeared with dirt, then take me for a fool, or a child at best: but if
my coat be never so much spattered, and dashed on the highway, I hope I shall
not be put to make an excuse.

Personal, particular, and private aspersions, are best expunged with scorn and
silence; he that cannot go through bad, as well as good report, has but a
shallow Religion, or is but a Novice in it; but if I must brush my cloak in the
Sun, I will take the wind so, that the dust shall fly into his eyes who threw
the dirt upon it: a single slur is too slight a challenge; I cannot be drawn
into the field upon a personal vindication: but since ye urge me with scandal,
telling me from day to day, that I lie as a stumbling block block before the
weak, that many are ready to fall by my example, that others triumph to see so
great a Cedar fallen, etc. You provoke me to enter the List, and to uncover my
cause under the open Heavens of God, before the World, Angels, and men. And as
the airy and empty rumors of lies and falsehood have begged audience and credit
at one ear, so I doubt not but with the other you will admit the true
information and right state of the ease, especially seeing you so much desire
it: which is in brief as follows, viz.

That I had the offer of a Parsonage, and was earnestly pressed to accept it, is
most true; and that I did at last comply and consent to the motion, is also as
true: Hine clamor, rixa, joci, mendacia, -- cachinni; but be not of a rash
heart, fama est mendax, there is little truth in tales; all that that is
reported with truth, and for truth, is not so: much chafe may be mixed with the
corn, till the fan disperse it; all that is affirmed, is not presently proved:
si sat sit accusasse quis erit innocens? by that rule Christ had been a great
sinner: but

Judicis officium est, ut res, ita quaerere rerum
Causas; --
Take the ground and circumstances of the Case along with you, and then I shall
appear more innocent; Thus:

When Master Dolman, the last Incumbent in the Parsonage of Christian-Milford,
lay sick without hope of life, he wrote to me, desiring me to undertake the
place, and succeed him in the work he had labored in: diverse of the parish
also, with passionate affection, importuned the same. I ask therefore.

1. Whether it be simply unlawful for a people or parish, Quere.
who are destitute of a preaching Minister, to desire and seek after such a
one, of whom, upon good grounds, they are sufficiently persuaded that he may be
instrumental to their good and edification in the Faith? And whether he that
shall be so desired may accept thereof, without being a stumbling block or
scandal? Or,

2. Whether one that is a stranger, and by reason of infancy or youth, has not
had time and opportunity to make full proof of his Ministry, be more fit to be
imposed upon a people, contrary to their general consent and choice, then one
that is better known and approved of by the godly?

That I was universally desired by the parish, shall appear anon: nevertheless,
I did (for a time) decline an immediate compliance, and suspended my resolution
of acceptance, upon these considerations, i. e.

1. Lest (as the rumor now is) I should be a scandal to the weak, Consid. 1.
and seem to build again the things that I had destroyed, inasmuch as formerly
I have disliked, and born witness against the common corruptions and abuses
concerning Tithes, Parish-Parsons, etc.

2. Fearing lest such common customs, and Parish-performances, would be
required of me, which I had not liberty to perform.

3. But there is another reason of as great weight to me though of little or no
moment to some: for, considering that Master Still the first Proprietor and
Incumbent, is yet living who had Institution and Induction into the said
Parsonage and had right and title thereunto, by as just power and authority, as
you or I hold and possess any of our lands and goods; this consideration had no
light impression upon me, and lay as no sm^ll scruple before me; for I like not
to rise by another ruin, as Doctor Dodiswell, the true Parson of Brinkworth,
can witness for me.

Nor does it satisfy me in that you say, Ob.
Master Still and Dr. Dodiswell were sequestered, either for plurality, or
malignancy, or both. For,

If it did become a sober man to be a Quadruplicator, Sol. 1.
an Apparator, or Informer; no doubt but there would be found some, that now
possess other men's Livings, and eat the bread out of their mouths, who have
both done and said as much against that Power, by which they yet enjoy their
Sequestrations, as the Sequestered themselves, who never professedly complied
with, nor publicly acknowledged that Power by which they were then Sequestered.
Which, think you, is the greatest and most dangerous enemy, the open or secret?
But I shall rest in the Act of Oblivion; and do believe, that Master Still,
Doctor Dodiswell, and Sir John Leuthall may be accounted fellow subjects, and
enjoy as much of their places and estates, as the present Power shall think fit.

I leave Master Still to plead his own cause, and to vindicate himself, Sol. 2.
if any shall implead him for delinquency, or as no Minister of the Gospel. I
have only to do with him so far as I am concerned in the Parsonage. If (as
some say) he was Sequestered as a Pluralist; yet why was he not left to his
choice which Parsonage to leave, as others have been in the like case? But
further, was it unlawful for him to hold two Benefices? or was not that Power
just which gave him title to them? If it was not unlawful, why was he
Sequestered as a Pluralist? if it was not lawful, why then has it been
practiced by some, and connived at by others, even such as would be accounted
the zealous Reformers of our times? one of which could at once hold

Westminster Martins Assembly Trinity, Titmarsh,
Michael, Procan (sede vacant) Marie.
Something I might interrogate concerning the Kings Power, under which Master
Still was invested; and something concerning the Parliaments power under which
he was divested; and something more, all tending to my particular satisfaction
in this case: but, sticking to my private resolution (silendo nemo peccat) it is
good to keep the teeth in the head, and the tongue within the teeth; it is not
safe coming too near the heels of time. Besides, conscience is a nice and
tender thing, and therefore inasmuch as there is a civil right and property
acknowledged to belong to every one, by that National Law and Power, under
which they live, blame me not if I am scrupulous, and critically examine every
part as I pass in matters of this moment. I love not to set my foot over
another man's threshold; nor do I think it possible to enjoy that comfortably,
which cannot be got conscionably.

I delight not in Sequestrations, so much evil and offense arises from them.
Sol. 3.
I see some (of swollen and accumulated titles, great Rabbis, Mandamus-Doctors)
who, to the scandal and spotting of their cloth, can forsake their first love;
cast off their parish and people, for no other cause that I could ever hear,
but only there was a better Living of another man's; to be had by the help of
some drunken Committee friend. And when they have once got footing, the key in
their hand, and the bell-rope by the end, they forget their place and duty; De
male quasitis non gaudet tertius bares.
( Tit. 1.8. 1 Timothy 3.4.) not given to hospitality, laying aside all for the
pride or portions of their children; not ruling well their own house, ill
disposing of the breeches, suffering their wives (at pleasure) to break what
bargains they make with their neighbors, to the great reproach and shame of
their Ministry. I abhor to be ranked, or reckoned in the number of such men.

These are my reasons why I did demur upon the matter. I know you will demand
upon what ground I could, and did accept the motion at last. However they may
seem to you, these thoughts somewhat I prevailed with me, viz.

Having seriously considered, Reas. 1.
and thoroughly examined the point of scandal I found that it would be only
taken, and not given by me; for having nothing at all to do with Tithes, no nor
with the Glebe it self to any private advantage, to make a gain thereof to my
self; there would be nothing but the name only of a Parsonage left to me, and
not so much as the name of a Tythe-monger remain to be imputed to me: I see not
how it should a mount to scandalum datum. Nor did I ever (as you your self
know) condemn Tithes simply, and as absolutely unlawful in all respects, but
rather justified the civil right of them; only for my own part, I could not
meddle with them, because of the inexpediency; and upon that account I have,
and do openly implead them. I did not rest in my private and single
determination; but, because it was my own case, I communicated it to such as I
though table to advise therein. Wherefore (declining the
injudicously-affectionate among my friends, and giving the hearing only of
their womanish reasons, that it was evil in me to accept the people desires,
because it was evil; and that I must not because I must not) I consulted with
the most grave, solid, judicious, and experienced Christians, who not only
approved, but urged my accepeatice, pressing it as more agreeable to a
Gospel-Ministery, to answer a general request for public good, rather then to
deny it upon the causless and groundless exceptions of a sew, there being no
foundation of scandal laid in so doing: nevertheless, hence (say you) is risen
a rumor among the baptized people, that a great Cedar is fallen. I wonder such
quick-sighted people, who have so profoundly washed their eyes, should see no
better, but take a poor, low, silly shrub, for a great Cedar. But.

Whether is it a sin, Quer. 1.
and scandalous practice, to preach in the public place of a Parish, at the
general request and common consent of the Parishioners? If so, then why do many
of the baptized themselves, even those virig egis ipsi capri, those zealous
Patrons and Champions of that opinion, procure by Magisterial power and order,
liberty to use such places for their Ministerial exercise? If it be no sin or
scandal, then surely they do but dream of the Cedars fall; unless the same
thing be sin in another, which is not in them? Ingens personarum privilegium.

Whether Tithes be precisely unlawful, Quer. 2.
without reference to a Levitical priesthood, or legal institution, but payable
merely upon humane and national ordinances? If not, then the Cedar they talk of
stands fast. If so, then many Cedars in their Lebanon do shake, and some of
them are already fallen. For he that shall deny to pay his Tithes which the Law
of the Commonwealth wherein he lives, requires of him, to him to whom they
are appointed, withholding them to his own private use, such a one will hardly
escape the censure of a Tythe-taker, especially if he exercise as an Officer of
the Church, in the place where they are payable. For he has no color to keep
them to himself, being no part of the purchase which his predecessors or he
made, when he or they bought the Land, out of which his Tithes are to be paid:
and therefore he does wrong another, and by unjust cavillations, rob him of his
right, unto the which the Law has entitled that man as well as it does him, to
any of his real or personal estate. Thus some of the baptized may
interpretatively be said to take Tithes, which they so much judge and condemn
in others.

I have heard what some of them have objected against Tithes, Obs.
i. e. that it is probable, and to be supposed, That Tithes were at first the
Arbitrary exactions and impositions of Tyrants, forcing out of men's estates,
more then they were willing to part with, and therefore ought not to be
continued and submitted unto, but every man may keep his own to himself.

I cannot positively contradict, yet I answer, that probability, Sol. 1.
and supposition, prove nothing on one side, when there is as much in
probability, to be supposed on the other side. It Is not unlikely, but that the
blindfold devotion, and mis-guided zeal of the people in former times, might
make them as forward to offer, as the Prince or Priest were to ask their
estates of them. Now if it was done voluntarily, and not violently, there is no
cause of complaint: for volenti non fit injuria.

But I answer according to the maxim. Sol. 2.
De rebus non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem, est ratie. However it is
plain, that Tithes are now required by a Law, though not by Magna Charta. Where
lies the Cedar now? In whose ground is it fallen?

But Sir I intend not a Plea for Parsons. How often have I condoled with you
the misery of our Nation, exposed to so much contention, division strise,
malice etc. nourishing a lazy, proud, covetous Ministry with Tithes etc. and
(proh gentis reformandae pudor opprobriumque!) when will the time of
Reformation come? you cannot prevent my desires, not outdo my endeavors, to
disburden my poor oppressed country of those abuses, which corrupt-minded men
have laden it withal, under pretense of Authority and Law: you cannot with
more zeal and earnestness, seek the ease and edification of the outward and
inward man, then I shall, not by fraud or force, but by prayer and practice.

Another reason which induced me to accept the offer, Reas. 2.
was an assurance of my freedom among the people; that they would not expect
such customs and ceremenies which I had not liberty to observe.

Besides, Reas. 3.
I might have supplied and satisfied many wants and interests. For, quitting
the Tithes (an honors crime, for which some of the worldly Sanctuary judged me
unfit for the place) I should have left Master Still to those advantages which
he could have made from his interest remaining yet among any of the parish,
seriously to secure my self from my own secret seruples; choosing rather to be
accounted his Curate there, then to have the report of doing him the least
wrong. And whereas the Glebe it self alone is too much for a sober man to spend
upon himself, the superfluity thereof might have flowed into the hungry bowels
of many.

Though it was reported by some Grandees (as I was credibly informed by one
within the limits of White Hall) that I did hunger and hunt after a Parsonage;
Reas. 4.
that these are your Seraphical men, who, although they preach against
Parsonages for a time, and for their own ends, yet when any great or fat one
falls, they are as ready for it as others. How great it would have been to me,
you may guess, by what I have already told you; and how greedily I did hunger
and hunt after it, you may understand by what I have yet to say, as a further
motive to my acceptance, which was this.

Some of the parish coming to me on a Sabbath Day, where ^u^ally met with many
godly people for our edification in the knowledge and love of God and his
truth, they proposed and pressed their desires. But I being unsatisfied in my
self, for the reasons given before; and some occasions calling me to London, I
left them, without a concession of their proposition, resolving in my self
rather against it, then to grant it; so far was I from hunting after it. While
I was in London, Master Dolman died; the parish voluntarily assemble, draw up a
Petition in my behalf, unanimously subscribe it, there being but one man only,
in all the parish (as I am informed) professedly refusing one Rich. Showell,
whose good affection to the Parliament, many of his neighbors ^an sufficiently
testify by woeful experience, when the Cavalieres ^ad power in those parts; the
Petition was sent up Post to me by (...) messenger of the parish, which still
pressed my acceptance, without my hunting after them.

When I considered the present providence, and revolving the former reasons in
my mind, I yielded; and, according to the desire of the people by their
messenger, I carried their Petition to White Hall, and gave it into Master
Longe's Office of Requests, where I was assured that it would be presented in
course, that the Protector had appointed no other way of address, in matters of
that nature, and that it m^^t first be read and heard, before any grant could
pass of the P^r^^n^ge. With these good words I was led into fools paradise, the
Petition being there filled up against Dooms-day-audience; and a secret Order
subtly procured for another. At which the parish are troubled, they draw up
and agree upon a second petition (the godly people of several parishes
adjacent, offering to assist with their petitions:) they send it to White Hall
with the same success as the former; they yet pursue their desires; diverse of
them go up to London an hopes of admission to be heard at least; they address
themselves to men potent enough, and such as were able to have assisted the
equity of their desires: but after long waiting, S.C.W.A. A.C.^.^.
and large expense (the old custom of Court) they had free leave to return
home without any let or molestation, according to the liberty of the subject.

-- Laberi as pauper is haec est: Pulsat us ragat. and pugnis conscissus adorat,
Vt lice at paucis cum dentibus inde reverti.
To be abused, and in vain to cry,
Was once (in Rome) the Subject, liberty. (...) ^at. 3.

The parsonage is disposed of to one Master Goffe, imberb is juvenis, ex
Ephebis nuper evasus, a young man; yet not so young but he can make a shift to
read his Notes to the people pretty well, and may in time be able to preach
true dectrine, and reform his practice. But such men will serve the present
turn: gravity is too solid to comply; youth is more tractable to the times,
It Is observed of a wise and potent Prince, who having laid a Spanish plot of
greatness, that he made choice of a young Council and Clergy, such as could not
discover his project, or would not contradict his pleasure. This young man
riding Post (as the fashion is for a Parsonage) met with one of his
acquaintance by the way, and told him his business; who asked if he had the
peoples good-wil and consent; to whom he replied, that he regarded or cared not
for that: so ingenuous was he to confess the truth, that he sought not the
people, but the Parsonage. 'Yet this man, by the guidance of Col. Goffe and
Master Lockyer declines the two Masters of Requests, Like Pa^^on, like
the highway which all honest men and causes keep and sneaking along the
by-way, creeps in at the back doo^, (...) his Higness presence flaps him in the
mouth with a l^ (...) (as he has since confessed) that at that very time their
petition was for me: a Chaplain fit for Col. Goffe. Thus he prevails, if not by
making lies his refuge, yet by the sleights of men and cun^^^g craftiness
whereby they lay in wale to deceive the people and me of our just right. A
friend in Cou^^ was ever better then a ^eny in the purse, or a just cause on
ones side. When will climbing Couri^ers cease to abuse the Prince and his
people!

Lastly, Reas. 5.
I have this to add, though I cannot boast of merit from God. I may plead
desert with man. I have contributed more with purse and person to the common
liberty (as we thought) then ever Master Goffe has done, and have better
deserved of my country then he has; and therefore in moral equity and common
honesty, I ought to have been served before him. Nevertheless, though I can
hold plea with men, I submit to the righteous sentence of Christ, ( Mat.
26.52.) as respecting me in particular for putting my hand so near the sword,
though I never touched it in action.

These two last reasons I urged to the honorable Col. Goffe: to the peoples
desire and consent, after a deliberate pause of profound gravity, with most
acute cloquence, he replied thus Hn, ha, hm kn, why, mn, Sir. it is not fit the
people should choose their Minister, for most Parishes would choose amiss, etc.
That many, or most, might fail in their choice, is not very doubtful; and how
much Col. Goffe would mend the matter, is as little to be questioned. For he
professed to me, that he would not only nor assist me whom he had long known,
and against whom he had nothing to object to my face when I put him to it
whether he had or no; but that he would do his utmost to establish Master
Goffe, a man (as he confessed to me) altogether a stranger to him till upon
this occasion. He was as good as his word: for when the people presented
themselves and their petition to some of the Court yet their further access was
so precluded, that they could not by any means yet entrance and audience. To my
last reason, of desert, the just and impartial Colonel very demurely answered
Mum. Verba dare may be the perpetual Motto of a Courtier, and Sic volo, sic
jubeo a fit inscription for a soldiers sword.

Whether Master Goffe is not to be reputed a false prophet, Quer. 1.
an hireling, a Priest of Baalim and a Minister of Antichrist, rather then a
Minister of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, seeing he does preach for hire, and
divine for money (Mich. 3.11.) has run greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward (Jude 11.) Who, like a false prophet, by reason of whom the way of truth
is evil spoken of, through covetousness and fained words has made merchandise
of men; whose heart has been exercised with covetous practices, forsaken the
right way, and loved the wages of unrighteousness, etc. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3 etc.
who has taken the over sight of the flock for filthy lucre sake, 1 Pet. 5.2.
Nor let any think that I overcharge or wrong him herein, having said nothing of
him but what may be proved ex ore suo, out of his own mouth, so that there
needs no further witness.

Whether Parson Goffe can confidently expect a comfort able success of his
Ministry, Quer. 2.
among those whom he constraines to receive him as their Minister, by an
outward power against their will? Would he have dealt so with the Cutlers
daughter of Oxford to make her his wife? does not compulsion and force alienate
affection? Is it not an evident demonstration of a carnal Minister? Mr.
Cradocke, now Chaplain to the Genesis Regiment, preaching heretofore in Bristoll
and since that in London, observed and laid this down for arule, That a carnal
Ministry will always cleave to a carnal Magistracy to uphold it; and a carnal
Magistracy ever seek to and ingratiate a carnal Ministry, to confirm it inmens
consciences; and where these two are thus twisted (his own word) together the
Kingdom of Antichrist is much strengthened: but as the Ivy (said he) winding
about the Oak suckes away and robs the tree of its juice and sap to feed it
self; so at last the worldly Ministry will become the ruin of the worldly
Magistracy. I am not against the civil Magistrate, but for him; and so I
suppose is Master Cradocke. I speak this, because when the people still desired
that I might preach sometimes among them, and it was reported that I would,
Master Goffe told one (from whose mouth I had it) that I should take heed how I
came there, lest I were sent where I would not be. So much like a Bishop does
he endeavor to domineer over the people by the soldiers sword, now that Col.
Goffe his Patron can keep that by force for him, which he has got by fraud.

Whether Master Goffe does understand and observe his Masters rule (if Christ
be his Master) to do as he would be done unto, Quer. 3.
in that he has done, and yet does what in him lies to divide the people and
me? If he say he would be content to be so dealt with, I think few will believe
him.

Whether Col Goffe and the P^^son with the rest (if they have taken the old
Covenant and Protestation) be not abominable hypocrites, Quer. 4.
notorious dissemblers, grand Apostates, and Traitors to the Commonwealth and
his Highness? For.

1. You know, among other particulars (as reducing this Church to the best
reformed according to the word of God etc.) we did engage to maintain the
Liberty of the subject; whose liberty stands (as in many other things, so)
chiefly in free access to make his grievance known, and supplicate a redress
thereof. Now this way was stopped up and shut against the people and me, that we
could not come to be heard, and make our case known; which liberty was
infringed and violated, principally by Col. G. as is most probable, yea very
apparent from his own words to me and other circumstances. Surely he or they
that will endeavor to hinder and overthrow their fellow subjects liberty in one
thing, will not be afraid to undermine them in many.

Colonel Goffe cannot forget the vociferation of the Army at New Market, where
it was the will (as we were told) of the General and Lieutenant General (now
Lord Protector) that we should all cry out Justice, Justice; when the Commons
of Parliament were present. But quantum mutatus ab illo est? he was then but
Captain Goffe (if I mistake not) now he is a Colonel tempora mutantur, etc.
it is Ployden's case: the things that did become him then (perhaps) are not
proper to him now. It is said of John Maria de Mont the Cardinal, a great
stickler in the contest between the Pope and the Emperor, and most active to
serve his Holiness in managing his affairs in the Council, and translating it
from Trent to Bolonia; when he came to be Pope ( Julius the third) being not
able to establish and settle the Synod in Bolonia against the Imperial design,
Hist. Cons. T^^dent.
but forced to yield to the return of it to Trent, he had no way to come off
handsomely (as he thought) to save his credit, but with this slight and sorry
shift; saying, that the action of Monte did nothing appertain to Pope^ Julius;
and those things which gave reputation to that man, do not give it to this. So
doubtless there is a vast difference between a Captain and a Colonel; he that
cried for Justice when he was a Captain, may do injustice when he is a Colonel.
The Pope says, that Peter may err as Simon, but not as Peter: which might be
the reason that Os Porci (the first among the Popes, as Platina tells us, that)
did change his name to Sergius Secundus. But, says one, if Os Porci be damned,
can Sergius Secundus be saved? As the poor shepherd, seeing the Bishop of
Cullen, and admiring his pomp as a Prince, when his calling was but a Bishop;
some replied, that he wore not those Robes as he was Bishop, but as he was
Prince; yea, but quoth the shepherd, Cum damnatus fuerit dux, quid fiet de
Episcope? If the Prince go to hell for his pride, what will become of the
humble Bishop?

Though it should be imposed as an Article of faith, Sen. in Herc. Fur. Id. in
Tro.
that omuis in far est salus, we have no Savior but the soldier; and that
Quodcunque libuit facere victori, licet, his will is his Law: yet I doubt it
would be found more true, that

Rara fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Sometimes, though very
rarely, may we find
The Christian and the soldier combined.
But how can the loyal Colonel and the Parson excuse themselves of the great
affront and treachery against the Protector himself? I know not how they
should, unless they can steal horses with more safety then others look on. For
if Mercy and Righteousness establish the Throne, as doubtless it does, Prove.
20.28. and 25.5. then he that shall go about to interrupt and divert the course
thereof, can be judged for no less then misprision of Treason at least.
Righteousness is suum cuique tribuere, to give every man his own. That the
people were mine, and I theirs, by free choice, voluntary consent, and
reciprocal respects, in such a relation, as the present dispensation made us
capable of, I need not prove over again; That his Highness has appointed two
Masters of Requests, by whom the subject might make his address, dress is well
enough known; nor will any say it was to delude the subject* but to facilitate
the gaining of his right, and that righteousness (the stability of a th^on^)
might be administered to him: That Col. G. (for one) notwithstanding should
attempt, and did divert his Highness course of justice* by introducing (in a
clandestine way) one that could lay no just claim to the people, nor cared for
their consent by his own confession; and that he would do what in him lay to
oppose me, though the Parish had desired me: this laid together, may raise a
Quere, whether Col. G. for one, be free from Treason against his blighness?

Whether the young Parson be not to be suspected of incontinency and lustful
wantonness in that he offered violence to a modest and unwilling people, Quer.
5.
foreing a conjuction with them by a civil power, before they were divorced for
any cause of fornication or adultery? There be (in this case also) who have
eyes full of adultery, and a whorish heart, which make them come too near their
neighbors house, 2 Pet. 2.14
who make no bones to break the seventh and tenth commandments; even these
wheremongers and adulterers God will also judge. If you say we were not
married, I am sure we were betrothed, and there was matrimonium ratum. though
not consummatum: and you know, Deuteronomy. 22.25, 27.
under the Law he that forced a betrothed Damosel was to dye, if she cried out,
though there was none to help. I am sure the Parish cried loud enough to be
heard from Wiltshire to White Hall, where Col. G. was more forward to further
the vitiating act, then to rescue from it. I do not interpret the text; and you
cannot deny the allusion: as for that Scripture, Isa. 59.14. I leave you and
others to apply.

All comfortable and commendable marriages, Obj.
are made up of the free choice, and full consent of parents and children. The
Protector is Pater Patriae, as a father in his country; you could not expect to
prosper without his approbation, which was requisite, if not necessary and
essential to the match.

All you say is confessed. Sol.
As children are not to be disobedient to their parents; so parents are not to
provoke, or grieve, or cross their children in that which is just and
reasonable. As children, who break the fifth commandment, by flighting and
rejecting their parents consent and counsel, can promise themselves no great
happiness in their wilful resolutions; so parents, who force their children
contrary to their affections, can have as little hope of their prosperity. But
we sought, and (by the good leave of Col. Goffe and others) would have got the
good will of our Father, if we might have had access to crave it. Howbeit, I
hope we shall not behave our selves unseemly, but continue our duty with all
submission.

What has Master Goffe done more then you? Obj.
wherein is he more to be blamed then you, who would have lived with the same
people before their first husband Master Still was dead?

He was dead civilly and in law, though not naturally: Sol.
he was divorced, whether frigiditatis causa, or for what other reason, I care
not to determine; nor (the truth is) do I care to harp much on this string, to
hear more of that particular, having no desire to meddle with the Parsonage,
upon that very consideration, no farther then the third reason of my acceptance
moved me, i. e. in that I might have been more answerable to Master Stills
expectation and satisfaction then any other was like to be.

If you say that there is no letter of Law against what the Parson and the rest
have done, Obj.
and therefore they cannot be accused of doing any wrong or injury.

I answer, Quod non vetat lex, hoc vetat fieri pudor, Sol.
true Christian modesty is a greater prohibition then all penal Statutes. But
there is an express Law against the parsons practice, Mat. 7.12. Suppose there
were any humane law to countenance his proceedings; yet you know men's laws are
like themselves, and have their failings: in such case the wise man says,

Judicis auxilium sub iniqua lege rogato;
Ipsa etiam leges cupiunt ut jure regantur. Cato.

When Laws are bad, it is to be understood,
That Judges ought to do the people good.
But when I saw, by the weather-cocks above, which way the wi^^ sat, and was
like to blow, I kept me to my Card and Compass; quitting the coast I made
toward at first, I resolved to steer another course. The most public place of
the parish being denied, I content me with a less public, where I shall
endeavor to gratify the peoples affections, till some signal providence remove
me.

Needs must, Ob.
that cannot choose.

It was not theirs, Sol.
but them I sought at first. I have not lost a Benefice, but the grant of a
benevolent peoples request. I offered Col. Goffe, that his young Chaplain
should take all the profit, if he would allow me but the people; which thing he
was as ashamed to grant, as he was unjust to hinder the other.

I cannot deny, but (not from a seraphical principle) that I have greedily
hunted after a Parsonage, and would have got it as Master Goffe has his, right
or wrong, rather then have gone without it: ambition, honor, preferment, etc.
have been my snares, though I was little taken with the credit or expectation
of gain from this Parsonage: I have been ready, between a zealous pride and
discontent, to argue the case with God after this manner:

Were it not better to bestow
Master G. Herb. his Temple.
Some place and power on me?
Then should thy praises with me grow,
And share in my degree.
But mine Author, whispering me in mine ear, bade me read on till I came to
that which I find most true:

How know I, if thou should me raise,
That I should then raise thee?
Perhaps great places, and thy praise
Do not so well agree.
And, truly, when I observe what slippery places preferment sets a man in; what
a strange Metamorphosis, and transportation the new-raised favorites of fortune
suffer, that they are ready to take the words, though not the sense, of the
true convert, Ego non sum ego; and others that take notice of them conclude,
that idem non est idem: so far are they from Queen Elizabeth's Motto, Semper
eadem, that you can hardly find virum in viro, or idem in eodem, the same
thing in the same person, or the same person in himself, it makes me think that
periculo sior est mundus blandue quam molestus, Bern.
the world does less hurt with its fr^wes then with its smiles.

How can you find such fault with others, when you your self have been so
faulty in the same thing? Ob.


Who trusted more to the legal righteousness then Paul? who more declaimed
against it? Phil. 3.4, 5 6, 7, 8. Sol.


Qui semel in scopulos vento contortus and unda
Nauta, scit in caut is monstrare pericula nautis.
He that has suffered wrack by wind and tide,
Is the unskilful Mariners best guide.
You come now to the maxima gravamina and tell me plainly where the shoo
pincheth, what are the true reasons why I could not be suffered to enjoy the
peoples choice: for (shy you) it is reported commonly reported,

That I am ill-affected to the present government, Ob. 1.
and speak lightly of the Protector.

He speaks against Caesar, Sol.
was on old forged charge against Christ ( John 19.) the most obedient subject
that ever was: but allegations without probation, go for nothing* but the foam
of malice. I have heard of a great Rabbie, a man famous in Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical respects. President of a College, Mr. T. G.
and Pastor of a Church, of forward compliance enough to the late alterations;
that he should say, How the Protector got up, he knew not; but now he is up, he
must hold it as well as he can: who will impeach him for that? Whether his
Highness took, or accepted of the Government contrary or according unto the
expectation, and approbation of the single honest, plain-hearted Christians, is
not for me to dispute or determine: that which concerns me and every one else
(now he is up) is to pray that we may live and lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty. Now therefore the good Lord grant, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that he may be delivered and kept from the ambition, pride, and deceit of his
own heart; that he may have the spirit of good and righteous government
enlarged in him; that we may have equity and justice administered to us hence
forward; that he may be to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of
them that do well; that he may discern and dispel all hypocritical and fawning
parasites, and that the Commonwealth under him may flourish in all obedience
and love to God, and one another: Amen, Amen.

You are too Seraphical and Allegorical in your preaching; you exceed the
capacity of plain people; Obj. 2.
the vulgar cannot reach you: nay, notwithstanding your Seraphical spirit has
flown above and against Parsonages, yet now you hunt after one, etc.

This child fathers it self: the falsehood is proportionable to the patrons and
fomenters of it. Sol. 1.
Princes and Prelates must speak like themselves; a little lie will not fill a
great man's mouth. Let those Dons and Doctors make it appear, that I hunted
after a Parsonage.

If they speak Ironically, Sol. 2.
and jeer me when they say I am too Seraphical, then the ball rebounds into
their own faces, and the arrow falls on their own pate. For,

If by Seraphical they mean a high flying fancy, then how super-Seraphical must
they needs be who judge me? Rectum est index sui and obliqui. They have the Cap
already, and long for the Mitre. If my fancy be beyond the Moon (as I would
have it be) how far beyond the Moon must theirs fly, to take the altitude of
mine? A Dwarf cannot pull off a Giants cap. He that undertakes to top another
light, must be taller in his own opinion: thus while he judges another, he
exposes himself to censure for the same thing. But remember,

To put out others light be not too bold; Quarles.

The Temple-snuffers were of purest gold.
2. If by Seraphical, they mean an empty notion and high flying fancy only,
without solid substance and practical reality; yet so the Epithet sticks fast
to them. For even they themselves, among black-coates and gray-coats, who
preach and prate against me, who seem (or at least would seem) to beat down
empty notions, and build up pure practice, even these (whom I can name) can
covet, and clutch more with one haud, then I can or dare hold with both.

But if by Seraphical they mean honestly properly, and plainly, Sol. 3.
then I rencunce not the attributes, but could wish rather that I did better
deserve it. That you may know my mind, I crave your patience a little.

It is a common received opinion, that there are four orders or ranks of
Angels, of which some make this difference and distinctions. 1. There are
Angels in the vulgar acception, which they picture in the shape of a man, with
wings, and their feet touching the earth. 2. Archangels, without feet, cut off
in the midst, ^s ^^^ther from the earth. 3. Cherubims, with faces and wings,
^^^out bodies, as more remote from corporeal and terrene matter and form. 4.
Seraphims, without any humane shape or figure, represented in a yellowish
color and fiery flame, as most abstract, transcendent, and separated from all
humane idea's and earthly notions. I consent to the conceit, and acknowledge
the mystery and Ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ in all, who was,

1. Made flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. who is to be seen, and felt, and
handled by us, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. who took part with us in flesh and blood, Heb.
2.14. his feet touched our earth; who walked in our nature; who first descended
into the lower parts of the earth, before he ascended into the hights of
heaven, Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Joh. 3.13.

2. Afterward he appears like Michael the Archangel, fighting our battles,
making war in heaven with the Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12.7. to show, that
as we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but spiritual wickedness in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 6.12. so the weapons of our warfare should not be carnal, 2 Cor.
10. our feet should not stand on the ground, we should have no confidence in
the flesh, Phil. 3.3. we should not trust in the worldly Sanctuary, nor lean on
the false and fleshly righteousness of the Law; but that we should fight the
good fight of Faith, 2 Timothy 4.7. by which we get the victory, 1 John 5.4 5.
that the foot of pride should be cut off, Psalm. 36.11. Mat. 18.8. that the
pride (of our works and walkings) might be hid from us. Job 33.17.

3. Then he is seen as a Cherubim; without the gross hue of legal services and
bodily exercise, which profit little, 1 Timothy 4.8. but with an head only and
wings, to show how swift and quick he is of understanding to know and do his
fathers will, Isa. 11.3. Psalm. 40.7, 8. to show also how that all the
foregoing, inferior or lower dispensations of his in the body should fly up,
and we with them resting in him, as being his body who is our head, Col. 1.18.
the head of principalities and powers, Col. 2.10. the head over all things to
the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. In this our head (the seat of understanding) are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. and our life with it, Col.
3.3. to show that, although we are the Body of Christ, we should not (through
self-denial) be seen in any thing, Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 15.10. or ascribe any
thing to our selves, as they Mat. 25.44. Act. 3.12, 13.16. As Christ our Lord (
Phil. 2.7.) submitted to an exinanimation of himself to come down to us; (...)
Mat. 16.24, 25.
so should we suffer an annihilation of our selves to go up to him, lose our
lives to save them. Our lives are safer out of sight in Christ, and nearer unto
heaven, then in never so great appearance in us, or a name that we are alive.
While we behold the face of our Cherub, we vanish out of our own sight. 2 Cor.
3.18.

As our head (Christ) had wings to fly up unto his head (which is God) Joh.
17.1.5. so have we wings to fly up to our head, Rev. 12.14. Isa. 40.31. we have
the creation and the Scriptures in them, Law and Gospel, Letter and Spirit;
History for the rational, and Mystery for the spiritual man: which, as the
Arms and wings of the body are placed in contraposition, though they be of
opposite dispensation, yet in service, use and end they are concentrick and
meet in one, in Angels and Cherubims, in body and head, in Christ and the
Saints. The Cherubims were set one directly against the other, each looking on
other, Exodus 25.19, 20 and 37.8, 9.
and both upon the mercy-seat; the Law and Gospel, those two great
configurations of Heaven, have a mutual aspect, both centring in Christ their
body, head, substance and truth, Joh. 1.17. Col. 2.17. The Gospel is a mystery
hid from us under veiles and coverings of figures and shadows in the former
ages of our fleshly life, Col. 1.26. while we are under tutors and governors,
Gal. 4.1, 2. And then the spirit of prophecy in the Saints is enquiring and
searching diligently after the time of Grace promised, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. and
the Angels of the first tabernacle, who walked in the worldly Sanctuary, whose
feet touched the earthly things ( Joh. 3.13.) they desired to pry into this
mystery; but when Christ is revealed in us ( Gal. 1.16) as the hope of glory (
Col. 1.27.) then are the Law and Prophets fulfilled, and all promises
performed, 2 Cor. 1.20.

The Jew bewailes her little sister, Cant. 8.8. the Gentiles condole her
divorced; the Jew groans after the Gentiles conversion, the Gentile longs for
the Jews recovery and return, the Jew grieves to see the Gentile lie in
heathenisme and Atheism, as without God in the world; the Gentile would be glad
to see the Jew cast off their whorish habit and attire of an harlot, to forsake
the traditions of men, and ceremonies of Moses, and embrace the faith of the
Gospel: the Law longs for the liberty of the Gospel, Romans 8.19, etc.
the Gospel mourns for want of obedience to the Law: the Law desires the
manifestation of the sons of God, the Gospel requires the adoption to be
obedient to the Law. Relations cannot be void of mutual affections.

To conclude, Christ appears as a Cherub, that is, as a master, over-mastering,
overcoming, and overruling all principality and power, sin, curse and death,
Col. 2.14 15. As an Angel or Ministering spirit, he walked with us on his own
feet, and washed ours, Joh. 13.5.10. and 15.3. then, like an Archangel, he is
cut off, Isa. 53.8.) from the natural life and walking with men in the flesh,
lifted up a little higher from the earth upon the cross; where, like Michael,
he fought with, and overcame the Dragon and his Angels, Heb. 2.14, 15. then he
flies upward in his resurrection and ascension; and (like the Cherubims)
spreads both his wings, of divinity and humanity, Law and Gospel, Letter and
Spirit, both united in him, over the Mercy-seat, Romans 8.1.
that there might be no more condemnation to us, but that we should have
boldness at the throne of grace, and find help in time of our need. Heb. 4.16.
because our Cherub, our Christ, appears in the presence of God for us, Heb.
9.24. this our Angel does always behold the face of our Father in heaven, Mat.
18.10.
whose face is the mercy-seat, Psalm. 4.6. and 17.15. John 14.8. for, like his
name, Exodus 34.6.7. it is merciful, gracious, pardoning, etc. Forasmuch then as
all things work together for our good, and that by the Creation, Law, Gospel,
Letter, Spirit, etc. God intends to draw us nearer to himself, let us not
neglect his great Salvation.

God gave thy soul brave wings; Mr. G. H. P^^^^hant.
put not those feathers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers.
4. Lastly, Christ is as a Seraph, a fiery flame, without any imaginary fashion
or forged Idea of the shadow and finite reason and thought of man. Though in
the days of his flesh, and after his resurrection he appeared in many forms,
yet he left all and forsook them at his ascension to the Father, by his
reduction and resolution into the Godhead, disappearing, and deserting all
visibilities, when he delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, that God might
be all in all. Now all Ministrations, Ordinances, Christ himself our life, 1
Cor. 15.24.28.
the word of truth by which we were begotten, all return into God: this is the
perfect state of Christ and in this state we are perfected with him. Now are we
dead indeed unto all that is self, and alive only in and unto God, Col. 3.3.
this is pure and perfect salvation; salvation by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. Heb. 12.28,
29. of which none but hypocrites and carnal Gospellers are afraid, Isa. 33.14.
2 These. 1.8. In this state Christ our Savior is an everlasting Father. Isa.
9.6.
Fire is the generating and productive principle of all things; without fire,
no prolifical virtue: fire also is the consuming and destructive power of all
things; so Christ is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and
end of all things: he will never rest, till he burn, devour all intermediates.
Psalm. 90.2.
From everlasting to everlasting he is God: everlasting a part ante, and a
part post; whatsoever is interposed between these two everlastings, is but
temporal, and must pass away: meats for the belly, and the belly for meat, but
God will destroy both it and them. Compare Gal. 4.3. and 2 Pet. 3 10. in Greek.
God will not spare the work of his own hands; even the heavens shall wax old,
and the firmament melt away. Those (...), those Elements and rudiments of the
Law, by which we were disciplined and taught in our nonage, shall be dissolved
by the conflagration of the Seraphical or fiery dispensation.

Gal. 3.19. We read that the Law was ordained by Angels, (...): I had rather
read it, Disposed by Angels, as it is Acts 7.53. (...), by the disposition of
Angels. To ordain, implies a magisterial supremacy, and Legislative authority,
which pertains only to Christ in matters of the Church; but to dispose of
what is ordained, is the office of a Steward or Minister appointed thereunto;
thus the Angels of the lower order minister in the worldly Sanctuary, and
dispense the Letter: but there is (Esh dath) a fiery law, Deuteronomy. 33.2
the fire of the law, or a law of fire, which is said to proceed (mimino) from
his right hand: not out of his left hand, in the weakness of the letter, or
wrathful ministration; but from his right hand, in demonstration and power, a
law of spirit and life, Romans 8.2. which is the power of God unto salvation,
Romans 1.16. Psalm. 110.2. Isa. 2.3. a law converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7, etc.
the everlasting Gospel which throws down Babylon, Rev. 14.6, 8. the
ministration of this Law belongs to the Cherubims and Seraphims, to those
that are of a more fiery, refined, and spiritualized principle, who have been
taken up into the third heaven, and seen the mystery of truth as it is in
Jesus; these are called able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter,
Psalm. 104.4
but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. such are a flaming fire. Such should all
endeavor to be; and so Seraphical would I be. I wish that I and all that
upbraid me, had a larger measure of this Ministry, that we were able to show
God more clearly to men, and bring men more near unto God. He that has an ear
to hear, let him hear what the spiritual Ministry of God is in the Church.

But, Cynthius aurem vellet, we must speak no more of these things yet; the
time may come when men will endure sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.
and not give heed to seducing spirits; then Parables and Allegories will not
be spurned and scoffed at as too Seraphical. As men yet love to dally and play
with the letter, and to cut such a Religion out of the Scripture, as, will
indulge and mince their faults, that will keep their own sin and Gods mercy a
great way off from them, that will form such a Christ without them, who can
find no room in their Inn, but must be thrust out among their bestial lusts:
the crafty, subtle, serpentine, Luke 2.7.
fox-like thoughts; the ambitious, proud, airy imaginations of men, are such
and so many, that Christ has not where to lay his head in their hearts. Mat.
8.20.
The chief Priests (generally the chief enemies of Christ) and the Scribes,
could not away with the Parables and Allegorical doctrine of Christ; 'twas so
Seraphical, that it did scrue and wind into their hard hearts; it did vex, and
fret, and gall their consciences, so that his life was little enough to appease
their rage, Luke 20.19. Allegories touch the quick, and bring things too close
and near home; there is no evil or sin spoken of, or against in all the
Scripture, but an Allegory will make every particular man guilty of it. But we
love not plain English; he that cannot daub with untempered mortar, and sow
soft pillows under men's arms, Quid Romae faciet? What encouragement can he look
for?

Yea, Ob. 3.
but you are so immethodical, confused and indistinct, so blunt and vulgar in
your expressions, that none of any parts and ingenuity desire or care to hear
you. But this objection you say came not from Court, though not far from it.

Come whence it will, Sol.
non been convenient, neither so do the witness agree; this has little kin to
the former: they look as if they would meet in the Antipodes. But, I pray Sir,
what method do we find prescribed in the Scripture? did they not all speak as
the Spirit gave them utterance? are we not to prophecy according to the
proportion of faith? has not every man his proper gift? let his matter be
good, and I dislike not the method of any man: doubtless orderly proceeding is
commendable; but whether we must go to Athens or Jerusalem for that form, to me
is no question at all: and that many under pretense of rule, and art, and
method, have so minced their Sermons into cippets of curiosity, that little of
edification has been to be found in them, to you is not strange.

Master Cradock, heretofore in Bristoll deservedly declaiming against the too
great niceness of young Scholars and raw preachers, had a passage to this
purpose: There be some that think all divinity and the mystery of Christ and
the Gospel is bound up in Schoolmen and Common-place-books; and if they can
patch up a Sermon or two with Logical definitions, divisions and subdivisions,
etc. Oh, presently they think themselves brave fellows, they have the Systeme
and whole body of Divinity always about them; as if (said he) the Mystery of
Christ and the Gospel could be carried from Oxford into the country in a
clog-bag. Surely he had too much cause to jerk the wanton wits of green-headed
Sophisters; which are also met with by an honorable and worthy Gentleman, thus:

As men, for fear the Stars should sleep and uod,
And trip at night, have spheres supplied;
As if a Star were duller then a clod,
Which knows his way without a guide:
Just so the other Heaven they also serve,
Divinities transcendent sky:
Which with the edge of wit they cut and carve.
Reason triumphs, and Faith lies by.
Could not that wisdom which first broached the wine,
Have thickened it with definitions?
And jagg'd his seamless coat, had that been fine,
With curious questions and divisions?
But all the doctrine which he taught and gave,
Was clear as heaven, from whence it came:
At least those beams of truth which only save,
Surpass in brightness any flame.
Love God, and love your neighbor. Watch and pray.
Do as you would be done unto.
O dark instructions, So should Mr. Goffe have done.
even as dark as day;
Who can these Gordian-knots undo? etc.
You deny the Resurrection, Obj. 4.
therefore deserve not any encouragement.

Prove it, Sol.
and punish me. He deserves not to escape scotfree who is of that opinion. There
are, you say, two great men, and they no small fools neither, who have reported
it in your hearing; the one no less then a Justice of Peace. When you see that
worshipful gentl. put him in mind, that qui statuit aliquid, part inaudit a
altera aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit. A Justice of Peace should have
two ears. Sen.
Teach him some law, and more honesty: he has too little of both. This is the
man that hanged me before he heard me (I think he never saw me) that concluded
peremptorily like a Just -- if Master Goffe missed the Parsonage, yet Pinnel
should not have, who ever had it. He had a Pastor of a flock to prefer, who
could have left his own sheep for the fleeces of others; he might have done it:
gain is godliness in some Clerks bibles, and covetousness no sin; the Justice
of Peace would have allowed it. I know the man, and would name him, but for the
respects I owe to some of his relations. I can produce the letters of two
Justices, as well known and better deserving in their country, then he, which
accuse me of no such thing; and had they not been so Encomiastick, and abounded
with respects, they might have seen the light. In brief, tell the Justice from
me, that he that shall go about to defraud and cheat another of his estate, is
one that yet lies dead in deceit and covetousness, and practically denies the
Resurrection.

The other Comrade is Master Goffe, whom you heard report it. It Is no matter
who invented it: the Proverb is fulfilled, Like priest, Jer. 20.10.
like people; report, and we will report it, is no new thing. If the Parson
has his Bible about him, ask what is written, and how he reads Psalm. 15.3.
desire him to turn to Col. 3.1.5. If he be risen with Christ, how is it that
his locorish and leacherous tooth remains yet in his head, that he must needs
force an unwilling people, to fulfill his unclean desire? that which is bred in
the bone, will hardly out of the flesh: there is no cure for him but death;
advise him to the cross, persuade him to mortify his covetousness after
earthly things, which is idolatry, and mind heavenly things more; else he will
be censured for more then a verbal Sadduce, and taken for one, who in deed
(more then in word) denies the resurrection. Let his life prove his faith. It Is
nothing now, there be so many good books abroad to borrow a Sermon, or read
ones notes to the people. It Is good to preach out of the Pulpit. Been loqui,
and male vivere, nihil aluid est quam sua se voce damnare. What I have here
spoken (...), Prosp.
cuttingly, is to make him more sound in faith and practice, Tit. 1.13.

You are vehemently suspected, Ob. 5.
and it is secretly whispered that you are tainted and touched a little with
Master John Goodwins opinion.

Master Goodwin is able to answer for himself, Sol.
I need not plead for him, nor am I ashamed to be named with him. What mistakes
he (being but a man) is subject unto, I enquire not after: he is no Pope to me;
nullius addictus inrare in verba, I pin my faith upon no man's sleeve. I fear
those that dislike his doctrine, do also disdain his practice; he that shall
convince him of error, and outstrip, or but equal him in manners, erit mihi
magnus Apollo, he shall be my Oracle. I wish his Doctrine and life were better
understood and imitated.

There is a great noise and stir now a days about judgment and opinions (not
but that there are many foolish and fantastical opinions abroad) but little
care is taken about reformation of life. He that considers how difficult it
has been (not to say still is) to remove an adulterous, drunken, swearing,
idle, lewd, scandalous Parson, and how easy it is to keep out a merely
supposed heretic, never yet convicted of error, will hardly be persuaded that
the Saturnine region of the golden age is hard by in the Platonic revolution.
Were Colonel Goffe (for one) truly zealous for that he pretends, viz. pure
doctrine and a holy life, were it not as easy for him to have his Spies and
Setters for vicious Parsons as well as for great parsonages? but the plot is
plain: he danceth in a net, and yet thinks that no man can see that his design
is not so much to oppose error and evil in any man, as to create favorites, and
gratify them with the fat benefices of the land; as in this particular case:
if I will be quiet, and let his Chaplain alone, I may have what freedom I
please in private to seduce men, and sow any dangerous opinions among them
there. Whereas if I be not thought sit to exercise my Ministry in public, by
reason of any error or vice in doctrine or manners, I ought not to be tolerated
in private; and if Colonel Goffe, etc. are true to their principles, or rather
have any true principle in them, they would convene me before some grave
assembly, and deal with me as an heretic, if I so appear: if they do not so, I
pronounce and proclaim them vain talkers, abominable hypocrites, and base
dissemblers with God and men. I fly not as guilty, I stand my ground, they may
know where to find me, I seek no corners; where I have been once, I dare go
again; I live in my country where I am and have been known for as honest a man
as any that shall asperse me.

But the truth is, the main drift of these super-Seraphical men is to promote
their minions, and monopolize all places of profit, while they make others bear
the odium of desiring them. Audacter calumniare, etc. is a threed-bare maxim
of Machiavel; what any knave dare to invent, every fool is ready to believe.
Thus the Monks and Friars in Italy cry out against the Hugonites in France,
that they were not men, but some strange kind of Monsters with heads like
asses, snouts like swine, etc. the credulous popularity are possessed with the
persuasions of their priests, and cry out, Fie on them, fie upon them etc. the
first and greatest faults were found with their heads, their notions and
opinions were monstrous: they did not say they had splay feet, bow legs; their
conversation could not be blamed. Many speak evil of the things they know not,
2 Pet. 2.12. they must be ashamed and silenced by a good conversation in
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16. Origin says, that of all torments to the damned spirits,
none is like to a devout and diligent reading of the Scripture: and Solomon
tells us, that none torture the wicked like the righteous man with his
conversation; therefore the wicked lies in wait for him, because he is not for
his turn, Wisd. 2.11, 12 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.
he is clean contrary to him, he was made to ^eprove his thoughts, he is
grievous even to behold, his life is not like other men's, his ways are of
another fashion, etc. read the second chapter of Wisd. though it be Apocrypha.
If men can swim with the stream (as it is hard swimming against it) and make it
an Article of their faith, that

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. A State-Religion still has been the
size:
Who Non-conformes, is thought to be unwise.
Such a one is filius alba gallinae, a rising man of the times: but to speak
against the vice and baseness of a Prelate or potent man, heretofore was alike
dangerous, Jer. 18.18. and Amos 7.12, 13. he that presses holiness further
then the extent of men's formality, shall be smitten with the tongne, and have
devices devised against him, as one too notional, whimsical, Seraphical, an
Arminian, Ranter, denying the Resurrection, what not? Let him be banished from
Bethel, and sent into the land of Judah. A greed, let it be so. Bethel is the
house of God, in the literal ministration, where Jeroboam (the sighter against
the people, that resists their spiritual and pure obedience to God) has set
up his golden calves, of man's gilded and idolatrous conceits and reason, and
has made it a den of thieves: but Judah is confession to the praise of God,
the spiritual land of peace, where men live to the praise of God, and the glory
of his rich Grace: Judah rules with God, and is faithful with the most holy:
Hos. 11.12
let me be banished into that country; I shall be content to be the worlds
exile.

When Aristides, surnamed the Just, was to be banished Athens, for no other
reason, but because he was a virtuous man, he went out of the City to hear
news; meeting with a countryman going to give his Vote against him for his
banishment, he asked his business; I go (said the man) to give my voice again
Aristides. Do you know Aristides? No: has he done you any wrong? No, not any.
Why then will you have him banished? O non placet mihi hoc nomen justus: Mande^.
I cannot endure a man that will be so good and just. (...), says another, We
will have none of our Citizens shall be too good. The world will take care of
its own, that they shall not exceed in virtue, goodness, honesty, holiness,
etc. as for the rest, away with them, away with them, they are not for our
turn, their ways are of another fashion, they object to our infamy the
wickedness of our education, Wisd. 2.
they boast that God is their Father, and that they ought to be like him to be
holy as he is holy in all manner of conversation, these are our eye-sores, out
of sight with them, we shall never be quiet for them, it is not fit such men
should live, fie upon them, crucify them, crucify them.

A little further, with your patience Sir, this is a considerable point. I hold
it as a facred Canon of our Lord, never to be repealed; Joh. 7.17.
If any man will Do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God. What symptoms or Characters soever else may be superadded, this remains
inviolable and infallible, Mat. 7.16.
By their fruits you shall know them. Where manners are not minded and mended,
there doctrine it self may be suspected for humane. In the council of Trent,
the masterpiece and maine service of the Pope's Legate, Hift. Council. Triden.
p. 342. 144, etc.
was to shuffle and shift off the reformation of the Court of Rome, which he
did for diverse months and years; this bred great discontent and contestation.
The zealous Prelates of the Spanish faction, out of devotion, and the
Imperialists upon other designs, press hard for amendment of life. A rich
Prelate among them inculcated it much, saying, that so long as their vessels
were not cleansed, the Holy Ghost would not dwell in them. The great Cardinal
Santa Croce could not but (seemingly at least) commend it: but with what
cunning devices and tricks the Papalins (zealous against error and heresy, so
called) still stav'd it off that history (a book worth the reading) will inform
you. England was never more ban'ed and bewitched then by a proud, covetous,
contentious, scandalous Clergy, who commonly are the first that cry out against
errors, sects, etc. like the woman's daughter, who would have her mother call
the honest woman whore first, lest she should be called so her self. Let Mr. J.
Goodwin defend his doctrine; his life will defend him against those that come
short of him. I wish his conversation were more fairly copyed out by the great
Scribes of our age; what hope we have to gain upon the Papists by doctrine,
when our grand Impugners of them are as bad, if not worse then they in practice?

Of all kind of cattle, I care least for a corrupt Clergy; such as these I
utterly dislike, and (not a true Ministry, or godly Ministers) I publicly
testify against, as those from whom I would receive neither Ordination or
approbation, viz.

If any personal or domestic Chaplain to any King or Potentate in France,
Spain or Italy shall so dishonor and undervalue his Prince or Sovereign, who
has the public profits of his Nation, as not to be content with that salary
his Prince allows, which is supposed to be sufficient and a meet competency,
but withal shall hold a Fellowship in a College (enough to maintain another
man comfortably) and besides that, seek the collation of one hundred, two
hundred, or three hundred pounds per annum (enough to preserve and succor many
families) as a perpetual gratuity for half the service, or less, which another
has done for a flap with the fox tail; Let such a man be censured for an
Episcopal Pluralist, or super-seraphical monoplizer, ipso facto, till he be
converted, and repent of his scandalous error.

Whether he that devours as much of the Commonwealths means, as would well
suffice two, four, six, or eight families, Quere.
is not to be reputed as unprofitable a member thereof, as Wood of Kent, or
Marriot of Grayes Inn?

2. If any Pastor of a gathered Church, whose judgment is yet for that form of
Church Government, shall forsake his flock, and leave them at six and seven on
the mountains, and in the wilderness, in England, Scotland, Ireland or Wales,
while he seeks or takes the honors and profits of a College or Regiment; let
him be judged an hireling ipso facto, till he amend and forsake this his
scandalous practice.

Whether a Pastor of a people (so called, Quer. 1.
and so owned) may forsake that people, being not renounced by them without
great offense, and suspicion of faulty principles?

2. Whether a Minister and a people standing in their own account as husband
and wife (often so compared) though they do mutually consent, may defraud each
other longer th^n fasting and prayer do require; or if they exceed that time,
whether they do not expose themselves to Satan's temptations for their
incontinency: and whether a plain divorce, for just cau^^, were not better then
such unhandsome and discommendable way of life?

3. Whether they who upon by-ends of absence feed their flock by Proxy shall
not go to heaven, and receive their reward so? This Q^ere has countenance from
what I have heard Master Peter's preach once and again; speaking of preachers
who expected their reward at the last day, God (said he) will first ask of
them, and say, to one, What did you preach for? I preached for 100, 200, 300 l.
per ann. You had it. To another, What did you preach for? why, I preached for
honor, great men's favor, to get a name etc. well, you had your wages, had you
not? To a third, And what did you preach for? truly Lord, I loved my ease; I
did not, I could not preach at all (fine preachers indeed) who fed the flock
then? I got another. Well, let him take the wages that did the work; Go thou
wicked and slothful servant, etc. but what did you preach for? for love of thy
Truth, to glorify thy Name, to save souls, etc. Well done good and faithful
servant, etc. what more true then this of Master Peter's?

3. If any rich Parson that has his hundreds per annum, shall thrust his
child or children into any Hospital, Charter House etc. which were founded and
intended for the relief of necessitous and poor people who could not maintain
and shift for themselves; and so cause the bread of the needy to fail, and
starve the hungry soul: Let him be condemned for a thief and a murderer ipso
facto, till he make restitution to the distressed, give to the poor what he
has pilfred from them, and cheated them of, steal no more, destroy no more,
but succor and save by a charitable and liberal distribution, repenting of
this odious injury and oppressive error.

Whether one that has 100.200.400. l. per annum. Quer. 1:
may not better provide for his children then he that has nothing?

2. Whether Ministers of such yearly income now, would be content that their
children should be put by such places in case they had not wherewithal to
provide other ways for them? will it not afflict and wound an indigent soul to
see another who has no need, go away with that which was appointed for him,
and for want of which he is ready to perish? Surely the cries of the poor have
a passage unto Gods ear, and God will certainly visit for this kind of
oppression and cruelty.

3. Whether such Ministers live by faith?

4. Whether they can preach confidently upon Exodus 20.15, 17. Thou shall not
steal; thou shall not covet?

5. Whether these be not they spoken of Mat. 23.14. That devour widows houses
and for a pretense make long prayers?

Whether they who have thus disposed of such places contrary to the Founders
meaning and intent, be any longer to be entrusted with them? and whether it
would not be a just president to prevent future unfaithfulness, if those who
have thus basely disposed of such places, were compelled to maintain some poor
men's children upon their own purses?

4. If any man (Doctor, Dean or Chapter) whose principles, like the
weathercock, may be blown about with the blasts of fortune and success, who of
a Cavalier can become a Roundhead in a moment, upon this ground (being
demanded his reason) that he must drive the nail that would go; and to show
that his conversation is real and sincere, upon clear conviction, it shall be
wrought when the Army is most prosperous; Let this man be trusted ipso facto,
as far as you can throw Bowbell over Paul's steeple, till he repent of this his
temporizing error.

Whether that saying be commonly true, Quer. 1.
Late repentance is seldom true? Paenitentia sera raro vera.

2. Whether politic compliance be to be trusted and rewarded before constant
fidelity?

5. If any man of war with the sword of blood in his hand, shall be deputed and
undertake to be a commissioner and by his approbation to qualify or enable a
messenger of the Gospel of peace and builder of the Lords house; and he, so
qualified by him, think himself better fitted or furnished thereby, Let the one
be censured for a hard, and the other for a soft head ipso facto, till they
learn more humility and discretion, and both repent; the one of his
presumption, and the other of his ignorance.

Whether David or Solomon was to build the temple of the Lord; and whether
Elis's sons, Quere.
or Samuel were to serve at the Altar of God?

-- Licuit, semperque licebit
Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis.
It lawful was, and still shall be
To speak of vice, and let the name go free.
None of all the forementioned gang are Canonical in my Calendar: I cannot
accept of their approbation to the Ministry: their practice is worse then
Master John Goodwins opinion.

Your book has given great offense; Obj. 6.
you are a lost man in the Army: so much Master Goffe told me.

As for my book, the close of it shall answer this objection; Sol. 1.
it is to be seen of all: he that dislikes it, may lay it aside, till he bestow
better things on the world then are in it: I have no more to say for it to any
man, but

Cum tua non edis, carpis mea carmina Leli?
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
He that finds fault, and will not better do,
For a fault-finder, and no more shall go.
The Press is open, let him send forth more truth and greater light. I own all
but the title, which was falsified at the Press; beside the total omission of
the Emphasis throughout, neglect of some Scriptures, mis-quoting others, and
some few mistakes besides, which I could not prevent in my absence.

If I am lost in the Army, Sol. 2.
it is where Master Goffe was never yet found: though now he can be content to
eat the fruit of my labor and hazard. One sows, and another reapeth; though
when I sowed, it was in hope of a better harvest, and greater liberty then not
to have a Petition received, or so much as admission to be heard in a
complaint. But necessitas non habet legem; hunger will break stone-walls: no
law limits extremity. I know Master Goffe was necessitated to do what he did;
he was lately married, and could not hold his fellowship in Oxford no longer; I
know not whether he were perjured or no in holding his Felloship after he was
married: a Parsonage now he must and will have; and such a one as he has, and
is like to make it, who could resist?

-- Quid non mortalia pector a cogis
Auri sacra fames.
Who can withstand the force of Gold,
Or from its Lucre his heart withhold?
What will satiate the Canine appetire of insatiable covetousness? I grudge no
man a Parsonage; he has it, I had rather he should have it (as he has it)
then I; his way of getting it I dislike. Much good may he do in it, and with
it; 'twas reported he would give an hundred pound a year to the poor; if he add
another, and double his bounty, there is enough besides, as much as many a
sober man and his family live well withal: much good also may the overplus of
his liberality do him: I wish it heartily; not as Niceas the Philosopher wished
to him that stole his shoes from him; much good may there be in all respects:
we ought to return good for evil. I have nothing against his person; but I
stand in utter detestation of his practice. I wish he may do the work of a
Minister, and be adorned in mind as he is in body: it is pity a proper person
should have perverse principles.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Where pious parts as well as
proper are,
That person all men will esteem most tare.
I confess I am so lost in the Army, that, I think, Sol. 3.
I shall never more be found in it.

But bear with my folly, semel insanivimus omnes, let me become a sool, and
glory a little. What is it that has lost me in the Army? why am I a lost man
there? Is it because I promoted their design with two horses in the beginning
of the war, for which I have not seen penny unto this day? an offense which
Master Goffe was never guilty of, I suppose. Or was it because I preached in
Beverstone Castle about twenty weeks for nothing? or because I preached twelve
months and more in Nottingham C^st^e at the same rate? or because I gave the
third part (all that I could get) of my Arrears in the Army to the wives and
children of those that could get nothing for service? Fool that I am, though
compelled, to let my left hand know what my right hand has done. 2 Cor. 12.11.
Or was it because I did reprove the recidination and Apostasy* the
dissimulation and hypocrisy of the Parliament and Army, to that valiant,
modest, and no way self-seeking General Fairfax? If I am become an enemy for
t^lling the truth, let me be forgiven that wrong.

If it was not true for which I reproved them* and b^re witness against them
(...) Windsor, then why did the Parliament afterward, in one of their
Declarations against the Scots, confess that the major part of them at that
time were corrupt? and the Army in their Remonstrance from Saint Albans,
acknowledge that they were faulty in too much compliance with the enemy, and
negligent in performance of their duty and engagement? If my reprehension was
just, why should I be lost in the Army for it? Yea, but if I were such a lost
man there, as Master Goffe says, then why did diverse Officers since invite my
return? and why did L. G. Cromwell himself (now his Highness) send his letter
from Newark by the Governor of Nottingham Castle to the Committee in my behalf,
that I might be considered in relation to the Garrison? a thing desired by the
Governor and soldiers, their own voluntary motion once and again to me. Thus
far have I been a lost man in the Army, farther then ever Master Goffe was
found in it. Nor am I yet afraid to look that ^ost of men in the face* yea, I
openly send this challenge to the whole Army, that if there be any error of
judgment, or matters of misdemeanor to be laid to my charge, let all or any of
them produce and prove it; if they make it good, I will be their close prisoner
for ever.

But if any muck-minded man or men, who, like the mole, are digging after the
earthly advantages of great pay and places for little labor and service: or if
there be any among them who are dous'd over head and ears in the waters of
worldly pleasures and carnal delight, or dipped only in the shallow fords of a
hollow profession and faith: or if there be any high soaring notionists
hovering in the airy emptiness of subtle and lean speculations, vanishing at
last into a monstrous nothing; and are not truly Seraphical purifying their
hearts with the fiery law of truth and love, with fervent charity and burning
affection to the brotherhood, whose Religion is but a sounding brass and a
tinckling Cymbal; such as these I esteem their words as wind, and account none
of their clamors or calumnies any of my guilt or sin.

With what indulgent Bull -- liberty of conscience some men can dispense with
taking 10.20 30, 40, shillings per diem to wear a sword by their side, and walk
up and down with a belt about their shoulders, I know not; I am to render a
reason of mine own actions, and to give an account for none but my self. If I
would, I think I might as well take Tithes, to which no particular man can lay
claim, for preaching as a Minister, as receive eight shillings per diem, as a
Chaplain in the Army which is squeezed and issued out of the labor and sweat of
indigent and more necessitous men then my self. I impose nor reflect on any
man; my faith is unto my self and to God: the danger makes me doubtful: great
gain is a gin and snare which few escape, being taken with. And therefore to
such as ask why I cannot accept the Army-pay and promotion, I answer:

Olim quod vulpes agroto cauta leoni
Respondit referam, Hor.
quia me vestigia terrent,
Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
What once the fox unto the lion said,
To be excused from coming to his den,
That I; the footsteps there make me afray:
Of all that go, there com's not one of ten.
Covetousness and climing to great places is a leprosy; if ten of a thousand
be cured, hardly one of ten acknowledge it. When I see the irreversible
footsteps of vanity, I fear to follow: I have heard many soldiers and officers
in the beginning of their march in the Army cry out against Lords of Manors
for extortion, oppression, ambition, etc. as being but Williams bastards,
Captain and Colonel of the Norman conqueror: but being advanced themselves to
the same dignity, can now make no bones to swallow Kings houses and whole
Lordships at a bit, when many of their fellows and companions in the same
service* hazard, and hardship cannot get a cottage to shelter them. When I see
such Patriots and pleaders of their countries liberty involved and inextricably
entangled in their predecessors snares, and when I see those Giants of the
Gospel-profession (some of them fluviatically Religious) drowned in the dangers
they seemed to avoid, and building the things they pretended to destroy, I am
afraid what would become of me (a feeble reed to those strong pillars) if I
should be exposed to the same temptations.

I remember Master Peter's preaching his weekly Lecture at White Hall about
November last was twelve months since, taking a just occasion to rebuke the
extravagant and luxuriant excesses of the soldiery, he fell upon their
exorbitant enormity handsomely, and (a his mode is) wittily, in this
interlocutory passage, i.e. You* and you, you* I pray Sirs, what were you? what
had you before the wars? why truly Sir, I was a poor Turnspit, a Tailor, a
Carpenters boy, a Weaver, an under-Clerk, etc. I had little or nothing to live
on; my hands were my lands etc. Well: but what are you? What have you now? He
struts out his foot, cocks his Bever, sets his arm a kemboll, and says, Why
Sir, I am a Captain, a Major, a Colonel, a Major General* etc. I have my
Silks, Satan (it should be Satin) Velvet, Plush, Scarlet, Gold lace, Cloth of
Silver, what not? I am rich, and fare deliciouslly every day, etc. Brave, Sir;
the world is well amended: but was this that you fought for? where is the
relief of the oppressed, the supply of the needy? What Is become of the wives
and children of those that have loft more then you have, their lives, which you
have saved? is it enough that you give them one or two shillings for twenty
shillings of their Arreares? was the end of your Covenant and fighting to
enrich your selves, and impoverish others? I doubt Master Peter's may preach
this at every Parade with the same success he did at first in
White-hall-Chappel, to those that are

Quales ex humili magna ad fastigia rerum
Extollit, quotiet voluit, fortuna, jocari,
Such as whose fortunes, fortune has in jest
Enlarged, for a time, beyond the rest.
Such as Job speaks of, and of whom Solomon complains, Job. 30.1.
Prove. 19.10. and 30.22. Eccles. 10 7. I condemn not all: millibus in multis,
some may be better; one of a thousand; as he said of our Gentry in England,

Not that they all are so, Mr. G. H.
but that the most
Are gone to grass, and in the pasture lost.
1. Whether the old Parliament were justly accused, Quer. 1.
complained against, and condemned as guilty for imbezeling the public
treasure and common stock of the Commonwealth, by gratifying their particular
favorites, and allowing such immoderate and excessive fees to civil places and
martial offices?

2. Whether those that receive the same, be nor equally guilty, and to be
censured for robbery done to their fellow subjects, seeing the receiver is as
bad as the thief? When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with him* etc.
Psalm. 50.18. be not partaker of other men's sins* 1 Timothy 5.22.

3. Whether at the beginning of the late Polemical and most unhappy
controversy, we did profess, engage, covenant and protest for common safety
and liberty of conscience only, or for private gain and particular advantages,
to purse or pocket up to our selves the public stock and Faith?

4. Whether we have paid our vows, and ^er^o^ned our proses* protestations,
etc?

5. Whether the Reubenites* Gadites* and half trib^ (...) Manass^h did sit
still in their inher^^ance before their br^thr^n ^ad quiet possession of
theirs? Josh. 1.14, 15. Or whether they were not child by Moses for their f^ult
therein? Numb. 3 ^.6.

6. ^^heth^^ ^^^t which some men avaritiously scr^^^ to themselves, before
(...) re^^ (...) ^rethren have indifferent and competent satisfaction with
them, will prove any more then Aurum Tholossanum in the end; that which has a
worm in the root, of which it is said, Non gaudet tertius haeres, it will not
last to the worlds end?

(...) my (...) as D^mocri^u^ J^n^o^ (...)

Hor.
Dixero si quid forte jocosius, hoc mihi juris,
Cum ven^a dabis --
Take in good part
The mild and tart.
Again,

Suspitione si quis errabit sua,
Et rapiet ad se quod erit commune omnium,
Si ulte nudabit animi conscientiam.
He that is guilty and is galled, will winch:
He that goes lame, I doubt his shoo does pinch.
Si quis est qui quid in se inclementius dictum existimavit esse; Tert.
sic existimet; He that is guilty and scorns to be told of it, let him turn the
buckle of his girdle behind him.

-- Nemo me impune lacessit. None me provoke
Without a stroke.
Again,

-- Ridentem (...)
Quid vetat?
If it be (...)
A jerking jest is not (...)
Let (...) be blameless, and they shall be shameless* the ^ore (...) ^^cking
heel.

(...) sibi de se putat omnia dioi. He that is guilty o^ a ^^^lt, will blush
He that is guiltless will not ^^re a (...).
A bad conscience is the worst condemnation. Who will, or can harm you, if you
be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3.13.

-- Hic murus ahene as esto:
Nil conscire sibi* null a palle soere culpa.
A conscience clear and void of sin,
Is brass without and gold within.
Uprightness has boldness; the righteous is a lion: truth triumphs over
falsehood and lies: holiness abhors wickedness. I hope there are many good men
in the Army, them I love and honor; as for the rest, sperno me sperni, I care
less for them then they do for me; only I pity and pray for them, but fear
them not a jot: there is no danger for any man to pull an old house about his
ears, when all the world is in a flame about him.

Who goes a warfare at his own charges? Obj.
will you not allow the soldier good pay for his great hazard?

Who has gone to war on his own expense? Sol.
but let none do violence to any, but be content with his wages; not taking his
own pay and another too unto himself. Who has not been paid by others, for
getting his own freedom? I hope they shall not lose theirs, who have paid for
it.

There is but one thing more, concerning which I shall endeavor to set my self
right in your opinion at this time, in reference to Master Goffe his doctrine*
which I did dislike and openly reprove. Two things you lay to my charge* as
blameworthy for so doing.

1. The manner of my carriage; in that I did not first privately admonish him
of his error, according to the rule Mat. 18.15. To which I answer: If his
offense had been against me to my particular prejudice only, the rule had
held, and bound me to what you say. But inasmuch as Master Goffe (as young as he
is) pretends to be a Presbyter, or Elder, to boast of God* Romans 2.
a guide of the blind* a light to them that are in darkness, an inst^uct^r of
the foolish, a teacher of babes, which has the form of knowledge, and of the
truth in the law; for him to deny the faith and doctrine of the Gospel to the
discouragement of men's obedience thereto, he is rather to be rebuked before
all, that others may also fear, 1 Timothy 5.20.

2. But you question whether there were ground of exception against the matter
it self, which you know was this. Master Goffe in the close of his
morning-Sermon ( June 1.8.) had three particulars, one against by-ends,
self-interest, worldly advantages etc. wherein he made a rod for his own back:
it is well if he would follow his own doctrine, Mat. 23.3.
and reform his practice; it would be a good example to his flock, 1 Timothy 4.12.
there are who say, and do not. In his second particular (wherein his error, for
which I found fault) he commended and pressed universal obedience to all Gods
commands; and yet in the same breath denied that there could be any such
obedience attained unto in this life, as being that which must be deferred till
hereafter, to be perfected when we come to heaven.

He that says there is no perfect obedience attainable in this life, and yet
will preach and press it, should go and preach where such are that can fulfill,
and do what they are commanded: what do such men on earth, where their
Ministry cannot take effect? why do not they rather fly to heaven, and preach
there to the glorified Saints and Angels? why do they not go and light their
candle to the Sun, and teach these things in the New Jerusalem, where they are
that will save them a labor of speaking twice, and do their duty before they
are exhorted to it? why do they stay here, operam and oleum perdere, to wash a
black moore white, unless it be for three hundred pounds per annum? nemo
tenetur ad impossible; if there be no perfect obedience here, why do they put
men upon impossibilities? Jerome complanied that there were too many in his
time that were impe^itorum Doctores, priusqam Doctorum discipuli, such as would
teach others to run, before they could go themselves; blind leaders of the
blind, Mat. 15.14
that cause the people to err, Isa. 9.16. Mr. Goffe is but a young Divine; yet
if he preach true divinity, none will despise his youth.

I know you stagger and startle, and are ready to stumble at what I say; but
give me leave to quiet and compose the hesitancy of your spirit, by recalling
only one passage to your remembrance. You know the young man in London, with
whom I had the long contest about the in-being and dwelling of the holy Spirit
in us. He could not be persuaded that it was any more or otherwise then by his
gifts and graces; there was no convincing him that it was personally,
substantially and essentially: for if so, he thought it would necessarily
fol^^^ ^^at then we in whom the spirit so dwells, must needs be Gods. I
instanced in Christ, in whom though the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily,
yet his body was not God: so the Saints proportionably and in like manner: yet
he could not be satisfied. Shortly after, he told me he was at a stand, and
could not tell what to think of my opinion; for yesterday (said he) I heard
Master Tho. Goodwin, who preached the same thing almost verbati^. Since that,
he was resolved; in the mouth of two witnesses the word was established. Thus
happily at first blush, universal obedience may seem as strange to you as it
was boldly denied by Master Goffe: but I must tell you, (...) he that denies
universal obedience and perfection to be attained (not as though I had already
attained, or were perfect) in this life, run^ himse^^ upon these rocks, viz.

1. He is repugnant in his faith to these plain and point blank Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, Genesis 17.1. walk before me, and be thou perfect, Mat.
5.48. be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, Luke
1.6. walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless,
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil.
3.14, 15. I press ^o the mark; let the perfect be so minded: with many the
like. Now he that says there is, can be no such thing, does, in effect, give
the lie to God, Christ and the A postle, as if they had called and exhorted
unto they knew not what, as though there had been no such thing of which they
spoke.

2. He is an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger from the
covenants of promise ( Ephesians. 2.12.) the covenant of God being this, that we
shall know his judgments, and Do them, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

3. He denis Gods All Sufficiency, with which he encouraged Abraham to
perfection Genesis 17.1. Is not God greater then the devil, 1 John 4.4. and
stronger then the strong man? Luke 11.21, 22

He disparageth the Grace of God in Christ, and all his most glorious and
blessed Attributes, his Mercy, Power, Justice, Truth, faithfulness etc. ^s
might easily be demonstrated.

He overthrows Religion and a godly life; he does (by consequence) dissuade and
dishearten from all strictness and exactness of conversation, and a circumspect
walking in this present world. For v^^o w^ll set himself with all diligence,
industry and intention of sp^^^, to comprehend that which is not to be
comprehended? who will go about to s^ek that in this world, which (...) only
to be found in another? what wider gate to security, ^^leness, lukewa^^^ess,
indifferency in Religion, profaness, avarice, murders, (...) ^^rections,
rebellion, treason, disobedience, an^ (...) manner of wickedness, then to deny
perfect obedience in this life? by (...) principle and position, Master Goffe
may excuse himself ^^om doing as he would be done unto: And Colonel Goffe may
^^stifie his force and violence, his treachery and affront which ^e has or
shall offer against any power, authority and government, whether past or
present, under pretense of making that up hereafter in heaven, of which (...)
comes short here on earth.

I charge not the Colonel further then he has made himself guilty. There be
two Acts of Parliament (which were once taken for law) the one entitled, An
Act prohibiting the proclaiming any person* etc. passed Jan. 30. 1648. the
other entitled, An Act for the abolishing of the Kingly Office, etc. passed
March 17. 1648. Let him read those Acts; if they condemn him not for a Traitor,
neither do I accuse him. All that I say, is this, He that is so forward,
active, and bold, to overturn one state, will not be afraid to subvert another,
upon the like ends and advantages: but a wise Prince will be watchful over such
men; he that loves the treason, does not care so much for the traitor. Let the
subject learn obedience in all submission, and the superior will sit secure,
whilst he does serve the Lord with fear, and rejoices with trembling. Psalm.
2.11.
So let all our Rulers do, O Lord.

6. He makes void the glorious cross and blessed death of our Lord Jesus
Christ. As if that were not able to destroy all enmity, Ephesians. 2.15, 16. to pull
down strong holds, to cast down imaginations, to subdue every thought, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. to cure all diseases, to defend every assault, Psalm. 103.3. and
107.20. Mat. 4.23. Joh. 5.4. Ephesians. 6.11, 16. Surely

The bloody cross of my dear Lord Mr G. H.

Is both my physic and my sword.
Has Christ all power in heaven only? is it not given to him in earth also,
Mat. 28.18. to forgive sins even here on earth? Mat. 9.6. will he have us
glorified with himself hereafter, Joh. 17. and will he not by himself sanctify
us here throughout, wholly in spirit soul, and in body too? 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24.
that he may present us unto God (not imperfectly, and with half obedience, but)
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. none but belly-gods,
and earthly-minded men are enemies to the cross of Christ. Can we destroy our
selves, Phil. 3.18, 19,
and cannot he save us? Hos. 13.9. are we stronger then he? can sin pollute,
and cannot he purge and purify? Zach. 13.1. can the devil lay snares and take
us, and cannot God find and break them? Psalm. 124.7. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. 1 John
3.8. He that shall dispense with plenary obedience, and total mortification,
does (like the Pope in Venice) indulge the Stews and whorehouses of men's
unclean and filthy hearts: like Spies of Canaan, he brings up as evil report on
the promises, power, and attributes of God, when he tells men that in striving
after perfect obedience, they do but Sisyphi saxum volvere, labor in the fire,
and spend their strength for naught; they set upon an unfeasable and
unarcheivable design: they will be like those silly women (2 Timothy 3.7.) ever
learning, but never attaining. Has this doctrine of iniquity any fellowship
with righteousness? Psalm. 94.20. woe to the foolish prophets that have seen
nothing, Ezekiel. 13.3. that have nothing but the instruments of a foolish and
Idol-shepherd, the decisions, consultations, determinations, conclusions, and
results of Synods, Convocations, Councels, Zach. 11.15, 17.
Assembly of Divines (so called) to make up a confession of their faith, and
model of doctrine, for them to deceive others withal.

The Lord, by the prophet Jeremy, complains of and reproves such as did
pilfer, beg, borrow and steal his word from their neighbor: these he disowns
as none of his prophets, Jer. 23.30, 31, 32.
and sets himself against them, cursing their Ministry with barrenness and
unprofitableness to the people. No marvel if men be generally such starvlings
in Religion and godliness, when their Pastors feed them with chafe instead of
wheat, and drive them to broken cisterns instead of the fountain of living
waters; shall Gods field be left for a rock, and the running waters be forsaken
for the strange cold waters? Jer. 18.14.
I say not that it is unlawful to make use of and apply the grave and wise
sayings of good and holy men; but to transgress, and make the commandments of
God of none effect by teaching for doctrines the traditions of men, is too much
like a Scribe and Pharisee, Mat. 15* 3 6, 9. Paul cited Moses and the Prophets,
and heathen Authors too ( Act. 17. Tit. 1.) yet would not have our faith stand
in the wisdom of men* 1 Cor. 2.5. then we trust too much to man, when we preach
or believe that which man commends to us as an article of faith or practice
and cannot find it commended of God, and to which the Scriptures give no
testimony. The wise Scribe, and a good man, brings forth good things out of a
good treasure* Mat. 12.35. and 13.52. the non-perfectionableness of the Saints
and their imperfect obedience, proceeds from the evil treasure of evil men's
hearts, and are not to be found in the good treasure of the Scripture, or a
good man's heart.

I have one caution to cast before Mr. Goffe and all other young and
inconsiderate preachers, viz. Whosoever shall break one of the least commands,
and shall teach men so to do, he shall be called least in the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5.19. it is our Lord and Masters Law; look to it. God has married
faith and love: what he has joined together, let no man put a sunder, Gal.
5.6. faith is the father, love is the mother, obedience the offspring: both
parents are alike impatient of issue, like Abraham and Rachel, Genesis 15.2. and
30.1. That our faith may be perfect in this life (or never) none doubts; and
that our love should be with all the heart, with all the soul, and with all the
strength to God, and without dissimulation, fervently, without mixture, with a
pure heart one to another, is as certain. If Abraham be our father, and Sarah
our mother; Isa. 51.2.
if our faith and hope be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. then we shall purify our selves
according to the pattern in the mount, 1 John 3.3, 4, 5, 6* 7, etc. Our faith,
like Adam, is first formed, out of which our love is taken; our love, like Eve,
is that by which faith works, and becomes fruitful, Gal. 5.6. 1 John 5.2, 3.
this man is not without this woman, nor this woman without this man in the
Lord; but both joined in one spirit, bring forth much holiness and obedience of
life, to the perfecting of themselves in the sight of God. Children in the
Hebrew tongue are called [banim] which in the root signifies to edify or
build up. (...) Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, Psalm. 127.5.
Children are the ornament, beauty, and complement of a family, Psalm. 128. in
them a man is built up, and his name continued, Psalm. 72.17. by works is our
faith made perfect, Jam. 2.22. pure obedience in love, and perfect holiness in
fear, are inseparable accidents, I may say, essential properties of the
adoption: where the promise of the father is really replied upon, the practice
of the Son is undoubtedly performed: for God to be our Father, and for us to
cleanse and perfect our selves in holiness, does not much differ* one is not
far asunder from the other, see 2 Cor. 6.18. and 7.1. where we find small
store of holiness, we may conclude there is but little faith and love; but when
we see holiness in all manner of conversation, we may point out the obedient
children, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17.
who fashion not themselves to their former lusts but to him that calls them.
It Is too presumptuous for any to excuse or mince a duty which God injoyneth to
the full; and too dishonorable to God, to distrust what he has promised. If
the faith of God be within us, the obedience of Christ will not be without us.
He that has no Christ but that without him, needs no devil but that within
him; If Christ be in heaven, and Satan in the heart, no marvel if men live as
if there were nor heaven or hell, nor God or devil, or resurrection from the
dead. Miserable days! when it shall pass for Orthodox doctrine, to dispense
with perfect obedience in us, and rely on a Christ without us. Our fathers
would have blushed at such loose notions, and we their children may bewail the
Apostacy we are fallen into, in the Poets complaint,

Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum pejor avis,
Tulit nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Unhappy times! when ^ransires sins
In parents are brought forth by twins,
Whose children their bad lives exceed,
And leave behind a far worse breed.
Men forsake the good old way of obedience and holiness, wherein the faith of
our fathers walked, and turn aside to the fruitless fancies of new notions,
forming to themselves a faith and works in speculation and discourse only,
denying the power of godliness; Hor.
filthy dreamers, immundo somnia visu nocturnam maculant vestem, who corrupt
themselves in the dark dreams of their night-visions, Jud. 10.
through the ignorance and brutish knowledge of their natural reason and
fleshly wisdom, whereby they glorify not God as God, Romans 1.21
but are vain in their imaginations of him, and their foolish hearts are
darkened; cursed children, seed of the adulterer and whore, generation of
vipers, that eat through the bowels of truth, chasing the new birth (like
Herod) out of their own land and nature, into a strange country, denying the
in-born power and holiness of God;

Which take away the Law, or its best fruits,
As not performable by best recruits.
In vain 'twas writ, man made, and grace distilled,
If by Christ's help it cannot be fullfill'd.
Which say, The Saints may will, not further go:
Does not God grant to will, and then to do?
Which in believers all good works destroy,
While it their fancy fills with this toy,
Faith alone saves: do but this believe,
Do not thy self with further trouble grieve.
Which call the called to security;
Saying None such (though they may step awry)
Can finally or totally relapse:
With such soft pillows some men get long naps:
Which say What hurt does sin? Christ for it was killed;
What need obedience? he has all fulfilled.
Which Satan's kingdom stronger make then Christ,
For not till death his kingdom is dismissed.
Thus death a passive, stronger is then life;
Then Christ himself, to end this ghostly strife.
Go on with this thy Christ, drink, rant, and whore;
He is the purs-bearer, and pays the score:
He is thy Porter, all thy burdens bears;
But all without thee, naught within repairs, etc.
See these verses and the rest of them before the examination of the Assembly
of Divines Faith, written by Master Parker: and read that unanswered (I had
like to say unanswerable) book.

7. Lastly, he that denies full and complete obedience in this life, smells too
rank of Popery, and may be suspected to be of a Jesuitical judgment (which
Master Goffe would be unwilling to own, or be charged with) while he seems to
insinuate a Purgatory hereafter, to purify us from those sins from which we
have not been purged here. If we die imperfect, we cannot rise perfect; as the
tree falls, so it lies. Or can the common death of the elemental body take
away the relics of sin, which were unmortified in the life? then we need not
make such have to repent and amend in our life time, but put it off till death,
and so save a labor, and do all our work at once; in the mean time, eat, drink
and be merry: if death do away sin, who will rise guilty? what wicked man will
not be clean, and good enough to enter into the holy City? no dogs, sorcerers,
liar, etc. shall be kept out. Soft pillows for the elbows. Who would part with
such bedds of Down?

Obedience was required of Christ, in the volume of the book it was written,
Psalm. 40.7. it was learned and performed by him, Heb. 5.8. Joh. 5.30. Phil.
2.8. and recompensed to him, verse. 9. the height of his obedi^nce was on the
cross; let us be his disciples: and Luke 9.23. let us take up his Baptism
indeed and in truth, and be planted into his likeness, Romans 6.3, 5, 8, etc.
read the chapter. If we be willing, and love not our lives unto the death, we
shall eat the good of the land, and be free from the curse of the earth, Isa.
1.19. Romans 6.7. Rev. 12.11. The Lord works (as some say, Lammagnanehu) for
the humble or obedient. Prove. 16.4
He that is blind, and cannot see the salvations of God, the cross will cure
his eyesight: vinegar and gall will make a good Collyrium, or medicine for the
eyes: the mystery of Christ's sharp and bitter passion, is the history of our
sweet and pleasant possession: buy this eye salve ( Rev. 3.18.) it will do as
much good, as that of Tobit to his fathers eyes. Tob. 11.11 Luke 19.4.
Zacheus could not see Jesus till he climed into the Sycomore-tree, that is,
the tree of a foolish fig or fruit, signifying the cross of Christ, which to
the Jew, that has too much false righteousness, is a stumbling block, and to
the Gentile, 1 Cor. 1.23
that has too much fleshly wisdom, is foolishness. The garment wherewith the
Divinity of Christ is clothed and covered, is his humanity; the hem or lowest
part thereof, is his humiliation unto the death of the cross: by this, the
bloody issue of our diseased and corrupt nature is stopped and cured, Mat. 9.20.
and 14.36. 1 John 1.7. the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. There be
too many that slight the inward cross of Christ, as an Allegorical and
Seraphical doctrine, looking upon it as foolishness, being not able to endure
sound doctrine, that which is spiritualized and brought home, and close to the
conscience, because it lays the ax to the root of the tree, and makes the young
man sorrowful, Mat. 3.10. and 19.22. but know you, that there is no clear fight
of Christ, but from the cross.

Blessed be the death and cross of Christ, by which the world, Gal. 6.14.
and all that is of the world may be crucified unto us, and we unto it; and
thanks be unto God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ;
therefore, honored Sir, be you steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.57, 58.
forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Farewell, Yours in and for the Lord, HEN. PINNELL.
Brinkworth July 18. 1654.
Postscript.
SIR,
I Could gladly make a retractation of what I have written; not that I am
conscious of overlashing with my pen, or overcharging any person: but because
the occasion has put me into an habit too Martial, and made me appear more
Polemical then I desire. Jer. 15.10.
Woe is me that my mother has born me a man of strife and of contention. I was
content to lie, like the flint, with my fire within my self: but the steely
tongues of men tipped with unrighteous censures and hard speeches against me,
have knocked and forced the fire abroad. If any spark catch and kindle to a
flame, to enlighten some, and burn others; let those bless God, and these thank
themselves. My purpose has been, for many months and some years past, to have
undertaken a task of another nature, and as much useful; but my unsettled
condition has let in so many interruptions and avocations upon me, that I am
discouraged to begin it. I pity wy generation, and would fain be serviceable to
it. I have now lived so many years, as to learn to measure my life by days:
that little (if there be yet any) of my time to come, bids me not be idle: and
that little leisure I have in my short and maintain time, tells me I cannot do
much. The people in four places (though I am neither Parson, Vicar nor Curate)
have some expectation of me; but my bodily infirmities get so much ground of
me, that I think sometimes I shall have enough to do to look to my self.
Whatsoever clamors hereafter arise, I mean not to quell with my pen, but
practice: I bless God I have a conscience and conversation inreadiness to
answer all gainsayers. I resolve (by Gods help) to clime and creep further
into the inward, hidden and secret world; the glimpse I have of it, sets me all
on fire. Let me not go alone, afford me your company, and persuade as many as
you can to go along with us.

Faustum iter and foelix det bonus ille Deus. The God of Truth guide us, and
then ^e shall no^ err: even so Amen.
FINIS.

