THE False FRIEND, Or, the FATE of DISOBEDIENCE.

A TRAGEDY: As it is Acted at the New Theater IN Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mrs. PIX.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Basset, at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, 1699.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COUNTESS OF BURLINGTON.
MADAM,
APPLAUSE, That food of Scriblers, were it mine, would not satisfy my
Ambition; nor should I know half the Transports I feel, at the Honor of
approaching You. The sublimest fancy, when it paints a Herione; Copy's You but
faintly: You have reached the bright Path of Virtue; and there You walk secure.
It wouid be equally a pain for You to descend; as it is for the Vicious, to
shake off their Mire, and Climb. I speak the Sentiments of the whole World; of
all, who are dependant on Your Noble Family; of all, in whatsoever Station; who
can boast the Happiness to know my Lady Burlington.

The past, and the returning Years Connt not a Day, but what is blessed, and
Crowned with some good Action of Yours: This You would hourly hear from every
Joyful Tongue, did not the fear to Offend another Charming Grace (Your Modesty)
deter them. That bashful Attendant is so Nice; it scarce dares Whisper^ to Your
Self, how Good You are. I tremble least I should now Offend; but who can quit
this lovely Theme? Such Virtues should for ever be the Poet's Song; the ablest
Pens should Tune Your Praise; for mean Conceptions Profane such Worth: This
ought to check my Aspiring; and force me silently to Admire, what I cannot
Worthily express. Only herein I am emboldened, that, as You have an Infinity of
Merit; so You have of Goodness. Under that sweet Umbrage I am safe; that gives
me Hopes, You will pardon this Presumption; and permit me, with this Trifle, to
offer my Constant Vows, for the Everlasting Prosperity of Your Ladyship; and
that great Man, whom You Love most; who most Deserves to be Beloved (Your
Lord.) May You both be Blessed in Your Illustrious Race; and long remain the
Darlings of Your Friends, and Fate: Whilst I, at humble Distance, beg leave to
Subscribe my Self,

Madam, Your Ladyship's Devoted Admirer, and Most Obedient Servant, Mary Pix.

PROLOGUE.
By Mr. Hodgson.
AMongst Reformers of this Vicious Age,
Who think it Duty to Refine the Stage:
A Woman, to Contribute, does Intend,
In Hopes a Moral Play your Lives will Mend.
Matters of State, she will not pretend to Teach;
Or Treat of War, or things ahove her Reach:
Nor Scourge your Folly's, with keen Satyrs Rage;
But try if good Example will Engage.
For Precepts often do fail from Vice to win,
And Punishments but harden you in Sin.
Therefore (Male Judges) She prescribes no Rule
And knows it is vain to make Wise Men of Fools.
Lest all those Wholesome Laws that she can give,
You Would think too much below you to receive.
-- That part then of the Reformation,
Which she believes the fittest for her Station;
Is, to show Man the surest way to Charm:
And all those Virtues, Women most Adorn.
First then, -- No Beau can e're Succesful prove,
Narcissus like, who is with himself in Love.
No wretched Miser must e're hope to find,
With Chest's Lok'd up, a Friend amongst Woman kind.
No Drunkard, Fool, Debauchee, or one that Swears,
Can Win a Woman, or beguile her Fears;
But he that is Honest, Generous, and Brave,
That Is Wise and Constant, may his Wishes have.
But Hold, I Would forgot --
You must not be Ill-natured and Unkind,
Moroseness Suits not with their Tender Minds.
They are all soft, as is the Down of Doves,
As Innocent and Harmless are their Loves;
And those Misfortunes which on Men do fall,
To their False Selves they Chiefly owe 'em all.
Did Men Reform, all Women would do well:
In Virtue, as in Beauty they would Excel.
But while each strive the other to Betray,
Both are to Fears and Jealosie's a Prey.
Let not Ill Nature then Reign here to Night,
Nor think you show most Wit, when most you Spite;
But Strive the Beauties of the Play to find,
The Modest Scenes, and Nicest Actions mind,
Then to your Selves, nnd Authress you will be kind.
EPILOGUE.
THE Author, who the Foregoing Scenes has Writ
Designed to show you Nature more than Wit;
Though, one would think no wonder could be greater,
Than to see any Forsake our Leader, Nature.
For She should hold the Lamp, when we Indite,
And Dictate every Thought and Line we Write
Nay, all think they have her Presence and her Light.
When as the Coy Daphne fled from our Apollo,
Nature flies Poets, and in Vain they Follow.
This Offspring still is Jilted worse than he,
Who for a kind soft Nymph, Embraced a Tree;
Yet why this Vain pursuit of her at last,
If she flies Poets, you fly her as fast;
Nay, yo are grown so very Ripe for Satyr,
As much as ye each other Love, ye hate her.
For when did she e're please this Barborous Age,
When all things else have taken on the Stage.
New Bullies, Blustering in Heroic Fustian,
In your Fermenting Masses, raised Combustion.
Anon, we hushed your forward Mood with Battles,
And made our Trumpets, and our Drums your Rattles.
But Gallants, since you are weary grown of these,
Let Humane Nature, Humane Creatures please.
All loose Expressions now are Banished hence,
Our Senses are only Fraught with Innocence.
Virtue Arises
Her Snowy Garment bears a Dazeling white,
Protect ye Beauties, the grace in which ye all delight,
And save the Hapless Lovers you have seen to Night.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr, Bowman, The Viceroy of Sardinia. Mr. Verbruggen, Emilius his Son. Mr.
Scudamore. Brisac, Alias Don Lopez, a Noble man of France. Mr. Thurmond.
Lorenza, a Nobleman of Sardinia. Mr. Hodgson, Bucarius, a General. Mr. Harris,
Roderigo, his Friend.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Barry, Adellaida, Daughter to the Viceroy. Mrs. Bowman, Appamia, a Lady
of Quality, brought up by the Viceroy. Mrs. Bracegirdle, Lovisa, Sister to
Brisac. Mrs. Lawson, Zelide, an Indian Slave. Mrs. Martin, Amidea. Mrs. Howard,
Labret.
Guards, and Attendence.

SCENE, a HALL.

THE False FRIEND, Or, the FATE of DISOBEDIENCE.
ACT I. SCENE I. A Hall.
Enter Emilius, Lovisa, Servants.
Emil. SAFELY we'ave reached Sardinia's Shore
Thou tender, Beauteous kindest Charmer
For which, Blessed be the Bounteous Powers:
Blessed be every Auspicious Star!
But, Oh! What Blessings shall I pour on thee,
Source of my Days! My Life! My Lovisa!
On this pleasing Subject my charmed Tongue would forever dwell,
And wish my Eyes could yet speak more,
To Express thy wondrous Kindness,
My Almighty Love!

Lov. Oh! My Emilius!

Emil. Ha! A Sigh! Thy lovely Eyes shining faintly!
What means This cruel Alteration!
Not fiercest Storms, when the Mad Waves
Danced highest, and, in their surly Sport,
Tossed us from side to side, moved thee thus!
No; Thou were Calm as Innocence: Calm
As Eastern Groves, and with a Smile would Cry:
Fear not; I can Dye with my Emilius!
And now we Ride Securely in the Haven,
What rude Gust dares disturb that Halcyon Bosom,
Where I have Horded all my precious
Stock of Peace, and built my Rest for eve.

Lov. Is it nothing then, to break the strongest Ties;
Ties which even Barbarians hold most Sacred:
Forsake Parents, Family, my Native Land:
Nay worse; leave my Fame at Random:
For the malicious World to Censure; whose
Vile Breath scarce spares the brightest Virtue?
How will it blacken my Errors! Is this
Not worth a Sigh! No; Emilius he is mine;
And he out-weighs 'em all!

Emil. Come to my Heart thou Darling softness
In thy own Mansion Reign. Oh! What
Transporting Pleasures does't thou give,
The earnest of Love's rich Feast, which I, the Happy
I, shall now receive.

Lov. Alas!

Emil. Nay! If thou break'st the Chain, my pleased
Imagination forms, I shall suspect thy Love;
For I appeal to Thee, with all my Foes (thy
Coldest Guards about thee) if, to a Tittle I
Have not obeyed thy hard Conditions: When
In France, I snatched thee from thy Destined
Bridegroom? It Is true; we were so close persu'd,
We scarce had time to Tie the Sacred Knot our selves:
I just could call thee Wise, my Charming Bride!
You Enjoined, and I obeyed, though my Heart
Rolled in Fire, I beheld thee like an Anchorite,
But now the cruel Task is over, and I will Seize thee,
Lock thee in these fond Arms; Warm thee
With my Sighs; and fill thee with the Fury of my Love.

Lov. Hear me Emilius -- though unwillingly
I wake thee from thy Dreams of Bliss.
Yet I have Fears, that wrack my Soul!
And to whom, but thee, should I disclose 'em?
Therefore I must be heard.

Emil. What, would my Angel say? Or why
Do ye repeat the Injunction to be heard?
Did I e're fly the Music of thy Tongue,
Or listen to it, with less respect:
Than what we pay to Oracles Divine?

Lov. You have brought me to Sardinia,
Where Your Father's Lord -- You are his
Eldest, and his only Hopes -- In the Spanish Court,
He no doubt, has chose some Princess,
To prop his Name from Sinking, and Bless
Your Genial Bed: What will then
Become of me!

Emil. My Love!

Lov. I have no Witness of my Noble Birth
[Pointing to her Woman. But that poor helpless Wretch -- --
Nay, should there be Enquiry made,
My angry Father, for my Disobedience
May disown me -- If they by Threats,
Or Prayers, Draw you too on their side:
Then I shall be left Exposed in this
Inhospitable Isle; perhaps wounded
With opprobrious Names; Called a
Wandering loose One; a wanton Mistress;
Save me Emilius, from that Thought --
Save me quick: It tears my Heart asunder!

Emil. Why do thou Wound me with thy grondless
Fears -- thy most unkind Suspicions?
Yet, if there is power in Words, thou shall be
Satisfied -- Hear ye Just Avengers!
Hear this kneeling Imprecation --
If e're my Heart incline to any other Beauty --
If to the last ruddy drop, that Animates this Frame
I not protect thee, my dearest Part my Wife --
If I am not proud to own, and honor thee in All
Prospirities, or worst Extremities: Let me
Live the most detested of my Race --
Hated by all good Men: And Cursed by Heaven!

Lov. Hold my Dear Lord!

Emil. No! Upon this Theme I will Exceed; and yet
Not talk too much -- Winds bear my Words --
And Treasure 'em amongst their blewest Plagues,
And dash 'em back upon this Perjured Head:
When I, in thought, Forsake her!

Lov. No more! I will, I will believe thee! --
Emilius has said it: And Truth it self
Will sooner Change then he!

Emil. to a Servant. I attend her here --
[Enter a Servant, and whispers Emilius. -- The Lady (my Blessing to
Whose Protection I shall Commit thee,
Till I Have wrought my Father to a Consent.

Lov. Is she good, and kind, Emilius?

Emil. She was my Mother's valued Care; lest
By her Parents young: Ever bred
With my Sister, and my self.
Large are her Possessions in both the Indies and in Spain,
Yet all Matches she refuses, and in my Father's Court
Exhausts her vast Revenues, What, e're Requests to him I made,
By her they were conveyed; by her obtained. -- She comes,
Retire a Moment, whilst I relate the Story of our Loves.

Lov. Which should she disapprove --

Emil. Impossible, she will be pleased, indeed she will
[Leads her out and returns. All shall be well.
Enter Appamia, and Zelide.
App. Emilius! Could you think our Joys
For your return would, by Surprise,
Receive addition: That you gave
No warning of the Blessing.

Emil. Oh my best Friend; most Excellent,
Of Women! Friendship was Languid
Till you received the Sacred Fire, and raised it
To those Heights, Natures almighty Master
First Ordained: Before designing Fraud,
And little Arts were used!

App. On any Theme you speak well, Emilius,
Though I Would hear nothing, but what relates to your self.

Emil. How much I am obliged, it is Impossible
To say; Yet like honest Debtors, I Would reckon up
The mighty Sum, e're I run further in the Score.

App. Hold, Emilius, I conjure thee hold!
The pleasure of serving you, Rewards
My utmost Care.

Emil. Oh! You are All Goodness; and her Fears
Were Vain.

App. [starting.] Her! What Her?

Emil. Nay Start not, Madam; -- To the
Noble Stock of Friendship I have only added
A little tender Branch; which Nourished under you
Shall kindly pay you back with Faith, and Love
Like mine.

App. What can Emilius mean?

Emil. In France, it was my Fate to see a Lady,
Of whose Beauty I shall forbear to speak,
Because your Eyes will be the Judge -- It is
Enough, to say, she caught my Heart.
In Everlasting Chains. -- In the Gallantry,
The French Court allows, I found daily means.
To tell my fair Saint, the Victory her Charms
Had won; and she at Length, Listened with
A Relenting Ear; drew me from the Terrors
Of Despair; for mine was no Common
Wandering Fire, which Time, or Absence, or
Some other Beauty might have Cured: There
Was no Medium in the firceness of my Love:
I must be the most wretched of
Mankind, or the Happiest.

App. Oh Emilius! Were these the Studies
Thou were sent to Learn? Is thy
Father's Care, and my incessant Kindness
Thus repaid?

Emil. Confusion to my Hopes! Appamia Weeps!
My Friend, and my Protectress Weeps!
At her Emilius's Joys!

App. No! -- Pray Sir proceed -- Zelede --
Thy Arm -- I am, Sick o'th sudden!

Emil. Madam! --

App. Nay, I beseech you Sir, go on -- Is
Your Choice of Noble Birth.

Emil. As any France can boast of.

App. Why was your Father, then not made
Acquainted? Why, in that Point alone,
Were your Letters sent to me? Still silent.

Emil. I did design it all; when from Lovisa's Mouth
I knew my Fate; but, Oh! Just as with
Down-cast Eyes, a blushing Face, trembling Hand,
Her soft Breath stole through the Rosy Doors
In broken Accents; Words half kind, and half
Concealed: Just as my Ravished Heart
Received the Blessing, and warm Ecstasies
Took place of Chilling Fears: When
Every Thought, and every Wish, and
Every Look was Love: --

App. [aside.] Good Heaven! How eagerly he talks!

Emil. Even in this perfect State of Bliss,
Her cruel Father was Bartering my
Inestimable Fair: Bargained with a
Neighboring Lord, for Dirt, and Acres;
Sold my Goddess like a Common Nothing
Of the Sex; that World of Beauty, for which
My aching Heart had paid a faithful Slavery,
Must be thrown into the fordid Arms of One
Who Gazed not on her Eyes, but on the Gold!

App. Have to the Issue; you dwell too long
Upon Description.

Emil. In fine, the Marriage Day was Set, but
I resol'v'd upon the Bridegroom's Death,
Or to receive my own -- when my
Kind dear One, helped by her Confident,
Escaped; Gave me her self; with the
Rich Prize I fled; found a good Priest,
Who made us One; and here as fully
Trusting you: Iv'e brought her my Virgin
Bride -- Receive her Madam, as the
[Enter Lovisa. Heart of your Emilius: For every Injury
That Is offered her, I shall feel it there.

App. Like that, she shall be Cherished; and find
No other Usuage, then the Heart of Emilius.
From me deserves.

Lov. If, Madam, you have never felt Love's Power,
I from your Prudence must expect severest
Censures for my Rashness.

App. Emilius has a bewitching Tongue
His Person too, I think may Justify
A Lady's Fondness.

Emil. Your Kindness makes ye Partial -- See,
How I trust That Kindness, when I
Deliver up to you this Rich Gift of Fate.

Lov. You talk, as if you were to leave me long,
Tell us rather the Method -- what is your porpose?

Emil. I Will to my Father's Palace, which adjoyns, and
Learn how to proceed; begging my best Friend,
My dear Appamia this Day, to Conceal my
Blessing from prying Eyes; from any
Gazers, but in whom she dares confide,
At Night I will return.

App. Your Sister will prove your Advocate;
She loves you, and has great Power
Over your Father's Will; you ask not,
After her -- But one in Love,
Like you, must be forgiven, if;
His Relations, and Friends are all forgot.

Lov. Wrong not your Friend, most Charming
Of your Sex; for many pleasing Hour,
Have I heard Emilius recount your Virtues,
And the fair Adellaida's: Nor Madam,
Look on worthless me, with disdainful Eyes:
Since I hope not many Leagues from hence,
I have a Noble Brother.

App. In Sardinia?

Lov. In the Court of Spain: Count Brisac.

App. The Count Brisac.

Lov. Do ye know him Madam?

App. No; I have heard of him; and slightly
Saw him, when he met Their Majesty's
In their last Progress.

Emil. I never saw him; but have from Fame,
A Generous Character; and hope, when
We do meet, it will be like Brothers.

App. No doubt on it; but if I might Advise --

Emil. Call it Command.

App. You should not too suddenly Declare your Marriage;
If this Lady can Brook a short Retirement:
I Will Manage it for the good of both.

Lov. Oh! I could live in Caves, or unfrequented Deserts:
So I now and then, might see Emilius!

App. Every Minute, it is but a Gallery parts us
From the Palace; his Duty paid to the Viceroy,
What hinders but he in few Hours, may return:
His Familiarity here will be easily Excused.

Emil. Blessed be the Breath that leads me on to Bliss;
The dear Indulgent Guide to what my Heart desires --
E're a Balmy Slumber has half refresh't
My Love, I Will fly to wake thee with my Kisses.

Lov. Oh! Do not think Sleep, or Rest will close
These watery Eyes, or ease this Throbbing Heart,
Till I behold thy Face again!

App. Emilius, I am considering farther --
Suppose you passed this Day Disguised;
Or to your Sister only made a Discovery;
Then she, an^ I might break the Matter
To my Lord, and hear how he resents it
E're he knows the bottom.

Emil. With all my Heart; that way I shall spare
The welcomes of Crouding Friends, which
Would, at this time detain me from my Wishes
My long Absence, and unexpected Arrival
Has passed me hitherto unknown.

App. Stay not with Adellaida to tell your Story,
Only learn Intelligence, and leave me to Explain ye.

Emil. I will -- One look -- one Smile, and I am gone.
[to Lovisa.
Lov. Forgive my Fears!

Emil. Which shall be short, as my Return is Swift -- From thee
With heavy Footsteps unwillingly I move
But I shall fly to meet again my Love.
[Exit.
App. Zelide, Conduct this Fair Traveller to
My Alcove. Repose, I am sure, is requisite,
After your Fatigues.

Lov. I will retire; not to Sleep,
But my dear Emilius, think on thee:
When our Thoughts please, Solitude's Felicity
[Exit Lovisa,
App. When our Thoughts please, Solitude's Felicity! Zelide,
O ye Just Powers! Is this proportioned Right!
Must hers Transport; whilst mine, like
Hurricans, scatter the laboring Brain, that
Forms 'em, into a Thousand painful Atoms?
I Will have no more on it; but fold my Arms, and
Fix my Eyes; and stupifie the rolling Torments
Till I am senseless grown: A Statue,
Stiff, and Motionless!
Re-enter Zelide.
Zel. How do you, Madam?

App. Well; my Eyes are Dry, and Heart is still.

Zel. I am glad you bear it so.

App. Why, Faithful Creature, why do weep?
Have I lost ought? Can I complain?
It seems, he did not know I loved.

Zel. True Madam.

App. Oh! Falser, Baser, than his whole
Dissembling Race -- He knew it well,
And bronght his Minion here, to Brave me
With his Scorn -- I must prepare the Bridal
Bed; with Leaves of Roses Deck the downy
Pillows! Oh! Barbarity.

Zel. Return it Madam; Disdain, the Disdainer;
To his Father's Palace; send the Fugitive;
And think of him no more. Is there.
A Grandee, even near the Throne, but Courts
Your Favor? If this ill-plac'd Love has got too near
Your Heart, go to the charming Western Climes, and
Reign a Princess there, as the vast Donation of your
Parents left ye' -- you mind not Madam, what I say!

App. Indeed I do not. Am I ugly, Zelide; very ugly?

Zel. Not Michael Angelo could Paint a siner Face.

App. Foul, as thy Flattery! Yet I believe thou
Art faithful; though I like it not Expressed this way --
What could he think my Letters meant; or
What the Mighty Sums, by me Remitted, to
Keep their Grandeur up?

Zel. He thought not on ye Madam; his
Eyes were taken up with a fair Fool,
That never had obliged him.

App. Ha! -- I begin to wake -- --
What was it, but slighted Love, made Medea,
Prove a Fury? doubtless her Breast was,
Once as soft, as Fond, as Innocent as mine;
As free from black Revenge, or Dire Mischiefs --
Rise ye Furies! Instead of Tresses, Deck me
With your Curling Snakes! -- For
I will sting 'em all to Death!

Zel. Here are hundreds will obey your Orders.

App. No; it shall be done without a Noise --
How quick is Hell Invoked! The
Seeds of Ruin grow pregnant, the very Moment
They are Sown! -- know thou, Zelide,
That Woman (I hate to Name Lovisa) --.
He did it with so much Tenderness --
Know thou I say, Brisac's her Brother?
And know thou too, Brisac Don Lopez?

Zel. What? That Don Lopez whom Adellaida,
This Morning Married: I know in part the Story:
Dear Madam inform me fully.

App. Yes. In the late Progress, made with the King
And Queen, wherein the Duke d' Alberquerque,
My Uncle, took Adellaida, and my self, to meet
The Court, there we saw Brisac, Adellaida charmed him;
I (see how Fate returns it) favored their Amors,
And he followed to Sardinia, and was Received as my Relation;
Don Lopez a Man of Quality, in the West Indies.

Zel. Why might not his pretentions have been
Allowed as the Lord Brisac?

App. Oh! it is just the Counter-blow of Fate!
Neither of the Fiery Youths had power to stay
The Spanish Grave proceedings; and so
They Are both undone -- and what am I!

Zel. Happy, and Blessed! Fortune's largest Gifts are yours.

App. No, Zelide, No! -- Come near, and I will
Tell thee what a Wretch I am!
Let thy Eye run over all the miserable things
Thou have Seen, or Read of: yet let thy Fancy
Make it worse -- See
Leprous Beggars Prisoners Ten Fathom Deep,
In New Drained Wells; and Ingendring Toads
With all their bloatted Brood crawling over 'em!

Zel. Oh Horrid!

App. Youth Buried alive in Strength and Vigor;
Parents by their Rebellious Children Torn;
Yet all this cannot equal mine.

Zel. Strange Disposition of our Fate! --
The Great; for little Causes, make themselves
Unfortunate.

App. Is it nothing then, to see another Clasp him?
Oh! I am lost, if I look that way!

Zel. Throw Emilius from your thoughts, and you
Are Happy.

App. What after being the loved Image there!
Since first they took an Image in --
Forget him -- when he Anticipated my
Earlyest Prayers, and was my Evening Theme,
My Mid night Wakings have Remembered him;
Made the join to wish his Safety:
And talked away the Starry Hours, till thou have,
Nodding, asked, what I said last -- weary with
Tormenting thee, have flown from my Bed,
To Trees and Shadows; Breathed his Name there --
Methought I beheld his goodly Mien, in
Whispering Boughs heard the soft Accents of
His Voice -- and Died upon the Sound -- Oh!

Zel. This way, you never will forgett him.

App. 'T was the last Sighs of my Expiring Love;
And from the Death of that I Rise
Another Woman -- The gentle Cords,
Twisted by Venus's self, that held my Heart,
Are Broke; and in their Stead, Nemesis has
Writ his Fate in Bloody Characters.

Zel. In all things I Obey.

App. I know thou woot, without Enjoining.

Zel. Command me then.

App. Bucarius, our General, (you know) my Lover,
Hates the Viceroy, and fears the return of brave
Emilius, Mistrusts the Governor should
Supplant him in the Court of Spain, purchase
His Honors for his most deserving Son, this
Will make him Eager to Cross the Noble Youth
In his Designs, it shall be so; --
Warn him hither; He sits my purpose:
Give Adellaida,
From me, Notice to speak with Caution, to her Broher,
And let my Servants be in readiness, should my
Design fail, in the deep Scheme I have laid,
I am sure I have my Rival in my Power;
And if she scapes, may I be only wretched --
Observe me Zelide -- tho I fear we both must fall.

Zel. I am Content when you are pleased.

App. O Faithful Slave! India alone can breed thy Fellow!

Zel. I was a Slave till your goodness raised me
To your Bosom, which when Death frights me from
May I be a Slave again!

App. If now my Native softness I forego;
And Plunge my self in everlasting Woe:
Let none my Black, and Guilty Annals see;
Or if they do: Charge Love; but pity me.

ACT II.
Enter the Viceroy, Adellaida, Don Lopez, Lorenza.
Vice. MY Adellaida! perfect Image of thy Mother,
Sweet in thy obedience; and of Temper gentle!
Let not thy careful Fathers Precepts be thought
Only the Effects of peevish Age; and thrown
From thy Remembrance like those uneasy
Rules, which unwillingly we hear,
And never design to practice!

Adel. What have I done to merit this Reflection?
Why am I thought so vile? what mighty
Error have I in my Conduct shown, to make my
Noble Father talk thus! to break the Heart
That Is filled with Reverence and Love
Toward him; Great as his tender Care
Can in a grateful Breast produce.

Vice. I accuse thee not my Child; and indeed I
Justly cannot: Thy prudent Youth has outdone
Our Celebrated Matrons, with Joy I have beheld
Your unaffected Care; and trusting to your
Discretion, waved the nicer Customs of our Spain,
And given you Liberty to your utmost wishes.

Adel. Do you repent your kindness, Sir?
Else, why is it mentioned now?

Vice. No. Yet I will tell thee, Adellaida
Foreboding Dreams Torture
My sick Fancy; my Peace of mind is Shockt
Most unaccountably -- thy Brother Emilius,
The other half of my divided-Heart,
And thee are the only Treasures Fate can
Wound me in, for I have learnt
So much Philosophy, to quit Honor, and
Wealth freely, as I would my Garments,
When my wearied-Body longs for rest.

Adel. Our last Letters left my dearest Brother in perfect Health.

Vice. True; they did so --
Yet be Cautious my beloved be Cautions let thy Father's fears
Set thy prudence on the Watch. Hark!
[Horn Winds without. The Huntsman calls --
I Will try in Sports to drive this Melancholy
Apprehensions off -- my Adellaida, Farewell.

Adel. Much Diversion wait on your Highness.

Don Lopez aside to Adel. My Life! Stay but a Moment here:
I Will instantly return,
[Exit.
Adel. I will -- Amida, come hither --
The rest retire -- Did thou not
[Exeunt Women. Tremble at my Fathers Speeches?

Ami. Indeed I was surpised.

Adel. Oh! He Is Divinely good; and the just Powers
Will Reveal my Disobedience; or punish it
With some unforeseen Misfortune --
To boast of Filial Duty, yet break it in
The Highest point -- To give my self away,
Without this Dear Indulgent Father's knowledge --
Horrid Impiety! Unpardonable Crime!

Ami. See the Loved Cause; and Cease your vain Lamentings.
Re-enter Brisac.
Adel. Oh! my Brisac! Why have we been so rash?
Why did we not stay for the Paternal Blessing?
Which would have removed this Cloud
Of Sorrows, that sink all hopes of Dawning Comfort.

Bris. Not Comfort! to me the Hours come Fraught
With Bliss! the very Sound that thou art mine!
That Adellaida's my Bride would Cheer me
In a Dungeon! Oh thou Beauteous
Wonder of the Earth! the Music of whose
Voice alone would charm a Lunatic;
And make the Wrack-stretch'd Slave
Forget his pain, Gazing upon
Thy Eyes Dye pleased; and think his Happiness was there!
Then shall we repine, or fear our Future Fate?
When we Command her Richest store;
When the Blessings of Transporting Love is ours?

Adel. How vain are all the Cautions of our Sex;
How weak the best Resolves of Womankind!
What boots it now to boast, my Eyes never gave
A Glance of kindness, or Ears inclined to the
Delusive stories of my Numerous Lovers --
I stayed but till the Fated Spoiler came
Then, at Random, Staked my Heart, my Liberty;
Whatever I had prized before:
And only sighed, when I could give no more!

Bris. Oh Adellaida! Why do thou please so well;
That I mistrust the greatness of my Joys; and
Fear, no Mortal must long remain in such
Exalted Happiness -- when thus I grasp
Thy Hand, and look upon thy lovely Face,
My Senses in Alarm, Crowd and hurry
Altogether; the tumultuous Pleasures
Gather round my Heart; and with my utmost
Reason I can scarce determine, whether
This is real, or some Visionary Bliss.

Adel. These are a Bridegroom's Ecstasies. --
But, my Brisac, woo't thou talk
Thus, when, after many Rolling Years,
Thou have lost that Name; when I have lost
The mighty Charm of being new;
Nay, perhaps, when both our Angry Fathers with Hatred
May pursue us; Drive us among humble
Villagers: Thou an Inhabitant of some Barren
Plain; and I the Mistress only of a little Cell:
Woo't thou then revive me with Love like this?
And make our Low-built Cottage Happier far.
Than Palaces, whose Turrets wrap their
Aspiring Tops in Clouds; or Crowded Cities,
Where Ten Thousand lay their Anxious
Heads, and never know such peace as ours!

Bris. All must be Peace near thee; Joy settles
Round thy Habitation; and Blooming
Pleasures spring at thy Loved sight!

Adel. Oh! Thou do talk away the Minutes, forgetting
Our Restraint -- withdraw, or we shall
Be Observed.

Bris. Not till you have Promised --

Adel. What?

Bris. To be this Night at our obliging Friends,
The kind Appania's

Adel. Impossible!

Bris. Most easy. Command your other Women
To retire; then with the faithful Amidea
When all the Court is still, pass the Long-Gallery:
There Is no shadow of a Danger.

Adel. Yet my Heart trembles at this thought?

Bris. Eager Love shall drive thy Causeless Fears
Away. Appania, Pitiful
And kind, as her soft Sex Inspires,
Prepares the Bridal Bed, Adorned with all
The Sweets, that ever Bounteous Nature gave --
But, Oh! What need of Odors, when thon art there?

Amid. Madam, One of the Pages is just Entering.

Adel. Be gone my Lord.

Bris. You will come --

Adel. I think not.

Bris. Those Charming Eyes, my better Friends,
Speak kinder things.

Adel. Then trust to them: and leave me
To Blush alone.

Bris. A Taste of Bliss, -- it is Sweet, as Health or Liberty:
It glides through every Vein; and Centers at my
Heart; Yet will I try to gain another Hour, else
Shall I hate the slow passing Day, repine at
The All Chearing Sun, and dye with Eager Expectation
Of the Friendly Night, Night Sacred to Lovers Joys
And Covert to the Blushing Bride; for Oh
What place, in Absence can my Spirits cheer,
When all my Ravished Heart admires is here?
[Exit. Enter a Page.
Page This Note from the Princess Appamia;
Also a Gentleman, who beggs to speak with you
In Private.

Adel. Reading. Mention your Marriage but with Caution;
Let me see you, E're you name the Happy Man!
You Will be pleasing surpised: I Will say no more,
Lest I forestall it. Yours,
Appamia.
Have! Admit the
Stranger; then let none interrupt us --
Why does Appamia Write in Riddles?
Enter Emilius.
Emil. Madam --

Adel. Nay; no Set Speeches -- I know thee --
By all the Blessings of this day, It Is he --
He himself, my own, my dear, My loved
Emilius -- Oh! Brother! what do the
Bounteous Heavens mean by this profuse Addition?

Emil. Adellaida!

Adel. I will not stop, nor ask a Reason for thy Disguise,
Or odd appearance; but talk wildly on,
And rest Secured I have thee here!

Emil. My Sister -- yet still the Dearer Name's behind --
My Friend! Blood is the Tie of common
Souls; a Sordid Earthly Link -- Friendship!
The Noble Workmanship of Heaven!

Adel. Art thou returned thou Wanderer!

Emil. I am.

Adel. Yes, Yes; I see thou art, my pleased Eyes
Behold thee not Altered, nor Estranged,
Thy Looks their wonted kindness bear; and I am blessed.

Emil. My Adellaida, I beg thee cease
Help and Assist me with thy utmost Power.

Adel. Is there a Power in me to serve Emilius!
And am I not Commanded?

Emil. Without my Fathers License, I have
Ventured back -- I prithee Sister, choose
Some Auspicious Hour to Reveal it --
Nay go farther yet my Sister; let him
Suppose I am Hardened grown in Disobedience;
Have made a bold disposal of my self,
Without Consulting him, from whom I had
My Being -- Then if his Fury Rise (as much
I fear it will) with all thy winning Sweetness,
(Melting, and soft) Curb the just Tempest --
Plead for thy Brother; as I would do for Adellaida.

Adel. Oh Sir!

Emil. Ha! What mean these Ominous Tears? --
It Is Strange! I cannot mention the Blessing of
My Life; the Business of my Love, to my
Best Friends: but strait I meet the Face
Of Sorrow -- Oh Adellaida! Had thou
To me committed ought of this Import:
I would not thus have Checked thy Blooming Hopes!

Adel. Twins were we in the Womb, and since onr Birth
By our Father equally Beloved; for my poor
Mother died E're we could Taste her kindness --
Both too, I think have trod the Paths of Virtue;
Both aimed at the rich Standard of all
Generous minds, Immortal Honor --
But if both have failed --

Emil. In what?

Adel. In Duty, Brother -- If Love has Broke
The Holy Ramparts down; and lest us Exposed,
Like the first Pair: Will our Adhering to
Each other Avert the Wrath of Heaven,
And our great Parent?

Emil. Exposed the Wrath of Heaven! --
What have thou done, my better half?

Adel. Even that rash thing, I guess you guilty of --
Which I should never have dared to own,
Had you not by Example
Taught me boldness -- --
Than Gordian Knot
Which few Escape, and yet by fewer is easy made
By me is Tied, without my Father's knowledge --
I am Married -- -- think thou my Brother,
What an Advocate, you have chose, whose
Every Argument, used for you, bears for her self,
The same Validity, and Weight!

Emil. What strange Game of Fortune's this?
The more I think, the more I am Confused.

Adel. Yet you are a Man; and will, I am sure; look Danger
Boldly in the Face: But I, a Woman, fearful
As a Hind, when the full Cry is up; and all are Bent
Upon the Slaughter -- therefore I beg, when the
Discovery's made, you will be my Protector, and
Prove a Brother; tho by an Angry Father I Am forsaken.

Emil. Oh Adellaida! To look too far, is wild amaze --
Hush then our Faults, and let us talk no more --
Let us forget this Interview till to morrow --
And if thou have such a Prospect, as my pleased Fancy
Paints: No Suffering can outweigh the Blissful Hours,
'Twixt the Setting, and the Rising Sun.

Adel. Promise only, that you will Love my Husband;
That My Father shan'not force,
Your Noble Arm against him, and I am satisfied.

Emil. I do.

Adel. Nay, but you shall Swear.

Emil. What would thou have me Swear?

Aeol. Kneel thus with me, and Swear; that as
I Will prove saithful to your Beauteous Choice
Fulfilling every wish, and word of hers,
So you will protect, and love the Lord,
That Rules your Sister's Heart.

Emil. I Swear I will, but why so nice a fear. When I injure him,
Fate Deeper Wound the darling my Soul is fond of -- Ha!

Adel. Why start you Brother?

Emil. Methinks, as thus we kneel, thus
Strengthening each other in highest
Disobedience: Red hissing Bolts
Are forming to Consume us!

Adel. Alas Emilius!

Emil. 'T was a Cross thought -- But let all
Be forgot, as these past Moments -- Name me not
Nor think of me, till next we meet;
Then Appamia shall direct us. I hear the
Huntsman's Horn; and guess my Father
Is returning -- No word of me I beg.

Adel. My Tongue I will Command -- But my thoughts are
[full of thee,
As thine, I hope, sometimes remember me.
[Exit severally. Enter Viceroy, Lorenza; Attended.
Vice. The Lowering Heaven's all Sullen as the Fate
I fear, Conspire to Increase this most unwelcome
Load upon my Drooping Spirits! The Day,
Lorenzo, which was as fair at our up-rising,
As Gaudy Nature could put on, is now reverst;
The Sun Wrapped up in Sable Clouds, Seems
To hasten his Delightful Course; and long
To Set in Darkness!

Lor. Such are the Joys of Humane kind;
Uncertain, as the Seasons! So Fortune Tempts us
With a Smiling Face; and (in a Moment) Sickness,
Death, or Cruel Disappointment Blasts
Our growing Expectations!

Vice. True, Lorenza; yet thou complain'st not
By Experience, or the weight of Sorrows:
But like the Common Vogue of the World;
That still Crios out, The Times are hard.
Fate grows blinder; more unjust than ever,
With a Knavish Partial Hand Scatters
Her Favors: Missing none but the Deserving!
This Complaint the present Age always thinks
Is new: When (alas!) their Forefathers
Always said the same. --
But prithee, Lorenza, leave thou such
Affectation -- Thy Fortune's large; Thy
Character is good; Noble thy Birth;
And all the Blessings of a prosperous Youth, Attend thee.

Lor. My Gallant Friend! Venerable Governor!
Say, Rather all the Curses.

Vice. How!

Lor. The Wretch that in a Raging Fever Lies,
Whose parch'd-up Soul Hunts round the Burning
Clay, wherein it is Consigned, and sighs but for a
Cool retreat: were he Lord of the Universe,
Would he not give it all for Liquid Draughts
Of Quenching Water; Sound his Big Titles,
In his Ears; Disclose his Hoarded Wealth;
Lull him with Enchanting Songs; Surround him
With the Various Pleasures, Luxury in Health,
And Power Invented; would this make him
Happy? No! Like me amidst the hateful
Bustle, He Would beg for Ease, or Death.

Vice. Folly, and Madness! Thou have no cause.

Lor. Not Cause! Is not all the Happiness my Heart
Can guess at, or my mind can Frame, Treasured
In Beauteous Adellaida? And does not the
Disdainful fair still view me with relentless Eyes!
Like the Coy Daphne, Fly my Loathed pursuit
Shun me, as she would Infection! O must Accursed!
Hated by Adellaida, Why do I Live? Why Drag
This Irksome Being, round a World, where
Nothing else can please!

Vice. Far from thy Soul be such a thought my Son!
She hates the not; but fearful, unknowing yet
Mankind, will only try thy Faith, e're
She, for Life Surrender.

Lor. Oh! had I grounds for that kind hope: I Would not
Exchange the Prospect of such Bliss, to be
Spains Monarch, or the United Worlds!

Vice. Have you not my Approbation? and is she not
The Pattern of Obedience? I own (won by her
Sweetness) I did promise not to force her
Inclinations; but I know she would as
Soon forgo her Honor, as Contradict my will

Lor. That Don Lopez, the lately arrived Kinsman
Of your fair Charge -- -- Oh forgive my Jealousy?

Vice. Nothing but her Friendship to Appamia.
At the return of my beloved Emilius, I hope
To fix that Lady, and all her Fortunes, in my Family,
Direct me heaven, but in the Disposal of those two choice blessings
Thou have given (my Children) and what e're Probations is
Fit beside, shall be received without a Murmer! [thought

Lor. Auspicious be the Moment, that we offer up
Our Prayers! Grant me good Heaven, my Love!
I ask no more.

Vic. Search; my Lorenza; find this darling Mistress out;
Fall at her Feet; and Breath thy faithful Vows:
I Will follow; and my persuasions add: This kind Force
Will Storm her gentle Breast; and touch that
Heart, whieh seems Impenitrable.

Lor. Oh Love! Thou charming little God, dwell in my Eyes,
And hang upon my Tongue, with Honey-dropping
Eloquence! Steal through her Ears; and thrill into her Heart.
Till She at lash the Almighty Rapture know:
To please her self; and ease her Lover's Woe!
[Exeunt. Enter Apamia and Zelide.
App. Remember Zelide, each particular
We'ave from Lovisa Learned.

Zel. Fear not Madam; my Memory shall be
A faithful Register to serve you.

App. Easy, and plain her Words --
An honest Freedom ran through her Narration. --
And am I Doomed to Ruin this Artless Innocence?

Zel. Blessed be these Reflections! Cherish these thoughts;
Coutinue Madam, as free from Guilt
As is Lovisa.

App. But shall she then possess Emlius?
Shall these Cursed Eyes behold the Hateful
O ject of their meeting Loves! See the Gay
Years Circle round with flowing Pleasure?
Whilst I despair! No, rather gape wipe, thou Earth
And swallow them or me -- to bear us all
The Burden is too great!

Zel. Still I am your Slave; and it is my fear for you;
For your dear Safety only, make me wish
You Would move no farther.

App. Yes; I will on; and give 'em back the Wracks,
I feel -- Sure it is but Justice --
The Earl d Englesac; he was the Man,
Her Father chose for whom the Nuptuals were prepared,

Zel. Right Madam.
Enter Page.
Page The Lord Bucarius waits your Pleasure

App. Admit him, yet stay, come back, Zelide
Whither am I going, can I decree Emilius Death
And Live? Yes; for he is Dead to me already --
But can I dehold the noblest Form, Nature
In all her Workings, e're produced; or,
Joining Art rendered Exquisite, a cold Lump
Of Clay: The Immortal Soul Hunted by
Violence, from her lovely Dwelling.

Zel. Think well Madam; for after Death,
Repentance is too late!

App. What is it that Staggers my Resolves --
Avaunt thou soft, Intruding Pity!
Let my wild Fancy view their Scenes of
Mutual Love; and Fire my just Revenge!
Ha! Methinks I see their glowing Lips;
Which thurst to meet their close Embraces;
Where their beating Hearts keep time;
Their Arms are Revetted together!
Part 'em ye Powers; part 'em! Set Seas, Olimpick Hills
And all the Lumber of the Earth between 'em! -- Oh!

Zel. Dear Madam Cease!

App. I will be Calm, as the still Waters; when scarce.
A Breath of Wind Curles the falling Waves --
Hushed like a sleeping Serpent underneath
A Bed of Flowers. -- But when those
Happy Loves think to trace the Steps of
Everlasting Joy. Tempests, and Whirlwinds,
Stings of Adders shall surround 'em!
Now let him come Oh what Earthquakes shake
This little Frame, would it were once Destroyed
Emilius, and Lovisa then
Might Live in Peace.

Zel. Look up my Princess disquiet be their Portion,
Since they have made it yours.

App. He comes my Woes must be dissembled, and my
Looks be Cheerful.
Enter Bucarius. -- My Lord, did you not wonder at my Summons?

Buc. I was pleasingly surpised; as Dying Men with a
Reprive; or Tortured Minds with sudden Ease
So Joyful, and so unexpected was the mighty Favor.

App. Your repeated Services I long heve weighed
Your continual Application, in whatever
Related to my welfare; nor is your Constant Vows
Of Love forgot -- And if I seemed to slight those
Assiduities: It was but, the utmost Trial of your Faith.

Buc. Oh Sounds Celestial! Words Transcendent, as
Thy Charms! What can my Goddess mean?

App. Leave Ecstasies, to a more sitting Season -- and if
You dare assist, and free me from an Usurpation
Which I hate: My self, with all the vast
Revenues I command, is thine, without another Article.

Buc. For one kind look, I would have forfeited my Life;
But Bribed so high: Methinks I should do more than Dye.

App. You know the Viceroy has Long been Ruler here;
And to his false Care my mistaken Father
Left unhappy me.

Buc. Which proved his Blessing. The Court of Spain
Is slow in their Supplies; and when the Viceroy
First appeared, the Island was in an Uproar;
Soldiers unpaid; and therefore Mutinous;
All Form of Government neglected -- He
Emptied your full Coffers, to stop their
Craving Mouths; and with the Wealth of your
Great Ancestors bought a lasting Peace.

App. Yet, though I put up this; Remit the mighty Debts,
Which he can never pay: Still would he
Retain a Tyranny upon my Will; still
Guide my Actions, and dispose of all my Fortunes.

Buc. By your Injuries, and my Immortal Love, he shan'not!
I Will Pistol him to Morrow, on the Castle Walk!

App. And so be lost your self! For he stands High, in
Popular Opinion; the thoughtless Vulgar hallow him applause,
Because he is famed for Hospitality, surfeits their
Censure Appitites, and drowns their Souls
In Riot;
But would you be directed by an injured Woman,
His Measures should all be broke, his growing
Expectations Blasted,

Buc. Instruct. Command me Madam, I Listen to perform.

App. This Day such Wonders has produced, that you will
Scarce Credit my Relation; Emilius is returned,
Emilius, whom even since my Childhood I own
To have Honored with my Friendship, trusting
It seems to that when in France he had seduced
A Lady from her Husband brings her to me to be
Protected; I Swear the Conscious Blushes almost burst
My Cheeks, if I reflect on the Vile Office he did design
Me; Shall I connive at their Amors, my Roof shelter
Their Impious Loves, help me Bucarius, help to Curse 'em.

Buc. Swift Vengeance overtake him: Emilius in Sardinia.
My Emulator still in the bright Source of Glory. Disappointment
Cross his Delightful purposes; Heart-rending Plagues
For ever rest upon him.

App. Not upon him, but the false wanton I Would punish; your
Sex is by custom privileged to Injuries like these, your
Honors scarce tainted, call a Venial Crime, but
In a Wife it is sure unpardonable.

Buc. What is it, Madam, you desire of me?

App. To have this Woman in a Monastry Clapped up, or
Instantly sent back to France. I Would have her Brother
Told her Baseness, to have her given up to his Revenge,
I know not what I Would have, for whilst she stays, the
Sight of her, and of her Crimes will make me Mad.

Buc. [aside.] Ha! I suspect, but I will search it thoroughly.
Who is her Brother?

App. Alas! I had forgot to tell you, this Emilius too I wish
Secured, till She is past the power of ever seeing
Him again, he is Disguised and may be Seized on
Some pretense.

Buc. Explain your Intentions to me, Madam.

App. The Room's too public for our Conference,
In my Closet, you shall be informed.

Buc. And if I stop at ought that you Command,
Or not Destroy whom ever you have Doomed;
May this blessed Moment of your kindness
Prove a Dream; and may I wake again to the
Despair' in which the Dawning Day beheld me.

App. That way -- I Will follow --
Now Zelide, now let the Glorious Sun
Withdraw his Cheerful Beams --
Darkness, and furies should Assist at this
Black Council -- Oh Love! Thy Golden shast
Pierced first this this Tender Heart, and warmed it
With a Lambent Fire: which now by Jealously,
Is set into a Blaze.
How I could Burn, how I am lost in rage,
No Gentle Shower's such Mounting Flames Assuage,
Lovisa the beloved must Mourn as well as I.
I Will be revenged my Zelide, and I Will Dye;
Can she my Rival then my Justice blame;
I give her Death, and taste my self the same.
[Exit.
ACT III.
Bucarius and Roderigo, Meet.
Buc. OPortunely are we met, my Faithful
Roderigo, for I have Deeds in Agitation.
That want a Subtle Head, a Heart resolved
And Hand like thine to help Accomplish.

Rod. Long have ye talked of Mischief railed on the
Viceroy, Breathed naught but Grievances, and
Swore redress; but whilst I find ye drag the
Proud Appamia's Chains, whilst thus ye
Haunt the Palace of that Disdainful, fair Glory,
And Interest, though they call aloud' I fear will hardly
Wake ye from the Lethergy of Love.

Buc. If now I shake not off the Effeminate Slavery.
Boys shall Proclaim my Folly's, and hout me
From the Society of Men; yet never till this
Moment had I such Grounds to hope Possession
O! Appamia her Wealth, and full Revenge on my
Honors Rival, and my Love the Cursed Emilius.

Rod. I cannot reach ye.

Buc. All shall be Unravelled, there is secret Marriges.
My Instrument, there is Room for Plots that shall
Destroy the growing greatness of the Viceroy's Race.

Rod. Appamia Married!

Buc. No; She would have been, my friend was first
In Love which sure's the greatest Curse, and Shame
Of Womankind. Emelius the Object of her Fancy,
Who having balked her Eager Wishes she meditates.
Revenge on his fair Choice, and I am to be the Fool
Employed.

Rod. How found you this?

Buc. Her every word and look informed me, but having
Wrung each useful Circumstance from her
Distracted fury, I Will Counter-plot her purposes
And sure Destruction shall overtake 'em all.
Come with me, and I Will unfold what I design,
Disguises must be had, much thought, and Caution
Used, ha! She follows, and in htr Face the Stamp of
Heaven wears, but I know her Soul deceitful,
And will not trust my Eyes to Gaze.
Enter Appamia and Zelide.
App. Not gone, my Lord, who have you there?

Buc. One that will Assist in your Commands.

App. Be Expeditious, and be careful, If the Reward
Inspires ye.

Buc. The Task's too easy -- I would have played
With Danger; for such a glorious Prize,
Courted Hazards; where Life hung by a Hair:
And whatso're is fancied Dreadful had opposed me!

App. Zelide shall still inform ye, how we move --
Industrious, and Faithful is the Indian Slave --
In her you may rely -- Haste, Noble Sir, as I have
Directed -- Let your first business be to keep
Emilius from returning Instantly.

Buc. He moves this Day as I contrive, and you
Appoint, to Morrow is his own farewell;
Remember Princess what you have promised,
[Exeunt.
Zel. Can then Spain's Beauty, Nay I may add
The world's, receive this Rough General,
For her Lord, the Son of Fortune, only whose
Sword is his Inheritance, whilst Princes,
Lords of Provinces Sigh to be her Slaves.

App. That Is a Thought the least disturbs me --
No Zelide, we shall never live to be his Bride.

Zel. How Madam!

App. Dye before; and so discharge our promise --
Hark thee, Zelide, thou art skilled in
Baleful Drugs, the greatest Foes to Humane kind --
One deadly drop by thee prepared, and mingled
With the stream of Life (the Blood) will Spoil
The Noblest Frame of Nature, Poison each
Azure Channel; let down the useful Springs,
Stop the beating Pulses, and all the curious Movements
Till the Machine Drops into it is Original Clay,
To be revived no more.

Zel. Oh Princess! Merciful Heaven keep you,
From thoughts like these!

App. Why do tremble? you said you were a
Princess Born; and that thy Swarthy Veins
Carried the Royal Blood of those, who heretofore,
Were Lords of Mexico! It must be false;
Thou have a Plebian Soul; else, thou had
Used that skill, which I Implore: and died,
E're been my Slave.

Zel. It was your gentle Usuage which reconciled me first.
To Life; and then to the Love of you:
Which if I have failed in --

App. No; thou have not; nor you shan'not --
If you refuse me: with this drawn Dagger
I Will give my Rival present Death -- Then
Our Laws will Doom me to severest Wracks,
And public Shame upon a Scaffold End me.

Zel. Oh my Loved Mistress!

App. Why is it such a pain to Live, and sin to Dye
If Bucarius fails, Lovisa's not removed, and
Then this Night they meet, and long succeeding
Joyful Days and Nights attend 'em, prepare
My Slave a Draught, prepare for her, or me
Both caenot must not Live.

Zel. Have peace, you shall be obeyed.

App. I thank thee, faithful Creature, now to the
Alcove lead -- I must Tinge Lovisa's Sweets;
If her mind is undisturbed, I am but half
Revenged -- She must be Roused; Alarmed with
Doubts, and Fears set her Desponding Heart in
Tortures like to mine -- Create her Woes,
May Equal my Despair.
[Exeunt.
SCENE Drawn.
Lovisa Sleeping on a Couch. Enter Appamia, and Zelsde.
App. There wrapped in Innocence, and Peace She lies,
No Dreadful Dreams, warn her of approaching
Fate, Calm Sleep, Cordial to the Wretched, for ever
Fled from me seems fond to eang upon those
Beauteous Lids, Baths and Wanton's in her
Eyes, and Revels on her Lips in Charming Smiles

Zel. Can you Commend, and not yet pity?

App. It Is Emilius no doubt, is the pleasing Image
Of her Dreams -- She sees him at her Feet
Hears his soft Vows, and Darts him back
Ten Thousand Joys --

Zel. Madam, She Wakes!

Lov. What gone again; ye Airy Fantam!
Why have ye forsook me? Why are my longing
Eyelids stretched in vain, for him, whom
Sleeping I beheld!

App. I told ye so -- -- -- Forgive my over-care -- --
Such Charge Emilius gave; such Charms
Have you: That much I Covet to be near you.

Lov. This is Excess of Noble Charity to a poor
Stranger; and your humble Handmaid -- --
But is there yet no news from my Dear Lord?

App. None -- I doubt my fair Friend, you will be
Too fond; expect more: Complaisance,
More Kinnness, than our Spanish Nobles
Pay to Wives.

Lov. To Wives! Why Madam, is there a Dearer Name?

App. Bless me! Nurtured in the Court of France, and Ask
That Question -- I thought your Gallantry had been
Our Example -- I assure ye, there is scarce a Man
Of Quality here, but would think himself despised,
Deformed, or most abominably Scandalized,
If public Fame took no notice that he had
A Mistress -- At all our old Customary Feasts,
There Is not a Don, though Married to the Charming'st Bride,
On Earth, but wears some other Lady's Colors;
Leaving his Wife so to be Honored by her Hero,
If she has any: But by the Husband She Is
Certainly neglected.

Lov. Oh my Emilius! How far art thou from
Once resembling such a Waverer!

App. I Am glad to hear it -- France has strangely
Altered him! In this Court he was the very
Minion of the Ladies
Addressed to all each blooming Beauty
Shared his Heart, though none possessed it wholly
With an Air of Universal Kindness applied to All;
But these were the Triffling Hours of Youth: Now
He seems fixed indeed.

Lov. The Character is so indifferent from the Brave
Emilius, that were it not for strongest
Proofs: I should think you did not know the Man.

App. Oh! He Is a Dissembler; take my word for it,
But he may make the better Husband.

Lov. If I could think, the Lord, my Heart has Chose,
For whom I have forsook all that the World
Calls Comforts, thus Inclined: I Would Dye to
Rid me of the Dismal Apprehensions, --
Oh Madam! Forgive me, if I say it is unkind!

App. What?

Lov. To tell me this -- If it be true, I Am undone!
Think on my Condition -- Suppose you had left
This Delightful Palace; the Place where you are
Known, and Honored; fled with some Dear Man,
To Distant Climes -- Consider, how it would shock ye,
But to fear this trusted only Friend should prove
Unconstant, Faithless, as the Seas you Past! Such
Is my Fate, if he forsakes me, for whom Iv'e
All forsaken -- Despair, and Death's my Portion!
Oh Emilius! Cruel! Unkind! Return, and
Cheer me, e're it be too late!

App. Accuse him not; nor grieve at what is delivered
As a Friendly Caution -- But why does he Loiter now?
He said he would not see the Viceroy; and though he hold
His Sister, near his Heart: Methinks, if he fulfilled
His parting Words, his Visit should be shorter.

Lov. I know not what to think -- My Soul so long
Has held him true; with such a Faith
Believed his Promises: that it will be wondrous hard
To Judge him False; but harder much to find him so.

App. Be wise, and you are happy -- All yet is in your Power,
Untasted Sweets; Virgins Favors; Beauty, like yours
Would Urge the greatest Rambler to play the Saint,
With Perjured Breath; kindle such lovely Fires, and
Venture his Immortal Hopes, for your Embraces --
I say not this of our Emilius -- But such Men there are.

Lov. Oh!

App. When next you see him; which must be suddenly, if
His Friends have swayed him, or Adellaida, by
The Description of some famed Beauty in her prime,
Renewed his old Amors: You Will find it in his
Altered Carriage; he will be reserved, disturbed,
Spite of Dissembled Fondness -- mark him
Nicely, and you may discover --

Lov. Oh all ye Powers! is this my Task! must
My plain honest Heart, that is full of Love,
Of Faith, and true Obedience, be wracked with
Jealous Pangs; still on the Watch, to find out the
Tricks, and Turnings of Deceitful Men: No, rather
Than endure, the Killing Pain; the little abject
Office: I Will rip it up; and led out
Love, and Life together.

App. No, my Lovisa (give me leave to call you mine)
We will live in highest Pleasure; Live, if you can,
Learn like me, to Despair, and slight the Betraying Race
I, who have seen 'em Cringing at my Feet; been
Surrounded with eager Eyes, and bended Knees,
Stopped my Ears at the bewitching Charmers --
The false Guilding of their Love would not down
With me -- I saw Interest Lurking underneath: and escaped Destruction.

Lov. Alas! What have you escaped? You are yet within the
Very bloom of Beauty; Love has not yet sent the Hero
He designs your Conqueror; had you met with one
Like my Emilius, graceful in his Person; by
Nature framed to be the Darling Joy of Womankind;
Who, when he tells the Story of his Love, would make
The Coldest Virgin's Bosom Heave; her Heart to Pant:
And Eyes run over, as mine do now!

App. [aside.] Oh scalding Drops; they set my Heart on Fire.

Lov. But when he sees the listening Maid Incline
To the soft passion, his Sighs Inspire: How his Eyes
Will talk; how he will tremble; How Infect
With the Convulsive Joy! How Swear! How Weep!
Oh it is too much for Words, it is Rapture all!

App. [aside.] Torture, worse than Death! Vengeance! Before
She noth possess him! She dies, my Zelide, by all my [my Face
Wrongs She dies.

Lov. And did I believe all this, Innocent and Credulous;
The Eager Transports of a first Amor: the
Noble Vows of Simpathising Souls, which
God-like, and untainted Truth possessed: Did I
Forego my Awful Duty, loose the Dear Blessings
Of my Indulgent Parents, fly from my Tender
Mother, whose Arms Nursed my Infant Weakness
Up to this Ingratitude, whose kind Eyes never
Viewed me but with Smiling pleasure -- which
Now perhaps, are Streaming for my Fault;
Or Closing with Pangs, greater than those
I gave her at my Ill-fated Birth!

Zel. Oh! who can here words like these, and keep their
Temper! not Conquered India, Groaning under
Her Tyrannic-Masters, shows a greater Wretch!

App. Madam! what mean your most immoderate Griess
Upon a bare Suggestion -- Fie, Fie!
It Is most unreasonable!

Lov. Your Pardon -- For I must have leave to Rave,
Can I but think of sharing my Emilius's Love, or
Loosing the Idea, my Soul had Framed of Deathless
Constancy; of endless Kindness; can my working
Fancy behold this dismal wrack of all my Quiet,
And not run Mad!

App. Mad! For what? Oh, were but as free from
Love as I! Banish the thought that, would disturb ye!

Love. Never, Never; till I Am Convinced, my Fears are Vain!

App. -- Zelide,
Prepare the Banquet, I commanded -- let the Italian
Eunuch Sing; and softest Music turn her Griess,
Till this Prince beloved, this dearest Man return:
And bring Peace, and Comfort to her mind.

Lov. Oh Heaven's! Banquets, and Music! am I
Fit for either!

App. Unkind is your Refusal of what my Care provided.

Love. I must Obey; with all these Swelling Griefs I consent
To your desires, because you say it is kindly meant.
So Wretches, who despair, when Death's in View;
Do Pleasures Taste; and seem delighted too.
Feigned Smiles conceal the faltering Smart;
Gay in their Looks: whilst Tempests rend the Heart
[Exit
Scene Draws.
Discovers Brisac, and Adellaida, sitting on a Couch A SONG.

After the SONG.


Bris. Crowned with dear Consenting Love, Listening
To the Music of thy Voice willingly would I
Forget the busy World; with thee Supinely pass
My Softer Hours on this Loved Bosom Wracked
With delight, confess the bliss, my Adellaida,
Created with Golden Slumbers Charmed and
Waking still to bless the Beauteous Cause, Crowned
With Happy Days, and Happier Nights, which
Feasted every Sense with Love, and still renewed
Desires, that will never, never Fade.

Adel. If, my Brisac, one Corner of the Globe were yours,
Or mine, I think we might Command a
Lasting Happiness: But when both, though born
To wealth, and Noblest Honors, are dependant on a
Rigid Parents Will: what shall we hope,
But lasting Woe?

Bris. Rather Eternal Joy! Is this the Language, Hymen
Requires, upon our Nuptial Day? No, No.
Kisses, Embraces are his Due -- Words soft as as thy
Frame; and Looks that Melt in kindly Shower's.

Amid. Madam, the Lord Lorenza comes this way!

Adel. Ha! My Fathers Favorite! Call my Women!
Oh my Brisac! how awkard is the Sound of Love
Pronounced by those we hate -- Not but that
Lorenza's Nicely brave; and Justly Qualified
For his inherent Greatness -- But if there be
A Fate below: Sure it is shown in that
Which Guides Affection.
Enter Lorenza.
Lor. Through all the Rooms of State, and Antichambers.
Have I passed: where the Dumb Gazers
In Expectation stand, like Statutes, or the
Senseless Pictures over 'em. No Life is seen
In Court, whilst you Fair Princess Retire
To Recesses, that are forbidden the Admiring World.

Adel. Methinks the Viceroy's side is proper'st
For the Gallant Man; where in this Iron Age
He will not fail to hear of Seiges, Battles,
And all the Glorious business of the Brave.

Lor. Yet there is a Lord, like me, seems to build
His Hapiness in Beauty.

Bris. Does that Displease ye?

Lor. Don Lopez, I shall find a place and time
To tell you whether it does, or no.

Bris. Soon as you will -- I Am ready.

Adel. [aside.] Oh my poor heart! -- My Lords!
Chose ye my Apartments for your Broils?
Hence I Command ye both -- you Don Lopez,
Return Apamia Word, I Will wait upon her -- --
And for you, my Lord, I should be glad to know
What business brought you hither?

Lor. Oh Words, and Looks cold enough to Confirm Despair.
-- But my Happy Rival shall not Triumph (for such
I know he is) here will I be revenged, or Fall!
Turn thou Invader of all the Joys, my Youth
Had promised; for, upon this spot of Earth
Will I dispute for Adellaida: though her Presence
Make the Chamber Sacred!

Bris. Here would thou Fight for Adellaida,
To have the Women's Cries Alarm all the Palace:
Be parted, 'ere my Arm could reach thee -- Boy.

Lor. Thou art a secret undermining Traitor.

Bris. Ha!

Adel. Don Lopez, my Lord have I no power?
I charge thee go; or else plunge both your
Swords into my Bosom -- go I charge ye --
And leave me with Lorenza!

Bris. Farewell! The time was most unfit:
And I repent my rashness.
[Exit.
Adel. So, My Lord was this well done!

Lor. Oh Madam! ask the Madman a Reason
For his last Extravagance! Ask Sinners
In Despair, why they Curse Heaven, when
They should Pray? Your Beauteous Eyes
Have ruined me! they have darted Fires,
Which though they set me in Extramest Burnings:
Yet the reflected Heat warms not the smallest Particle of you!

Adel. Lorenza; tell me freely, is it your self
You Love, or me?

Lor. Oh Cruel Question! Command one Hand
To Cut the other off;
Take this Weapon -- Stab me over, and over with
Wounds though but in wanton Sport of Tyranny,
See if I Would Complain!

Adel. If this be true, if you could suffer this, sure you
Can suffer less; and for a Gift so Noble, as
My everlasting Friendship, bear the Wrack
Of disappointed Love.

Lor. I guess your meaning -- how quick it runs
Through my Distracted Brain! it is got alrendy
To my Heart, and pulls the Bursting Strings --
Your Father comes -- But, Oh! I sind no
Advocate will do!

Adel. Stop him Lorenza.
Divert his Wrath, for much I fear, He
Has heard of this disorder: Perform my first
Desires; and let me be obliged.

Lor. Though Death is mingled with these sweet Words,
And surely will follow: yet much I Am pleased to hear 'em.

Adel. No; you shall Live renowned, and long; if my
Prayers prevail: But meet my Father, and appease him.

Lor. Will you forgive me then this Roughness; this most
Unmanly Violence, my passion Caused?

Adel. I will.

Lor. But will you ever see me more?

Adel. Yes; Instantly: and tell you all my Fate.

Lor. Oh thanks; though it is my undoing, whilst I hear
You speak: I shall dye Contented.
[Exit.
Adel. This young Nobleman, is Honest Just, and Brave;
I must Conside in him; else his Love will
Set him full at my Brisac; or draw my
Father's Hatred on my Husband.
What a Name is that! How much is he Dearer
Than all Mankind! If I forgot my Duty
Forgive me Heaven.
It Is Love Nature's first, and great decree
Preserver of the World and Conqueror of me.
[Exit. Enter Bucarius.
Buc. So, this Disguise will do; Appamia doubtly
Armed for our Destruction, Resistless Beauty
Dwells in her Celestial Form, but Oh! Hell has
Been at Work within; There Subtilty, Revenge,
And violent Passions Reign, yet she shall be
Over reached and yield to my Embraces; or
Bear the Odium of the Bloody Crime which
I Will Contrive; Heist Roderigo.
Enter Roderigo.
Rod. The same.

Buc. Well! How, and How.

Rod. Exactly as your heart desires -- Emilius passing
From the Palace back to Appamia was seized,
His name demanded, which he denying, was, a Spy clapped up;
And there Remains, till you think fit I should release him:
and as you Ordered, give the Paper.

Buc. Within an Hour let it be done -- Comes
Don Lopez, as I directed?

Rod. He follows; I told him a Stranger waited
For him in this private Grove.

Buc. Excellent! away, be careful Roderigo, since
Ruin, or Glory, waits such bold Attempts --
Fly -- I hear him. --
[Exit Rod. Enter Brisac.
Bris. By my full hopes of dear expected Bliss,
This Quarrel most Ominous. If
It Is Lorenza waits me here, should Death
Or Conquest be my Fate; What Troubles
Must I heap on thee, my poor kind Adellaida!
Ha! Who have we here! -- Would you,
Sir, ought with me?

Buc. If you are the Count Brisac. --

Bris. Brisac! How came you by that Name?

Buc. My Eyes Inform me you are the the Man.

Bris. Trust me Friend, I cannot recollect where
They Learn that Knowledge; for till this
Moment, surely mine did never Encounter 'em.

Buc. Yes; often: Though not heedfully, my time indeed was spent
From Court, where, you resided, but my Noble
Injured Friend -- I Am sure, you will own --

Brisac. What Friend? Lead me out of this amaze!

Buc The Earl of d Anglesack.

Bris. And what of him?

Buc. Have you not a Sister too -- Lovisa Named?

Bris. Yes. Pleasing is the Remembrance; her Beauty
And her Fame stood fair, when I lest France;
I dare Answer for her, She has not lost the
Virtuous Character.

Buc. Beauty, indeed, she still retains -- But, Oh! --
The more Inestimable Jem, Bright Honor --!
Which sullied once, or lost, like the flying Hours,
Can never, never be retrieved!

Bris. Whither do thy Speeches lead; for I am yet in the Dark?

Buc. Observe, that Earl I mentioned, Espoused your Sister

Bris. I do believe it; for my Father writ, 'twas so Designed,

Buc. Oh fatal Nuptials! Oh unhappy Marriage
Wretch'd d'Englesack! Oh my dearest Friend!

Bris. What mean these Exclamations! Who
Has wronged your Friend, and mine?

Buc. Lovisa.

Bris. No.

Buc. If deserting his Red, and him, when scarce the
Hymenial Tapers were burnt out, e're the
Fresh Beauties of the Spring, by Virgins strow'd,
Were withered: If this base: Then basely
Has Lovisa done.

Bris. With whom? Or what: Or how? Let me
By degrees, to a just Fury rise!

Buc. Of him she has blindly chose, I can give
But small Account -- -- Some Idle Debauchee,
Who caught her with a Foppish Face;
A Guady Coat; such a despicable Triffle. --

Bris. Patience, ye boiling Viens! Back to your
Fountains; and carry cooling Patience! --
Where are these Adulterers? Speak, thou
Upstart Fiend; sent to Wrack my quiet!

Buc. Behold this wound, given by the Villain who is
In Sardinia hid -- I have track'd him hither,
Your Father, and the Earl, come on; but Spite
Of this disabl'd Arm, I Will make Vengeance sure,
E're the dishonor's blazed abroad.

Bris. Thou make Vengeance sure! Thou prevent the
Dishonor of my Family! By Hell, I shall
Believe all that thou have said a Cursed invented Lie:
Unless you show me Lovisa in Sardinia.

Buc. I Will do it; if you will Engage to keep your temper;
And after bring you, where I am to meet the
Traitor. I knew not of your being here: nor when
I saw you, had I made an Application, but that
My over-eager Zeal for poor d'Englesack threw me on,
On his Honors Ravisher just at our Landing,
Where the Ships Crew, prompted by the Triumphant
Villain, whom I suppose a Native here disarmed
And broke my Limbs.

Bris. Prodigious! All Monstrous, and uninteligible!

Buc. I am sorry I can with so much Ease convince ye
Who would serve a Friend so earnestly, and be
Thus suspected it was my violent Friendship
Made me out do their Search, and find away to pass
In the same Ship, with the false Fugitives; though 'twas
Too late to stop 'em -- Follow me, I will Inform you
Of every little Circumstance; and to Confirm 'em true.
Show you Lovisa in the wanton Reveller's Arms.

Bris. Do this, and be for ever --

Buc. What?

Bris. Cursed, as I am now!
From all the Downy Sweets, I long for, thus removed
From all that is Lovely; all that is beloved.
From Love Natures Feast her sublimest Joy
From Raptures, that would almost Life destroy,
Roused by the call of Honor, Injured Fame
My Love I hazard to preserve my Name,
Quit the Dearest Wife to hide a Sisters Shame.

ACT IV.
Enter Appamia, meeting Zelide.
App. Have thou seen Bucarius

Zel. I have.

App. And moves the Engine right?

Zel. As Mischiefs self were the Contriver, --
Emilius is freed; and by a Lotter charged with
Villainy, a Feign Challenge sent him, to defend his Honor,
Threatened with Cowardice: If he devulge or
Forbear the meeting.

App. An early Courage, and undaunted Mind his forward
Youth has still discovered: His Manly Arm
Plucked fair Fame from Danger's ugliest Mouth;
And in our Annals made long Tracts of brightness.

Zel. Gloomy, and sad this way he walks; now revolving
Deeply in his troubled Breast, this unexpected Charge
Of Fate; then starting, as from a Dream of Horror,
And Crying out Lovisa!

App. Aye; that is the Thought that tears him; not
For himself, but her, he fears -- Fool, Fool!
Be still; or to Elysium go, and meet her there!
On Earth I stand the Flaming Bar between
That ye shall never clasp with Joy --

Zel. The Lord Bucarius hither trains Brisca, by ways.
To him unknown, where he shall see Emilius, and
Lovisa behold their meeting Joys, and Confirm the
Dishonor he suspects; next the pretended Challenge
Draws Emilius back, and leaves Lovisa to yours
And to her Brother's Rage.

App. My Fancy hurry's on to wild Confusions I dare
Not trust Brisac's resentment, they may talk, and
All be well; is the fatal Cordial ready.

Zel. The Poison is.

App. But may we trust Bucarius in his Contrivance
Of a Challenge, I know Emilius eager to Answer
His Accuser, Suppose the General prove a real Foe
My Rage shrinks back at thought of my Emilius,
I cannot bear that he should be destroyed, my Injuries
Mount high, but Love Soars higher yet, and will
Preserve him.

Zel. Bucarius I dare dromise will not exceed your
Commands, least he forfeit what he so lately gained,
Your Favor.

App. Emilius comes, have, give Lovisa Notice why
Do thou flutter thus my Injured Heart, why
Steals the Woman's weakness into my Eyes at his
Loved sight, here will I wait unseen, and view their
Fondness to Steel my Soul from all remorse.
[Exit. Enter Emilius, With a Paper in his Hand.
Emil. Called, Villain; Coward! Seized
Challenged in my Father's Court! And yet
By Honor, and by Love compelled not to
Discover who I am. (for that would give this
Blaster of my Fame just Cause for his black Calumnies.)
But Oh! Lovisa!
To whom shall I commit her? How hide
These dark Perplexities! Which should the
Trembling Dear once know: 'Twou'd
Fright her Peace away; and
Break her tender Heart.
Enter Lovisa and Zelide. Lov See where he Stands; Squandering the precious
Minutes; which I with eager Expectation
Counted -- Pains in my Heart, and in
My Eyes, incessant Tears.

Zel. Some Grief has seized him; but sure your Sight
Will hush his Cares -- I Will to my Princess;
And inform her of his coming.

Lov. My Lord!

Emil My Love! My Life!

Lov. Am I well used?

Emil. Are ye not my Dearest!

Lov. No!

Emil. By whom?

Lov. By thee, Emilius; thou much Loved false One!

Emil. Ha!

Lov. Is this your promised have? Are these thy Joys Sardina
Yields? Could you not add a Day to your Dissembled Truth!
Must I be tortured instantly? Yes, yes I must!
For I deserve it all; from Heaven I merit more:
But not (Oh cruel Man) not from thee!

Emil. My Angel! Thy upbradings are unjust --
Were there no Cause for my delay: Methinks
Lovisa might have chid me less Severely --
But, Oh! Believe Emilius, who never will
Deceive thee, there was a Cause!

Lov. That Cause I Would know. If I am Loved,
I may be trusted -- The Letter, which, at sight
Of me, so hastily you hid -- Let me see it;
Ease the wracking Fears, that from my Heart and
Eyes draw painful Showers -- For I too think, I
Have a Cause, much Cause, to suspect thy Faith.

Emil. What Villain, equal Enemy to Truth, and me,
Has dared Traduce my Honor?

Lov. Give me the Letter; and I Will confront the Accuser.
With the falsehood you stand Charged.

Emil. How poor is your Request! Command
My Life; and try. your Power!

Lov. If desiring so small a thing I am denied:
What future hope can raise me from Despair!
Oh Emilius! Thy words have lost their Accent!
And thy looks their Tenderness! Something sadly
Whispers to my Soul, I am undone! --
For ever, ever Ruined!

Emil. Sure Fate has watched her time, for my Destruction!
And with a smiling Face, led me on to happy Moments;
Which I expecting doubly Fraught with Joys:
Now turn the Cursed Reverse, and leave no
Grasping Hold!

Lov. I am that Fate you fear; the Bar to some
New Beauty, or Wealthier Aim -- But
Oh! My Lord! If there remains one Spark
Of Honor, bestow me in a Cloister; amidst secluded
Virgins I Will remain; nor murmur your unkindness --
Do this; if you are not lost to all Humanity --
Let the Holy Veil shrowed me, from the vile Scorns
Of your ungrateful Sex!

Emil. O here am I! Who is it talks thus to me!
It is Lovisa! My Wife! Dearer thrn
These Eyes! Dearer than my struggling Heart!
Which never trembled, but at thy Anger!
Dearer than every Tie, or Bond, which Nature makes!
By her am I Condemned; by her thus hardly used,
Take notice thou Stranger, Enemy; whatsoever
Thou art -- All thy approbrious Names I here
Forgive Thee; since she, my Bosomed Soul, who
Like my Conscience, knows each Action of my Life:
Since she Taxes me with loss of Honor -- Oh!
All ye Powers! Perhaps I have mistook the
Paths of Virtue; and am indeed a Villain!

Lov. I cannot bear to see him thus! It wracks me,
Worse than my Suspicious! Oh! Forgive my
Inconsiderate Words; and take me to your Arms; whilst
Mine are filled with Pleasures; leaning on your Breast,
And Listening to your Sighs; let me forget my Sorrows;
And if it is Deceit: It Is also Delight ineffable,
To be so deceived!

Emil. Oh Charmer! Charmer! But all words are weak,
I Will grasp thee, fireer, than Life can bear;
And leave my Soul upon thy Lips!

App. aside behind the Scenes. Poison, and Death shall enter next the
Torturing Wretches!
Bucarius and Brisac appear in the Balcony.
Buc. Look there!

Bris. Ha, my Eyes betray me into Errors!
Blasts, and Lightenings seize 'em!

Buc. Forbear your Passion; or our Revenge is lost!
It Is but one Slave, by Bribes I Have gained:
On, the least Noise we are discovered!

Emil. Do I not Love ye!

Lov. I will suspect no more!

Bris. Cursed, Cursed Lovisa! Contagion of my Blood!
Disgraced is our, till now, untainted Honor.

Buc. Vile Lovisa! -- Begone! they will turn
Upon us! Begone; or I shall think you
Cowardly! Avoid the Vengeance such wrongs require!

Bris. Fly! I need no urging; Conduct me to the
Fatal Place; that I may mark it for the
[Exeunt from the Balcony. Traitors Blood! O Lovisa!

Lov. Ha! Did I not hear my Name!
It was pronounced aloud; and with a Voice,
That I Am sure is not unknown!
Oh my Emilius! All my Fears return!

Emil. Thy Fancy only!

Lov. Yet, you started too! Ha! Thy lovely Eyes
Relate their Fires! And thou again
Art lost in Contemplation!

Emil. Take off Oh! Lovisa, those piercing Looks;
Let not those Heavenly Lights, the Planets
That must Rule my Days, this Moment
Pry into my Heart: And all the Years
I have to come, I Will lay it open, to thy view: Spare me some
Hours, and I Will bring thee everlasting Peace!

Lov. Eternal Woe! Ha! I reflecton thy past words!
Thou have an Enemy! O Idle Jealousies; where
Got ye room into a Bosom that is filled with naught
But Love! Behold me on my Knees; Hanging upon
Thine, with Dying Pangs! Oh! Let it strike Compassion
Through thee!

Emil. Why does thy. Tenderness Torment thy self, and me;
Indeed my Love, there is no Danger; nor Just Cause
For thy disquiet -- I Will entreat our Friend to Comfort ye.

Lov. I have no Friend, but thou; slay with me, I beg ye by
These Tears; by these poor trembling Limbs; which with
Their shaking loose their Hold, that I will never quit
Till Life forsakes me!

Emil. Oh hardest Trial! -- But the time will be Elapsed --
Who waits there?

Lov. Do call 'em -- Command they tear me from ye!
No, they need not! Death, Death rids ye of the trouble!

Emil. Ha! Sinks! Faint and Cold! -- Appamia
[She faints. Princess! Zelided Help there!
Enter Appamia, and Zelide.
App. Bless me! What Is the matter? Lovisa Swooning
In your Arms!

Emil. Enquire not; but quickly apply some Remedy!

App. The precious Cordial -- now Zelide; now --

Zel. Madam?

App. Do thou demur; and see the lovely Creature dead
Be Swift, I charge thee! Fly! -- Bend her
[Exit, and returns with a Bowl. Gently forward! -- Give it me --
Hold, from your Hand it will be most acceptable --

[Emil. to Zel.] Why do thou tremble?

App. Alas! We are frighted all! T'has seized me so:
I am almost in her Condition!

Emil. My Love Drink this --

App. Well may she indeed be faint; for all my Art
Could not persuade her, in your absence, by the Taste
Of, ought to Refresh her out-worn Spirits.

Lov. Oh! Will it give me Rest --
[Drinks.
Emil. I hope so dearest!

App. [aside] It Is done, and by his Hand! -- Methinks the
Infernal Powers Smile; turn; turn over their horrid Leaves
Of black Revenges: And set mine down most Exquisite!

Emil. How fares my only Blessing?

Lov. Beyond the power of struggling longer with my Woes!
Lead me Virgins, from him, and from the Light;
Let Sable Curtains make an Artificial Night
There will I fix, and my sad Fate deplore,
Nor e're look up or aim at Comfort more.
[Exeunt.
Emil. She Is gone! And with her Griess has riven my
Heart asunder! Oh Appamia! By the pure
Fire, that kindled in our Infant Minds, and grew
To Friendships holy Flame, I do Conjure thee
Cherish my Lovisa; whatever rugged Fortune's mine,
In Life's uncertain Lottery: Or if the Blank
Prove Death; Oh! Let me dye your Beggar: Turn
All the kindness you have born to me, and
Fix it on my Mourning Bride! So may
The Power's shed on your Beauteous Frame
Eternal Blessings; never ceasing Joy:
And successive Comforts without end!

App. Why this Injunction?

Emil. If I return: 'twas needless: If not,
Remember it my latest Prayer!
Protect that Innocent Unhappy Fair:
And Shield her from that ugly Fiend Despair.
[Exit.
App. Ye Cursed Fond Foolish Eyes, that drew in Fires, yet
Wanted power to dart 'em back, Stretch your Extorted
Lids pursue his Lovely Form, perhaps ye never
May behold him more. Zelide, I prithee Drench this
Dagger in thy fatal Compound that the least
Entrance by it made, may carry Death speedy
And inevitable.

Zel. Is this at last the only Service I must do for
My most Generons Mistress, to scatter destruction
Round, and leave her Name Accursed.

App. It Is past, my Zelide, we are plunged in deep
Unfathomable depths, there is no returning.
The shudderrings over Lovisa there I must sink
In Blood, and loose the sense of fear.

Zel, Oh for Lovisa I could weep! In few hours space
Such heat will boil within her Veins;
Such pains will stretch her Aching Nerves;
Intolerable Burnings in her Brain; through every
Pore Fire unquenchable force its way;
Hissing in her Blood: and Flaming in her Eyes.

App. And by Emilius this Cordial Draught was
Administered: it is fit he sees his handy work --
Oh Subtle Aid of Hell; for the Contrivance was
Beyond my hope -- In such pains must She Expire, say thou?

Zel. Oh yes! But if your Christian Faith, I have Learnt
Be true; Death Ends her Misery, and mine for causing it,
Bears an Eternal Date.

App. Can thou fear Hell, that look its Offspring?
Complexion'd, as our Fancy paints Devils --
But (Oh'!) for me, who have a thousand times
Been told my Form was bright as Angels Form,
To sink amongst Internal black Tormentors!
Away! I Will shun that thought, my self I Will fly.
To think is tasting Hell, before I dye.
[Exeunt.
SCENE Changes.
Enter Adellaida, and Amidea.
Adel. Support me, Amidea; for I sink with Fears!
And ye Auspicious Stars, Assist! Grant, as I
Wish to loose a Lover, I may gain a Friend!

Ami. See, Madam he comes.

Adel. By my Appointment comes -- What shall
I say? How work him to my Wishes?

Ami. Denying his despair, Succeeds.
Enter Lorenza.
Lor. With all the trembling Fears, unhappy Wretches
View their awful Judge, I am come to know
From you, the bright disposer of my Fate,
What is my Doom?

Adel. And when that Doom is past, Lorenza the Wise,
And Brave, Arm with Resolution; and what is
Irrevocable, bear with unshaken Minds.

Lor. Oh pointing Prelude to the sure Blow of Fate!
Why was I born! Or why preserved to this
Distracting Hour! ye Malicious Stars that knew
Me formed the hate of Adellaida? Why in my Cardle did ye
Forbear to shed your poisonous Fires, and blast my
Thoughtless Childhood: E're I knew such pangs as these!

Adel. Call it not hate, Lorenza, when I profess an
Esteem particular; which every day increases,
And grows to an Admiration of your Noble Qualities:

Lor. But never will produce the least spark of Love -- Say Madam
Is it not so? Do I not speak your thoughts?

Adel. Suppose you came too late: turned Beggar, when I
Was Bankrupt grown; your worthy Heart is not
To be Trifled with: therefore I deal without Reserv^

Lor. Executions though delayed, or given Instantly
Bear equal Terror!

Adel. That you, My Lord, already have my Father's Voice,
Is Granted; Nay, that Minutely I expect his Dread
Commands, Most true: but that they cannot be by me
Obeyed, is also a sad Truth; which you must hear!

Lor. Hold, 'e're ye pronounce my Fate! -- what! never
Adellaida? no continued Services? not Reiterated
Prayers? no Expense of Blood? will nothing,
Nothing move thee? Oh Inexorable!

Adel. Had I not thought you the Noblest of Mankind
I had not Dared thus far; For my Petition is --

Lor. I Guess it Madam -- what ails my heart to heave!
But go on -- all will be Calm.

Adel. Ha! Lorenza! Thy Face grows Pale
I would have asked thee, to have told the Viceroy
Thy desires were Changed -- But Oh! I find
Thee fixed, to both our Ruins!

Lor. What does my Rival fear my Sword? Or does he
Scorn me? Or is it height of Pride or Cruelty
To send me Death, this Torturing way?

Adel. Wrong not the Innocent; it is I alone would tempt thee
To a Generous Act: to do a Deed, will set the
Foremost in Heroic Lovers Fame; to quit thy
Passion, but to save thy Mistress -- for Oh! if you
Persist, you may heap my Father's wrath upon me;
Yes, you may cause my Death: My Love ye cannot Cause!

Lor. O Severity! -- But I Will Complain no more -- If I am
Thy distin'd Victim, it is he, the happy he, shall
Send me through my Wracked Heart; force his Triumphant
Way, with hands steeped in my Gore, (a sight will
Please those Cruel Eyes) Grasp the Bliss: for which,
Whilst I have Breath, I shall be wishing!
(is going)
Adel. Hold, Lorenza, against whom do thou Arm?

Lor. Needs that Question? Don Lopez, my Cursed Supplanter!

Adel. Stay thee a Moment; and know -- That Noble
Youth's my Husband -- If after this knowledge, thou
Dare to lift thy Impious Hands against him;
If thou do Wound him (For Chance of 't Rules the Brave:)
Blasted be my hopes for ever, when I not double all those Wounds
Upon my Bosom! If I not neglect my latest Prayer;
And in Cursing thee, forsake the hated World!

Lor. Oh wretched State! -- Be still, my
Raging Heart, be still! Bound no more in boiling
Blood! I Will open the Sluice; and give thee Ease --
Turn, Adellaida, swift as thy Wishes! See where
Thy Fury falls -- I have Revenged thee of thy detested Foe!

Adel. O desparate Man! Now thou have Ruined me
[Stabs himself. Indeed -- Some help there!

Lor. All help is vain; when Despair, like mine, gives
The Blow! There needs no second Aim -- say --
Will Not thou Curse me now?

Adel. Oh! I must Curse my self for ever! Why, Amidia;
Do thou stand aghast? Start from thy sad amaze;
And fill the Palace with thy Cries.

Amid. Help here! help!
[Exit.
Adal. Lorenzo! thou rash unfortunate!
What have thou done?

Lor. Ha! Can my Streaming Wound force a relenting
Tear? Yes, yes, it does: Let not the Precious Balm
Drop too near my Heart: Lest I Revive;
And again Torment thee!

Adel. Oh! I would waste in never ceasing showers,
To save thy Noble Life.

Lor. Is It possible? Lend me thy Hand; nor shall your
Too, too happy Husband feel a Jealous pang --
The Kisses I shall leave upon it, are Damped
With the Cold Dew of Death.
Enter Viceroy, Attended.
Vice. Whither does this doleful Sound Conduct me?

Adel. Behold the Blasting Sight!

Vice. Ha! Lorenza Dying! who has done this Cursed Deed?

Lor. I, my self. Farewell my Father --
Oh Adellaida, Farewell.
(Dies.)
Vice. My Son! My Darling Expecttation for ever gone!
-- Ah Trait'riss! Ah Ingrate! well may
Thou Weep: This was thy Work.

Adel. Oh Sir!

Vice, It Is past excuse, or Pardon! has my Indulgence caused
This Disobedience? Cursed then be former Fondness; I shall
No more behold thee, but with a Loathing Eye.

Adel. Fatal Sounds! Drive not your once Loved Daughter
To Distraction.

Vice. Where lernt ye boldness to contemn my Choice? Confusion
Light upon your Awkard Sex! Give ye your Will;
Your Headstrong Will, and you will lead your selves into perdition.

Adel. Kneeling I implore your Mercy -- O pity and forgive
Your Wretched Offspring, with dear Paternal Blessings
Raise me; Or I shall sink beneath your dreadful Anger!

Vice. Pity and Pardon! when I behold the blooming Hopes
Of Spain Levelled by thy base Pride, below the meanest
Slave! Denied the Sacred Funeral Rites! Raked up in
Vile Unhallowed Clay! Oh sad Remembrance! It Is
For some Minion this Brave Young Man was Sacrificed --
But hide him I Charge thee, hide him from thy
Injured Father, or by my Just Resentment,
He shall be Years a Dying. I Will have his Eyes pulled out,
His Flesh by Burning Pincers torn; and when he Roars,
In heat of Torment, Scalding Oil shall be the Draughts
Administered, and Add to his Hellish Pains.

Adel. See Sir, See; how you drag me on the Earth!
Send, Send me to Lorenza; but use such killing Words no more

Vice. If he escape my Vengeance, may the sure hand of Fate.
Overtake him! when with Fond Eager Eyes,
Thou steals to the Banquet of ungracious Love;
May thou View him the Destruction of thy Hopes,
Pale, Bleeding, and Dead; as is Lorenza.

Adel. Kneel Amida, kneel, prostrate lie on the Ground
Bathing with me his Feet,
And lifting up thy Hands, to move him.

Vice. This Murder's thine, False Girl! Seek Heaven,
With Patience, and Prayer, Cry out aloud for Mercy there;
Which (Oh!) I fear will now be hard to find!
[Exit.
Ami. Rise Madam, I beg ye Rise,
These Wounding Griess Consume ye.

Adel. Ah Cruel Father! there is something whispers to my heart
I shall have Peace, in spite of all this Drowning Tempest --
Yet I will Rouse a little, and warm my most unhappy Love,
My Dear Unfortunate Brisac: Conjure him
Fly This Fatal Isle!
And safety in some humble Harbor find.
For sure no Star Reigns here, to Lovers kind!
[Exit.
ACT V.
Enter Brisac, and Bucarius.
Bris. THis is the Grove, you say, wherein you did appoint
That Vile Companion of my Sisters Lust, a Meeting.

Buc. It is. And he, bold in his Crimes, defied my
Challenge; and swore to answer with his Sword.

Bris. Enough, The unlooked for Infamy carried such a stain.
That my Heart detested to Communicate the Story,
Even to my nearest Friends -- Therefore,
Thou Stranger, (as thou art) If I fail, I leave
To give my Father and the Enquiring World
A Just Account.

Buc. Impartial Heaven will avert your Fall I don't doubt;
However, by the Friendship I owe your Sisters Husband,
The wronged d' Englesack: I Will speak your Actions Nobly.

Bris. Yet there is something more --

Buc. Freely Declare your Pleasure.

Bris. This Letter to the Princess Adellaida, the
Viceroys only Daughter, deliver from my hand;
She will take care of you, and my wretched Sister.

Buc. Conclude it done; unless your own Commands forbid it.

Bris. No more. I see the Villain coming, my rising
Blood proclaims him so. Be gone; nor
Watch the Event: But leave the rest to Fate.

Buc. Farewell, thou Gallant Man, Honor guide
Thy Sword through the Polluted Veins
Of that false Traitor.

Bris. Farewell.

Buc. [as he goes off.] Fight, Fight, ye thick Skull'd Fools,
Till I part ye! Yet hereabouts my business is to Lurk -- For
Whosoe'ere O'recomes, this Poysond Sword dispatches
Him; besides Roderigo, and choice Russians wait
Lest they should Parley, and agree.
[Exit. Enter Emilius.
Emil. Art thou the bold Insulter over my Fame; who
Unprovoked forcest my Arm to Chastise
Thy Ill-manner'd Folly?

Bris. So Haughty! But words are a Coward's Armor,
To hinder my Suspicions -- thou art such --
Speak only this, and then no mo -- Have thou not
Brought from France a Fair False Woman
Called Lovisa

Emil. The truest, and most Charming of her Sex --
I own I have --

Bris. Hold -- Now use thy Sword; for mine
Is eager to be thee.

Emil. Heaven Witness, I was never backward --
Heaven also knows my Soul is free from fear:
Yet there is something in that Form, which stay's my Arm:
Sure it is the Resemblance of my Lovisa!

Bris. Thine, Villain! Thine! Come on; or I shall
Take thee unprepared.

Emil. Disputes thou her! Nay then, farewell
All thoughts of Peace --
[They Fight, Brisac falls My Sword has pierced thee --
Yet I tremble for it -- am strangely
Shockt! As if I had received the Wound I had given!

Bris. Thou have indeed, over come; tho I appeal to
Honors Rules; and Justify the Attempt.
Enter Bucarius.
Buc. Ha! My Friend! I Will stretch my pinnion'd Arm,
And burst tho new Sodder'd Sinews to Revenge thee!

Emil. Beset!

Bris. Hold base Man! Nor call me Friend, and practice
Villainy like this! Assist ye Powers, my weakness;
And let me throw my Body twixt their meeting Swords,

Emil. Thou art Disarmed.
[Rises.
Bris. And you are Wounded --

Emil. And to be felt, a Scratch!

Buc. [aside.] You have both your Banes: And now I Will
Leave ye.
[Exit.
Emil. But -- What art thou? What unequaled Hero --
Who in the last Efforts of Life, struglest
'To save thy Enemy?

Bris. Justice was still the Master of my Actions -- That
Urged me now to save thee: That prompted me
To take thy Life, for the abuse of my loved Sister.

Emil. Thy Sister! Speak that again -- But let a
Dreadful Bolt of Bellowing Thunder follow,
And strike me past the Sense of ever hearing more!

Bris. Lovisa! To whom, though my Veins empty a pace, I
Blush to own, is my Sister: Married to the Count
d'Englesack -- -- and this -- Oh

Emil. My Wife I swear; as sure as the Destruction
This Cursed Deed has Drawn upon me -- But
Oh no further Talk; no Words -- Lean, and
Let me bear thee to the adjoining Palace of
Appamia -- There try the power of Art,
To stay thy Fleeting Life.

Bris. To Appamia's! -- My Laboring Heart
Beats quicker at the thought -- There I may
See -- But I will not Name her -- She
Shall be happy, and I forgot.

Emil. Lean, Sir yet more -- Yonder I spy some
That may assist Us -- Oh Fate! Oh Lovisa!
How shall I ever dare appear before thee;
Thus sprinkled with thy Brother's Blood?
[Exeunt. Re-enter Bucarius, and Roderigo.
Buc. The Victims are ready for the Sacrifice -- Now let 'em
Dye in whining Tales; and hope Elysium; whilst I Seize
My exasperated Heroine. -- And
Retire, till the Storm is past.

Rod. What Is your Design?

Buc. To abscond a while; and if the Murmurings prove
Too loud at Us: To fly to the Indies; and there Revel
In Love and Pleasure; too great for Laws;
And happy above the reach of Fate.

Rod. I ask but to partake your Fortunes;
Which ever way they Bend.

Buc. You shall Command 'em -- have to Appamia
The humble way I need no longer move,
She dares not; cannot now deny her Love
Her Guilt, and Rival Rage her scorn Disarms,
I Am paid with nothing but her longed for Charms.
Exev
SCENE Changes.
Enter Adellaida, and Amedia.
Adel. How every Sense, is out of Tune, wounded and broken:
When the Minds disordered, through these Antique
Cloisters have I walked alone, at the silent Solemn
Midnight Hour; without the least fear, or apprehension --
Yet now a Gloomy Evening; and the Fatal Chance
Of the proceeding Day strikes me with horror:
Each Marble Pillar seems a shrouded Ghost;
And the hollow Winds Echo like their Groans!

Amid Go back dear Madam! For sure there is unusual Terror

Adel. On; and seek Appamia: I have made thee
A Coward, by my Fears.
Enter Emilius, Brisac, Led.
Bris. Here let me Rest; any further Motion gives me present

Emil. Gently set him down, whilst I fetch help --
[Death. Whose there -- My Adellaida.

Adel. [returning.] Is it Emilius calls?

Emil. That Wretch Emilius! Oh Sister! This cursed Hand,
And this unhappy Sword, I fear has slain a
Gentleman: Whom now to save I willingly would Dye!

Adel. What Gentleman!

Emil. The Brother to Lovisa my Wife! Behold!

Adel. Ah! Murder! Murder! My Love! My Husband
[Falls.
Emil. Darkness o'rewhelm me! What do thou say? upon Bris.

Bris. Thy Brother! Oh the strange work of Fate!
But upbrad him not; nor grieve too much,
My Charming Bride!
Upon thy Bosom let the poor Brisac Expire!
It Is the Millky-way: And leads I hope to Heaven!
[Dies.
Adel. Thou shall not go without me; come back;
Come back! Open thy Eyes Speak yet again!
Breath upon me -- Alas his Breath is gone!
Some Angel hat caught the precious Sweet:
And Treasured it in Immortality!

Emil. Her Griess root me with stiff'ning Horror!
Pale Death Usurps the lively Red, that used to Adorn
His Face: What Villain with obdurate Heart
And cruel Eyes could do this! But shall a Wife
Behold thee thus; and not Revenge Thee? -- --
Thy Dagger poiuts, the way detested, and
Accursed I Will drive thy barbarous Soul to Shades
Below; if my Sight, almost Drowned in Tears, can
Guide my feeble Arm!

Emil. Strike boldly!

Adel. Ha my Brother! My Darling Brother!
Fall, fall thou Wretch! Strike, strike and wound
Thy self.

Emil. What mean ye?

Adel. Prevented then in Desparation, Dig the Earth up!
Force thy way through to the Center --. or call upon
You ponderous Roof to Crush thee!

Amid. Help Sir! I cannot hold her!

Emil. What shall I do! prithee call my Father hither --
It Is now too late to hide ought from him --
[Exit Amid. Oh! That at first I had discovered her Love, and mine

Adel. My Father! Ah his Curse did this -- a Parents
Curse brought on me all this World of Woe!
Since then Curses have the power to kill: I Will Curse
All humane Kind! And first for thee -- Despair
Still gnaw thy Soul; when e're thou hop'st for Comfort,
May the deluding Vision vanish from thy Eyes; and
Such a Sight as my Brisac is now: Be thy
Perpetual Portion!

Emil. I beg ye cease!

Adel. Where Is now the charming Syllables; that used to carry
Thrilling pleasure to my Heart; and melting softness
To my Eyes! It Is gone! It Is past for ever! Even the
Last Antidote against Despair, Hope, is gone! --
Then with never-ceasing Wailings fix here, on this
Dear dead Image, feed thy Soul with Sorrow; till
I grow Pale and Cold like my Sorrow Love: till
One Grave (the only Bridal Beremains)
Receive us both!

Emil. Severely has my Fate Ordained, that I should be
The cruel Causeof these Heart-wounded Griefs!
Enter Viceroy, Amidia.
Vice. What does this continual Voice of Sorrow mean?
Still to Alarm me with New Mischiefs!
Can the time, Measured by so few Hours,
Produce these various Scenes of Horror?
Is it Don Lopez, over whom my Daughter Weeps?

Amid. Not Don Lopez, but a Nobleman of France,
Who in the late Progress, gained the Heart, and
Since the Nuptial Vows of my unhappy Mistress!

Emil. Oh Sir! Your Son, your wretched Son has done
All this -- Commit me to the hardest Laws,
My Just Country Decrees -- But Oh!
If e're in my Obedience I deserved your Favourur'd
If my Mother whose loved Memory you Treasured
As your greatest Bliss, Was dear to ye; when
Under the Ax, or on the Wrack I expire: Save
And protect my wife -- Send her safely back
To France: From whence I stole the unequaled prize!

Vice. Emilius here! My Eyes, and Ears thus entertained.
With Sights of Death, and Sounds of Marriage!
What mean these dismal Riddles?

Adel. I can Explain 'em -- See Sir your Power, you
Bid it Rain; and lo from my Eyes whole Deluges
Have poured -- you said I should behold
Pale Horror in the Face of him, I Loved
And look how dreadfully you are obeyed!

Vice. Alas! it is dire Confusion all -- But
Take her from the Body, and Guard her with special Care.

Adel. Stand off! Indeed ye'are to blame,
[They go to take Adel away. Do not Father; do not part us now --
I ask but this Cold Hand -- I Will lay it to my
Heart; and it shall bring me Quiet;
Everlasting Quiet.

Vice. Ye humor her distraction -- to some
Apartment lead her --

Adel. Let him come with me then -- do, do, Inhumane
Creatures do; yet all your Forces cannot keep in Life
I have him still; I hold, I grasp him --
Ah me! Their cruel strength prevails,
Another Look -- Ye Tigers, my Heart Strings
Swell, and Ach with painful stretching --
Once more, and they will burst -- Yes, yes,
My pale dead Love -- I shall -- I will
Over take thee! I will, I will!
[Exit forced off.
Vice. What have I done, Alonza; to deserve
Such Punishments? Henceforth never
Let Man build, in Earth his Happiness;
Since even our Children, whom we from Heaven are priviledg'd to Love, prove
our greatest
Torments! To the Hall of Justice let this
Dead Lord be born; and Summon thither the
Alcade, and all the Officers -- Oh Emilius!
How shall I behold thee now a Criminal to
Heaven, and me! But I will not Chide thee
Lest thou shoulst suffer; and thy Father's words
Prove the sad Presages of ensuing Fate.

Emil. You are too good; and I too guilty, for the Blessing
Of your forgiveness -- I feei a Pain almost
Intolerable; where that Villain touched me with his Sword.

Vice. Lead to the Wife you named so tenderly; and let us
Try to stop the further Current of these Misfortunes. --
Enter Lovisa, led by her Woman; her Hair down, Distracted, Wounded in her
Bosom, and Arms. -- Ha! What Beauteous Wretch is this?

Emil. My Lovisa! Or is it some Phantome, raised
For my Astonishment?

Lov. Give me way, I am all Consuming Flames.
Unhand me. Let me Lanch my
Veins yet Deeper! They are all on Fire!
Blood cannot quench 'em! My Breath is
Flakes of Fire! My Eyes like flaming
Meteors Shoot! My Nerves, my Arteries,
Like Shrivel^d Parchment shrink in Fire --
I Burn; I Blaze; I Dye -- Oh that I could --
For Death they say is Cold!

Emil. Speak, La Brette, the Cause; e're I Catch the
Madness! E're I grow Wild as Winds,
And Deaf as Storms!

Lab. Thus did I find her mangling her own Flesh,
Tearing her lovely Hair; and Raging in these Direful
Torments.

Lov. Off, off with these
Burning Robes! Dip 'em in some Spring,
Then Cover me again; and let 'em Drop, and Drop
Upon my Fiery Heart; Or turn the Rivers
On me; Lap me in Cool refeshing Waves --
Give (Oh give) me Ease!

Emil. Oh that I could -- that I could know from whence
These Horrors come Look not thus Distractedly
Upon me Be Calm, my Love; be Calm!
And since there is no hope of Life: Let Us Dye
In peace!

Vice. My Son!

Emil. Your Pardon Sir; I have no further wish --
The Business of my Hours is done!

Vice. Alonza! Search, Inquire; these Pangs are greater
Than Nature gives.

Emil. What Starts and what Convulsions
Do thou bear! It must be Poison
But by whom?

Lov. Ha! Yet another Blaze; Am I not
Consumed? My Head is Aetna; All the Springs
Of Blood, Rolling Seas of Fire
Bear me to the Frozen North, lay me in a Bed
Of Snow, will ye not Emilius; No, it is impossible,
The Mass is all on Fire! Ay now the Fabric
Falls, and I am Ashes.

Emil. My Sisters Dagger, Death Lingers. Look up Lovisa.

Vice. Alas Emilius! Think upon thy wretched Father!
Enter Bucarius, Dragging in Appamia, and Zelide.
Buc. Come forth thou Woman! Angel in View
In Action Fiend! And thou Black
Accomplice; whose Looks and Deeds are
Parallel Come forth. My Breath
Will last, Spite of thy Bloody Hand,
To tell the Viceroy, the Murders, thou have Caused

Vice. Bucarius Wounded! Which way shall I turn
My Bloodshot Eyes? Appamia!

Buc. Curses instead of Pity: First upon her, and then on me

App. Villain!

Buc. I am Indeed a Villain. Love, which sooner or later
Ruins all Mankind; was my Destruction.
But, Oh! I find, I cannot end my Story
Appamia's Love set me on to Mischief, and when
I claimed the promise, she had made
(For my Reward) Her person, and her
Wealth; She answered with a Blow
By a Poisoned Dagger given Sieze
Her, and that Devil Moor They will finish
What I cannot Oh!
(Dies.)
Vice. How, Madam! Guards put that
Infidel upon the Wrack immediately.

Zel. I Offer up my Limbs; practice your Torments
Yet not all the Agonies, Spain, or hell can.
Invent shall force Confession from me,
That will Injure my Loved Mistress!

App. Oh thou Strik'st me deeper, than my Conscience;
'Twas my Command forced the unhappy Wretch;
Save her from the Wrack; And I will own the fatal Turth

Vice. Appamia! Is It possible -- Is this Lovely
Creature by thee Destroyed?

App. No; by Emilius

Emil. I! did I? Falser than Malice in the Mouth
Of Envy! Invention blacker than Hell Creates!

App. the Cordial (Fool!) it is true, it was by me
Prepared, but you conveyed it to the Charmers Lips.

Emil. Hell and Despair! What could provoke
Thee? How have I been Deceived!

App. Dull, and Insensible had I not Eyes,
As well as thy Lovisa? She saw and Loved,
And ventured all -- So would I
My Flames were Fiercer far than hers.
Which disappointed, turned to black Revenge,
Accomplished now, but Oh for thee, ungrateful
As thou were, To thy Death I never did consent;
Nor that I care to be believed, for all things now are
Equal with me: But when that dead Villain brought
The Fatal News, That with Invennom'd Steel he had
Touched thee; I with the Poisoned Dagger, which he
Named gave back the Blow, and there he lies at
Once the proof of my Revenge, and Love.

Vice. How Terrible's a Woman's rage; but the Law
Must speak thy Sentence: Secure. 'em Guards.

App. The Law! but will that end my Misery, -- ha^t^
Late I begin to see the Fatal Ills my unhappy
Love has caused; My Zilide, who now shall Shield us
From the Terros of Despair? Let me for ever
Warn my Sex, and fright 'em from the thoughts of
Black Revenge, from being by Violent Passions
Swayed. Murder! And am I the cause? Fall Mountains
On this Guilty Head, and let me think no more.

Vice. Emilius -- Is there any Hopes?

Emil. Still there is warmth about her Heart
Her Eyes too Glimmer, like dying Tapers --
Oh my Lovisa! My Love has been thy Bane.

Lov. I grow Cool Emilius; thou may receive me now,
And not be set on Fire -- This I can bear --
Thus I could have died, And not Complained!

Emil. what pains have thou not born; what
Wracking Misery; When the Pangs of
Death are thought refreshing ease!
Hold off a little. -- Thus let us meet,
Thus let me Clasp thee -- Thus will
We Mount together.
(Stabs himself.)
Vice. O Fatal End of all my Hopes!

Emil. Farewell the blooming Expectation
Of a Prosperous Life -- Also farewell
The wracking Cares, the Treacheries, the
Woes, that might have been my Fate! --
Your Pardon Sir, My Disobedience, thus punished, Claims it.
How fares my Partner (even in Death)
One Kiss -- the last, that I shall ever take -- Oh!
[Dies.
Lov. Stay, my Emilius; I am a Stranger
Here; and have been hardly used -- No
Friend to Close my Dying Eyes? He Is gone!
I follow -- Lay me by the Man I have Loved;
With whom I would have Lived, for whom I Die.
[Dies.
Vice. Appamia, My Foster Daughter, but
I have done, Heavens Mercy overtake thy
Crimes: On Earth thou will meet with none.
Alonza, Thee I Substitute in full Authority,
Till farther Orders from the Court of Spain Arrive, and will
My self, for ever from the World retire
Leaving this sad Truth behind: That Parents
Should not, beyond the hopes of Heaven
Their Children Prize.
Nor Indulged Children dare to Disobey,
Lest they are punished such a dismal way.

FINIS.

