Truth Vindicated, AND The Liars Refuge swept away. Being an Answer to a Book
set forth by THOMAS COLLIER, called A Looking-glass for QVAKERS, and also to
some particulars in a Book of his called A Dialogue, etc. Wherein the truth is
cleared from those Slanders and Reproaches by him cast upon it; and the Refuge
of Lies swept away, and upon trial, himself found guilty of many of those Evils
which he has falsely charged upon the INNOCENT.

Also an Answer to his Queries in the end of the Book, called A Looking-glass,
etc. with some Queries returned to him to be answered.

Together with an Epistle to the people called Baptists; with whom we sometimes
fed on Husks: But now are brought to the Fathers house where there is BREAD
enough

Published by us who love truth in the inward parts, and are now called forth
by the Lord to bear testimony against Deceit, Unrighteousness, and deeds of
Darkness; who have long wandered upon the barren mountains, running from
mountain to hill; but now have heard the voice of the good Shepherd, and are
brought to the true fold, and known to this generation by the names of John
Pitman. Jasper Batt.


The lip of truth shall be established for ever: But a lying tongue is but for
a moment. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1658.

Truth vindicated, and the Liars Refuge swept away.
THomas Collier, a man long well known unto us, who has for some time professed
himself a Minister of the Gospel, or a Teacher of others, saying, that he is
set for the defense thereof; having published a Book, which he calls, A
Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and an Inquiring Christian (where in
truth there was neither) in which he undertakes to discuss the principles of
the people called Quakers, therein setting down several particulars, as by them
held, and guilty of, which they deny. Neither has he made any proof thereof,
but only said it; which Book being answered by I. N. and Thomas Collier charged
for uttering many Lies against the foresaid people, and above fifty of them
returned to him for a proof, or to rest on his head until the dreadful day of
account, unless he timely repent: Thereupon he has published another Book,
which he calls A Looking-glass for Quakers, in which he says, the truths
asserted in that Dialogue are clearly proved, and James Naylor and the Quakers
are proved to be liars and deceivers. Now it is not the truths in that Dialogue
(if any there) which he was called upon for a proof, but the lies by him
therein invented, which yet remain unproved, notwithstanding what is by him
alleged.

Now these Books coming to our view, and by us examined and weighed; and
finding our selves concerned therein, we being reputed by him under that name,
were pressed in spirit to publish this vindication on the Truths behalf, which
is by us owned, and lies and liars denied.

But before we proceed further, this is to be observed, that we sent him a
Letter dated the 19th day of the first month, 1657. thereby acquainting him
that such books we had seen published in his name, expressing such particulars
which we did declare in the name and fear of the Lord, were not owned by us,
but denied, and the Author to be neither Minister of the Gospel, nor Christian,
but a Liar, slanderer, and false accuser: And that if he did not disown the
said books, or confess that he had wronged the truth, and us who own it, or
otherwise reasonably satisfy us in some short time, either by word or writing,
we should as the Lord should direct and order, publish our Innocence, and some
of the Authors wickedness, that so his Sheeps clothing might no longer hide
his wolvish nature. Now there being a time and place agreed on, and appointed
by him and one of us for him to vindicate himself, and prove the particulars
before mentioned, where was a meeting accordingly, and where only four of those
particulars debated. Thomas Collier went away, not mentioning any further or
other time for debating the rest, though it was then, and still is by us
denied; that what was then by him offered for proof of his Assertions, to be
any way valued for his purpose: And now his Looking-glass being his only
Refuge (that we know of) which consists much of Lies, must be swept away, unto
the particulars whereof we are now come. 1 That all our principles, are
delusions. 2 That we hold not any principle of truth truly as it is in Jesus.
Now for proof of these particulars, he says, that if that which follows be
true, then this is true; and we may safely conclude, that if that which follows
be false, then so must this.

That which follows is this; that we forsake the true way, decreed and ordered
of God for the attaining of justification, which is by faith in Christ
crucified; this is charged on the people called Quakers, not one or some of
them, but the people called Quakers. Now for proof hereof in his Dialogue, he
only says it, but offers none. In his Glass he alleges James Nayler, in his
love to the Lost, concerning justification, where he uses these words; That
persons are so justified as they are sanctified, and mortified and no farther;
And at other places he several times expresses Mortification and
Sanctification, before Justification: And at another place; That by which the
just lives, is that by which the creature is justified. And so T. C. says,
that it is James Naylers great work to make Sanctification, Mortification, and
Justification to be one, and Justification to depend on Sanctification and
Mortification.

The work that we have in hand is, not to vindicate persons, but truth; and if
any one should forsake the true way decreed and ordered of God for the
attaining of justification, Is that a sufficient ground to say, the people
called Quakers do so? Is there any one or more that has set out any writing by
appointment, and signed in the name of the people called Quakers (as T. C. and
others did a writing in the name, and by appointment of the Messengers of the
Churches at Tiverton the 18th day of the 7th. month) wherein such a thing is
declared, as to forsake Christ the way to Justification, then there might be
some ground for such a charge; but further, the truth declared by James Nayler
in this particular, we own; and he that with an impartial eye views his
writing, will never find any such thing by him declared, as T. C. falsely
charges; for J. N. says, that the wisdom of men in the fall, finding these
several words in the Scripture, has in their imaginations run them into
division, and separated that which is in one, and cannot be divided in the
possession, for it is one that works all these: and that which sanctifies,
that mortifies, and the same justifies; and so his drift is, not to make
Justification to depend on Sanctification and Mortification, but all on the
just one; and so to discover the vanity of such a people, who would conceit a
possession of justification without sanctification or mortification, like the
Authors of that Writing from Tiverton, who say they are joined to the Lord, and
yet confesses abominations reigning in their souls, drawing iniquity with cords
of vanity: A light spirit, slavish fear, mockers of God, living short of the
true sight and sense of Gods Majesty, a wretched worldly spirit, coldness and
deadness on their souls, formality in holy duties, indifferency, Laodicean
spirit, without the sense of the work, and true travail of soul, as in that
writing with more such fruits is expressed.

Now J. N. clearly lays the work of justification, sanctification, and
mortification on Gods righteousness, saying, it is the work of God wrought by
Christ; and they who had received the Spirit, were called to all these by faith
in his blood: And in what he writes concerning Redemption in the same Book he
says, All who knows the redemption of Christ by his precious blood, etc. And
in another place, Who has redeemed us to God by his blood; and so it is clear
by his words, as he expresses them, without T. Colliers Expositions, that he
lays the work on Gods righteousness wrought by Christ; and why should T. C.
conclude a meaning from some of his words, contrary to his own expressions; but
the thing is very probable, that he had laid this charge from his own
imagination before he had ever seen J. Naylers Love to the Lost.

Another testimony he offers for proof of this particular, is what himself
heard (as he says) at a meeting of ours at a place called Himmington, but it is
like it was intended Limmington, where he and another, as he says, taking
occasion to hold forth Christ amongst them, they heard with patience until
they came to hold forth justification through his blood; Then their Teacher
cried out blasphemy, and said, that they spoke stories to the people, and
denied the spirit by which they spoke. There coming to the meeting, and
speaking there of justification by the blood of Christ, is confessed, and their
preaching of that which they knew not might well be called stories; but that
our friend Christopher Holder called Justification through the blood of Christ,
Stories or Blasphemy, is utterly denied, as several do witness who were then
present, and do affirm that our friend said he owned the words, but their
spirit he denied; for them to talk of that which they were ignorant of, might
well be called Stories, the Prophet says, Jer. 5.2. Though they say, the Lord
lives, surely they swear falsely. Dare any say, the Prophet denied the Lord
lived? Now for such whose abominations reign, are drawing iniquity with cords
of vanity, etc. as T. C. confessed of himself since that time, witness Tiverton
writing. We say, for such to take upon them to preach Justification through the
blood of Christ. Their testimony is by the truth in us denied, and may well be
called stories, and they blasphemers: and the Lord will say to such, what have
you to do to take my words into your mouths? And further we know that
Christopher Holder (at that time, and believe yet does, if living) own no other
way for justification, but Christ crucified by faith in his blood, as the
Scriptures declare; and so both those which T. C. produces as witnesses for
him, are found bearing testimony against him, and so the two first particulars,
and this which follows are found false: We also say, that if both those before
produced by T. C. for evidence had declared the thing asserted, which is
utterly denied, yet could no rational unprejudiced man take them for sufficient
evidence, to prove the people called Quakers hold such principles.

And further we do declare for our selves, and that which is also assented unto
by the people called Quakers, that this we own and witness Jesus Christ is
come a light into the world, that all men through him might believe; and is the
true light which lights every man that comes into the world: And whosoever
follows him shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
This is he who is the way to the Father, and none can come to the Father but by
him; even he who was in the beginning before all things, and by whom all things
were made; even he that was dead, but is now alive, and lives for evermore, who
is made unto the Saints sanctification and righteousness, as well as
justification and redemption, and saves his people from their sins: And they
who are made witnesses of him, know him dwelling in them, and for that end made
manifest to destroy the works of the Devil: And all those who make a
profession of his name, and say, he is their Redeemer, Savior, or Justifier,
and have abominations reigning in their souls, Iniquities written in their
foreheads, and are drawing it with cords of vanity, are Liars and Deceivers;
for none can know him a Justifier, but they who know him a Sanctifier and a
Mortifier; and whosoever knows his salvation from condemnation, must know his
salvation from sin: This is that Christ we bear record unto, the seed of the
woman that bruises the Serpent head, whose day Abraham saw, and was the Rock
that followed Israel, of whom they drank. The same the Prophets prophesied of,
who was born of the Virgin in the City of David, preached himself the light of
the world, the way to the Father, was hated, persecuted, mocked, reviled, and
delivered to be crucified, by those who professed they were in expectation of his
coming, yet chose a Murderer before him. This is he who is the living bread
that came down from heaven, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is
drink indeed, and whereof whosoever does not eat and drink have no life in
them: He that can receive it let him; who was a man of sorrows, acquainted with
griefs, his visage more marred then any man's, of whom many were and are
astonished, was crowned with thorns, crucified between Thieves, was buried,
rose again, and ascended far above all heavens, and fills all things, being
glorified with the Father, with the glory which he had with him before the
world was, the same to day as yesterday, and for evermore, who makes
intercession for the Saints, and is the Mediator of the New Testament, even the
man Christ Jesus, and he that has seen him, has seen the father also, through
whose blood we are justified, and are redeemed from our former vain
conversation; and witness remission of sins, who has baptized us with the
holy Spirit, and is our righteousness, with whom we have fellowship, and with
the Saints in light: And they that walk in the light as he is in the light,
have fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from
all sin; who though we are many, are one bread; for the bread that we break is
the Communion of the body of Christ, and the cup that we drink is the Communion
of the blood of Christ, and they that discern not this body, eat and drink
their own damnation, (he that has an ear to hear, let him hear) and under his
Banner we fight, against the Beast, false Prophet, Deceivers, and all the
Nations of the world, now united together against him (Our weapons being not
carnal but spiritual, mighty through God, to the casting down of strong
holds, and high imaginations) whose daily Cross we witness to be the great
power of God to salvation, who lives and dwells in us, and whose peace none can
ever take from us; and who shall dash his enemies in pieces, and grind them to
powder, before whom Nobles does bow, and Kings cast down their Crowns, whose
scepter is a scepter of righteousness, and of the increase of his government
and peace there shall be no end, unto whom be glory for ever and ever. And this
is the truth spoken from our hearts, the Lord bearing us witness; and this is
the true way decreed by God for attaining of justification, which we have seen
and heard, and are witnesses of, and is no principle of delusion, but held by
us truly, as it is in Jesus, according to the Scriptures of truth; and so
Thomas Collier has wronged the innocent, for which he must account.

Another of the particulars falsely charged on us is, that we have set up
another way for the attaining of Justification, that is by Quaking, etc. This
is only affirmed in his Dialogue, but no proof mentioned; and in his Glass he
endeavors thus to prove it; that this is true, is evident, and apparent, in
that they have affirmed, that their Quaking is the spirit of burning, through
which all must pass, to enter into Righteousness and Justification, etc.

Let the Reader mind this proof; he says, it is evident and apparent; by what
evidence? If persons will take an impudent false affirmation for proof, then it
is evident and apparent, but not otherwise by what is produced; he says they
have affirmed it; who is it? what particular person? we and many others deny
it, and own no other way, but what we have already declared: and it is very
likely, if he had heard such a thing from any particular person, he would have
mentioned it in his Dialogue, or his Glass, and so he appeals to the
understanding for judgment; but we say, he that judges this a proof, to say
they have affirmed it, is void of understanding: And if T. C. had not been
blinded with envy, arrogance, and impudency, he would rather have confessed his
lie, then have persisted in his obstinacy; but at last he calls I. N. to
justify this, in his answer to the Dialogue. Now this must be granted, that
the Dialogue was published before there could be an answer to it; and the
charge was laid in the Dialogue, and so laid without proof or cause: And can
any one in reason take J. Naylers Book for a witness, when in that Book he
returns this to be one of the Lies charged by T. C. on the people called
Quakers, and no such words in his Book, as to say, that the Quakers have set up
another way to attain Justification by, that is by quaking, etc. He alleges
the 15 page, but there is no such thing affirmed: This he says, that all that
do declare the way they came to God, witness quaking or trembling; and all
that knew the word of God trembled at it. Do he here say, that the Quakers have
set up quaking as a way to attain Justification? T. C. might blush at such
impudency, if he had not got a forehead that could not.

Another lie by T. C: charged on us is, that we have outed Christ in the great
work of justification, and no less then trample under foot the blood of the
covenant, counting it an unholy thing, or at least too unholy to look to it, or
expect justification by it; this he affirms in his Dialogue. Now in his Glass
to prove it, he says, if the preaching of it be Stories, and Blasphemy, this
is a trampling of it under foot, etc. And if Sanctification and Mortification
be the fulfilling of the Law, and the creatures justification, then the blood
of Christ is laid aside.

For answer we say, that T. C. and such as he makes the preaching of it a
story: If any in taking upon them to preach Justification by the blood of
Christ to other, while abominations reign in their own souls, and are drawing
iniquity with cords of vanity, as is expressed in Tiverton writing before
mentioned: and as for Sanctification and Mortification to be the fulfilling of
the Law; and the Creatures justification is not proved by T. C. that the people
called Quakers own any such thing; but we say, such as imagine to themselves a
Justification without Sanctification, and Mortification, shall be scattered in
their imaginations, being no other but filthy Dreamers, deceivers, and being
deceived, and are blind leaders of the blind, and shall all fall into the pit
together.

Now consider, what greater Agents can the Devil have for his Kingdom, then
such who preach to others, or expect to themselves Justification, without
Sanctification and Mortification, taking, and what in them lies giving liberty
to themselves and others to live in lust; but the grace we own and witness,
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and so Justification,
Sanctification, and Mortification, is all the work of God by Christ; and none
may conclude, they have one without all; Faith without works being dead. As for
our owning the blood of Christ, we refer it to what we have said in our answ.
to the first particular: But T.C. goes on in his wickedness, adding sin to sin,
lie to lie, and says, pa. 3. it further appears in that all that will own
them, must deny all their faith and justification in Christ crucified. Verily,
except thou repent, God will smite thee, thou lying tongue, he will destroy
thee for ever; he will take thee away, and pluck thee from thy dwelling place
and root thee out of the land of the living, and give thee thy portion with
liars, who have herein out-stript all that have gone before thee that have come
to our view: If thou can produce one example, that ever any were invited to
own, or refused to be owned by us on any such terms, or let shame and
confusion cover thee for ever: But he is still running on in his lying and
false accusing, like the horse into the battle, saying, hence it is they judge
and condemn all but themselves, because they have found out another
righteousness: So that indeed and in truth they account the blood of the
Covenant too unholy for them to look at for justification; neither do they ever
teach remission of sins by faith in the blood of Jesus. Very many people can in
this bear testimony against thee: and surely we say, did thou know that
blood, and faith in it, thou would witness victory over, and cleansing from
those abominable lies. Now let any rational man judge what proof here is more
then the reiterating of a company of lies, and therefore need no further answer.

Another of his Lies charged on us is, That we have found another way to go to
God by, then Christ the Mediator, this he affirms in his Dialogue, and for
proof says it over again in his Glass, and to it adds another lie; That we
disown Christ to be a man; he adds further, and says, Naylor in his Love to
the Lost, where all their principles are stated, such as they are; yet there is
never a one of Christ's Ascension and Mediatorship. Does J. N. or any other
(except thy self) say that all the Quakers Principles are there stated? Thou
have said before, they have set up another way to Justification then by Christ,
that is by quaking. Do thou find such a principle in that Book? It Is like
thou will not deny, but the way to Justification is a principle: And if we have
set up quaking to be the way, and all our principles be there stated, then that
must be one, or thou must be a Liar: It were well if thou knew a bridle for thy
tongue; but because his Ascension and Mediatorship are not stated there (as
thou say) does it follow that they are denied by the people called Quakers?
and then thou draws thy conclusion suitable to thy premises, saying, by all
which it appears, that they have indeed another way, such a one as themselves
have invented to go to God by, and not by Christ, page 4. By what does it
appear? because thou have said it, here is nothing else remaining to prove it;
but who can believe thy testimony, that art thus given over to lying,, except
such as are as blind or impudent as thy self?

He still goes on charging, that they own not Christ in his Authority, will not
submit to him in his word: In stead of harkening to the voice of Christ in
Scripture, they hearken to, and follow after either the voice of Satan, or
suggestings of their own deceitful hearts within them, and call this Christ
and his voice, which they must and do obey, though contrary to all rules of God
in Scripture.

And instead of proving this with an audacious impudent face, he asks the
question, saying, Oh all you Quakers! is this a lie too? do you not witness it
to the world, that you hearken not to the voice of Christ in Scripture? nor
obey him on the account of faith, but to the voice of Satan? or at best your
own deceitful hearts, though contrary to all rules of Scripture. Will any
rational man account this a proof? was ever such impudency heard of? First, to
slander and accuse falsely; and when called upon for a proof, then ask whether
this be a lie too? What is it, but as much as to say, who dare deny what he
affirms, though never so false. Can any of thy own followers be so blind as to
own thee here? And thou go on, page 4. filling up thy measure of lies
saying, you call it the light within, the voice of Christ, the true Word, etc.
when it is but your own lying fancies at the best, witness your turning aside
from all the glorious truths of Christ, in Scripture: And then for proof of all
this, beside thy own false affirmation, thou bring J. Naylers words in his
Salutation to the seed of God. Nor can your litterall promises sure your
condition, nor save you from Satan's power. Does this any way tend to the proof
of what is asserted, that we own not Christ in his authority, etc? But thou
go on, as if thy main work were to invent lies, and say, by which he would
give to understand, that all the Scripture must be laid aside, only looking
to, and following the Lights within. Did thou ever hear of such a thing from
any of those called Quakers, as to press any to follow Lights within? Or is
there any thing in those words of J. N. tending to the laying aside of
Scripture; but thy Master sets thee forth to manifest thy self.

We further answer, the truth of the Scriptures do we own and witness; the
voice of Christ have we heard; to his authority are we subject, and have his
word abiding in us, which is a light to our steps, by which we come to see the
deceit of our own hearts, and are delivered from it, by which also we see where
all those are who are imitating the Saints recorded in Scripture, without the
life and power which they had, and so are no better then those vagabond Jews,
who would cast out Devils, because Paul and others did, but were void of that
power and authority by which they did it. For this we say in the name of the
Lord, there is many have, and read the Scriptures, but few know the commands of
Christ, of which sort are all those that know not Christ made manifest in them;
for those whom the Lord sent spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, and had
the word abiding in them: Acts 2.4.
And the Saints knew the anointing in them which taught them all things, and
needed not man's teaching, 1 Cor. 2.12,13,14.
and so they did not steal the words, every man from his neighbor, but as they
had received the gift, so they ministered; and if they had not received a word
from the Lord, they dare not speak a divination of their own brains, but in the
name of the Lord did bear their testimony against all such to be deceivers; and
such as run, and the Lord never sent them, for by their fruits they are known.

And by the same rule do we walk as they did, even the spirit of Truth, and not
by another man's line: And so as all are kept to this rule, every one is kept in
his place, and so are serviceable to one head, one Lord and Master. Of the
Apostles, some were sent to preach and baptize, another was sent to preach the
Gospel, and not to baptize. Some were sent to the Circumcision, and others to
the Gentiles: Now as they all were obedient to the commands they had received,
they discharged their duties, and not like a generation of men in these days,
who are crying up the Scriptures; but being ignorant of the commands of Christ,
intrude themselves into things they know not, and runs on in a vain imitation
of the Saints recorded in Scripture in outward observations and bodily
worships, but comes not to the life, power and authority which they witnessed,
and are ignorant of the true guide and Leader: And so many seeing in the
Scripture what Paul or others of the Lords faithful Ministers wrote unto
particular persons or Churches according to their several conditions or
occasions, take a part or parcel of it, and read to their hearers, or
followers; and then add a Divination of their own brains; but the voice of
Christ, or Word of the Lord they never knew, and so they go contrary to the
rules of Scripture, unless it be in following the false Teachers and Prophets,
who stole the words, etc. against whom the true Ministers recorded in the
Scriptures, were sent by the Lord to bear witness, and the same is witnessed
in this day of the Lord: For on him do we wait to know his will, and receive
his counsel, and as he commands, we obey; and when we have received a word
from him, and a command to utter it, we dare not dispute, but obey, and speak
as the spirit gives utterance, and until then we dare not but be silent; for
such as runs and the Lord sends not, shall not profit the hearers; and so not
to take a Message that another has received, and run with it when the Lord
never commanded us: And this also we say, the baptism of Christ we have
received, and the communion of his body we partake, and do discern it, even one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. And if he shall command us to go into the water,
and to eat bread and drink wine together, we shall be obedient; but to do it
our selves, or administer it to others, because some of the Saints did it, we
dare not, unless we are commanded of the Lord; for such as meddled with the
things of God, and not commanded by him, nor as he commanded, though some of
them might have good intentions in what they did; yet the Lord showed his high
displeasure on them by severe punishments, and sending his faithful servants
to testify against them; witness Nadab and Abihu, the men of Bethshemesh,
Vzza, Saul, and the false Prophets, who stole the words from their neighbor,
and run when the Lord never sent them: And therefore let all such as do things
by imitation of the Saints in Scripture; or of others who obeyed the commands
of God, and have not received the like authority as they had, fear and
tremble, and take warning in time, lest the Lord make them examples of his
wrath and indignation, as he has done others before. Now let no envious,
cavilling, or ignorant person slander us, and say, we deny the Scripture, for
of the truth thereof are we witnesses. And also of the spirit of truth which
gave them forth, which was and is the Saints guide and leader, and dearly do we
own them, and this is the truth from our hearts.

Page 4. Another of his lies charged upon us is, That we disown the coming of
Christ from heaven: And for proof of this, he brings E. B. in his Book called,
The true faith of the Gospel, wherein he says, The very Christ of God is
within us, we dare not deny him, etc. Now T. C. says, If the very Christ of
God be within them, he cannot come from heaven. E. B. further saying; they that
are led by the spirit of Delusion shall answer the rest of thy Query; (by which
says T. C.) he gives to understand, that those that owns the being in, and
coming of Christ from heaven, and looks for him, are led by a spirit of
Delusion: So that they do not only condemn the generation of the just, etc. but
the Saints of God in the primitive days. How is this man hasting to fill up
his measure of lies and slanders against the innocent? Does E. B. because he
says, The very Christ of God is within us, deny his coming from heaven? Might
it not rather have been from thence concluded, that he witnessed his coming?
But T. C. is found adding three lies instead of clearing himself of one; for
he says, that E. B. gives to understand, that those that own the being in, and
coming of Christ from heaven, and look for him, are led by a spirit of Delusion.

2 That we condemn the generation of the just, that are now waiting for the Son
from heaven.

3 And the Saints and servants of God in the Primitive days. He further says,
that it is no part of Naylers Creed in his Love to the Lost, the Ascension,
Intercession, and coming of Christ: (observe) Naylers Creed, a scoffing, vain,
light spirit, the Scripture in him, and such like is fulfilled: The leaders of
the people cause them to err, by their lies and their lightness; but if J. N.
has not a word of it in that Book, is it not blind impudency therefore to say
the people called Quakers deny it?

And further we answer; This is he whom we bear testimony unto, who fills all
things: he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven,
and dwells in us, as he did in the Saints in the Primitive days, whom we now
own, and witness to be our King, and Lawgiver, and are so far from condemning
them, that we give our testimony with them, and leave it to the understanding
unprejudiced Reader to judge, whether T. C. by saying that Christ was not in
the Saints, as he did lately at Glastonbury, before many witnesses, be not
found condemning the Saints in the Primitive days; who said that Christ was in
them, as Paul and others. And also the generation of the just, now who are
witnesses of his being in them, and obedient to his commands; and so what he is
charging us, upon true trial he is found guilty himself.

Another of his Lies by him charged on us is, That we disown the kingdom of
Christ, which is the great and blessed promise of the Gospel, the faith and
hope of Saints, for proof hereof he says, If the very Christ be in them, he is
not in heaven; and that Naylor in his Salutation to the seed of God,
contemptably says; you observe days and years, persons and forms, lo here,
and lo there; and the time and manner of his Reign you are jangling abouts and
what a one he shall be; all which as T.C. says, declares that he accounts the
Reign of Christ so much witnessed in Scripture, etc. to be but jangling and
conceits.

Now mark the insufficiency, absurdity, and falsnesse of this pro^, as if E. B.
because he says, the very Christ of God is in us, the ^ore he disowns his
kingdom, and denies his being in heaven Might he not as well charge the same
on Paul, who says, Christ lives in me? And Christ himself, because he uses
these words, I in them? etc. in his prayer for the Saints; John 17. And if the
Saints faith and hope be according to Christ's prayer, who is it that disowns
and denies the coming and kingdom of Christ according to their faith and hope;
either E. B. and the people called Quakers, who witness Christ's being in them
according to his prayer, and promise; or T.C. who denies Christ's being in the
Saints, contrary to both? He further alleges, that J. N. says, you observe
days and years, etc. as before expressed: We say as before, may not T. C. as
well charge Paul, nay Christ himself, for disowning his Kingdom, and denying
his coming, whose words were to the same purpose?

We further answer, that this is the King, who reigns in righteousness, and
rules in judgment; and for such who live in wickedness, have abominations
reigning, Iniquity apparently written in their foreheads, drawing it with
cords of vanity. To dispute and talk of the Reign of Christ, it becomes them no
better then a jewel in a Swines snout, and may well be said to be jangling and
conceits; for Satan's subjects to talk of Christ's kingdom and reign, servants
of Sin, while there, to boast of freedom by Christ, such cannot be witnesses
of it, and their hope will perish; But T. C. talks of the appearance of Christ,
which the Scripture witnesses, and Saints expected; but what is that to him
who lives in lying, and such abominations, as are confessed by him in Tiverton
writing? For such as hoped for his appearance purified themselves, as he is
pure. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is
true, and he in us. This is the ancient of days, who now sits as Judge and
Lawgiver, and we bear testimony his judgment is just, and his Laws righteous,
whereunto all shall confess. This is that King, whose kingdom is not of this
world, whose throne is for ever and ever; And a scepter of rigteousnesse is the
scepter of his kingdom. Even he by whom God has spoken unto us, who is
appointed Heir of all things, by whom he made the world, by the word of whose
power all things are upheld.

Page 5. Another lie by him charged on us is, That we disown the Resurrection
of the dead: For proof of this he alleadges Ja: Naylers Love to the Lost, in
these words; That it is a mystery sealed with the Sons of God. Nor can any ever
know, with what bodies they shall rise, till they come to the flesh of Christ;
and he says, note, this man owns no flesh of Christ, and that he intends by
coming to the flesh of Christ, is to come to know that Christ has no flesh,
but all spirit. Now to examine this proof, that the Resurrection is a Mystery,
is a truth; for Christ says, I am the resurrection; and Christ is a Mystery,
hid from the wise and prudent, as the Scriptures witness; but because J. N.
says, the Resurrection is a mystery, and that none shall ever know with what
bodies they shall rise until they come to the flesh of Christ. Does therefore
the people called Quakers disown the Resurrection of the dead, and deny the
flesh of Christ? what a strange kind of reasoning is here? Surely no
understanding unprejudiced man can own this any way tending to the proof of
what is asserted; might it not rather be concluded from these words, seeing
that the Resurrection is a mystery? and none knows with what bodies they shall
rise until they come to the flesh of Christ; that he owns, both the
Resurrection and flesh of Christ? Other words T. C. mentions of James Naylers,
which tends nothing at all to the disowning of the Resurrection; but he adds
words of his own, and from his own propositions or suppositions, at last
draws this conclusion, this must be no part of the Resurrection: so excluding
the body and the Resurrection, when the words produced admits of no such
Interpretations: He also says, note Naylors Divinity in a mystery: And we also
say, note the scoffers light (as well as) lying spirit of this man T. C. But
let the understanding unbyassed Reader take notice what J. N. writes touching
the Resurrection, and then they must confess that he is so far from disowning
of it, that he clearly declares the contrary; for thus he says, The day
comes, in which all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Judge,
and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Think on
this you wicked workers, who live and dye in your sins, etc. And further, a
terrible day will this be unto you that die in your sins: And this the children
of Light knows whom your envious minds is accusing, as though they denied the
Resurrection, though you see them preparing for it, by casting off the deeds of
darkness, etc. which, were our hope only in this life, we were of all men most
miserable, who have denied all these things for the Lord, that in him we might
be found at that day, in whom we look for a better resurrection, etc. Therefore
has God appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness,
and give a just recompense: When the Lord himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, the quick and dead to judge,
and the dead in Christ shall rise first, as says the Scripture. Wherefore
blessed are they that dye in the Lord, but woe to you that dye in your sins
at that day. And now let him that is not given up to lying and blindness,
judge whether I. N. owns the Resurrection of the Dead, or not. How is this man
T. C. found adding lie to lie: First, charging the people called Quakers, that
they disown the Resurrection of the Dead; and when called to prove it,
produces I. N. for evidence, who so clearly and fully declares his owning of
it; but he thinks (it may be) to blind the eyes of the simple, and cover his
own wickedness by deceitful reciting some, and falsely mentioning others of
James Naylers words, as he who compares T. C. his writings with J. Naylers, may
easily behold: and then from his own additions, suppositions, and false
interpretations, draws conclusions; but the wicked is snared in the work of his
own hands.

Page 6. Another of his lies charged upon us is, that we disown eternal life
with Christ; and for proof of this he says, this is clear, that you own no
eternal life with Jesus Christ, of any man, but of the Light within, which
they call the seed, etc. and then produces J. Nayl. words in his Salutation to
the seed of God, page 13. and with this seed is the Covenant, which seed you
know not: observe this proof; Does his three times affirming of it prove the
thing once in the Dialogue, and twice in the Glass? what is this, but first to
make a lie, and then as if twice affirming of it again were sufficient proof?
As for J. Naylers words, With this Seed, etc. Is there any thing in them
tending to the disowning of eternal life, with Christ of any man? verily he is
void of reason, or blinded with prejudice, that will admit this for a proof.
May not T. C. as well say, that Paul denies eternal life with Christ? because
he says, the promise is to the seed, not seeds, etc? And what is mentioned of
J. N. in answer to that particular going before touching the Resurrection, may
be sufficient to demonstrate, that eternal life with Christ is by him owned,
and so T. Colliers own evidence is found against him.

And this we say touching both those particulars; Eternal life with Christ; and
the Resurrection of the dead. The life which is eternal with Christ we own and
witness, according to the promise of Christ, for him we witness living in us,
who was from everlasting and shall be to everlasting; he who was the first, and
shall be the last, in whose strength we stand, and in whose power we witness
victory over all unclean spirits; and shall after we have suffered with him a
while, reign with him in life and glory for ever.

And as for the Resurrection of the dead, we are so far from disowning of it,
that we are pressing hard toward the attaining of it: Yea, the resurrection of
the just and unjust do we own; for if our hope were only in this life, we were
of all men most miserable: But we are not of those that say, how are the dead
raised? and with what bodies do they come? But on the good will and pleasure of
the Lord do we wait, who gives a body as it pleases him, and to every seed
his own body: And if any are yet asking what body it is that shall arise? we
answer in the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.36, etc. Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it dye, etc. And so all busy, lying, wicked
persons shall one day know, that that day which will be to us a day of glory and
rejoicing, even the day of the Resurrection shall be to them a day of shame,
misery, and lamentation; He that has an ear to hear, let him hear. And so
these must rest on Thomas Collier for lies, and the people called Quakers are
acquitted.

Page 6. Another charge which he lays on us is; That notwithstanding all this,
we own our selves to be perfect and free from sin, entered into a state of
Justification, not by faith in Christ, but by their own righteousness attained
by taking heed to the Light within, and passing through the spirit of burning
as they say (viz.) of quaking fits, etc. This he affirms in his Dialogue, and
being put to his proof (for there he offers none) In his Glass he says; This
is a truth so apparent, that he that runs may read, in every Quakers mouth: Yet
it seems this must be proved too, though it be the common Language in
discourse, and in print, etc. Yea, we exepct proof, for we deny it, and charge
thee to be a liar, and thy testimony is not to be received. Now for proof he
says, But this may easily be discerned in Nayler concerning perfection Page
33. 40, 41. is this a proof sufficient to prove what is asserted? to mention
such a place, when there is nothing there tending to the proof of any part of
it? But he further alleadges Ja. Naylors answer to his Book, page 73. in these
words; Did ever Minister of Christ preach against perfection as thou do? who
say, that perfection is not attainable here? Is this any thing at all to
prove what is asserted?

And further at the meeting at Glastonbury before mentioned this particular
being one of the four then debated, T. C. then said, That by every Quaker, he
did not mean every particular of them, bu^ the generality of them, or every one
that he had discourst withal: And being urged to name some particulars, he
answered, he did not remember where he had discourst with any about that
particular: He was then asked, whether he had not discourst with some at
Bristoll (then named to him) he confessed he had. It was then demanded, whether
they affirmed any such thing to him, that they were perfect? he answered, that
he did not remember whether they did at all discourse about that particular,
and so out of his own mouth is proved the liar. How does T.C. forget himself,
to say, It Is so apparent, that he that runs may read in every Quakers mouth;
and that it is the common Language in discourse, and in print, etc. And thence
would infer a kind of impudency in the people called Quakers, to deny it, or
demand proof for it. Surely, if those particulars before asserted by him were
so evident in every Quakers mouth, and the common Language in discourse and
print, he might well have produced some particulars for instance. Is it
possible that there can be any almost of his own followers so blind as not to
see his lying and impudency? besides his absurdity, to bring the Answer to his
Book, to prove what he had said therein? So that if his Book had not been
answered, it seems his proof had yet been wanting; although what is there
alleged, serves not at all to his purpose: Let all who have any modesty,
blush at such wickedness and folly.

And we further say, that perfection we own, witness, and press after,
forgetting that which is behind: Pressing hard forwards, even toward the
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, believing that
he which has begun the work, will in his own time finish it in us. And all
those who with us in faithfulness and patience wait for it, we owning,
obeying, and following the light of the world, the gift of God which is
perfect: And they who walk in the light as he is in the light, have fellowship
with us, and know his blood cleansing from all sin: For into the new Jerusalem
shall nothing that is unclean ever enter; and they who are by the Lord
foreknown, are predestined to be conformable to the image of his Son; that as
he is (even so they should be in this present world) who was perfect, and left
us a perfect example, and whose prayer was, that they may be made perfect in
one: And when he ascended on high, he gave several gifts, but all to this end,
for the perfecting of the Saints: And for this the Ministers of Christ
labored, to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, and only and alone in
him do we own, witness, and press after it: And of this several of the
Saints in Scripture came to be witnesses, even to be cleansed, washed and
sanctified, made free from sin, and so servants unto righteousness, and had
their fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life; and the way is but
one, and so the charge remains false.

Another of his Lies charged on us is, that we own neither Salvation, nor
Damnation of any person, but of the Light within. This he affirms in his
Diaglogue: and for proof brings J. Naylers Love to the Lost, concerning
Judgment, where he produces these words, Judgment passes upon all that is in
the Creature contrary to the life of God, and his judgment must pass upon all
that is unrighteous, and they live in that which is for judgment, fire and
condemnation: And T.C. says, It were well for evil persons, if nothing were
for judgment and fire but evil principles and practices, etc. What evidence is
this, to prove that the people called Quakers own neither Salvation nor
Damnation of any person, which is affirmed in both his Books? Is there any
thing in these words tending to such a purpose? because I. N. says, Judgment
passes upon all that is in the creature, contrary to the life of God, and his
judgment must pass upon all that is unrighteous, and they live in that which
is for fire and condemnation. Does therefore he, or the people called Quakers
deny the Salvation, or Damnation of persons? If in this T. C. had been
faithful to I. N. he might have found in the same Book concerning Judgment,
speaking of the wicked; with that which you hate shall you be condemned, with
other words to that purpose: And in the same Book concerning the Resurrection,
he thus says; Think of this you wicked workers, who live and dye in your sins,
and yet please your selves with talking of the Resurrection, etc. A woeful day
will it be unto you who are found in your sins, and in love of the world; you
profane Esaus, and cursed Nimrods, etc: You hypocrites, who profess God in
words, but in works deny him, etc. A terrible day will this be to you who dye
in your sins: And speaking of the children of Light, he says, That in him we
might be found at that day, in whom we look for a better resurrection; which
did we not see to be an unmeasurable reward, we have an opportunity to return,
etc. And if our hope were only in this life, we were of all men most
miserable, and many other words to the same purpose: And now that T. C. or any
other should be so impudent as to charge the people called Quakers for owning
neither Salvation nor Damnation of any person, and be so blind to produce J.
N. for a witness, who so evidently declares that he owns both.

And this further we say, A day we own, wherein every man shall receive a due
reward according to their works done in the body, whether good or evil. Even
in that day which God has appointed to judge the world in righteousness, when
the wicked shall not be able to stand in judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous. Yea a day when all that are in the graves shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth, they that have done
good, to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation, when a final separation shall be witnessed, and
each receive his sentence, Come ye blessed, go ye cursed; from which sentence
there shall be no appeal, nor flying from the execution thereof, Oh consider
this ye who are drawing iniquity with cords of vanity! having abominations
reigning in you, and iniquity apparently written in your forheads: Ye who now
make it a light thing, even to lead the innocent with lies, slanders, and
reproaches; verily in that day shall your hands grow weak, which now are
strengthened one by another; and your faces gather palenesse, which now cannot
blush: Then shall all false coverings be ripped off, and all appear as they are;
In vain shall it then be for such to say, Lord, Lord, we have preached and
baptized in thy name, etc. Nay hear your sentence; Depart you workers of
iniquity into everlasting fire, etc.

Another lie by him charged upon us is, That our principles are but the
pinciples of the old Ranters, which are out of date, revived and brought into
credit again by a new dress, etc. This he affirms in his Dialogue, without
mentioning any proof: And in his Glass for a proof, he says, That this is
true, I need not prove in this place; Any that know the principles of the
Ranters may easily discern it. The Ranters would have no Christ but within, no
Scripture to be a rule, no Ordinances, no Law but their Lust, no heaven nor
glory but here; no sin but what men fancied to be so; no condemnation but in
the consciences of ignorant ones, etc. And what the Quakers is more or less,
let their own consciences judge, only they smooth it over with an outward
austere carriage before men, but within are full of pride, filthiness and
abominations, which by degrees break forth, witness Naylers Exaltation in the
West. Here is the charge and the proof of it; but we are confident, he that is
svvayed by the least spark of honesty, will not find us guilty on this
evidence. He says, That this is true, I need not prove; had he said, I cannot
prove he had spoken the truth, although to confess himself a liar and false
accuser, for envy and subtelty it self can never prove it; and it is very like
if he had any evidence, he would produce it; but at last he says, Witness
Naylers Exaltation in the West. Let the Reader a little consider when this time
was that he speaks of; it was not until about the ninth month, in the year
1656. And I. N. had answered the Dialogue, wherein this Charge was laid in the
fifth month before, and yet now no evidence produced for proof of this
particular, but that which he calls Naylors Exaltation in the West: So it is
clear the charge was laid and continued about four months, without any
evidence; and as its likely, if this Exaltation (as he calls it) had not been,
he had yet remained without proof. We further answer, as to the particular
which he calls J. Naylers (Exaltation in the West) it is sufficiently known to
many, that that action was not at all owned by those who professed, and lived
in the Truth; and were called Quakers, which may more at large appear by
George Bishops Book, published in answer to Ralph Farmer; But mark these
Principles of the Ranters, which he says are the principles of the Quakers.
One is, The Ranters would have no Christ but within, which we utterly deny; and
what we own and witness concerning Christ, we have already demonstrated: Even
he it is that we bear testimony unto, who fills all things, and preached
himself the light of the world, which lights every man that comes into the
world, who is the savation of all those who believe in, obey and follovv him,
and the condemnation of all such who reject and disobey him.

Another of the Ranters Principles (as he says) is, No Scripture to be a rule.
We say, that which the Scriptures declares was the guide and rule of Saints
we own and witness, and the Scriptures of truth to be given forth by that
Spirit which could not err.

Another, No Ordinances. The Ordinances of Christ we own; One Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, and his Cross ordained by him we daily witness, which
crucifies us to the world, and the world unto us, and its the great power of
God to salvation.

Another is, No Law, but their Lust. Thomas Colliers own principles, as
manifested by his practice and confession, appears more like the Ranters then
ours: For the grace of God which has appeared to all men, has taught us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godlily and soberly in this
present world. Now T. C. besides those many lies and false accusations against
the Innocent, confesses himself guilty of reigning abominations in his soul,
and to be drawing iniquity with the cords of vanity, etc. witness Tiverton
writing; Let the rational Reader judge whose principles are nearest like the
Ranters, his or ours.

Another is, No heaven nor glory but here. This we say, that if our hope were
only in this life, we were of all men most miserable; but we believe, expect,
and wait for a Crown that is immortal, a Kingdom which is eternal, reserved
for us in the highest heavens, which none can deprive us of.

Another is; No sin but what men fancy to be so. But we say, the breach of the
righteous Law of God is sin, what ever men fancy, and the reward thereof must
they receive, And whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Another is; No condemnation for sin but in the consciences of ignorant ones.
Here he goes on still charging without proof. Now T. C. affirmed in our hearing
at Glastonbury, before many witnesses, that persons may be freed from guilt and
condemnation, while motion and action of sin remains: Surely this is the
Ranters or Libertines principle to commit sin, and not be condemned for it;
what is this but a seared conscience? And herein he declares himself worse then
the Ranters, whom he says, owns condemnation for sin, etc. We say, that Jesus
Christ is made manifest to condemn sin in the flesh; and happy are they who are
hereof made witnesses. Here judgment and mercy meets together, and
righteousness and peace kisses each other.

But at last he says, They smooth it over with an austere carriage before men,
but within are full of filthiness, pride, and abominations. Thou hypocrite,
first pull the beam out of thine own eye, before thou go about to take a mote
out of another. Do thou accuse us for abominations and filthiness within,
while thy abominations reign, and art drawing iniquity with the cords of
vanity? Slavish fear has stopped thy mouth, etc. as by thy own confession in
Tiverton writing appears. The Pharisees will rise up in judgment with thee,
and such as thou art, who make the outside clean, while your abominations are
manifest within and without; for the root must be as the branches, the tree as
the fruit, therefore let shame and silence cover thee: And now our consciences,
unto whose judgment T. C. has appealed, does clearly acquit us, and condemn
him for a Liar.

Another of his particulars charged upon us is, That Satan blinding us with the
apprehension of the goodness of our cause, or else a sense of its badness, that
he has hemmed them in with a pretense of their own infallibility, and the
ignorance of all others, that they will admit of no sober discourse, nor bring
their principles to the trial of Scriptures, etc. but give railing accusations,
hard terms, and hiddeous names, and this is the strength of their arguments,
etc. This is the substance of their charge in the Dialogue, where no proof is
offered, as other particulars before; and in his Glass he says, that this is
truth, he that runs may read; if to call Persons Lucifer, Devil, Beast, etc.
Let the understanding judge, and their pretense of infallibility, carrying all
in a mystery, pretending all in the dark but themselves, witness Naylors
pretended answer to my assertations in the Dialogue concerning them. Now mind
this Proof, and see where there be any other but his own affirmation; first (as
in many others before) invent, and make a lie, and then for proof, when called
to it, affirm it over again and say; that this is true, he that runs may read,
or this is so clear I need not prove, and so instead of evidence; here is
impudency; surely more honesty would have appeared in it, for him to have
confessed his lies, then thus to add impudency thereunto; but at last he brings
J. Ns. answer to his Assertions, a strange proof, to bring the answer to the
Assertions, for proof of the Assertions it is strange; T. C. is not ashamed of
his absurdity; what is this but an implicet confession? that the assertions
were laid down, without proof, and so if they had not been answered, he yet had
had no proof; but at first intended a lie; for if the things asserted had been
true (which is denied) yet he not knowing it, were a lie for him to assert what
he knows not, as they swore falsely who said the Lord lives, Jer. 5. besides
Thomas collier confessed that be had a sober discourse with a friend at Bristol;
Contrary to what he here affirms, and what hideous names are there in J. Ns.
answer: Is it a hideous name to call a liar a liar, or to tell one that
opposes himself against Christ and Truth, that he is of Antichrist, and one of
Gogs army, one whose lies, lightness, impudencies and false accusations,
appears as T. C. does? it is not against scripture rules, to tell him, that he
is of his father the Devil, and shall know the judgments of the Lord against
him one day for it, for this know; we are not of those that cry peace to the
wicked, like C. T. and the Authors of that writing from Tiverton; but as we
receive from the Lord, so must give to every one his due portion, Judgment to
whom is belongs, and this we likewise say, that all that are not turned to the
light; are in the dark, and are not turned to Christ, who is the light of the
world, and was given for a Covenant of light, and may not we justly say, they
are in the dark, who are disputing against it, though they say we judge them in
saying so? they are such to whom it belongs, and Childrens bread is not for
such; (he that can receive it let him) and that Spirit whom we follow is the
Spirit of Truth, which we witness according to the promise of Christ which is
infallible, and so far as any are guided by it they are infallible, and all
others are in the dark let them profess what they will, but here we leave him;

And come to other of his lies (viz.) That amongst all the falfe ways of
Satan, there is none more pernicious and dangerous, etc. undermines the whole
body of Truth, makes an end of Christ in his person, offices, power, and being
as man all at once, and so makes an end of justification and salvation all at
once, makes an end of the authority of the Scriptures, etc. at once. What a
heap of lies are here at once; surely as a fountain easteth out her waters, so
do thou thy wickedness; but now examine his evidence, this as others is
affirmed in his Dialogue, without offering any; and in his Glass he says, that
this is all true is manifestly cleared, for none roots up all at once like
this, the person of Christ; see Naylor in his love to the lost, Concerning
Christ, he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, that he might
become a living example to all Generations, which no creature could be, the
whole creation being in the fall, and then he says here in Naylors account,
Christ is no creature, then no man, no person, for every man is a creature; but
Christ is no creature; Naylor says, then no man, he says farther page 89.
this is he who cannot be limited, nor his person restrained in one place; who
fills heaven and earth with his presence, and dwells in the bodies of his
Saints; and T. G. says, if this be not to make an end of the person of Christ,
he knows not what is? here is a strange conceit of a person, that fills heaven
and earth with his presence, and dwells in the Saints; blindness with a
witness, etc. Now this seems to be the drift of his argument, as if because J.
N. saying Christ humbled himself, etc. and cannot be restrained into one place,
but fills heaven and earth, and dwells in the bodies of his Saints, and is a
living example to all Generations, which no Creature could be, etc. therefore
denies him to be a person, a man; and so seems to conclude, that this is to
make an end of the person of Christ, else he knows not what is; how does T. C.
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, but perverts them to
his own destruction; how is he covered with darkness, that may even be felt,
while he is crying out against the people called Quakers; blindness with a
witness? how is he found contradicting the testimony of the Saints, recorded in
the Scripture, yea of God himself, who says unto the Son, Heb. 7.8. Thy throne
of God is for ever and ever, etc. Romans 9.5. Who is over all God blessed for
ever, and Col. 1.15,16,17. Who is the Image of the invisible God, all things
created by him, etc. This is he who when he had by himself purged our sins,
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: and Christ's prayer is, I in
them, and they in me, and Paul says, Christ lives in me, and the word is nigh
in the heart, and the mouth; and Christ says, I and the Father are one; and
this is he who preached himself the light of the world, the way to the Father,
and that none comes to the Father but by him; who is a living example to all
Generations, and dwells in the Saints, and this is our testimony of him, and the
substance of the testimony, that J. N. gives of him, even the same which the
Saints recorded in Scripture gives of him; now seeing the Scriptures directs to
the light, and the work which the Ministers of Christ, were sent to accomplish,
was to turn men from darkness to the light, and the testimony he gives of
himself, that he is the light of the world, we say, that all those who follow,
and are obedient to this light, do not walk contrary to the scriptures, but the
same way that they did who recorded the scriptures, and so whosoever turns from
this light perverts the scriptures, and turns from that which the Saints in
scriptures directed unto, and so our testimony is one with the scriptures, and
the life of them we live; But he speaks of a strong conceit of a person, that
fills heaven and earth with his presence, and dwells in his Saints; now in the
Epistle to the Heb. it is recorded that Christ is the express Image of his
Fathers person; and Christ himself says, I and the Father are one, and he that
has seen me, has seen the Father also, and that he fills all things, and
dwells in the Saints, has been sufficiently declared all ready; now is Christ,
divided? or are their more Christ's then one? nay, verily one God, one Christ,
one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, whose flesh and
blood we own according to the scriptures and affirm, that except ye eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, though their may be many
now as formerly ready to say; how can this man give us his flesh to eat? etc.
and that Christ is in heaven, and how can he be in the Saints? this is the
mystery hid from ages and generations, yea from the wise and prudent; the Son
of man in heaven, though at the same time talking with Nicodemus at Jerusalem,
Joh. 3.13. he that can receive it let him, and so our principles are brought to
trial, and found according to the scriptures, and inventions denied, and they
are accursed that are found making to themselves Images, and Likenesses; And so
T. C. is found slandering the innocent.

Another lie by him charged on us is, that we often use the name of Christ,
etc. when indeed it is but a juggle, a cheat, and under that name stab and
crucify him, etc. for Christ was never called Christ in scripture, or Jesus,
or Son, etc. but as he was man, truly man, etc. they lay him aside as a thing
of naught, and under pretense of Christ within they take an advantage by their
principles, as much as in them lies, to murder the true Christ; this is
affirmed in his Dialogue; but as others no proof offered, and in his Glass he
endeavors thus to prove it, they talk of the name of Christ for a cheat, a
juggle, witness what has been proved; but we say it is abhominably false
witness what has been answered, but he goes on with his own inventions, a
Christ, yet no Creature; a person, but such a one as fills Heaven and Earth.
What Christ does T.C. Imagine? will he make him by whom all things were created
part of the creation? if he be one with the Father in the Father and the Father
in him, as the Scriptures testify of him, may not we give him the same
testimony? But now observe, who follow their inventions, contrary to the
Scriptures T. C. or we; he says Christ was never called Christ in scripture,
or Jesus, or Son, but as he was man, truly man in his Dialogue, page 42. The
Author to the Hebrews says 1.3.8. upholding all things by the word of his
power, but unto the Son he says, thy throne O God is for ever and ever, etc.
and Isaiah 9.6. To us a Son is given, etc. his name shall be called wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God. etc. Acts 9.5. I am Jesus whom thou persecutest;
and Romans 9.5. Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came who is God over all
blessed for ever, Amen. Read and tremble thou blind guide, is this scripture or
not? is Christ here called Christ, Jesus, and Son, as man or God? surely either
thou art ignorant of the Scripture, or denyest this to be Scripture; but as he
is found contradicting the Scripture, so himself also; for in his Dialogue,
page 42. he says they often use the name of Christ, etc. that is to let in
their principles, etc. for if they did not, etc. every one would fly from them;
in his Glass he says page 8. they never used the name of Christ, unless in
contempt; now if we never used it but in contempt; can any one think that this
would let in our principles, and keep people from flying from us? one time he
says they often use his name, and another time they never used his name; and
then he draws his conclusion from his own confusion, saying by all which it
appears that they use the name of Christ but as a juggle, a cheat to deceive
Souls by, and indeed stab the true Christ, and justification by him, etc. Such
as is the foundation, such is the building, the foundation, confusion and
contradiction, and the building a heap of abominable lies and falsehoods: he
says by all which it appears, etc. what by saying in the Dialogue they often
use the name of Christ to let in their principles and then in the pretended
proof of the same particular in his Glass says, they never uses his name but
in contempt; what Babylonish work is here? but still he goes on to fill up his
measure, saying, all that believe in him, you endeavor to crucify and
murder, by your murtherous words and writings, witness your setting up of
Naylor, to be the true Christ; this we utterly deny, and what Christ we own we
have from the truth in our hearts declared; and farther touching J. N. we refer
the Reader to Georg Bishops Book before mentioned, he farther produces the
words of E. B. in answ. to John Bunnion, Christ is within us, slain in the
great City, etc. he is now risen and ascended, etc. Now observe what does this
at all serve to prove the charge? and yet again he concludes his proof thus;
they slay the true Christ if ever any people in the world have done it; and so
we shall conclude our answer to this particular, and leave it to the
understanding unprejudiced Reader to consider, how vain and light the things
offered by him are, to prove what he asserts, and whether we might not safely
say, that if ever one were given over to lying, slandering and false accusing,
T. C. is.

The next lie by him charged on us is; that we deny the birth from above by the
Spirit, Joh. 3.5. etc. thus turning from the light of Christ shining in the
scriptures, they hearken to, and follow the light of their own hearts,
Imaginations of their own minds instead of Christ; this is his charge in his
Dialogue; but no proof at all mentioned there, nor in his Glass that we find,
by which it appears he cannot find any thing to say for himself, and so passes
this particular in silence; it had been better he had done so by others, then
what he has done, instead of clearing himself of one lie, added several to it.

How ever farther to manifest the falsenesse of it, we declare that the birth
from above by the spirit of God, we own and witness according to the
scripture, John 3.3,5. without which birth none can enter into the Kingdom of
God, and we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen and now enjoy,
even that birth which is brought forth through great travil and many bitter pangs
which the red Dragon seeks to devour; this is the heir whom the Husbandmen
seeks to kill: the man-child who shall rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, the
King whose Throne is established in righteousness, and of the increase of his
Government and peace there shall be no end, glory to his name for ever.

Another of his lies charged in his Dialogue, is, that we are enemies to the
true light; but seeing he leaves this without proof both in the Dialogue and
Glass; we shall leave it without answer, upon his head to remain until he
prove it, repent, or be judged for it.

Another lie charged on us by him is, that under the notion of perfection we
are guilty of the great and damning sin of unbelief; and in his Glass for
proof he says, that this is truth, what has been already said is sufficient
to manifest; for if the Doctrine of Christ be stories, then we may easily
conclude what faith you own in him, beside all your writings hold forth no
other faith, but a faith in Christ within you, not on Christ without you; and
this is his proof. He now begins to hang his work together, toward the
beginning he says (when he should bring his proof) that which follows shall
prove this; and now says, that this is truth, what has been already said is
sufficient to manifest; the first particulars were to look for evidence from
what followed, and now this which follows, must rest on that which went
before, and so one looking for help from the other, are both helpless, and fall
together; for how shall that which goes before prove this which follows, when
it has no proof for its self; what shifting is here? some time bring the
answer to the Assertions to prove them; some time that which follows shall
prove that which goes before, and now that which goes before must prove that
which follows; bad shifts indeed; but he concludes this sin you are guilty of;
and what has been said is sufficient to make it manifest; we say what has
been answered has fully declared T. C. in what he said a Liar; and so his
first particulars, and this also remains without proof: farther he says all
your writings hold forth no other faith; but a faith in Christ, within you; not
on Christ without you: Can any reasonable man conclude otherwise; but that T.
C. has uttered too lies in this sentence; first his words imply that he has
seen all the writings of the people called Quakers, else how dare he say all
their writings; now if he has not seen them all; (as who can believe he has)
then he is a Liar to say all their writings; and yet here he mentions the
writings of no one particular person, and secondly holds forth, no other faith
but a faith in Christ within you, not on Christ without you; and George Bishop
in his Book, entitled, Jesus Christ the same to day as yesterday and for ever;
bears testimony to that Christ which was born of the Virgin, witnessed a
good Confession before Pilate, etc: and several other vvritings testify the
same, etc. And farther we say, that unto the same Christ do we bear vvitness
as we have firmly declared; but this we also say, that they that rest on
talking of that Christ which suffered at Jerusalem, and come not to know him
manifest within them, are but Reprobates.

Page 9. Other lies charged on us by him are; That we set up another way of
Salvation, sacrificing to our own nets; proclaim that all that own
justification in the blood of the Covenant are deceived, trampling under foot
the Laws and Ordinances of Christ, judging all that walk therein to be
enemies, proclaiming their own rigteousnesse: And then says, all these have
been sufficiently proved, and are daily witnessed. This we say, some of them
have been already falsely charged, and sufficiently made appear to be lies, but
not one of them proved, nor never can; for in the presence of the Lord we deny
them, and declare them to be a heap of abominable lies: And as for the
proclaiming of our own Righteousness, trampling under foot the Laws and
Ordinances of Christ; judging all that walk in them to be enemies, sacrificing
to our own nets; how can thou be so impudent as to say, All these have been
sufficiently proved, when (as we remember) there has not any proof been
offered; and that which thou have endeavored to prove, is denied and found
false, and would thou now have us believe they have been proved before any
proof offered? Blush at such impudency. And he goes on, saying, Do they perform
any duty to God or man, because the Scripture requires it? We say, we perform
duties, because God requires it of us; and this is the ground of our obedience,
as it was of the Saints that went before; and such as meddled with the things of
God, when not required by him, he declared his wrath against them, as the
Scriptures testify. Does not the Lords Prophet say, Isa. 1. To what purpose is
the multitude of your sacrifices, when you come to appear before me, etc? These
things the Scriptures declare; yet the Lord says, who has required these
things at your hands? when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear. Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil, etc. Now can such
be owned, who say, they preach and baptize in his name? and are set for the
defense of the Gospel, whose abominations reign, and are drawing iniquity with
cords of vanity, etc? Nay, woe is their portion, and this their sentence,
Depart ye workers of iniquity.

But T. C. goes on, saying, Do they not call it literal obedience and
imitation? Yea, and well we may, when performed by them who are out of the
life: For our God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth; not in the oldness of the letter, but in newness of
spirit. Have thou been so long professing thy self a Teacher? a Minister of
the Gospel, and yet is thy Ministry come no further then the Letter, Then thou
have but a dead Ministry, the fruits whereof declare the same; that thou art
one of them that ran, whom the Lord never sent, and profits not the people. But
he goes on with his lies, saying, All their work is to reproach and contemn
those that own Christ Jesus according to the Scriptures, and desire to obey
him, but this suits not to their light within. Thou false accuser, our work is
not to reproach or contemn any, but thou thy self art found casting reproach
and contempt on the innocent, and those that own Christ according to the
Scripture, and obey him, we own, and have unity with; but according to the
Scriptures have thou been found to deny him in our hearing before many
witnesses, saying, that thou believedst in a Christ which was not in the
Saints; when we own him in heaven, and in the Saints also according as the
Scriptures testify, John 3.16. and 17.23. But this thy dark lying spirit,
which is turned from the true Light, cannot comprehend, but art reasoning thus;
If he be in the Quakers, how can he be in heaven? because E. B. says, The very
Christ of God is within us; when Christ himself, John 3. before mentioned
says, No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of man which is in heaven; and yet he was then talking with
Nicodemus at Jerusalem, who professed himself a Teacher in Israel, and yet says,
how can these things be? If thou have an ear to hear, thou may hear. And so
T. C. is found guilty of that which he charge us, reproaching and contemning
such as own Christ, and obey him according to the Scripture; and also denying
him as Christ himself and the Saints in Scripture bears witness of him. He
further says, this suits not with their Light within, but the true light in
believers teachers obedience, etc. We say, while thou art talking of the true
light in believers, art turned from it in thy self, and do not walk in it:
For he that walks in the light as he is in the light, knows the blood of
Christ cleansing from all sin, which thou art ignorant of, who have been so
long professing thy self one of his Ministers; and yet so far from cleansing,
as that thy abominations reign, and art drawing iniquity with cords of vanity.

Page 10. But T. C. still goes on with his work, adding and asserting lies; but
offers no proof, but his own affirmations, saying; They condemn the poor humble
souls that live in the sight and sense of their sins for Publicans; that this
is clear and truth (he says) is manifest, else what means your crying so much
up of perfection, and condemning others, because they say they have a sense of
their sin, and it is their burden. We say, what means thy lying, but that thou
have to fill up thy measure; produce one of us, or that is owned by us if thou
can, that did condemn the poor humble souls that live in the sight and sense
of their sins for Publicans; or for saying, they have a sense of it, when
indeed it is their burden: But such as thou art, the light and life of God
condemns, where ever it is made manifest, who art talking of a sight and sense
of sin; but it is not your burden, because you still live in it, and plead for
continuance of it. Now how many years have thou professed thy self a Teacher of
others? and a Preacher of remission of sins? and yet have thy abominations
reigning, and art drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, etc. as by thy
confession appears.

But there is a generation, who by the confession of a sight, sense, and
burden of their sin get ease and liberty to continue in sin. Now these the
light of the world condemns; for it is they, and they only who confess and
forsake their sins (not who confess and live in sin) shall find mercy. But
thou say, what means your crying up of perfection? We say, he that desires
to keep his sin, though he will confess it, no wonder he cries out against
such as cries up perfection.

Now why may not thou as well dislike, and charge God himself, Christ, his
true Servants and Ministers, for commanding, pressing after, and laboring for
perfection? as how full the Scripture is to this purpose, he that truly views
it may easily find. But consider, whose Minister do thou now show thy self?
The Ministers of Christ labored to present every man perfect in Christ, for
which end they were sent, and received gifts for the perfecting of the Saints:
And art thou crying out against such as are crying up perfection? Cease thy
profession to be Christ's Minister, while thou art opposing that work for which
such were sent. Here thou fully manifests thy self, for whom thou Ministrest:
And further art crying out; You self-righteous Pharisees pretend your selves
free, and condemn the generation of the righteous who maintain the spiritual
warfare, that dare be so audaciously impudent and wicked, etc. That because we
say perfection is not to be attained till Christ comes from heaven, that
therefore we deny perfection. T. C. The Pharisees may rise up in judgment and
condemn thee, for they made clean the outside; which thou confesses to be so
defiled, as to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, etc. and have thy
abominations reigning in thee, and yet dare to be so audaciously arrogant,
impudent, and wicked, as to say, thou art set for the defense of the Gospel,
as in thy Epistle before thy Dialogue.

Consider further; what spiritual warfare do thou maintain, while the
strength of sin has wrested all thy weapons out of thy hands: And thy
abominations (and not Christ) reign in thee, whose being in thee thou denyedst
at Glastonbury in our hearing, before many witnesses; and so according to the
Scripture art a Reprobate. Now whose servant thou art is evident, thy own
confession in Tiverton writing testifies against thee. Art not thou one of
Satan's slaves, while thy abominations reign? and yet do thou talk of
maintaining the spiritual warfare? Now observe, is it likely that one, that the
strength of sin has wrested all weapons out of his hands, should stand in the
warfare against sin? how can it be but that abominations should reign in such
a one; and yet he says, he is set for defense of the Gospel. Surely he has
badly discharged his trust, to suffer the enemy to wrest all his weapons out of
his hand: It Is against the Lamb that thou art engaged, as by thy own confession
and practice appears. Did ever any one of us say, that perfection was to be
attained before the coming of Christ? But this is it we say; The Son is come,
of whose coming we are witnesses, and this the Saints in Scripture witnessed, 2
John 5.20. And here thou art found to be of the spirit of Antichrist, who art
denying his coming, in whose strength and power we press hard toward
perfection, believing we shall attain it; but thou say, page 10. Its your
duty to oppose sin, and live by faith in Christ. We say so too, rather then to
live in lying, and in his strength only do what we say. Now mark thy saying
and practice, how do they oppose sin, where abominations reign, and drawing
iniquity with cords of vanity, and have iniquity apparently written in their
foreheads? verily they are Satan's slaves, and servants of sin; and what faith
is that which these live in? the faith of Saints purified their hearts, and in
it they witnessed victory over sin and world, the mystery whereof is held in a
pure conscience; and where sin reigns, they know it not, but are strangers to
it, though they may talk of living in Christ: He that is in Christ is a new
creature, all old things are done away, and they are no longer servants of sin,
to obey it in the lust thereof; but servants unto rigteousnesse, and have their
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life: And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them; but woe to them that are drawing
iniquity with the cords of vanity, have abominations reigning, and iniquities
apparently written in their foreheads; who declare their sins as Sodom, and
hide them not. We say, it is well to confess and forsake sin, and to bring
them forth to judgment, and not to hide them from the light, but to be so many
years confessing of sin, and not only still live in them, but draw iniquity
with cords of vanity; what do these but declare their sins as Sodom? or at
least as the Jews, who would lie and commit abominations, and yet cry, The
Temple of the Lord, or lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us?
They who have ears to hear, let them hear.

Page 10. Another lie by him charged on us is, That we shut up the Kingdom of
heaven, and will not enter therein our selves, nor suffer them that would. For
proof of this he says; This likewise is true and clear; for the way that God
has ordained to enter into the Kingdom, is by faith in Christ crucified, but
you will not enter as has been cleared; but we say falsely charged, never yet
cleared: But consider, how do thou know that this is the way? Is it not
because the Saints left it upon record in the Scriptures? and so the wickedest
man in England may know it; but thy confession and practice declares thee not
to be in it, and so thou know it but by report of those who were witnesses
of it, and walked in it.

Now how vain a thing it is for any to talk of the way to the Kingdom of God,
while they walk in the way that leads to the kingdom of Satan. This we say and
know, The way to the kingdom of God is by faith in Christ crucified, the same
that preached himself the light of the world, and there is none beside it. Now
this faith where it is witnessed, purifies the heart, gives victory over sin,
overcomes the world, and is held in a pure conscience, which all are ignorant
of, and far from, whose Iniquities are apparently written in their foreheads,
have abominations reigning, and are drawing Iniquity with cords of vanity; for
no unclean thing shall ever enter into this Kingdom, nor he that loves or
makes a lie, what ever is professed. We further say, It Is vain for any to talk
of Christ crucified, while strangers to his Cross, which we witness to be the
great power of God to salvation; and choose rather then our liberty, wherein we
rejoice, being daily called to take it up.

Now there is a generation who profess to be Christ's Disciples, that take not
up his Cross, but say they will when called thereunto. What? profess to be
Christ's Disciples, and not take up his daily Cross? this profession is vain,
and such by Christ are denied to be his Disciples; who says, Whosoever will be
his Disciple, must take up his Cross daily and follow him: For the way to the
Kingdom is straight, through many tribulations, and an entrance thereinto is
freely administered unto us; and the same as the Lord moves us, do we freely
declare unto others; and so far from shutting up the Kingdom of heaven, as by
T. C. is falsely charged on us: But to prove that which can never be, he goes
on, saying, You own no flesh of Christ, but all spirit, therefore you shut up
the way to the Kingdom. But we say, The flesh of Christ do we own, therefore
T. C. belies us; And what Christ is, we have firmly declared, even the same
that the Scriptures testifies of, whose flesh is meat indeed which he gives for
the life of the world, John 6.51. But he goes on in his old way, saying, That
they will not enter, unless they may enter by their own righteousness, and not
by the blood of the Covenant. First, by the blood of the Covenant you will not
enter, that is clearly often proved: We say it has been falsely charged, but
never yet proved; for Christ Jesus we witness to be a Covenant of Light, and
an entrance into the Kingdom which is everlasting, by faith in his blood to us
is administered, by which we are redeemed from our former vain conversation, and
from whom we receive power and strength to do his will, and not our own; who of
God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. He
further says, Then it must be by your own righteousness if you expect to
enter, but in truth you never look to come there. We answer as before, an
entrance is freely administered unto us into the kingdom which is everlasting,
but not by our own righteousness; for we suffer the loss of it, with our
bodily exercises, will worship, voluntary humilities, with vain imitations,
forms, and traditions, which we sometimes lived in, while short of the life,
which none knows but they that has the Son, in whose righteousness alone we
now stand, and rejoice in the loss of our own, that we might be found alone in
him, in whom is acceptance, the will, the deed, and the power is only his, and
so is the glory for ever:

And then T. C. brings these words of J. N. There is a seed to which the
promise of Redemption is, etc. Does not the Apostle say the same in effect? The
promise is to the seed, not seeds, as of many, etc? And in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed, etc. J. N. also says; All who know the
redemption of Christ by his precious blood, are redeemed from the vain
conversation, etc. And much more he has to the same purpose, wherein he
clearly and fully declares that he owns Justification and Redemption of
persons, not by their own rigteousnesse, but by the blood of Christ; and so the
witness Th. Collier produces for him, is found to give testimony against him.

Another charge against us is, That we leave the weighty things of faith and
obedience to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ as vile and contemptible: And
for his proof, he says; This is a truth, there needs no proof: But we say,
this is a lie that cannot be proved: But he goes on with his work, saying, Else
what means not only their leaving undone the Ordinances of Christ, as
Baptism, Church Fellowship, breaking of bread, etc. Even the whole profession
of the faith of the Gospel, but reproaching it, and those who in faithfulness
to Jesus Christ walk in obedience to Christ therein.

Now this we say as before, the Ordinances of Christ, do we own, and his daily
cross do we witness; yea one Baptism, even the Baptism of Christ have we
received, and are baptized into his death, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being content patiently to suffer with him for a while, that we may
reign with him for ever; yea and Church fellowship are we brought into, and
live in where our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ;
where all the faithful feeds at one Table, and drinks of one Fountain: being
heirs of one inheritance, and the life and power of the Gospel do we partake
of, and far from reproaching it or any others; the Lord is our witness, for by
him are we taught better things, and all those who in faithfulness obey him we
dearly own, and in the life have unity with: but such as we find making a
profession of the name of Christ, his Ordinances, the Faith of the Gospel, and
obedience to him, and know not his voice, but are setting up their own
inventions, imitating such as went before without their Authority, and knows
not the true Faith which purifies the heart, gives victory over sin and the
World; but are drawing Iniquity with cords of vanity, abominations reigning,
not Christ, iniquities apparently written in their foreheads, not the Fathers
name; these are they who profess God in words, but in deeds deny him: against
all such do we bear testimony, and let such as names the name of Christ depart
from Iniquity; for because of such things is the wrath of God revealed, and let
all those who profess the faith of the Gospel, show it by their works of
Righteousness, and not live in works of wickedness, for we dare not count
them clean, which are wicked; but in the name and fear of the Lord, we say
vvo unto them, that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness, and are dravving Iniquity with cords of vanity.

Then he produces J. N. in his love to the Lost, concerning, Baptism; where he
says, their forms of Water, and God cannot be limited to any form or rudiment;
now J. N. is speaking of such as keep themselves disputing and jangling about
outward ceremonies in an imitation of John's Ministry, calling it the Baptism of
Christ; but so far from the power of Christ or John, as not come to the form of
either; and says their form of Water and God cannot be limited, etc. And we
say such may well be called forms of Water, who are thus taking on them forms,
but are from the life and power, as their own Confession, witness Tiverton
writing. T.C. further says, let them not think this will be a good excuse for
them in the great day of the Lord, that we took them up from the Letter, to
which we say, the day is come, that they that worship God must worship him in
Spirit and in truth; and for all your litteral obedience, you are no better
then those of whom the Lord speaks, Isa. 1. While your abominations are thus
reigning, your iniquities apparently written in your foreheads, and you drawing
it with cords of vanity, and are mockers of God, formal in holy duties, and
the World like a canker has eaten out all the divine sweetness of regenerating
and sanctifying grace, etc. as witness your own confession in Tiverton
writing' has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as
in obeying the voice of the Lord? wash you, make you clean, etc. but T.C.
farther says, God can and does limit his people to a visible Rule and order,
wherein they show their faith in him, love to him, and his Authority over them,
etc. We say that God has according to his promise tent the spirit of truth,
which guides his people into all truth, and put his Law in their hearts, and
written it in their inward parts, etc. And this the Saints in scripture
witnessed, and by it were kept unto him with whom we give in this testimony
that the spirit of truth is come, which guides into all truth; and all those
who are led by it are the Sons of God, and so of the truth of the scriptures
are we witnesses, and have their testimony for and with us: And then he farther
says, page 11. We bless God that we have the Letter, and that he has given
us his spirit through the Ministry, and has in any measure subjected our
hearts to his Authority in the Letter, etc. We say let him that mentions the
name of God depart from Iniquity, and stop they mouth, and leave boasting of
being subject to his Authority, until thou witness cleansing from, and
Dominion over abominations, which by thy own confession are yet reigning in
thee. He still goes on saying, so undermining all the Ordinances of Christ, and
laying of them aside as vile and contemptable, else what means not only their
judging all except themselves to be carnal, etc? and themselves Pharisees, etc.
Thou Hypocrit be silent; how have thou judged us, and called us self righteous
Pharisees? etc: and now say we judge all but our selves; thou confessed we
profess to own Christ, and press after holiness, selfe-denyall and perfection,
and seem to be most holy, self denying, etc. and that our lives seem to
demonstrate that we are perfect and free from sin, and yet art charging us for
judging, who judge according to Christ's rule expressed in the Scripture to know
the tree by his fruit, and so because we judge thee by thy fruits, and not thy
profession, thou art crying out against us for judging, we say again behold the
Lord comes in flames of fire, to render vengeance against all such ungodly
sinners, who profess his name in words, but in works deny him. Therefore cease
thy talking of thy Ordinances of Christ, of faith in him, obedience and love to
him; and of making mention of his name unti^l thou depart from Iniquity, and
know Dominion over those abominations, which are now reigning in thee; for our
God is just, and will render to every one a due reward according to their
works; But thou say its the way to make an end of all says and profession at
once; this we say, of all such faith and profession which thou live in, we
trample upon it, in the name, power and Authority of the living God, yea all
that profession of God in words, where works deny him, as thine do by thy
own confession: and what is here proved against thee, and that faith which
does not purify the heart nor overcome sin, what is it better then the faith
of Devils, and is not thine short of this? for the Devils believe and tremble,
while thou art speaking against trembling. And thou say, but indeed we are
bad and vile and vvretched; yea thy actions declare thee so to be; how many
years have thou been confessing thy badnesse and vileness, and yet continuest
so? have thou never read in the Scriptures he that confesses and forsakes his
sin shall find mercy; thou say we believe that he has made us accepted in
the beloved, and in him he does accept our services, etc. He that is in him is
a new Creature, old things are done away; and they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; Thou farther say, we do
not only live by grace now, but we hope for the mercy of God, etc. The grace of
God teaches to deny ungodlynesse and wordly lust, and to live righteously,
godlyly and soberly, in this present world; but what grace do you stand in,
whose iniquities are apparently written in your foreheads, Abominations,
reigning, and drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and what hope is yours,
but the hope of the Hypocrite that perishes? for they that truly hopes for his
appearing, purifieth themselves as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. and this is far
different from what appears in you, who are as before expressed in Tiverton
writing: Farther he says, in this grace we stand poor and needy, etc. We say
they that stand in the grace of God, though they may stand poor and needy, yet
not wicked and ungodly, for the grace of God teaches to deny ungodlynesse,
etc. and this in the fear and name of the Lord we utterly deny, that such stand
in the grace of God whose Abominations reign, and are drawing iniquity with
Cords of vanity, etc. What is all your sacrifices better then the offering of
Swines blood, or the cutting off of a dogs neck? verily the Lord is so far from
accepting such services, as that they are ahominable unto him; And thou farther
say, rejoicing, that he has accepted of such poor ones as we are to honor
him in the profession of his name: we say the joy of the wicked is but as the
crackling of thorns under a pot; and what is yours otherwise if your
wickedness be according to your own confession in Tiverton writing; surely in
vain do you cry the Temple of the Lord, the Ordinances of Christ; while thus
defiled with your Abominations; against such a profession, and Professors of
it, will the Lord appear to render vengeance, whose works deny him; and in this
faith and profession thou say, thou art confident that God will keep a
remnant to his Kingdom and glory, notwithstanding all the rage of Devils,
Quakers, and men; We say there is no unclean thing shall ever enter into the
Kingdom of God; and therefore vain is thy confidence, that God will keep such
a remnant which he by his faithful Servants declares, shall never enter
therein; What will that God, before whom the wicked cannot stand, and whose
eyes cannot behold the thing that is evil, suffer such a remnant to enter in or
be kept to his Kingdom, whose abominations reigns, and are drawing Iniquity
with cords of vanity? nay the remnant that the Lord has and will choose, shall
be of an upright heart, and without guile in their mouths, not mockers of God,
and they that comes on Mount Sion, must be such whose garments are not defiled,
and are redeemed from the Earth, not the Earthly mind standing in them, and who
have the Fathers Name (not Iniquity) apparently written in their foreheads.

Another lie charged on us by him is, that we make God a liar, and for his
proof he says, they that say they have no sin deceive themselves, and what in
them lies, make God a Liar, it is the Scripture Language, read your own doom,
1 John 1.

Now what evidence is this to prove that the people called Quakers make God a
Liar, if thou can, produce that person amongst them, who make God a Liar, or
that have said he has not sinned; for that is the Scripture language, he that
says that he has not sinned made God a Liar; but what is this to the people
called Quakers, that Scripture we own, but it does not at all serve for thy
purpose, unless thou prove the people called Quakers say they have not sinned,
and so until then, it must rest as a lie invented by thee, and not that we are
guilty of it; And farther we say, all have gone out of the way, all shut up
under sin, and all that come truly to know Christ Jesus, and faith in his
blood, know salvation and cleansing from sin, who is made manifest to destroy
the works of the Devil, and to save his people from their sins, And we know
that God is true, and is the avenger and punisher of lies and Liars.

Another of his lies charged on us is, that we destroy civil courtely as God
has commanded it, and for proof says, that is proved in the Dialogue, and
their own practice vvitness it, levelling all conditions, witness likewise,
Magistrate, people, Husband, Wife, Parents, Children, Master, Servant all
alike, no difference in the Quakers Religion; witness George, for in the
latter end of his pretended word to the Gentiles, etc. he says all to the
light within, etc. Now mark his proof: first he says its proved in the
Dialogue; we say its falsely charged in the Dialogue; but no proof offered that
we are guilty of it; he there mentions several Scriptures which we own; neither
can he prove us guilty of the breach of one of them; he says also their own
practices witness it; Now if he means the vain practice of this Generation,
which is usually called Complements; many vain wicked words used to no good
purpose: but in much deceit, in pretending service and friendship, when the
contrary is intended, and respect of persons, such civil courtesy and vain
customs we do deny, and bear testimony against; and so did the Saints recorded
in Scripture, The customs of the Heathen are vain, and Christ's flock were
chosen out of the World, and bore testimony that their deeds were evil; And
farther we declare, that it is our duty and practice to do good unto all, and
the several conditions and relations of Magistrates, and people, Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, we own and practice
according to the Scriptures, and deny the contrary;

But he says witness George, all to the light within, etc. as if to direct to
the light within, were to destroy civil courtesy, and level all conditions: a
wicked conclusion, it being so far from destroying conditions and relations,
before expressed, that it preserves them, and such as are guided by it, know and
practice their several duties therein; He farther says, a learned piece full
of Divinity in Foxes account, observe his light and scoffing Spirit, the false
Leaders mark, and this scripture fulfilled in the last days shall come
scoffers, etc. But T. C. goes on and concludes his evidence with an addition of
many lies, saying that under pretense of perfection they have brought in a
Religion made up of infidelity, pride, disobedience, hypocrisy, trampling of
the blood of Christ under foot, etc. The truth of this has been largly
manifest in what has been said and testified before from their own writings,
words and practices; we say, what word, writing, or practice have thou
produced, of any of the people who profess and live in the truth that are
called Quakers? and the falseness of what has been by thee said, has been
sufficiently declared by what has been answered; and thou found guilty of that
hell-born sin of lying.

Which is the next particular by him charged on us; and for proof says,
witnessed that notwithstanding their infidelity, pride, disobedience, etc. yet
pretend themselves perfect, free from sin, etc. what evidence is this, but
three lies produced to prove one, for he says their infidelity, pride,
disobidience, etc. which is by us denied, and never yet by him proved, and so
both charge and evidence is sound false, and how grossly guilty hereof himself
is, what has been before proved against him is sufficient to manifest; yet
farther he goes on, saying, the truth of all is made manifest, in that light
that has discovered them, etc. Now how contrary to truth this affirmation is,
we may leave to the impartial unprejudiced Reader to judge, for there is
several particulars returned to him by J. N. to rest on his head as lies, for
which he offers no proof at all, but lays them down in his Dialogue, and not
mention them in his Glass, and how vain and insufficient the evidence by him
offered for the rest is found, we have sufficiently made manifest, and yet he
comes with even height of impudency, and says, the truth of all is made
manifest, etc. And then he leaves it to the Reader, saying, be impartial, and
thou will be warned of the most dangerous and pernicious Principles that has
appeared, etc. The truth, and true professors of it in former ages met with no
better account from the enemies of it, a sect every were spoken against; Christ
himself in whom was no guile found, yet crucified as a Blasphemer, and his
Ministers and Servants accounted pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, not
fit to live, such as turned the world up side down; and we are not better then
they, but herein find the Scriptures fulfilled; the Disciple is not above his
Master, etc. And we also farther say, let the Reader be impertial, and we are
confident, he as many lies affirmed in that Glass, as ever he saw in so small
a volume, beside the scoffing, light, absurd, arrogant, contradictory, confused
expressions therein contained.

And then in the 13. page, he says Naylor in his pretended answer, runs over
and sets down many particulars, but answers none; Let his Book herein bear
testimony against thee that thou speak false; has he not answered thee
touching perfection, the light, and other particulars? as for that catalogue of
lies by thee charged on us, and by him returned to thee, what answer should be
given more then to deny them, while thou have only charged, and for the most
part, not so much as offered any proof for them? T. C. farther says, only page
8. he forms something of his own invention, etc. That is, that I did affirm the
Scripture was Christ; judge if Naylor be not a grevious Liar; to assert such a
thing for answer; We say there is no such thing asserted by J. N. in that page
of his Book, nor any other that we find, nor any words tending to such a
purpose, and so still T.C. is found a grievous Liar, to affirm things so
notoriously false.

Page 13. He farther says, Christ prays for none but such as believe through
their word, John 17.20. etc. If Naylor or any of the Quakers do know of any
converted to Christ since that time, without a Bible or Ministry from the
Bible; Let them manifest it if they can, etc. I say God has limited us to a
Bible.

We answer, was Paul converted by a Bible, or a Ministry from it? Was it a
Bible or Christ that Peter preached, Act. 2.36. when three thousand souls were
added to the Church? Is it not the same way which he declares, that the
Prophets prophesied of? and were saved by? even him whose day Abraham saw, unto
whom the Gospel was preached, and was the Rock that followed Israel. And so the
Apostles. Was it a Bible, or Christ that they preached to bring people to
repentance by? And so how art thou found here bearing testimony against the
Scriptures and thy self, setting up another way to conversion then what the
Ministers and Apostles of Christ, yea, Christ himself preached, who said, I am
the way to the Father, and no man can come to the Father but by me: And he was
the same yesterday as to day, and for ever. Art not thou one of those who art
searching the Scriptures, and thinks therein to have eternal life, but will
not come unto Christ that thou may have life? But thou say that Naylor
reproacheth Christ, in accounting the way of converting souls by the Ministry
of Christ, in the use of the Bible to be new. Now J. N. does not say that the
Ministry of Christ is new, but advances it above all other, and is charging
thee for setting up another way to Conversion, then what is declared in the
Scriptures of Truth, who declared Christ the way and no other, who was the
foundation of the Prophets, as well as of the Apostles: And this we say, there
is many now in those days (such as thou art) which take a Ministry from the
Bible, and steal the Prophets, Christ's, and the Apostles words which testifies
of Christ, yet never knew the Ministry of Christ: But they run, yet I sent them
not (says the Lord) therefore they profit not the people. Out of thine own
mouth be thou judged to be one of them, witness Tiverton Writing, where thou
with others confessest, that all your weapons are wrested out of your hands;
and the true Ministers of Christ had their Ministry from that which was before
the Scriptures, even from the word which was in the beginning, and this the
Scriptures witness.

But thou say, The Scripture is the absolute rule of Saints the written Law
as in the Old Testament, so it is in the New, and good it were for the Quakers
if they could yet so own it. We say, that that law written is the present
ministration and absolute rule of Saints: For thus says the Lord, It shall
come to pass in the latter days that I will write it in their hearts, etc. The
fulfilling of which promises we are witnesses of; even the Law of God written
in our hearts, which is to us an absolute rule; For neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature; and as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, etc. And here we have the Scriptures
bearing testimony with us, but we do not know that T. C. has any Scripture to
bear testimony with him in saying, That the Scripture is the absolute Rule of
Saints; and so the testimony of the Scriptures do we own, but deny Tho:
Colliers. He says, page 14. the denying his Book, false Doctrine, Lies,
Antichristian, another Gospel, etc. he can comfortably bear for his Lords sake:
His servant thou art to whom thou art obedient: And while thy abominations
reign, and art drawing iniquity with cords of vanity; for whom do thou work?
He that commits sin is of the Devil. And this know, that according to thy work
so shall thy reward be: Therefore beware of dreaming on in a vain profession:
For though thou may say at the last day, Lord, Lord, in thy name have I
preached, baptized, etc. yet workers of Iniquity must depart. And then he says
page 14. That the light which lights every man that comes into the world, is
the light of nature which all men have by Christ, as in his Book is largely
manifest, and proved by Scripture: For answer we say, the thing is not
manifest, neither has he proved it by the Scripture. Indeed in his Book there
is some of his own inventions and imaginations touching a light of Nature, and
Additions, and meanings of his own put on the Scriptures, but so far from being
proved by Scriptures, that there is no mention of a Light of Nature in the
Scriptures produced by him, nor in any other Scripture we know of; but that
which John, a man sent from God says, is the true light which was in the
beginning, by whom all things were made, he says, is the light of nature; but
whose testimony is to be received, John's or his, let the spiritual man judge;
we adhere to John's, and deny his.

He further says, page 14. Let Naylor prove that Christ lights all men with
the saving light, etc. and rages at his blindness, etc. because he has seen so
far into the life of our Religion, as to discover it, which makes them startle,
and will prove their fall, in persuading people that there is no other way then
the light of the world to bring souls to God, he instances John 8.12. We
answer; Oh wicked blasphemy, will this prove our fall, to persuade people that
there is no other way then the light of the world to bring souls unto God?
verily this will be the fall of all that oppose it: But whosoever builds here,
the gates of hell shall never prevail against him. Christ says, I am the light
of the world, I am the way to the Father, and none can come to the Father but
by me. But who said, He is a saving light to all; we say, he is the true light
which lights every man that comes into the world, according to John 19 And
the same light which leads all those out of darkness who follow him, will be
the condemnation of all those who reject and disobey him: The same Christ who
is set for the rising, is also for the fall of many in Israel; and not one
light, one Christ for the saving of some; and another light, another Christ for
the condemnation of others; but one and the same light, Christ for both. As for
thy seeing into the life of our Religion, etc. verily the desire of our souls
is, that all might come to the knowledge of it, but thou art yet ignorant of
it; for it is the mystery hid from the wise and prudent, even Christ in us the
hope of glory, whose being in thee thou have denied, and so art smitten with
blindness, and weariest thy self to find the door. Thou art thinking that we
endeavor to hide our Principles, and would not have them manifest; when as
that which we have received in the ear, we declare on the housetop; but the
ground of blindness is in thy self, who have eyes and see not, ears and
hears not, a heart but can not understand; for that wisdom wherein thou
stand cannot perceive the things of God, because they are spiritually
discerned. And until thou own him the light of the world, as the Scriptures
testify of him, thou can never know the way to the Father, nor see into the
life of our Religion, for our life is hid with Christ in God. But thou say,
thou will admit him to be the Light of the world, as in thy book is manifest;
verily thou must own him the light of the world, as the Scriptures declare him,
or thou will be deceived in the day of trial, when thou look for salvation
by him. We further say, we own him as the Scriptures testify of him, even the
Light of the world, the way to the Father, the life's the truth, the mighty
power of God.

He further goes on page 14. saying, Read your confusion you blind Quakers.
The Apostle says, he had not attained, neither was he perfect, etc. We say, we
press toward the mark for the price of our high calling of God in Christ
Jesus; And let as many as be perfect be thus minded. And if Paul had attained
Christ, do thou say he had not attained perfection? For Christ is perfect;
and he says, Let as many as be perfect, etc. Was not he himself one of those
many? and so we say we have attained to that which is perfect, and are pressing
forward: And may not thou as well charge Paul for blindness and confusion
as we, who owned and witnessed perfection, and yet was pressing forward?

Again he says; Prove that ever any of the Saints in Scripture did like you
Quakers say, they were perfect here, any otherwise then by faith in Christ,
which we own and witness? We say, do we own it otherwise then by says in
Christ? and in this faith do we witness victory over sin and the World: but
for thee to say, which we own and witness, what does it profit? for this that
know O vain man that faith without works is dead: now what works or fruits
does thy faith produce, who art Drawing Inquity with Cords of vanity, and whose
Abominations are reigning in thee, etc. as witness Tiverton writing; what
are these but fruits of Sodom, and Clusters of Gomorrah? therefore cease thy
profession of faith until it produce better fruits, but thou thy self wilt
own some were perfect in the Scripture, why then do thou bid us prove it?
that is sincere, upright walking with God, etc. we say we own it no otherwise
but according to the Scriptures; for no workers of Inquity can stand in his
presence, nor walk with him: now from this perfection thou art far off, who
while thou pretendest to wait for the Counsel of the Lord; Confessest thou art
Drawing Iniquity with Cords of vanity, art Lukewarm, formal in holy Duties,
this is far from Sincerity and uprightness page 15; Thou farther say, All
that Do indeed, Quake and tremble at the word of the Lord, will quake and
tremble at the Delusions of these poor, blind deluded people, that are
deceiving and deceived: here the Deceiver is talking of Deceiving and being
deceived; We say let the Hypocrite first pull the Beam out of his own Eye,
before he meddle with a mote in another, thou say thou know the Letter
of Scripture is the Rule of Saints, and the Spirit the Guide to that Rule, we
say the Letter kills but the Spirit gives life; that which the Scripture
declares to be the Saints guide, Rule, and Leader, we own, and have formerly
declared, but what guide and rule do thou walk by as thy practice and
Confession declare? is it not the Prince of Darkness, and his Laws? therefore
cease talking of the Saints Rule and guide, while thou art thus Ignorant of it,
and walking Contrary to it.

And so now thou concludest thy Lies, Lightness, scoffs, Reproaches, and
Slanders, saying: I say no more but leave them to the Lord, whom I earnestly
desire in mercy to look upon them, etc. we say let him that mentions the
name of God depart from Iniquity, for the prayers of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord, and if the Lord will not hear them that regard
Iniquity in their hearts, shall such be heard whose Iniquities are apparently
written in their Foreheads and are Drawing of it, with Cords of vanity? we
farther say, with the Lord we rest, in his arms are we preserved from the
wicked who bend their bows, shoot out their arrows even bitter words: yea in
vain do they plott, and Imagine mischief, their Snare is broken and we are
escaped and the Mischief which they causelessly devised against the Innocent,
is fallen upon their own heads, glory to the Lord for ever; As for that which
he calls Naylors exaltation in the west: we refer as formerly to George
Bishops Book in Answer to Ralph Farmer, entitled the throne of truth exalted.

And thus have we brought this Glass to the Light, wherein whosoever
impartially views it, may easily observe what it represents, and is contained
in it, it Bears the Image of the Prince of darkness, and contains many
absurdities contradictions, Lies, slanders and reproaches, yet affirmed and
published with as much impudency, as falsness, as if the Author neither feared
God, nor regarded man, so this Day the Scripture is fullfilled in our Eyes and
Ears, that the Enemies of God, have consulted together with one consent and
are confederate against the Lord, the tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites
of Moab, and the Hagarius, Geball, and Amon and Amalick, the Philistians with
the inhabitants of Tire.

The Lord having now appeared in great Love, power, and Magesty, to gather a
remnant out off and from all kindreds, tongues, Nations and families of the
Earth, to bear Testimony against all the unrighteous Deeds of the World; all
Nations, kinreds forms, sects and professions, are now consulting, and taking
counsel together against this Remenant, and are drawing up their forces
against the holy City, Ashur also is joined with them, he that has an ear to
hear let him hear: but this Mount Sion can never be moved, for God is in the
midest of her: and though her gates stand upon by Day, yet no unclean thing
can ever enter therein, neither any that works abomination, or that loves
and makes a lie: but only they whose names are written in the Lambs book of
life.

And therefore why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine Mischief: for
ye shall be slain all the sort of you, as a broken wall, and a sa tottering
sense shall ye be whose fall comes suddenly without remedy; for he that sits in
the heavens laughs, yea the Lord has you exceedingly in derision, he has set
his King upon his holy hill of Sion: Who does and shall reign till all his
Enemies be made his foot stool, the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken it.

A few words in Answer to Thomas Colliers, Queries.
Query 1. Whether ever the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles did teach a Doctrine
as you have amongst you, (viz) to look to the Light within for salvation, but
rather to Jesus Christ without, and what he had done for finners without them?
Act. 13.38.39. and 16.31.

Answ. We answer Moses directed to the Word nigh, in the heart and in the
mouth, which Paul says was Christ: and if in the heart, then within, and Paul
says that this was the Mystery that God would make known to the Gentiles,
Christ in us the hope of glory, and Christ himself says; except you eat my
flesh and drink my Blood you have no life in you: if they eat and drink it,
it was within them; and for the Scriptures by thee alleged, the words without
is not at all in them.

Quer. 2. Whether Christ by his Spirit in the Gospel Ministration do not lead
Souls to the beholding of what Christ has done without them, for them, yea,
or nay? according to 1 Cor. 15.3. Acts 13.39.

2. Answ. The Mystery to be Manifested to the Gentiles, was Christ in them, and
Paul traveled, that Christ might be formed in the Galathians, and the
anointing dwelt in the Saints, and Christ's righteousness was to be fullfilled
in them, and know you not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates?
and the Word without is not mentioned in the Scriptures by thee alleged.

Quer. 3. Whether it be fair dealing for your teachers who pretend they own the
Scriptures, to call it litterall, and deny it to be the word of God, as Naylor
in his love to the lost, Concerning the word, page 14.15. how often does he
call the Scriptures the Letter, as distinct from the word, men say the Letter
is it, etc. yet are not ashamed to call their false and nonsensicall sayings
the word of the Lord, wittness Fox in his word to the Jews and another to the
Gentiles, concludes in both that this is the Word of the Lord to you, etc. and
Borough in his Trumpet, his word must be the Word of God, believe it those
that list.

Answ. If the Scriptures be written with Letters, is it not Litteral? and the
scripture declares, that Christ is the Word of God, and he was in the
beginning, all things were made by him; now where does the Scripture say so of
it self, and if the word was in the beginning, and all things made by it: then
it must of necessity be distinct from the Letter; now that we call our false
and nonsensicall sayings the word of the Lord, is false: for he has not
proved the sayings of George Fox or Edward Borough alleged by him either
false or nonsensicall, but if G. Fox, Edward Borough or any other did receive
a Message from the Lord to Jewe or Gentile, they might say thus says the Lord,
and if they write it, the writing is a Declaration of it.

Q 4. Whether there be not a difference between the Word God, and the Word of
God, the Word Christ and the Word of Christ?

Answ. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God: and God was
the word: he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is the
Word of God, and Paul says, Ephe. 3.17. that Christ may dwell in your hearts,
etc. and Coll. 3.16. let the word of Christ dwell in you, etc. we make no more
difference between them, then Paul or John does.

Q. 5. Whether God has not, ever since he has been minstering to men by a
word or law written, Required his people to walk according to the word or Law
of the Ministration under which they lived?

Answ. These are the last Days wherein the Lord has according to his promise
written his Law in the hearts of his people, and this is the Ministration which
the Saints live under, the anointing dwelling in them, and therefore to be
obeyed, the Mystery made manifest, Christ in us the hope of glory:

Q 6. Whether God has not broken to pieces, and brought to shame all that have
turned aside from the written word as a Rule: And whether the Quakers be not
now going down by the righteous hand of God, as the Ranters have done before
them?

Answ. That Prophet is now witnessed of whom Moses testified, and whosoever
will not hear this Prophet shall be cut off, yea and broken to pieces: all
those who will not have him to reign, shall be ssaine before him: and although
those who now hear witness unto him, to be the Light, the way, the truth, the
word, their King, Prince, Leader, and Lawgiver whom this generation calls
Quakers, may be persecuted, scorned, reproached, slandered, scourged,
imprisoned, and slain; yet we are not forsaken by the Lord, but the truth
prospers, and many faithful witnesses are raised up: to bear testimony against
deceit and Deceivers, and the hand of the Lord is with us, and against all our
Enemies: but our Kingdom is not of this world; for the Disciple is not above
his Lord, but the wicked may say, there is no help for him in his God, and that
the Lord has forsaken him.

Query 7. Whether, seeing that Christ has foretold that in the last days
deceivers should come; it might not be your wisdom, yet once more to bring
your Principles to the trial of the sanctuary, and not to be so over-hold and
confident in your way, especially there having been so many before you, as
confident as you, whose confidence came to folly; it is never too late to repent
if the Lord give grace?

Answ. Deceivers we know are in the world, and by their fruits we know them; in
that Writing from Tiverton, thou have marked out thy self to be one of them; as
that is an infallible mark, to cry peace to the wicked, and art not ashamed to
bid those rejoice, whose Iniquities are apparently written in their foreheads,
abominations reign, are drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and tell them
their King comes in righteousness, and in peace? More marks three are of a
Deceiver in that Writing, which we refer the Reader unto there to mind: And as
for our Principles, they are tried and weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary; yea, tried in the fire, and for the Truth we are bold as Lions, and
this confidence we shall never cast away. The hope of the wicked shall perish,
but they that trust in the Lord shall never be ashamed; and that repentance do
we witness never to be repented of.

Query 8. Whether the 2 of Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. be not Scripture, where the
Apostle says, that the Scripture is able to make wise unto salvation through
faith in Christ Jesus, and is profitable for reproof, for correction, etc. and
is able to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly to furnish him to every
good work? And if so, why do you so much plead against the rules of Scripture,
and the Ministry that is according to the Scripture?

Answ. Yea, we own it to be Scripture, and profitable, and with it we correct
thee who art found contrary to the Ministry that is according to it: And seeing
that it is profitable for the man of God, why do thou plead so much against
the Rules of Scripture, who say, perfection is not attainable here? but it
seems thou excludest thy self from being a man o^ God.

Quer. 9. Whether Timothy and Titus were Ministers of Christ? And if so, why do
you not rayl at them as well as at us, who received their rule without them
from the Apostle Paul, and not from the Light within as you pretend.

Answ. They were Ministers of Christ, we own them so; but to rail at any we
deny (unless you will call such Language as Peter spoke to Simon Magus, spoken
by the same spirit, to be railing) and with them have we unity; but against
thee and such as thou art, do we bear testimony for several reasons; they were
redeemed from all Iniquity, but ye are drawing iniquity with cords of vanity.
The grace of God had taught them to deny ungodliness, etc. Your abominations
reign: they were saved by the washing of Regeneration; but your sin has
eaten out all the Divine sweetness of regenerating and sanctifying grace, and
so by their fruits of holiness were known to be what they professed; but your
works of wickedness deny God, though in words you confess him, witness
Tiverton writing; and Paul bids Timothy stir up the gift that was in him.

Query 10. Why is it not lawful for Saints now to be raised on in the way of
holiness by imitation, or example? and as a means or a help as well as in the
Primitive times? according to these Scriptures, Mat. 11.29. John 13.14,15.
Phil. 3.17. 2 These. 3 9.

Answ. Christ is given for an example, and is a perfect pattern for his to
follow, and the Saints are to be followed while they walk so as they have him
for example; but the word Imitation we find not in the Scripture, nor the
practice (as we take it) unless the Magicians of Egypt, the sons of Sceva,
and such like, and the Scriptures beforementioned we own.

Query 11. Whether it be not a cunning device of Satan to judge and condemn all
the Saints to be formal, and without the spirit of Christ, that walk in the
Ordinances of Christ, on purpose to cause contempt and reproach upon both
Christ and his Ordinances?

Answ. Yea it is, and as cunning a device likewise of Satan to persuade persons
in a form that they are Saints; walk in the Ordinances of Christ, are set for
the defense of the Gospel, and yet abominations reign in them, iniquities
apparently written in their foreheads, and are drawing iniquity with cords of
vanity, while they confess to wait for the counsel of the Lord. Now such as
come to the Light of the world, and follow it, are led out of both into the
practice of the true Ordinance and worship, whch is in Spirit and Truth.

Query 12. Whether, as the Ministry of the legal Ministration was to open the
law of that Ministration, Nehem. 8.4.8. So the Ministers of the Gospel are not
to have respect to the written rule of the Gospel, and to open and apply the
same, rightly dividing the word of truth? according to 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17.

Answ. The true Ministers of the Gospel are not Ministers of the Letter, but of
the Spirit; and they know the Law written in the heart, and have the anointing
dwelling in them, whose teaching they are to follow, and speak as the spirit
gives them utterance, and then they rightly divide the word of truth.

Query 13. Whether if any speak not according to the Law and the Testimony, it
is not because there is no light in them? Isa. 8.20.

Answ. They that speak not according to the Law and the Testimony, are turned
from the light; for the Law is light, and the Testimony of Jesus is the spirit
of prophecy.

14. Qu. If all have the true light in them which leads to God, why does the
Apostle say, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in
the Lord?

Answ. The true light lights every man that comes into the world. He was in
the world, and the world knew him not; but unto as many as received him unto
them he gave power to become the sons of God, and the light shined in the
darkness, when the darkness comprehends it not; but a time is witnessed, that
God commands the light to shine out of darkness.

Qu. 15. Whether Christ's ascending into heaven, when he was taken up in a
clond, Acts 1.10. be meant that he ascended into the hearts of men?

Answ. It is meant as it is spoken, and the Saints have their conversation in
heaven, and are in Christ, and Christ in them, John 17.

16 Qu: Whether his sitting at the right hand of God, making intercession for
the Saints, be in the hearts of Saints, or in heaven?

Answ. The glorious God, at whose right hand Christ sits, fills heaven and
earth, and dwells in the Saints, whose conversation is in heaven, as the
Scriptures witness.

17 Query. Whether the Scriptures do not make a real distinction between Jesus
Christ, and the Sp^t, John 16.13,14. and Chap. 14.26. and Chap. 5.39.

Answ. The Scriptures testify that Christ is the Word, and that the Father,
Word, and Spirit are one.

18 Query. Whether God or the Spirit be at all called man? or the Son of man
the seed of David, as Christ is? and whether you own Christ to be indeed truly
a man of flesh and blood as we are? according to Heb. 2.14.

Answ. Christ is called the Son of Man; and he says, I and the Father are one:
And unto us a Son is borne, his name is the mighty God, etc. And unto the Son
he says, Thy throne O God, etc. And the man Christ Jesus do we own, and his
flesh and blood do we witness, which is meat indeed, and drink indeed. Yea,
him we own according to Heb. 2.14. but not as you are; for he was perfect,
without spot, without sin, but ye are wicked, your abominations reign, are
drawing Iniquity with cords of vanity: Iniquity apparently written in your
foreheads, as by your own confession appears in Tiverton writing, but in his
mouth was found no guile. Now the wicked think that God is like unto them; but
he will reprove them, and set their sins in order before them.

19 Qu. Why the Saints, if perfest as you pretend, were so much in the sense of
sin, and confession of it, as we find they were? Ps. 32.5. Isa. 6.5. Romans 7.24
25.

Answ. The Saints, as they declared a sense of sin, so also a purging, healing,
and deliverance from sin, as Isa, David, Paul and others, whom the Scriptures
witness; and as they confessed, so they forsook and found mercy.

20 Qu. Whether a lowly, self denying frame of the spirit, sensible of finne
and corruption, and warring against it, be not the frame of spirit that most of
all becomes the Saints, and is most approved of God in Scripture? as Isa.
57.15. Mat. 5.3. Rom: 7.24,25.

Answ. We know that the Lord dwells with him that is of a contrite spirit, and
an humble heart; and the poor in spirit are blessed, and are approved of God,
even they, and only they that deny self daily; but there is no peace to the
wicked, and they do not war against sin* whose abominations reign; but they
war against Christ, who are drawing iniquity with cords of vanity.

21 Query. Whether this temper of spirit be found in you, yea, or nay?

Answ. Yea, lowly, self-denying, and truly poor; For we suffer the loss of our
own, that we might gain Christ, in whom all our sufficiency is, both to will
and to do: And though tempted to sin, and warring with the enemies of our
souls, yet are not overcome, but are more then Conquerours through him that
has loved us. We choosing his Cross rather then our own liberty; which Cross
we have found to be the great power of God to salvation: Let him have the glory
of all.

And after all this he says, that he has briefly run through many things,
etc. through redeeming of time which is precious, and called for in other
employments. We answer, how did thou redeem time, when thou inventedst thy
Dialogue, and so many Lies and Slanders therein against the Innocent? What was
it moved thee thus to reproach the Lords people, who art passing through the
Wilderness, toward the Land of Promise, and neither eat of thy Bread, nor
meddle of thy Waters? Was it any other ground then what moved Amaleck to fight
against Israel? Surely had thou known the preciousnesse of time, and what it
is to redeem it, thou would not have employed it thus, to invent Slanders and
Reproaches: Yea, such things as the Lord knows never came into our hearts, but
are detested by us: And yet thou art found mispending more time to vindicate
what thou had thus unjustly done. Thou might well say, it was called for
to be spent in other employments, and the more thou have to account for: For he
that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. And then thou say, It is for the Lord; what? and yet called for to
be spent in other employments? what confusion is here? But the work shows, that
it is not for the Lord; for will a man lie for God? Nay, If some that preach in
his name must depart as workers of iniquity, much more they that speak lies in
his Name.

He further says, He has faith given him to believe that God will speedily
set a stop to those things and principles that are so dishonorable to him, and
ruining to souls. Verily thy fruits declare what thy faith is, no better then a
vain hope which shall perish: And woe to them which call evil good, and good
evil. We know that the Lord has wrought for the glory of his name, in thus
carrying on his truth against all ooposition, and sets a stop to the rage of
the wicked, who had swallowed us up quick, had not the Lord been on our side.
Yea, he puts a bridle in their jaws, and a hook in their noses, and turns them
backward, and snares them in the work of their own hands; but delivers those
that trust in him, praises to his name for ever.

And then at last he sets down several particulars about Perfection, which we
have spoken to already in what goes before; and therefore here need not answer,
but warn thee speedily to repent, and fear before the living God, who suddenly
appears to render to every man a due reward according to his works, whether
they be good or evil. For our God is a God of knowledge, and by him are actions
weighed.

Some Queries for Thomas Collier.
1 Qu. WHether ever any Minister of the Gospel, or one that was set for the
defense thereof, had at the same time abominations reigning in his soul, and
was drawing iniquity with cords of vanity? 2 Query. Whether that be not a false
Teacher, Deceiver, or Liar, and not a true Minister of Christ, who cry peace to
the wicked, even to such whose iniquities are apparently written in their
foreheads, since the Lord says, there is no peace to the wicked? 3 Qu.
Whether the woe of the Lord be not against such who now pretend to wait for the
counsel of the Lord, that they may know it, and yet are drawing iniquity with
cords of vanity, as it was in the days of Isaiah? 4 Qu. Whether ever the mouth
of a true Minister of Christ were stopped with a slavish fear? 5 Qu. Whether he
be not an hypocrite, who reproves others for their sins, while his own
abominations reign in his soul, and is drawing iniquity with cords of vanity? 6
Qu. Whether Christ words may not well be spoken to such a one (viz.) Thou
hypocrite, pull the beam out of thine own eye, before thou go about to take a
mote out of another? 7 Qu. Whether they are true Ministers of christ, who
daily complain, and make addresses for maintenance? 8 Qu. Whether such might
not rather be called greedy dogs which can never have enough? 9 Qu. Whether any
unclean thing shall ever enter into the new Jerusalem? 10 Qu. Whether they that
dye in their fins shall not receive the wages thereof? 11 Qu. Whether there be
a time of cleansing from ^in after the dissolution of the body? 12 Qu. Whether
the tree does not lie as it falls? 13 Qu. Whether many shall not come at the
last day, and say, Lord, Lord, in thy Name have we preached, cast out Devils,
and done many wonderful works. To whom Christ will then say, Depart ye workers
of iniquity, etc? 17 Que. Whether such whose Abominations reign; are drawing
iniquity with cords of vanity, and slavish fear has stopped their mouths, be
workers of Iniquity, yea, or nay? 15 Qu. Whether such must not receive the same
sentence that Christ pronounces against workers of Iniquity, what ever their
profession be? 16 Query. Whether God be not just to render vengeance against
all such who in words profess him, but in deeds deny him? 17 Query. Whether he
that commits sin be not of the Devil? 18 Qu. Whether they stand in the
warfare against sin and the Devil, who are drawing iniquity with cords of
vanity; or whether they are not joining with Sin and the Devil against Christ?
19 Qu. Whether any whose Iniquities are apparently written in their foreheads,
and are mockers of God, are joined to the Lord, yea, or nay? 20 Qu. Whether
they that are joined to the Lord are not one Spirit? 21 Qu Whether any truly
know Christ their Savior, while their Abominations reign, and are drawing
iniquity with cords of vanity? 22 Quer. Whether they that are without the sense
of Gods Majesty, in whom the world has eaten out all the Divine sweetness of
regenerating and sanctifying grace, who are formal in holy duties, and whose
Iniquities are apparently written in their foreheads, are built up through
that one everlasting Spirit, a holy Tabernacle for the living God, yea or nay?
23 Qu. Whether such as have the form of godliness, and are without the power,
must not be turned from, yea, or nay? 24 Qu. Whether such must not be denied,
who are without both form and power? 25 Query. Whether any of the Ministers of
Christ did ever plead for sin, and against perfection; but for perfection, and
against sin? 26 Qu. Whether Jesus Christ be not the same to day, as yesterday,
and for ever? 27 Query. Whether they are not Reprobates who do not know Christ
within them? 28 Qu. Whether ever a Minister of Christ had all his weapons
wrested out of his hands by the strength of sin? and whether such a one can
stand in the warfare against sin; or for the defense of the Gospel? 29 Qu. If
sin or sinners be purged out of the house of God, whether those that remain
must not be perfect? and if so, whether any of you will be left there? 30 Qu.
If the Church take effectual course to purge away sin or sinners (as in the
Writing from Tiverton is directed) whether thou must not be purged away, whose
Abominations reign, are drawing iniquity with cords of vanity? Slavish fear
has stopped thy mouth, sin has wrested all thy weapons out of thy hand, a
light spirit, living short of the true sight and sense of Gods Majesty in the
Churches: Coldness and deadness on thy soul, formal in holy Duties, and
indifferent and Laodicean spirit on thee, without the sense of the work, and
true travail of soul, as in that writing by thy own confession appears.
Besides those many lies, slanders, and reproaches thou art found guilty of, in
what is before declared?
A word to those called Baptists.
AND now a few words to you called Baptists, who stumble at the same stumbling
stone as all the rest of the professions in the world do: Oh who would or could
have thought that truth should have become such a burdensome stone to you of
all others, who are professing that you wait for his Reign! yet when he is
witnessed to reign, (and have dominion, whose right it is, and must reign,
until and his enemies become his footstool, even the promise of the Father)
The same the Prophets prophesied should come, and whose day Abraham saw, and
rejoiced: And the Apostles were eyewitnesses of; when he is owned and
witnessed, obeyed and followed, now is all of an uproar, and many of you among
the rest are engaged against him: But know that this is the stone upon which
whosoever falls, it breaks them to pieces: but on whomsoever it falls, will
grind them to powder; for assuredly he is the same, and not another. Jesus
Christ the same to day, as yesterday, and for ever.

And therefore we beseech you in bowels of love consider what you are doing,
and against whom you strive. Oh! Its hard for you to kick against the pricks.
For we bear testimony in the name and fear of the living God, that its the
Son of God many of you persecute, revile, and reproach; and that you shall one
day confess, though now you may think you do God service; And therefore cease
striving against him, and come down to his footstool, and let every thing bow
to his Name, that so his reign in the particular you may come to witness: For
truly, unless you know his Reign there over sin and corruption, and all
that is contrary to God, his appearance, who you profess ye are waiting for,
will be a day of dread and terror, of woe and misery, of bitter lamentation;
though many of you now dispute, preach, and print against him, yet in that day
shall your mouths be stopped, and palenesse cover your faces, when this sentence
you must hear, Depart ye workers of Iniquity, I know you not. Then shall you
see that nothing that is unclean can enter this City. And verily, unless you
know him a Savior from sin, and your Redeemer from iniquity, in the
particular, he will not be a Savior to you from hell and condemnation; for
they that hope for the latter, and know not the former, this is the hope of the
hypocrite that will perish, and not stand in the time of greatest need: So
think it not sufficient to be offering sacrifice to the Lord, and crying out,
The Temple of the Lord, etc. And that you profess his Ordinances, and walk in
Church Fellowship as you call it.

But in coolness and moderation of spirit let each put this question to
himself: Has the Lord commanded me? Is this required at my hands? or do I it
because others have done it, and left it upon Record; and so the testimony in
my self is wanting, that the Lord required it. Oh consider of it in time, ye
that have not heard the voice of God, nor seen his shape, and have not his Word
abiding in you, but are enemies to those that this witness; Surely the Lord
will not hold you guiltless; when he comes to judgment; neither can you stand
before him with any boldness for want of the testimony in your selves; Then
must your profession come to the ground: So be not hasty or rash, but try your
selves, search your selves. Know you not that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye
be Reprobates? And where he is made manifest, it is to destroy the works of the
Devil: And if it be not done in the particular while you are upon Earth, when
do you think it shall be, seeing the Tree lies as it falls? Think of this all
ye that are yet strangers to it in your selves, and oppose it in others, even
by pleading and printing against it. Surely the Lord is arising, yea, in glory
and great Majesty is he arising to rip off all unrighteous coverings: And now
must all appear as they are before him, who will not respect the persons of
any, nor the highest profession, whilst they are strangers to his life, and
enemies to his Cross, and opposers to his work.

Now we appeal to Gods witness in you, which many of you so slight and set
at naught, Whether it be not the condition of many of you, notwithstanding your
high profession; and know assuredly, unless you return and repent, this shall
one day witness for the Lord, and for us against you; though for the present
you may set light by it, you shall one day bow unto it. Oh! do not many of you
now bow to the pride of the world? and respect persons? and receive honor one
of another? You that so long have professed to be separated from the world, and
yet uphold the worlds Teachers lest you should suffer? Abominable deceit; what?
to declare against them in words, and yet uphold and maintain them in actions?
Nay, do not many of you in words, writings, and actions join with the world
against the innocent, denying the same as the world does, even the beginning
and the end of the work of God, the light and perfection? Whereas the work of
Christ's Ministers was, To turn people from darkness to the light; and the end
of their Ministry for the perfecting of the Saints.

Oh! how can it be, but that you should be overcome by the enemies of your own
houses, while you thus oppose the works of God, and plead against it, as many
of you do! How is your glory turned into shame, who are become the degenerate
plant of a strange Vine unto God? How are you smitten with blindness, and
wearying your selves to find the Door? You were once hated by the world, but
now joined with the world against the Heir: And truly its now no marvail to the
Children of Light, though the Scripture be fulfilled in you, even to reject
Jesus the Light of the World, and choose a Murderer; join with any rather
then children of Light. How can it be otherwise, seeing many of you are just
fencing your selves against the Truth, and not therewith content, but are
likewise what in you lies making bars and fences for those that you judge are
weaker, lest they should own it; and not only refusing to enter the Kingdom
your selves, but shutting it up against others: Your zeal for God being turned
against Truth in a great measure, and nothing you account so dangerous, and so
much cry out against; Even for this have tears been shed for you in secret;
your piety is now turned into policy, complying with the world, lest you should
suffer by them. Consider in the cool of the day, what is the difference between
you and the world? Do you not speak when you will? and pray when you will?
go when you will, and come when you will, as the worlds Teachers do?

Dare any of you say, you speak as the Oracles of God? or as you are moved of
the Holy Ghost? and as the Spirit gives you utterance? Even that which your
eyes have seen, your ears have heard, and your hands have handled of the word
of life? Do you not rather steal the words of the true Prophets, Christ and
the Apostles, being strangers to their Life, and enemies to that Spirit they
were guided by, and so run in your own wills, not knowing another to gird you,
and carry you whether you would not; crying peace to the wicked, as the worlds
Teachers do? But woe is to the wicked, and to them that draw iniquity with
cords of vanity, even now pronounced from the same Spirit as formerly it was;
and this shall stand in heaven against you all that live in it, pleads for it,
and cry peace to it, let your profession be what it will.

And therefore we persuade and beseech you to be reconciled to God. Wash you,
make you clean, put away from you the evil of your doings. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well, etc. And this know, by your own power, nor in your own wills
you can never do it; but you must believe in, obey, follow, be guided and led
by him who is the Light of the world, and leads contrary to the will of man (in
which all sin is committed) and so leads to do the will of another, and they
only are happy that knows him borne in them, the first taken away, and the
second established: So this we say to you, There is no other name given under
heaven by which men can be saved, but the name of Jesus, he that saves his
people from their sins, and preached himself the Light of the World: He that
reproves in secret for that which none can lay to your charge; not only for
wicked actions, but for idle and unprofitable words, and vain thoughts; and
blessed are all they who know him their guide and leader, King and
Lavv-giver, and are wholy subject to him, they shall reign with him upon
Mount Sion, and shall sing that new song, which none can sing but the
Redeemed from the Earth: He that has an ear to hear, let him hear: So the
way to true peace is through the svvord, the way to life through death; the
way to obtain mercy is through judgment; the way to reign, is to suffer
with him; and this must all witness in the particular, all must know the
living slain, and the dead raised by the mighty power of God; and such as have
part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no power.

And therefore we warn you all in love to your souls, that ye wander not
abroad; salvation must be witnessed at home, or all is vain. We further say, as
living witnesses, for the Lord we now stand, who have obtained mercy, after
long travail, and cruel bondage under the oppressor, wandering from Mountain to
Hill, and groaning under the burden of corruption (as we are persuaded some of
you do) Yea, we could even have laid down our earthly tabernacle to have been
rid of it; but in all professions that we were, the enemy carried us captive,
for which we wept in secret, and often bevvailed our conditions, and breathed
for deliverance, but knevv not how to obtain it, sinking under the burden,
without hope of relief, in this woeful, sad, and lamentable estate, where
we long continued, and had until this day, had not the Lord in his eternal
love revealed his Son in us, whom we witness is mighty to save, and on whom
only salvation is laid, even the light of the world; he that shevved us sin,
and made manifest our conditions, and often times had called upon us to turn from
the evil of our ways, but we knevv him not; and as soon as we believed that
this was he, not looking for another, but gave up to be guided by him, that
discovered our lost estates, the war we soon witnessed betvveen Light and
Darkness, the Lamb and the Dragon in the particular, even such days as we
had not known since the foundation of the world: And this we found, the same
that made manifest sin, gave victory over it, we standing single in it, adding
nothing to it, nor joining any thing of our own with it; but let the Lord
work his own work; and so dominion we vvitness over those sins that we so
long had groaned under: and now we know Jesus, a Savior from sin, and a
Redeemer from iniquity, glory to his name for ever and ever, in whose saving
health we now-rejoyce, even with joy unspeakable, which none can take from us.
And verily the desire of our souls is, that ye may come to partake of this joy
with us; and the way how we came to it, have we truly laid down before you; and
no other end have we in declaring this, but our earnest desire of your eternal
happiness, being pressed in spirit to it by the Lord, who bears record to the
truth of our hearts herein. Oh, that you could receive our testimony, yea, the
testimony of the Lord by us. Oh! that that eye might be opened in you, which
the God of this world has blinded; That you might know in this your day, the
things that belong to your peace, before they be hid from your eyes, and the
day of your visitation pass over your heads. For verily your leaders cause you
to err by their lies and lightness, and have cried peace unto you, when the
sword of the Lord pierces to the very soul. Oh! return, return to him who is
the Light of the world, who is made manifest within; who is the living bread
which came down from heaven, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is
drink indeed; and no longer seek your food in desolate places, and hew unto
your selves broken Cisterns that will hold no water: For the Son of God is come
and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we
are in him: And if you walk in darkness, and say you have fellowship with
him, ye lie, and do not the truth; but if you walk in the light as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all sin. And therefore no longer wander abroad, for the
Kingdom of God is within you: And say not in your selves, who shall ascend up
into heaven, to bring Christ down to us? For the word is nigh unto you, even in
the heart, and in the mouth; he that can receive it, let him: And now are we
clear in the sight of God concerning you, whether you hear or forbear; and
though Israel be not gathered, yet a good savor shall we be unto the Lord,
both in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

Oh! slight not the counsel of the Lord unto you by those who sometime drunk of
the Cup of fornication with you, and since have drunk of the Cup of
tribulation, yea, of the Lords indignation, but now drink of the cup of
consolation and salvation, and are well known unto many of you by the names of

Streat, the 21 day of the fourth month, 1658. John Pitman. Jesper Batt.


THE END

