A SERMON Preached to the Artillery Company, AT St. MARY le BOW, September. 11.
1677. And at their earnest desire PUBLISHED.

By THOMAS PITTIS, D. D. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Mart. lib. 1. Epig. 3. I, fuge, sed pateras tutior esse domi. LONDON: Printed
by J. D. for John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.
September. 18. 1678.
To the Honorable Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet; Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Tower of London; Alderman, and President of the Artillery Company.
Sir Joseph Sheldon, Knight, and Alderman, Vice President. Colonel John Mews
Treasurer. As also to The Right Honorable Francis, Lord Viscount Newport,
Baron of Erral, Treasurer of his Majesty's Household, and one of the Kings most
Honorable Privy Council. Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State. Stewards. Sir Francis Chaplain Knight. and
Alderman, now Lord Major Elect. Knights, late Sheriffs of London. Sir John
Peak, Sir Thomas Stamp,
Samuel Pepys, Esquire Richard Beckford, Esquire Capt. Daniel Causton,
AND To the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen,
Professing and Exercising Arms in that Renowned and Honorable Society.


Right Honorable, etc.
YOU, that are advanced by your most Illustrious Leader, whom his Royal
Highness vouchsafes to command, and condescends to be your Captain General,
(whose early Prowess astonished the World, and continued Victories have made
the Earth and the Sea shake; when his Friends were amazed at his Heroical
Attempts, which at once awed and confounded his Enemies; to whom Courage and
Conduct, both at Sea and Land, seem as natural as they have been familiar: His
Name only is too august and awful to be mentioned in such a Dedication as this,
to which common Custom has entitled many) may safely lay your Commands on me,
who being always trained to strict Obedience, cannot reject the Orders of my
Superiors, without offering violence to my self. Though my Judgment therefore,
in relation to my Discourse had before you, does not altogether correspond with
yours, (especially as to the Publication) yet I am resolved to submit my Will,
because it seems neither discreet nor safe for me to disoblige so Honorable a
Society, in which every Commander has the skill of a General, and he that
marches in the lowest place of Dignity among you, De Corona, cap. 11. De
Idolola. cap. 19.
understands Discipline sufficiently to Command. Though Tertullian, therefore,
questions the Practice of Christians warring against others, not dreaming that
they would Arm against themselves: And Arnobius vindicates our Saviors
Innocence, Adver. Gent. lib. 2.
whilst at the same time he evinces his Power, because he did not propagate his
Doctrine by the Sword; did not beat out the Brains of Men, that he might put
his Precepts into their Heads; Challenged not any Temporal Authority, nor
spread his Legions over the World to dissolve the Peace of Humane Societies; as
if, like Draco, he would write his Laws with Blood. And even to propagate our
own Religion, we confess our Weapons must not be Carnal. Yet that Christians,
notwithstanding, upon other Accounts, did not conclude Wars unlawful, when, by
assaulting others, they defended themselves under the Command and Conduct of
their Prince, appears by that Lightning Legion mentioned by Eusebius; who,
being in Arms, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 5.
and before the Enemy, by their devout Prayers obtained Rain to refresh
themselves, and Lightning from Heaven to discomfit their Adversaries, when the
whole Host might otherwise have perished. And, Tertul. Apo. cap. 37. Eucher.
Episcop. Lugdun.
besides others interspersed in the Army and Garrisons, we know there was a
Thebean Legion, (as well as the former Melitin) all Christians, who became as
Glorious and Renowned Martyrs, as they were Valiant and Victorious Soldiers;
never before equaled by any, nor probably will ever be again, considering
their Cause, Number, and the Place to which they innocently retired; every one
of which readily suffered a tame death from the hands of the Executioner,
rather than either to Sacrifice to an Idol, or Rebel against their Lawful
Sovereign. This following Discourse does therefore justify Defensive Wars,
when our own Prince calls us to our Arms; in which, as he is Judge of the Cause,
so he becomes only responsible for it to him who is above the Highest; and we
that are Subjects escape Guilt, if we behave our selves with Faithfulness and
Courage. Those that are mercenary under another, have their Case different;
with which, my Discourse not meddling, I shall have nothing to do in the
Dedication. The Sermon, perhaps, might make a rattle from the Pulpit, when
assisted by the help of a good Sounding-Board, a swift Delivery, and your
Commendations: But I fear, for all, it will appear to be charged with white
Powder only when coming from the Press, and not carry a good Report far:
However, since your Commands are that it must be printed, it becomes your own,
and you are bound to defend it; for you having so dearly paid for it, I can no
longer call it mine; Justice therefore presents it to you, from him who is

Right Honorable, etc. Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant THO. PITTIS.

Luke 3.14. former part. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him saying, And
what shall we do?
WHen the Watchman (like Ezekiel) is set upon the Tower, Ezekiel. 33.
if he blow not Trumpet when he discerns the Sword coming, though the People
die in their Iniquity, their Blood will be required at the Watchman's hand: But
if he warn them to prepare for Battle, and they securely slight the Alarm, he
delivers his own Soul from guilt, though they all perish by their careless
inadvertency. Having for this end therefore received our Orders, if we
discharge our Duty with faithfulness and alacrity, we have a reward given us
far above the merit of our Action, a Glorious Crown outweighing all intervening
Difficulties; But if we either desert our Station before we are relieved,
Desertores, Sediti^sos, and Fugitives, aut si loco, statime, vel praesidio
ce^^^ssent, tergave de^ ssent, aut e castris effugissent, tanquam p ssmo sa^m^e
adstrictos, capitali poena plect^re selebant Alex. ab Ale. and Cenial. Di^^.
lib. 2. cap. 13.
our Superior Officer finds us sleeping, or the Enemy chance to make his
Approaches, before we have given sufficient warning, we die then, without
mercy, as those that have been unfaithful to their Trust, and betrayed our
Fellow Soldiers to the Adversary.

Now because the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, nor
Favor always to Men of skill, Eccles. 9.11.
(as the wise Man informs us). It was a pious use among some Philosophers to
begin their Lectures, as well as end, with Prayer; and it was a custom among
the Heathens, Mos ergo Romanus erat, instructo ^a^ atoque exercitu, quum
congredi acie parant, Deos primum consulere. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 4. c.
7.
before they went to encounter an Enemy, to make some Observations from the
Heavens; as if the one could not instruct with success, unless they had the
influence of a superior Being, nor the other Fight prosperously with their
Enemies, without the smiles and approbation of the Gods. And though this has
been sometimes abused to more unworthy designs, when Men determined their own
Resolutions, and then sought God to patronize their Villainy; vowed first, and
then made enquiry, and a long Prayer became the Prologue only to the devouring
Widows Houses: Yet it well becomes the stoutest and most victorious Heroes to
pray for success (when their Cause will bear it) before they attempt an Hazard
and Encounter, that they may prepare themselves for another Life if the present
should be lost; may deprecate Divine Wrath and Vengeance, that the Artillery
may not play upon them from Above, that the Stars may not fight against them,
the Clouds of Heaven fall upon a Worm, and they may have no Enemy to encounter
but the Men that are in Battalia before them.

For Military Men, that are sweltered continually in Smoke and Darkness, dwell
in the midst of Blood and Wounds, and bear their Lives continually in their
Hands; that travel in the midst of Noise and Storm, and cannot have the
advantage of very frequent Retirements: that live always among the Dead, to
whom the Graves are never shut, but, though glutted, gape for more; should
especially before their Enterprise not forget their last Encounter, that their
Preparation may prevent a Surprise from Death, that it may not assault them
sleeping in their Trenches, and possess them of eternal Misery before they are
awake, to escape the Danger.

When the Baptist therefore became the Herald of the approaching Messiah, was
commissioned to prepare for his Lords Reception, now laid his Ax to the Root of
the Tree loaded with the Vices of Men, and preached the necessary Doctrine of
Repentance: They that heard him, surprised with the unexpected terror of the
Lord, that smote their Breasts like a Clap of Thunder, being vvilling to escape
that Fire, which without altering their course of Life, should assuredly
consume what it could not purify; began to enquire how they might escape the
Wrath to come: And whilst the Publicans and the People made their Address to
St. John for his Directions to order their Lives; the Soldiers also,
(whatever wickedness may be supposed to attend the Camp) though they might not
fear the Fury of an Enemy, were loath to dwell with Everlasting Burnings, and
therefore demanded of him, saying, What shall we do?

This was then the Soldiers Question; and I doubt not but it is yours now: To
answer therefore to your Demands, as well as the end of your appearance here,
that the Sword may not slash the Gown in pieces, nor the Priest refuse to
instruct the Soldier when he seeks the Law at his Mouth, because he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; since we come not here to consecrate any
Villainous Design, to entitle God to the Works of the Devil, or to seal
Conspiracy by a Sacrament; I shall in the handling these words, endeavor, 1.
To view the Persons making the Demand. 2. Answer the Demand it self.


First, For the Persons. These were Soldiers, a Profession consequent to the
Fall of Adam, and the distinction of Men's Properties in the World, almost as
ancient as Humane Societies; without which, considering the depraved
dispositions of Mankind, Prerogatives would be invaded by aspiring Men, Laws
die for want of execution, the different Privileges of Mankind would be
confounded, and our Properties submit to every one that is either stronger or
more subtle than our selves. Nor is this Profession more Ancient than
Honorable, the Designs of it blazon the Glory of its Possessors, without any
other Herald but themselves, their Employment being either to gain or secure
Peace; They draw therefore their own Escutcheons with the Points of their
Swords, their Hazards write their Names in Blood; they are entitled to Trophies
by their Valor and Victories, and become a Root of Honor to Posterity. Nay
the great Titles that now distinguish the degrees of Men, were first drawn out
of the Field, being there differenced by several Commands; and the honor of
the Pike cannot be rendered less or new by that of the Gown, (and God forbid
that any of us should fall out about it) since the Magistrate has his Sword
too, and I hope he does not bear it in vain.

But I must not here vindicate the Honor only, but the Lawfulness of this
Profession too, when the Sword is not lifted up to Slay the Innocent, nor used
to Combat the Lord's Anointed. It Is true, indeed, the Christian Doctrine
designing an universal Peace on Earth, (though by accident sends a Sword)
delivers nothing of the State of War; yet by its frequent allusions to it,
translating its Rules, Words of Command, and Names of Weapons into the use of
Christians, and spiritualizing Warfare it self, without rebuke or contradiction
to the thing; It seems to be a reasonable Conclusion, that our Savior left the
determination of this to the common Custom and Justice of the World. And
therefore the Answer of St. John Baptist, to the Demand made by the Soldiers
in my Text, neither rebukes, nor inveighs at their Profession, but gives them
some short Rules how to behave themselves in that capacity; That they should
not disturb their own Quarters, nor the Habitations of others, by either
frightning or plundering the Innocent, but be contented with their fixed
Allowance; to which must be added this too, That they must not Mutiny for want
of Pay. Thus also when Cornelius (who was Commander of part of that which
amongst the Romans was called the Italian-Band) was directed by an Angel to St.
Peter, that this Apostle might inform him what he ought to do, ( Acts 10.) He
did not tell him, what he was once told himself, Mat. 26.22.
They that use the Sword, shall perish by it; this being private and without
Authority; nor advised him to lay down his Commission, but acquainted him, That
his Prayer was heard and his Alms had in remembrance before God; and
immediately preached the Gospel to him, with which it seems his Profession was
consistent. Nay our most Blessed and Glorious Lord himself, when he had the
opportunity of conversing with another Captain, ( Luke 7.) does not at all
reprove his Calling, though he argued to Christ's Authority from his own; but
healed his Servant whose health he had petitioned, and dismissed him with this
honorable Eulogy; I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel.

Now though the Gospel is altogether silent as to the Case of Public Wars,
even whilst it prohibits private Revenge; because its Rules, if exactly
followed, would certainly produce an Universal Peace: Yet Nature it self
designing Man's Defense, (though it sent him naked into the World) by giving
him reason to form Weapons by Art and Industry, when the Beasts are armed by
their very shape and frame; And the Gospel nowhere forbidding the lawful use
of Arms; As in the case of private Injuries we are directed to appeal to
public Wrath, ( Romans 12.19.) So in public Mischiefs, when no satisfaction can
be otherwise obtained, it must be lawful for Sovereign Powers to endeavor to
regain that by force, which others have unjustly deprived them of, and to
resist violence offered to them: Because all these being coordinate under God,
Tertul. ad. Scap. cap. 2.
and acknowledging no Superior upon Earth, cannot make their Appeals for
Justice against each other, and therefore would be left without means of
Defense or Reparation, should they not repel one Force by another, where Laws
are silent and cannot speak; or if they do, Obedience is refused: Without this
then, they could neither protect others nor themselves; and for a Prince to be
a Christian, would be, of all Men, to be most miserable. This the Primitive
Converts to the Faith well knew, and therefore refused not to serve the
Emperors in their Wars, though they did to bow and sacrifice to their Idols,
but flocked to the Field in whole Legions, when their Sovereigns Honor or
Safety was endangered: Nor are any now free from suspicion, who lay down their
Arms in their Princes Cause, that they will not take them up in their own.

But though Public Wars appear lawful, when the Cause is just; yet Civil Wars,
betwixt Prince and Subject, will always be Criminal on the Subjects part. For
the Prince being in lawful Possession, will be the Defender, and the People
Aggressors, unless we are able to justify Rebellion, Vid. Tertul. Apol. cap.
31, 32, etc.
and lift up our hands against the Lord's Anointed, with a better show of
Argument and Reason, than because it has been done, or designing Men put it
into our power: Such insinuations as Liberty of Conscience, Ambros. Orat.
contra Auxentium.
and Privilege of the Subject, when there is no unjust invasion of either, are
stale and fulsome; the Design is smelt, like Gunpowder, at a distance; nor can
we now so easily be cheated into our own ruin, to satisfy the Malice,
Avarice, or Ambition of a few: And certainly we must be infatuated or
bewitched, if we are twice in the same Age vanquished by one little Stratagem.
Our Wounds are yet fresh and reeking; and though the Blood be stopped, and the
Gash skinned over, the Scar remains: But Charity, which has covered a multitude
of Sins, should blot this out of our Memories, would others do the same from
their Attempts and Writings. But alas! we are forced sadly to remember, when
Iniquity was established by a Law, and Men among us like those frantic
Ephesians, in the celebration of their (...), beat out the Brains of all they
met with in honor to their Gods, when Clouds and Darkness overspread our
Habitations, as if Damnation had been brought upon this other World. We have
seen a Church (like Noah's Ark) swimming in the midst of Waves and Tempest;
viewed the Heavens covered with Smoke, and our selves amazed in the midst of
Thunder; our whole Land turned into an Aetna, and the adjacent Islands into
Vulcanellaes, belching Fire and Brimstone upon themselves, as if the great
Conflagration were come, and the surrounding Sea had been to be absorped in
Flame: nay, the Throne it self floating in the Monarch's Gore. May our Joys
never more be sullied with such dismal Prospects as these. May the Stars never
forsake the Pilot, nor the Sun be robbed of its Light or Influence. Exodus 7. etc.
May the Plagues of Egypt never reach our Habitations, where Darkness was thick
enough to be felt; where Rivers of Water were turned into Blood, and Lice
brought into all their Quarters. May the Power of Frogs never be seen, nor they
croak in our Bed-chambers; the itch of Novelty never seize us, more venomous
than the Boyls of Egypt; nor the place on which now I stand ever-more undermine
it self: Let Hail and Thunder never be paralleled with Powder and Bullet, and
Mouth-Granadoes more killing than all: May the Locusts never appear in Armies
to eat up all the Grass in the Land, nor any Homebred or Foreign Enemies
sweep away our Beasts faster than the Murrain: May the Parallel never more run
to the Jewels and Earrings, nor our Houses be like to those of the Egyptians,
in each Family to have one dead. May the King's Throne be established in Peace;
our Religion safe under the Conduct of Divine Providence; our Laws never be
mute or silenced, our Properties secured, and our Estates increase; this City
become the Admiration, though not the Envy of the World; and you still remain
our Guard, that we may never more be made like a gentle Beast ready sadled for
the next that will ride us. And thus I pass from the Soldiers Profession.

Secondly, To their Religious Demand, What shall we do?

In Answer to this, The Baptist's return must not only limit my Discourse,
because I speak not only to Soldiers, under that Appellation, but to such as
are Christians too. And certainly Religion, though it softens Men's Manners,
cannot be thought to make their Heads so, nor to degrade the true Valor of Men
into the cowardice and effeminacy of a Woman: For though it molifies Beastial
and Savage Natures, yet it does not abate the Courage of Mankind, but advances
it under the Conduct of Prudence, heightens Valor, by directing it to its
proper Object; enlarges the Christian Soldiers Fortitude, by propounding
strong Arguments to encourage it, and makes their Virtue look like it self.

For (1.) it discovers to Men the vanity and transitoriness of this lower
World, for the sake of which they are so loath to part with their lives. (2.) It
enables them to run through Difficulties and Hazards, by injoyning
Mortifications and Austerities to themselves; enduring Hardship, as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, prepares them for the troubles of a Temporal
Warfare; gives them Patience to bear, and Courage to overcome all their Misery.
(3.) It gives them sufficient hopes of God's assistance in all their lawful,
though difficult, Encounters: for he, giving his Spirit to them that ask him,
entitles them to Omnipotence it self. (4.) It assures them of the Pardon of
their Sins, the want of which makes Men Cowards, and afraid to die. (5.) It
promises a future Life after this is ended, of which Men have an invincible
evidence in the Resurrection of our Savior. This will make them (like the
Ancient Martyrs) stand as if their Bodies were impenitrable, look the stoutest
Enemies in the face, bear up against the Shock and Fury of an Adversary, whilst
they view their Bodies only as the outward Garments of their Minds, which they
may lay aside without losing: Every Wound makes but a new breathing-place for
their Souls, which coveting Enlargement, through these holes, endeavor to make
their passage to it. The veiw of Immortality causes great Minds to scorn the
Advantages of this Life, wish for their Translation, and despise all the
Terrors of Death. And lastly, (to name no more) Religion makes Men more
obedient to their Commanders, and orderly in their deportment; by teaching them
to be subject for Conscience Sake, to mind that Rank in which they stand, and
not to entrench on the Authority of others; to be sober and temperate, that
they may be fit to Watch or Fight; and to be diligent and faithful in their
Place and Station, that they may with resolution either withstand or assault an
Enemy.

And now, to answer the Soldiers Demand, (What shall we do?) will not be
difficult, since, in a word, it is to believe what the Captain of your
Salvation has said or done upon the Authority of his Divine Revelation; and to
live suitable to your Profession; which is to entitle your selves to his Favor,
and Reward, by performing the general Condition of the Gospel.

But since I speak to Persons that are engaged to Fight under the Banner of
their Temporal Prince, as well as that of their Lord and Savior; since the
Directions left in Sacred Writ are there exhibited in Martial Terms, it may
perhaps be more acceptable to you, if I deliver them in such too; that Divine
Truths may pass securely when clad in Armor, distinguished by the same Colors
with your selves, and having your own proper Shibboleth, may rest in the same
Camp with you.

First then; You must not at any time List your selves under a pretended
Officer that has not a lawful Commission; for all these must derive their
Authority from the Great Prince and Captain of your Salvation, to whom you have
vowed Duty and Allegiance: If therefore you submit to the Conduct of any that
does not from hence fetch his Power, you are no longer under our Savior's
Banner, but Combat under another Ensign, what Colors soever they pretend to
Display; And then you are sure, when taken, (as you cannot escape) to be
punished as Desertors, being notorious Renegadoes from your Cause and Interest.
He that is not with me, says Christ, is against me; and he that gathers not
with me, scatters, (Luke 11.23.). We read of Scribes, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites in the Gospel, who compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; but
when he is gained, they make him more the Child of Hell than themselves, Mat.
23.15. And it is predicted by our Savior, (though this did not influence the
Men, but they the Prediction) That there shall arise false Christ's, and
Prophets, working Wonders in confirmation of their Authority, insinuating their
Doctrines with such specious Shows, and subtle Arguments, that (if it were
possible) they will deceive the Elect: But when they say unto you, Behold! be
is in the Desert go not forth: Behold! he is in the secret Chambers, believe it
n t, Mat. 24.24, 26. Such are those false Teachers mentioned by St. Peter, 1
Pet. 2.1.
who bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them. 1 Timothy 3.6.
And these are they (says St. Paul also) who creep into Houses, and lead silly
Women captive, laden with sins, led away by diverse Lusts. Such are not to be
complied with, but resisted; we must abominate them as St. John did Cerinthus,
St. Paul the Gnostics, Athanasius the Arrians, or St. Cyprian did Novatian.
For as the Promises of the Gospel are only made to the True Church; so that
cannot well be a Church, in which there is no lawful Ministry; As an Army is
but a Rout of Men, without Discipline, when they are not put in Order by such
as have Authority to command them.

Secondly; You must lay aside all your Encumbrances, those Impedimenta
Militiae, 2 Timothy 2.4.
that weary the Christian Soldier in his March, and hinder his Activity in all
his Encounters: Heb. 12.1.
Let us lay aside every Weight, (says St. Paul) and the Sin which does so
easily beset us: All filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, says St. James:
Jam. 1.21.
We must leave our sinful Passions and Vices behind us, if we will press
forward for the prize of our high Calling; and the pomps and vanities of a
fantastic World must be first blown off like loose Corns, before we Discharge
at Principalities and Powers, and Attaque those Spiritual Wickednesses, who
being posted in high Places, have already gained the advantage of the Ground:
All softness and effeminacy must be abandoned, and we must first shake off
Youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22.
if we intend to encounter more rugged Enemies: These do as much mischief in a
Christian's Warfare, as Women and Children in a Camp, devour the Provision, but
make their Relations lose the Field. A tender Man, that can only sleep upon a
soft Pillow, cannot rest when he exchanges it for a Stone; and he that lies
always upon a Down-Bed, with warm Curtains drawn about him, will take cold when
he rests only on a Turf of Earth, and has nothing over him but the Canopy of
Heaven, and be utterly disabled to fight an Enemy: though he may appear in a
Slashed Doublet, he will endeavor to sleep in a whole Skin; and will suffer no
more Inconveniences for Religion, than he will Wounds for his own Country.

Thirdly; You must not forget to put on your Armor. The last thing a Soldier
parts with is his Sword, nor is he dressed till he is girded to it. In times of
Difficulty he sleeps in Armor, and in the intervals of Danger (though he may
put it off, yet) he keeps it in his view and power: Hence is that direction of
St. Paul, Wherefore, take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able
to withstand in the evil Day; and, having overcome all to stand, (Ephesians. 6.13.)
Nothing then remains after the Victory, but to keep the Field, which is the
Signal of the Conquest; to secure what you have now gained; behold with joy the
Salvation of God, and to put on your Eternal Crowns.

Now what those particular pieces of Armor are, by which Christians encounter
with success, the Apostle also directs to, as a most Faithful and Generous
Commander.

(1.) Truth girt about your Loins, that you be not betrayed by false
Insinuations. Possess your selves of all the saving Doctrine of the Gospel,
that no Heresy may be able to oppose the Divine Sentiments of your Minds: And
let this claspe close about you, that so, like the Ancient Military Girdle, it
may fix and fasten your other Armor, that it may keep in your Bodies that they
may not swell with Lust or Intemperance, but make them subservient to your
Minds, and the uses of Religion; and that it may knit and fortify your Loins,
that you may be prepared, and strong, for Battle.

2. You must also take Righteousness for your Breast Plate; Obedience to the
Orders of your Supreme Commander, when conveyed to you by intermediate
Officers. And here your Exercise must be sincere, and according to the utmost
of your Power, Universal. This will guard you from any inordinate Fears and
Anguish in your Minds, and mortal Wounds from the assaults of Sin.

(3.) You must put Shoes upon your Feet, as being ready for March or Battle;
Peace within your selves, and Charity to others; that Offenses from without may
not scandalize you, and like sharp Stones grieving the bare Feet of a
Traveller, wrench your Joints, or cause you to desist from your Enterprise,
that you may run on with fury upon your Enemies, when your Feet are thus
securely shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

(4.) You must take the Shield of Faith; a firm Belief possessing your Minds,
both of the Promises and Threats of Heaven; and this will quench all the fiery
Darts of the Wicked. This lifts the Soul above Difficulties, makes it conquer
in the midst of Thunder; and though this may roll up and down the Clouds, our
Faith arms us against its Power, and makes it break under our Feet: The belief
of the Promises will excite our Endeavors fully to possess them, and an
assurance that God's Threats are infallible, will make us diligent and vigilant
to avoid them: This will help us to Conquer this World, whilst it reaches to us
the Glories of the next.

(5.) You must assume the Helmet of Salvation, which is the Confidence and Hope
of it: This, like an Helmet, will bear off the Blows of our Enemies, that we
may put to flight the Armies of the Aliens, those Foreign Lusts which War
against our Souls; Keeps us free from Fearfulness or Despair, and makes us
persevere unto the end, in hope of that Immortal Crown which hangs in our view
if we believe and expect; and shall certainly at last be in our Possession, if
we are not weary and faint in our Minds.

(6.) You must take the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; which teaches us
to possess our selves of the Weapons of our Adversaries, and both to handle and
secure our own: It discovers the Force and Stratagems of our Enemies, and no
Ambush can be so closely laid to offer us any Injury in our Marches, if we fix
our Designs by these Rules: We can with ease withstand Assailants, when we
receive them with a scriptum est, and draw Directions and Arguments from Sacred
Writ to obviate the Subtilty or Storm of Temptation.

Now lest, thus accoutred, we should go forth and fight in our own Strength,
and, like the Wicked, rage and be confident; we must add to all Watchfulness
and Prayer: Vigilance that we are not taken by surprise, and thus made
Prisoners of War; and Prayer too, that the Lord of Hosts may join in the
Encounter, deaden all the Bullets of our Enemies, and add a greater Power to
our own.

And now, that our Armor is thus fixed, we must prepare and make ready for the
Battle: The Drums beat, and the Trumpets sound, and every Man must hasten to
his Colors, and put himself into his Rank and Order; The World and the Flesh
are Confederates with the Devil, to Conquer and Lead you away in Triumph, and
their Vanguard begins to appear. Remember therefore the Obligations of your
Baptism, De Sacramento Militari apud. Romans Macedon. Lacedemon, etc. Vid. Alex.
ab Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 1. cap. 20. Tertul. de Corona Mil. cap. 3. and de
Spectac. c. 4.
that Sacramentum Militare, by which (as the Romans in their Oath) you are
engaged to fight the Battles of your Leader; to withstand all the Temptations
of the Devil, abandon all the Lusts of the Flesh, and defy the Pomps and
Allurements of the World: Remember those that have gone before you, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises; especially our Supreme Lord himself,
who calls to you as Julius Caesar was wont to his Soldiers, not go yonder, but
come hither and make your selves Partners in the Victory: He himself has set
you an Example, engaged you by immense Issues of his Love, and is gone to
prepare Crowns for you, if you remain faithful to the Death. What he commands
is highly reasonable, tending to the perfection of your Natures, and Godliness,
gives you the Advantages of this Life, and the Glory also of that which is to
come. Pluck up therefore your Courage and Resolution; Let Cowardice and Fear be
ashamed, and sneak, and not appear in a day of Battle. For as a small Levite,
of mean Parts and Spirit, is fit only to carry Wisps of Hay to feed Calves at
Dan and Bethel; but has not courage enough to slay a Sacrifice, nor knows he
how to offer it to the God of Israel: So if you do not abandon your Fears, your
Adversaries will easily win the Field, and make you turn back in the day of
Battle, though you are harnessed and carry Bows, are furnished with Arms to
assault your Adversaries, and defend your Selves: Resolve then either to secure
your Bucklers, or (as the manner was) to be brought back upon them; to endure
any Hardships and Difficulties, rather than to give ground or quit the Field:
It Is not enough to boast and ruffle when you put on your Armor, unless your
Courage maintains your Honor, till you come at last to put it off. For a
Hectoring Coward is but like an Hare in an Helmet, or an Hog in Armor; the one
may Snuff and Grunt at a Storm, but he lies down and sleeps in it: and the
other may make a frightful Appearance, but runs presently before the Face of
his Enemy. A few Cowards are enough to disorder a whole Army; their fear makes
them full of mistakes, they will create Light in the midst of Darkness, and
take the Sparks in their own Eyes, for Fires in the Camp of the Enemy; and if
they are prevailed upon to fight, they strike winking, and like the old (...),
ventilate only, and beat the Air, or fall upon their Friends, and disorder the
Host. Carnal Fear therefore must have no place in the Christian Camp.

But yet our Courage must not advance to Rashness. This creates Zeal in
Religion without Knowledge, and that will flame so furiously, that it will not
kindle only, but burn up Devotion, consume the Sacrifice, and the Altar too.
Such a Man being clothed in Fire, belches Flame, and speaks Thunder: But
though (like the Horse in Job) he smells the Battle afar off, Job 39.
and laughs among the Trumpets; yet both equally distinguish the Sound and the
Enemy; only the Horse is capable of better management, being to be held in with
Bit and Bridle; but the Zealot being blind, (though he does not know it) lays
about him without discretion, whilst Chance only directs him to that which he
encounters. This makes him often assault Christianity with its own Weapons,
fight against our Savior under his own Banner; and whilst he thinks to win
Heaven by Storm, he makes the Kingdom suffer violence, and endeavors to force
it without a Metaphor. Such a Man will kill the Apostles, to do God Service;
refuse his Worship, to avoid Superstition; and rob the Church, to escape
Sacriledg. No Bowls are so pleasant to Carouse in as those of the Temple, Dan.
5.3.
if Belshazzar has once the possession of them; nor is any Estate so desirable
as Glebe-Lands to the Furious or Profane; the tenth Sheaf shall then make the
fairest Bread, and the best Barn to lodge it in, shall be a Temple desecrated by
such a bold profanation. The Christian Soldier must take his Directions
therefore from his Officers, and duly observe his Rank and Order; not invade
the Station of his Superior, nor desert his own: For where there is not this
distinction it is not Order, but Confusion; the Pulpit will there be made a
Drum, and this turned into a Pulpit. He therefore that does not observe his
Place, is not capable of Military Conduct; for an Army must be under exact
Discipline, and the first thing a Soldier must be taught, is how to obey: And
when you have thoroughly learned this, you must be used to frequent Exercise,
that you may know how to handle your Arms, be more expert in receiving and
obeying all words words of Command, and encounter your Enemies in any Figure
you shall be cast into: For Habits are acquired by frequent Acts; which, once
obtained, become easy and pleasant to you.

But above all, John 15.17. John 17.11. Phil. 2.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.2, 3, etc.
you must be at unity among your selves; and there is nothing in all Christian
Religion, to which Men are more frequently and pathetically exhorted: This
Cements the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.17.
which the Lord's Supper both represents and increases. If an Army once break
their Ranks, they make a Gap to receive the Enemy, who soon spies such an
Advantage to break and rout the main Body. And if Christians, by differences
among themselves, refuse to stand by, and assist each other; leave their
Station, 1 Cor. 12. chapter
and invade each others Rights and Office; Satan, being the Prince of the Air,
presently plays upon them from on High; and having cantoniz'd those that were
before united, crumbles them into Faction and Divisions, Gal. 5.15.
and makes the Church fight against it self, that joining his Forces with one
Party, he may increase the Schism, till he has destroyed another, and weakened
all: And if those that remain yet undivided do not make good their Front
against him, by filling up the Places of the Dead; His Name is Legion, Mark 5.9.
and he will pour down his Troops upon us, 'till we are put into an eternal
Confusion, and routed beyond the possibility of a Rally.

For what countenance can we expect from him that is Defender of the Faith, if
we raise Disturbances by our Divisions? Nay what Protection from God himself,
when instead of opposing the Common Adversary, we run upon each other, and
destroy our selves, and fly the Methods of Divine Providence? Prove. 19.3.
And our Religion is now so interwoven with the Concernments of the State, that
we can hardly disjoynt the one without endangering, if not ruining the other;
and God and the King become either our joint Enemies, or Friends. To make
Christianity, then, tilt against it self, and by this to raise Intestine
Divisions, is to run our selves on the Points of Swords, antedate all the
Misery we fear, provoke and dare the Violence of others, and draw Blood from
our Persecutors Heads upon our own: Whilst we pretend to light our Matches at
the Stars, if we thus make Thrones uneasy, we do it at the Flames of Hell,
that we may discharge Fire and Brimstone into the World.

Instead of this therefore, let us encourage one another to Love, and to good
Works, Heb. 10.24.
and fight the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.
that prostrates our Enemies, and lays them at our Feet; 1 John 5.4.
mortify all our reigning Sins, Col. 3.5.
and persevere in all the Duties of Religion, Col. 1.23.
that we may lay hold of Eternal Life; and, Romans 8.37.
through Jesus Christ, be more than Conquerors. For inward Guilt will make our
Muskets recoil upon our selves, our Swords turn their Points upon our Bosoms;
and when we are called to Fight the Battles of our Sovereign, we shall sheath
them with such trembling Hands in the Bowels of our Adversaries, that we shall
give them time to make a Pass at our own. Let us therefore, whilst we engage
our Enemies, first make Friends with our selves, and then contend with
Faithfulness and Courage, that no Fear may cause us to give back, nor any
Hypocrisy make us Treacherous; We otherwise bussle and fight for Satan in the
Name of God; and instead of Kindling our Sacrifice with Coals from the Altar,
we burn it in the Flames of Hell.

Finally, that you may know how to use; as well as gain, a Victory, you must
not swell and be puffed up with your Successes; Luke 18.11, 14.
for this is so far from being an Argument that you grow in Grace, that you
have drunk Poison, and are even blown up by the Devil: The Christian Soldier
must be the more humble and modest, by how much the more he is Victorious: This
is the way to possess your Conquests, and your selves too; and whilst ye thus
demean your selves, you still go on to complete your Tryumphs. You can never be
secure in this World, but your whole Lives are a continued Warfare; the Enemy
will Assault where he cannot Conquer, Ephesians. 6.12.
and will trouble those whom he cannot overcome: He will rise again after he is
slain, and endeavor to get Dominion over us, even when we have him under our
Feet; and is always like a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. Mark 13.37.
seeking whom he may devour. Be watchful therefore, and always upon your Guard;
1 Cor. 10.12.
and let him that stands, take heed lest he fall, that when he has
overpowered one Temptation, another may not overcome him. Val. Max. lib. 9.
cap. 1. Sen. Epist. 51. ad Lucil. Cyprian. passim de Lapsis, and in Epist.
Hannibal was vanquished by the Delicacies of Capua, after he had conquered the
Roman Army; and some were found amongst the Lapsi, after they had confessed
Christ in a Prison. And if we too having begun in the Spirit end in the Flesh,
our sensual Pleasures having bauk'd our Progress, and weakened our Resolutions,
Ezekiel. 18.24.
stain all the Christians former Victories; Though he has contended earnestly
for the Faith, and kept it safe amongst Earthquakes and Storms; yet, if after
all (like the Ancient Romans in times of Peace) he grow luxurious, and lies
down playing in the Sun, he will not only discolor his Beauty, but stain the
Glory of former Actions, whilst every little Vermin will assault him. Judge.
15.15
Sampson who slew a thousand Men with that uncouth and Enthusiastic Weapon,
the Jaw Bone of an Afs, was yet weakened by the Embraces of a Woman; and though
he brake all the Bands of the Philistines, was so hampered in the Locks of his
Mistress, that he lost his own; Judge. 16.19
and with these his Strength departed from him, till he, became a Vassal and
Scorn to his Enemies, being first a Slave to his own Prisoners, when his Reason
yielded to his Affections: Take heed therefore, least after God has brought you
out of the Land of Egypt, you tempt him in the Wilderness; Heb. 3.12.
and (as the Apostle applys it) that there be not in you an evil Heart of
unbelief, in departing from the Living God; but exhort one another daily,
whilst the state of your Trial lasts, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of Sin; that having subdued your Enemies in the World, you may at
last triumph over Death too, through him who died and rose again, Jesus Christ
the Righteous; To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and
one God, be all Glory, Power, and Adoration, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

