OCCASIONAL DISCOURSES

1. Of Worship and prayer to Angels and Saints. 2. Of Purgatory. 3. Of the
Popes Supremacy. 4. Of the succession of the Church.
Had with Doctor Cosens, by word of mouth, or by writing from him.

By THOMAS CARRE Confessor of the English Nunnerie at Paris.

AS ALSO, An answer to a libell written by the said Doctor Cosens against the
great General Council of Lateran under Innocentius the third, in the year of
our Lord 1215.

By THOMAS VANE Doctor in Divinity of Cambridge.

Printed at PARIS Anno Dom. 1646. With Permission and Approbation.

A LETTER TO A Gentleman at S. Germains.
HONORED SIR,
As by many other just titles, so I am yours by this in particular of the last
of October. for that you have been pleased thereby to signify what passes at S.
Germains, and that you so truly resent the wrong which is done to Truth in the
proclaiming of victories (especially by such, as you express it, as are not
guilty of too much understanding) gained by the Lord of London-Derrie, D.
Cosens (and who not?) over all the Papist Priests they meet withal: bearing
all down before them, as they please to term it. Sir, I am easily persuaded
to believe, that the bruiters of such untruths were not very understanding
indeed, and that they spoke accordingly. For I my self am witness, that the
Lord of London-Derrie honestly and fairly denied that there were any such
reports occasioned by him, or that indeed there was any such cause: and I am
much mistaken, if D. Cosens be found so little ingenuous, as to abett so
absolute an untruth. For sure, he met with none weaker then my self, and yet,
to speak sparingly, he bore no advantage away; as I hope this sca^tling Of
prayers to Angels, which I have under his own hand (and some other occasional
discourses which he will not deny) will partly make good. At least I most
willingly leave it to the indifferent reader to judge of the Lion, ex illo
vngue, rather then to have Truth suffer through my silence, where my weak
endeauours might be able to contribute any thing to its liberty and luster.
Certainly my labor therein was not so much to answer difficulties, as to
discover corruptions, mistakings of, and violence made against the Authors
genuine sense, which being once discovered, the former seeming difficulties
vanished of themselves, Sir, if you do me that right, (which I easily promise
my self from your frie^dship, yea even your justice) as to conceive I use
candor herein, and speak but a measured truth; you will admire with me, how
this could be made a subject of triumph and glory. Thus far to my friend
then. Now to every courteous Reader, I have this humble suite to make, that,
while he hears corruptions, mistakings of, and viole^ces made against the
genuine sense of the Authors, he permit not his judgment to be forestalled
with a preiudicate opinion, that these words are but the effects of passion:
but co^trarily that without passion or preoccupation, he would have patience to
read and judge: and if he find the^ not real truths, no false aspersio^s,
let me pass for an impostour: But if truths indeed; let truth be published,
vindicated and known; let me^ be our friends, but let Truth be incomparably
more our friend; let the Fathers be heard speaking their own sense without
force, that streams of honey may be conuayed from them into the hearts of the
unlearned, not straynes of poison; And let such as use violence against it
know, that Truth for a time may be clouded, but cannot be overcome: That
iniquity for a time may flourish, but cannot be permanent; Finally, that no
victory is more glorious, then to be subdued by Truth. Superet igitur Veritas
volentem, nam and inuitum ipsa superabit.

The ensuing discourse of Prayer to Angels etc. I purposed fairly and frie^dly
to have examined betwixt Mr. Cos. and me, and therefore I addressed it to
himself in the terms following.
APPROBATIO.
PErlegimus nos infra scripti in sacra Theologiae facultate Parisiensi
Magistri, duos hosce tractatus, Anglicano scriptos idiomate, quorum titulus
est, Occasional discourses of worship and prayer to Angels and Saints etc. had
with D. Cosens by word of mouth, or by writing from him, by THOMAS CARRE
Confessor of the English Nunnerie at Paris. As also an Answer to a libell
written by the said D. Cosens against the great General Council of Lateran
under Innocentius the third, Anno Domini 1215. by THOMAS VANE etc. quibus and
fidei Catholicae elucescit veritas and hominis haeretici deteguntur imposturae:
cuius in hac part an praeualeat inscitia, an audacia, haud facile est
iudicare. Hos itaque tractatus vtiliter posse typis mandari, in bonum scilicet
tum fidei tum pietatis Christianae, nostris hic testamur chirographis. Datum
Parisiis 4. Maij, 1646.

H. HOLDEN. IAC. DVLAEVS.


The same in English.
We whose names are vnderwritte^, Doctors in Divinity of the sacred faculty
of Paris, have perused these two treatises written in the English tongue,
entitled, Occasional Discourses of worship and prayer to Angels and Saints
etc. had with D. Cosens by word of mouth or by writing from him, by THOMAS
CARRE Confessor of the English Nunnery at Paris: As also an answer to a libell
written by the said D. Cosens against the great General Council of Lateran
under Innocentius the third, An. Dom. 1215. by THOMAS VANE etc. wherein as well
the truth of Catholic belief is mainely illustrated, as the cosening wiles
of an heretical man are plainly discovered: whose whether ignorance, or
boldness be more preualent in this behalf, is hard to judge. Wherefore we
testify by these our handwritings, that the said treatises may profitably be
given to the Press, for the furtherance of Christian faith and piety. Given at
Paris this 4. day of May, in the year of our Lord 1646.

H. HOLDEN. I. DVLEE.


NOBLE Sr.
After a sincere protestation, that I as much love and honor your person, as I
hate what Catholic belief oblidges me to judge error in you; let me use
freedom, without offense, to tell you in all Christian Charity, that of 14.
objections which you have made out of the holy Fathers against worship and
prayer to Angels and Saints, There are six corrupted, the words, or sentences,
most important and even decisiue of the controversy, being absolutely left
out, though they were in the very midst of the passages cited or immediately
following, as 1. That of the Council of Laodicea. 2. That of S. Augustine
Conf. 10. c. 42. 3. That of the same Saint contra epist. Parmeniani. 4. That of
Irenaeus. 5. That of S. Ambrose. 6. That of S. Bid.


Five either forced to speak against themselves, or else nothing at al for you:
as 1. That of Theodoret twice. 2. That of Origene against Celsus. 3. That of
Athanasius. 4. That of Epiphanius.


And finally three brought in for witnesses which speak not of the worship, or
prayer to Angels or Saints at all, and therefore not to the present purpose; as
1. That of S. Austine. 2. That of Tertullian twice. 3. That of S Chrysostom.


Now that I may not only say this, but make it appear in effect, I will
observe this order, fairly to put down your several objections, severally,
and in as many, and the same words without changing or omitting one syllable
produced by you, and attend each of them in particular with my answers,
apprehending that the most perspicuous, and satisfactorie way, to the readers
or hearers, and least subject to be misconstrued or misconceaued.

Of the worshipping and praying to Angels.
COSENS THat this was forbidden by S. Paul, and condemned by the ancient
fathers of the Church is manifest, both from the testimony of Theodoret and
others, and from the Canon made against it in the Council of Laodicea.

CARRE. That the worship and prayer to Angels, as it is practiced in the
Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church (which is the thing in question) is not
forbidden by S. Paul, or condemned by the ancient Fathers, etc. which you
pretend to make good by sundry passages of the Fathers here puttdowne, I hope
to make as clear, as the said Fathers own plain words can make it.

COS. Let no man seduce you through humility and the Religion or worshipping of
Angels. They that maintaynd the law, induced the Colossians to worship Angels,
telling them, that the law was given by Angels and therefore that they ought to
be worshipped. And this vice continued a great while among them both in Phrygia
and Pisidia. Therefore the Council which was gathered together at Laodicea,
which is the Metropolitan City of Phrygia, forbad it by a law, and commanded
them, that they should not pray to Angels. To this day are to be seen the
oratories which they and their neighbors made, to the Angel S. Michael. And
this they did (praying to them) out of humility, saying that the God of Heaven
and earth was invisible and incomprehensible, to whom they could not come; and
that therefore it behooved them to procure his favor by the Angels. And this was
it which S. Paul meant when he said, Let no man seduce you through humility,
and the worshipping of Angels.

CAR. We answer that that passage of S. Paul is to be understood of such as
are so seduced as that they give away to creatures, sovereign worship which is
due to God alone. And in this sense we with S. Paul cry out Let no man seduce
you, etc. And that this is not said gratis, but is indeed the true sense of S.
Paul, appears first out of S. Chrysostom upon the same place saying. There
are some who say that we are to be brought to God by Angels and not by Christ.
2. by the co^text or sequel of words in the very next verse, and not holding
the head, to wit Christ, but in lieu of Christ substituting Angels, as says
the said Theodoret and S. Anselme. 3. by the Council of Laodicea it self, to
which we have Theodoret wholly alluding and referring to it, and therefore is
to be interpreted by it. Let us hear then what it says, and consequently what
Theodoret would and must say.

COS. The words of the Canon made by the Council of Laodicea about 1300.
years since be these.

CAnon 35. That Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God and go to
the Angels, making private meetings for that purpose which are wholly
forbidden: therefore if any one shall be found, to follow this secret and
private Idolatry let him be accursed.

Car. Here is somewhat not rightly putt down, some thing quite left out. Take
it as follows.

That we ought not to relinquish the Church of God, and depart thence, and
nominate Angels, and to make assemblies which are known to be forbidden.
Therefore if any shall be found, to follow this secret Idolatry, Let him be
accursed. Because he forsook our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, and
abandoned himself to Idolatry, or went to Idols. These words (because he
forsook our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God and abandoned himself to
Idolatry, or went to Idols) are quite left out, being yet the most important
to decide the difficulty betwixt us, though immediately following, and clearly
delivering the reason, or cause of what preceeded.

Is there now any need of further answer? Do Catholics hold that they ought
to forsake the Church of God and to depart thence to name, call, or (if you
please) invoke Angels? Do they to that purpose, make any secret assemblies
which are publicly forbidden? Do they finally forsaking our Lord Jesus Christ
the son of God give themselves over to Idolatry, and thereby draw the curse
upon their shoulders, it being imposed for no other cause, as the Council it
selse expounds it self, designing the particular reason of the curse saying
Because he forsook our Lord, etc. why did you then deal so spareingly with
your friends, as by leaving out what was most important, to leave them with
some apparent doubt quaking under the fear of a curse if they should worship
or pray to a Saint, whereas the words, being produced, made most clear, that
there was indeed no cause of fear at all.

In a word that this Canon cannot be meant of the Religious worship which the
Catholic Church pays to Angels and Saints, is further manifest both by the
Canon 34. immediately preceding in the same Council where the Religious
worship of a true Martyr is approved in these words. A Christian ought not to
forsake the Martirs of Christ, and go to false Martirs. And also by the 51.
art. following. We ought not to celebrate the birthdayes of Martirs in Lent,
but only to make a memory. (which we call now a co^memoration) of them upon
saturday and sunday. Judge then whether it were likely that the holy Council
would with one breath, both establish and destroy the worship due to Angels or
Saints, the difficulty equally vrgeing against them both.

Again the phrase of the Council being nominare Angelos I would feign know by
what rule it is rather englished to go to the Angels, then as the words
usually signify by the common consent of men, to nominate or name the Angels,
which is wont to be done in coniurations and enchantements, etc. which sense
the canon 36. immediately following seems particularly to favor and confirm,
as rendering the reason of the precedent canon: because (says it) the ministers
of the Altar or Clerks, ought not to be Magicians or enchanters, or to make
certain scrolls (Phylacteria) wherein things are written, etc. in such were the
Pharisees accustomed to write the Commandments, and to wear them about their
heads or arms in a superstitious manner as appears by Hierome Oleaster upon
Deuteronomy. c 6.

Nor does this passage of Theodoret any whit prejudice the Catholic cause, all
things being well balanced. First, because his sense herein is the sense of
the Council, which you see touches us not. Secondly his words being duly
considered, they figh not with a Catholic proceeding; for he imputes only the
worship of Angels as a vice to those who did it upon this motive, that they
delivered the law (telling them that the law was given by Angels, and therefore
they ought to be worshipped) which is no Catholic ground of that worship: and
again in that they said the God of heaven and earth was invisible and
incomprehensible, to whom they could not come, and therefore they ought to
procure his favor by the Angels. As though, forsouth, Gods inuisibiltie and
incomprehensibilitie were the true reason concluding that man cannot approach
him, and that therefore we were necessitated to procure access by the Angels
favor: which is a dream falling into no Catholic heart: For though we
willingly profess that the mediation of Angels and Saints is good, holy,
useful, and always usual in the Church of God, yet is it not upon a mistaken
ground, that there is no other way to get access to him. We know that by the
feet of heavenly Love we are able to walk home to that invisible and
incomprehensible Deity; which Love is heard, though the Angels were even
silent, and is not refused entry. So that the mediation of Angels is neither
necessary for that reason, nor indeed (for any thing I have yet been taught)
necessary at all, by an absolute necessity obliging every one in particular.
The words of the Council of Trent being these: that it is good and profitable
humbly to call upon them, etc. and to fly to their prayers help and
assistance, etc. not that that is the only means to approach unto God, etc.

COS. Again; Theodorets words (upon the 3. Coloss.) are these and to the same
purpose.

FOr in as much as they willed men to worship Angels, the Apostle forbids
it, and commands the contrary, that so all their words and works might
beset forth by the remembrance of Christ. And give thanks (says S. Paul) to
God the Father by Christ not by the Angels. Which rule the Council of Laodicea
held. and for a salve to that old sore, made alaw, that Angels should not be
prayed to.

Car. This place requires no new answer. The solution of the former cleares
this too. for in as much as they willed men to worship Angels, in the manner
about declared, the A postle most justly orbiddeth it, and so does the Council
of Laodicea after him, and all Catholics say Amen. Whether according to the
said Council, Vbisupra,
because they forsook our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, and abandoned
themselves to I dolatrie. Or according to S. Paul in the same place, because
they held not the Head, which is Christ, Non tenens caput. Or following S.
Chrysostom for that the Colossians which made their approaches to God by the
Angels, Upon the firstch to the Coless Upon he 2 th to the Co loss.
had many Judicial, Grecian or Ethnicall observations. Or following
Theophylact, because by the apparances and shadow of humility you (the
Colossians) were set upon, tempted and deceived: for these seducers affirmed
it a thing unworthy the Matestte of the onelybegotten (Christ) that you
(Colossians) should be brought to God by his guidance, and that this is a
work, far outstriping man's poverty (litlenes) whence they also say it is
more aggreeable to reason, to auerre that this office, of conducting to God, is
performed by the Angels: Whereupon doubtlesly they introduced a worship,
professed a Religion, and persuaded the unlearned, that they should apply
themselves to them, and, in their access to God, use them (who had brought us
salvation) for their Guides. And again in the same Chapter ver. 10. Why
therefore, says he, he (Christ) being omitted or left (omisso) Do you betake
your selves to the Angels, as Guides to conduct to the Father. Finally the same
Theop in the beginning, or argument of the said Epistle, in discovering the
scope of it, or the reason moving S. Paul to write to them, discouers also what
kind of worship of Angels he reprehends in them And this did induce him (S.
Paul) to write to the Colossians because a wicked tenet was of late received
among them: for they apprehended that there was no access to God and the
Father by the son, but by the Angels; esteeming it an absurd thing to believe
that the son of God should come in these last ages, since in the old Testament
all things were done by the Ministry of the Angels. They further observed
diverse Judicial institutions, and customs of the Gentiles, etc. And had M.
Cos. read on one line further (for it immediately followed in the same place)
he had found the solution. Nor ought our Lord Iesius Christ to be relinquished.
Behold how all of them concur in this, to condemn the worship. invocation,
or religion of Angels, which excludes the Mediatio^ of Jesus Christ, which
Catholics do as much detest as any, and consequently here is nothing against
Catholic doctrine.

Cos. Cardinal Bellarmine and some others answer, That the old Heretics said,
no man could come to God by Christ, but by the Angels; and therefore that they
ought to be prnyed to, and worshipped, not Christ.

Car. Card. Bellarmine, for as much as I am able to discover, has neither the
words, nor the sense heero put down for his own reply: how beit such an an
swear had not been without good ground: for he brings in S. Chry sostome saying
no less, in his 7. Hom. upon the Epist. to the Colossians, who affirm that we
are not to be reconciled and come unto God by Christ; but by the Angels. And
has not Theophylacte the same in terms, as I have newly cited him in his
argument upon the Epistle to the Collossians. They thought, says he, there was
no coming to God the Father, by the son (Christ) but by the Angels? Yea does
not even Theodoret himself say as much too in effect, about, where he is
alleged against us, when he affirms they said that the God of heaven and
earth was invisible and incomprehensible to whom they could not come, and
therefore they ought toprocure his favor by the Angels? How do you then M.
Cosens forgett your self, and go on saying?

Cos. But neither does the Council of Laodicea, nor Theodoret, nor S. Paul,
attribute any such opinion to them.

Car. Yes Sir, Theodoret you have newly heard speak; and the Council and S.
Paul above, both which do in formal words reprehend and accurse such
abominable Religion to Angels, as causes vsto forsake the only begotten son
of God, etc. so the Council: and not to hold the head: so S. Paul. How unduly
therefore do you thence affitme that they (the Council, Theoph. S. Paul)
condemned them only for giving religious worship to Angels, in praying to
them, that they would become Mediators for them to God. And with all,
forsouth, that that should be it, which they call a secret kind of Idolatry,
and a forsaking of Christ and his Church.

For further satisfaction, and the absolute clearing of the place, and
discovering Theodorets sense in point of honoring and praying to the Saints or
Angels let himself be heard speak, where he discourses more plainly and
fully upon that subject.

In his Epitome of Divine dccrees. De Angelis, c. 7. THe divine Daniel the
Prophcte did also affirm, that some (to wit Angels whereof he spoke) were
Princes of Nations, etc. And added withal, that no other did help him, while
he made intercession to God for the liberty of the I ewes, then Michael their
Prince. The 8. book of the cure of the Grecian affections. THe generous souls
of the tryumphant Martyrs walk now in heaven, and are present amidst the
Quires of Angels. Marry even their bodies are not contaynd in their
particular monumets: The ancient devotion to relics which is never heard of
amingst the protestants.
but the cities and villages having divided them amongst them instile the^
conseruers of their souls and Physicians of their bodies, and worship them as
Presidents, and keepers of their cities; and making use of their intercession
to God, they obtain divine gifts through their favor. Their intercession made
use of.
Their bodies being cuttin pieces, the virtue of them remaynes entire and
undivided. And those so little and diminutiue relics have an equal virtue to
the whole Martyr, Favors and cures obtained at and by means of their relics.
while undivided, and vncutt into pieces. For the virtue present distributes
favors and proportions its liberality to the faith of the suppliants. And
even these things move not you to praise their God, but you deride and scoff
at the honor, which all every where exhibit to them, and repute it an
abominable crime to draw near their graves. In the same book about a leaf
after. Why are you offended with us, who make not Gods, Their honor.
but honor Martyrs, as witnesses of God and most loving servants. Again in
the same book. But the fair and famours Temples of the victorious Martyrs
appear illustrious for greatness, Temples built to God in their name, and honor.
excellency, and all kind of ornament, and streams out the splendor of their
beauteousnes on every side. Nor do we frequent them once twice of five times a
year, but we celebrate frequent assemblies, nay often we sing praises every
day to their Lord and Master. And those that are in good health, beg the
conservation of it, such as are afflicted with any disease, entreat to be
freed of it. They also demand children who want them, and such as are sterill
desire to become mothers, etc. Travelers sue to them to be companions, and
guides of their journey: who return safe, render thanks. Prayer to them.
Nor do they go to them as to Gods but pray to them as heavenly men, and
deseech them to be pleased to be intercessours for them. Now that such as
faithfully demand obtain their desires, their Donaries speaking their cures,
openly publish. For some hang up resmblances of eyes, others of hands and
feet, made of silver or gold. To wit their Master accepts of small things and
of little value, measuring the gift by the ability of the giver. And a little
after. NAy further they are careful to call their newborn children by their
names, procureing to them thereby security, and safe custody. Is it possible
that this Authors testimony should ever be used against honor and prayer to
Saints? Did ever or could ever any Catholic speak more aduantagiously in his
own behalf? Could the Author ever more clearly express himself a
Catholic, or even more fully, and freely and evidently deliver Catholic
duty, and practice in this behalf? Which he himself also observed in his
Religious History c. 3. of Macarius his life, saying in the end of the same. I
making an end of this narration, pray and beseech that by the intercession of
all these (of whom he spoke) I may obtain the divine assistance. And c. 18 of
Eusebius, And I pray that I may obtain that intercession, which hitherto I
have enjoyed while he was yet alive, etc. And finally in c. 27. of Baradatus.
Grant that by the assistance of their prayers I may approach to that Mountain,
etc.

COSENS.Saint Augustine in his 10. book of Confessions chap. 42. has these
words. Whom should I find, that might reconcile me to thee o my God? Must I go
to the Angels? With what prayer? with what Sacrament should I do it? I hear
that many desireing to return to thee, and being not able to do it by
themselves have made trial of this way, and have been very deservedly deluded
by it.

CARRE. There is some thing in that Passage, which is most material, omitted,
some what also false translated. Take therefore the passage word for word as it
lies.

Whom could I find, that might reconcile me to thee? Was I to go to Angels?
With what prayer? with what Sacraments? (was I to do it, is not in the text,
howbeit that much imports not) Many desiring to return to thee, and not being
able to do it by themselves, as I hear, have tried these things (haec) can
not, at least be referred to the Angels alone) and have fallen into a desire of
curious visions (this clause of curious visions is quite left out, though most
material ( and were held worthy of illusions or to be illuded by it, these
words, byit, are added to the text, because they may seem to refer to the
going to the Angels, as though that were the cause of their being illuded,
which serves the better to patch up the Doctors sense whereas indeed their being
illuded, might either be imputed to their going to the Angels: Prayer:
Sacraments: or else more immediately and apparently, to the desire they had to
have curious visions, which can never be deuoyd of fault. But if he will needs
have all the mischeife be putt upon their going to the Angels, Let him please
either to look upon the marginall notes in what impression so ever of his
whole works where he will find remedia vitiorum a Daemonibus: the remedies of
vices from the Devils: or else take the pains to read on five or six lines
further, and he will discover what Angels S. Augustine spoke of, who says. For
they being highminded, sought thee in the pride of their learning, and did
rather exalt their hearts then kenecke their breasts. And so they drew the
Princes of the air toward them, who conspired and were companions with them
in the same pride, and by them they were deluded through magical powers, etc.
For the devil was transforming himself into an Angel of light. Behold how,
and by what Angel they were deluded; and consequently how this apparent
difficulty falls all in pieces. If any desire a clearer prospect upon S.
Augustins mind herein, by knowing of whom he had heard this opinion of being
purged and reconciled to God by the mediation of the Angels, etc. Les him take
the pains to read what the same Saint says in his 9. and tenth book of the
city of God all over, and he will plainly discover to what he there alludes,
to wit, to the opinions of Trismegistus, the Platoniques (and after them, it
may be, to the Symoneans who were sick of the same disease) as says
Tertullian in these terms. The discipline of the Magicalart of the Symoneans
ser uing the Angels, is counted among the idolatries. Who held that men were to
go to the supreme God by the lesser Gods or Angels, having first used holy
purifications or purgations As l. 10. c. 9. speaking against Porphyrius a
Platonique. For Forphyrius does promise a certain purgation, as it were of the
soul, by him called Theurgia, yet he does it with a certain hesitation and
(as one would say) with a blushing kind of disputation and denies that any by
this Art is helped to return to God: so that one may discover him wavering
betwixt the vice of sacrilegious curiosity, and a Philosophical profession
now putting one opinton, now another. For now he warnes us to beware of this
Art as deceiptfull, and dangerous in the deed doing, and prohibited by the law.
And soon after, as giving way to such as praise it, affirms it conducible to
the cleansing a part of the soul, not the intellectual part, wherein the
Truth of intelligible things which have no corporeal similitudes are
discovered, but the spiritual part capable of corporeal images (or
resemblances) for this part says he, is adapted and fitted by certain
Theurgicall consecrations, which are called (Teletae) to the receipt of spirits
and Angels, whereby to see the Gods.

And ibid. chapter 16. whereas therefore some Angels do excite men to worship this
one (God) and some again excite them by working wonders to honor themselves
with sovereign worship (Latria) and so too, that those, forbid that these
should be worshipped, let the Platonique say to whom we should rather give
credit, yea let what Philosophers soever say, let the Theurgi or rather the
Perurgi, etc. Nay lastly let even men say, if there be yet any sense of humane
nature, whereby they are created reasonable creatures, in any measure left in
them, whether we ought rather to sacrifice to those Gods, or Angels who
command that sacrifice should be offered to them, or to him alone, to whom
these command it, who forbidd that sacrifice be offered either to themselves or
to those others.

The 9. book of the City. LEast any should East any should thinks he ought
to follow them as good (Daemones) Angels, by whose means or mediation, as it
were, while he does desire and studiously en deauour to be reconciled, to the
Gods, which every one beleeuees to be good, etc. he may wander far from the
true God But that which I most admire is that you Mr. Cos. whom reports have
always delivered to us for a learned, moderate, and ingenuous man, should
pick out such abstruse passages (which being well looked into make nothing at
all for you) and endeavor amidst such darkness to wrest your will from a Father
by forceing him to speak against what he has dogmatically and clearly
delivered in so many other passages, which you might, with as much facility,
have met withal, as In the II. book of the City of God Chap. 31. But the
holy Angels, after whose society and company we groan in this most perilous
pilgrimage, as they have an eternal permanencic, so have they a facility in
knowing, We are a^^^sted by them.
and a felicity in reposing: for without difficulty they help us, because
they labor not in their spiritual, pure, and free motions. Epistle 121. chap.
9. OR happily let them (to wit our prayers) be known to the Angels who are
with God, that in what manner they are to offer them to God: and what counsel
they are to use therm. T^^y offer our praters to God.
And what by his command (to wit Gods) they know ought to be fulfilled, etc.
they may bring unto us either openly or covertly: for the Angel said to the man
(Tobic.) And now when thou and Sara did pray, I offered your prayer in the
sight of Gods claritie. In his 6. Chap. of his Annotations upon Job. Have mercy
on me have mercy on me (o friends) heseemes to Welairfully pray to them.
bescech the Angels, that they would become intercessours for him, or at least
the Saints, that they would pray for a penitent. The City of God the 22.
book. Chap. 8. I Had begun to dispute more diligently of the whole cause: and
behold while I disputed, other voices of new gratulations are heard from the
Martyrs shrine. The public practice of praying at the shrines of the Martyrs
My Auditors turned and began to run that way: for she (to wit Palladia Paul's
Sister) as soon as the was down the stairs (where she had stood) she was
gone to pray to the holy Martyr: ( ad sanctum Martyrem orare to pray to the
Martyr, or at the shrine of the Martyr to wit S. Stephen as is plain by these
words following. What was in the hearts of those that exulted, but the faith of
Christ, for which Stephens blood was powered out?) who as soon as she had
touched the rayles, falling as it were down into a sleep, she rose sound. A
mirucle Wrought in S Augugustins sight.
While therefore we made inquiry what had befallen, which had caused that
joyful noise, they brought her sound into that part of the Church where we
were, from the place where the Martyr lay. Then both men and women made so
great an admiting noise, that the brute continuing with tears seemed to find
no periode. She was lead to that place where a little before she had stood
trembling, etc. The 7. book and 1. Chap. against the Donatists. LEt him (S.
Syprian of whom he spoke) help us by his prayers in the mortality of this
flesh, A saint prayed to in particular.
as persons laboring in a dark cloud, etc. Upon Psalm the 83. ALl the
Martyrs which are with him (Christ) do intercede for us: The Saints interceede
for us.
Their intercessions are not ended save with the end of our sobbings. The 1.
Sermon on the feast of S. Stephen. SAint Stephen was heard that by his prayers
Saul's sin might be blotted out. We counseled to pray to S. Stephen.
Let us therefore commend our selves to his prayers: For much more is he now
heard for those that pray rightly to him? In Psalm. 88. Sermon 2. LEt us
celebrate the birthdayes of Saints with sobriety, Their birthdayes celebrated.
that we may imitate them who went before us; and let them rejoice in us, who
pray for us, that the blessing of our Lord, may for ever remain with us. In
the City of God. 10. book the 12. chap. When his Angels do hear, The Angels
hear us.
he (God) does hear in them, as in his true temple, not made by the hands of
men. Against Faustus. the 20. book the Chap. 21. Christian people do
celebrate together the Memories of Martyrs with a religious solemnity;
Religious worship
both to excite imitation, Sacrifice
to be made fellow partners in their merits, and to be helped by their prayers:
yet so as we offer sacrifice to none of the Martyrs, but to the very God of
Martyrs, Altars.
though we erect Altars in the Memories of Martyrs, etc. If then saint
Augustins mind be made good by so many and so manifest places; To what end
should the D. come yet coldly dropping another seeming place out of the said
saint? or to what purpose should I answer it? Howbeit lets yet hear him
speak for every ones full satisfaction.

S. Augustine. l. 2. contra Ep. Parm. chap. 8.

Cos. IF the Apostle had said, you shall have one for your Advocate, and I will
pray the Father for your sins, what good or faithful Christian would have
endured it, or accounted him one of Christ's Apostles? and not rather have
looked upon him, as upon an Antichrist.

Car. I answer first that by Advocate (which is indeed in the text Mediator)
the D. will either have S. Augustine after the Apostle to mean the Principal
and immediate Mediator, Mediator.
which if the Apostle had assumed to himself, he had justly been looked upon
by all good Christians, not as an Apostle of Christ, but rather as an
Antichrist: or else the mediate, less principal, and impropre Mediator (which
he must mean if he would have the place to make any thing against a Catholic
and to his purpose.) And such certainly the Apostle both might be and was, and
yet is far from incurring the censure of an Antichrist, since S. John was
doubtlessy a Bishop, and every Bishop if we believe S. Paul Heb. 5. is taken
from among men and is ordained for men in things pertaining to God that he may
offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin, which is to be some kind of
Mediator or Advocate representing their miseries, pleading their cause, and
mediating their reconcilement to God by Christ the only properly true
Mediator of Redemption. In this kind of Mediation are the Priests employed
says Joel c. 2. Between the porch and the Altar, shall the Priests, the
Ministers of our Lord weep, and shall say, spare o Lord, spare thy people, and
give not thine inheritance into reproach, that the heathens should rule over
them, and thus finally (concludes S. Aug. in this place) do all Christian men
commend themselves mutually to one another prayers. So far is he from
speaking against mediating in this second sense, or consequently from
apprehending that derogatorie to Christ our prime Mediator.

I answer secondly that here again is a whole clause left out, whence the
clearing of the difficulty was to be demanded to wit, (As Parmenianus in a
certain place put a Bishop Mediator betwixt the people and God.) And how did
Parmenianus put Bishops Mediators etc? marry, as purifiers and iustifiers of
men by their own virtue and justice, since they (the Donatists) allowed virtue
and effect to the Sacraments and Sacrifice only according to the quality of
the Minister or offerer, which was indeed to assume to themselves the proper
Mediation of Christ Jesus who only of himself is able to appease Gods wrath
against sin, as being our principal, immediate, primarie Mediator and indeed
our only Mediator of Redemption, who by the right of his own merits obtaynes
grace forvs: the others only by him and by his merits. Such a Mediator it is
manifest S. Aug. spoke of in this place (and such we admit none but Christ
alone) who spoke against the pride of the Donatists, which forsoothe would have
no spott or vice to be amongst them or their fellows, as says S. Augustine in
the chap. immediately before, which was a prerogative due to Christ alone, who
was that one and true Mediator for who^ none prayed, and he prayed for all, as
says the said St. in this 8. chap. In fine one of S. Augustines principal
designs in this place was to prove against the Donatists that they iniustly
separated themselves from the Catholic Church upon pretense of the wickedness
of the Bishops and priests in the Church: for, dato that it were so indeed, yet
were that no just cause of a division or schism; since (be the Bishops and
priests what they will) we ought always to be secure of one Mediator, Jesus
Christ the just, whom we have an Advocate with the Father, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. Hence I believe the weakest may observe, that it
is not fairly done of Mr. Cos. to make use of the mistaken sense of an obscure
passage in an Author, to stagger the unlettered, who are not able to examine
him, while being examined he bears no show of difficulty along with him.

COSENS.S. Irenaeus against Heresies 2. book chap. 57.

THe Church Catholic does not invoke Angels, bnt purely calls upon God and
Christ.

CARRE. Still something is left out most important to the clearing of the
difficulty. S. Irenaeus his words are these. Neither does it (to wit the
universal Church) doc any thing by Angelical inuocations nor by incantations,
nor by any other wicked curiosity, (these words by incantations nor by any
other wicked curiosity, are omitted) but cleanely, purely, and manifestly
directing prayers to God, etc. Now what do these words incantations, and
wicked curiosities, lead us to, but the old heretics to wit the Symonians,
the Marcites, Meandria^s, and Carpocratia^s, against whom he had spoken,
showing here that the Catholic Church in working her true miracles did not use
their proceeding in working false ones (which they did by the invocation and
superstitious naming of Angels, to whom they ascribed the creation of the
world) by incantations and spells whereby they deluded many, especially poor
women, robbing them of fortunes and honor, with the exercise of innumerable
villainies (as is to be seen in the 9. 20. 22. and and 24. chapters of his
first book) but by fasting and prayer performed chastely, purely, openly, and
without hope of lucre. His words are: That universal Church which is in every
place, demanding by fasting and much prayer, the spirit os life returned to the
dead man, who was given to the Saints prayers. What is here yet I pray, against
the invocation of Saints?

Cos. Origene against Celsus l. 5.

ALl prayers are to be sent and offered up unto God by our Angel and high
Priest, who is the Prince and Lord of all Angels. Nor will our Religion permit
us, to supplicate or pray to any other whom so ever.

Car. Answer. First your choice herein is not very happy, if you should make
him stand up alone against all antiquity, ingenous men would not esteem his
word were sufficient caution after his so many errors, yea even in this place
where he destroys Christ's Divinity making him inferior to his heavenly
Father. Howbeit if you admit his authority upon this matter, so do I: and
thus I produce him speaking of the Angels in the same place. O Angels receive
man converted from his old error again: they (the Angels, holy souls, and
blessed spirits) endeavor, says he, to reconcile God to such as shall serve
him, and pray jointly with us, contra Celsum l. 8. page 432. Again infinite
millions of Angels make intercession for maukind. Again, who doubts but all
the holy Fathers assiste us with their prayers in Number. c. 32. hom. 26. Now make
him blow hot and cold with the same breath, and speak for you saying, all
prayers are to be offered to God, etc. nor will our religion permit us to
supplicate or pray to any other whomsoever. Lo you have made him quarrel with
himself, but what have you gotten? save only by contradicting himself you
have destroyed the credit of the Author you depend upon, while you hurt not us
who want not a number of others to rely upon. Were it not better to save his
credit saying with S. Hierome, Origene, Methodius, Euscbius, and Apollinaris
write against Celsus and Porphyrius. Consider with what arguments and with how
many gliding problemes they dissolve the things which were wouen by the spirit
of the Devil, and because sometimes they are compelled to speak, they speak
not what they think, but what they are forced by necessity to oppose to the
Doctrine of the Gentiles. For says he not in the same book that had he
discourered that Celsus had by Angels understood true Angels as Gab. Mich.
etc. he would then according to his ability have said something to the matter
by rejecting the word Adoration, and the actions of the Adorer, that is
offerings and Sacrifices, and the giving of the worship of Latria, so that it
is manifest that he denies not the prayer to the Saints absolutely, but only
in the sense in which they held their false Gods were to be prayed to and
adored, which according to Plato they termed Angels, and gave them sovereign
honor, as is clear from S. Aug. in his 10. book of the Gitty and is partly
cited above, where they are termed lesser Gods. For says he of the Angels in
the same place, though they do descend, etc. and offer the prayers of men, yet
are they not at all so called Gods as that we are commanded to adore them, or
to worship them with divine honor. And to this we all say; so be it,
contenting our selves to afford them an inferior honor, sortable to servants,
which bears no proportion to that sovereign and divine honor, which we
reserve for the Great Master alone.

Cos. Tertullian in his book of Prayer chap. 12.

THese prayers are vain, and deservedly farelted, which are made without the
authority and precept of Christ or his Apostles. For such prayers be not for
religion, but superstition.

Car. Sincerity is still desired: The authors words are still either so
indirectly, or sparingly put down, that it is impossible they should bear out
his sense and make it intelligible to the Reader. Tertull. in this place
speaks not one word of Prayer to Angels or Saints, either in express terms,
or can the exigencie or scope of his meaning be wrested to it. He speaks only
of certain frivolous forms (which he points out in particular leaving no
place to mistake what he meant) or observations in prayer, which he says
rather conduce to superstition then to religion, as is, says he, the custom
of some to put of their cloakes to pray, etc. Mark his own words as they lie,
and then indge what reason you have to make use of them. Having described some
manner of praying, he goes on saying. But since we have touched one certain
point (or part) of an idle observation, I will not fail to mark out the rest
(caetera) to which vanity is deservedly exprobrated, because they are done
without the authority of any precept either of our Lord, or his Apostles. What
was it then which was reputed vain, as being done without authority, etc.
what but the rest (caetera.) And what was the rest? was it happily prayer to
Saints? No, not any syllable intimating that; but the rest was such as was the
vnum aliquod, to wit empty observation, such then, (and not prayer to Saints)
must the rest be in good consequence, nor dare any deny it, since not I but the
Author himself a line after concludes it saying: as is that of certain
persons putting of their cloakes to pray (this clause cleares the doubt and yet
is left out and not looked upon.) Let us now examine whether any fairer
dealing, or more sincerity be used in the next allegation out of the same
Author.

In his Apologet. chapter 30. Cos. THese things I can ask and pray for of no
other, but of him who I know is able alone to give them to me, and whom alone I
serve.

Car. Nor here again is there any mention made of Angels in terms, nor does
the subject oblige to any thought of them. Nor are indeed the Authors words
putt down fairly as they lie, though the sense is almost the same. These
things (says he) I can pray for of no other, then of whom I know I shall
obtain them, because even he it is who alone does give, and I am he whose part
it is to impetrate, being his servant who observe him alone. Mark only what
these things were which he prayed for, in whose person he spoke, and to whom;
and you will easily discover this place conteynes no difficulty at all. The
things he prays for are (as himself declares in the precedent line.) Long life
to all Emperors, asecure reign, a safe Palace, strong armies, a faithful
Senate, an honest people, a peaceable world, etc. He speaks it in the person
of Christians, who were accused by the Ethnicks that they prayed not to their
Gods for the Emperor. Where upon he makes an Apology for them to the
Emperor, showing that though they pray not to their false Gods, who were but
indeed dead men, and therefore less powerful then himself, yet he retorts
upon the Ethnicks in these terms, but you are irreligious who seek safety
(to wit by the means of false Gods) where it is not; you demand it of those
that are not able to give it, ouerpassing him in whose power it is, and so
concludes that Christians have not recourse to their Gods as they have, but to
the true God, in these words. But we call upon the eternal God, the true God,
the living God, because he alone is able to give it. He, I say, not the false
Gods, whom alone he excludes from that power of helping the Emperor, without
having any thought, or making any relation to the Angels or Saints at all,
which yet he should have done to have made this place useful for your purpose,
as you must needs confess.

Cos. S. Athanasius l. 4. against the Arrians.

NO man should pray to God and the Angels to receive any thing, but ought to
petition the Father and the son, etc.

Car. Still is the Author surprised, as it were, and forced to speak what he
means not, and what the subject does not ^^acte, as shall be shown by the
context and the scope of the Author In the interim take his words as they lie.
For never would any pray to receive any thing of God, and the Angels, or of any
created things: nor did any conceive this form of words, GOD AND THE ANGELS
GIVE it THEE, but contrarily of the Father and the son, for their unity, and
uniform reason of giving. Nor does the Cathol. Church use any such form of
prayer, as joining the Angels with God, by reason of their unity and uniform
reason of giving, which is the holy Fathers sense. Which that it may plainly
appear to be so indeed, let us only reflect against whom he speaks, and what
argument he uses. He is here disputing against the Arrians, upon this passage
of S. John, Ego and Pater vnum sumus. The Arrians would have that place to be
understood of one in will; S. Athanas. of one in substance: and thus he argues
a little before the place in question. If, says he, for that reason (to wit
because they will and nill the same) the Father and the son were to be held
to be the same thing, and by that means the Word were esteemed to be like the
Father: then were it necessary too that Angels, and other things more
excellent then we, the Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominations, and the
rest which appear in heaven, the sun moon and stars should be so esteemed
the sons of God as Christ is his son, and this speech also should be
pronounced of them, they and the Father are one, since what God wills they also
will. Which if it were true, they also would be admitted into the same power of
giving with the son: but that is false, therefore and that too which
preceeded. That that is false, he goes on proving out of S. Paul, grace and
peace be to you from God our F. and from Jesus Christ, etc. admitting none of
the creatures into his fellowship, in the power of giving (ratione, in that
behalf or respect.) Now, says he, the very manner of giving, does convince
the unity of the Father and the son; for never does any pray to receive any
thing in this form of words, God and the Angels give me such a thing, as we
say, God the father and the son give me, etc. with S. Paul (...) that this
passage does not at all speaake of prayer to Angels in the sense we defend it
in, that is, as they make intercession to God for us in quality of faithful
servants of his; as being his creatures, infinitely inferior to him, etc. not
by reason of their unity with him, and uniform power of giving, as above,
which alone is the sense rejected by S. Athanasius: not the honor and prayer
to the Angels and Saints, which was the practice of that Age, as may partly
appear by these few passages.

In a Sermon of our Blessed Lady, toward the end which is among his works,
and very ancient, if not his own.

ANd now give ear, o thou daughter of David and Abraham, and incline thine
ears to our prayers, forgett not thy people, nor us, who are of thy family
and of thy Fathers house.

Again in the same place. Where upon all the rich among the people pray to
thee, as being enriched with these goods and spiritual contemplations. We cry
unto thee, be myndfull of us, Most holy Virgin, etc.

A little after. We exalte thee with shrill and resounding voices, saying: I
salute thee Lady full of grace, our Lord is with thee, make intercession for
us, o Mistress, Lady, Queen, and Mother of God.

And the same is made good more fully by the Fathers of the same Age. First by

S. Hilarie. The Angels of the little ones are over the prayers of the
faithful. In Mattheu^ 18.
And again. The Angels do daily offer up to God, the prayers of those which
are saved through Christ.

S. Ephraem. O my most clement God, have mercy on thy creature, In fine
orationis de laudibus sanctae Dei matris.
by the intercession of the mother of God always a Virgin; and of the Hosts
of Heavenly spirits, and companies of Angels, of Cherubim, Seraphim, Prophets,
Martyrs, etc.

S. Basile. By the intercession of the Holy Mother of God and all these who
have fore^^ glorified thee, Basil. in his Liturgy.
sanctify our souls and bodies, and grant that we may serve thee in sanctity
all the days of our life.

Again. Who is in tribulation flies to the forty Martyrs: In Homilia in 40.
Martyrs. prope finem.
such as are in prosperity betake themselves to them too: the one to be
delivered from his affliction: the other to be continued in his prosperous
condition. This good woman is heard to pray for children: and to sue for a safe
return to her husband abroad; and for his health while he is infirm.

S. Gregory Nyssene. He (to wit Meletius deceased) makes intercession for us,
and for the sins of the people. In oratione De obitu Meletij Episcopi.


Again. We stand in need of many benefits: interceede, In oratione de Theodoro
Martyr.
and make earnest entreatie for our country to our common king and Lord.

Again. As a soldier pray for us; as a Martyr use the liberty of speech for
thy fellow servants, etc. Beg for peace that these public assemblies may not
be interrupted; Ibide^ paulo post.
least the cruel and wicked Barbarian may rage and make violence against the
temples and Altars; least the profane and impious tread ^^ly things under their
feet: for even we who are conserved fafe and sound, aseribe that benefit to
thee: and petition for safe guarde and security for the time to come, etc.

S. Gregory Nazianzene. But thou o sacred and dinine man, look down upon us
from above, In fine orationis in l^^d^m S. Basilij.
and either stop the sting of the flesh which God has given us for our
exercise, or prevail that we may endure it with courage, etc.

Saint Ambrose also followed in in this age, and gave restimonie to this Truth,
as you will see in my answer to the ensuing objection.

COSENS.S. Ambrose in 1. cap. ad Romans

THey that neglect to come unto God himself, and go to him by others, use to
make this miserable excuse, that by the help of others they can come to God,
as by the help of noble men they can come to the king. Go to, It is treason
to take the honor or Majesty of a king, and to give it to a Lord. And do
these men think to escape, if they give the honor of God to a creature and
worship it? For therefore do men go to a king by great and noble personages,
because the king is no more then a man himself. But to come to God (who knows
every thing) and to procure his favor there is no such need of a helper or
suffragator. For where ever any one will speak (or pray) unto him, he will
himself be ready to hear and answer him.

CARRE. This place upon the first sight may seem both lively to express, and
at once to improve the Catholic custom of making use of the Saints
intercession to God. But truly were S. Ambrose the Author of it, as he is not
by any scholar believed to be, even Calvin himself affirming of those
Commentaries, that they have nothing worthy of S. Ambrose, yet if I make it not
appear to any scholar that it was neither spoken nor meant to that purpose, I
will be content to loose the small credit I own. The Authors discourse then,
(be he who he will) was upon this verse of S. Paul. Saying they were wise men
they were made fools. Upon which he. For they think themselves wise men,
because they think to find out Philosophical reasons, searching the courses
(...) the stars, and the qualities of the elements, but despising the Lord of
them; therefore they are made fools, seeing if these things ought to be
praised, how much more their Creator? yet being ashamed of their neglect of
God, they are wont to use this miserable excuse, saying, that by those, (to
wit, fellow servants or creatures whereof the speech was before, and are after
named conserui) they are able to go to God, as by the Countes they come to the
king. Go to, is any one so madd, or so unmindful of his salvation, as that he
would challenge the honor of a king to a Count, since if even any be but found
to treat of his matter, they are justly condemned guilty of treason? And
these think not themselves guilty, who give away the honor of Gods name to a
creature, and forsaking the Lord and Master adore their fellow servants, as
though there were yet some further thing reserved for God. For even therefore it
is that we go to the king by the means of the Tribunes or Counts, because
indeed the king himself is a man, and he knows not in whose hands to entrust
the Common wealth. But to procure favor with God from vhom nothing lies hid
(for he knows all men's merits) there is no need of a saffragator but a
devout mind. For where ever such a one shall speak unto him, he will answer
him.

Observe hereupon, that Mr. Cos. in his translation of this passage, 1. In
steed of (ipsos those) which must needs have relation to some persons or things
goeing before whereby the sense is cleared, he puts, others, which quite
obscures and changes the sense. 2. He leaves out this clause most important and
decisiue, Forsaking the Lord, adore their fellow servants. 3. He puts any one
where as indeed it is such an one (talis) referring to one mentioned before,
devout in mind: such an one indeed will be heard without a suffragator, that
is without needing any to suggest their merits, as though God were ignorant of
them: whereupon he says, for he knows all men's merits.


In a word, this Author is here reprehending the pagan Philosophers, who
knowing God did not worship him accordingly, but gave away the honor due to
him alone, to creatures, to stocks, stones, and statuaes, who^ they called and
honored as their gods, as is evident all through the chapter. In particular,
where he says. So was their heart blinded, that they changed the Majesty of
the invisible God, who^ by these his works they did acknowledge, not into men,
but (which is worse, and even a crime not to be excused) into the similitude of
men, that the form of a corruptible man, that is the picture of man is by them
termed their God, that so they may receive the pictures of them being dead
into the glory of a God, to whom being alive they durst not ascribe Deity.

And a little after. Changing the truth of God into a lie, that they gave the
name of the true God, to those wuich are not Gods: for taking from stones,
wood, and other metal, what they are indeed; they attribute to them what they
are not, etc. for they are not now called wood or stone, but God, and this is
rather to serve the creature, (which is called above, their fellow servant, and
in that name condemned) then the Creator. So that it is manifest, that the
Author does not at all in this passage, touch or point at, much less
reprehend or condemn the Catholic practice of giving an inferior honor to
the Saints; and praying to them to become intercessours for us: which will yet
more clearly appear to such as will take the pains to read his book de
viduis after the midst, where he says. Peter and Andrew therefore prayed for
the widow, I wish to God there were any so ready to pray for us, at least he
who prayed for his mother in law, Peter, and Andrew his brother, They could
then impetrate for affinities sake, now they are able to do it for us and all
men. You see that one subject to a great sin, is less fit to pray, at least
to obtuyne for her self: Let her therefore imploye others to pray to the
Physician. For the sick are not able to pray for themselves, unless the
Physician by the entreaty of others be invited to come to them. Flesh is
infirm, the mined is sick, and hindered with the chains of sins. It is not
able to make one weak stepp toward the seat of that Physitia^. We must
therefore heartely beseech the Angels in our behalf, who are given for our
help, we must pray to the Martyrs, of whom we seem to challenge a certain
kind of patronage by the privilege of flesh and blood. They have ability to
pray for our sins, who if they had any sins of their own, washed them with
their blood; For they are Gods Martyrs, our Prelates, the overseers of our life
and actions: Let us not blush to make use of them for intercessours of our
infirmity; since they themselves experienced the infirmity of flesh and
blood, even while they were victorious.

As for that sentence, to wit: To procure favor with God, there is no need of
a suffragator, which may seem most to urge against a Catholic sense. I
answer first; Psalm. 129.
according to that of S. Hilarie. The nature of God has no need of their
intercession (to wit of the Angels) but our infirmity. And this in case a
suffragator signified a helper or intercessour, which yet is never in proper
speech but only by metaphore, much less here the true sense of the word. For
suffragator will be found another thing if we take Tullie for our Master in
finding out the true sense of a latin word: suffragatio, says he, est ipsa
voluntatum and animorum declaratio quae fit suffragiis, the act of suffragating
is the very declaration of men's wills and mynds which is done by suffrage: (he
calls it not a helping or praying for) so that it truly imports as much as
informer, giver of advise, or one having a deliberatiue voice, the word
suffrage haueing been primarily instituted to signify the voice which the
Citizens of Rome gave in the election of any Magistrate, or in the resolution
of any other import^at affair of the Common wealth, put to the peoples
deliberation. Whence we are wont to say that Bishops only have right of
suffrage, or deliberatiue voices in the Counsels, etc. Hence, such toward the
Emperors, as had the credit to give their voices, advice or opinion touching
the capacities or incapacities of persons pretending preferments, were called
suffragators, that is informers, helping to supply the Emperors want of
knowledge, of the merits or demerits of particular persons aiming to bear
office in the common wealth. And such suffragators, says the Author and we
with him, God needs none, since as is said in the same place, For be knows all
men's merits: from whom nothing lies hid, and so needs not any to inform him of
the worth and abilities of his subjects, as the Emperors needed the advice of
the Tribunes or Governors of Provinces, of the sufficiency of persons within
their precincts, and was enabled thereby to discern who, were fit to be
employed.

Now that it is not a mere imagination of mine, for the clearing of this place
but a certain truth that it was conceived by some heathen Philosophers, that
the greater God or Gods stood in need of advice from the lesser Gods, Angels,
or devils let S. Aug. speak: City of God l 8. c. 28.
Some heathen Philosophers think (says he that the celestial Gods who have
care of humane affairs, would not know what men do, if the devils of the air
did not announce it to them, because heaven is far distant from earth, and
suspended on high, In his book^ de Mundo.
whereas the air is contiguous (or touches) to Heaven and earth. And Aristotle
seems to say no less, where he compares God with the great king of Persia,
etc.

S. Chrysostom Hom. de Profectu Euang.
Cos. We are more preualent with God, when we pray to him by our selves, then
when others pray for us, You have no need of a Patron with God.

Car. Here are two things affirmed, and both true being well understood, and
make nothing at all against us, The first that a man is more preualent praying
alone for him self, the^ when others pray for him. That is, it is a surer way
to be heard, for a man to pray for himself, then only to depend upon another
man's prayers, he not praying himself. The second. That a man has no need of a
Patron with ^^od. Absolutely, as that God would not hear him without a Patron,
I grant^^, And what is this against a Catholic, And thus or to this effect,
must as well the D. as we, interpret him, unless we will have him to make head
against common sense, S. Paul, and himself, where he speaks, (and that more
plainly) of the intercession of Saints, for here indeed despeakes not of it at
all, (unless in consequence) and therefore, this is not the fittest place to
decide a controversy.

That he Should oppose common sense, it is evident; because at least if
another prayers help not, no reason can be suggested, why they should hurt,
and therefore we should be more preualent praying alone.

That he should contradict S. Paul's counsel is no less manifest, who in the
5. These. 25. verse says, Brethren pray for us. Heb. 13. ver. 18. Pray for us,
and the 5. of S. lames ver. 16. Pray for one another that you may be saved.

And that he should quarrel with himself. is as clear if we read what he
says, in his 28. Homily to the people of Antioche, touching the intercession
of the Angels in the time of the Sacrifice. The Angels do then in lieu of olie
branches propose the very body of our Lord, pray for mankind, as though they
should say, We pray o Lord for these whom thou have loved in so large measure,
that for their love thou incurredst death, and gave up thy spirit upon the
Cross, we beseech thee for these, for whom thou freely gave thy blood, we
pray to thee for those, for whom thou did Sacrifice this body.

Give therefore this flood of eloquence leave to speak for himself, and he
will sweep away all hints for cauills to catch hold on. If we be negligent
says he, and slothful, we cannot be saved even by the merits of others, etc.
But these things we say, not to deny that one may pray to the Saints for
sinners, In Math. Hom. 8.
but least we our selves might fall into sloth and idleness, and leave the care
of our own affairs to others while we our selves sleep.

Again. The prayers and supplications of Saints, have force for us, in Matt.
Hom 5.
yea and that most great: Marry then it is, when we our selves too demand the
same thing by Penance.

Again. Wherefore let us frequently visit them, lets touch their shrines, and
with great faith embrace their relics, to the end we may receive some
benediction: for as soldiers show the wounds which they receive in battle to
the king speaking with confidence; so these bearing their heads which were cut
of, Hom. 40. to the people of Antioche.
and proposing them; are able to obtain of the king of heaven what ere they
please

S: Epiphanius haer. 79.
Cos. LEt no body worship the Virgin Marie, nor any man or woman besides. To
God is this holiness or religion due.

Car. Let no man worship her as a Goddess, by giving her sovereign honor
testified by sacrifice: I grant it. Let no man worship her by ascribing to her
inferior honor, I deny it. And that both the parts of this distinction is
saint Epiphan. not my ne, and consequently that it was his true sense, is
evident to any, who will please to look upon the place. For first the title is
against the Collyridians, women who sacrificed a loaf, a bunne, or cake
(whence they take their name) to our B. Lady, and the whole discourse is spent
upon the same subject all through, distinguishing betwixt sovereign worship,
expressed by adoration, and subordinate worship, by the word honor. As let
Marie be honored, but let the Father, Son and holy Gh. be adored. And again,
Though Marie be most beautiful, holy and bonored, yet not so far forth as to
be adored. In fine, he concludes in these words. Let Marie be honored. Let
Christ be adored. fiat, fiat.

Bid in Proverb.
Cos. We ought to invoke (that is by prayer to call upon) none for help but
God alone:

Car. The answer is easy, add only two little monosyllables which you have
left out (to wit in nos, into us, and leave out as many for help) and read,
We ought to invoke, that is, by prayer to call into us, none but God alone,
and you will perceive the difficulty insensibly and without force vanished
away.

For the rest, if you desire indeed to know S. Bedes sense upon this subject,
be pleased to read him upon the 4th. of S. Luke, where writing upon these
words, It is written, thou shall adore the Lord thy God and serve him alone; he
speaks both exactly and amply with all: some (says he) peradventure will
demand, how these two be reconciled together, to wit what is here commanded to
Serve God alone; and that of the Apostle, scrue one another mutually out of
Charity. But this finds an easy solution out of the original Greek text,
whence the Scripture was translated, where the service is named in two
different manners, bearing withal a diverse signification, for it is called
both Latria and Dulia: true it is that Dulia is taken for a common service,
that is a service which of its own nature, is indifferently exhibited to God,
or any other thing whatsoever. Whence also we have the word servant which the
Grecians call (...). Latria contrarily is taken for that service alone which
belongs to the worship of the Divinity; which is communicable to noe creature
at all. Whereupon they are pronounced Idolaters who offer vows prayers and
Sacrifices to Idols, which they owe to God alone. Wherefore we are commanded to
serve one another through Charity; which the Grecians call (...). And we are
commanded to serve God alone: with that worship which the Grecians call (...).

Again. Let us always serve such a Queen, who forsakes them not who hope in
her. Jesus Christ, being pleased in, and hearing the prayers of the Saints,
does much more hear his mother, when she prays for sinners. In one of his
Sermons of our Blessed Lady in his 7. Tome.

Again. Let us demand for us the frequent intercessions of the Saints be they
Angels or men, to the mercy of our gracious Creator. Upon the Cant. l. 4. c.
24.

Again. Let us pray to all the Saints to make intercession for us to God. In a
Sermon. upon the great Litanics, Tome 7.

Having now given full satisfaction, as I presume, to any impartial reader,
not only that all these specious passages alleged out of the Holy Fathers
against us, conclude nothing at all (many of them being manifestly corrupted:
others forced, others mistaken (but contrarily, having evidently made good by
positive and plain allegations out of the said Fathers, (others I would not in
this short discourse, though with great facility I could have alleged) that
they are wholly for us: I will pass on to another of his assertions spoken,
and put down under his hand, with an admirable confidence against Purgatory,
in these terms.

OF PVRGATORIE.
Cos. THAT none of the Greek Fathers holds Purgatory in the sense, in which
the Council of Trent holds it.

Car. I believe, Mr. Cosens, were you obliged to make always good the
propositions, which upon all occasions, you advance, with such an absolute
boldness, and in such a generality, as this is now asseuered, you would fall as
far short in your proofs, as you ouerlash in your positions. The Council of
Trent consisted (if we should even abstract from the assistance of the holy
Ghost, which I dare not think was wanting, not have I any reason for it, no
more then for the first four General Councels, that assistance being promised
to the Church in general, in what time, or place soever, that the spirit of
trueths hall be with you for ever, in aeternum, S. John cap, 14. And shall
teach you all truth, ibid, cap. 16.) of such a company of learned and pious
Prelates, and other Ecclesiastical persons, as it ought, in common sense, to
be exe^pted from the rash censure of every single oppone^t, whilst it is
generally admitted in all matters of Faith by all the symbolicall Church spread
over all the world, and in community with the Church of Rome: and was rejected
by none, save only by a diminutiue part of the least part of the world,
Europe; which actually then made a schism from it, which was then confessedly
the only visible Church of Christ.

Howbeit for every ones satisfaction we will hear what the greek Fathers have
sa^d upon this subject.

S. Denis. And then the divine Prelate drawing near, Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 7.
he finisheth his holy prayer over the deceased, and after the prayer the same
Prelate salutes him, and withal all the assistants every one in their rank.
This prayer petitions the divine mercy to pardon all the sins, which the
deceased had committed through humane frailitie, and that he would place them
in light, and in the Land of the living, and in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, in the place where forrow, sadness and wailling is banished, etc.

Origene. l. 8. in Romans 11.
He alone to whom the Father has given all judgment, is able to know, for how
long a time, or what ages sinners may be tormented in this purgation which is
made by fire.

Eusebius. Alexandrinus. Memento, etc. Hem. de Dominica.
Be myndfull in the oblation (or as we now say, put them into your Memento) of
your parents and brethren, who are already departed this life; for by this
means you procure great rest to the dead. Accomplish thy prayers.

S. Zenon. Sermon. de Resur. extat to. 2. ^. b. PP.
By her (he speaks of a widow lamenting the death of her husband) profane
wailing, she interrupted the divine solemnities, wherein the Priests were
accustomed to commend the deceased to God.

Eusebius Caesariensis. In vita Constan. l. 4 cap. 71.
A great multitude of people together with the Priests, not without tears, and
truly with great expression of sorrow, powered out prayers to God for the soul
of the Emperor, etc.

Athanasius. Quaestione 34.
Why then? do even the souls of sinners perceive any benefit, when assemblies
are made for them, exhibitions of good works and oblations? If they did
participate no benefit thereby, there would be no commemoration made in the care
taken, and in their funerals. But as the vine does flourish abroad in the
fields, and the wine shut up in the vessel resents its odor, and flourishes
together with it: so we understand that the souls of sinners do partake some
benefit by the unbloody sacrifice, and good works done for them, as our God
alone does order and command, who has power over the living and the dead.

OBSERVATION.
Behold the souls of sinners have benefit by the unbloody sacrifice, and good
works done for them.

Cyrillus Hier^^ol. Catechesi My^ag 5
And then as soon as that spiritual sacrifice, and that unbloody worship
over that propiiiatorie host^ (propitiationis Hostia) is performed, we beseech
God for the common peace of the Churches, for the quiet of the world, forkings,
for soldiers. And then we make mention of such as dyed before us. First of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that God by their prayers would
receive ours. Then for the deceased Fathers and Bishops. Finally we pray for
all those who dyed from amongst us: believing that it is a great help to their
souls, for whom the obsecration (or prayer) of that holy and dreadful
sacrifice which is put upon the altar, is offered. Which I will demonstrate
unto you by an example; for I know many do say, what does it profit a soul
departing out of this world in sin, that mention is made of him in this
sacrifice? for if any king should send such into banishment as offend him, and
after their kindred making a crown; should present it to the same king for
those banished men who suffer punishment, whether would he not bestow upon them
some part of the remission of their sins? in the same manner using prayers
for the dead, though otherwise sinners, we plaite not indeed a crown, but we
offer God sacrificed for our sins, that we might make him who is most mylde,
propitious both to our selves and them.

OBSERVATION.
Mark here an unbloody worship: and a propitiatory host, over which memory
was made, of such as departed this life before us, etc. entreating that by
their prayer, ours might be heard. In fine prayer for all in common: out of a
belief that it is a great help to their souls. A dreadful sacrifice put
upon the Altar, and offered for our sins. What Church, but the Romans Catholic
does still observe this ancient custom?

Gregory Nazianzene. In his oration in co^mendations of his deceased brother
Caesarius. Anno 380.
And such things they are which we offer, which if small and unanswerable to
deserts, yet while we do according to our possibility they are acceptable to
God. And some (to wit things or duties) we have already paid, and other we
will pay, offering anniuersarie honors, and comemorations, etc.

OBSERVATION.
Anniuersaries and commemorations for the dead, which we in communion with the
Church of Rome, still observe, and none but we. At least the book of common
Prayer expresses not such practice.

Gregory Nyssene. In his oration, That we are not to lament their death who
dyed in faith. Lib. de anima and Resur.
That either being purged in this life, by prayers, and the study of wisdom;
or expiated after death by the furnace of a purging fire, etc.

Again. It is altogether necessary that while that which is faulty is
consumed in purging fire, the soul also which is united with the same
faultines, should remain in the fire, till that bastard, material, forged,
and corrupt mixture, be entirely abolished, being consumed by fire, etc.

OBSERVATION.
Expiation after death by purging fire. The soul relayned in fire, till what
is vicious and corrupt in it, be purged by fire.

S Chrysostom. Hom 12. in Matt.
Why do thou after the death of thy friends call the poor together? why
do thou beseech the priests, to pray for him? I am not ignorant that your
reply will be, to the end the deceased may attain to repose, and that he may
find his Judge more propitious (or favorable) etc.

Again. Hom 21. upon the Acts.
Then shall his wife with confidence pray to or petition him (God) putting
down the price of our Redemption for him, By how much he was more subject to
sin, by so much more stood be in need of alms deeds. Call the widows, and
tell his name. Order every one to make supplications and prayer for him. This
will appease God, though it be not performed by himself, but another for his
sake be the Author of the Alms. And this is a doctrine of the dinine Mercy.
God has given us many ways of salvation, etc. Oblations, prayers and alms
are not made in vain for the dead. The holy Ghost disposed all these things,
willing that we should help one another.

Again. Oration ^ 1. upon the first to the Corinth.
supplications, alms, oblations, which he mentioned immediately before) were
not rashly invented, nor do we in vain make memory in the divine mysteries
of the deceased, and approaching, we beseech the proposed lamb who took away
the sin of the world, in their behalf, but that they might have some
consolation thereby. Neither does he who is present at the Altar while the
venerable mysteries are performed, cry in vain, For all those who have
reposed in our Lord, and those also who celebrate their memories, etc. for what
we do are not stage plays, God defend; but these things are done by the
ordinance of the Holy Ghost.

Again. In his Epist. to the Philipp. the 3. sermon. moral.
These things were not establisbed in vain by the Apostolical laws (or
Constitutions) that a memory should be made of those who have departed this
life, in the venerable and dreadful mysteries,

OBSERVATION.
The priest makes prayer to God for propitiation to the sins of the dead. For
their repose. The price of our Redemption, is put down for them. Use of the
name of the deceased, which the Catholic Church observes yet in the Collect of
the Mass of the dead, as Peter, Paul, etc. Prayer and supplications, though
performed by others, appease Gods wrath, is a doctrine of the divine mercy:
disposed by the holy Gh. An Apostolical constitution, that memory should be
made in the divine mysteries (or Mass) of the souls departed.

Theodoret. In the 5. book of his Ecclesiastical history ^. 36.
The Emperor Theodosius, having placed his eyes and aspect upon the biere
(wherein were the relics) of that holy man (S. Chrysostom) he powered out
prayers for his parents, and entreated that they might be pardoned the injuries
which they had done through ignorance. Now his parents were deceased long
before, etc.

Again. He offered prayers to God for the deceased, beseeching him to remitt,
In the History of the holy Fathers of James Nisibit^.
what he had offended in his life time, and that he would daigne to receive him
into the Quire of Angels.

OBSERVATION.
Prayers at, or over the Relics of Saints (a thing never heard of in our
English Protestant Church) for the souls departed that the injuries which they
had done might be pardoned: not that the number of the elect be shortly
actomplished, etc. which only was the custom of the English Protestants in
their Form of Burial.

Basilius Seleucius. In his sermon. of Lazarus his being raised to life.
If he who dyed were a sinner and had much offended God, we must not only
weep but give alms also, offer the Sacrifice of the Altar, and perform such
other things, as may afford some consolation to the soul departed.

OBSERVATION.
Alms given, and the Sacrifice of the Altar offered for the souls departed.
This practice is not found in the Order for the burial of the dead in the
book of Common prayer: but is peculiar to the Catholic Romans Church.

Procopius Gazaeus upon the sixth chapter of Isaye, makes mention of a purging
fire.

Gregorius Presbyter. In Theodoro Archiman drita.
Where some said to him that his mother was dead, thou art deceived, quoth he,
she is not dead, but lives. He powered out prayers to our Lord for her fasting
for the space of a week, that our Lord would pardon her.

Leontius. In the life of John the Almner.
A certain man was lead captive to the Persians and was shut up in prison. But
some flying thence, and coming in to Cyprus, and being asked by his parents
whether they had seen him there, they made answer and said, we buried him with
our own hands (It was not indeed the man where of they were asked, but another
not unlike to him) and withal they signified the month and day of his death.
And they (his parents) as if he had been deceased indeed, made three Collects
be made for him every year. But after three years, making a escape from the
Persians, he returned into Cyprus whre upon his friends said to him: truly
brother we heard you were dead, and we made a memory of you thrice a year.
When he heard they had made memories of him thrice a year: he asked them in
what month they celebrated the^; and they answering, etc. he said, that in
those three times a year, there came one as bright as the sun, and freed me
from my iron chains and prison, etc.

OBSERVATION.
The custom of praying for the dead in the beginning of the 7^h. Age proved,
and approved from heaven by miracle.

Maximus. The prayers of the just do only profit those who are worthy of
mercy, whether they be alive or dead, etc. From this place he begins to
expound, that prayers do profit the dead and declares that this question had
been agitated before that time.

S. Damascene. And who is able to declare the multitude of restimonies touching
these things, in order as they are put in the lives, and divine revelations of
Saints, whereby it is evidently showen, that those prayers, Masses, and Alms
which are offered for them, do greatly profit the dead, even after death. This
is the will of that merciful Lord, and it is acceptable to him, that all of
us, as well in our life time, as after the end of our labors, should one help
another: nor had he otherwise afforded us this occasion, that in the unbloody
sacrifice memory should be made of those that are departed this life: Nor that
we should celebrate Mass (sacra) in memory of them in the third, ninth, and
fortieth day, or at the years end (which yet the Catholic and Apostolic
Church constantly observes, without all controversy) unless it were aggreable
in his sight.

OBSERVATION.
That it is an undoubted custom in the Catholic and Apostolical Church to
make memory of the dead in the unbloody sacrifice, as a thing which does
greatly profit them. No such memory is made at all in the Protestant Church of
England.

Theophylact. c. 12. upon S. Luke.
The sinners which dye are not always sent into Hell (Gehennam) but they are
in Gods power to be dismissed: and this I affirm in respect of the oblations
and distributions which are made for the dead, which do not a little conduce
even to such as dyed in great sins. He does not therefore having killed,
always send into Hell, he has power indeed to send, yet makes not still use
of this power, etc. but remittes certain sins etc.

Will you rather hear the sense of the later and present Greek Church upon
this subject, to see if they contradict their ancient Fathers, as you do?
Hear it then speak, first as it is put down in the Council of Florence in
the 3. Decree in these terms.

Item we define, that if persons truly penitent departed this life in the love
of God, before they had yet done satisfaction for commissions and omissions by
worthy fruits of repentance, their souls shall be purged with purging pains.
And that they are helped to be freed from such pains, by the suffrages of the
faithful yet living; to wit, by the Sacrifices of Masses, prayers, Alms, and
other offices of piety, which are wont to be performed by the faithful for
the faithful, according to the Churches institutions.

OBSERVATION.
Behold a general Council (above 200. years ago) consisting of 141.
Bishops, as well of the Greek as Latin Church, called by Pope Eugenius the 4.
(at the instance of the Emperor of the East) who presided in person (the
Patriarch of Constantinople being also present) Defines, that souls departing
this life without doing full satisfaction for their sins, suffer purging
pains: and are thence released by Masses etc. according to the custom and
Institution of the Church.

Secondly, as it is delivered by Hieremi: Patriarch of Constantinople in his
answers to the Divines of Wirtemberg about the year 1578. as follows:

It is not in vain established by the Apostles, Taken out of Chrysostom. hom.
69. ad pop. Ant. and 3. upon the Philip.
that in the dreadful mysteries mention should be made of the Dead. They know
that hence great prosit and great utility does accrue unto them: for when all
the people does stand with hands lifted up, and all the company of the
Priests: and the dreadful Sacrifice is proposed, how is it possible that we
should not work their Lord to take pity on them (or be merciful unto them)
by praying for the^.

OBSERVATION.
Lo mention or commemoration made of the dead in the dreadful mysteries (or
Mass) and that with much profit: as being the means whereby God is moved to
mercy.

And mark, that we have not this from a private man, or a man of small note,
or upon some light, and slight account: but even from the great Patriarch of
Constantinople, the second or new Rome, upon an occasion most pregnant to
produce a precise profession of the faith of the Greek Church, since it was
sent to another part of the world, where it was not like to pass in private,
but was liable and likely to be discussed to the full; by a people (to wit the
Divines of Wittemberg) who in lieu of being admitted into their communion,
found their expectatio^s fo^^lely frustrated, their profession of faith, which
they sent to be approved, opposed, and affronted, and their Doctrine rejected,
as not aggreeing with the Greek Church.

Thirdly, as it is expressed in the Synodicall Decree of Parthenius present
Patriarch of Constantinople, upon the renets of Calvin printed in Paris 1643

Lastly (says he) to find a pretext, to reject the fire of Purgatory, he
(Calvin) goes about to repudiate (or reprove) our ordinary and lawful
Co^memorations for the dead, whereby we hope that God will grant rest to them,
and a refreshing (or time of breathing) from the vexations or torments
(acerbitates) which do afflict them.

The same is delivered by the Liturgies or Masses of S. Basile the great, and
S. John Chrysostom. The first in these terms.

The Priest with a loud voice beseeches God to be myndfull of all who have
departed this life. Let him recreate them in his Tabernacle, let him lead them
through horrid Mansions, and place them in lightsome Tabernacles: Let him
deliver them out of most thick darknesses, tribulation, and dolor, least he
should enter into judgment with them. Let him pardon them, what ever, as men,
they may have offended, while they were yet clothed with a fleshly garment.

The second in these.

Further we offer unto thee this reasonable observance for the faithful
departed, for our brethren and sisters, by the interuention of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and all the Saints.

Again. Remember o Lord, as being good, thy servants, and pardon what ever
they trespassed in their life.

OBSERVATION.
Lo a Memento Domine, pronounced aloude, Prayer made for the dead that they
might be delivered from darkness, tribulation and sorrow: pardoned what in this
life they might have offended. oblation made for them: The intercessions of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles etc. employed. Judge whether it is the Catholic
or Protostant practice which is here expressed: and whether of these does more
emulate the primitive customs of their forefathers.

By these more then sufficient testimonies of the Greek Fathers, in their
writings, Council, Liturgies etc. it is most manifest that it was, and is the
practice of the Greek Church, to offer Sacrifice, to give Alms, to pray for
the souls departed, that their sins might be pardoned, and they delivered
from their purging pains, their purging fire, whereby what is vicious and
corrupt might be purged. It rests only that we show that it is in the sense,
in which the Council of Trent holds it: which is that which Mr. Cosens denies.
Hear the Council of Trent.

Whereas the Catholic Church instructed by the holy Ghost, Sess. 25.
by holy Writ, and the ancient Tradition of Fathers, has taught in holy
Counsels, and lastly in this universal Synod, that there is a Purgatory,
and that the souls there detayned are helped by the suffrages of the
faithful, but especially by the Sacrifice of the acceptable Altar; the holy
Synod commands the Bishops to use a diligent endeavor, that the wholesome
doctrine of Purgatory, delivered by the holy Fathers and Counsels, be
believed, held, taught, and preached every where, by the Faithful of Christ.

Again. If any affirm, that after the receipt of justifying grace, the fault
is so remitted, and the guilt of eternal pains so blotted out to any penitent
sinner, Sess. 6. can. 30.
that there remaynes no guilt of tempor all punishment to be paid, either in
this life, or the next in Purgatory, before we can get entry into the
kingdom of heaven, let him be accursed. What I pray, is here, which sounds not
the very same, and bears not the same sense with the precedent passages of
the Greek Fathers?

The Council of Trent says, There is a Purgaterie.

The Grecian Fathers say, A Furnace of purging fire.

The Council of Trent affirms, that the Catholic Church instructed by the
Holy Gh. etc. was taught this doctrine by holy Scripture, and the ancient
Tradition of Fathers.

The Grecian Fath. The holy Ghost disposed all these things. They were not
rashly invented. They were not established in vain by the Apostolical laws.

The Council of Trent auerres, That the souls there detayned (to wit in
Purgatory) are helped by the suffrages of the faithful, especially by the
Sacrifice of the Altar.

The Grecian Fath. That the souls of sinners partake some benefit by the
unbloody Sacrifice, and good works done for them. That they prayed for all
those who dyed from among them, believing that it is a great help to their
souls, for whom the obsecration of the holy and dreadful Sacrifice which is
put upon the Altar, is offered, and the price of our Redemption is put down.
That Oblations, Prayers, Alms, are not made in vain for the dead. The Priest
prays that the deceased may find his Judge more propitious: That God would
become propitious to the sins, not only of the living, but also of the dead,
That it is an undoubted custom in the Catholic, and Apostolical Church.

The Council of Trent commands, That the wholesome doctrine of Purgatory
should be believed, held, taught, preached etc.

The Grecian Fath. believe, hold, teach, and preach it.

The Council of Trent accurses such as deny, that after we have received
justifying grace, there remaynes any guilt of tempor all punishment either to
be paid in this life, or in the next in Purgatory etc.

The Grecian Fath. affirm that such as are in purging pains, are helped to be
freed from them by the suffrages of the faithful yet living, to wit, by the
Sacrifices of Masses, prayers, alms, and other works of piety. That the
sinners which dye are not always sent to hell. That the oblations and
distributions which are performed for the dead, doc not a little conduce even to
such as dyed in great sins.

Was there ever, or even could there ever be imagined, a greater and sweeter
harmony upon any point of doctrine, betwixt the East and the west the Greek
and the Latin Church? Is ouum ouo similius? Is it not then a boldness without
the warrantie of all reason, to affirm the contrary point blank? to wit,
forsooth, that they held it not in the sense the Council of Trent held it! Did
they at least hold it in the sense it is held by the Prot. Church of England in
her 39. Articles? Where she says: The Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory
etc. is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrantie of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.

Observe the contrariety betwixt the Greek, and English Protestant Church.
Origene.

Sinners are tormented in a purgation made by fire.

The Prot. Church of England.

It is a fond thing. Article 22.


Eusebius Alexand.

By the means of prayers great rest is procured to the dead.

The Prot. Church of England.

It is a thing vainly invented. Art. 22.


S. Athanasius.

The souls of sinners have benefit by the unbloody Sacrifice, and good works
done for them.

The Prot. Church of Eng.

The Sacrifices of Masses in the which it was commonly said, Art. 31.
that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have
remission of pain or guilt were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceipts.

Cyrillus Hier.

A dreadful Sacrifice put upon the Altar, and offered for our sins.

The Prot. Church of Eng.

Blasphemous fables, dangerous deceipts.

Cyrillus Hier.

He believed that it (to wit prayer for the dead) was a great help to their
souls.

The Prot. Art. 22.
Church of Eng.

A fond thing vainly invented.

S. Greg. Nyssenus.

Expiation after death by purging fire.

The Prot. Church of Eng.

There is no other satisfaction for sin but that alone, Art. 31.
(to wit the bloody oblation finished once upon the Cross.)

S. Chrysostom.

A Doctrine of the divine mercy.

The Prot. Church of Eng.

A fond thing. Art. 22.


S. Chrysostom.

A thing not rashly invented.

The Prot. Church of Eng.

A thing Vainly invented.

S. Chrysostom.

Disposed by the Holy Ghost.

The Prot. Art. 31.
Church of Eng.

A dangerous deceit.

S. Chrysostom.

An Apostolical Constitution that memory should be made of the souls
departed in the divine mysteries.

The Prot. Church of Eng. Art. 22.


Grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of
God.

In fine. S. Damascene

Delivers it for an undoubted custom in the Catholic and Apostolic Church to
make memory of the Dead in the vndloudie Sacrifice.

But the Prot. Church of England, will have it to be a fond thing, vainly
invented; and the Sacrifice of the Mass ablasphemous fable, a dangerous
deceit, rather repugnant to the word of God.

See what a goodly accord there is between the ancient Greek Fathers and our
new Reformers! or rather behold their apparently iarring and irreconcilable
discord which the smoothest wit is not able, even speciously to appease, or to
tune it up to any their least advantage. Their stale and cold replies drawn
from the diversity which they pretend to be amongst Catholics themselves upon
this subject, gain no credit, nor are of any moment with rational men; As,

That they agree not about the place where Purgatory should be.

Nor about the Tormentors, whether Angels or Devils.

Nor about the torments; whether by fire or water, or neither.

Nor about the causes of the torments of Purgatory; whether venial sins
only; or mortal sins also, for which full satisfaction has not been made
in this life.

Nor about the time which the souls tormented may remain in Purgatory etc.

Nor about their state etc.

For all these things swerve from the purpose, as not coming home to the state
of the question betwixt us and the English Protestants: which is, Whether there
be a Purgatory; not where the place of Purgatory is; who are the Tormenters;
what torments there be: whether pure and true fire, or some other thing
equivalent etc. of all which we pronounce with S. Basile, Superuacua in
Ecclesia sileant, Let not superfluous and unnecessary questions be heard of in
the Church: especially so far as to confound matter of Faith with matter of
opinion. Now these things, touching the place of Purgatory etc. pass among
Catholics for matters of opinion, not of Faith; and are with amity,
humility, and submission disputed in our schools, but have not yet been
defined in our Counsels, whence the belief or not belief of them, are of
free choice amongst us; we being neither made of the number of the faithful by
that, nor miscreants by this. We are not of those presumptuous souls who
think to have access to all the divine secrets, while we know by Saint Paul
that we are none of his Counselors. We are willingly persuaded by S. Basile
to praise what we have received upon the account of faith, and what has been
delivered over in trust to us, but do not curiously sound hidden mysteries. We
finally receive of the Catholic Roman Church, that there is A Purgatory;
and of that we dare not doubt: but where and what it is etc. (she having of
that delivered no Decree) in all humility we dispute; nor do our doubts
therein, violate, touch or call in question the belief of Purgatory, that
stands still undoubted and inviolable.

Since therefore all the Eastern Bishops and Fathers, as we have seen,
deliver the same doctrine with one heart, one mouth, one faith, touching
purging fire etc. Prayer, Alms, Sacrifice for the dead etc. whereby great rest
is procured to their souls: may not I justly admire to hear one man stand up,
and affirm the contrary and that with so much confidence as that he feared
not to pass his word to yeald himself a Catholic upon the proof of it;
Contra Iulianum l. 2. s. 2.
and may I not with just offense speak to him in S. Aug. words saying, To what
purpose doc these your words serve, but to make evident to the world, either
how negligent you have been to acquaint your self with the words and sense of
Catholic Doctors in this behalf; or having used diligence to know them, with
what fraud you go about to circumuent the ignorant etc.? Si nesciens hoc
fecisti cur non miseram respuis imperitiam? si sciens, cur non sacrilegam
deponis audaciam? si cernis cerne, and tandem tace. Pelagianam (Lutheranam)
linguam tot linguis Catholicis deprime; tot venerandis oribus, proterua ora
submit.

Hitherto I have insisted upon the productions of the Greek Fathers authority
only, because the challenge called thither alone, though I could have used a
more sure and satisfactorie way (the Scriptures as they are understood both by
the Greek and Latin Fathers together with the practice of the whole Church of
God) and have said with S. Augustine; Vbisupra.
I conceive that part of the world ought to suffice you, in which it pleased
our Lord to crown the first of his Apostles with a most glorious Martyrdom:
if you would have given care to Blessed Innocentius, presiding over that
Church, you had forthwith freed your perilous youth from the Pelagian
(Lutheran) snares. For what could that holy man have answered to the African
Counsels (Anglicanis conuicijs) but what the Apostolical and Roman sea holds
with the rest of the Churches etc. There is no reason therefore to provoke to
the Bishops of the East, because they two are Christians, and that faith of
both the parts of the world, is one and the same, because faith it self is
Christian; and certes the Western part brought you out, the western Church
did regenerate you etc.) It rest that I make the great Saint Augustine alone
speak for the practice of the Latin Church and himself, because I perceived
by a paper which M^ Cosens himself presented me with, that he had used some
endeavor to draw him to his side, or at least, if he could prevail no
further, to render his testimony doubtful: to the end that he or others might
build wood, hay, stubble or worse (upon that mistaken foundation) which he does
most clearly in these ensuing passages.

S. AVGVSTIN. CONF. lib. 9. cap. 12.

The Sacrifice of our price is offered for her. Sacrifice offered for her soul.


And. c. 13. book the same.

Now I beseech thee hear me for the sins of my Mother. He prays for her
sins.


Again a little after.

She desired only that a Memory should be made of her at thy Altar, She
desired to be remembered at the Altar.
at which she served without intermitting any day, where she knew the holy
victime was dispensed, whereby the handwriting was blotted out, which was
contrary to us.

To these passages some have made answer, that they do admit prayer for the
Dead; a Commemoration to be made for them at the Altar; yea, and Sacrifice to
be offered also. Howbeit not as we mean, to deliver them from their pains,
but for diverse other effects. And that thereby, we cannot enforce a Purgatory;
nor did S. Augustine speak of purging fire. Let the holy Father therefore
answer for himself.

S. Augustine li. 2. c. 20. de Genesi against the Manichees.

After this life he shall have either purging fire, Purging fire
or eternal punishment: So far are any from escaping this sentence.

Again upon the 37. Psalm.

They would be secure, etc. not only from that eternal fire which shall
torment the wicked for ever; but also from that too, which shall purge
(emendabit) those, who shall be safe by fire. And a little aster. That fire
shall be more grievous, then any thing a man can suffer in this life.

Now we have found in the Fathers formal terms, (not in our own forced
consequences, which were not in question) Prayer made at the Altar; Sacrisice
for the Dead; yea, and Fire too, wherein their souls are tormented: and yet
some will not be satisfied, but will have that fire to be understood of the
Fire of Conflagration at the day of Doom. Let us therefore yet hear saint
Augustine wipe away this scruple.

De Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 23. Pains suffered before the day of Judgment.


And it is manifest that such are purged by temporal pains (which their
spirits suffer) before the day of judgment.

Again in the same book, chap. 13.

Some suffer temporal pains in this life only; others after death; some both
now and then; yet before that most severe, and last Judgment. And the same
again the 21 book, chapter the first.

So that now out of S. Augustine, we have found Prayer, Memory at the Altar,
Sacrifice, Fire which is temporal, and that too punishing the spirit, or ghost
of the dead, even before the day of General Conslagration at the day of Doom.

To think to answer all that has benesaid, by opposing some few obscure
places culled out of the same Father: and so, (were it possible) to force him
to contradict himself, were in my judgment, but very bad payment. For first,
this is not to produce evidences; but doubts; not to clear, but to obscure
difficulties; and consequently, ought to have no force at all to thrust a man
out of his possession. Possideo, quia possideo, still dasheth such weak
opposition upon the head. Secondly, it is but a poor shift, to make a Father
seem to stand up against himself, to the end he may stand with them. Thirdly
it is to treat a holy Father unworthily, to endeavor to draw his sense from
his words, In his book de Doctrina Christiana
against his own rule, and the Rule of Reason, which is, that clearer places
should illustrate obscure places; not that obscure places should be
industriously employed to cloud clear places. That is but to put out the
light, to see better; or rather to hate and fly the light, least it might lay
them naked, and they be discovered by it. The worst of arguments was wo^t to
be, to aim to prove an obscure thing, by a thing more obscure; and yet it is
far worse to darken a clear thing by an obscure, and yet (forsooth) think
to have so preposterous a proceeding pass for an argument.

Our proceeding is not such: our Catholic custom is to pray for; to make
Commemoration of; to Sacrifice at the Altar for the souls departed that they
may be relieved, or freed from their pains which are caused by fire, before
the day of judgment. And we bring in our judge saint Augustine, to whom we
have both appealed, pronouncing sentence for us in terms, in the very same
words the Church does believe and practice it. We do not make his sentence
for him, but take from him, such as he pleases to deliver it. We use no
violence to him to make him speak what we please, but we are well pleased with
what he speaks. we go not about to surprise him, and wrest a word from him,
and then force it to our purpose, which was spoken only by the bye, while he
was treating upon another subject. But we take his judgment from places,
where, on set purpose, he is handling that subject which is in question
betwixt us.

In fine, we take it not from one or a few (which is another Rule of reason,
to understand a few places by many places) but from abundance of places, all
clear and consonant, and to the life expressing the present practice of the
Catholic Church. Hear him again and again in these ensuing passages, which
I will here promiscuously putt down as they shall occur; omitting yet a
many more.

S. Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 16.

He speaks of Children soon after their infancy, and says: If he have
received the Sacraments of our Mediator, though he end his life even in these
years, that is, being translated out of the power of darkness, into the
kingdom of Christ, he is not only not prepared for pains eternal, but shall
not even suffer any purging torments after this life.

De Ciu. Dei, l. 21. c. 24.

The prayer of the Church, or of certain pious people, are heard for those,
who being regenerated in Christ, neither ledd se very ill a life in this
mortality, as they should be judged unworthy of such mercy; nor yet so very
well, as that they should be found not to need such mercy.

De verb. Apost. Ser. 32.

It is not to be doubted, but the Dead are helped by the prayers of the holy
Church, and the saving Sacrifice, and alms, which are employed for their
souls, that our Lord may deal more mercifully with them then their sins
deserved; for the Universal Church observes this, delivered by their
forefathers, that prayers should be made for those who died in the communion of
the body and blood of Christ, when at the Sacrifice they are remembered in
their place, and memory is made that it is offered even for them too.

And again in the same place.

But let them employ these things (to wit) Oblations, Prayers, and gifts, or
Almsdeeds, which help the souls departed, more obseruantly, instanly, and
abundantly for them, to wit. the dead.

Enchir. c. 110.

It ought not to be denied that the souls of the dead are relieved by the
piety of their suruiuing friends, when the Sacrifice of our Mediator is
offered for them, or alms are given in the Church.

And again, in the same place.

When therefore the sacrifices, either of the altar, or what almes-deedes
soever, are offered for all the dead which are baptized; they are thankesguings
for such as are very good: they are propitations for those who are not very
evil: and though to such as are very evil, they be no helps to the dead,
yet are they some kind of comforts to the living.

De verbis Apostoli, Sermon. 17.

Therefore does ecclesiastical discipline observe that which the faithful
know, when the Martyrs in that place are recited at the Altar of God, where we
pray not for them, (the Martyrs) but we pray for the rest of the departed,
whereof commemoration is made. For it is an injury to pray for a martyr, to
whose prayers we our-selues ought to be commended.

De cura pro mortuis. Cap. 18.

Which being so, let us not esteem that the dead have any advantage (by being
buried in this or that part of the Church whereof he had spoken) save only by
the solemn supplications which we make for them, either in the Sacrifices of
the Altar, or of prayer, or almes-deedes. Though yet they profit not every one
they are made for, but those alone who obtain in their life time, that they
may profit them.

De Haeresibus: haer. 53.

The Aerians took their names for a certain Aerius, who being Priest, was
said to be troubled he could not be made Bishop, and falling into the Arrians
heresy, added some of his own tenets, affirming that it was not lawful to
pray or offer Sacrifice for the Dead.

De cura pro mortuis c. 1.

In the books of the Machabees we read that a sacrifice was offered for the
dead. Howbeit though it were not at all read in the ancient Scriptures, the
authority of the universal Church which is evident in point of this custom,
is uo small matter; where the commendation of the dead has its proper place in
the prayers of the priest, which are powered out to God at his Altar.

Here you will mark two things. The first is that saint Augustine esteemed the
Machabees to be Scripture, since he argues for Purgatory from it: and indeed
he confirms the same both in his second book of Christian Doctrine, the
eight Chapter; and also in his 18. book of the City of God 36. Chap. in
these words. The books (to wit two) of the Machabees are held to be
Canonical, not by the Jews, but by the Church. The second, that though there
were no scripture for it, yet ought the authority of the universal Church to
prevail, at it does in many other things of greater co^ sesequence. Witness
the said Saint in diverse passages, which both the Catholic and Protestant do
admit of.

For first, Epist fundamen.
moved by the authority of the Church we believe the Gospel it self, which
without it we should not believe. I would not, says he believe the Gospel
unless the authority of the Catholic Church did move me to it.

Secondly, we believe many things which are not in the Scripture, as that the
son is consubstantiall with the Father: It is not found written in holy
writ, says he, and yet that it is said, is defended in the assertion of
faith. That the Father is unbegotten. We read not in those books (the
scriptures) that the Father is unbegotten: Epist. 174.
and yet we make good that we ought to say so: in the same place. That the Holy
Ghost is to be adored: Give me say you (he means Maximinus an Arrian) some
testimonies where the Holy Ghost is adored: as though, forsooth, (replies saint
Augustine) out of these things which we read, we understood not also some
things which we read not. That it was written when the Apostle saint Paul was
baptized, no mention being made of the rest of the Apostles: It is written when
the Apostle saint Paul was baptized: and it is not written when the rest of the
Apostles were baptized: and yet we must understand that they also were
baptized. Finally, that a child which cannot yet speak, is said to believe,
and may be baptized. Be it far from me to affirm that children believe not
etc. he believes in another, who offended in another. It is answered (dicitur)
he believes: and it is of force: and he is numbered among the faithful baptized.

See what a necessity is imposed upon all Christians to have some other
infallible ground besides Scripture, to stand upon, both to make good Scripture
it self (to wit that it is the true word of God: that there are so many
books of it and no more: that we have the true sense of it etc.) and many
other maine grounds of Christianity, which, you see, we dare not deny, while
yet we can produce no formal scripture for them. Now what ground that is, let
the same Saint Augustine deliver. Saint Cyprian, faith he, does admonish us
that we should run back to the fountain, that is to the Apostolical
Tradition, and so bring down the chanells to our times. It is the best way, l
5. cap 26. contra Donatistas.
and to be done, without doubt. And again it is manifest, that in a thing
doubtful, the authority of the Catholic Church confirmed by the order of
Bishops succeeding one another, and the consent of people, Ex libro co^tra
Manichaos Did. 11.6. Palam.
from the very foundation of the seas of the Apostles, till this present time,
is of force to faith (valet ad fidem.) And to know which is an Apostolical
Tradition, which not, De Bap. con. Don. l. 4. c. 24. and l. 2. c 7. and Epist.
118. c. 1.
the same saint Augustine leaves us another Rule thrice over for failing. What
the UNIVERSAL CHVRCH holds, and is not yet established in Counsels, but is
always observed, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by no other
then by Apostolical authority. Whence he concludes that it is a most insolent
madness to dispute whether that ought to be done, which the whole Church
frequents all over the world. But the whole Church all over the world, in the
year 1517. frequented (as all our adversaries confess, and condemn in us) an
vnblouddy sacrifice, prayer, alms, etc. for the dead, that they might be freed
from their sins, etc. therefore it was (following saint Augustins phrase) and
is, a most insolent madness to deny it.

In conclusion, either has the proposition and practice of the UNIVERSAL
CHVRCH auhoritie, to convince the belief of a thing not otherwise written, yea
or no? If not: It were but meet that the simpler sort should be instructed
clearly and fairly upon what infallible warranty they believe these ensuing
points, which they meet not with in their Bible.

1. That Christians have indeed the whole revealed word of God. 2. That it is
contained in so many books, neither more nor fewer. 3. That the Epistle to the
Hebrews is a part of it, how ever it was some times doubted of. 4. That there
is a certain number of Sacraments, etc. as above out of saint Augustine.
But if you grant me that the universal Church has such an infallible
authority, and that upon it you depend for the certainty of the precedent
articles, I may say with S. Augustine, you observe by this of what importance
the authority of the Cathol. Church is: but you must also answer me, why
Catholics may not with equal confidence depend upon the same authority, in
point of assurance of purgatory? I am not able to discover a disparitie, or
apprehend how being held credible in the delivery of those, she should not
also be credible in this, since both are equally proposed: both rely upon the
same veracitie or credit. Be pleased to ponder this part well, and afford the
world a clear and satisfactorie answer. The grounds of Christianity seem to
me to be shaken, if the Churches veracitie herein beviolated, and great pity
it were, that the animositie to make good our private opinions, should betray
Gods known truths. An erring Disputant, says saint Augustine, is pardonable
in other questions, which are not yet maturely digested, De verbis Apost. Sermon.
14.
nor confirmed by the full authority of the Church, their error is to be
borne with: but it must not advance so far, as to endeavor to shake the
very foundation of the Church.

Of the Popes supremacy.
Against the Popes supremacy Mr Cosens used 4. or five arguments which I will
put down as they past.

The first.
Cos. S. Gregory being demanded certain questions of Augustine Achb. of
Canterbury, answered him that he was to learn of neighbor Churches how he
was to behave himself, seeming thereby to say in effect, why do thou ask
me, who have noe such authority, learn of the nearest Churches, etc.

Carre. To this it was answered, that this objection was nothing to the
purpose: because S. Augustins demand was in matter of ceremony, not of Faith:
of particular observance of a small part of the Church, not of the general
government of the whole, wherein the Popes supreme power is especially and
properly exercised and known. For these are the words of his third demand.
Why, there being but one faith, are the customs of Churches so diverse? And
there is one custom of Masses in the Roman Church, and another is observed in
the Churches of France. So that it appears evidently that saint Augustins
demand to saint Gregory was only about the diverse customs of saying Mass
(the very word will hardly now be welcome) and was indeed like to that of
Ianuarius to the great saint Augustine Doctor of the Church: Epist. 209.
and saint Gregory's answer again entirely consonant to the great S.
Augustines, speaking of an indifferent, no necessary observation. Lets hear
them both.

Saint Gregory. Your brotherhood is acquainted with the custom of the Church,
wherein you will remember you were bred. But it pleases me, that if you have
found any thing, either in the holy Roman Church, that of France, or in what
other soever, which may be more agreeable to Almighty God, you carefully make
choice of it, and power out by special institution, in the English Church
(which is as yet young in faith) the choycest things which you can cull out of
diverse Churches: for the things ought not to be loved in respect of the places,
but the places by reason of good things. Cull therefore what is religious,
pious, and right, out of what Church soever, and having gathered them, as it
were into a bundle, settle them as a custom in the heart of the English.

Saint Augustine upon the like occasion. But other things which are diuersified
in diverse places and regions: as is that, that some fast saturday, some not:
some daily communicate the body and blood of our Lord, others receive certain
days only: in some place no day is omitted, wherein it is not offered: in
others, on saturday and sunday only, in others again, on sunday alone: or
what ever may be observed of this nature, the whole kind of them have free
obseruances: nor can a grave and prudent Christian observe any better rule or
discipline herein, then to behave himself according to the Church where he
chances for the time to light: for what is neither enjoined against faith, nor
good manners, may be indifferently observed, and may be kept for their society
amongst whom we live.

Now, how out of these premises of Saint Gregory, this conclusion which was in
question (Ergo saint Gregory did not acknowledge himself the Head of the
Church) can be inferred, I confess I am not able to divine. It will belong to
him who made use of it, to make it appear, or else to cease with his, to brag
of a victory, when the weakest may discover he falls so far short of all
show of a proof: and consequenly (as was replied in his presence) that passage
alleged, made nothing at all to the purpose pretended, which was to conclude
against the Popes supremacy.

For the rest, how truly saint Gregory did acknowledge, vindicate and exercise
the supreme authority of the Church of Rome, shall be made manifestly and
plentifully appear upon occasions of answer to Mr Doctors other objections as
they occur. Though the same might be partly observed too, even out of his
said replies to saint Augustins questions, as when he says to the 9th quest.
We give thee no authority over the Bishops of France: because the Bishop of
Arles received the Pall from ancient times of my predecessors, whom we ought
not to deprive of the authority received.

Again in the same place. But we committ the care of all the Britain Bishops
to thy brotherhood: that the unlearned may be taught; the infirm strengthened
by persuasion; the perverse corrected by authority.

Again in the answer to the 8. quest. We will have thy Brotherhood so to order
Bishops in England, etc.

OBSERVATION.
Mark how he gives him authority over the Bishops of Britanie; denies him
authority over the Bishops of France as having formerly received authority
from the same sea by the gift of a pall which is practiced by the Roman Church
till this day, finally how he expresses himself by Volumus, we will etc. all
which are the words of a master, and speak his power to the life, at least, if
we make him the judge of the Controversy, as Mr Cosens his argument will have
it.

Cos. Again the same saint Gregory cried out against John Patriar. of
Constantinople, for proudly assuming to himself the pompous name of universal
Bishop etc. ergo, he did not allow the supremacy of Rome. Carre. This was his
second medium, and I confess it were specious enough had it never before been
heard of, but being too obuious and even worn threadbare with every ones
frequent handling, it is transparent to vulgar eyes, and he walks but in a
nett, who makes use of it for a cloak.

To this my answer was, that therefore saint Gregory exclaimed against the
proud and pompous title of UNIVERSAL BISHOP vhich John Patriarch of
Constantinople assumed to himself, because he apprchended that thereby all the
office or dignity of Bishop was absorpt or exhausted, so as none should be
Bishop but himself. Now whether this apprehension was true we labor not, it
is sufficient to show that saint Gregory at least made such a conceit, or
feared so much. Which is evident by these passages drawn out of his own
Epistles.

1. l. 4. Epist. 32.
If therefore (says he) that name (of universal Bishop) be assumed by any to
himself in that Church etc. the universal Church therefore (which God forbid)
does fall from its state when he falls which is called universal. But may that
name of blasphemy be far from the hearts of Christians, wherein the honor of
all priests is taken away, while one does madly arrogate it wholly to himself.

2. And it is very hard to be patiently endured; in so much as despising all,
Epist. 34. l. 4. Indict. 13.
my said Brother and fellow Bishop should only endeavor to be called The
Bishop.

3 Because if one be called an universal Patriarch, Epist. 36. ibid.
the name of Patriarch is taken from the rest.

4. Least some private thing being given to one, l. 4. Epist. 32.
all the priests might be deprived of their due honor.

Hence it is manifest that saint Gregory understood John the Patriarch of
Constantinople so to arrogate the name of universal Bishop, as that he did
derogate thereby from all other Bishops; that he did madly arrogate that power
wholly to himself; that with the contempt of his brethren, he alone would be
called Bishop; that the name of Patriarch would be taken from the rest, etc. As
though, forsooth, he alone were properly the only true Bishop; all the rest
being but as his Deputyes or Delegates. Which were indeed an intolerable,
sacrilegious, abominable attempt, and altogether repugnant to the sense and
practice of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, which holds the least
and lowest of Bishops, to be as absolute, proper, and perfect, in genere
Episcopi, as the greatest in place and dignity.

For the rest, it is so evident that universal Bishop, or universal
Patriarch, may be taken in some other tolerable (though not in this pompous and
odious) sense, that none ca^ with any appara^ce of reason deny it. For read we
not in the 1. Act. of the Council of Constantinople under Menas, an address
to Pope Agapetus in these words? To our most holy and most blessed Lord,
Archbishop of the Ancient Rome, and Oecumenicall (or universal) Bishop,
Agapetus. Yea does not even saint Gregory himself often deliver, In his
Epist. 32 and 34. of his 4. book, and 30. of his 7.
that the same Title of universal Bishop was given to his Predecessors
(howeuer out of humility or fear of scandal they refused it) in the Council
of Chalcedon, one of those 4. General Counsels which he professed to receive
and honor as the 4. Gospells; affirming in particular of that of Chalcedon,
that he embraced it with his whole heart, and observed it with a most entire
approbation; and therefore could not conceive that any thing was there
attributed to the Sea Apostolic which had no good sense at all. So far must
he needs be from crying against it in all senses!

But to loose no more time about a Title, or in a question de nomine (the worst
of questions) which I discover not to be so important to the Catholic cause,
that it should stand or fall by the Presence or Absence of it; Seruus Seruorum
Dei being without controversy the most Christian and most usual with all our
Popes (having been left them by the same saint Gregory l. 12. Ep. 32. I thus
answer M Cosens his Argument in form. Saint Gregory cried out against the
proud title of universal Bishop, etc. In that odious sense, whereby he
conceived, or feared, that John of Constantinople so pretended to be Bishop as
that he would not be content to be vnus e multis, one amongst many; but, vnus
solus, the only one (vt despectis fratribus Episcopus appetas solus vocari)
excluding all others from that dignity (which out of his words I have showed
to be his doubt above, Page 123.) I grant it most willingly, as he did it most
worthily. He cried out against it in all senses imaginable; in particular, as
it signifies Bishop and Head of the universal Church, or imports the Supremacy
(which is the only thing now in question) I deny it, and undertake to convince
the said Denial to be rational and good out of the same Saint, by many
evident titles, omitting for breuities sake the multitude of authorities out of
others, which with ease I could produce.

THE FIRST TITLE BY WHICH Saint Gregory makes good the Supremacy, is his own
words.
FIRST, l. 11.6.54.
by his own formal words in many places of his works: As in the 11th book
54. Chapt. where he says, If answer be made that there was neither
Metropolitan nor Patriarch, one must reply that the cause ought to be heard
and judged by the Sea Apostolic, which is the head of all the Churches.

2. l. 7. Ep. 63.
Whereas he (to wit the Primate of Bizacium in Afrique) says, he is subject
to the Sea Apostolic; if any fault be found in a Bishop, I know not what
Bishop is not subject to it. Marry when faults exact it not, all are equal in
the way of humility.

3. Hom. 21. upon the Gospel.
Why God all mighty permitted him (Peter) whom he had appointed to be over all
the Church, to be affrayd at the word of a maid, and to deny himself.

4. 5. Pauit. Psalm. v. 9.
And the temerity of his madness (he speaks of a certain Heretic) goes so
far, that he does challenge to himself the Roman Church, the head of all the
Churches.

5. l. 6. Ep. 48.
When I knew that Maximus was made Bishop, against reason and custom, I
dispatched away letters that he should not presume to celebrate the solemnity
of Masses. Which letters of mine being published in the City, etc. he caused
publicly to be torn, and did publicly insult in contempt of the Sea
Apostolic; which how I endure you know, who am readyer to dye then that the
Church of Blessed Peter the Apostle, should degenerate in my days.

6. l. 6. Ep. 48.
I earnestly beseech and exhort you with the affection of a Father, that every
one would suspend himself from an unlawful communion; and that he would
utterly avoid such as the Sea Apostolic admitts not into the fellowship of
her Communion, least that he thence stand guilty in the sight of the eternal
judge, whence he might have been saved.

7. l. 4. Ep. 34.
Though Gregory's sins (says he himself to Constantina Augusta) be so great
as to deserve to suffer such things; yet the sins of Peter the Apostle are
none, that he should merit to endure them in your reign. Therefore I beseech
you again and again, for God Allmighty's sake, that as the precedent Princes
your Parents, sought for the favor of saint Peter the Apostle, so also you
would endeavor to seek and conserve the same, not permitting that his honor
may in any sort be diminished with you (by reason of our Sins who serve him
unworthily) who may both now be a helper to you in all things, and hereafter
may be able to absolve your sins.

8. l 7. Ep. 64
Whence have they (the Grecians) till this day, that the subdeacons go in
Linnen-Coates (tunicis) but that they received it from their mother the Roman
Church?

9. Ibid.
As for that which they say of the Church of Constantinople, who doubts but it
is subject to the Sea Apostolic.

10. l. 7 Ep 54
Perverse men etc. will not be subject to the precepts of the Sea Apostolic;
and they reprehend us, as it were, in point of faith, l. 4. Ep. 32.
which they know not.

Lastly, in his Epistle to Mauritius the Emperor, (being the very place, which
is worthy to be observed, where he exclaimes against that pompous title of
universal) saying: It is evident to all who know the Gospel that the care of
the whole Church is committed by our Lords voice to S. Peter the Apostle the
Prince of all the Apostles: for to him it was said, Peter do thou love me?
feed my sheep, etc. behold he receives the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
the power of binding ad loosing is given to him: the care and principality (
principatus, sovereignty or dominion) of the whole Church is committed to him,
and yet he is not called universal Apostle.

OBSERVATION.
Receive from saint Gregory's own mouth then, that the Sea Apostolic is the
head of all the Churches: That all Bishops found in fault, are subject to it:
That Peter was placed over all the Churches: That the Roman Church is the head
of all the Churches: That it is known to all that know the Gospel, that the
Care of the whole Church is committed by our Lord himself to Peter the Prince
of all the Apostles: and that yet, he is not called universal Apostle. What
other thing is this, I pray, then to cry out with a loud voice, and to make
open demonstration to all the world, that while he exclaymes against the title
of universal Bishop; he refuses not the headship of all the Churches, but
professes to have jurisdiction, and superintendencie over all the other
Bishops. Archbishops, and Patriarchs; as does partly appear by what I have
already cited out of him: and more fully shall yet appear in my ensuing
discourse.

THE II. TITLE WHEREBY saint Gregory makes good the supremacy, is, The
exercice of such power all over the Christian world.
FIRST over the Bishops of Europe; l. 12. Ep. 15. to s. Aug.
in particular, over the Bishops of England, Let the Bishop of York order 12.
Bishops, and enjoy the honor of a Metropolitan: but let all the Bishops of
England be subject to thy brotherhood.

Secondly, l. 7. Ep. 112.
over the Bishops of France. Granting the use of the Pall to the Bishop of
Auston, he says: And withal we perceived we were to grant, that the Church of
the city of Auston should be after the Church of Lions, and to challenge to
it self this place and rank, by the favor (indulgentia) of our Authority.

Thirdly over the Bishops of Spain, saying. Let him, who presumed, while the
innocent Bishop was yet alive, to be ordered in his Church against the Canons,
being deprived of priesthood, be cast out of all Church-ministerie: and withal
let him be kept in safe custody, or else be sent unto us. Let the Bishops who
ordered him, being deprived of the Communion of the body and blood of our Lord
for the space of six months, be appointed to do penance in a Monastery.

Fourthly. l. 7. Ep. 32.
Over the Bishops of Africa. In particular, thus to the Bishop of Carthage. By
loving the Sea Apostolic, you baue recourse to the source of your office or
dignity, knowing whence priestly ordination had its beginning in Africa.

Again. l. 10. Ep. 2.
Writing to Columbus a Bishop of Numidie etc. he says: You are diligently to
examine all the contents of his Petition (to wit Donadeus Deacon degraded by
Victor a Bishop of Numidie) and if his complaint be accompanied with truth, let
canonical rigor be used against his Bishop Victor.

Fifthly. l. 2. Ep. 6.
Over the Bishops of Greece. In particular, over John Bishop of Iustiniana
prima, in these words. As for the present, having first disannulled, and made
of no effect the Decrees of thy sentence, we decree, by the authority of
Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, that for thirty days space thou shall
be deprived of the holy Communion, that with very great penance and tears,
thou may prevail with Almighty God to pardon thy so great an excess. And
if we shall come to perceive that thou do coldly perform our sentence, know
that then, not barely thy injustice, but the contumacie also of thy
brotherhood, shall be more severely punished.

Again. l. 5. Ep. 7.
Writing to the Bishops of Epirus, he says: Know that we have sent a Pall to
Andrew our brother and fellow-Bishop; and have granted (or confirmed) him all
the privileges, which our predecessors conferred upon his.

Again. Writing to John Bishop of Corinth, l. 4. Ep. 51.
touching Secu^dinus a Bishop whom he had deputed to examine and depose one
Anastasius Bishop, quam (causam) ei examinandam iniunximus, he says: And
because, in that sentence (whereby it is evident that the fore named Anastasius
was justly condemned, and deposed) our forementioned brother and fellow Bishop
so punished certain persons, that he reserved them to our arbitrime^et. And a
little after speaking of another, we pardon him this fault, and we appoint that
he should be received in his rank and place. Again. We will have them, to
wit, Euphemius and Thomas, to remain deposed as they are: and we decree that
they shall never more be received into holy orders, under what pretext of
excuse soever.

Sixthly. l. 5. Ep. 14.
Writing to Marinianus Bishop of Rauenna upon the difference which was between
his Church and Claudius the Abbot, he says: And do not you your self know,
that in the cause which was agitated by John Priest, against John of
Constantinople (our brother and fellow Bishop) recourse was made to the Sea
Apostolic, following the Canons, and the cause was ended (definita) by our
Sentence. And thence saint Gregory frames an argument a fortiori in these
words which immediately follow: If therefore the cause be deuolued to our
knowledge even from the City where the Prince (to wit the Emperor) resides;
how much more is the business which is against you, to be determined, or judged
here, the truth being known. The like speeches bearing a face of authority
with them, are all his Epistles so full of (as may with ease be seen in Dr.
Sander's visible Monarchy) that who would take the pains, could hardly light
upon an Epistle, where he should not meet with the^. If he should look upon
the 11. book and 10. Epistle he would find him instile the kings his sons,
saying: according to the writing of our sons the most excellent kings etc.
And in the end of the same Ep. And we command that all these things shall be
observed for ever, which are contained in this our Decree, as well by thy self
(he speaks to a certain Abbot) as by all those who shall succeed in thy
place and rank, or whom it may otherwise concern. And if any king, Priest,
Judge or secular person, having knowledge of this our Constitution, shall offer
to oppose it, let him be deprived of his honor and dignity, and acknowledge
that he stands guilty of the iniquity committed in the sight of the divine
judgment. And unless he do either restore the things which he wickedly took
away, or expiate his iniquity with the tears of worthy repentance; let him be
kept from the most sacred body and blood of our Lord God, Jesus Christ our
Redeemer, and be liable to a strict punishment at the day of Doom,

If upon the 4. book, 34. Chap. there he excommunicates or suspends from Mass
the Bishop of Salonitane, who was made without his knowledge against custom as
he complaynes: The Bishop of the City of Salonitane was ordered without my
own, or my Nuncius his knowledge, wherein a thing was done, which never
happened under the reign of any the preceding Princes. And concludes with a
covered reflection, or reprehension against the Emperors themselves. And,
says he, if the causes of Bishops who are committed to me, are carried with my
most pious Lords, by syding and the supportation of others, what do I,
unhappy man, in this Church? But, I give thanks to God, and impute it to mine
own sins, that my Bishops should contemn me, and fly to secular Judges for
refuge against me.

In conclusion, fearing to trespass upon the patience of my gentle Reader, I
omit a number of other clear passages, and appeal to every Christian heart,
whether it be not even industriously to endeavor ones own loss, to dwell
upon the words of an Author, which manifestly contain some doubtful and
odious sense, and thence force the conclusion to what our passion aims at,
without going on with the same Author to hear him out, and to take along with
us what he plainly, positiuely and frequently delivers upon the same subject.
It is true saint Gregory cries out against the proud title of universal
Bishop, yet speaks he not in a limited sense, and points he not particularly
at what he fears in it? saying: Least all priests should be thereby deprived
of due honor: Least he should endeavor to be called Bishop alone etc. as I
have intimated from himself above. page 123. But is it not also true, that he
more then any (such is God's providence) preaches, proclaims, practices the
power of supreme Head of the universal Church? Tearming the Sea of Rome, THE
HEAD OF ALL THE CHVRCHES. NOT KNOWING WHAT BISHOP IS NOT SVBIECT TO IT. WHERE
PETER WAS APPOINTED BY ALMIGHTY GOD TO BE OVER ALL THE CHVRCH: THAT NO
COMMUNION IS LAWFVLL WHICH THAT CHVRCH ADMITTS NOT. THAT IT IS THE MOTHER
CHVRCH: THAT THEY ARE PERVERSE MEN WHO WILL NOT BE SVBIECT TO IT. Will you
hear these propositions seco^ded and confirmed by his public practices,
which suffer no gloss? Is it not he who gouernes and gives laws to Europe,
Afrique and Asia?

Does he not order all the Bishops of England to be under saint Augustine? Does
he not send the Pall to Auston in France, and by the favor of his authority
rank it next to Lions?

Does he not in Spain, deprive a Bishop (ordered against the Canons) of
Priesthood and all Ecclesiastical ministry, depriving the Bishops too who
consecrated him of the body and blood of Christ, etc.

Does he not in Afrique command Columbus to use canonical rigor against
Bishop Victor, if Donadeus Deacon whom he (Victor) had degraded, had right on
his side.

Does he not in Greece, by the authority of Blessed Peter prince of the
Apostles, disannulle what the Bishop of Iustiniana Prima had done, and deprive
him of the holy Communion for thirty days?

Does he not profess openly, that the cause of the Patriarch of Constantinople
(though the Emperor resided there) was, according to the Canons, deuolued to
the Sea of Rome, and was ended by his SENTENCE?

If we will then hear Gregory, lets hear him thoroughly: If we fly to his
authority, let us stand to his verdict. Let not his word be taken where it
pleases you, and rejected where it displeases you, for so I shall have cause to
make use of a passage of saint Augustine against the Manichees in in Ep.
Fundam. and say: Do you conceive me a fool in such a measure, that without
giving any reason at all, I should believe what you please, and what you please
not, I should not believe? Noe, that were not to deal fairly and ingenuously:
If Gregory must be our vmpire, LET ROME BE TERMED THE HEAD OF ALL THE
CHVRCHES, as he styles it: and exercise jurisdiction over all the Churches, as
we have seen him practice, and let not UNIVERSAL BISHOP which we cannot, or
will not understand aright, stand betwixt us as a wall of division, a
seed-plott of irreconcilable discord: The fortunes of Greece depend not upon
it; nor Christian Beatitude. If it signify head or chiefe-bishop of the
UNIVERSAL CHVRCH, it is but ROMES DVE: if it would entayle the whole right,
power, and dignity of Bishop upon Rome alone, Rome reiects it as sacrilegious
and blasphemous, and so do we.

Mr Cosens his third Medium or argument was, that appeals to Rome were
prohibited in the Mileuitane and 6th. Carthaginean Council; and that under
pain of excommunication. Ergo the Africans did not acknowledge the Supremacy
of Rome.

Carre. My answer was, that for minor or lesser persons, or minor and lesser
causes, appeals were prohibited; I granted it: That Appeals were forbidden
for Mayor or greater persons, at least in mayor or greater Causes, I denied it.
And consequently I denied the Conclusion intended, to wit, Ergo the Africans
did not acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome. And the reason is; because the
Supremacy of Rome is discerned, and exercised in greater causes, as in matter
of faith, or the general government of the universal Church.

For such they precisely are which Rome did always challenge, as properly
belonging to her own jurisdiction. Hear in confirmation of this, what saint
Gregory writes to the Bishop of Iustiniana prima l. 2. ep. 46. If any cause of
faith, or crime, or Money-matter, be commenced against our fellow-Bishop Adrian
Bishop of Thebes, if it be a thing of little importance, let it be judged by
our Nuncio'es (Responsales) who are, or shall be in the Royal City
(Constantinople) but if it be a matter of weight, let it be referred hither, to
the Sea Apostolic. And such Africa never denied to Rome, to wit,
aknowledgment of jurisdiction, and subjection in GREATER CAUSES, but
contrarily, had frequent recourse to the Popes of Rome with due submission and
aknowledgment. Yea the very Fathers (to the number of 61.) of the Mileuitane
Council wrote to Pope Innoce^tius in these terms. Whereas God by his special
grace has placed thee in the Sea Apostolic, and has given us thee such an
one (tale^, one so qualified, or so good) in our days, that it would rather be
imputed to our negligence, if we should conceal from thy veneration, what we
judge ought to be represented for the Churches advantage; then that we need to
apprehend, that thou would esteem it importune or otherwise slight the same:
we beseech thee daigne to employe thy pastoral care in the great dangers of
the infirm members of Christ: for a new and most pernicious heresy, etc.
Again in the same place; while we intimate these things to thy Apostolical
heart, we need not use many words to exaggerate so great an impiety, which we
doubt not thou will so deeply resent, that thou will not be able to contain
thy self from correcting them etc. Again, But we conceive (by the mercy of
our Lord God Christ Jesus, who daignes both to direct thy counsels, and to
hear thy prayers) that they who hold those perverse and pernicious tenets,
will easily yield to the authority of thy Holiness which is drawn from the
authority of the holy Scriptures. And in the end of the same Epistle, We
addressed these writings to your Holiness from the Council of Numidia (to
wit from Mileui) imitating our fellow-Bishops of the Province of Carthage, who
we perceive have written upon this subject to the sea Apostolic, which (sea
Apostolic) thou a blessed man do illustrate, (or which your holiness does
govern, quam Beatus illustras.)

Thus did the whole Council defer to the Sea Apostolic. Hear now how this
respect is received by Pope Innocentius. With care, says he, and congruitie
did you exhibit respect to the Apostolical honor, (to his honor, I say, who
besides what was without, had the solicitude of all the Churches) in seeking
what sentence you are to hold in points of great difficulty, following therein
the form of the ancient rule, which you know the whole world observes with me.
Behold how Pope Innocentius ascribes the honor done to himself, to S. Peter:
as to one who had the care of all the Churches, and declares, that in having
recourse to him, to know what they should hold in points of GREAT DIFFICVLTIE,
they do but follow the ancient form of proceeding, which (as he says they
knew) all the world observes. Hear again, S. Augustine confirming the same:
What answer could that holy man return to the Africane Counsels, but that
which the Apostolical Sea and Roman Church holds of old perseuerantly with
the rest? And what form of proceeding did they (amongst the rest) express?
Marry that they were to betake themselves to his Pastoral care in the great
dangers of the infirm members of Christ, as to condemn Heresy, etc. That
they were to intimate such things to his Apostolical heart to have them
corrected: That the authority of his Holiness, is drawn out of the
authority of holy Scripture. Is this to misacknowledge or deny the supremacy
of Rome? No: let only this form of proceeding be observed; this correction
endured; this authority be acknowledged, and we shall thus far most
willingly join hands, and make the very Counsels which are alleged against
us, the model of our practice. So far falls Mr. C. short in his proofs
drawn from the Council of Mileui: Will you hear how much better he speeds in
the 6. Council of Carthage, where it is pretended, that appeals to Rome were
prohibited, yea even in Mayor persons too, as in Bishops, Metropolitans etc?
Certes, if that Council be well looked into, and with an indifferent eye, it
will be found so far from concluding against the supremacy, that it does
absolutely convince the truth of it. for

First, what was there said, was said against the manner, and frequencie, not
against the right of Appeals; as manifestly appears by the Epist. of the
Africane Bishops to Pope Celestine in these terms. Conc. A^^ri^ c. 15.
The office of a due salutation being premised, we beseech you with our whole
affection, that you do not easily admit such as come from hence to your
ears, and that you would no more receive to Communion such as we may have
excommunicated, etc. let not then those who were barred from Communion in their
own Provinces, appear to be restored to Communion by your Holiness, with
precipitation, and otherwise then is meet.

Behold the company of the Bishops of Afrike become humble suitors to the
Bishop of Rome (and consequently acknowledge his jurisdiction, otherwise it
were a most silly part to sue to him in those terms) not that he would not
admit any appeals at all, but not easily admit them etc? Not that he would
restore none at all to Communion etc. (which yet they should have done, and
have denied he had any such authority, had they opposed the supremacy) but
only that it should not appear that they were reslored with preoipitation,
and otherwise then was meet, always presupposing such a power.

Secondly, what was said, was said in point of Minor causes, as in civil,
pecuniarie, scandalous and criminal matters etc. (such as was that of Apiarius
an Africane Priest, and that of Anthony Bishop of Fussal: both which appealed
to Rome, and their Appeals were there admitted) to prove or disprove which,
productions of witnesses would often be necessary, to wit, people of diverse
sexes and ages, little fit to undergo the difficulties of such a voyage: to
say nothing of the charges, or other impediments, as is expressed in the Epist
105. of the Africane Council to the Pope of Rome, Celestine.

Thirdly, whatsoever was said, nothing was done; what ever was proposed,
nothing was enacted or decreed against the right of Mayor persons, to wit
Bishops, in their appeals to Rome, who kept their privileges, according to
that of S. Augustine, speaking of Ceoilianus Archbishop of Carthage deposed by a
Council of seauentie Bishops, saying: He might have contemned the conspiring
multitude of his enemies, because he saw himself in communion with the Church
of Rome by Communicatory letters, wherein the Principality (or sovereignty) of
the Sea Apost. did always flourish, where he was prepared to plead his cause.
Nay what was even proposed too, was done dependently of what should be
discovered in the Council of Nice, which they had sent for to the Patriarchall
Churches in the East; and that with all possible submission to the Church of
Rome the while: witness their own words as they are put down in the said 6.
Council, In Ep. ab omni Concilio Africano ad Bonifacium Vrbis Romae Episcopum.
in answer to the propositions contained in the Monitorie sent to them from
Pope Zozimus, by Faustinus Bishop his Legate etc. Wherein he recommended to
them the observance of the 7. canon of the Council of Sardis indeed, Conc.
Sardis. cap. 7.
but under the name of the Council of Nice, it being esteemed an appendix of
this, touching Appeals to Rome, as follows. But if he (to wit a Bishop
judged and deposed by the Assembly of Bishops of the same Country) who
demands to have a new hearing of his cause, have by petition moved the Bishop
of Rome, to send a Priest (e latere suo, commonly called Legatus a latere) it
shall be in the Bishops power to do what he will and what he judges fit: And
if he decree to send some, endowed with his authority from whom they are sent,
who being present with the Bishops, should judge, it is in his free
disposition. And if he believe the Bishops sufficient to put a period to the
affair, he shall do what in his own most wise counsel, he judges behoofull.

Now the Africane Bishops, not finding this in the Council of Nice, and not
otherwise being acquainted with the Council of Sardis, save only whith a
spurious one, (made near Sardis by the Arrians) as S. Aug. gives testimony,
and favored by the Donatists: And on the other side, being wearied out with
frequent, costly and disorderly appeals (as in the present with that of
Apiarius a simple priest) for the second time, were willing doubtless to have
lighted upon some lawful redress in that behalf: yet mark, I beseech you,
with what humility and respect to the Sea of Rome, it is sought for. They sue,
they supplicate, they protest in the interim, to observe what was enjoined them
by the Popes Legates, which certainly they had had no reason to do, had they
apprehended no authority in the Pope to command.

We profess (says Alypius Bishop of Tagaste) that we are willing to observe
what is established in the Council of Nice, In the 6. Council of Carthage.
and a little after, but we find it not as our brother Faustinus brought it.
And thereupon he applies himself to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, that the Acts
of the Council of Nice should be sent for into Greece, that all ambiguitie
might be removed, says he, and concludes, Howbeit We profess, as I said
before, that in the mean while we will observe these things, till the entire
Coppies (exemplaria concilij Niceni) shall come.

With which the Popes Legate Faustinus was so fully satisfied, that he
pronounced upon it, Nor does your sanctity fore-iudge or do a prejudice to
the Church of Rome etc. in that our brother and fellow-Bishop Alypius daigned
to say the Canons were doubtful: but only please to write these very things
to our holy and most Blessed Pope etc.

To which Aurelius Archb. of Carth. replied. Besides these things which we have
promised in the Acts, we must of necessity withal, most fully intimate by the
letters of our Towns, every thing we treat of, to our holy brother, and
fellow Priest Boniface. Which the whole Council seconded with, Placet.

And we profess, adds Aug. Bishop of Hippon, we will observe this, saving a
more diligent inquisition about the Council of Nice.

Finally, the whole Council resolves to expect the Acts of the Council of
Nice, authenticated under the three Patriarchs hands whereby, say they, the
chapters (which are contained in the present instructions (commonitorio) of
Faustinus etc.) being there found, shall be strengthened by us, or not being
found, shall be more fully handled in a subsequent Synod collected to that
effect.

Let now indifferent persons judge what could ever be spoken with more
submission and indifferency, and less entrench upon the Popes known
authority, which even by this their proceeding, clearly discouers it self,
and shines, as it were, through this seeming miste of the Africane opposition.
Otherwise 1. In Ep ad Cel^st. Gone. Afric. c. 15.
Why is a Council expressly called in obedience to Pope Celestine. 2. And why
does the same Pope give this honorable testimony of S. Aug. who was one of the
chief supposed Antiappellants, that for his life and merits they always had
him in their communion, and that he was never touhed with so much as a rumor
of any sinister suspicion? 3. Why did the same S. August. in cause of an
Appeal made by Bishop Anthony of Fussal, to Pope Celestine, have free
recourse to him as to caompetent Judge, instructing and commending the cause
unto him, acknowledging that some for certain faults, the very Sea Apostolic
(as he says ep. 261.) judging, or confirming the judgments (or sentences) of
others, were neither deprived of Episcopal dignity, nor yet left altogether
unpunished: desiring him to command all the things directed to him (to wit the
Process) to be read before etc. It was neither for want of wit, virtue nor
learning sure, for in that quality what Pope might not rather have had
recourse to him? 4. Why is Faustinus admitted into their Council, and
permitted to propose the Popes pleasure which they promise to observe till
farther inquiry be made in a matter ministering just cause of doubt? 5. Why is
Apiarius (a turbulent and wicked priest) in virtue of the Popes release, (by
provision as it is called) and by his order, admitted to a second hearing in
Afrike, after he had been twice cast out by the votes of the Bishops there? 6.
Why does Faustinus himself pronounce in the full assembly, that by this their
proceeding no prejudice was done to the Sea of Rome? 7. Why did Aurelius
esteem it a point of necessity to impart all the particulars of their treaty
to Pope Boniface? 8. Finally, why is it concluded by the unanimous consent of
the whole Council, that if the things which Faustinus had in his instructions,
be found in the Acts of Nice, they will confirm it, If not (they do not say
they will forthwith cast of obedience to the Church of Rome) they will call
another Council, and treat the business more fully?


But I will yet go on and say, Fourthly, put case I would give what can never
be proved, nay what is contrary to the known truth of the Fact: That the
Africans opposition had been against the right of Appeals to Rome, not against
the manner only: and that in mayor persons, and causes too; in a word, that
what they proposed only, had been decreed also: and that conciliariter too,
yet how would this conclusion be made good by Mr. C. Ergo the Pope of Rome is
not supreme head of the Church? Certainly in a Protestant sense it could not,
since they affirm that even General Counsels etc. both may err, and have
somtymes erred, in the 21. article of the 39. Ergo a fortiori, this of Africa
which was but a Provincial Council, may have erred, and consequently one
should be convinced of rashness, to conclude any thing out of it (especially in
matter of faith) till men's consciences were assured, that though it might, yet
indeed it did not err here in which how it should he made good I am not wise
enough to guess. Nor yet can it be made an argument ad hominem, and conclude
against a Catholic, for he does not place the infallibility of the Church in
the decree of a provincial, but in the Definition of a General Council. Ergo
nothing follows hence neither. Ergo (to be short) I will conclude this part
with these few testimonies of the African Fathers, as well before as after
this 6. Council of Carth. in point of the Popes Supremacy; omitting a number
of most pregnant places out of other Fathers: partly for breuities sake, and
pratly because the Africans are most concerned herein.

Tertull. l. de Pudicitia c. 1. n. 5.

He styles the Pope of Rome the High priest and Bishop of Bishops, and terms
the Church of Rome, In Praesc. ^. 36. n. 212.
Happy Church, to whom the Apostles powered out all their doctrine together
with their blood.

S. Cyprian.

The Primacie (or chief place, rule and authority, In l de vnitate Ecclesiae.
the word Primatus being so Englished by the best Grammarians) is given to
Peter etc.

They dare sail to the Chair of Peter and to the Principal or chief Church.
Epis. 55. ad Cornelium Papam.


And writing to Stephen Pope of Rome, he says, Let thy letters be dispatched
into the Province of Arles, and to the people there residing, whereby Marciane
(who being Bishop of Arles favored the Nouatian heresy) being excommunicated,
another may be substituted in his place and the flock of Christ may be
gathered together, which to this day is contemned, being dispersed and wounded
by him.

Optatus Mileuitanus.

A Bishops chair was first conferred upon Peter in the City of Rome: In l.
2. cont. Parmenianum.
wherein the HEAD of all the Apostles, Peter, sat etc.

Victor Vticensis.

And especially the Roman Church which is the HEAD of all the Churches. In l.
2. de Persec. Van.


S. Augustine l. 2. de Bap. contra

Donat.

Peter the Apostle, in whom the Primacie of the Apostles, had the preeminencie,
with so exceellent a grace, (or advantage.)

Again. Like as all the causes of Mastership were in our Savior, In quaest.
Noui Test. q. 75.
so after our Savior they are all contained in Peter; for he constituted him
to be the HEAD of them (the Apostles) that he might be the Pastor of our Lords
flock, Eugenius who was one of Aurelius his Successors in the Archbishopricke
of Carthage.

The Roman Church is the HEAD of all the Churches.

Fulgentius de Incarn. and Gratia c. 11.

That which the Roman Church (which is the HEAD or top of the world, holds)
and teaches, and which the whole Christian world, together with it, both
believes without hesitation to Justice, and doubts not to confess to faluation.

I conclude then, that since it is most evident, that the Africans were for us
Catholics both in their words and practices, as well before and in the fore
said Counsels, as after the same, it is altogether in vain for the
Protestants, thence to hope for any help or support to their Cause.

Now Mr. C. having returned you a fair, full, and satisfactorie answer to each
of your obiectio^s: permit me the favor of one of your settled answers, to that
one only demand which I then made, and often iterated, and still iterate, as
being the very sum and abridgement of all controversies to wit, where was
your Church in the year 1500. etc. till the year 1517. when Luther began to
storm?

This is the rule I have been taught by the ancient Fathers First by Irenaeus,
who had the happiness to have seen Policarpe S John's scholar. We, says he,
can number those, who were instituted Bishops in the Churches by the Apostles,
and their success^urs even unto us, who taught, or knew noe such thing as these
do madly fancy to themselves. And a little after, But whereas it is too long
to number the successions of all the Churches in such a volume as this, we
confound all those who by any means gather more then they ought, either by
their wicked self-complacencie, or vain glory, or else by their own blindness,
and erroneous sense, by pointing out that tradition which that greatest, most
ancient and most known Church to all men, founded and established at Rome by
the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, and by faith announced to men,
brought down even unto us, by the successions of Bishops; for unto this Church
by reason of its more powerful principality, every Church ought to resort,
that is, all the faithful all over the world, wherein that Tradition which is
from the Apostles, is conserved by those which are all over (vndique.) And so
names the Popes from Linus who succeeded S. Peter etc. till Eleutherius, who
was in his time of whom he says, Now Eleutherius in the twelueth place has
the Bishopric from the Apostles, and he adds: By this ordination and
succession the TRADITION which is in the Church from the Apostles and the
proclamation of Truth is brought down unto us: And this is a most absolute
demonstration (plenissima ostensio) that it is conserved in the Church from the
Apostles till this day, and is delivered over in truth.

Behold the succession of Bishops, is esteemed by him, and delivered unto us,
for a certain demonstration, that those who have it on their side, have the
same lively faith conserved even from the Apostles time till this day.

Secondly, by the learned Tertullian in the same age, saying: In Praescri p. c.
32.
Let them produce the origin's of their Churches; let them declare the row or
process of their Bishops, so running down from the beginning by successio^s,
that that first Bishop may have had some one of the Apostles, or Apostolical
men, which yet perseuered with the Apostles, for his Author and Predecessor.
Let the Heretics, says he a little after, even forge any such thing if they
can. And he counts, Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacetus, Auarestus,
Alexander, Sixtus etc.

Thirdly, Optatus Mileuitanus, In 4 Tom. carm contra Marcion.
saying: In that singular (vnica) Chair, Peter first sat, to whom Linus did
succeed etc. to Julius Liberius, to Liberius Damasus, to Damasus Siricius at
this day, who is our fellow; with whom (or in whom) all the world agrees with
us in one society of Communion, by the commerce of letters formed (to wit a
kind of circular or communicatorie letters used in those times to discover them
to be of the same co^manion) Produce the origin of your chair, you who will
needs challenge the Holy Church to your selves.

Fourthly S. Augustine, In his Ep. 165.
thus: If the order or process of Bishops who succeed one another be
considerable, how much more certainly, and indeed sauingly, do we count from
Peter himself etc. For Linus succeeded Peter etc. and so counting down to
Anastasius, who then was Pope, he co^cludes in these words: in this rank or
line of succession, no Donatist (Protestant) Bishop is found etc.

Now to know of what consideration and weight the succession is with the same
S. Augustine, lets take it from himself in his Ep. Fundamenti cap 4. where he
professes, that the succession of priests, from the very Sea of Peter the
Apostle till this present Bishop-pricke, most justly retaynes him in the bosom
of the Catholic Church.

That this is a reasonable demand in it self, I am most confident, because
Fathers so learned and able, provoked to it in their times, with so much
confidence, and taught others to do the same. It is necessary, says
Tertullian, Praescrip. c. 20.
that every family should be brought back and reduced to its origin. And
that it is reasonable in particular from us, it seems no less evident,
because what we demand we are ready to exhibit: to discern whether you or we
are true successors to S. Peter, we name our men immediately from him, who have
succeeded one another till this day, till this present Popedom of Innocentius:
and we desire you, fairly to produce the like evidence, or else cease unjustly
to pretend the succession which you can show no right to. Finally that it is
the only short and sure way to discern truth from falsehood which is the
only thing we ought to aim at, the great Tertull. testifies and makes
manifest. What the Apostles preached, says he, that is, what Jesus Christ
revealed unto them, ought not to be tried, Praescrip. c. 21.
nor proved, save only by the same Churches which the Apostles founded, by
preaching unto them by word of mouth, or afterward by their Epistles. Which
things being so, it is evident thence, that all doctrine which does conspire or
agree with those Apostolical Churches which are the Mothers (matrices) and
sources of faith, is to be esteemed true, as holding without all controversy,
what the Churches received of the Apostles, the Apostles of Christ, Christ of
God. Marry all other doctrine ought to be preiudged of falsitie, which savors
against the Truth of the Churches, Apostles, Christ, and God etc. But we
Catholics (miscalled Papists) communicate for the present and did communicate
with the Apostolical Church of Rome in her Pastor Alexander the VI. in the
year 1500. as holding no doctrine contrary to it, but conspiring with it;
therefore our Doctrine is to be judged true, the contrary to be preiudged
false: This (concludes Tertullian) is an EVIDENCE of Truth: or accordin to
Irenaeus, plenissima ostensio, a most full DEMONSTRATION.

Such a Demonstration it is which we demand of you in the hehalfe of your
Protestant Church from the year 1500. downward: of your Church, I say,
whether you define it as in the 39. Art. The visible Church of Christ is a
congregation of faithful men, Art. 19.
in which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered etc. Or as you describe it by oppositio^ to ours, tearming it a
Congregation of men etc. which opposes Masses unbloody Sacrifice, adoration
of the consecrated host, worship of Angels and Saints, and prayer to them,
Purgatory, the Supremacy, the infallibility of the Church etc.

Assign the place where this Congregation appeared, give up the names, at
least of some of their chief Bishops, or Pastors, or Doctors, or Elders.

Verify that they preached against the Mass, unbloody Sacrifice etc.

Rational and modest men, will judge I am spareing enough in these my demands,
since it is to go no further then a Definitione ad definitum, to know where
this Congregation etc. then was, yea even your own men confess it: For will
not Fulke against
Fulke say that Pastors and Doctors have always been in the Church, Heskins
and Sanders p. 69
and that they have continually from Christ to Luthers time, resisted false
doctrine? will not others maintain Ba^croft in Recognitione page 441.
: That the administration of the word and Sacraments, is absolutely necessary
to salvation. Willet in his synopsis page 71.
That the Church continues no longer then it has these marks Hiper in his
common places l 3. p. 548.
. That these marks ought to be external and visible, to the end men may know
where the Church is, and to what society every one of the faithful ought to
join himself. Finally Whitgift in Def. p. 465.
, that the Church of God is not to be shut up in one kingdom etc.

My demand is sparing enough then, I say, for I might well require further
(according to the Ancient Fathers Rules above) to have it evidently proved,
that such a Church or Congregation had always been, in all times and places,
one and the same, and that too made good by continual, and uninterrupted,
succession: that so it might appear to have descended from some of the
Apostles, and consequently be indeed, as the true Church is defined in the
Nicene Creed one, holy, Catholic, Apostolic. Howbeit knowing well that
never yet any Protestant has returned a fair answer, even to these few
demands, I will presume you will find it work enough for the present, to point
us out, within the time prefixed,

The place where the Congregation was assembled.

The names of the Preachers, or Preacher at least, with evidence that he
preached or held the Doctrine of the thirtienyne Art. or what else may be meant
by the pure word of God: or, opposed that which is contained in the Council of
Trent.

And that they, or he, duly administered the Sacraments, (and that but two
only) according to Christ's ordinance etc.

Do not, I beseech you, as you sometimes did, name S. Ignatius. That is too
prodigious a leap, at once to skippe above 1400. years backwards, and yet not
prove your affirmation neither, to which every disputant is liable. I could
with like facility name him too, and yet you would not admit that for good
payment. You will please to remember, the thing I demand is, that you would
acquaint us with the names of some of your Bishops, or Pastors etc. in the
beginning of the 16. Age not in the end of the first. As S. Ignatius passed too
tymely for our present purpose, so Bishop Tunstall and B. Gardner came too sat
(though you made no bones to name them too) but sure you were not serious with
your friends in a subject which exacted it; or else your poor answer is a
plain conviction how desperate your cause is. They have both left learned
works behind them which will ever speak them Roman Catholics. Tunstall. page
47. de verit. Corp. Christi. Ed. Parisianae 1554.
The Transubstantiation, and the Idem in codem lib. page 93.
Sacrifice of the Mass, are not tenets of the Protestant Church, to name no
more. Et Guard. in Confutatione etc. page 73.
Nor did Bishop Tunstall sure dye a Prisoner in Lambeth, in Queen Elisabeths
time, for being a Protestant. Idem in codem lib. p. 5.
If this assertion then (to wit, that Bishop Tunstall and Bishop Gardner
helped to continue the succession of the Protestant Church) which came
accompanied with noe countenance or appearance of Truth, were termed impudent,
what wrong were done to it? since it could not fall from a man, as having any
thing of satisfaction, any face of reason, but as a Mercury of every wood, to
stand in the light, and to stop the course of Truth; which S. Augustine might
have happily termed inanissimam vocem temeritatisque plenissimam l. de moribus
Ecclesiae Cath. c. 29. For was it ever written, ever affirmed, ever called in
question by any? By any! I do not say by Catholics, but even by Protestants
themselves? Nay do not even In l. de Praesulibus Anglia in vita Tunstalli
Good man and In Elisabetha page 37.
Camden deliver the contrary and put it out of all doubt?

Do not fly to the Catholic Roman Church neither: that were too poor a
shift, to beg a succession of her, against whose Idolatry you daily cry
out. Nor is it that Church we enquire after, we know that that City placed
upon a hill never lay hidd: that Tabernacle seated in the sun, was always
illustrious, constant, permanent: we can bring in, reum confitentem upon that
subject, we have conuictions from our Adversaries own mouths. The surueyer of
the pretended discipline 6.8.
Priests of all sorts, together with the people, from the topp to the toe were
drowned in the puddles (or dregs) of popery, says one. Even 1260. years
the Pope and his Clergy possessed the outward and visible Church of Christians
raygning without any debatable contradiction, says another. Luther de Capt.
Bab. de Bap.
The Popes tyra^nie for many ages has extinguished Faith etc. says a third.
This Idolatrous Roman Harlot then, this chair of pestilence, this whore of
Babylon (for thus yours please to qualify the Spouse of Christ, his wholly
fair, in whom there is found no spott or blemish) was easily found, by such as
even sought her not; she lived, she reigned, soueraignely too, without
contradiction; entirely without limitation or reserve, over priest and people;
perseuerantly, even for the space of 1260. years. But we desire (Remember I
pray) to have the obligation to be ledd to the Protestants Church within the
time prefixed: to hear their sermons: to see the administration of their two
Sacraments only: let this be shown and we are ready to communicate with them
under what kind or kinds they please. But if, as it indeed never was, so it be
impossible it should be proved; nay if the same be publicly professed by your
own Authors, saying, In the ages past there was no face of a true Church: for
some ages the pure preaching of the word vanished, Inst. l. 4. c. 1. 11.
so Calvin. From 400. years and more the Religion of Christ was wholly turned
into Idolatry, adds in his Acts page 767.
Fox. The Church was at that time invisible and could not be shown, confesses
Regius lib. Apol. page 176.
: The Truth was then unknown and unheard of, when Martin Luther, etc. openly
pronounces In Apo. p. 4. c. 4. Diuis. 2.
I uell: We say that for many ages before Luthers time, a general Apostasy
ouerspred the face of the earth, nor was our Church in that time conspicuous
(or visible) to the world, concludes In exposit. symb. p. 400.
Perkins) permit me to ask by what iniquity are poor souls fedd, or rather
starued, with falsitie? and to conclude with that strongly reasoning
Tertullian, in the person of the Catholic Church, saying: who are you? when,
and whence came you? what do you do in my possession, being none of mine? By
what right do thou (o Marcion, o Protestant) cut down my wood? By what
prerogative do thou (o Valentine) diuerte my fountains? By what authority
do thou, o Apelles, transport my bounds? THIS POSSESSION IS MINE, why presume
you being strangers, to feed and sow herein at your pleasure? THE POSSESSION
IS MINE. I POSSESS IT OF OLD. I POSSESS IT FIRST. I HAVE SVRE RECORDS (OR
EVIDENCES) FROM THE OWNERS, TO WHOM THE THINGS BELONG. I AM THE HEIR OF THE
APOSTLES. And this, by best right; (may the Catholic Roman Church affirm)
because she alone is able, by her never interrupted succession of her Bishops,
to derive her pedigree from the same Apostles. Counting confidently (without
fearing to be contradicted by any, though her very enemies) In the first Age.
Petrus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens.

The 2 Age. Anacletus, Euaristus. Alexander, sixtus I. Ye'esphorus, Hyginus,
Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Ileutherius, Victor.

The 3. Age. Zephyrinus, Calistus, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus,
Cornelius, Lucius, Stephanus, Sixtus II. Dionysius, Felix, Eutychianus, Caius.
Marcellinus

The 4. Age. Marcellus, Eusebius, Miltiades, Syluester, Marcus, Julius,
Liberius, Felix II. Damasus, Siricius, Anastasins.

The 5. Age Innocentius I. Zozymus, Bonifacius, Celestinus I. Sixtus III. Leo
magnus, Hilarious, Simplicius, Felix III. Celasius I. Anastafius II. Symmachus.

The 6. Age. Hormisdas, Joan. I. Felix IV. Bonifacius II. Ioannes II. Agapitus,
Silver. us, Vigilius, Pelagius, Ioanues III. Benedictus I. Pelagius II.
Gregorius magnus.

The 7. Age. Sabinianus, Bonifacius III. Bonifacius IV. Deusdedit. Bonifacius
V. Honorius I. Seuerinus. Joan. IV. Theodorus, Martinus I. Eugenius,
Vitatianus, Adeodatus, Donatus, Agatho, Leo, Benedictus II. Joan. V. Conon,
Sergius.

The 8. Age. Ioannes VI. Ioannes VII. Sisinnius, Constantinus, Gregorius II.
Gregorius III. Zacharias. Stephanus II. Stephanus III. Paulus I. Stephanus IV.
Adrianus, Leo III.

The 9. Age. Steph. V. paschalis, Eugenius II. Valentinus, Gregorius IV.
Sergius II. Leo IV. Benedictus III. Nicol. I. Hadrian. II. Joan. VIII.
Martinus, Hadrianus III. Stephanus VI. Formosus, Bonifacius VI. Stephanus VII.

The 10. Age. Joan IX. Benedict Leo, Christoph. Sergius, Anast. Lando, Joan X
Leo VI. Stephanus, Ioannes, Leo VII. Stephanus, Martinus, Agapitus, Ioannes,
Leo, Benedictus, Ioannes, Donus, Benedictus, Benedictus, Ioannes, Ioannes,
Ioannes, Gregorius V. Syluester II.

The 11. Age. Ioannes XVII. Ioannes XVIII. Sergius. V. Benedictus VIII. Ioannes
XX. Benedictus IX. Gregorius VII. Clem. Damas. Leo, Vict. Steph. IX. Nicol.
Alexand. Greg VII. Vict. Urban. Paschas.

The 12. Age. Gelas, Calixtus, Honorius II. Innocentius II. Gelestinus II.
Lucius, Eugenius, Anastasius IV. Hadrlanus, Alexand. Lucius, Vrbanus, Gregorius
VIII. Clemens III. Celestinus III. Innocentius III.

The 13. Age. Honorius III. Gregorius IX Celestinus IV. Innocentius IV.
Alexander IV. Vrbanus IV. Clemens, Gregorius, Innocent. Hadrian. Nicol.
Martinus, Honorius IV. Nicol. Celestinus, Bonifacius VIII.

The 14. Age. Benedictus X Clemens V. Ioannes XXI. Benedictus XI. Clemens VI.
Innocentius VI. Vrbanus V. Gregorius XI. Vrbanus VI. Bonifacius IX.

The 15. Age. Innocentius VII. Gregorius XI. Alexander V. Ioannes XXII.
Martinus III. Eugenius IV. Nicolaus V. Cailistus III. Pius II. Paulus II.
Sixtus, Innocent. VII. Alexander VI.

The 16. Age. Pius III. Julius, Leo, Hadrianus, Clemens, Paulus, Julius,
Marcellus, Paulus IV. Pius IV. Pius V. Gregorius. XIII. Sixtus V. Urban. VII.
Gregorius XIV. Innocentius IX. Clemens VIII.

The 17. Age. Leo XI. Paulus V. Gregorius XV. Vrbanus VIII. Innocentius X.



Thus did S. Irenaeus bring down the succession of the Church, by naming the
Bishops of Rome, who immediately succeeded one another, from S. Peter to his
time. And he judges it a most ABSOLVTE DEMONSRATION.

Thus did Tertullian etc. And he puts it down for an EVIDENCE of TRVTH.

Thus did Optatus, etc. And he concludes, that in Pope Siricius, who then sat,
all the world agreed with them (Africans) in one Communion.

Thus did S. Augustine etc. And he co^fesses it retaynes him in the bosom of
the CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Thus finally do we Catholics to this day. And we instantly demand, 1. Why
the like proceeding should not be held an absolute Demonstration; an Evidence
of Truth, as well from us, as from them. 2. Why we English Catholics may not
by as good right be said to agree with all the world in one Communion in Pope
INNOCENTIVS, who sitts at this day, as the Africans in Siricius who then sat?
3. Why it should not retain us without all he sitation or staggerring, as it
did Saint Augustine, in the bosom of the CATHOLIC CHVRCH?


Et hic murus aheneus esto.

AN ANSWER TO A LIBELL, WRITTEN BY D. COSENS AGAINST THE GREAT General
Council of Laterane under Pope Innocent the third.

Wherein the many and great errors of the said D. Cosens, are manifested to the
world.

By THOMAS VANE Doctor in Divinity of Cambridge.

2. Tim. 3.13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived. Printed at PARIS Anno Dom. 1646. With Permission
and Approbation.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST ACCOMPLISHED Gentleman, Sr KENELME DIGBY KNIGHT etc.
SIR,
I do not dedicate this, craving your protection thereof against calumny, and
censure; the greatest Princes (I know) cannot do it; yea their own persons
are not censure-proofe against the meanest varlets. Nor hereby to engage you to
any favor or defense thereof, beyond the direction of your own judgment; your
free mind (I know) disdaynes to stoop to such a lure, and mine to cast it
out. Let the book suffer its own fate, for so it will; he that finds fault
with it, let him tell me so and if I cannot defend it, I will acknowledge the
error. Nor to take occasion to flatter you; you are above it: and impossible
attempts vanish even in the undertaking. Nor yet to pay you your due praise, I
am below it; and Fame her self discharges that debt, borrowing the tongues of
all men for her help: But to testify the honor I bear you, for your
transcendent worth in your self; and the gratitude, for your great favors to
me. It wants proportion (I confess) to either; which proceeds from my poverty
of materials: but as small pictures compared with greater tables, so this
(being all I have to offer) may present me as lively, though not so largely

SIR, Your most humble and obliged servant, THO. VANE.

TO THE READER.
READER, Doctor Cosens (since his coming into these parts) has written diverse
papers against the Catholic doctrine and belief; and has showed them, or
delivered the substance of the^ in discourse to diverse persons, thereby to draw
them, or keep them from the Catholic Communion; who not having ability or
leisure to examine their truth, I believe, thought better of them than they
deserved. These papers of his came afterward into the hands of several
Catholics, and each one answered that which he happened on, or which was (if
any was) more particularly addressed to him; which is the reason that he has
more answerers than one, though to them all, any one was more than enough.
Amongst his papers, this against the fowrth Council of Lateran came to my
hands, to which I soon after returned a brief answer, and so the matter
rested; but hearing since that he, and some that think well of him, have
triumphed in these his works, as though he had gained great victories; that I
might vndeceiue them, for so much as I undertook, (if at least they will
suffer it,) and to inform all others, that please to read, I thought good a
little to enlarge my former answer, and to print it with Mr. Carres. And others
there are, at least one other, that I know, who if he thought fit to print
what he has written in answer to Doctor Cosens, could perhaps discover more
corruptions of his than we have done. But here are more than enough to warrant
us to say of him, as 1. kings 25.25.
Abigal said of Nabal; for by his deeds he makes true the signification of his
name: and that they that rely on him, will be like those that lean on a
broken reedy staff, which will run into their hands, and wound instead of
supporting them.

D. C. OF THE GREAT General Council of Lateran under Innocentius the third;
said to be Maximum and celeberrimum Concilium, Anno Domini 1215.
MAXIMVM, for the number of eight hundred Priors and Abbots (who had no voices
in Counsels but by privilege from the Pope) was as great again as the number
of the Bishops. Celeberrimum, for it was every where famous for this one thing
of special note in it, that so many men met together to no purpose; met, but
did nothing. Therefore of this so Great and so famous a Council, these be the
words of Platina, (who was the Popes own Secretary,) in vita Innocent. III.
Venere multa tum quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte
potuit, quod and Pisani and Genuenses maritimo, and Cisalpini terrestri bello
interse certarent. Eo itaque proficiscens tollendae discordiae causa Pontifex,
Perusii moritur. And to the same purpose are the words of Matthew. Paris (in
Historia minori) who lived in the same time when this Council was called
together. Concilium illud Generale, quod more papali, grandia prima front prae
se tulit, in risum and scomma desiit, quo Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Decanos, Archidiaconos, omnesque adid Concilium accedentes ludificatus est.
(For after the Pope was gone to appease the tumults between the Genuenses and
them of Pisa, there was nothing done) Et cum nihil geri in tanto negotio
cernerent, redeundi ad su a cupidi, veniam sigillatim petierunt. Quibus Papa
non concessit, antequam sibi grandem pecuniam promisissent, quam a mercatoribus
Romany prius accipere mutuo, Papaeque soluere coacti sunt, antequam discedere
Roma potuissent. Papa iam accepta pecunia, quaestu osum Concilium dissoluit
gratis, tot usque Clerus abiit tristis.

ANSWER.
It was called, Maximum, you say, for the number of eight hundred Priors and
Abbots, (who had no voice in Council but by privilege from the Pope) was as
great again as the number of the Bishops. It Is true that it was justly called
maximum partly for this reason, though not for this only, for the number of
voices, not only of Bishops who have their suffrages by common right, but even
of Abbots and Priors, who have theirs by the Popes grant, does mainly
contribute to the greatness of a Counsel. Yet suppose the greatness of this
Council be to be measured by the number of Bishops only, how many can there be
named greater? but very few in the world; and therefore it may well be called,
Maximum. And Celeberrimum also; not, that so many met together, but did
nothing, (as you say;) but because there were present the Pope in person, two
Patriarchs in person, and the other two by their Legates, the Greek and Roman
Emperors by their Legates, the Ambassadors of the kings of France, Spain,
England, Jerusalem and Cyprus, with others; as I shall prove anon. But if to
be famous for doing nothing, and for being to no purpose deserve the title of
Celeberrimum, these goodly objections, when they are well known, will justly
bear that title on their brow.

You further tell us, that Platina (whose words you cite) was the Popes own
Secretary: and you do it either to no purpose, or else to insinuate, that
therefore he was more knowing in the truth of the story, or the more faithful
historian, or both. For the former, it had indeed been likely, if he had
been Secretary to the Pope, under whom this Council assembled, as any one
would think you meant, when you added this note in such a weighty parenthesis.
But certain it is, that Platina was borne many years after the celebration of
this Council, and died in the year 1481. which was above 260. years after
this Council; as says Trithemius de scriptorib. Eccles as he is cited in the
works of Platina, the page before the Epistle. This therefore is but a
deceiptfull insinuation of yours. Or if you did not say this with intent to
deceive others, but were your self deceived; surely your care to inform your
self well before you write, is very small. Besides if it were true, that he
had been the Popes own Secretary, as for greater emphasis you express it,
yet his authority cannot counterpoyse the authority of all that are of a
contrary mind, (to that you think Platina was of,) whom I shall by and by
produce. And lastly Platina does not affirm to the prejudice of this Council,
that which you erroneously imagine he does, as I shall presently show. As for
his faithfulness, I do not think you will make his being the Popes own
Secretary an argument thereof; men of your coat are not such honourers of the
Pope.

Now for the words themselves of Platina, you misunderstand them; for you apply
those words, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, generally, to the whole
business of the Council, whereas the intent of them, at the most, is but
particular concerning the Holy Land, as the foregoing words do show, which
are these: At Pontifex vbi videret Saracenorum potentiam in Asia concrescere,
apud Lateranum, maximum Concilium celebrat. Venere multa tum quidem in
consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, quod and Pisani and
Genuenses maritimo, and Cisalpini terrestri bello interse certabant. These
words then, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit, are at the most to be
referred to the buisinesse of the Holy Land, of sending aid thither, and
making resistance against the Turks in Asia, and to nothing else. And the
reason why nothing could be decreed in that matter, was the wars he
mentions, which could not be a hindrance from their making of other Canons in
that Council.

And as it is apparent enough, that this at most, was the meaning of Platina,
to wit, that nothing was decreed concerning the Holy war; and that therefore
this place makes nothing to your purpose, who hereby would make void all the
Canons of this Council; so it is also apparent that Platina (if so much was
his meaning) was deceived even in that; and that there was something decreed
concerning the sending of assistance to the Holy Land, as appears by the
decree of the Expedition, which is at the end of the Canons, whose truth I
shall further prove by and by. Yea, and that Platina did not so much as deny
the decree of the Expedition, in his words, nec decerni quicquam aperte potuit,
is very probable; for then he would rather have said, nec decerni quicquam
potuit, absolutely; but his qualisication of it by the word aperte, seems to
grant that something was done, though not aperte. And that something was
decreed, is manifest by that which I shall say hereafter; what then he means
by these words, nec aperte, in that which was decreed, is not manifest. Perhaps
by Decree, he means the execution of the Decree, in actual warring against
the Turks, wherein there was nothing openly done, whatsoever might be
secretly done rending to their prejudice. If this be his meaning, (as no other
can be with truth in the thing) then, though his words be obscure, and
improper to signify thus much, yet his meaning is true, but nothing to your
purpose.

But Nauclerus does open this obscurity, and makes it clear against you; for
he speaking of the same buisinesse, and using the same words with Platina, in
the rest, instead of Platina's aperte, he says apt; Vel. 2. p. 914.
nec decerni tamen quicquam apt potuit, quod and Pisani and Genuenses etc.
There could nothing be fitly, conveniently, and to the purpose decreed in
regard of the time because of the wars in Europe. And immediately after he
says, (to confute that which you say, that there was nothing done here)
Editae tamen nonnullae constitutiones referuntur, but there are diverse
constitutions declared to be made.

As for Matthew Paris his Historia minor, I cannot meet with it, and in the
volume of his whole works both mayor and minor, set forth lately by Dr Wats of
London: I can find no such words as you cite. And if you had been willing
that your quotation should have been examined, you would have given a man a
nearer aim than a whole history, whether mayor or minor, to find it in,
especially in a quotation so important to your main design; unless you meant
to give a man more trouble than is fair in one that writes a controversy. The
like you have also done in some of your following authorities. But if these
words, Et cum nihil geri in tanto negotio cernerent, which are all that
concern your purpose, be to be found in him, he speaks of the same
expedition of the Holy Land, and of the execution thereof, not of the Decree it
self, as the word geri will as well bear in its signification: and if he
mea^t otherwise he had no good intelligence in the buisinesse, (as I shall
presently prove;) for though he lived in the same time of this Council, yet
he lived in a far dista^t place. And his words, in ta^to negotio, do surely
point at some one particular matter, which though it have been the occasion of
calling many Counsels, yet when the Prelates were met, they discussed and
decreed many other things for the good of the Church. So that though it be
true that nothing was executed in the great business of the Holy wars, by
reason of the wars in christendom, yet it is far from proving that which
you so boldly affirm, that neither the Decree of the expedition for the Holy
Land, nor any one Canon was made in this Council. They met (say you) but did
nothing; nor have you (I am sure) done any thing against them. And that you may
further see the integrity of this your Author, in matters concerning the person
of this Pope, (which is the purport of all the other words by you all eadged
out of him,) read c Baronius in his last tome, anno 1197. who tells us, that
this Matthew Paris seems to have writ his history of purpose to take occasion
to sclander the Popes; and then reciting a story, concludes thus. Vidisti
Lector Paris ingenium, animique male compositi malam sententiam, res fingere,
verbaque formare indigna Romano Pontifice, and ab hoc vno tampatenti mendacio
caetera discas, and caueas videasque qua tunc sit homo fide dignus, cu^ totus
sit in carpendis Romans Eccles. Pontificibus. And therefore his accusation of the
Pope for exacting a great sum of money of the Council, first as it is
impertinent to your buisinesse, (for his couetounsesse could not nullify the
Canons of the Council) so also is it most unlikely to be true, because Paris
is recorded for a slanderer, and Pope Innocent III. for a worthy and excellent
man. Nauclerus vol. 2. p. 876.
Nauclerus calls him, vir doctrina and moribus insignis. And Platina, in his
life, says, constat cum in quouis genere vitae probatissimum fuisse, dignumque
qui inter Sanctos Pontifices censeatur. And again in the next words to those
you cite, cuius vita adeo probata fuit, vt post eius mortem, nihil eorum quae
in vita egerit, laudauerit, improbaueritque, immutatum est. The same also says
Nauclerus; and adds, quin and religionis apprime studiosus. But you are glad to
cite any thing to the disparagement of a Pope, though there be no color of
truth for it.

Now that nothing at all was done in this Council, which is the main matter
you drive at, Vol. 2. p. ^15.
and for which you have misinterpreted the meaning of Platina and Paris, is
very untrue. Which I prove, first by the authority of Gregory IX. who lived in
the time of this Council, and was created Pope but about eleven years after,
and commanded the Decrees should be put in the body of the Canon law, wherein
he used the service of Raymundus, of whom Platina thus writes, In vita Greg.
IX. fine.
Raymundum autem Barchino nensem, quo adiutore in compilando libro Decretalium,
Gregorius vsus est, ita quidam tam laudant, vt maiori commendatione laudari
nemo possit. So say the Annal Ee^lEs post Basin tom 13. p 459 XV.
And Binius in the life of the said Gregory IX says that this Raymundus was
Canonized by Clement VIII.

Secondly, S Thom. 4. sent. did. 17. q 3. art. 1 ad tertiam.
I prove it by the testimony of the greatest Divines of that age, S. Thomas,
and S. Bonauenture, who speaking of the precept of yearly confession, S Bonau.
4. sent did. 17. q. 2. arg. 3.
say that the Church did institute it, and the Fathers command it in this
Council.

Thirdly, by the testimony of the Council of Trent, which speaking of the same
Decree, calls it, Conc Trid, sess. 14 can, 8.
the constitution of the great Lateran Council. And that the Acts of this
Council were always extant, and are not counterfeit, appears, in that they
now are, and have been in the body of the Canon law, ever since the time of
Greg. IX. who commanded them to be inserted; and Annal. Eecles. post Baron.
tom. 13. anno 1234. XV.
anno 1234. which were but nineteen years after the Council, approved the
collection. Neither could any man have means to know the truth of the Canons
better than he, the Council having been held not long before, by his uncle,
in that city, where he being Pope could command the sight of all the
monuments; and many were still alive who had been present in the Council
celebrated but nineteen years before the publishing of these Canons, and knew
therefore what was done in it, better than those who were further removed,
either in time as Platina was, or in place as was Matthew Paris, if they had
(as you suppose) said any thing against it. Nor was it likely that Pope Gregory
either would or could have obtruded them before the eyes of such great Prelates
and Princes, for decrees made in Council, had they not been so indeed. Nor
would the Church (the things there determined so much concerning her) nor they
who did so much emulate her proceedings, have been silent, had such a thing
been attempted.

Lastly I prove that there were Canons made in this Council, yea and that
those Canons were received in England, (a thing which you deny toward the end
of your discourse) by a Matthew. Paris. hist. ma. anno 1222.
general Counsel (so it is styled) of England, held at Oxford, by Stephen
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1222. which was but seven years after
this of Lateran, and about 12. years before the Canons thereof were put into
the Decretalls by Gregory IX. where toward the end it is said, Binij Co^oil.
tom. 7. part. 2.2. fol. 833.
Vt autem omnia fine bono concludantur, Lateranense Concilium sub sanctae
recordationis Papa Innocentio celebratum, in praestatione decimarum in aliis
capitulis praecipimus obseruari. But this is not all you have to say against
this Council;

C.
There be many things besides, which may make us justly to suspect the
authority of this pretended great Council. For first, before Cochlaeus put
(...) forth, it was never extant; and it was but lately neither that he put it
forth, in the year 1538. Three years before, when Merlin put forth the
Counsels, there was no such Council, that he met withal, to set out; it is
not in his edition. But Cochlaeus (a man not so well to be trusted, and who
feigned many things in writing Luthers life) tells us, that he had the Decrees
of this Council out of an ancient book; but where he got that book, or who
first compiled it, or of what authority it was, he tells us nothing at all. It
is most likely, that ancient book was no other but the book of the Popes
Decretalls, where those things that are said by him to be decreed in this
Council, are here and there scattered in several places. Those scatterings
(I believe) did Cochlaeus, or some other, collect together, and made up one
body of them in manner and form of a Council. But so illfauored a form has
he given it, that often it betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out
of any authenticke copy.

ANSWER.
You further say, that there are many things besides, which may make you justly
suspect the authority of this pretended great Council, as you are pleased to
call it. I easily believe that there are many things that make you not only to
suspect, but flatly to reject the authority of this and many other General
Counsels, but none justly. But it is not the authority of this General
Council, (which is the same in all,) but the verity of the Canons and Decrees
thereof (you would have said) and the authority of the^ that affirm those
Decrees, that you with so much sagacity suspect. And if you think the Council
and the Canons thereof but pretended, which are acknowledged true by the voice
of all the Catholics of the world, what shall make them to be accounted
real? or shall the voice, of one pretended Deane diminish their reality? And
if you think this Council but pretendedly Great, which consisted of the great
est number, of the greatest persons both Ecclesiastical and secular, that ever
met together in the world, I must needs think that the common sense and
understanding of a man, is in you but pretended. Does not Platina the Popes
own Secretary, close by the words cited by you, say, Pontifex apud Lateranum,
maximum Concilium celebrat? And does not your own Matthew Paris, in the words
by you cited, say Concilium illud Generale? besides many more and better
witnesses. And can you after all this, call it so scornefully a pretended
Great Council? yea no General Council, no Council at all? as you do in the
latter end of your pamphlet. Surely you are Goliath that defy the whole host
of Israel, yet every one, though as little as David, is able to cut of your
head, with your own sword.

Now the grounds of your suspicion, whereby you would dismount the Canons of
this great Council, are so feeble, that they show you are no skillful
enginier. Whereof one is, because Merlin has it not in his edition, he could
not meet with it, to set it forth. But this is a poor argument; for first we
know that there were many other Counsels which Merlin could not meet with,
which have since been put forth, and Protestants I think will not deny, that
there were such, as the second of Nice, four of Lateran, two of Lions, one of
Vienne, and one of Florence; and this of Florence was celebrated later than any
that he sets down, and was the last General one, that was held before his
publishing of his book, about fowerscore years before it. And yet it seems
that he could not meet with the Records of this Council, or else he did
purposely omit it, which is not likely, how much more easy then was it for him
to miss this of Lateran, which was held about 300. years before. Besides, it
is manifest that neither the world at that time, nor he himself did believe,
that he had set forth all the Counsels; as appears by the king of France his
Privilege at the beginning of his work, and his own words at the end of his
Epistle before the second volume. The words of the kings Privilege are these,
Coneilia quae in Ecclesia a temporibus Apostolorum vsque ad concessum
Basiliensem celebrata potuerunt coaceruart, by which it appears that as they
were all that they could then get, so they were not absolutely and certainly
all that were. The words of Merlin himself are these. Nam si authentica,
integra, solida, and a me^dis expertia fuerint exe^plaria, vndehaec fideliter
excerpta sunt, apprime castigata sunt, pura, vera, and sincera quae profero,
suoru^ Archetyporu^ quidem germanam conditionem prae se ferentia, quae si grato
animo tuleris, propediem (conside) ampliora nostris te sudoribus assecuturum:
by which it likewise appears that he did believe that there were diverse
others which he had not set down. Now for you to infer that because he
could not meet with this Council of Lateran, therefore there was none such, is
a very unjust consequence, and is as strong against the eight other above
named, as against this.

Another ground of your shrewd suspicion is, because Cochlaeus first put it
forth, and because he put it forth but lately; so that you object both
against the person, and against the time. For the person of Cochlaeus, you say,
he was not a man so well to be trusted; and to make that probable, you say,
that he feigned many things in writing Luthers life. Against the time of
Cochlaeus his edition you object, because it was lately set forth, to wit, in
the year 1538. three years after Merlin set forth his edition of the
Counsels. I will first consider the truth of what you say, and then the force
thereof. Concerning Cochlaeus his edition of this or any other Council, I can
find nothing, but that Bellarmine in his controversies reckons him amongst such
as have writ of the Counsels, yet he does not reckon it amongst the catalogue
of his works, in his book de Script. Eccles. nor can I find it here in
Paris. Yet taking what you say in this for granted, I do not find that he was
a man less to be trusted than Merlin, or any other; for Bell: calls him, Vir
doctissimus, and fidei Catholicae propugnator eximius; and therefore you who
traduce a man without any proof, are much less to be trusted than he yea than
any man I know, for your many falsifications, proved both in this and your
other writings. As for your saying that he feigned many things in writing
Luthers life, that is but a new slander which as you do not offer to prove, so
it is impossible you should; for how can you know the heart of another man from
whence his faigning must proceed He may indeed write that which is false, but
that he did so by his own fiction, and not by others misinformation, you
cannot be assured, unless he himself had confessed it, which you do not
prove that he has Nor do you prove so much as that he has written any
thing false of Luther.

You also suspect Cochlaeus his edition of the Counsels in regard of the time,
because he set it forth lately. And what I pray, is lately? you say, the year
1538. which is a hundred and eight years ago. Indeed in comparison of the
Apostles times it is but lately, but in comparison of the invention of
printing, which was but about two hundred years ago, and according to the
ordinary account of scholars in editions of books, I believe none will
account a book set forth a hundred and eight years ago, a thing lately set
forth. Much less have you reason to account it so, seeing you do not account
Merlins so, which yet (as you say) was set out but three years before. It is a
paradox to say, Merlin an ancient writer in the year 1535. Cochlaeus a late
writer in the year 1538. Can three years odds in a hundred and eleven make
one to be called late, and therefore to be (as you say) suspected, and not the
other? Surely if this your argument of latenesse be good against one, it is so
against both; whereby you may, according to your prudence, suspect all the
Counsels set forth by Merlin. But I will give your suspicion yet more scope;
for Merlin published the Counsels in the year 1524. as appears by the last
words of the whole work; so that Cochlaeus his edition was full fourteen
years after Merlins, according to your computation of Cochlaeus. And now to
turn the point of your argument upon your self, this laternesse of Cochlaeus
is so far from being a ground of suspision, that it is (by just so much) a
stronger confirmation of the truth and exactness of his work. It was but by
accident that the Counsels were printed at any time; they might have been let
alone till this present year, or not printed at all, would that have made you
suspect the truth of them all? it would then have made the world suspect you
for a very weak man, or rather have put you below all suspicion. But it so
falling out that the Counsels were printed at senerall times, by the care of
several men, the later they were printed, the more means had the publisher to
make further search, and to inform himself out of the Manuscripts more fully;
as we find, that in all editions of books, the latest (if the publisher apply
due diligence) are most full, most pure, and most correct. I hope you will not
say that the late edition of S. Chrysostom by Sr. Henry Sauill, is therefore
the more suspicious. So that here is neither truth in the grounds of your
suspicion, nor reason that this last should be any ground, though it were true.

You say moreover, that Cochlaeus says, that he had the Decrees of this
Council out of an ancient book, but where he got that book, or who first
compiled it, or of what authority it was, he tells us nothing at all. And you
add your conjecture, as weak as your former suspicion, that it is most
likely, that that book was the Popes Decretalls, where the supposed Canons of
This Council are scattered in several places. Concerning Cochlaeus I can say
nothing, seeing I cannot meet (as I said before) with this his work that you
cite, but I will favor you so far as to suppose you say true, and the^
consider the purpose of it, which indeed is none at all. But for that he had
it out of an ancient book is much to his purpose, which book (I will be bold
to conjecture, seeing you are so for your liking) was the very Original of the
Council it self; and where he got it, is impertinent for you to demand. And
for this my conjecture I will give you good ground, this, that in Crabs edition
of the Counsels I find an Epistle to the Reader before the beginning of this
Council, the title whereof is this; Bartholomens Laurens Nouimagensis, Lectorl;
the beginning of the Epistle this. Haec sunt quae ex Archetypo illo cuius supra
mentio sit, lectu adeo difficili, summo labor descripsimus; quae sicui grata
and vtilia fuerint, primum gratias agat Deo, qui horum qualecunque exemplar
hucusque seruauit; deinde F. Petro Crab, qui hoc ipsum vt inter Co^cilia
ederetur, procurauit And this perhaps is the preface which you mention
hereafter and ascribe to Cochlaeus, for other I find not. But whose soever it
was, it proves thus much, that this Council (which was first published (that I
can find) by Peter Crab) was taken out of the Original Record, than which there
can be no better authority; and so he says again in the body of his Epistle,
certe in editione hac scdulo curatum est, ne quicquam ei ab Archetypo alienum
ingeri possei. And in this edition is the Decree of the expeditio^, and the
others, which in particular you hereafter seek to nullify, whereby those
objections are before hand answered; yet I will say more when I come to them.
But suppose the Decrees of this Council had been taken out of the Popes
Decretalls (the original being lost, as were the Canons of the first Council
of Nice, which makes so much uncertainty about the number of the^) into which
they were inserted (as I showed before) by Gregory the ninth, but a few year es
after they were made; in several places, according to the several titles to
which they were to be referred (which you disgracefully call scattering) what
impeachment is this unto their credit? The Popes Decretalls are a testimony of
no small reputation amongst all learned Christians. And why I pray scatterings?
the Decretalls are not a collection of the Counsels, that so you should expect
every Canon in his order, but a digestion of the Canons of all the Counsels
that pertayne to one matter under one head; like the collection of the Statutes
of England by Rastall and others; (out of which if one would undertake to
extract all the laws made in Queen Elizabeth's reign, he must look perhaps
in a hundred several places) which yet I think you will not call scattering,
but methodicall digestion. But these are the reproaches thrown upon the chief
spiritual father of the Christian world, by those whom God has (like Symeon
and Leui) for the cruel schism they have made in the Church, divided in
Iaacob and scattered in Israel. But from whence soever the first publisher of
this Council took the Canons thereof, certain it is that they were
acknowledged, and ascribed to this Council, by a testimony above all
exception, namely, of the whole clergy of England in a Council at Oxford, as I
have showed before, and that, 12. years before the book of the Decretalls was
compiled. So that from the Decretalls is not the first view that we have of
the Canons of this Council.

You again repeat, and say, Those scatterings (you believe) Cochlaeus or some
other did collect together, and made up one body of them in manner and form of
a Council. But so ill favored a form he has given it, that it often
betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out of any authentic coppie.
Even now you said (without doubt) that it was Cochlaeus that set forth this
Council, now, it was he or some other; and this I must needs grant is very
true; for if it be set forth, certainly it was either by one or another. And if
it were not Cochlaeus, then have you lost much labor in seeking to poison his
credit herein. And if it were some other, then is your decrying this Council
by reason of this edition of Cochlaeus, of no force, for then I affirm, that
this some other, was a man of the greatest credit of all other, and so the case
is clear against you, out of your own words, and you say nothing here to
impeach the credit of this other; which I wonder at, for you may as well speak
against you know not whom, as say you know not what, as you do in all this
discourse. You took it ill of Cochlaeus that he did not tell you where he
had that ancient book; and have not we much more reason to take it ill of
you, that will not tell us who it was that first put forth this Counsel you so
much find fault with, nor give us any aim to find out this editio^ you mean
(written by you know not whom) from any other? but although you here fail us,
yet you think you come home to us in that which follows; and although you
know not who first put forth this Council, and that we know that both first
and last have done it in the same manner; yet without relation to the
publisher, the very form of this Council, you say is so ill fauouted, that it
often betrayeth it self not to be genuine, and taken out of any authentic
copy. Which deep charge of yours against this Council will recoyle upon your
self, and by the ill favored form thereof, betray it self not to be
schollerly, nor taken out of any authentic copy, either of reason or
authority.

C.
For secondly, who will believe? who can persuade himself, that this Council
of Lateran should cite the Council of Lateran in the Decrees and Canons which
were there compiled? that is, that it should cite it self, as a Council not
now sitting, but passed and held a long time (or some time at least) before it?
The style of other Counsels uses to be, Haec sancta Synodus decernit, or
placuit huic Sanctae Synodo, as asession now in being, when they make their
Decree. But this Council of Lateran speaks of it self, as of some other
Lateran Council, then was at that time sitting, Fuit, and noscitur fuisse, as
of some decrees made before, six several times together; once in the 11.
chapt. twice in the 29. three times more in the 33.46. and 61. Chapters. In
Lateranensi Co^cilio pia fuit institutione prouisum. De multa prouide^tia fuit
in Laterane^si Co^cilio prohibitu^. Deuolatur collatio secundum statutum
Lateranensis Concilii. Et in Lateranensi Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum.
Will any man think these be the words of the Council of Lateran itself?

ANSWER.
Will any man think these be the words of a man that considers what he says?
who will believe, who can persuade himself, that a pillar of his sect, should
frame an accusation against a Council, which (to phrase it most gently,) is (I
believe) the greatest oversight that ever was yet committed in this kind. You
say that this Council while it was sitting, does cite it self, as a Council
that had sitten some while before; and to prove it you allege six places,
wherein there is mention of the Council of Lateran; and you most weakly
imagine, that the Council of Lateran there spoken of, is this Council of
Lateran that speaks. Know then (and a great shame it is that you should be
guilty of such an ignorance, as not to know it before you framed this terrible
objection) that there were four Counsels of Lateran, (according to the most
received opinion concerning the place) of which three were before this; and the
Council of Lateran cited in this, was that which was celebrated next before
this, under Pope Alexander the third, in the year 1180, wherein all those
places you (more punctually than any other) do allege, are to be found. And
is it possible that you (who talk sometimes, as if you had been Secretary to
all the Counsels) could be so ignorant, as never to have read or heard of any
Council of Latera^ but this, so that finding in this the Council of Lateran
cited, you should think this Council cited it self? for if you had but read
this Council in Binius, you should have found all these places by you cited,
referred in the marge^t to their particular chapters, in the former Council of
Lateran, under Alexander the third. Or if any man had forged this Council (as
you injuriously to us imagine) could you think him so silly a fellow, as to
conceive such a gross absurdity as this, should steal away unobserved? And if
he did not believe he should always escape undiscovered, (as to his eternal
unhappiness, by your seuerer inquisition, he has not,) could you think him
so foolish asto do a thing in it self most absurd and impertinent, which had
no end in it, (for it was all one whether this Council cited the Council of
Lateran or no,) and which could arrive at no other end, but the ruin of that
which was his maine design, namely, the begetting of the worlds belief to
this his edition of this Council; to which he must needs foresee, that this
would be the undoubted overthrow?

But howeuer, you make bold to slight and traduce some particular Catholics,
though most learned and virtuous, yet (to use a frequent word of your own, but
much more seasonably) I wonder how you dare, so easily to condemn all
Catholics in general; as to suppose that all the Popes, Catholic Bishops,
Divines, Canonists, and other learned men innumerable of the Catholic Church,
yea those whose interest is mightily concerned in this Council, even all
temporal Princes, whose Lay-dependants are not few in number, nor faint in
courage, nor all defective in learning, but some of them very eminent therein,
were all so blind to this grand absurdity as not to see it, if they were
Clergy, not one amongst so many millions not to have so much fear of the God
of heaven nor honesty as to discover it; if they were of the Laity, not to have
so much regard to the God of this world, proper interest and to humane
prudence, as to publish this prodigious forgery; but to suffer these Canons to
be blanched over with the title of a great General Council, and by that
means current through the world, until you with much industry and art, come
and discover this long hidden secret, and mystery of iniquity, to Catholics
eternal shame (as you surely think) and your own eternal honor.

But now you may see, that when men with pride and obstinacy fight against the
truth, they fall into that pit of shame and folly, that they prepared for
others. Yea you go on with more courage than foresight, thus;

C.
Therefore thirdly, Cochlaeus is feign to excuse the matter by a conjecture, (in
his preface to this Council set forth by Crab) that these decrees were
collected and brought into this form, wherein he presents them, by Pope
Innocentius himself, some while after the Council was done. He cites three
chap. of the Council to that purpose, (three of those six that are named
before) and says, the Reader will easily deprehend as much. But what reader will
like it well, that the decrees of a Council should be written some while after
the Counsel is ended? It was always the use of Counsels to write their own
decrees, and to sign them too, before they went away. And Innocent the Pope
was not so weak a Scribe, as to make the Synod it self speak after such a
manner, In Laterane^si Concilio noscitur fuisse prohibitum; or, fiat hoc,
secundum quod prouisum est in Lateranensi Concilio etc. which certainly is not
the style of the same Council concerning it self; Innocent the third knew
well enough what belonged to it.

ANSWER.
First you made Cochlaeus guilty of a foul fault, and now you bring him in
making an excuse, and both falsely. First, I can find no such conjecture as
you speak of, and secondly if it were to be found, it is no excuse. You say it
is to be found in his preface to this Council set forth by Crab; but we may
sooner gather the Sibylls leaves than find it, for there is no such thing.
There is indeed an epistle of Bartholomaeus Laurens, which I have mentioned
before, and by which you were confuted, it being thereby proved that that
edition was taken out of the original, for which there needs no excuse.
Besides, it is a thing in it self improbable, that Cochlaeus who (as you say)
wrote this Council himself, should afterward write a preface to another man's
edition of the same Council. But suppose this conjecture you mention (to wit,
that these decrees were collected and brought into this form he presents them,
by Pope Innocent himself, some while after the Council was done) be some
where to be found; what excuse is this I pray, or what does it excuse? If the
conjecture be true, it confimes the whole cause against you: namely, that all
these decrees were made in the Council; if it be false, it is nothing. But you
draw co^sequences from hence which are certainly most pitiful and
inconsequent, with which while you think to strengthen your cause, you do
weaken the credit of your own understanding.

You say, what reader will like it well; that the decrees of a Council should
be written some while after the Council is ended? And I say, what reader (but
your captious self) will dislike it? Indeed if the decrees of the Council had
been written some while before the Council began, you might justly have
asked, who would have liked it; but to ask who will like, that they should be
written afterward, is most ridiculous. But you suppose, because it is said in
the conjecture you allege, that they were collected and digested into the
form they are in, after the Council was done, that therefore they were not
written in any form, no not at all in the Council it self; to which purpose
you say, that it was always the use of Counsels to write their own decrees,
and to sign them too, (as very pertinently you add) before they went away;
intimating hereby, that they did not so in this Council; and your reason is,
because Pope Innocent did collect them into the form they now are in, some
while after the Council was done. Surely you did not consider what all
impartial men would conceive of your ability, seeing you make such an
inference as this; so poor, that few in the world would have made themselves
guilty of the like. And I demand of all theworld, whether the decrees of the
Council could not be written, and signed too, by, and in the Council, and yet
be brought into this form, or method, wherein they now are, by Pope Innocent
some while after? every one that has but common sense will conclude against
you. Yea his collecting and putting them into a form some while after, is a
proof (clean contrary to what you infer, namely) that they were written
some where, and in some form or other before. For otherwise from whence should
Pope Innocent collect these decrees? out of his memory? that is most
improbable. Collection imports not the inuenting or making them, but the
gathering of them out of some Records or other; and out of the original it is
most likely (if he gathered them at all) that he took his collection, seeing
he lived in the time and place of this Council, and was present and president
therein. Your argument then is no better than this, The Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles were collected and brought into a form written and
printed, again and again, after the first writers were dead and gone;
therefore they were not at first written by themselves or their assigns.

You further labor to assoyle Pope Innocent from the guilt of forging these
Decrees, (for you take it for granted that they were forged, and Cochlaeus you
are most constant to, for the man that forged them,) because Pope Innocent was
not so weak ascribe (you say) to make the Synod quote it self; Wherein you
might well have spared your pains, for Quis (quaeso) vnquam vituperauit
Herculem? who, I pray, ever accused Pope Innocent hereof? you think Cochlaeus
does, because he conjectures (as you say) that these Decrees were collected and
brought into this form by Pope Innocent, after the Council was dissolved; as
if to collect decrees, and bring them into some or other form after the
dissolution of the Council, were all one as to forge them? A conceit surely
unworthy of any judicious man. Innocent the Pope (you say, and truly,) was not
so weak a Scribe as to make the Synod quote it self, he knew well enough what
belonged to it. Yet so unhappy are you, that you cannot support this truth,
(which no body puts you to, by denying) but by affirming a greater falsehood,
namely, that this Council does cite it self. But if you had been so good a
Scribe, as to have known as well what belongs to the making of objections
against a Council, as Pope Innocent did the style of Counsels, you would I
think have kept your own counsel, and been more silent in this matter. But
you go on, and say.

C.
We had best therefore believe Platina, non est decretum ibi quicquam; non
potuit ibi decerni quicquam. Improbauit Innocentius ipse Abbatis loachim
libellum, damnauit ipse Almericum. He says, It was not the Council of Lateran
that made any decrees to condemn them; but that Pope Innocent condemned them
himself. And we may well conclude, That both these and other things, de
quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope set down in his own
Decretalls; out of which he took those Canons, whoeuer he was that compiled
them into the form of a Council.

ANSWER.
You say, we had best therefore believe Platina; which I grant we may do,
but not your sense of his words, which I have already refuted. But what degree
of trust soever we yield unto Platina himself, I am sure we had best give
none unto you, in your citation of Platina, who have wronged both him and us,
in all that you have here alleged. All that he says, is what you brought,
and is answered in the beginning, nec decerni tamen quicqua^ aperte potuit;
instead whereof you make him say, non est decretum ibi quicqua^; no^ potuit ibi
decerni quicqua^; wherein besides the explication and change of the words, you
leave out the main word aperte, which changes the whole sense. Platina says,
nothing could be decreed openly, you allege him saying, there was not, nor
could be any thing at all decreed, whereas the decreeing of nothing openly,
does imply that something was decreed, though not openly; and for the meaning
of Platina's words, I refer the reader to the first paragraph, where I show,
that these words of Platina were spoken with relation to the business of the
Holy wars, and not concerning the decrees of this Council.

And as here you leave out a word to the corrupting of the sense, so in the
following words which you allege, (as if they were placed in Platina as they
are in you, and were a further proof of the same assertion, whereas they have
no connection together in sense, and are above a dozen lines asunder,) you put
in a word, which is the very hindge on which the sense is turned, and turned
contrary to the assured truth thereof; and that is the word, Ipse, he himself,
as if the condemnation of Almericus and the book of Ioachim had been the
Popes act without the Council, that so you might prove the Council falsified,
wherein the said acts are recorded to have passed. And then you add as another
saying of Platina, or as your construction of the former words of Platina, He
says, it was not the Council of Lateran that made any decrees to condemn
them, but that Pope Innocent condemned them himself. But Platina has neither
any such formal words, nor are they the meaning of the words he has; for his
saying the Pope did condemn them, does not necessarily imply that the Council
of Lateran did not condemn them, for it might be done by both, either
severally or together, and this latter way it was done, as I have already
proved, and do now again by the testimony of Beluacensis, a Beluac l 30 hist.
cap. 64.
who speaking of this Council says, that the Abbot Ioachim and Almericus were
condemned therein. So that you are Ipse, He himself, that have falsified
Platina, laid unjust objections against the Council of Lateran, and (aperte)
manifestly condemned your self of foul play by the evidence of the fact,

For a close to this section you say, we may well conclude, that both these
and other things de quibus nihil decerni potuit in Concilio, were by the Pope
set down in his own Decretalls; out of which he took these Canons, whoeuer
he was that compiled them into the form of a Council. Your conclusion is like
your premises, there is no truth in either of them both; you say, that both
these and other things, (I suppose you mean all the Canons ascribed to this
Council,) were set down by the Pope in his own Decretalls, that is,
according to your meaning, invented by the Pope, and put first into his
Decretalls; for if they were first decreed in Council, and afterward put into
the Decretalls, it is not for your purpose, but against you; and that it was
so, I have already sufficiently proved; and do yet again by the title of
these constitutions, as they are set down in the Decretalls; which are not
barely ascribed to the Pope, as many others are; but to him in a general
Council; thus, Innocentius tertius in Concilio generali. We may therefore
well conclude; that your conclusion built on your extreme corruption of
Platina, having so rotten a foundation must needs fall to the ground.

Lastly you say, that he took them out of the Popes own Decretalls, whoeuer
he was that compiled the Canons into the form of a Council. But I have proved
before, that he took them out of the original Records of the Council; and if
he had taken them out the Popes Decretalls, it had been well enough; those
Decretalls not being the Popes own, singly, as you have said, but the Popes
and Counsels of Lateran together, as I have many ways proved. So that of all
that you have hitherto said, there is not one word but is either untrue, or
impertinent; and to use your own words, de quibus nihil decerni potest. Yet as
if you had not said enough of this nature, you go on to make faults, in steed
of finding them (as you suppose) in others.

C.
For the third Canon of this Council (concerning the excommunication of
temporal Princes, and the Popes power to free their subjects from all
obedience to them, and to give away their kingdoms) is indeed one of the
Extrauagants;, cap. 13. de Haereticis, that is, Pope Innocents own Decree, and
not the Counsels of Lateran, vbi nihil decerni potuit. So in the 71. Canon,
concerning the recovery of the Holy Land from the Saracens (for which this
Council was chiefly called, and met together) the compiler has made the words
to run in a Popes style, and not in the style of a Council, Ad liberandam
terram sanctam de manibus impiorum, sacro Concilio approbante definimus, etc.
neither in the Council was there any such Decree made; as both Card.
Bellarmine (against king James's Apology,) and Eudaemon Cidonius (in his
Parall. Torti and Tortur.) do confess out of Platina. He therefore that made
these two decrees, of absoluing subjects from obedience to their Princes, and
of recovering the land of promise from the Saracens, may well be thought to
have made that decree also of Transubstantiation, which has made such a noise
in the world, and for which this Council is so often quoted under the name of
Maximum omnium, Generale, and celeberrimum Concilium.

Answer.
The third Canon of this Council, concerning the excommunication of temporal
Princes, you say, is one of the Extrauagants, cap. 13. de Haereticis, but you
are very Extrauagant in saying so; for there is no such matter in the place by
you cited, nor indeed any such place as you have here rashly set down. All
that is to be found is this; that in the fifth book of the Extrauagants, there
is a Title de Haereticis, under which title are only three chapters, and in
them not a word of this matter. And this for the truth of your quotation; I
will now consider the sense of what you say, and the truth thereof. The third
Canon (say you) is one of the Extrauagants, that is, Pope Innocents own
Decree. By which it seems, that it is the same thing with you, to be one of
the Extrauagants, and to be Pope Innoce^ts own Decree; as if the Extrauaga^ts
were Pope Innoce^ts own decrees; whereas it is apparent by the titles to whom
they are ascribed, that not one of them was made by Pope Innocent; so mightily
are you mistaken in this matter. This Decree then is not Pope Innocents own,
and not the Counsels of Lateran, as you say, but Pope Innocents own, and the
Counsels of Lateran; his, in and with the Council of Lateran, as I have
proved. You also cite your self (for it is to be found in no author else)
against the Council of Lateran, saying, vbi nihil decerni potuit, where
nothing could be decreed; against which I oppose (besides all that I have said
before) a man of much better authority, Albertus Crantzius, who says Crantz.
Metrop. l. 9. cap. 1. sect. Innoc. 3.
Concilium maximum congregauit Lateranum; ibi multa constituta, quae hodie
extant in corpore iuris, there many things were decreed, which are at this day
extant in the body of the law.

Moreover the sense of this Canon you do lamely, and with change of the
terms set down; for there is no mention of kings nor kingdoms; and then the
Popes absoluing of the vassalls of temporal Lords (for those are the words of
the Canon) from their fidelity to them, and exposing their land to be occupied
by Catholics, expressed to be but in the case of neglect to purge their land of
heresy, and continuance therein after excommunication by the Bishops, and after
a years contempt of making satisfaction; and then there is added this
reservation also, Saluo iure Domini principalis, etc. saving the right of the
principal Lord, so that he give no obstacle hereunto, nor oppose any
imp^diment. Now this power of the Pope, whatsoever it be, is far from that
which your confused words insinuate, which to your weaker readers (I suppose)
will sound, as if the Pope had power to absolve the subjects of any kings from
their fidelity, and dispose of their kingdoms when, to whom, and for what
cause so ever they pleased; which is nothing so. Yet if this power of the Popes
were so vast as you believe it, or would have others to believe it, why should
it trouble you? And why should you be more tender of the interest of Princes
than they themselves, and all their courts about them, who either received this
Canon immediately from the Council, as I have said and proved, or else suffered
it to be coseningly thrust upon them, as you have said, but not proved.

And I wonder that you a Protestant, should fasten upon this decree of deposing
of Princes by the Pope, (to make the decrees of this Council odious and
incredible,) when as it is well known, that the Popes in sixteen hundred
years, have not deposed so many, as Protestants in one hundred; for almost
whersoere the gangrene of that heresy has spread it self, they have either
actually deposed and expelled their Princes, as in Swede, Denmark, Scotland,
Netherlands, Geneua; or diverse times attempted by violence to do it, as in
France often, in Bohemia, in Poland, and now it is feared in England. And if
you say, that though these Puritan Protestants have both taught and done these
things, yet the true Protestant of the Church of England, he never taught such
doctrine, he cannot think such a thought without horror; surely we have
nothing but your bare and often broken word for our security. For what
experience has the king, or his few predecessors of your religion had, that in
case they should have deprived you of your desires, as they denied to grant
the desires of the Puritanes, if they should have turned you out of your
Bishoppricks and Deaneries, taken from you the Church usurped Livings, set up a
religion that would not have endured wiuing preachers, what experience have
they had, that in these or the like cases, your Protestants of the Church of
England would not attempt their destruction, and if they were able, lay the axe
on their necks, as your Supreme Gouuernour of your Church of England Queen
Elizabeth and her instruments did, on the neck of the renowned Mary Queen of
Scotland, and Dowager of France.

Can you then think much that the Pope, a person of an other quality, and more
dis-interessed than the subjects of Princes, should have some kind of power,
by all convenient ways to reduce and correct heretical Princes? Especially
seeing the Emperors, Kings, and Princes gave their votes unto this Decree, and
were, for so much as concerned themselves, the makers thereof. But you will not
believe that this decree was made in the Council, but think that you have
proved the contrary. My advice then is that you acquaint the Kings and Princes
on this side the seas, with this strange cheat that is put upon them; it is
like to be a matter of high acceptance to them, of great reproach to their
unfaithful servants, that would not discover that which you have done, and of
great praise and preferment to your self.

You further object against the Act of the expedition for the recovery of the
Holy Land, (which you call the 71. Canon, but no body else does so that I know)
because it runs, say you, in a Popes style not in the style of a Council By
which I perceive, that though you are one of the Court yet you are none of the
Council, for you are not skild in the styles of Popes and Counsels.

Otherwise you would have known, that it is the manner in those Counsels
where the Pope himself is present, to decree things in his name, with this
addition, sacro approbante Concilio, as in the Council of Florence inlueris
vnionis, even as Acts of Parliament of England, are made in the kings name,
with the advice or consent of the two houses.

You say moreover, that Card. Bella mine and Eudaemon Cidonius do confess out
of Platina, that there was no such decree made. Your Eudaemon Cidonius I cannot
meet with here, nor is it much material, for that answer which serves your
quotation of Bell: will serve him also, seeing (as you say) it is both their
confessions out of Platina. For the finding of your citatio^s out of Bell: you
use us very ill, giving us no direction, but a book of perhaps twenty leaves
in folio to find out twenty words, which when we have found, to recompense
our pains, we find your mistake and falsehood. For Bellarm. does not speak
directly of the particular chapter of the expedition, whether that were made in
the Council or no, but of the buisinesse of the Holy War in general, de hoc
articulo, cu^ multa disputata fuissent, nihil certi definiri potuit; and there
is a difference sure betwixt nihil certi, and nihil omnino, nothing certain,
and nothing at all, as you would have it. And I suppose this nihil certi is
meant in regard of the further and more particular managing of the war, from
which they were hindered by the present war in Christendom, and which is no
denial of the Decree of the expedition, which consists of a few general heads
concerning the raising of contributions to this great work from the clergy,
(wherein the Pope himself gave a great example) of punishments on those that
hindered it and indulgence to them that advanced it, with the like. All which
though they were undoubtedly decreed, yet it may be said with Bell: out of
Platina, that after much disputation there was nothing certain defined, in
regard of the nearer and more particular articles for the managing of the
war, being put from it by the present war in Christendo me. Yea it might be
said nihil certi in regard of this decree it self, not of the letter and
intention of it, but of the wars at home, yea rather the contrary was certain,
namely, that it was not executed. And if Platina (or Bellarmine out of him) had
intended to exclude this Decree of the expedition (which is all that we
affirm to be done in that kind) why did they express it with these
reseruations, of aperte and certi, and not say directly and without limitation
nihil as you do? which had been more plain, and agreeable to the gravity of
those writers. Therefore by these reseruations they must needs intend some
thing, which (as I conceive) is that which I have expressed. Howsoever,
certain we are, that this Decree was made in the Council, by all that proof
whereby we have proved the whole Council, of which this is a part; and
particularly (because you here make a particular objection against it) by
Matthew. Paris, who intimates so much, by repeating Matthew. Paris. histma. p. 189.
the substance of this very Decree, in almost as many words as they are in the
Council, which are too long to set down here.

Your further say, that he that made these two decrees, of absoluing subjects
from obedience to their Princes, and of recovering the land of Promise from the
Saracens, may well be thought to have made the decree of Transubstantiation
also. And you say truth in that, but it will not help you; for Pope Innocent
made them all, but, sacro approbante Concilio, that is, the whole Council,
consisting of the Pope and the rest of the Prelates, decreed them. Nor have you
reason so to boggle at the word Transubstantiation, or at this Council for the
word; seeing the thing knew no beginning since our Savior, as our Catholic
books do sufficiently prove; and even the word it self was in use before
this Council, as appears by Roger Houenden in Henrico 2. where he has these
words. Annul. p. 576.
Confessi sunt etiam, quod Sacerdos noster, bonus sieve malus, iustus vel
iniustus, corpus and sanguinem Christi posset conficere, and perministerium
huiusmodi Sacerdotis, and virtutem diuinorum verborum, quae a Dominoprolata
sunt, panis and vinum in corpus and sanguinem Christi vere transubstantiantur.
Also by Blesensis, who was king Henry the second his Chaplayne, who says
Blesens. Ep. 140.
Et vt gratia exempli, in vno Sacramentorum vide as abyssum profundissimam, and
humano sensui imperceptibilem, pane and vino transubstantiatis virtute verborum
caelestium in corpus and sanguinem Christi etc. Both these wrote in the days
of Henry the second, and the Council of Lat. was held in the days of king
John, who reigned the second after him. And in both these good English authors,
do we find the word transubstantiated, applied to the bread and wine changed
into the body and blood of Christ; nor do we find in any story, that these
men were questioned for the use of these words, as if they did import any thing
more in their sense, than that which was the general belief of that and the
foregoing ages. It is not therefore the Decree of transubstantiation made in
this Council afterward, which has made such a noise in the world, as you say
it has, but the heretics and Schismatiques that have opposed it.

Nor was this Counsel for this decrees sake called Maximu^ omniu^, generale,
and celeberrimum, but because it was summoned by the Pope from all parts of the
Christian world, and there met together the greatest and most renowned assembly
both of Clergy and Laity, that ever was in the world: which therefore it ill
becomes you to deride. In fine, the three particular decrees you here oppose,
but have proved nothing against them, are first inserted into the Decretalls,
which was done by Pope Gregory IX. not many years after the Council was held;
who therein used the service of one of the best men of the world, as I have
proved before. Secondly, they are put into the number of the Canons of this
Council by Crab: who (as I have also proved) took them out of the Original
Records. Thirdly, they are also reckoned amongst the rest of the Canons, by all
others that have made edition of this Council, as Surius, Binius, and
whosoever else. Lastly, they are received and allowed by the Catholic Church,
the strongest testimony of all others; and do you think to overthrow them?
who is sufficient for this? he therefore that attempts it, deserves the name of
haereticorum maximus omnium, generalis and celeberrimus. In the next place, you
invade us with an Arithmeticall argument; but when I have reckoned with you, it
will appear that you are not a man of good account; for thus you cast it;

C.
But as it should seem, he that first composed it, and styled it so, or
afterward set it forth, and entitled it a General Council, had not his
lesson perfect. For between the seventh and the eighth General Council, I
trow there cannot another General Council interueene, as this notwithstanding
is made to do, if it were so Great and so General, as they say it is. They
count the second of Nice for the seventh General, which was held in the year
787. and the Council of Florence (held in the year 1449.) for the eighth
General, as is there, in the last session of it, expressly set down; Finis
octaui Concilii Generalis factus est 21. Iulii etc. So that unless they will
make two eight general Counsels, this of Lateran could be none.

ANSWER.
You pass from the matter of this Council, to disprove the title thereof; and
say, he that entitled it a general Council had not his lesson perfect, and
that because (as you say) they count the second of Nice for the seventh
general Council, and the Council of Florence for the eighth, and between
the seventh and the eighth there cannot another interueene, as this is made to
do, if it were so great and so general, as they say it is. Truly if he that
published this Council, had had his lesson no perfecter than he that made
these objections, he deserved to be whipped for a trewant, for never were there
such idle objections made. I pray who are these, they, that account the
Council of Florence the eighth general Council? your reader cannot but
think you mean us Roman Catholics, against whom you here dispute, and whom
you would make to appear so simple, that they cannot tell eight. But it is not
the Roman account, I trow, that you here follow, but the schismatic
Grecian, who yet will give you no more thanks for it, nor no more admit you a
member of their Church, than will the Catholics. You must know th^n, if you
did not before, that the eighth general Council was celebrated in
Constantinople against Photius, who made a schism between the Latin and
Greek Church, they of the schism rejected this eighth, and many other
general Counsels, which were celebrated in the west; amongst which this
fourth of Lateran (you so strongly and weakly fight against) was one; until
the Grecians meeting again with the Latins in the Council of Florence, the
Grecians called that the eighth general Council; which yet soon after they
rejected, and so at this day allow but seven. But if men may receive and reject
Counsels at their pleasure, then you may with the Lutherans allow but six;
with the Eutychians which are yet in Asia, but the first three; with the
Nestorians which are yet in the East, but the first two; with the Arrians and
Trinitarians which are in Hungary and Poland, none at all. And this you and
yours may do with as good reason, as they do reject and revile this of
Lateran, and above all, the sacred Oecumenicall Council of Trent.

And that you may again fall into the fault, of which you falsely accuse
others; you are out in your computation of the years of the holding of the
Council of Florence; but this I do not mention as a matter of moment, it
being brought in but on the by. But I cannot omit a weighty passage that you
have a little before, where you say, that between the seventh and the eighth
general Council you trow, there cannot come another, if it were so great and
so general, as this is said to be. Whereby you intimate, that the greatness of
this Council was the hindera^ce that it could not come between the seventh
and the eighth, and by consequence, that if it had been a little one, it might
have come between; which is a very new and pretty fancy. A little general
Council it seems might have crowded in between the seventh and the eighth as
an appendix to the former, or otherwise have found place and union with it
under the same name and number of the seventh, but this being so great and so
general, could not possibly find a room betwixt them, but that it must make
two eights, as you say, rather than an eighth and a ninth, which ninth (if it
had been so, in this case) might yet have been called the eighth in some
other respect, as I have showed. But I had thought that Counsels in regard of
number being of discrete quantity, did not require any place by reason of their
greatness, (as if they were in this regard, of continued quantity also,) more
than if they had been little: the abstract number of eight, (I trow) can no
more come in, between seven and eight, in a small subject tha^ in a great, and
therefore the greatness of this Council was no more hinderance to its coming
in between the seventh and the eighth, without cha^ging the name and order of
the number, than if it had been never so little.

You tell us also, that in the last session of the Council of Florence it is
expressly set down, Finis octaui Concilij generalis, etc. yet the words more
expressly than you have set the^ down are, Finis generalis octauae Synodi,
which though not different in substance, yet the difference of the words
Concilium and Synodus if you had understood the reason thereof, had been
enough to prevent your objection. For it appears hy an epistle of
Bartholomaeus Abramus to the Archbishop of Rauenna, set down by Crab at the
beginning of this Council, and by Binius at the end, that the Latin Original
of this Council was lost, and that this that is now extant, was translated by
the said Abramus out of the Greek, for which reason he uses the word Synodus
according to the Greek, and not Concilium; and it is called octaua because it
was so in the greek which he translated; and the Greeks set it down so,
because (as I said before) they accounted no Counsels general, but where they
themselves were present and which they did receive, of which this was indeed
the eighth. But this account is (for very good reasons) rejected by Praefat.
huic Synod.
Surius and Notis in Council. Florent.
Binius, and by all Catholics. And Crab though he have no caveat upon this
place, yet that you may see he spoke according to the letter of the greek
copy, and not his own mind, he calls all the Counsels betwixt the 2. of
Nice, and Florence, General Counsels; all that the Church accounts so; and
particularly of this Council of Lateran he says, Instituta generalis Concilij
Lateranensis tempore Innocentij Papae tertij.

In the end of this section you make this notable conclusion; So that unless
they will make two eight general Counsels, this of Lateran could be none;
which out of your discourse may as justly be inferred thus, so that unless
they will make two, or nine eight general Counsels, that of Constantinople
the fourth, the four of Lateran, the two of Lions, that of Vienne, that of
Pisa, that of Florence, or some one of these could be none. Could be none, is a
false consequence, could not be the eighth, is true; nor is that of Florence or
Lateran numbered for the eighth by any Catholics at this day, but this is
reckoned the twelfth, that most commonly the sixteenth. But that the number of
eight, which you so hunt here, may come in (because nos numeri sumus) he that
first made this objection (which I believe was not you) shall by my consent be
reckoned Sapientum octauus, the eighth wise man, which he shall be without a
rival, there shall not be two of them; especially if he that next aspires to
it be a great one, for then (I trow) he cannot interueene in the order of
number, between the eighth and the ninth, as you have taught us for our
learning.

C.
Besides, if it were a general Council, how came it to pass, that the Canons
of it were never generally received? as amongst us in the Church and kingdom
of England they were not, and as without doubt they would have been, had the
Council in those days been accounted general, and the Decrees of it under
that style and title sent abroad into the world. But with us in England ever
since that time, and contrary to the 46. pretended Canon of it, subsidies have
been paid to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; and against the 41. Canon, with
us Currit praescriptio, though oftentimes ex bona fide ortum non habeat; and
yet again contrary to the third Canon there, with us, Clericorum bona qui de
haeresi conuicti sunt, they go not to the use of the Church, but are always
brought into the kings Exchequer.

ANSWER.
The generality of this Council you further go about to disprove, because the
Canons thereof were not (as you say) generally received; and this you prove,
because they were not received in England; but that they were not received in
England you do not prove, but by three instances, which you do not prove; and
if you had, they had proved nothing. For it is not properly the general
receiving that makes a Council to be general, but the general calling
thereof from all parts of the Christian world, and such was this. Otherwise no
Council could be styled general in the calling of it, or while it was
sitting, or when it was concluded, until it did appear that all the world had
received it, which is a condition that never happened to any Council, because
some or other heretics (against whom all general Counsels have been
commonly called) or perhaps all, did refuse to receive it. So that by this your
character of a general Council, you have plainly casheired all the general
Counsels that ever were; for even the first four, which you seem to
magnify, and grant them the title of General, were the Canons of them
generally received? It is manifest that they were not, but were rejected by all
those sorts of heretics who were the occasion of their calling.

Moreover, your reason to prove that the canons of this Council of Lateran
were not generally received to wit, because they were not received in England;
if it were true, yet it is inconsequent, and your deceit or mistake lies in
the indistinction of the word Canons, whereof some be of faith, some of manners
and discipline. Now that a Council be accounted to be generally received, it
is not required that the Canons of discipline and practice be received in all
kingdoms, but it is sufficient that the Canons concerning matters of faith be
generally received, to style the reception general, and the Council general,
for so much as the generality of reception can contribute to the title of its
being general. As for example, the kingdom of France does not receive the
decrees of the Council of Trent concerning government, but of faith it does,
as do all other Catholic Countries, for which reason, even this kingdom
which denies to receive the Council of Trent in matters of government, does
notwithstanding acknowledge it general. By which it appears, that you are not
so well versed in General Counsels and their reception, as to know distinctly
the meaning of the words according to their Catholic use. Now there is no
doubt that the kingdom of England did receive this Council for the matters of
faith, otherwise it would have been noted heretical as now it is, and for its
not receiving the Canons of discipline and government, you prove not but by
your own bare word, which I may most justly deny; yet I have other proofs
against you.

But first I will take notice of your mistake (if not vnfaithfullnesse) in your
description of the 46. pretended Canon (as you call it) contrary to which, you
say, subsidies have been paid to the king, inconsulto Pontifice; as if that
Canon had said, that no subsidies at all should be paid to the king but by the
advice of the Pope, whereas the Canon speaks only of the subsidies of the
Clergy, as requiring the Popes advice. As for the practice of England contrary
to these three Canons you mention, if it be true (which I do not believe,
because I have heard good lawyers in England say the contrary in one, which
concerns prescription) yet it does not prove that these Canons were not
received; for these crossings of the Canons may happen, either through
indulgence of the Pope granted to the kings, or the kings usurpation contrary
to the Canons received; or in your insta^ce of prescription, through the
headstrong impiety of the people, who will not observe the good laws they
receive, being contrary to their evil customs. If England had observed all
the Canons they have heretofore received, when they were as wise, as learned,
as pious, as judicious (at the least) as now they are, you and I (I believe)
should not have been at this bay, that now we are. Now contrary to your
proofelesse assertion, I prove that the Canons of this Council were received
in England, as well those of manners as of faith; first by the testimony of
Linwood, and the municipall laws of the land, as they are affirmed by
Franciscus a sancta Clara, in his article of transubstantiation.

Secondly by the Council of Oxford before cited, held by the then Archbishop
of Canterbury, but seven years after this of Lateran, (which was the very
first Council in the world, that was held after this) where it is said, Binij
tom. 7. part. 2. page 233.
That all things may be concluded which a good end, we enjoin that the Lateran
Council celebrated under Pope Innocent of holy memory, in the paying of
tithes, and in the other chapters be observed. By which it appears, how much
you are deceived, in saying that in England the Canons of this Council were
not received: as you also are in saying.

C.
Lastly, I believe no good story can be showed to confirm the pretended title
of this Council, that the Patriarch of Jerusalem and Constantinople were
present at it, and 70. Metropolitans besides; though that will not make it
general neither, for want of the two other Patriarchs of Antioche and
Alexandria, who are not mentioned to have been among them. Howsoever, nihil
ibi actum quod quidem constet; and so was it neither any General Council, nor
so much as any Council at all.

ANSWER.
What you believe imports not, for I know you believe many heresies and errors,
amongst which errors this is one, That no good story can be showed that the
Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople were present at this Council etc.
One is said to be present either in person or by deputy; that those two
Patriarchs which you first mention, were there in person, is affirmed by
Platina, Paris, and Vrspergensis; and that the other two were there by their
deputies, with above 70. Metropolitanes, besides a very great number of
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, some in person, and some by Proxy;
and with these the Legates and deputies of the two Emperors, of all (or almost
all) the Kings, Princes, cities and other places of the Christian world, is
recorded by Paris, and Vrspergensis. And I suppose you will not deny any of
them to be good historians, especially Paris and Platina, whom you called in,
in the beginning of this your work, as witnesses (as you thought) against the
Canons of this Council. Matthew. Paris. hist. may. p. 188. i.e.
Paris and Vrsperge^sis speak almost in the same words; Vrspergens. Chronic.
p. 320.
thus: Anno ab Incarnatione Verbi 1215. celebrataest sancta vniuersalis Synodus
Romae, in Ecclesia Saluatoris, quae Constantiniana vocatur, mense Nouembri,
praesidente Domino Innocentio Papa tertio, Pontificatus eius anno 18. in quo
fuerunt Episcopi 412. inter quos extiterunt de praecipuis Patriarchis duo,
videlicet, Constant: and Hierosol: Antiochenus autem graui languore detentus,
venire non potuit, sed mifit pro se Vicarium, Anthedarensem Episcopum:
Alexandrinus vero sub Saracenorum dominio constitutus, fecit quod potuit,
mittens prose Diaconum suum Germanum; Primates autem and Metropolitani 71.
Caeterum Abbates and Priores vltra octingentos; Archiepiscoporum vero and
Episcoporum, Abbatum, and Priorum, and Capitulorum absentium Procuratorum non
fuit certus numerus comprehensus. Legatorum vero Regis Siciliae in Romanorum
Imperatorem electi, Imperatoris Constantinopolitani, Regis Franciae, Regis
Angliae, Regis Vngariae, Regis Hierosolymitani, Regis Cypri, Regis Arragoniae,
necnon and aliorum Principum, and Magnatum ciuitatum, aliorumque locorum inge^s
fuit multitudo. Here is your erroneous belief plainly and amply confuted. I
wonder what histories you have read concerning this Council, that these should
escape you; especially Paris the Popes dear friend, and Platina the Popes own
Secretary. I have therefore reason to believe that you took up these objections
upon trust, and of men that were not faithful, who have greatly deceived you.
And therefore the title of this Council which you again so scornefully and
boldly call pret^nded, shall be really accounted General, by the best and
noblest part of the world, the Catholic Church, when all other pretended
Churches, Counsels, and their Canons, their Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters
shall have no being, nor memory but of dishonor.

You further say, (according to your manner, without proof,) that this
Council vas not General, for want of the personal presence of two of the
Patriarchs; wherein you are much mistaken: for otherwise the first four
commonly styled General, and for such acknowledged by very many Protestants,
cannot be truly such, because the Chief Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome, was not
present in any of them, but by his Legates. Unless you will say, that though
two may not be absent, yet one may, especially when that one is the Pope, a man
who^ you (I know) can very well spare, not only out of the Council, but out of
the world. And yet I wonder that you that have had the fortune to be the
pretended Deane of S. Peter's Borough and the pretended Master of S. Peter's
house, should yet be such an enemy to S. Peter's chair. But if you desire to
know what makes a Council general, and what are the insufficiencies thereof,
which you ought to have expressed and proved, before you had shot your hasty
bolt of condemnation against this Council, read Turrecremata, and Canus upon
this subject.

You at last conclude thus, Howsoever nihil ibi actum quod quidem constet, and
so was it neither any general Council, nor so much as any Council at all
Wherein first your proposition is false and has no authority (that I know of)
but the worst in the world, your own. Yet you set it down in Latin, as if
they were the words of some author, but neither express the place, nor so much
as his name, and therefore I take it for yours, and reject it. Secondly if it
were true that nothing as done there, yet your inference from thence is
inco^sequent, to wit, that therefore it was neither any general Council, nor
so much as any Council at all; concerning the nullities of a Council, or of
the generality thereof, I need say no more than I have done, seeing it rests on
you to prove, that doing nothing is one. And for your affirmation that nothing
was done, I have fully disproued it through this whole discourse. I will
therefore only add the testimony of Matthew. Paris, who though he were no friend
to this Pope, as I have showed before, yet speaking of this Council in the
place above cited, says thus: His omnibus congregatis in suo loco praefato,
and iuxta morem Conciliorum Generalium in suis ordinibus singulis collocatis,
facto prius ab ipso Papa exhortationis sermon, recitata sunt in pleno Concilio
capitula 60. (Wherein is a mistake in the figure, it should be 70.) quae aliis
placabilia, aliis videbantur onerosa. Tandem de negotio Crucifixi and
subiectione terrae sanctae verbum praedicationis exorsus, subiunxit dicens, Ad
haec ne quid in negotio Jesus Christi de contingentibus omittatatur, volumus and
mandamus, etc. And so repeats at large the substance of the Decree of the
Expedition for the recovery of the Holy land. So that it is manifest by this,
and that which has been said before, that there were many things done in this
Council, yea all that are affirmed to be. And it is called a Council, and a
general Council, by Vrspergensis, Paris, Platina, Grantzius, Nauclerus,
Beluace^sis, and all that I can find that have any way written thereof, except
your vncontrowlable self. Besides it has the allowance of the Holy Catholic
Church, the awful spouse of Christ, more true, more wise, more vigilant, and
infinitely more reverend then all the sects and Synagogues of Schismatiques, and
Heretics; and therefore their obiectio^s against her, whom they ought to
believe and reverence above all things on the earth, especially when they are
propounded peremptorily, as these are, are fitter to be rejected than to be
answered. I conclude with the words of Surius: a Nemo sanae mentis ambigere
potest, hanc quae sequitur Synodum Lateranensem cum primis insignem and vere
oecumenicam fuisse, quippe in qua de negotiis religionis summa Latinae and
Graecae Ecclesiae concordia tractatum est, cuique interfuere Patriarcha
Constantinopolitanus, and Hierosolymitanus, and Archiepiscopi tum Lani tum
Graeci 70. Episcopi 412. Abbates and Priores plus 800. simul omnes Praelati
1215. aut eo plures. Nec defuere Legati Graeci and Romani Imperatoris, Regum
Jerusalem, Galliae, Hispaniae, Angliae, and aliorum. Quodsi vero ea cuiquam
propterea minus ponderis habere videatur, quod recentior sit, ille certe
Christum mendacem facere velle videtur, qui perennem praesentiam suam promisit
Ecclesiae suae, and Spiritum sanctum suum, Spiritum veritatis, qui cum illa
maneat in aeternum. Manet sua semper Catholicae Ecclesiae authoritas, quam
quisquis contemnere ausus est, non ille efficit vt ea minor sit, sed se dignum
reddit, qui eius pondere penitus opprimatur.

No man well in his wits can doubt, that this Council of Lateran was very
famous, and truly general, because therein were handled the matters of
Religion, with very great agreement of the Greek and Latin Churches, and
wherein were present the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, and 70.
Archbishops Greek and Latin, Bishops 412. Abbots and Priors above 800. all the
Prelates together were one thousand two hundred and fifteen, or more. Neither
were there absent the Ambassadors of the Greek and Roman Emperors, of the
kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, and others. But if this Council
seem to any to have less weight, because it is later, he truly seems to be
willing to make Christ a liar, who has promised his perpetual presence to his
Church, and his Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, which remains with her for
ever? The authority of the Catholic Church does always abide here, which who
soever presumes to despise, he does not lessen her, but renders himself worthy
to be crusshed to pieces with her weight.

And now instead of your proving the Catholic writers liars, and forgers, and
the Catholic Church credulous, negligent, and ignorant (which you
endeavored) you have proved your self, unwise, unlearned, and audacious; and
I believe will loose all credit and reputation of integrity, or capacity, in
the judgment of all prudent men, of what religion soever they be, that shall
read these your unworthy works. But suppose the thing it self were true,
that you have labored for (abstracting the authority to the contrary) to wit,
that there had been no Canons made in this Council, yea suppose there had
never been any such thing as this Council, what is it to your purpose? What
article of our Catholic Faith is thereby cancelled? how is your invisible
Church of England, or your Chapel in France (where God has his Church)
defended? Not at all, by ought that you have said. No nor by your Mimique
acting of the priest in hearing of confessions, (which we perhaps shall hear
too, at the third or fourth hand, for as you have no character of priesthood
for the hearing of Confessions, so neither have you any sealevpo^ your lips)
whereby though like the asinus apud Cumanos in the lio^s skin, you bray and
keep some in awe, yet it may be they will be instructed to discover you, and
make your vain aspiring the object of their contempt and laughter, as it is of
ours, and even of all your fellow reformadoes. Your o^ne conclusion therefore
which you discharge against us, recoyles upon your self, nihil ibi actum, quod
quide^ constet; in all that you have done, it is certain that you have done
nothing. And your objections and discourse have in them neither any general
counsel, nor (except the Counsel of the ungodly) so much as any counsel at
all.

And now let me tell you, that it were much more for your credit, to forbear
such bold brauing of the whole Catholic Church, especially in a Catholic
Country, and in the Court of a Catholic Queen, and that with such feeble and
vnschollerly arguments; of which, (were not your judgment ecclipsed by
partiality, and your passion swelld by opposition, and your ouerweening
conceit of your self the producer of extraordinary confidence and insolence
in you) you could not render your self guilty. Also your presumptuous and
offensive language, even to the Masters of those schools wherein you are not
worthy to be a disciple, is sufficiently observed; though co^ered with that
patience which you have not deserved; Otherwise, your weakness, or malice, or
both, would ere this have been characterd on your brow, had not the hands of
our Catholic Priests been bound up with modesty, and charity, and respect to
those, who see, suffer, but (I believe approve not your boisterous behavior.
And in this buisinesse of writing your shame is laid open with the books you
cite, wherein your quotations are not sooner examined, than your corruptions
are discovered. If therefore you have not grace enough to become a virtuous
Roman Catholic, of which you made show (as there is good proof) when you
came first into these parts, yet learn at least to be rational in your
discourse, honest in your allegations, and civil in your language, both to
particular reverend and learned men, and especially toward the whole
Catholic Church. And then if you have a disposition to say or write any more,
you shall be answered with solidity, and equal ciuility.

And whereas one Mr Crowder has reported, that I have renounced the book I
lately set forth, and will not stand to it; and that Doctor Holden who approved
it for Catholic, has also refused to justify it; or words to this purpose;
and gives this for his reason, why he does not publish the answer which he
and his Coadiutors (as it is said) have framed thereunto: which is indeed but a
retreat for their inability to answer it; I say, it is false in him whosoever
says it, and malicious in him that invented it. And I further profess to him
and to the world, that (notwithstanding the slanders to the contrary) I do
auow the said book for mine, and for Catholic, and so does Doctor Holden.
And if he, or any, or all his fellow Ministers, will publish any thing that
they will call an answer thereunto, they shall not loose their labor, they
shall have a reply; wherein I make no question their weakness shall be made to
appear, as herein appears the weakness of D. Cosens.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF D. Cosens, or any one on his behalf, shall say that I have not here, set
down truly what he wrote; whosoever desires to be satisfied therein, may if he
please see the original under his own hand, which is in my keeping. And
although his name be not set to it, yet every one that knows his hand, will
grant he wrote it, and the Countess of Denbigh by whose order I received it,
said that it was delivered to her by Doctor Cosens. Which paper, and others of
his also (he inwardly shrinking at his own guilt) has mightily labored to
recall into his own hands, that so there might remain no handwriting of his
own against him; but it was not fit that one of his temper should find so
much favor, but that they should remain upon the perpetual registry of time,
by being committed to the press; seeing he has deserved to have part of the
divine handwriting against him, that was against the blasphemous Baltazar;
THEKEL, Thou art weighed in a balance, and art found too light.


