THE GARDEN OF EDEN.

OR, An accurate Description of all Flowers and Fruits now growing in England,
with particular Rules how to advance their Nature and Growth, as well in Seeds
and Herbs, as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants.

By that learned and great Observer, Sir HUGH PLAT, Knight.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleetstreet betwixt the Two
Temple Gates. 1654.

TO THE HONORABLE and most perfect Gentleman, FRANCIS FINCH junior, of the
Inner Temple, Esquire.
SIR,
YOu may please to pardon my forward inscribing this Book to your name. Were it
a Work of mine own composition, I should have thought on a meaner Patron. But
the memory of that learned Knight the Author (to whom I had so near Alliance)
may excuse this presumption. He was a great Searcher after all sorts of
Knowledge, and as great a lover of it in all others. And I humbly conceived I
could not do him a higher service than by placing his Book under your
Protection, who are not more honored by those many Noble Families whence you
are descended, than by that large Portion of Learning and Virtue which have so
enriched your Noble mind; and rendered you precious to all that know you. I hope
that Candor and sweetness which accompanies all your Actions, will also show it
self in acceptance of this Offering from him who is ambitious of no other
title than

SIR, The most humble and most devoted of all those that honor you CHARLES
BELLINGHAM.

The PVBLISHER To the Reader.
I Shall not blush to tell you, I had some ambition to publish this Book, as
well to do right to the learned Author (my ever honored Kinsman) as to check
their forwardness who were ready to violate so useful a Work. There are some
men (of great name in the world) who made use of this Author, and it had been
civil to have mentioned his name who held forth a candle to light them to their
desires; but this is an unthankful age. And what ever you may think of this
small Piece, it cost the Author many years search, and no small expense, there
being not extant in our language) any work of this Subject so necessary and so
brief. He had consultation with all Gentlemen, Scholars, nay not a Gardener in
England (of any note) but made use of his Discoveries, and confirmed his
inventions by their own Experience. And what ever they discovered (such was his
modesty) he freely acknowledges by naming the Authors, sometimes in words at
length, as Mr. Hill, Mr. Taverner, M. Pointer, M. Colborn, M. Melinus, M.
Simson, and sometimes by T. T. A. P. etc. What ever is his own has no name at
all, unless sometimes (and that not often) he add H. P. at the end of the
Paragraph. And when he refers you to some other part of the Book, it is
according to the Number or Section, not the Page, for that only serves for the
Table. He wrote other pieces of Natural Philosophy, whereunto he subjoyned an
excellent Abstract of Cornelius Agrippa de Occulta Philosophia; but they fell
into ill hands, and worse times. As for this Collection of Flowers and Fruits,
I would say (if I had not so near Relation to it) that no English man that has
a Garden or Orchard can handsomely be without it, but at least by having it
will find a large benefit. And all Ladies and Gentlemen by reading these few
leaves may not only advance their knowledge and observation when they walk
into a Garden, but discourse more skilfully of any Flower, Plant, or Fruit then
the Gardener himself, who (in a manner) grows there night and day. Farewell.

C. B.

The Author's Epistle
To all Gentlemen, Ladies, and all others delighting in God's Vegetable
Creatures.

HAving out of mine own experience, as also by long conference with diverse
Gentlemen of the best skill and practice, in the altering, multiplying,
enlarging, planting, and transplanting of sundry sorts of Fruits and Flowers,
at length obtained a pretty volume of experimental observations in this kind:
And not knowing the length of my days, nay, assuredly knowing that they are
drawing to their period, I am willing to unfold my Napkin, and deliver my poor
talent abroad, to the profit of some, who by their manual works, may gain a
greater employment than heretofore in theirusual callings: and to the
pleasuring of others, who delight to see a rarity spring out of their own
labors, and provoke Nature to play, and show some of her pleasing varieties,
when she has met with a stirring workman.

I hope, so as I bring substantial and approved matter with me, though I leave
method at this time to Schoolmen, who have already written many large and
methodicall volumes of this subject (whose labors have greatly furnished our
Studies and Libraries, but little or nothing altered or graced our Gardens and
Orchards) that you will accept my skill, in such a habit and form as I shall
think most fit and appropriate for it; and give me leave rather to write
briefly and confusedly, with those that seek out the practical and operative
part of Nature, whereunto but a few in many ages have attained, then formally
and largely to imitate her Theorists, of whom each age affords great store
and plenty.

And though amongst these two hundred experiments, there happen a few to fail
under the workmans hand (which yet may be the Operators mistake not mine) yet
seeing they are such as carry both good sense and probability with them, I hope
in your courtesy I shall find you willing to excuse so small a number, because
I doubt not, but to give good satisfaction in the rest.

And let not the concealing, or rather the figurative describing of my last and
principal secret, withdraw your good and thankful acceptance, from all that
go before; on which I have bestowed the plainest and most familiar phrase that
I can: for* Jo. Baptista Porta himself, that gallant and glorious Italian,
without craving any leave or pardon, is bold to set down in his Magia
naturalis, amongst many other conclusions of Art and Nature, four of his secret
skils, (viz. concerning the secret killing of me^, the precipitation of salt
out of sea water, the multiplying of corn two hundred fold, which elsewhere I
have discovered: and the puffing up of a little past, to the bigness of a
football) in an obscure and Aenigmatical phrase. And I make no question, but
that if he had known this part of vegetable Philosophy, he would have penned
the same as a Sphinx, and rolled it up in the most cloudy and dark some speech
that he could possibly have devised.

This Author, I say, has emboldened me, and some Writers of more worth and
higher reach then himself, have also charged me, not to disperse or divulgate a
secret of this nature, to the common and vulgar eye or ear of the world.

And thus having acquainted you with my long, costly, and laborious
Collections, not written at adventure, or by an imaginary conceit in a Scholars
private study, but wrung out of the earth by the painful hand of experience:
and having also given you a touch of Nature, whom no man as yet ever durst send
naked into the world without her veil; and expecting, by your good
entertainment of these, some encouragement for higher and deeper discoveries
hereafter, I leave you to the God of Nature, from whom all the true light of
Nature proceeds.

H. P. Knight.

An Alphabeticall Table to the Book.
A.
ANnis seeds to grow in England page 78 Apple cornels to set 101 Apple agrees
not with a pear-stock 120. note contra 121 Apples kept without wrinkles 164
Apricot multiplied 127 Apricot, which is best 136 Apricots fair 157 Apricots to
bear well 148 Apricot stones to set 155 Apricots in what ground 146 Apricots to
prosper 105 Arbor when to cut. 90 Arbor aloft 94 Artichocks from frost 39,
41, 79 97
B.
Barking to help 159 Barking of trees 107 Barley growing without earth 47
Barrenness in trees, upon what cause, and how helped 163 Bays to plant 36 and
100 Beasts of herbs to grow speedily 76 Birds of herbs to grow speedily 76
Blossoms from frost 104 to stay blossoming 157 Borders of herbs delicate 77
Box tree to plant 100 Branches to root 70, 102, 105 Briony sap to gather 62
C.
Candying of growing flowers 42 Canker avoided 107 Carnations growing in winter
50, 96 Carnations old and revived 52 Carnations how to set 69 Carnations plants
to carry far 69 Carnations seed to gather 72 Carnations of diverse kinds upon
one root. 75 Carnation pots of a stately fashion 49, 50 Carnations to multiply
83 Carnations early 65 Carots kept long 66 Carots to grow large 35, 67 Carots
when to sow 68 Cats at the roots of trees 99 Cherries when to plant 101
Cherries growing long upon the tree 105 Cherry stock wild, of what bigness to
graft on 110 Cherry upon a plum stock 113 Cherries fair 157 Cherry to grow
large 119 Cherries in clusters 265 Chestnut tree to plant 111 Cions how to
choose 119 Cions made the stock 120 Cions how to carry far 126 Cions to prosper
146 Cions and stock suitable 164 Coleflower seed to gather and plant 73
Coleflower to bear late 74 Coliander to sow 81 Color of a flower altered 71,
138 Cowcumbers to multiply 63 Crabstock, at what bigness to be grafted 109
D.
Dogs at the tree roots 99 Dung for pot herbs 35 Dwarf-trees 150 Dwarf-trees in
an orchard 52 Depth for trees 108
E.
Earth barren strengthened 77 Earth, see Ground Eldern to plant 36, 100 Elm no
stock to graft on 120 Elm to lop truly 152 Early fruit 56, 64, 103, 145
F.
Fearn to enrich ground 33 Flower de luce of seed 91 Flowers to grow gilded 41
Flowers candied as they grow 42 Flowers to keep backward 66, 67 or forward 64,
65 Flowers to grow upon trees 71, 67 Flowers grafted one upon another 71
Flowers single made double 85 Flowers from frost 96 Fruit early. See Early.
Frets of herbs in a delicate manner 77 Fruit hanging long upon the tree 104
Frut without stones 136 Frut hiden with leaves 136 167
G.
Garden enriched philosophically Garden ground rich 70 Garden within doors 44
Garlic to grow large 35 Grafting in the bud, with all the rules 111 Grafting
in the cions, with all the rules 117 Grafting, how often in the year 135
Grafting between the bark and tree 139 Grapes kept long 67, 92, 97 Grapes
growing long upon the Vine 105 Ground to temper 33 Ground enriched with Fearn
33 Ground enriched with soot 33 Ground enriched with horn 34 Ground enriched
99, 100 Gilding of leaves, and flowers growing 41
H.
Hasels when to plant 101 Hedge of fruit trees for a garden 72 Hedge when to
cut 90 Hedge of white-thorn, how to use 72 Herbs with great heads 34 Herbs to
grow upon trees 71 Herbs grafted one upon another 71 Hops, how to order 98
Horn to enrich ground 34
I.
Inoculation, witb all the rules thereof 111
K.
Kernels when to set 70
L.
Leaves growing gilded 41 Leeks to grow great 36 Lettice to sow 37 Lettice
seeds to gather 37 Lettice to grow great 37 Lopping of trees for beauty 108 139
Lopping of trees for bearing 147
M.
Medlar upon a white thorn 110 Medlar stock for a Quince 137 Mellons to grow
great 63 Mellons to order 57 Musk-mellon to prosper 94 Mellons to multiply 63
Misseltoe to find 86 Misselchild 86 Moss to kill 160 Mold rich for Orchard or
Garden 33, 99
N.
Nursery, what ground it requires 134 Nuts, when to set 70 Nuts set 111
O.
Oak, when not to be felled 109 Oak, how to lop 152 Onions and Baysalt sowed
together 34 Onions how to order 79 Orchard of dwarf-trees 52, 103 Orchard
ground how to keep 140 Orchard wet, how to help 146 Orchard barren to bear 99
P.
Parsnips kept long 66 Parsnips when to sow 68 Parsnips to grow large 35, 68
Peaches in what ground 149 Peach stones to plant 102, 155 Peach upon a
plum-stock 123 Pear, in what ground 149 Pear stocks, of what bigness to be
grafted on 110 Pear, not to be grafted upon a white thorn ibid. Pear tree when
to plant 101 Pescods early and late 80, 90 Pineapple when to set 102 Pinks of
Carnations, and in carnation time 72 Piony of the seeds 91 Pippen upon what
stocks 137 Pyramides of herbs to grow speedily 76 Plants, when to set 102
Plants rooted, how to remove without harm 88 Plums growing long upon the trees
105 Plum-stocks white, of what bigness to graft on 110 Plum agrees not with a
Cherry stock 113 Plum-stones when to set 101 Pompions to grow great 38 Pompions
to multiply 63 Poplar to grow 100 Pot-hearbs, what dung they require 35 Pots
for Carnations, of a stately fashion 49, 75 Proining of trees for beauty 108
Proyning of trees for bearing 147 Purslane seed to gather 37
Q.
Quinces when to plant 101 Quince grafted upon Medlar 121 Quinces to grow
delicate 155
R
Radish 91 Radish to grow large 35 Roots when in their best strength 40 Roots
to grow long and great 67 Roots old removed 88 Roots of trees, how to be
ordered in setting 149 Roses grafted, upon what stocks 38 Rose musk to bear
late 40 Roses growing in winter 50 Roses to bear late 65, 82 Roses to defend
from frost 65 Roses early 65 Roses late 66, 82, 95 Roses to multiply 83 Rose to
bear twice in one year 89 Rose of Gelderland, how to plant 90
S.
Salt sowed with Onions 34 Sap in trees checked 162 Sappinesse in wood avoided
153 Sap of herbs, how to gather 82 Sap of trees, how to gather 156 Seeds how
old they may be 34 Seeds how to choose 34, 84 Seeds to multiply 67 Seeds to
sprout speedily 84 Seeds to grow full and plump 91 Seeds kept from Foul 91
Sent of flower altered 71. 138 Snayles to kill 35 Soot to enrich ground 33
Spring when to set 102 Stock gilliflower made double 85 Stock and cions suitable
164 Stock gilliflowers how to plant 69 Stock gillyflowers to continue long
growing 88 Stock when it is big enongh to be grafted on 110 Stock made to
prosper 131 Stock to multiply 134 Stones when to set 70 Strawberries wild into
gardens 38 Strawberries how to water 38 Strawberries early 64 Strawberries
large 92 Suckers planted 111 Spinach when to sow 91
T
Taste of a flower altered 71, 138 Timber or tree togrow of any fashion 148
Trees old recovered 56, 103 Trees coming of a branch 70 Tree to bush in the top
55, 9 Trees to prosper 105 Tree from barking, or canker 107 Tree, at what depth
to set 108 Trees to top 108 Tree bark-bound, helped 31 Tree let into another
124 Tree how to transplant 134, 143 Tree transplanted, how it alters. 137
Tree-gum in Winter 140 Tree to grow tall 55 Tree made to root higher 141, 162
Tree with a wreathed body 142 Tree-gum in Autumn 158 Tree to burnish 160 Tree
barren to bear 143 Tulip to double 86 Turnips kept long 66 Turnips to grow
large 35
V.
Vine cutting to choose 35 Vine when to plant 35 Vine young, when to proin 35
Vines old, recovered 56, 103, 145 Vine to carry grapes long upon it 105
Vineyard how to keep 141 Vine bleeding helped 145 Vineyard to plant 54
W
Walnut tree to plant 111 Walflowers how to plant 69 Wardens in what soil 159
Warden agrees not upon a white-thorn 110 Water philosophical for gardens 167
Water artificial for gardens 75 93 Wax artificial for graffing 124 Weather
ill to work in 109 White-thorn for what Cions 110 White-thorn stock at what
bigness to be graffed on 109 Woods speedy 106 Worms to kill 70
THE GARDEN OF EDEN.
OR, A brief Description of all sorts of Fruits and Flowers, with means how
to advance their nature and growth in England.
I Shall not trouble the Reader with any curious rules for shaping and
fashioning of a Garden or Orchard; how long, broad, or high the Beds, Hedges,
or Borders should be co^trived; For every man may dispose it as his House or
quantity of ground requires. And (to deal freely) I look on such work as
things of more facility then what I now am about. Every Drawer or Embroiderer,
nay (almost) each Dancing Master may pretend to such niceties; in regard they
call for very small Invention, and less learning. I shall therefore speak to
that which common searchers pass over, or never aimed at, being somewhat above
their reach, who neglect the cause of what they find effected. Yet I shall
begin with the ground, soil, or earth it self, as the Foundation of all;
still confessing what light or assistance I had from those who employed their
hours this way as well as my self.

2. Break up your ground, Tempering the ground.
and dung it at Michaelmas. In Januar. turn your ground three of four times, to
mingle your dnng and earth the better, rooting up the weeds at every time.
Proved by Mr. T. T.

3 In winter time, Fern to enrich ground.
if you cover the ground which you mean to break up in the Spring, with good
store of Fern, it keeps down grass and weeds from springing up in winter,
which would spend some part of the heart of the ground, and it does also enrich
the ground very much, for all manner of Roots and herbs. By Mr. And. Hill.
Ashes of Fern are excellent.

4. Quaere, Soot to enrich ground
of enriching ground with Soot, which Mr. Stutfield (that married my Lord
North's Brothers Daughter) assured me to have found true in pasture grounds,
the same only strewed thinly over.

5. Shavings of Horn strewed upon the ground, Shavings of horn to enrich ground.
or first rotted in earth, and (after) that earth spread upon the ground,
makes a Garden ground very rich. Probatum at Bishops Hall, By H. P.

6. Onions and Baysalt sown together, Onyons and Bay Salt.
have prospered exceeding well.

7. The surest way to have your seeds to grow, Age of seeds.
is to sow such as are not above one year old, T. T.

8. If herbs be nipped with the fingers, Herbs with great heads.
or clipped, they will grow to have great heads. T. T.

9. Choose such seeds as be heavy, Choice of seeds.
and white with in, T. T.

10. Swines and Pigeons dung are good for potherbs and sisted ashes laid about
them, Dung for potheabs
kills Snails, To kill Snailes.
T. T.

11. If you would have Garlic, Roots made large.
parsnep, radish, turnep, carot, etc. to have a large root, tread down the tops
often, else the sap will run into the leaves, T. T.

12. Take the cutting of a Vine from a branch that spreads most in the midst
of the Tree, Choosing of a Vine cutting.
and not from the lowest nor the highest branch, having five or six joints from
the old stock, and it would be a cubit long or more: Vine when to plant.
plant it in October. or March. T. T.

13. Proine not your young Vines until they have had three years growth. Young
Vines to proine.
T. T.

14. Every slip of a Bay tree will grow, Bays to plant.
strip off the great leaves, and set them in March when the sap begins to
rise. T. T.

15. Every plant of an Eldern will grow. Eldern to plant.
T. T.

16. First, Leeks to grow great.
put some good fat dung into water, and therein water your Leekes one night,
and make your beds of good fat dung, that the dung may be a foot at the least
in depth: then cover the bed with Fern, and set the Leekes with a great
planting stick, and fill not the holes with earth, but water them once in two
days and no more; after this manner of setting I have seen Leekes as great as
the stem of a spade. T. T.

17. Sow Lettice in August for Winter. Lettice to sow.
T. T.

18. After the Lettice is all blown, Lettice seed how to gather.
and some of the bolles begin to bear a white poff, then cut off the whole
great stem, and lay it a drying in the sun: and when it is dry, beat it up and
down with thy fist upon a board, and put altogether in a dish, and blow away
softly all the dust. Lettice to grow great.
T. T. And if you sow or set your lettice in the shade they will be very great.

19. When it has bolles, Purslane seed to gather.
cut it up, and lay all the herb to dry in the shadow then beat it out. T. T.

20. Strawberries which grow in woods, Wood Strawberries into Gardens.
prosper best in Gardens: and if you will transplant them forth of one Garden
into another then enrich the last ground by watering the same either with
Sheeps dung, Watering of strawberries.
or Pigeons dung infused in water; by Master Hill.

21. The musk and yellow Rose, Roses grassed upon what stock.
and all those double and centiple Roses, may well be grafted in the bud upon
the Sweet-brier. By Mr. Hill.

22. If you would have Pompions to grow exceeding great, Pompions to grow great.
first plant them in a rich mold, then transplant those sets into other fat
mold, watring them now and then with the water wherein Pigeons dung has been
infused, then take away all the hang-bies, maintaining only one or two main
runners at the most, and so you shall have them grow to an huge bigness.
Proved by Mr. Hill. You must nip off these side branches about blossoming time,
with their flowers and fruits; and take heed you hurt not the heads of the main
runners, for then your pompions will prove but dwindlings.

23. In winter time raise little hills about your Artichokes close to the
leaves, Artichokes from frost. See this in Numb. 26. 58.
because they are tender; and if any extreme frosts should happen, they might
otherwise be in danger to perish.

23. Musk rose to bear late.
If you cut away the old branches of a Muskerose, leaving only the shoots of
the next year to bear; these shootes will bring forth musk roses the next year,
but after all other musk-rose trees. By Mr. Hill.

25. Roots in their best strength.
The roots of every tree and plant, are most full of sap when their tops or
heads are most green and flourishing: and when the bark of the Tree will pill
and loosen from the body, then will the rind also loosen from the root; and
when the tops begin to wither or stand at a stay, then do the roots likewise.
And therefore that common opinion, that roots are best and of most force in
Winter, is erroneous. So as if I should gather any roots, for the use of
Physic or Surgery, I would gather them either at their first putting forth of
leaves, or else between their first springing, and the springing up of their
branches, when they begin to incline toward their flowring. By A. H.

26. Artichocks from frost. 23, 38.
If every evening you lay a great colewort or cabbage leaf upon the top of
every Artichoke, this will defend the apple from the violence of the frost.
Flowers or leaves gilded and growing.
By Goodman the Gardener.

27. A branch of Box or Rosemary will carry their leaves gilded a long time
fair, Quae^^ of Isinglasse dissolved.
notwithstanding the violence of rain, if you first moisten the leaves with the
gum of Mastick, first dissolved in a hard egg according to art, and leafe-gold
presently laid thereon. Do this in a Summers day, when all the dew is ascended,
and when the Sun being hot, may presently harden the Mastick, and so bind down
the gold fast unto it. Quaere, if Myrrh and Benjamin will not do the like,
dissolved as before.

28. Make gum water as strong as for Ink, Flowers candied as they grow
but make it with Rose Water; then wet any growing flower therewith, about ten
of the clock in a hot Summers day, and when the Sun shines bright, bending the
flower so as you may dip it all over therein, and then shake the flower well;
or else you may wet the flower with a soft callaver pensill, then strew the
fine searced powder of double refined sugar upon it: do this with a little box
or searce, whose bottom consists of an open lawn, and having also a cover on
the top; holding a paper under each flower, to receive the sugar that falls
by: and in three hours it will candy, or harden upon it; and so you may bid
your friends after dinner to a growing banquet: or else you maycut off these
ers so prepared, and dry them after in dishes two or three days in the sun, or
by a fire, or in a stove; and so they will last six or eight weeks, happily
longer, if they be kept in a place where the gum may not relent. You may do
this also in Balm, Sage, or Borrage, as they grow.

29. I hold it for a most delicate and pleasing thing to have a fair Gallery, A
Garden within doors.
great Chamber or other lodging, that opens fully upon the East or West sun,
to be inwardly garnished with sweet Herbs and Flowers, yea and Fruit if it
were possible For the performance whereof, I have thought of these courses
following. First, you may have fair sweet marjerom, basil, carnation, or
rose-mary pots, etc. to stand loosely upon fair shelves, which pots you may
let down at your pleasure in apt frames with a pulley from your Chamber window
into your Garden, or you may place them upon shelves made without the room,
there to receive the warm sun, or temperate rain at your pleasure, now and
then when you see cause. In every window you may make square frames either of
lead or of bords, well pitched within: fill them with some rich earth, and
plant such flowers or herbs therein as you like best; if herbs you may keep
them in the shape of green borders, or other forms. And if you plant them with
Rosemary, you may maintain the same running up the transumes and movels of your
windows. And in the shady places of the room, you may prove if such shady
plants as do grow abroad out of the Sun, will not also grow there: as sweet
Briars, Bays, Germander, etc. But you must often set open your Casements,
especially in the day time, which would be also many in number; because flowers
delight and prosper best in the open air. You may also hang in the roof, and
about the sides of this room, small pompions or Cowcombers, pricked full of
Barley, first making holes for the Barley ( quaere, what other seeds or flowers
will grow in them and these will be overgrown with green spires, Barley growing
without earth.
so as the Pompion or Cowcomber will not appear. And these are Italian fancies
hung up in their rooms to keep the flies from their Pictures: in Summer time,
your chimny may be trimed with a fine bank of moss, which may be wrought in
works being placed in earth, or with Orpin, or the white flower called
Everlasting. And at either end, and in the midst place one of your flower or
Rosemary pots, which you may once a week, or once every fortnight, expose now
and then to the sun and rain, if they will not grow by watering them with
raiue water; or else, from platformes of lead over your windows, rain may
descend by small pipes and so be conveyed to the roots of your herbs or flowers
that grow in your windows. These pipes would have holes in the sides, for so
much of them as is within the earth, and also holes in the bottom, to let out
the water when you please in great showers And if you back the borders growing
in your windows with loose frames to take off and on, within the inside of
your windows, the Sun will reflect very strongly from them upon your flowers
and herbs. You may also plant Vines without the walls, which being let in at
some quarrels, may run about the sides of your windows, and all over the
sealing of your rooms. So may you do with Apricot trees, or other Plum trees,
spreading them against the sides of your windows. I would have all the pots
wherein any herbs or flowers are planted, Pots for flowers of a good fashion.
See this also Numb. 56.
to have large loose squares in the sides; and the bottoms so made, as they
might be taken out at ones pleasure, and fastened by little holes with wiers
unto their pots, thereby to give fresh earth when need is to the roots, and to
remove the old and spent earth, and so in your windows: See more of this in
Numb. 30.

30. To have Roses or Carnations growing in Winter, Roses or Carnations in
winter.
place them in a Room that may some way be kept warm, either with a dry fire,
or with the steam of hot water conveyed by a pipe fastened to the cover of a
pot, that is kept seething over some idle fire, now and then exposing them in a
warm day, from twelve to two, in the Sun, or to the rain if it happen to rain;
or if it rain not in convenient time, set your pots having holes in the bottom
in pans of rain water, and so moisten the roots.

I have known Master Jacob of the Glassehouse to have Carnations all the winter
by the benefit of a room that was near his glass house fire; and I my self,
by nipping off the branches of Carnations when they began first to spire, and
so preventing the first bearing, have had flowers in Lent, by keeping the pots
all night in a close room, and exposing them to the Sun in the day time, out at
the windows, when the wather was temperate: this may be added to the Garden
(mentioned Nu. 20.) to grace it in winter, if the room stand conveniently for
the purpose.

31. Reviving of Carnations.
You shall oftentimes preserve the life of a Carnation or Gilliflower growing
in a pot, that is almost dead and withered, by breaking out the bottom of the
pot, and covering the pot in good earth, and also the old stalks that spring
from the roots; but every third or fourth year, it is good to slip and new set
them.

32. Orchard of dwarf trees.
If you make an Orchard of dwarf-Trees, suffering none of them to grow above a
yard high; then may you strain course Canvas over your Trees in the blooming
time, especially in the nights and cold mornings, to defend them from the
frosts: And this Canvas being such as Painters use, may after be sold with the
loss only of a penny upon the ell. You may use it only for Apricots, and
such like rare fruit whose blossoms are tender; or else to backward them after
they be knit, if you would have them to bear late when all other Trees of that
kind have done bearing. In this dwarf Orchard I would have the walks between
the Trees either pavedwith brick, or graveled, and the gravel born up with
bricks, that the sun might make a strong reflection upon the Trees, to make
them bear the sooner. And to bring forth the better digested fruit, I would
also have the plot so chosen out, that all easterly and northerly winds may be
avoided by some defense. I would have it but a small Orchard; and if it were
walled in, it were so much the better. Help this Orchard with the best
artificial earths and waters that are. Uineyard to plant.
I think a Vineyard may thus be planted, to bring forth a full, rich, and ripe
Grape: or if you could happen upon a square pit of a yard deep, whose banks are
sloaping* and whose earth have been philosophically prepared (as before Number.
10.) and that your Trees were bound sloaping to the sides of your Orchard, and
backed with boards, or lead, for reflection, that so your trees would prosper
and bear most excellent fruit: And to keep your Trees low, when your stock is
at such height as you would have it, Trees growing either high or low.
nip off all the green bunds when they come first forth, which you find in the
top of the Tree, with your fingers; and so, as often as any appear in the top,
nip them off: and so they will spread but nor grow tall; even as by nipping off
the side buds only, you may make your Tree to grow straight and tall, without
spreading, till you see cause: And thus with your fingers only, and without
any tool, you may keep your young Trees growing in what form you please.

33. Early fruit
To have early fruit, you must have an especial care to plant or graffe such
fruits, as are the earliest of all other, and then add all artificial helps
thereto.

34. Old trees recovered
Two quarts of Oxebloud or Horse blood for want thereof, tempered with a hat
full of Pigeons dung, or so much as will make it up into a soft paste, is a
most excellent substance to apply to the principal roots of any large tree,
fastening the same about them, after the root of the Tree has taken air a few
days, first, by lying bare: and it will recover a Tree that is almost dead,
Vines recovered.
and so likewise of a Vine. For this will make a decaying Tree or Vine to put
forth both blossoms and fruits afresh. This must be done to the Tree about the
midst of February, but apply it to the Vine about the 3d or 4th of March. This
is of M. Nicholson Gardener.

35. Get a load or two of fresh Horse dung, Ordering of the Musk-Mellon.
such as is not above 8. or 10. days old, or not exceeding fourteen: lay it on
a heap till it have gotten a great heat, and then make a bed thereof an ell
long, and half a yard broad, and eighteen inches high, in some sunny place,
treading every Lay down very hard as you lay it; then lay thereon three inches
thick of fine black sifted mold; prick in at every three or four inches
distance a Musk mellon seed, which has first bin steeped twenty four hours in
Milk: prick the top of your bed full of little forks of wood appearing some
four or five inches above ground; upon these forks lay sticks, and upon the
sticks so much straw in thickness, as may both keep out a reasonable shower of
rain, and also the sun, and likewise defend the cold (some strain canvas
slopewise only over their beds) let your seeds rest so until they appear
above ground, which will commonly be in six or seven days. You must watch them
carefully when they first appear; for then you must give them an hours sun
in the morning, and another in the afternoon; then shall you have them shoot an
inch and a half by the next morning; then strew more fine earth about each
stalk of such plants as have shot highest, like a little hill to keep the Sun
from the stalks: for if the Sun catch them, they perish; and therefore you shall
often see the leaves fresh, when the stalks wither. Heighten your hills, as you
shall perceive the stalk to shoot higher and higher. The plants must remain
till they have gotten four leaves, The shortest way is to buy plants and set
them.
and then remove them, taking up earth and dung together carefully about every
root: make a hole fit for every of them good ground, placing them (if the
ground serve) upon an high slope bank, which lies aptly for the morning sun,
if you may; let this bank be covered with field sand two inches thick all over,
except near about the plants (this ripeneth and enlarges the fruit greatly)
then cover each plant with a sugar pot, gilliflower pot, or such like, having a
hole in the bottom; or else prick in two sticks acrosse, archwise, and upon
them lay some great leaves to keep your plants from rain, sun and cold. After
they have been planted a day or two, you may give them two hours sun in the
morning, and two in the evening, to bring them forward, but, till they have
stood 14. days, be sure to cover them from 12 to 4 in the afternoon every day,
and all night long. These pots defend the cold, and keep out all worms from
spoiling your plants; and therefore are much better then leaves. Note, that you
must defend them in this manner in the day time, until your plants have gotten
leaves broad enough to cover their stalks and roots, from all injury of
weather; and then may you leave them to the hot Sun all the day long.

If there be cause, you must with rain water, water them now and then, but not
wetting the leaves. And if by any exceeding cold, or moisture, your plants do
not shoot forward sufficiently, but seem to stand at a stay, then take some
blood and pigeons dung tempered (as before in Number. 34.) apply the same to the
roots of the young plant; leaving some earth betwixt the roots, and the same
will make them to shoot out very speedily. Remember to plant three plants
together there in each place, being round, and a little deep, and of the
bigness of a round trencher. Now when they have shot out all their joints
(which you shall perceive when you see a knot at the very end of the shoot,
which is somewhat before the flowring time) then some do use to cover every
knot, or joint, with a spade or shovel full of fine and rich earth; and thereby
each knot will root, and put forth a new shoot ( quaere, of the same course in
Pompions or Cowcumbers) by means whereof you shall have great increase of
Mellons. Pompions and Cowcumbers multiplied


When your Mellons are as big as Tennis Balls, then if you nip off at a joint,
all the shoots that are beyond them, Mellons to grow great.
the Mellons will grow exceeding great; for then the sap does not run any more
at waste. But some hold, that you shall have greater Mellons though not so
many, if you suffer their shoots to run on without earthing the knots; and
then, when when you see your Mellons of the bigness of Tennis balls (as before)
then nip off, at a joint, all the shoots that are beyond the Mellons, but
meddle not with the chief runner. This of Mr. Nicholson Gardener. Lay your
young Mellons upon Ridge-tiles, to keep them from the ground, and for
reflection.

36. Make a high bank, slopewise like a penthouse, Early strawberries.
that opens to the Sun, and is by some means defended from all hurtful
winds: plant your Strawberries therein, and water them with the infusion of
some apt dung, now and then, when the weather is dry.

37. Bow down the branches of Roses, Roses to bear late, and from frost.
having buds upon them, into a vessel of wood pitched, standing within the
ground, to keep them long upon the stalk, or to prevent frosts if you see cause.

38. Quaere, Early Roses and Carnations.
What Pigeons dung and blood, applied to the roots of Roses, or Carnations,
will do, in the forwarding of their bearing.

39. Plant Roses, Early Roses.
according to the manner set down for Strawberries before ( Number: 36.) to have
them before all others.

40. Make a Lay of sand, and a lay of carot roots, Carots, parseneps, and
Turnips, kept long.
cutting away the tops close to the root, with some of the small ends of the
carots; do this in October or November: in dry weather: and about the last of
December where there is no frost, unpack them again; and if you will then keep
them longer, you must pare off the shooting at the upper end of the root, and
then lay them in sand. This out of Gardiners Kitchin-Garden, printed 1599. So
of Parsneps and Turnips.

41. Quaere, Roses and flowers backward.
If binding the bark somewhat hard with a packthred, or rather with
Brawn-bands, Quaere, of doing thus after the rose is new budded.
will not keep roses, and other flowers and fruits, long from blowing, by
staying the sap from rising.

42. To have roots prosper and grow great, Roots long and great.
you must trench your dung about the depth of your root which you would sow;
and if the root once get into the dung, then it forketh, and gathers fibras,
whereas otherwise it will grow wholly into a long, round, and fair root, of Mr.
Andr. Hill

43. But if you desire to multiply your seed, Seeds to multiply.
not respecting the roots, then mix your dung first well rotted with good
mold, and therein sow your seeds and they will encrase much: so as for seeds
the dung must lie in the top, and for roots in the bottom By Mr. Andr. Hill

43. Gather your carot or parsnep seeds etc. Large Carots, or parsneps.
from the highest spiring brances, and out of some friends Garden, where you
may be sure of the best; sow these seeds about March, or April: and at drawing
time choose the fairest roots of all other; cut off their tops somewhat low,
and set them again, and then let them seed the next year; then take the
seeds from the highest tops and sow them, and so shall you have most fair
and large roots. This of Master Hunt, the good horseman.

44. Take off the tops as far as the green goes, A new planting of carnations,
wallflowers, and stock gilliflowers.
viz. till you come to the wood, from Carnations, Gilliflowers, etc. slit them
upward thorough the nethermost joint, thrusting between the joins some fine
searced earth, made first into pap; and with the same pap close the ends round
about as big as a Walnut: make holes in your pots, and put in your tops so
earthed; these do seldom or never fail. By Minisris Hill. Also, the old root
is here preserved, and you may carry these tops thus earthed 100 miles in a
box. Plants to carry far.
Quaere, if this secret will not also extend to stock Gilliflowers,
Wallflowers, etc.

45. Cut off a bought from any tree; and two inches from the bottom, Branches
to root.
take away the bark round about, prick it into the ground, and it will grow.
Quaere.

46. In the end of February or March, To kill Worms.
wet the ground first, and about eight or nine of the clock at night, by
candlelight, gather up all the Worms in dishes, and so you may destroy them.

47. A Rich mold for a Garden: Rich mold
See among the Trees. Numb: 29.

48. Set or sow Kernells in November, When to set or sow.
Nuts in February, stones of fruit in March, all in the increase of the Moon.

49. Quaere, One plant upon another, or upon a tree.
Of graffing roses, the splicing way, and so of thyme, rosemary, hysope, etc.
to be graffed in this manner, either one upon another, or graffing them upon
the boughs or branches of trees, if happily they will take.

50. Whether the color, sent, Color, sent, or taste of a flower, altered.
or taste, may be altered in a Flower or Herb, by Art, see the Title, Trees and
Plants, numb: 90.

51. Instead of privy hedges about a quarter, Fence of fruit trees.
I commend a Fence made with lath or sticks, thinly placed and after graced
with dwarf apple, and plumme Trees, spread abroad upon the stick.

52. When you would have a strong and speedy White-thorne hedge about your
garden, White-thorn hedge.
set your plant high and sloping, and not flat, after the common manner. Prick
in the cuttings, with the slope side downward, that the rain may not get in
between the Wood and the Bark. Weed these hedges twice every year, and as the
sprowts do grow of some length, let them be platted, or brayded upward from
the ditch; defend them from Cattle with a dry or dead hedge.

53 Let Carnations or Gilliflowers shed their leaves, Carnation seed to gather.
and leave the cods standing upon the root till the end of October, v^z. so
long as you may for the danger of frost: then cut off the stems with the cods
upon them; stick them upright in some dry place in an upper room, and so let
them rest until the Spring, then sow them. Your Carnation seed will prove
fair large pink, and bear in Carnation time; by S.

54. Your Coleflower seed will not ripen till Michaelmas, Coleflow re seed to
gather and to plant.
or a week after; let it stand so long or longer, if you fear not frost,
before you gather the seeds, which grow in yellow cups; and being ripe, are
also yellow themselves.

Be sure you gather the cups before the seeds be shed; put these seeds with
their cups or cods in a box, but cover not the box, and keep the box in some
place from the frost; prick them in about the full of the Moon in April, when
cold weather is spent: remove them when they have gotten four leaves, and in
the full of the Moon in any case. Remove some of them in several months,
Coleflower to bear late.
and so you may save them growing with Coleflowers till Christmas. Your ground
cannot be too rich for them; the best removing is not till June and July, and
those of least growth, are best to remove late, to bear in Winter. Cover each
Coleflower in frosty weather, every night with two of their great leaves,
fastened in two places, with two wooden pricks. Do this also in cold gloomy
days, when the sun shines not.

55. Graft the branches of Carnations the splicing way, Diverse carnations in
one root.
as in small twigges of Trees, placing upon each branch a several colored
flower, but let the branches which you graft, be woody enough. By S.

56. Cause large Carnation pot to be made, Stately pots for carnations As
before Number. 29.
viz. double in bigness to the usual pots, let them have ranks of sloping
holes, of the bigness of ones finger, each rank one inch distant from another.
Set in the midst of the pot a Carnation, or a Lilly, and in every of the holes,
a plant of thyme or hysop; keep the thyme or hysop as it grows, even with
clipping, or in the form of frets or borders, and set these pots upon fair
pillars in your Garden, to make a beautiful show. Birds, beasts, pyramides
etc. to grow speedily.
Also, you may either of stone or wood, make Pyramides, losinges, circles,
pentagons, or any form of beast or foul, in wood, or burnt clay, full of
slope holes (as before) in Gilliflower pots; these being planted with herbs,
will very speedily grow green, according to the form they are planted in: And
in this manner may you in two years space, make a high pyramid of thyme, or
rosemary. In hot weather, they would be shaded with some strained canvas from
the sun, See after in Number. 84.
and watered now and then by some artificial means. Also, a fret or border
may be cut out in wood or lead, Delicate frets or borders.
and after placed in a Garden when the hysope or thyme sides are grown to some
height to be let thorough the cuts, The wood may be laid in some oil color.
and always after kept by clipping, according to the work of the border, or
fret: let the earth settle well before you sow your seeds; Earth strengthened.
water with an infusion of dung, or good earth, because otherwise the earth
within your molds will spend, and then your plants will decay.

57. Sow English Annis seeds when the Moon is at the full in February, To sow
Anniseeds in England.
or any time between the full and the change: if frosts will not suffer you to
take the full Moon, hatch them into the ground, with a rake stricken thick upon
them: then strew new hors-dung thinly upon the ground, to defend the seeds
from the frost. These will ripen about Bartholomewtide; then respecting the
Moon as before, sow again, and these seeds will be ripe sooner then those
which were sown in February. These seeds will also come up well, being
self-sowen, only break up the ground about them when they begin to ripen. That
ground which you would sow in February, break up about Michaelmas; let it lie
and crumble all the Winter: then when you mean to sow, stir it up again, that
it may be mellow; for, the mellower the better. A black rich mellow ground is
best, and they like well in a rich dunged ground: Proved by S.

58. Having well earthed your Artichocks, then strew upon them some fresh
horsdung, Artichocks from frosts
one inch in thickness, and so leave them all the winter: By 23. 56.

59. Onio^ seeds ordered.
Sow Onion seeds in February within eight days after the full at the farthest
(but the nearer the full, the better, so all will go to seed, or head, and not
grow to scallions: after you have sowed them, cover them as you did your Annis
seeds, before in Number. 57. By S.

60. Sow the early Pease as near Midsommer as the Moon will suffer, Early and
late Pescods.
if you would have them come about six weeks after Michaelmas: but if you
would have them ripe in May, then sow them in the beginning of September,
somewhat before or after, as the Moon will give you leave: at the full is good,
or three days before the full, and till eight days after the full, is also
good: these will be ripe in May. Make your holes about one inch and a half
deep, wherein you set your pease; let the ground be rich, mellow, and ordered,
as before, ( numb. 57.) in Annis seeds; bear them up with sticks, as they do
the Gardenpease; cover them after they be set with new horsdung about half an
inch thick, all over; and (if you may possibly) plant them so, as that they may
be defended from the North, and Northeast, by reason of some hedge or wall.
Quaere, of covering them with un sleakt lime powdered, after they have been
steeped in some apt liquor a convenient time; by S.

61. Colianders to sow.
Sow Coliander seeds in February, respecting the Moon as in Annis seeds, (
Number: 57) but they need no dunging: By S.

62. Sap of Briony, to gather.
In April make a deep overthwart cut or gash into a Briony root, taking away
the earth first from it; put in a Goos-quill a little under the slit, sloping
the quill at the end which you thrust into the root: but first make a hole with
your knife to get in the quill, and so you may gather great store of the water
of Briony, placing a Receiver under the quill; By S.

63. Roses to bear late.
Quaere, If one may not prevent the early budding of the Rose, by crosshacking
the bark (as in trees to kill moss, or to stay their sap from rising.)

65. Roses and carnation multiplied
You may multiply many roots from a province rose, and the double musk-rose, (
quaere, of Carnations) if you buy a grafted rose tree, that has gotten many
sprowts from the place graffed, and setting the root so as the body may lie
sloping near the earth: then lay as many of the branches as you may
conveniently into the earth, loosing every slip a little from the body, and
pricking with an aule about the joint that is next the slip, from whence many
sprowts will issue. And thus may you have great store of Province roses without
graffing in the bud, because each of them stands upon his own root; whereas
the bud is maintained from one Root, whch also maintains many other
branches. By S. See before in numb. 53.

65. Good seeds to know.
Put some of your seeds in a sawcer of fair water, set it a while upon a
Chafingdish of Coals; and if they be good, they will sprowt in a short time,
else not.

66. Quaere, Seeds to sprowt speedily.
In what time seeds may be made to grow in earth, moystened with warm water
now and then, and the same placed in a warm room, over a Furnace, with a
small temperate heat under the same.

67. Remove a Plant of stock gilliflowers when it is a little woodded, Single
flowers doubled.
and not too green, and water it presently; do this three days after the
full, and remove it twice more before the change. Do this in barren ground,
and likewise three days after the new full Moon, remove again; and then
remove once more before the change: Then at the third full Moon, viz. eight
days after, remove again, and set it in very rich ground, and this will make
it to bring forth a double flower; but if your stock-gilliflowers once spindle,
then you may not remove them. Also, you must shade your plant with boughs for
three or four days after the first removing; and so of Pinks, Roses, Daysies,
Featherfew, etc. that grow single with long standing. In removing, break not
the least root. Make Tulipees double in this manner. Tulipee double.
Some think by cutting them at every full Moon before they bear, to make them
at length to bear double. Number: 71.

68. By sitting upon a hill late in an evening, Miseltoe to find.
near a Wood, in a few nights a fire drake will appear; mark where it
lights, and there you shall find an Oak with Misletoe therein, at the Root
whereof there is a Misell-childe, whereof many strange things are conceived.
Missel child
Beati qui non crediderunt.

69. Gather your Grapes at the full of the Moon, Grapes kept long. See after in
Number. 82
and when they are full ripe, slip each bunch from the stock whereupon it
grew, and hang those bunches along by beams, in the roof of a warm chamber,
that does not open to the East, or to the North, and these will keep plump and
fresh till our Lady day, or thereabout: or else with every bunch, cut off some
of the stock whereupon the stalk grew, and then hang up the bunches. Both
these ways be true; By S.

70. Make a ^^^tle square or round hole in a Tree, Flowers in Trees.
or in some great arm there of, of half an inch, or an inch deep, fill it
with earth, sow therein some Rosemary seeds, Wall-flower, Carnation, or other
seeds; and these will grow first in the earth, and after root in the sap of the
Trees, and seem in time as if they were graffed.

71. Remove both double and single stock-gilliflowers, Stock-gilliflowers to
continue.
when they are half a foot high, and then they will stand six or seven
years: whereas otherwise they will decay very speedily: See before, Number. 67.

72. If you remove any rooted plants of Herb or flower, To remove rooted
plants.
though it be somewhat forward in the Summer, so as you do it in the evening,
after the heat is past; and plant it presently, and water it, there is no
danger of the parching heat of the sun the next day. But in any case heave up
the Earth with the Root carefully, so as you do not break the least sprigge of
any root; for then the sap goes out of the Plant, and it perishes. This way
you may recover great Gilliflower roots, and others, without danger; by S.

73. Cut your Roses, Roses to bear twice.
after they have done bearing, so soon as the Moon will give you leave, viz.
the fourth, fifth, or sixth day after the change, and so you shall have store of
Roses again about Michaelmas, or after. Take heed you cut no branch of a Rose
so low, as that you leave no leading branches upon it: for that will hinder the
bearing of the Roses exceedingly. It is also good in the after-said days after
the change, Hedge and Arbor when to cut.
to cut any Hedge, Arbor, etc. to make it grow the better: By S.

74. If you would have Peascods before all men, Early Peascods.
sow the early pease in August, three days before the full Moon, or within six
days after, and these will come very early; By S.

75. How to plant the Gelderland rose, Gilderland roses.
see among Trees and Plants, Numb: 119.

76. How to have Onion seeds, Seeds full and plump.
Annis seeds, and other seeds, to keep full and plump, see among Trees: Numb:
135.

77. Sow at every wane before Midsommer, Radish and spinach.
to have Radishes unseeded, and one under another; but at Midsommer wane so we
Radish, Spynage, etc. but once, to grow till winter unseeded; Proved by Tomkins
the Gardner.

78. The double Piony, Piony and Flowerdeluce.
and Flowerdeluce, will grow of their own seed. By Tomkins.

79. Lime beaten to powder, Seeds from devouring
and mixed with corn before it be sown, preventeth Rookes, and other foul,
from devouring the same. By my Cousin Mathews of Wales; Quaere, If it do not
also help to enrich.

80. Gather you Grapes, as before, Grapes kept long. Prove this in cheries,
clusters of raisins, figs.
number. 69. dry them in a stove, till the faint water be spent, and so you may
keep them all the year for your table. Quaere, If they will not plump up
again at any time in warm water. Quaere, of drying all manner of apples,
plummes, pears, etc. this way, for lasting. Before numb. 69.

81. As soon as your Strawberries have done bearing, Strawberries large.
cut them down to the ground; and as often as they spire, crop them, till
toward the Spring, when you would have them to proceed toward bearing: now
and then as you cut them, strew the fine powder of dried Cow Dung ( quaere of
Pigeons dung) upon them, and water them when there is cause. After in Number. 85.
Field strawberries, this way, will grow two inches about in bigness, as I am
credibly informed. Enrich Carnation pots this way.

82. To water your pyramides, Watering artificial.
pentagons, globes, beasts, etc. made of wood, or lead, and overgrowne with
herbs, as before in number. 56. let there be placed a long and large pipe of
Lead, or tin plate, reaching from the bottom to the top; let the bottom be
sodred up, and let it have diverse holes in the sides, at a reasonable distance:
then have an exceeding large funnell of tin plate, to let in to the pipe at
your pleasure to receive so much rain as will water the same sufficiently; and
when it raineth not, you may also water thereby with some rainwater kept of
purpose.

83. Quaere, If Pompions planted in large pots, Arbor aloft.
will not grow and bear fruit: for then you may have an Arbor of them in an
open tarras, leads, or gutter, having a frame to support the fruit. Enrich the
earth; as before, Numb. 83. now and then, to nourish the plant the better.

84. Quaere, Musk-Mellon to prosper.
If Musk-mellons will not grow, and bear in such pots, for so in a Leads or
tarras, the sun will shine shrongly upon them; and you may defend frosts and
cold winds by streining of canvas: water the pots with rain water put into
other pannes, wherein you may place these pots when you want rain.

85. cut you Roses when they are ready to bud in an apt time of the Moon, Roses
late.
and they will begin to bud, when other Roses have done bearing: this is an
excellent secret, if frosts happen in budding time: for so may you have store
of Roses, when others shall have few or none, and may then be sold at a high
rate. This I proved the 18th. of March 1606. being a few days after the
change, upon diverse standards at Bednal-green, being extremely nipped with
frosts, in budding time; and many of them did yield me great store of Roses,
when the rest of my Garden did in a manner fail.

86. Store of Roses.
Cut your Rose-standards in the twelve days, and not before: so they will
bear exceeding well. Proved often by Garret the Apothecary, and Pigot the
Gardener.

87. Flowers from frost.
Toward Winter, new earth your Gilliflowers, Carnations; and such other
flowers as you would defend from the violence of Winter; then whelme carnation
pots that are bottomless upon them, or having a great hole in the bottom: and
by this means, neither the sharp winds, nor the frost, can easily pearce to
their roots. I hold this to be a good course for the defense of Artichokes
Artichocks from frost.
in Winter.

88. Grapes kept.
You may keep bunches of Grapes that are sound and well gathered, in stone
pots, covering them carefully, with sand.

TO choose ground for a Hop-Garden, you must be sure it be not a moorish or
wet soil (though such perhaps may content a wild Hop) but a dry ground, if it
be rich, mellow, and gentle, is absolutely best. Yet a light mold (though never
so rich) is unapt for this purpose, for the heaviest ground will bear the
greatest weight of Hops. Place your Garden so as the Sun may have free access
to it, either all day, or warmest part of the day. It must be guarded also from
the wind, either naturally defended by hills, which is best; or artificially by
Trees: but your Trees must stand aloof, lest the shadow of them reach the
Hops, or drop wet upon them, which will destroy all. About the end of March, or
beginning of April, take your roots from some Garden where they are yearly cut,
and where the hills are raised high (for there the roots will be greatest) let
each root be nine or ten inches long, let there be three joints in every root,
and of the last yeer's springing; but be sure no wild hops cumber the ground,
which cannot be distinguished by the root, but by the fruit, or stalk.

Secrets in the ordering of Trees and Plants.
DOgs and cats applied to Dogs and carst to the roots.
the roots of trees before the sap rise, have recovered many old decaying
trees, shred them.

2. Diverse ways for the enriching of a ground, Rich ground.
whereof to make an Orchard, see among Flowers. Numb. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. Gravelly ground is to Ground enriched.
be dunged with chalk, and chalky with gravel, for lack of dung. T. T.

4. Strip away the leaves form the boxen slip, Box tree pranted.
and wind not the stem, but set it whole without winding. T. T.

5. Bays to plant.
Every slip of a bay tree will grow: strip off the great leaves, and set them
in March, when the sap begins to rise.

6. Eldern to plant
Every plant of an Eldern will grow. T. T.

7. Ground enriched.
Sand enricheth a clay ground; and clay a sandy ground.

8. Poplar to grow.
Every slip of the Poplar tree will grow.

9. Trees to bush in the top.
All Trees which you would have to grow thick at the top, and to bush there,
cut or proin them in May: for they spring more in June and July, than all the
year before or after.

10. Cherries when to plant.
Plant Cherries in October, November, January, and February. T. T.

11. Quinces when to plant.
Plant Quince Trees in October, November, February, and March. T. T.

12. Hasels and pear trees when to plant.
Set Hasells and Pear Trees in October, November, February, and March. T. T.

13. Apple cornels set.
Set Apple cornells evermore the end that is next the root downward, five
fingers breadth between every cornell; moysten them often with water by
sprinkling, and set the cornells in March. T. T.

14. Plumstones set.
Set plumstones in November, six or eight inches ches deep in the earth. T. T.

15. Pineapple corness set.
Set the Pineapple cornel (first steeped in water three days) in October,
November, February, and March, four inches deep.

16. Set Peach-stones the sharp end downward, Peach stones set.
in November, four or five inches deep. T. T.

17. Springs and plants set
Set springs and plants in harvest.

18. Branches to root in the ground.
If a Plant put forth many stalks or branches from the root, and you would
have each branch to root, then bear up the earth about them to some reasonable
height, either with tills or brickbats; and in that earth, every branch will
root. ( Quare, if your branch will root at any part but in a joint, about the
which also, with a great aule you must prick many holes even to the wood,)
This is a necessary secret in all such plants as be straight and stisse, and
not apt to bow, or to be laid along within the earth. By Mr. Pointer.

19. O'd tree or vine recodered
How to recover an old decaying tree or Vine, with blood, and pigeons dung, see
among the Flowers Numb. 34.

20. Orchard of dwarf trees.
An Orchard of dwarf-trees, that may be defended from all frosts, see among the
Flowers, Numb. 32.

21. Early fruit
How to have early fruit, see among the Flowers Numb. 33.

22. Fruit growing long.
Plant Dwarse Trees, and when the fruit is almost ripe, bow down their branches
with their fruit upon them, into great earthen pots, or pitched tubs, either
with bottomes, or without bottomes, the pots or tubs standing in the Earth;
then cover them with boards and earth from the sun, and the sap of the Tree
will keep them growing a long time, as I suppose. Prove this in green fruit,
Blossoms from frests.
ripefruit, and almost ripe fruit; also in the blooming time, if you fear
frosts bow down the branches with the blossoms, as before to defend them in
May, from the injury of the weather: and by this help you may happily have
Fruit, when others shall want.

23. Grapes growing long upon the Vine.
Put a Vine branch through a basket in December, choose such a one as is like to
bear grapes; fill the basket with earth, and when the Grapes are ripe, cut off
the branch under the basket: Plums and Cherries growing long.
keep the basket abroad, whilst the weather is warm; and within doors in cold
weather, in a convenient place: Prove this in plummes and cherries, etc.

24. Trees to prosper
Make diverse holes with a croe of iron, round about the bodies of your Trees;
and about Alhallontide, pour Ox blood into the holes, cover them with earth,
and this will make your trees to prosper well. Probatum in Apricot trees,
Apricots to prosper
By Mr. Andr. Hill. If you do this at the Spring, the smell of the blood will
offend you; and therefore this practice is best for the Winter season.

25. Plant the shoots of Sallow, Speedy woods.
Willow, Alder, and of all swift growing trees, being of seven years growth,
sloping off both the ends one way, and laying the sloaped ends toward the
ground, let them be of the length of a billet, bury them a reasonable depth in
the ground, and they will put forth seven or eight branches, each of which will
become a tree in a short time. I take moist grounds to be best for this purpose:
thus you may have speedy growing woods.

26. To make any branch of a tree to root, Branches to root.
see among the Flowers, numb. 45.

27. Mix green Cowdung and urine together, Trees from Barking or canker.
wash the trees with a brush so high as you think meet, once in two or three
months, and it will keep the trees from barking with beasts, conies, etc. and
the same does also destroy the canker.

28. Take of the rich crust of one acre of ground, Rich mold for Ochard or
Garden.
and therewith you may make any Garden, or Orchard ground, that is but a foot
deep in goodness, of what depth you please to make the roots of your trees to
prosper the better.

29. In high grounds and sandy, Depth for trees.
set Trees deep: in low grounds, and watery, plant them shallow; the shallower
the better. By Master Hill. But by Taverner, you must set your Trees so, that
the roots may spread in the upper crust, which is the fruitful part of the
earth. This crust in some grounds is two foot; in some three foot; in some one
foot; and in some but half a foot deep: see the reason more at large, in his
book, page 34.

30. Lop, Procining Of trees.
top, and proin all Trees in January, in the wane of the Moon, and pare them
over in March: so shall the bark cover his stock the sooner.

31. Slit the bark of all Trees that are bark bound, Trees baakbound, helped.
in February, or March, in the increase of the Moon.

32. Refuse to grass, Ill weather for Orchard works.
plant, remove, lop, top, proin, to slit the barks of trees, or set or sow
cornells, nuts or stones, in weather frosty or watery, and when the wind shall
be East or North, or North-east. Yea, the best Oak felled under such a wind,
Oak when not to be selled.
will prove but wind-shaken timber.

33. Small Crabstock of three inches about, Bigness of crabstock.
or less, may be graffed.

34. Pear stock, Bigness of Pear stock and white thou ne.
and white thorn stocks of the same scantling, all of them about the length
of twelve or twenty four inches.

35. Wild cherry stocks, Bigness of wild chery stocks.
three, four, or five foot long and three inches about, little more, or less.

36. White plumstockes would be of the same bigness. White plumstocks.


37. When the stock is able to put forth in one year a shoot of a yard long,
When a stock is to be graffed.
then is it of strength sufficient to bear a Cions; for then it shows to like
the ground well; otherwise, it will never prove a fair tree.

38. A Pear or Warden, White thorn no stock for pear or warden; good for a
medlar.
grasled upon a white thorn, will be small, hard, cappard, and spotted; but a
Medlar may well be grafted upon a white thorn. Taverner.

39. The suckers of Quince trees, Suckers planted.
and Filberds, will prove well being planted. Taverner.

40. For Chestnuts and Wallnuts, Nuts set.
set the nuts only. Taverner.

Rules for inoculation, or graffing in the bud.
41. IF you graft in the bud, 1 Close well in the bottom.
be careful to close the same well in the bottom of the scocheon; for there
the sap rises that makes it to take. By Andr. Hill.

42. 2 Time of grasting.
From the eight of June until the 24 is the best time to graft in the bud in
plums and cherries, but specially in Apricots; but the surest rule is to do
this work when you find the bark to come easily from the body.

43. 3 Instrument to graft with.
Two parts of three in a Goos-quill taken away in breadth, is an apt tool to
take off a bud withal, without danger of hurting the bud. By Master Pointer.
Some commend a tool of Ivory; some do only slip off the bud and the bark
together.

44. 4 Losengewise.
Graffing, by taking off a bud losenge wise, and setting the same in another
like place upon a stock, is good. By Master Pointer. This is done at such time,
as is sit to graft in the cions.

45. 5 What to do when the bud takes.
When your bud takes, then in March after, cut off all that grows above it,
stripping away all the buds that put forth: and that which remains serves to
lead up the branch of the bud to keep it straight, and to defend it from
breaking with the wind.

46. 6 The lowest bud maintained.
If you graft two or three buds upon one tree, and they all do take, maintain
only the lowest, and preserve and strengthen the same with some neither
branch, as before in number. 45.

47. 7 A cherry upon a plum tree.
A Cherry prospers well upon a Plum stock; but not e contra: and therefore,
if you graft a Cherry in the bud upon a branch, or bough, of a Plumtree that
does bear, you may make the same Tree to bear both Plums and Cherries. Proved
by Mr. 8 Grafting compasses.
Hill.

48. A pair of Compasses made flat at the ends, and sharp with edges, is an apt
instrument to cut away the bark for inoculation, both for a true breadth and
distance all at once. And so likewise with the same you may take off the bud,
truly to fit the same place again in the stocks some Compasses are made flat at
one end, and sharp at the other.

49. 9 Galy preserved in the stock.
You must have care in this grafting, not to hurt or bruise the gelly next the
stock which must minister sap to your bud.

50. 10 Gelly in the bud preserved.
Also when you have taken off your bud, clip the sides of the bark whereon the
bud stands, with a pair of Scissors, very even, in a square form; or rather
somewhat longer then broad: for if you cut the Bark at the ends with a knife,
laying the inside upon any board, you will hurt the gellie in the inside, and
then the bud will never take.

51. 11 Bud to take no air.
Make the place ready for inoculation, and remove not your bud before you mean
to place it, for taking of too much air.

52. 12 How to slit the bark.
When you have cut down the bark on either side, and likewise at the top, leave
the bottom of the bark whole, and then slip down the bark; and between the
bark and the Tree, put in the bud, and bind the loose bark of the Tree upon
your bud, and by this means your grafting will take more certainly. The lesser
your slit is, and the closer that your bud fitteth the slit, it it the likelier
to take.

53. Take off your bud from a sprig of the last years shoot, 13 What buds are
best.
for that is best for this purpose; by Mr. Andr: Hill.

54. Make an overthwart cut at the bottom, 14 How to slit the bark.
and then begin your slit upward, putting up your bud from the bottom of your
slit, closing well at the bottom, This is contrary to the common course, which
begins at the top, with a slit downward.

Graffing of a Cions.
55. A Tool of Ebony, 1 Grasting tocl
or Box, is better to open the bark than a tool of Iron, if you would graft a
cions between the bark and the tree. By Master Pointer: for Mars tainteth the
sap presently.

56. Grafting whipstocke wise, 2 Splicing way.
and letting in the cions into the stock by a slit, is good for young Trees,
that spring upot stones, or pippins, being of theee of four years growth, and
not above. Some call this the splicing way.

57. Grafting upon a old tree, 3. Cleaving he body.
by cutting off the head, and one inch from the center by striking in a small
iron wedge, and as it eleaveth by following the same with your knife; and so on
either side, placing of a cions, sap to sap; this is a way of grafting used by
Master Pointer of Twicknam.

58. Graft within a foot of the ground, 4. Low grafting.
if you would have the fruit to grow low, and easy to be gathered; and this is
also thought a fit way to make your cions to take, because the sap rises
speedily to the cions.

59. Graft your cions on that side the stock, 5 On which side to graft.
where it may take least hurt with the south-west wind (because it is the most
common, and the most violent wind that blows in the spring, and summer:) so
as that wind may blow it to the stock, and not from the stock.

60. If you would have fair and kindly Cherry trees, 6 How to have large
Cherries.
set the stones of Cherries, of the same kind as your bud or cions is of, and
at three of four years, you may graft thereon, according to the manner,
spoken of before, in Numb: 57 viz. great Cherries, upon stocks that carry great
cherries.

91. Some think it good, 7 What cions is best.
that your cions have some of the former years shoot with it, that it may be
the stronger to graft, and abide to be put close into the stock; and perhaps it
will forward the sam in bearing.

62. It is the best way, 8 Cions put in close.
to put in your cions in the graffing as close and straight as you may: neither
are you here to fear the pinching of the stock, unless it be where you graft
in a deep clift of a large body.

63. So likewise you may graft, 9 The cions made the stock.
upon a bearing bough of an Apple tree, a contrary Apple; and when that cions
is grown great enough to receive another graft, you may graft a contrary fruit
thereon; but an Apple cions does not agree with a Pear stock, Uponwhat stock
to graft.
(not e contra) nor a Plumme upon an Apple or pear stock, neither will any
Cions of a Fruit Tree take upgn an Elm stock; proved by Master Hill.

64. A Quince may well be grafted upon a Medlar stock: to Quinces upon a Medlar.
and a Medlar will grow, but not prosper so well upon a Quince stock, because
the Cions will outgrow the stock; proved by Master Hill.

65. Unless the uttermost rind or bark of your stock be very gentle and
thin, 11 Bark when to slit.
it is best to slit the same along: but hurt not the innermost bark when you
graft between the bark and the tree By Mr. An. Hill.

66. Before you graft your cions, 12 Prepasing the cions.
take a way a little of the uppermost bark on either side the edge, but hurt
not the greenish part.

67. If your bark and cions are both straight, 13 When to graft deep.
then may you graft the deeper into the stock, viz. four inches, and that is a
very sure way to make the Cions to take, so as you join sap to sap well; but
if either the stock or cions be crooked, then two inches are sufficient. By Mr.
And: Hill.

68. You may graft an Apple cions at Christmas, 14 Grasting at Christmas.
so as you graft the same very deep into the stock, viz. four inches, or
three at the least, and close it well: for, though the sap rise not, yet the
moisture of the stock is sufficient to preserve the cions, until the sap do
rise; proved by Mr. And: Hill.

69. Long Moss, 15 Graft bound with moss
well bound about the head of your stock and of an inch or more in thickness,
is sufficient alone to keep out both wind and water from the stock where the
cions is let in. This must be repaired again at Midsomer.

70. Close your Cions with red or green wax, 16 Closing the cions.
having a little butter therein about the slit: and this both keeps out the
wind, and makes the sap to creep under, and cover the slit the sooner.

17 Peach upon a plum stock
71. A peach may well be grafted or inoculated in a plmme stock, and will
thrive better then upon his own stock.

72. If two Trees grow together, 18 One ^ree let into another.
that be apt to be grafted one into another, then let one brach into an other
workmanly joining sap to sap.

73. If you have three or four good buds next the foot of the cions, 19 Length
of a cions.
that cions is long enough to be grafted; and so you may make diverse cions of
one branch, where you cannot get plenty of cions.

74. Close all your incisions upon small and young stocks, 20 Artifi^iall wax
to close with.
with a mixture consisting of green wax, or red wax: and if your wax be old,
melt the same, and add some fresh turpentine thereto, or else you may use
pitch instead of wax, adding Turpentine: but let there be always in your wax,
one fifth, or one sixth part of butter, to keep the same supple; and when you
have applied this salve close to the joints, then strew thereon the fine powder
of dried earth, which you must have always ready; and that keeps it hard in
the sunshine: This is the only composition to make the bark to cover the
stock. You must first after your grafting, bind the stock and the cions
together, with the bands of Brawne, and then lay your tempered wax thereon; and
if the band continue whole, you shall cut it in sunder about August following;
by Andr: Hill.

75. You may carry your cions in this manner, 21 How to carry a cions far.
a long journey without endangering them: First, wax over the ends with the
artificial Wax, (mentioned before in Numb: 74.) then role them up in great
store of green Moss moystened, and tie them, and then put them into a case or
box of wood, and so carry them; By And: Hill: You may keep a cions fourteen
days or 3 weeks in grafting time, so, as it be done before March, by sticking
the same in your window only; yet some will have ends of them dipped in the
compounded wax, as before in Numb: 74.

76. Always be careful when you graft upon your stocks the splicing way, 22
Upon large fruited stocks.
that your stock be of as large a kind of fruit, or larger, then the Cions, or
else it will not be able to feed the Cions: or else you must graft upon larger
stocks, if the cions be of a large fruit, and the stock but of a small fruit.

77. Plant an Apricot in the midst of other plumme Trees round about it, 23
Many Apricot Trees of one.
at a convenient distance; then in an apt season, bore thorought your plum
Trees, and let in to every one of them, one or two of the branches of your
Apricot tree, thorough rough those holes, taking away the bark on both sides
of your branches which you let in, joining sap to sap, and lute the holes up
with tempered loame; and when they are well knit, the next year cut off the
branch from the A. pricot Tree: and so you have gotten many Apricot Trees out
of one. Take away in time all the head of your plum Tree, and all other
branches maintaining only that which is gotten from the Apricot. But some
commend rather the leting in of a branch of one Tree, into the other,
worknanly, for the more certain kind of grafting.

24 Observation in stock.
78. Plant every stock with one leading branch, at the least, to carry up the
sap: and after your stock has grown one year, and makes good show of liking
the ground, then graft your cions upon it, leaving one or two leaders; but none
so high as to overtop your cions: and when your cions is well taken, then cut
away your leaders, and all other spires; and so your cions will prosper
exceedingly. By Andr. Hill.

79. Some hold opinion, that if when others begin to graft in the slit, 25
Heading of stocks, and grafting after.
you do then cut off the head of your stock, leaving one branch near the head
to lead the sap, and then after cold weather is all past, if you graft in the
slit, that so your stock and cions will prosper far better, then if you had
grafted the same in the slit at the first. By Andr: Hill.

But then yon must remember to take away the leader, that the sap may more
plentifully feed the cions.

80. Some do cut off all their cions in the Winter, 26 When to cut down a
cions.
viz. either in November, or December, and then lay them in earth; and in the
new Moon of March or April, they graft them, and they prove exceeding well;
persuading themselves, that no knife is so sharp, but that it will hurt the
bark orgelly of the cions, if the cions should be cut down when the sap is
up. This of Mr. Colborne; who commends this course, upon long experience. And
if you graft those cions upon such forward trees, Upon what stock to graft.
as have put out their sap very plentifully, they will prosper exceeding well;
because being hungry, and almost starved for want of nourishment, they take
hold of the sap that arises from the stock, very eagerly.

81. Note, 27 Stocks when to graft.
that your stocks may put forth buds, yea, small leaves; and yet you may safely
graft upon them.

28 Stockss to prosper
82. If you would have your stocks of your young grafted Trees to prosper, and
grow exceedingly, then suffer the waterboughs to grow up with the stock, till
the bodies be as big as your arm, and then prune them at your pleasure; for by
this means the sap does rise more lustily, when it has many branches to draw
from the root.

83. You may graft in the Cions, 29 Late, grafting, yet with advantage
a Month after other men, and yet have a longer shoot than they, the same
year, in this manner: Cut off the head of your stock when other men do (which
many times falls out to be in very cold weather) then cover your stock over
with your artificial wax, (as before in Numb. 74.) and one month after, or
when all cold weather is past, crop your stock one inchlower, and then graft
your cions; and then (cold weather being past) the sap will rise very
plentifully to maintain the cions. Proved by Master Andr. Hill.

84. Graft not upon any young stock, 30 When to graft a stock.
till it be able to put forth a shoot of a yard long in one year (which
sometimes will not happen, till it have been of two or three years growth) for
till it put forth abundance of sap, it will never feed the cions sufficiently.
proved by Master Andr. Hill.

85. The stocks of black Cherry Trees, 31 Stocks so great cherriet.
are best to graft the great Cherry upon; proved by Mr. Colborne.

86. To have your Nursery full of stocks to graft on, 32 Store of stocks.
sow the stampings of crabs; which are commonly: full of Cornells; By Mr.
Kirwin.

87. Let your Nursery consist always of a more barrain ground then your
Orchard, 33 Ground for a Nursery.
whither you mean to remove your stocks and grafts. So likewise, A rule for
transplanting of Trees.
if you transplant any Fruit trees, bring them always from a worse ground to a
better, or else they will never prosper.

88. Slope your stocks which you mean to graft on, 34 Stocks stopped.
like Colts feet before you graft them: for so the bark will cover the sooner,
and the rain shoots from the stock the better. Proved by Master Colborne.

89. If you would have your graft to bear quickly, 35 Cions to bear quickly.
one special help is, to take it out of a bearing branch.

90. At the beginning of the year, 36 The times of several grafting.
and before the sap do rise, you may graft in the body of the stock, or by way
of splicing upon every little branch of your Tree (but always remember to take
off the top of your cions, having any leaves upon it:) when the sap is up, then
you must graft between the bark and the stock; and then the sap is so
plentifully risen, that the bark will easily pill from the body, then may you
graft in the bud, or leaf. How to graft at Christmas, See before in Numb. 69.

91. To graft Roses, 37 Plants upon trees
or herbs upon trees, see among the Flowers, Numb. 49.

92. Graft the small end of the cions downward; 38 Fruit without stones, and
hidden with leaves.
and so of pears and apples; and they will have no coar. Quaere, of glummes
grafted upon a Willow, to come without stones. Also, such apples and pears thus
grafted, will for the most part hang under the leaves, and not be seen,
unless you come under the trees: By S.

93. A grafted Apricot is the best: 39 Apricot grafted.
yet from the stone you shall have a fair Apricot, but not so good; and the
grafted is more tender then the other. By S.

94. Graft a Medlar upon a Quince, 40 A large Medlar.
and it will bring a fair and large Medlar: By S.

95. A cion of a pippin, 41 A pippin upon what stock
grafted upon a crab-stock, is more kindly, and keeps better, without touch
of canker, then being grafted upon a pippin. By Mr. Simson.

96. Trees that bear early, Why trees transplanted do alter.
or often in the year, as Pear Trees upon VVindsorhill, which bear three
times in a year; these, though they be removed to as rich, or richer ground,
yet they do seldom bear so early, or so often, except the soil be of the same
hot nature, and have the like advantages of situation, and other circumstances,
with those of Windsor. And therefore commonly, the second fruit of that Pear
tree being removed, does seldom ripen in other places. By Master Hill.

97. All those fantastical conceits, Color, sent, or taste altered.
of changing the color, taste, or sent, of any Fruit, or Flower, by infusing,
mixing, or letting in at the bark, or at the roots of any tree, herb, or
flower, of any colored, or aromaticall substance, Master Hill has by often
experience sufficiently controlled: and though some Fruits and flowers, seem
to carry the sent or taste, of some aromaticall body, yet that does rather
arise from their own natural infused quality then from the hand of man.

98. Some do never graft between the bark and the tree, Graft between bark and
tree.
but in old stocks.

99. Lop the branches of your trees always in Winter, How to lop.
before the sap do rise within ten or twelve inches of the trunk; and in the
Spring, when the sap is up, cut those branches close to the trunk: And so shall
you both have your tree lusty, because no sap is left in those vast branches
(which would have been lost, if you had proined them according to the usual
all manner, in March, or April) and also the sap will then come purling out,
and soon cover the Wood; whereby you shall avoid those blemishes in your
trees, which others procure by proining them in the Winter. By Master Andr.
Hill.

100. Quaere, To have green trees in winter.
what herbs, flowers, or branches of trees, may be grafted upon the bay or
holly tree, or any such tree as keeps green to Winter, to make them also
carry green leave in Winter.

101. Pare your ground with a shod shovell, Orchard ground to order.
so often as any grass or weeds begin to put forth, both in your nursery and
orchard; and so shall you both keep the ground mellow, and the rain shall
have better passage unto the roots of your trees. By Masters Pointer; who
keeps Coins in his Orchard, only to keep down the grass low, because
otherwise it would be very chargeable. Vineyard to order.
Also, in Vineyards, the use is to turn up the grounds with a shallow Plough,
as often as any grass offers to spring: but I think, that prevention of
graffe, both in Orchard and Vineyard, is much better, if in were not too costly.

102. Upon the Epiphany, Tree rooted higher See after in 106.
by reason of a great storm, an Apple Tree, that had not been very fruitful
before, was almost blown up by the roots at Hackney; and after with Ropes it
was drawn upright, and the what mounted, and the Root covered with earth; and
that Tree, the next Summer, bare an exceeding great burden of fruit.

103. When your Apple Cornells are of two years growth, Wreathed bodies of
trees.
then set a long straight stick by each of them, winding the young stock about
the stick; by little and little as it grows, and fastening it with bands under
the stick, and so it will grow in a wreathed form.

104. Quaere, Fruit enlarged.
If nipping off the new and tender tops about blossoming time will not make
summer fruit trees to blossom speedily, or to enlarge the fruit.

105. If an old Tree that is spent, Barren trees to bear.
and has done bearing, be underpropped, so as the body sink not, and that the
earth be after taken away from under all the roots, and instead thereof, good
rich mold be conveyed into the void places, that so an old tree will flourish
again, and bear fruit. See before in Numb. 103.

106. The Lord Zouch, Transplanting old trees.
in Winter, in the year 1597 (and Master And. Hill) thinks moist weather is
best, that the earth cleaving to the roots, may be also removed with them, the
earth being fast bound with Fearn branches to the roots) removed diverse apple
trees, damson trees, etc. being of thirty or forty years growth, at Hackney:
the earth was dug in a good large compass from the roots, the roots little
hurt; holes were prepared for each tree before hand, enriched with fresh and
good earth; and branches and tops taken off almost close to the trunk; and they
were planted again in the same hour wherein they were removed; and the roots
placed toward the same point of the compass as they first grew. He had a few
damsons the first year, and all put forth leaves at Michaelmas after, anno 1598.

107. Blood laid at the roots of old Vines, Old Vines recovered
has been commended for an excellent substance to harten them, unto Mr. Andrew
Hill.

108. If you cut any Vines when the sap is up, Bleeding of Vines stayed.
presently cover the place with good store of Turpentine, and it will stay
bleeding. Proved by Mr. Melinus. Some commend the straight binding of a
packthred about the bark thereof: some sear with a hot iron, and drop hard wax
presently upon it.

109. By the opinion of some men, Early fruits.
if outlandish fruit Trees be planted in England, they do strive to put forth
blossoms, and to bring fruit at the same time with us, as they did in their
natural places, unless the extremity of cold do nippe or hinder them. And
this seems to them to be the reason, why the Black thorn at Glassenbury
Abbey, did use to blossom at Christmas, because happily the plant was brought
from such a climat, as where it did blossom at the same time of the year.

110. If your Trees stand in wet grounds, Wet Orchard helped.
some do advise to lay lime on the face of the ground, to help the bearing of
the trees.

111. If whilst you maintain some suckers to your stock, The Cions to prosper
(because the stock is not yet so big as your arm) your Cions does not prosper
to your mind, then nip off the buds that grow upon the suckers, now and then in
the midst, till your cions thrive according to your own desire.

112. In proining of your Fruit Trees, True proining
or of any other shrub or plant bearing fruit you must always have respect,
whether it bear his Fruit upon the first, second, or third years sprowt; for
you must never cut away all the bearing sprowts, if you mean to have any
Fruit. As, in Pippins, the third years sprowt does only bear Fruit; and in
some other Fruit Trees; only the second years sprowts; in Gooseberries, the
last years sprouts bear most, by Mr. Andr. Hill.

113. When your Trees are young, Timber to grow of any fashion.
you may bow them to what compass you will, by binding them down with
packthread to any circular form, or other shape that pleases one best. And by
this means your Timber will grow fit for Ships, Wheels, etc. whereby great
waste of Timber in time would be avoided.

114. Mix Cow Dung and Horse-dung well rotted, Apricots to bear.
with fine earth and Claret wine Lees, of each a like quantity, baring the
roots of your Trees in Jan. February, and March: and then apply of this mixture
to the roots of your Apricot Trees, and so cover them with common earth: by
this means, such Apricot Trees as never bare before, have brought forth great
store of fruit. Prove this in other Trees. This of Mr. Andr. Hill.

115. Pears, Pear, Warden, Peach, in what ground.
Wardens, and Peaches, delight in Clay grounds.

116. When you plant any Tree, How to use the roots in settings.
press not down the Roots together, with laying earth confusedly upon them,
but extend every branch by it self, and cover it loosly with earth, according
to that form wherein it did first grow. By Mr. Colborn. Apricot, in what
ground.


117. Apricots like well in sandy ground.

118. Some hold opinion, Dwarf trees.
that if one set the slips of an Apple Tree, and so of diverse other Trees, that
these will prove Dwarf Trees. And so of the Tree that bears a white flower
as big as a Rose, Gelderland Rose.
called the Gelderland rose.

119. From May to the end of July, Dwarf trees.
you may take off the bark from any bough of a Tree, round about the bough
four inches deep, if the bough be as large as a man's wrist; or else a less
depth will serve. If the bough be less in compass cover the bare place; and
somewhat above and below, with loame well tempered with Horse dung, binding
down the loame with hay, and brawn ban ds upon the hay: and so let it rest
till about Alhallontide: And then within two or three days of the first New
Moon, cut off the bough in the bare place, but in any case cut not the green
bark above it; and then set it in the ground, and it will grow to be a fair
Tree in one year, according to the length of the bough. Quaere, of watering
the loam now and then. Yet in reason, me thinks it a likelier course, to clap
a gilliflower pot made of purpose in two halfes, with a great hole in the
bottom, about such an arm; and after you have bound the pot well with wier,
then to fill it with good earth, which you may better water in dry weather,
than you can do the lump of loam. You may also use a twig no bigger than ones
finger, in the same manner. Yet some do rather commend the binding of the loam,
or earthing the Tree, with a pot about it, without taking away any bark at all,
but only pricking many holes with a great aule, in that part of the bark which
is covered with the loam or earth. You must remember to underprop the pot, or
else to hang it fast to the Tree. Quaere, if a branch must not root at a joint.
How to lop Elms.


120. If you cut off the top or head of an Elm, it will not leave rotting
downward, till it be hollow, and dote within: but an Oak will abide heading
and not rot. Also, the boughs or branches of an Elm, would be left a foot
long, next to the Trunk when you lop them. This of an expert Carpenter.

121. To avoid sappinesse, Sappiness to avoid.
fell both the bodies and the arms of Oaks and Elms in December after the frost
has well nipped them: and so your saplings, whereof rafters, sparres, etc. are
made, will last as long as the heart of the Tree, without having any sap. By
the same man.

122. Take off a thin turfe of two foot, Young trees to grow.
round about each tree newly planted, cover the same with Fearn, Pease straw,
or such like, a handful thick: water your Trees once a month, if the weather
prove dry, with dung water, or common water, that has stood in some open pit
in the sun. This keeps the ground loose from baking; whereby the Tree will
prosper the better, and put forth shoots of three and four foot in one year:
remember you do not set any Tree above one foot deep, or little more, and give
each Tree some props for the first year, that the wind shake it not too much.
And yet some, of good experience, do hold, that it skilleth not how much a
young tree be shaken (so as it be not blown up by the roots) and that it
prospers so much the better.

123. Quinces growing a against a wall, Delicate Quinces.
lying open to the sun, and defended from cold winds, eat most delicately.
This secret the Lord Darcy brought out of Italy. quaere, of all other Fruits.

124. Set Peach stones in a dry ground, Peach and Apricot stones to set.
where there is no water within three or four foot; for this tree has one root
that will run deep into the ground: and if it once gets into the water the
Tree dies. The stone brings forth a kindly Peach. Set Peach and Apricot
stones in pots of earth, within doors in February; keep the earth moist, by wat
ring now and then; transplant them in March into your Orchard. By S.

125. In the end of March, Sap of tree to gather
gather the sap of the Trees within a foot of the ground: but take off the
first bark, and then slit the white bark overthwart wise, even to the body of
the Tree; but slit only that part of the bark which stands South-west, or
between South and West, because little or no sap rises from the North, or
North-east side. After you have slit the Tree, open the slit with your knife,
so as you may let in a leaf of a Tree, first fitted to the breadth of the
slit; and from this the sap will drop, as it does in filtration. Take away the
leaf, and the bark will close again; earthing it with a little earth upon the
slit. By S.

126. Cut away all the idle shoots of the last year, Fair Apricots and Cherries
in your Apricot and Cherry Trees, before Christmas some three weeks, to make
your fruit the fairer.

127. If you would stay the sap of Trees from rising, To stay blossoming.
to make your Trees to blossom later, thereby to avoid frosts in blooming time,
then hack crosse-wise, viz. overthwart the Tree, upon so much of the Tree as is
within the ground, even down to the root, and then cover it again with earth.
Hack it very thick, even thorough all the bark to the very Wood, in the new
Moon three weeks before Christmas, if they be Apple trees, pear trees, or
warden trees: but for Apricots, do this rather in the full of the Moon, next
before Christmas; but cross hack your cherry trees and peach trees in the new
moon next after Christmas: and so you shall have your blossoms, and by
consequence your fruit, come later then other men's do, because the sap cannot
rise. I think you must also hack the maine root. Cuaere. By S.

128. If you would make a tree in a short time to cast his leaves, Green trees
in Autumn.
and thereby to bring forth young leaves, which will last upon the tree fresh
and green, when all other Trees have lost their leaves; then cross hack the
bark, close to the wood about Midsomer. Quaere, if the Moon be here to be
respected.
In all the cross hackings here mentioned, let every of them be half an inch,
or thereabout, distant one from another; and every rank of hacks, one inch
above another, or thereabout. Also, this practice to avoid the fall of the
leaf, must be done but every second year to any Tree, for fear of destroying
the same.

129. But if in January, Bodies of trees to enlarge. Barkbound.
or before the sap do rise, you hack the body long-wise, and not overthwartly,
and that only thorough the first bark, and no further; this will make the
bodies of your Trees to swell, and burnish the better, to maintain their heads
or grafts.

130. And if by overthwart hacking you would only kill the moss of Trees, To
kill Moss.
then let your overthwart backs be through the bark, even to the wood: and this
you must do between Alhallontide and S: Andrews day; viz. so soon as the leaves
be off the Tree, both to avoid moss, and to make barren Trees to bear. You
must make these hacks with the nether corner, or point of a small hatchet, so
as every notch may be about half an inch long: and hack the body the height of
a man; viz. one row of hacks, two inches below one another; all over the body:
but let there be a distance between the overthwart hacks, so as they may not
meet in a round ring, like a circle, about the tree: and by this means the
uppermost bark whereon the moss grew, will in time fall clean away, and the
moss with it, and the tree will gather a new bark. And though the tree be thus
hacked but to a man's height, yet the tree will bear much better the next
year. But when your leisure serves, crosse-hack all the body in this manner,
even to the trunk, as also a part of every great arm that grows next the
tree: Note, that in seven years the Tree will be barkbound, and so mossie
again, as at the first: and therefore once in seven years you must renew this
work. By S.

131. But if your tree bear not, A Tree to root higher.
because it was planted too deep at the first, then take away the earth from
the body of the tree; and a little below the uppermost face of the ground,
prick the body of the Tree clean thorough the bark, full of holes, with a
pretty round aule or bodkin, of a reasonable breadth. Then cover the body with
earth, and diverse new roots will issue, to make the same fruitful.

132. And if your Tree bear not well, Sap choked.
by reason that all the sap runs into leaves, Barren trees to bear.
which is a common fault in diverse Orchards, then to check the sap, cut off all
the young roots that grow about the master roots; and cross hack the body
under the ground, and likewise the maine roots, as before ( Number. 131.) to avoid
mosie, and cover the Tree with earth again: for by this means the sap is kept
from rising up too plentifully. By S.

133. All barrenness, Causes of barrenness in trees.
or unfruitfulnesse in Trees, does for the most part arise, either by reason of
their mossinesse, whose cure is set down before in Numb. 131. or because they
are bark-bound; whose remedy is also in Numb. 130. or because they were planted
too deep, whose remedy is in Number. 132. or by reason that the sap, which should
turn into fruit, runs together, or for the most part into leaves: and this
is remedied also in Numb. 133.

134. App'es without wrinckles.
Gather not your Pippins till the full Moon, after Michaelmas; so may you keep
them a whole year without shrinking: and so of the grapes, and all other
fruits; so of Onion seeds, Annis seeds, and other seeds, which you would keep
full and plump. By S.

135. Respect between the stock and cions.
Let your tree whereon you graft, be more forward then the cions; viz: let it
either have bigger buds then the cions has, or small leaves: but the cions is
best that has only red buds, and no leaves.

136. Cherries in clusters
I have seen Cherriesgrow in clusters like Filberts, viz. 2, 3, 4, and 5. upon
one stalk. Cuaere, if it be not performed in this manner; Join 2, 3, 4, or 5.
leaves with the buds in one flit together, by way of incoulation, and so leave
them.

Here I will conclude with a conceit of that delicate Knight, Sir Francis
Carew; who, for the better accomplishment of his Royal entertainment of our
late Queen of happy memory, at his house at Beddington, led her Majesty to a
Cherry tree, whose fruit he had of purpose kept back from ripening, at the
least one month after all Cherries had taken their farewell of England. This
secret he performed, by straining a Tent or cover of canvas over the whole
tree, and wetting the same now and then with a scoope or horn, as the heat of
the weather required* and so, by withholding the sunbeams from reflecting
upon the berries, they grew both great, and were very long before they had
gotten their perfect cherry color: and when he was assured of her Majesty's
coming, he removed the Tent, and a few sunny days brought them to their full
maturity.

A Philosophical Garden: with a touch at the vegetable work in Physic, whose
principal fire is the Stomach of the Ostrich.
FIrst, pave a square plot with brick, (and if it be covered with plaster of
Paris, it is so much the better) making up sides of brick also plaistered
likewise: let this be of a convenient depth, fill it with the best vegetable
which you can get, that has stood two years, or one at the least, quite
within his own Sphere: make contrition of the same; and be sure to avoid all
obstructions, imbibe it with Aqua coelestis in a true proportion, grind it once
a day till it be dry: being dry, let it stand two or three days without any
imbibition, yt it may the better attract from all the heavenly influence,
continuing then also a Philosophical contrition every day (this grinding must
also be used in the vegetable work where the of herbs is used instead of aqua
coelestis) during all the time of preparation: then plant what rare flowers,
fruits, or seeds, you please therein. And (if my Theory of Nature deceive me
not this so enriched from the heavens, without the help of any manner of soil,
marle, or compost (after one years revolution) will make the same to flourish
and fructify in a strange and admirable manner: yea, I am persuaded, that it
will receive an Indian plant, and make all vegetables to prosper in the highest
degree, and to bear their fruits in England, as naturally as they do in Spain,
Italy, or elsewhere.

So likewise of that Walnuttree, planted within the limits of the aforesaid
Abbey, which on St. Barnabias Eve stands bare, and naked without leaves; and
upon the day it self, richly clothed with his green vesture.

I could remember many Philosophical plants in England, were it not that the
loss of Ripley's life, that renowned Alchymist, who suffered death (as the
secret report goes) for making a Pear Tree to fructify in Winter, did command
an altum silentium in these matters: but it was the denial of his medicine, and
not the crime of conjuration, which was but colourably laid to his charge, that
wrought his overthrow.

Nay, if the earth it self, after it has thus conceived from the clouds, were
then left to bring forth her own fruits and flowers in her own time, and no
seeds or plants placed therein by the hand of man, it is held very probable
(unless for the sin of our first Parents, begun in them, and mightily
increased in us, the great God of Nature, even Natura naturans, should recall,
or suspend those fructifying blessings which at the first he conferred upon his
celestial Creatures) that this heavenly earth, so manured with the stars,
would bring forth such strange and glorious plants, fruits and flowers, as none
of all the Herbarists that ever wrote till this day, nor any other, unless
Adam himself were alive again, could either know, or give true and proper
names unto these most admirable simples.

Also, in the work of fructification, I think that Corn it self may be so
philosophically prepared, only by imbibition in the Philosophers aqua vitae,
that any barren ground, so as it be in nature kindly for Corn, shall bring
forth a rich crop, without any matter added to the ground, and so with a small
or no charge, a man may sow yearly upon the same ground And he that knows how
to lay his fallowes truly, whereby they may become pregnant from the heavens,
and draw abundantly that celestial and generative virtue into the Mataix of
the earth; this man, no doubt, will prove the true and philosophical
Husbandman, and go beyond all the Country Coridons of the Land, though never
so well acquainted with Virgils Georgicks, or with Master Bernhard Palisiy his
congelative part of rain water, which he calls the Vegetable salt of Nature:
wherein though he observed more then either Varro, Columella, or any of the
ancient Writers in this kind, did ever dream of; yet does he come many degrees
short of this heavenly mystery.

Now, to give you some taste of that fire which the Philosophers call the
Stomach of the Ostrich, (without which the Philosophers true and perfect Aqua
vitae can never be made) you must understand, that it is an outward fire of
Nature, which does not only keep your Glass, and the matter therein
contained, in a true proportionable heat, fit for workmanship, without the
help of any ordinary or material fire: but it is also an efficient and
principal cause, by his powerful nature and pearcing quality, to stir up, alter
and exalt, that inward fire that is enclosed within the Glass in his own
proper earth. And therefore here, all the usual Chemical fires, with all their
graduations, are utterly secluded; so as neither any naked fire, nor the heat
of filings of Iron, of sand, of ashes, nor of Baln. Mar. though kept in a most
exquisite manner, nor any of the fires engendered by putrefaction, as of dung
and such like, no nor the heat of the Sun, or of a Lamp, or an Athanor (the
last refuge of our wandering and illiterate Alchymists) have here any place at
all. So that by this fire and furnace only, a man may easily discern a
mercenary workman (if he deal in vegetables only from a second Philosopher;
and if in any thing (as no doubt in many things) then here especially vulgaris
oculus caligat plurimum.

This fire is by nature generally offered unto all, and yet none but the
children of Art have power to apprehend it: for, being celestial, it is not
easily understood of an elemental brain; and being too subtle for the sense
of the Eye, it is left only to the search of a divine wit: and there I leave
it for this time.

The physical use of this fire, is to divide a Coelum terrae, and then to
stellifie the same with any animal or vegetable star, whereby in the end it
may become a quintessence.

Here I had thought to have handled that crimson colored salt of Nature, so
far exceeding all other salts, in a true, quick, and lively taste, which is
drawn from the Philosophers earth, and works miraculous effects in man's
body; and withal, to have examined that strange opinion which Doctor
Quercitanus, an excellent Theorist in Nature, and a great Writer in these days
does. violently maintain, in his discourse upon Saltpeter.

But because it is impertinent to this subject, and that I have discoursed more
at large thereon in my Abstract of Corn. Agrip. his Book De occult. Philos.
and for that Quercitanus does show himself to be a true Lover of Hermes
Household, I will not strain my wit, to write against any particular person
that professes himself to be of that family; although both he, and some
others, as great as himself, must give me leave, whenever I shall be forced
in that Book to handle the practical part of Nature, and her process, happily
to weaken some principles and positions, which both he and they have already
published; excusing my self with that golden saying of Ar^isttle, (...).
Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. But I am afraid I have
been too bold with vulgar wits, who take no pleasure to hear any man altius
philosophari, that they can well understand; and therefore I have compiled this
Book in plain terms, of such a Garden and Orchard as will better serve for
common use, and fit their wits and conceits much better.

FINIS.
^ooks printed or sold by William Leake at the sign of the Crown in
Fleetstreet between the two Temple Gates.
A Bible of a fair large Roman letter, 4o.

Tokt's Heraldy.

Man become guilty, by John Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl of
Monmouth.

Welby's second Set of Music, 3 4 5 and 6 Paris.

The H^story of Vienna, and Paris.

Callis learned Readings on the Stat. 21. H. 8. cap. 5. of Sewers.

Sken' de fignificatione Verba rum.

Posing of the Accidence.

Delaman's use of the Horizontall Quadrant.

Corderim in English.

Doctor Fulkis Meteors.

Nyes Gunnery and Fireworks

Gato Major, with Annotat.

Mel Helliconium, by Alex. Riss

Lizerillo de Tormes.

The Idiot in four books.

Aula Luck, or the house of Light.

Topics in the Laws of Engl

Perkins on the Laws of Engl

Wilkinsons Office of She iffs Parsons Law.

Mirror of Justice.

The Fort Royal of Holy Scripture, or a new Concordance by J. H

A Tragedy written by the most learned, Hug Grotius, Called Chris^^ Patiens,
and Englished by George Sands

Solitary devotions, with man in glory, by the most Reverend and holy Father,
Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury.

Ex^^citatio Scholastica.

Mathernaticall Recreations with the General Horologicall Ring, and double
Horizontall Dyall, by William O^ghtred.

PLAYS.
Hero and Leander.

The Wedding.

The Hallander.

Henry the Fourth.

Maids Tragedy.

King and no King.

Philaster.

The grateful Servant.

The strange Discovery.

The Merchant of Venice


