THE Good Old CAUSE OF ENGLAND Revived and Asserted, With Proposals humbly
tendered to the Consideration of the PARLIAMENT; In Order to a Setlement,
Security and Peace in This NATION.

By G. P. And diverse other well affected Persons.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Leach at the Faulcon in Shoe-Lane, 1658.

The good old Cause of England Revived, and Asserted; with Proposals humbly
tendered to the consideration of the Parliament: In order to a Setlement,
Security, and Peace, in the Nation, etc..
THat the power of the former Committees for removing Malignants and
Delinquants, from Offices of Power and Trust in the Commonwealth, being many
years since determined;

1. Many honest well-affected persons have been removed, and left out of
authority.

2. Diverse Malignants and ill-affected persons have crept into power, as
Judges, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners of the monthly Assessement, etc.
by these means.

1. Some by Marriages and Alliances.

2. Others by the favor and countenance of Eminent Persons, in authority for
private ends.

3. Many have intruded and insinuated themselves into the society and
fellowship, of the honest, godly Congregations, and by their false and
deceitful demeanors, have undiservedly acquired the good opinion and
certificates of those godly, harmless people, who did not search into the
bottom of their designs, nor discovered that ugly shape, covered with that
outward vizard and mere formality of Religion, denying the power thereof, the
better to conceal their evil purposes.

And by these wyles having crept into authority, may prove the most dangerous
Instruments in the Commonwealth: For the most notorious Cavaliers, and enemies
of our peace, would accept of places of honor, power, and profit from their
enemies hands, for these reasons and ends:

1. They are thereby in a better capacity to discover to the common enemy the
honest designs and purposes of the well-affected people of the Nation.

2. To serve, countenance, and protect their own malignant party and interest;
and to oppress and undermine the honest well-affected party.

3. They being conscious of their own guilt and incapacity, are the more ready
to act arbitrarily at the will and pleasure of any person, that shall be the
means to recommend them to power and authority.

4. And thereby bring the Government into contempt, in the judgment and
affections of the good people, and all conducing to the introducing and
re-investing of the common enemy, and his party, into power and authority in
the Nations.

And the boldness of these subtle Cavaliers have been such, That (having
procured themselves to be Elected by their malignant parties and interests in
the Countries) they had the confidence to sit in the great Council of the
Nation, whereby they are in a capacity to carry on their malignant designs, and
to challenge equal voices with those Eminent Members that have spent their
blood and treasure to serve this Commonwealth, and redeem it from its former
Slavery and Tyranny, in order to that Glorious and Blessed Reformation, so
often promised, vowed, and protested to be wrought in these Nations.

And it pleased the Lord in a providential manner to point at, and discover two
of these notorious Cavaliers, lately expelled the House.

But it is to be feared there may be many more of like guilt and principles
that are left behind, who may prove the grand obstructors of the blessed work
of Reformation in all these three Nations, for which so much blood and treasure
has in many years together, been spilt, which some persons that know, will
not, and others dare not discover to the Parliament.

It is therefore humbly Proposed.
THat the Parliament will order, that no Persons who have born arms for, aided
or assisted the late King, and his party, in the late war against the
Parliament, or have been sequestered, or voted delinquents, do sit in Parliament
within eight days after publication of such order, upon paenalty of
sequestration of their estates, or such other fine and punishment as the
Parliament shall think fit to appoint.

1. And by this means those that know themselves to be guilty, will immediately
withdraw, without the trouble of charges, and examination of witnesses.

2. That a standing Committee be appointed by Parliament from time to time to
receive all complaints against all Malignants, Delinquents, and ill-affected
persons for bearing Offices, contrary to the several Acts, Orders, Ordinances
and Declarations of Parliaments, with power to impose Fines and Imprisonments
on the offenders, in case they hold, or exercise their offices after
publication made to the contrary. And that the same Committee may have power to
send for persons, papers, and witnesses, to examine witnesses on oath, and to
grant Commissions to the respective Counties from whence such complaints are
made* and where the witnesses reside. And that the one half of the Fines may be
paid into the public Treasury and the other to go to the Prosecutor.

And lest this proposition may seem to some unreasonable, It is thought fit
herein to insert several Resolves of the late Long Parliament, tending to the
purpose aforesaid.

Die Veneris 9. Julii 1647.
REsolved, That no person that has been in actual Wars against the Parliament,
or has acted by the Commission of Array, or voluntarily aided the King in this
War against the Parliament, or that since the twentieth of May in the year,
1642. has sued for, or voluntarily accepted a pardon from the King, or has
directed, advised, assisted, signed, or consented unto the Cessation of
Ireland, or otherwise assisted the Rebellion of Ireland, or stands sequestered
by authority of Parliament for Delinquency, shall presume to sit in this House.

Resolved, That the persons that shall be comprehended within this Order, shall
incur the penalty of being put into the second branch of the fourth
Qualification in the Propositions concerning such Members as deserted the
Parliament, and sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxon.

Resolved, That such Members as are in Town, or within ten miles of the City of
London, as shall conceive themselves concerned in this Order, shall have
liberty to present their Case to the House under their hand in writing before
Thursday next.

Resolved, That this be added to the last Vote, That if any of the Members to
whom the liberty of twenty days is granted, shall come to the House within the
said space of twenty days, shall have four days liberty only, within the said
former twenty days, to present their Case under their hand in writing to the
House.

John Smith Clerk of the Parliament to attend the Commons.

Die Jovis 15. Julii 1647.
REsolved, That this House does declare, That such Members of this House as
have delivered in their particular Cases, and as shall within four days
present their Cases in reference to the Votes concerning such Members as are
not to sit in this House, shall not incur any further danger or penalty,
other than their being disabled to sit as Members of Parliament.

Resolved; That those Members to whom Liberty of twenty days was given by
former order to present their Cases, and shall according to the said Order
present their Cases, shall incur no further penalty upon any of their Cases,
then being disabled to sit as Members of Parliament.

The state of the several Cases of John Doyley and Bennet Hoskins, Esqs, Sir
Philip Percival, Thomas Cholmeley, Observe that these Gentlemen withdrew and
did not sit in that Parliament.
and Thomas Dacres Esquire were all of them this day read, and ordered, That they
be referred to the Committee where Mr. John Corbet has the Chair, and the
Committee has power to confer with, and examine the Gentlemen respectively
upon their several Cases, and concerning any other thing comprehended within
the Votes, whereupon their Papers were brought in, and upon all circumstances,
and thereupon to ascertaine their several Cases, and report the same to the
House.

John Smith Clerk of the Parliament to attend the Commons.


