THE Spanish Wives. A FARCE, As it was Acted by His MAJESTY's Servants, AT THE
THEATER in Dorset-Garden.

LONDON: Printed for R. Wellington, at the Sign of the Lu^e in St. Paul's
Church yard, 1696.

Ovid Travestie: A Burlesque upon Ovid's Epistles: The Third Edition, enlarged
with Ten Epistles never before printed; by Capt. Alex. Radcliff, of Gray's Inn.
Sold by R. Wellington in St. Paul's Churchyard.

To the Honorable, Colonel TIPPING, OF WHITFIELD.
SIR,
YOU may please to remember, when I had the Honor to be in your Company last,
at Soundess; part of our Discourse was upon Dedications. I believe you did not
then apprehend the Danger so near. But, this Play being kindly received by the
Audience; I hope it will not meet with a worse Fate, when it claims your
Protection. You have known me from my Childhood, and my Inclination to Poetry;
and it is from the Happiness of that Acquaintance, I presume to make so
Worthless an Offering. This also, joined with your Good Humor, secures me from
the Severity of your Judgment, which gives you Power to be the greatest of
Critics. I need not tell England, how much you have always Served your
Country; since that would be ^^e Proclaiming it to be Light at Noonday. I know,
all Witty Men, especially your self, hate any thing, that tends toward
Flattery; therefore I shall only in Sincerity tell you: I am,

SIR, Your very Humble, and most Obliged Servant, MARY PIX.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mr. Penkethman, in a Press-master's Habit.
WHat Cheer, my Lads? Igad, I Am ^ome to say,
I^ll press to Sea all those who Damn this Play:
Lord how our Ship might here be Mann'^ to day!
Sea Fights, it is thought, will not much ^gr^e with those
Whom they call Wits, and less with Mealy Beaus.
Mayhaps 'twou'd make them stink; for, every Year,
We don't go to drink Punch, and take French Air.
But sure, the Gentlewomen are at rest,
None of them are afraid of being Pressed.
Well, how^s the Wind here? Still that is veering round,
Like your Church-Weathercocks, on English Ground,
Then hiss it goes; Oh, that is a plaguey Sound:
Igad, it is worse to every Actor's Ear,
Than Frets of Wind to your huge Mops of Hair^
For thus your Cri -- Critics serve Nine Plays in Ten,
Worse than Jack Frenchman does our Merchantmen.
Like Pirates too, while honest men they are breaking,
The damned Fresh Water Sharks are n't worth the taking:
Yet long to maul these ^ame New Plays as much
As we, when Homeward bound, to take a Touch;
Or, as Dubart, to snap his Brother Dutch.
Yet why should they Hiss Plays not worth regarding?
Do we Bombard a Town not worth Bombarding?
Drolls shortly will amuse ye at the Fair:
To like This, think your selves already there,
As for you Spruce Gallants, pray be n't too nice,
But show you can Oblige a Woman twice.
The First Time she was grave, as well she might,
For Women will be damned sullen the first Night;
But faith, they will quickly mend, so be n't uneasy:
To Night she is brisk, and trys New Tricks to please ye.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by Mrs. Verbruggen.
OUR Author, by me, puts up her humble Prayer,
This Farce, this Trifle of a Play, you will spare^
I Will try your good Nature: But, oh! I fear
You are not like my fond Old Husband here.
Then, first, my Character who will admire?
Some will think it too cold; others, too full of Fire.
I dare swear every Spark here will say,
Damn it, that Cursed Baulk has spoiled the Play.
Then the Ladies my Staggering will not allow,
They Will cry, Where Is her strict Rules of Virtue now?
But the Ladies are not so ignorant: All know
The Difference 'twixt a Spanish Husband, and a Beau.
With Submission our Author still appears;
Courts your Indulgence, and your Judgment fears;
Lives on your Smiles, and at your Frowns despairs.
The ACTORS Names.
Governor of Barcellona. A merry old Lord, that has traveled, and gives his
Wife more Liberty than is usual in Spain. Marquess of Moncada. A Jealous Lord,
Guest to the Governor. Camillus. A Roman Count, following the Marquess's Lady,
as contracted to her before. Colonel Peregrine. An English Colonel. Friar
Andrew One that attends the Count. Hidewell. Retained by the Count. Diego.
Servant to the Governor.
The WOMEN.
The Governor's Lady. A brisk and airy Lady. Elenora. Wife to the Marquess.
Spywell. Woman to the Governor's Lady, Orada. Woman to Elenora.
SCENE, Barcellona.

THE Spanish Wives, etc.
ACT 1.
Enter the Governor of Barcellona, and the Marquess of Moncada. Govern.
PRithee, my Lord Marquess, don't trouble me with thy Jealous Whims: You say,
there was Masqueraders last Night under the Windows, -- why there let 'em be a
God's Name! I am sorry 'twas such a cold raw Night for the honest Lads. By the
Honor of Spain, if I had heard 'em, I would have sent the Rogues a Glass of
Malaga to warm 'em.


Marquess. O Lard! O Lard! I shall run mad! Sure, my Lord Governor, your Horns
will exceed the largest in the Palace-Hall. -- Oh! that my Wife were out of
your House, and Barcellona! Methinks I am not secure, though she is under eleven
Locks.


Gov. By my Holy Dame, I am of your Mind: I don't think you are secure.


Marq. How! Do you know any thing to the contrary?


Gov. Why, by the Mass, this I believe: her Head's at work;
And I dare say, she has made ye a Cuckold,
In Imagination, with every Don she has through
Any Peep-hole seen, since your first Marriage.

Marq. Oh! dam' her! dam' her!

Gov. You Will never take my Advice.
Sings. -- Give but a Woman her Freedom still,
Then she will never act what is ill:
It Is crossing her, makes her have the Will.
-- though! I have been in England --
There they are the happiest Husbands --
If a Man does happen to be a Cuckold,
Which, by the way, is almost as rare as in Spain:
But, I say, if it does fall out, all his Wife's Friends
Are his; and he is caressed, -- nay, Godszooks, many times
Rises to his Preferment by it.

Marq. Oh, insufferable! I am not able to bear your Discourse.
Enter a Country Fellow. -- A Man coming from my Wife's Apartments!
-- Oh, the Devil! the Devil!

Gov. I see no cloven Foot he has.

Marq. No; but he is one of his Imps; a Letter-Carrier.
I read it in his Face.

Gov. Oh! I begin to perceive it now, -- here is the
Superscription writ in his Forehead: -- To the
Beauteous Donna Elenora, Marchioness
Of, etc. Ay, it is very plain.

Marq. Well, Governor, these Jeers will not be put up so.

Country Fellow. What a wannion ails ye, trow? What do ye mean by Letters? Ich
am no Schollard; my Calling is to zell Fruit; and zum of the Meads of this
Hause (Meads Ich think 'em) beckoned me in; -- I zould 'em zum; and that is all
I know.

Gov. Ay, honest Fellow, I dare swear it is: -- why, if thou were a Monkey, he would
be Jealous on thee.

Marq. You may think what you please, but I fear other things.
Therefore, if, as a Guest, you will let me have
The Freedom of your House, I Will take
This Fellow in, and search him.

Gov. Ay, with all my Heart. -- Oh these Jealous Fools!

Aside. Marq. Come along, sirrah; I Will look as much as in thy Mouth.

Gov. Ay, for fear there should be a Note in a hollow Tooth.

Count. Fellow. Why, -- de ye zee, as for matter of that, --
ye ma' look in my A --

Gov. Hold, Beast, it is a Man of Quality you speak to.

Count. Fell. Zooks, I think it is a Madman.

Marq. Come your ways, Impudence!

Count. Fell. But, Sir, Sir, -- must the Meads zerch me, or the Men?

Marq. I Will tell you presently, ye wanton Rogue.

Exit. driving him before him. Enter the Governor's Lady. Gov. How now, Tittup?

Lady. Morrow, Deary.

Gov. Why, Tittup, here the Marquess has been fretting,
Fuming, swearing, raging: he is just Horn-mad --
Hark ye, Tittup, did you hear any Serenading last night?

Lady. Yes, Deary; 'twas the English Colonel to me; --
You are not angry, Deary.

Gov. Not I. Sings.
He that has a handsome buxom Wife,
Must surely be always pleased;
Blessed with a pleasant quiet life,
And never, never teased.
But hark ye, Tittup, that English Colonel
Has such a Lear, such a Tongue, such a Nose,
Such a -- have a care on him, Tittup.

Lady. I warrant ye, Deary, the honest Freedom you allow
Is sufficient: ^'ll never go farther.
You know, he dines here to day, and brings
His Music to entertain us in the Afternoon.

Gov. Yes, yes; I must dispatch some business,
To be ready to receive him, -- B'w'ye Tittup!

Lady. B'w'ye, Deary: Buss, before ye go. --

Gov. (Kisses her) A pies! a pies! your Kisses glow! Fie, fie! I don't love ye.
Exit. laughing.

Lady. It Is my Colonel, my Peregrine, sets my Heart on fire;
And gives that warmth my old Husband found
Upon my Lips -- But then such a Husband, --
So good, so honest, preventing every Wish. --
-- Then such a Colonel, so handsome, so young.
So charming, -- Where Is the Harm to give a Worthy
Begging Stranger a little Charity from a Love's Store,
When the kind old Governor can never never miss it?

Exit. SCENE, a Palace.
Enter Count Camillus, and Friar Andrew. Friar. Well, my Lord! now we are come
to Barcellona, I fear this Devil of a Marquess will be too hard for us.


Camil. How, Father Andrew, desponding! -- 'Twas but this Morning, over your
Malaga, you swore by the Eleven Thousand Virgins, and all your Catalogue of
Saints, you would bring my Elenora to my Arms.


Friar. And by Fifty Thousand more, so I will, if it be possible: If not, my
Oath is void: You know the Marquess hates me heartily, as I do him, because
once he caught me carrying your Letter to his Wife.


Came. For the good Office, I think, used ye most scurvily.


Friar. Scurvily! basely, barbarously; without respect to these sacred Robes;
tossed me in a Blanket; covered me with Filth and Dust; and so sent me by force
to our Covent. For which, and my natural Inclination to Cuckoldom, I have
joined in your Attempts, and waited on you to Barcellona, to be revenged.


Came. You know there is Justice in my Cause. --
Elenora was, by Contract, mine, at Rome;
Before this old Marquess had her. And could I again
Recover her: I don't question but to get Leave of his Holiness
For a Divorce, and marry her my self.

Friar. Nay, that is as you please; when she is in your possession, marry, or
not, it is all one to Father Andrew; it never shall trouble my Conscience. I
must own, were I in your Condition, I should not marry; because daily
Experience shows, a Wife's a Cloy, and a Mistress a Pleasure.


Came. Well, we'll discourse that when we have the Lady; and in the mean time,
good Father, be diligent.


Friar. I think I am diligent; I am sure, I am worn to mere Skin and Bone in
your service. This morning I found for ye a Mercury, a Letter-Carrier, that can
slip through a Keyhole, to deliver a Billetdoux to a fair Lady,


Came. I wish he were returned; I f^ar some Misfortune has befallen him.


Friar. O! here he comes, sound Wind and Limb!
[ Enter Hidewell ( the Country Fellow before.] -- So, my dear Tool of
Gallantry! how have thou sped?

Hidewell. Gad, the hardest Task I ever undertook. -- Sir, you gave me five
Ducats, -- as I hope for Preferment, and to be made Pimp-master general, it
deserves double the Sum.


Came. Nor shall thou fall of it, Boy, if thou have succeeded.


Hidew. First then, the damned old jealous Marquess caught me, and
notwithstanding my counterfeit Speech and Simplicity, had me amongst his
Varlets, to be searched. They knew his Custom, and no sooner entered, but they
flew upon me like so many Furies: I feared it had been to tear me Limb from
Limb; but it proved only to tear my Clothes off; which was done in a twinkling,
and I left as naked as my Mother bore me; whilst the old Marques^, grovel'd all
over my habiliments, and run Pins in 'em, so thick, that a poor Louse would not
have 'scap'd spitting. The only thing which pleased me, was to observe a
Peep-hole the Maids (knowing this to be their Master's Searching-room) had
made; and sometimes one Eye, sometimes another, viewing my Proportions.


Came. But had you any Letter? was that safe?
Satisfy me there.

Hidew. Pray let me take my own method. --
Nothing being found, they gave me again my Clothes,
And the Marquess a Ducat for my Trouble:
Yet I had a Letter --

Came. Which thou ingeniously swallow'dst.

Hidew. No; which I more ingeniously brought.

Came. What, in thy Hat?

Hidew. My Hat had the same severe Trial.

Came. Thy Shoes --

Hidew. They passed the same Scrutiny, -- impossible in any of them to hide a
Scrip, the least shread of Paper.

Came. How then?

Hidew. My Lord, do ye observe this Stick?

Came. (viewing it) Yes, it is an honest Crabtree-stick --
I see no more in it.

Friar. (taking the Stick, and putting on his Spectacles to view it) Come,
come, let me see it; I can smell ou^ a Note that comes from a fair Hand; -- By
St. Dominick, here is neither Paper nor Writing upon it.

Hidew. Give it me. ( He unskrews the Ferrule at the bottom, takes out the
Letter, and gives it to Camillus.)

Friar. Thou dear Abstract of Invention, let me kiss thee.

C^m. Excellent H^dewell! if thou will stay with me, whilst
I am in Barcellona, I Will satisfy thy utmost Wishes.

Hidew. Most willingly.

Came. Here Father, here dear Confident! Orada writes^
That the tormented Marquess has remo^'d her
From those Apartments that were next the Streets,
To some that overlook the Gardens, -- thither,
She says, my Elenora would have me come this night;
And if they can find a place to 'scape at,
Before the Lodgings are better secured, they will:
If not, we shall hear of them, -- a gentle Whistle
Is the Sign. -- Hidewell, you shall not appear in this,
Because if seen, you would be known again.

Friar. Pray let me go: Gad, if the Business should be done
Without my Help, I should take it very ill.

Came. Well, well, we will in, and consider on it. Exeunt.
Scene draws, and discovers the Governor, his Lady, Colonel Peregrine, several
Gentlemen and Ladies. A SONG.
I.
ALas! when Charming Sylvia's gone,
I sigh, and think my self undone:
But when the lovely Nymph is here,
I Am pleased, yet grieve and hope, yet fear^
Thoughtless of all but her I rove;
Ah! tell me, is not this to love?
II.
Ah me! what Power can move me so?
I dye with Grief when she must go;
But I revive at her return;
I smile, I freeze, I pant, I burn:
Transports so sweet, so strong, so new,
Say, Can they be to Friendship due?
III.
Ah! no, it is Love, it is now too plain,
I feel, I feel the pleasing Pain:
For, who ever saw bright Sylvia's Eyes,
But wished, and longed, and was her Prize?
Gods^ if the Truest must be blessed,
Oh! let her be by me possessed.
Colonel Peregrine and the Governor's Lady dance; all the Time the Governor
cries, -- Ha boy, Tittup!
Well done, Tittup!
Ha boy, Tittup!

Gov. The Dance done, he goes to her, -- You are hot, you are hot Child.

Lady. A little warm.

Gov. Well, Tittup, do but carry thy Body swimmingly,
Without tripping, and we will begin a Reformation
In Barcellona, shall thou go through Spain, --
The Ladies shall live like Cherubims, --
But have a care, Tittup, have a care of a faux pas.

Lady. Fear not, Deary.

Gov. Come, now let us sit down, and see the rest perform --
Let me have some lively Songs --
Colonel Peregrine goes to sit next the Governor's Lady. -- Hold, Friend,
hold! I have not learnt so much
Of your English Fashion yet, to let another man
Sit by my Wife, and I decently keep at a distance.

Coll. I beg your Pardon, Sir.

Gov. Nay, -- no harm; -- (Sings)
If an old man has a beauteous Treasure,
Let her sing, and dance, and laugh without measure,
And then she will think of no other Pleasure.

Col. Your own, Sir?

Gov. Ay, ay Boy; I have a Thousand of 'em
In a day, ex tempore.

Col. Is It possible?

Gov. Come, now I have done, do you strike up. --

(Songs and Dances.) The Music ended, enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord, there is
to wait on your Honor, --
His Excellency the Duke Gonsalvo de Medina, de Sidoni, de --

Gov. Hold, hold, enough, enough, -- Where is he?

Serve. In the Hall of Ceremonies.

Gov. Gadso! I must go to him, sit you merry,
I Will be with you presently. Exeunt all but Colonel Peregrine, the Lady, and
Spywell.

Lady. Spywell, stand at yonder Door, and give me information, as soon as ever
my Lord comes up the great Stairs.

Spywell. I will, Madam.

Col. My Angel! by Heaven I am raging mad;
Burnt up with violent Love. -- Thy Shape --
Thy every Motion fires me, -- but thy Eyes --
They set me in a Blaze -- Oh! I must dye,
Unless the Cordial of returning Kindness save me!

Lady. Can you be so Ungenerous to wrong this noble Governor, who is so fond of
you, and even dotes on me?

Col. He wronged thee more, when he condemned thy lovely
Youth to withered Sapless Arms. -- Can little foolish Tricks
Of fondness make amends for Ecstasies, Pantings,
The Joys unutterable of vigorous Love?

Lady. I must not hear ye.

Col. You must, you must -- I Will, kneeling, fix Ten thousand
Burning Kisses on thy Beauteous Hand;
And the little wanton God swims and revels in thy spritely Ey^s.

Lady. Why am I fastened here! -- too Rigorous Heaven!
Take from this wondrous Stranger his Conquering Charms,
Or give me more Insensibility!

Enter Spywell. Spyw. Madam, my Lord's upon the Stairs.

Lady. Away, away; mark what I say, and keep up the Discourse.

Coll. This is but living upon the Rack;
You might contrive a better Opportunity.

Lady. Peace, and observe. -- But are your Ladies then so free
And yet so innocent in England? --

Gov. (peeping) -- Gadso, -- they are together; though I am not jealous, it is
convenient to hear a little what their Conversation is.

Coll. -- Chaster in their Thoughts than your Nuns, yet merrier: more
frollicksome than your Carnavals.


Lady. Very pleasant! just so I would live, -- yet
If a bold encouraged Wretch once offered at my Honor,
I would not stay to use my Husband's Sword, -- but
With my own Hands stab the vile Presumer.

Coll. You need not, Madam, talk of Weapons; your Eyes,
Though they roll in Fire, yet shoot chaste Beams,
And show your Heart as cold as Ice.

Gov. So, so; very, very well, by the Mass!
How is it my Ganymede of the War, who look
Fitter to storm Hearts than Towns. -- Yet, igad, you English Boys
Fear not their pretty Faces, but Fight like rugged Romans,
Or the old rough Gauls.

Coll. You compliment us, my Lord.

Gov. No faith, I hate 'em. -- Well, Tittup, are ye almost ready for your
Dinner?

Lady. When you please, Deary.

Gov. I warrant the Marquess would not let his Wife dine with us for the King
of Spain's next Plate-Fleet.

Lady. He has let me see her but once; -- when I offered it again, he plainly
told me, my Company was unfit for her: -- rude Brute!

Coll. To us who have been bred otherwise it seems a Miracle,
That men can be so barbarous to the Fair Sex.

Gov. But I Will set 'em an Example, if Tittup holds her Ground.
-- Come along -- (Sings.)
Merrily, merrily let us pass our Time,
In Freedom, Joy and Plenty:
At Sixty appear but in our Prime,
Whilst the Thinking Sot is old at Twenty.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE, a Chamber.
Enter Elenora Marchioness of Moncada, and Orada. Elen. Do think the
Messenger got off, Orada?

Or. Faith I know not, Madam, -- I thought I heard the Marquess's Voice as he
went out. -- The Fellow seemed very cunning. --

Elen. All his Policy but little would avail him,
If my Husband met him, -- by Heaven
It Is kindly done of Count Camillus, to leave his Wealth,
His Palaces, and all the Pleasures of delightful Rome,
To follow wretched me to Barcellona.
I am a thing accursed by cruel Guardians,
For my Parents died when I was young; they would not else
Sure have forced me, condemned to an old jealous
Madman. -- I saw his Follies and his Humors, and I begged,
Like a poor Slave, who views the Rack before him, --
All in vain; they were inexorable. -- so may just Heaven
Prove to them in their greatest need!

Or. This is a melancholy Thought, Complaints will not break Locks; we must set
our Wits at work to free our selves. I have searched the Lodgings round, but
there is no Passage; an imprisoned Mouse could scarce escape.


Elen. But prithee, dear Orada, how got you in favor with my Lord? He used to
hate ye abominably.


Or. True; and whilst he did so, it was impossible for me To serve you^
Ladyship. -- So I wheeled about, --

Railed at you and all your Ways most heartily,
And immediately obtained his Grace.

Elen. Would that do?


Or. Yes, with a bantering Letter I showed him, pretending I had got it from
you; and a long Harangue how Wives ought to hear with their Husbands Ears, see
with their Eyes, and make use of no sense without Permission. In fine, I
ravished him with my Discourse, till he threw those withered Sticks, his Arms,
about me, and swore I should remain his Heart's Joy.


Elen. ^Tis a great Point gained, you must wheedle him this Night with some
Story, and keep him in the Closet -- whilst I watch for Camillus, or his Agent.


Or. I warrant you, Madam.


Elen. Orada, get me the Song I love, the succeeding tedious;
Imprisoned Wretches thus count the succeeding Hours,
And groan the melancholy Time away.
A SONG.
BE gone, be gone, thou Hagg despair;
Be gone, back to thy Native Hell:
Leave the Bosom of the Fair,
Where only Joy should dwell.
Or else, with Misers, willing Revels keep;
And stretch thy wretched Lids from Sleep.
But hence be gone, and in thy hated room
Let Hope, with all its gentle Blessings, come.
(A Noise of unlocking Doors.) -- So! now my Jailer comes.

Or. Then I Will observe my Cue. -- Come, come Madam,
You must not complain. -- Suppose your Husband
Kept you in an Oven, or a Cellar, you ought to be content --
I say, -- Wives must submit.

El. Hold thy Tongue, Impertinence! --
When you were good for any thing, my Husband
Would not let ye come at me: now he has brought you
To his turn, I must be perpetually plagued with you.

Enter the Marquess. Marq. You are a perpetual Plague to me, I Am sure --
You hate every body that tells you your Duty.

El. Inhuman Spaniard! -- what would thou have?
-- Am I not immured, buried alive?

Marq. Yes, yes; I have your Body, but your Heart is with the young Count
Camillus. Do You blush, ye Strumpet, in Imagination^ -- Ye Eve! Dalilan Devil!
I Will let out that bounding Blood. -- Orada -- get a Surgeon to take away fifty
ounces.


Orad. My Lord, you are not mad! What! have a Surgeon quiddling her white Arm,
and looking Babies in her Eyes!


El. Monster! be thy self the Butcher, and let my Heart's Blood out: That
Gentleman you named has Honor, Truth, and Virtue.


Marq. Thou lie, false Women! he is a Rake, a Hellhound, and wallowing now in
Rome's Brothels.


Or. I could contradict him if I durst. Aside.


Elen. (laughing) Perhaps so.


Marq. Do You fleer, poisonous Witch? I am going to dispatch the ^ast Business
that brought me to Barcellona. Then, Minion, thou shall be immured in a remote
Castle, where thou shall not see the Face of Human-kind, except thy Women, and
when I design to visit thee.


Elen. Know this, and let it gnaw thy Jealous Heart:
Thy Visits will be my severest Punishment.

Marq. Watch her, Orada; preach those Maxims thy Zeal for me suggests; let her
not have Liberty to think.

Or. Fear not; let me alone to teaze her.

Exit Marquess, locking the Doors after him. Elen. Ay, -- make all fast --
Insufferable Tyrant! -- Come Orada,
Let Us go view the dear place, which at
Wish'd^for Night brings my dear Camillus to me.

Exeunt. SCENE, a Hall.
Enter the Marquess. Marq. Where Is this plaguey Governor? I must have him with
me, because it is about the King's Business; though I hate him for breaking^ our
Spanish Customs, in letting his Jilting Wife have such Liberty. -- Ha! here she
comes, -- and a Spark with her; -- I Will abscond, and see how virtuously she
carries her self.


Enter Colonel Peregrine, and the Governor's Lady. Lady. I dare not stay, --
my Husband thinks I am gone into my Chamber; if by any chance he should come
this way, all our Hopes are ruined.


Coll. Were he by, I Would seal my Vows upon thy melting Lips -- Oh! receive my
Heart; it flutters near thee, and struggles for passage.


Lady. I am covered over with Blushes!


Marq. (aside, peeping) Confound your Modesty! were you mine, you should be
cover'c over with Blood.


Coll. My Life! cannot ye contrive some way to bless me? Your Sex were ever most
ingenious lucky at Invention.


Lady. Suppose you pretended a Quarrel in England, -- for which you were
pursued, and begged Leave to hide here. -- If you were in the House, I might
get an Opportunity to visit ye, -- But sure you would not be such a naughty man
to ruin me, if I did.


Col. Not for the World!


Lady. I would fain love ye, and preserve my Honor.


Col. That is preserved whilst it is concealed: The Roses in your Cheeks will
only wear a fresher Die, -- and those dear Eyes are no Tell-tales, Love will
make 'em shine and sparkle more. -- I Will put your Advice in execution.


Lady. I must not venture on another moment. -- Farewell.


Exeunt severally. Col. Farewell, my Blessing.


Enter Marquess. Marq. Oh Women! Women! Women! -- They are Crocodiles, they are
painted Serpents, gilded Toys, disguised Fiends, -- But why name I these? They
are Women -- Just such another is my Damsel of Darkness; if Fortune would but
throw a handsome Fellow in her way. -- Here comes the Governor, singing, I
warrant ye, -- poor Credulous Fool, -- I cannot but laugh -- ha, ha, he!

Enter the Governor singing: Let her have her will, etc. -- Hey da! I am glad
to find you so merry. It Is as great a wonder to see you laugh, as 'twou'd be to
see me cry -- And that I have not done these Fifty Years, old Boy.


Marq. My Lord, which is best, for a man's Wife to Cuckold him in Imagination or
Reality?


Gov. Lord! Lord! your Head is always upon Cuckolding, All the Cuckolds may be
hanged, for what I care.


Marq. Oh fie, no! Hanging would be a scurvy Death for a man of your Quality.


Gov. Why -- what do you mean by that, now, ha? -- Don't provoke me, I say -- do
not -- I shall make old Toledo walk if you do, for all it is in my own House.


Marq. I must not tell him now, -- It will put him so out of Humor, he will not go
with me, -- 'Twas only a Jest, my Lord, -- I would beg the Honor of your
Company to the Duke of Sidonia's.


Gov. With all my Heart -- come, come: Sings.

Tormented still's the Jealous Fool,
Himself, nor Bosom Wife can never rest:
Yet he often proves the Woman's Tool,
Whilst the Contented Man is ever blessed.

Exeunt. SCENE, A Chamber.
Enter Camillus, Friar Andrew, and Hidewell, with a Ladder of Ropes. Came. So,
Hidewell! Have thou got the Ladder of Ropes?


Hidew. Yes, my Lord, here is all the Tackling.


Fri. Is it strong? -- for I am something weighty.


Cant. How, Father! just now you said you were worn to Skin and Bone.


Fri. Ay, my Lord; but you know Bones ill covered will soonest be broken.


Came. True; take care of your self besure. -- Hidewell, I have altered my Mind,
-- Thou shall along with us; watch on the outside the Wall, and give us notice
when the Coast is clear.


Hidew. With all my Heart.


Fri. Let me see, have I got my Holy Water about me?


Came. Holy Water! for what?


Fri. Oh! I always love to say my Prayers, and have those Trinkets, when I
undertake a dangerous Design.


Came. Don't be so profane, Domine, -- you will never thrive, -- yet, if your
Devotion's strong, you have time enough -- We shall not go this Hour or two.


Fri. Nay, I will not hinder ye, -- an Ejaculation as I go along does the Business.


Enter a Serva^ Serve. My Lord, the English Colonel, that lodges in the House,
sends to know if you are at leisure.


Came. Tell him, I am, -- and long to kiss his Hands. -- I like that Gentleman,
he appears brave Exit Servus.

And bold -- should our Designs grow desperate:
I dare believe he would not scruple his Assistance.

Fri. Faith and troth I like him too, -- he treats like an Emperor; I dined
with him to day, -- and he so gentilely, so agreeably forced Flesh upon me,
that by St. Dominick, I could not refu^e him; though it is a strict Fast, a
horrible strict Fast, as I hope to be an Abbot. -- Then the obliging Toad has
such a Waggish Eye, I Will pawn my ^eads, a plaguey Dog for the Women, and they
are ever good-natured: -- By his Holiness's Toe, I love the Sex my self, -- for
all this dangling Robe, and my foolish Vow of Chastity.


Came. It Is pity you were not a Knight Errant, -- the Church has robbed the
Ladies of a famous Adorer.


Fri. No, faith, my Lord, I do 'em more Service in these Weeds: I have saved
many a desperate Soul.


Came. How!


Fri. Thus: in procuring them the full Possession of their Desires; and that
su^ely brought 'em to Repentance; and you know, what Repentance brings 'em to.


Hidew. Truly, Father, I shall grow angry with you; for if once the Priests
take up the Office of Procuring, there will be no Business for a Lay-Pimp.


Came. Peace, -- the Colonel comes.


Enter Colonel Peregrine. Col. -- I am your Lordship's humble Servant, -- I
have just had some Music to complement me, -- I am a great Lover of it, -- if
your Lordship is so, we will have the Entertainment there.


Came. Nothing can oblige me more. -- Some Chairs there!


A Dialogue-Song and Dances: at the time of the Dances Camillus and Peregrine
seem in Discourse. Hidew. If your Lordship pleases, being in this Dress, I will
aim at a Jigg, I danced thus once in a Masquerade.


Came. Prithee do. A Iigg by Hidewell.


A SONG. Betwixt Mr. Leveridge a Spaniard, and Mrs. Cross an English Lady.
He. FAirest Nymph that ever blessed our Shore,
Let me those charming Eyes adore,
And fly no more, and fly no more.
She. Spaniard, thy Suit is all in vain;
I was born where Women reign,
And cannot brook the Laws of Spain.
He. For thee my Native Customs I Will forgo,
Cut my black Locks, and turn a Beau.
She. E're I submit to be your Wife,
Listen to an English Husband's life;
With Sparks abroad I Am every day,
Gracing the Gardens, Park, or Play,
Hearing all the pretty things they say;
Give and take Presents, and when that is done,
You thank the Beaux when I come home.
He. Oh! I now my Temper fear.
She. Oh! sigh not yet, there is more to hear:
At my Levy crowding Adorers stand,
Fixed on my Eyes, and grasping my white Hand;
All their Conrts and Oglings bent on me,
Not one regardful Look toward thee:
At this thou must be pleased, or else not see.
He. Then we must part, and I must die.
She. If thou art such a Fool, what care I?
He. I cannot share thee, so I am undone.
She. A wiser will supply thy Room.
Chorus. Then we must part, etc.
If thou art such a Fool, etc.
I cannot share thee, etc.
A wiser will supply, etc.
Col. (To the Singers and Dancers) -- So, well performed; -- return to my
Apartments, I Will be with ye presently.


Exeunt. Came. The odness of our Adventures surprise me: -- Both our Mistrisses
in the same House! -- I hope 'twill further our Designs.


Col. It must. -- My Lord, I have a Favor to beg; That you would lend me one
of your Implements to morrow, to manage a Plot I have in agitation.


Came. Most willingly take your Choice.


Fri. I am at your Service.


Hidew. You are so forward, -- Canonical Fornication-Broker, -- I believe I am
fittest for the Gentleman's Service.


Fri. Goodlack, Upstart! I helped ye to my Lord, -- and now ye are for
engrossing all Business to your self.


Col. Nay, -- I must have the most expert, because the Case is difficult.


Fri. Well! I Will not say much! -- But here stands little Andrew, who has
undertook to bring a Smock-fac'd Cardinal to a Maddona, secured with a Guard
more num^rous than Argus's Eyes, and more dreadful than the Dragon you wot of
-- yet spite of massy Doors, impenetrable Bolts, and Italian Padlocks, ^ffect^d
it.


Hidew. Phough! what is that! I have carried on an Amor for the Queen of Spain,
-- conveyed her Letters made up in Wax-Candles; Love-Complaints writ in the
inside of her Glove; besides a Thousand other Contrivances you never dreamt of.
-- It Is true, at last the Fate of all Court-Pimps was mine: I fell into
Disgrace; as that had raised me, so it ruined me; I lost a Coach and Six by my
Profession, -- And shall you pretend to Rival me?


Fri You lost! why, Sirrah, Sirrah! I tell thee, if I had employed my Parts in
Church-Politicks, in Tricks of Priestcraft, by this time I had been Pope. --
But the bringing kind loving things together, was dearer to me than the Tripple
Crown, -- And shall a Varlet contend with me?


Col. Gentlemen! dispute no more; I find either of you is qualified for my
purpose. -- My Noble Lord, good Night, -- if you want me, on the least notice,
I am ready. Exit Col.


Came. I thank you, dear Neighbor, good Night. -- Hidewell, take up the Ropes,
and come away.


Fri. Along, Blunderbuss.


Hidew. I hope, Father Peremptory, before to morrow Morning, you will stand in
need of my Cunning, to deliver that loved Carcass from some imminent Danger.


Fri. I defy thee, and all thy shallow Imaginations.


Came. Leave jangling, and make haste.


Exeunt. SCENE, a Palace.
Enter the Marquess, Orada following him. Ora. -- My Lord, I have a Thousand
things of greater consequence to say. -- Pray return.


Marq. Dear Orada, by and by; I must see where my Devil of a Wife is.


Ora. You know she cannot pass the Lodgings, perhaps she is at her Devotions.


Marq. No, she is too foul to Pray.


Ora. (Taking him by the Arm) -- But, my Lord, -- as I was saying, --


Marq. (Flinging from her) I Will return immediately. --


Ora. There Is no keeping this mad Fool out of his Wife's sight; -- They must
even to Bed, whilst I parle with the Lover.


Enter Marquess, pulling in Elenora. Marq. -- So, Gentlewoman! I have caught
ye! -- How? With your Head out at Window, making your amorous Complaints!


Elen. I was almost stifled for want of her. -- Sure you are not Jealous of the
Trees and Stars, -- They were my only Objects.


Marq. Oh Impudence! did I not hear you say, When will he come; my Light, my
Life, break through this Veil of Darkness, and shoot with Rays of Comfort on me?


Ora. (aside) A duce of these thinking Minds! so brimfull of Cogitations, they
must run over.


Elen. I knew you behind me, and therefore did it to torment ye.


Marq. It may be so; but I sha'n't trust ye -- Come, into the Bedchamber. --
Orada, do you School her, -- I Will wat^h for your Light and Life my self.


Or. My Lord, you had better go to Bed with her, and then you will be secure.


Marq. No, no; in, in. (Shuts 'em in and locks the Door) -- Now for my Pistols
-- that I may give this Midnight-Guest the Welcome he deserves. Exit.


SCENE changes to an Orchard.
Count Camillus and Friar Andrew come down the Wall by a Ladder of Ropes.
Friar. -- So! -- We are got well in; Heaven send us safe out again!


Came. Father, Father! don't trouble Heaven in this Affair, you will never prosper.


Friar. Bless me, my Lord! Prayers are natural to me: if you are so wicked to
neglect 'em, I cannot help that.


Came. Come, mind your Business: where is the Whistle?


Friar. Here, here, -- now for a delicious Vision, Of a peeping Angel! Whistles.


(The Marquess above.) Marq. The Signal's given, and here is the Answer. Shoots
off a Pistol.


( Friar Andrew falls flat.) Came. We are discovered; and if I stay, all other
Opportunities are left for ever. --

A Cry within of Thieves! Thieves! -- Why Friar! Friar! Father! You are not
hurt, the Bullets went over our Heads.


Friar. Are ye sure I am not hurt? -- I did conceive I was killed.


Came. No, no; but I know not what you may be if you stay -- Follow me, with
speed. Came. gets over the Ladder.


Friar. Oh Pox! the Devil of all ill Luck! ruined, hanged, When the Friar is
halfway up, the Ladder breaks, and falls down.
drawn, and quartered! No possibility of escaping without a Miracle, -- and I
cannot have the Impudence to expect a Miracle. -- Noise within, Where! Where!
Thieves follow. -- Oh! they come! they come! -- and now at my greatest
Extremity I cannot pray. -- God so! here is a Tree! -- I Will try to mount it.
Gets up the Tree.


Enter the Marquess, and several Servants. Marq. Search well, Boys! leave not a
Shrub or Tuft of Grass unexamin'd -- Five Pistoles to him who finds One.


1 Serve. I warrant ye, my Lord! let us alone for ferreting 'em! -- Soho! what
have we here -- A Pox, it is a Stub of a dead Tree -- 'thas broke my Nose.


(Another Servant looking up in the Tree, where the Friar is.) 2 Serve. Oh
Rogue! Are ye there? I Will be with ye presently. ( Friar Andrew, as the Fellow
gets up, throws his Bottle of Holy Water full in his Eyes, and pulls his Cowl
over his Face, and roars out: They bot^ fall from the Tree together.) -- The
Devil, the Devil! oh, my Eyes are out! The rest cry, The Devil! They drive the
Marquess in, who often turns, and cries: Let me see him! let me see him!


The Friar follows 'em roaring. SCENE changes to the inner part of the House.
Several Servants enter in Confusion, -- a great knocking at the Door, and cry
of Fire, Fire^ One of the Servants open the Door, -- Enter Hidewell, Men and
Maids, as from their Beds -- some crying, Fire, some Murder, Treason, etc.
After them -- Enter Friar Andrew, driving several Servants, who run out,
crying, the Devil! the Devil! Hidew. -- Make haste, unlucky Devil! -- 'Twas I
cried Fire! opened the Door for your deliverance -- Fly, and own me for the
Master of your Art for ever.


Friar. I cannot stay to thank ye, -- But -- I yield, I yield. Exit running.


Enter the Governor, in his Nightcap, and Sword drawn. Gov. Benedicta Maria!
What! Fire, Murder, and Treason all abroach at once! -- a horrible Plot! -- By
the Honor of Spain, a terrible one, as I hope to be a Grandee!


Enter the Governor's Lady a^tended. Lady. S^ywell, what can be the meaning of
this? My Colonel would not come in such a way. -- My Lord! my Deary! the
Matter, -- the Cause of this Disturbance!


Gov. Here, Sirrah! raise all the Guards: Oh Titt^p! we are like to be murdered,
-- drowned, and blown up, no body knows how, nor which way: A damnable Plot! by
his Majesty's Mustach^es I swear!


Lady. Sure it is a false Alarm, -- The House has been searched by so^e Servants
discreerer than the rest, -- and they find nothing.


Enter Marquess, cutting his Servants. M^rq. Villains! Dogs! under the notion
of the Devil,
These Sheep-lookt Rogues, these Dastard Whelps,
Have let the Robber of my Honor escape; whilst I
But just examined if my Wife was safe, the Wolf, the Goat is gone.

Gov. Hey da! my Lord Marquess, Are we then alarmed only with a jealous Whim of
yours? By the Peace and Pleasure of my Life, I Will suffer it no longer. -- Any
other of my Palaces are at your Service; but such a Wasp shall molest my
Honey-hive no more.


Marq. Uncivil Lord! thy Palaces, nor all thy Wealth should bribe my stay, --
To morrow I Have resolved for my departure, -- in the interm, I desire an hours
Conference.


Gov. Soon as you please, I am free.


Enter a Servant, with Hidewell. Serve. My Lord, here we have found a man that
(...) body knows.


Gov. Ha! who are ye, Sirrah? Your Name? From whence do you come? Whither do you
go? What Is your Business? -- Answer me all at once.


Hidew. I daut I caunt, -- but I Will do no more than monny a Mon; I will tell ye
the truth: Coming to Morket with my Fruit, do you zee, Ich heard the noise of
Fire, Fire! Thieves, and suchlike, -- zo che thought good Crabtree-stick might
walk amongst the Rogues; zo Ich have left the Fruit with our Margery, and come
with main Vorce to help ye, do you zee.


Gov. An honest Lad! and, do you hear, you may sell your Fruit to my Family.


Hidew. O Lard, O Lard! Ch'am a made Mon, and my Wife and Children: what! zell
my Fruit to my Lord Governor -- made for ever! henceforth I Will scorn my
Neighbors, and despise my Betters.


Mar. I like this Fellow, because I searched him thoroughly, and found him no
Go-between. -- Here, Sirrah! there is something for ye, -- and were I to stay,
ye should ha^ my Custom.


Hidew. I thank your Honors.


Gov. (to a Sentinel) Let him out. Exit Hidew.


Marq. Youll remember to morrow morning early.


Gov. Most certainly.


Marq. (aside) Then I Will convince this credulous easy man what need there is
of watching one's Wife: -- Goodnight. Exit.


Gov. Farewell; go thy ways, for a troublesome, maggot-pated, jealous-crown^d
Simpleton, as thou art: -- Hey boy, Tittup! how is^t Tittup? how shall you and
I get to sleep again Tittup? ha!


Lady. I know not.


Gov. What, moody, Tittup! (Sings)

I Will rouse ye, and mouse ye, and touse ye as long as I can,
Till squeaking I make ye confess:
There Is Heat in a vigorous Old Man,
When he loves to excess, when he loves to excess.

Exeunt. The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, a Chamber.
Enter Camillus and Friar Andrew. Came. Cursed be my disappointing Stars, that
thus have crossed me! whilst I but aim at Elenora's Freedom; she, for my
Attempts, suffers from her Tyrant-Husband worse usage.


Friar. You may curse your Stars, if you please; but for my part, I bless the
pretty twinkling Gentlemen, -- that is, if they had an hand in my Deliverance.
-- I am sure, if I had been caught, my Usage would have been bad enough. -- I
long to know what is become of that Hangdog Hidewell. -- Oh! -- talk of the
Devil, and he appears.


Enter Hidewell. Hidew. -- Down on your Marrow-bones, Domine, and thank my
Ingenuity, else your brittle Thread had been cut; and you left in a dark way by
this time.


Friar. Come, come; don't be so triumphant: -- for had not my own roaring
Preaching Voice --


Hidew. Ay, ay; much used to Preaching, I believe, -- unless it was Indulgence
to a yielding Female.


Friar. Well, as I was saying, had not my own Almighty Voice struck Terror
through 'em, I had been in Limbo, long before your Ingenuity came to my
Assistance. -- Not but you did me a Kindness, -- and I acknowledge it, --
That Is enough for a man of my Qualifications.


Came. Oh Hidewell! -- all my Hopes are ruined, and poor Elenora must remain a
Slave for ^ver.


Hidew. My Lord, you are mistaken, -- our Expectations now stand fairer; the
Governor and Marquess both take me for a very silly honest Fellow, -- and have
ordered I shall have full and free access; -- then let me alone for a
Contrivance. -- I Will get the Lady for you, and the Woman for my self; following
the Example of all noble Knights, and trusty Squires.


Friar. I find you are providing for your selves: But what must I have for my
Pains-taking in this Affair?


Hidew. You know, you cannot marry; -- I Will give you leave
To tempt my Damsel, when I have her: Do You conceive
-- If she loves Spiritual Food, I Will not be your hind'rance.

Came. Dear Hidewell! thou shall go immediately; learn when they remove; ^athom
their Designs; I Will force her from him on the public Road. -- He ^orc'd her
from her plighted Faith, her Vows, and all her Wishes: My Force is just.


Hidew. Trust to me, my Lord, and fear not.


Enter Colonel Peregrine. Col. My Lord! your humble Servant! I have not rested to
night, since I heard of your Disappointment, reflecting how my own Affair may
prove.


Came. Ah Colonel! our Cases are very different, -- You hunt but for Enjoyment,
the huddl'd Raptures of a few tumultuous moments: -- But I am in quest of
Virgin-Beauty, made mine by Holy Vows; constrained by Fiends, instead of
Friends, to break the sacred Contract, and follow the Capricio of a mad Old
Man. -- Virgin did I call her? -- By Heaven, I dare bel^eve she is one, at
least her Mind is such; -- and were she in my power, I Would soon convince the
World of the Justice of my Cause.


Col. My Lord! you shall command my Sword and Interest in Barcellona, -- yet
you must give me leave to mind my own Affairs. -- I grant your Passion more
Heroic; -- for I should scarce accept the Governor's Wi^e for mine, if he
would give her: -- but I am amorous and eager, as Love and Beauty can inspire
hot and vigorous Youth.


Friar. By St. Dominick, well said, old Boy: I Will stick to thee. I hate these
whining Romantic Lovers. Nor would I have trudged to Barcellona, had I thought
the Count only fixed on Honora, -- ^sha, I can get it out, -- Honorable Love.


Col. Since you are so willing, Sir, -- I have Employment for you. -- Can you
play the Hector well, pursue with a fiery Countenance, swear without
intermission, make noise enough, no matter what you say?


Friar. I Will try, I Will try, -- hum! hum! -- by St. Dominick, by St. Patrick,
St. --


Col. Hold! hold! what do you mean? You must swear by Jupiter, Radamanthus, Mars,
and those blustering Sparks; not such puny passive Saints.


Friar. Well, Sir, -- I shall be soon instructed: -- But what must I swear all
this for? or like the Bullies of the Age, must it be all for nothing?


Col. No, no, there is a Cause; -- Come along with me -- and I Will give ye
Clothes, and full Directions.


Hidew. If I might advise ye, Sir, he should not undertake it; he has something
in that unlucky Phy's shows him unfi^, though coveting Intrigues: plaguey
unfortunate Lines, I swear.


Friar. Peace En^y^ Scrietchowl! Raven! Bat! Devil! When did I ever fail before
that Night? nor then neither, sirrah, ha!


Hidew. Rage on, Spite! I say but this. -- Have a care, when in all your
Gallantry, you don't forget, and make a Friar-like ^alutation.


Friar. Pox take ye for putting me in mind on it -- for, I always do a thing I
am forbid.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Please your Honor, a Lady desires to speak with you.


Came. I Will wait on her.


Col. I Will leave you this Apartment free, my Lord my Business being in haste.
-- Come, Father!


Came. Farewell: may your Desires be fulfilled, or you cur^d of 'em.


Col. Your Servant.


Friar. B'w'ye Hidewell! I don't question but to top you in my Performance when
we meet next.


Hidew. Heaven help the weak, I say. Exeunt Col. and Friar.


Enter Orada. Came. Ha, my dear Orada! What Miracle got thee this liberty?


Ora. My Lady was so thoroughly frighted at the noise of the Pistols, and the
Confusion she heard, (for you, I suppose) that she has since been ill. -- The
jealous Marquess could not find in's Heart to trust a Doctor with her, but sent
me for a Cordial.


Came. I hope her Sickness has no Danger in it.


Ora. No, no; it is over now, -- scarce enough left for a Pretext for, my coming.


Came. But, what Hopes? What shall be our next Design? Speak Comfort, my best
Friend!


Ora. Faith, I know not well: -- Suppose the Marquess were some way informed,
you are in Barcellona, -- 'twou'd ^right him out of his Wits; -- I Would back it,
and persuade him to send Elenora in the night privately, lest you attempt her
on the Road, -- then you may seize the unguarded Fair. -- Methinks something
like this might be done.


Came. We Will in, and consider farther on it.


Hidew. Hark ye, Donna, if your Lady falls to my Lord, you prove my natural
Perquisite, by the Example of a Thousand Years.


Oro. What means the Fellow?


Came. Despise him not, Orada; he has prodigious Parts under that Russet Coat.


Ora. I care not for him, nor his Parts, I shall never examine 'em.


Hidew. You and I shall be better acquainted for all this.


Ora. Away, Bumpkin!


Came. I tell ye he is a Beau in Disguise.


Ora. I believe so.


Came. Come to this inner Room, Orada, lest we are interrupted. Exeunt.


SCENE, a Hall.
Enter the Governor, Marquess, and Diego. Gov. A-pox, a-pox! Was this your
Conference^ -- If I had guessed at it, the Devil should have conferred with ye
for me.


Marq. I would have thanked a Friend that sorewarn'd me, of an approaching Evil.


Gov. Evil! What Evil? The Evil is my knowing it; if I had not, 't had been
none. -- Yet how am I convinced you have not abused my Tittup: -- By the Honor
of Spain, I Will Fight for Tittup: Guilty or not Guilty. -- My Lord! -- what you
have said is a scandalous, contagious, outrageous, --


Marq. Hold, -- if you say one word more, I draw.


Gov. Well, well! -- I will have Patience, -- but if this Colonel does not come
with the ^ham-plot you have buzzed into my Head, by King Philip's Beard, --


Marq. Threaten not; Ill meet you when and where you please, ill-manner'd Fool!
Exit.


Gov. Diego! I have born up, -- yet, Igad, to own the Truth, I am damnably
afraid -- there is something in it. -- That English Colonel is a plaguey Dog; he
looks as if he were made to enter all Breaches, conquer every way. -- I Will try
if I can sing after this News. (Sings)

Lock up a Woman, or let her alone;
Keep her in private, or let her be known:
It Is all one, it is even all one.
-- A scurvy Tune, as I hope to be a Grandee. -- Nay, if my Voice is broke, my
Heart will quickly follow^ -- Diego!


Dieg. My Lord!


Gov. I ever found thee faithful; -- if the Spark does come, follow exactly my
Directions, and all shall be well yet.


Dieg. Fear not me, my Lord, I Would lose a Leg or an Arm at any time in your
Honor's Service, and never cry, Oh! for it.


Gov. Hark, hark! I think I hear a Noise. Cry of Fire here.


Without, a Cry of Murder, and shutting Doors. Enter Col. Peregrine, his Sword
drawn, leaning upon his Servant. Col. Oh, my Noble Lord! I Am ruined, unless
your Pity save me: in England I, in a Duel, killed a Gentleman, and his Friends
have pursued me hither, setting upon me, Four at once.


Gov. Alas and welladay! it is sad indeed! and you, I warrant, are wounded
desperately.


Col. I fear, to death, -- oh! oh!


Gov. Ah, the dissembling Rogue! it grieves me almost to disappoint him, the
Smock-fac'd Dog does it so cunningly. aside -- Diego!


Dieg. Sir.


Gov. Diego, get one of my able Surgeons to search the Wound.


Col. I thank you, my Lord; my own Servant has great Skill in Surgery, I Will
trust him.


Gov. Diego! carry this Gentleman to an Apartment near the Garden, free from
Noise, -- I Will send Tittup to visit ye by and by.


Col. Your Lordship's all Goodness. Exit.


Gov. And thou all Treachery, -- Oh! the English whineing Dog -- how shall I
punish him? By the honor of Spain, he deserves to be utterly disabl'd, --
rendered wholly incapable. -- But I Will have Mercy in my Anger: hanged -- I have
loved the handsome Whipster, and he shall find it.

( Enter Diego.) -- So, -- have ye disposed of him as I ordered?


Dieg. Yes, my Lord; and whilst I was in the Chamber, he groaned as if his
Heart were breaking, -- But I had the Curiosity to stay a little at the Door,
and heard both laugh ready to burst, ^^'t please your Honor.


Gov. Please me! not much, in faith, Diego; but -- let me tell 'em, had they
fell into the hands of any other of our Nation, their Mirth would quickly have
been spoiled, and their Whoring too adod.


Enter Servants, hauling in Friar Andrew. Serve. My Lord, we have took the
Ringleader, that pursued the Noble English Colonel.


Gov. Good Boys! Good Boys! -- Well, Sir, -- And what are you?


Friar. If you are a man of Authority, as by your House and Port I guess you
are, I charge you, do me Justice; for by yonder blew Firmament, and all those
hated Stars, that twinkl'd at my Brother's Murder, I Will flea that cursed
Colonel.


Gov. Thou Hangdog, begot in Lewdness, and born in some Sink of Sin, -- Son of
a thousand Fathers, and Maker and Contriver of Cuckolds without number; I know
thee for a Pimp: Here, Diego! fasten upon one Whisker, whilst I take the other;
if they are fast, I may alter my Opinion^ -- They are reverend Whiskers, I
confess, -- if not, I proclaim thee a Pimp.


They pull, and the Whiskers come off between'em. Fri. Oh, mercy! mercy! I do
own my Profession; but good my Lord, forgive me.


Gov. Ay, that I will, but I Will punish thee first, -- here, -- carry him to the
red Tower, and let him have Two hundred Lashes, till all Thoughts of
Concupiscence, either for himself or others, be thoroughly mortified.


Fri. Hear me, my Lord!


Gov. No, away with him.


Fri. You must hear me; I am a Priest, I excommunicate ye else.


Gov. A Priest, and a Pimp! Oh Lord!


Fri. Why? is that such a Wonder?


Dieg. Look, my Lord! here hang his Beads under h^s Clothes.


Fri. Now, my Lord, you are satisfied the Secular Arm cannot punish me; pray
give me a Release.


Gov. Hold, hold, not so fast. -- Take him, and carry him to the next Abbey just
as he is, and tell the Fathers what ye know.


Fri. It Is well it is no worse, -- to deal with the Tribe, let me alone, they will
judge my Frailties by their own.


Gov. Say ye so, Beelzebub, in his own Clothing! but I Will be a Thorn in thy
side, I Will warrant thee, old Father Iniquity.


Serve. My Lord, w^'ll set the Mob upon him, that is worse than all the Justices
in Quorum.


Fri. I Will Curse, Excommunicate, Purgatory ye, Hang ye, Damn ye. Exit forced
off.


Enter Governor's Lady. Lady. My ^eary, Spywell tells me our dear Colonel's
wounded.


Gov. Oh, most dangerously, Tittup; he has as many holes through him as a Jew's
Cake.


Lady. Alas, then I fear he is dead.


Gov. No, no; Nature has framed his Body for the purpose; a Sword passes and
repasses like a Jugler's Ball, and no harm done.


Lady. Cruel Deary! you make a Jest ^n't, but I Will visit and comfort him.


Gov. Hold, hold; his Wounds are dressing: You would see him naked, would ye?


Lady. Oh Gad! not for the World.


Gov. Retire to your Chamber, I Will send for you when it is convenient.


Lady. I will, Dear; but pray take care of him.


Gov. Yes; there shall be Care taken of him, I promise ye. -- A hopeful young
Gentleman, by the Honor of Spain. -- Diego! follow to my Closet, there I Will
make thee sensible of my Design. Exeunt.


Enter the Marchioness Elenora, meeting Orada. Elen, Dear Orada! bring'st thou
Comfort, or must I remove from Barcellona to Wilds and unfrequented Deserts,
impenetrable Castles, and all the melancholy Mischiefs spritely Youth can fear?


Ora. I hope not, Madam; the Lord Camillus employs his Brain and all his busy
Instruments, for your deliverance.


Elen. Give me the Scheme of his Design, that I may guess at the Success.


Ora. Madam, -- my Lord. -- Enter the Marquess.


Elen. Take that -- thou impudent Performer of my Tyrant's Will, Strikes her.


Ora. My Lord, you see what I suffer for your Service.


Marq. But we'll be so revenged, Orada; when we ha^^ her wholly to our selves,
by Heaven, I Will bring that pampered Carcass down: The Roses shall wither in her
wanton Cheeks; her Eyes, whose hot Beams dart Fire, grow dull and languid: --
By all my Pangs of Jealousy, I Would rather clasp a Fiend, than Doubting Sleep by
such an Angel.


Elen. And it is thy Doubts, Old Man, not I, torment thee -- Our Sex, like
Water, glides along pleasant and useful; but if grasped by a too violent Hand,
unseen they slip away, and prove the fruitless Labor vain.


Marq. To Waters, Waves, and Rocks most justly may you be campar'd; -- but I
want time to hold an Argument. -- Prepare this Night for your remove, -- I am
fixed, -- your Jewels, Equipage and all put up.


Elen. Let my Slaves take care of that, -- What need have I of Jewels,
Ornaments, or Dress, condemned to Cells and everlasting Solitudes? Enter a
Servant.


Serve. My Lord, a Country Fellow is very importunate to speak with you.


Marq. Bring him in, -- Mistress, you to your Chamber. You hear the man's
Business is with me.


Elen. May it prove a vexatious one, I beseech Heaven. Exit.


Enter Hidewell. Marq. -- Oh, my honest Fruiterer, what brought you hither?


Hidew. Why, an't shall please ye, -- a mavelous thing has hapt since I see
ye last, -- a parlous Contrivance, by th'Mess, -- as I hope for Margery, I never
see the like.


Marq. The matter, Friend!


Hidew. Nay, Gadsores, '^is zo strange, I cannot tell whether I was asleep or
dreamt, or no.


Marq. Prithee tell me quickly; what Wonder have thou m^t with, Fellow?


Hidew. Zir, I Am but a poor Fellow; but, as Neighbor Touch has it, I can zee
into a Millstone, as var as another man.


Marq. Talk to the purpose, or I shall grow tired: -- is it any thing
concerning me or my Honor?


Hidew. Ay, ay, Zir, you don't know the bottom of this Plot.


Marq. Nor the top on it neither, -- dall^ing Fool, proceed.


Hidew. Nay, you will know it soon enough: -- Ha^'t you a very handsome Wife, buxom
and free, as the Saying is?


Marq. Oh the Devil, lies it there? Well! what follows?


Hidew. I^ags, Cuckoldom, ch'am afraid, Zir, -- for coming out of this Hause,
there meets me a waundy handsome Fellow, ^adsores, -- he had the swinginst --
what do you called. --


Marq. Perruque, do you mean?


Hidew. Ay, u^slid! our biggest Bushel, that is kept on purpose for the Maste^s
of the Measures to zee, would not, -- no, ^ sacks, ch'um zure -- it would not
cover it.


Marq. Did he enquire after my Wife?


Hidew, By my troth he did. -- Friend, says he, do you go often to that House?
-- Mahap I do, -- mahap I do not, said I, what is that to you? Nay, -- no harm,
quoth he; and thereupon slipped a piece of Gold into my Hand. -- I must confess
that softened me, -- and he went on, -- D^st thou not know an old jealous,
freakish, confounded Marquess lives there? Pray ye now dan't be angry, Sir, --
I use but his own words.


Marq. No, no, go on.


Hidew. And has he not, quoth he, a young lovely Wise? --. And then he run on
with hard words, I could not conceive for above a quart^r of an hour, tho I was
wise enough to pick it out, that he was Amour'd on her.


Marq. Confound him, confound him!


Hidew. Quo^h he, -- Can thou convey a Letter to her? -- Why how now mon, zed
I, who do take me for, a Pimp? No, no, ch'am no Pimp, -- an I war chou'd have
better Cloas of my Back, -- ^y the Mess, chall do none of your Bawdy M^ssages,
not I; Do It your self, an you wull, for Tim. With that he drew his Sword, and I
very vairly took up Heels, and run away, for ch'am very veard of a naked Sword.


Marq. Could thou not discover his Name?


Hidew. His Ze^vants called him -- Count -- a -- Came -- Came -- Came -- ch'am
zure 'twas zummot about Came.


Marq. (starting) What, -- Camillus!


Hidew. Ay, ay, that is it, that is it, in tro^h.


Marq. Oh, I am ru^n'd, blown up, undone! Camillus has his Pockets crammed with
Gold; -- he will bribe the World to take his part: -- Then that Contract -- so
firm and sure, -- I lose her, and what I value more, her large Fortune. --
Orada, what shall I do?


Ora. Suppose ye remove my Lady in a Litter, without any of your own
Attendance, -- for indeed I fear he will way-lay all the Roads. -- My Lord, she
may be got many Leagues this night, and when in safety, you may send back for
your Equipage.


Marq. Many Leagues! we'^l go a Thousand, -- for I Will be with her, and force
her speed.


Ora. (aside) That I suspected.


Hidew. Zir, Zir, here che may serve ye, for I keep a Litter, as well as zell
Fruit.


Marq. Oh! you are an honest Fellow; and, fear not, you shall be rewarded
beyond your Wishes: -- Come in, -- I Will give thee an Order for one of my best
Horses, because my Servants shall not suspect it is for my self. Orada! get your
Lady r^ady, -- '^is now near Night, and it shall be done with speed.


Exit. Ora. Be sure you lame the Horse now; for as soon as the Litter has lost
sight of the Marquess, we return into the City, and toward the Morning escape
in a Felucca already ordered, -- whilst the disappointed Marquess is ^unting
the Roads in vain.


Hidew. Madam, I desire none of your Directions, I am perfect Master of my
Trade. -- I cannot but think how bravely I shall maintain thee. Girl; for Money
comes rolling in.


Ora. Mind your Business, and think of Fooling afterward.


Exeunt. SCENE, a Chamber.
The Scene draws, and discovers Col. Peregrine upon a Bed, and his Man by him.
Col. I begin to grow damnable weary of nursing up this no Wound; I wish the
dear Angel would but come, and heal the real Wound my Heart endures.


Serve. Truly S^r, I should have but l^ttle Stomach to a Mist^ess, if I were in
your circumstances: -- What^ attempt to Cuckold a Spanish Governor in his own
House!


Col. Peace Coward, and see who is coming.


Serve. Sir, Sir, it is my Lord Governor.


Col. Well, well -- Oh! oh! oh!


Enter Governor and Diego; speaks aside to Diego. Gov. Diego! unobserved secure
that Sword, Hat, and Perruque, -- I shall have use for it.


Dieg. Yes, my Lord.


Col. Oh, oh, oh!


Gov. How do you, Sir?


Col. Oh, very bad, -- just, just fainting.


Serve. Please ye to have some Cordial, Sir?


Col. A little, if ye will.


Gov. And are not you a damned dissembling handsome Toad -- Answer me that now,
-- answer me that. What^ corrupt the Wife of my Bosom, my Darling Tittup! break
the Laws of Hospitality! Well, -- you are a desperate Fellow, I protest; --
design to Cuckold one that hopes to be a Grandee of Spain! -- Abominable, by
St. Jacques! Come, come, get up; your Wound's not mortal, I Will engage.


Col. I Am so confounded, I know not what to say.


Serve. Ay, I thought 'twou'd come to this, -- Now shall I be tossed in a
Blanket, burnt, drowned, hanged!


Col. Be quiet, Rascal, and be damned!

Gov. What, you are out of humor, Sir! I must confess, it is a plaguey
disappointment. Come, in short, I Will use ye much better than you ought to
expect. Go with haste and privacy to your Lodgings, and the Town shall know
nothing of the matter: -- Your Wig and other Accoutrements shall be sent after
ye; but I must use 'em first.


Col. My Lord, I beg your Pardon for this Attempt; you know '^ has been no more.


Gov. Your Goodwill was not wanting, thanks to your whoring Stars.


Col. Though unarmed, I will not stir from hence, if you practice a thousand
Cruelties upon me, unless I have your Promise, that you will not hurt your
Wife. -- I have Honor, though the Rules are now transgressed. Nor can I leave a
Lady (whom my Love has enticed) to the Resentments of a Spanish Husband.


Gov. An Honorable Dog, as I hope to be saved! by all that is sacred, I ^ill
not hurt her; only she must remain deprived of that Liberty, which, against our
Country's Custom, I had given her.


Col. That I Am sorry for; but cannot ask more.


Gov. But I shall ask you to be gone. -- Diego -- get one of my closest Chairs,
and let him be conveyed home, as sick.


Col. Oh, I could tear my Flesh.


Gov. No, no, fast and mortify it.


Col. I own you generous, but have not the Heart to thank you.


Gov. I tell ye once again -- your Absence will best express your
Acknowledgment.


Col. Your Servant.


Gov. Oh, your very humble Servant, sweet Friend in a corner! -- Now, Diego!
help to equip me. Exit Colonel.


Dieg. My Lord!


Gov. The Perruque, the Perruque block -- oh, how the amorous Rogue has
perfumed it, -- the Pulvil, Essence, and Powder o'ercomes me.


Dieg. My Lord, may I presume to tell ye, -- your black Beard, and that white
Perruque look very disagreeable.


Gov. No matter, the Curtains will hide that. -- Now go to my Wife, and tell
her, I am gone to the Castle, to see the Guards relieved, and shall sup there.
-- Tell her also, I desire she would visit the wounded Colonel in my absence.
-- Exit Diego. -- Now I shall find if Tittup knew the bottom on it, and were
consenting to this Roguery. Throws himself on the Bed.


Enter his Lady, and Spywell her Woman. Lady. Oh, we are happy beyond what we
could expect; my Husband sups at the Castle to night, -- yet I tremble every
Limb of me: -- I swear I love this old Governor, and nothing but this charming
Englishman could have tempted me to break my Vows.


Spyw. Madam, you walk and talk, you know not where -- you are in his Chamber.
Goes toward his Bed.


Lady. -- My Love, my Life, will thou not meet me? there is no further need of
Counterfeiting.


Governor leaps up, and snatches her Hand. Gov. Ungrateful Tittup!
His Lady. (shri^king) Ah!

Gov. How could thou serve me so?


Lady. Phogh, I knew 'twas you, and did it on purpose to make you jealous.


Gov. A pies, a pies, no, no, you did not know 'twas I: -- I would be deceived,
but cannot.


Lady. Oh, what must I expect?


Gov. Diego! -- first turn this Baggage out of doors, -- and do you hear
Mistress, -- if ye tattle of these Affairs, I Will have ye poisoned, -- else ye
are free and safe.


Spyw. Madam, farewell; I cannot excuse my self.


Lady. Now my Turn's a coming.


Gov. Ah Tittup! whither, whither art thou fallen?


Lady. (crying) No, Deary, not fallen, I was but staggering -- and you caught
me Deary.


Gov. For which I humbly conceive, you wish me hanged, Deary.


Lady. Indeed, indeed D^ary, I Am glad my Honor's safe; -- I never had an
Inclination before, and never will again, if you forgive me.


Gov. I Will take care you shall never have another Opportunity; your back
Apartments must be your Prison, and an old Dovegna your Companion, till Tim^
and Age have wrought off your loose Desires. No more ^oity toity, -- no more
appearing at Windows, -- dining at Deary's Table, and dancing after it for
Diges^ion. -- I say, Tittup, all these Vanities must be forgotten.


Lady. Oh! stab me first! Let me not be a May Game to all my Servants, who by
my Confinement would guess at my Disgrace. You used to swear you loved your
Tittup -- I never did a Fault before, but what a Frown might punish -- Now let
me experience your boas^ed Fondness; and take me to your Heart, with kind
relenting smiles -- else leave me distracted on the Earth in endless fears
bemoaning my Indiscretion, and your Cruelty.


Gov. (aside.) I feel I begin to mollify!

To her. Oh, Tittup, Tittup! Thou h^^t been a Baggage! a very Baggage -- by the
Honor of Spain!


Lady. I confess I have been frail -- But I will be forgiven, so I will -- I Will
hang about thy Neck; nor leave the dear Place 'till my Pardon's signed.


Gov. What! Give you again your Freedom to see another Colonel, and be again
betrayed?


Lady. No; there is not such another Colonel.


Gov. How, Tittup!


Lady. Not such a Tempter; such a Seducer, I meant.


Gov. Thou pretty Epitome of Woman's weakness -- I dare not trust thee -- Tittup
-- you must retire.


Lady. Do, lock me up; and next moment you are gone, I Will hang my self in my
own Garters, so I will. -- Can you behold your Tittup hanged? her Eyes gogling,
her Mouth, you have buss'd so often, gaping; and her Legs dangling three Yards
above Ground? -- This is the Sight you must expect.


Gov. Oh! I cannot bear the thoughts on it -- Stand farther off -- farther yet --
that I may rush upon thee with all the vigor of Sixteen, and clasp thee from
such a Danger -- Thou resistless Ruler of a doting, fond, old Fool! -- Here --
I forgive thee -- but if after this, I catch ye staggering, expect no Mercy.


Lady. By the new Joys, your returning Kindness brings me, I Will die first!


Gov. The World may blame my Conduct; but then -- they know not Tittup's
Charms; the Power of her Eyes, and Pleasure of her Arms. -- I cannot raise my
Voice to sing, yet -- hum! -- No; Gad, zooks, 'twon't do.


Lady. Henceforth

Good Humor shall supply thy want of Youth,
You shall be always kind, I full of Truth.

Exeunt hugging. SCENE, a Hall.
Enter Elenora, and Orada. Elen. Do we succeed, my dear Orada?


Ora. Beyond expectation, Madam -- within some moments, you are in Camillus's
Arms. -- Hidewell is gone for a well-appointed Litter, which wheels but round,
whilst Hidewell plays Tricks with my Lord; and then carries you to the English
Embassador's.


Elen. Now my Desires are so near fulfilling, I begin to fear 'em -- yet I know
Camillus is Honorable.


Ora. All Is Honorable. The House is Honorable, the Lady Honorable: Fear
nothing, but in, and Pray for our Success -- I think I hear my Lord -- You must
be sure to seem very unwilling.


Elen. I Will warrant ye. Exit.


Enter the Marquess. Marq. Is your Lady ready?


Ora. Yes, my Lord. But, good Lord! what a life have I had with her -- I
believe she has thrown Fifty things at my Head -- She swears she will not go like
a Thief in the Night.


Marq. Oh! when the Litter comes, we'll do well enough for that -- I Will make
her go, or leave her dead upon the place. -- Do thou think none of the
Servants perceive our Preparations at this Backdoor?


Ora. My Lord, there is no Danger -- it is so far through the Gardens; and now we
have these Apartments, their People never come at 'em. Enter Hidewell.


Marq. Here comes my trusty Fellow well! have go a Litter?


Hide. Ay; and by the M^ss, an able one too -- I worn ye Mon, before day, we be
past whistling after.


Ora. Friend, you never talked to a Lord in your life, I suppose.


Marq. Pho, pho! it is all well -- Is the Horse for me ready too?


Hide. Just by the Litter, my Lord! -- my Lord -- i ^ackens it saunds rarely.


Marq. Call Elenora.


Ora. I will vent^re -- but Heavens! how I shall be used! Exit, and Re-enter
with Elenora. -- Nay, M^dam, it is in vain disputing it; for you must and shall.


Hide. A vine Dame, by the Mess!


Elen. Commanded by my Slave! Monster! whither do thou intend to have me at
this dead hour of Night? to Death, I hope.


Marq. To Death, if you resist -- Orada, hall her along.


Ora. I think I do pull her -- I believe her Arm will come off.


Hide. Why law ye, Mistress -- dan't be so veard -- Ye shall come to no hort --
I have had vine Vokes in my Litter 'vore naw.


Elen. Away, Fool! leave halling me -- I will go -- thou cr^el Devil!


Marq. Come, I Will see her in the Litter; and then take Horse.


Exeunt. Re-enter Marquess and Hidewell. Marq. Sirrah! Sirrah! where is my Horse?


Hide. My Lord! m^ Lord!


Marq. Sot! Dunce! my Horse!


Hide. Why a -- why a -- I tied him to the Pales -- and it is so waundy dark
without, I cannot find him.


Marq. Fly and search! Bid the Litter go softly: I Will oretake 'em.


Hide. I Am gone, I Am gone -- (Comes back.) -- My Lord, must I bring him hither?


Marq. Eternal Fool! Call to me, and I Will come out. Hide stopping. Udsookers!
'ch'am zummat a veard.


Marq. This Fellow will make me mad -- Beast! will ye stir!


Hide. Ch'ave heard Vokes talk of Ghosts, zo I have, about the Park Pales.


Marq. ^ascal! I Will make a Ghost of thee; if thou do not go, or direct me,
where my Horse is.


Hide. I run, I run! Exit. The Marquess following him.


Hidewell crosses the Stage running: the Marquess within cries, Where are ye?
Hide. I Will lead him a Dance -- Here, here! Exit.


Within. Here, here! Marq. A Pox, where? The Marquess Entering. -- Oh! the
Devil! I cannot wag a step further! I have lost sight of him, and the Litter;
and am lamed into the Bargain -- I hope Orada, observed my Directions for the
Road -- The Pass I gave 'em, lets 'em through the City Gates: If this Fool
would come once, I should soon overtake 'em. -- Numps, Fool! Are ye coming?


Hidewell within. O Lard! O Lard! ch'am an undone, Mon! Gh'am an undone, Mon!


Marq. What Is the matter?


Enter Hidewell leaning on his Stick; as soon as he comes in, he falls down,
and roars out. Hide. Oh! Oh! Oh!


Marq. What ails the Fellow? Where Is my Horse?


Hide. A Mur^ain, a Pla^ue take your Horse -- ch'am maimed for ever -- For
getting up to make haste, he has thrown me, and broke my Leg. Oh, my poor Wife
and Children! they must to the Parish -- Then Margery -- how she will take on!
for, to zay truth, I loved her better than my Wife -- Oh! Oh! Oh!


Marq. The Devil take thee, and all thy Family, for an unlucky Dog! I see, I
must call up my Servants at last. Exit.


Hidewell, getting up. Farewell, sweet Signior! for, by this time, your Lady's
in safe Hands. Exit hastily singing.


Enter the Marquess. Marq. Pedro! Olonzo! Valasco!


Pedro. Did you call, my Lord?


Marq. Yes. A Fellow has broke his Leg -- You must wake Monsier Cureclap, my
F^ench Surgeon -- and, Olonzo, give Orders to my Grooms this moment, to prepare
two Horses; Valasco shall go with me.


Pedro. My Lord! what Fellow? Where is he? Why, here is no body!


Marq. (looking about.) Gone! Hell and Furies! A Plot upon my Honor, my Life,
my Wife, my Estate! Murder! Murder! Saddle all my Horses; get what Friends
Money will purchase; search every Road -- my Estate! my Wife^ Hell and
Damnation!


Enter Governor, with a Letter in his hand: His Lady, Diego, and Servants.
Gov. So! the Cry's up again -- but Heaven be thanked, it is almost over now --
What Is the matter, my Lord Marquess?


Marq. Ruined, undone for ever! My Wife's Run away!


Lady. How! Run away! That Is worse than I, Deary.


Gov. I know not: It Is according as you prove, Tittup -- A^ bad Wife's better
lost than found.


Lady. Unkind Deary.


Marq. My Lord, burying all Animosities, I beg you would assist me now. I shall
run mad -- my Wife, nay more, a great Estate, lost! lost!


Gov. My Lord, you must be pacified -- I Have ill News to tell you -- there is a
Letter sent me from Rome, by the Cardinal Patron of Spain; that you stole a
Young Lady, firmly contracted to a Noble Roman Count: Also His Majesty's Order
to put the Lady in a Monastery, till your Cause is tried.


Marq. I Will Hang my self! I Will Drown my self! I Will Bury my self alive! Dogs,!
Whelps! get me Cords, Knives, Poison, Sword, and Fire. Exit Raving.


Gov. The Man's distracted -- Diego, after; and persuade him.


Lady. It Is a just Judgment on him, Deary, for being so Jealous.


Gov. Ay, Tittup; when Women never give any cause, you know, Tittup.


Lady. Hump!


Enter a Gentleman. Gent. Sir, my Lord Camillus^ sends to give you an Account,
that he expects the Lady Elenora at the English Embassador's. He hears, by an
Express, your Honor has Orders from the King relating to her; to which he
willingly submits.


Gov. An honest Lad, by the Honor of Spain -- Tell him, Friend, I Will wait on
him immediately at the Embassador's.


Lady. Deary. Exit Gentleman.


Gov. What now! That begging look's put on for something.


Lady. Let me go with you, and see the Embassador's Lady, and the Marchioness,
and --


Gov. -- And the English Colonel. Ha! why, Tittup, can thou look me in the
Face, and ask this? -- By the Honor of Spain, I believe this Hoity, Toity will
desire me to admit him for her Gallant.


Lady. Truly, Deary, if the Colonel is there, you shall hear me charge him,
never to see me more.


Gov. A new way, Tittup! to go into a man's Company, to forbid him your sight!
Come -- thou shall along! and --

Sings. If with Horns my Kindness thou do repay,
I^ll Punish thee some unknown, uncommon way,
Nor hear whatever thy Charming Tongue can say,

SCENE changes to the English Embassador's.
Camillus meeting Elenora and Orada: Runs and Embraces Elenora. Came. My
Elenora! art thou here! do I hold thee fast, thou choicest Blessing of my Youth!


Elen. Witness my Heart, which strongly beats, how much I Am pleased in my
Camillus's Arms! But, Oh! I blush, when I remember I am another's Wife.


Came. No more o'that; the Cardinal's my Friend, and has promis^d a Divorce
immediately -- Therefore Crown my Joys with Smiles, and forget past Dangers.


Elen. I can say only this: I love ye --


Came. And not descending Angels, with all their Heavenly Tunes, could Charm
like that dear sound! -- safe in a Monastery thou shall remain, till the
Dispute is ended. And then -- Oh! thou blessed Charmer -- then all my Sufferings
shall be liberally paid; and longing Love Revel in Feasts of unutterable
Delight. -- Nor art thou forgot, dear Orada, but, whilst I have Life, shall be
us^d like a Friend, and Mistress of my Fortunes.


Orad. I humbly thank your Honor, and heartily rejoice at my good Lady's
Happiness.


Came. Poor Hidewell! -- I hope he is in safety. --


Enter Hidewell. Hidew. -- Yes; and here, at your Honor's service, -- though I
have had a broken Leg, and two or three other Misfortunes, -- but all^s well
now, and I can dance for Joy.


Came. Thou art a witty Rogue, -- and henceforward shall have no occasion to
expose thy self, ^ I Will provide for thee like a Gentleman.


Hidew. I Am your ready Slave, -- D' ye h^^r that, Mrs. Scornful? ( To Orada)
how d' ye like my Parts and Person now?


Ora. Troth I Have seen so much between my Lady and the Count, that my Mouth
almost waters.


Hidew. We shall soon agree, I find.


Came. My de^r Elenora, the Ambassador's Lady sends A Lady enters and whispers
Camillus. word, her Husband is gone for a few days to hunt: she is very ill,
but that all things in her House are at your service.


Elen. To morrow I Will wait on her.


Enter Colonel Peregrine. Came. Oh, my dear Friend! here is the lovely Prize,
which so well deserves the Pains I have taken.


Col. A charming Lady! -- My Lord, you are a happy man.


Came. How goes your affair, and what is become of the obliging Friar?


Col. Nay, Heaven knows! the Story is too long to tell; only this: I found the
old Lord generous, and resolve to attempt his Wife no more.


Came. I Am glad on it -- in your Age you never will repent an uncommitted Sin.


Elen. That Governor^s Lady seem^d a pretty good-humored Creature; therefore,
my Tyrant, let me see her but once


Enter Friar Andrew, his Clothes torn, and covered with Dir^, and his Face
scratched. Came. Who have we here! Oh Heavens! Father Andrew!


Col. What! my Hector thus us^d!


Hidew. What has befaln thee, oh thou weak Brother?


Fri. (angrily) What has befaln me! you may behold what has befa^n me; Dirt,
Wounds, and Disgrace. -- The Ladies may live in Rat^ Traps, or dye of the Pips,
for Father Andrew's Assistance again.


Hidew. Look, forward Undertaker and wretched Performer, there the Lady stands,
delivered by me!


Elen. My Lord, is not this the Friar brought your first Le^ter, after I was
married, whom the Marquess caught and abused?


Came. The same, Madam


Hidew. I said he had unfortunate lines, but he would take no warning.


Elen. Not to encourage any thing that is ill, but because you have suffered in
my Cause, there is a Cordial will revive the Heart, and wash out all Stains.
Gives him a Purse of Gold.


Col. For me you have suffered too; and I beg you would accept of this. Gives
him more.


Fri. Spite of Vows, in this Necessity there is no refusing such a Favor.


Came. Come, Father, cheer up your self, have recourse to your old Friend
Malaga, -- I Will provide for ye, that you shall go thro^ no more Dangers.


Fri. By St. Dominick, I had not need; for I have almost lost my Life in this.
Enter a Servant.


Serve. Sir, the Governor of Barcellona is come to wait on ye.


Came. Gods me -- in, Father! you would not see him, I suppose.


Fri. See him! I Would sooner see the Devil: -- Well, I Will get a pretty Wench to
wash me without, and good store of Malaga within, and try to forget past
Sorrows. Exit.


Enter Governor and his Lady, Arm in Arm. Gov. My Lord, your Servant.


Came. Yours in all Obedience.


Gov. (aside) -- Yonder he stands^ -- the Ogling Rogue! I thought so. -- My
Lord Camillus, before I talk to you, pray give me leave for some few words with
that Gentleman.


Came. With all my Heart.


Gov. Sir!


Col. My Lord!


Gov. Nay, of the the other side, if you please, -- Now, Tittup, speak what you
promised.


Lady. Colonel Peregrine, my Lord has been so good to forgive me what is past;
and I desire, for the future, as you are a Gentleman, you would, after this
night, never see me more.


Col. Madam, I obey.


Gov. And do you hear, -- if ye prove a Man of Honor, about Threescore Years
hence I may leave ye Tittup for a Legacy, and abundance of Wealth, a World of
Wealth, by the Honor of Spain. -- Nay, it is worth staying for.


Col. Threescore years hence, quotha!


Gov. Now, my Lord Camillus, to you and the Lady. They go aside.


Hidew. I wish we had some Music, -- since our Success, I cannot keep my Heels
on the Ground.


Col. If the Company agree to it, I can procure my Lord Ambassador's, and send
for my own.


Hidew. I Will motion it presently.


Elen. I freely submit, and will retire to what Monastery you appoint. I hope
my future Conduct will satisfy the World of my Innocence.


Came. And mine, of my Faith and Constancy.


Col. What say ye now to Music and Dancing? Hidewell ^ongs.


Came. With all my Soul, this is a Jubilee, which I Will keep whilst I Have life.


Elen. But are we secure?


Gov. Fear not, Madam; my Guards surround the House, -- and am not I here? They
all sit.


Songs and Dances: Them over, the Company comes forward. Came. Greatness was the
Attendant of my Birth;
But Love gives me Heaven upon Earth^
These Comforts my Elenor^ does impart:
^oy to my Eyes, sweet Raptures to my Heart.

Gov. Like you, here stands a happy Man;
And I Will keep my Tittup, -- that is, if I can.

FINIS.

