THE Necessity and Encouragement, OF UTMOST VENTURING FOR THE CHURCHES HELP:
TOGETHER WITH The Sin, Folly, and Mischief of Self-Idolizing. Applied by a
Representation of -- 1. Some of the most notorious National sins endangering
us. 2. The heavy weight of wrath manifested in our present Calamities. Yet
withal, grounds of -- 3. Confidence, that our Church shall obtain Deliverance
in the Issue. 4. Hopes that the present Parliament shall be still employed in
the working of it.


All set forth in a Sermon, Preached to the Honorable House of Commons, on the
day of the Monthly solemn Fast, 28. June, 1643.

By HERBERT PALMER B.D. and Minister of Gods Word at Ashwell in Hertfordshire.

Published by Order of that House.

MARK 8. 35. Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will
lose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. JER. 18. 7,
8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil, that I
thought to do unto them. London, Printed for JOHN BELLAMIE in Cornhill at the
three golden Lions near the Royal Exchange. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE the House of Commons, now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe God of Heaven has called you to a work of the greatest Honor, and
greatest Difficulty, that lies upon any number of men, throughout the whole
world at this day: Obad. ver. last.
To heal the wounds of Zion, and be her isntrumental Saviors; the Repairers
of the breach, Esaias 58. 12.
and the Restorers of paths to dwell in; and to build up the old wastes, and lay
the foundations, even of many generations; To save and rescue two Kingdoms, (as
you have helped to do a third already) from most desperately-endangering ruin;
and make way, Revel. 11. 15.
in them, for that blessed Proclamation of the seventh Trumpet, Now are the
Kingdoms of this world, become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ!

To strengthen your hearts, and hands in this sacred employment, as this
Sermon, by your call, first presented it self to your attentive ears, so by a
second command of yours, it is now tendered to your favorable eye; and withal
exposed to the public view of all, whether friends, or foes to the Peace and
welfare of our Jerusalem, or Neuters. In it I have labored so to speak to
every ones conscience, that did hear it, or shall read it, as to make them 1.
Sensible of what they should have done, and what they have done; and then 2
Apprehensive of what God has done, and means to do with the general, and with
them in particular, according to both his threatenings, and promises; and 3. by
all, Zealous for God and his Church, and confident of his grace to his Church,
and all her faithful helpers.

In the mean time, since it has pleased him, who is the only wise God, and
the ruler of all things; All whose paths are mercy and truth, to such as keep
his Covenant, and his Testimonies; to exercise your humility, fidelity, faith,
and patience, by tidings unexpected from diverse parts of the Kingdom; And you
have so far apprehended his purposes in it, as to call us all, in and about the
City, with your selves, to a solemn and extraordinary public Humiliation,
before the Monthly day comes about: I trust, there is, and will for ever, be
written upon your hearts, that holy care which I was bold to recommend unto
you, to enquire where the cause is, why God at any time expresses his
displeasure; and that not only in reference to the Nation generally, or any
particular persons in it, but even to your own selves, and that as a Body; that
so you may thereby be both directed, and excited to fulfill the will of God,
according to whatsoever you do, or shall find amiss in any.

In all which, give me leave once more, to beseech you, in the Name of God, and
his Churches, to make us and your selves at once happy. You are our Healers,
and while you subsist, as we shall not be altogether miserable, so neither
without your special faithfulness, and zeal, can we attain to any settled
prosperity. I shall not now instance in any other particulars, having touched
upon diverse in this discourse, which you are now pleased to make one of your
spiritual Remembrancers. In it, I have taken the freedom of others, to insert
a few things, which either straits of time, or shortness of memory, forced an
omission of in the delivery. Whereof the chief are some enlargement, of our
dangers in the first Uses, and of the Use of examination, about our helping the
Church, and the insertion of the Catalogue of sins against the several
Commandments in the Use of Humiliation.
The God, whose truth it is, sanctify You and us all by it, as by all the rest
of his Word of truth^, So shall the Truth make us and you free from all our
dangers and fears, of all kinds, temporal, and spiritual, and finally,
glorify us all, in and with him, who is the eternal Truth, and eternal Life,
the Lord Jesus Christ; In whom I am ever

Your most humble, and Devoted Servant HERBERT PALMER.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE last Fast, before the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
ESTHER 4. VER. 13, 14. Text.
Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thy self,that thou
shall escape in the Kings house, more then all the Jews. For if thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance
arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be
destroyed. And who knows, whether thou be come to the Kingdom for such a time
as this?
Preface.
BEhold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a curse, says the holy
Prophet Moses unto all the Congregation of Israel, now upon the borders of the
promised Land, Deuteronomy. 11. 26. Ever since Moses knew them, they had not been in
so good a temper, as they were at this instant when he spoke these words; and
yet he holds it no discourtesie in him, nor disparagement to them, to set home
his Exhortations with these incentive quicknings, which he after pursues with a
great deal of variety and emphasis, in the latter end of that Book, Chap. 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, and 32.

We are fallen into times, wherein, if ever, Gods people need all manner of
quicknings from Gods word, when as his providence is about to do some terrible
thing, for, or against the Church, or both. I would hope, we are upon the
borders of that promised blessing, which we at least have made to our selves
many a time: And I do hope, we are not now in the worst temper that ever we
were. Though on the other side, it is altogether apparent, we are still upon
the borders of ruin, and of one of the wofullest curses, that ever befell a
Nation professing Gods Name. Let it not then sound harsh to any ear, specially
on so solemn a day of Humiliation, that a Text is presented, which carries not
a blessing only, but also a curse in the very Forehead of it. It is, that we
may take our choice, as Moses afterward amplifies the like speech, chap. 30.
19. And for any thing I know, or any man else, as we that are here before God
this day, do choose, even this day, we may fare our selves, and all our Israel
with us, at least, in the Good, the Blessing held forth.

But I Preface no longer.

Sum of the Text.
THe words contain summarily,[ The necessity, and encouragement of utmost
venturing for the Churches help, in time of danger.] The Jews, at this time,
Gods only visible Church on earth, were now in one of the greatest dangers
that ever threatened a Nation. The story is well known, I cannot spend time to
decipher it. It is my great comfort, in that and the whole of my Discourse,
that I speak to wise men; else the multitude of matters to be crowded together,
within the allotted compass of time for this holy Exercise, would suffer
prejudice among us, by my necessary have; Therefore also I shall give you no
other division of the Text, then into the Points that thence offer themselves
to our present instruction. I will name them all together, and show you the
Rise of the severalls as we go along.

The first Doctrine is, [ Every one of Gods professed people owe their
endeavors, with the utmost hazard of themselves, to help the Church in time of
danger.]

The second this, [ Private self-respects, prove great hindrances to most
necessary duties.]

The third, [ Those whom private, and self-respects hinder from the Churches
help, can have no assurance, what ever seeming advantages they may hope upon,
that they shall escape more then others.]

The fourth is, [ Though those who are most hopeful to be instruments of the
Churches help, fail her in time of need, yet deliverance shall not fail her,
some way or other, according to Gods promises.]

The fifth is, [ Though the Church be delivered another way, yet a destruction
is owing to them and theirs, that have neglected their utmost endeavor for her
help.]

The sixth is, [ There is great hopes, that those who are extraordinarily
raised up, to a special opportunity of serviceablenesse to the Church, are
intended by God to procure her help, if they will themselves, and be faithful.]

All these Points will appear to be most naturally raised from the scope and
words of the Text, and all of singular use for our edification, according to
the present condition of things among us; As the sequel will show.

1. Doctrine.
The first Doctrine is this; [ Every one of Gods professed people, owe their
endeavors, with the utmost hazard of themselves, to help the Church in time of
danger.]

Mordecai's former charge to Esther, Grounded on the Example in the Text.
and this re-inforcement in the Text, supposes this Doctrine fully. It had been
too presumptuous, to put so great a Person, too injurious, to press so dear a
Friend, to so desperate a piece of service, if upon this general ground, it
had not been a certain, and indispensable duty. Comparing her and our
It was hers, therefore all others respectively, all ours particularly. Nothing
could discharge her, nothing can acquit us. Consider, and compare; 1. Her
Person and ours: 2. Her peril: 3. Her small likelihood of prevailing: 4. And
the certainty of the business to be done without her.

1. Person.
1. Her Person: Which of us, even the highest, matches her greatness? how
extremely below are the most? who has so much to lose, if we lose all, as she?
Those we venture for, are our equals, or near it some of them, and many are
superiors to the most. She was far above all her Nation, of whom the best were
distressed tributaries, and multitudes little better then slaves. She ventured
alone, none with her, none for her, we have many engaged as well, as far as
we; and we have cause to be glad of them, as well as they of us. If then it
were her duty, to endeavor and venture, it is ours without all peradventure.

2. Peril.
2. What was the hazard she must rush upon? or what is the utmost venture?
Death. This was hers. And what death more certain, or usually more
reproachful, then for breaking through the known Law of an Imperious Monarch?
This she must expose her self to. While yet this charge and threatening of her
tells us, [ that it is no sin but a duty of necessity, to prefer the regard
of a peoples, of Gods peoples, safety, before any such formality of a humane
Law.] Yet contrarily, had she forborne this, her danger in humane appearance had
been none at all, because though she were a Jewesse, yet not known to be such.
And now can our hazard by endeavor be worse, (at the worst) or more certain, or
more reproachful (though the reproach less just) then hers? or to any of us,
can there be less hazard, if we forbear altogether any endeavor? If then she
must not forbear because of peril, no more may we, without the greatest peril
of sin.

3. Improbability of success.
3. How unlikely was it she should prevail with one who in thirty days had not
called for her, though his wife? and now pressing upon him against his Law? and
appearing in opposition to his so doted on Darling Haman? and of a Decree,
already sent forth into all his Dominions? which also by the Law of the Medes
and Persians seemed unalterable, and so the Case remediless altogether this
way? Is there any thing we are to Endeavor (let it be what it will) so
unlikely to prosper, as this undertaking of hers? yet for this must she pawn
her life: And what may we then refuse?

4. Needless attempt.
4. Was it not pity, to drive her forward against such a Canons-mouth; when
though she sat still, the Business should be done? (himself tells her so) in
which she might be lost, and do nothing at all to it? What greater certainty
can we have, or what equal, that what we are called to Endeavor and Venture
for, will prosper if we do altogether nothing? How many would then indeed
resolve to do nothing, and think themselves excusable too? But so might not
she, nor so may not we, without sin can be excused; For it appears, that
according to the Doctrine, [ Every one of Gods professed people, owes, etc.

Let us confirm it by a few other Examples, Confirmed by Scriptures and
Examples.
and then by some Reasons. 1 John 3, 16, We ought to lay down our lives for the
Brethren. Here is the Doctrine and Duty fully asserted. The Brethren, the
Church, have a right to our utmost endeavor, with what hazard soever; we owe
it to them, we ought to venture our lives, and when the pinch comes, actually
part with them. And here is an example, beyond example, in the words foregoing,
of God himself; Christ God and Man both, laid down His humane life for His
Church. Hereby perceive we the love of God toward us, in that he laid down his
life for us. This ought to be Reason sufficient to us, to hold our selves
obliged to the same hazard in our measure, in thankfulness to Him, and
imitation of Him, and to testify the truth of our love, which we profess to
bear to the Church, as the Apostle was now exhorting to love. Love denies
nothing of endeavors, ventures all things of hazard, for the Object loved. So
ought we to do, because we ought to love the Church, Paul. See also, Phil. 2.
17. ^4 2 Timothy 2. 10.
and profess we do love it. So Saint Paul, Col. 1 24. I now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of
Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church. Here is another
great Example, not only of this Duty acknowledged, but practiced, and that
with joy; and as a debt to Christ and his Church: A strong Reason also
insinuated; All Christ's Members must suffer after His example, even for the
Churches good; not meritoriously, or satisfactorily, (which was only proper to
him the Head) but by way of conformity to Him, and testimony to them, to seal
hereby, the truth of the Doctrine of Christianity, of faith and holiness, and
proclaim it worth suffering for, and to propagate it, while any opportunity is
afforded, in despite of sufferings. Moses also of old, Moses. See alsO, Heb.
11.
ventures and forfeits all his greatness in the Court of Egypt, being the
reputed and adopted son of Pharaohs daughter, for his brethrens sake, the
children of Israel under oppression, even for the reseue of one of them
tyrannically abused, Aaron.
Exodus 2. And so Aaron, Numb. 16. Even though his people but the day before,
were in rebellion against him, and would have thrust him out of his Office, and
at the present had again renewed their mutiny against him and Moses, crying
out, Ye have killed the people of the Lord, when it was Gods own immediate
vengeance that struck them, and for this murmuring he now strikes them so
heavily, as 14700. of them died of the plague in a quarter of an hour or
less. Into the midst of which multitude with extreme danger, Aaron to save
them ventures himself, and runs in with his censer and incense, between the
living and the dead, to make an atonement for them. Here was an admirable
charity indeed, typifying Christ's, our great high Priests, both dying and
praying for his very enemies and crucifyers. And David, David.
when his people were in danger of the destroying Angel, offers himself to his
sword, his own life to the Pestilence, that they might be spared, 2 Samuel 24.
17. Finally even Joab, Joab.
though a man of blood, and when his turn came to die, unwilling enough, (1
Kings 2.) yet can encourage himself and his brother too, to venture themselves
to the utmost* for their people, the cities of their God, even though not
certain of the success, which he therefore wholly referres to God, Let the
Lord do that which seems him good, 2 Samuel 10. 11, 12. And great reason for
all this, By Reasons.
whether we consider God or the Church, our selves or the enemies or friends of
the Church, or Bystanders.

Reason 1. We owe our selves wholly to God.
1. All Gods professed People Owe themselves Certainly to Him, to Do all
things, Venture, Lose, Suffer all things at His Bidding, and for His Sake. If
then He Appoint to Do any of this, or all this, for the Churches sake, we Owe
it as a Duty Unquestionably. What say You to this? Brethren, what think you of
St. Paul's saying* You are not your own? 1 Cor. 6. 19. What have you, which is
not His, by Creation, by Preservation; special Providence and gift? And may He
not call for all that is His, at any time, or any way? Are not you His, by
Redemption too? You are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body
and in your spirits which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Satan had you once his
slaves; and you did his work, fulfilled his lusts, with body and soul and all
that you had; and all that was Dishonor to God exceedingly. Now God has
bought you with a price, such a price as the precious blood of His own Son; can
you choose but owe your selves wholly to Him, at His pleasure? Once more; are
you not His altogether, by covenant? A right He has in you even that way, as
much as it is possibly for you to pretend, or imagine your selves ever to have
been your own. What is the covenant of Christianity plainly, but for Him to be
our God, and we His people? Jer. 31. 33. and every where, and Heb. 8. 10. to
deny our selves, take up our cross daily, and follow Him, Luke 9. 23. to sell
all, Mat. 13. 44, 45, 46. forsake all, hate all, Luke 14. 26. 33. or else we
are told by the Truth it self, we are no Christians; we cannot be his
Disciples? Now does not all this amount to all endeavor, and the Venture of
the utmost hazard? What can any one except against this, or except out of this?
Thou have an estate; who gave it thee, but God? ( Riches and honor are of
thee, etc. ^ Chron. 29. 12.) or rather lent it thee, made thee steward of it?
He appoints thee to lay out so much for such an use, gives the Church a Letter
of Attorney: Is it not thy due to yield it upon demand? Thou have honor and
dignity; who promoted thee? Psalm. 75. 7. God is the Judge, He puts down one,
and sets up another. If He will have thee lay it down and give over thy office,
may thou say, I am not bound to yield to it? Thou have friends; who made them
friends, and able to show themselves friendly, but God who rules all hearts? If
He will thee to slight their friendship in this or that case can thou say,
thou owe Him no such respect? Thou art a Freeman, in bondage to none; who
made thee free spiritually, but Christ? made thee be borne a freeman
temporally, (not a slave, as in some countries) but God? if he call thee to
venture lying in a dungeon, as a prisoner; a captive; or come into bonds and
debts to do Him necessary service; will thou say thou owe Him no such
service? In a word, thy lims, sense* life, whence had thou them, or have them
first and last? may He not then command them all? Owe thou not all of them to
Him? and so thy self in all respects to Him? and accordingly to His Church, at
His will? Remember this as the first main Reason, upon which all the rest
depend. They are diverse, but of each of them more briefly.

Reason 2. The Church is Gods Receiver, as much as she needs.
For 2ly. God has made the Church his receiver of all his rents, and dues, so
far as her need requires. Plainly God every where expresses, that He counts
that done or not done to Him, which is done or not done to His Church. Christ,
we know, expresses this as the style of His sentences at the great day of
Judgment, (even referring to particular members, helped, or neglected) You did
it to me, You did it not to me, Mat. 25. Where note also, the very Reprobates,
and now doomed to damnation, dare not deny but they owed all respect to Christ;
and speak as though they would not have neglected it, if they had looked at it
as reaching to Him, so that He would have taken it to heart. But they might
have known (we may) from so many expressions in His word; that in reference to
the Churches necessities, Christ and the Church are one; and have but one name,
Jer. 23. 6. with 33. 16. and 1 Cor. 12. 12. If we could see no Reason for this,
yet since he so often says it, we must not choppe logic with Him, and offer
to deny it, but if we would, all logic and reason would confute us; for,

Reason 3. The Church is Gods glory on earth.
3. God is specially glorified upon earth, or dishonored according as His
Church fares. Israel is His glory, Esa. 46. ult. (The Church Christ's spouse and
His kingdom) He is glorified in their welfare, when their number increases,
their sins are purged, they freed from judgments and enemies, and their
prosperity advanced. Therefore to endeavor this with our whole strength, and
utmost hazard, is our duty, as well as to love Him with our whole hearts, and
souls, and minds, and strength, and to do all things to His glory. And we
cannot fail in any thing, but we fail so much in our love to Him; and
dishonor Him so much; therefore,

Reason 4. We pray for it in the Lords prayer.
4. We pray for this, for the Churches good, when we understandingly pray as
Christ has taught us. Hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in Heaven. And we mock God if we so pray, and endeavor
it not, with all cheerful readiness, universal Fractice, and constant
continuance, like the Angels in Heaven, though we cannot reach their
perfection; nor are they put upon hazards, because they have no sin, and so no
suffering to undergo, but

Reason 5. Angels give us example.
5. The very example of the Angels endeavors affords a distinct argument of our
obligation. They are sent forth to minister for their sakes that shall be the
heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. It is not too mean an office then for the
greatest on earth, to endeavor the Churches help. For,

Reason 6. All things and persons are for the Churches sake.
6. All things, and persons are ordained for the Churches sake. The very world
continues, that every one that in Gods Decree belongs to the Church, should be
converted, and be brought to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. All gifts are bestowed
for the Churches sake, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man,
to profit Doct.1.
withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. all for the Churches profit, and so 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life or death, or things present or things to come, all are yours. All, not
only things, but persons, Apostles, and Ministers, Kings, and Parliaments, and
all, are every one of them intended for the Church; God called this Parliament
for his Churches sake; and for his Churches sake it is that he has so
established and continued it. Even Kings,
And the Prophet tells how that it was for Jacob his servants sake and Israel
his elect, that God raised up Cyrus and gave him victories, holding his right
hand, and subduing Nations before him, and loosing the loins of Kings, opening
the two leaved gates, etc. Esaias. 45. ver. 1. 4. And elsewhere that Kings should
be nursing Fathers to his Church, Esaias 49. 21, 22. and 60. 16.
and Queens nurses, and that they should carry the Churches children in their
arms, and upon their shoulders, and give them suck, do even the meanest
offices of help to them, with all diligence and paines-taking and breaking
their sleep (as Nurses use for their nurslings) for their good. And all this
Cyrus has taught us, to be not only prophesies of what shall be, but precepts
of what ought to be: For understanding of the prediction, Esaias 44. 28. that he
should build the Temple, he takes it to be a command given to him; as he
proclaims to all the world, And even the very Authority of Christ in Heaven.
2 Chronicles. 36. Ezra 1. Thus all humane authority on earth is for the Churches
good. And which is far higher and a most exceedingly admirable expression,
the very Authority of Christ in Heaven, (though ultimately for his own glory,
the glory of God, yet) is also intended for the Churches good. So remarkeably
and fully speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 22. God gave him to be the Head over
all things to the Church. How much more are earthly men so meant? It is
injurious therefore without question not to God only, but to the Church in
point of right, for any man on earth to withhold any thing from her, whereby
she may be helped or benefited. For also --

Reason 7. Our comforts are from the Church.
7. The comforts (as well as Talents) that we have received, we may
instrumentally thank the Church for them, as our Mother that bare us; and her
children as our brethren and sisters, that helped to bring us up, both
naturally and spiritually; and do still (while we live) more for us then we
can possibly requite, with our utmost endeavor and venturing our selves for
them. Doct.1.
Thankfulness then ties us, besides all former Obligations. The rather because
--

Reason. 8. Our sins have endangered her.
8. Every one by their sins have sundry ways endangered the Church, and do
almost continually; provoking God, and sometimes men against her; dishearting
the Friends, and strengthening the Enemies, by evil Words, and Examples. We owe
then by way of satisfaction to her, and repentance toward God, to do
henceforward our utmost to help, and rescue, and strengthen her every way. This
was David's reason, in the forementioned 2 Samuel 24. and Paul's provocation to his
duty, doubtless, many a time. This is the more strong, because still --

Reason. 9. Enemies do their utmost.
9. The Church has many Enemies, who do, and will do their worst against her,
and are specially encouraged, and advantaged by our neglect. They get ground as
much as we withdraw, and give back; And our valor makes them at least at a
stand, and is some discouragement to them. Also --

Reason. 10. Friends fail, or are strengthened by what we do.
10. When any of Gods people shrinks, he endangers to break the Ranks, and
disorder others, and make them run away from their Colors, as well as himself;
or at least sads their hearts, weakens their hands, and makes bare their sides,
and contrarily, each ones vigor and valor adds strength to his companions
every way. We owe it to them then, and to the profession we have made to stand
to them, and live and die with them. And there are great examples both ways of
this.

Reason. 11. So By standers in their degree.
11. Finally, Bystanders, and Neuters, are much led like sheep by the eye, and
though fearful, yet are sometimes engaged by our courage. But to be sure, they
learn fearfulness of us; And if those see us backward any way, whose interests
seem to be more in the Cause then theirs, they will easily think themselves
excused; And then their sins will prove ours. This I speak, to those that in a
more peculiar manner profess themselves Gods people; though others also are
professed Christians at large; there should be no such difference, if all would
come up to their duties: But since all will not, at least not readily, we that
are outwardly forwardest any way, must be so every way, else I say, we
discharge not our debt, and duty, and give ill example to those that are too
too backward of themselves. So I have done with the proof of the first Point,
which is the main foundation Doct.1.
of all, and therefore not to be lightly passed over, but put beyond all
gainsaying. I come now to the Use of it.

Use. Consideration 1. Of Churches dangers needing help.
The Use that I shall make of this first Doctrine by it self, is only to provoke
us all, to a serious consideration, of our Church and Nations dangers, calling
for our utmost help; as also what help is possible and necessary for us to
afford; (taking in Ireland also into our thoughts, though I cannot at every
turn name it, but it must never be forgotten, specially on these solemn days
of seeking God; their unhappiness affording us the first advantage of enjoying
this public happiness of these days of humiliation, toward our own good as
well as theirs.) Where we ^we help, we must needs consider the need of help,
and the means of it.

The Churches dangers needing help, are reducible to two heads, Judgments, and
Sins. Both together put us into the condition of Isreal, Nehem. 9. 37. whose
sad expression is, We are in great distress. Indeed far greater then theirs
was then, as a comparison would fully clear, but that I have no leisure for it;
neither shall I now say all that I intend on either Head, because the following
Points require a reservation of somewhat of each kind, to reinforce them: But
yet even to make further way for them, and in the mean time for a brief
discourse of the means of help, somewhat also must here be premised of the
Churches dangers, both in regard of judgments, and sins.

For our dangers, 1. Judgments.
in regard of Judgments, I may thus recapitulate them. First, An attempt, upon
a deep-rooted, long-projected design, 1. Attempt against all this.
to ruin Religion, Gods true Religion, our Laws, and Liberties; and in, and for
all this, this present Parliament.

2 Army raised against.
2. An Army raised for this, by Papists-counsels, enemies to the true Religion,
and consequently to our State, and Laws, by which it is established; Made up
for the most part of men of desperate spirits, enemies to Parliaments, and
Laws, because themselves are Delinquents, and resolve to be Libertines; and men
of desperate fortunes, and therefore enemies to the propriety and true liberty
of the Subject, without the violation of which they cannot subsist in their
broken condition.

3 Enemies possess our King.
3. These enemies possessing the Person of our King, abusing his Doct. 1.
Use.Consider the Churches danger.
mind, by their wicked suggestions, and counsels; his Name, to countenance all
their lawless outrages, and to cast all manner of reproaches upon the
Parliament, And particularly, upon prime Members of both Houses.

4. They have prevailed far.
4. These enemies having prevailed in many places, to rob and spoil houses,
villages, towns, countries; to carry away Prisoners, and use them with more
then barbarous cruelty; to kill and destroy, many in the field in open war,
some in cold blood, (if their boiling rage and malice can ever be said to be
cold blood) and not a few, by worse then brutish usage in their Prisons; to
violence, and violate men's consciences, by forcing upon them the Protestation
against the Parliament.

5. Their strength enough to endanger all.
5. These enemies being in themselves, many in number, and of great strength; in
diverse places apparently stronger then we, in all kind of strength, (except
spiritual) and in the whole, powerful enough to put all into exceeding
hazard, by force and fraud, arms and conspiracies, (witness Bristoll, and the
late damnable Plot against the Parliament and City) specially considering the
multitude of secret enemies, seeming but Neuters, intermingled every where with
us, specially in all considerable places; (the City is not, the Parliament it
self has not been free) and not a few, even almost professed enemies, let
alone and suffered, in the very City, and much more in the Countries; and too
many false and treacherous friends in the Armies, and every where. Besides
multitudes of professed Neuters, ready to fall to the enemies, where ever they
shall appear stronger, and in the mean time, affording as little help, as
possible they can, the rather because the worst of the Parliaments exclaimed
against severity, is courtesy to the ordinary usage of their adversaries
against any that have in the least opposed them.

6. Churches friends weak and few
6. Our friends impoverisht daily, without means of restauraration, disheartened
by mutual jealousies divided by differences in opinion, diminished by deaths,
and captivities, without hopes of ransom, and few grow up in their rooms.

7 Foreign States help not, but hurt thence.
7. Foreign States and Countries, at the best no friends, while in the mean
time, Papists in several parts, afford great assistance to our enemies, by
contributions of Moneys, and Arms: And so have some of our pretended Friends
done too, whose consciences Doct. 1. Use.Consider the Churches danger by sins
National.
will one day pay them to the full for it, on earth, or a worse place, (or both)
as fighters against God and his true Religion; and self-condemned in their own
hearts, for worse rebels (if we be thought by them to be so at all) then any
rhetoric can make us.

8. Ireland wastes, and endangers.
8. Ireland, not only affords us no help, but helps to wast our Estates, our
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, while the Rebels there are in part furnished from
sorrain States, and now at last, threatening us also with an actual Invasion;
and at least some of those Rebels being actually in Arms against us.

Lay now all these together, and we must needs acknowledge, that our danger is
exceeding great, and we all In great distress, in regard of the Judgments that
lie upon, and threaten our Church and Nation, and Ireland with us.

And now it is time, 2. Churches danger by sins of Nation
that we come to consider our Nations sins a little, as the provoking Cause of
all these Judgments: For so the Prophet resolves the Question, why the sword
was sent against Judah, Jer. 4. 18. Thy ways, and thy doings have procured
these things to thee: This is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, and
because it reaches unto thy heart. To show this, we will scan first, A Nation
sinful 5. ways.
how many ways a Nation may be called sinful, according to the phrase, Esaias
1. 4. and a people laden with iniquity: And then see, whether in all those
respects, our Land be not undeniably sinful, and laden with transgressions.

Five ways a Nation may deserve the name of sinful. 1. All ranks tainted much.
First, when all sorts and ranks, that is, many in each of them, are apparently
tainted with sin.

2. The most tainted with any one kind of sin.
2. When particular sins, as ignorance, drunkenness, swearing, profaneness,
(any one such notorious sin, and much more, if diverse) do visibly taint the
greatest number in a Nation, every where; according to the expression, Ezekiel.
22. Thou have done thus and thus.

3. A few notorious sins altogether unpunisht, though laws against them.
3. When any visible iniquity, though practiced but by some few, is not at all
punished, though there be law against it. This comes under another phrase in the
forementioned chapter, Ezekiel. 22. In thee; in thee have they set light by Father
and Mother; in the midst of thee, have they done thus and thus: We know the
very not enquiring after Achan, (there having been a particular warning,
Doct.1. Use. Consider the Churches danger by sins National.
that one such man would make all Israel accursed) made God charge his single
fact upon all the Nation, Israel have sinned, and they have trangressed, etc.
Ios 7. And accordingly he threatens not to be with the Nation any more, except
they found him out, and punished him accordingly.

4. Laws silent, or too weak to restrain sin.
4. When the Laws are too weak and slack, or altogether silent in the restraint
of wickedness. This could not indeed be in the Jewish commonwealth, because
they had laws of Gods own making, to punish all manner of transgressions, that
God would have to be punished: But since other Commonwealths have taken to
themselves (I am afraid farther then God allows) a Liberty to count themselves
free from his penal laws, it is manifestly possible, that they may be wanting
in necessary laws, to suppress ungodliness; and then they make the Nation
guilty of such sins, as for want of good laws are practiced; In that the
Authority that God has given in a Nation to make laws for the observation of
His divine Laws, is not put in execution sufficiently. Authority, I say, sins
in not making such necessary laws, and inferiors sin in not following them
with petitions and importunities for the making of them. And so all are
sinful, the Nation is sinful.

5. Sin countenanced, or allowed by law.
5. Much more when any sin has any kind of countenance, and allowance from
Authority, and specially from laws: and that offenders against Gods
commandments, can pleadmans approbation, if not command in some sort, of their
practices. This is the highest and worst degree of all, not only because it
does immediately taint the generality in point of practice; but lays a cursed
foundation of vilifying all Gods laws in any thing when it appears to
inferiors, that superiors (though men like themselves) dare take upon them so
to cross Gods Authority with theirs.

And now if in all these respects, Our Nation showed sinful by acknowledgments
of all.
our Nation is greatly guilty of transgression and sin against our God and
Heavenly King, we are beyond all peradventure a sinful Nation, and a people
laden with iniquity; and for this, for the present I only appeal to every
ones conscience, that seems to have any sense of conscience, and to the
general complaint that there is every where, of something or other in all
these kinds. Even they often times, that notoriously help to fill up the measure
of a Nations wickedness, do yet themselves complain aloud of the universality
of Doct.1. Use. II. Consider what help may, should be afforded the Church.
corruption, and sin of all sorts, and in all sorts. Let me then take them, and
all others, at their own words in this, and judge them out of their own mouths
(God will be sure to do so one day,) that they have acknowledged our Land and
Church to be not only a greatly endangered, but a deeply guilty people; and so
in both respects needing abundance of help, even the utmost that can possibly
be afforded, by any, by all of us. And that is the other consideration,
belonging to this Use, what help is propor and possible to be afforded to the
Church in this her need?

1. 1. Outward.
Against the outward danger, outward help is needed for our Nation, and Church,
and Ireland also; Counsels, purses, persons, whatsoever is ours, or can be
justly procured by us, is owing, (as the doctrine has showed us) because it
may be helpful, and may be needed one time or other, for the Churches help.

2. 2. Spiritual.
Against the whole of the danger, Prayer may be helpful, and is altogether
needful, 1 Prayer.
constant, humble, penitent, faithful, fervent prayer. I need not insist on
this, you have heard it already this day abundantly, and powerfully. 2.
Humiliatio^.
But of Humiliation not only as a companion of Prayer, but also as a Parent or
Nurse of it, and so as a distinct means of help for the Church, I must a little
particularly speak; specially this being a solemn day of Humiliation, wherein
both God and man require of us, to urge this, which I shall do by showing;
first, what is the nature of it; and then secondly, the object of it, to what
it extends, both as a duty, What it is,
and as a means. For the nature of it; Humiliation is a lying low, and being
abased at Gods feet for mercy, making first, a hearty confession and
acknowledgement to God of 4. things. 1. Of natural extreme sinfulness and
corruption, and particular sins, as many as are known, or by enquiry can be
found out, with their aggravations. 2. Of extremity of punishment thereby
deserved. 3. Of impossibility of escaping such punishment without Gods favor.
4. Of impossibility of obtaining Gods favor, without repentance and faith in
Christ our surety. 2. From all this making also an entire submission and
yielding to any temporal correction, which God lays or continues, without
murmuring, or offering to free our selves by sinning again in any kind. All
this is included within the nature of true humiliation. Why required.
Which as it is often called for in Scripture1 as a duty, giving glory to God,
in all his providence, and particularly in his Doct.1. Use. Consider how to
help the Church by humiliation.
Judgments mixed with mercies, according to his Word, and all his sovereign
dignities and titles of Creator, Preserver, Ruler, and King of all men and
Creatures; and all his glorious attributes of Just, Holy, Wise, Gracious,
Powerful, True, So2 is it also frequently both in general and in the
particular parts of it, made and appointed a necessary means of helping a
Nation; one place shall now suffice for many, Lev. 26. 40, 41. If they shall
confess their iniquities,, and the iniquity of their Fathers, with their
trespass whereby they have trespassed against me, and that also they have
walked contrary unto me, and that I also have walked contrary to them, and have
brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts
be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity; Then will
I remember, etc. And all this the rather, because3 such a Humiliation is both
most necessary and most effectual, to make us endeavor what ever else is
conducible toward the Churches help, as specially a holy Example, and activity
for Reformation; of which afterward.

Now for the object of Humiliation, 2. How far it extends, namely to
It concerns (and would though we our selves were both altogether innocent,
and free from all personal danger;) 1. Sins of Nation.
1. The sins of the Nation, (we live amongst) endangered also by his judgments
felt, or feared. But much more, when our own being sensibly in danger, as well
as others, calls us to remember our own sins, and be humbled for them,
specially being some way guilty also even of the Nations sins, as we shall see
anon.

2. Sins of Forefathers for 5. Reasons.
2. This Humiliation for the sins of our Nation, must extend to the sins of our
Forefathers; this we find commanded, (by way of condition to a promise) Lev.
26. 49. and every where practiced in solemn Humiliations, referring to a
Nations good, as Ezr. 9. Nehemiah 1. and 9. Daniel 9. Ierem. 3. And the reasons
of this are clear.

1. Tenants children liable to pay Parents debts and forfeitures.
1. In that we as their heirs, are justly liable to punishments (temporal) for
their sins in former times. Men's Justice requires debts of Heirs, namely the
Landlords rents; and for wastes committed against their leases; God may much
more. This broke good Iosiahs heart, melted it into tears, when by the reading
of the book of the Law, he found what arrerages he and his land were in, for
the forfeitures of their Forefathers; Doct. 1. Application. Consider how to
help the Church by humiliations for sins of forefathers.
Though he had begun to put himself and them, into a better posture of service,
and duty, toward God their great Landlord: So should we also be affected, even
with the sins of our Ancestors.

2. Enjoying fruit by their sin.
2. Specially if in any thing we find, that any worldly commodity we enjoy, is
the fruit of their sin: Whereas Humane Politics excuse, or justify, or
commend those sins, that redound in appearance to worldly security, or
advantage; as the letting evil men, or evil practices alone, which might have
been redrest, and suppressed, if not at one time, yet at another, had there been
a true, and through zeal for God, and faith in God. Divine wisdom commands
humiliation for (and reformation of, if yet to be done) as endangering evils:
Therefore holy Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.
who trusted in the Lord with all his heart, after his humble acknowledgments
of manifold transgressions, ventures to pull down all the high places, even
superstitious, as well as idolatrous, which all former Reformers, even Asa, and
Jehoshaphat in their times meddled not with. And holy David, though perhaps he
had not power enough, to punish the treacherous murders of the great General
Joab, yet cannot die in peace, till he has left a charge upon his son Solomon,
to pay that debt for him, 1 Kings 2. which therefore he carefully fulfilled
without delay.

3. Lest we approve, or excuse sins, because theirs.
3. Yet more, It is required that we be humbled for our forefathers sins, lest,
as we are too apt, we either approve of the evil of them, (which else we could
not but in our consciences condemn) even because it was their practice to do
thus, and they went no further in reforming; and this we usually think excuse
enough.

4. Or think it, because they were not punished for it.
Or 4. Lest we should make it an argument also, that God is well pleased with
such, and such things, because our forefathers did so, and were not severely
plagued, but rather flourished in those ways: Which also is a common pretense,
for the continuance of evil practices.

5. Or return to them again, after a leaving them.
Or 5. Last of all, Lest even after we had forsaken their sins, we should again
by temptation, be drawn to return to them: Against all which, there is no
better antidote (under the grace of Christ) then a sad, and serious, and often
repeated, and renewed humiliation, even for our forefathers sins, as well as
those of the present Doct. 1. Application. Use 1. Consider how to help the
Church.
generation, in our nation and people.

3 Our own.
3. But to all this, we must be sure to add, (or rather to premise it first in
our hearts, though my method leads me to name it last) the humiliation for our
own personal sins; As many as we do, or can by strict enquiry know, by our
selves. And this generally, for the reasons noted at the first; Gods honor,
our own reformation, and our escaping wrath, through Gods mercy in Christ.

And this we must do, even after we have resolved, Though reforming, or
reformed. N. B.
or begun to reform, and also after we have reformed, how perfectly soever, and
even have our pardon sealed never so sure. That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, when I am pacified toward thee,
for all that thou have done, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16. 63. And to the like
purpose, Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32. Because also, while we are but resolving, or
beginning to reform our selves, we may suddenly revolt, even to worse then
before, if a through Humiliation, shame, sorrow, and fear, keep us not. And
after we have reformed most completely, still some taints remain in our own
hearts, ( and much more many times, in others tainted by us) which need this
mortification. Pharaohs often revolts, and even Isreal's too, all Moses time,
are sad confirmations of this. We read them often relenting, but never solemnly
making it their business, to humble themselves for their transgressions.

3. A holy example.
3. Moreover, against the spiritual danger of sin, a holy example, an exact
unblameable conversation may be greatly helpful, and is infallibly needful,
St. Peter supposes, even ungodly men may thereby be constrained to glorify
God, 1 Pet. 2. and profane Paganish husbands converted, even without the Word,
by the conversation of the wives, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. It shows ungodly men, that
godliness is a possible thing to be practiced as well as worded. And where it
is wanting, no word can do so much good, as that want does harm; as I shall
again touch anon.

4. An active endeavor of reformation.
4. Finally, against sin and judgment both, an active endeavor of reformation
is specially helpful, and beyond controversy needful. 1. Against judgment,
as appears by the promise of pardoning that is, sparing for the present, Jerem.
5. 1. If but a man were found, that did execute judgment, and seek the truth.
Application. Use. 1. Consider how Reformation helps the Church.
And by the assigning this the cause of Gods indignation powered out upon them,
Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31. because God sought for a man that should stand in the gap,
and make up the hedge before him for the land, but found none: that is, never a
man of note, active for reformation: For else there were godly men, that
mourned and prayed, Ezekiel. 9. but none stood up strongly for God; that would
have helped much. 2. Against sin, by using all the authority any has; As a
Governout of a family, Parent, Master, Minister, or Magistrate to bring sinners
to repentance, and keep others from sinning. This no man will, no man can in
general deny to be a helpful, and necessary duty: therefore I add no more of
it for the present, but shall meet with it again in some following Uses of
other Points.

Doct. 2.
I now come to the second Doctrine, which is this: [Private self-respects,
Grounded on Text.
prove great hindrances to most necessary duties.] It had like to have done so
here with Esther; it did so at the first bout, till Mordecai's divine
arguments, of faith, and despair, dreadful frights, and glorious hopes,
quickened her to the heroic resolution, expressed in the following verse. I
will go in to the King, which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I
perish. Thus she overcame at last, and was no longer hindered from her duty:
But too many are every where, as sad experience proclaims to all ears.

This turned Peter for a fit, Exemplified by Peter.
from a Champion of Christ in the garden, to a Renegado in the Palace. It was
not indeed a necessary duty indeed to follow Christ thither, at that time: Nor
perhaps, to make answer at all to the questions then put to him, if silence
would have satisfied. But it was absolutely necessary for a Disciple of Christ,
not to deny his Master any where, much more, not to forswear him, with cursing
and banning, that he knew no such man, but contrarily to profess himself his,
if he could not without such horrid lying conceal it; yet this private
self-respect put him upon, not only to neglect his duty, but to do quite
contrary. He conceited that the owning of his Master, would at this time
endanger his own personal safety, and if he denied him, he might escape
unknown, and untoucht out of the high Priests Palace, what ever became of his
Master. And Doct. 2. Self-respects hinder most necessary duties.
now, though every one curses not, or swears like him, yet have not too many of
us our fits, when we come into malignant companies, too like this?

This also was the very thing that delayed the building of the temple so long,
The Jews neglecting the Temples building.
till God by punishments and severe chidings, forced them out of it, Hag. 1.
compared with Ezra 4. Indeed at the first, the adversaries, under color of the
Kings Commission, made them to cease by force and power; but afterward it was
merely the Jews base self-respects that bindred it: For the truth was, neither
the adversaries complaint to the King was against the Temples building, but
against the Cities, and accordingly his Decree mentions not the Temple, but the
City. They (the enemies) spited the Temple chiefly, as looking at that (as it
was indeed) as the pledge of the Jews welfare: But that would have born no
color for a complaint, the Jews having had Cyrus his command for it; therefore
they abuse the King with the noise of danger of rebellion, etc. so
surreptitiously get a Command from him, which they abuse, to make the
Temple-work to cease. Thus far Ezr. 4. Now Haggai tells us, that after this, the
Jews being able better to brook the want of the temple, then of houses for
themselves to dwell in, do for all the Decree, try their adversaries
courtesies, and fall to building of houses for themselves, which was indeed
properly to build the City, (which the other was not) and then finding their
enemies take no alarm at that, they proceed to make them gorgeous and gay,
fall to sieling them, while they let Gods house lie waste, and say, The time is
not yet come for the building of it; nor never would have come in their
conceit, if God would have held his peace, and his Prophets been silent, as
long as there had been a shadow of an adversary, that had a quarrel against
the Temple, and so against them, when they should offer again to go in hand
with it. Confirmed by Reasons.


What now are the Reasons of this briefly?

Reason 1. Self-love prevails in most;
1. The general corruption that is in all naturally, namely self-love, which
makes men self-idols, and self-idolaters. This is the great cause of the
perilous times foretold, 2 Timothy 3. 1. Men shall be lovers of their own selves,
even professed Christians would be so, more notoriously then formerly. Yet
before that, St. Paul sadly complains of the generality of Christians, (even
Teachers) All Doct. 2.
seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ, Philip. 2. 21. This wholly
possesses the most (sc. all that are not truly regenerate) and taints the best
too much, and too often. Hence all Christ's Disciples forsake him and fly, when
he was apprehended, Matt. 26. 56. and all Paul's friends, Taints all.
every one of them forsook him at his first answer, and no man stood by him, 2 Timothy 4. 16. For --

Reas. 2. Experience of backwardness profitable
2. Worldly experience teaches, that men often escape by not being too forward,
and sometimes even advantage themselves besides. He that forbears, is sometimes
hid; and enemies sometimes, will hire even to Neutrality. At this bait, a
self-lover cannot but bite; and upon this condition, he will never stir hand
nor tongue, for the Church, or Christ, or God, or any thing. Contrarily --

Reas. 3. Of forwardness hurtful.
3. There are also many experiences that the most forward in any Cause of
danger, are often lost, and hardliest escape. They run more upon the mouth of
danger; provoke the enemies rage more, in hot blood, and their malice in cold
blood, and their fear too, which makes them endeavor their destruction above
other men's. This no self-idolater can abide to think on, and much less to
adventure, how necessary soever it be he should, and though he do appear
somewhat on the Churches side.

Reas. 4. Laziness and sensuality makes toward and negligent.
4. Sometimes mere laziness and sensuality, renders men cowards at well as
fear, and keeps them from public services of any kind, that must cost them
any pains and sweat, and interrupt them in their ease and pleasures, which they
love more then they do God, (and therefore much more then they do the Church)
even those, they have a form of godliness, but they deny the power of it, as
the Apostle speaks also in the forementioned, 2 Timothy 3. 5. The power of
godliness would carry them on to all Endeavors for God, and his Church; But
the form, will no further then may stand with their pleasures, and that is
very-very-little in any time, specially in the times of the Churches dangers.

Reas. 5. So does covetousness.
5. Covetousness makes many neglectfull, and cowardly, as well as any thing.
All activity usually is costly, and their Money is their life, at least their
vital spirits, their lifeblood; therefore if they must part with much of
that, they grow faint, like men that have lost much blood, and even the very
fear of it, strikes them into a kind of swoun. They may then wish better to
the Doct. 2. Self-respects hinder most necessary duties.
Church then to the adversaries, for the right of the cause, or in the
general. But if they can but fancy a hope that they shall keep their goods, if
the adversaries should prevail; the Churches party shall sink and starve,
before they will part with much to save them, if they can tell how to keep it.

Reason. 6. Covetousness. etc. makes do work to halves
6. Yet again, some can serve their covetousness, and ambition, and other lusts
much, by seeming to do something, but not their utmost, that they may still be
employed. So unfaithful Lawyers, often prolong Suits, to get more Fees; and
hard-hearted Chirugions torment their Patients with delays, that they may get
more for their Cures: And so the complaint is, that Commanders and Captains do
in their Profession, with dead pays, and false m^sters, and slow proceedings,
losing opportunity. It is charged upon Statesmen too, in their Profession to
have this Art. Undoubtedly, the spirit of this, is mightily in the world, where
opportunity is to advance it; though with the disadvantage of the Church
always, and sometimes the hazard of her utter ruin.

Reason. 7. Envy scorns to labor when others shall be thanked.
7. Envy also sometimes is deeply guilty of neglect of duty. Others (they
think) being Chief in the Employment, are like to be Chief in the thanks,
honor, and reward: This those that date on themselves, their own wisdom, and
worth, scorn, and hate; and so refuse to do any thing, or at least, do as
little as they dare. So was it probably with the Elders of Succoth, and Peniel,
each of them thought himself as good a man as Gideon, and therefore would not
afford him and his weary men, the least relief in their victorious Progress.
Certainly, this made the Ephraimites quarrel with Jephtha, even after they had
neglected to help him, Judge. 8. 2. And this made Israel so ready to revolt
again from David, upon Sheba's traitero^s blowing the Trumpet, 2. Sam. 20.
because they thought the men of Judah would have the greatest thanks for
bringing the King baske, cap. 19. Only once to show that no payson is so
venomous, but God can extract good out of it; This viper of envy, while it
meant to sting the Apostle to death, joined with him in preaching the Gospel,
for which in despite of its devilish intention, he rejoices aloud. But
ordinarily, No dosposition is so barren of all good, or fruitful of all evil,
as this cursed root of envy.

Doct. 2. Self-respects hinder most necessary duties.
Reason. 8. Libertines spirits fear the Churches prosperity.
8. Unto all these must be added, that the lusts, and fancies of many, make them
fear the Churches prosperity, as well as the enemies triumph, and therefore
they will in no wise put to their utmost strength in her behalf, lest she
growing strong, should too much curb their wild fancies, and unbridled lusts,
Like unruly children, that desire not to see their Mother recover any
weakness, that they may the more freely run up and down without control. This
provokes not a few even to be enemies to Christ and his Church, Psalm. 2. 1, 2,
3. The fear of his bands and cords, tying them too straightly. Much more then
does it cause neglect in too many of those that still profess themselves
friends.

Reason. 9. Earthly-mindednesse regards only present and sensible things
9. Finally, All this flows from that earthly-mindednesse that is in all men
naturally, (and too much of it in all still upon earth) that they only, or
chiefly, regard things present and sensible, and prefer them before things
spiritual and eternal, though never so earnestly, and plainly promised, and
threatened. Faith is not ever active, and when it is not (or where it is not at
all) many wordly considerations, as present and sensible, must now overruled to
hinder spiritual activity, and hazarding ones self to the utmost. Only faith
in its vigor, makes a man of a true public spirit; Like Moses, Numb. 11. and
Exodus 32. and Numb. 14. who not only was not content to be happy alone in
Pharaohs Court, but not in Gods favor. A piece of self-denial, next to
miraculous: But there never arose such another Moses, the world is generally
quite of another temper.

Doct. 3.
Therefore the third Point comes seasonably in, to correct, at least in part,
the infection of this pestilentiall self-love. The Point is this: [ Those whom
private, and self-respects hinder from the Churches help, can have no
assurance, that they shall escape more then others.]

Grounded on the Text.
If Mordecai spoke sense, this is a certain truth. Esther was in no humane
danger, at least not certainly, or like others, because not known to be a
Jewesse, and so within the Decree of destruction. And who that had known it,
durst discover her, when he could not be assured, but that the King, not
intending to include her, would for his Honor and Loves sake exempt her, what
ever became of all the rest? But for all that, Mordecai warns her not to
presume upon that, so as to neglect her duty, Doct. 3. Self respecters not
assured to escape.
even with the hazarding of her self suddenly for the Church: Which must needs
suppose this general truth, and bind it upon all who break loose from the
duty to which they were bound, Few or none can plead such probability of
escaping as she; and who ever would plead any, Confirmed by Reason.
does but paint with false and watercolours, easily washed off. See the Reasons
of it.

Reason 1. None can escape but by Gods leave.
1. God orders all things, and they must have his favor to escape, or else
nothing will serve their turn; Prove. 29. 26. Many seek the Rulers favor, but
every man's judgment comes of the Lord. If he give sentence against any man,
(or woman) in vain shall men absolve them. Saul spared Agag, and Agag
concluded that surely the bitterness of death was past; but God had said no
such thing, and Samuel taught him another lesson. Let men go, or climb, or
flee, or hide themselves any where, in Heaven, Earth, or sea, there is no
escaping from Gods revenging hand, Amos 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Though men say with
those scornful men that ruled in Jerusalem, Esaias 28. 14, 15. We have made a
Covenant with Death, and with Hell we are at agreement, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies
our refuge, and under falsehood we have hid our selves. Yet if God be not
willing to have them escape, hear this sentence and prediction what shall
befall them: The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters
shall overflow the hiding place, and your covenant with death shall be
disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it, etc. to v. 23.
All their hopes shall be disappointed, their supposed friends provelyers and
enemies, and the evils they promised themselves should not touch them, shall
utterly overthrow them. He denies God to be Almighty, that confesses him not
able to effect this. Few deny it in words; but few think of it in earnest in
their hearts: specially such self-Idolizers as we are now speaking of.

Reason 2. Such provoke God more then ordinary sinners.
2. But to this must be added a second consideration; That their neglects of
duty for the Churches help in time of danger make them more liable to Gods
displeasure then ordinary men, ordinary sinners, Amos 6. 1, 2, 6, 7. A woe is
to those that were at ease, and put the evil day far from them, and drink
wine in bowls, and were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph; (so far
from helping them Doct. 3. Self respecters not sure to escape.
that they were not troubled at their miseries) Therefore shall they go Captive
with the first that go Captive, etc. So Prove. 24. 13, 14. If thou forbear to
deliver those that are drawn to death, and those that are ready to be slain,
(If a man afford not his help, to reseue innocent persons from the cruelty of
those that would butcher them, or starve them, or the like) If thou say,
Behold we knew it not, Observe this well.
(we knew not that they would be, or were, so barbarously used, when yet they
did sufficiently know it, or might have done, if they had been willing to have
informed themselves) Does not he that ponders the heart, consider it? and he
that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? and shall not he render to every man
according to his works? Every one has sins enough at all times, to enwrap them
in common calamities. But by the former Points it appears, that they are
specially guilty of great sins, for their very neglect of help of their
brethren in danger. Therefore Moses upon this supposition, first chides, and
then earnestly threatens the Reubenites, Gadites, and Manassites on the other
side Jordan, if they did not help their brethren in their wars against the
Canaanites, you have (then says he) sinned against the Lord; and be sure your
sin will find you out, Numb. 32. 23. A man had better have his most deadly
sworn enemy, in the height of his greatest rage, find him out, then his sin to
find him out. God can, and often does, preserve from the one, but from the other
nothing shall, or can: For then Gods vengeance hunts, and pursues such men, to
their inevitable destruction. For --

Reason 3. Their base lusts deserve punishment at all times.
3. The causes of their neglects are all base lusts, such as at any time, if
there were no service of danger to be undergone for the Church, would provoke
God against them to their destruction: Revel. 21. 8. The fearful, are in the
forefront of those that shall be cast into hell. And Mark. 8. 35. Whosoever
will save his life, shall lose it. And Phil. 3. 19. Their end is destruction,
who mind earthly things. And 1 Timothy 6. 9. Covetousness drowns men in
destruction, and perdition. So ambition, sensuality, envy, and self-love, have
all their several brands, and threatenings sufficiently. The refusal to have
Christ to reign over them (which is in the advancement of his Church) himself
calls enmity, and dooms to damnation, Luke 19. 27. Doct.3. Self-respecters not
sure to escape.
And plainly, The Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve the Church (in
prosperity) shall perish; Yea, that Nation shall be utterly wasted, Isa. 60.
12. How much more then any particular person? and specially, that will not
venture themselves for her help in danger? For also --

Reason 4. Their fairest excuses are but sprouts of cursed unbelief.
4. Their fairest excuses, The improbability of doing any good to the Church by
their endeavaurs, and probability of prejudicing themselves, if stood upon, are
nothing but the sprouts of cursed unbelief, dishonorable to God, and to his
Promises made to his Church, and her helpers, as the following Points will help
to illustrate. Mean time --

Reason 5. None go under so strong a guard as in the Churches service.
5.This will particularly add a confirmation, That no man goes at any time
under so strong a guard, as when he ventures himself to the utmost of duty for
the Church. They are then questionless in their way; and He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, and in their hands they
shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone, Ps.
91. 11, 12. And Ps. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encamps round about those that
fear the Lord, and delivers them. To end this, consider, I pray, what occasion
was it, that brought Elisha in danger, for which he had an host of Angels to
guard him, 2 King. 6. 17. The mountain full of horses and chariots of fire
round about, him: But when he had done the people of Israel special service,
and thereby had provoked the King of Syria, namely by warning of his secret
plots and ambushes against Gods people, for which he sent an Army to apprehend
him. Not but that after all, a man may lose his life in the Churches Cause,
(else also it were no such virtue, or valor) but as he is not hurt by that, (a
Christian is not) so may he as soon die in his bed, and sooner; which makes his
sin, in refusing to venture his life, so much the greater, and his danger, in
time of danger, so much the more deadly. Besides a further danger afterward,
though both he and the Church escape for the present, as our fist Point gives
us to understand, and to which I shall now proceed, leaving the fourth till
afterward, because I will make the application of the second, and third,
already dispatched, and of the fist all together, and reserve the two other
Points, as the comfortablest parts (with their Applications) to the close of
all.

The Point then to be now handled is this,

Doct. 5.
yet a destruction is owing to them and theirs, [Though the Church be delivered
another way,Destruction owing to not helping the Church.
that have neglected their utmost endeavor for her help.]

This is a second blast of judgment, against ungodly neglect of so necessary
duty. Before we heard, That if the Church, Grounded on Text.
or any of her members fall, such are in danger (more then others, rather then
less) to perish too. But this is worse. The Church may escape, and shall
infallibly, to the utmost extent of Gods promises; but however they and theirs
shall perish, Exemplified by the curse of Meroz.
that have been wanting to her. This is most plain in the Text: Plainly
ratified, by the curse denounced against Meroz, Judge. 5. 22, even after the
victory gotten, And judgment on Succoth and Penuel.
and the enemies destroyed: And by the vengeance executed on the Elders of
Succeth, and the Inhabitants of Penuel, And Jabesh Gilead.
Judge. 8. also after the victory and deliverance: And once more upon the
Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, for not helping in the execution of justice
against the wicked delinquents of Gibeah, and their abettors of Benjamin, Judge.
21. and this also after the work done. In this latter, I deny not, but there
was too much cruelty used to the women and male children of Jabesh Gilead. But
all was just with God; as besides, that he never punishes any too much (and yet
he rules, Explicated.
and over rules all) the reasons of the Point will presently clear. But first,
I must interpose a few words of Explication. The 1. 1.
is, that by saying. Destruction is owing to them; Nothing hinders but God may
take his own time for payment. He may justly do it presently, and is ever able
when he has a will to it; and so in any time of their lives: Or he may stay
till their death, and reckon with them once for ever, (which is worst of all
for them) according to 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust to
the day of judgment, to be punished. 2. 2.
This (as all other sins) is pardonable; and actually pardoned, upon true
repentance, and faith in Christ our Surety; and so the destruction may be
altogether avoided. 3. 3.
But if God do afford pardon, he usually makes such, who have been in any
punishable degree guilty, feel some smart of their untowardnesse, whereby also
he makes way for their repentance, and warns others; as he did for their
neglect of building the Temple, Hag. 1. and 2. 4. 4.
The destruction that the Family, and Friends of the offenders are enwrapped
Doct. 5. Confirmed by Reasons.
in, is only temporal; unless they be guilty of the same sin, or the
vengeance of God reckon with them also for their ungodliness, in other
respects. And now the Reasons of the Point, will set it out fully.

Reason 1. Their sins not lestened by Gods grace, or others faithfulness.
1. The sins of those that have neglected to help the Church, are no way
lessened, by Gods overruling grace delivering his Church another way, nor by
others faithfulness, whom he has made use of to deliver it. Indeed upon
repentance, either and both are matters of comfort, (as Joseph speaks of Gods
overruling his brethrens wicked malice against him, which was worse then
neglect can be, Genesis 45. 50.) but both set out the more the shame of such
neglect in it self, because God meant to deliver his Church, and others
ventured themselves for it, but they would not; And so their destruction is a
due debt to them, who would not pay the debt of their endeavors.

Reason 2. They are unprofitable servants.
2. The Parable of the Unprofitable servant, dooms such most dreadfully, Matthew.
25. The Master lost nothing, and the fellow servants were diligent, and gained
with their talents; yet his neglect cast him into utter-darknesse;
notwithstanding the imputation upon his Master, of being an austere man, which
is retorted upon him, and made an aggravation of his fault. We showed in the
first Point, that all gifts, and abilities, and authority, and all, are all
Gods, and are disposed by him, and intended for his Churches good, and so for
his own glory. They then that have not so employed them, have been sacrilegious
by perverting them to their own private use. Such have been dead members,
having been altogether useless, and so fit to be cut off; or worse then dead,
disappointing, and putting to pain, both at once, like a broken tooth, Prove.
25. 19. and so it is fit to be rid of them. They have been barren trees, fit to
be cut down, even for cumbring the ground, Luke 13. 7. And Mar. 11. 13. we read
of the fig tree cursed, even because it was a late-ward tree, and came behind
the usual time of other trees. So every way is it most just with God, to deal
with such persons as have not been fruitful for the Churches help. And
particularly, if any pretend, and profess extraordinary zeal, and
forwardness, and yet have secret reservations, and give not God, and his
Church all, even though they pretend so, and would have the credit of so doing;
Doct. 5. Destruction owing to not helping the Church.
Let them remember the direful vengeance on Ananias and Sapphira his wife, for
such hypocrisy, Acts 5.

Reason 3. They that forsook the Church in extremity, are unworthy to rejoice
with her in prosperity.
3. Destruction is owing to those that help not the Church in danger; because
they that forsook her in extremity, are altogether unworthy to rejoice with her
in prosperity. This is reserved by promise only for her mourners, and helpers,
Esaias 57. 18. 66. 10. and Psalm. 122. 6. They shall prosper that love thee; No
love in such as forsook her when she had most need of their help. Therefore
they may be justly deprived of the comforts of her Mercies which she finds at
last. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.
13. Spoken of not relieving the necessity of particular Christians in poverty
and want, as the context before and after shows. How much more then will this
fall heavy upon the forsakers of a Nation of Christians?

Reason 4. Unless converted, they will betray again.
4. Unless God convert such effectually, by an inward work, bringing them to
special repentance for their sinful neglects; Though they may after show
great affection and zeal for the Church in her prosperity yet they still bear
false and treacherous hearts, and would betray the second time in like
extremity. Therefore the Jews did wisely, that they would not suffer the
Samaritans to build with them. Ezr. 4. For that their fashion was to claim
kindred of them, when they saw the Jews in favor and prosperous, and
contrarily to renounce them when they saw them in a low condition. Such
Hypocrisy God abhorres, and owes them a vengeance for it.

Reason 5. They will do no faithful service the while.
5. Even during the Churches prosperity, they will never do* God and the Church
any faithful service: But only still break for their own lusts. This God
discovers from the first, (men sometimes see it a while after:) And therefore
sometimes in graciousnesse to his people whom he has delivered, and is about
to reform further, he takes away such dross, and purges away such tin, (such
reprobate silver) as they are called, Jer. 6. last) which may well be understood
of persons as well as things, as the next words also help to confirm, Esa. 1.
ver. 25, 26.

Reason 6. God jealousy will not bea^e with them.
6. Gods jealousy for his Church, both in reference to the evils that they
have been accessory to, in not helping her; and to prevent others from
following such ill example here after, will not suffer such to escape
altogether scot-free. God saw more evil in their ways and heart, then man
could, he saw Doct. 5. Destruction owing to not helping the Church.
upon the same principles urged by stronger temptations, they would have proved
enemies, though now they were only Neuters, or false and hollow hearted, left
handed friends: It is I say, but the same principle of wicked self-love,
wrought upon by Satan, and men, with other opportunities that makes some men
Neuters, Observe this well.
and others desperate enemies, which God seeing (though men do not, or will
not, or cannot,) counts all such a generation of vipers and a brood of
Serpents, and devotes them to destruction. Yet even the omission of duty is
directly threatened with damnation, Mat. 25. And if some did not smart sometimes
even for omissions in this world, the Church would have a great many fewer
helpers then now she has.

Reason 7. They sin for their children, etc. And corrupt them, and are punished
in them.
7. Finally, the extending of this destruction (by God) to the families and
friends of such as help not his Church, is most just, whenever he pleases so
to deal; (and that according to the proportion of humane justice in many
cases) 1. Because Men often forbear their duties for their children and
posterities sake, as well as their own, and so they stick not to say oft-times.
Therefore their children shall pay for their neglects together with themselves.
2. They often engage them according to their capacity in the sin, as well as
themselves, and train them up (even from children) in Neutrality and
Lukewarmnesse, and a spirit of self-love and selfe-seeking; therefore God cuts
off sometimes the children too, as a corrupted generation. 3. At least because
men take themselves to be punished in their families and friends ruin:
Therefore that the fear of that may help to antidote them against the sin of
neglect, and provoke them to the utmost of duty; God both threatens ever, and
punishes sometimes the families, and friends, as well as themselves. And so I
have dispatched the doctrinall part of this point also. I come now to a joint
Application of all the three points together, which will afford a threefold
Use. 1. Of Examination. 2. Of special and reinforced Humiliation. 3. Of
Exhortation. All which have relation also to the first doctrine of all, as will
easily appear to any observant mind. To begin with the first,

Use 1. Examinations how far we have helped the Church in her distresses, or
neglected it, and why.
We have here a just ground of Examination of our selves every one of us, how
far we have helped the Church in her distress and danger; and whether any
selfe-respects have hindered us Application Use 1. Examination about helping the
Church.
more or less: And this will dispose us to Humiliation, and afterward to
Reformation and amendment, specially the more faults and the more aggravations
we find in our selves. Of whom we ought in this case to be most jealoufly
inquisitive even more then we need be of others; and yet those that are public
persons (whether Ministers or Magistrates) seeing wrath upon a Nation, and so
setting upon a Reformation, of necessity, ought to make as much enquiry after
others also, within their spheres, as they can. But let me speak chiefly to
every ones conscience for themselves in particular.

Herein according to the help we might and should have afforded, showed in the
former use, let us examine, 1. 1. What outward help we have afforded, Or do
yet resolve if need be or think much to think of.
What outward help we have neglected, particularly since the late greatest
dangers of our Church and Nation, and the calamities of Ireland: And let our
consciences withal tell us what we intend and resolve to do, in case more
should be needed. Which as it may clear many very much, though they have not
yet altogether ventured so much as others: so it may condemn those greatly,
that may seem to have done a great deal. If any thinks what he has done or
ventured for the Church, a great deal; so as he grudges and shrinkes at any
more offered to be called for, what need soever there may be: If any man think
ought less then all, enough, he has yet done as good as nothing in Gods
account; Whether it be fear, or covetousness, or sensuality, or any other lust
that causes him so to stick, of which the Doctrines and Reasons forementioned
may convince him, if he will thoroughly lay them to heart as he should.

2. How we have prayed
2. Let us next examine, how we have prayed; what special helps, suitable to the
Churches special dangers, we have that way afforded. And if we find neglects
here, (as I much doubt all or most may) either in omissions, or in slight
performances: Of these specially relating to secret prayers, and when others
have prayed in our hearing publicly or privately there can no possible cause
be given, but our wretched corruption, profaneness, uncharitable want of
compassion, stupidity, and unbelief, and such like, too too-far prevailing
lusts; which make our neglects very culpable in Gods fight, and so should they
be in ours.

3. What example we showed.
3. Let us next examine, what example we have showed; whether Application
Examinat. Three sorts guilty.
we have helped the Church any way effectually in this, or contrary. Here let me
speak a word to three sorts among us. Professed Libertines.
1. Some there are, I am afraid too many, that are as far from helping the
Church against sin by their examples in the least, as the professed enemies are
from helping her against their own companions. There are men who in stead of
professing godliness, (which yet in spite of their hearts, their very
baptism and name of Christians, and coming to Church cannot but continually
profess) do little less then openly profess Libertinisme, and who make it
their boast, that they are not of the preciser-sort, as they scornfully term
them. Such though without any solemn examination they may and do know their
own practices, yet I wish that they would but even this day, and this hour, by
light of the former Doctrines and Reasons examine the guilt of those practices,
and the displeasure that hangs over their heads, even for the mischief done to
the Church and Nation hereby, in stead of the help they owed. And with them --

Scandalous Professors of Religion.
2. A second sort no less guilty, if not rather more (and indeed more in some
respects) are those, who though they desire to make a special show even of
Piety and conscience, and go under the name of Professors, (as the phrase
has been much, and is yet still partly among us) do yet notoriously and
scandalously live in one ill course or other; being known by such as live near
them, and branded, ascovetous, false in their dealings, filthy, riotous in some
companies, devilish in their families, and the like; to the great reproach of
Religion among all those that know or hear of their ungodly and loose
behaviors. These also need not so much examine themselves about their
practices, which they cannot be Ignorant or almost forgetful of, as about the
wickedness of them, even in reference to the Churches prejudice, and danger
thereby, they being her great shame and disease, and most undeniable causers of
her judgments; and therefore liable to the most exemplary severity of God in
his judgments, presently or at what other time he shall please to reckon with
them for it. But besides both these there is yet --

The best in some degree give some ^^l example.
3. A third sort, whom I must also call to examination, and herein I shall
exempt none, though I shall now accuse none particularly, whom their conscience
accuses not, yet let me ask even Application. V^^. Examination what example we
have showed.
the best of this Assembly, even those that have the greatest reputation of
Honest, Conscionable, and godly, but one or two questions. 1. You are (and that
deservedly) well esteemed of in the general, yet for all that does there not
lie upon you some unhappy note of reproach a [ But] of some ignominy? A good
man, But, too eager of his pleasures. A zealous man, But, too self willed. A
religious woman, But, too much given to the fashion, and worldly pomp, and
bravery. If I durst tarry upon this point, I could make many more unhappy
instances in this kind. But let me in one word, put it home to every ones
conscience, by the second question. Are not the best, at least sometimes,
guilty to themselves, of such outward miscaraige, as were it not for the
Doctrine of the Saints infirmities, it would shame and dishearten them utterly?
But though by that doctrine and the grace of Christ, they may indeed well think
themselves discharged of those miseariages in regard of guilt, redounding to
damnation; yet let me charge them back upon them thus far, as to call them to
examine the offense of such infirmities this day, Mischiefs of it to the Church
as things that besides the personal evil of them, have done mischief in the
example, and bardned some sinners, and multiplied many sins; while It
multiplies sins.
Some thereby take liberty to themselves, to practice the same evils often,
which they saw in them but once, and to practice others upon this pretense,
Such have their sins for their turn, and this is for mine. Reproaches religion.
Others to reproach all religion as hypocrisy, even for such a single
infirmity. And Hardens self flatterers.
others again, call their enormous customary sins, infirmities, and will count
themselves children of God for all that, as supposing those in others in whom
they saw even once such an infirmity, to offend so often, or in other kinds:
And so by one root of bitterness springing up (as it is Heb. 12. 15.) many are
defiled, and many more may be. And all is mischievous to the Church, in stead
of helping it in its time of need.

I have one piece of Examination more, to put to every conscience; 3. What
endeavor of reformation for the Churches help.
which is, what help we have afforded the Church, groaning under the burden of
sin, by endeavoring an effectual reformation, according to our utmost
strength and authority, whether Domestical, or Friendly, Ministerial, or
Magisteriall.

Domestical
1. Domestical: We should (all that have families to govern) Application.
Examination
have done like Abraham, Command our children, and household to keep the way of
the Lord; Like Joshua, to resolve, that not we only, but our bonse shall serve
the Lord; Gen.18. 18.
Like David, to endure no deceitful persons, Josh. 24. 15.
tellers of lies, any wicked ones, to abide in our houses, in our fight: Psalm.
101.
But to make our Families Churches, as it is phrased of sundry Saints in the
New Testament. Romans 16.
But will our consciences now say, Col. 4.
We have done so? How many are there, whose servants are ignorant, while
themselves abound in knowledge, In reference to servants.
and even while they keep Ministers in their houses too? How many who while
they go to Church, their servants either stay at home, or go to the Tavern, or
perhaps worse places? Their Cooks specially seem privileged to keep no
sabbath, take no other care of their own souls, then by providing meat for
their Masters, and the Families bellies: And their Coach-men, and Footmen,
serve God sufficiently, if they look to their horses at the Church door? How
many are there, whose servants notoriously scorn that holiness their
Governors seem to profess; or at least make not so much as a show of
regarding it? Who have some Family Duties, when they are at leisure, and half
their family absent, and at such unseasonable times at night, as more then half
that half, are asleep most of the time? How many, that never think of being so
much angry that their servants offend God in any thing, as when they offend
them, or putting so much weight upon Gods commands, in any thing, as they do
upon their own? How many, To children.
whose children are very, very little different in outward behavior, from
those, whose parents make no such show of piety as they do in any sort? The
Daughters, in idleness, boldness, pride, and pomp. The Sons in
licentiousness, according as their fancy leads them? How exceeding few are
otherwise? I tremble to think, and dare not (because of the time) enlarge my
self to express, what woeful deformities there are in Christians families, and
therefore how little help such afford the Church, and specially, what will
become of the next generation, if things hold on as they do. But yet, though
but a little any where, yet some there is doubtless, of care to reform
families, and keep sin under there.

But By authoririty of friendship.
May we hope the like of any endeavors toward friends? We should have showed
the truest friendship to the soul, Application. Use 1. Examination What help to
the Church, by endeavoring to reform Levit. 19. 17.
not to suffer sin upon them; at least have showed our selves grieved to see
them sin. But will our consciences say, we have done this? Can we name those,
that have in this kind been the better for us? Or if some are, had we power
with no more? Have we so much as tried in any whether they would endure a
reproof? Have we ever ventured to lose them, rather then they should lose Gods
favor, or their souls, or the comforts of a good conscience? Have we ventured
to have them say, We hate them, because we would not, (could not) forbear to
cross them in their ways of evil? Alas, alas! where is this to be found? And
how little help has the Church had from us in this regard? Israel in their
good temper, would even fight with their brethren, (that had a great while
fought for them) rather then their sin should endanger the Church generally,
Josh 22.
and offer also to give them a fifth part of their lands, to hire them not to
sin.

By Ministers
3. What shall I say for my own profession? God be merciful unto us, to the
most zealous of us, that we have afforded no more help publicly, Publicly.
by crying down all sin, in our own Congregations, or others: Even upon days
of Public humiliations, how little do we preach against sin. And then, for
private, Privately.
Oh the woeful neglect among our own people at home, or friends abroad! We are
afraid to provoke them, to lose them, to be losers by their disfavour, to incur
danger by their displeasure. We are afraid to discourage men now, if we should
denounce Gods judgments for their sins, and to arm Malignants with reproaches,
if specially we preach against the sins of Professors. But did Gods Prophets
for bear ever for either, or both these causes? Or is the Church helped, by the
courage of those against whom God is angry, for their unreformed lives? or
credited by our silence, when their misbehaviours make a loud noise? I must
say, Remember this.
(as he) When we all have preached Repentance, as much as we have preached
first, Confidence, and then Faith, we shall be reformed and saved; and I doubt
not till then. And that men receive it so ill from some few, or are displeased
with some few words from any, it is because we all use them to so little; and
in all help the Church little: whereas we, of all others, should be ever her
principal helpers against sin.

By Magistrates.
4. Finally, Magistrates should have used their utmost Authority Application.
Use. 2. Humiliation for helping the Church so little.
to suppress sin, which oppresses the Church. I need not ask in most places,
whether this have been done:

I fall rather upon the second part of the necessary Application of our
foregoing Doctrins, concerning the duty of helping the Church, and the sin and
danger of neglecting it, which is to call us all to a serious and sad
Humiliation, as many as have been remembered by their consciences of any
neglects, specially willing, and most of all customary. To humiliation; I say,
as for our own most secret, and personal sins, so for all our guilt of not
helping the Church, as we might, and ought; and for all our Nations sins, (even
those of our forefathers) together with the judgments lying upon the Church and
Nation, and hanging over us. We are to be humbled this day, even for our want
of humiliation hitherto, wherein I much fear, the best of us have been too
defective. Specially this being a main duty of the day.
This is a day of learning it, God and man have commanded the preaching of it,
(specially on these days) as well as practicing it, and of practicing it, as
well as learning it. I have a little taught it this day, and would now fain
work the practice of it, upon my own heart, and yours. Let us then, I beseech
you, fix our minds upon our sins, personal, and national, and the desert of
them, And there being so much cause.
that Gods glory may now be advanced, by our thoughts of both, quickened by the
apprehension of our calamities, as it has been dishonored by our former
sinfulness. Remembering specially the Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 1. 31, 32.
spoken indeed of a particular case, but one more nearly concerning our Nation,
then any other Reformed Church, perhaps in all the Christian world, (as I shall
touch by and by) as undoubtedly appliable generally to all sins. If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Let us then acknowledge for our selves and our Nation, that according to the
late Covenant, ordered to pass through the Kingdom; [ Our own sins, and the
sins of this Nation, have deserved the judgments and calamities that lie upon
it.] Which that we all may do the more heartily, and humbly, let me now present
you with a brief Catalogue of some more capital National sins among us; and
then once more, mind you somewhat further of Gods heavy wrath, greatly
declared against us in his judgment Application. Use 2. Humiliation for
National sins.
for these sins. And then see, whether we can choose but be exceedingly humbled
both for the one, and the other, now and hereafter.

Here I reckon, to begin with, against the first Commandment, Idolatry,
Ignorance, and Atheistical scorning of all Religion, conscience, and civil
honesty.

1. For our Nations sins against the 1. Commandment. Idolatry.
The first of these Idolatry, the sin that is most formal high treason
against God, is aggravated in our Nation and Kingdom, since the Reformation, by
the continual plottings of idolatrous Pa^ists, traitors unto our Kingdom,
which (together with the great danger we have been in, and are specially now at
this day, by their conspiracies) are at once a just reward of our too much
tolerating them, from the very first, but much more of late years; and a
strange symptom of strange lukewarmnesse in us, to suffer such enemies to God
and our selves so much, while yet they so often, and so desperately refused to
suffer us to be at quiet in our condition, notwithstanding.

Ignorance.
The 2. Ignorance, is very much aggravated, by the innumerable multitudes
tainted with that soul-killing sin, in which of all others it is impossible for
any to be saved: And yet scarce a fist, I may say a tenth man, or woman,
through the whole Kingdom, in a better condition, as will be found to our
incomparable grief and shame, specially (the Laws and persons have been so
extremly wanting to remedy this, all this while) when once an effectual course
comes to be taken, to make this Land a Christian Nation in earnest, by bringing
the generality of our people to knowledge.

Atheistical scorning of religion, and all honesty.
The 3. is a wickedness, unheard of, I think in the world, among any people, of
any religion whatsoever, (unless in Italy, where yet it is not comparable to
what is among us) and most audaciously, and uncontrolledly practiced in our
England every where, even by no beggars neither. And this I rank under the 1.
Commandment, though immediately seeming to be against men, because it is
against men, merely for Gods sake, because they show some respect to his Law
and Word, and so most properly against God himself. I know not whether a
formal Atheist, known to be so, but keeping himself quiet, would do the one
half of that mischief that this Atheistical scorner does.

Application. Use 2. Humiliation for sins against the 2. Com-
Against the second, I name superstition, and the heavy weight put upon
ceremonies, and circumstances, and humane ordinances, while the holy Ordinances
of God have been shamefully neglected, by an
Ignorant-pluralizing-nonresident-carelesse, and unsufficiently-maintained-
Ministry; and a profane people, that liked all this well enough, and even
loved to have it so.

Against the 3. Commandm.
Against the third: 1. Vain oaths, cursings, and blasphemies, in infinite
multitudes. 2. And either unnecessary oaths, in Universities, and upon
Officers, and Inquests, and private persons; Or, 3. at least no regard of their
observation, in those that take them, or in those that give them. 4. Extreme
profaneness in the common-sort, (and others) in the very public Assemblies,
and the most solemn services of God, by sleeping, going out and in at their
pleasure, talking, and laughing oft-times, and no redress of it, by Officers
care, or Magistrates endeavor. 5. A twisted cord of Simony, and perjury, for
Benefices. 6. Also a flood of riot, and drunkenness, overflowing all places,
and bearing down all reproof. 7. And finally, the most horrid profanation of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by the unworthy receiving of ignorant, and
apparently godless persons. The inexcusable fault of persons in authority,
(and even of Laws too) in suffering such pollution, of so sacredan Ordinance:
Pollution, I say, As also the monstrous profanation of that sacred Ordinance
of Excommunication, made to lacquy for fees, or persecute godliness.
to those profane receivers of it to their own damnation, though not to
others, who have no authority to keep them back. And yet that heart-grief, that
they who are the most zealous for Christ's honor, and other men's souls, herein
have taken for such Profanation, and the grievous scandal that this has
continually given, and does give to this day, to (many thousands perhaps of)
weak ones, whom this alone has driven from our Church, is a fearful
aggravation of this sin of our Nation.

Against the 4. Commandm.
Against the fourth, there has been most notorious prophanations, violations of
the Sabbath, the Lords day, and notwithstanding the Doctrine of it more clearly
among us, even authorized then any where else in the world, as also the
practice of it more glorious here, then any where, and an answerable
prosperity, ever since Queen Elizabeth's time, according to the Application Use.
2. Humiliation for National sin.
prophecy ( Esaias 58. 13, 14.) yet the profanation had been more impudent and
outrageous then any where else: Men having undertaken to make void Gods holy
Commandment, as it were by a Law, and even by persecuting all that would not
consent to such violation; Then which, scarce so great affront was ever put
upon God by any Nation professing his Name.

Against the 5. Commandm.
Against the fifth, Clandestine marriages, without, and against Parents consent,
for which the Laws have no sufficient prevention nor redress.

Against the 6. Commandm.
Against the sixth, The fearful guilt of innocent blood of the Martyrs, shed of
old in time of Popery, and the fresh bleeding wounds (though not to the
extremity, Note this well
because power was wanting) of Gods faithfullest Ministers and people,
persecuted to the utmost extremity of color of law, and often a great way beyond
law: Many pincht, themselves and families, next to utter undoing, if not
altogether, with sore wants by that means. Thousands of late driven out of the
Kingdom into America, and threatened even theretoo. And by and with all this,
That scarce at all feared, or thought of, but most prodigiously frightfull
guilt of the blood of souls. Thousands, Note this specially.
and Millions (so far as can be judged by any rules of Scripture) gone to hell,
out of this Kingdom, even since the reformation, for want of good laws, and
through wicked Magistrates, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and wicked Ministers,
and Neighbors, in stead of good ones. Millions, I say, now howling in hell, in
those infernal flames, from whence there is no redemption, damned through the
undeniable defect of sufficient means of salvation in an ordinary way; and
through the damnable persecution, made against all show of godliness. A
wickedness, for which alone, it is next a miracle, that God has not sunk the
whole Kingdom into the bottom of the Sea, long ere this.

Against the 7. Commandm.
Against the seventh, The abominable filthiness of whoredom, and adultery
specially, never sufficiently shamed, or frighted, but of late years grown
beyond all shame. And the wickedness of Play Houses suffered, which though
generally against all the Commandments, one way or other, yet for the most
part, more immediately against this.

Against the 8. Commandm.
Against the eighth, The oppression, usury, racking of Rents, Application. Use.
2. Humiliation for national sins.
Enclosures, depopulations, defrauding of Creditors, by lands paying no debts,
and of Purchasers by preconveyances. Perverting of justice, Engrossing
commodities, enhaunsing of prises, every where cried out upon.

Against the 9. Commandm.
Against the ninth, All kind of lying, and slandering.

And finally, against all the Commandments, The general lukewarmnesse of all
our Laws against sin, Against all generally.
either belonging to the first, or second Table. I cannot now instance in the
particulars; But if it be seriously considered, Lukewarmness of Laws.
it will be found as I say, That scarce any one Law made since the Reformation,
Observe this well.
for Religion, or against any particular sin, but has a deep taint of
Laodicean lukewarmnesse; something is said, as to restrain wickedness, but so
weakly, as there is much to be considered, even about our best Laws: The
discipline of the Church in ill hands.
But withal, there has been generally, a great want of a godly Discipline for
the Church all this while. The government being left in the hands of men, who
were scarce so much as likely in reason, to use that power they had, according
to God. I mean the Chancellours, and Commissaries, etc. who managed all Men
that usually bought their Offices, and so most likely to sell the sins of the
people: And who had more reason (for their gains-sake) to be skillful in the
Popes Canon Law, then in Gods Canonical Scripture. And who might usually do
what they lift securely, because all appeals were, for the most part, made to
men of their own profession, and like themselves; and yet they had not so much
power to do good, Neglect of children, and youth.
as to do evil. Finally, the want of a public care, to breed up children, the
poor specially; and neglect of visiting Schools, and Universities, whereby a
seed of evil doers has still sprung up, to fill the Land with corruption. And
of all this, there is scarce any thing but to a rational observant man, has
been, and is, notorious, or may be soon made so, and declared to be abominable
in the sight of God: For which we may well fear his speaking against us, as
against his people of old, Jer. 5. and 9. Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord, shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

For great wrath manifested in Gods judgments, in 10. considerations.
Doubtless, he has begun to visit us for these things, (besides many other
our wickednesses) and that his soul may not be avenged on us, we had need
exceedingly to affect, and afflict, and humble our souls, with a holy fear of
his displeasure, already manifested Application. Use. 2.
unto us, and proclaimed against us, and namely by a tenfold Consideration of
the dreadfulnesse of the judgment which we all lie under, and are in extreme
danger of.

The judgment it self, a devouring sword.
1. The judgment in it self, touched a little before; A sword drawn against us,
with so much advantage for our enemies, and disadvantage to our selves, and
with such desperate purposes of our utter ruin. Esaias 1. 20.
You have more then once heard of the calamities of war, therefore I insist
no further upon that; only remember, that when God is most angry, he threatens
that, Esaias 1. 20. and often else where.

The kind, Civil war by drunkenness.
2. The kind of the judgment, a civil war, or rather an unnatural intestine
war, a war against our own bowels. Scarce a family in the whole Kingdom, that
is not engaged against it self. This is according to the heavy curse, Jer.
13.13, 14.
of filling Kings, Princes, Prophets, inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem with
drunkenness, Politic drunkenness, and dashing one against another, (the
brother against the brother) the fathers and the sons together, Jer. 13.13, 14.
and observe what follows in the end of ver. 14. I will not spare, nor have
pity; not have mercy, but destroy them. And if we be not all utterly destroyed,
yet manifold families will undoubtedly; and those that remain, will be such
enemies to their neighbors, and one to another in the same family, as God
alone knows when the direful effects of that drunkenness will cease, even
though the war be ceased.

Occasion, the Militia, hoped to be our settling.
3. The occasion was most dreadful; That which was meant, and hoped to have
been our safety, the settling of the Militia, petitioned by all Countries,
acknowledged by the King necessary to be done, seemed to be granted, and then
refused; whereby the Parliament saw themselves forced to settle it. This proved
the pretense, and occasion of all our unsetling. Answerable to that heavy
curse even against the enemies of Christ, Psalm. 69. 22. Let that which should
have been for their welfare, become atrap.

Sufficient means of prevention, vain; wise men confounded.
4. The humane means of prevention, seeming most sufficient, yet rather causing,
and increasing the mischief. A Parliament sitting, Chosen with the greatest
care that ever the Countries took in any Age; Never a choyser company of wise
and good men, seemed to be gathered together, and all the wisdom of the Land
besides, Esaias 29. 14
contributing to the counsels of the one side, and the other, in Application.
Use 2. Humiliation for Gods heavy wrath.
Parliament, and ont of Parliament, and engaging themselves to the utmost, and
having a long time of debate, by words, and messages, and writing, space to see
the wisdom, and faithful intentions of each other, and to manifest their own;
and after all, to agree in nothing but disagreement and confusion, ( like
drunken men as before) what a woeful curse is this? specially being
foreprophesied against Israel, Esaias 19, 14. Behold, I will proceed to do a
mavelous work among this people, even a mavelous work, and a wonder; for
the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. Many confounded that they gave nothing but
mischievous counsel, which only was believed; and others so confounded, that
their faithful counsels were discredited, as when God meant to bring a scourge
on Rehobo^^, and vengeance on Absalom.

Example of others (and our selves in others case) blessed with more wisdom and
success.
5. All this aggravated by example of others, finding that favor with God, that
we could not find, (according to the difference between Hos. 1. 6, 7. Exodus 9.
and 10.
Judah and Israel, or Goshen and Egypt. Exodus 9. and 10.) that we and they
both could then be wise and prosperous, and we so unhappy, in and among our
selves. Our brethren of Scotland had much the same Cause; God then let us be
wise for them and our selves together, and the danger of those wars between
them and us, after near three years hazard, ended with very little blood, and
with great peace and amity. But God has denied us this favor, this wisdom,
so that his anger appears to be the more against us; and we seem still the more
filled with drunkenness.

The ground of the quarrel. Both protest for the same things.
6. The ground of the quarrel as held forth on both sides, makes still the
mischief a greater prodigy. The honor, dignity of the king, the Privileges
of Parliament, the Law of the Land, the property and liberty of the Subject,
are fought for on both sides, and which is most admirable, the same Religion,
the true Religion, Protestant Religion, ( except only that the Popish Army in
the North, are so honest, or so impudent, as to disclaim that Cause, and
profess to fight for their own Religion.) And all this, is Protested before
God and man, heaven and earth; all the world is called to witness of their
faithful purposes and intentions. And is not here then a strange drunkenness,
at least on one fide? and a strange curse? scarce the like ever heard of in the
world. Application. Use 2. Suppose both side hypocrites.
What! are both sides hypocrites? or one only? or neither? Every way it is most
dreadful, and woeful. 1. If both sides be generally hypocrites, or the chief
of both; Can God but resolve to destroy us all, as a most perfidious Nation,
unworthy to live in the world, Esaias 10 5, 6.
and deal with us, as Esaias 10. 5, 6, Even send a foreign enemy, to take the
prey, and take the spoil, and to tread us all down, Or one side.
like the mire of the streets? 2. If one side be faithful, and the other not,
2 Samuel 15. 11.
yet is it not most dreadful, that God should let hypocrites so far prevail,
as first to seduce many well meaning people, (as Absalom under pretense of a
vow he had made, carried away 200. honest Citizens of Jerusalem, who went with
him in their simplicity, and knew not any thing, but when he had them there, he
soon turned them into conspirators and rebels like himself) and then to
prevail so far, to endanger the most faithful of the Land? Or both sides
meaning right.
3. Contrarily, if both sides can be thought to mean faithfully, and only
disagree through mistakes, and misunderstandings; Is not this a prodigy of
Gods displeasure against us? Is not this most emphatically a filling us with
drunkenness, (as before) that we kill our friends as foes, and they us, in
like sort, (Like the terrible vengeance on the enemies of God and his Church, 2
Chro. 20 23.
2 Chronicles. 20. 23. till they had utterly destroyed one the other.) But God never
did thus to his faithful people since the world was. Therefore sure this
cannot be the case with us. Yet still, (as before) take it which way you will,
it is a most horrible and dreadful wrath against our Kingdom and Nation, even
in this respect.

The time in civil respects, when in hopes of settling.
7. The time when this evil befell us, is greatly observable, as proclaiming
still more wrath; 1. In civil respects. In how fair hopes of settling were we?
Specially this Parliament being continued by an Act, and so many good Acts made
besides. And now for God to deal so, Jer. 18. 9, 10.
as to undo all, threaten this Parliament with the worst kind of dissolution,
by the sword, which may kill all Parliaments for ever; What is it but the heavy
wrath threatened, Jer. 18. 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; If it do evil in
my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith
I said I would benefit them?

The time in spiritual respects, when we expected reformation, and desired it.
8. The time, 2ly. in spiritual respects, pronounces the indignation more hot,
Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14
and heavy against us. For God to do this, not Application. Use 2. Humiliation
for Gods heavy wrath.
only to a Nation, but a Church; not only to a people, but His people; To
blast, and offer so to dash in pieces all the hopes he had given them of a
Reformation, by them labored for, at least with great seeming earnestness;
and in stead hereof, to threaten the total ruin of the Church, and true
Religion among us, by the hands of her most cruel Popish enemies. How enraged
is God, when he so refuses to reform us, who pretended such desire of
Reformation? Like that most terrible threat of vengeance, Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord
have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and
according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, says the Lord.

Willingness to obey in helping Ireland refused.
9. The obedience we would yield to him, in yielding help to our brethren of
Ireland, according to the duty of this Text, and many other places, adds to the
manifestation of his wrath against us and Ireland both. Esaias 31.3.
He here threatens destruction for not helping, and gives hopes to those that
will. How angry is he then, that will not afford us leisure, or means, nor them
any help by us? But as this showed his heavy wrath against Israel, when he
would not regard them, seeming willing to trust and obey him, after their
rebellious distrust, Numb. 14. And as Esaias 31. threatens both the helpers, and
the helped together, ver. 3. So, God seems to deal with us and Ireland, as if
he also meant to fulfill the very word of the Irish rebels, many Months ago;
That they hoped to find us so much work at home, as we should have no leisure
to send much help thither: And as though God meant to destroy his Church in
England, and Ireland both together. Thus all things proclaim his exceeding
fierce wrath against us.

Spiritual means to make our peace fruitless.
10. One thing yet further, adds exceedingly to the notification of Gods fierce
wrath against us; The means we have had and used, to make our peace with God.
Never so much fasting and prayer in England; eighteen Months solemn fasts by
Authority, (besides all voluntary ones, by the liberty that there is now of so
doing) with so many millions of prayers, daily and continually; and all these
as it were rejected, Prayer, Psalm. ^^*4.
or at least in a great degree, according to the sad complaint, Psalm. 80. 4.
How long will thou he angry Application. Use 2. Fasting, Jer. 14. 12.
against the prayer of thy people? and the more sad threatening, Jer. 14. 12.
When they fast I will not hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offering
and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will corsume them by the sword,
and by the famine, and by the pestilence. What will God regard, if he turn away
his eye from such solemn services, from such outcries of prayers? How greatly
must we needs say, he is provoked against us? Specially also, when we have had
also some beginnings of Reformation; Some Reformation.
restoring liberty to many faithful Ministers, and encouraging Preaching,
repressing the profanation of the the Lords Sabbath, and pulling down Images,
and Crosses: and yet (our miseries still continue, and work higher, rather then
otherwise) For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still, as the Prophet,

Jer. 5. 9.
And now ( Honorable and Beloved) when you have heard all these tokens of Gods
displeasure against us, Reinforceme^t of our Humiliation.
and our Nation, can you choose but tremble, and humble your souls greatly,
before your God this day? Certainly, we cannot believe Him to be just, but we
must needs acknowledge our sins to be very grievous, and heinous, that have
provoked such a wrath, as these things discover to be kindled against us. So
that if we could spend all the remaining part of this day, in bewayling and
bemoaning the vileness of our transgressions: If we could wear out all our
strength, and spirits, in doleful lamentation: If we could weep out our eyes,
and distill all the moisture of our bodies into tears of blood, we yet should
not sufficiently mourn for our iniquities, nor make an acknowledgment
answerable to our demerits, or to the just indignation manifested against us.
God Almighty grant, for Jesus Christ's sake, that we may all think of these
things more then ever yet we have done, and be more affected, and grieved, and
humbled, (for our own, and our Nations sins, and shares in wrath) then formerly
we have been, that so we may be disposed the better to embrace the exhortation
to amendment of our selves, and reformation of others, to the uttermost of our
power ever hereafter.

Meanwhile, in a day of solemn humiliation, and time of such danger, and being
specially called to deliver Gods Message, at this time, in this place; and all
Ministers being charged by the religious Ordinance, set forth diverse Months
ago, [ in their several Auditories, specially on the fast days, most
earnestly Application. Use2. Special application to the Parliament.
to persuade, and inculcate the constant practice of this public
acknowledgement, and deep humiliation] Let me take leave to discharge my
conscience in a humble trembling representation to thar high Authority, that
has required my service this day, of the fitness of their taking into
consideration, What humiliation is, or may be required of them as a Body?
Coming hither as the heads of our several Tribes, and Elders of our Cities?
You had at the first, besides your own personal sins, the sins of the Nation,
whom you represent, and of former Parliaments, whom you succeed, to be humbled
for, namely such, and so many, as you did, or could take notice of. But you had
not then any actions of your own, as a joint body, to consider, whether there
were any failings in you; as now after many days, and months, even some years
sitting together you have. And it is, at least possible, that you may find
failings in some things, in so long time, and so many businesses. Your enemies
and the Churches charge you with enough, with multitudes. I dare not second
them, nor abett any of their virulent reproaches. But doubtless it is
possible, you may have had failings, of some kind or other. Consider then, I
beseech you, in the Name and presence of the great God, before whom you are
come as a Body this day, to humble your selves, and afflict, your souls,
whether there be not somewhat to be sought out among you, for which you are all
jointly as a Body to be humbled.

You cannot but remember, 1. What great things God has done for you, Above all
Parliaments, ever since any were. I shall have occasion to touch some of them
anon. Do your consciences now think, that as a Parliamentary Body, you have
fully answered all his favors hitherto?

2. Also you cannot but remember (and we also ever must, as with thankfulness
to God as the Author, so to you as his instruments) what great things he has
done already by you: In taking off burdens, in making Peace with Scotland, in a
great deal of liberty enjoyed of Gods Ordinances by your means. But are you
assured, that you have all the way proceeded with that spirit of encouragement,
that these things should have put into you?

3. But above all you cannot but be apprehensive how many things God had done
against you, even against You as a Body: In Application. Use 2. Special
Application to the Parliament.
the Northern Army that should have been brought up against You; in the Armed
Troops at your doors; in withdrawing the Kings presence, and Heart from You;
in all the aspersions cast upon you; in the war raised against you* and your
disappointment of seeing it ended long ago, even before it was begun; in all
your Propositions of Treaties refused; in the late horrid conspiracy against
You. All this, not man only, but God has done against You. And wherefore? I am
far from saying, from thinking, that it is not for my sins, and all the rest of
ours, the people of the Land. (Oh that our hearts could weep and bleed for it
as we ought!) I know and acknowledge, they are our sins, that are punished, if
you have failed or shall fail in any thing. But yet as often as there is
failings in you, God would have even you to be humbled for them. It was Isreal's
sin, that provoked God to let Satan tempt David to number the People. Yet it
was David's sin to number them. And he humbled himself greatly for it, when he
was warned of it by the Prophet. It is the feets catching cold often times that
causes the Headache, and the Rheum in the eyes; yet when it is so, the Head
takes somewhat to purge it self, and cure the eyes. Consider, I beseech you,
whether ever God did any such thing to any servants of His in Authority, they
continuing steadily faithful, I know Moses suffered much reproach, and was
often endangered by the peoples rebelling against him. But God instantly still
pleaded his cause, and ended all. Also, so long as David kept his integrity, he
never had any defeat, in any battle; nor did any Enemy prevail so as to
distress him at any time: But after his great fault, and Gods heavy threatening
upon it; he had diverse sore shakings, specially by Absoloms conspiracy, driving
him almost out of his Kingdom. And so Solomon while he kept close to God, had
no Adversary at home or abroad: But after his wives turning away his heart, to
countenance (at least) their Idols, he had more then one, that lifted up their
hands against him. Think now how much your Adversaries and their Successes call
you to an enquiry among your selves, why God should let them attempt and
prevail so far against you? If you shall find any thing amiss among your
selves, it will; be no wonder, the faithfullest men have had their failings.
Jacob forgot his vow at Bethel a long while, till a great scandal in his
Family, and a fearful outrage of his sons upon it, and danger Application.
Use. 2. Special application to the Parliament.
thereupon to them all, and Gods Admonition after all, brought it to his
remembrance; and then upon search, he found Idols too, that he before took no
notice of, or at least winkt at. So, David failed in the manner of bringing up
the Ark, (and the Priests, Levites, and Elders of the people were in the same
error with him;) and recovered not himself to see where the fault was in three
months: 1 Chro. 13. 15.
And afterward he abidde three years famine, 2 Samuel 21.
year after year, before he enquired of the Lord the cause of it, who
thereupon told him it was for an Oath-broken, and Innocent bloodshed; For whch
God would now have Justice done upon the posterity of the offender. Also
Zerubbabel and all the Elders of the Jews (as was noted before) failed not a
little in so long neglecting to set about the building of the Temple, even
though God the while sent diverse judgments upon all the Nation for it. All
these instances still make it the more necessary to have this seriously laid to
your hearts, that God may have the glory he looks for from you, and that
whatsoever you can find amiss, you may the more zealously set your selves to
make him (not satisfaction, which Jesus Christ only can; and has done
sufficiently, but) such amends as poor creatures and his faithful servants are
by his grace enabled unto. And now may I presume one step or two farther? To
propound according to the subject of my text, that it is specially requisite,
that you consider, whether you have done your utmost for the help of the Church
in this sad time of her danger and distress? I shall anon show, how great
hopes there are, that you are the men whom God intends to use as his great
instruments in this happy work; these thoughts will prepare you for it.
Therefore let me most humbly offer a double question in two words, concerning
the execution of Justice upon the Churches enemies and the hastening and
effectual advancing of the businesses of Religion. 1. Have not notoricus
offenders, I mean Idolatrous, Traitorous Priests, even after reasons urged by
you for their execution, and delivery of them up into your hands, been in fine
spared? For which their party has well requited you ever since; and so have
others too, for all your gentleness to many desperate Delinquents, who have
been your prisoners. 2. For the other, Was there not a time, when nothing you
asked was denied you? Might not somewhat in that advantage of opportunity, been
obtained Application. Use 2.
for Religion, which has not been, and which would have kept the wheels going
eversince, that have long stood still for want of it? And since that season,
was it not morally possible to have speeded some things more then they have
been? I know, I am not able to fathom the depths of your Businesses, and
Hindrances, which have been apparently very many: Therefore I take not upon me,
so much to be a reprover, as a remembrancer. Yet even the former, could I know
things as well as your selves do (or may, by reviewing your journalls) my
Office would not only bear me out in, but even require of me, as the Case may
be. We have long, and too justly complained of Princes being flattered, by them
that least should, and how much we and they have been undone by it. Let it, I
beseech you, be your glory (and God will make it so) that you had rather be
twice admonisht, even without cause, then to want it once, when there is just
cause. And so I leave this Advise, with one word of addition.

That if ever after this day, Observe this specially.
God should (which if we all seek him as we should, even this day, I hope he
never will) send you and us, any affrighting tidings; As we all must, each one
for themselves in particular; so you would, both for all us, and for your
selves severally, and jointly as a Body, make diligent inquiry, what is Gods
meaning in it? What sins they are, that have provoked him so against us, and
you: and accordingly see and practice, each one, their duties upon it.

Use. 3. Exhortation* to help the Church by all ways possible.
And so I pass to the third Use, which is of Exhortation, to all and every one,
to resolve and practice from hence-forward, the utmost possible for the
Churches help, endeavoring all, venturing all, to this end, both against sins,
and dangers of enemies. Taking in for Motives, and to answer all Objections,
the Text, Doctrines, and Reasons, foregoing, and following, together with the
Protestation, made two years ago, and the late Covenant, and for Means, (namely
against sin in special) the Assembly called. There is not any Duty, and way of
help, general, or particular, that any has been backward to set upon, or can
be tempted to neglect, but upon the grounds laid, I durst undertake to
convince, of the necessity of doing the utmost, even for our own sakes, as well
as the Churches. And without me, if any will deal faithfully with themselves,
and apply things home to their own hearts, each Application. Use. 3. Exhort to
help the Church all ways possible. Special Exhortation to the Parliament.
will not fail to persuade themselves to all things that come within their
compass. This therefore I earnestly exhort all to do, now and hereafter,
whiles I apply my speech particularly at this time unto those, upon whom this
work lies principally, because they have the Power and Authority in their
hands: Our Senators, of the honorable Parliament.

Let me beseech you, Honorable and Worthy, to remember all that you have heard
of the necessity of helping the Church, that it may provoke you, and prevail
with you, to put to all your strength, To help against sin.
and even venture all things, that you may effectually help the Church,
particularly against the cause of all her dangers, sin. And herein, not by
way of exclusion of other matters, but of specification of some main things to
be looked to; Let me name some particulars to you.

Banish Idolatry.
1. The banishment of idolatry wholly, and for ever. Never reckon upon the
Churches safety, or the Nations, while any such treason against God, is so much
as winkt at in this Kingdom. So far as you do not the utmost possible in
this, I must tell you, you are and will be greatly wanting to the Churches
help. And never fear the provoking of any persons, or multitudes, at home, or
abroad, by your faithfulness to God and the Church herein. For believe it, you
will run a thousand times worse hazard by suffering them, as experience for the
present, besides all other things may teach you; show therefore your
indignation against all the relics and objects, and practisers of it, in all
places within your reach, as you have happily already begun to do in some. And
manifest your zeal and wisdom, in preparing such Laws, against that cursed
practice for the time to come, As all the Nation may hear and fear, and do no
more so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13. 11. and secure the children that are growing up.

Dispell ignorance.
2. Dispell ignorance. We are undone by this mist of infection, specially in the
Country. In the Name therefore of Jesus Christ, who will come in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. In the name of
millions of souls, throughout the Kingdom, (of many even in my Congregation)
whom this black Devil possesses, and who cried out, as he, Mat. 8. 29. that we
torment them, when we offer but any endeavor for their dispossession; and
which no means in the world (according Application. Use 3. Exhort to help
against sins.
to Man) can cure, without your effectual help: And in the name of all the
faithful Ministers of the Kingdom; who preach to stocks and stones in the
likeness of men; I cry out unto you, unto you this day, for help, help,
effectual help. I name nothing particular now because of the Assembly, else I
had rather have spent my whole time upon this one argument, then to have past
it over so briefly.

Conjure down the Atheistical Devil.
3. Conjure down the atheistical Devil; the impudent scorner of godliness and
conscience. Make every word of that kind a greater reproach to the Speaker,
then he can intend it to the person spoken against. Make it an action of the
case, to reproach any with a Nickname for their conscientiousnesse to God; and
let such pay good damages and full costs speedily, or any other way whereby it
may be more effectually done. And till then, know for a certainty, that that
direful threatening will hang over the Land which is recorded, Jer. 23. for one
kind of reproach against the Prophets of God, ver. 33. to the end, and it will
utterly drown us in destruction when ever it falls. Also without a law of this
Nature, let me assure you, that make what ever Reformation you will or can, it
will prove in the issue (and even within a very little while I doubt) but as a
wall dawbed with untempered mortar and crumble all to nothing, and the Church
can never be helped while her glory is made her shame, and suffered to be so.

Cure Superstition.
4. Cure Superstition. There are more tainted with it then you can easily
imagine; and it is bred and nourisht, by every thing that is customary,
(specially among those that are not thoroughly instructed) and chiefly by any
mere humane ordinance, (though useful being rightly used) when once any
special weight comes to be put upon the mere using it. And while a root of
superstition is nourisht in men, Idolatry will soon be graffed upon it with a
little help. Besides that a little of this leaven will greatly sour Men's
Consciences, and in stead of the power of godliness leave nothing but a Form.
I may not amplify this; but I hope it will be considered and consulted of.

Make all fear an Oath.
5. Make all men fear an Oath: 1 by a more ready and certain penalty for rash
swearing; 2 by taking away unnecessary Oaths. My soul blesses you, blesses God
for you, for the taking away the Oath of Churchwardens as well as that Ex
Officio, and the late Application Use 3. Exhort to help against sins.
Canonical Oath. Oh do the like to other Officers, and in Universities, and
Corporations, and Courts, by causing a review to be made what Oaths are
unnecessary, and how the use of them may be other ways supplied. 3 And what
Oaths you see necessary to be continued or added; make them dreadful. Let
them be administered ever in an awful manner, that they may consider what they
do, when they pawn their souls and all things else; that they speak truth and
will do as they say. 4 And let no ignorant person be trusted to swear, more
then a child. But of that a word more anon. I will use no other motive then
that one. Jer. 23. 10. Because of swearing the Land mourns: the pleasant
places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their
force is not right. So that you do not help the Church if you remedy not this,
what you can; if you did all things else.

6. Make a law for Preaching.
6. Make a Law for preaching. There was never any yet, that I could ever hear of
in this Kingdom since the Reformation, which is such a prodigy, such a piece
of Laodicean Lukewarmnesse, as I believe the like was never heard of, in a
Reformed Christian Kingdom or Church; unless Ireland perhaps too. What the
effects have been of the want of it, all the world fees; And to me it sounds
among the worst of Omens, that I have heard of some disputing against such a
law* I will say but this: 1. If God have not had dishonor enough, by some men's
preaching against Preaching, because our Law commanded it not; and by all the
reproach cast upon his faithfullest Ministers for their double diligence, which
has also been prohibited the^ by those that ought to have promoted it; And 2
if the people of God have not by this been sufficiently scattered abroad as
sheep without a Shepherd; and torn by dogs for seeking their food abroad when
they had none provided for them at home; And 3 if enough have not gone to hell,
under unpreaching Ministers, in more then eighty years: And 4 finally, if God
have not put more weight upon this one ordinance under the N.T. then all other
Ministerial works together: to teach all that have Authority under him to do
the like; to make them beshrew themselves that preach not the Gospel; Then let
there be still no law to enjoin it, nor for any thing else belonging to the
worship of God, and man's salvation by as good reason. But if all be contrary,
then once more let me call to Humiliation, for this Application Use 3. Exhort
to help against sins.
neglect these eighty years and upward; and promise my self, that a Reforming
Parliament will not, cannot but compose such a law as shall be abundantly
sufficient for ever hereafter.

7. Make Simony impossible.
7. Make Simony impossible, To swear the Clerk, is to swear the buyer to prevent
a dearth: It is to forbid those that fear an Oath, and set open the door to
those that dare be wilfully false. And the present penalties of the statute,
do seldom reach cunning chapmen. This I will be bold to say, if every
Minister that has the charge of souls, and discharges that duty conscionably,
be not worthy of all that due, which the law any where allows him; take it
away in Gods name, and employ it to a better use, if you can find it out. But
if he be worthy of it, by the sentence of God and man both, a high way-robber,
or one that breaks into a house at midnight, is not so great an offender, as a
Simoniacall Patron, (whether he presents a man otherwise worthy, or one that is
altogether unworthy) and if you make not as sufficient a law against the one as
the other, (I say not for the penalty, but which may be as effectual or rather
more, and so it may be, I durst undertake) you will no more answer it to God,
then if you made not a sufficicient law against those outrages, if there were
none.

8. Make Clandestine marriages impossible.
8. Make Clandestine Marriages impossible. They are so in the Reformed Churches
in France; they may be so here, when the King and you please. It is mere humane
law, the common law among us, (not Gods law) that calls it a marriage, if two
be joined by a Minister, (a Popish Priest has served the turn) in any house
or room, or place, and at midnight or any time, if with such and such words.
Why is such a wild Authority given, to rob Parents of their children, and
Masters of their Apprentices, and children of themselves, against Gods express
word? and no Penalty that I know of in our law, upon such a Minister, or such
Parties. How many Noble Families, besides others, have been by this License
(and that which has been next door to it in use, the Licenses of
Ecclesiastical Courts, which last to this day where such disobedient children
will go seek them) shamed and grieved and mischiefed? This may be remedied
instantly, if the law ratify no marriage, but Public, after Banes, with
Parents or guardians consent, or some higher Power, if they should be
Tyrannical and altogether unreasonable. I am amazed, that the Gentry having
Application. Use 3. Exhort to help against sin.
so smarted by this license to their children to be disobedient, have not long
since in Parliament, taken an order for it. But I hope, God has raised up you
at last, to do him this piece of service, among a great many others.

Sundry particulars briefly mentioned.
I may not enlarge my self upon any more particulars. I will sum up all the
residue that I have thought of, in almost as few words as there be matters.

9.
9. Keep all the holy Ordinances of God from profanation,; the Word read and
preached, prayer, singing, Sacraments, punishing sleepers, and all other rude
persons.

10.
10. Secure the Lords day fully, from working, and playing, and buying, or
selling, and as much as may be, from apparent idleness.

11.
11. Encourage a faithful Ministry, particularly with sufficient maintenance
for wives and children.

12.
12. Secure youth in the Universities, and Schools, with the utmost of care; and
even in Parents houses, what you can, specially the poorer sort. The young ones
are the hopes or the bane of the Church and State in the next 20, or 10. or 7.
years.

13.
13. Repress drunkenness, by a better composed Law then any yet is extant, and
the haunting of the shops of that wickedness.

14.
14. Suppress altogether, (and not only for this time of our calamity) that
trade of nothing but infection, Players.

15.
15. Cast more shame and wrath upon whoredom, and adultery specially.

16.
16. Prevent all oppression, injustice, fraud, to the utmost of your powers.

17.
17. Finally, Set your selves, generally, to frame such Laws, as may make
sinners soonest weary of sin, and Governors able to yoke them with the most
ease that can be conceived.

And for all this, let me again remember you, of your late solemn, and sacred
Vow and Covenant, both in reference to your selves, and to the Kingdom. First,
as it relates to your selves; You declare, [ That in humility and reverence of
the Divine Majesty, -- Your true intent is, to endeavor by Gods grace, the
amendment of your own ways.] Let these words, I beseech you, be ever before
your eyes, and upon your heart; and let all that hear or see you, read them in
your language, and in your lives; Application. Use 3. Exhort to help the Church
according to the late Covenant.
So shall you greatly help the Church by your holy Example, while withal, you
cannot then find in your hearts, but to afford all other possible help, with
your joint Authority. Besides all former ties of Duty, your own voluntary
obligation in this Covenant, is ever to be thought on, as a most mighty
engagement. And therefore, as you look that any benefit shall come to you, by
others keeping their Covenant (which you call them to) particularly, for your
help and protection, Relating specially to the Parliament.
without which you know, according to man, you must be lost: But specially, as
you look God should help you, unto whom you have, before all the world, made so
solemn an Appeal, and without whose help* you know, you must infallibly perish;
so be true to this your Covenant every way, as men, as Christian men, as
Parliament men, So you are, and so in point of honor and respect you would
have men look upon you, and God in point of protection. You must then, (God and
men do, and will look for it) carry your selves so, for all good. If any shall
offer to say, they meant nothing in this clause of the Covenant, but in
reference only to their personal carriage, and not any way concerning matters
of public reformation; I would only put this dilemma to him. Either he has
done well or ill as a Parliament Man, and toward reformation hitherto. If he
have done well, doubtless he that promises to amend in other things, (because
his and the Nations sins deserve the judgments that lie upon us, as the
Covenant speaks) cannot but even thereby be engaged to persevere in all good
for reformation, and to Proceed further in it, as far as is necessary, as the
greatest matter of importance of all other, and most for the Churches help. If
he have done ill, then certainly, as that is part of his sins, for which the
judgments are deserved and inflicted, so can it not but be a part of that which
he has directly covenanted to endeavor the amendment of, as being among the
worst of his ways, needing amendment. Thus, Beloved, God has hold on you
every way. And happy is that man, that is willing to be held by God, and to
God, that willingly engages himself to him.

Now as your Covenant calls in the Kingdom, to a like vow; as I must needs
bless God for it, in regard of the good it will do, I hope, in diverse, who
will be careful to keep it in a faithful endeavor, to amend their own ways
as they promise: So in regard Application. Use. 3. Exhort to help the Church
according to the late Covenant.
of the woeful ignorance, forespoken of, which is specially among our Country
people, I must needs confess, my heart trembles to think, in what a fashion
they will take it. Not at all regarding the matter of it, but merely like
brutes, follow the Herd, do as their neighbors do; take it, or refuse it, do
something, or nothing for your protection, howsoever, as they see them do. But
specially for this part, Relating to the Kingdom.
of amendment of their ways, what possibility is there, that they can or will
be one jot the better for their Vow and Covenant, when they know nothing of
God, and so regard nothing of God, no more then those that never heard of him?

Oh then that you would be pleased to consult with the Assembly, Speedily to
consult with the Assembly, for some remedy of Ignorance.
and that without delay, among your first Propositions, what course is possible
to be taken, speedily to put some knowledge into those, who else, while you are
consulting of other matters first, will by hundreds, and perhaps by thousands,
die in one part or other of the Kingdom, and so go to hell irrecoverably. I
beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and for loves-sake to poor souls,
consider and do it.

Last of all in this Use, Improve the Assembly.
Let me recommend to you, a full improvement of the Assembly, now at last
happily called, and I hope, intended by God for a special blessing to us all,
and you too. To which end, let me in few words make an humble Motion or two
unto you. 1. By propounding all things to them that are the Churches grievances.
One is, That you will be pleased to make the plaster as wide as the sore. The
Church has many wounds and grievances. You have received many Petitions in
writing, requests in Sermons. Satisfy them all, I beseech you, so far, as to
consult of them, and of what ever else may be necessary to a perfect healing.
You need not fear us, who can conclude nothing; neither do we affect it. You
have the Law in your own hands, to consent, and ordain, as you shall see cause.

By engaging the Ministers to keep to Gods word.
2. That you may be the more assured, we do mean nothing, and shall speak
nothing but faithfully, I humbly wish, a profession, or promise, or vow, (or
call it what you will) to be made by all us Ministers, in the presence of God,
to this effect; That we shall propound nothing, nor consent, nor oppose, but
what we are persuaded is most agreeable to the word of God; and will renounce
any preconceived Opinion, if we shall be convinced that the Word of God is
otherwise. Application. Exhort to help the Church by forwarding the Assembly.
So shall we all seek Christ, and not our selves, nor sidings, and Gods truth,
and not victory or glory, to our selves.

By a liberty of Petition to discuss any thing omitted.
3. Finally, that at least before the dissolution of the Assembly, there may be
liberty given to Petition the discussing of any thing that may possibly have
been omitted all the while, and not at all propounded, by either of the Houses,
and yet be fit to be considered of. That so all the work may be accomplished in
Gods due time, by the grace of Jesus Christ, and assistance of his Holy Spirit
to his glory, and his Churches most effectual help.

And so I have done also with this Use of Exhortation, and with my Application
of all those Points which have been already handled. There are yet behind two
other Points, which are the comfortablest part of the Text, and therefore I
hope they will be of all the rest, the least wearisome; and yet I trust withal
happily profitable, and helping to make all the rest so.

The 1. of them, (which was the fourth in the first nomination, but now comes
to be the fifth in order of handling) is this;

Doct. 5.
[ Though those who are most hopeful to be instruments of the Churches help,
fail her in time of need, yet deliverance shall not fail her, some way or
other, according to Gods promises.]

This is peremptorily affirmed of the Church of God at that time, Who ever
fails the Church, Gods promised help fails not.
by Mordecai. And the Reason was, There was an undeniable Promise yet remaining
to be fulfilled to the people of the Jews, which was plainly, the Messiah,
Christ, the Lord and King of the Church, was to be born of that stock, of the
Tribe of Judah, Grounded on Text.
and Family of David. The Church was then great of that blessed Birth. And as
the severest Justice among men, uses to spare the mother for the fruits sake,
if she be known to be with child, when condemned, till her delivery: So much
more was it infallibly certain, that no condemnation should destroy this
blessed promised Fruit, by destroying the Mother before his birth. In like
sort, though the promise be of an inferior degree, yet whatever promise there
is to be fulfilled unto the Church, or any part or member of it, shall be a
sufficient supersedeas, or reprieve from any destruction, though all the World
should swear the contrary, Confirmed by Reason.
and therefore, much more though the most hopeful Instruments should fail her
in time of need. The Reasons briefly are;

Doct. 5.
Reason 1. Al Gods words are pure words.
1. All Gods words are pure words, Psalm. 12. 6. As silver tried in a Furnace of
Earth purifyed seven times. They are altogether pure, and no dross at all in
them, first nor last. God meant them Faithfully to the utmost extent of them,
for Things, Persons, substance, Circumstance, Time, Place and all; and will
accordingly always hold to them unchangeably. And this sentence is the more
strongly applied to the Doctrine, because Psalm 12. begins with the complaint of
men's failing; and yet after inserting a promise of Gods taking part with his
servants, this is added for assurance, The words of the Lord are pure words,
etc. And it must needs be so, For also -- *

Reason 2. He can create Deliverance by an Almighty power.
2. His Power is Almighty. He can create means, create Deliverance without
means, make the least unlikeliest, most contrary things, means to effect it.
The Scripture abounds with expressions and instances to this purpose in the
Prophets and holy stories. I cannot stand now to particularize them.

Reason 3. His love is not weakened, by others failings.
3. It was his love, not his weakness, that made him command others to h^l^ his
Church; and therefore their neglect shall not cannot weaken his love, but
rather glorify it. He saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessour. Therefore his own arm brought salvation to him, and his
righteonsuesse it sustained him, etc. Esaias 59 16. and then by and by, v. 20.
And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and (...) them that turn from
transgression, says the Lord. The thing then is sure, where ever there is a
promise.

Now for the improvement of this point to our benefit. The main use and work
must be to make enquiry, Use.
whether there be any such promise of deliverance made to our Church and
Nation, Enquiry after a promise for our Church in this Nation.
as may give us any assurance that what ever this or that man does, or who ever
fails the Church, in her time of danger and distress, yet Deliverance shall
not fail her, but God will raise it up some way or other.

To resolve this most important question, let me first clearly state it, and
then propound such grounds as may give some light what to build upon concerning
it.

First then the question is not, whether the enemies of the Church may not yet
prevail upon us further then they have hitherto. The question stated.
1 Negatively.
Positively.
Nor yet whether they may not so far prevail, as for a time, to suppose
themselves absolute Conquerours; and many on Doct.5. Application. Enquiry after
a promise for our Church in this Nation.
Gods people to think themselves wholly overcome, and think the Church in this
Nation to be altogether past recovery again. 3. Nor yet, whether in the next
generation, when we have enjoyed and abused a Reformation, and Peace for some
years, there may not be such a revolt from the truth and prevailing of
enemies, as that Popery should again get the upper hand among us, and establish
it self fully for as long a time, for diverse years. 4. But in brief the
question is, Whether the present dangers of the Church, shall end in such a
Conquest of the enemies over our Religion in this Nation, by killing many, and
driving away the rest, as to reduce us to the condition of Italy or Spain; so
as for many years together there shall be no show or sign of any number of the
true Religion? or whether they shall and at last, in a peaceful and happy
Reformation?

Now to this I give a twofold answer. 1. That I grant we have no such promise
to our Church of England, Answered partly Negatively.
as the people of the Jews were in possession of at this time that the text
speaks of, and ever before Christ was born; No such promise as the Jews had.
which yet was to them not as inhabitants of that land, of Canaan, but as to
the stock of Abraham, Isaac and Iacab. No Nation or Inhabitants of any land* or
stock of the Gentiles, having any such promises, that the Church of God should
not be destroyed and cease among them.

2. Yet for all that I am persuaded and do believe, and therefore have I
spoken and do speak, Positively, yet a sufficient promise at this time.
that there is a sufficient promise for us English men at this time, that the
Church of God in England shall not be so destroyed or roated out, as that the
true Religion and all the faithful Professors should be dead and buried, as
the effects of this present war. But contrarily, that such a Deliverance shall
come, as that this Church in the issue of these present troubles, shall get the
upper hand, and enjoy a blessed Reformation.

My grounds are these. 1. Though we have not a Formal promise of Deliverance,
Grounds.
yet we may have (and have as I conceive) a Virtualt; and though not a plain
verbal one, yet a real.

2. When we have an example of Deliverance vouchrsased to others, very like to
us in condition; I take it to be a Virtuall Promise of like favor to our
selves, By example particular.
So much faith Naamans little maid had, that because Elisha had done many
miracles, he could and would cure her Master of his Leprosy, 2 Kings 5. 3.
(even Doct. 5. Application. Enquiry after a promise for our Church.
though he never had cured any of that particular disease of the Leprosy, which
is most remarkably insinuated, Luke 4. 20.) And doubtless Christ's curing the
woman of the bloody issue, was by him meant as a virtuall promise, that he
would revive Jairus daughter, Mark 5. Indeed, because diversity in the persons
may very much vary the case, therefore examples are in the lowest degree of
virtuall promises, and yet they are not nothing, Accordingly, it is not
nothing, that God in a very like case (liker then either of those now noted)
has granted deliverance to Scotland. It is, at least probable, that he meant
that, as a virtuall promise to England.

No Church more severely dealt with then the word expresses.
3. But I take it for a much stronger ground, and more undoubted; That the word
of God, in the Story, and in the threatenings together, has an epitome of all
that God will do to his Church, planted in my Nation. And that God will never
deal more severely with any National Church, then his Word ( which is every
way most perfect) relates or threatens. Therefore if it cannot be found in the
Scripture, that God did ever bring destruction upon his Church planted in a
Nation, or transplant his Church wholly out of such a Land, while they were in
such a condition as ours is, then will he not do it now. But contrarily, if he
has always, in such a case as ours is now, afforded his Church deliverance,
this I believe to be a very strong promise, that he will afford us the like
now. Logicians say, that even one example of a thing, and no instance to the
contrary, is a sufficient argument. And if it hold not in Scripture examples,
(when none of a diverse kind can be produced) I know not what use can be made
of the greatest examples of mercy, as mere examples, which yet were all written
for our learning, (as all Scriptures are) that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4.

A reforming Church never wholly transplanted.
4. In special, If God did never destroy a Reforming Nation, never wholly
transplant a Reforming Church; then will he not do so to us, because we are
such. And for this there is special Reason, whether we consider the
Reformation to be the special work of God, and little of the Nation in it; as
in Josiahs time, God wrought it by a special work upon the King, who saw all
done himself, and the people showed little, concurrence in it; yet God would,
and did carry it through. Because he that loved the people so well, Doct. 5.
Application. Enquiry after a promise for our Church.
being yet corrupted, as to begin to reform them in a manner himself, when he
had begun it once, would make somewhat of it, and not let it altogether come to
nothing. OF whether God (though he ever be the Author and finisher of all good,
yet) act the reformation much by the peoples hands, as it was in Hezekiahs
Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. Here again the same reason holds. He who loved the
Nation so well, as to put such a beginning of grace into them, would not let
that fail suddenly. But he made the work prosper in their hands, The grounds
applied,
and no enemy hindered them.

And now to apply this to our selves: We are a reforming Church in all parts of
reformation.
If ever a Nation, or Church in affliction and danger, were a reforming Church
and Nation, we are such; and that in all the parts of Reformation. 1. For
purity and clearness of truth of Doctrine. 2. Purity of Worship, freed from
all superstitions and man's devices, and complete in all the Ordinances of God
3. Purity of Church government, and discipline, according to the word and rule
of Christ. 4. Purity of life and conversation. 5. Particularly, the Sabbaths
sanctification, the greatest pledge of mercy to a Nation, and to ours
experimentally in special, according to Esaias 58. 13, 14. All this Reformation,
we apparently labor for in our Church, and so are doubtless a reforming
Church and Nation, and shall not be destroyed at this time.

This labored for, for all the Nation.
2. All this is striven for, not simply for the liberty of private persons, that
they may be free from persecution; but for the glory of God, and the saving of
others souls throughout the Nation. Which disposition of his servants, being
much above all self-respects, God does highly esteem, and so will bless it,
with prosperous success in the issue.

Striven for above 80. years.
3. This Reformation, Gods servants have striven for, and panted after,
Ministers and people, eighty years together, more or less; and have appeared
for it, in a considerable party, though not joined and associated as now, by
the happy advantage of this Parliament; and have been much persecuted, even for
it. And therefore now when God has given them to attempt further, and with
more hopes, and greater beginnings then ever before, He will not now, at this
time, give them wholly over to enemies, to ruin all utterly.

Enemies enmity against reformation specially.
4. The rather, because the enmity of the enemies is specially provoked, Doct.
5. Application. Enquiry for a promise for our Church.
even by the desire and attempt of Reformation, some in one point, some in
another. They pretend (as was noted before) to fight for the true reformed
Protestant Religion. But (except some ease about Ceremonies and the like to
tender consciences) they evidently oppose any further reformation then was in
Queen Elizabeth's time, and reproach the Parliament as intending to alter
Religion, because they profess to purpose an endeavor of a through
reformation. Therefore God will not take his enemies part against his people,
but his peoples against his enemies, in the issue at least, in giving them the
Reformation contended for.

We have been his darling Church.
5. He has showed a greater spirtuall love to this Nation for eighty years and
more together, thou to any in the Christian world, in raising up so many
excellant Lights, for powerful preaching, and for holiness of life, above all
other Churches, and given us above all others also, the Doctrine and practice
of his holy Sabbath. And all this, notwithstanding our National grievous
provocations forementioned. Therefore when now the Nation is working into the
best way of being generally better, he will not suffer them to become now
irrecoverably for continuance worse; But at least, this time, try the whole
Nation with a general Reformation.

God has himself given the hopes.
6. Himself has mainly and manifestly given the first hopes of this, and raised
up not the desires only, but the expectation of his servants, by ways far
beyond their contrivances, and wonderfully beyond their very thoughts, ordered
by himself. And namely, Particularly, by turning enemies plots against
themselves 7. ways.
mavelous much by his very enemies plots and counsels, turned upon
themselves. As 1. Their attempt against Religion and Liberties both together;
whereas if they had undertaken either alone, they never in likelihood had had
any considerable party appearing against them, as now is by uniting the
patriots and zealots both in one, and showing to either, the necessity of such
union. 2. In their attempt against the two Nations at once, England and
Scotland; so grasping at both, they could hold neither. 3. Yet beginning first
with Scotland, to impose Popish practices upon them the more manifestly, who
were more impatient of Popery then our Nation was: and so provoking them to
stand upon their guard, and link themselves suddenly in a National Covenant
against them, which also much weakened their attempts upon us. Doct. 5.
Applications. Enquiry of a promise for our Church.
4. Breaking the first Pacification with Scotland, which forced them to prevent
their being invaded, with coming with a powerful Army into this Kingdom, and
to refuse to be satisfied, without an English Parliament (our only remedy too,
under God) did ratify the peace with them. 5. Their frequence breakings of
Parliaments, rendering them justly suspected, that they meant so by this, as
soon as the Peace was made; counseled to urge the continuance of this
Parliament by a Law, (the only possible means for leisure to reform, as also
for legal power of defense against them, if they should any more plots as now
they have) and the two Armies in the Kingdom no way else to be paid, forced
the yielding to it. 6. Before this, They raised Soldiers to go against
Scotland, who did no other service, in diverse Countries, but to begin to pull
down their innovations, and play the reformers, with a strangely sober
wildness. A Preludium, not to be neglected (though then it may be, no man
imagined any such thing) that a warro must make further way, for a further
reformation. 7. Their plottings, and conspiracies, and attempts against the
Parliament; and rapi^^es, and spoilings of Countries, making the resolution for
reformation appear the more necessary, and so become the more strong.

From all which, my Conclusions are three. First, This is indeed a time of
Jacobs trouble, but he shall be delivered out of it.

2. The longer deliverance is delayed, and the lower we are brought, before we
obtain Reformation, the greater and more glorious, will the one and the other
be, when the full time comes.

3. Who ever abuses this to careless neglect, is like never to see it, or
enjoy the good of it, but they and theirs to be destroyed, according to the
Text.

But I must answer an Objection or two. First, Object. 1.
1. In stead of a Reformation (say some) we see nothing but Deformation. All in
Confusion, our Reformers, unreformed in life and opinion, unbridled in their
fancies, and ways. Heresies, Schisms; and Libertinisme abound.

This is the worst can be said; Answer.
Yet may be satisfied diverse ways. 1.
1.It was ever so, where Reformation was working: So in Luthers time, so in the
very Primitive Church, yet God carried on the work, and so he will how. 2.
2. Perhaps the cry is Doct. 5. Application. Enquiry after a promise for our
Church.
greater then the cause. The distractions of the time, leaving all at liberty,
all appear in their worst Posture, (yet there are many sober still and pious
undeniably) and most of them will be soon quelled by a good discipline. These
things are not long-lived, but when they are let alone. 3.
3.Their showing themselves, will make the Reformation more complete. Ill
manners causing good Laws. 4.
4. God seems on purpose to prolong the war, to cut off many, that would
abuse a peace.

The most earnest for Reformation (say others) are so divided in opinions,
Object. 2.
as they will never agree, and so all will come to nothing.

This is also a great grief and danger. Answ.
1.
But 1. For this the Assembly through Gods blessing, may be, and will be, a
happy remedy. And whereas men object again, that also as unlikely; I bid them,
Pray, pray, and not prophecy. 2.
2. Since they all (and all that pretend to Reformation) profess to hold to the
Word; when things come to be debated by the Word, there will, I doubt not, be
found more agreement in the issue, then any one thought of before; or at least,
a modest resolution not to disturb the Churches Peace.

But what say you to the killing of the two Witnesses? May not that be to come,
Object. 3.
and even now coming, and where is then your confidence, and the promises you
talk of?

Answ.
1.
1. Whether the two Witnesses be slain or not, I will not at the present, so
much as offer my Opinion, for diverse reasons. The rather, because I can fully
answer that objection without it, Namely, by saying -- 2.
2. If this be the time of their killing, ere this war end; then is my
confidence most certain, and we have a most full verbal promise, (which is
more then I said before) That England shall not quite lose the Gospel, nor the
Church, at this time. Their death is limited clearly, to three days and a
half, (that is so many years) and then they certainly rise again, and ascend
into heaven, which cannot signify less, then a most glorious and blessed
Reformation, at the close of all the foregoing evils; which fully answers both
my Doctrine, and Application.

I have now only the sixth and last Point to handle, namely,

Doct. 6.
[ There is great hopes, that those who are extraordinarily raised up to a
special opportunity of serviceablenesse of the Church, are intended Doct. 6.
Hopes that extraordinary Instruments shall be used to help the Church.
by God to procure her help, if they will themselves, and be faithful.]

The phrase in the Text, Who knows? is usual in Scripture, to signify great
hope, if not altogether certainty, Jonah 3. 9. Joel 2. 14. And with this,
Mordecai intends to put courage and comfort into Esther, to whom he spoke
before in a threatening strain, not willingly, but as apprehending a necessity.
And the bitterness of that Pill, Grounded on the Text in Scripture phrase.
he tempers and allays with this Cordial; That in all likelihood, if she would
venture her self for the people of God, according to their necessity, and her
duty, she should be the person, used in the deliverance; and that her
extraordinary strange advancement to be Queen, Confirmed by Reasons.
was intended by God, for this very end. And the Reasons are very fair for it.

Reason 1. From Gods wisdom.
1. God is most wise, and does nothing in vain. Now it would at least seem to be
in vain, that when a work is to be done, He should extraordinarily fit an
instrument for it, and then not employ that instrument, unless there prove
some to be some special failing in that instrument, in the mean time. Indeed,
if such an instrument warp, Though he cast aside warping Instruments sometimes.
or grow crooked, He may with apparent wisdom, lay it by altogether, or for a
time. 1. That all such may be humble, and ascribe nothing to themselves of
their fitness, strength, or success, but all to God. 2. And that those that
look at the most hopeful instruments, should not idolize them, and forget God,
by trusting too much in them, or applying our selves to them too much, (
neglecting God) as we are greatly apt to do. But if they persevere in
faithfulness, no reason can (by us at least) be conceived, why God should
refuse to use them, in that work which is to be done certainly; namely, the
help of his Church in desperate dangers.

Reas. 2. From Gods unchangeable*nesse.
2. God is pleased to do thus, to show that He has no fickleness in him. He is
not weary of an instrument, which he has long used, much less when the great
time of using them comes. Only (as before) he will not have any think him tied
to any that shall carry themselves untowardly, specially in any visible manner.
Greatly manifested in overlooking sundry failings.
And yet he also vouchsafes sometimes to overlook a great many failings, in
those that are his own. Of which their humiliation, repentance, and amendment,
may be a happy pledge, both to thomselves, and others too, as far as it is as
visible as their Doct. 6. Hopes that extraordinary Instruments shall be used to
help the Church.
failings have been visible. So, though God saw fit to lay aside Moses, for a
particular visible failing, ( yet specially for the types sake, to show that
the Law brings us not to Canaan, but Joshuah, Jesus) yet raising up Joshuah in
his stead, he carries him through the work, though he also had his failing, in
not searching in time for Achan. So after God had cast off Saul, he so assists
David, (notwithstanding his failings also) as when he died, Israel was
delivered from all enemies round about, and no adversary left unsubdued, 1
King. 5.3,4. And so after he had the second time set on Zerubbabell, and
Jeshua, upon the work of his Temple, ( after their long lingering) he carries it
on by their hands, and so promised them, Hag. 2.4. Zach. 4.7.9. And specially,
having raised up faithful Nehemiah extraordinarily, (who yet acknowledges he
had need of sparing, according to the greatness of Gods mercy, Neh. 13. 22.)
he was continually with him, and mightily prospered him, for his Churches good
every way.

Reason 3. To encourage such, and others by them.
3. God does this usually, to encourage, both such instruments to engage
themselves to the utmost for him; and others, to associate themselves to such
persons, as to standards by him set up, to revive, unite, and strengthen his
people. The faith of the best is not so strong, but it needs experimental
encouragements, as well as general promises. For which end specially, the
Scripture examples of deliverances are recorded, which yet would stand in very
little stead, if extraordinarily raised, and fitted instruments should be
usually cast by and not used. Nature has seen this, and so made a Proverb,
That an Army of Hearts, if led by a Lion, may be victorious. The discovery of
somewhat extraordinary in any Leader, seems a promise of success; which
mightily raises the spirits of those that follow, who else were ready to droop
and fall away.

Reas. 4. The promises to the Churches helpers, belong first to such.
4. The manifold Promises of blessing to the Church, and success to those that
engage themselves for it, in time of danger, do fall most strongly to the share
of such Eminent, and extraordinarily raised persons. To him that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance. He that had five talents being faithful,
is blessed with the gain of five more, and has the unprofitable servants talent
cast in besides, Matt. 25. 28, 29, Luke 19. 24, 26. Insomuch that --

Doct. 6.
Reas. 5. No disappointment recorded, but some cause assigned.
Finally, scarce any (if any) example can be given, of any such hopes
disappointed, but the cause, to wit, their failing in some main point of duty,
has been as manifest as their disappointment. We find it in Saul, 1 Samuel 13.
-- 15. and even in Moses (and Aaron) their unbelief, Numb. 20. Nay, not so much
but the very delays have their causes assigned, or at least they may be
gathered. God expressly chides the Jews for their neglect, Hag. 1. And he that
shall diligently observe the time that the Temple was in hand, before
Artaxerxes Decree, (specially if it were Artaxerxes Longimanus, as many think)
or even let it be Cambyses, or Smerdis the Mage) will see cause to think, they
made but slow have with it, when they had liberty enough. So that delay in
Joshua's time, was plainly for want of enquiry after Achan, and doing justice
on him; and the stop of the Ark from Jerusalem, was a wrong order taken in the
carriage of it, which occasioned Vzzahs meddling beyond his calling, 1 Chro. 13.
15
and Gods breach upon him for it. But where we find none of these
miscarriages, the instruments prosper in their undertaken work for the Churches
help and good.

The Use of this Point is at once to Encourage, Use. Encouragement to the
Parliament to be faithful to the Church.
and warn the Parliament, (and all Prime Instruments) to continue in
faithfulness for the Churches utmost help. You have heard in the former Point,
that Deliverance and enlargement shall arise some way or other. This tells you,
There is great hopes, You are the men God intends to use in it. To this purpose
consider: 1. From what God has already done for you.
1. What great things God has already done for you: 2. What by you. I will
only name some heads (for your meditations) though they deserve the descant of
Volumes.

In your authority given.
Your coming to the authority you are invested with, and so power to help the
Church, was more strange (all things considered) then Esthers coming to be
Queen. 1. That any Parliament should be called. 2. That such a Parliament
should be chosen. 3. That before the Act of continuance, it should appear a
ruin to dissolve you as formerly. 4. But specially, that any ruin was not
hazarded, rather then the passing that Act of continuance (an Act of such
wonder, as we can scarce believe our senses, our experience, our
understandings, that it is credible, or possible.) All this makes up your
authority and power to help Doct. 6. Application
the Church, incomparable beyond all your Predecessors.

Preserved.
2. The preserving your authority in the hearts of men, after so many invective
aspersions, and in the midst of so many difficulties, even in the hearts of
many loose men. Whom also your enemies carriages have as much alienated from
them.

Your persons preserved.
3. Your famous preservations from the Northern Army, the armed Cavaliers, the
late Conspiracy, and all other attempts of fraud, or force.

Special victories.
4. The graduall victories, and deliverances obtained by those employed by you,
and for you, some of them of singular remark, and importance; particularly
Manchester, preserved from force, and Bristoll from treachery; besides sundry
other Towns, that should have been betrayed.

Helps at a dead lift.
5. Your being helped often at a dead lift. Your adversaries have scoffed at it.
But you have found it, that as often as you have been at a stand, God has
afforded some discovery, or some victory, to set the wheels agoing again.

Spiritual helps.
6. Your spiritual helps beyond all other Parliaments. Such powerful preaching
so near you, (and all the City over) specially your monthly Fasts, never the
like in any Age.

Armies of prayers.
7. An Army, many armies of prayers all the Kingdom over, more for you, (both
from hope, and fear) then ever for any of your Predecessors.

Growth in zeal by all.
8. That which makes all the rest most hopeful, that all these things together,
Mercies, and Dangers, and Deliverances, and means of grace, have made you grow
in zeal, for God and his Church. Witness your Protestation, Declarations, your
beginnings of reformation of Idolatry, Superstition, Sabbath-breaking,
scandalous Ministers, your late Covenant, and calling the Assembly. What now
means God by all this? But that you should think He loves you, and means to use
you further, for his glory, if you will your selves, and be faithful. And that
as often as you are afraid, lest after all you should be destroyed; you should
encourage your selves as Manoahs wife did her husband; If the Lord were pleased
to kill us, he would not have done so, and so to us, Judge. 13. 23.

From what God has done by you, always profpering effectual means.
For consider also what he has done by you, in one word. Do but except that
you are not yet delivered, and that you were to be brought into dangers and
troubles; What one main thing have you Doct. 6. Application. Encouragement and
warning to the Parliament.
attempted effectually for the war, or for the Church, wherein you have not been
greatly and effectually assisted, to a remarkable degree? I cannot have time
to name particulars. But your Journalls and Records will tell you. And I
beseech you, think often and much of them; that they may strengthen your
hearts, and hands against all Future Fears of danger. Esther had nothing but
her strange advancement to hearten her. You have all her experience and
success, besides your own, to encourage you. You may possibly be in greater
danger then ever yet. But I think, hardly in such, as the Jews were now when
she undertook their help. And I dare say, it is less (though all is alike, in
propriety of speech, with the Almighty) to deliver you, and us by you, then the
Jews by Esther, Be not then afraid of your enemies and the Churches, Fear not
to provoke them in your just defense. Therefore fear not enemies so as to
comply with them,
You can no way more expose your selves to them, then by fearing them, and so
complying with them. The Church is to be helped against them, which cannot be,
if you fear or favor them. Once more therefore let me remember you of your
engagements most solemnly made in your former Protestation and late Covenant
about this; and to assure you, that God will certainly require both the one and
the other, But keep to the Protestation and Covenant.
of you. You have heard that founding word, (even out of this place) I will
bring a sword upon you, which shall avenge the quarrels of my Covenant. Lev.
26. 25. Take heed of that, You have had great help by the Peoples cleaving to
you, according to their Protestation, and look for more by this Covenant. I
beseech you, do not forfeit all, by failing of your part. As you deal, you
must expect to be dealt with herein. Which however it would be sinful in them
that should break their obligation, though you should break yours; yet would it
be most just with God. Let me then pray you in his name (who may command you,)
that when ever we shall be so happy, as that it is seasonable to treat again,
Specially consult with them in any Treaty.
that you admit not, much less interpose, any article, to do otherwise or
less then your Protestation and Covenant. Upon the debate, let them be read
over, and scanned carefully, how they and any motion agree, and keep to your
rules. Having such clauses, as they have, you will find them to afford just
Liberty enough: But in the residue to be more unalterable to you, or by you,
then the Laws of the Medes and Persians. I am no Judge, nor ever shall be, nor
ever desire to be, what is the Doct. 6. Application. Encouragement and warning
to the Parliament.
meaning of condign punishment, in the Protestation, further then belongs to a
Minister of the Gospel, and Word of God. But I again beseech you, remember
that you are tied to do according to that in the presence of Almighty God.
Interpret it, with as much favor, and with as much charity as you can toward
any. But there is a sad sentence, 1 Kings 20, 42. which he was angry to hear,
to whom it was pronounced, verse 43. But he found it true to his cost three
years after, when it seems he had altogether forgotten it, Asking Gods consent
about pardoning Delinquents.
1 Kings 22. Therefore, I humbly entreat you, to ask Gods consent first,
whether he will spare such, or such, or pardon them; and if He will not, You
must not. And next, consult not only with your own safeties, but all theirs
you are entrusted with. The Land, the Church, Religion, Laws, thousands that
have helped you: Consult with their good, (though not with all their persons)
and then you will see, what you must do with Delinquents. You see, I meddle
with no particulars, because I am no Statesman. Only St. Paul bids me,
Remember those that are in bonds, Heb. 13.3. And helping those that are in
prison, for helping you and the Church.
as bound with them. So do I you, and beseech you, to take as effectual a
course as may be, that Gods prisoners, your prisoners, at Oxford, and else
where, may be better used, or if it be possible, delivered.

And now if you will be resolute, and faithful to God, and for God, and his
people, I am so far assured of your safety and success, in the issue, that I
desire no other shelter on earth, for security, then you shall have generally,
as a Body, as a Parliament. I may miscarry alone, though you escape: and
multitudes of us, must miscarry, if you should be ruined. But I am confident,
You shall not, nor Gods Cause in your hands, if you hold out in integrity. The
victories under the old Testament may make us confident of the like, if we will
be faithful.
I confess, I am once grieved and ashamed, to read the victories Gods people
obtained in the Old Testament, who yet were not without some failings, but the
best of them, men subject to like passions as we are; and so it was the
Covenant of Grace, not Works, whereby they obtained such Deliverances: And then
to think how often Gods people, under the New Testament, and now, are defeated,
and put to the worse. The truth is, we are worse in our hearts and lives then
they, or else we should have as many, and as great victories, (except miracles,
but not excepting wonders) as they ever had. And if we can yet at last, learn
to be as faithful as they, (Governors and People) when they prospered, I will
be bold to promise, We shall never have any defeat more.

And now I close up all, with that encouraging charge of holy Jehoshaphat, to
his great Council of Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. Deal courageously, and the Lord
shall be with the good.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii, 28. Junii, 1643.
IT is this Day Ordered by the House of Commons, that Sir Oliver Luke, do from
this House return thanks to M. Palmer, and M. Hill to M. Carter for the great
pains they took in the Sermons they this day preached, at the entreaty of the
House of Commons, at S. Margarets in the City of Westminster, being a day of
Public Humiliation, and that they desire them to Print their Sermons. And it
is Ordered that no man presume to Print the said Sermons, or either of them,
but whom the said M. Palmer, and M. Carter shall authorize under their hands in
writing. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint John Bellamie and Ralph Smith to Print my Sermon.

HERBERT PALMER.

Errata. Page 16. line 28. for 49. read 40. p. 37. l. 23. for have r. having.
p. 39. l. 1. for had r. has. p. 45. l. 13. after Prophet, r. complain. and in
the margent, for Ier. 5. 9. r. Esaias 5. 25. p. 50. l. 36, for cried r. cry.


