SCRIPTURE AND REASON PLEADED FOR DEFENSIVE ARMS: OR The whole Controversy
about SUBjECTS taking up ARMS. WHEREIN Besides other Pamphlets, an Answer is
punctually directed to Dr. Fernes Book, entitled, Resolving of Conscience,
etc. The Scriptures alleged are fully satisfied. The rational Discourses are
weighed in the balance of right reason. Matters of fact concerning the present
differences, are examined.

Published by diverse Reverend and Learned Divines.

IT is this fourteenth day of April, 1643. ordered by the Committee of the
House of COMMONS in Parliament concerning Printing, That this Book, entitled,
Scripture and Reason pleaded for Defensive Arms, be Printed by John Bellamy
and Ralph Smith.

JOHN WHITE.



LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy and Ralph Smith at the Sign of the three
Golden Lions near the Royall-Exchange, M.DC.XLIII.

To the READER.
It Is a bitter Controversy that our poor sinful Nation is fallen upon,
wherein not only Arms are engaged against Arms, but Books written against
Books, and Conscience pretended against Conscience. In this perplexed
condition, What shall the people do? What shall they resolve? They expect to
receive Council from Divines, who (though it be a mixed Argument) are most
likely to settle them. And they have great reason to do it; for the truth is,
The world takes sufficient notice that the Cause, as it now stands, has many
Divines strongly engaged unto it on either side, and that their Resolutions
have had a great Influence upon it, and upon the people.

We know upon whom Doctor Fern lays the burden, when he says, His Epist.
Many in the simplicity of their hearts have been wrought upon by such as
misled them. But we plead in the words of the great Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12.
That our rejoicing is this, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation to the
world, and more abundantly toward our Congregations: To whom we appeal, and
to our Sermons preached among them, whether we have taught any thing, but
humble and holy obedience to all just and lawful authority, sincere love and
constant maintenance of the Truth. What is it that We may be suspected of? What
Designs may we be thought to carry on? What Interesses? What ends? What is it
that We hold dear unto us, but the Gospel of our Lord, but the souls of our
people? Did we make a gain of them? 2 Cor. ^^ 17, 18, 19.
Did Titus make a gain of you? Think you that we excuse our selves? We
speak before God in Christ.

It Is not a new thing to be challenged as Seditious, as Tertullus accused Paul;
Act. 24.5.
To be hurtful unto Kings and Provinces; Ez^. 4.15. Act. 17.
as Rehum and others wrote against the Jews: To be setters forth of new
Doctrines; as the Epicureans blasphemed that chosen vessel. But our witness
is with God, and in our consciences, and before the people in our preaching,
and in our conversation, That we are not the troublers of Israel, That we pray
for the Peace of our King, and that we seek the welfare of our Nation; and
that we teach no new, no other Doctrine, then what the Scriptures confirm, as
this Treatise will fully show; The^ what our King himself has allowed, in his
clearing our Brethren of Scotland by Proclamation, Luther, B^genhagius, Ius^^s,
Jonas, Am^sdo^sias, Sp^lati^^ ^^nct ho^, C^^t^^g^^, and (...) Lawyers and
States-me^, pu^lished a writing, Anno 15^1 to justify defensive Arms, etc. K
James Speech in Pa^^. An. 1609.

See Remonstr. Dec 15. 1641. Votes, May 20 Remonst. May 26 1641. Declar. July
13 Aug 3. Aug 15. Aug. 20. October. 22.
Petitions of Parl March 26 May 20. Iun. 27. Iul. 15. Petitions of London, and
several Counties for the Kings return. With the L. Generals Petit. which
would not be received, etc.


when they had Covenanted and taken up Arms; then what our State has formerly
favored in yielding aid to Rochell; Then what other Churches, Scotland, the
French Protestants, the united Provinces, and great Divines have given suff^^ge
unto. And as for the State of this Kingdom in the very Constitution of it: The
Case is yet clearer, King James himself blamed a Bishop for a
right-Court-Sermon that he preached before Him, and the House of Peers, That
he had not distinguished well between a King at large, and the King of
England. And in a manner, even all the points of the present difference might
be answered against the King, by the King Himself, in His Majesty's Answer to
the nineteen Propositions, page 17, 18, 19, 20. Which we desire the Readers
seriously again to peruse, as out of which a political Catechism might be
drawn to instruct the people, just so as we have instructed them.

To conclude, After the Kingdom has duly considered the many provocations it
has had, which will appear by the Remonstrances, Declarations and Votes of
Parliament; The No^successe of other Remedies, as namely frequent Petitions and
Treaties; and has read this following Discourse with a mind not prejudiced;
We hope that this present Action of Parliament will stand justified, and our
Judgment and Consciences clear: Especially after this our Protestation, That
we seek nothing but the Truth, and to the Truth, if others can convince us,
we are resolved to yield.

SCRIPTVRE AND REASON PLEADED For Defensive Arms.
SECT. I. The Question rightly stated.
THe Question which the Doctor has propounded, as necessary to be scanned is
thus expressed [ Whether if any King will not discharge his Trust, but is bent or
seduced to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, Subjects may take up Arms
and Resist?] He maintains the negative, and his principal place of strength
is, Romans 13.2. Whosoever resists shall receive to themselves damnation. This he
interprets of resisting the higher power, mentioned ver. 1. by which he
understands the King or Supreme; and the resisting, a resisting by Arms. But
it seems to me, however he make a show of distinct handling his matter, that
he either carelessly, or sophistically confounds things, which ought to have
been more distinctly expressed by one that truly desired to have resolved
consciences in so weighty a cause, as forbearing to defend Religion, Laws and
Liberties, when they are all in danger of subversion. To which purpose, I shall
make bold to propound diverse considerations toward a better clearing of the
true state of the question; and the strength of his proofs for it.

1. It cannot be imagined that a King, who is bent, or seduced to subvert
Religion, Laws and Liberties, means to do this by a mere personal
strength; (For which no Sampson-like strength would suffice) but by the
assistance of others, whether men in office, and trusted with the civil Sword
under him, if he can draw them into his design, or by the soldiery ordinary
or extraordinary; and that not in one part of the Kingdom, but in several
parts, as fast as he can get instruments for his turn.

2. Here then will come diverse questions belonging to the case. 1. Whether the
resisting by Arms, the illegal attempts of an under Officer of Justice;
suppose a Major or Sheriff, though armed with Commission under the Kings hand
or seal, be a resisting of the higher power and damnable. 2. Whether the
resisting a Captain of the Soldiery, coming to act any illegal commands
with his bands of armed men, though he also have a like Commission from the
King; be a resisting of the King, and so forbidden? Both these where the King
is not present, but in another part of the Kingdom.

3. It will be further questioned (in case he should grant resistance lawful
thus far) whether it be lawful to resist the officers or soldiers of the
King, he being besides them, and animating them with his commands to do
violence? I will suppose for the present the Kings person is and shall be safe,
notwithstanding the resistance, or that else the resistance must be forborne. I
only ask, whether his followers commanded by him, standing by to do murders
and rapes may be resisted with arms or not.

4. If he will say that in all these cases resistance may be made; so the Kings
Person may be safe. 1. The King may thank him for the care of his Person, but
his Power and Authority is as much impugned by this, as by many that plead for
the defense now actually under-taken. 2. The Cavaliers and Followers of the
King will thank him never a whit; For they may all be knocked on the head or
starved, and yet the Kings Person be safe. And they would soon desert the
cause, if this were believed, or would be rooted-out, if this were generally
practiced; and that is all the Defendants desire, who honor the Kings Person
and authority, as much as the Doctor or any of his fellows, not to say more;
how ever they resist his Cavaliers.

5. If he will deny resistance where the King is present, because there his
commands are certainly known to be his, which may be doubted of in remote
Countries. Then, 1. So should it have been expressed for clear understanding,
and not coucht in uncertainty. 2. Then all these Cavaliers are justly resisted
where the King is not present, which again if it were believed and practiced
would soon end the business; For even in the next Parish to the King, they
might be resisted, though not where he appears and speaks. 3. What if it be
doubted whether the King be not forced by threatenings and fear of his life to
command so and so. Kings have been prisoners, and have commanded so, and by
wise and good Subjects, Castles and Towns have bin kept by force of Arms
against such as they bad to assault it, if not yielded. Our Law supposes, The
King can do no wrong, yet supposes wrong may be done in his name by his
followers; If he then command a notoriously wicked thing: The Law will suppose
him forced or the like; And then resistance shall be as well lawful, as if he
were absent. Or even necessary to rescue him out of such wicked hands. 4. What
if it be doubted, whether a King be bewitched by sorceries? There have bin such
things of old, and the Devils power does not seem to be lessned now? 5. What
if it be doubted, whether the King be distracted? A thing that has befallen
Kings as well as mean men? Are subjects bound from resisting the commands of a
bewitched or distracted Person to the ruin of Religion, Laws, and liberties?
still preserving his person safe. 6. Suppose it be certain he is not forced,
nor bewitched, nor distracted: Yet doing as bad as any forced, bewitched or
distracted person can possibly do, by commanding such tyrannical Acts, what
reason can be imagined, why such a command should tie subjects hands from
resisting his followers, offering to act his tyranny, more then if he were
forced, bewitched or distracted? Is the liberty of his body and mind from those
violences, an enslaving of his people to his lawless lusts of cruelty and
mischief?

6. If he say further, that even his officers or soldiers, if they have his
Seal or warrant may not be resisted in the remotest Country. Then besides the
former inconveniences, these are to be added. 1. Any that come among ignorant
common people may abuse them at their pleasure, if they will but pretend the
Kings Seal or Warrant. It has bin counterfeited for Briefes: How ordinary
would it be, if it might not be resisted? How would malicious men murder with
it? Robbers spoil with it, and who could remedy it? 2. By this means any that
had a design to depose the King and usurp the Kingdom, might by a
counterfeit Seal and Warrant, kill all the Kings faithfullest Subjects, and
strengthen so himself and his party, as the King should after have no power to
save himself. Laws observed will secure sufficiently from this. And liberty
to resist illegal violences will appear to be necessary to the Kings safety,
as well as the Subjects. Kings have seldom or never bin murdered or deposed,
where Laws have bin preserved in their vigor: But often where illegal
violences have had place. Let this also not be forgotten.

7. Well but thus the case I suppose is understood (if not by the Doctor, yet)
by the general of those that take the Kings part against the Parliament, that
neither the King in Person, nor any of his officers or soldiers, that have
commission from him may be resisted, because that were to resist the King,
which say they all, the Apostle forbids and threatens, Romans 13.2. But here
again I blame the Doctors negligent handling of that place upon diverse
considerations further.

1. Without doubt the first verse is to be regarded, as being the foundation of
the second, as appears by the word [ Therefore] Yet that he has greatly
neglected. Perhaps for fear the scanning of it would do him an ill turn, as
I shall by and by endeavor to show, by comparing the subjection commanded with
the resistance forbidden.

2. In the first verse he does very ill to read always (except once by
chance, as I think) higher power for higher powers, and so never to tell us
whether the other powers (who are higher in relation to the common people,
though inferior in relation to the supreme) S. Peter's governors may be
resisted or not? even with Arms. Perhaps this fraudulently also.

3. In the second verse, he is very careless to tell us, whether resistance
(which is three times in English, but there are two Greek words, the first
being different from the second and third) signify all kind of opposition,
though without Arms, to the higher and supreme power at least, but then much
more with Arms? Or whether it only signify resisting with Arms, and no other
there forbidden, and made damnable. Yet this a needful Question, for a
conscience to be resolved in, and more ordinarily then about resisting. And so
would well have become the Doctors learning and pretended care of Conscience,
and even regard of Authority to have discoursed upon. But since he has not
vouchsafed to do any of these, I shall take the pains to do it for him, and
for the conscientious Readers, as well as I can.

1. The first verse begins, (...). Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers. Here are two questions. 1. What is meant by being subject. 2. What by
higher Powers. By being subject is meant yielding obedience, either active or
at least passive, that is doing or forbearing acccording to command, or
submitting to suffering when one does otherwise. It cannot be denied but both
these are parts of subjection, and that so much is commanded by the word (...)
at least in some cases. But the second Question, What is meant by higher Powers,
will clear in what cases either of these is required? By the higher powers
then is meant all civil legal Authority, which in St. Peter's phrase is of the
King as Supreme, or governor (for these are higher then the people, though
lower then the King) but it is to be observed that the word is in the abstract
powers, which notes the authority, wherewith the person in authority is legally
invested, and not the person in the concrete, least that might be understood of
his personal commands without or beyond, or even against his Authority. Which
conceit the Apostle does greatly prevent by using the word Power, which he does
also all the while he treats of this matter, except only that once he names
Rulers, v. 3.

2. It is to be observed that the things about which the authority, and so the
subjection in this place is conversant are civil matters, belonging to the
second Table between man and man. Not that I deny Magistrates to have Authority
to command things belonging to the first Table, and that subjection is due to
them in such commands concerning Religion, so that it be according to the will
of God. But I say, that this is to be fetched from other Texts rather then this.
My reason is, because the Roman Magistrates, of whom properly the Apostle
speaks, were so far now from commanding things for Religion, that they
commanded things against Religion, and the first Table* and therefore certainly
the active subjection at least here required is limited to civil matters.

3. And now that so much as I have said is required, active Obedience to
legal, civil Authority to all Magistrates in their legal commands in civil
matters; or at least passive yielding to the penalty of the Laws, in case of
not obeying actively; and neither further then to legal commands of legal
Authority, appears by the Apostles reason in this 1. verse. For there is no
power but of God; which he redoubles in a second phrase, The powers that be are
ordained of God, or under God (...). Every soul must be under their order,
which is (...), because they all are ordered by God under him, his deputies and
vicegerents in their order and degree, higher and highest. This is true of all
powers, and therefore to all must subjection be performed. And to none has God
ordered or ordained any Authority but legal. Which as none will deny (no not
the Doctor himself) of other Governors besides the supreme: So can none with
reason affirm, that any has more authority then the Laws, whether special or
general, written or unwritten, have allotted them. Which Laws God ratifies
(being not against his) and so the Authority according to them. And this our
Doctor also confesses (in sense) in m^re places then one of his Book, for
active Obedience, that no more is due, but according to the Laws of God, and
the established laws of the Land. Only he argues for passive obedience beyond
this, every where. 1. Because he argues against resistance even of Tyranny. But
in a word to refute this from the Apostles reason in the first verse. If I be
bound to be subject to tyranny, (or to suffer violence of a tyrant) by virtue
of the commandment here. Then tyranny is the Ordinance of God, or Magistrates
have power ordained of God to use tyrannous violence (for thus the Apostle
argues for subjection from Gods ordaining the power) But this is false. Ergo,
so is that, that I should be bound to suffer tyrannous violence.

And now if this be the true and whole meaning of the precept in the first
verse, It will not be hard to clear the meaning of the prohibition and
threatening in the second verse, which runs thus, (...). Whosoever therefore
resists (or carries himself disorderly against the power, or opposes) the
power, resists or sets himself against the Ordinance (or order appointed) of
God, and they that resist (or so set themselves against man and God both) shall
receive to themselves Damnation. Now here we are to resolve two Questions. 1.
What resistance is? 2. Who (or what) may not be resisted? 1. Resistance is
contrary to subjection, as (...) is to (...), and this also the word [
Therfore] notes. For it shows that the sin of Resistance is a transgression of
the duty of subjection. It is then twofold, either in not obeying commands, or
in not suffering penalties. He that is wilfully, and obstinately disobedient to
some commands, is (by the Apostles scope, and by the consent of all
interpretours that handle it fully) a Resister, (...), though he never offer to
take up Arms, but yields to suffer any penalty. A man that refuses to answer
at the Law, he shall be outlawed; he that refuses to yield possession shall
have a Writ of Rebellion out against him; he that refuses to put himself upon
a legal trial at his arraignement, shall be pressed to death, as a most
obstinate resister of authority, and so in many other cases. Or secondly,
Resisting is in not suffering penalties, resisting by force, and even by Arms.
This is one kind of resisting, and the worst kind against a lawful power: but
what it is, our second Question is to determine; which again breaks it self
into two. What is the power that may not be resisted? and who? In both, the
former verse may, and must guide us, as the word power repeated, and the
conjunction, therefore, and the mention of Gods Ordinance the third time
assures us. 1. Then what is the power that may not be resisted? The legal
authority of the Magistrate, or the Magistrate legally commanding according to
his authority. For as the subjection reaches to this, and no further. So the
sinful resistance extends to this, and is by it limited: because Gods
Ordinance has confirmed all this, and no more. Only upon the change of the
phr^se, and not saying he that is not subject, but he that resists, the Spirit
of God seems to favor in some cases a simple not obeying, and will not charge
that with resisting Gods Ordinance; Namely in such Laws as being of an
inferior nature, may be generally good to be made and kept. Yet to some
persons in some cases so extremely inconvenient as the penalty according to man
is much rather to be ch^sen, then the practice of that Law in that case. Now in
such a case (as our Divines generally use to say, that obedience may be
forborne to many civil Laws, Extra casum sc^ndali) the Holy Ghost seems to
favor (I say) the not obeying, and only charges guilt upon a not submitting to
the penalty which is undeniable resisting: But I say again, that by all the
foregoing context, and the reason from Gods Ordinance in the second verse: The
prohibition of blaming of resistance, go's no further, then, of legal commands
of legal authority. The Doctor will not (does not) say that the most
peremptory, or obstinate refusing to obey actively tyrannous and illegal
commands is resistance. By what authority then of the Text or context will he
stretch the prohibition to refusing to suffer tyrannous violence? Or how does
any resist unlawfully (though by Arms) when unlawful violence is offered him?
which God no where gave authority to use to him, nor ever commanded him to
yield unto? In a word, till Gods Ordinance can be proved allowing tyranny
(which can never be) or undeniably ordaining a man to suffer it, which is no
where in his word (I mean the extremity of tyranny depriving of life, or so)
though often it is so in his providence, when he affords no means of
resistance: This Text of the Apostle will no way condemn the resisting by
Arms tyrannous and illegal outrageous violences. Besides all that, the
context following refuses this sense of the Doctor, as I have already showed.

But let me not forget my second Question, or branch about resistance. Who may
not be resisted? The Text says, The power, any Magistrate acting with lawful
authority legally. The Dr. would restrain it to the supreme, because he
thinks it was hard to assert all Governors irresistible though tyrannous. But
I say, interpreting resistance ^right, as before; and so the Governor or
Magistrate may be no more resisted, then a Monarch. And the King is resisted in
resisting the meanest Officer. Even high Treason may be committed in taking up
Arms with some circumstances against a Magistrate, who is not Supreme. The
Laws cannot be obeyed, but by obeying other Governors in the Kings absence
(who cannot be every where) and so obstinate disobedience, which is resistance;
may be, when only a petty Officer, or Magistrate is present; but commands
according to Law. Contrarily in the Doctors interpretation, resistance is not
forbidden, neither with reference to the lesser Magistrate, nor to the Supreme
as has been showed. And if it were forbidden to resist with Arms a tyrannous
King; of necessity (as has been showed) this would extend to forbid resistance
of any that he imployes ^n his tyranny. Or else all the dispate about it would
soon be at an end, as was also noted. But if the Doctor say that he includes
under the Supreme all that A^t his Will, and only denies that subordinate
Magistrates are within the security of this prohibition of resistance by Arms,
if they be tyrannous without any command from the Supreme. I would have him
show me a ground of this distinction upon a Text of Scripture, (which speaking
before of all powers, names, the power indefinitely) a ground I say out of
Scripture, which himself requires in the beginning of his second Section, or
religious reason, or else what conscience ought to regard what he says? If
both Governors and Supreme be to be acknowledged Gods Ordinance, and both to
be subjected to for that cause, as S. Paul here, for the Lords sake (as S.
Peter, Ephesians. 2.12.) then either both may be resisted by Arms if tyrannous; or
neither? Let him now take his choice, and say what he will, If he says only
the Inferior may be, then he looses this Text, which matches them both
equally. If he say neither may be; Then besides all that has been said on the
Text and context, I only add this: That then every meanest Officer (if wicked)
may ruin the whole neighborhood, because he may not be resisted by Arms, who
yet will bring Arms to act his villainies. And so the blessed Ordinance of God
in Magistracy shall turn to the greatest curse to Mankind (the best and most
conscientious of them) that can be imagined, in regard of outward sufferings,
and general confusion. It remains therefore that as the Apostle in the
following verses, banishes tyranny out of the context, describing every where a
righteous Magistrate, and not a tyrant: So tyranny is to be banished out of the
interpretation of this Text, which allows him that is a tyrant, no security,
that he shall be endured, and not resisted even with Arms. Though it does (and
that most justly and necessarily) secure a just ruling Prince or Magistrate
from all resistance, even when he punishes most severely according to Law and
justice, upon the heaviest guilt of being found resisters against God (that
resist such a rule) and the heaviest penalty of damnation.

SECT. II. Having clearly stated the Question, I proceed with the Doctor to
his second Section, To examine how he maintains his Negative, That a
Magistrate may in no case be resisted; or as he expresses himself, That
Conscience cannot find clear ground to rest upon for making resistance.
HIs principal place of strength whereon he trusts, is Romans 13.2. Whosoever
resists shall receive to themselves damnation. To which he does every where
refer.

Though (which I wonder at in a Scholar of his acuteness) without ever
offering to Analyze the Verse, or those before and after; which would have
afforded strength and clearenesse to his cause, if there be any to be found for
it there.

Therefore my first work must be to do that, namely to expound Analytically
(but as briefly as may be) so much of the Chapter as concerns subjection to
Magistrates; and then Conscience shall judge, whether he has urged it rightly
to the Apostles scope.

The scope of the Apostle (I make bold to say) is properly and merely in this
place to urge Christians to be obedient to the Civil Laws of the Roman Empire
and so of other States, between man and man, and to the Magistrates that had
authority and ruled according to those Laws of what degree soever their
authority was.

To this end, 1. He delivers the precept generally in the former part of the 1.
Verse, in which are three things.

1. The duty, Subjection, which is either Active obedience, or Passive
submission in case of not obeying.

2. The Subject, Every soul, All Christians of what Rank, Sex, Age,
Condition, etc.

3. The Object, in the Abstract, which notes the Legal authority, the higher
powers, in the plural number, which our Doctor is pleased to take no notice at
all of, but only and every where reads it, the higher power, as if it only
pointed to the Roman Emperor, and so now to our King.

2. He produces a reason for the precept, from Gods authorizing Magistrates and
their Laws, and this is delivered in a double expression.

1. By way of Negation, that any Magistrate can be Named which is not of Gods
authorizing, There is no power but of God, which undeniably confirms my
exposition of the Plural number, powers, to note all sorts and degrees of
Magistrates, as does also, that he repeates it.

2. By way of Affirmation, the powers that be are ordained of God, or under
God; (...), (as the Dr. notes) which as it speaks of all sorts of Powers, so
it adds both a further Amplification and urging Reason, and a tacit limitation
of the subjection. The Reason is, they are Gods vicegerents, and Deputies; by
him, ordered to govern under him, and therefore to be submitted unto by virtue
of his Sovereign authority, who is absolutely and undeniably the highest
power, and Lord over all.

The Limitation is, that it must be only in those things wherein those powers
oppose not him, under whom they are and from whom they have their authority,
and it is certain he gives them none to oppose him.

Ver. 2. Thirdly, He urges the precept, by an Applicatory inference, from the
Reason premised, denoting the sin of denying subjection; Whosoever therefore
resists the power resists the Ordinance of God.]

Wherein note, the Apostle has altered his first word; and instead of a
Negative, which one might have expected, puts now in an Affirmitive ( Not
whosoever is not subject, but whosoever resists) wherein he seems to favor
(at least in some cases) the Exposition noted before of subjection, and the
distinction of Active and Passive Obedience to humane Laws; and so will not
always charge disobedience upon the conscience or soul of a Christian, for
the omission, or doing contrary to a humane Law; But only in case of
resistance, (that he will neither do nor suffer) for then he is guilty of
resistance of the Ordinance of the authority of God, by and under which these
Laws were made and are urged.

Fourthly, He urges it again by a threatening of Gods displeasure against such,
inferred from the sin of their resistance. And they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.

The word is (...), which properly signifies Judgment, (...), is properly
Damnation.

But if the resistance be obstinate, and a wilful persisting in it, I doubt
not, but the full sense of (...) Damnation, belongs to such resisting, and
resisters of Laws even humane (which are not opposite to Gods) and resisters
of Magistrates urging obedience according to those Laws.

Ver. 3. Fifthly, By the present and continued benefit of such authority and
Magistracy and Laws. Which is delivered again both negatively and
affirmitively. For Rulers are not a terror to good works but to evil.] wherein
he both prevents an Objection, and asserts an advantage.

He prevents the Objection (that this authority was a wrong to our liberty)
which he denies, so long as our liberty is only used to do well, and practice
good works.

And on the other side, there was an advantage to those that did well; because
evil works were terrified by Rulers.

Where also note, that he has changed the Abstract, Powers, into the Concret,
Rulers, to imply, that subjection is due and resistance forbidden, no farther
to Rulers (or no longer for the (...), then they exercise their lawful power,
and are not a terror to good works but to evil; For their power makes them
not (nor allows them) to be a terror to good works.

Sixthly, He urges it by a second Application of the benefit, and securing from
fear of danger if men will obey. -- Wilt not thou then be afraid of the power?
Do well and thou shall have praise, etc.]

Where again he repeats the word Power (as preventing an Objection, That
Rulers might abuse their power.) Noting, that he still means of the power
rightly used, according to the nature of it; whence will come praise to them
that do well, according to the Laws.

Ver. 4. Seventhly, By a Confirmation of the Application: From Gods end in
authorizing Laws and Magistrates, He is the Minister of God to thee for good.]

It is for thy benefit, that God has deputed Magistrates; where his authority
is the fourth time mentioned, and thou art both against God and thy own good,
if thou yield not obedience Active, or at least Passive.

Eighthly, By a third Application of threatening against disobedience, either
Negative, or especially Positive, which is resisting. He bears not the Sword
in vain, etc.] Where is intimated, that he may punish even capitally some
disobediences and resistance. And again the fifth time Gods authorizing him is
asserted and applied, to this power of punishment. That he executes Gods wrath
temporally; God is angry with disobedience, and requires his Vicegerents to
punish them, even by the Sword, if the offenses merit it according to the
Laws, and so with other punishment.

Ver. 4, 5. Ninethly, By a reinforcement of the Precept, under the term of
Necessity of Conscience, which is but an Explication of the not resisting the
Ordinance of God. Where also the Apostle prevents an Objection, as if he only
had before advised them to obey or not resist, to save themselves from the
Magistrates wrath; For it is Gods wrath also upon the Conscience, and so the
Conscience is bound, though you could find a way to escape temporal wrath.

V. 6. Tenthly, It is urged by a Parallel of respect usually paid to
Magistrates, Tributes, the due whereof is also urged, because Magistrates
devote themselves to the public good, and so must be maintained upon the
public stock, and if maintained, then much more obeyed and subjection yielded
to them.

Ver. 7.11. Finally by an universal requiring, to yield to all their dues,
where he asserts, that he requires no other subjection, and so forbids no other
resistance, then what the Law requires as due, or forbids as undue: because
obedience Active or Passive was due by the Laws.

This is in sum the Apostles scope and Argumentation.

And now let us more particularly consider whither the clause, threatening
resistance with damnation (or ought else in the whole context) do fight
against such resistance as the Doctor oppugnes? or rather of the two may seem
to fight against him, and justify such resistance if not otherwise vitiated.

To which purpose let us proceed by these Considerations.

First, That whatsoever resistance is here forbidden and threatened, relates to
inferior Magistrates as far as their authority reaches according to laws, as
well as supreme Magistrates.

I may no more resist a Constable commanding me, or arresting me, or
distraining my goods according to Law, then I may do the King commanding me,
etc.

Yet the Doctor takes no notice of this at all. But as if it were, not only the
higher power, in the singular number, but the Highest in the Superlative
degree; He restraines all to the King, which is a dangerous fallacy, not only
in the present Question, but against all government.

To which I add, to refuse to be subject to the Parliament according to Laws,
and to resist is much more (by this Scripture) undeniably a resisting the
ordinance of God, and brings damnation.

And what then will he say to those that have done so too, and against the
Parliament, and those sent by their authority unquestionable.

2. Secondly, That Prohibition of Resistance cannot be meant here, which is
wholly contrary to the Apostles reasons following, which persuade to Subjection
and not Resistance. Or that Assertion, or Interpretation, is not according to
the Apostles scope, which is formally opposite to his Arguments afterward.

But such is the Doctors Interpretation and Assertion, Ergo, His Assertion and
Interpretation is, that Subjects may not resist a Prince, who is bent to
subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties.

The Apostles Reasons against Resisters are.

1. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil.

Now is this a reason why I may not resist such a Tyrant?

Who can be more a terror to good works, and not to evil then he that is
bent to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties? Ergo of such a Resistance of a
tyrant the Apostle speaks not. But of Resistance of that Ruler, who go's
altogether according to Laws and Liberties, which is justly punishable with
Damnation without Gainsaying.

2. A second Reason or enforcement of the Apostles argument against Resistance
is, Will thou then not be afraid of the power. Do that which is good and thou
shall have praise of the same. Now does this argue a Tyrant is not to be
resisted? Is there no cause of fear of him (while a man does that which is
good) that is bent to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties? Or shall a man
have praise in doing good, of such a Tyrant.

Therefore is not a Tyrant that power which may not be resisted. But he that
stands to the Laws, and Rules according to them, Damnation is just against
those that resist him without question.

3. Thirdly, The Apostle proceeds, verse. 4. For he is the Minister of God to
thee for good (and so not to be resisted without resisting the Ordinance of
God, and so incurring damnation) But is this true of a Tyrant bent to subvert
Religion, Laws, and Liberties? Is he the Minister of God to thee for good? Or
the Minister of his own lusts rather, for evil? Resistance of such an one
then, is not the Resistance the Apostle forbids, but of one who is the
conservatour of Religion, for he, and he only is the Minister of God to thee
for good, and worthy is he of Damnation that resists such an one.

4. The Apostle adds, If thou do that which is evil fear, for he bears not
the Sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil.

Is this man a Tyrant, bent to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, or most
directly opposite to Tyranny.

A Tyrant secures those that do evil (so they will join with him and serve him
in his Tyranny) from fear. And he bears the Sword, not only in vain, in
reference to any good end intended by Gods ordinance, but altogether contrary
to it; and is so far from being the Minister of God, that he is (as before) a
Minister of his own lusts, to shelter those that do evil, and to pursue with
all wrath, and revenge him that does good, and will not be a slave to his
lawles designs and desires. Still then of such a Tyrant S. Paul argues, not
that he may not be resisted: but him that he describes, which is a just
Governor, and so upon no terms to be resisted.

5. Upon all this the Apostle resumes: Wherefore you must of necessity be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

What rules of conscience (before laid, inferred now by the word, wherefore)
urge such an Asinine or stupid su^ject, as to be subject even passively, and
not to resist one that is bent to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, when
all that went before speak expressly of another power and Rulers of another
temper?

A man then for fear of wrath, not being able to make good his Resistance, may
yield such passive subjection, but sure conscience (at least not in this place)
urges him not to it.

6. Yet the Apostle goes-on: For this cause also pay you Tribute, for they are
Gods Ministers continually attending on this very thing.

For what cause? Because they may attempt to subvert Religion, Laws and
Liberties? Do we pay Tribute for this cause, that they plunder and change
Laws, etc. Or that they may defend them? Also upon what thing are they thus
Gods Ministers to attend continually? Is it to subvert Laws, etc. Or to
preserve them? The Apostle then speaks not of a Tyrant, but a just ruling
Prince, and pity but he should be damned that resists him.

7. Finally, he concludes this matter with saying, Render to all their due. By
what Law of God or man may a Tyrant subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, or
even be let alone in so doing.

I am sure the Apostle has not expressed any such thing hitherto. It is Ergo,
but the Doctors mistake, though I confess it has been many wise and good
men's before him, that the Apostle forbids resisting such a Tyrant, which as I
said above, all his Reasons go rather quite contrary unto, as describing the
Power and Ruler that is to be subjected to, and not resisted, altogether cross
to Tyranny, and his Interpretation and Assertion is altogether cross to the
Apostles.

Having set the understanding of the maine Text right, I come now to those
examples that are alleged to prove, That it is lawful to resist in some
cases.

1. The example of the peoples resisting Saul's illegal and tyrannical attempt
to have put Jonathan to death without cause.

If this were lawful in them in a particular man's case (against whom also
there was some seemig cause) How much more to resist one that is bent to
subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, and so to take away the life of many at
his own pleasure.

To this is answered, not, that it was unlawful in the people to make this
resistance (which yet if he deny not, he plainly yields his cause in his first
Proposition, and Romans 13.2. forbids not all Resistance) but only that the
people drew not into Arms themselves, but being there at Saul's command did by
a loving violence and importunity hinder the execution of a particular and
passionate unlawful command.

To this I reply.

1. If it were lawful now; what hinders but they might have come together to
prevent such a mischief as Jonathans unjust Death? Sure Saul called them not
together to resist himself in any thing. Neither did his calling them together
to fight against the Philistines authorize them to fight against him, if it
were not lawful of it self.

Our King called the Parliament together, yet he allows not them to resist
upon that pretense, though they are undeniably, not the great Council only,
but the great Court of Judicature in the Kingdom.

This piece then of his Answer is nothing but words and pretense.

2. As for his loving violence and importunity wherewith he would blanch their
Resistance.

Grant they showed a love to Saul, because Jonathan was Saul's son. But had
Saul counted him his Enemy, (as he did David afterward) It would have sounded
harsh violence, and out-ragious enough, and it was plainly a great deal beyond
a loving violence. For Saul swore his death, and they swore his life, that not
a hair of him should, etc.

This was Resistance then with an Oath, as it were, to make Saul forsworn.

After this Example then our people may swear an Association, that not one of
the Parliament shall be put to death (unless prooved guilty according to Law)
notwithstanding any Proclamation of them to be Traitors, or condemning them to
death illegally.

3. And thirdly, as it cannot be thought, but if Saul had further attempted by
himself, or any of his followers to assault Jonathan, the people would have
actively resisted him and them even with arms in Jonathans defense.

The second Example is David's resisting of Saul, sc. by gathering a band of
600. men, and offering to have kept Keilah against Saul, but that God told him
the Keilites would have betrayed him.

That he sinned not in it appears.

1. By his own pleading his innocence even to God in his Prayers and Psalms,
as far as concerned the business between him and Saul.

2. Himself after this pleades it to Saul, 1 Samuel 24 and 26. and calls God to
witness that he had not transgrest at all against him.

3. God himself discharged David from all notorious sin, excepting the
matter of Vrijah, 1 Kin. 1.5.

Now had not his Resistance been lawful, it had been most notorious Rebellion
and Treason.

4. Fourthly, even our Doctor condemns it not, and therefore, all resistance is
not unlawful, much less damnable, as he often thunders.

But this Example sticks with him, and therefore he makes a fourfold answer.

1. David's guard that he had about him was only to secure his person against
the cutthroats of Saul, if sent to take away his life.

Reply. But this could not have bin done without killing diverse of them, if
they had assaulted him, which had then bin no murder, but a just defense and
execution of Justice. So far himself grants lawful.

2. But he says it was a mere defense without any violence offered to Saul.
Therefore he still gave place as Saul pursued, and did no act of hostility to
him, or any of his Army, when they were in his power, 1 Samuel 26.

Reply. He was not strong enough to encounter Saul in the field, who had diverse
thousands (3000 mentioned 1 Samuel ^1.) against his 600. Wisdom bids him fly as
long as he could, rather then fight.

2. Conscience forbids him to kill Saul: so I grant it does any Subject, though
having the King at any such advantage. But that he hurt none of his followers,
1 Samuel 26. was again an act of wisdom, and we need not go to conscience for a
reason of it. He had only one man with him, Abishai, and had he offered to kill
any of the Army, how soon might this in all likelihood have wakened the rest,
and so he had endangered his own life to little purpose. For he could not in
probability have killed many, and what had that done to his cause and defense
afterward.

Yet also, I hold not that in cold blood, one or many that are upon the
defensive, may lawfully kill sleeping enemies, or such waking farther then
appears, at least in some sort necessary, or much advantageous to the defense,
and prejudicial to the opposites. But if killing, as many as David could have
killed that night, himself and Abishai would have given hopes of ending Saul's
pursuit of him, and have made peace; I doubt not, but he would and might have
done it, as well as keep Keilah against him.

But this intent of David's is denied; For,

3. The Doctor says, It is only an uncertain supposition, not fit to ground
conscience in this great point of resistance.

Repl: The Text declares it as certainly as may be, unless it had said so in
undeniable terms.

For, 1. David contents not himself to ask God whether Saul would come down,
but what the Keilites would do.

To what end that, but that he meant to stay, if they would stand to him.

2. When God answers him only about Saul's coming, he asks the second time,
which shows clearly his mind ran upon staying there.

3. When God told him they would betray him, the Text then says, he and his
men went whether they could go, which shows they were now disappointed of
their purposes and hopes of staying there, and must now shift for themselves
where they could.

When none of this will elude this example of David's resistance, the Dr. adds a
fourth Answer which will strike it dead.

4. To this and all other demeanours of David in his standing out against Saul.
We say his example was extraordinary; for he was designed and anointed by the
Lord to succeed Saul: therefore he might use an extraordinary way for
safe-guarding his person.

Repl: But in these few words there seem to be many errors and inconvenient
expressions.

Does he not* imitate those that to illude David's reason, why he durst not kill
Saul, Say Saul was extraordinarily anointed and designed King by God, and so
upon him violent hands might not be laid, but this holds not for other Kings
elective or successive by humane Laws.

I do not for my part think their shift sufficient, but believe it utterly
unlawful, even because this is asserted by David (in reference to the office
of Saul, as I believe) being written for our learning, to teach us how to carry
our selves toward all sovereign Princes.

But I say if he will elude David's act of resistance, he encourages them
including his forbearance. Let him consider it.

2. Is not what he speaks of a successor dangerous to his own Position? for if
David's right of succession authorized him at all to resist, may not a successor
plead the like authority, if in danger, which yet he will not grant, unles he
mean to overthrow his own assertion.

3. It seems to me a strange way of answering Scripture examples (unles upon
stronger necessity then any thing the Doctor has alleged, as will appear by
the scanning of all his Arguments and Texts against resistance) that such a
thing was extraordinary, when no such thing can be gathered out of the Text.

I know many men have this faculty of interpreting, who yet will not suffer it
against their own assertions; but with me (except in undoubted failings or
duties) The ancient Rule holds good, Praxi^ sanctorum est interpres
Praeceptorum. David did thus against Saul's violence, therefore this is not
contrary to* but an Interpretation of the honor due by the 5 t. Commandment.

4. It is so far from being good which the Doctor says, that contrarily
David's Unction, ought rather to have strengthened his faith; not to have used a
way of defense; which in another had been (by the Doctors saying) rebellious
and damnable.

What a disparagement is this to Faith, and even to Gods Honor, that his
anointed shall be safeguarded for so long together only by a way, which in all
others is abominable? Credat Judaeus non ego. David's Faith then and Gods Honor
in his preservation, proves the means both lawful and ordinary.

And if so, then much more is it lawful for many persons, and most of all for
a State-Representative in this manner to defend themselves and resist.

A third Example alleged by the Doctor, is the Priests resisting the Kings
attempt upon their office and Gods worship, 2 Chronicles. 26. And after thrusting
him out of the Temple, when God had smitten him with Leprosy for it.

I for my part put no great weight on the former. But their thrusting him out
of the Temple is somewhat toward a hinderance even by force, of a Prince if he
persist to violate Gods undoubted ordinances, as it had been to have staid in
the Temple being leprous, added to the sin of his going in at all, and
presumption to offer Incense. But such a case is hardly supposable among us.

Only I add, that I wonder the Doctor offers to say; God by smiting him with
Leprosy, discharged him of his Kingdom.

The Story implies no such thing, but only that he dwelt in a several house,
and Jotham his son judged the people of the Land. The Law allowed not any to
come near to such or touch them, and what they touched, without being
unclean, therefore he could not sit in public Judicature, but his son did it
for him, yet for all that he remained King till his death, and probably did
give out diverse Orders, which might be done by means of those that must needs
minister to him.

But if the Doctor say right, may not an untoward Inference be made, that if a
King should attempt to violate Gods ordinance and worship in any thing, and God
should visibly strike him with some loathsome Judgment, this should discharge
him of his Kingdom, which is more then ever the Parliament said, or so much as
thought, as they call God to witness.

A fourth Example is Elisha's shutting the door against the Kings Messenger
that came to take away his head. This example the Doctor says speaks little.

Reply. But as little as it speaks it forces him to speak that, which if he
will stand to, I do not much doubt, but I shall make any unpartiall man
(perhaps even the Doctor himself) to say his cause is lost in reference to his
first Proposition.

Hear his own words,

Let us thence take occasion to say, that personal defense is lawful against
the sudden and illegal attempts of such, even of the King himself, thus far
to ward his blows, to hold his hands, and the like.

I Reply 1. Then is not all resistance unlawful and damnable, if against
sudden, he may much more against deliberate intended illegal violence.

And his distinction of personal defense, etc. will not satisfy conscience by
his own words in the beginning of this Section. If To. 13.2. be to be
interpreted his way, because every distinction and limit of any place in
Scripture must have it is ground in Scripture. What ground has this in
Scripture in his way, either here or elsewhere, specially when he will not allow
the Parliament to believe any intention to take away any of their heads,
notwithstanding all words and preparations against them without the spirit of
Elisha.

But hear him further,

"Not to endanger his Person this, nor return blows; this is not lawful he
says.

Reply. I am not willing to oppose him in these Assertions, though the case may
be so hard, as a man must loose his life, if he will merely defend himself,
and in no sort offend.

But specially a woman must loose her chastity (in which case, and principally
the latter) let the Doctor answer what is to be done, and whether no blows may
be returned.

But that the Princes person may not be willingly assaulted, the speech of
David forenoted is that which concludes me, and not at all the D^^argument. He
says the whole commonwealth is concerned in his person, and that a particular
nature will yield to the universal.

Rep. But he argues fallaciously, the whole is concerned somewhat in the
Princes person, but not so as that it perishes, if he die or be killed. Which is
often, and no harm, no visible chang, but that he is missing. Whereas the
yielding of a particular nature to the universal, is to keep that from
dissolution and perishing, as the Naturalists say, and no otherwise.

But that which follows is yet better. Thus he objects for us against himself
[if this be drawn from personal Defense to the public resistance now used, as
they usually make the Argument thus: If the body natural, then the body
politic may defend it self: If a private person, much more the whole State
may, and they do but shut up the way against the King, that comes to destroy
his Parliament, and take away their heads] then he answers two things.

1. As the natural body defends it self against an outward force; but strives
not by a schism or contention within it self. So may the body politic against
an outward power, but not (as now) by one part of it set against the head, and
another part of the same body, for that tends to the dissolution of the Whole.

Rep: But by his leave he abuses the similitude between a natural and a
politic body; and perverts the state both of the Question and the example in
hand, and withal runs into more absurdities then one in his own way, as I
shall now show him.

1. The natural body can do nothing but by the guidance of the head, that is
of the soul residing in the head, and employing the senses and faculties placed
in the head to that purpose. But a body politic, is a company of reasonable
men, whose actions may be divided from their politic head, and yet be
rational and regular, and when the particular politic head is distracted, or
while an Infant, it can and does order it self within him, and so it does and
must do, when the politic head is bent to subvert Religion, Laws and
Liberties, because the subversion of these, (and not the opposition or
resisting of those that would subvert them) would be the dissolution of the
whole. But so would not be the very death of the politic head, (though, as I
said before, it is unlawful to attempt it) Whereas the death of the natural
head, is certainly the dissolution of the whole natural body.

2. As the natural body may defend it self against outward force, so against
the malignity of any disease, or pain in any member of the body, even resient
in the very head, and so the hand may pull out a tooth, even for the
painfullnesse of it, though seated in the head, and perhaps one eye for some
disease, thereby to save the other; and lance and cut the flesh, and even
cut off a limme, leg and arm, to stopp a Gangrene; yet is this no making of a
schism, or unnatural contention within it self.

3. He has granted it to single persons; but denies it to the whole body, or a
considerable part together.

Reply: Then belike if six or twenty or a hundred single persons be assaulted
illegally, by a like number of single persons (suppose in their several houses
in the same Town) they may shut the doors and defend themselves, and even any
of them hold the very Kings hand and ward his blows. But if they happen to be
all in a body together in the market place, and be assaulted by such a number,
or a quarter so many, they must not offer to resist, but let them cut all their
throats, because forsooth in the body politic, one part must not be set
against the head, and another part of the Whole.

4. He grants the body politic may defend it self against an outward force,
but not (as now) one part, etc.

Reply: Then belike if the King employ Danes or Irish against the Parliament
and Kingdom, they may resist them (and is not the case so now, at least in
part) but not if he employ only English-Cavaleers. Surely the mighty wits of
the Earl of Strafford, who was condemned mainly for counselling to bring in
nine thousand Irish to reduce this Kingdom, wanted our Doctor to have advised
him to forbear that design, and only Arm English, and then the peoples hands
and consciences should have been tied from resisting by the Doctors and his
fellow-Chaplaines Divinity, and must have yielded Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and necks too, for fear of dissolving the whole politic body, by
defense.

5. When the state of the Question by himself set, is, when a Prince is bent
to subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties. What dissolution of the Whole can
be feared by defense and resistance against such intentions, worse then that
or so bad? While therefore he talks of such defense, tending to the
dissolution of the Whole, he perverts the Question, or else forgets, that the
subverting of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, cannot be accounted less then a
dissolution of the whole politic body.

6. I say therefore by an Argument a f^rti^ri (retorting his words upon
himself) If a private person may defend himself a against illegal Assaults of
the Kings Messenger (or even of himself, as before) then much more the
representative Body of a State, and even any considerable part of the Body
(with them, or) even without them, to save Religion, Laws and Liberties
against an intent to subvert them. And if against outward foreign Force, then
much more against homebred, unnatural Members, who exceed (rather then come
short of) any outward Force in rage and c^uel^y, tending to the subversion of
the Whole, and all such unnatural and gangrened members are justly and
necessarily cut off for the safety of the whole, though their cutting o^ cannot
be without a maime and lamenesse, at least for the present. I say for the
present, for new members will grow up in the politic body in time, though
never in the body natural.

2. He has yet another Answer for us in these words, [Personall Defense may be
without all offense, does not strike at the order and power that is over us, as
general resistance by Arms does, which cannot be without many unjust
violences, and does immediately strike at that order which is the life of the
Commonwealth. And this makes a large difference 'twixt Elisha's shutting the
door against this Messenger, and their shutting-up the way against the King by
armed men.]

Repl: 1. If some personal defense may be without all offense, yet not all.
And he at least seems to have yielded all personal defense lawful, so the
Kings person may not be violated.

2. Whose fault it is originally, that general resistance by Arms, cannot be
without offense? Are the Plunderers not in fault; but the defenders must be
counted guilty? And whose hand is it that strikes immediately at the order,
which is the life (as he says) of the Commonwealth? The defendants of
Religion, Laws, and Liberties? Or theirs who intend and attempt to subvert them
all?

3. How does personal Defense, if offensive to the Messengers assaulting,
strike less at the power over us, then general or common defense does? Or
rather neither does, since the power over us (as intended and ordained both by
God and man) is for the preserving and defending, not subverting Religion, Laws
and Liberties; and so defends the true power, strikes not at it.

4. If general Defense cannot be without many unjust violences, no more is any
war at all, in a foreign Country ( de facto.) But as the impossibility to
restrain these wholly, does not make all wars unlawful, so much less does it
a necessary defense, in case of such danger to Religion, Laws and Liberties.

5. Whose fault is it, that these unjust violences cannot be avoided, the
Assaylants or the defendants? Let God (and conscience) be Judge. To Him we
fear not to appeal; and while the conscientious Defendants labor as much as
morally they can to prevent and rectify all such unjust violences, whether the
danger of some acting them, who must be employed in the defense; altogether
forbids the general defense, to the utter subversion of Religion, Laws and
Liberties.

6. And this indeed makes a large difference between Elisha's case and ours. He
defended but one against a sudden passionate command. He pleades against
malicious deliberate intents for defense of many, the general, of all
faithful Prophets, Magistrates, Princes and all, with Laws and Liberties for
all posterity. Let Heaven and Earth judge, who is the wrong-doer, and whether
the defendants may not as Innocents call for justice, as well as David against
Saul, 1 Samuel 24. and 26. ( vide locum.)

As for the Parliaments power to conclude of the Kings intentions without the
Spirit (Prophetic) of Elisha (I wonder we had not here also, that Elisha
defended himself by an extraordinary way, being an extraordinary person, as
well as David before) that belongs to the third Proposition, handled in his
third Section, thither I refer it. Only saying that since the printing of the
Doctors book some blood has bin shed by the Kings Counsel of war at Reading
in a pretended legality: So at Oxford some others have lately been condemned
with pretense of Law, and what shall become of them, who knows whether they
will put them to death, in terrorem to others? Or reserve them for fear some
of their party should be served with the same sauce?

Finally, whereas he says, the King desires not any punishment should be
inflicted on any that oppose him, then what a legal trial shall adjudge them
to, which no good Subject ought to decline.

Reply. This were credible, if we were assured what is meant by a legal
trial, and that it did signify, not a trial by such Judges and Juries, as
are apparently partial: or if we could forget that the six Members accused of
High Treason in January last, offered themselves to be tried, and the
Parliament offered to try them in Parliament, according to their Privileges,
being Members of their Houses, and from thence forth the Accusation was laid a
sleep (till of late) notwithstanding the reiterated importunities of both
Houses of Parliament, who also in one of their Declarations or Petitions to the
King, urged a Statutes, how such accusations ought to be managed and conclude
to this effect, that by Law and Justice this ought not to be denied.

And thus I have vindicated the Examples of Scripture by the Doctor alleged
for us, and from thence, and from his own words partly, the Question in hand
between us, as far as concerns the first Proposition. I am now to proceed to
his own allegations against us: In which he is so confident, as he promises, [
That Scripture excludes this and all other exceptions, giving no allowance to
resistance, in regard of persons or causes, or other pretenses (how true this
is, let what has been said already be judge) and this not only by Examples,
but by Precepts, Conclusions, Resolutions, which are more safe. These we are
now to examine.

First, his Allegation of the 250 Princes, gathering the people against Moses
and Aaron; Himself satisfies, that there was no cause for it, Moses and Aaron
did not deserve it. [I add, they had done nothing, but what appeared to be the
formal will of God, whose cloud and pillar was by day and night over their
heads, and whose many miracles had continually ratified the authority of Moses
and Aaron, Moses his very face by a continued miracle was sufficient to have
dazeled them, if he had pulled off his veil.] But to this he answers, The
Princes supposed they did deserve it, and that is now enough it seems, to make
people, not only say to their Princes, Ye take too much upon you, but
therefore to rise in Arms also. Which I hope will appear to be without cause
too in the end of this Treatise.

Repl. 1. I have showed there was not the least ground for them to suppose ill
of Moses, but all contrary.

2. Because a false supposall allows not a man to do such or such a thing,
shall this forbid that action, where the supposall is true and certain? By
this all war should be unlawful, for upon a false supposall it is. Also all
Justice should be injustice and unlawful: for upon a false supposall it is so.
We never said nor thought, That uncertain supposals suffice to arm against a
Prince; but at least such as rules of reason and prudence allow in all cases of
importance. And whether there be now any such; As he referrs, so do I to the
end of the Treatise.

Secondly, he urges, 1 Samuel 8.11. Namely, that God by Samuel tells Israel, that
if they would needs have a King, he should take away their goods, and make
their children servants, and then they should cry to God, because of their
King, but he would not hear them, which implies they should be left without
all remedy against his oppression, but only crying to the Lord.

To this diverse Answers may and must be given. Answ. 1. Though this be further
urged by some to authorize Kings to take their Subjects goods at their
pleasure, yet less the Kings of Israel never took it so; For Ahab and Jezabel
were not so unskillfull in the right of Kings, that they would have had Naboth
put to death by false witnesses for blasphemy, that so his vineyard might come
to the King by confiscation; if by a plain Law of God at the founding of the
Monarchy, he might have taken the vineyard at his will, as the Text 1 Samuel
8.13. mentions his taking of vineyards even to give to his servants, and much
more for his own use. But Ahab and Jezabel both, though they wanted neither wit
nor stomach to advance that Prerogative, were it seems novices in both to our
Modern Advocates for Monarchy; or rather it is certain Samuel tells them what
their King would do, and not what he should do by right. His words are
Prophesies not Laws.

2. Neither are the latter words of their crying to God, and his not hearing
them, in form of a Law and Prohibition (or at the most but a Prohibition of
attempting or thinking to have the government altered again from Kings to
Judges) but a prediction by way of punishment, what should befall them for
their sinfully impetucus affecting and asking a King, that they should feel
him oppressing them, and that God would never remove the burden, as long as
that King (whom they should first have) should live, Nor yet alter the
government again from Kings to Judges, though they should be never so weary of
the one or other; and pray never so much to him for either or both. And indeed
the event verifies this interpretation, in both respects. For Saul proved
tyrant enough; and particularly in taking their sons from them, as it is
threatened, 1 Samuel 8.11, 12. etc. so recorded Cap. 14.51. But specially his
tyranny was most prodigious in the Massacre of the Priests forementioned: And
so did many of his successors; after they had a King once, they never were
under any other government altogether. For though they had no Kings of their
own from the Babylonish Captivity, till the Maccabees time, yet were they
under strange Kings (which was worse) the Babylonians and Persians (of which
after their return from captivity, see their heavy complaint, Neh. 9.) and
after them the Grecians and the Kings of Syria and Egypt, and then a while the
Maccabees race possessed the Kingdom till the Romans subdued them, and set up
Harod and his race under the Emperor, who was indeed their King from thence
forth (the high Priest calls Caesar their King, Joh. 19.15. and so does the
Prophet. Zach. 11.6.) till Vespasian and Titus destroyed their Commonwealth.

3. This Prediction then of such punishment to them by their Kings oppressing
of them, cannot be a Law or punishment intended to other Nations being under a
King, who have not provoked God in seeking a King as Israel had* God threatened
and imposed on the Jews and other Nations in Nebuchadnezzars time their putting
their neck under his yoke, Ier. 27.3. etc.
though he was not their hereditary Prince, but an invading enemy. From whence
no man will gather (I hope) that any Nation are bound to yield to a foreign
Enemy invading them. Also God threatened that the Jews should be carried
captives into other Countries, and there they should serve other gods, wood and
stone, etc. where he would not show them any favor; I am sure no man will
argue from hence, that this is a law for other captives to submit to (or was
any excuse to them, much less a law) but a mere punishment to them, Ier. 16.1^
and warning ^o other, least in them also sin be punished with sin, which is
the forest punishment of all.

4. This place then being such a prediction of punishment does not prove so
much, as that to them it was unlawful to defend their very goods against their
Kings tyranny, but that (at the most) it should be vain to them; because if
God would not hear their cry, their defense would be to little purpose, and
what they might save at one time would begotten from them at another, when
their King should list to attempt it.

5. After all, this Text (let the utmost be made of it that can be) reaches not
to the first and maine Proposition of defending life. Or the second of
chastity: but still the defense of those remain lawful and warrantable,
though also so does the defense of goods (as may appear by what has bin said)
whereas the King is not an absolute Monarch. The absoluteness whereof is
indeed (as has bin fore-noted) in power over goods, but not at all over the
chastity of any, nor so much as over their lives, further then they offend
known Laws.

Thirdly, He says, we have not only example, but resolution and conclusion out
of Scripture, That the people might not be gathered together, either for civil
Assemblies, or for war, but by his command that had the power of the Trumpet,
that is the supreme, as Moses was, Number. 10.

Rep. The Text puts in no such restraint, no restraint at all, but only that
the Trumpet should blow for such and such occasions, and where it did blow,
they should assemble. I grant, while the supreme (and those under him) do
their duties, there may be no Assemblies, but by their Authority, Laws and
commands; but when they neglect it, and will not discharge their trust; much
more when they abuse it, to destroy those, by and for whom they are trusted;
This Text has neither word nor intimation, forbidding the people to assemble,
even for war. Himself granted not long since, That the body politic might
defend it self against an outward force. Suppose a Fleet of Spaniards, or
Danes or Irish, invaded our Coast: The Prince and all his Officers, are
ignorant or neglectfull, or even consenting. Shall the people not assemble for
defense, because the Prince blows not the Trumpet? Or a band of
high-way-robbers set upon a village, and the Constable and Officers are
secretly confederate with them: May not the village without their officers, and
the neighbor villages also run together, as to quench a common fire? We use to
say, Necessity has no Law, or knows no Law. The meaning is good, That ordinary
laws for settled times, give way to present pressing necessities, not only
before men, but God too, who in saying, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice;
directs to prefer necessities of mercy and safety, before all ordinary
Formalities, either of Religion, or of civil Justice. How else might a private
man kill one that assaults him? And if one may defend himself, I say again (as
before) much more many; and to that end Assemble even for war, and make
Trumpets of their own, when they that have the ordinary Trumpets, will not use
them at all, or against the common good. And Number. 10. has not the least shadow
to the contrary. Also without the Trumpet may not the Church assemble?

Fourthly, For David's carriage toward Saul and his Army, 1 Samuel 26. it is
partly answered before. But he urges, That though it be said, they intend not
hurt to the Kings Person, yet might they not as well have hurt his person in
the day of battle, as any of them that were swept away from about him by the
fury of the Ordnance, which put no difference 'twixt King and common Soldiers.

Rep. Indeed this is the hardest case can be put against defense by Arms. But
supposing (as has bin partly proved already, and will be more, the further we
proceed) that against his messengers and instruments, arms may be taken, and
battles fought to prevent the subversion of Religion, Laws and Liberties, upon
which they are bent: I only ask 2 or 3 Questions.

1. By what rule of conscience or God, is a State bound to sacrifice Religion,
Laws and Liberties (the conservation of which is the end of all governments,
and so of all Princes Authorities) rather then endure that the Princes life
should come into any possibilities of hazard, by defending them against those,
that in his name are bent to subvert them.

2. If he will needs thrust himself upon the hazard, when he needs not, whose
fault is that? Is it theirs that desire not to have him hurt in the least, and
resolve not to hurt him wittingly or willingly, but merely to defend themselves
upon necessity; and offend others that are his seducers, or instruments, or
both? And to this purpose, let it be remembered that I have proved, that David
would have kept Keilah against Saul, and then if Saul would have bin obstinate
to assault it in his own person; how could David have helped it, if an arrow or
a stone from the wall had hit him and killed him? And then withal, whether
there be not somewhat this way, in that of David; Either the Lord shall smite
him, or his day shall come that he must die, or he shall go into the battle
and perish. If he might fight with Saul's Army, as in Keilah he would, and Saul
would go down into the battle, his blood would have bin upon his own head.
As if a King disguised should offer any private violence, a watchman that would
not (or even might not) hurt him being known, were without blame, if he
knocked him down, or even killed him, as he might in like case a disorderly
private person. Now in battle, to many or most (and especially to the Gunners
that give fire to great Ordnance) he is altogether disguised, and so they are
blameless, in reference to his personal hurt. The fault is wholly his own
and those wicked Counselors that have thrust him upon the fury of the battle.

3. For also, why should not all that truly wish well to the King, of all other
times keep him out of the battle, when it is against Rebels? I am sure David's
men would not let him hazard himself, 2 Samuel 18. (though he offered it) and said
he was worth 10000 of them. They then that put him upon such desperate dangers,
against supposed Rebels show they love their own rapine (for which they fight,
and to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties) above his person and life. And
then let God be Judge who stretches out the hand against him unlawfully? They,
or others?

Fifthly, He observes two things more concerning the point of resistance.

1. That all the seeming instances for it, are out of the old Testament.

Rep. 1. Why should he insinuate this to be insufficient? Is not the old
Testament Gods word, and a direction for our lives, as well as the new? Was
not, Honor thy Father and Mother (under which himself comprises obedience to
Princes) a law of the old Testament? And if it were lawful (as the instances
have bin justified against all that he has said) to resist then; how comes it
to be unlawful now? Did Christ come to make Tyrants secure from resistance,
who were not before.

2. I would entreat him, if he be at leisure to rejoyne to this reply, to tell
us the intent of Christ in the new Testament; bidding his Disciples, rather
sell their garments, then want a Sword. I am persuaded for my part, that he
thereby directs them to a just and necessary defense, against any out-ragious
attempts of violence illegal. Though he afterward blames Peter for using the
Sword without warrant. The new Testament then has somewhat also toward
Resistance.

But 2. He says, It is a mavelous thing, That among so many Prophets
reprehending the Kings of Israel and Judah for their Idolatry, cruelty and
oppression, none should call upon the Elders of the people, for this duty of
resistance.

Rep. To this marvel, there may be a ready satisfaction, if we remember, That
even in the reign of the best Kings, not only the peoples hearts were usually
unprepared, and in their greatest seemings hypocritical and treacherous, as
appears by the Story and the Prophets. But also the Princes, Elders and Nobles
were exceedingly corrupt. In Joash his time, as soon as Jehojada was dead, the
Princes came and corrupted the King; and in the beginning of Esay's Prophecy
in Vzziah's time (who was among the better Kings) he calls them Princes of
Sodom, and so even in Hezekiah's time, how does Micah complain of them. ( Ch,
3. and Jer. 26.) and Jeremy in Josiahs time after the Reformation begun. Now if
they were so bad in good times, who can marvel, if they were stark naught,
where the King was rought, and helpers forward of his Idolatries, cruelties and
oppressions. And why should it then be expected, that the Prophets should call
upon them to resist, the King being on their side, and they on his.

Sixthly, At last the Doctor comes to his maine strength of all, namely, Roman.
13.2.

In the improvement of which Text to his purpose, he lays down four
Positions, and then makes a five-fold Objection, and shapes Answers to them;
all which must come under examination.

1. He says [ I may suppose that the King is supreme, as St. Peter calls him,
or the higher Power, as St. Paul here, though it be by some now put to the
Question, as one absurdity commonly begets another to defend it.]

Rep. But by his leave he runs away too fast with his supposition in a
double respect.

1. That St. Paul here, Romans 13.2. speaks only of resisting the supreme
power, the King, or Emperor or Monarch, whereas the word in this second verse
is indefinite, the power (...), which extends to all in authority in either
rank or degree, as well as the supreme, as was noted before. If he (or any
for him) say that the power, v. 2. must signify no more then the higher power,
v. 1. which he interprets only of the supreme.

Repl. Here again I must tell him, he abuses his Readers (carelessly at least,
I will not say wittingly, let his conscience look to that) for he always
reads higher power in the singular, whereas it is Powers in the plural, and
the next words, There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained
of God, shows the Apostle speaks of all sorts and ranks of Powers. Therefore
he must take in the other, Powers, as well as the supreme in both verses, and
that will be nothing for his benefit, as will appear by this brief reason. If
the Powers that are under the Supreme may not be resisted by this, Romans 13.2.
Then either the resistance forbidden extends not to resisting (though with
Arms) out-ragious and tyrannical assaults of illegal violence offered by
those officers, as suppose a Major, Justice, or even a Constable, or else even
one of those officers, even a petty Constable is as absolutely over those that
are under his office as any Monarch, and they slaves to his lusts, as well as
to an Emperors, because the one ought not to tyrannize (by the Doctors
Confession 1.) no more then the other, and the one ought not to be resisted no
more then the other by this argument and Text.

Now which part of distinction will the Doctor choose, if the former, he deserts
his cause plainly. If the latter, then besides the apparent absurdity of it; I
urge, that all men will grant, That a Constable and such like officers
(between the people and the supreme) are liable to be themselves punished by
Laws, if they offer any out-ragious and illegal violence, which cannot
possibly be, unless they may be resisted even with Arms in case any arm
themselves to practice violence, Also else a few of them, as the Major or
Aldermen of a Town, joining together, might go through all the City and
rob, and kill as many as they would by force of Arms, and no man might offer
to resist them by taking Arms against them. It remains therefore that all
Magistrates (except the supreme to begin with) may be resisted even with
Arms, if offering violence and tyranny; And yet St. Paul forbids to resist the
Powers without distinction of supreme or other. Therefore St. Paul m^anes not
to forbid resisting Tyranny with Arms: But resisting legal and lawful
commands, even other ways, as well as with Arms, though this be the worst
kind of resistance, where obedience is due.

But secondly, It must not be granted him (for all his bigg words of Absurdity,
imputed to those that deny it) That the King of England is in all
considerations the supreme (or the highest Power (if St. Paul's words were in
the superlative.) This belongs to Politics, and the Doctors Divinity will not
reach it, himself cannot deny it, That the King is not supreme in the
legislative power. Though he have a negative voice in Laws, so have either of
the Houses distinct. He can then neither make new Laws alone, nor abrogate
old ones: Nor violate (without injustice) the goods, much less the lives or
chastities of any of his meanest Subjects, and least of all authorize any of
his followers by his warrant or presence to do so. His Supremacy then is
bounded by Laws, and is given him (be it more or less) ad salutem non ad
destructionem. Which yet were not, if no Tyranny of his might be resisted. But
of that more anon.

But the Doctor will prove the King supreme 3 ways.

1. St. Peter's distinction comprehends all that are in authority. The King as
supreme, and those that are sent by him: In which latter rank are the two
Houses of Parliament, being sent by him, or sent for by him, and by his Writ
sitting there.

Repl. 1. Why did the Doctor leave out the word Governors? Is he afraid to
grant the Houses of Parliament any power of Government?

2. What if sent by him, referrs not to the King, but to the Lord, for whose
sake, all both King and Governors are to be obeyed, and by whom both are sent?
(but of this also more anon.)

3. But grant him his way, I ask how it shall appear, that the name of King
extends as far every where as S. Peter's (...). The Spartans had two Kings,
and yet neither of them so supreme, but under the control of the Ephori,
There are also Monarchs as supreme as any that have the Title of King. The
Great Duke of Florence, The Great Duke of Muscovy, and others. Also the Romans
in S. Peter's time called not their Emperors King Rex, Which yet is the ordinary
Latin of (...). In a word, he only is supreme, whom the Law calls supreme,
and no further then the Law makes him.

2. He says also, by the Oath of Supremacy it is acknowledged, That there is
no power above him without or within this Realm, and that he is in all causes
and over all persons supreme.

Repl. But some Lawyers will tell him, That the Oath of Supremacy is either
only against foreign powers (and namely the Pope) having to do here; or
against all particular persons having authority above the King within the
Realm. But that with all Law Books intimate a superiority, in curia Comitum
Baronum, etc. which is the two Houses of Parliament.

And secondly, That he is supreme not to judge all persons and causes at his
pleasure, but as assisted according to Laws with his Counsel and Judges, and
specially his great Council, and chief Judicature (during their sitting) the
two Houses of Parliament. His Supremacy then, still appears limited by, and
according to Law.

3 But he adds, This is also acknowledgedged by the Petition of the two Houses
addressed unto his Majesty, wherein they style themselves, his Loyal Subjects.

Repl. True and right; but still this is to be understood, to be Subject
according to Laws, and for the good of King and Kingdom, neither of which is
promoted or preserved by a restraint of a defensive Resistance of tyranny,
which restraint, the Doctor so contends for. Add here, what must elsewhere be
further urged, That the King himself in his answer to the 19 Propositions,
acknowledges that the two Houses have legal power, more then sufficient to
prevent or restrain Tyranny. Which I would feign have any man show me, how it
can be done, but by taking up Arms, and then I will yield him the cause, That
all Arms taken up are unlawful. But till then the King has granted the
cause, legal and just against the Doctors first maine Proposition, and all his
Arguments.

His next ground is, That in the Text of the Apostle, all persons under the
higher Power are expressly forbidden to resist, for Whosoever, in the second
verse, must be as large, as every soul in the first verse, and the resistance
forbidden here concrnes all upon whom the subjection is enjoined there, or else
we could not make these universals good against the Papists, exempting the Pope
and Clergy from subjection.

Repl. 1. He still runs on in his error to limit the higher power to the
supreme.

But secondly, I grant him that all other powers under the supreme are
forbidden to resist in the Apostles sense. A Constable, Justice, Major,
Sheriff, Judge of Assize, nor the very Houses of Parliament may not resist the
authority of the King commanding according to Laws. But yet it remains to be
prooved, that they may not resist his violence, when he is bent to subvert
Laws and Liberties, and Religion and all: Or the violence of his followers,
even though doing it by his warrant or in his presence. Also, because he does
so much insist upon the phrase of higher power, let me put him a case. A wicked
Robber that has committed twenty most bloody murders one after another, in
cold blood is led away after legal condemnation by the Sheriff to be put to
death: Suppose a King would come with armed soldiers, and offer to take him
violently and by force out of the hand of Justice. Who resists damnably now
that power which is the Ordinance of God, and to whom the Sword is committed?
The Sheriff and his men that resist the violence, or the Kings followers (or
even himself) that resist the due Execution of Justice? Let him study on it
and give an Answer at his leisure.

3. He proceeds, In those days there was a standing and continual great
Senate, which not long before had the supreme power in the Roman State, and
might challenge more by the fundamentals of that State, then our great Council
(I think) will or can. But now the Emperor being supreme, as S. Peter calls
him, or the higher power, as S. Paul here, there is no power of resistance left
to any that are under him by the Apostle. Thus for the persons that should
resist, all are forbidden. Now consider the cause.

Rep. 1. Doubtless Saint Paul wrote not to the Roman Senate, nor Saint Peter
neither. And if the Doctor will prove it unlawful for them to resist, he must
prove it from the Law of nature, or at least from some ancient Law of the old
Testament, given to the Ancestors of the Roman Senate. Or else show how this
could concern them, who never heard any thing of it. For any thing then ^e
says, it was lawful for the Roman Senate and the Heathen Subjects to resist,
though not for Christians.

2. If he or any for him shall say that it suffices for his cause that it was
forbidden to Christians and accordingly is now.

Rep. 2. If you reply that supposing it not forbidden to Heathens; No more was
it to Christians, before S. Paul (and S. Peter) wrote. And if so, then belike
(as was formerly touched) the Apostles laid a yoke upon the necks of
Christians, worse then all the Jewish ceremonies, which the Gentiles were ever
freed from: For whereas before the Romans might resist their tyrannous
Emperors, now by becoming Christians their hands must be tied to have all
their throats cut, (even though the whole Senate were Christians) at one Neroes
pleasure. He that wished that all Rome had but one neck that he might strike it
off at a blow, had done wisely to have endeavored to have made them all
Christians, and then he and his Guard with him, or his Army might by this
Doctrine have struck off all their heads, or run them all through one after
another as fast as they could deal blows, and so he should have his will in
their destruction, though there must have been a little more pains taken
about it. Surely Christ who came to purchase liberty to his people never meant
to enslave them to tyrants above all others of Mankind. The Doctor must go
prove resistance unlawful from some other grounds of natures law or the
ancient laws of Scripture, or else this Text of S. Paul will appear to have
another interpretation, even that which has been given before in the
explication of the Text, and inference from it.

Thirdly, I will not therefore trouble my self to compare the Authority of the
Roman Senate with our Parliament, much less argue for that power which they
had lost about a 100 Years before S. Paul writ; It suffices he has not
disproved at all their present power of resisting tyranny, when S. Paul wrote,
and that by the same argument I have disproved, that S. Paul forbids Christians
to take any such power to themselves.

4. But he adds [was there ever more cause of resistance then in those days?
Were not the Kings then not only conceived to be inclined so and so, but even
actually were enemies to Religion, had overthrown Laws and liberties?] Rep. If
it had been before demonstratively proved that resisting the power (or higher
power) did properly signify, taking Arms against the Supreme, when he plays
the tyrant: This fourth step were a just illustration, and confirmation of it.
But now he only beggs the Question (whether deceitfully or being himself
deceived by his own strength of fancy against resistance) and builds without a
foundation. For will it prove that S. Paul forbids resisting by Arms a tyrant;
Because Nero was then a tyrant. Unless there were nothing else that could be
cold resisting the higher power, but resisting by Arms? He that should have
wilfully and obstinately refused the just Laws of the Roman State, had resisted
the higher powers in S. Paul's meaning (as the whole context, and all
interpreters show) What is this then to infer a prohibition of resisting
tyranny by Arms? It inferres indeed, or includes principally resistance of
lawful commands by Arms. But how comes tyranny in? because forsooth Nero was
a tyrant. Rep. But his authority according to the Laws of which alone the
Apostle speaks was not tyrannous. The Argument therefore is wholly
inconsequent, and fallacious from legal commands to tyrannous violence. And
that the Apostles context proves abundantly, notwithstanding his pretended
answers of Objections. But hear him.

1. Therefore, If any should from the Apostles reasons that he gives against
resistance in the 3, 4, and 5, verses, For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil, and he is the Minister of God to thee for good.

REPLY. That Rulers so long as they are not a terror to the good, but minister
for our good are not to be resisted. The consideration of those times leaves no
place for such exception, because the powers then which the Apostle forbids to
resist, were nothing so, but subverters of that which was good, just etc.

REPLY. This still labors of the fallacy, that Rulers and Powers signify the
personal commands of the supreme; only once here ere he is aware he names
powers in the plural, which the Apostle forbids to resist. But I say as often,
It only signifies the legal commands of Authority, whether supreme or
subordinate. Secondly, though Nero was a Tyrant, yet were not all his
Magistrates and Officers so; nor he himself in all matters (perhaps not at
all when S. Paul writ this he had his Quinquiennius, and it may possibly fall
within the Quare) unto those which were legal, which were the greater part
that concerned Christians, It was forbidden to make resistance, and the Dr.
has said no word to prove yet, that the prohibition extends further.

2. He makes a Second Objection that some say, that prohibition was temporay
and fit for those times. To which he makes 2 Answers. 1. That this is a new
exc^ption never heard of I think but these times.

REPLY. I have not in my Reading observed any to make such an exception, and
do readily yield to him that so to put of the Apostles prohibition is a
senseless, and presumptuous shift. But I must encounter his second Answer.
Which is*

That the Reasons of the Prohibition (in his sense of resisting Tyranny by
arms) are perpetual, verse 3.4 5.6.

REPLY. I have formerly showed the contrary, and that all the reasons fight
against his sense. But he will prove it.

From that order that good, for which the powers are ordained of God, which
will be of force as long as there is Government, and will be always, reasons
against resistance, because resistance (though it be made against abused powers
(as then they were) does tend to the dissolution of that Order, for which the
power it self is set up by God; by which also the other distinction of theirs
is made void when as they reply they think acutely, That they resist not the
power, but the abuse of the power.

REPL It is granted by him that the state of the Quest. is, when a Prince is
bent to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties. I would then feign know what
order or good will then be in force, when these are subverted? And whether this
Tyrant that attempts to subvert these, intends not to dissolve that Order, for
which his power and himself were set up of God? And how then the Apostles
reasons can possibly reach to forbid resistance to such attempts or practices;
I will instance in four Commandments of the second Table which the Roman
Laws in those times were conservators of as much as any Nations in the world
(except Gods people of Israel) the 5, 6, 7, 8. Com Suppose Nero gathers
together a Company of dissolute young men* and with this guard or band enters
into several houses, encourages those children that were willing to be so
wicked* to abuse Father and mother: from thence they go to the Marketplace,
and kill any they meet, and have quarrel with; then they catch men's Wives and
ravish them before their Husbands faces* and after that rob the rich men's
houses at their pleasure: I demand now, what greater (or equal) dissolution of
that Order, for which the power is set up of God can be imagined? Or how the
not resisting such a Tyrant can with common sense be inferred from those
sentences, Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil, and he is the
minister of God to thee for good? What is this, but to call good evil, and
evil good? Which the woe against which our Doctor would scarre men from
resisting tyrranny in his title Page: resistance of such an one then is so
far from dissolving of order, as there is no means under heaven to keep
order from being dissolved in such case, but resistance.

Secondly, whereby it will appear also how void his confidence is, that by his
former words he has made void the distinction between the power and the abuse
of the power himself has granted (and cannot in conscience deny) that though
the Prince is to be actively obeyed when he commands lawful things; yet not
when he commands against the Laws of GOD, or even the established Laws of the
Land: he then distinguishes acutely he thinks, between the power and the
abuse of the power. Why is it not as lawful for us in the second verse so to
distinguish upon (...) as well as for him in the first verse upon (...)? Or if
it be not, he must give us a better reason then he has yet. And till then I
again make bold to tell him that all the Apostles Argument, v. 3, 4* 5, 6, 7.
justifies our distinction, and refuse his interpretation.

Another Objection he makes against hmselfe, is, That some say the Emperors
then were absolute Monarks and therefore not to be resisted; he answers. They
did indeed rule absolutely and arbitrarily, which should have according to the
principles of those days been a stronger motive to resist. But how did they
make themselves of Subjects such absolute Monarks, was it not by force and
change of Government? And was not the right of the Senate and people good
against them with as much, or more reason, then the right of the people of this
Land is against the succession of this Crown, descending by three Conquests?

REPL. 1. This Objection is needless, and so shall be none of mine. Also it is
a nicety to aver, and very hard to prove that the Emperors were (or any
other Princes are) absolute Monarks, under whom there is a government by
written Laws, as among the Romans were the 12. Tables, and many other Laws.
But I add, that no Prince can be an absolute Monarch to have power over men's
lives at his pleasure (or over the chastity of any at all) He can have no power
but according to the Ordinance of God. Now it is certain God never ordaines
any such Arbitrary, or injurious power. Therefore no Monarch has any such de
jure. As for that, any has de facto, as he speaks of the Emperors ruling
absolutely or arbitrarily. If they did so (as they often did) for evil, I have
formerly showed, and he has not refelled it, that they might have been
resisted 2. What he speaks of their becomeing Monarchs touches not our case at
all. For however he insinuates, Who ever has soberly written for defense and
resistance against Tyrranny does not plead any right in the people of this Land
against the succession of this Crown: But though the King and his rightful
succcessions ought still to hold the Crown; This forbids not a necessary
defense against their unjust violences when ever they shall use them. 3. Yet
withal I add, that though so long as there was any in the Roman State who had
not by Oath or the like expressed their consent to the usurpation of the Roman
Emperors, they were free to have thrust them out again, or rather bound to
have done it, and restore the Senate to their lost authority: yet when any have
with the generality yielded to the change of an Aristocracy (wherein no man
has personal right of succession) into a Monarchy; they* and specially the
posterity of those that have so yielded, are from thenceforth for ever bound to
that government, according to just and equal Laws already in being or to be
made hereafter, even by the Monarke alone, if they have trusted him with it
alone; But never can they lose their right (no, not by their own consent) of
just defense of Chastities, or of their lives, until they forfeit them by
their misbehaviour against some just Laws or other. 4. As therefore the Doctor
disclaimes the pleading for an arbitrary power) (such as Conquerours use) in
this crown, so if he can plead no better against resisting our Kings then he
has in the case of the Roman Emperors he will merit but small reward for his
pains. But for that, viderit ipse.

5. I come to his last objection, That Christian Religion was then enacted
against by Law; but the Religion contended, is established by Law. He answers
two things.

First, Is the Religion established denied to any that now fight for it? etc.

REPL. This with the rest belongs to matter of fact in the third Proposition,
and seventh Proposition. Thither, I refer it that I may not say over
needlessly the same things, or say but a little here or that which he will
needs make necessary to say a great deal more then I desire.

Secondly, the prohibition (says he) not only concerns Christians, but all
the people under those Emperors; and not only Religion was persecuted, but
liberties also lost the people and Senate were enslaved by edicts* and Laws,
then enforced upon them and they (according to the principles of these days)
might resist notwithstanding the Apostles prohibition, and the Laws then forced
upon them, or else the State, as they usually say had not means to provide for
its safety. Thus one fancy of theirs thwarts another because both are
groundless

REPL. 1. Whether the Christian Religion being condemned by law then, did deny
them resistance in its self, I shall perhaps give him account in another
place. Mean time he cannot deny but the difference is very great between a
Right to defend that which the Law defends, and that which the Law punishes.

Secondly, I have proved that the prohibition of resisting Tyranny by arms,
did not concern the Heathen Romans (and therefore not the Christians neither.)

Thirdly, what ever liberties were lost, and new Laws enforced, yet so long
and so far as the Emperors ruled by the Laws, the people and Senate were in
no such slavery, that they needed resist to save the State. But when they used
lawless violences according to their lusts, neither the Laws nor the Apostle
prohibited a defensive resistance. So that although Christians might not defend
their Religion against Law, yet he has brought nothing to show, they may not
defend it, when the Law has established it.

But of the means of safety in state, he will speak more anon, and so will I.
And now I shall oppose his conclusion wi^h a little change of his words.
Hitherto of Scripture, which how strong so ever it seems against resisting
tyranny by Arms, yet says nothing at all to prohibit it, rather the Reasons
forbidding resistance of just power legally administered, favor this resistance
of Tyranny as has bin showed. By which conscience will clearly see, that
according to the examples of David, and Elisha, and the rest that have been
justified; it has clear warrant for such resistance of Tyranny,
notwithstanding all the Dr. has alleged to the contrary. Now let us see what
Reason can enforce.

SECT. III.
I Have been so large in refuting his strength from Scripture, that I need not
spend a like proportion upon the rest; and so shall I forbear such a
Syllabicall REPLY, as I have made to his former SECTION. I shall here only
touch Material Passages, the rather, becouse of other pains upon the
following SECTIONS. Our Dr. examines the Fundamentalls of this Government as
he says, though he after urge that the Fundamentalls talked of are asserted
common to all Governments, which is true of that which this ^ECTION maintains,
Power being Originally from the people at the first. Upon this he descants,
and meddles not with any particular fundamentalls of our State (which indeed is
a more proper business for Lawyers and Statists then Divines) except the
peoples right is now in the two Houses of Parliament, the representative body
of the People. I will therefore keep only to what he says, and not meddle much
with our State in Special. For if the power of R^sistance belong to all
States, in time of need, by the common Fundamentalls of all States it will be
reason enough to prove it so in ours. And whereas he says (that the
Fundamentalls must have a correspondencie with the established Laws,) I grant
it in a right Sense, that is, that the Laws must flow from those Principles,
which are transcendents to all particular Laws, but not if he mean that they
must be ever limited by particular Laws. In Nature the safety of the Universe
is the Fundamental of the Harmony of the Elements, and the power and
inclination of each Creature toward its preservation. Yet this Fundamental is
not limited by the particular inclinations of Creatures, which as himself told
us above, give way to the safety of the Universe. To apply this in a word, the
safety of the whole is the undoubted genera^ Fundamental of all States; and
so of the particular Laws toward this, and among them of the Kings being
entrusted with the Militia. But it is not limited by this particula^ L^w: which
in case of necessity, when the Prince cannot, or will not discharge ^is T^ust
for the safety of the whole, must in Reason needs give way to the Fundamental,
the safety of the Whole; and so ( quo ad hoc for so much and so long, till
this necessity ceases) falls into other hand, those that are next entrusted: or
rather then fail to the whole community it self.

But to come to the fundamental by him instanced in, power originally in and
from the People, and this to be reassumed, when the King entrusted will not
discharge his Trust. Concerning which let it be rememb^ed, that there seems to
lie a ca^umniating Fallacy in two of these ph^ases. First in tha^ of not
discharging the Trust, which here sounds, as if it might be but some ordinary
Omissi^n of C^re; whereas the State of the Q^est^ by himself laid, is such a
not discharging the Trust, as proceeds from his being bent (of himself) or
seduced (by others, which is all one for the danger, and so necessity of using
what power may be for resistance) to subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties. In
this case only, Power of resistance is here pleaded for, not in others.

And indeed the very phrase, of Power of Resistance observed, can bear no
other Construction. For it Imports a violence offered, a danger presented,
which needs to be resisted, not a slight or ordinary failing to discharge a
Trust.

But his phrase of re-assuming the power, seems more to sound a taking away
all Power henceforth from the Prince; which the Parliament (nor those that have
rationally pleaded their Cause) never mention, but with Protestation to detest
the thought. And I for my part, wholly disclaim the pleading for any such
reassuming of Power by the People or Parliament. I only maintain a Right to
use so much of it and so long, as is of necessity of the safety of the whole.
Of which now let us argue, whether this Government of ours, cannot (as the
Doctor says) be built upon this fundamental, but confusion and Anarchy be
raised?

He makes his discourse upon two particulars, as it must be, first of the
Original of power. Secondly, of the Power of reassuming it. In the first I
will not tie my self to the phrases of the Observatour, or any else; but
examine the Dr^. Assertion and proofs, by what Scripture and religious Reason
declares above it.

To clear which I will propound a brief Schema of the maine things
considerarable in Government, which in the prosecution of the discourse, I
shall make use of more then once. I say that, in Government four things are
considerable.

1. The Nature, Authority of Commanding to do ^orbeare
by making Laws, calling for obedience to them. Constraint to obedience by
punishment, Verbal. Real.

2. The end Chief GODS Glory, Good of the Whole Society.
Secondary, special Comfort of the Governors,
3. The Efficient. Supreme, GOD. Subordinate Man. 1. By Nature, Parents 2. By
Accident in which is considerable. 1. The moving Cause, the will or consent of
the Parties be Governed which is either Altogether free, and by Ch^ise partly,
forced, by Occasion o^ Violence.
2. The persons Governing. 1. In a Family, Husband, Mr. Mrs.
2. In a State, one Monarch Many in Aristocracy of Chief Men. Democracy of
people. Sovereignty, Subordinately, Officers





4. The Extent Absolute, Limited,
For Commands, Constraints,
the Kind Degree

He that has not all these in his Eye, (I mean not in this Form or Phrase,
but in sense, shall never discern clearly, nor discourse rationally of this
subject of government, our Dr. though he once occasionally mention the Peoples
good, as an End upon which Rulers ought to attend, Yet he speaks so little o^
it, as it had need be a little more rememembred then it is, and Gods glory
also which is the chiefest End of all. But indeed the thought and mention of
those Ends much, would be too cross to his purpose: and therefore he is wise
in his Generation (as I may say, if without offense) to forbear it. Therefore
on the other side. I must make bold to tell him, that though the physical end
of things may be silenced or slighted in a Discourse or Definition, Ye^ in
mo^all things (such as Governm^n^) the End, at least the chief End, is a
necessary ingredient of both, D^finition and discourse, and an Essential part
of it; if a man will consider it, as he ought practically. Let me therefore
add i^ to his Definition o^ Description of Power or Government, and then it
will r^^ t^^s. It is a sufficiency of authority for Command and Coerci^n in the
Governing of a People, for Gods glory, and the good of the Society. And all the
lawful Power has this Effect in part, even H^athen, Authority redou^^s to
Gods Glory as the conservatour o^ Mankind; and effects also, the Civil good of
the Commonwealth.

Now the Dr. says, this power it self (not naming the end) is to be
distinguished from the designing of the person to bear that Power, and the
qualification of that power; this I grant him, and accepting his grant of the
two latter being from men, and after their consent, ratified by Gods permissive
Approbation: I defi^^ a little to examine, how far that may be granted him
which he earnestly contends for, that the Power it self is from God; and what
may be inferred from thence for him or us.

His meaning is, that All Men are (as he says) bound to set up and live under
Government. This being the Ordi^ance and Appointment of God unto men as they
are Reasonable Creatures. If he mean this of Parentall Government, That is set
up to their hands, by God in Nature, as long as the Parents and Children live
together; and bind the Children to live with their Parents and under them, till
either necessity drive them away, or their Parents dismiss them. But ^f he
mean this, of Political Government, of a People, of many Families, as it is
p^a^^e he does (and must if he will speak ad rem) then I cannot absolutely
grant it him, neither will his text or Reasons prove it.

My Reasons of Denial are first, that all Mankind, whose Parents are dead, and
were not by them while they lived, Subjected to a Government are naturally
free; and so not bound to part with that free some (as even a Monarch does part
with much freedom when he takes the Rule) unl^sse they see a necessity, or at
least a great advantage, for Gods Honor, and their own and others Good: which
is not always to be found in setting up a politic Government.

2. Wherein I am confirmed, by the consideration of the three great Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who while they lived in Canaan, were not within any
government, but only Domestical, and neither did rule, nor were ruled by the
Inhabitants of Canaan, nor joined with them in a Common government. Though
Abraham's Family was very numerous for a Family, yet it would be hard to call
him a Monarch, much less Isaac; and Jacob less, who when he went down into
Egypt, does not seem to have had any Servants, but only Sons, and his and
their Wives and Children.

3. And to this may be added, that by all Authors, it seems to be late, before
any settled government, (beyond parentall;) any of diverse Families in
continuation, came to be in the World.

4. When the World was more empty as in Abraham's time, a godly man, as he,
having a Competent Family, might subsist without others, joining in a
government with him; and he could not do them any remarkable good, or gain
glory to GOD by it, they being Pagans. So that it is not (I say) absolutely
true, that men are bound universally, as by an Ordinance from GOD, to set up,
live under government in the Drs. sense. Marriage is GODS Institution and
Ordinance, and more originally then the Government political, and necessary
for increase, yet are not all of mankind bound to marry, but for their own
good and comfort, and so of others, and advancing Gods Glory in both. So it is
with Power, or Government. Political, though new when the world is peopled; As
there is less Necessity of Marriage, then when the World was thinner, (though
still a Necessity to many, even to most.) So is there more Necessity of being
within Government to secure ones self and others from wrong, and do one self
and others good and glorify GOD in all. And so far I grant it Gods ordinance
to all.

But one thing more I must remember him, and the readers of. Namely that this
Power, will not be proved absolutely to extend, to the making of any Humane
Laws, but only to see to the Observation of the Laws of Nature, and of God
by His word and special Revelation both of the first, and second Table; and to
no other power of coercion, then what the Light of Nature will Argue
Necessary, for the Observation of those Laws of Nature. And that all further
power, belongs to the third particular, which he calls the qualification of the
Power, and depends upon man's Consent (so it be not against Gods Law and Word,)
which I call the extent of the Power. Which if it be true, it shall be seen
anon, what Consequence may be drawn from it to the disadvantage of the
Doctors purpose.

And now let us view the Doctors proofs, that Power it self is an Ordinance of
God, binding all Mankind, to set up and live under government. Romans 13.1. The
Powers are of God, and the Ordinance of God, v. 2.

REPL. The Doctor seems to have an excellent faculty, to take so much only of
a Text, as seems to serve his turn, and leave out the rest, which at least
might seem to be against him: the words v. 1. are, There is no Powers but of
GOD, The powers that be, are ordained of God. This may be true, when Powers
are, and not that there must be powers every where, as in the similitude
before, there is no Marriage but of GOD, the Marriages that be are ordained of
GOD. As for Saint Peter's Ordinance of Man, or it is in the Original, Humane
Creation, which is more Emphaticall, granting as the Dr. does, that the
qualification, and Person is from Man's Creation, I will not urge more from ^he
Text against him.

2. He urges ver. 4 He is the Minister of God, this yet proves not a necessity
in all of setting up Government. But only when it is set up to acknowledge the
Governor Gods Vicegerent. So (as before) the Husband is GODS Vicegerent: Yet
a Woman not absolutely bound to be under a Husband. The truth is, Government
and Power is from GOD originally in these respects, no further. First he has
laid a general charge upon Mankind, to advance his Glory, their own and
others good (whom thus are bound to love as themselves) by all means not by
him forbidden. Secondly, in the parentall Authors, (or proparentall, if the
Parents dye in their Childrens Infancy) he has showed them how much Government
may conduce to this. Thirdly he declares by instinct in Nature, that as
Parentall Authority is deputed by him, so that he affords a deputation to other
Governments when once set up. Fourthly, showing all men (now a days and long
since) in fully inhabited places of the world, not only a profit, but even a
necessity of being within Government (at least for his glory, in the Civil
good of societies) Upon these grounds we may say he ordaines and commands all
to be within one Government or other; but not absolutely, nor without relation
to this end.

But thirdly, he alleadges. By me Kings reign, and I have said ye are Gods,
and the word of God came to them, Joh. 10. That word, says he, is the issuing
out of the Commission for the setting up a Government over and among the People.

REPL. But none of all this will amount to his Conclusion; 1. Kings reign by
God, that is they are his Deputies. Men could not give them any Authority over
themselves unless God owned it and by his instinct had prompted them to it.
Secondly, he says, Ye are Gods; but this an owning the designation of the
Person, as well as the Power. This place either proves more then the Doctor
urges it for, or less. Thirdly, as for his Dixi, the Doctor mistakes most of
all For it relates plainly to his owning the Persons, (whom yet he tells. They
shall are like Men: but the Power dies not) and is rather a granting a
particular Patent or Commission to the Person chosen or succeeding, then a
Commission (or Original Writ) to set up a Government.

His Reason is no more Universally True, then his Texts pertinent. God (he
says) Governs all Creatures, Reasonable, as well as Unreasonable; the lower
world by the Heaven, and the Reasonable Creatures Men, by others too set up in
his stead, etc.

Repl. But what if the Edge of this Reason be Turned against himself? For by
whom according to the Dr. are Kings and Monarks Governed? In an Aristocracy,
each of the Governors is Governed by all the rest of his fellows, and so in a
Democracy, but in a Monarchy, one Governs all, and he himself is Governed by
none. Either then al mankind are not bound to be under Government (and then all
his Texts and this Reason are alleged in vain) or else Kings and Monarks are
also under some Government, at least of the Representative Body of they people
(according to what was before alleged from our Lawyers, Rex non habet
Superiorem praeter Legem and Curiam Comitum and Baro^um, etc.) Let him take his
choice. Nor can he evade this with saying the Text Speaks of Monarks, and they
are called GODS, and so none above them But 1. I appeal to all Interpreters,
whether the Psalmist intend it not (and so Christ after him) of all sorts of
Judges, and so Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not Curse the GODS, nor speak evil of
the Ruler of the People. Yet this S. Paul acknowledges extended even to the
High Priest the Ecclesiastical Goververnour. 2. Is not the Text at least
meant, of all the Governors in a Democracy, and in Aristocracy, that they are
called GODS, yet each has the rest above him 3. However still his Reason is
void, for all Reasonable Creatures are not governed by others in GODS stead;
for by his saying, Monarks are not; and yet they often times need to be governed
so far as not to be suffered to undo all by their Governing or else this
Question had never bin in the world, which our hearts bleed to be forced to
dispute, concerning the power of resisting Monarks.

If now the Dr. will say that we afford GOD a poor part in setting up of power
for the governing of Men, he had need seek better proof or else he will hardly
persuade any more to a considerate Reader. But perhaps he will say I have
yielded him enough, (and more then others have done) that will be seen by the
use he can make of his assertion. But in the mean time, I have 2 or 3
Considerations to propound, from his Texts and Reason, and my own grants and
assertions.

1. Each one of his Texts speaks of more then the Supreme Powers, Romans 13.9.
Plainly Plural, more then once, and takes in all Ranks, as has been proved.
Saint Peter names Governors to be submitted to for the LORDS sake, as well as
the Supreme and I should think, Sent by him, is by the LORD rather then by
the Supreme, as I shall show by the Reason by and by; and St. Paul has said
the powers that he (even the Governors) are ordained of GOD. And Prove. 8. after
the words, By me Kings Reign, follows, And Princes Decree justice, By me
Princes Rule, and Nobles even all the Judges of the Earth. This is plain,
as well for other Governors as Supreme, being the Ordinance of God. And as for
Psalm. 82. and Ioh. 10. I have spoken before. I wonder then that the Dr. in a
Treatise of Conscience, and having that word so often in his Discourse makes no
conscience of confining these places (as in effect he does continually) merely
to Supreme power; It was for his turn indeed, as will appear more anon But
that will hardly satisfy a Conscience, let him think on it.

But I must not forget his reason now serving me once more against him. God
governes all men by others in his stead; now that is done by subordinate
Governors, as well as supreme (and so the inferior and unreasonable
creatures by diverse subordinations) and the subordinate do sometimes, even ten
more then then the supreme, let him be never so good; if they be bad. the
government and order will be disturbed and perverted, in a large Dominion,
because his eye and hand can not be but in one place at once, and all may be
and will be naught, if those under Governors be naught, whiles he his absent.

But if they be good, they keep things for the general tolerably well, how
bad soever he is. For his badnesse then, (as his goodness before) will not
reach to all places, and scarcely (though badnesse in a corrupted world will
reach further then goodness) much further then where he is present. Kingdoms
then are governed under God, by other Powers as well as by the preame* and they
no less sent by him then the supreme; I shall make an inference or two from
this afterward.

Secondly* mean time I add my second consideration. That in all the
forementioned Texts the spirit of God with the mention of Governors authorized
and ordained by him, inculcates their duty to him, and their obligation to
Justice, etc. and that not only when he speaks to them, Psalm. 82. and of
them at large, Prove. 8. But even when he speaks to inferiors to be subject to
them, and especially when he forbids resistance, Romans 13. And for this cause
they are all to be prayed for, 1. Tim. 2, 2. That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Which words, if they may not be
taken, as intending why God has set any in Authority; yet the thing is
undoubtedly true, he never by way of ordinance gave any Authority for any
other End.

Those Governors then whether supreme or other, that under pretense of their
Authority from Gods Ordinance, disturb the quiet and peaceable life* which the
inferiors should lead in all godliness and honesty (as to be sure they do,
that are bent or seduced to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties) are far
from being Gods Ordinance in so doing; and therefore however their power it
self, a sufficiency of Authority for command and coercion in governing the
People, be from God; yet their Tyranny is not at all from him* by way of
Ordinance or Approbation, and so they that resist it even with Arms; Resist
not the Ordinance of God, but resist the violation of his Ordinance, and so do
nothing unlawful, though it be a resisting of the supreme person.

Thirdly, let it be remembered that St. Peter in the place forementioned,
speaking of Governors, suppose if meant as the Doctor would* sent by the
supreme, adds ( for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well.) If then the supreme send Governors to erect or practice a
Tyranny (to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties (whether under the name of
Justices of Oye^ and Terminer, Sheriffs, Commissioners of Array, or the like)
which is to the Punishment rather of those that do well, and the praise of
Evil doers; St. Peter says not a word, to bid be subject to them, either
actively, or so much as passively. Nor any where else in Scripture, I dare be
bold to say it, does the Spirit of God bid be subject to Princes or politic
Governors, though tyrannous, or perverters of Religion, and Justice. I mean
not when it speaks of them as such.

And till then though they have power from God, which is not to be rejected;
yet their Tyranny being not from him, but against him, may, and the Doctor has
not been able (nor will never be) to prove to the contrary.

SECT. IV.
IN this Section the Doctor undertakes to treat of the Forfeiture of the Power*
and so of the Re-assuming of it by the Parliament or People, for the Kings not
discharging his trust. And denies this Forfeiture, and this power of Reassuming
that Power. But this (he says) they that plead for it offer to prove by two or
three things laid together. First, that the power is derived from the People by
way of Election. Secondly, that there is a Covenant between the King and the
People. Thirdly, that it is necessary for a State have a means within it self
to preserve it self. Against all those the Dr. argues and I follow him. Only
remembering him that by Forfeiture is not understood Forfeiture of all Kingly
Authority; nor by Reassuming (as I said before) a taking of the whole power
from him to themselves, but only for the particular Case in hazard, and for
the present necessity.

And now to begin with what he first mentions the Derivation of power; I must
tell him that he forges what he before complained of in others; that they
confounded the power it self with the person and the Qualification* I am sure
he does so here, if ever man did. He before granted the Person and
Qualification from men and then they approved of God; and more then that, no
man pleads to be derived nor more to be forfeited, plead not for so much, nor
he Pa^liament neither. But only the Qualification for he particular Case of
danger, and till that danger may be suffici^ntly secured.

Yet here now at first, to oppose the Forfeiture (but of this particular which
is only in question now before us) he denies the power to be from the People,
and appeals to what he has cleared, which is only (by his own saying* but
not altogether as has been showed) that the Power it self is from God. But
for all that, if no more can be said against the persons forfeiting his
reigning Power, and specially in the Qualifications of it, even for ever, it
may undoubtedly be forfeited and so reassumed all of it: which is more then I
say.

Secondly, but he will prove, that though the People have this Power absolutely
(which himself has more then once granted, of the Designation of the Person
and Qualification) yet could they not have right to take it away.

REPL. The King will have no cause to thank him for his undertaking, as well
because he does it not with any great strength; as also because he has hereby
provoked men to dispute even this Case; which no way needed, since the
Parliament never pretended to this Right in general, but rather disclaimed it.

First, he says* [Many things which are altogether in our disposing before we
part with them, are not afterward in our power to recall.]

REPL. True; but some things are, and that both, if conditions be not observed,
and even at our own pleasure.

A King makes some Officers for term of life; others, quamdin se been
gesserint; others, a^^ ante been placite. To the latter he may send a Writ of
Ease at his pleasure; and every day its in his power to recall their Authority.
To the second their offices are sure without power of recalling till they are
legally convicted of misbehaviour. To the third, as long as they live, their
Authority is firm, and no power of recalling it wholly. Yet even such may be
hindered from some Administrations, by Accusations by and apparency of Crimes,
making it unfit for them to be trusted in the particular.

We imagine not the People to have power to recall that Regal Authority at
their pleasure: we argue not that they have power to recall it wholly, upon any
Case of Mal-administration. All that we plead for is power to administer a part
of it upon necessity, which he will not administer for good, but rather for
evil. And there are not many things that were altogether ours, and in our
disposing before we part with them* but are still so far ours, as to use them
again in our necessity for that turn at least, though there are some.

Secondly But he will prove this to be one of those that are not after in our
power to recall [especially, says he, such; in which there redounds to God an
interest by the Donation, as in things devoted, though after they come to be
abused.]

REPL. 1. Grant this true, in referrence to the Power of recalling them wholly,
(which yet is not universally true as will appear straight) yet may there be
power enough to administer so much as is of necessity.

A Wife is tied to her Husband by the Covenant of God. (so called Prove. 2.) by
the Ordinance of God, more ancient, and no less strong then that of Politic
Government. She cannot recall wholly her Husbands Authority over her, though
she was once altogether at her disposing* to choose or another or none to be
her head. All the goods of the Family are his in Law, and not here but by his
leave and order: Yet for her necessity, she may by the Law of God and
conscience administer so much of the goods as is fit, and secure her Person
from his violence by absence (though that ordinarily be against the Law of
Marriage, and the end of it,) or any other means of nccessary defense.

But secondly, it is not altogether true, that there is no power or recalling
any thing devoted to God. Hezekiah took off the gold from the Doors of the
Temple and the Pillars which he had overlaid, and all the silver in the house
of the Lord, to pay the King of Assyria his demanded Ransom, 2. Kings 18.14,
15, 16.

If the Doctor will not own this Act of Hezekiah; I am sure he will that of
David, taking the hallowed Bread, which was not for any, by Gods Law to eat,
but only the Priests. This was devoted to God, (and not so much as abused) and
by him assigned to a special use: yet from that diverted, and lawfully without
question.

And now I appeal to all Consciences, Whether the necessity of saving a
Kingdom from the subversion of Religion, Laws and Liberties, be not greater
then David's necessity was? And if [ I will have mercy and not sacrifice] did
justify David's act, will it not theirs, who in a necessity use or administer
the power of the Militia or Arms, which ordinarily is only to be admieistred
by the King? Neither will Abimelech the Priests consenting to David alter the
Case: for it was devoted to God, and but in necessity he might not have
consented, nor David accepted. Necessity then recalled that particular Bread,
through devoted. So necessity may recall this parcel of power in question.

Thus the Doctors ground fails him for our Case; yet 3. see what he adds, [so
although it were as they would have it that they give the power, and God
approves (himself often has said, and cannot deny, but they give the Person his
power and if they take it from his person, yet they may leave it to his Heir
but we argue not for so much) yet because the Lords hand and his oil also is
upon the Person elected to the Crown, and then he is the Lords Anointed, and
the Minister of God, those hands of the People which were used in lifting him
up to the Crown, may not again be lift up against him, either to take the
Crown from his head, or the Sword out of his hand; this true informed
Conscience will not dare to do.

REPL. 1. Is not Gods hand upon a Judge? Is not he the Minister of God? Is not
a King bound to God and to his People to appoint Judges, who may less be
spared in their Power, then the Monarch himself (for what is his Power when an
Infant? Is not the Kingdom then administered Aristocratically? But there must
always be Judges and inferior officers in a large Dominion, or all government
is lost.)

Will the Doctor say that the hands that have lift up the Judge or Officer to
his seat (that is the Kings hands) may not be lift up against him to pull him
down and pull off his Robes, or take the Sword out of his hand? The interest
that God has in him, shall it preserve him in his Office, in case especially
of Mal-Administration? But shall it (or has it done) even so long as no
offense is proved against him? The Parliament has indeed desired it for Judges
and great Officers; but has it been granted? Or what means the putting out of
so many old Justices of Peace lately, without any Crime alleged against them
at all; of which more Countries then one have at the Assizes complained as a
great grievance?

What will the Doctor say to this? Yet they were Gods Ministers and had the
Sword committed to them. If he say the King was their Superior, and so might
take their Authority away, but the people is not Superior to the King.

REPLY. This satisfies not, because notwithstanding, here is a Person, in whom
GOD has an interest, and who is his Minister, deprived of his Authority: not
only when he abuses it, but merely at pleasure. The Drs. Reason then has no
strength in it thus faare, or this done to inferior Magistrates is not lawful.

2. But secondly, what strength is in his Argument, lies in the Kings being
GODS anointed, and therefore the Crown may not be taken from his Head by Men,
this I have granted him before, and am so far from recalling or disputing
against, that I will add this word of confirmation to it. Supposing we speak
of such a Prince or Monarch, (call him King or Emperor, or Duke, or what you
will) that is not deposeable by the express Laws of that Commonwealth, as
the Duke of Brabant was, and the Duke of Venice is, (for such as those Dukes
were not properly supreme, nor GODS immediate Vicegerents, as Saul, and David,
and the like) I say then, that though in case of Mal-Administration, an
inferior Magistrate may be Lawful and most justly, and necessarily deposed by
the Kings Authority; I will not say the like so long as they carry themselves
well, and are not merely Annual Officers, who also are glad usually when
their year is out, because their Office is a burden and charge) yet a
Supreme may not by the people, because he is GODS immediate Vicegerent, and
so specially owned by Him, and have none upon Earth, unto whom GOD by any
expression in his Word, has given Authority over them, to take their Crowns
from their Heads. I say again, as a Wife cannot take away her Husbands
Authority, because she is in no sense above him. So unless the Law of that
State, name a Superior to him that is in Tittle, the Prince to take his Crown
from him, in such a case he cannot be deposed by the Law of GOD, which appoints
no persons to do such a thing, to illustrate which, Let me add that in those
times, when GOD allowed by the Judicial Law, a Man to put away his Wife, It
did not allow a Woman to put away, or forsake her Husband, though I know about
our Saviors Time Josephus relates of Women having gotten that, among the
Jews, at least some of them, as he instances in Salome sister to Herod the
Great, who put away her Husband. But GOD allowed it not. And so that may be
lawful for a Prince who is Superior to do to an Inferior Magistrate, which
is not lawful for the people to do to the Prince who is Supreme, no not in a
like case of Mal-Administration. I could instance in sundry other Prerogatives,
in GODS Word to Superiors, which hold not (no not in like cases) to
Inferiors, but it needs not with the Parliament, as has been often said.

2. But whereas the Dr. adds [ Nor to take the Sword out of his hand] This is
inconsequent diverse ways. First, himself in the former SECTION, in the case
of Elisha, granted a private man, might resist the Kings Messenger, and even
hold the Kings own hands, sure he may (he does that while equivalently) take
the Sword out of his hand. Secondly, the people took it out of Saul's hand when
he would have put Jonathan illegally to death. Thirdly. If he would kill
himself, it may be taken out of his hand. 4. Since out of all question GOD
never put it into his hands, to kill the Innocent, nor much less to subvert
Religion Laws, and Liberties, he being GODS anointed and GODS Minister for
good, etc. hinders not the taking the Sword so long out of his hand, till it
has been sufficiently employed, to punish those Malefactors and delinquents
which he should, but will not strike with it, or rather will defend and employ,
S. Yet I say further, to do that which the Parliament has done (supposing the
necessity, of which hereafter,) is not to take the Sword out of his hand
himself grants (as was noted before in his Answer to the 19. Propositions)
that the two Houses have a legal power to punish, even such as do violence
being his followers or Favorites, though countenanced with some surr^ptiously
gotten Command from the King: and moreover, that they have power more than
sufficient to prevent and restrain Tyranny. Their settling the M^litia in safe
hands, and the Navy* and securing Hull is by them declared to be for no other
end, nor their raising an Army since. If then those that they would punish be
Delinquents, and if in them whom the King trusts there be (though not at all
in the King) an intention to bring in a Tyranny, even with Arms, and to
subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties (which is the state of the present
Question) then by the Kings own grants, as aforesaid, they may Legally and
Lawfully take the Sword into their hands; and do not take it out of Kings, but
his wicked Followers. 6. But because the Dr. closes his Assertion, with, saying
This will not a a true informed Conscience dare to do.

REPLY. I will be bold to try, whether Conscience many not say, It dares do no
other then than this latter; (so far to take the Sword into their hands,)
whether even his Tower of Battery. Romans 13.21. not by what has been said
formerly, and even now so won from him, as it is become ours to beat down his
Principle in this first Question, to the very dust.

Secondly, I say the Parliament is a Power ordained of God, it is the Minister
of God, It is to be a Terror to evil Works, It is to be a Revenger to
execute Wrath on them that do evil, It is to watch continually (as GODS
Minister) in th^s very thing, and so for the praise of them that do well (and
so the secu^i^g of Religion, Laws, and Liberties) it is not to bear the Sword
in vain. And a sword it has, by the Kings own sentence to the purposes
aforesa^d And this Parliament (what ever other might be) is not deposeable
(dissoluble) but by themselves. The Sword cannot be Legally taken from them
till they give it up. It remains then that they are bound in Conscience to
GOD, and to the People, and King too, that have entrusted them with this Power
to use it to these ends, to punish Delinquents and tempters (though under
Color of surreptiously gotten Commands from the King) to subvert Religion,
Laws and Liberties; and to prevent Tyranny, and preserve themselves, and
Religion, Laws and Liberties. They may not only Lawfully do this, upon these
Premises and suppositions, but they are by all Obligations to GOD and Man
necessitated to do so, and even to take away the wicked from before the King,
that so his Throne may be established in Righteousness. This is clearly the^
the Parliaments not only Power, but duty. I^ they m^stake in the present case
(of which anon) yet the general case stands good, they may and ought to do
so, to take Arms when such a case comes.

The Dr. has somewhat more to say against the Peoples power, applicable to our
Kingdom. Let us hear it also. [How shall Conscience be satisfied, concerning
the Peoples power, derived from their Election, when our Kings are such by
Inheritance, and claim not by Election, and the Crown has been often settled by
Conquest.]

REPLY. Neither is Conquest any thing of it self to power, or Lawful
Authority, of which only we argue; but only as it obtaines consent by
agreement, which is all one in Sense, and Effect with Election. Only Election
sounds more Freedom of will, Conquest Imports a Force occasioning that will.
But it is evident in Reason, that he that is free (as all men are by Nature,
(as was said before) except their bond to Parents) becomes not subject, de
jure, till his Consent, Agreement, or Election makes him so, and to no more
then his Consent reaches, explicitly or implicitly: and so for many men, they
can no other way be subject to one, to a Prince or Monarch, but by their
Agreement, whether for fear of his Force, or hopes of his virtue, he is not
their King or Lord, till he be made so by their Consent, I mean at first, and
Originally. But what need I stand to prov^ this largely, when our Dr. has
confessed it (in sense) before, in saying the designing the person and
Qualification of the Power is from Men, Man's invitation what is this? put man's
choice Agreement, Consent together. And if there be 100. Conquests, the
Conqueror has not the qualification of his power one whit enlarged, by Right,
until the People have consented and yielded up their former Rights, and when
they have, then his Right is settled accordingly, and to his s^ccessours, if so
consented to, else not; and to h^s ^e^res, if consented to, else not; and to
Heirs male only, as in France, or Fema^e also as in England according to the
consent. Or if the Conqueror to obtain the Peoples (...) his posterity, will
offer to have le^t power then his Predecessor bed, ^e^ upon such cons^^t, the
q^alification of his power is lessened for ever after to him and his. Conquest
th^n first or last, one or many, are no more to right o^ power, then an
occasion or Motive to consent; consent Choice Agreement are all in all.
Secondly, as for Inheritance, it is nothing but a succession of consent. Indeed
posterity are bound to the consent of their Parents for the Person, Family,
qualification, but to no more. In all other Cases and respects they are as
free, as their Parents at first were. A Prince then only inherites, what was
given the first of the Nation, or others since by consent of the people; and by
written Law or custom, he must claim any power he will exercise; or else he
cannot plead any right title to it. And his qualification of power admits of
increase or decrease, as he and the People agree and consent. His power is
altogether derived by Election and consent, first and last whence I will
infer no more, but as before, that therefore in case of necessity, the people
may use so much of it as may suffice to save themselves from Ruin; and that
may be inferred from it, by what went before. As for his Repetition of Romans 13.
and the Roman Emperors being Monarchs absolute, I need say nothing to now, I
have said enough before.

After this he comes to the Covenant, and Oath, which the Prince takes to
confirm what he promised, which he denies to make the Kings Admitttance to the
Kingdom altogether conditional, as is the merely Elective Kingdoms of
Polonia, Swethland etc. and that it is nothing to allow resistance, unless in
the Covenant could be showed, that in case he will not discharge the trust, it
shall be Lawful for the States to resist,

REPLY. The Oath is only urged, to show that the Kings Conscience is bound
more firmly then what he is sworn to, and as a Testification of the C^venant:
The matt^r sworn to, is the maine; nor that urged for an absolute forfeiture,
but for the case of necessity.

Secondly, in more Elective Kingdoms, the conditions of the Covenant are more
largely perhaps and more solemnly explicit then in successive, and the Power
is more Restrained then in some successive: yet consent b^ing the foundation of
succession, as was said before, a King that enters upon the succession, does by
that ver^ually, before his Oath o^ Coronation consent to the first Conditions
or Covenant, those that have been made consequently, and in that sense his
Admittance is altogether conditional: not that the people may refuse him at
their will, without new Conditions, but that he may not refuse the former
Covenant, and Conditions by offering to take more power then those gave him (or
his Ancestors which is all one) And if he do, the people are not bound to obey
those Commands (the Dr, confesses before) and I add as before, they may resist
his illegal Violences.

3. For now the case is all one, as if the choice or agreement, Covenant, o^
consent were originally made but yesterday. And then consider it. We are a
multitude of Freemen, and whereas we might have agreed on an Aristocracy, We
agreed on a King on such and such Covenants or Conditions, without mention that
we will resist if he break them. But simply promise Obedience on those
Conditions, and he on those accepts the Crown. But next day breaks all, and
shows he is bent to subvert all Religion, Laws, and Liberties. How now in
Reason (for of Scripture we spoke enough before) can it be supposed, that such
a choice or agreement, has turned us into such Slaves, as we must only
suffer, and not at all resist, (or rather is not all reason plain, that I have
given away no more of my natural freedom (which is to resist all violence and
wrong) then I meant and expressed to give away. I say then, that unless a Nation
have covenanted not to resist in such and such cases, they have power to
resist, because it is a natural right each has against all (except Parents)
so far is it from my being bound not to resist, unless I have expressly
covenanted that I may. Though withal I do not say, that I may covenant at all
to resist in no case, as I shall have occasion to show anon.

Fourthly, in the mean time, if the Doctor grant that in case the agreement
be, that if the Prince discharge not his trust, the states may take Arms and
resist, as in effect he seems to do, when he says, That were something, (for
if he do no such agreement;) Then is not all Resistance damnable, nor Rom
13.2. Rightly interpreted by him. For this and more the Brabancons had in their
Agreement with their Duke, even to choose another, as the Doctor himself tells
us afterward. So ever now and then he must contradict his maine Proposition by
the force of truth.

But he says after, that [The slender Plea^ Election, is thought to have a
Covenant in it, but usually the higher we rise in all Empires the freer Kings
were, and still downward the People gained on them.] And by this he would imply
that specially in successive Kingdoms (as this) what ever may be said of
merely elective States, there can be no forfeiture of power by breach of
Covenant made in after Ages by succeeding Princes.

REPLY. In the first times, there was a great simplicity in all covenants, in
sale of Lands, and letting of Lands, and the like; yet no man ever sold, or
gave away, or lent more then he meant; though the force and fraud of ill men,
forced after Ages to more express Covenants. In like sort Ex malis moribus bon^
Leges, (as well between Prince and people, as between common men) the tyranny
of Princes forced People to require them to sundry necessary express Laws*
Yet these Laws now for Phrase or expression, will not in reason, be thought
more then was intended in the first simple Covenant, how brief soever it were;
for certainly free people, and in their right wits, never meant to enslave
themselves to the wills and lusts of those they chose their Princes. But to be
subject to them for their general good; which when they found by experience to
be violated, or in danger to be so for want of express Laws (specifications
of the General Law of Nature, the general good of the society) they were
forced by necessity to require them to make such Laws, for their general
safety, and particularly also to prevent inferior officers from tyranny under
the name of the superior: and so to prevent all necessity of Arms within
themselves. And some good Princes for their peoples comfort have even been
forward of themselves to make such Laws, which yet without our making, they
were bound for the most part to have done accordingly for the welfare of their
Dominions. The People then have gained nothing for the great part of Laws for
their Liberties, but ability to claim them as undoubted more then before; nor
have Princes lost any thing almost, but a power of impovershing and ruining
their Subjects so much as before they seemed to have for the satisfying of
their own Prodigalities and Lusts. Still then it remains that the People had
a right to all fitting Liberties, even after they submitted to a King: unless
they expressly gave them away; as unto some C^nq^erours, the conquered Party
were sometimes forced to do. But yet ( N. B.) even then the Conquerours
followers, who were part of his subjects at that time, and by who^e hands he
conquered the rest, (whether more or fewer) did consent and agree to the
Peoples, and so their own Posterities, having but such and such Liberties, and
yielding to the new Conqueror and his Posterity such and such Power and
Authority. So still consent gave whatsoever a Prince could or can challenge. I
say then once more unless in the first foundation of a State, Kingdom or
Empire (and this Kingdom particularly) the People did make their King so
absolute, as to give away all power of resistance from themselves in any case;
(which the Doctor I believe will never be able to prove of this, or any other
Civil State) though they made no express conditions or Covenant, much less
any mention of reserving a power of resistance; yet the Law of Nature allowed
them still some Liberties; (what they were we shall have occasion to scan in
the next Section:) and amongst them this for one, to resist any violence
against themselves, in any thing that the Law of Nature did undoubtedly make
them still Masters of, and was not subjected to their Princes power.

But the Doctor concludes his reasoning against such power of resistance to be
in our Parliament with that which indeed has least show of strength of any
thing he has said yet.

Thus he writes, [where the King as it is said, never dies, where he is King
before Oath or Coronation, where he is not admitted upon any such Capitulation
as gives any power to the People, or the representative Body as is pretended
to; nay, where the Body cannot meet but by the will of the Prince, and is
dissoluble at his pleasure, that therein such a State, such a Power should be
pretended to, and used against the Prince, as at this day, and that according
to the Fundamentals of such a State, can never appear reasonable to any
indifferent judgment, much less satisfy Conscience in the resistance that is
now made by such a pretended Power.]

REPL. This is the most plausible Plea he has or any can bring, specially the
latter part of it, about the calling and dissolving the Parliament at the Kings
will and pleasure. But to this also as well as all the rest sufficient
satisfaction I doubt not may be given before indifferent judgments and
unpartiall Consciences, in the manner following. First, as the King never dies;
so he never grows, he never has more authority (unless by a new grant from
the people) then his first Predecessor had; unless it can be proved, that the
people then gave away their liberty of defense from outrageous violence, which
all are naturally invested with; it is free for them now as well as it was the
second day or hour after they chose or consented to their first King as was
employed before.

Secondly, as he is King before Oath or Coronation. So he gives away none of
his Rights in his Oath, nor do the People when they crown him. But he there
professes himself bound by his Kingly Office to rule so and so, for the common
good, and they yield no more to him, then they did to his first Predecessor, as
before.

Thirdly, as he is not admitted upon any such capitulation in express terms,
as mention this power of resistance in the people, or representative body, in
case of Tyranny. So nor do the people at his admittance express a yielding to
him such absolute power, as they may not, or will not in any case resist, I say
again and again, it can never be rationally conceived the people have given
away such a natural liberty, such a necessary power for their common safety:
Unless it can be proved that they have done so. The proof then before the
Bar of indifferency of judgment, and unpartiall conscience will lie on the
Doctors part not ours.

Fourthly, But he says, the representative Body cannot meet but by the will of
the Prince, and is dissoluble at his pleasure.

REPL. 2. It has been so de facto multo, but whether it be altogether so de
jure, may justly be questioned upon these grounds. First, for their meeting,
when the Prince is an Infant, or if a prisoner in enemies hands, and so cannot
give out a legal Warrant for their meeting; or if distracted, has not the
State power to meet in Parliament for their common safety, and the Princes too?
They have met in the infancy or minority of Kings, and made Laws, as in Edw.
the 6. time, and not by the mere power of the Protector, for the Nobility
after put him out (his head was cut off afterward by a Law made while he was
Protector.) It was then, (and could be nothing else but) the inherent power of
State, to meet so, in cases of necessity. Yet I believe there is no written Law
for this; but the general Maxim of Salus Populi suprema lex. And this will
extend to the case of Tyranny, as fully as any of the former, if not more.
Withal, did not the Lords in Richard the 2nds. time, call a Parliament without
the King, wherein they had their grievances redressed; and this afterward was
confirmed in the first of Hen. the 4th.

Secondly, then for their dissolving; It has indeed been very much practiced
by our two last Kings.

But our Histories (so far as I remember) quare whether Hen. 3. did not
dissolve some Parliaments in discontent? mention not any such thing as a
Parliament dissolved in displeasure, or against the desire of the Houses. But
as they meet very frequently, oft-times every year, sometimes oftener; (so that
in the space of a hundred years there are counted above a 100. Parliaments) So
they sat till they had ended the Princes and their own businesses, which went
much together; and so it never came to a matter of examination or discontent,
the delay of calling them to meet, or the too timely dissolution of
Parliaments. Parliaments were not wont to be so odious or dreadful to Princes
as within these forty years they have been. By whose default they have been so
since, let the encrochments upon Magna Charta and the Subjects liberties direct
any to judge.

2. But further, for both these. First, the Parliament averres that there are
Laws that there should be a Parliament every year, and so they have abated of
their Right, rather then gained upon the King by the Act of the Trienniall
Parliament.

2. And for the dissolution I have heard some wisemen affirm, that by Law it
cannot be dissolved, while there are any Petitions of grievances, or such
matters of importance, depending and unfinished. Whereunto may be added most
justly, that in ordinary times Country Gentlemen and Noblemen, and in a manner
the whole body of the Parliament, would be as sick of a long Parliament and
continual attendance as the King could wish, and would petition (rather then
be tied so by the leg) for a dissolution, or at least a Prorogation. And it is
well enough known, that even this Parliament after the Act of Continuation
past, were as weary of sitting, as need to be desired, till the Rebellion in
Ireland, seconded by the growing evils at home, put new spirits into them, and
forced them to that diligence of attendance and unwearied labors (so many as
have taken the common good to heart) as no Age or Story can parallel here, or
in any other Kingdom or Nation.

Thirdly, beyond all this I appeal again to the Kings Answer to the 19.
Prepositions formerly mentioned; and ask whether if the King have absolute
power to forbear calling them, at his will; and to dissolve them at his
pleasure; it be not a mere nothing that he says the House of Commons have
power to impeach his own Followers and Favorites, who have broken the Laws,
even by surreptitiously gotten commands from the King: and that the Lords have
power to judge and punish, and are an excellent skreene between the King and
the people, to assist each against any incroachings of the other, and by just
Judgments to preserve the Law, which ought to be the rule of every one of the
three: and that the Power legally placed in both Houses is more then sufficient
to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny.

What serves all this for, when his Favorites will keep him from calling a
Parliament, perhaps all his days, unless unlooked for nece^sity force him to
it? We haoe ^eene our selves about 13. years without one; and had there not
been conceived hopes that there would have been Money given against the
Scots, it had not been then called as it was.

Again, what serves the calling them, when the same Favorites being
questioned, shall counsel a dissolution? We have known that too, even three
times in this Kings Reign, and no other dissolution but on these grounds. And
the last was within three weeks because they would not in all have (and
contrary to all former Presidents and Privileges) give money against the Scots,
and embroyle the two Kingdoms in a perpetual War, not having had one
grievance redressed. And in the case of a Prince, bent or seduced to subvert
Religion Laws and Liberties (which is the Doctors Case propounded.) It is
undoubted, he will if he can dissolve them, as soon as they offer but to
punish any of his Favorites* and so to cross the design (unless he dare
not, of which anon) because therefore I believe the King in that Answer, has
not ascribed more then right to the Parliament. It will follow, that in right
(specially in such case) they ought not to be dissolved. And that if by force
they should be, (or should not have been called at all) the People have right
to meet together, when and where they can, in a Parliamentary manner or
otherwise: to such end as to defend themselves and one another from tyranny and
the designed subversion of Religion, Laws and Liberties, as has been often
said.

Fourthly, but for the present condition of our Kingdom and Parliament, I must
profess, that as I admire the providence of God, in the Act passed for the
continuation of this Parliament; so I do for the forementioned expressions of
the King in that answer. Which laid together, may to any understanding men,
wholly decide this first Question between the Doctor and us in point of
Legality in our Kingdom (if there were nothing else said or to be said) that
supposing such a design to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties. This
Parliament has (if no other had or could have, being dissoluble at pleasure)
complete power and Authority to do all they do, that so they may prevent and
restrain the designed tyranny.

Fifthly, Yet I have one thing more to allege, supposing the power of calling
and dissolving wholly in the King ordinarily; yet there may be such power in
them so long as they do sit to command Arms to be raised for the suppressing
of any Delinquents, maintaining themselves with Arms, even under the color of
the Kings Authority, which I thus make good. (If there be any such kind of
Power in the very Judges in their Courts at Westminster, for the whole
Kingdom; and in their several Circuits for the Shires they sit in; although
themselves are made Judges at the Kings will merely, and put out ordinarily at
his pleasure, and they can neither keep Assizes at any time, nor keep any
Term any where, but when and so long as the King pleases to give Commission:
if (I say) there be such a power in the Judges, and even in one of them; then
much more in the whole Parliament, which is unquestionably and undoubtedly the
highest Judicature in the Kingdom, and has most power during their sitting.
Now that such a kind of power is in the Judges, I appeal to experience, in
the case following

A private man has a suite with the King about Land or House and the like. The
King has possession and some Officer or Tenant of his holds it for the King.
The Judges having heard the Cause* give Sentence for the Subject, adjudge him
to have the possession delivered him by the Kings Tenant or Officer; he refuses
and arms himself to keep possession still Upon this, after due summons and
process of law, a Writ of Rebelli^n shall go out against the Officer of the
Kings, (even though he should pretend to keep possession still by a command
and warrant from the King and the Sheriff shall be commanded to raise Arms
even the whole posse Comitatus, if need be, to expel this Officer of the
Kings, and bring him to condign punishment from resisting the Kings au^hority
in his Laws.

Here now is raising Arms by the Kings legal Authority against the Kings
Title and the Kings Officer notwithstanding any pretended authority from the
Kings personal command; and that Officer ha^h a Writ of Rebellion sent against
him, and shall be punished by Law* for offering to resist the Law upon any
pretense. (A^ke the Lawyers whether in sense ^his be not the Law, and
ordinarily practiced* save that the King does not command the contrary; but
whether that would hinder Law or not?) The Parliament then may in the case of
necessity raise Arms against the Kings personal Command, for the general
safety, and keeping possession (which is more necessary then the hope of
regaining) of the Houses, Lands, Goods, Liberties, Lives, Religion and all.

And this by the Kings legal Authority, and the resisters of this are the
Rebels in the Laws account, and not the Instruments so employed Legally,
though with Arms by the Parliament.

If the Doctor now (or any for him) will retort upon me, as he thinks, what I
said before, that if this be granted, a King intending Tyranny, will not call a
Parliament; or if he have called it, he will straight dissolve it, as soon as
they attempt any thing against his mind.

REPL. I reply, he will do so indeed* if he can persuade the people, by the
Doctors Divinity or Law, to endure him and his followers to take away their
Goods, and do what else he list; and they for want of a Parliament called or
sitting, dare not defend themselves at all. But if he find, that they believe
no such Doctrine; but without dispute of Law or Consciences resolve rustically
not to be robbed of their goods at pleasure, or used like mere slaves; but
that they will defend themselves and somewhat they begin to do, and beat away
or kill some that come to take their goods away in such ill^gall manner; he may
then be glad to call a Parliament to quiet the People, who perhaps also may
begin to mutiny by troops; and be willing to sacrifice perhaps some of his
Followers unto them (as ^mp^o^ and Dudley were in the beginning of H. the 8.
though they proceeded with color of the penal Laws) and even to provide for
his own Maintenance, as (...). ^. In such a case some against his will called a
Parliament, Anno of his Reign. And that it may be, he will, not he dares not
hearken to those that would persuade him to dissolve it, because then he
should bring all confusion (besides want) upon himself again, which was Hen.
the Thirds Case, Anno.

Therefore I conclude, that the Parliament (as I said before) may have this
power and upon advantage of the Kings necessities, and Peoples not enduring
oppression, be able to exercise it, even though they meet not but at the Kings
will, and are dissoluble at his pleasure.

And so I have said enough of this Section, except only that I must note, that
in the close of it, he either thinks those he has to do with (Parliament and
all) gross fools, or else he shows himself extremely simple in reckoning up
the remedies of Tyrranny (though he love not to use so harsh a word; but we
must when he has stated the Case for us of a Prince bent or seduced to
subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties;) The denying of subsidies and aid, etc.
If he mean in Parliament, such a Prince never means to call any. If out of
Parliament, this is the grievance, that he takes it against Law, by Ship-moneys
and Monopolies, and Imposts and any way: and if they deny it, themselves are
fetched up by the Pursevants, and put in prison: and for not executing such
illegal commands; Fined at pleasure half, or all their Estates; and perhaps
starved in prison, or little better: Kept so close, that they fall sick and
dye Nay if the Prince proceed to command his Soldiers or Officers to kill
without delay any that shall deny Subsidy or Aid, though never so illegal.

Has not then the Doctor propounded a goodly remedy of Tyranny, to deny him
Subsidy and Aid? As if to quench a house a fire, he should send for a pair of
Bellows to blow a cool breath.

Let him now consider whether he uttered those words in scorn or in policy?
and with what science or skill in common Reason (not to say in Politics) and
so with how truly an informed conscience he deals justly between the King and
the People. We have yet some further strength of his reason to examine in the
next Section. Of which now.

SECT. V.
IN this Section he propounds this Reason as alleged for the peoples Power,
that else [ the State should not have means for its own safety, when etc.]

REPLY. This Reason we acknowledge ours, and considering what a State is, a
Body composed of many thousands, who by themselves (or their Ancecestors) set
up a King over them, for their safety and good, this Reason is as much Reason,
as any thing can be between Man and Man: Nor shall the Dr. be ever able to
speak Reason in Opposition to it; himself grants straight way, that salus
Populi in a good Sense, is suprema Lex. And when a People, neither seeks nor
desires any thing of hurt to their Prince, but only safety to themselves, It
is good in no sense, if not in this; to allow (I say more command) a State that
has any considerable strength to do it, to defend it self, and so procure
its own safety, even by resisting if need be, by force of Arms. And though he
j^ere at the Plea of necessity, when as he says Right and just will not defend
a thing, Yet if himself were assaulted on the high way by one that offered to
kill him and in his house in the Night by Robbers, would he say that either out
of the case of Necessity, he a private m^n, or any S^rvants of his, might in
right or justice kill another man, or that Necessity would not be a sufficient
Plea, if in that Case any did kill such a Thief or Robber, not only before men
but God also. The Law among us allows the Plea of se defendendo in such Cases,
And Gods Law expressly, Against one that breaks a house in the night, though
not in the day, as not admitting them a necessity to kill the thief, as the
Text there plainly implies. As for his saying, [ Every thing must be honest
which is Spar^ae utile, imagined to conduce to the proposed End;)

REPLY. This is but a second calumny, of which his Treatise is full every
where, neither profit nor Imagination is admitted or urged in this case, but
necessity apparent, or judged imminent by Rules of prudence, which commands
endeavor of prevention of extreme evils (such as the ruin of a States
safety) even by care and Power before hand, as well as when it lies gasping
under the pressure. Counsel in prevention is indeed better then help out of
trouble: For by that less trouble is suffered, and less offense acted in the
defense.

But these are but the Drs flourishes, for he will now stabbe this reason to
the heart with diverse contrary Reasons, against all the plea of Necessity of
safety. The first is that, this among others is one of the many Weapons
sharpened for Resistance at the Philistims Forge, the Romish Schools.

Reply. First himself will not allow this to be reproach to him, or his
fellows in any of their positions, nor think it sufficient to make an
Argument be rejected, because the Romonists have either used it or abused it.

Secondly, but he is deceived in paralelling the Cases. They plead for the
Popes Power of curbing or deposing Kings in case of Heresy, because else the
Church has not means for the maintenance o^ the Catholic Faith, and its
own safety.

Reply. The Argument is not good, his Church is not a Civil State, but the
good of it is mainly spiritual, and to be preserved by such spiritual means,
as GOD has appointed, who both instituted and constituted it himself, and
left not to it, the ordering of its own safety or good. But our case is of a
Civil State, whose good is Civil and natural, and is to be preserved by
civil and natural means, and so by Arms in case of danger, even from its
own Prince, bent or seduced to ruin it. The Dr. himself straightwayes
grants, the State has means of preservation such as the Law has prescribed.
If he can show us any true means, in the case stated by him, but this power of
resistance, I yield him the cause. If not he does but abuse his Readers
Conscienc^s, to blind them with words, which are of no validity. But I have
showed him before, and must again remember him, that in our Parliament State
(by the Kings own acknowledgement) has such Power by Law to punish even the
Kings followers and Favorites, as is more then sufficient to prevent, or
restrain Tyranny. We ask no more for our safety. But when they will resist
the Parliament by Arms, It has no way to punish them, or defend the State but
by Arms Which therefore it may lawfully take up.

Secondly, the Dr. adds (If every state has such Means to provide for its
safety, what means of safety had the Christian Religion in, and after the
Apostles Times? Or the People then enslaved, what means had they for their
Liberties? Tertullian in his Apology says, the Christians had number and
Force sufficient to withstand, but they had no Warrant. And the Apostle forbids
them, and all other under the higher Power to resist.

Reply. This example of the Christians not resisting is counted a Capital
Argument, we shall see what strength it has. First it is brought in this
place, for the Christians were neither a civil State, (of which the present
Reason proceeds) nor near to the greater number in the The State. They had the
Laws (which is in some Sense the State) against them, and so they ever had
been, and the greater* part of the body of the Estate by far, were opposite,
even in Tertullians Time. Though therefore the Church being properly only a
spiritual State, have not of necessity, civil means to provide for the
outward safety of Christians: yet a Civil State, (whether of Heathens or
Christians) may have and has, which is by taking Arms, in case of necessity
as before. But the Dr. says the Apostle forbids them and all, under the Higher
power to resist.

Reply. I suppose what I have formerly said on this place, Romans 13.2. may and
will satisfy most Readers for that place. But the Drs. importunity forces me
to repeat part of it here, and apply it to the case of Christians, even then,
and much more now: And so I make bold to tell the Dr. that he does most
miserably wrest the Apostles words in this case of all others, which to
demonstrate (I say to demonstrate) I appeal to the context after and before,
and let all Christians, and Consciences, or even reasonable Men, Judge whether
the Drs. Interpretation be not most absurd. Thus the Dr. interprets v. 2.
[Whosoever shall take up Arms to resist Nero, persecuting the Christian
Religion, resists the Ordinance of GOD; Rebels against GOD in resisting the
higher Power ordained by GOD, and if he kill any man in such resistance, he
commits murder, and incurres damnation for so doing.] This is the Drs. Sense
plainly, and his words here and there, are fully so much. Now mark St. Paul's
Reason, v. 3. and make Sense of it, or Religion much less of it, if you can to
this purpose. First, for Rulers are not a terror to good works but to evil.
Nero is the Ruler here meant, persecuting Nero: Let the Dr. now tell me (or any
for him) Is not persecution a Terror to the Works that are persecuted? and
then is Christianity a good work or not? Nero persecutes that, and is a
Terror to that, but so he is not to good Works. Then belike Christianity is
not a good Work^? Will St. Paul speak thus? or does he know what he says,
when he says, Rulers are not a terror to good Works, therefore they must not
be resisted? Christianity is a good work, and Nero is a terror to it (though
by GODS Ordinance he should not be) therefore he must not be resisted. What can
be more unreasonable, then to bring a Reason, which is quite against the thing
it is brought for? to interpret then, as the D^. does v. 2. is to make St. Paul
argue against himself, if you Reader (are not) should not be; and ^f you Keep
the literal since (are not) then either he speaks that which is fal^e of
Nero, and h^s Officers, and under Rulers, for they were a terror to good
Works, if Christianity be a good work, or Christianity is no good Work. Let
the Dr. take his choice of the three. I have a fourth too take to formerly
said down, which is that he speaks of Civil Legal Authority in civil
Laws as then in the Roman State and such like, and to Rulers according to
them were not terrors to good Works; as the Apostle says.

Secondly, but see the Apostles next words, will thou then not be afraid of
the Power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, that
is thou needst not resist, but only look to do well, and h^e will commend
thee. But is this true of persecuting Nero? Might the Christians count this a
safe course, of which they need not be afraid to practice Christianity? safe
that i^, for which the Power would not do any thing against them: bu^ rather
praise them? did Nero so? Or could the Ap^stle think he would? O ^d he deceive
Christians in saying so? or condemn Christianity as not good? (...) a Reason
against hims^l^e? Some of these things must be said, or else the D^. Sense
must be renounced, it must be said that he meddles with no matter of Christian
Religion here, but of civil Subjection to Civil Laws, which Rulers according
^o their Power, would praise them for; and they need not fear such powers
doing well.

Thirdly, add further what the Apostle does, v. 4. [For he is the Minister of
GOD to thee for gooD,] Is this true of persecuting Nero, in the case of his
persecuting? Whereby the Apostle proves he will praise thee, doing that which
is good? Surely in an overruling Work of GODS Grace, the very Devil is GODS
instrument for GOOD, as to Job, (and we may say M^nister too.) And Nero not a
whit more in the Act of persecuting. Bu^ this far from St. Paul's meaning: For
he means a civil good, praising, and rewarding, and protecting. Nero did
(St. Paul knew) quite contrary to this: He cannot then mean him as a
Persecuter; and so never intends here to forbid resisting his Persecution.

Fourthly, go on one step further with the Apostle, which will yet make it
more plain if more can be; [But if you do that which is evil then fear, for
he bears not the Sword in vain, for he is the Minister of GOD, a Revenger to
ex^cute wrath on them that do evil^) Evil contrary to Christianity is
Idolatry, (for one thing,) and to make Chri^tians Idolaters, did Nero and
others persecute them, if they would cast in a grain of I^cense into the Fire,
by way of sacrifice to their Idols, they were freed. Now is it St. Paul's
meaning, If you turn Idolater then fear, for Nero bears not the Sword in
vain, for he is GODS Minister, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon them that
commit Idolatry? Or is Christianity the evil they were to fear, as that
which he used the Sword against, and that with great wrath and revenge? There
is then nothing like the Drs Interpretation, In all these Arguments of the
Apostle: but the clean contrary, besides what follows, v. 5, 6, 7. Of which
see the exposition before.

But some will say, was it then lawful for the Christians, then to have
resisted the persecuting Emperors? Tertullian and the Fathers thought
otherwise.

I answer, first, whether it were or no, (of which by and by) most certain, it
was not forbidden in this, Romans 13.2, 3, 4. Yet this is the Capital place. If
any other can be found forbidding it, which the Dr. offers not to urge, further
then what we have examined already, that is nothing to this Text. For no Logic
or Rhetoric can extract that sense from hence; who ever they be, that have so
interpreted it heretofore.

Secondly, but because of the great Outcry made of the Christians not resisting
then, I will once more look upon the Text, Romans 13.2. and compare it also with
that before so: v. 1. and see whether by a right view, it will not plainly
pronounce Christians even then, free from passive subjection in case of
persecution (supposing they had Force to resist, by their hands not tied by
Gods Ordinance from resist^nce, or at least wise, only upon a special Reason
applyable to that State of the Church: and Roman Empire, (of which yet there is
not the least intimation in that place, but must ^e gathered elsewhere, as we
shall see) and which is no impediment at all to Christians resisting the
persecution now of Popish Tyranny.

I say then, Subjection to the Higher power is commanded, and resisting it
forbidden there, upon this ground, because they are of GOD ordained under GOD,
GODS Ordinance, Note how all the words accord in the Original, (...) be
subject (...) whosoever resists, (...) ordained under GOD, (...) the Ordinance
of GOD, all from the word (...) to set in order) that i^ GOD has given to men
Power and au^ho^ity, to urge the execution of his Laws, and to make some Laws
under him and his, and to punish according to the merit of the Offenses, the
transgressions of the one or the other. And so far as this, they are to be
subjected unto by every soul, either actively or at least passively, and not
to be resisted, by wilful froward disobedience, and much less by taking up
Arms against such Laws, or them that exercise authority to them. But this is
all the Authority GOD gives to any, and not to make Laws against his, nor yet
to punish those tha^ obey his Laws: And if any such Laws be made, or any such
punishment offered to be inflict^d (even by reason of such Laws made) they are
not the Ordinance of GOD, He has afforded them no such Authority, no such
Power. Nay such Laws and Rulers according to them are the (...), the opposers
and Resiste^s of GODS Ordinance, of the Law of Nature, or Scripture, or both.
The Laws therefore are Null and the Authority Null; quoad hoc) as will be
plain by this instance. A King grants a Charter to a Major of a Town to
govern that Town (with others, or alone, that is all one) according to his
Laws, and punish all Malefactors, and moreover to make some particular Laws
or Orders in the Town, for the better keeping all in due Subj^ction and Order.
This Major makes Laws directly against the Kings, against the King himself,
offers to swear the people to another King. Are not those Laws then Null? and
his Authority Nu^l* so far forth? or can it be thought, that because the King
commands subjection to the Mayor, and forbids to resist him, as long as he
rules by the Kings Laws, or by such as his Charter enables him to make, being
not against the Kings; that therefore they may not resist him, if he would
massacre them, (or under color of his new made Laws) condemn them because
they will not be Traitors to their King, and submit to an usurper? will the Dr.
say it? or any else? and is not this the very case if men will think of it, if
a King should make (or has made) Laws, that men should worship the Sun,
worship an Idol, an Image? Are not these traitorous Laws against the King,
the GOD of Heaven? can any then, King, they or the Authority commanding them,
i^ quo ad hoc, GODS Authority, GODS Ordinance or deny them to be resisters of
him? The Laws that are in themselves Null: the Authority Null: so far
forth: no kind of Subjection then is due to them in this from this Text. Nor is
any Ordinance of GOD at all resisted in resisting them. Rather is it not a Duty
[But the Christians did not resist, though Tertullian say they had number and
Force sufficient.]

REPLY. Mr. Goodwin, in his Anticavalierisme has very rationally showed, first
that in all probability Tertullian was mistaken in his Computation, if he mean
it throughout the Empire. They might have some considerable number and so force
in one place or City, and not enough in general. Secondly, that if they had
so, yet generally it was not known to Christians, and that is all one in such
a case, he that knows not his strength dares not resist, no more then he that
has no strength. Thirdly, that if they knew their strength, yet they did not
know it lawful to resist generally. Some might know it, yet not preach it for
fear; and if it were not generally believed, they would not resist. Fourthly,
that there were special Reasons, why GOD might conceal this from them, this
Liberty of resistance. Of all this there are many considerable things in that
treatise ( Vide:) I will only add this One, that if Resistance seem so
unfitting now, it would have seemed much more then. The Christian Religion came
in upon the Roman Empire as a Novelty, and neither they not their Ancestors
for many Generations had any Principles (but the remote ones of the Law of
Nature) to persuade them to give it Entertainment. So that to have resisted by
Arms, would have seemed a great obstinacy and perverseness^, specially in
Reference to the Doctrine of Christ a crucified GOD, (a Man risen from the dead
and gone into Heaven) which the Pagans counted foolishnes, as well as it was a
stumbling block to the Jews. Also Christ himself founding his Church by his
own suffe^ings, would have them specially like him, in sufferings at the
spreading of it in the World; Whereby he also got far more Glory in that not
only his Church was preserved (like the burn in the midst of the Fire) in the
midst of sufferings without resistance; But also i^ propagated mainly, and
conquered by suffering merely. This I say was then greater glory, then to have
allowed them straightway to defend themselves, and resist with Arms: which
also till a long time would have been in vain, and to their hurt, besides
Reproach without miracle. But now the case is much otherwise in regard of
Protestants persecuted by Popish Princes, specially recalling Laws of
toleration, or changing Laws establishing the Religion. For the Protestant
Religion, to show it self no noveltie appeals to that which the Pap^sts
cannot deny the holy Scriptures, and rejects nothing, (if even an unpartial
Heathen were Judge, and umpi^e between them) which the Scripture calls to
believe or practice. Also ^t pro^esses nothing, which the Scriptures rej^ct.
Therefore their resistance may much more be justified to their Adversaries
Consciences, Who though they dare not deny the Scriptures plainly, yet dare
not trust to them alone to confute the Protestants by them, but put them to
death, for things not only besides the Scriptures, but even against it, as
making and worshipping Images, Crosses, Crucifixes and the like. Here the same
King and Laws being generally acknowledged, yet will the Inferior Governors,
make Laws against the Kings, and even Force the Kings Subjects, to do Homage
and even swear Allegiance to another besides Him. Therefore they are not (in
this) to be accounted GOD^ L^eutenants or Deputies, or their Laws of any
Validity, but they may be resi^ted, as Rebels against the King of Heaven,
while they pretend to be his Servants. The Roman Emperors then, as mere
strangers, in point of Knowledge or Profession, were rather but at lest for the
time) to be convinced by suffering then by resistance. But pretended Christian
Princes (specially after a toleration, and most of all after a Legal
Establishment) turning Persecuters of that truth whichas in the Bible, he
^selves profess to hold; may be resisted in a Defensive way. And there is
nothing in the Bible to gainesay it* And whether now the Christians might also
have resisted as soon as they had any strength, (^ ever they had any before
Constantines Time,) I leave it to others to judge. For upon the Grounds fore
noted, it hurts not our Cause at all; if they mig^t^t.

The D^. proceed^* so do I (^f it be replied that things being so enacted by
Law, it was not lawful to resist. I answer (says he) all that proceeded from
those Emperors, were merely ^rbitrary, and enforced upon the Senate, who did
not discharge their truth, etc.

Reply. First, what is tyrannously done against humane Law may be resisted as
we have s^id; and so may, (by what we have lately proved) tyrannous Laws
directly and clearly against GOD, and his true Religion; and therefore if ever
we should be so unhappy (which I hope will never be unless the people
beleiving this Drs. Position, betray this Parliament,) that a Parliament should
join with a King to cast out the true Religion, and bring in Popery; and so
make Laws against us, which are now all for us (yet might we resist; and not
suffer our selves to be massacred or condemned for not consenting to be
Traitors to the King of Heaven (LORD Jesus Christ) whom yet they would pretend
to rule by, and for him. If any man can show me, that it is Gods Ordinance we
should submit and suffer in such a case, I shall not refuse to yield; but I
confess I cannot see it* though I know even those that defend the resistance
now used Lawful; affirm it were not lawful, if the Law were against us, as
it is for us. But how humane Laws made without against GODS Authority, can
hinder me from the Liberty granted me by the Law of Nature, to defend my self
from outrageous Violence, being altogether an Innocent, I cannot see, specially
in a case concerning GODS immediate Honor as well as my safety.

2. If Laws cannot tie my hands in all Cases (in the forenamed) from
resistance, much less an Arbitrary Power. (but of that, it will be convenient
to discourse a little further; and apply it also to Civil Matters, as well as
to Religion, wherein we shall also see whether all Civil Laws do so tie us,
as none of them neither may be resisted, and if any, which? and which not?

I say then an Absolute Arbitrary Power, or absolute Monarchy (as some call it)
is not at all the Ordinance of GOD; and so no lawful Power secured from
resistance by Rom.. 13.2. First GOD allows no man to rule as he list, to make
what Laws he list, to punish how and whom he list. But his Word speaks the
Contrary every where. Secondly GOD not allowing, Men cannot give it, to a
Conqueror, or any other. They can give but what GOD allows, for they have no
more their own, in that sense. Now no man can give any thing but what is his
own. Thirdly, particularly, no man is allowed by GOD, or can be made by Man,
an absolute Monarch, a mere Arbitrary Prince in point or Relig^on. I am far
from denying Authority about Circumstantialls in Religion. But I mean, he has
no Authority to bid what GOD forbids, or to forbid what GOD bids; or punish
them that obey GOD rather than him. GOD never gave this Power, nor can men give
it. Fourthly no Monarch has any Power from GOD, or can have from men, to
violate the Chastity of any. A Law of Platoes Community, is null, because
against GODS express 7th. Commandment, and may and ought to be resisted* (yet
now we are among civil matters.) Fifthly, no Monarch has any Power from GOD,
or can have from men, to take away the life of his Subjects, any one at his
mere pleasure, or without a Law broken, (whether Civil or Martial.) and
known to the Transgressour, or which he ought to have known, and might (which
Jonathan could not, he had no means to know of his Fathers Oath being then
made, and in his absence) Lycurgus his Law to destroy all Children that were
deformed, or weakelings, and Pharaohs Arbitrary Command to destroy all the
Israelitish Males, were both alike tyrannous and null: and might have been
resisted. In all these cases there is, I say, no absolute Monarchy, no mere
arbitrary Power, Lawful, none that is GODS Ordinance. And whosoever challenges
such Power, is (in that) not GODS Deputy, but an Usurper, whether King or
Caesar, Roman or Turkish Emperor or any other. Sixthly, but the only Cases
wherein a Monarch may be absolute in Matter of Liberty of men's persons, of
Goods, an^ manner of Judaciall proceedings, and making or taking away Officers
and Honors and such like, in those I grant, that as GOD denies not, but a
Monarch may have absolute Authority (only he must use it to Good) so men may
give away their Liberty (by Fear or otherwise) and become much enslaved to
their Princes Will, in comparison of what others are. And if any be so (which
I believe not of the Roman State, though much was done arbitrarily by the
Emperors) I yield they may not resist though they be sorely pincht. They may
thank themselves who bound their own if therefore our Parliament in after
Ages (or this by being forsaken by the People, seduced by the Dr.) should so
enslave us, we must bear it and not resist, because it is our own Act, who
choose them and put all such things into their hands, but in other things we
should not, could not be bound, as I said before.

The Doctor has a third Reason [We cannot expect absolute means of safety and
security in a State but, such as are reasonable]

REPL. If by absolute means of safety and security he mean such as God
cannot defeat; we grant what he says, or such as God has forbidden. But if he
take it of rational means; he says nothing at all that allotts any means
which are not absolutely sufficient (according to humane proceedings) to
procure such a safety as a State shall n^ed. A State is a most considerable
body, and may challenge all possible means which God has not denied them; and
so even a private man may, being altogether innocent* except where a greater
good then his Particular life, calls him to venture it, or yield it up. But
there is no greater good on earth (in civil respects) then the safety of a
state. Therefore all means not forbidden from Heaven are reasonable, and to
be expected and used, though not expressly provided for (that is mentioned) in
the Fundamentalls of this Government, which the Doctor would require. Then he
falls a commending the excellent temper of the three Estates, King, Lords,
Commons, having each a power of denying.

REPL. They have so; in making particular Laws. But the Quest. now is of
exercising the general and maine fundamental Law of all States, to save the
whole from ruin and subversion. Here though all three agreeing (and none
denying) makes the safety more secure, and more comfortable and honorable. Yet
no reason, but in a Coordinate Power (as here it is plainly so; see the Fuller
Answer to the Doctors Book) any two or of three or even any one of them,
rather then all should fail and be dissolved, should have Power to endeavor
the common safety which the others neglect or intend to subvert or betray.

And I verily believe the Doctor himself or any other of his party (if he
forbear not to say so much least it should be retorted on himself) will
confess that the King and the Lords may save the Kingdom from ruin, without
or against the House of Commons; and the King and the House of Commons, without
or against the Lords: and which is yet more, the King alone without or against
both Lords and Commons. For indeed, this is the very thing now pretended by the
King for his taking Arms to save the Protestant Religion and the Laws, and
his own Rights, etc. which he says, the Lords and Com^ons (whom he terms the
Major part of both Houses present) intend and go about to subvert. And if they
did so; certainly all true Subjects and Pa^riots ought not only not to join
with them in their Arms, but to join with the King in his against them.

And if it could be possible that all the three Estates should agree to ruin
Religion and the State; even the Body of the People, should (by virtue of the
power which each State has for its necessary safety) have Authority sufficient
to defend themselves, and resist all outrageous Attempts of mischief (as has
been proved before) though then for want of many conveniences and perhaps of
wisdom to manage it, the defense and resistance must needs be much more
hazardous and dfficult. The power therefore of denying* and so all other power
in each of the 3. Estates and in any two of them, or all the 3. together is
given, and is to be used ad Edificationem, ad Salutem, non ad destructionem)
for the common good and safety, not ruin. For in that it is Null and void in
all reason and equity. But the Doctor says, Must the King only trust and not
be trusted? Must he not always have his security against the other, which
cannot be but by power of denying?

RE^L. 1. But he forgets that the Question by himself stated is, when the
Prince will not discharge his trust; and more then so^ is bent or seduced to
subvert Religion Laws and Liberties. Then it is senseless to trust him, till
(...) shew^s another a better mind; and it is most ridiculous to allow him in
this case a power of denying safety; for that is to allow him a power of
subverting all. 2. But when the ^u. is (as now it ^s made in Hypothesi,)
whether the Prince or the two Houses do mean w^ll or ill? and who does or does
not discharge their trust, and who does or does not intend the subversion of
Religion Laws and Liberties: who can be Judge between them? or who can
amongst men decide the difference but the Body of the People? Exercising their
understanding and consciences to judge who is in the right, (by all that has
been said and done on both sides formerly, and of late) and so their power and
strength too to defend the right side, and resist the wrong-doers? And these
whether the Doctor (or any under Heaven) will or no, must have, and will have
the Power of denying or granting means for their own and others safety and
securi^y.

The Doctors reproaches against the Parliament I pass. Only where he says
[Conscience might demand for its satisfaction. Why should 100. in the House of
Commons see more then 300? or 20. in the House of Lords more then 60. that are
of a different judgment and withdrawn?]

REPL. Satisfaction may well be given: First, by saying it is evident the major
part of the House of Commons, when they were most full were all that way, that
100. are now (though that be a slander for but a while since there were 300.
there) The King a year ago in ^anu. last commanded all that were in the
Country to come up, which certainly most of them did. Yet no Votes but this
way they go now, only things were not then at the ^eighth they now are. 2. If
yet the Major part were of another judgment they would certainly come and vote
and end the business. The House has often called the absent, and punished some
for it; certainly they knew then there were not enough against them of their
Members to over-vote them 3. They that are wilfully absent, are offenders
against the Law and the common good; and so are not to be trusted; or thought
to have wisdom, to see things right how many soever they may pretend to be.
For also 40 being the legal number for the House of Commons to vote any thing:
It is against all Rules of Politic Bodies, that the absence of others, (there
being the Legal Number present) should hinder or discredit any Vote or Act of
the Legal Body. One judge of Assize, two Commissioners or Arbitrators, and the
like, suffice for any Business: and though still the greater number, the more
honor and comfort; yet a legal number must and will ever suffice. 5 As for
the Lords, who pretend their absence forced by reason of Tumults. First, this
by an Almanac, (as the Doctor speaks elsewhere) may be confuted, the greatest
part of those that came, and after withdrew; stayed a considerable time after
the Tumults, till the King was gotten to York, and begun to call them away.
And if his calling them away, or their withdrawing themselves shall have power
to make the votes or judgment of a part that are yet resident there (as the
D^. has learned to call them) Null, or not to be regarded: then have the King*
or such a number of Lords, and Commons, even out of the Parliament House, power
to disanull a Law (even the Law for the not dissolving of this Parliament,
without an Act for it, which must pass all the 3. Estates, both Houses and the
King and in which each have their power of Denying.) And this alone (what ever
might be pretended against other Parliaments) makes the legal Votes of the two
Houses the full judgment and Authority of the whole representative Body of the
Kingdom, how few soever be present, or how many so ever be absent, and upon
what pretense soever. 2. But withal, if I were Confessor or Chaplain to any
of those Lords that have withdrawn themselves and upon pretetence of the
Tumult, deny to return: I would make bold to ask them this Qu. in their ears
(for their consciences satisfactoin, as well as mine own) which City and
Country rung of them, and which produced such and so many Petitions, for the
settling of the Militia, and helping Ireland, and outing the Bishops and Popish
Lords out of the House of Peers; whether their refusing to concur in the
relief of Ireland, and in securing the Kingdom, even in petitioning the King
for the settling of the Militia (which yet the King after, acknowledged
necessary to be settled*) were not the true and only cause of those tumults that
were? And if so, where was their judgment to see the means of safety, or their
conscience to provide for it? And then whether their own guilt did not more
send or drive them away, then any violence of the Tumults? Which tumults yet I
approve not, nor ever did. But if God so punished those that would not
discharge the trust, it is easier to answer that question, why so many
remaining should see more, that is better; then thrice so many (if so many)
dissenting and withdrawn.

As for the Doctors preferring Monarchy before Aristocracy, he shall not have
me for his Adversary; who thank God, I am borne and live (and hope to dye)
under a Monarchy; though not absolute, as the Doctors Position would make him
(when he listed) though the Doctor wisely disclaimes any such intention. But
for his reasons, why a King should se^e better then the Major part of both the
Houses,; because he sees even with their eyes, though dissenting from them; and
has other Council besides, and that he has many reasons to persuade him to
consent to their free and unanimous Votes: All this is most unreasonable as the
Question is now stated, of a Prince bent to subvert Religion Laws, and
Liberties, (for we are still upon that general supposition in this Section)
for whatever they see, he will be sure (as far as he sees his own strength)
to consent to nothing that shall hinder his design. And therefore to plead his
power of denying, or his wisdom in this case, is to yield him all power to be
a Tyrant. Which after all, the Dr. will yet prove he has so far as he may
not be resisted in it, by the inconveniences that will follow if he have it
not. Hear his saying. [Such power of resistance would be no fit means of
safety to a State, but prove a remedy, worse then the disease.]

Reply. If he can show this, de does wonders. What? worse then subversion of
Religion, Laws and Liberties? For that is the disease. Surely all these are of
little worth with the Dr., if he will maintain any thing in a State, to be
worse then these. Sin indeed in the practicers is worse, then the suffering
of the worst Tyranny* But that is not properly in question in this Section, but
the Civil Inconveniences of resistance though I grant they may prove sins
too, as things may be managed? but otherwise it is evident, no Civil
Inconvenience to remedy such a Tyranny, as is in dispute, can be so bad as the
disease.

The Dr. once more urges, Romans 13. and by ver, 3 4 5 6. would feign prove, that
the Apostle shows the evil and inconvenience of resisting Tyranny.

Reply. But I have showed more then once* that the Apostles Reasons are quite
against him* and he says nothing to prove that he abuses not the Apostle,
(not vouchsafing, I doubt, not daring to quote the words as they lie, lest
every eye should see how he perverts them* much less offering to Analize
them: or show the strength of the Reasons, which I have done against him:]
Only he repeats what he has before told us, in general that although the
powers were then altogether unjust, etc. Nothing answerable to the end for
which governing power is ordained* Yet does the Apostle draw his Reasons
against resisting them from that good Justice, Order for which God has set up
the higher Powers.

Reply. This is as good a Reason, as to say, God has ordained Ministers,
Pastors, to preach and administer his word and Sacrament, and pray, that his
people may be saved: Therefore though the Ministers, Pastors, be careless,
and neither afford the People any Word or Sacraments, or prayers; or false
Teachers, and pervert Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments: Yet the People may not
seek their Souls safety, from some other, that will be more faithful, even
though not attempting to put those evil Ministers, Pastors, quite out of
office; but leaving them in their places, still to see if GOD will give them
better minds. Only not trusting them so long, as they show themselves
notoriously unfaithful, If to deny the people this be reasonable, because God
ordained them ministers, Pastors, for their good, though they that are such by
Office do nothing toward it; then the Dr, may pretend he discourses with some
reason. Which yet will not satisfy the Apostles phrases, as I have abundantly
showed before.

But he says [the Apostle would insinuate that the resisting of the Higher
Powers even when they are Tyrannical tends to the overthrow of the Order which
is the life of a Common wealth, not only because there is still Order under
Tyranny: but chiefly because if it were good and lawful to resist the power
when abused it would open a way to the people to resist and overthrow Powers
duly administered for the executing of wrath on them that do evil.

Reply, All this is altogether contrary, for 1. The Apostles words, will bear
no such Insinuations as I have proved. 2. If Religion Laws and Liberties be
subverted, what Order is left under such Tyranny? Sure whether Civil order be
or not, no Religious order is, which yet is more worth then the life of a
Commonwealth. God has often overthrown Commonwealths for subverting this
Religion; But never in his Word preferred the ordinary Order of a Commonwealth
(or the Commonwealth it self) before (...) Religion, so as to bid his
servants suffer that to be subverted; even when (...) by the laws of a
Commonwealth rather then the order of the Commonwealth should be endangered
by it. 3. It is a Sign the Tyranny was deeply and desperately resolved, if it
cannot be resisted by a mere defense, but that must tend to the overthrow of
the life of the Commonwealth 4. The tyranny breaks the Order, stabs at the
life of the Commonwealth; and yet the Dr. is so zealous an advocate for it
(however he deny it) that (he cries whore first) he cries out of the danger to
Order. 5. To tend to the overthrow of that Order which is the life of the
Commonwealth, may be a fallacious phrase. Does it tend so necessarily, or in
the intention of the Resisters? Or rather contrary? Or does it so tend to
overthrow it, as the Tyranny to (be resisted) does? All remedies of violent and
desperate diseases, do in some Sort tend to the overthrow of the Life of the
Body: Yet none says the remedy is worse then the disease, which that is known
to be mortal, the other may prevent death. 6. This opens no such gap to the
people to resist and overthrow power duly administered* as the Doctors does open
a gappe to Tyranny. If a man, a Prince fear not GOD* and know his people
principl'd not to resist him in any case, what can hinder him from all Kind of
Tyranny.

And I would it were not evident that the presumption of this had made way for
what we feel. I am sure the Jesuit Contzen, (whose principles have been
followed step by step among us, see Mr. Newcomens Sermon ^n Neh. 4. Preached
last Nov. 5. to the Parliament) encourages a Prince to attempt the subverting
the Protestant Religion, though established by Law, because the Protestants
will not Rebel for the cause, nor ever did. The Dr. seconds him well. But now
a people, if void of conscience, yet will find it hard (and think it so, if
they have any wit) for them to hope to overthrow powers duly adminstred. It is
not so easy a thing* multitudes will stand (as their duty and their comfort
experienced commands them) for such powers. And the Order that is settled* will
much help to repress such unruly disorders. And though there be examples in
Stories of people that have prevayled against Tyrants: Yet I remember not one*
that ruling according to Laws, was overthrown by the people; namely in settled
times; for the soldiers mutynies, against the Roman Emperors, Pertinax and
others, will not reach this case. Finally We are far from saying, that
pretenses suffice, or even that every act of Tyranny allows of a National
resistance; But such as (in the case by the Dr. stated) shows, (or gives just
grounds to believe) a design to subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties, or any
of them.

But the Dr. will illustrate or prove his inconveniences 3. ways.

[1. This power of resistance if admitted and pursued may proceed to a change
of Government. The principles that are gone upon, and have carried it on so
far as we see at this day may also lead it on to the greatest of evils.]

Repl. Is not the King much beholden to the Dr. that will needs urge the
Parliament to those consequences they have professed to have no thought of, and
in their late Declaration in maintaining that of May. 26. do profess to be
unlawful

2. If he mean deposition of the King, or which is more, change of the
Monarchy into Aristocracy or Democracy I deny that this may proceed necessarily
or Rationally from a necessary defense, unless the Dr. will undertake to prove
that the state by no resistance or defense can be safe without deposing their
King or taking away Monarchs, which he neither will nor can, as I durst
undertake against him* if that were now the Qu: in hand, which I hope shall
never be. Though sure, there is no such temptation to it, as to see Tyranny
acted, and all sober necessary defense, cried out upon as Rebellion, all
bloodshed in such defense murder, and the end of it damnation. And when
Religion (if ever it should be) is only laid wast by the countenance of such
doctrines, improved as the Jesuit Advised, then if a people should be greatly
oppressed in their Civil liberty, there might be some danger, they would deny
the Drs. grounds, and all their allegiance and respect to Monarchy together.
And I dare be bold to say it, Monarchy never received such a blow since States
were; as the Counselors of Princes and Court-Chaplaines have provoked men to
give it. Because Kings must be absolute, and People mere slaves, formerly in
doing* and now in suffering.

2 He says [This power of resistance* when used and pursued, is accompanied
with the evils of a Civil War etc.]

Reply. 1. Whose fault is that? Suppose the people, that is, a great many
Papists would rebel, unless the King and Parliament would subvert Religion,
and bring in popery; and take away all the Laws that displeased them: must
they do this to avoid the evils of a Civil War? and if not, then neither
must the Parliament or People sacrifice Religion, Laws and Liberty, to the
fear or danger of a Civil War. No war so bad as the Parisian massacre, or
that of Ireland. The King of France commanded the one, the Irish people the
Rebels acted the other. In a Civil war we may save something; and after
recover all: Under a Tyranny not to be resisted we have nothing, have lost
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and have neither goods nor Lives, Wives nor
Children that we are sure of a day to an end. He that rationally preferres such
a Tyranny before a civil War, surely hopes (upon some special grounds, that
Tyranny, will be none to him, who pleads so well for it is indemnity; but
rather an advancement to him, much good may it do him.

3 He says the people may be discontented even with the Parliament and so it
will come to ^ade and Tyler, and overthrow all government.

Reply. 1. I have satisfied this Objection for the maine of it already. 1. That
it is lawful for the people to resist even the Tyranny of a Parliament, when
altogether outrageous, (as in our Quest^on) not else. 2. That the principles of
defense cannot be drawn to a necessary change of the Government. Of which I
add 2. Reasons. One that the defense will suffice without it, if wisely
managed to secure the safety of the State and Religion; so: morally. For still
men, some or other, must be trusted; and those that discredit themselves a
while may merit a trust again afterward: Enough for their honor and comfort
and not too much for the Commonwealth, and they need not be trusted (as
before) till they do merit a trust again. And yet no opposition much less
change of government. 3. The next government (suppose each shire (as the Dr.
talks* a Commonwealth* and all governed by a Folkmoot) is still liable in all
reason, to mischiefs, as bad, or worse then were in that government rejected.
And this they among the people that are not grown barbarous and brutish (by
suffering Tyranny and loss of Religion and Liberties, by the Drs principles)
may be made so sensible of; that they will never offer to attempt such a
madness. 3. Make a people Religious (as much as man can make them) and let
them enjoy the comfort of doing that which is good as St Paul speaks of Rulers
praising such. And then the Rulers need not fear the multitude of them (though
some will ever be wicked) that they will Rebel and change the Government. The
People indeed by Absaloms flattery Rebelled against David a righteous and just
Ruler. But there was more then ordinary in that GOD threatened it to him for
his adultery and murder. They did not so, to the great Reformers Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah specially yet questionless they 2. offended very
many; for the Princes and People (as I noted before on a special occasion)
were very bad even in their times. Some Papists as did rebel against King
Edward the 6. and some against Queen Elizabeth. But both soon and easily
subdued. GOD will not suffer, a just Prince or State to be trodden under foot (
David was humbred not overthrown) and men will still be found to take their
parts. As then St. ^aul bids Christians, doing that which is good* not fear
the powers he exhorts to submit to and not to resist, that is legally ruling by
Civil laws under God.

So I may say to Rulers (Kings and Parliaments) doing well, Ruling according to
GODS Ordinances they need not fear the power of Resisting Tyranny in the
peoples hands, which I say again, [Though people have often used it, and
prevailed against Tyrannous Governors, yet never did they prevail against Just
Rulers, to Depose them, or much less alter the Government. Tyranny then
(helped forward now by the Doctors Principles,) will be only that that in a
despair will drive People to Cantoning and Folkmoots (if any thing will) and
not at all our Position of a sober necessary Defense.

The Reasons that the Dr. has brought againh Resistance, are so far from being
the Apostles Insinuations, that they are wholly unsufficient to discredit it
with Reasonable and unpartiall Men, to whom (next under GOD) we Appeal. His
conclusion Ergo repeating that because some must be trusted, therefore Ergo the
K is still (I must tell him) most unreasonable, when his case supposes he will
not discharge his trust, but is bent to subvert Religion, Laws, and Liberties.
(So perpeatually the Dr. does or will, forget the State of the Qu.) The King
ought ordinarily to be trusted, and a just King (a David) is worth 10000. nay
100000. of us his Subjects; but the will and Lust of such a Tyrant as the Qu.
speaks of, is not to be satisfied upon one ( Jonathan or Naboth) the meanest
of those thousands; yet it must be, if he must still be trusted when he is bent
upon extreme Tyranny.

What the Dr alleadges further of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and
the late Protestation, prejudices not defensive Resistance, no more then
Scripture and Reason has done. The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are
only to the Kings Legal power and Authority, which no man disputes against.
The Protestation is to defend as far as lawfully I may, according to the duty
of my Allegiance, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate* and a
defensive Resistance, intends no hurt, but defense and maintenance of him in
all these respects; and so was never protested against. It is therefore vain
that he adds, [The Kings power cannot be prevalent for the good of his people
unless it be preserved to him entire, unless he has a power of denial and
of chief Command of Arms.]

Repl. But we Argue not against a King intending the good of his people; but
bent to subvert all Good, and this indeed he cannot do, unless their hands
be tied* by some such Positions as the Dr. would make them believe, that they
must not deny him his power of denial of their safety* when he himself (or
others under him) means to subvert all Religion, Laws and Liberty.

And now after all these discourses, the Dr. spends above a Page (in the 1.
Edition) to sum up his strength, and boasts of his Victory enough and enough.
But how justly the Consciences of his Readers and mine must and shall Judge
now, and God above all. To whom I very willingly appeal as well as he, or any
other; who for mine own part, have even in this discourse, showed I am no
Idolizer of the Parliaments, nor carried away with it (as he charges) as the
Papists with the name of the Church, nor yet do I think Religion may be
defended any way. For it may not be with lying nor with doing any thing that
God has undoubtedly forbidden. But he has forbidden such defensive resistance
as I have Argued for, my Conscience finds not, notwithstanding the Drs. big
words, continually misapplying the indeed terrible sentences of the Apostle,
against unlawful Resisters of the Lawful Power.

And so I have done with the maine of the Drs. Book, which concerns a Divine.
The 2. last Sections, are matters of fact; wherein it is more easily to
satisfy a man's own Conscience, then discourse of it publicly: because it
brings persons much on the Stage: and some of it cannot but reflect on the
King. Of whose honor I am so tender, that I would not willingly have an
unworthy thought of him. Neither will I yield to the Dr. or any other living
Man, in my zeal to His Royal Person Honor and Estate according to my
protestation. Yet somewhat must be said, and the Drs calling for it, will
deserve little thanks, nor yet his pleadings for all the actions done, if they
be well examined. To that therefore though unwillingly, I come.

SECT. V.
IN this Section he propounds the sum of his second and third general, which
are much matters of fact. Yet in this above the major part of Votes, he again
slides into matter of right and most illegally and unjustly argues against the
major part of Votes as against a prevailing Faction. But if conscience may
refuse (or suspend) to consent to such Votes under that pretense, in vain do
all numerous Bodies meet; For this principle of his dissolves, and blows up
not only all Parliaments, but all other meetings, Civil or Ecclesiastical.
For how seldom are any matters of great importance, once controverted, and
concluded by an unanimous Vote of all as one man? And in remote places, who can
be assured in conscience it was so, though said so? And what a new doctrine of
Polity is this, to make every one, in a great Assembly to have a mere
Negative, as this upon the matter does. The King has it not, in this case,
much less any other single Man. But he will not say so, if the Major part
should Vote any thing that pleases his Doctorship. If they would Vote the
Re-establishment of Bishops Votes and Authority, this were Good with him no
doubt, but if it be against his Positions, then it is but the prevailing of a
faction. So unjust and partial are Men that dispute and Argue for their own
Interests, though with pretense of Conscience.

But he first repeates what he had told us in his first Section, that it is
agreed, 1. That this Resistance must be, Omnibus Ordinibus Regni
Consentientibus. 2. That it must be* Legitima Defensi^ a mere Defensive
Resistance.

Repl. For the first of these if some agree to it, yet all do not: I cannot for
the Reasons often insinuated and inserted in what went before; meaning it as he
does here of an Unanimous consent in Parliament, for not only a legal number
Voting, suffices to any Parliamentary Act, being the Major part present. But if
no Parliament were called or could meet through the strength of a Tyranny
already prevailing. Nor the Nobility and Gentry and Commons so much as send one
to another, t^ know one another minds, through the several Shires of a
Kingdom, yet might any one Shire* or part of a Shire, begin to take up Arms
to defend themselves by resisting Outrageous Attempts of Tyranny against their
Religion Laws, and Liberties, and that from the Natural Liberty, that all have
to be no further Subject then God has commanded, or themselves consented with
Gods consent; and this originally belongs (as an inseparable privilege of a
Reasonable Creature,) to each person single, and from thence is derived to
Parliamentary and Representative Bodies, and so in Case of such necessity, is
not bound to wait, their Assembling, or Votes, nor to be concluded by them, if
Assembled they should Vote the contrary by a Conspiracy with the Tyranny: But
each may defend himself, and each by the Law of charity may (and should) also
defend his Neighbor, but especially when the danger is common; as all may
without any Votes or Commands, run together to quench a common fire, stop a
breach made by the Sea, resist a Foreign Invading Enemy: Without I say, and
even against any Votes or Commands (if any should be) to the contrary. Though
still I grant, Omnibus Ordinibus Regni Consentientibus, out of Parliament, and
much more in Parliament, (or the Major part consenting, and much more, few or
none dissenting;) makes the defense more Honorable, more Easy, more
Successful; Only I cannot yield it as absolutely Necessary to the
lawfulness of the defense.

But the Dr. proceeds, and would insinu^e, that the resistance begun (in the
point of the Militia) not only found opposition, specially in the Lords house,
but also that the Votes were not free. And that their proceedings are declared
against by a greater number than do remain in either House, such as have
been cast out, or have withdrawn themselves in dislike of their proceedings.

Reply. Now we are come to matter of Fact, and here in many things which the
Dr. has in these two Sections, never any people (that desired to satisfy
their Consciences) had such advantage, by all sorts of Declarations, Diurnalls,
and Writings, summing up, and repeating actions, and proceedings, both since
the business of the Militia specially, and even sufficiently before, that he
that will go by an implicit Faith, as the Drs. phrase is, or believe only one
side, is inexcusable if he be misled. All then that that needs be done, to
understanding and vigilant Consciences is, but to awaken their memories, and
send them to their Almanacks (as the Dr. speaks) or their Memorialls, and
apply them a little to their hands and hearts. To that then the Dr. says, may
be replied, first, that there was need of settling the Militia. When once both
Houses petitioned it, the King himself acknowledged it. Yet it was opposed a
while by some in both Houses, (but the Petition was not consented to at the
first by the House of Lords.) No marvel; there were Popish, and Popishly
affected Lords, whose design, at least to keep Popery among us still, and in
some of them no doubt to advance it, by the ruin of this Parliament,) would
have been hindered or spoiled by the settling it. No marvel then such opposed
it; who also as was noted before, opposed the succors of Ireland, till all the
Kingdom almost cried out upon them and it, with whom joined (to their great
Honor) at lest the most, if not all, the Bishops present usually. Only once
(as I remember) for Irelands business there were two or three Bishops
consenting. But when once those were outed, and the Popish and popishly
affected w^thdrawn^, (even before some of them withdrew) all Votes passed for
the Militia* as now it is. Let consciences now judge, whether ought to be stuck
to, those that were for it, or those against it? Secondly, it is altogether
false that a greater number of the House of Commons have declared against the
proceedings; then have been there, and voted their continuance. About 6^. (and
not many more) have been cast out for their notorious malignancy, and many of
them for Actual War against the Parliament. But there was ever the Major
part for the Militia, and so for the consequent proceedings. Else (as I said
before) why came not the Mayor part, to out vote them, and set all Right? Let
Conscience judge.

The next thing the D^. would prove, is that the Parliament is not upon the
Defensive; and then that they keep within the Defensive.

In the first, he puts two questions who was first in Arms? and what is the
cause of the Arms? In answering the former, because he speaks of an Almanac.
I must remember him, and he seems only to think of 1642. But 1641. must not
be forgotten, nor thrown aside as out of date. There we find first a
memorandum of the Northern Army intended to be brought up against the
Parliament. By the good then, the chief Actors and proiectours of it, sled
beyond Sea in all haste, after once the Portugal Ambassador had disclaimed to
Mr. Wadsworth that he knew Sir John Suckling (or had any Commission to desire
Forces from the King for his Mrs. Service (who yet listed and paid diverse
Officers and others, and gave ou^ that he was to go into Portugal with three
or 400. Secondly, there we find a Memorandum of a great Lord that said, when
the Scots were once gone, they would teach the House of Commons better manners,
who now did what the list, or to this effect. Thirdly, there we fi^nde a
Memorandum, that about one and the same time, there was first a strange
business (GOD will in due time clear it,) in Scotland,; and Secondly, the
Popish Rebellion brake forth in Ireland: and thirdly, the Parliament was many
ways threatened in England, by Libells of several kinds, Quaeres, whether any
Acts passed while two Armies were in the Kingdom were valid; Relations of
Plots against prime Members; many intelligence of warning from foreign parts.
Fourthly, there we find a Memorandum of the Irish Rebels, boastings of their
Party here, threatening to invade the Kingdom. 5. There we find a Memorandum,
that the King brought Winter with him out of Scotland (as he went thither in a
kind of storm, against the earnest advise of both Houses, and after a severe
speech made by the Lord keeper in his name and presence) all clouds and never a
Sun shine day all the year after. The privileges of Parliament infringed in
two or three things, are, the two Houses declared to him by a Petition of December
1.14. The Parliament guards dismissed, and a new one denied, though they
desired to trust the then Lord Chamberlain of the Kings House: but another was
offered to be put upon them, under the Command of the Lord Chamberlain of the
Queens House. All these Memorandums, the Almanak of 1641. affords, which all
put together, make some what toward ^he necessity of a preparation for
Defense, at least by petitioning for the Militia to be settled ( Etsi non
placent singula, juncta juvant.)

But now no sooner does our Almanac of 1642. appear, but first it presently
presents us with the accusation of the 6. Members; and secondly, straight after
with the Kings coming to the House of Commons, to demand the five Members of
the House. The carriage of which business, by the Kings Attendants, if any one
will be ignorant of, let him be so; Res ipsa loquitur, the thing it self was
so in the sight of the Sun, as was incapable of a mistake; yet did an Answer
(to a Petition of the Maj^r, and Aldermen of the City, upon the occasion of a
few days after,) say that the King had no other Attendants, but only
Gentlemen armed with their Swords. Thirdly, about a week aft^r, the King
withdrawes to Hampton Court, and never returned to the Parliament since, (nor
ever passed any Bill save that against Bishops Votes, and two or three about
Ireland;) of which what the Lord Digby said to the Cavaliers, that came to the
House of Commons, and how he behaved himself at Kingstone upon Thames, the
Parliament has sufficiently declared, and in their Defense of their
Remonstrance of May 26. have showed, that it is evident he did so carry
himself, though it have been denied. Fourthly his Letter (after he was fled)
to the Queen, and another to Sir Jews Dives counselling the King to retire to
some strong place, on which the Attempt on Hull, has made an unhappy Comment,
(and another since that surprised, written to the Queen, signifying what
Counsel he gave the King in a Letter, about that time which has been ever
since followed.) Fifthly, the Militia denied for Cities and Corporations, (upon
pretense of a Petition from the City of London, contrived by Binion, and some
few others) which was of the greatest consequence for the Parliaments safety,
and to keep out foreign Forces; and this when the Houses thought the King had
granted it; (the mean while the Queen goes for Holland, in a strange season of
the year, and on a small occasion, (the Parliament having the year before,
given Reasons against her offering to go beyond Sea, upon another pretense,)
and how she has done since her going over, is too well known. Finally the
Earl of Newcastle in a disguised habit and Name, and Captain Leg, (two
persons that were named in the business of bringing up the Northern Arms)
came to Hull, and one of them, I remember now not which, but the Papers will
tell,) showed the Kings hand for to have had Hull, and the Magazine delivered
up to him. And all this before the settling of the Militia by an Ordinance, or
Sir John Hothams taking in Forces to keep Hull safe. Let Conscience now judge,
whether all this gave not just occasion, for a preparation for Defense* and of
a long time after this, nothing more was done, the Militia settled in very ^ew
Countries, till the Kings proceedings has further warned them ^o stand upon
their guard, in other places besides London.

It is true the King for a time had nothing but Proclamations and Declarations
to oppose them. But after he was once gone Northward (and the Qu. beyond Sea*)
what did he ever do or say, but in opposition to them? and while his
Declarations renounced all thoughts of War, notes were sent over into Holland
for Arms, and a beginning of an Army raised at York, under the name of a
Guard. When first the Houses having petitioned the Removing the Magazine at
Hull to London. (Upon a counter-Petition of a very few Gentlemen of Yorkshire,
pretending the name of the whole County that it might be kept clear still) the
King goes instantly to Hull, and demands entrance, intending as he declares to
the Parliament after* that he meant so to do) to take possession of the Town
and Magazine, and dispose of it: and being denied, proclaims Sir John Hotham
Traitor, without any process of Law, or sending first to the House to know if
they would own it; and after demands justice so peremptorily, as to deny
before hand all other businesses, but that of Ireland, (and how well that was
done, we must remember anon) and then was the Army raised under Color of a
Guard the Yorkshire men, not coming in readily enough to make it appear a
great Army.) And all this before ever it was declared by the Houses that the
King seduced by wicked Council, intended to make war against his Parliament,
and so before ever they set out the Propositions for Money, Plate Horses, and
therefore certainly before any one man was listed. In all which the event has
showed, that they were rather in wisdom too slow, then in conscience too quick
in their Preparations for defense. Remembering also, that as soon as the Ship
(Providence) was come to them (a provdence indeed to discover what was before
intended) the Siege was straight said to Hu^, and the Declarations then spoke
another Language then common men understood them to speak before. For after
all the Lords present with the King had subscrib^d (about June 16.) that they
saw in the pretented Guard, etc. no intention of War against the Parliament:
within few days, the King tells them, that if to seek to recover Hull and the
Magazine (then at London) and suppress the Militia) in all which the
Parliament was engaged as much as could be) were to make War against the
Parliament, he ever meant to do these things, and had ever declared so; though
I believe none that believed him did or could so understand: Let Conscience now
judge who began first.

As touching the cause of these Arms, the Doctor would persuade us, that it is
for something which the King has right to Deny. To evince which, he first
affirms, that it cannot be for Religion or Privileges and ancient Rights and
Liberties, for these the King does not deny.

REPL. But now sufficient verbal promises, with such actions done (as were
noted even now) are to secure Religion or the State, Conscience must judge, and
it may a little the better, when we come to consider them again in the proper
place for them (for here they outrunne their season like Abortives) in the next
Section. Secondly, he says it must then be for denying the Militia, the
disposing offices of State, and such like; also the government of the Church,
and the revenue of it; and for not denying his power of denying in Parliament.

REPL. 1. For the Militia, I refer to what has been said, how just reason
the Parliament had to petition the securing it, and after to settle it (as in
case of necessity) by Ordinance. Of which their Declarations have given more
full account. 2. For disposing Offices of State, it was never desired, till the
difference was very far advanced, and Hull attempted; and Sir John Hotham
proclaimed Traitor, and the Army raised at York, called a Guard. And so only
desired as a Security after such a breach; and no way a cause of the breach;
Thirdly, For the Kings power of denying, it was never in question between him
and them, till the Militia was absolutely and peremptorily denied. And in all
their Declarations they never take it away; but contrarily in the defense of
that May, 26. they grant, that though the King be bound by Oath and care of his
people, not to deny any Bill for general safety and good (for in ordinary
matters they yield he may deny) Yet if he do deny, it is no Law without him.
Only in case of the common safety, they say the two Houses may do what is
necessary, and it binds the Subjects for that necessity, though he do deny.
The denial then of the Militia only, in the case of necessity (with other
things noted before) forced them to do what they did toward Arms; and not any
difference about a power of denial in general. 4. For the government and
Revenue of the Church. I believe indeed it was a part of the cause of taking
Arms; but not on the Parliaments part: the major part of whom in either House,
never (till very lately) declared, nor showed any purpose of taking either away
quite, but only reforming (which the Doctor says his Majesty is always ready to
agree,) as may appear even by the great agitations for so long in the House of
Commons of the Bill against Episcopacy root and branch; and at last it was
wholly laid aside; which shows the major part never owned it as their delight.
Else they would first have absolutely concluded the destructive part; and then
consulted what to have in the room. B^t to consult first for Successors; was
Pacuvius his Policy to preserve the Senators of Capua, though he made show to
condemn them all. And had the Commons past the Bill against them; yet did the
Lords never show any such intendment, who were not easily won to take away
their Votes, till their Protestation against both Houses in their absence
helped to persuade them to it. It can then no way appear to Conscience that
ever the Parliament had thoughts of Arms, to obtain their taking away. But, I
am verily persuaded, by all I could ever hear from the Episcopal Party; that
their fear of this made them (who had still enough of the Kings ear and
heart,) urge the King to many Actions, which have helped the War forward.
Among the rest, I cannot but note one* not a week passed between the 12.
Bishops for their Protestation before the King first accused of high Treason,
the L. Kimbol^on, and the other five, and then came in that manner to the House
of Commons to demand those five. And whereas the Doctor says the King is bound
by Oath to maintain the Government and Revenue, as by Law they are established.

REPL. 1. He discovers a secret to us which we understood not before. All men
stood amazed at the late Oath to this effect for the government; and among
other Arguments against it not a few considerable men of the Ministry and
Gentry before the Parliament looked at it as an injury to the King, and opposite
to our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (and so the Parliament did in effect
vote it) because it urged men to swear never to consent to alter the
Government, which yet the King and State might possibly judge fit to be
altered. But we never thought that the King was supposed bound by his Oath to
it already; and much less that all Kings in succession would be bound (as now
the Doctor teaches us) by their Oaths to maintain it as it is by Law
established. This it seems they presumed upon, and so thought to have made all
sure, by swearing all the Ministry and Universities, and Masters of Arts, and
Schoolemasters, and Physicians* who would have had influence enough into the
whole Kingdom within awhile. But God laughed at this Project, turned it upon
the Head of the Projectours and all the Party, as appears this Day. And so I
am persuaded He will do, all their Present endeavors of War to recover
themselves. 2. But in good earnest does the Doctor (or any else) think the
King bound by Oath to maintain Bishops still in England (though he has
consented to take them away in Scotland, to prevent War) even though he hazard
the ruin of the Kingdom by a Civil War? and notwithstanding any
inconveniences represented to him by the complaints of his People, and the
wisdom of his Parliament, and his own too? Or does his Oath bind him to any
more then to maintain them so long as they are established by Law as he swears
to maintain all his other Subjects in their Rights; and yet an Act of
Parliament may alter many things in men's Rights. Are not all Rights of Church
and State (which are not properly jure divino) compromitted to the Parliament
the three Estates, King, Lords, Commons, every time they meet? And may they not
alter and change this or that, so far as it is humane and established but by
the Laws of the Land? The Kings Oath then binds not him and his Parliament
from taking away Bishops, if they judge them (not jure divino) and their
continuance to be prejudicial to the State and Church; (and so of Revenues the
same may be said.) 3. And if the Dr. will not admit this Answer, but still
contend, the King did swear to maintain them (at his Coronation) as they were
then by Law established. Is not the King beholding to him for charging him with
Perjury (as in effect he does) since it is evident that by taking away the
high Commission Court, and their power in their Courts of imposing Oaths and
Penalties, and after that their Votes in Parl. he has not maintained them as
they were by Law established, when he took the Oath.

How the Doctor will answer this I know not: sure I am, if any Minister having
taken the Oath (never to consent to alter the Government as it now stands
established,) had offered to petition such a taking away of their governing
power; he should quickly have been accursed as a perjured person, and
accordingly so dealt with. It remains then that the King only swore to
maintain them according to Law; while they should stand by Law, and not to
bind himself from any Law-making, though to take them away, in case it should
appear to be for the good of Church and State. And if this be not made good
that their taking away will be so; let us all fight for them. But if it be, woe
to those men that hazard the King and two of his Kingdoms ( England and
Ireland) once more* (as before they would two years one after another, have
hazarded England and Scotland) to maintain Episcopal greatness and
Authority. 4. What degree of Reformation (or any thing like to the Primitive
Bishops) did they ever offer to be reduced unto? which might have contented
Parliament and People both, if ever propounded in earnest, to have asked no
more. Or what cure for any effectual Reformation have any of them (or their
Party) ever showed since the Parliament met, to have rendered it any way
hopeful that they would be good instruments hereafter? 5. If therefore after
all warnings, they will needs put the King still on (as it appears even by the
Doctors words) to fight for their maintenance: Let them remember Mr. Brightmans
Prophetical Interpretation of the spewing out of the Laodicean Angel. And
though a vomiting sometimes makes a man's heart sick, and ready to dye; yet where
he has strength of Nature it comes up at last, and proves happy cure. Which in
this case (if it be Christ's act* as it much seems to be) will not fail to be
fulfilled to our comfort at last, how weak soever it bring us first. I
conclude this then, that as Physic is upon the defensive* so much more the
endeavor to cast up the humor which unprovoked or but a little stirred,
endangers the Bodies health by Inflammations and the like. So the late voting
down the B^s* was merely defensive; and the War, so much as it is to maintain
them, themselves are and ever were upon the offensive, and offenders, in and
the Parliament not at all.

Now for the managing of the resistance, the Doctor offers to examine whether
it has been so void of Hostility as that defensive way, they pretend to,
should be. Let us examine it with him. Here he contends 1. that the Defendant
should be of answerable demeanor to David defending himself against Saul.
REP. But he may be pleased to consider, that as all that handle the difference
between an offensive War and a defensive, do rationally maintain, that he that
is outragiously injuried (as David in his Ambassadors, 2 Samuel ^0.) Or
dangerously threatened, is but on the defensive; though he be actually ^n Arms
first, through diligence and some advantages perhaps: so a man* keeps himself
within the bounds of a defense, though he actually offend him that does, or
that would assault him, and even though he begin first. So David did in the
former case, invading the Ammonites Country, and yet he was properly defensive.
So a man on the high way, if a Robber should assault him; if he could prevent
his blow and strike first, it were but in his own defense: but much more to
strike again and kill (if he cannot otherwise defend himself) which yet is
the highest degree of offense between party and party. Ob. But David still
withdrew and having taken the Kings spear and cruse, he restored them without
demand. Rep. True, but I have formerly given the reason why he ever withdrew,
Page I need not repeat it. And as for the cruse and spear, he took them not
away for fear of being hurt by them (as now Ammunitions and other provisions)
but as the Dr. well says, to show Abners neglect and his own integrity; and
therefore when they had done him that service, he restored them without demand.
But the Parl. cannot fly from place to place like David; they must keep at
Westminster, or dissolve themselves; and they have offered to restore that
which they took to prevent their own and the Kingdoms being mischefed by it;
so that security might have been obtained for time to come; witness the
Petition sent by the E. of Holland and others to Beverley, while Hull was
besieged. In a word there has been nothing done in this kind, of all that the
Dr. reckons up, which mere necessity has not forced; and most of those things
must have been done by David, if he had kept Keilah against Saul as he desired
and meant to have done. 2, And whereas the Dr. further urges [that the Kings
loyal and peaceable Subjects are assaulted, despoiled of their Arms, goods,
estates, their persons imprisoned, because they would according to their
allegiance assist him in this extremity; or would not contrary to their
conscience, join with them against him] Rep. This concerns two sorts of
persons; and for both* though somewhat differently, the satisfaction to this
allegation depends upon the justice of the defense it self. For 1. if the
Parl. do justly take up Arms, then without all doubt (however the Dr. talks of
an implicit faith) they may seize upon the arms goods estates* persons of those
that actually under what pretense soever) assist against them. Though if their
defense be not just, then all this is confessedly a multiplication of
injustice: but if they may fight with the Army that opposes them, they may
disarm, etc. those that strengthen the army with monys etc. 2. as for those
that only would not, contrary to their conscience join with them against him, I
have 2. things to say. 1. If any of these have in former times any way promoted
illegal commands and practices it is much to be doubted they can bring but
slender proof of their forbearing to join with the Parl. out of conscience.
There is nothing more easy then to pretend conscience in all controverted
points. But he deserves not to be believed in his pretense, that has been but
even now (and much more if he be still) a violatour of rules of conscience in
other respects. It is well known how tender they have been of other men's
consciences in needless Ceremonies, in illegal Innovations, in profane
violations of the Lords Sabbath and the 4th. Com. who now cry conscience to
save their money, or to weaken the Parl. 2. If any be really conscientious in
the point; ye^ upon the necessity of a just def^nce the Parl. may as well
secure their persons, and specially their Arms* and levy some moneys upon them
as in a common danger of a foreign enemy trenches may be dug on a man's Land
or Forts built ev^n against his will* and in a fire breaking violently out the
next house may be p^l'd down to save a town or many more houses. Though it is
also true, that such ought to have recompense afterward when all the danger is
over, and so I doubt not, but all truly conscientious shall have in due time.
When it shall appear they only forbear out of conscience, and did no acts of
malignancy withal; nor spoke malignantly against the Parliament and their just
proceedings.

The Modesty of some (of many) that have suffered a great deal worse within
these few years, then the Parliament makes their most Malignant Prisoner,
suffer may sufficiently show, what a Conscientious refusal signifies, if it be
no more but so. And if the Parliam. have nothing more to Answer for then rigor
against such, the Dr. will hardly prove, they have transgressed the bounds of a
lawful defense. His reproaches therefore in the close of this Sect. I let pass
and come at last to his 7. and last Sect. whereunto* if as good a reply can be
made as to the former, I shall not much doubt the Sentence of Conscience (of
any one who is unengaged or unpartial) in the whole Question between us.

SECT. 7.
WE are now come to the Tendrest Piece of all the Rest; and how confidently so
ever the Dr. charges the Parliament and all that cleave to them with Rendering
the King odious, etc. and says it concerns them so to do; yet it shall
appear by what I have to reply to him in this Section, how little delight I
have to make the King Odious, and that the Parliament also has and does as
much as lay in them to put off all Imputations from the King and charge them
(as the Law does) upon his Counselors, Judges, Followers and Favorites. Here
1. let me remember him; that whereas in other Kingdoms, some Favorites, when
they have seen their Prince endangered have rather taken his actions upon
themselves, then cast theirs on him, and been content to Sacrifice themselves
rather for his safety, then expose him to shield themselves. It has been the
continual practice of the plotters against our Religion, and Liberties to
Entitle the King to all their Illegallities and Oppressions; There can scarce
that Grievance be named (if we except the Ship Money which was devolved upon
the Judges, and yet it is well known how they were tampered with in the Kings
Name) which they have not Fraudulently gotten the King to own as his Act; and
this is their constant practice to this day, who then has labored to make the
King Odious? or whom did it concern but they? that so far as the people would
find fault with any thing* they should be forced in a sort to find fault with
the King; and this also helped to Charm all Tongues* and tie down all hands
till they provoked the Scots beyond all degrees of sufferance, to come in with
an Army and demand security in and by an English Parl. as well as one in
Scotland.

2. Next whereas the Dr. upbraids the Parliament and People, [That it seems
they are men that would be loath to suffer for their Religion, they are so
ready to fly to Arms to secure themselves]

Repl. 1. It ill becomes a pretender to, and Disputer for Conscience to speak
this Language that has lived to see how many sufferings (though not resisting
to blood* striving against sin) many even of the Parliament, but specially of
the Ministry and people have yielded to within 16. or 18. years, and never
thought of flying to Arms, but rather of flying out of their Native Country,
as thousands have done: Unless the Dr. will undertake to justify, all that
was Imposed upon men's Consciences all this while; And if he will do so he shall
save many Consciences a labor to judge with what a Conscience he Writes. 2.
Does he think, that they could be so simple as not to foresee that their very
flying to Arms was and would be a great suffering, and might prove (if God
should defeat them) the means of extreme suffering. A people so taught, so
enured to Passive obedience, and no way enured to War, could not be supposed
willing or forward to engage themselves, their purses, or much less their
Persons, against the Name of their King: and each day since the first Necessity
has continually sounded this out, so that they had no reason to be forward to
fly to Arms. 3. By what I said on the former Section, and added with the
Petition by the E. of Holland (even now mentioned) It appears they did not fly
to Arms but fly from it, as far as they could and durst. 3. Whereas the Dr.
often in this Section, in the beginning, middle and end insists mainly, upon
the breach of Charity, in suspecting the King upon Remote fear, and mere
Jealousies, causeless Jealousies etc.

Repl. This may sufficiently be satisfied both in the behalf of the
Parliament, and then of the People that adhere to them jointly and singly. For
the Parliament and people both jointly; This may justly be said, 1. The Dr.
mistakes, it is not simply a Jealousy of the King, but rather of the Kings
Counselors and Followers, who find so much favor with him (as they and others
did before the Parliament against the Scots and us both, and Ireland too,
witness all their heavy complaints against the Great Favorite Strafford) that
they are able to put him from time to time, upon these Actions which his
goodness of it self, rightly informed and councelled, would abhor; and has
so often declared against, and yet Actions again have discredited those
declarations, as the Memory of those that have been awake cannot forget, both
Referring to Religion and Liberties and the Parliament Remonstrances do amply
set out, besides other Books. If therefore Security be once obtained against such
persons; I am persuaded the King will be no more suspected; and in the mean
time, it must be a strange Charity that can choose but suspect them. 2. Where
the danger is of much importance, both for Greatness of Mischief and
Inevitableness according to Man, if not timely prevented; Charity to ourselves
(and others) will not only allow, but commend, and even command to suspect and
accordingly prevent, such dangers by suspecting Persons and Actions which in
lesser matters they would and might and should venture to trust. Fire near
straw or Gunpowder, is to be suspected more then near hard wood.
Hedge-breakers and breakers of Houses are not equally to be suspected.
Religion* Laws and Liberties are precious things and may be sooner lost then
recovered. And his Charity has drunk of the water of Lethe, that forgets these
were lately attempted and endangered. (The Kings own Declarations acknowledge
Laws and Liberties have been broken.) And how since the E. of Straffo^ds death,
all the old Projectors are become Converts, is too hard a morsel for Charity
to swallow, when it must hazard such dear things to many of the same Persons
again. Specially seeing still, what they have done since the first sitting of
the Parliam. toward their old Projects, as has been partly noted already and
somewhat more must be said by and by.

Next for the Parliament alone. They are the great Council of the Kingdom the
public Watchmen, the Highest Court of Judicature, it concerns them therefore
to exercise their Charity, for the safety of those that have trusted them.
Charity toward Attempters against a City, is none of the Virtues of a
Watchman, nor toward Attempters of dangerous Treasons against a King and
Kingdom, the Virtue of a Judge. Were they only to loose their own Liberties
or Lives, their Charity might venture much further, then now it may, when they
must Answer for Religion, Laws, and Liberties (and so Lives and Consciences) of
a whole Kingdom, of 2 Kingdoms, England and Ireland, as formerly of England
and Scotland, if not rather then and still, of all 3. in a degree. Who would
not Curse their Charity, detest their Folly, if by their Credulity, all this
should be betrayed and ruined. If Rhetoric needed in this cause, no Subject
could deserve it better, then to cry down such a pernicious Charity, as this
would prove, if they should be deceived with credulity.

And then for the People alone, have they not a charity to exercise toward the
Parliament, as well as toward the Kings Followers; whom have they trusted to be
public Watchmen, the one or the other? Whom has the law trusted to be the
great Council and chief Judges, the one or the other? Who has pleaded for
their Liberties the one or the other? 12. Subsidies were demanded (with intent
thereby to engage us in a bloody War against Scotland) in the Parliament of
April, 1640. Only for taking away of Ship Money. But this Parliament has
proved it so illegal and other things more, that it was taken away without any
cost at all, by way of Exchange, and many other happy Laws has the ^arliament
passed, and obtained for us. But what one thing did the Kings former
Counselors move him to offer to his people, by way of prevention, for State or
Religion, in a whole year together? To whom then must the People exercise their
charity? Must they condemn their watchmen, as scaring them needlessely with Old
Enemies, discredit the law that says. [No dishonorable thing ought to be
thought of such a great Council, such a high Judicature.] And that when they,
more then ever any Parliament before give account to all men, of all their
Actions and the grounds of them? Well, shall that People deserve a ruin, that
believe Old Wolves, rather then their faithful Dogs, then their Council of
Shepherds: That shall think themselves bound to be charitable, to those that
have attempted their ruin, and uncharitable to those that under God have
hitherto saved them. In a word, let those that love Religion, and Laws, and
Liberties compare the best actions on the one side, with the best on the other,
and the worst on the one side, with the worst on the other: and then let
charity judge (if it dare, or can) the Parliament Fools or Traitors, to GOD
and the KING, and the STATE; and the Kings followers, the only wise men, that
have discovered their cunning Treachery, and the only faithful men to
Religion, his Majesty and Kingdom. Take in then* the Declarations and
Protestations; on the one side* and on the other, and remember is is not a
single charity, whether I shall suspect the King; but first mixed* whether I
shall or may suspect the Kings followers who can do any thing with him so
far, as that they may do contrary to what he says and then a distinguishing
charity* whether I shall suspect them, who were once (most of them apparently)
Delinquents, against Religion and the Laws, Or the Public Watchmen, and the
great Council an Judicature of the Kingdom: who have done so much and with
such diligence to save and restore both and then let Conscience exercise
charity as it will answer to GOD, to it self to all it is Fellow English men
and Christians, and even to the whole World. Thus in general, now we must
examine some particulars.

The Dr. names 4, grounds of fears and jealousy, with which the people have
been possessed. All which he first rejects with a gentle comparing of the
Parliamont (who has set them forth) to the Devil the Arch-accuser. This is
his charity. In stead of rataliating, I will only say the Lord forgive thee*

His first ground is [Reports of Foreign Power to be brought in. This, he
says, was given out before the setting up of the MILITIA, to keep the People
amused, the easier to draw them into such a posture of defense as was
pretended; and they are all discovered by time to have been vain.]

REPL. 1. why will he perpetually forget that the King himself granted the
Militia necessary to be settled. 2 It was not merely Foreign Forces to be
brought in; but Papists and Delinquents rising at home, that was insinuated a
cause of the desire to have the Kingdom put in a posture of defense. 3. Who
knows not of the billeting of many thousands of Irish upon us even during the
fitting of a former Parliament? The Project of Germane Horse in the Dukes time
is it quite forgotten? The Earl of Staffords Council, not only to bring in
his Irish Army consisting most of Papists, wherewith to reduce this Kingdom,
was it not proved by the Oath of a Privy Counselor present, and confirmed by
his own Notes taken at the time, and did not the rest of the advice then given
by that Politician, (that the King being now deserted by his Parliament, might
do any act of power (Quaere the words in his charge) amount to Counselling the
bringing in of any forces from any place? And why must all intelligences after
these prevented, be counted vain 4. For is all suspicion vain, because the
thing suspected comes not to pass, when mean are used to prevent it? Is all
preventing Physic Vain? Is all fear of Pirates in a Sea voyage vain, if
none assault a well manned and provided Ship? Was not such a Navy being secured
in safe hands, as would under God have made great Foreign Forces repent their
coming against the Kingdomee; competent reason why those that did mean to come
(if they might have had no resistance on the Sea) now thought it too hot a
service? 5. But besides the Navy, they had no Landing place, Hull being
contrary to the Court-expectation (and attempt as was Noted before) secured by
the Parliament, and so might well be the more discouraged. 6. Which is the more
considerable, because no sooner had they got a Port-Town, namely Newcastle; but
though no Foreign Forces came, who could not be so soon ready; yet Foreign
Ammunition came, not a little; and Forces of our Countrymen, who served in
Foreign Countries, and money too, from Foreign Princes or People. And what
more is coming, if our unhappiness continue till the Spring who can be secure!

But for this if it prove so, the Dr. has a defense ready. [All Christian
Kings (he says) cannot but think themselves concerned in the cause, and it
will be as just for the King to use them* against subjects now in arms as it
was unjust in the Barons to call in the French against their natural King*

REPL. 1. The Dr. bestirres himself to make the King strong; (to maintain the
Prelacy among other things as himself has told us) before, in the former
Section, he said that they that assist him, do it according to their
Allegiance. So that he intends that all his Subjects are bound by their
Allegiance to assist him and fight against the Parliament (even though their
Consciences judge them to intend the conservation of Religion, Laws and
liberties, and his followers to intend their subversion.) And here he calls
all Christian Kings i^, as themselves concerned in the Cause 2. When the
Rochellers took Arms according to their Privileges and Edicts of the Kingdom
to defend themselves. And our Protestant or Popish Counselors got 8. Ships to
be sent to assist the King of France against them, and in the Low Country they
did the like too, what will the Dr. say, were all the Christian Princes
concerned to assist against the Rochellers? If, he do, the very soldiers and
mariners that went into Ships, shall rise up in judgment against him, who when
they knew what they went for, utterly refused to fight against their Religion;
and so the greatest part of them were set a Shore again, and the rest went on
their voyage, and did the mischief to help beat the Rochell Fleet, and give the
King possession of the Haven, so as he afterward with the help of the King of
Spain (so still Princes are concerned against the Protestant*) made a
Barricado so strong as when a Fleet from hence after re-Voyage attempted to
relieve Rochell by Sea, (being then actually besieged by Land) it could not be
done. 3. What will the Dr. say to that Voyage to Rey and that to releeve
Rochell, when it proved too late? Why was not the King still concerned to help
the King of France? or was he? 4* Will it be Just for the King to use Foreign
Forces, when to the understanding of Common Readers he has utterly disclaimed
it in more then one Declaration? 5, What Counsel, would an Enemy to the King
and Kingdom (that has read Stories, and ours in special as the Dr. seems to
have done) give, but the using of Foreign Forces? was not the Kingdom
Conquered by this very means, by the Saxons, when King Vorteger was in debate
with his Lords and People, called them in to assist him? Did not the Turks so
come into Europe? and often the like has hapened. 6. He counts it damnable, to
resist for defense merely, much more then, as the Barons in K. John's time, to
call in a Stranger to make him King: if then to call in other Kings to assist
against the Parliament be as just as that was unjust, it is a high virtue
though to the utter endangering of the whole Kingdom, whose Counselor surely
it were pity the Dr. should ever be, who has no more judgment, or more
Conscience or charity toward the public good, then to advise and commend such
a practice. 2. Next he propounds the Queens Religion, as a matter which is
urged to cause fears and jelousies. Of which he says, It is no new cause.

REPL. 1. It is true, to the great grief of all that truly love Religion, or
wish well to her Majesty, but had others wished it otherwise (as the Dr.
speaks for himself) who have had access unto her, She had not bin told by a
great man in the Church, (in the worst season that could be, when it is said
she had some Pangs about Her Religion and asked of it) that She might well be
saved in her Religion. Or if any give no credit to this passage, yet it is
notorious enough that her illumination has been so far from the endeavors
of those who might have bin heard by the King and the Queen both, that
Ministers have bin checked for praying for Her conversion. 2. But no man has
said, this alone is a sufficient Cause, nor was the Chief cause at the first.
It is well known tha^ at the first, and for diverse y^e^s She carried her self
so, as those that loved the true Religion pitied her rather then severely
blamed her, and hoped good of her, if any means were used for Her good. But
when after some years, a Nuncio from the Pope, was brought over and settled
here, those about her have been more active: and yet more since the Q^: Mother
came first over, things have ripened apace, and how far Her Religion has
been a Cause of the dangers of Scotland, England, and Jreland, by the
countenance of the Popish Party generally, and multitudes of Jesuits and
Priests, in Court, City, and Country, any common understanding may judge, that
remember specially, what even a Solomon did for Outlandish Idolairous wives,
which Nehemiah set so home ^. 13.

3. The little business of her journey into Holland, and the great business
that has been acted by means of that, is but an unhappy comm^nt or
explication, of the justness of fears and Jealousies from her Religion.

4. As for the Doctrines and practices of these Times which the Doctor says,
are not the way to make her fall in love with our Religion and draw her to it.
She has little reason to be offended with them, if she be pleased with the
Doctrines and practices of her own Popish Religion; Witness the Parisian
Massacre, the powder Treason; and the present too lamentable rebellion of
Ireland. Let but that be compared with the worst can be imagined of our
Doctrines and practices, and then let her love, which is fairest and meekest?

3. Then he comes to the resort of Papists and his Majesty's entertaining them,
and David's example (1 Samuel 22.2.) toward Ziba is alleged to justify it.

Rep. 1. But the Dr. forgets that the time before the Parliament, the Papists
and popish party had undeniably made an inrode upon our Doctrine, public
Worship, Laws and Liberties; and against them in special was the Militia
desired to be settled by people and Parliament. And after all this, upon a
difference about the Militia, to employ them against the Parliament sooner or
later, is an example beyond example; and beyond the power of words to take off
the exception. Suppose a Woman suspected of incontinence: (And Popery is
spiritual whoredom) should take to her self the parties with whom she were
suspected to be her servants the better to defend her honor, were this a way
to clear her self? Or a Captain to take in Forces to defend himself, having
been challenged that they had a design to ruin his Army or Castle? 2. What
charity can stretch it self to believe, they intend to assist the King in
maintaining the Protestant Religion, and the Laws against themselves, which yet
his Protestations proclaim? Surely some about him, must needs give them other
assurance, or they would not be so mad, as to fight for their own suppression,
and their Adversaries promotion. 3. But if they be so good subjects (as the
D^maintaines) and help the King in such an extremity, must they not be counted
to deserve a great reward, and what can that be, but Ziba-like, to divide the
Land? A Tolleration at least they must needs expect, if not indent for, or be
promised. 4. Or, if they be strong enough to overthrow the Parliament, will a
division content them? Will they not be able to command King and All
hence-forward? ( N. B.) If Protestants charity can be so sottish, by this
Doctors delusions, as to trust to their fair dealing with Religion and Laws,
when the Parliament is by their force ruined, they deserve no other pity then
a bewitched or distracted Man, who is not afraid of Fire nor Water, but let
Straw or Gunpowder lie near the one, and pulls up floud-gates to give the
other passage. 5. David's followers 1 Samuel 22.2. were far from Popish qualities.
The Text describes them thus, [Every one that was in distress, and every one
that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, bitter of soul:] Here
is not a word of all this, that signifies them to be wicked. A faithful Man
may be in distress several ways; he may be in debt, through Gods hand upon
him, not his mispending; and not able to pay, but willing if he were able, and
resolved when he should be able: and may be bitter of soul, through
oppression, etc. So that though in likelihood among so many there were some
vicious; Yet here is nothing to affirm, that they came as vicious, but as
afflicted. 6. Had any of them been Idolaters (as Papists are) had they been of
confederacy with the professed enemies of Gods true Religion and people, and so
known, then David had been too blame to have entertained them; (and Saul would
have been sure to have laid it to his charge:) Neither could he ever have
purged himself so long as he had made them his Guard, that he meant to be
faithful to God and Israel: And specially if Saul had before excepted against
such Men as treacherous. This is the Case now, The enmity of Papists, by their
very Religion, against ours, our Parliament, and Protestant people, is known to
all the world, that understands any thing. The Parliament has often and often
declared their fear of them these two Years, and in reference to the settling
of the Militia, that so their design on the Kingdom might be defeated. The
King protests, not to own them nor their help. Yet things all along since the
first discontents, are still acted as they could wish, and did and do applaud.
And now after all this, to take them into the Armies, and employ them against
the Parliament, is as far from David's fact in entertaining his Troops, as
their designs against the Parliament are far from his against Saul* 7. It is
true indeed, that professed Papists were not actually entertained at the first;
It had been too gross for them to have appeared at the first, specially in any
number; and would have raised all the Kingdom against them. The Ice therefore
must be broke by others first; and by Court-converts; Of whose Religion the
Priest that had lately written on the subject, (on which Dr. Featly had
animadverted,) has given a fair warning, sufficient to startle any man
almost. To which purpose, let me add a word of a Book I have seen, called
Jesuitica Negotiatio, printed near 20 Years since by Order of the States of
Frizeland; which contains Instructions (surprised) of the Jesuits, toward the
Conversion of the united Provinces: Among which this was one, [That whosoever
they could convert to the Romish Religion, should be still allowed to profess
the Protestant Religion, and keep any Office or place he was possessed of; and
give sentence against any Papist, or Priest, or Jesuit, according to his place,
even sentence of death, if he could not avoid^ it: Only with two cautions. 1.
That he should be as favorable as was possible. 2. That he should give timely
Intelligence of any severe sentence.] Let now charity judge, what
circumspection almost can suffice against such a generation of Men? Or what
jealousy can be too much of them that still profess this treacherous
Religion? And yet all this notwithstanding, at last to have even professed
Papists taken in against the Parliament: Can this be without a design in them
that have counseled the King to it? Was it not in a prudent foresight, that
they should be called and admitted to help, that the Papists have no where been
plundered by the Kings Army, though others have, who held not with the
Parliament? 8. As for Ziba, David knew not his treachery at the first, and his
lies had so blasted honest-hearted Mephibosheth, that it appears, David did
scarcely believe his apology for himself: Otherwise (what ever may now be said
of his credulous charity to Ziba, to the prejudice of one that was not present
to answer for himself) it was none of David's good deeds (to be imitated,) to
recompense a flattering Sycophant (that had brought him a present, in a hard
time indeed,) with so large, a share in Mephibosheths estate, When by the Law
of God, he was to dye for his false accusation of Treason, as Mephibosheth had
deserved death had it been true. But now our Papists are known to be Enemies
to the Parliament (as was said before,) and some of their Party in the Country
stick not to say, that the Parliaments Intentions of rigor against them,
already showed by the executing of so many Priests and Jesuits, Men of tender
consciences; is one part of the Court-quarrell against them. They are more like
Doeg then Ziba, who first accused the Priests, and then readily undertook the
execution of a most cruel sentence, and executed it with all cruelty. But
Psalm. 52. Reads their doom. And Psalm. 54.4. Suits the Ziphims too, those of
David's own Tribe, that came and discovered him to Saul, 1* Sa. 23.26* once and
again, and so incensed him afresh against him; Though Saul blesses them, (1
Sa. 23.21.) as his special good subjects that had compassion of him.
Conscience must now judge, whether the Papists being favored* were any cause
of the resistance now made; or only the resistance now ^^de was the cause, that
they were admitted to help the King in his distress. 9. But for the D^. to
honor them with the Title of good subjects, preferring them before the
Parliament and so great a part of the Kingdom as visibly adhere to them, is
one of the highest reproaches that ever was belcht out against them; enough for
a Jesuit or a Pope to have said. But the Dr. (how ever he pretend modesty
oft-times, and respect to the Parliament,) stabbs them as desperately, as any
enemy could do now and then: While he seems also resolved to justify all
that has been done against them, else he would have been silent in this piece,
and the next that follows about Ireland. 10. In the mean time, because he
upbraids, with a scandal that this resistance brings on our Religion, which
(says he) would not be easily wiped of, were it to stand or fall by the
doctrines of this giddy age. I must needs make bold to tell him, that he
forgets himself strangely, and the Doctrines and practices of our Religion,
when he can scarce name that Country, where there are any Protestants, that
have not taken Arms to defend Laws and Liberties, and with them Religion,
(even though not before allowed by Laws.) Sweden, Germany, France, The low
Countries, Bohemiah, Scotland. And did not Q. Elizabeth of blessed memory,
assist them in France, Holland and Scotland? and K. James, Holland, and at
least owned the cause of the French, though he only sent Ambassadors? and K.
Charles did send to aid Rochel (as I noted before) and ownes the Prince of
Orange sufficiently, who yet is Rebel General against the K. of Spain, if our
Parliaments resistance be Rebellion. Indeed, we in England are the last; and
above all other Nations have been by the Court Doctors within this 40 Years,
much prepared to suffer any thing rather then resist, (Yet Bishop Bilson in the
Queens time, was suffered to aver that the States of a Kingdom might resist,
vide) But it now above all other times, greeves; that we offer to do what all
others have done before us (upon a great deal less Authority; considering our
Parliament continued by Act, and its power granted by the King, as I have noted
before, against all delinquents:) For if they could have subdued and swallowed
us up, the other Protestants in other Countries would much more easily have
been devoured.

4. The last Allegation, is concerning the businesses of Ireland. Of which
because the Dr. says the King has written enough, he had done wisely to have
written nothing but that word. Though I have not yet been so happy (who would
be glad to see it) to meet with any Answer to the last Piece of the House of
Commons, which reckons so many particulars of wrong done to that poor
Kingdom^. (Therefore till I meet with that, I must needs tell the Dr. he says
not enough to clear the business, nor the Kings Councillors in that
business. For whereas his whole defense is ^in a word,) that the Kings
necessity, made it lawful to make use of any thing intended for their relief,
which he parallels by the Necessity that excused the Scots coming in hither.
To this diverse things may and must be replied. 1. The Scots are no parallel
for this carriage toward Ireland. Their coming (what ever the Dr. affirms)
brought no such great detriment to the Inhabitants there, if you except their
professed enemies, Papists and Prelates, as the poor Soldiers and other
Protestants of Ireland have suffered by the actions done concerning them. 2.
The King and Parliament have justified by Act of Parliament, their coming, as
necessitated; Yet they were proclaimed Traitors again and again, and it was
counted necessary to make War against them one year, and a second, as now
against the Parliament. The necessity then that is now pretended by the Kings
party, wants a great deal of the justification that the Scots have had before
all the world, specially remembering all that was noted before, of the doings of
the Kings followers, before ever the Parliament did any thing but Petition. 3.
Which necessity by them pretended, if it appear a necessity, by themselves
made, will it not make their actions concerning Ireland more horrid, and
proclaim the design to be more rooted. 4. But it must by no means be
forgotten, what has been pretended for Ireland, to which these actions are
most contrary. 1. When the King rode Northward, and the Parliament more then
once represented that it would greatly prejudice Ireland, The King protested
still it should not; but he would be as ready to do all things for Ireland, as
if he had stayed at London. 2. When he had been at Hull, and demanded of the
Parliament justice upon Sr. John Hotham, he declared, he would do no business
till he had satisfaction in that, except only the business of Ireland. 3. A
few days after that, he would in all haste go over in Person to subdue the
bloody Rebels, and venture his Royal Person to recover that poor Kingdom.
Who now almost can believe his Ears or Eyes, that any thing should be done to
the prejudice of Ireland. 4. If the dates be observed of some of those things
mentioned in that Answer of the House of Commons, they will be found done,
before the Parliament had done any thing more toward their own defense, then
when that profession was made after the Kings being at Hull, and when the King
would have ventured himself to go into Ireland. 5. It is strange that the
puni^hing of Sr. John Hotham, and the suppressing the Militia, the recovery of
Hull and the Magazene, which at last (after many other Declarations persuading
of no intention at all of a War against the Parliament) the King declares he
would loose his life, but he would obtain, and this (I think, Quaere) before
there was any one man listed for the Parliaments defense; should be thought a
necessity allowing any retarding, much less disappointing the crying
necessities of Ireland, after such Protestations of care for it. 6. If the
Parliament be not only, not so good subjects, as the now entertained Recusants,
but unless they be worse then those horrid Rebels, (of whom some of the Kings
Declarations speak with destation enough;) while the Parliament protests
before God and the Kingdom, and the world; that they have no Thoughts nor
Intentions but loyal to the King, and faithful to the Religion and Kingdom,
and the Popish bloody Rebels, who one while avouch they have the Kings
authority for what they have done, another while seem to renounce him and to
intend a new King; But always profess to intend the extirpation of the
British Nation, and Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, and then to come
over into England to fight against the Parliament and Puritans and Protestants
here: If I say the Parliament be not worse then the Irish Traitors, it is a
prodegy, that any necessity can be thought sufficient to do such and so many
acts as that Declaration of the House of Commons mentions, or almost any one of
them; to the woeful prejudice of that bleeding Kingdom, and great
encouragement of the bloody Rebels. It would be too long to insist on every
particular, which if a man would Rhetorically (and but justly) amplify, he
might astonish all men, how the former Protestations and those actions could
agree, and what necessity could be pretended for some of them, as entertaining
Irish Rebels, etc. (vide) 7. Unto all which, add but this as a corrollary,
that the whole is a most unhappy verification of that which at the first
breaking out of the Rebellion was related as spoken from the Rebels, that they
had a considerable Party in England, in the very Parliament, and the Court; and
that they doubted not but to find us so much work at home, as we should have no
leisure to send succors to the Protestants there (Nor can I forget, what I
heard a few days before the Irish Rebellion brake out, that a Steward of a
Popish great Lord, dissuading a Churchwarden from obeying the Order of the
House of Commons, about taking away Idolatrous Pictures, etc. Bidds him not be
too hasty, for before a Month were at an end, he should see great alteration,
and so it appeared, though blessed be God, not yet to the full of their hopes.)

Lay now all these things together (which the Dr. has instanced in, and forced
this descant upon) with those in the former Section, and then let all
consciences exercise their most unpartiall judgment, and most ample charity,
and then suspect in whom the design has bin and is, which has necessitated
the other party to take Arms, to defend themselves; and then let them say
Amen, to an Application of two Stories of Scriptures, one of Jotham to the men
of Shechem, If you have done faithfully, etc. then rejoice, and ^et your party
rejoice; but if not, then fire come forth and devour, etc. The other of
Solomon, concerning Abner and Amasa's blood, let it rest on the head of Joab,
etc. but upon David, and upon his house, and upon his Throne, let there be
peace from the Lord for ever; and let I say, all that love God, and the King,
and Justice, and Truth say, Amen.

But the Doctor will have us consider what the King has done to exempt these
scruples of fears and jealousies from the peoples minds. Which in sum are
the passing of Bills this Parliament; and protestations for Religion,
Privileges of Parliament, Laws and Liberties. For the first of these, what are
they worth, in ill times; and under ill Judges (if once the Militia and the
Navy be surrendered, and this Parliament dissolved) what did magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, Articles of Religion, serve to prevent all the illegalities
and innovations upon Church and State before this Parliament; or what did all
the Laws and Privileges of Scotland serve them for? If suspected Councillors
and followers be still about the King and favored by him, where shall be a
security to take away these fears. Also for the other, What have Protestations
prevailed to prevent former danger. That unparalled danger to the House of
COMMONS, and the whole Kingdom, by his coming into the House, with such
Followers waiting at the doors, so weaponed, so behaving themselves and speaking
then and since, was it not the very day after his Message, denying them the
Guard they desired, and protesting toward the close [ We do engage unto you
solemnly the word of a King, that the security of all and every one of you from
violence, is and shall ever be as much Our care, as the preservation of Us and
Our Children.] And how did all men judge (that believed the Protestations set
out at York a while) that no war was intended against the Parliament, till
some strength gotten, as was noted before, under the name of a Guard out of
Yorke-shiere, and more endeavored by Agents in several parts of the Kingdom,
and hoped for from beyond Sea, altered the language and the face of things,
till it came to the present extremities. Also whatever the Doctors Informations
were at the time he was penning his clause of applauding the Kings excellent
moderation amidst the pressures and extremities of war, showing what respect
he has to the Property and Liberty of the Subject; whosoever remembers what
all (but wilfully ignorant, or altogether careless) know of taking away arms
from the Countries along to Chester and back afterward, the plundering of
Banbury (notwithstanding the Kings promise to the contrary) and Abington,
Reading (but most specially Brainford) and Kingston, though helping them in,
and having promise of all favor, and then at Marlborow, and great cruelties to
those that were led away Prisoners, and this since the Kings Proclamation
against plundring; and since that Newbury, and many other Towns formerly, and
of late in Bark shiere, Oxford shiere, Surrey, Buckingham shiere, will have
little cause to believe the Doctors intelligences; or assurances, that all
protestations that come in the Kings name may be trusted. And whereas he urges,
that we may not raise an evil thought against the King, Eccl. 10. What shall
we say to those men, unless that of David concerning Saul's Councillors, 1 Samuel 24. That at least they deserve to be accursed, that force men either to
distrust or to suffer ruin, because they have power and will to break that
which we would trust the King in, most gladly and desiredly, if he had no such
men about him. I have no desire nor will to prosecute particulars further: But
the Doctor abuses his Readers to cast an oblique aspersion, as if the
Parliament had any thoughts of contending for a new frame of Religion, which
deserves no answer, so gross a slander it is. And then 2dly to insinuate
plainly that the 19. Propositions were urged, as so necessary, as unles they
were granted, the Kingdom must be imbroyled in a civil war, and the relief
of Ireland neglected. The forenamed Petition by the Earl of Holland clears
that sufficiently, and the Petition too, that the Earl of Essex should have
presented or sent, but the King would receive none from him.

The rest of the Doctors book is but recapitulations Rhetorical of what he
has said before (and an Answer to the instance of Libna's revolt, which I will
be no justifier of, because so little is said of it in Scripture.) To which I
have only these things to add.

1. Though Absalom (which he mentioned before, and I slipped) did falsely
calumniate David (what ever petty neglect might be in some officers) as appears
by 2 Samuel 8. and 1 Chapter and so being a comely person which takes much with the
multitude, and a strange f^atterer of all that came for Justice, what ever
their cause were, 2 Sa. 15. and the heir apparent of the Crown, might invegle
the people into a Rebellion: Yet neither is this any thing like to the causes
of complaint or suspicions, that we have had and have still; nor yet is there
any probability, that a people justly governed should by Parliamentary
Declarations be armed against their King: As besides all other Arguments
appears, by the small assistance of armed men, any Country has yielded to the
Parliament, even where they think them in the right in the cause, and
themselves too in danger to be plundered.

2. If the Parliaments actions in all things about their defense cannot be
excused or justified (specially by those that see not the whole of their
actions, and much less the reasons of them) yet their consciences, that see
the justnes of the action for the main, of defense; and grounds to believe
their Protestations of their intentions in the defense, are not bound to be
Neuters, much less to assist the King against them, because they are not or
cannot be satisfied in this or that particular. For then scarce any war might
lawfully be joined in.

3. In special, for the sufferance of so many Sects to vent their doctrins
with such liberty, and to commit unsufferable outrages upon the worship of
God. 1; Has not the Parliament declared against Brownists, Anabaptists in the
first Remonstrance. 2. Have not some Sectaries bin punished? as he that made
the new Creed, was he not imprisoned? 3. How many scandalous and innovating
Ministers have bin complained of, and yet few of them questioned and those not
fully censured (scarce one by both Houses) the Doctor will not lay to their
charge the suffering of such: which yet he may with more reason, as being
offenders of longer continuance and more danger. 4. The truth is, partly the
multitude of offenders at first complained of, and partly for near a year and
an half of late, their own extreme danger by the Malignant parties getting
strength, since the Irish rebellion broke out, and so multitude of businesses
overwhelming them, have hindered that Justice, which else those Sects and
outrages (the Doctor mentions) would have found, and may yet in due time, if
legally proved. 5. And if he will say. some special men favored them in the
very Houses, he cannot say more then may be made good of others favoring
Superstitions, Arminianisme, Socianisme, and even Popery it self, Yet this
were most unjustly charged upon the Body of either House, and much less on
both. And when it shall please God, that the Consultation of Divines shall meet
(for which they have more then once passed the Bill for his Majesty to confirm)
it will I doubt not appear to all the world, that they never meant to suffer
any such opinions or practices, as are truly dishonorable to the true Reformed
Protestant Religion: as even in the mean time, the Orthodoxisme and Moderation
of the Members of that Assembly (generally) known to all that know the persons,
may be a sufficient pledge; among them all, there being very few, that are
liable to any pretense of exception for Sects; and perhaps none at all, for
countenancing any such outrage, as the Doctor cries out upon. 6. In fine, the
worst of the Parliament (charged upon them with any shadow) in matter of
Religion is but omissions or delays, which are but Moats to the beams which
the Doctor overlooks in their Adversaries, of old and still. Who have made
stables of Churches, but they? Who have burned and trodden under foot Bibles,
but their Partisans of Ireland? Not to insist on their horrid blasphemies
(which if Gods word be true, as they will one day find it) makes our Land
groan and mourn under them. If a conscience comes to weigh these in the
balance with the Parliament; let it, if it dare, be charitable to the
Cavaliers and their Army, so as to believe, Religion is like to be defended by
them, when the Parliament intends to ruin it. I will say no more to the Doctor
but this one thing, that a sober conscience that peruses his whole Treatise,
will wonder what kind of conscience his is, that Rhetorizes so for charity on
the one side, and wholly neglects it on the other; telling us more then once,
that though we lay down our lives for our Religion, it is nothing, if we have
not the charity he calls, While himself with all confidence, charges the
Parliament with many grievous faults against Religion, Allegiance, Laws and
Liberties, and Liberties, and discredits all their Protestations and
Declarations to the contrary, as if he thought, that as his great Text, Romans
13. speaks only in his conceit of Monarchs; so 1 Cor 13. related also to them
only. No resisting that higher power, but all charity to him, what ever he do
or say. But as for the Parliament, their power is of no regard, They may be
resisted at pleasure, and their words and actions deserving no charity, or
challenging none. Consciences will judge (and may without breach of charity)
how charitable or true these interpretations and imputations be. And so I have
done with him.

If any other now ask me, why it is not as fitting easy to put off all
imputations from the Parliament, and lay it upon a Faction there (as the
Declarations in the Kings Name use to do) as it is for the Parliament to put
off all from the King to his Councillors and Followers. I answer in a word,
the Law commands the one, and Reason gives a fair ground for it. The King is
but one; and so if those about him, fill his head with strange Doctrines in
Religion, and Maxims or interpretations of law, and with strange relations in
matters of Fact, and answerable suggestions, unles he were a Prophet or an
Angel, he can hardly avoid false opinions and errors in government. Himself
tells us in the forecited answer to the 19 Propositions, of
surreptiously-gotten commands from a King, by followers and favorites against
the Law, which he is bound to protect when he knows it. Therefore according to
our Law, The King may be misinformed, but he cannot be mistaken, and the King
can do no wrong, because it supposes he does nothing but by Advise of his
Councillors in matters of State, and Judges in matters of law. Therefore he
grants the Commons may impeach such Favorites and Followers of his, and then
the Lords are to judge and punish them. Would this have bin suffered, or would
it yet, the Parliament and he would soon accord. But they get him to let them
lay all upon him, which themselves say and do; and this hazards our undoing.
We would not charge or distrust the King: We dare not, must not (unless we
mean to be ruined) trust or discharge his Councillors. But we hope and pray
that God will bless him so at last, as that those being taken away from before
him (or rather being yielded up by him) as dross from the silver, his Throne
shall be established in righteousness, Majesty and Honor. Mean time we
proclaim, they injury him, and us, and the law, that interpret what is said or
done against the multitude of his Followers and Army, or any of them, though
sheltred by his Name and Presence, as done against him. On the contrary side,
the Parliament is a numerous Body, where each one Votes single, and it must be
a Mayor part that carries any thing; and there is no other sense of a
Parliament in Law and Reason, then the mayor part at least: Therefore the Votes,
and Orders, and Declarations that come (as all do) from the mayor part, cannot
be less then the Votes of the Parliament, themselves (...) the Counselors and
Judges, and have none on whom to discharge any imputation. So the unles a
Parliament can be a Faction (which in our Law is a mere contradiction) It i^
impossible, that a Faction can carry things there; or what is there done can be
so put^ off, and the Parliament discharged. I conclude then, a King may be
charitably believe to mean well, as he protests, only to be misinformed and
abused by wicked Councillors. But the Parliament cannot be (is not) well
thought of by charity it self in it is highest perfection, if the mayor part
vote and act evil things. The Parliament is then the offender before God and
man.

For conclusion of all. Let me add 5 or 6 Qualifications or Cautions upon the
whole matter. 1. All Governors, Supreme specially, have somewhat of
Prerogative, beyond written or express Laws. But this to be used for the
Subjects good not hurt. 2. A Christian, though able and innocent, is not to
resist all injuries, done to him in his Estate or person, no not by private
persons, much less if done by the command of Governors, specially of the
Supreme. Christian meeknes requires the one, and Christian subjection the
other. 3. An open and public resistance by arms, is the last Refuge under
Heaven, of an oppressed, and endangered Nation. Many injuries are to be let pa^
while appearing but personal, not political, or designed as presidents.
Jealousies are not to be suddenly taken up, nor too deeply taken in: And all
possible means of redress and satisfaction is to be endeavored before this
course be taken. 4. If Laws do injury, they must not be resisted, unles they
command undeniably against God, and not only so, but threaten extreme
extremity. 5. Whatsoever injury happens to be done to innocent persons, is to
be recompensed as speedily and fully as may be. 6. A Peace is to be embraced,
desired, pursued with all faithfulness; so it may be but rationally safe* and
not betray to the misery, which war was undertaken to prevent or remedy. 7. The
Nation (and Parliament) that is put to this necessity of a war must
acknowledge God^ just and heavy displeasure, which so threatens them, so
endangers them; and therefore must before all, and in all, and with all, humble
themselves most unfainedly to God, and seek to make their peace with him, and
thus may hope He will bless their Arms and desires of peace, with sufficient
victory and a peaceful and happy Conclusion in due time. Which the Lord of
Hosts and God of Peace, may do for us (as He will for all His.) I shut up all
with that Prayer and Prophecy, Psalm. 125.4, 5. Do good O Lord to those that be
good: and to them that are upright in their hearts. As for such as turn aside
to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

