Iohannis Playford Effigies
portrait of John Playford

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SKILL OF MUSIC.

IN TWO BOOKS.

THE FIRST: The Grounds and Rules of MUSIC, according to the Gam-vt, and other
Principles thereof.

THE SECOND: Instructions and Lessons for the Bass-Viol: AND Instruments and
Lessons for the Treble-Violin.

By JOHN PLAYFORD.

To which is added, The ART of DESCANT, or Composing MUSIC in Parts.

By Dr. THO. CAMPION.

With Annotations thereon, by Mr. Chr. Simpson.

The Seventh Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, for I. Playford at his Shop in the Temple near
the Church. 1674.

PREFACE To all Lovers of MUSIC.
MUSIC in ancient Times was held in as great Estimation, Reverence and Honor,
by the most Noble and Virtuous Persons, as any of the Liberal Sciences
whatsoever, for the manifold Uses thereof, conducing to the Life of Man:
Philosophers accounted it an Invention of the Gods, bestowing it on Men, to
make them better conditioned than bare Nature afforded; and concludes a special
necessity thereof in the Education of Children, partly from its natural
delight, and partly from the efficacy it has in moving the Affections to
Virtue; commending chiefly these three Arts in the ^ducation of Youth, Grammar,
Music, and Gymnastick; this last is for the Exercise of their Limbs: Quintil.
reports, in his time the same Men taught both Grammar and Music. Those then
who intend the Practice thereof, must allow Music to be the Gift of God, yet
(like other his Graces and Benefits) it is not given to the Idle, but they must
reach it with the hand of Industry, by putting in practice the Works and
Inventions of skilful Artists; for merely to Speak and Sing are of Nature, and
this double use of the Articulate Voice the rudest Swains of all Nations do
make; but to Speak well, and Sing well are of Art: Therefore when I had
considered ^h^ great want of Books, setting forth the Rules and Grounds of this
Divine Science of Music in our own Language, it was a great motive with me to
undertake this Work, though I must confess our Nation is at this time
plentifully stored with skilful Men in this Science, better able than my self
to have undertaken this Work; but their slowness and modesty (being, as I
conceive, unwilling to appear in print about so small a matter) has made me
adventure on it, though with the danger of not being so well done as they might
have performed it: And I was the rather induced thereunto, for that the
Prescription of Rules of all Arts and Sciences ought to be delivered in plain
and brief language, and not in flowers of Eloquence; which Maxim I have
followed: For after the most brief, plain, and easy method I could invent, I
have here set down the Grounds of Music, omitting nothing in this Art which I
did conceive was necessary for the Practice of young Beginners, both for Vocal
and Instrumental Music. The Work as it is, I must confess, is not all my own,
some part thereof being collected out of other Authors which have written on
this Subject, the which I hope will make it more approved. And if in the whole
I gain your ingenious Acceptance, it will further encourage me to do you more
Service in this Nature.

John Playford.

Of MUSIC in General, And of its Divine and Civil Uses.
MUSIC is an Art unsearchable, Divine and Excellent, by which a true
Concordance of Sounds or Harmony is produced, that rejoices and cheereth the
Hearts of Men, and has in all Ages and in all Countries been highly reverenced
and esteemed; by the Jews for Religion and Divine Worship in the Service of
God, as appears by Scripture; By the Graecians and Romans to induce Virtue and
Gravity, and to incite to Co^rage and Valor. Great Disputes were among Ethnic
Authors about the first Inventor, some for Orpheus, some Lynus, both famous
Poets and Mu^icians; others for Amphion, whose Music drew Stones to the
building of the Walls of Thebes; as Orpheus had by the harmonious touch of his
Harp, moved the Wild Beasts and Trees to Dance: But the true meaning thereof
is, that by virtue of their Music, and their wise and pleasing Musical Poems,
the one brought the Savage and Beast-like Thracians to Humanity and Gentleness;
the other persuaded the rude and careless Thebans to the fortifying of their
City, and to a civil Conversation: The Egyptians to Apollo, attributing the
first Invention of the Harp to him, and certainly they had an high esteem of
the Excellency of Music, to make Apollo (who was the God of Wisdom) to be the
God of Music: But the People of God do truly a^knowledge a far more ancient
Inventor of this Divine Art, Jubal the sixth from Adam, who, as it is recorded,
Genesis 4. 27. was the Father of all that handle the Harp and Organ, St. Augustine
goes yet farther, showing, that it is the gift of God himself, and a
Representation or Admonition of the sweet Consent and Harmony which his Wisdom
has made in the Creation and Administration of the World. And well it may be
termed a Divine and Mysterious Art, for among all those rare Arts and Sciences,
with which God has endued Men, this of Music is the most sublime and
excellent for its wonderful Effects and Inventions: It has been the study of
Millions of Men for many thousand years, yet none ever attained the full scope
and perfection thereof; but after all their deep Search and laborious Studies,
there still appeared new matter for their Inventions; and which is most
wonderful, the whole Mystery of this Art is comprised in the compass of three
Notes or Sounds, which is most ingeniously observed by Mr. Christopher Simpson,
in his Division Violist, page 18. in these words, Tria sunt Omnia. ^ Benedicta
sit Sancta and Individua Trinitas.
All Sounds that can possibly be joined at once together in Musical
Concordance, are still but the reiterated Harmony in Three; a significant
Emblem of that Supreme and Incomprehensible Trinity, Three in One, Governing
and Disposing the whole Machine of the World, with all its included Parts in a
perfect Harmony; for in the Harmony of Sounds, there is some great and hidden
Mystery above what has been yet discovered. And Mrs. Katherine Phillips in her
Encomium on Mr. Henry Laws his second Book of Airs, has these words: Nature,
which is the vast Creation's Soul,
That steady curious Agent in the whole,
The Art of Heaven, the Order of this Frame,
Is only Music in another Name.
And as some King, Conquer'ing what was his own,
Has choice of several Titles to his Crown;
So Harmony on this score now, that then,
Yet still is all that takes and Governs Men.
Beauty is but Composure, and we find
Content is but the Concord of the Mind;
Friendship the Unison of well tuned Hearts;
Honor's the Chorus of the Noblest Parts:
And all the World, on which we can reflect,
Music to the Ear, or to the Intellect.


Nor has there yet been any Reason given of that sympathy in Sounds, that the
Strings of a Viol being struck, and another Viol laid at a distance, and tuned
in Concordance to it, the same Strings thereof should sound and move in a
sympathy with the other, though not touched: Nor that the sound of a Sackbut or
Trumpet, should by a stronger Emission of breath, skip from Concord to Concord,
before you can force it into any Gradation of Tones or Notes. More Observations
of the mystery of Sounds is learnedly discoursed by the Lord Bacon in his Not.
Hist. 2 Cent. Chap. 1. Ath. Kercherus, a learned Writer, reports, that in
Calabria, and other parts of Italy, there is a poisonous Spider, called the
Tarantula, by which such as are bitten fall into a frenzy of madness and
laughter; to allay the immoderate passion thereof, Music is the speedy Remedy
and Cure, for which they have solemn Songs and Tunes.

The first and chief Use of Music is for the Service and Praise of God, whose
Gift it is. The second Use is for the Solace of Men, which as it is agreeable
unto Nature, so is it allowed by God, as a temporal blessing to recreate and
cheer men after long study and weary labor in their Vocations. Eccles. 40. 20.
Wine and Music rejoices the Heart, as the Philosopher advises, Musica
Medicina est molestiae illius per labores suscipitur. AEli^nus in his Hist.
Animal. l. 10. c. 29. writes, That of all Beasts, there is none that is not
delighted with Harmony, but only the Ass. H. Stephanus reports^ that he saw a
Lion in London leave his Meat to hear Music. My self, as I traveled some
years since near Royston, met a Herd of Stags, about twenty, upon the Road,
following a Bag-pipe and a Violin, which while the Music played they went
forward, when it ceased they all stood still; and in this manner they were
brought out of Yorkshire to Hampton Court. If irrational Creatures so
naturally love and are delighted with Music, shall not rational Man, who is
endued with the knowledge thereof? A learned Author has this Observation, That
Music is used only of the most Aerial Creatures, loved and understood by Man:
The Birds of the Air, those pretty Winged Choristers, how at the approach of
the Day do they Warble forth their Makers Praise; among which observe the
little Lark, who by a natural instinct does very often mount up the Sky, as
high a^ his Wings will bear him, and there Warble out his Melody as long as his
strength enables him, and then descends to his flock, who presently send up
another ^horister to su^ply this Divine Service The Philosopher s^ys, not to be
Animal Musicum, is not to be Animal Rationale. And the Italian Proverb is, God
loves not him, whom he h^th not m^de to love Music. Nor does Music only
delight the Mind of Man, and Beasts, and Birds, but also conduces much to
bodily health by the exercise of the Voice in Song, which does clear and
strengthen the Lungs, and if to it be also joined the Exercise of the Limbs,
none need fear Asthma or Consumption; the want of which Exercise is often the
death of many Students: Also much benefit has been found thereby, by such as
have been troubled with defects in Speech, as Stammering and bad Utterance. It
gently breaths and vents the Mourners Grief, and heightens the Ioys of them
that are cheerful: It abateth Spleen and Hatred; the valiant Soldier in Fight
is animated when he hears the sound of the Trumpet, the Fife and Drum: All
Mechanic Artists do find it cheer them in their weary Labors Scaliger (
Exercet. 302.) gives a reason of these Effects, Because the Spirits about the
Heart taking in that trembling and dancing Air into the Body, are moved
together, and stirred up with it; or that the Mind, Harmonically Composed, is
roused up at the Tunes of the Music And farther, we see even young Babes are
charmed asleep by their Singing Nurses; nay the poor laboring Beasts at Plow
and Chart are cheered by the sound of M^sick, though it be but their Masters
Whistle. If God then has granted such benefit to Men by the Civil exercise,
sure the Heavenly and Divine Use will much more redound to our eternal comfort,
if with our Voices we join our Hearts when we sing in his Holy Place. Venerable Bede writes, That no Science but Music may enter the Doors of the Church. The
Use of which in the Worship and Service of God, that it has been anciently
used, and should still be continu'd^ may be easily proved from the Evidence of
Gods Word, and the Practice of the Church in all Ages: You shall seldom meet
Holy David without an Instrument in his Hand, and a Psalm in his Mouth; Fifty
three Holy Meters or Psalms he Dedicated to his Chief Musician Jeduthun, to
Compose Music to them: He was on^ in whom the Spirit of God delighted to
dwell, for no evil Spirit will abide to tarry where Music and Harmony are
lodged; for when he played before Saul, the evil Spirit departed immediately.
This Power of Music against evil Spirits, Luther seems to think that it does
still remain, Scimus (says he) Musicam Daemonibus etiam invisam and
intolerabilem esse. We know that Music is most dreadful and intolerable to the
Devils. How acceptable Divine Harmony was to God in his Worship, appears in 2 Chronicles. 5. 12, 13. Also the Levi^es which were the Singers, all of them of
Asaph, of Hemon, of Ieduthun, with their Sons and their Brethren, being arrayed
in white linen, having Cymbals and Psalteries, and Harps, stood at the East
end of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twenty Priests sounding with
Trumpets: It came even to pass, as the Trumpeters and Singers were as one, to
make one sound to be heard in Praising and thanking the Lord: and when they
lift up their Voice with the Trumpets and Cymbals, and Instruments of Music,
etc. that then the House was filled with a Cloud, even the House of the Lord.
The Use of Music was continued in the Church of the Jews, even until the
Destruction of their Temple and Nation by Titus. And the Use thereof also began
in the Christian Church in our Savior and his Apostles time. If you consult
the Writings of the Primitive Fathers, you shall scarce meet with one that does
not write of the Divine Use of Music in Churches; and yet true it is, that
some of them did find fault with some Abuses thereof in the Service of God;
(and so they would) now if they were alive;) but that condemns the Right Use
thereof no more than the Holy Supper is condemned by St. Paul, while he blames
those who shamefully profaned it. The Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
in all Ages have had this Divine Science in great Esteem and Honor:
Constantine the Great, and Theodosius, did both of them begin and sing Divine
Hymns in the Christian Congregations; and Justinian the Emperor Composed an
Hymn to be sung in the Church, which began, To the only begotten Son and Word
of God: Of Charles the Great it is reported, that he went often into the
Psalmody and sung himself, and appointed his Sons and other Princes what Psalms
and Hymns should be sung. But to come nearer home: History tells us, that the
ancient Britains of this Island had Musicians before they had Books; and the
Romans that Invaded them (who were not too forward to magnify other Nation^)
confess what power the Druyds and Bards had over the Peoples Affections, by
recording in Songs the Deeds of Heroic Spirits, their Laws and Religion being
sung in Tunes^ and so (without Letters) transmitted to Pos^erity; wherein they
were so dextrous, that their Neighbors of Gaul came hither to learn it. Alfred
a Saxon King of this Land was well skilled in all manner of Learning, but in
his Knowledge of Music took most delight. King Henry the Eighth did much
advance Music in the first part of his Reign, when his Mind was more intent
upon Arts and Sciences, at which time he invited the best Masters out of Italy,
and other Countries; whereby he grew to great Knowledge therein; of which he
gave Testimony, by Composing with his own hand two entire Services of five and
six Parts, as is recorded by the Lord Herbert, who writ his Life. Edward the
Sixth was a Lover and Encourager thereof, if we may believe Dr. Tie, one of His
Chapel, who put the Acts of the Apos^les into Meter, and Composed the same to
be sung in four Parts, which he Printed and Dedicated to the King; his Epistle
began thus: Considering well, most Godly King,
The Zeal and perfect Love
Your Grace does bear to each good Thing,
That given is from above:
That such good Things your Grace might move,
Your Lute when you assay,
Instead of Songs of wanton Love,
These Stories then to Play.


Queen Elizabeth was not only a Lover of this Divine Science, but a good
Proficient herein; and I have been informed by an ancient Musician and her
Servant, that she did often recreate her self on an Excellent Instrument called
the Poliphant, not much unlike a Lute, but strung with Wire: And that it was
her care to promote the same in the Worship of God, may appear by her 49th
Injunction. And King James granted his Letters Patents to the Musicians in
London for a Corporation.

Nor was his late Sacred Majesty, and Blessed Martyr, King Charles the First,
behind any of his Predecessors in the promotion of this Science, especially in
the Service of Almighty God, which with much Zeal he would hear reverently
performed, and often appointed the Service and Anthems himself, being by his
Knowledge in Music a competent Judge therein.

Of whose Virtues and Piety (by the infinite mercy of Almighty God) this
Kingdom now enjoys a Living Example in his Son and our Gracious Sovereign
Charles the Second, whom God long preserve, whose Love of this Divine Art
appears by his Encouragement of it, and the Professors thereof, especially in
his bountiful Augmentation of the Annual Allowances of the Gentlemen of His
Chapel; which Example if it were followed by the Superiors of our Cathedrals
in this Kingdom, it would much encourage Men of this Art (who are there
employed to Sing Praises to Almighty God) to be more studious in that Duty, and
would take off that Contempt which is cast upon many of them for their mean
performances and poverty; but it is their and all true Christians sorrow, to
see how that Divine Worship is contemned by blind Zealots, who do not, nor will
not understand the use and excellency thereof.

But Music in this Age (like other Arts and Sciences) is in low esteem with
the generality of people, our late and Solemn Music, both Vocal and
Instrumental, is now just led out of esteem by the new Corants and Iigs of
Foreigners, to the grief of all sober and judici^^s V^derstanders of that
formerly solid and good Music: Nor must we expect Harmony in Peoples Mi^ds, so
long as Pride, Vanity, Faction, and Discords, are so predominant in their
Lives: But I conclude with the Words of Mr. Owen Feltham in his Resolves^ We
find that in Heaven there is Music and Hallelujah^s Sung, I believe it is an
helper both to Good and Evil, and will therefore honor it when it moves to
^irtue, and beware of it when it would flatter into Vice.

J. P.
The TABLE.
FISRT BOOK.
Of the Scale of Music, called the Gam-ut, page 1 Of the several Cleaves or
Cliffs, page 8 A Rule for the proving your Notes, page 10 A Rule for Naming
your Notes in any Cliff, page 11 A Table of the Comparison of Cliffs, page 18
Of the Tuning the Voice, page 19 Of Tones or Tunes of Notes, page 22 The Notes
their Names, Number, and Proportions, page 24 Of the Rests and Pauses, and
Notes of Syncopation, page 26 A Rule for Keeping Time, page 29 Of the four
Moods or Proportions of Time page 30 Of the Adjuncts and Characters used in
Music, page 35 Directions for Singing after the Italian manner, page 37 Of the
five Moods used by the Grecians, page 57 Short Airs or Songs fit for
Beginners, page 62 Directions for Singing of Psalms, with the several Tunes,
and the Bass under each Tune, page 73
SECOND BOOK.
A brief Introduction for Playing on the Bass-Viol, page 91 Several Lessons for
Beginners on the Bass-Viol, page 105 Instructions for Playing on the
Treble-Violin, page 109 Several Lessons for Beginners on the Violin, page 117
THIRD BOOK.
The Art of Descant, or plain way for Composing of Music in Two, Three, or
Four Parts. The Manner and Order of Singing the Divine Service in
Cathedral-Churches.
An Introduction to the Skill of MUSIC.
CHAP. I. Of the Scale of Music called the Gam-Ut.
THe Gam-ut is the Ground of all Music, both Vocal and Instrumental; and (as
Ornithoparcus reports) it was composed by Guido Aretinus, about the year 960,
who (out of six Syllables in the Saphick of the Hymn of St. Johan. Baptista,)
framed his Musical Scale set down in those six Syllables, as Names for the six
Musical Notes.

VT queant laxis REsonare fibris
MIra gestorum FAmuli tuorum,
SO Lve poluti LAbii reatum.
VT RElivet MIserum FAtum SOLitumque LAborem.
VT RE Mi Fa Sol La VT RE Sol La.

These Six Notes were thus used for many years past in that order, ascending
and descending; but in these latter times, Four are only in use, the which are
Sol, La, Mi, Fa; so that Ut and Re are now changed into Sol and La, four being
found sufficient for expressing the several sounds, and less burdensome for
the memory of Practitioners.

Besides the Names of these Notes, there is used in our Scale of Music, called
the Gam-ut, seven Letters of the Alphabet, which are set in the first Column,
at the beginning of each Rule and Space, as G. A. B. C. D. E. F. And of these
there are Three Septenaries ascending one above the other, G being put first,
which is according to the third Letter in the Greek Alphabet, called Gamma, and
is made thus (...), (the first derivation thereof being from the ancient
Greeks) as you may see in the Scale at the end of this Chapter.

These seven Letters of the Alphabet are called seven Cliff's, or more properly
Cleaves, the other Names and Syllables adjoined to them are the Notes; and by
these three Septenaries are distinguished three several Parts of Music, into
which the Scale is divided; first, the Bass, which is the lowest part;
secondly, the Mean, or middle part; and thirdly, the Treble, or highest part;
so that according to these three Septenaries, Gam-ut is the lowest Note, and E
la the highest. And this the usual Gamuts in Mr. Morley and others, did not
exceed; but it is well known that there is many Notes in use, both above and
below, which exceed that compass, and that both in Vocal and Instrumental
Music, which ought not to be omitted; for the Compass of Music is not to be
confined: And though there be but three Septenaries of Notes in the Example of
the Gam-ut, which amount to the Compass of One and Twenty Notes or Sounds; yet
in the Treble, or highest part, as occasion requires, you may Ascend more
Notes, for it is the same over again, only eight Notes higher: Or in your Bass,
or lowest part you may Descend the like Notes lower than Gam-ut, as the Compass
of the Voice or Instrument is able to extend, the which will be the same, and
only Eights to those above. And these Notes of Addition are usually thus
distinguished:

Those above E la are called Notes in Alt, as F fa ut, and G sol re ut, etc. in
Alt. And those below Gam-ut are called double Notes, as Double F fa ut, Double
E la mi, etc. as being Eights or Diapasons to those above Gam-ut. I have
therefore in the Table of the Gam-ut in this Book, expressed them with double
Letters in their right places.

The Gam-ut is drawn upon fourteen Rules and their Spaces, and does comprehend
all Notes or Sounds usual in Music; either Vocal or Instrumental, yet when any
of the parts which it is divided into, viz. Treble, Mean, or Tenor and Bass,
shall come to be pricked out by it self in Songs or Lessons, either for Voice
or Instrument, five lines is only usual for one of those Parts, as being
sufficient to contain the compass of Notes thereto belonging: And if there be
any Notes that extend higher or lower, it is usual to add a line in that place
with a Pen.

But all Lessons for the Organ, Virginals, or Harp, two staves of six lines
together are required, one for the left hand or lower Keys, the other for the
right hand or upper Keys.

Therefore he that means to understand what he Sings or Plays, must study to be
perfect in the knowledge of the Scale or Gam-ut, and to have it perfect in his
memory without book, both forward and backward, and to distinguish the Cliffs
and Notes as they be in Rule or Space; for knowing the Notes Places, their
Names are easily known.

Also, on the right side of this following Table of the Scale or Gam-ut, there
is set four Columns: In the first is the Alphabetical Letters, or Cliffs: The
other three show the Names of the Notes, ascending and descending, according to
their several Names and Keys^

In the second Column is set the Names of the Notes as they be called, which is
B duralis or B sharp, as having no flat in B mi; and then your Notes are called
as they are set there on the Rules and Spaces ascending. The third Column is B
proper or B naturalis, which has a B flat in B mi only, which is put at the
beginning of the line with the Cliff, and there you have also the Names as they
are called on Rule and Space. The 4th Column is the Notes, called B fa or B
mollaris, having two B flats, the one in B mi, the other in E la mi, placed as
the other; by observing of which, you have a certain Rule for the Names of the
Notes in any part, be it Treble, Mean, Tenor, or Bass.

In these Three observe this for a General Rule, that what Name the Note has,
the same Name properly has his Eighth above or below, be it either in Treble,
Mean, Tenor, or Bass.

There is an old Meter, though not very common, yet it contains a true Rule of
the Theorick part of Music, which is necessary to be observed by young
Beginners, and as it falls in our several Chapters I shall insert it: It begins
thus, TO attain the Skill of Musicks Art,
Learn Gam-Ut up and down by heart,
Thereby to learn your Rules and Spaces,
Notes Names are known, knowing their places,


THE GAM-VT, OR SCALE OF MUSIC.


A Second Table of the Scale of MUSIC called the GAM-VT, in which every Key or
Note is put in its proper place upon the Five Lines, according to the two usual
signed Cleaves or Cliffs, viz. the Bass and the Treble, ascending from the
lowest Note of the Bass to the highest in the Treble.

^ D la sol, E la, F fa ut, G sol re ut, A la mi re, ^ F fa ut, G sol re ut, A
la mi re, B fa b mi, C sol fa, ^ A la mi re, B fa b mi, C sol fa ut, D la sol
re, E la mi, ^ B mi, C fa ut, D sol re, E la mi, F fa ut, G sol re ut, ^ C^ fa
ut, DD sol re, EE la mi, FF fa ut, Gam-ut, A re.

CHAP. II. Of the Cliffs or Cleaves.
IN this Gam-ut (as I said before) is contained three Septenaries of Letters,
which are G, A, B, C, D, E, F. These seven Letters are set at the beginning of
each Rule and Space, and are called seven Cleaves; of these seven four is only
usual, one of which is usually placed at the beginning of every Line of the
Song or Lesson, either Vocal or Instrumental. The first is called the F fa ut
Cleave or Cliff, which is only proper to the Bass or lowest part, and is thus
marked ^ on the fourth Line, at the beginning of Songs or Lessons. The second
is the C sol fa ut, which is proper to the middle or inner pars, as Tenor,
Counter-Tenor, or Mean, and it is thus signed or marked ^. The third is the G
sol re ut Cleave or Cliff, which is only proper to the Treble, or highest, and
is signed or marked thus ^ on the second Line of the Song or Lesson.

These three Cliffs are called the three signed Cliffs, because they are always
set at the beginning of the Lines on which is pricked the Song or Lesson; (for
Cleave is derived from Clavis which signifies a Key.) From the place of this
Cliff, the places of all the other Notes in your Song or Lesson are understood,
by proving your Notes from it, according to the Rule of the Gam-ut.

The fourth Cliff is the B Cliff, which is proper to all parts, as being of two
natures or properties, that is to say, Flat or Sharp, and does only serve for
that purpose for the flatting and sharping of Notes, and therefore it is called
B fa, B mi; the B fa signifies flat, the B mi sharp: The B fa, or B flat, is
known on Rule or Space by this mark [^]; and the B mi, which is sharp, by this
[^.]

But these two Rules you are to observe of them both: First the B fa, or B
flat, does alter both the name and property of the Notes before which it is
placed, and is called Fa, making it half a tone or sound lower than it was
before.

Secondly, the B mi, or B sharp, alters the property of the Notes before which
it is placed, but not the Name; for it is usually placed either before Fa or
Sol, and they retain their Names still, but their Sound is raised half a tone
or sound higher.

Note, That these two B Cliffs are placed not only at the beginning of the
Lines with the other Cliff, but is usually put to several Notes in the middle
of any Song or Lesson for the Flatting and Sharping of Notes, as the Harmony of
the Music requires.

CHAP. III. A brief Rule for proving the Notes in any Song or Lesson.
FIrst observe with which of the three usual Cliffs your Song or Lesson is
signed with at the beginning, if it be with the G sol re ut Cleave, then if the
Note be above it, whose name and place you would know, you must begin at your
Cliff, and assign to every Rule and Space a Note, according to the Rule of your
Gam-ut, ascending till you come to that Rule or Space where the same Note is
set: But if the Note be below your Cliff, then you must prove downwards to it,
saying your Gam-ut backwards, assigning to each Rule and Space a Note, till you
come to its place. So that by knowing in what place of your Gam-ut the Note is
set, you will easily know its name, the next Chapter directing you an
infallible Rule for it, and that by an easy and familiar Example.

CHAP. IV. Containing a plain and easy Rule for the Naming your Notes in any
Cliff.
HAving observed the foregoing Direction of proving your Notes, to know their
Places, you may easily know their Names also, if you will follow this Rule:
First, observe that Mi is the principal or master Note, which leads you to know
all the other; for having found out that, the others follow upon course; and
this Mi has its being in four several places, but it is but in one of them at
a time; its proper place is in B mi, but if a B fa, which is a B flat (as is
mentioned in chap. 2.) be put in that place, then it is removed into E la mi,
which is its second place; but if a B flat be placed there also, then it is in
its third place, which is Alamire; if a B flat come there also, then it is
removed into its fourth place, which is D la sol re; so that in which of these
it is, the next Notes above it ascending are Fa sol la, Fa sol la, twice, and
then you meet with your Mi again, for it is found but once in Eight Notes: In
like mannear, the Notes next below it descending are L sol fa, La sol fa, and
then you have your Mi again: For your better understanding of which, I have
here inserted the aforementioned old Meter, whose Rules are plain, true, and
easy.

No man can sing true at first sight,
Unless he names his Notes aright;
Which soon is learnt, if that your Mi
You know its place where e're it be,
1.
If that no Flat be set in B,
Then in that place stands your Mi.
Example. ^ Sol la Mi Fa Sol la fa Sol

2.
But if your B fa B mi.
B alone be Flat,
Then E la mi.
E is Mi be sure of that.
Example. ^ Sol la fa Sol la Mi fa Sol

3.
If both be Flat, your B and E,
Then A la mi re.
A is Mi here you may see.
Example. ^ La Mi fa Sol la fa Sol la

4.
If all be Flat, E, A, and B,
Then Mi alone does stand in D la sol.
D.
Example. ^ La fa Sol la Mi fa Sol la

The first three Notes above your Mi
Are fa sol la, here you may see;
The next three under Mi that fall,
Them la sol fa you ought to call.
Example. ^ Sol la Mi fa sol la fa sol fa la sol fa Mi la sol fa

If you will sing true without all blame,
You call all Eights by the same name.
Example. Sol la fa sol sol fa la s^l ^ Sol la fa sol sol fa la sol

These Rules and Examples being seriously perused by the Learner, will
infallibly direct him in the right naming of his Notes, which is a very great
help to the Singer; for there is nothing makes him sooner mistake his tune in
Singing, than the misnaming of his Notes: Therefore for the better
understanding the Rule of naming your Notes, by finding your Mi in its several
places, cast your eye on another Example, for the like naming your Notes in any
Cliff whatsoever, be it Bass, Trebl^, or any Inward Part. For there is no Song
pricked down for any part, but it does employ some of those Five Lines in this
following Example. The which several Parts are demonstrated by those little
Arches, or Columns, on the right side of the following Example.

Example. Mi in B. Mi in E. Mi in A. ^

This Example expresses the Names of the Notes as they are called in the three
removes of your Mi. I have seen some Songs with four flats, as is
beforementioned, that is to say, in B mi, E la mi, A la mi re, and D la sol
re; but this fourth place of D la sol re, is very seldom used, and such Songs
may be termed irregular, as to the naming the Notes (being rather intended for
Instruments than Voices) and therefore not fit to be proposed to young
Beginners to sing. And because I will omit nothing that may be useful to
Practitioners, I have set down a third Example of the naming of the Notes in
all Parts and Cliffs, as the Flats are assigned to all Cliffs.

An exact Table of the Names of the Notes in all usual Cliffs, expressed in the
Six several Parts of Music.
TREBLE, G sol re ut Cliff on the second Line.
^ Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^ la mi fa sol la fa
sol la la fa sol la mi fa sol la

ALTUS, C sol fa ut Cliff on the first Line.
^ Fa sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol ^ sol la fa sol la mi
fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol la

MEAN, C sol fa ut Cliff on the second Line.
^ mi fa sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol la fa ^ fa sol la fa sol la mi
fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol

COUNTER-TENOR.
^ Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^ la mi fa sol la fa
sol la la fa sol la mi fa sol la

TENOR.
^ La fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol la mi ^ fa sol la mi fa sol la
fa fa sol la fa sol la mi fa

BASSE.
^ Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^ la mi fa sol la fa
sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la fa

First learn by Cliffs to Name your Notes,
By Rules and Spaces right;
Then Tune with Time, to ground your Skill
For Musicks sweet Delight.
A TABLE showing the Comparison of the most usual Cliffs, how they agree
together in the Naming the Notes.
^ SLFSLMFS SLFSLMFS SLFSLM ^ LMFSLFSL LMFSLFSL ^ LFSLMFSL LFSLMFSL ^ FSLMFSLF
FSLMFSLF FSLMFS ^ FSLFSLMF FSLFSLMF FSLFSLM ^ SLMFSLFS SLMFSLFS SLMFSLF ^
MFSLFSLM MFSLFSLM

CHAP. V. Of Tuning the Voice.
THus having briefly given you plain and familiar Rules for the understanding
the nature and use of the Gam ut, it will be necessary, before I set down your
first plain Songs, to insert a word or two concerning the Tuning of the Voice,
in regard none can attain the right guiding or ordering their Voice in the
rising and falling of several Sounds which are in Music (at first) without the
help of another Voice or stringed Instrument. They are both of them
extraordinary helps, but some Voices are best guided by the sound of an
Instrument, and better, if the Learner have skill thereon to express the
several sounds, so that his Voice may go along with the Instrument, in the
ascending and descending of the several Notes or Sounds. And (if not) if an
Instrument be sounded by another who is an Artist, so the Learner has a good
Ear to guide his Voice in unity to the sound of the Instrument, it will with a
little practice, by sometimes singing with, and sometimes without) guide his
Voice into a perfect Harmony, to sing any plain Song with exactness; I mean by
Tuning his Notes perfectly, Ascending and Descending, and also in the rising or
falling of a Third, a Fourth, or Fifth, and Sixth, etc. as in the following
Plain Songs are set down. At the first guiding the Voice therein, it will much
help if you observe this Rule; for a Third ascending, which is from Sol to Mi,
at your first Tuning sound by degrees all three Notes, as Sol La Mi, then at
second Tuning leave out La, the middle Note, and so you will Tune from Sol to
Mi, which is a Third. This Rule serves for the rising of Fourths or Fifths,
etc. as your third Plain Song in the next page directs.

1. Observe that in the Tuning of your Voice you strive to have it clear.

2. In the expressing of your Voice, or Tuning of Notes, let the Sound come
clear from your throat, and not through your teeth, by sucking in your breath,
for that is a great obstruction to the clear utterance of the Voice.

Lastly, observe that in Tuning your first Note of your plain Song, you equal
it so to the pitch of your Voice, that when you come to your highest Note, you
may reach it without Squeaking, and your lowest Note without Grumbling.

Here follows the three usual Plain Songs for Tuning the Voice in the
Ascending and Descending of Notes.
^ SLMFSLFS SFLSFMLSLS ^ SMLFMSFL LFSMFLMSLS ^ SLMSMSLMFSFSLMFSSS ^
SLMFSLSLSLMFSLFSF ^ SLMFSLFSSS SFLSLS ^ FLSSSSFLSFSFSFLSFM ^ SMSFLSFMLSLSFLSFM
^ LSSSFSLSSSFSMSLS

CHAP. VI. Of Tones or Tunes of Notes.
OBserve that the two B Cliffs before mentioned are used in Song for the
flatting and sharping Notes. The property of the B flat is to change Mi into
Fa, making that Note to which it is joined a Semitone or half a Note lower; and
the B sharp raises the Note before which it is set a Semitone or half a sound
higher, but alters not its Name; so that from Mi to Fa, and likewise from La to
Fa, is but a Semitone or a half Note, between any two other Notes it is a
perfect Tone, or sound, as from Fa to Sol, from Sol to La, from La to Mi, are
whole Tones, which is a perfect Sound. And this may be easily distinguished, if
you try it on the Frets of a Viol or Lute, you shall perceive plainly that
there goes two Frets to the stopping of a whole Note, and but one Fret to a
half Note; so that it is observed that Mi and Fa do only serve for the flatting
or sharping all Notes in the Scale, and they being rightly understood, the
other Notes are easily applied to them; for if G sol re ut have a sharp set
before it, it is the same in sound with A la mi re flat; and B fa B mi flat, is
the same with A la mi re sharp; and C fa ut sharp, is D sol re flat, etc. as
being of one and the same sound, or stopped upon one and the same Fret on the
Viol or Violin. For Example: Unisons. Octaves. ^

For a Discourse of the Cords and Discords, I shall only name them in this part
of my Book.

PErfect Cords are these, a Fifth, an Eighth, with their Compounds or Octaves.

Imperfect Cords are these, a Third, a Sixth, with their Compounds,, all other
distances reckoned from the Bass are Discords.

A Diapason is a perfect Eighth, and contains 5 whole Tones, and 2 half Tones,
that is in all the seven natural Sounds or Notes besides the Ground, what flats
or sharps soever ^here be. But for a further Discourse, I shall refer you to
the Second part of this Introduction, entitituled, The Art of Descant, or
Composing of Music in Parts; my purpose in this Book being only to set down
the Rules for the Theorick part of Music, so far as is necessary to be
understood by young Practitioners in Music, either Vocal or Instrumental. I
shall therefore proceed to the next Rules for the Notes, their Time and
Proportions.

CHAP. VII. The Notes; their Names, Number, and Proportions.
Large. Long. Breve. Semibreve. Minim. Crotchet. Quaver. Semiq. ^

MEasure in this Science is a Quantity of the length and shortness of Time,
either by Natural Sounds pronounced by the Voice, or Artificial, upon
Instruments; which Measure, is by a certain motion of the hand or foot
expressed in variety of Notes. These Notes in Music have two Names, one for
Tune, the other for Time or Proportion of Notes to certain Sounds. The Names of
Notes in Tuning I have set down in the former Chapter, being Four, Sol, La, Mi,
Fa. Those in the Proportion of Time are Eight, as a Large, Long, Breve,
Semibreve, Minim, Crotchet, Quaver, and Semiquaver, expressed at the beginning
of this Chapter: The four first are Notes of Augmentation or Increase, the four
last of Diminution or Decrease. The Large is the first of Augmentation, being
longest in sound; and the Semibreve the last of Augmentation, being shortest in
sound: In Time, it is called the Master-Note, being of one certain Measure by
it self. All the other Notes, both of Augmentation and Diminution, are measured
by or proportioned to its value: The Large contains eight Semibreves, the Long
four, and the Breve two. The Notes of Diminution, viz. Minim, Crotchet, Quaver,
and Semiquaver, are reckoned to, as the others were measured by the Semibreve;
and, according to the ordinary proportion of Time, two Minims are accounted to
the Semibreve, two Crotchets to the Minim, two Quavers to the Crotchet, and two
Semiquavers to the Quaver.

Example. Notes of Augmentation. Notes of Diminution.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Rests or Pauses, of Pricks, and Notes of Syncopation.
Large. Long. Breve. Semibreve Minim. Crotchet. Quaver. ^

PAuses or Kests are silent Characters, or an artificial omission of the Voice
or Sound, proportioned to a certain Measure of Time, by motion of the hand or
foot (whereby the Quantity of Notes and Rests are directed) by an equal
measure, the signatures and characters of which are placed over each Note in
the Example at the beginning of this Chapter.

To these Notes appertain also certain other Rules, as Augmentation,
Syncopation, Pricks of Perfection or Addition; of which, I shall only set down
what is necessary to be understood by the Practitioner; as first, of the Pricks
of Perfection or Addition; next, of Syncopation, or breaking of the Time, by
the Driving a Minim through Semibreves, or Crotchets through Minims, which is
the beating the Time in the middle of such Notes.

First, this Prick of Perfection of Addition is ever placed on the right side
of all Notes thus, for the prolonging the sound of that Note it follows to half
as much more as it is: For Example, the Prick which is placed after a Semibreve
is in proportion a Minim, and makes that Semibreve which before was but two
Minims to be three Minims, in one continued Sound; and so the like proportion
to other Notes. Example.

Prick Long. Breve. Semibreve. Minim. Crotchet. Quaver. ^

A further Example of the Prick Notes, wherein the Measure of the Time is
barred, according to the Semibreve, both by Prick Semibreves, Minims, and
Crotchets.
^ ^ ^ ^

Secondly, Pricks of Perfection are used for perfecting of Notes, and are only
used in the Triple-Time; of which, I shall speak more at the latter end of
Chap. 10.

Thirdly, Syncopation is when the beating of Time falls to be in the midst of a
Semibreve or Minim, etc. or, as we usually term it, Notes driven till the Time
falls even again. Examp.

^ ^

Of the Tying of Notes.
^ ^

This Example shows, that many times in Songs or Lessons, two, four, or more
Quavers or Semiquavers, are Tied together by a long stroke on the top of their
Tails: And though they be so, they are the same with the other, and are so tied
for the benefit of the sight, when many Quavers or Semiquavers happen together,
not altering the Measure or Proportion of Time.

CHAP. IX. Of the Keeping of Time by the Measure of the Semibreve or
Master-Note.
OBserve that to the Measure of the Semibreve all Notes are proportioned, and
its Measure is expressed (by a Natural Sound of the Voice, or Artificial on an
Instrument) to the moving of the hand or foot up and down when its measure is
whole; in Notes of Augmentation, the Sound is continued to more than one
Semibreve; but in Notes of Diminution, the Sound is variously broken into
Minims, Crotchets, and Quavers, or the like: So that in keeping time your hand
goes down at one half, which is a Minim, and up at the next. For the more ease
at first, if you have two Minims, or four Crotchets, as in the Example
following, in one Bar, which is the proportion of a Semibreve; you may, in
Minims, pronounce one, two, your hand being down at your first sounding one,
lift it up leisurely, and when it is up a small distance pronounce two, and
then laying your hand down again begin the third Minim, lifting it up at the
fourth, and down at the fifth, etc. Also when you have four Crotchets,
pronounce one, two, three, four, that is, the hand is down at one and up at
three, and down when you begin the next Bar of four Crotchets, as in this
Example. This Rule observe, according to the Measure of those Notes your
Semibreve is divided into, be it either Triple, Duple or Common Time.

Example. ^ 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 ^ 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1

CHAP. X. Of the Four Moods or Proportions of the Time or Measure of Notes.
The usual Moods may not here be mist,
In them much cunning does consist.

THere are four Moods, the which are divided into four Tables, that is to say,
Moods.
Great. 1. The Perfect of the More. ^ 2. The Perfect of the Less. ^
Less. 3. The Imperfect of the More. ^ 4. The Imperfect of the Less. ^



These four Moods were used in former times, but of late years, those of our
Nation that have Composed Music, either Vocal or Instrumental, have made use
only of the two latter; that is to say, the Imperfect of the More and Imperfect
of the Less, one being called the Triple Time, the other the Duple or Common
Time, these two being sufficient to express much variety of Music: However,
because the Italians do at this day use in their Music all four, I will not
omit to give you the Definitions and Proportions of them in their order, and be
more large upon the two latter, because most used by the Practitioners of
Music in this our Nation.

Of the two first Moods.
1. THe Perfect of the More is when all go by three, as three Longs to a Large,
three Breves to a Long, three Semib^eves to a Breve, three Minims to a
Semibreve; except Crotchets, etc. which go by two; Marked thus, The Perfect of
the More ^.


2. The Perfect of the Less is when all go by two, except the Semibreves, as
two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, three Semibreves to a Breve, two
Minims to a Semibreve, etc. and its Sign or Mark is made thus, The Perfect of
the Less ^


Of the two last or most usual Moods.
3. THe Imperfect of the More is when all go by two, except the Minims, which
go by three, as two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, two Semibreves to a
Breve, three Minims to the Semibreve, with a Prick of Perfection, which makes
the whole proportion of three Minims, and is called a Time: Its Mood is thus
signed ^, and this is usually called the Triple Time.

The Imperfect of the More ^


This Mood is much used in Airy Songs and Galiards, and is usually called
Galiard or Triple Time; and is of two Motions, the one slow, the other more
swift.

The first is, when the Measure is by three Minims to a Semibreve with a Prick,
which Prick is for Perfection, to make it a perfect Time, and is usually called
Three to One.

^

The second Measure of this Triple Time is to a swifter motion, and is measured
by three Crotchets, or a Minim with a Prick for Perfection. This swifter
Measure is appropriated or used in light Lessons, as Corants, Sarabands, Iigs,
and the like.

^

This swifter Triple Time is sometimes pricked in Black Notes, which Black Note
is of the same Measure with the Minim in the foregoing Example, but is seldom
used, because the Minims are the same and serve as well.

For Example: ^

4. The fourth or last Mood, which is called the Imperfect of the Less, is when
all go by two, as two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, two Semibreves to
a Breve, two Minims, to a Semibreve, two Crotchets to a Minim, etc. and this is
called the Dupla or Semibreve Time, (but many call it the Common Time, because
most used;) its Mood is thus marked ^, and is usual in Anthems, Fantasies,
Pavans, Almans, and the like; whose Measure is set down in this following
Example.

The Imperfect of the Less ^


Note, That when this Common Mood is reversed thus ^, it is to signify, that
the Time of that Lesson or Song, before which it is so set, is to be Played or
Sung as swift again as the usual Measure.

CHAP. XI. Of the several Adjuncts and Characters used in Music.
1. A Direct is usually at the end of a Line, and serves to direct to the place
of the first Note on the next Line, and are thus made, ^ 2. Bars are of two
sorts, single and double. The single Bars serve to divide the Time, according
to the Measure of the Semibreve: The double Bars are set to divide the several
Strains or Stanzaes of the Songs and Lessons, and are thus made, ^ 3. A Repeat
is thus marked ^, and is used to signify that such a part of a Song or Lesson
must be Played or Sung over again from that Note over which it is placed. 4. A
Tie is of two uses; first, when the Time is broken or struck in the middle of
the Note, it is usual to Tie two Minims, or a Minim and a Crotchet together, as
thus, ^

The second sort of Tie is, when two or more Notes are to be Sung to one
Syllable, or two Notes or more to be played with once drawing the Bow on the
Viol or Violin, as thus: ^ Thou art not Kind but Cruel.

5. A Hold is thus made ^, and is placed over the Note which the Author intends
should be held to a longer Measure than the Note contains, and over the last
Note of a Lesson. 6. The Figures usually placed over Notes in the Thorough-Bass
of Songs or Airs, for the Organ or Theorbo, is to direct the Performer to
strike in other Parts to those Notes, as Thirds, Sixths, and the like, to the
Ground, as thus: ^
I shall here conclude the First Part, wherein I have set down what is needful
to be understood of the Theorick Part of Music, in the plainest and easiest
Method that I could; not doubting but by it, and a little assistance of some
already skilled in Music, to guide you to the Practick.

A Brief Discourse of the Italian manner of Singing; wherein is set down, the
Use of those Graces in Singing, as the Trill and Gruppo, used in Italy, and now
in England: Written some years since by an English Gentleman, who had lived
long in Italy, and being returned, Taught the same here.
The Proem to the said Discourse is to this effect.
HItherto I have not put forth to the view of the World, those Fruits of my
Music Studies employed about that Noble manner of Singing, which I learnt of
my Master the famous Scipione del Palla in Italy; nor my Compositions of Airs,
Composed by me, which I saw frequently practiced by the most famous Singers in
Italy, both Men and Women: But seeing many of them go about maimed and spoiled,
and that those long winding Points were ill performed, I therefore devised to
avoid that old manner of running Division, which has been hitherto used, being
indeed more proper for Wind and Stringed Instruments than for the Voice. And
seeing that there is made now a days an indifferent and confused use of those
excellent Graces and Ornaments to the good manner of Singing, which we call
Trills, Grupps, Exclamations of Increasing and Abating of the Voice, of which I
do intend in this my Discourse to leave some foot-prints, that others may
attain to this excellent manner of Singing: To which manner I have framed my
last Airs for one Voice to the Theorbo, not following that old way of
Composition, whose Music not suffering the Words to be understood by the
Hearers, for the multitude of Divisions made upon short and long Syllables,
though by the Vulgar such Singers are cried up for famous. But I have
endeavored in those my late Compositions, to bring in a kind of Music, by
which men might as it were Talk in Harmony, using in that kind of Singing a
certain noble neglect of the Song (as I have often heard at Florence by the
Actors in their Singing Opera's) in which I endeavored the Imitation of the
Conceit of the Words, seeking out the Cords more or less passionate, according
to the meaning of them, having concealed in them so much as I could the Art of
Descant, and paused or stayed the Consonances or Cords upon long Syllables,
avoiding the short, and observing the same Rule in making the passages of
Division by some few Quavers to Notes and to Cadences, not exceeding the value
of a quarter or half a Semibreve at most. But, as I said before, those long
windings and turnings of the Voice are ill used, for I have observed that
Divisions have been invented, not because they are necessary unto a good
fashion of Singing, but rather for a certain tickling of the Ears of those who
do not well understand what it is to sing Passionately; for if they did
undoubtedly Divisions would have been abhorred, there being nothing more
contrary to Passion than they are; yet in some kind of Music less Passionate
or Affectuous, and upon long Syllables, not short, and in final Cadences, some
short Points of Division may be used, but not at all adventures, but upon the
practice of the Descant; but to think of them first in those things that a man
will sing by himself, and to fashion out the manner of them, and not to promise
a man's self that his Descant will bear it; for to the good manner of Composing
and Singing in this way, the understanding of the conceit and the humor of the
words, as well in passionate Cords as passionate Expressions in Singing, does
more avail than Descant; I having made use of it only to accord two Parts
together, and to avoid certain notable Errors, and bind certain Discords for
the accompanying of the Passion, more than to use the Art: And certain it is,
that an Air composed in this manner upon the conceit of the words, by one that
has a good fashion of Singing, will work a better effect and delight, more
than another made with all the Art of Descant, where the Humor or Conceit of
the words is not minded.

The original of which defect (if I deceive not my self) is hence occasioned,
because the Musician does not well possess and make himself Master of that
which he is to Sing. For if he did so, undoubtedly he would not run into such
Errors, as most easily he falls into, who has framed to himself a manner of
Singing; for Example, altogether Passionate, with a general Rule that in
Increasing and Abating the Voice, and in Exclamations, is the foundation of
Passion, does always use them in every sort of Music, not discerning whether
the words require it: Whereas those that well understand the conceit and the
meaning of the Words, know our defects, and can distinguish where the Passion
is more or less required. Which sort of people we should endeavor to please
with all diligence, and more to esteem their praise, than the applause of the
ignorant Vulgar.

Thus Art admits no Mediocrity, and how much the more curiosities are in it,
by reason of the excellence thereof, with so much the more labor and love
ought we, the Professors thereof, to find them out: Which love has moved me
(considering that from Writings we receive the light of all Science, and of all
Art) to leave behind me this little light in the ensuing Notes and Discourses;
it being my intention to show so much as appertains to him who makes
profession of Singing alone, upon the Harmony of the Theorbo, or other Stringed
Instrument, so that he be already entered into the Theorie of Music, and Play
sufficiently. Not that this cannot also be attained by long Practice, as it is
seen that many, both Men and Women, have done, and yet this they attain is but
unto a certain degree: But because the Theorie of these Writings c^nduceth unto
the attaining of that degree; and because in the profession of a Singer (in
regard of the excellence thereof) not only particular things are of use, but
they all together do better it; therefore to proceed in order, thus I will say:

That the chiefest foundations, and most important Grounds of this Art are, the
Tuning of the Voice in all the Notes; not only that it be neither too high nor
too low, but that there be a good manner of Tuning it used. Which Tuning being
used for the most part in two fashions, we will consider both of the one and
the other; and by the following Notes will show that which to me seems more
proper to other effects.

There are some therefore that in the Tuning of the first Note, Tune it a Third
under: Others Tune the said first Note in its proper Tune, always increasing it
in Lowdness, saying, that this is a good way of putting forth the Voice
gracefully.

Concerning the first: Since it is not a general Rule, because it agrees not in
many Cords, although in such places as it may be used, it is now become so
ordinary, that instead of being a Grace (because some stay too long in the
third Note under, whereas it should be but lightly touched) it is rather
tedious to the Ear; and that for Beginners in particular it ought seldom to be
used: but instead of it, as being more strange, I would choose the second for
the Increasing of the Voice.

Now, because I have not contained my self within ordinary terms, and such as
others have used, yea rather have continually searched after novelty, so much
as was possible for me, so that the Novelty may fitly serve to the better
obtaining of the Musicians end, that is to delight and move the affections of
the mind, I have found it to be a more affectuous way to Tune the Voice by a
contrary effect to the other, that is, to Tune the first Note in its proper
Tune, diminishing it; because Exclamation is the principal means to move the
affection; and Exclamation properly is no other thing, but the slacking of the
Voice to reinforce it somewhat more. Whereas Increasing of the Voice in the
Treble Part, especially in feigned Voices, does oftentimes become harsh, and
unsufferable to the Hearing, as upon diverse occasions I have heard. Undoubtedly
therefore, as an affection more proper to move, it will work a better effect to
Tune the Voice diminishing it, rather than Increasing of it: Because in the
first of these ways now mentioned, when a man Increases the Voice, to make an
Exclamation, it is needful that in slacking of it, he Increase it the more. And
therefore I have said that it shows harsh and rough. But in the Diminishing
of the Voice it will work a quite contrary effect, because when the Voice is
slacked, then to give it a little spirit, will always make it more passionate.
Besides that also, using sometimes one, sometimes another, variety may be used,
which is very necessary in this Art, so that it be directed to the said end.

So^ then, if this be the greatest part of that Grace in Singing, which is apt
to move the affection of the mind, in those conceits certainly where there is
most use of such Affections or Passions, and if it be demonstrated with such
lively reasons, a new consequence is hence inferred, that from Writings of men
likewise may be learned that most necessary Grace, which cannot be described in
better manner, and more clearly for the understanding thereof; and yet it may
be perfectly attained unto: So that after the Study of the Theorie, and of
these Rules, they may be put in practice, by which a man grows more perfect in
all Arts, but especially in the profession of a perfect Singer, be it man or
woman.

More languid. A livelier Exclamation. For Example. ^ Cor mio deh non langui --
re gui -- re. ^

Of Tuning therefore with more or less Grace, and how it may be done in the
aforesaid manner, trial may be made in the above-written Notes with the words
under them, Cor mio, deh non languire. For in the first Minim with the Prick,
you may Tune Cor mio, diminishing it by little and little, and in the falling
of the Crotchet increase the Voice with a little more spirit, and it will
become an Exclamation passionate enough, though in a Note that falls but one
degree: But much more spriteful will it appear in the word deh, by holding of a
Note that falls not by one degree: As likewise it will become most sweet by the
taking of the greater Sixth that falls by a leap. Which thing I have observed,
not only to show to others what a thing Exclamation is, and from whence it
grows; but also that there may be two kinds of it, one more passionate than the
other; as well by the manner in which they are described, or tuned in the one
way or the other; as also by imitation of the word, when it shall have a
signification suitable to the conceit. Besides that, Exclamations may be used in
all Passionate Musicks, by one general Rule in all Minims and Crotchets with a
Prick falling; and they shall be far more Passionate by the following Note,
which runs, than they can be in Semibreves; in which it will be fitter for
increasing and diminishing the Voice, without using the Exclamations. Yet by
consequence understand, that in Airy Musicks, or Corants to dance, instead of
these Passions, there is to be used onl^ a lively cheerful kind of Singing,
which is carried and ruled by the Air it self. In the which, though sometimes
there may be place for some Exclamation, that liveliness of Singing is in that
place to be omitted, and not any Passion to be used which savoureth of
Linguishment. Whereupon we see how necessary a certain judgment is for a
Musician, which sometimes uses to prevail above Art. As also we may perceive
by the foregoing Notes, how much greater Grace the four first Quavers have upon
the second syllable of the word Languire (being so stayed by the second Quaver
with a Prick) than the four last equal Quavers, so printed for Example. But
because there are many things which are used in a good fashion of Singing,
which because there is found in them a greater Grace, being described in some
one manner, make a contrary effect one to the other; whereupon we use to say of
a man that he sings with much Grace, or little Grace: These things will
occasion me at this time first to demonstrate in what fashion I have described
the Trill and the Grup; and the manner used by me to teach them to those who
have been interessed in my house; and further, all other the more necessary
effects: So that I leave not unexpressed any curiosity which I have observed.

Trill, or plain shake. Gruppo, or Double Relish. ^ Cor -- re mi -- a.

The Trill described by me is upon one Note only, that is to say, to begin with
the first Crotchet, and to beat every Note with the throat upon the Vowel [ a]
unto the last Breve; as likewise the Gruppo or double Relish. Which Trill and
Gruppo was exactly learned, and exquisitly performed by my Scholars. So that if
it be true, that Experience is the Teacher of all things, I can with some
confidence affirm and say, that there cannot be a better means used to teach
it, nor a better form to describe it. Which Trill and Grup, because they are a
step necessary unto many things that are described, and are effects of that
Grace which is most desired for Singing well; and (as is aforesaid) being
described in one or other manner, do work a contrary effect to that which is
requisite: I will show not only how they may be used, but also all the effects
of them described in two manners, with the same value of the Notes, that still
we may know (as is aforementioned) that by these Writings, together with
Practice, may be learned all the Curiosities of this Art.

Example of the most usual Graces. ^ 1 Beating of the Throat. ^ 2 Beating the
Throat. ^ 2 Trill. ^ 2 Trill. 1 A plain fall. 2 D^uble fall. ^ A fall to take
breath. ^ Another fall like it. ^ Where this Mark ^ is set over a Note, the
Trill is to be used.

It is to be observed in these Graces that the second has more grace in it
than the first; and for your better experience we will in this following Air
describe some of those Graces with words under, together with the Bass for the
Theorbo; in which Air is contained the most passionate passages.

Abating the Voice A sprightly Exclam. A more lively Exclam. ^ Deh deh dove son
fuggiti deh dove son spariti ^ Exclam. Exclam. Exclam. Trillo. ^ g'oc chi de
qualier rai jo son ce ner homa i ^ Exclam. cheerful, as it were talking in
harmony, and neglecting ^ Aure aure divine ch'er rate peregrine in que- ^ the
M^sick. ^rill. Exclamation. ^ sta par^'en quella deh recate nouella dell' alma
^ Exclam. larger time. Trill. Exclam. ^ luce loro aure ch'io me ne moro deh
recate no- ^ Ex^lam. ^ uella deli' alma luce loro Aure Aure ^ Exclam.
reinforced. ^ ch'io me ne moro. ^

And because in the two last lines of the foregoing Air, Deh dove son fuggiti,
there are contained the best passions that can be used in this noble manner of
Singing, I have therefore thought good to set them down, both to show where it
is fit to increase and abate the voice, to make Exclamations, Trills, and
Grups; and in a word, all the Treasures of this Art; and that they may serve
for Example, whereby men may take notice in the Music of the places, where
they are most necessary, according to the passions of the words. Although I
call that the noble manner of Singing, which is used without tying a man's self
to the ordinary measure of time, making many times the value of the Notes less
by half, and sometimes more, according to the conceit of the words; whence
proceeds that excellent kind of Singing with a graceful neglect, whereof I have
spoken before.

[ Our Author being short in setting forth this chief or most usual Grace in
Singing, called the Trill, which, as he says very right, is by a beating in
the Throat on the Vowel (a'h) some observe that it is rather the shaking of the
Uvula or Palate on the Throat, in one sound, upon a Note. For the attaining of
this, the most surest and ready way is by imitation of those who are perfect in
the same; yet I have heard of some that have attained it by this manner, in
singing a plain Song, of 6 Notes up and 6 down, they have in the midst of every
Note beat or shaked with their finger upon their Throat, which by often
practice came to do the same Notes exactly without. It was my chance lately to
be in company with three Gentlemen at a Musical Practice, which sung their
Parts very well, and used this Grace ( called the Trill) very exactly: I
desired to know their Tutor, they told me I was their Tutor, for they never had
any other but this my Introduction: That (I answered) could direct them but in
the Theory, they must needs have a better help in the Practick, especially in
attaining to sing the Trill so well. One of them made this Reply, (which made
me smile) I used, said he, at my first learning the Trill, to imitate that
breaking of a Sound in the Throat, which Men use when they Lever their Hawks,
as he-he-he-he-he; which he used slow at first, and by often practice on
several Notes, higher and lower in sound, he became perfect therein. The Trill,
or Shake of the Voice, being the most usual Grace, is made in Closes, Cadences,
and other places, where by a long Note an Exclamation or Passion is expressed,
there the Trill is made in the latter part of any such Note; but most usually
upon binding Notes in Cadences and Closes, and on that Note that precedes the
closing Note. Those who once attain to the perfect use of the Trill, other
Graces will become easy.]

Since there are so many effects to be used for the excellency of this Art,
there is required (for the performing of them) necessarily a good voice, as
also a good wind to give liberty, and serve upon all occasions where is most
need. It shall therefore be a profitable advertisement, that the Professor of
this Art, being to sing to a Theorbo or other stringed instrument, and not
being compelled to fit himself to others, that he so pitch his Tune, as to sing
in his full and natural Voice, avoiding feigned Tunes of Notes. In which, to
feign them, or at the least to enforce Notes, if his Wind serve him well, so as
he do not discover them much; (because for the most part they offend the Ear;)
yet a man must have a command of Breath to give the greater Spirit to the
Increasing and Diminishing of the Voice, to Exclamations and other Passions by
us related; and therefore let him take heed, that spending much Breath upon
such Notes, it do not afterward fail him in such places as it is most needful:
For from a feigned Voice can come no noble manner of singing; which only
proceeds from a natural Voice, serving aptly for all the Notes which a man can
manage according to his ability employing his wind in such a fashion as he
command all the best passionate Graces used in this most worthy manner of
Singing. The love whereof, and generally of all Music, being kindled in me by
a natural inclination, and by the study of so many years, shall excuse me, if I
have suffered my self to be carried further than perhaps was fit for him, who
no less esteems and desires to learn from others, than to communicate to others
what himself has learned; and to be further transported in this Discourse,
than can stand with that respect I bear to all the Professors of this Art.
Which Art being excellent and naturally delightful, does then become admirable,
and entirely wins the love of others, when such as possess it, both by teaching
and delighting others, do often exercise it, and make it appear to be a pattern
and true resemblance of those never ceasing celestial Harmonies, whence proceed
so many good effects and benefits upon earth, raising and exciting the minds of
the Hearers, to the contemplation of those infinite delights which Heaven
affords.

This Author having set most of his Examples and Graces to the Italian words,
it cannot be denied but the Italian Language is more smooth and better vowelled
than the English, by which it has the advantage in Music, yet of late our
Language is much refined, and so is our Music, to a more smooth and delightfal
way and manner of singing after this new method; especially by the excellent
Compositions of Mr. Henry Laws, and other excellent Masters in this Art, and
was by them Taught for above this forty years past, and is daily used and
taught by several eminent Professors at this day. Therefore such as desire to
be taught to sing after this way, need not seek after Italian or French
Masters, for our own Nation was never better furnished with able and skilful
Artists in Music than it is at this time, though few of them have the
Encouragement they deserve, nor must Music expect it as yet, when all other
Arts and Sciences are at so low an Ebb: But I do hope, as Almighty God has most
miraculously restored His Sacred Majesty in Peace, whose Virtues and Piety
declare Him a Lover and Encourager of Arts, and of Music especially; so I hope
the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of this Kingdom, will follow His Gracious and
Royal Example.

Of the five Moods used by the Grecians.
1. The Dorick, 2. The Lydian, 3. The AEolick, 4. The Phrygian, 5. The Ionick.
OF these Moods, though of little use among us, there is scarce any Author that
has wrote of Music but do give some account of them; among the Latin,
Alstedius, Cassiodorus, and others; in English, Mr. Butler and Mr. Morley;
therefore not intending to be singular, I shall give you this short Narrative.

These five Moods have no relation to those Moods mentioned in the former part
of this Book; those have reference to Notes and Time, these only concern Tune.
That which the Grecians called Mode or Mood, the Latins termed Tone or Tune:
The design of either, was to show in what Key the Song was set, and how each
Musical Key had relation one to another. These five appertained to the Grecians
only, and had their several appellations from the Countries in which they were
invented and practiced. The Latins reduced theirs to Eight Tones or Tunes, and
were by the Churchmen termed Plain-songs. These exceeded not the compass of six
Notes, and was to direct how to begin and end in the proper Keys; which eight
Tones or Tunes are printed in the Tenor Part of Mr. Morley's Introduction, page
147. The Grecian Moods had these various effects.

1. The Dorick Mood consisted of sober slow Tuned Notes (Counterpoint) where
the Composition of Parts goes Note for Note together, be they of two, three, or
four Parts, as is set forth in my late Book of Music of four Parts to the
Psalms and Hymns used in our Churches, Printed in Folio, 1671. This Mood had
its name from Doria, a civil part of Greece near Athens; and being solemn,
moves to Sobriety and Godliness. 2. The Lydian Mood was used to grave solemn
Music, the Descant or Composition being of slow time, fitted to Sacred Hymns
and Anthems, or Spiritual Songs, in Prose, sometimes in Verses alone, and
^ometimes in a full Chorus of four or five Parts; which moves a kind of
Heavenly Harmony, whereby the mind is lifted up from the regard of earthly
things to those celestial Joys above. This Mood had its derivation from the
famous River in Lidia called Pactolus, and the winding retrograde Meander,
representing thereby the admirable variety of Sound in Music, passing by the
famous Cities, Philadelphia, and Sardis once the Royal Seat of rich King
Croesus. 3. The AEolick Mood, was that which was of a more Airy and soft
pleasing sound, as your Madrigals or Fa la's of five and six Parts, which were
Composed for Viols and Voices by many of our excellent English Authors, as Mr.
Morley, Wilks, Wilbey, Ward, and others: Which Music by its variety and
delightfulness, allayeth the Passions, and charmeth the Affections into a sweet
and pleasing temper; such as was that enchanting Music of the Harp, provided
for King Saul, 1 Samuel 16. That Saul was refreshed, and the evil Spirit departed
from him. This Mood had its derivation from AEolia (a Kingdom of AEolus) whence
he is feigned to send his rushing Winds, which do resemble this Mood, that is
so commixt with fancy and airy reports, one part after other. 4. The Phrygian
Mood was a more warlike and courageous kind of Music, expressing the Music of
Trumpets and other Instruments of old, exciting to Arms and Activity, as
Almans, and the like. This Mood had its derivation from Phrygia (a Region
bordering upon Lydia and Caria) in which is that Martial Town Cios, and the
most high Hill Idae, famous for the Trojan War. Many Historians have written of
its rare Effects in warlike Preparations: Suidas (in litera T) writes of
Timotheus, a skilful Musician, that when Alexander the Great was much dejected
in his mind, and loath to take up Arms, he with his Phrygian Flute expressed
such excellent sounds and varieties of Music, that the Kings passions were
immediately stirred to War, and ran presently and took up Arms. But the Story
of Ericus the Musician passes all; who had given forth, that by his Music he
could drive men into what Affections he listed; and being required by Bonus
King of Denmark to put his Skill in practice, he with his Harp, or Polycord
Lyra, expressed such effectual melody and harmony, in the variety of changes in
several Keys, and in such excellent Fug's and spritely Airs, that his
Auditors began first to be moved with some strange passions, but ending his
excellent Voluntary with some choice Fancy upon this Phrygian Mood, the Kings
passions were altered, and excited to that height, that he fell upon his most
trusty friends which were near him, and flew some of them with his fist for
lack of another weapon; which the Musician perceiving, ended with the sober and
solemn Dorick, which brought the King to himself, who much lamented what he had
done. This is recorded at large by Crantzius, lib. 5. Daniae cap. 3. and by
Saxo Grammaticus, lib. 12. Hist. Daniae, and others. 5. The Ionick Mood was for
more light and effeminate Music, as pleasant amorous Songs, Corants,
Sarabands, and Iigs, used for honest mirth and delight at Feasts and other
merriments. This Mood had its derivation from the Ionians of Ionia, which lies
between AEolia and Caria, a situation full of all pleasure, whose plenty and
idleness turned their honest mirth into lasciviousness. By this Mood was the
Pythagorean Huntsup, or Morning Music, which wakened and roused their dull
Spirits to study and action. The abuse of this Mood is soon reformed by the
sober Dorick; for what this excites above moderation, the other draws into a
true Decorum.
Let thus much suffice to have been spoken of the Grecian Moods. I shall now
set down some short Songs, and Airs for two Voices, very useful for Beginners.

Short Airs or Songs of Two Voices, Treble and Bass for Beginners.
A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. W. L.
^ GAther your Rose-buds while you may, old ^ Time is still a flying, and that
same Flower that ^ smiles to day, to morrow will be dying.

A. 2. Voc. BASSE. W. L.
^ GAther your Rose-buds while you may, old ^ Time is still a flying, and that
same Flower that ^ smiles to day, to morrow will be dying.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. I. P.
^ COmely Swain why sitt'st thou so, Fa la la la la etc. la. ^ Folded arms are
signs of woe, Fa la la la la la la la la la. ^ If thy Nymph no favor show, Fa
la la la la la la la. ^ Choose another, let her go, Fa la la la la la la la la
la.

A. 2. Voc. BASSE. I. P.
^ COmely Swain why fitt'st thou so; Fa la la la la etc. la. ^ Folded Arms are
signs of woe, Fa la la la la la la la la la la. ^ If thy Nymph no favor show,
Fa la la la la la la la. ^ Choose another, let her go, Fa la la, etc.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. T. M.
^ NOw is the Month of Maying, when merry ^ Lads are playing, Fa la la la la,
etc. ^ Each wi^h his bonny Lass upon the greeny grass, ^ Fa la la la la, etc.

A. 2. Voc. BASSE. T. M.
^ NOw is the Month of Maying, when merry ^ Lads are playing, Fa la la la la,
etc. ^ Each with his bonny Lass upon the greeny grass, ^ Fa la la la la, etc.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. B. R.
^ IN the merry month of May, in a morn by break of day; ^ forth I walked the
wood so wide, when as May was in her pride; ^ there I spyed all alone, Philida
and Coridon.

A. 2. Voc. BASSE. B. R.
^ IN the merry month of May, in a morn by break of day; ^ Sorth I walked the
wood so wide, when as May was in her pride; ^ there I spyed all alone Philida
and Coridon.

A. 2. V^c. TREBLE. H. L.
^ COme Cloris hye we to the Bower, to sport us e're ^ the day be done; such is
thy power that every Flower ^ will open to thee as to the Sun.

The wanton Suckling and the Vine
Will strive for the Honor, who first may
With their green Arms incircle thine,
To keep the burning Sun away.
A. 2. Voc. BASSE. H. L.
^ COme Cloris hye we to the Bower, to spo^t us ^ e're the day be done; such is
thy power, that every Flower ^ will open to thee as to the Sun.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. I. G.
^ Will Cloris cast her Sun-bright Eye upon so ^ mean a Swain as I? Can she
affect my oaten reed? or ^ stoop to wear my Shepherds weed.

What rural sport can I devise,
To please her Ears, to please her Eyes?
Fair Cloris sees, fair Cloris hears^
With Angels Eyes and Angels Ears.
A. 2. Voc. BASSE. I. G.
^ Will Cloris cast her Sun-bright Eye upon so ^ mean a Swain as I? Can she
affect my oaten reed? or ^ stoop ^o wear my Shepherds weed.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. T. B.
^ TUrn Amarillis to thy Swain, turn Amarillis to thy ^ Swain, turn Amarillis
to thy Swain, thy Damon calls thee ^ back again, thy Damon calls thee back
again: Here is a ^ pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty Arbor by, where
Apollo, ^ where Apollo, where Apollo, where Apollo cannot, cannot ^ spy, where
Apollo cannot spy. Here let us fit, and whilst I ^ play, sing to my Pipe, sing
to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, ^ sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe a Roundelay;
sing to ^ my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe a Roundelay.

A. 2^ Voc. BASSE. T. B.
^ TUrn Amarillis to thy Swain, turn Amarillis, turn ^ Amarillis, turn
Amarillis to thy Swain, thy Damon calls ^ thee back again, thy Damon calls thee
back again: Here ^ is a pretty Arbor by, where Apollo, where Apollo, where ^
Apollo, where Apollo cannot spy, where Apollo cannot ^ spy: There let us sit,
and whilst I play, sing to my Pipe, ^ sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to
my Pipe, sing to ^ my Pipe a Roundelay; sing to my Pipe, sing to my ^ Pipe,
sing to my Pipe a Roundelay.

A. 2. Voc. TREBLE. W. L.
^ LOve is lost and gone astray being blind has lost ^ his way. Ve -- nus
cries for her son. out alas she is undone! ^ Cupid sor his mother wept,
weepin^, thus sat down and slept.

A. 2. Voc. BASSE. W. L.
^ LOve is lost and gone astray, being blind has lost ^ his way. Venus cries
for her son, out a -- lass she is undone! ^ Cupid for his mother wept, weeping,
thus sat down and slept.

For more Songs and Airs of this nature for Beginners, I refer you to two
Books lately published, one entitled, Select Airs and Dialogue ^or One, Two,
and Three Voices; the other, The Musical Commpanion, containing Airs for Two,
Three, and Four Voices.

RULES and DIRECTIONS For SINGING the PSALMS.
THe Tunes of Psalms are of general use, all who are true Lovers of Divine
Music will have them in estimation, they may be called Holy David's Music,
they are easy and delightful: Those who are principally concerned, are
Parish-Clerks, as being the Leaders of those Tunes in their Congregations, for
whose use and benefit, I have set down these following Directions.

First, observe how many Notes Compass the Tune is; secondly, the place of the
first Note; and lastly, how many Notes above and below that, so that you may
begin the first Note in such a Key, as the rest may be sung in the compass of
your own and the peoples Voices, without squeaking above, or grumbling below.
For the better understanding of which, these following Instructions are
necessary, which serve also for all other Tunes that are not here; but when you
are perfected in these, I refer you to my large Book lately published in Folio,
Entitled, Psalms and Hymns in Solemn Music of Four Parts; in which is 47
several Tunes, with the Bass under each Common-Tune, as proper to sing to the
Organ, Theorbo, or Bass-Viol; also variety of excellent Translations of Psalms
and Hymns, never before published.

The Short Tunes to Four Lines, whose Measure is Eight Syllables on the first
Line, and six on the next.
These Tunes, in Tuning, the first Note will bear a cheerful high pitch, in
regard their whole Compass is not above five or six Notes, from the highest
Note to the lowest. To Psalm. Consolatory. Oxford Tune Cambridge Tune Litchfield
Tune Low Dutch Tune
To Psalms of Prayer, Confession, and Funerals. York Tune Windsor Tune
Westminster Tune Ely Tune Worcester Tune Hartfordshire Tune
To peculiar Psalm. as 25,50,67,70,134. Southwell Tune New Tune

These Tunes are eight Notes Compass above the first, and therefore you must
begin the first Note indifferent low. To Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving. St.
David's Tune Martyrs Tune Winchester Tune London Tune London new Tune Norwich
Tune Hereford Tune Exceter Tune


Long Tunes, most of them usual to Psalms of Eight Lines, which contain Eight
Syllables in the first Line, and six in the next.
These Tunes are eight Notes in Compass above the first Note, and therefore you
must begin the first Note low. 1 Psalm. Tune 81 Psalm. Tune 113 Psalm. Tune 119
Psalm. Tune 148 Psalm. Tune
These Tunes fall four Notes lower than the first Note, therefore begin that
indifferent high. 51 Psalm. Tune 68 Psalm. Tune 100 Psalm. Tune 125 Psalm. Tune

The most usual Common Tunes Sung in Parish Churches, with the Bass under each
Tune.
Psalm. 4. Oxford Tune.
^ O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call: Thou have set me
at liberty, when I was bound and thrall.

Psalm. 69. Litchfield Tune.
^ SIng ye with praise unto the Lord, new songs with joy and mirth. Sing unto
him with one accord, all people on the earth.

Psalm. 116. Windsor Tune.
^ I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard has he: ^ ^ When in my
days I call`d on him, he bowed his ear to me. ^

Psalm. 141. Westminster Tune.
^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee unto me: ^ ^ And hearken Lord
unto my voice, when I do cry to thee. ^

Psalm. 26. Worcester Tune.
^ LOrd be my Judge, and thou shall see my paths be right and plain: ^ ^ I
trust in God, and hope that He will strength me to remain. ^

Psalm. 133. Hereford Tune.
^ O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see: ^ ^ Brethren together fast
to hold the band of amity. ^

Psalm. 21. Cambridge Tune.
^ HElp Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay: ^ ^ And faith and
truth from worldly men is parted clean away. ^

Psalm. 39. Martyrs Tune.
^ I Said I will look to my ways, for fear I should go wrong: ^ ^ I will take
heed all times that I offend not with my tongue. ^

Psalm. 25. or 50,67,70,134. Cambridge short Tune.
^ I Lift mine heart to thee, my God and guide most just: ^ ^ Now suffer me to
take no shame, for in thee do I trust. ^

Psalm. 134. or 25. New Tune.
^ BEhold and have regard, ye Servants of the Lord: ^ ^ Which in his house by
night do watch, praise him with one accord. ^

Psalm. 23. Low Dutch Tune.
^ THe Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed: ^ ^ How can I then
lack any thing whereof I stand in need. ^

Psalm. 84. Winchester Tune.
^ HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me! ^ ^ The
Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be! ^

Psalm. 103. Hartfordshire Tune.
^ MY Soul give land unto the Lord, my Sp'rit shall do the same: ^ ^ And all
the Secrets of my Heart, praise ye His Holy Name. ^

Psalm. 145. Exceter Tune.
^ THee will I laud my God and King, and bless thy name for aye: ^ ^ For ever
will I praise thy name, and bless thee day by day. ^

Psalm. 73. York Tune.
^ THe L. is both my health and light, shall man make me dismayed? ^ ^ Since God
does give me strength and might, why should I be afraid? ^

Psalm. 95. St. David's Tune.
^ O Come let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: ^ ^ In him our rock
of health ^ejoyce, let us with one accord. ^

Psalm. Hackney Tvne.
^ REgard, O Lord, for I complain, and make my suit to thee: ^ ^ let not my
words return in vain, but give an ear to me. ^

Psalm. 135. London New Tune.
^ O Praise the L. praise him, praise him, praise him with one accord ^ ^ O
praise him still all ye that be, that servants of the Lord. ^

Psalm. 100.
^ ALl Pple that on earth do dwell, sing to the L. with cheerful voice: ^ ^ Him
serve with fear, his praise forth tell; come ye before him and rejoice. ^

Psalm. 125. Ten Commandment Tune.
^ THose that do put their confidence, upon the L. our God only: ^ ^ And fly to
him for their defense, in all their need and misery. ^

First Psalm.
^ THe man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear: ^ ^ Nor led his
life as sinners do, nor sat in scorner^ chair. ^ ^ But in the Law of God the
Lord does set his whole delight: ^ ^ And in that Law does exercise himself,
both day and night. ^

Psalm. 51.
^ O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity take ^ ^ My sins
deface, my faults redress, good L. for thy great mercy sake ^ ^ Wash me, O L.
and make me clean from this un^ust and sinful act: ^ ^ And purify yet once
again my heinous crime and bloody fact. ^

Psalm. 68.
^ LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight, ^ ^ His
enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight: ^ ^ And as the fire
does melt the wax, and wind blow smoke away: ^ ^ So in the presence of the Lord
the wicked shall decay. ^

Psalm. 81.
^ BE light and glad in God rejoice, which is our strength and stay: ^ ^ Be
joyful, and lift up you voice, to Jacob's God I say. ^ ^ Prepare your
Instruments most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: ^ ^ Stri^e up with Harp and
Lute so sweet, on every pleasant string. ^

Psalm. 113.
^ YE children which do serve the L. praise ye his name with one accord: Who from
the rising of the Sun, till it return where it begun: ^ ^ Ye blessed be alwa^s
his name. The L. all Pple does surmou^t, Is to be praised with great fame. The
L. all Pple does surmou^t, ^ ^ As for his glory we may count, above the Heavens
high to be. ^ ^ With God the Lord who may compare, whose dwellings in the ^ ^
Heavens are: Of such great power and fo^ce is He. ^

Psalm. 148.
^ GIve laud unto the Lord, from heaven that is so high; ^ ^ Praise him in deed
and word above the starry sky: ^ ^ And also ye, his Angels all, Armies royal,
praise him with glee. ^

Psalm. 119.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart, ^ ^ Whose
lives and conversations from Gods Laws never start. ^ ^ Blessed are they that
give themselves his S^atutes to observe, ^ ^ Seeking the L. with all their
hearts, and never from him swerve. ^



A BRIEF INTRODUCTION To the Playing on the Bass-Viol. The Second BOOK.
THe Viol (usually called) de Gambo, or Consort Viol, because the Music
thereon is played from the Rules of the Gam-vt, and not as the Lyra-Viol, which
is by Letters or Tableture. Of this Viol de Gambo there are three several
sizes, one larger than the other, according to the three Parts of Music set
forth in the Gam-vt, viz. Treble-Viol, Tenor-Viol, and Bass-Viol. The
Treble-Viol plays the highest Part, and its Lessons are pricked by the G sol re
vt Cliff ^; the Tenor-Viol, or middle part, its Lessons are by the C sol fa vt
Cliff ^; and the Bass-Viol, which is the largest, its Lessons are by the F fa
vt Cliff ^ These three Viols agree in one manner of Tuning; where I shall give
you the Directions for Tuning the Bass-Viol, which is usually strung with six
Strings (as you may observe on the Figure expressed in the foregoing page)
which six strings are known by six several names; the first, which is the
smallest, is called the Treble; the second, the small Mean; the third, the
great Mean; the fourth, the Counter-Tenor; the fifth, the Tenor or Gam-vt
string; the sixth, the Bass. But if you will name them after they are Tuned,
according to the Rule of the Gam-vt, the Treble string, is D la sol re; the
small Mean, A la mi re; the great Mean, E la mi; the Counter-Tenor, C fa vt; the
Tenor or fifth string, Gam-vt; and the sixth or Bass, double D sol re.
Belonging to these six strings there are seven Frets or Stops on the neck of
your Viol, which are for stopping the various Sounds, according to the several
Notes of the Gam-vt, both Flats and Sharps: For the more plain understanding of
which, I have drawn an exact Table in the following page 88. beginning with the
lowest Note on your sixth string, and so ascending to the highest on the first
or Treble string. Your perfect understanding of that Table will much further
you in the knowledge of Tuning your Viol; for which Tuning I will give you two
Rules, one by Tableture or Letters, the other by the Gam-vt Rule; the first
being the easiest way to a Beginner, whose Ear at first is not well acquainted
with the several distances of Sounds that the Strings are Tuned in, shall by
this way use only one Sounding, viz. an Unison, which is to make two strings
(one of them being stopped, the other not) to agree in one and the same sound:
The Letters are Eight, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H; seven of these are assigned to
the seven Frets on the Neck of the Viol; A is for the string open, so B is the
first Fret, C the second, D the third, E the fourth, F the fifth, G the sixth,
and H the seventh.

Example. Six Strings.


When you begin to Tune, raise your Treble or smallest string as high as
conveniently it will bear without breaking; then stop only your second or small
Mean in F, and tune it till it agree in sound with your Treble open; that done,
stop your Third in F, and make it agree with your Second open; then stop your
Fourth in F, and make it agree with your Third open; then stop your Fifth in F,
and make it agree with your Fourth open; and lastly, stop your Sixth in F, and
make it agree to your Fifth open. This being exactly done, you will find your
Viol in Tune, according to the Rule of the Gam-vt.

Example, Tuning by Letters. ^

Example, Tuning by Notes. ^ D la sol re. A la mi re. E la mi. C fa vt. Gam-vt.
D D sol re.

The other way of Tuning is by the Rule of the Gam-vt, by distances of Sounds,
as in the foregoing Example, thus: The Treble being raised as high as it will
conveniently bear without breaking, is called D la sol re, then tune your
second four Notes lower, and it is A la mi re; the third four Notes lower is E
la mi; the fourth three Notes, or a f^at Third lower, is C fa vt; the fifth
four Notes lower, is Gam-vt; and the sixth four Notes lower than the fifth, is
double D sol re: This is the most usual way of Tuning it; yet there are some
Lessons do require it one Note lower, which is double C fa vt, but that is very
seldom.

Example of the Notes ascending and descending. ^ ^ ^ ^

Your Viol being Tuned, practice to play this Example of the Notes ascending
and descending, and by it you shall know your Viol is right Tuned.

An exact Table, directing the Places of the Notes, Flat and Sharp, to every
Stop on the Bass-Viol, according to the Gam-ut; beginning at the lowest Note of
the Bass on the Sixth String, and ascending to the highest on the Treble.
6 String.
^ Double D ^ol re. Double E la mi. Flat. D D E la mi. Proper. D D Ffa ut. D D
F fa ut. Sharp. Sixth string open. Sixth string first fret. Sixth string second
fret. Sixth string third fret. Sixth st^ing fourth fret.

5. String.
^ Gamut. Gamut sharp. A re. B mi flat. B mi proper. Fifth string open. fifth
string ^^^st fret. fifth string second fret. fifth string third fret. fifth
string fourth fret.

4 String.
^ C fa ut. C fa ut, sharp. D sol re. E la mi, flat Fourth string open. fourth
string first fret. fourth string second fret. fourth string fourth fret.

2 String.
^ E la mi F fa ut F fa ut, sharp G sol re ut. G sol ^e ut, sharp. Third string
open. third string first f^et. third string second fret. third string third
fret. third string fourth f^et.

2 String.
^ A la mi re. B fa b mi, flat. B fa b mi. proper. ^ (...) fa ut. C sol fa ut,
sharp. Second string open. second string first fret. second string second fret,
second string third fret. second string fourth fret.

1 String.
^ D la sol re E la mi, flat E la mi F fa ut E la ut sharp G sol r^ ut. first
string open. first string first fret. first string second fret. first string
third fret. first string fourth fret. first string fifth fret.

It is usual in Lessons for the Bass-Viol, to change the Cliff where the Notes
ascend above D la sol re, which is very necessary to prevent the drawing of
more lines above; therefore the Practitioner ought to be perfect in the C sol
fa ut Cliff on the middle line, as you see in the five last Notes of the Table;
also this Example mentions the like agreement of Notes in both Cliffs.

Example. ^ ^

In this Example the Notes pricked in the Tenor Cliff, are the same with those
in the Bass or F fa ut Cliff, and are stopped in the same places on the Viol.
This I thought fit to mention, because you will meet with the change of Cliffs
in the following Lessons.

Observe, that in the foregoing Table the Sharp (^) before a Note makes it
stopped a Fret lower, and a b Flat before a Note a Fret higher; for two Frets go
to one whole or perfect Note, as that Table does direct: Sometimes you may see
a ^ before D sol re, then it is stopped a Fret lower, which is the place of E la
mi flat, so if a Flat is set before A la mi re, it is a Fret higher, which is G
sol re ut ^; the like of other flat or sharp Notes.

Also if a B flat or B sharp be set on Rule or Space at the beginning of any
Line with the Cliff, that Flat or Sharp makes all the Notes which are in the
same Rules or Spaces to be flat or sharp through the whole Lesson.

TREBLE-VIOL.
These Directions for the Bass-Viol do also serve the Treble-Viol, which is
strung and tuned in the same manner, only eight Notes higher, G sol re ut on
the Treble is the Eighth above G sol re ut on the Bass, being stopped on the
same String and Fret with the Bass; and so other Notes accordingly.

TENOR-VIOL.
The Tenor-Viol is an excellent inward Part, and much used in Consort,
especially in Fantasies and Airs of 3, 4, 5 and 6 parts. The Tuning of it is
the same with the Bass and Treble, for the distance of sound betwixt each
string; but being an Inward Part betwixt both, its Tuning is four Notes higher
than the Bass, and five Notes lower than the Treble; its first or Treble string
is tuned to G sol re ut on the third string of the Treble-Viol; its second four
Notes lower, which is D la sol re; the third for Notes lower, is A la mi re;
the fourth three Notes (or a flat Third) lower, is F fa ut; the fifth four
Notes lower than it, is C fa ut; and the sixth four Notes lower than the fifth,
is Gam-vt; which is answerable to the Gam-vt on the Bass-Viol.

For the better understanding of these Tunings severally, viz. Treble or Tenor,
observe these two Examples of them, according as their six strings are Tuned by
the several Distances of Notes in the Gam-vt.

The Treble-Viol Tuning. ^ 1 2 3 4 5 6 String.

The fifth string on the Treble-Viol is the same with G sol re vt on the third
string of the Bass-Viol.

The Tenor-Viol Tuning. ^ 1 2 3 4 5 6 String.

The fifth string of the Tenor-Viol is tuned to C fa vt or fourth string of the
Bass-Viol.

For the Names of the Notes, and their Proportions of Time, I refer you to the
fourth and seventh Chapters in the first Book.

Some General Rules for the Viol.
THere are three sorts of Bass-Viols, as there are three manners of ways in
playing.

First, a Bass-Viol for Consort must be one of the largest size, and the
Strings proportionable.

Secondly, a Bass-Viol for Divisions must be of a less size, and the Strings
according.

Thirdly, a Bass-Viol to play Lyra-way, that is by Tableture, must be somewhat
less than the two former, and strung proportionably.

2. In the choice of your Viol Bow, let it be proportioned to the Viol you use,
and let the Hair be laid stiff, and the Bow not too heavy, nor too long.

3. In holding your Viol observe this Rule: Place it gently between your Knees,
resting the lower end thereof upon the Calves of your Legs, and let your Feet
rest flat on the Ground, your Toes turned a little outward, and let the top of
your Viol lean toward your left shoulder.

4. In the holding of your Bow, observe this Rule: Hold the Bow betwixt the
ends of your Thumb and your Forefinger, an Inch below the Nut, the Thumb and
first Finger resting on the Wood, the ends of your second and third Fingers
staid upon the Hair, by which you may poise and keep up your Bow. Your Bow
being thus fixed, you must draw it over one string, and then another, in a
right angle, about two or three Inches above the Bridge, making each several
string yield a clear sound.

5. In the posture of your left hand observe this Rule, place your Thumb on the
back of the Neck, and opposite to your Forefinger, so that when your Fingers
are to rest on the several Stops or Frets, your hand may have liberty to move
up and down, as occasion shall require; and in the stopping observe, that when
you set any finger down, let it not be just upon the Fret, but close to it,
bearing it hard down with the end of your finger, and let it rest there,
playing the following Notes with your other fingers, until occasion require the
moving it; and be sure not to lift your fingers too high, but keep them in an
even distance to the Frets, that so they may pass more readily from Fret to
Fret.

Also in the Rule of true Fingering, where you skip a Fret, there leave a
finger; and when you have any Notes which are high Notes, that reach lower than
the Frets, there the highest Note is always stopped either with the third or
fourth finger; if with the third, then the first and second fingers are ready
to stop the two next Notes either ascending or descending from it: But if the
highest Note be stopped with the fourth finger, then the Note under it is stopped
either with the third or second finger, according as it is either Flat or
Sharp; if Sharp, the third; if Flat, the second. But whether the highest Note
be stopped with the third or fourth finger, the third below it must be stopped with
the first finger^ which is ever as a guide to the two Notes above it. Lastly,
when two Notes which follow one another are stopped with the same finger removed,
it is to prepare the other fingers to the aforementioned posture, or to remove
them to some other place. This order of Fingering directs the whole Fingerboard
(in stopping three Notes which follow upon any one string) with this proviso,
where stops are wide, the fourth or little finger is of more use, than lower
down, where the stops fall more close.

6. In the moving your Bow observe this Rule, when you see an even number of
Quavers or Semiquavers, as 2, 4, 6, or 8, tied together, you must begin with
your Bow forward, though the Bow be drawn forward the Note before; but if the
number be odd, as 3, 5, or 7, (which is by reason of a Prick Note or an odd
Quaver Rest) then the first Note must be played with the bow drawn backward.

Lastly, in the practice of any Lesson, play it slow at first, and by often
practice it will bring your hand to a more swift motion.

And now, your Viol Being Tuned according to the foregoing Directions, I have
here following set down a few Lessons for to begin with, and over the Notes I
have set figures, to direct with what fingers to stop them; 1, 2, 3, 4, is set
for first, second, third, and fourth fingers; those which have no figures over
them, are the string open.

For the usual Graces, the Shake is the principal; of which there are two, the
close shake and the open shake; the close shake is when you stop with your
first Finger on the first Fret, and shake with your second Finger as close to
it as you can; the open shake is when you stop with your first Finger on the
first Fret, and shake with your third Finger on the third Fret; this observe in
all stops whatsoever. For other Graces, as Double Relishes, Back-falls, etc. I
refer you to the Table of the several Graces in my Directions for the
Treble-Violin, which are proper also to the Bass-Viol.

Short Lessons for the Bass-Viol.
1 3 1312 12 13 3 2 12 12 ^ ^ 2 3 23 1 3 23 2 2 12 ^ 2 3 31 3 1 21 2 2 32 ^ 31
31 3 1 3 13 1 2 ^ The Ground of John come kiss. ^ ^ ^ A Ground. ^ ^ A Ground. ^
^ A Ground. ^ ^ ^ A Tune. ^ ^ ^ ^ A tune. ^ ^ ^ ^ A Preludium. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ An
easy Division. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

A BRIEF INTRODUCTION To the Playing on the TREBLE-VIOLIN.


THE Treble-Violin is a cheerful and spritely Instrument, and much practiced of
late, some by Book, and some without; which of these two is the best way, may
easily be resolved: First, to learn to play by rote or ear without Book, is the
way never to play more than what he can gain by hearing another play, which may
soon be forgot; but on the contrary, he which learns and practices by Book,
according to the Grounds of Music, fails not, after he comes to be perfect in
those Rules, which guide him to play more than ever he was taught or heard, and
also to play his part in Consort; which the other will never be capable of,
unless he have this sure guide.

The Violin is usually strung with four strings, and tuned by fifths; for the
more plain and easy understanding thereof, and the stopping all Notes in their
right places and tune, it will be necessary that on the neck or finger-board of
your Violin, there be placed six frets, as is on a Viol: This, though it be not
usual, yet it is the best and easiest way for a Beginner who has a bad Ear, for
by it he has a certain rule to direct and guide him to stop all his Notes in
exact tune, which those that do learn without, seldom have at first so good an
Ear to stop all Notes in perfect tune.

Therefore for the better understanding thereof, in this following Example is
assigned to those six frets on the finger-board, six Letters of the Alphabet in
their order; the first Fret is B, the second C, the third D, fourth E, fifth F,
and sixth G; A is not assigned to any of the Frets, but is the String open.



In this Example you have the names of the 4 strings, and the letters assigned
to each fret.

The Scale of Music on the four Strings of the Treble-Violin, expressed by
Letters and Notes.
The Fourth String or Bass. ^

The Third or Great Mean. ^

The Second or Small Mean. ^

The First or Treble. ^

This Example does direct the places of all the Notes, Flat and Sharp; each
Note being placed under the Letters, according to their several Stops upon each
string distinctly, beginning at the lowest Note on the Bass, or fourth string,
and ascending up to the highest on the Treble, according to the Scale of the
Gam-vt; in which you may also observe, that the Lessons for the Violin by
Letters are pricked on four Lines, according to the four several strings; but
Lessons by Notes are pricked upon five Lines, as appears in that Example.

For the Tuning of your Violin it is by Fifths, which is five Notes distance
betwixt each string; for, according to the Scale or Gam-vt, the Bass or fourth
string is called G sol re vt, (and is tuned an eight above Gam-vt on the
Bass-Viol) the third or great Mean, D la sol re; the second or small Mean, A la
mi re; and the first or Treble, Ela; as in the following Example the first Note
of each string is upon ^, and is known by this signature * under each of those
Notes.

But for a Beginner to Tune by Eights, will be easier than by Fifts, if his
Violin be fretted; to begin which, he must wind up his first or Treble string
as high as it will bear, and stop it in F, then Tune his second an Eighth below
it; then stop the second in F, and Tune the third an Eighth under it; then stop
the third in F, and Tune the fourth an Eighth below that; and so your Strings
will be in perfect Tune.

Example of the Tuning By Eights. By Fifts. ^ 2 2 3 1 2 3 ^ 2 3 4 2 3 4

Another Example of the Tuning, as the five Notes ascend on each of the four
strings, beginning on the Bass or fourth string.

^ * 4 String. * 3 String. * 2 String. * 1 String. ^ G sol re vt. D la sol re.
A la mi ^e. E la.

Some General Rules for the TREBLE VIOLIN.
FIrst, The Violin is usually played abovehand, the Neck thereof being held by
the left hand; the lower part thereof is rested on the left breast, a little
below the shoulder: The Bow is held in the right hand, between the ends of the
Thumb and the three first Fingers, the Thumb being staid upon the Hair at the
Nut, and the three Fingers resting upon the Wood: Your Bow being thus fixed,
you are first to draw an even stroke over each string severally, making each
string yield a clear and distinct sound.

Secondly, for the posture of your left hand, place your Thumb on the back of
the Neck, opposite to your Forefinger, so will your Fingers have the more
liberty to move up and down in the several Stops.

Thirdly, for your true fingering, observe these directions, which will appear
more easy to your understanding, if in your first practice you have your
Violin fretted, as is before mentioned, that where you skip a fret or stop,
there to leave a finger, for every stop is but half a Tone or Note, for from ^
to ^ is but half a Note, but from ^ to ^ is a whole Note, therefore the leaving
of a finger is necessary to be in readiness when half Notes happen, which is by
flats and sharps.

Next, when you have any high Notes, which reach lower than your usual Frets or
Stops, there you are to shift your fingers; if there be but two Notes, then the
first is stopped with the third finger; but if there be three Notes that ascend,
then the first is stopped with the second finger, and the rest by the next
fingers.

Fourthly, in the moving your Bow up and down observe this Rule, when you see
an even number of Quavers and Semiquavers, as 2, 4, 6 or 8 tied together, your
Bow must move up or forwards, though it was up at the Note immediately before,
but if you have an odd number, as 3, 5 or 7 (which happens very often, by
reason of a pricked Note or an odd Quaver Rest) there your Bow must draw back at
the first Note.

Lastly, in your practice of any Lesson, play it slow at first, and by often
practice you will bring your hand to a more swift motion.

As for the several Graces and Flourishes that are used, as Shakes, Backfalls,
and double Relishes, this following Table will be some help to your practice;
for there is first the Note plain, and after the Grace expressed by Notes at
length.

A Table of Graces proper to the Viol or Violin.
Smooth Graces.
^ A Beat Explan: A Backfall Expla: A Double Backfall Explan: ^ Elavation
Explan: A Springer Expla. A Cadent Explan:

Shaked Graces.
^ A Backfall shaked Explan: A Close shake Explan: A shaked Beat ^ Explan:
Elevation Explan. Cadent ^ Explan: Double Relish Explan. ^ or thus Explan:

Short Tunes for the Treble-Violin, by Letters and Notes.
^ Maiden Fair. ^

Note, That in these Lessons by Letters, the Time is not put over every Letter,
but if a Crotchet be over any Letter, the following Letters are to be Crotchets
also, till you see the Note changed, and so in ^ther Notes likewise.

^ Maiden Fair. ^ ^

^ The Kings Delight. ^ ^ ^ ^ The Kings Delight. ^ ^ ^ Parthenia. ^ ^ ^ ^
Parthenia. ^ ^ John come kiss, with Division to each Strain. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ The Lark, with Division. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Ingenious Practitioner,
HAving thus (after the plainest method I could) set down several Rules and
Directions for thy practice on the Treble Violin, by way of Fretting; which way
I have known used by some of the most eminent Teachers on this Instrument, as
the most facile and easy to initiate their Scholars: And also by the way of
Pricking down Lessons in Letters; yet do I not approve of this way of Playing
by Letters, save only as a Guide to young Practitioners, to bring them the more
readily to know all the Stops and Places of the Notes, both Flat and Sharp, as
is set down in the Table page 96, 97. And having by this practice come to the
perfect knowledge thereof, to lay the use of Letters aside, and keep to their
practice by Notes only. And therefore in the Introduction to the Skill of this
Music, I have added some few Lessons both ways, that after thou can play
them by Letters, thou may play the same again by Notes: Those who desire to
be furnished with more Lessons, I refer to a Book lately published, Entitled,
Apollo's Banquet, containing above two hundred new Tunes for the Treble Violin,
with the most usual French Dances added to them.

By the practice of these Rules, and a little help of a Master, I doubt not but
thou may in a short time become a good Proficient on this Instrument; which
is the hearty desire of thy Well-wisher,

J. P.

FINIS.
The ART of DESCANT: OR, Composing of Music in Parts.

By a most familiar and easy Rule.

In Three several TREATISES:

I. Of making Four Parts in Counterpoint.

II. A necessary Discourse of the several Keys, and their proper Closes.

III. The Allowed Passages of all Concords, Perfect and Imperfect.

By Dr. THO. CAMPION.

With Annotations thereon, by Mr. Chr. Simpson.

London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Temple. 1674.

THere are Nine Concords of Music, as follows:

A Unison, Third, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, Tenth, Twelfth, Thirteenth, and
Fifteenth; whereof five are called perfect, and four imperfect.

The five perfect, are Unison, Fifth, Eighth, Twelfth, and Fifteenth: Of these,
you may not take two of one sort together, neither rising or falling, as two
Fifths, or two Eighths.

Of the other four, called imperfect, you may take two or three together of one
sort, rising or falling, which are a Third, Sixth, Tenth, and Thirteenth.

These Nine Concords are comprehended in four, viz.

Unison, Eighth, Fifteenth, are accounted as one, for every Eighth is the same.

Third, Tenth, likewise.

Fifth, Twelfth, likewise.

Sixth, Thirteenth, in like sort.

So that in effect there are but four Concords.

The Discords are, a Second, Fourth, and Seventh, with their Eighths; which
being sometime mixed with Concords, make the best Music, being orderly taken.

THE ART of DESCANT: OR, Composing Music in Parts.
I. Of Cou^terpoint, in Latin Contra punctum, was the old manner of Composing
Parts together, by setting Points or Pricks one against anoth^r (as Minims and
Semibreves are set in this following Treatise) the measure of which Points or
Pricks were sung acco^ding to the quantity of the Words or Syllables to which
they were applied. (For these Figures were not as yet inven^ed.) And, because
in Plain song Music we set Note against ^ote, as they did point against point,
thence it is, that this kind of Music does still r^tain the name of
Counterpoint.
Counterpoint.
THe Parts of Music are in all but four, howsoever some skilful Musicians have
Composed Songs of twenty, thirty, and forty parts; for be the parts never so
many, they are but one of these four in nature. The names of those four parts
are these: The Bass, which is the lowest part and foundation of the whole Song;
the Tenor, placed next above the Bass; next above the Tenor, the Mean or
Counter-Tenor; and in the highest place, the Treble. These four Parts by the
Learned are said to resemble the four Elements; the Bass expresses the true
nature of the Earth, who being the gravest and lowest of all the Elements, is
as a foundation to the rest; the Tenor is likened to the Water, the Mean to the
Air, and the Treble to the Fire: Moreover, by how much the Water is more light
than the Earth, by so much the Air is lighter than the Water, and Fire than
Air. They have also in their native property every one place above the other;
the lighter uppermost, the weightiest in the bottom. Having now demonstrated
that there are in all but four Parts, and that the Bass is the foundation of
the other three, I assume that the true sight and judgment of the upper three
must proceed from the lowest, which is the Bass; and also I conclude, that
every part in nature does affect his proper and natural place, as the Elements
do.

True it is, that the ancient Musicians, who intended their Music only for the
Church, took their sight from the Tenor, which was rather done out of
necessity, than any respect to the true nature of Music; for it was usual with
them to have a Tenor as a Theme, to which they were compelled to adapt their
other Parts: But I will plainly convince by demonstration, that contrary to
some opinions the Bass contains in it both the Air and true judgment of the
Key, expressing how any man at first sight may view in it all the other Parts
in their original essence.

In respect of the variety in Music which is attained to by farther proceeding
in the Art, as when Notes are shifted out of their native places, the Bass
above the Tenor, or the Tenor above the Mean, and the Mean above the Treble;
this kind of Counterpoint, which I promise, may appear simple and only fit for
young Beginners, (as indeed chiefly it is) yet the right speculation may give
much satisfaction, even to the most skilful, laying open unto them, how
manifest and certain are the first grounds of Counterpoint.

First, it is in this case requisite that a formal Bass, or at least part
thereof be framed, the Notes rising and falling according to the nature of that
Part, not so much by degrees, as by leaps of a third, fourth, or fifth, or
eighth, a sixth being seldom, a seventh never used, and neither of both without
the discretion of a skilful Composer. Next, we must consider whether the Bass
does rise or fall, for in that consists the mystery: That rising or that
falling does never exceed a fourth, If the Bass do rise more than a fourth, it
must be called falling: and likewise, if it fall any distance more than a
fourth, that falling must be called rising.
for a fourth above, is the same that a fifth is underneath, and a fourth
underneath is as a fifth above; for Example, if a Bass should rise thus: 1 2 3 ^

The first rising is said to be by degrees, because there is no Note between
the two Notes; the second rising is by leaps, for G skips over A to B, and so
leaps into a third; the third Example also leaps two Notes into a fourth. Now
for this fourth, if the Bass had descended from G above to C underneath, that
descending fifth in sight and use had been all one with the fourth, as here you
may discern, for they both begin and end in the same Keys, thus: G C ^ G C

This Rule likewise holds, if the Notes descend a second, If your Bass should
fall a seventh, it is but the same as if it did rise a second; or a sixth
falling, is but the same of a third rising: and so on the contrary, if the Bass
do rise a seventh or sixth, it is the same as though it did fall a second or
third.
third, or fourth; for the fifth ascending, is all one with the fourth
descending. Example of the first Notes.

1 2 3 ^The third two Notes which make the distance of a fourth, are all one
with this fifth following.

But let us make our approach G D ^ GD yet nearer: if the Bass shall ascend
either a second, third, or four^h^ that part which stands in the third or tenth
above the Bass, shall fall into an eighth, that which is a fifth shall pass
into a third, and that which is an eighth shall remove into a fifth.

But that all this may appear more plain and easy, I have drawn it all into
these six figures,

Though you find here only mention^d and figured a third, fifth, and eighth,
yet not only these single Concords are meant, but by them also their By their
Compounds is me^nt their Octa^es, as a third and it^ eig^ts, a ^^^th and i^s
^ig^ts, etc.
Compounds, as a tenth, a twelfth, a fifteenth, and so upwards; and also this
Unison as well as the eighth.

This being granted, I will give you an Example of those figures prefixed: When
the Bass rises, beginning from the lowest figure, and rising to the upper; as
if the Bass should rise a second, in this manner: ^

Then if you begin with your third, you must set your Note in A la mi re, which
is a third to F fa vt, and so look upward, and that Cord which you see next
above it use, and that is an eight in G sol re vt.

After that, if you will take a fifth to the first Note, you must look upward,
and take the third you find there for the second Note. Lastly, if you take an
eighth for the first Note, you must take for the second Note the Cord above it,
which is the fifth.

Example of all the three Parts added to the Bass.

8 5 Treble ^ 5 3 Mean. ^ 3 8 Tenor. ^ Bass. ^

What Parts arise out of the rising of the second; the same answer in the
rising of the 3 d and 4 th, thus: 8 5 8 5 ^ 5 3 5 3 ^ 3 8 3 8 ^ This rises 3 d
this a 4 th ^

Albeit any man by the rising of parts, might of himself conceive the same
reason in the falling of them; yet that nothing may be thought obscure, I will
also illustrate the descending Notes by example.

If the Bass descends or falls a second, third, or fourth, or rises a fifth
(which is all one as if it had fallen a fourth, as has been showed before)
then look upon the six figures, where in the first place you shall find the
eighth which descends into the third, in the second place the third descending
into the fifth, and in the third and last place the fifth which has under it
an eighth.

8 3 8 3 8 3 Treble. ^ 5 8 5 8 5 8 Mean. ^ 3 5 3 5 3 5 Tenor. ^ Bass. ^

Thus much for the rising and falling of the Bass in several: Now I will give
you a brief example of both of them mixed together in the plainest fashion, let
this following strain serve for the Bass.

Example. ^

The two first Notes fall a second, the second and third Notes fall a fifth,
which you must call rising a fourth; the third and fourth Notes fall a fifth,
which you must name the fourth falling; the fourth and fifth Notes rise a
second, the fifth and sixth Notes rise a third, the sixth and seventh Notes
also fall a third, the seventh and eighth rise a second, the eighth and ninth
Notes rise a fourth, the tenth and eleventh Notes fall a fifth, which you must
reckon rising a fourth.

Being thus prepared, you may choose whether you will begin with an eighth, or
fifth, or a third; for as soon as you have taken any one of them, all the other
Notes necessarily without respect of the rest of the parts, and every one
orderly without mixing, keeps his proper place above the other, as you may
easily discern in the following Example.

Example. 8 3 8 3 8 3 5 3 8 3 8 Treble. ^ 5 8 5 8 5 8 3 8 5 8 5 Mean. ^ 3 5 3 5
3 5 8 5 3 5 3 Tenor. ^ Bass. ^

Let us examine only one of the Parts, and let that be the Tenor, because it
stands next to the Bass. The first Note in B is a third to the Bass, which
descends to the second Note of the Bass: Now look among the six figures, and
when you have found the third in the upper place, you shall find under it a
fifth, then take that fifth which is C next from F to B below, is a fifth
descending, for which say ascending, and so you shall look for the fifth in the
lowest row of the figures, above which stands a third, which is to be taken;
that third stands in D; then from B to F the Bass rises a fifth, but you must
say falling, because a fifth rising and a fourth falling is all one, as has
been often declared before; now a third, when the Bass falls, requires a fifth
to follow it. When you have made a formal Bass, and would join other three
parts to it, set the first Note of your Tenor either a third, fifth, or eighth,
above your Bass, (which of them you please) which done, place your Mean in the
next Cord you find above your Tenor, and your Treble in the next Cord above
your Mean, then follow the Rule of your figures, according to the rising or
falling of your B^ss, and the other Notes will follow in their due order.
But what needs farther demonstration, when as he that knows his Cords, cannot
but conceive the necessity of consequence in all these, with help of those six
figures.

But let them that have not proceeded so far, take this Note with them,
concerning the placing of the parts; if the upper part or Treble be an eighth,
the Mean must take the next Cord under it, which is a fifth, and the Tenor the
next Cord under that, which is a third: But if the Treble be a third, then the
Mean must take the eighth, and the Tenor the fifth. Again, if the uppermost
part stands in the fifth or twelfth, (for in respect of the Learners Ear, in
the simple Concord I conclude all his compounds) then the Mean must be a tenth,
and the Tenor a fifth. Moreover, all these Cords are to be seen in the Bass,
and such Cords as stand above the Notes of the Bass are easily known, but such
as in sight are found If this Discourse of Cordt under the Bass do trouble the
young Beginner, let him think no more upon them (for it is not intended that he
should place any Notes below the Bass) but let him look for his Cords,
reckoning always from his Bass upward; which that he may more easily perform,
let him draw eleven lines (which is the whole compass of the Scale) and set the
three used Cliffs in their proper places; this done, he may prick his Bass in
the lowest five lines, and then set the other three parts in their orderly
distances above the Bass, Note against Note, as you see in this following
Example.

I have proposed the former Example of the eleven lines, to lead the young
beginner to a true k^owledge of the Scale, without which nothing can be
effected; but having once got that knowledge^ let him then compose his Music
in several parts, as be sees in this second Example.

He^e I think it not a^^ss to advertise the young Beginner, that so often as
the Bass does fall a fifth, or rise a fourth (which is all one, as has been
said) that (...) which is a third to the Bass in the antecedent Note, that
third I say must always be the sharp or greater third, as was apparent in the
last example of four Parts^ in the first Notes of the second Bar in the Mean
Part, and likewise in the last Note but one of the same Part; in both which
places there is a ^ set to make it the greater third. The same is to be
observed in what Part soever this third shall happen.


under it, trouble the young Beginner; let him therefore know, that a third
under the Bass, is a sixth above it, and if it be a greater third, it yields a
lesser sixth above; if the lesser third, the greater sixth. A fourth underneath
the Bass is a fifth above, and a fifth under the Bass is a fourth above it. A
sixth beneath the Bass is a third above, and if it be the lesser sixth, then is
the third above the greater third, and if the greater sixth underneath, then is
it the lesser third above: And thus far I have digressed for the Scholars sake.

Treb. M. Ten. Bass.


Which being pricked in several Parts, appears thus: 3 8 3 5 3 8 3 5 3
Treble. ^ 8 5 8 3 8 5 8 3 8 Mean. ^ 5 3 5 8 5 3 5 8 5 Tenor. ^ Bass. ^

If I should discover no more than this already deciphered of Counterpoint,
wherein the native order of four parts with use of the Concords, is
demonstratively expressed, might I be my own Judge, I had effected more in
Counterpoint, than any man before me has ever attempted, but I will yet
proceed a little further. And that you may perceive how cunning and how certain
nature is in all her operations, know that what Cords have held good in this
ascending and descending of the Bass, answer in the contrary by the very same
rule, though not so formally as the other, yet so, that much use is, and may be
made of this sort of Counterpoint. To keep the figures iu your memory, I will
here place them again, and under them plain Examples.

8 5 8 5 8 5 5 8 5 8 5 8 ^ 5 3 5 3 5 3 3 5 3 5 3 5 ^ 3 8 3 8 3 8 8 3 8 3 8 3 ^
^In these last Examples you may see what variety Nature offers of her self; for
if in the first Rule the Notes follow not in expected formality, this second
way being quite contrary to the other, affords us sufficient supply: the first
and last two Notes arising and falling by degrees, are not so formal as the
rest, yet thus they may be mollified, by breaking two of the first Notes.

8 5 5 8 ^ 5 3 3 5 ^ 3 8 8 3 ^ ^How both the ways may be mixed together you
may perceive by this example, wherein the black Notes distinguish the second
way from the first.

3 5 8 ^ 5 8 3 ^ 5 8 3 ^ ^In this example the fifth and sixth Notes of the
three upper Parts are after the second way, for from the fourth Note of the
Bass, which is in from G, and goes to B, is a third rising, so that according
to the first Rule, the eighth shall pass into the fifth, the fifth into a
third, the third into an eighth. But here contrariwise the eighth goes into a
third, the fifth into an eighth, and the third into a fifth; and by these Notes
you may censure the rest of that kind. When your Bass stands still (that is
to say, has two or more Notes together in one and the same place) you may
choose whether you will make your parts do so too, or change them, as you see
our Author has done in the second Note of this present example. If you change
them, you may do it either by the Rule of descendi^g or ascending, which you
please, so you do but observe formality.


Though I may now seem to have finished all that belongs to this sort of
Counterpoint, yet there remaius one scruple, that is, how the sixth may take
place here, which I will also declare. Know that whenever a sixth is
requisite, as in B, or in E, or A, the Key being in Gam-vt, you may take the
sixth instead of the fifth, and use the same Cord following, which you would
have taken if the former Cord had been a fifth.

Example. 6 3 ^ ^ 6 3 ^ ^The sixth in both places (the Bass rising) passes into
a third, as it should have done if the sixth had been a fifth.

Moreover, if the Bass shall use a sharp, as in F sharp; then must we take the
sixth of necessity, but the eighth to the Bass may not be used; so that
exception is to be taken against our Rule of Counterpoint: To which I answer
thus; first, such Basses are not He does not mean, that such Basses are bad,
false, or defective, but that they have (perhaps for elegancy or variety)
assumed the nature of some part for a Note or two, and so want the full
latitude of a Bass in those Notes.
true Basses, for where a sixth is to be taken either in F sharp, or in E
sharp, or in B, or in A, the true Bass is a third lower, F sharp in D, E in C,
B in G, A in F; as for Example.

^In the first Bass two sixths are to be taken, by reason of the imperfection
of the Bass wanting due latitude, the one in E, the other in F sharp; but in
the second Bass the sixths are removed away, and the Music is fuller.

Nevertheless, if any be pleased to use the Bass sharp, then instead of the
eighth to the Bass, he may take the third to the Bass, in this manner.

3 ^ ^ 3 ^ ^Here the Treble in the third Note, when it should have past in the
sharp eight in F takes for it a third to the Bass in A, which causes the Bass
and Treble to rise two thirds, whereof we will speak hereafter.

Note also, that when the Bass stands in E flat, and the part that is an eighth
to it must pass into a sharp, or greater third, that this passage from the flat
to the sharp would be unformal; and therefore it may be thus with small
alteration avoided, by removing the latter part of the Note into the third
above, which though it meets in Unison with the upper part, yet it is right
good, because it jumps not with the whole, but only with the last half of it.

Example. 1 2 Teble. ^ 8 3 Mean. ^ Tenor. ^ Bass. ^

For the second Example look hereafter in the rule of thirds, but for the first
Example here, if in the Mean Part the third Note that is divided, had stood
till a Minum (as by rule it should) and so had past in F sharp, as it must of
force be made sharp at a close, it had been then passing unformal. But if the
same Bass had been set in the sharp Key, the rest of the parts would have
fallen out formal of themselves without any help, as thus: Treble. ^ Mean. ^
Tenor. ^ Bass. ^When the Bass shall stand still in one Key, as above it does in
the third Note, then the other parts may remove at their pleasure.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that in composing of the Bass, you may break
it at your pleasure, without altering any of the other Parts: as for Example.

Treble. ^ Mean. ^ Tenor. ^ Bass. plain. ^ Bass. divided. ^

One other Observation more I will handle, that does arise out of this Example,
which according to the first Rule may hold thus: Treble. ^ Mean. ^ Tenor. ^
Bass. ^

Herein are two errors; first, in the second Notes of the Bass and Treble,
where the third to the Bass ought to have been sharp; secondly, in the second
and third Notes of the same Parts, where the third being a lesser third, holds
while the Bass falls into a fifth, which is unelegant, but that scruple may be
taken away by making the second Note of the Treble sharp, and instead of a
fifth by removing the third Note into a sixth.

When any informality does occu^, the Scholar need not keep himself to the
first rules of the Bass rising or falling^ but may take such Cords as his
Genius shall prom^t him to^ (having a care that he take not two eighths or
fif^hs together) rising or falling betwixt any two Parts whatsoever: It Is true,
our Author did invent this Rule of the Figures, as the easiest way to lead the
young Beginner to this kind of Composition, in which he has done more than any
that I have ever seen upon this subject; but this he did to show the smoothest
way, and not to tie his Scholar to keep strictly that way, when a block or
stone should happen to lie in it, but that he may in such a case step out of
this way for a Note or two, and then return again into it.


but if the upper third had been the greater third, the fifth had fitly
followed, as you may see in the third and fourth Notes of the Tenor and the
Bass.

There may yet be more variety afforded the Bass, by ordering the fourth Notes
of the upper Parts, according to the second Rule, thus:

Example. ^ ^ ^ ^

But that I may (as near as I can) leave nothing untouched concerning this kind
of Counterpoint, let us now consider how two Thirds being taken together
between the Treble and the Bass, may stand with our Rule. For sixths are not in
this case to be mentioned, being distances so large that they can produce no
formality: Besides, the sixth is of it self very imperfect, being compounded of
a third, which is an imperfect Concord; and of a fourth, which is a Discord:
and this the cause is, that the sixths produce so many fourths in the Inner
Parts. As for the third, it being the least distance of any Concord, is
therefore easily to be reduced into good order. For if the Bass and Treble do
rise together in thirds, then the first Note of the Treble is regular with the
other Part, but the second of it is irregular; for by rule instead of the
rising third, it should fall into the eight. In like sort, if the Bass and
Treble do fall two thirds, the first Note of the Treble is irregular, and is to
be brought into rule by being put into the eighth, but the second Note is of it
self regular. Yet whether those thirds be reduced into eights or no, you shall
by supposition thereof find out the other parts, which never vary from the rule
but in the sharp Bass. But let me explain my self by Example.

Example. ^ ^ ^ ^

The first two Notes of the Treble are both thirds to the Bass, but in the
second stroke the first Note of the Treble is a third, and the second, which
was before a third, is made an eight, only to show how you may find out the
right Parts which are to be used when you take two thirds between the Treble
and the Bass: For according to the former rule, if the Bass descends, the third
then in the Treble is to pass into the eight, and the Mean must first take an
eight, then a fifth; and the Tenor a fifth, then a third; and these are also the
right and proper parts, if you return the eight of the Treble into a third
again, as may appear in the first example of the Bass falling, and consequently
in all the rest.

But let us proceed yet further, and suppose that the Bass should use a sharp,
what is then to be done? as if thus: ^ ^ ^ ^

If you call to mind the Rule delivered concerning the sharp Bass, you shall
here by help thereof see the right parts, though you cannot bring them under
the Rule: for if the first Note of the Bass had been flat, the Mean Part should
have taken that, and so have descended to the fifth; but being sharp, you take
for it (according to the former observation) the third to the Bass, and so rise
up into the fifth. The Tenor that should take a fifth, and so fall by degrees
into a third, is here forced by reason of the sharp Bass, for a fifth to take a
sixth, and so leap downward into the thirds. And so much for the thirds.

Lastly, in favor of young beginners let me also add this, that the Bass
intends a close as often as it rises a fifth, third, or second, and then
immediately either falls a fifth, or rises a fourth. In like manner, if the
Bass falls a fourth or second, and after falls a fi^th, the Bass insinuates a
close, and in all these cases the part must hold, that in holding can use the
fourth or eleventh, and so pass either in the third or tenth.

Thus, or thus. Thus, or thus. ^ ^ Thus, or thus. Thus, or thus. ^ ^ Thus, or
thus. ^ ^

In the Examples before set down I left out the Closes, of purpose, that the
Cords might the better appear in their proper places, but this short admonition
will direct any young beginner to help that want at his pleasure. And thus I
end my Treatise of Counterpoint, both brief and certain, such as will open an
easy way to them, that without help of a skilful Teacher endeavor to acquire
the first grounds of this Art.

A short Hymn, Composed after this form of Counterpoint, to show how well it
will become any Divine or grave subject.
^ Lord have mercy upon me, O hear my prayers both ^ Lord have mercy upon me, O
hear my prayers both ^ Lord have me^cy upon me, O hear my prayers both ^ Lord
have mercy upon me, O hear my pra^ers both ^ day and night, with tears poured
forth to thee. ^ day and night, with tears pou^'d forth to thee. ^ day and
night, with tears poured forth to thee. ^ day and night, wi^h tears poured
forth to thee.

THE ART of DESCANT: OR Composing Music in Parts.
PART II. Of Tones of Music.
OF all things that belong to the making up of a Musician, the most necessary
and useful one for him is the true knowledge of the Key or Mood, or Tone, for
all signify the same thing, with the Closes belonging unto it, for there is no
Tune that can have any grace or sweetness unless it be bounden within a proper
Key, without running into strange Keys, which have no affinity with the Air of
the Song. I have therefore thought good in an easy and brief discourse to
endeavor to express that which many in large and obscure Volumes have made
fearful to the idle Reader.

The first thing herein to be considered is the eighth, which is equally
divided into a fourth, and a fifth, as thus: The8 ^ The 4. The 5.

Here you see the fourth in the upper place, and the fifth in the lower place,
which is called Modus Authentus: But contrary thus: The 8 ^ The 5. The 4.

This is called Modus Plagalii, but howsoever the fourth in the eighth is
placed, we must have our eye on the fifth, for that only discovers the Key, and
all the Closes pertaining properly thereunto: This fifth is also divided into
two thirds, sometimes the lesser third has the upper place, and the greater
third supports it below, sometimes the greater third is higher, and the lesser
third rests in the lowest place: as for Example: ^ The lesser 3. The greater 3.
^ The greater 3. The lesser 3.

The lowest Note of this fifth bears the name of the Key, as if the eighth be
from G to G, the fifth from G beneath to D above, G being the lowest Note of
the fifth, shows that G is the Key; and if one should demand in what Key your
Song is set, you must answer in Gam-vt, or G sol re vt, that is, in G.

If the compass of your Song should fall out thus: ^

Respect not the fourth below, but look to your fifth above, and the lowest Note
of that fifth assume for you Key, which is C, then divide that fifth into its two
3ds, and so you shall find out all the closes that belong to that Key.

The main and fundamental close is in the Key it self, the second is in the
upper Note of this fifth, the third is in the upper Note of the lowest third, if
it be the lesser third; as for example, if the Key be in G, with B flat, you
may close in these three places.

^ ^

The first close is that which maintains the Air of the Key, and may be used
often, the second is next to be preferred, and third last.

But if the Key should be in G with B sharp, then the last close being to be
made in the greater or sharp third, is unproper, and therefore for variety
sometime the next Key above is joined with it, which is A, and sometimes the
fourth Key, which is C. But these changes of Keys, must be done with judgment,
yet I have aptly closed in the upper Note of the lowest third of the Key, the
Key being in F, and the upper Note of the third standing in A, as you may
perceive in this Air.

1 ^ ^ 2 3 ^ ^ 4 ^ ^

In this Air the first Close is in the upper Note of the fifth, which from F is
C, the second Close is in the upper Note of the great third, which from F is A.

But the last and final Close is in the Key it self, which is F, as it must
ever be, wheresoever your Key shall stand, either in G, or C, or F, or
elsewhere, the same rule of the fifth is perpetual, being divided into thirds,
which can be but two ways, that is, either when the upper third is less by half
a Note than the lower, or when the lower third contains the half Note, which is
Mi fa, or La Fa.

If the lower third contains the half Note, it has it either above, as La Mi
Fa; La Mi being the whole Note, and Mi Fa but half so much, that is the half
Note; or else when the half Note is underneath, Mi Fa Sol; Mi Fa is the half
Note, and Fa Sol is the whole Note; but whether the half Note be uppermost or
lowermost, if the lowest third of the fifth be the lesser third, that Key
yields familiarly three closes; example of the half Note, standing in the upper
place was showed before, now I will set down the other.

^ ^

But for the other Keys that divide the fifth, so that it has the less third
above, and the greater underneath, they can challenge but two proper closes,
one in the lowest Note of the fifth, which is the fundamental Key, and the other
in the uppermost Note of the same, wherein also you may close at pleasure. True
it is, that the Key next above has a great affinity with the right Key, and
may therefore, as I said before, be used, as also the fourth Key above the
final Key.

Examples of both in two beginnings of Songs. 1 ^ ^ 2 ^ ^

In the first Example A is mixed with G, and in the second C is joined with G,
as you may understand by the second closes of both.

To make the Key known is most necessary in the beginning of a Song, and it is
best expressed by the often using of his proper fifth, and fourth, and third,
rising or falling.

THE ART of DESCANT: OR Composing Music in Parts.
PART III. Of the taking all Concords, Perfect and Imperfect.
THe consecution of perfect Cords among themselves is easy, for who knows not
that two eighths or two fifths are not to be taken rising or falling together,
but a fifth may either way pass into an eight, or an eight into a fifth, yet
most conveniently when the one of them moves by degrees, and the other by
leaps, for when both skip together the passage is less pleasant: the ways by
degrees are these.

1 2 3 4 5 6 ^ ^

The fourth way is only excepted against, where the fifth rising into the eight,
and in few parts it cannot well be admitted, but in Songs of many Voices it is
oftentimes necessary.

The passage also of perfect Concords into imperfect, either rising or falling,
by degrees or leaps, is easy, and so a Unison may pass into a lesser third, or
a greater third; also into the lesser sixth, but seldom into the greater sixth. A
fifth passes into the greater sixth, and into the lesser sixth; as also into the
greater or lesser third; and so you must judge of their eights, for de octavis
idem est judiciem; and therefore when you read an Unison, or a fifth, or a
third, or a sixth, know that by the simple Concords the Compounds are also meant.

Note here, that it is not good to fall with the Bass, being sharp in F, from
an eight unto a sixth.

As thus: Or thus. ^ ^ But concerning imperfect Cords, because they observe not
all one way in their passages, we will speak of them severally, first declaring
what not harmonical does signify, whereof mention will be made hereafter.

Relation, or reference, or respect not harmonical, is Mi against Fa in a cross
form, and it is in four Notes, when the one being considered cross with the
other does produce in the Music a strange discord; Example will yield it more
plain.

1 2 3 4 5 6 ^ ^

The first Note of the upper parts in E la mi sharp, which being considered, or
referred to the second Note of the lower part, which is E la mi, made flat by
the cromatick flat sign, begets a false second, which is a harsh discord; and
though these Notes sound not both together, yet in few parts they leave an
offense in the ear. The second Example is the same descending; the third is
from E la mi sharp in the first Note of the lower part, to the second Note in
the upper part, it being flat by reason of the flat sign, and so between them
they mix in the Music a false fifth; the same does the fourth Example; but the
fifth yields a false fourth, and the sixth a false fifth.

There are two kinds of Imperfect Concords, thirds or sixts, and the sixts
wholly participate of the nature of the thirds; for to the lesser third, which
consists but of a whole Note and half, add a fourth, and you have the lesser
sixth; in like manner to the greater third that consists of two whole Notes, add
a fourth, and it makes up the greater sixth; so that all the difference is still
in the half Note, according to that only saying, Mi and Fa sunt tota Musica. Of
these four we will now discourse, proceeding in order from the lesser to the
greater.

Of the lesser or Imperfect Third.
The lesser third passes into an unison, first by degrees, when both parts
meet, then by leaps, ascending or descending when one of the parts stand still,
but when both the parts leap or fall together, the passage is not allowed.

^ Lesser 3 d into the unison. Passages not allowed. ^

Secondly, the lesser third passes into a fifth, first in degrees, when they
are separated by contrary motions; then by leaps, when the lower part rises by
degrees, and the upper part descends by degrees, and thus the lesser tenth may
pass into a fifth. Lastly, both parts leaping, the lesser third may pass into a
fifth, so that the upper part does descend by leap the distance of a lesser
third. Any other way the passage of a lesser third into a fifth, is disallowed.

^ Allowed. Disallowed. ^

In the last disallowance, which is when the upper part stands, and the lower
part falls from a lesser third to a fifth, many have been deceived, their ears
not finding the absurdity of it; but as this way is immusical, so is the fall
of the greater third in the former manner into a fifth, passing harmonious;
insomuch that it is elegantly, and with much grace taken in one part of a short
Air four times, whereas had the fifth been half so often taken with the lesser
third falling, it would have yielded a most unpleasant harmony.

^ 1 ^ ^ 3 4 ^ ^ ^He that will be diligent to know, and careful to observe the
true allowances, may be bold in his Composition, and shall prove quickly ready
in his sight, doing that safely and resolutely which others attempt timorously
and uncertainly. But now let us proceed in the passages of the lesser third.

Thirdly, the lesser third passes into an eight, the lower part descending by
degrees, and the upper part by leaps: but very seldom when the upper part
rises by degrees, and the lower part falls by a leap.

^ ^Fourthly, the lesser third passes into other Concords, as when it is
continued, as in degrees it may be, but not in leaps. Also it may pass into the
greater third, both by degrees and leaps, as also in the lesser sixth, if one
of the parts stand still, into the great sixth it sometimes passes, but very
rarely.

1 2 3 4 ^ ^

Lastly, add unto the rest this ^ ^ passage of the lesser third into the lesser
sixth, as when the lower part rises by degrees, and the upper part by leaps.

Of the greater or perfect Third.
The greater or perfect third being to pass into perfect Concords, first take
the unison, when the parts ascend together, the higher by degree, the lower by
leap; or when they meet together in a contrary motion, or when one of the parts
stand still. Secondly, it passes into a fifth when one of the parts rests, as
has been declared before; or else when the parts ascend or descend together,
one by degrees, the other by leaps; and so the greater tenth may pass into a
fifth; seldom when both parts leap together, or when they separate themselves by
degrees; and this in regard of the relation not harmonical which falls in
between the parts. Thirdly, the greater third passes into the eight by
contrary motions, the upper part ascending by degrees.

^ The Unison. The Fifth. The Eighth. ^

The greater third may also pass into other Concords, and first into a lesser
third, when the parts ascend or descend by degrees, or by the lesser leaps.
Secondly, it is continued but rarely, because it falls into relation not
harmonical, thereby making the harmony less pleasing. Thirdly, into a lesser
sixth, when the parts part asunder, the one by degree, the other by leap.
Fourthly, into a great sixth, one of the parts standing, or else the upper part
falling by degree, and the lower by leap.

1 2 3 4 ^ ^

Of the lesser Sixth.
The lesser sixth, regularly goes into the fifth, one of the parts holding his
place; rarely into an eight, and first when the parts ascend or descend
together, and one of them proceeds by the half Note, the other by leap.

1 2 ^ ^Howsoever the ways of rising and falling from the lesser sixth into the
eight in the for^mer example may pass, I am sure that if the Bass be sharp in F
fa vt, it is not tolerable to rise from a sixth to an eight.

^ ^Lastly, the lesser sixth may pass into an eight in Crotchets, for they are
easily tolerated.

It passes likewise into other Concords, as into a greater sixth, the parts
rising or falling by degrees, as also in a greater or lesser third, the one
part proceeding by degree, the other by leap; or when one of the parts stands.
It self cannot follow, by reason of the falling in of the Relation not
harmonical.

1 2 3 ^ ^

Of the greater Sixth.
The greater sixth in proceeding affects the eight, but it will hardly pass into
the fifth, unless it be in binding-wise, or when way is prepared for a Close ^ ^

Finally, the greater sixth may in degrees be continued, or pass into a lesser
sixth, as also into a greater third, or a lesser third.

^ 1 2 3 ^

These are the principal observations belonging to the passages of Concords,
Perfect and Imperfect, in few parts; and yet in those few, for fuge and
formality sake, some dispensation may be granted. But in many parts necessity
enforcing, if any thing be committed contrary to rule, it may the more easily
be excused, because the multitude of Parts will drown any small inconvenience.

FINIS.
THE ORDER of PERFORMING THE DIVINE SERVICE IN Cathedrals and Collegiate
Chapels.
THe Confession and Absolution being read by the Priest in one continued and
solemn Tone, the Priest and the whole Quire repeat the Lords Prayer: Thus, ^
Our Father which art in Heav^n, etc. for ever and ever, Amen. Priest. Quire. ^
O Lord open thou our lips, And our mouth shall show forth, etc. Priest. Quire.
^ O God make speed to save us. O Lord make have to help us. ^ Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. ^ As it was in the beginning is
now, etc. world without end, Amen.

The Venite is begun by one of the Quire, then sung by Sides, abs^rving to make
the like break or Close in the middle of ev^ry Verse, according as it is
shorter or longer.

Sunday. ^ O (...) ^et us sing. etc. ^et us heartily rejoice in the strength,
etc. Monday. ^ O come (...) us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the
strength etc. Tuesday. ^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in
the strength, etc. Wednesday. ^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily
rejoice in the strength, etc. Thursday. ^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us
heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. Friday ^ O come let us sing^ etc. Let us
heartily rejoice in the strength etc. Saturday ^ O come let us sing, etc. Let
us heartily rejoice in the strength^ etc.

After the Psalms, a short Voluntary is performed ^n the Organ. After ^he first
^^sson Te Deum is sung, the Priest beginning alone, ^ We ^^aise thee O God,
Then ^he whole Quire Answer, We knowledge thee^ etc. which is Composed usually
in 4 Parts for sides, by sev^ral Autho^s: Sometimes it is su^g to one of th^se
following Tunes of 4 parts with the Organ or without it. Te Deum being ended
and the Second Lesson, Iubilate or Benedictus is Sung by the Quire, as they are
variously Composed, or else, to one of the following Tunes of 4 parts.

These several Tunes of 4 Parts are proper for Quires to Sing the Psalms, Te
Deum, Benedictus or Jubilate to the Organ, or sometime without it.
A. 4. Voc. Cante^bury Tune.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength etc. ^ O
come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc.

A. 4. Voc. Imperial Tune.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength etc. ^ O
come ^et us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength^ etc. ^ O come
let us sing, etc. Let us hea^t^^y rejo^ce in the s^reng^h, etc. ^ O come le^ u^
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the s^^ength, etc.

These six Tunes are sung in His Majesty's Chapel with the Organ to the
Psalms, Te Deum, etc. Com^osed by Mr. John B^ow and Mr. William Turner,
Gentlemen of His Majesty's Chapel.
A 4. Voc.
^ O come let us sing etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc.

A 4. Voc.
^ O come let u^ sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing^ etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc.

A. 4. Voc.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing^ etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc.

A 4. Voc.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing^ etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength etc^

A 4. Voc.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come
let us sing etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc.

A 4. Voc.
^ O come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O
come let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rej^yce in the strength etc. ^ O come
let us sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc. ^ O come let us
sing, etc. Let us heartily rejoice in the strength, etc^

The follows the Apostles Creed, which is sung by the whole Quire in one
continued solemn and grave Tone: Upon Festivals Athanasius's Creed is sung in
the same Tune by sides; and sometimes it is sung to the Organ to one of the
following Tunes of 4 Parts^

^ Whosoever will be saved, etc. that he hold the Catholic Faith.

After which the Priest sings, ^ The Lord be with you. And with thy Spirit.
Priest. Quire. ^ Let us pray, Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon
us. Priest. The whole Quire in one Tone ^ Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father
which art in Heaven, andc. Priest. Quire. ^ O Lord show thy mercy upon us. And
grant us thy salvation. Priest. Quire. ^ O Lord save the King. And
mercifully^hear us when we call, etc. Priest. Quire. ^ Indue thy Ministers
with, etc. And make thy chosen people^ etc. P^iest. Quire. Priest. ^ O Lord
save thy people And bless thine, etc. (...) etc. Priest. Quire. ^ Because there
is no other that fights, etc. O God make clean, etc. Quire. ^ And take not
thy holy Spirit from us. After every Collect the Quire Answers ^ Amen.

Upon the usual day that the Litany is appointed to be sung, it is sung by two
of the Quire in the middle of the Church, near the Bible-desk.

^ The whole Quire answering in the same Tune. O God the Father, etc. have merry
upon us miserable, etc. ^ The whole Quire answering the same. O God the Son,
etc. have mercy upon us miserable, etc. ^ The Quire Answer the same. O God the
holy Ghost, etc. have mercy upon us, etc. ^ The Quire Answer the same. O holy
blessed and, etc. have mercy upon us, etc. Priest. Quire. Quire. ^ Remember not
Lord, etc. Spare us good Lord Good Lord deliver us. Quire. Quire. ^ We beseech
thee to hear us good Lord. Son of God, we beseech thee, etc. Priest. Quire. ^ O
Lamb of God, that take away the sins, etc. Grant us thy peace. Priest. Quire.
^ O Lamb of God, that take away the, etc. Have me^cy upon us. Priest. Quire.
Priest. ^ O Christ hear us. O Christ hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Quire.
Priest. Quire. ^ Lord have mercy, etc. Christ have mercy, etc. Christ have
mercy, etc. Priest. Quire. Quire. ^ Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy,
etc. Our Father, etc. Quire. Priest. ^ But deliver us from evil, Amen. O Lord
deal not with us after, etc. Quire. Priest. Quire. ^ Neither reward us after,
etc. O God merciful F^ther that, etc. ^ O Lo^d ar^se, etc. Priest. ^ for thy
name sake. O God we have heard^ etc. time before them. Quire. Priest. ^ O Lord
arise, help, etc. for thine honour^ Glory be to the Father, etc. Quire. ^ and
to the Holy Ghost. As it was, etc. world without end, Amen. Priest. Quire. ^
From o^r enemies defend us O Christ. Graciously look up our, etc. Priest.
Quire. ^ Pitifu^ly behold the sorrows, etc. Mercifully forgive the Sins, etc.
Priest. Quire. Priest. ^ Favorably with mercy, etc. O Son of David, etc. Both
now and Quire. Priest. ^ ever vouchsafe, etc. Graciously hear us etc. O L.
Christ. O Lord let thy Quire. Priest. Quire. ^ mercy be, etc. As we do put our
trust, etc. We humbly beseech ^hee, etc. ^ Amen.

FINIS.
Music Books Sold by John Playford at his Shop near the Temple Church.
CAnticum Sacra, the first Set, containing Latin Hymns for two and three Voices
to the Organ, Composed by Mr. Richard Deering, in four books, in fol. price 3
s. 6. d.

Canticum Sacra, the second Set, containing Hymns and Anthems for two Voices to
the Organ, some in Latin and some in English, Composed by Dr. Gibbons, Dr.
Rogers, Mr. Ma^thew Lock, and others, in three books in fol. price 5 s.

Hymns and Mottets for two Voices to the Organ, Composed by Mr. Walt. Porter,
in three books, fol. price 2 s. 6 d.

The Psalms of David, Composed in four parts, as they are sung in Parish
Churches, in one volume in fol. price 3 s.

An Introduction to Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, with A Compendium o^
the Art of Descant, or Composing Music in parts, newly printed, and enlarged
with an addition of The manner of performing Divine Service in Cathedral
Churches and College Chapels, published by John Playford, in octavo, price
bound 2 s.

The Treasury of Music, containing three volumes of Airs and Dialogues,
published by Mr. Henry Laws, and other Eminent Composers of Music, for to Sing
to the Theorbo or Bass-Viol, price bound 10 s.

Choice Airs and Dialogues, to Sing to the Theorbo or Bass-Viol, being most of
the newest Airs and Songs su^g at Court and at the Public Theaters, Composed
by several Gentlemen of His Majesty's Music, to which in this new Edition are
added many more new Songs, and also those Songs sung in the famous Play called
the Tempest, in fol. price 3 s.

The Musical Companion, in two books, the first containing a Collection of
choice Catches for three Voices, the second containing a choice Collection of
Airs, Songs and Glees, some for two, some for three, and some for four Voices,
all bound in one volume in quarto; the price of this new Edition is 3 ^. 6 d.

The Dancing Master, containing above 200 Country Dances, with the Tune to
every Dance, and also plain and easy Rules directing the manner and way of
Dancing them, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Apollo's Banquet, containing a choice Collection of the newest Tunes, Airs
and Jiggs, for the Treble-Violin, to which is added the Tunes of French Dances
used at Court and in Dancing-Schools, with Instructions for such as learn to
play on the Treble-Violin, price 1 s. 6 d.

Musicks Recreation, containing a choice Collection of Lessons for the
Ba^s-Viol Lyra-way, to variety of new Tunings, and also Instructions for the
Practitioners, price 2 s. 6 d.

Musicks Handmaid, containing a Collection of new and choice Lessons for the
Harpsecon or Virginals, price 2 s. 6 d.

Musicks Delight, containing new and pleasant Lessons and Instructions for the
Cithren, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Pleasant Companion, containing variety of new Airs and Tunes for the
Flagelet, with Instructions for Learners on the same, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Other Books.
THe Psalms of David, Translated into English Meter by the Reverend Dr. Henry
King, late Lord Bishop of Chichester, according to the Measure of the common
Psalms sung in Parish Churches, published for public, or private use of
Families, in octavo, price bound 2 s.

An Antidote against Melancholy, the first part, compounded of witty Ballads,
Songs, Poems, and merry Catches, in octavo, price bound 2 s.

A Cabinet of Mirth, or the second part of the Antidote against Mela^cholly,
containing a choice Collection of merry Tales, witty Jests, and ridiculous
Bulls, in octavo, price bound 1 s.


