THE Banquet of MUSIC: OR, A Collection of the newest and best SONGS sung at
Court, and at Public Theaters. WITH A THOROW-BASS for the Theorbo-Lute,
Bass-Viol, Harpsichord, or Organ.

Composed by several of the Best Masters.

The WORDS by the Ingenious Wits of this Age.

THE FIRST BOOK.

Gui: Vaughan Sculpi
a group of musicians play the harpsichord, viol and sing

LICENSED, Nov. 19. 1687. Rob. Midgley.

In the SAVOY: Printed by E. Jones, for Henry Playford, at his Shop near the
Temple Church, 1688.

TO THE READER.
HAving already published a COLLECTION of this nature, Entitled, The Theater
of MUSIC, containing many excellent SONGS, in four Books, I am encouraged to
proceed to this second Volume, called, The Banquet of MUSIC, whereof you are
here presented with the first Book; hoping that both this and the following
will receive the same favorable Reception with the former, which will further
encourage the Endeavors of

Your humble Servant, H. Playford.

A Table of the SONGS contained in this Book.
A
A Gentle Breeze from the Lavinian Sea, Page 2 Ah, how sweet it is to Reign!
Page 25 As in a verdent Willow Grove, Page 40
B
By what I Have seen, I am undone, Page 4
G
Great Son of Night! Page 34
H
How sweet are the Youthful Adventures of Love! Page 1 P. Here Is to thee, Dick!
Page 10 How can they taste of Joys or Grief! Page 30 P. Has yet your Breast no
Pity learned! (A Dialogue.) Page 36 P. How pleasant is this flowery Plain! Page
42
I
I loved you dearly once, it is true, Page 3 I saw the Lass whom dear I loved,
Page 21
N
P. Now are we met, and Humors agree, Page 20
O
O how sweetly Love invites! Page 22
P
Pretty Armeda will be kind, Page 16
S
Sum up all the Delights, P. Page 20
T
'Twas Night, and all the Village wrapped in Sleep, Page 5 This troublesome
Journey of Life, Page 15 This Poet sings the Trojan Wars, P. Page 17 Tell me,
why your Face discloses, Page 24 Though our Town be destrow'd, Page 32
W
When Money has done what e're it can, Page 8 When Beauty, armed with smiling
Eyes, Page 16 Why should short-lived Mortals strive, Page 28 What Scorn appears
in those fair Eyes! Page 33
Y
Ye Gods, you gave to me a Wife, Page 23
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Brief Introduction to the Skill of MUSIC, both Vocal and Instrumental, by
Mr. John Playford, is newly Reprinted with Additions; and sold by Henry
Playford, at his Shop near the Temple Church.

^ HOw sweet are the youthful Adventures of Love! What pretty kind Sympathies
mu -- tual -- ly move! How in a -- mo -- rous Mu -- sick they each play their
Parts, and make in their Minds a trans -- fu -- sion of Hearts! Yet as strange,
and as va -- rious Pow' -- rs they have, when from Frowns, Sighs, and Smiles,
is Bliss, and a Grave.

Mr. Alphonso Marsh.
Mr. Snow.
^ A Gen -- tle Breeze from the La -- vi -- nian Sea, was gli -- -- ding over
the Coast of Si -- ci -- ly; when lulled with soft Repose, a Pro -- strate
made, u -- pon her bended Arm had raised her Head: Her Soul was all tranquil
and smooth with Rest, like the har -- mo -- nious Slumbers of the Blessed;
wrapped up in si -- lence, in -- no -- cent she lay, and pressed the Flowers
with touch as soft as they.

II.
My Thoughts, in gentlest Sounds, she did impart,
Heightened by all the Graces of that Art;
And as I sung, I grasped her yielding Thighs,
'Till broken Accents faulter'd into Sighs:
I kissed, and wished, and forrag'd all her Store,
Yet wallowing in the Pleasure, I was poor;
No kind Relief my Agonies could ease,
I groaned, and cursed Religious Cruelties.
III.
The trembling Nymph all over Confusion lay,
Her melting Looks in sweet disorder play;
Her Color varies, and her Breath's oppressed,
And all her Faculties are dispossessed.
At last impetuously her Pulses move,
She gives a mighty loose to stifled Love;
Then murmurs in a soft Complaint, and cries,
Alas! and thus in soft Convulsions dies.
Mr. Snow.
^ I Loved you dearly once, it is true, but now thank Heaven I Am free; and as my
love was scorned by you, so you are now by me: In vain you do ex -- pose your
Charms, my Heart for to surprise; which is prepared for all A -- larms, and can
with -- stand your Eyes.

II.
Not all your feigned Sighs, nor Tears,
My Pity e're can move;
Who once gets free from beauteous Snares,
Is mad again to love:
No, Cloe, now my Heart's my own,
And so it shall remain;
I value not your Smile or Frown,
Your Favor or Disdain.
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ BY what I Have seen, I am un -- done, and would no longer By what I Have seen,
etc. live; Strephon, Be -- lin -- da's Heart has won, the Prize I saw her give:
Or if be -- fore her Heart was his, she gave it over a -- gain; she unconcerned
re -- ceiv'd the Bliss, I lan -- guish to ob -- tain. I lan -- guish to ob --
tain.

II.
Cruel Belinda! cease to give
Those looks, when I am by;
Cannot my Rival happy live,
Unless he see me dye?
If you delight to punish me,
I will no more complain;
But let not him my Torments see,
To glory in my Pain.
^ It Was Night, and all the Vil -- lage wrapped in Sleep, when Grief lay hushed,
and Sor -- row could not weep; even proud Am -- by -- tion too in qui -- et
lay, and peaceful Rest did all the World survey: On -- ly young Phi -- le --
mon, whose sad Despair kept him a -- wake, and tor -- tur'd him with Care; as
he up -- on a River's Bank was laid, and thus the me -- lan -- cho -- ly
Shepherd said: Break, foo -- lish Heart, and grieve no more, thy Sorrows,
Sorrows, are in vain; they ^ ne -- ver can thy Joys restore, but serve to feed,
to feed, thy Pain: Those Friends, who when thy Fortune shone, were al -- ways
cour -- ting thee, now thou art poor, do thee disown, and scorn, and scorn, thy
Com -- pa -- ny, and scorn thy Com -- pa -- ny. Friendship is now be -- come a
Trade, by Fortune bought, by Fortune bought, and sold; a mere Self -- in -- te
-- rest is made, mo -- no -- po -- liz'd, mo -- no -- po -- liz'd by Gold:
Death is the on -- ly cer -- tain Friend, for all the World, the World's a
Cheat; ^ and he thy Mi -- se -- ries will end, though they, though they be never so
great. Then farewell World, and worldly Joys, false Hope; false Hope, and vain
Desires; which Reason blinds, and Sense de -- stroys, and on -- ly Pride, and
on -- ly Pride, in -- spires. Since Virtue, Truth, and Ho -- ne -- sty, are
flown, and none but Fortune's Fools are in re -- quest; no more I will my wret
-- ched Fate bemoan, but on this Bank con -- ten -- ted e -- ver rest.

Mr. Daniel Purcell.
A SONG to a Lyra Tune.
^ WHen Money has done what e're it can, and round about run to pleasure a Man,
whose Life's but a span; with worldly Joys, and the glittering Toys, which do
make such a noise, as confound all advice, that is given by the Wise, and in a
trice, reduce the Wretch to Mise -- ries, and there do leave him. Then the
World which be -- fore for his Store did a -- door him, straight seems afraid
of one decayed, and him upbraid of the Wealth, with each by's Trade, did be --
fore de -- ceive him; but when the Mor -- tal sees his own un -- ^ do -- ing,
finds his Acquaintance and Friends are all a go -- ing, then he sighs and
moans, and then he pines and groans; at last he craves, his Friends deny, at
which he raves, and swears, he will dye, and thus he cries, He never was wise, un --
til in Mi -- se -- ry he dies; and thus the wretched Spendthrift lies, fare him
well for evermore, Amen.

A. 2. Voc. The Words by Mr. Cowley.
^ HEre, here is to thee Dick, this whi -- ning Love de -- Ere, here is to thee
Dick, here, here is to thee spise; here, here is to thee Dick, this whining,
whining Love despise; Dick, this whi -- ning Love despise, this whining, whi --
ning Love despise; pledge me, pledge me, my Friend, here, here is to thee Dick,
pledge me, and drink, drink, till thou be'st pledge me, here is to thee Dick,
pledge me, my Friend, pledge me, and drink, drink, till thou be'st wise: It
sparkles brigh -- ter far than she, it is pure, it is pure, and right, without de
-- wise: It sparkles brigh -- ter far than she, it is pure, it is pure, and
right, without de -- ceit, ^ and such, such, no Woman e're will be, no, no, no,
they are all so -- ceit; and such, such, no Woman e're will be, no, no, they are
all so -- phisticate, they are all, all, all, so -- phi -- sti -- cate. With all
thy servile pains, what phisticate, they are all, all, all, so -- phi -- sti --
cate. With all thy servile can thou win, with all thy servile pains, what
can, what can, thou win, but an ill favored, pains, what can thou
win, with all thy servile pains, what can thou win, but an ill favored, and
un -- clean -- ly Sin? A thing, a thing, so vile, and so short -- lived, that
Venus Joys, as and un -- clean -- ly Sin? A thing so vile, so vile, and so
short -- lived, that Ve -- nus Joys, as ^ well as she, with reason may be said
to be, from the neg -- le -- cted Foam derived. well as she, with reason may be
said to be, from the neg -- le -- cted Foam derived. Follies they have, so
numberless, in store, that on -- ly he who loves them can have more; Follies
they have, so number -- ber -- less, in store, that on -- ly he who loves them can
have more; neither their Sigh -- s, nor Tears, are true, those id -- ly blow,
these id -- ly fall; neither their Sigh -- s, nor Tears, are true, neither
their Sigh -- s, nor Tears, are true, neither their Sigh -- s, nor Tears, are
true, nothing like, nothing like to ours at those id -- ly blow, these id -- ly
fall; nothing like, nothing like to ours at ^ all, but Sighs and Tears, but
Sighs and Tears, have Sex -- es too. Here Is to thee a -- all, but Sighs and
Tears, but Sighs and Tears, have Sex -- es too. Here Is gain, here is to thee a
-- gain, thy senseless Sor -- rows drowned; here is to thee, thy to thee a --
gain, here is to thee a -- gain, thy senseless Sorrows drowned, thy sense --
less Sor -- rows drowned, let the Glass walk, 'till all things too go sense --
less Sor -- rows drowned, let the rou -- nd, 'till all things too go rou --
Glass walk, 'till all things too go rou -- nd, 'till ^ -- nd, 'till all things
too go round: Again, again, again, again, 'till these two Lights be all, all
things too go round: Again, again, again, again, 'till these two Lights be
four, no Er -- ror here can dan -- ge -- rous prove; thy Passion Man deceived
thee more, none four, no Er -- ror here can dan -- ge -- rous prove; thy
Passion Man deceived thee more, none dou -- ble see, like Men in love; none dou
-- ble see, none dou -- ble dou -- ble see, none dou -- ble see, like Men in
love; none dou -- ble see, like Men in love. see, like Men in love.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ THis trou -- ble -- some Journey of Life I Have be -- gun, and I know ve -- ry
CHORUS. well how far I have run, but a -- las! cannot tell how soon 'twill be
done. Then farewell to Then Care, to Care, then farewell to Care, Fear, Sorrow,
and Trouble, and Love that makes all o -- there farewell to Care, then farewell
to Care, Fear, Sorrow, and Trouble, and Love that makes all other Mi -- se --
ries double, for I Will make the best and the most of this Bubble. Give me but in
quiet a Mi -- se -- ries double, for I Will make the best and the most of this
Bubble. competent Wealth, and sometimes in private an a -- mo -- rous Stealth,
with a Friend and a CHORUS as before. Bottle to drink the King's Health.

Mr. John Roffey.
Mr. Snow.
^ PRetty Ar -- me -- da will be kind, when at her Feet you prostrate lie; no
cru -- el Looks was e're designed, to dwell with -- in her charming Eye: Gaze
on her Face, and every Part, that is ex -- po -- sed to your view; you will
presently conclude her Heart to be so soft, 'twill yield to you.

II.
But first it is fit you try your Skill,
You may not think that without pain;
And some Attendance on her Will,
So rich a Prize you shall obtain:
Wooing's like Angling-Men, must wait
Woman's time, and give them play,
'Till she has swallowed well the Bate,
Before she will become his Prey.
III.
What though Armeda's Looks be kind,
And you read Yielding in her Eyes;
Yet you, alas! may quickly find,
Those Charms do naught but tantalize:
Her Heart may not so easy be
As you imagine, but may prove
As hard as Adamant to thee,
And proof against thy Darts of Love.
IV.
Your Skill, and all the Art you have,
Make Trial of Sir, if you please;
Tell her, you are her Captive Slave,
And beg of her Relief and Ease:
But she will not hear you, for she spies
That underneath your gilded Bate;
A crafty Hook enclosed lies,
So from your Angle she will retreat.
ANACREON's Defeat. [The Notes with this Mark * over them, are to be sung
Demiquavers.]
^ THis Poet si -- ngs the Tro -- jan Wars, a -- no -- there of the Theban
jarrs, in rat -- ling Numbers, in rat -- -- ling Numbers, Verse that da -- res;
this Poet si -- ngs the Tro -- jan Wars, a -- no -- there of the The -- ban
jarrs, in rat -- ling Numbers, in rat -- ling Numbers, Verse that dares.
Whilst I in soft and hum -- ble Verse, my ^ own, my own cap -- ti -- vi --
ties rehearse; whilst I in soft; in so -- ft, and hum -- ble Verse, my ow -- n
Cap -- ti -- vi -- ties rehearse; I sing my own Defeats, which are not the
Events of Common War; I sing my own De -- feats, which are not the Events of
Common War, which are not the Events of Common War: Not Fleets at Sea have
vanquished me, nor Brigadeers, nor Cavalry, nor Ranks and Files, nor Ranks and
Files, of In -- fan -- try; not Fleets at Sea have ^ vanquished me, nor Bri --
ga -- deers, nor Ca -- val -- ry, nor Ranks and Files, nor Ranks and Files, of
In -- fan -- try: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, A -- na --
cre -- on still de -- fies, all, all, your Ar -- til -- le -- ry Companies;
save those encamped in kill -- ling, kill -- ling Eyes, each Dart his Mistress
shoots, he dies, each Dart his Mistress shoots, he dies.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
A. 3. Voc. (A Catch.) Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ SUm up all the Delights, sum up all, all, sum up all the Delights the World
does produce, the darling Allurements now chiefly in use; you will find, when
compared, there is none can contend, with the so -- lid Enjoyment of Bot -- tle
and Friend: For Honor, or Wealth, or Beauty, may waste, those Joys often fade,
but rarely do last; they are so hard to at -- tain, and so ea -- si -- ly lost,
that the Pleasure never an -- swers the Trouble and Cost. None like Wine, none
like Wine, and true Friendship, are lasting and sure, from Jealousy free, and
from En -- vy secure; then fill up the Glasses until they run over, a Friend
and good Wine are the Charms we a -- door.

A. 3. Voc. (A Catch.) Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ NOw, now we are met, and Humors agree, call, call for Wine, and lose no
Time, but let us merry be; fill, fill it about to me, let it come, fill the
Glass to the top, I Will drink every drop, Su -- per -- na -- cu -- lum: A Health
to the King, round, round, let it pass, fill it up, and then drink it off like
Men, never baulk your Glass.

Mr. Snow.
^ I Saw the Lass whom dear I loved, long sigh -- ing, and complai -- ning;
while me she shunned and dis -- ap -- proved, a -- no -- there en -- ter -- tai
-- ning: Her Hand, her Lip, to him were free, no fa -- vour she re -- fus'd
him; judge how unkind she was to me, while she so kind -- ly used him!

II.
His Hand her milk-white Bubby pressed,
A Bliss worth Kings desiring;
Ten thousand times he kissed her Breast,
The Snow amounts admiring:
While pleased to be the Charming Fair,
That to such Passion moved him;
She clapped his Cheeks, and curled his Hair,
To show, she well approved him.
III.
The killing Sight my Soul inflamed,
And swol'n my Heart with Passion;
Which, like my love, could not be tamed,
Nor had Consideration:
I beat my Breast, and tore my Hair,
On my hard Fate complaining;
That plunged me into deep Despair,
Because of her disdaining.
IV.
Ah, cruel Moggy! then I cried,
Will not my Sorrows move you?
Or if my Love must be denied,
Yet give me leave to love you:
And then frown on, and still be coy,
Your constant Swain despising,
For it is but just you should destroy
What is not worth your prizing.
Mr. Snow.
^ OH how sweetly Love invites! How transporting his Delights! A thousand Joys
a -- bout him skip, a thousand Cu -- pids on one Lip; his Chains are Love --
knots, that does tie, com -- by -- ning Souls by sym -- pa -- thy: Ri -- go --
rous Torments he makes ea -- sie, and despairs him -- self to please ye. Ev' --
ry Sigh a Pleasure moves, like the Groans of kis -- sing Doves; ev' -- ry Sigh
a Pleasure moves, like the Groans of kissing Doves.

II.
His Empire's all composed of Charms,
With joy we truckle to his Arms;
For those he kills, he still composes
Beds of Honor, and of Roses:
Thus they unfortunate become,
Enamored of their Martyrdom.
{vocal join}Rigorous Torments he makes easy,
And despairs himself to please ye.
Every Sigh a Pleasure moves,
Like the Groans of kissing Doves;
{vocal join}Every Sigh a Pleasure moves,
Like the Groans of kissing Doves.
Mr. Snow.
^ YE Gods, you gave to me a Wife, out of your wonted favor, to be the Com --
fort of my Life, and I was glad to have her: But if your Provi -- dence divine,
for something else de -- sign her; to obey your will at a -- ny time, I Am rea --
die to resign her.

Mr. Samuel Akeroyde.
^ TEll, tell me, why your Face dis -- clo -- ses flaming Blushes, when I say,
Thour't young as A -- pril, fresh as May, and sweet as June's first budding
Roses? Why when I but name my Passion, should the Lil -- lies dis -- ap --
pear? Why takes the Blood such quick pos -- ses -- sion, planting bright Car --
na -- tions there?

II.
Say why thy Cheeks are thus unfolding
These new Charms, whilst humbly I
The old in Rapture am beholding,
With wonder gaze, and gazing dye:
If budding Charms are so surprising,
What must full-blown Roses do?
Like Morning Sun in Crimson rising,
Painting the Hemisphere anew.
Mr. John Banister.
^ AH! how sweet it is to Reign! how delightful it is to see the begging Eye,
and bended Knee! to hear the Gilded Palace ring, with Praises of the King!
Kings are Gods, and from the lofty Throne, on all the rest of Men look down,
all bow to them, but they submit to none; with Frowns they kill, and with a
Smile more ravishing Delights they move, than all the fading Sweets of Love.
Pleasure, and Treasure, and Beauty, are theirs, to sweeten their Cares; all
Nature gives, or Art can find, to please the Sense, and ease the Mind; the Gods
for Monarchs did ordain, ah, how sweet it is to Reign!

^ WHen Beauty, armed with smiling Eyes, and in betraying Features dressed; for
wandering Hearts in Am -- bush lies, she beats the Valiant, cheats the Wise,
and gains a Throne in ev' -- ry Breast: To so ma -- ny bright forms she al --
ters her shape, no God, nor no He -- to, can e -- ver escape. Who pleasing
Looks, and Mirth, disdain, she wounds with more Ma -- je -- stick Art; and
where the haughty Men prove vain, such Pear -- ly showers of Tears she will rain,
as can dis -- solve the hardest Heart: So ^ deep is her Cunning, so sweet is
her Stroke, that all must be subject to Beauties soft Yoke. But, ah! how sweet
it is to possess, the secret Wishes Beauty move; the Joys no Language can ex --
press, nor a -- ny wretched Mor -- tals guess, that has not tried suc -- cess
-- full Love. Such Raptures of Pleasure from Beauty proceed, that none but True
Lovers are happy indeed.

Mr. John Banister.
^ WHY should short -- lived Mortals strive to gain, gilded Cares, and glorious
Pain? It Is not Pow'r's bound -- less sway, nor all the Guards that wait up --
on a ^ ^glitt'ring Throne, can drive in -- true -- ding Care away: Wisdom's
sacred Hand can bind, the ^ ^ra -- ging Passions of the Mind; he that has at --
tain'd to that, is the Em -- pe- ^ ^rour of Fate. Rough Tempests that make
Kingdoms roll, a -- against his Breast in ^ ^vain do beat; they cannot shake his
fix -- ed Soul, but must, like vanquished Waves, retreat. ^ ^ No rest -- less
Wish, no trem -- bling Fear, or fierce Despair, can en -- ter there; vain Love,
cold Death, or ha -- sty Time, have nei -- there Darts, nor Wings for him: When
Life for -- sakes his qui -- et Breast, he does but change his place of Rest,
it is he, it is he a -- lone is blessed, it is he, it is he a -- lone is blessed.

Mr. John Banister.
The Words by Mr. John How. Set by Mr. James Heart.
^ HOw can they taste of Joys or Grief, who Beauty's Power did never prove?
Love's all our Torment, our Relief, our Fate depends alone on Love: Were I in
heavy Chains confined, Neaera's Smiles would ease that State; nor Wealth, nor
Power, could bless my Mind, cursed by her Absence, or her Hate. Of all the
Plants which shade the Field, the fragerant Myr -- til does surpass; no Flower
so gay, that does not yield, to blooming Roses gau -- die Dress: No Star so
bright that can be seen, when Phoebus Glories gild the Skies; no ^ Nymph so
proud a -- dorns the Green, but yields to fair Ne -- ae -- ra's Eyes. The a --
mo -- rous Swain no Off' -- rings bring, to Cu -- pid's Al -- tar as be --
fore; to her they play, to her they sing, and own in Love no o -- there Power:
If thou thy Empire wilt regain, on thy Conqueror try thy Dart; touch with pi
-- ty for my Pain Ne -- ae -- ra's cold dis -- dain -- full Heart.

^ THough our Town be destroyed, since our selves we en -- joy, where e're we
reside, we make a new Troy; when mer -- ry in one place, our Minds compass
CHORUS. all, thus Man's the great World, and the Globe's but the small. Then
drink our Veins full, and while Wa -- ters glide a -- bout the dull Earth, let
Wine be our Tide; then drink our Veins full, and while Wa -- ters glide a --
bout the dull Earth, glide a -- bout the dull Earth, let Wine be our Tide.

Dr. John Blow.
Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ WHat Scorn appears in those fair Eyes, where na -- tive Sweetness used to
flow? If your A -- do -- rer you despise, on whom will you your Love bestow?
Ah! let not your severe Disdain kill him, who lives alone for you; in -- glo --
rious Conquests they obtain, who mur -- der Slaves they first subdue.

II.
Welcome to thirsty Fields kind Showers,
To cheerful Birds the Morning Light;
Returning Suns to withering Flowers,
To me the charming Caelia's Sight:
The Floods against their Streams may run,
The Gods may cease to be obeyed;
But think not, cruel Nymph! your Scorn
Can quench the Flames your Eyes have made.
^ GReat Son of Night! come from thy Ebon Cell, where sof -- test Slumbers do
delight to dwell; with wreath of Poppies bound about thy Head, make have, and
bring my trou -- bled Thoughts to Bed; with wreaths of Poppies bound a -- bout
thy Head, make have, and bring my trou -- bled Thoughts to Bed. Some sweet De
-- lu -- sion, gentle Sleep! devise, to draw the frin -- ged Curtains of mine
Eyes; before I am -- a -- ware, my rest -- less ^ Mind implores thine aid, with
silken Cords to bind my scat -- ter'd Sen -- ses with thy migh -- ty Hand, and
charm them gent -- ly And charm them gent -- ly with with thy Leaden Wand; and
char -- m them gently, charm them gently thy Leaden Wand; charm them gent --
ly, charm them gent -- ly, with thy with thy Leaden Wand. Lea -- den Wand.

Mr. James Heart.
A Dialogue betwixt STREPHON and DORINDA.
^ Strephon. HAS yet your Breast no Pi -- ty learned! Dorinda, must I si -- gh
in vain! The listening Herd seem more concerned, when of your Ri -- gour I
complain. Dorinda. Beguiling Shepherd! with such Art, the sub -- tle Poison you
instill; no Antidote Strephon. se -- cures the Heart, such migh -- ty force it
has to kill. I bring no Weapons to de -- stroy, but tender Wounds for you to
cure; such Wounds as must your Care employ, no ^ Dorinda. rough -- er Hand they
can endure. Forbear, forbear, pray tempt no more! My Heart I feel almost
undone; and can no more, no more oppose that Power, that Power, Strephon. which
has such Conquest won. Dorinda, you the Conqu'ror are, here I for your
Protection Dorinda. sue; and as your Prisoner took in War, some Mercy challenge
as my due. I can no mo -- -- re reject your Prayer, Strephon, for Heaven --
sake constant prove! My Breast shall bury all your Care, and kind -- ly en --
ter -- tain your Love. CHORUS. ^ CHORUS. So those bright Eyes which do the
Tempest raise, with one kind Look the an -- So those bright Eyes which do the
Tem -- pest raise, with one kind Look the an -- gry Storms appease, and save
poor sin -- king Lo -- verse from the Seas. gry Storms appease, and save poor
sin -- king Lo -- verse from the Seas. Painters, henceforward with your skill --
full Arts, draw Beauty with one Eye a Painters, henceforward with your skill --
full Arts, draw Beauty with shoo -- ting Darts, the o -- there we -- ping, the o
-- there we -- ping o -- one Eye a shoo -- ting Darts, the other we -- ping,
weeping o -- ^ ver wounded Hearts: Painters, henceforward with your skill -- full
Arts, draw ver wounded Hearts: Painters, henceforward with your skill -- full
Arts, Beauty with one Eye a shoo -- ting Darts, the other weeping, the other
draw Beauty with one Eye a shoo -- ting Darts, the other weeping, weeping o --
ver wounded Hearts. weeping o -- ver wounded Hearts.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
Mr. Snow.
^ AS in a ver -- dent will -- low Grove, for sligh -- ted Lo -- verse meant, Syl
-- van -- der raving of his Love, thus gave his Passion vent: Is there no ju --
ster Laws above, ye Gods, than to cre -- ate, in poor Syl -- van -- der so much
Love, in Daph -- ne so much Hate!

II.
Alas! (he cried,) my Angel's gone,
The lovely fair one's fled,
And's left me here forlorn, undone,
What more can Mortals dread?
And my Condition now is worse
Than if I Would never been blessed,
Privation, the Apostate's Curse,
Does wrack my tortured Breast.
^ SYmphony for FLVTES. ^

^ HOW plea -- sant is this flow -- ry Plain and Grove! What perfect Scenes of
In -- no -- cence and Love! As if the Gods, when all things here below were
cursed, reserved this place, to let us know, how beau -- ti -- full the World at
first was ^ made, e're Mankind by Am -- by -- tion was be -- tray'd. The hap --
py Swain in these e -- na -- mell'd Fields, possesses all the Good, possesses
all, all the Good, that Plenty yields; pure without mixture, as it first did
come, from the great Treasury of Nature's Womb; free from Disturbance here he
lives at ease, contented with a little Flock's increase, and covered with the
gen -- tle Wings of Peace. No Fears, no Storms of War his Thoughts mo -- lest,
Ambition is a Stranger to his Breast; his Sheep, his Crook, and Pipe, are all
his ^ Store, he needs not, neither does he covet more. Often to the si -- lent
Groves he does re -- treat, whose Shades de -- fend him from the scor -- ching
Heat: In these Re -- ces -- ses un -- con -- cern'd he lies, whilst through the
Boughs the whisp' -- ring Zephire flies, and the Woods Choristers on every
Tree, lull him asleep, lull him asleep, with their swee -- t Harmony. CHORUS.
CHORUS. ^ CHORUS. CHORUS. CHORUS. Ah happy, happy, happy Life! Ah happy, happy,
happy, ah hap -- py Life! Ah blessed Re -- CHORUS. Ah happy, happy, happy Life!
Ah happy, happy, happy, ah hap -- py Life! Ah blessed Re -- CHORUS. treat, void
of the Troubles, the Troubles, that attend the Great! From Pride, and courtly
Fol -- lies, treat, void of the Troubles, the Troubles, that attend the Great!
From Pride, and courtly Follies, ^ free, from all their gaudy, gau -- die Pomps,
and va -- ni -- ty: No guilty Re -- free, from all their gau -- die Pomps, and
Va -- ni -- ty: No guilty Re -- morse does their Pleasure annoy, nor disturb
the Delights of their in -- no -- cent Joy. Crowned morse does their Pleasure
an -- noy, nor disturb the Delights of their in -- no -- cent Joy. ^ Monarchs,
whom Cities and Kingdoms o -- bey, whom Cities and Kingdoms obey; are not
Crowned Monarchs, whom Cities and Kingdoms o -- bey, whom Kingdoms obey, are
not half so contented, are not half so contented, or happy as they. half so
contented, are not half so contented, or happy as they.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
FINIS.

