PLAUTUS's COMEDIES, AMPHITRYON, EPIDICUS, and RUDENS, Made English: With
Critical Remarks Upon Each PLAY.

-- Non ego paucis Offendar maculis: quas aut incuria fudit Aut humana parum
cavit natura: -- Horat. Art. Poet. LONDON: Printed for Abel Swalle and T. Child
at the Unicorn at the West End of S. Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
university crest

TO Sir CHARLES SIDLEY, Bar.
SIR,
THE Translation of the old Dramatick Poetry being as yet in its Infancy,
requires the indulgent Patronage of some Eminent Person whose Wit and Judgment
entitle him to a Right of Saving or Condemning it; but especially one whose own
Performance has abundantly convinced the World that it may be done, and that
better by Us than our Neighbors. Sir, were it not too great a Trespass upon
your Modesty, I would insist upon the Easiness of the Style, the Politeness of
the Expressions, and the Delicacy of the Turns in your Bellamira, even in those
parts of it which are purely Translation. The Consideration of these and many
other Accomplishments, makes me fear this mean Performance will scarce merit
the Pardon, much less the Protection of so complete a Patron: But however,
should Such a one be pleased to accept of this Trifle, mean as it is, it will
undoubtedly be an Encouragement for greater Wits and abler Pens to proceed in
the same Design, to the Improvement of our Language, and the Honor of our
Country. And this is the utmost and only Aim of* Sir,

Your most Humble and Devoted Servant.
THE PREFACE.
THIS Nations Excellencies in Dramatick Poetry have been so extraordinary, and
our Performance both in Tragedy and Comedy have discovered such strange
Genius's, that we have some reason to believe, that we have not only surpassed
our Neighbors the Moderns, but likewise have excelled our Masters the
Ancients. But the want of Knowledge of the Ancients has been one great Reason
for our setting our selves so very much above 'em; for though we have many
Beauties which they wanted, yet it must be owned, that they have more which we
have not, except it may be some very few of our Pieces. But then their
Excellencies are far less known to us than ours; for the Common People are
unacquainted with their Languages, and the more Learned sort, for want of due
Observance and Penitration, have been ignorant enough of their essential
Beauties; they, for the most part, contenting themselves with considering the
superficial ones, such as the Style, Language, Expression, and the like,
without taking much notice of the Contrivance and Management, of the Plots,
Characters, etc.

But a considerable Discovery of these Excellencies has been made by means of a
late Version of Terence, especially by the help of the Preface and Remarks: And
this has made me hope, that two or three Plays of Plautus's could not be very
unacceptable after them; and since the principal Fault of the Remarks in that
Version was their being too short, I have made these somewhat longer and
clearer, hoping they will prove the principal means of recommending this Book
to the World, even though the Translation had been brought to the utmost
Perfection it was capable of: a Thing which I dare never pretend to. I made
Choice of the same three which Madam Dacier had done before me; those being, in
many respects, fitter for my purpose. But before I come to Particulars in those
Things, I shall give some Character and Account of my Author.

Plautus, if considered as a Dramatick Poet, may justly enough be styled the
Prince of the Latin Comedians, for though most of 'em are lost, and consequently
little capable of being judged of, yet, from all Circumstances, we have good
reason to presume that they never came up to Plautus; so that there is no one
to stand in competition with him but Terence: But if Comedy consists more in
Action than Discourse, then Terence himself must be obliged to give place to
our Author; and as Terence ought to be esteemed as a Man who spoke admirably,
Plautus is to be admired as a Comick-Poet. The principal Differences of these
two Poets have been touched upon in the Preface to the English Terence; and
from thence it will appear, that Plautus had the vaster Genius, and Terence the
more exquisite Judgment* and, considering what Persons they copied, as the
later was called the Half Menander, so the former may be styled the Half
Aristophanes.

Terence's Style was generally more refined and pure, and withal more elaborate
than this Poet's; yet undoubtedly, Plautus was a most absolute Master of his
Tongue, and in many Places there appear such a Sharpness and Liveliness of
Expression, nay and such a Neatness and Politeness too, that is scarce to be
found in Terence; and this, perhaps, may have occasioned Varro to say, That if
the Muses were to speak Latin, they would certainly make use of his very Style;
and Tanaquill Faber to call Plautus, The very Fountain of pure Latin. As to Wit
and Raillery, Terence might by no means be compared to him; then he is not
always so happy, but often degenerates to a Meanness that Terence would never
have been guilty of; and though his Jests and Repartees were sometimes admirable,
and often far above Terence's, yet they were many times as much below him, and
by their Trifling and Quibbling, appear to have been calculated for the Mob.
This, probably, made Rapin observe, That he says the best Things in the World,
and yet very often he says the most wretched. A little before he says, Plautus
is ingenious in his Designs, happy in his Imaginations, fruitful in his
Invention; yet, that there are some insipid Jests that escape from him in the
Taste of Horace; and his good Sayings that make the People laugh, make
sometimes the honester s^rt to p^ty him. The most remarkable Thing in his
Style, is the natural and unaffected Easiness of it, I mean in opposition to
Stiffness, which with the true Elegence and Propriety of the Latin Tongue in
Common Discourse, seems almost its distinguishing Character, and sets him above
any other Roman Author in that respect. It Is true, Terence has all these
Excellencies, and perhaps is more exact in Propriety of Terms, and in his
Choice of Words, yet his extreme Closeness and great Elaborateness, I presume,
has made it somewhat less Free and Familiar, or at least it would be so if any
other Man of less Judgment had managed it. So that what I mean is, that
Plautus's Style ought rather to be imitated for Common Discourse than
Terence's. Plautus had the Misfortune of living in a worser Age than Terence,
therefore there must be a larger Allowance for his Obsolete Words, his Puns,
and Quibbles, as well as those Words that were peculiar to the Theater and his
Subjects, which if once transplanted, would never thrive elsewhere.

Next, may be considered our Authors Characters* and in that point indeed,
Terence triumphs without a Rival, as was observed in the Preface to that
Author; and for a just and close Observance of Nature, perhaps no Man living
ever excelled him. It ought to be observed, that Plautus was somewhat poor, and
made it his principal Aim to please and tickle the Common People; and since
they were almost always delighted with something new, strange, and unusual, the
better to humor them, he was not only frequently extravagant in his
Expressions, but likewise in his Characters too, and drew Men often more
Vicious, more Covetous, more Foolish, etc. than generally they were; and this
to set the People a gazing and wondering. With these sort of Characters many of
our modern Comedies abound, which makes 'em too much degenerate into Farce,
which seldom fail of pleasing the Mob. But our Author had not many of these;
for a great part of 'em were very true and natural, and such as may stand the
Test of the severest Judges. His two most remarkable Characters, are his Miser,
and his Bragadocio; and that the Reader may the more clearly understand the
nature of these Characters, their Resemblance to some of ours, and their
Unlikeness to those of Terence, I shall give a Translation of some part of 'em.
First then, take the First Act of his Third Comedy called Aulularia, which
begins with the Old Covetous Fellow and his Maid.

Euclio and Staphila. Euc. Out-a-doors, I say: Come out. I Will fetch ye out with
a Horse-pox, for a damnable, prying, nineey'd Witch.


Sta. Why do you misuse a poor Rogue at this rate?


Euc. To make ye a poor Rogue as long as you live, like a Jade as you are.


Sta. But why, Sir, am I thrust out-a-doors now?


Euc. Must I give you an account, you hempen Bitch? -- Get you from the Door:
-- that way: -- See how the Jade moves. -- Observe what you will meet with. If I
take a good Cudgel or a Whip, '^bud, I shall soon put you out o'your Snails
pace.


Sta. softly.] Would I were hanged out of the way, rather than be bound to
serve such an old Rogue.


Euc. How the Jipsey mutters to her self! -- Faith, I shall spoil those damned
eyes, then look what I Am doing if you can. -- Huzzy, go further off: -- Further
still: -- Further still: -- Still, I say. -- So! stand there. -- Now, you
Baggage, stir one step, move a hairs breadth, or look back in the least till I
speak, and by Cocks-nowns, I Will hang y' up in an instant. -- [To himself, going
^ff.] I never met with a more subtle old Hag than this in my days: I Am cursedly
afraid this Witch should trap me in my discourse, and discover the place where
I Have hid my Gold: Troth, I believe the consuming Jade has Eyes in her Breech.
-- Now for my Gold, that has cost me such a woeful deal of trouble, I Will go see
whether that be safe as I hid it.


Exit Euclio. Staphila alone. As I live, I cannot devise or imagine what Evil
Genius or Madness has possessed my Master; he uses me so inhumanely; and kicks
me out a doors ten times a day. Troth, it puzzles me strangely to find out the
meaning of his crazy Whims: He watches whole Nights together; and sits all day
long within doors, like a lame Cobbler upon his Stall. -- Well, considering
these Plagues, and the difficulty of concealing my young Mistresses Labor, now
at hand, I find no way but making a short cut, and hanging my self.


Re-enter Euclio. Euc. Now I Have found all well within doors, my mind's a little
at ease. -- Now come in, and keep House.


Sta. What, for fear it should be stolen away? There Is no Plunder for Thieves;
there is nothing but Emptiness and Copwebs.


Euc. I Will warrant ye, I must keep a House like an Emperor for your sake, you
old Sorceress? Huzzy, I Will have every Copweb taken care of, and preserved.

I Am very poor, I confess; but I patiently bear what the Gods lay upon me. --
Get ye in, and make fast the door; I Will be back presently. Take a special care
you don't let e're a Soul come within the doors; and that they mightn't pretend
an Excuse to borrow Fire, I Will have ye put it all out: If there be any now, out
with'^ in an instant. If they want Water, tell 'em the Pump is dry; if they
would borrow a Knife, an Axe, a Mortar, or a Pestil, as Neighbors used to do,
tell 'em the House was robbed, and they are all stolen. 'Sbud, I Will have no body
set a step within my House when I Am gone; therefore if Good-luck her self
should come, I charge ye keep her out.


Sta. Troth, you needn't fear her coming; for were she at the Threshold, she would
never come in.


Euc. Hold your prating Tongue, and get ye in.


Sta. To please you, I Will do both.


Euc. And besure you secure the Door with two great Bolts: I Will be here
instantly.


Exit Staphila. Euclio alone. O, I Am wretchedly perplexed that I Am forced to go
out a doors now; and troth, it goes sore against my mind; however, '^is upon
sure grounds. For now is the time for our Officer to distribute the Money to the
Poor: Now if I should be negligent, and not be among the Beggars, I Am afraid
the World would presently conclude, that I had got Gold at home. For it is n't
likely such a poor Fellow as I pretend to be, should so little value Money, as
not to be there. Notwithstanding my restless care of concealing this Gold, it
strangely runs in my Head, that all the World knows of it, and every body seems
to be more obliging, and to complement me more than ever. They meet me, stay
me, embrace me, enquire after my Health, my Welfare, and every thing. -- Well,
I Will go, and be back again as soon as possibly. Exit.


Here we see a considerable deal of the strange Nature of this old miserable
Fellow; and this Character he has carried through the whole Play: But to see
his Humor a little more perfectly, take part of the fourth Scene of the second
Act; where the Servant Strobulus and the two Cooks are discoursing about this
Miser.


Strobulus and Congrio. Stro. A Pumice-stone is not half so dry as that old
Huncks.


Con. Say ye so, in troth?


Stro. Take this from me. If the least Smoke should chance to fly out of his
House, he strait allarms the Town, exclaims against Heaven and Earth, that he is
undone, and ruined for ever! -- I Will tell ye: whene're he goes to Bed he ties a
Bladder at his Nose.


Con. What for?


Stro. For fear of losing part of his Soul when he is asleep.


Con. And does n't he plug up his lower Bung-hole too, lest any should steal
out that way?


Stro. It Is civil to believe me, since I do you.


Con. Why, truly, I do believe ye.


Stro. Did you never hear, how it goes to the Soul of him to pour out the Water
he has once washed his hands in?


Con. Do think, Boy, we shall be able to squeeze out a swinging sum of Money
of this old Gripes, to purchase our Freedom with?


Stro. Troth, should ye beg Hunger it self of him, the Wretch would deny ye.
Nay more; whenever he gets his Nails to be cut, he carefully scrapes up all the
Pa^ings, and saves 'em.


Con. Why, faith, this is the most miserable Cur upon the face of the Earth. --
But is he really such a pinching Wretch as you say?


Stro. Why the other day a Kite chanced to steal a bit of something from him;
this poor Devil goes strait to my Lord Chief Iustice' s, crying, roaring, and
houling for his Warrant to apprehend it. -- O, I could tell ye a thousand of
these Stories, if I had leisure.

This is stretching of a Character a degree above Nature and Probability; yet
these sort, at first sight, will glare and dazzle a common Audience, and
sometimes give a superficial Pleasure to a more judicious one; but are
carefully to be avoided by any correct Writer.

His Miles Gloriosus, or Braggadocio, is as remarkable a Character as this, and
there you may see another too in the same place, one who wheadles as much as
the other boasts, and plays the Knave as much as the other does the Fool. For
the Reader's Satisfaction, he follows a Translation of the first Act of the
Miles Gloriosus, which begins between that Blockhead and his Buffoon.


Pyrgopolinices, with his Servant Artotrogus, and his Soldiers. Pyr. to his
Soldiers.] Take care to have my Buckler outshine the resplendent Sun, when the
Heavens are serene; so that in the midst of the Battle, I may dazzle the Eyes of
my Enemies, and confound every man of 'em. -- In the mean time, I Will comfort my
bold Bilbo, that he might n't be dull and melancholy for want of use this long
time; for the poor Rogue is damnably eager to slice all my Foes, and make a
Hash of them. -- But where is Artotrogus?


Art. Here, an't like your Honor, ready to wait upon a Man of the grea^est
(...) and Fortune in the Universe, and of the most majestic Air; then for
personal Valor, Lord, Mars himself dare n't pretend to measure Swords with you.


Pyr. You mean him in the spacious Gurgustid^nian Plains, the mighty
Generalissimo, Bomb^machides -- Cluninstaridy -- Sarchides, great Neptune's
Grandchild? --


Art. -- The same, Sir. Him with the golden Armor, whose whole Army you blew
away with a single Puff, like Leaves before the Wind, and Feathers in a Storm.


Pyr. By Hercules, 'twas nothing.


Art. No, faith, Sir, nothing at all to what I can relate, -- [Aside] but the
Devil a bit of Truth's in it. If any Man can show me a greater Liar, or a more
bragging Coxcomb than this Blunderbuss, he shall take me, make me his Slave,
and starve me with Whey and Butter-milk -- Well, Sir?


Pyr. Where are you?


Art. Here, Sir: -- Wonderful! how you broke the great Indian Elephants Arm
with your single Fist?


Pyr. What Arm?


Art. I would have said Thigh.


Pyr. Pshaw, I did that with ease.


Art. By Jove, Sir, had you used your full Strength, you would have flead, gutted,
and bon'd the huge Beast at once.


Pyr. I would not have ye relate all my Acts at this time.


Art. Really, Sir, it is impossible to innumerate all your noble Acts that I
have been Spectator of. -- [Aside.] It Is this Belly of mine creates me all this
Plagues. My Ears must bear this Burden, for fear my Teeth should want Work; and
to every Lie he tells, I must swear to.


Pyr. What was I going to say? --


Art. O, Sir, I know your meaning. -- 'Twas a noble Exploit; I remember't very
well.


Pyr. What was it?


Art. Whatever you performed, was so.


Pyr. Have ye a Table Book here?


Art. Do You want one, Sir? -- Here Is a Pencil too.


Pyr. Thou'st ingeniously accommodated thy Sentiments to mine.


Art. O, it is my Duty to adapt my Manners to your Nod, and always keep 'em
within the compass of your Commands.


Pyr. Well, how many can you remember?


Art. I remember a hundred and fifty Cilicians, a hundred Sycolatronideans,
thirty Sardeans, and threescore Macedonians, you slew in one day.


Pyr. And how many are there in all?


Art. Seven thousand.


Pyr. That Is right. You're an excellent Arithmetician.


Art. I have 'em in capite, though not in black and white.


Pyr. Truly, a prodigious Memory!


Art. That Is owing to your Table.


Pyr. As long as you proclaim my Honor, you shall never want eating: my Table
shall be always free to receive ye.


Art. Then in Cappadocia, Sir, where you would have certainly cut off five
hundred Men, had not your Sword been a little blunt; and those but the Relicts
of the Infantry you had just defeated, -- [Aside] if there were any such in
being. -- But why should I mention these things, when the whole World knows how
much the mighty Pyrgopolinices excels the rest of Mortals in Valor, Beauty,
and Renowned Exploits. All the Ladies in Town are ready to run mad for ye;
troth, and all the reason in the World for it, since you have so charming a
Countenance. As yesterday, some of 'em caught me by the Cloak, and --


Pyr. Prithee, what did they say of me? [Smiling.


Art. They fell to questioning: Prithee, says one, is n't this the stout
Achillis? His Brother indeed, quoth I. Let me dye, says another, if he be n't a
wonderful handsome Man, how nobly he looks, and how gracefully he wears his
Hair! What a prodigious Happiness it is to be his Bedfellow!


Pyr. Said she so, in faith? [Laughing.


Art. And more than that, begged of me, for God's sake, to get ye to pass that
way, that they might see how triumphantly you marched along.


Pyr. This same extraordinary Beauty brings a Man to extraordinary
Inconveniences.


Art. Well, strangely importunate they were, they nothing but begged, prayed,
and conjured me to bless 'em with a sight of ye; nay, they sent for me so
often, that I was sometimes forced to neglect your Business.


Pyr. I think it is high time to be marching to the Piazza, and pay off the
Soldiers I listed yesterday; for the King was very earnest with me to do him
the favor of raising him some new Levies. This day have I appointed to pay him
a Visit.


Art. Let Us be marching then.


Pyr. Guards, follow your Leader. Exeunt omnes.


I need not make many Reflections upon this Scene; but for the clearer
perceiving of it, let us bring it to the Touchstone of Nature, that is,
compare it with Terence, and show how modestly he has managed the same Subject
and Characters, to wit, his Thraso and Gnatho, in the beginning of the third
Act of his Eunuch.


Thraso and Gnatho. Thra. Was the Lady so extremely thankful?


Gna. O, vastly, Sir.


Thra. And wonderfully pleased, say ye?


Gna. Really, Sir, not so much for the present as the honorable Person who
bestowed it; and for that, Sir, she triumphs above measure.


Thra. Truly, it is my peculiar Fortune, to have every thing I do most
gratefully received.


Gna. Faith, Sir, I Have observed as much.


Thra. Why the King of Persia, whenever I did him a Kindness, was extremely
sensible of it: He was n't so to others.


Gna. A smart Tongue so well hung as yours, Sir, can obtain that Glory with
Ease which cost others so much Toil and Labor.


Thra. Right.


Gna. The Monarch has you in his Eye then?


Thra. Right again.


Gna. And wears you next his heart?


Thra. Very true: And trusts all his Army and Secrets to my Discretion.


Gna. Prodigious!


Thra. Then if he happened to be tired with Company, or fateagu'd with
Business, and was desirous of Ease, -- as though, -- you know what I mean.


Gna. Yes, Sir: -- As tho, when he had a mind to clear his Stomach, as a Man
may say, of all Concerns, --


Thra. Right: Then was I his only Companion hand to fist.


Gna. Ay marry Sir! This is a Monarch indeed.


Thra. Oh! he is a Man of a thousand.


Gna. Yes, one of a million, if he chose you for his Companion.


Thra. All the Officers envied me, and grumbl'd at me behind my back; but I
valued it not: They envied me intolerably: But above all, one who had the
Charge of the vast Indian Elephants. One day, this Fellow being more turbulent
than the rest, I snap'd him up; Prithee Strato, said I, why art thou so fierce?
Is It because you're Lord of the wild beasts?


Gna. Neatly said, as I hope to live; and shrewdly. Bless me! you overthrow Man
and Beast. -- What said he, Sir?


Thra. Not a word.


Gna. Nay, I cannot tell how he should.


Thra. But, Gnatho, did I never tell you how sharp I was upon a young Rhodian
Spark at a Feast?


Gna. Never, Sir; let us hear't, by all means. -- He has told it me a thousand
times. [Aside.


Thra. Why this Rhodian Spark I told ye of, was with me at a Feast, where I
happened to have a small Girl: This Stripling began to be sweet upon her, and
waggish upon me too. How now, you impudent Saucebox, said I; you're Man's meat
your self, and yet have a mind to a Tid-bit.


Gna. Ha, ha, he.


Thra. What Is the matter, hah?


Gna. Very fine, sharp, and delicate; that could not be mended. But pray, Sir,
was this your own? I took it for an old Jest.


Thra. Did you ever hear't before?


Gna. Often, Sir; and it takes to a miracle.


Thra. They Are obliged to me for it.


Gna. I Am sorry though, you were so sharp upon the foolish young Gentleman. But
pray, Sir, what did he say then?


Thra. He was quite dashed out of Countenance; and the whole Company ready to
dye with laughing. After that, every body stood in great awe of me.


Gna. And truly they had reason.


Here may be seen Bragging and Wheadling sufficiently, but still Nature closely
observed, and all its due proportions; whereas the other has too much outgone
Probability, and strained his Characters to an extravagant pitch. I shall not
criticize upon the Particulars, but leave the Reader to judge their
Differences; but only I may observe, that when Characters are carried too high,
as many of ours are, they may probably make an Audience laugh very heartily,
but can give 'em but small Pleasure; whereas others will give 'em great
Delight, though less Laughter.

I am afraid I have dwelt too long upon this Subject, therefore I pass on to
our Author's Plots. In that respect, he had not often that Art and Management
that Terence had, nor in all his Plays was so regular as he; though in several he
was, particularly in those I have chosen. But then his Scenes were commonly
less languishing, his Incidents more surprising, and his Surprises more
admirable; undoubtedly he had more of the Vis comica, which I may translate
Liveliness of Intreague, than Terence. His Subjects were all more Simple than
the other's, but I am apt to believe, that will be reckoned but a very small
Commendation in our Nation, who are but little Lovers of such thin Diet, as
they call it. His Narrations are more lively and sharp than those of Terence'
s, and, I think, every whit as natural and as well brought in: I Am sure in some
of 'em he can never be outdone as to his way of bringing of 'em in. As for the
General Rules of the Stage, I refer the Reader to the Preface to Terence.

Our Author's principal Fault was, his mixing the Representation with the
Theatral Action in many places, where he often makes his Actors speak^
immediately and directly to the Spectators; a Fault that Terence was not wholly
free from. This our modern Plays, I think, are never guilty of; only in our
Monologues and Asides, our Actors have got a custom of looking so full upon the
Spectators, that it seems but one degree better. But our Author is not guilty
of this in these three Plays, except in Amphitryon, and that by way of
Prologue, nor of any other Faults but what, I believe, I have shown in my
Remarks. And these that I have here chosen, are no ways inferior to Terence' s
in matters of Plot and Intreague, but in some respects superior, though not so
elaborately wrought up, or always with that Niceness; so that these may
undoubtedly prove excellent Models for our Poets Imitation, provided they
observe Differences of Tastes, Humors, Ages, and Persons, and keep to those
principal Beauties they already possess, some of which are undoubtedly above
the Ancients. Only Terence will teach 'em one thing that Plautus does not, to
wit, the great Cunning of working in Under-Plots, and still preserving the
Unity of Action; for Plautus has none of them. As for the Necessity of Rules,
the Objections against 'em, and the wonderful Perfection our Plays might arrive
to by a more close Observance of 'em, I must once more refer my Reader to the
Preface to Terence. It was principally upon the Poets Account, and for all such
as are desirous of understanding and judging the Excellencies of Dramatick
Poetry, that I translated these Plays. If it be objected, that the Poets,
Critics, and Lovers, as well as Judges of Dramatick Poetry, do most of 'em
understand the Original; I must deny the Truth of it, though several of 'em do:
But if they did, these will be much more proper for their Design, especially by
means of the Notes and Remarks; and the Reasons I urged for the translation of
Terence, bear a greater force in this Author, for here is a greater Obscurity,
by reason of corrupted Copies, wrong Points, false Divisions of whole Acts as
well as Scenes* besides a greater number of knotty and obscure Passages, than
in Terence.

Though this was my principal, it was not my only Design of translating this
Author, for I had all the way an Eye to School boys, and Learners of the Latin
Tongue: Therefore, upon that account, I have not only kept perfectly close to
his Sense, but almost always to his Words too; a thing not only extreme
difficult in an Author so frequently verbose, but oftentimes dangerous too: And
for an Instance, I need not go any further than the very first Sentence of the
Prologue to Amphitryon, which if I had made shorter, I could have made better.
I cannot forbear mentioning a Passage in the third Act of the same Play, which
just now comes to my remembrance: Nam ce^to si sis sanus, aut sapias satis,
Quam tu impudicam esse arbitrare, and praedicas,
Cum ea tu sermonem nec joco, nec s^o
Tibi habeas, nisi sis stultior stultissimo.


Which I have translated, perhaps, too closely thus; I Am sure, had ye either
Wit, or Discretion, or weren't the greatest Fool in Nature, you would never hold
Discourse, either in Mirth or Earnest, with the Woman you believe and declare a
Strumpet. I Am confident many other Translators would not have been so
scrupulously nice, but have made shorter work of it. But I have not only been
so scrupulous in this Case, but I have likewise imitated all his Faults and
Imperfections, whenever I could do it without extreme Injury to the
Translation; I speak of his Puns, Quibbles, Rhimes, Gingles, and his several
ways of playing upon words; which indeed were the Faults of his Age, as it was
of ours in Shakespear' s and Johnson' s days, and of which Terence, as correct
as he is, is not perfectly clear. Our Author's playing upon words are of that
various nature, and so frequent too, I need not go far for a single Instance,
which shall be in the fore part of the Prologue to Amphitryon: Justam rem and
facilem esse oratum a vobis volo.
Nam just ab justis sum orator datus.
Nam injusta ab justis impetrare non decet:
Justa autem ab injustis petere, insipientia 'st:
Quippe illi iniqui jus ignorant, neque tenent.


Which I have translated thus; I desire nothing but what is reasonable, and
feasible; for it is a reasonable God requires Reason from a reasonable People;
but to require Roguery from reasonable People, is base; and to expect Reason
from Rascals, is nonsense; since such People neither know Reason nor observe
it. Our Author's Wit did many times consist in his playing upon Words; a great
pity indeed, for a person who was so well able to writ after a more substantial
way, of which we have many remarkable Instances. Besides his Quibbling, partly
from his Carelessness and Necessities, he has sometimes a vein of Trifling,
which was but very indifferent; and on those places the Reader must make some
allowance for the translation, and not expect more than the Matter will well
bear. As for our Author's Jests and Repartees, for what we know of 'em, I took
a particular care in preserving their Force; and for the most part, I presume,
I have done it in a great measure, sometimes by a lucky hit, or a peculiar
happiness of our Tongue, other times by a little Liberty taken, and when all
have failed, the Remarks have generally supplied the Defect, a way I was forced
to content my self withal in many places; the worse they were, they were
frequently more difficult to preserve, therefore I thought it as well to slur
over some few of the meaner sort. Several of his Jests and bits of Satyr are
undoubtedly lost to us, not only in respect of our Language, but also our
Knowledge, and this sometimes makes his Sense a little obscure. And as the
Sense of an Author ought to be his Translator's chiefest Care, so it has been
mine; and though I cannot affirm, that I have kept to it in every passage, yet I
believe I have often done it where a common Reader will think I have not; and I
think it no commendation to my self to say I have hit it on many places where
the Common Interpreters have missed.

After all, I dare not pretend to say, that this Translation equals the
Original, for there is such a peculiar Air in this Author as well as Terence,
that our Tongue seems incapable of, or at least it does so to me. Yet still if
'twere always read with the Original, it would make far more for me than
otherwise. In short, the Reader ought to look upon this as a Translation of an
Author who had several Faults, and such places, as the English must of
necessity appear mean, being little b^tter in the Original; and likewise as an
Author of Antiquity, some of whose Customs and Manners will appear a little
unco^th and unsightly, in spite of all a Translator's Care. I endeavored to
be as like my Author as I could, especially in that which I reckon his
distinguishing Character, to wit, the natural and unaffected easiness of his
Style, and as this seems the most capable of imitation so I believe I have been
more successful in this Particular than in any other: and that is the main
Reason I have had so many Abbreviations, to make it appear still more like
common Discourse, and the usual way of speaking. Perhaps I may be thought to
have been too bold in that point, because I have had some that are not usual in
Prose; therefore I don't set this way as a Copy for any one to follow me in,
nor shall I use it myself in any other Piece. I have all the way divided the
Acts and Scenes according to the true Rules of the Stage, which are extremely
false in all the Editions of this Author, especially the Scenes.

To make this Translation the most useful that I could, I have made Remarks
upon each Play, and those are of two sorts, though equally intermixed: The first,
to show the Author's chief Excellencies as to his Contrivance and Management of
his Plots and Incidents; the second, to discover several Beauties of Style and
Wit, principally such as are not very clear, or cannot well be preserved in our
Tongue; and those are likewise to vindicate my Translation. Several of these I
must own my self obliged to Madam Dacier for, or at least the hint, though some
of 'em I could not have missed of in the prosecution of those Designs I aimed
at. I have borrowed little or nothing from any other, for here is are far the
best Notes I ever met with, though many of 'em were done more to show her Parts
and Reading than for any real use, a thing which I shall never aim at. I have
been forced in most of 'em to be extreme nice and curious in penetrating into
the bottom of the Author, for I find it far more difficult to discover a Beauty
than a Fault. I might have enlarged upon 'em, and have made several more, with
good grounds, but I thought it dangerous to say all that could be said; but
instead of that I was forced, much against my will, to dash out several of
those upon Amphitryon upon the account of the Printer, but the rest are more
full and complete.

If business would have permitted me, I should have ventured upon three more of
our Author's Plays; and upon that Account, I have taken somewhat less time than
was necessary for the translating such an extraordinary difficult Author; for
this requires more than double the time of a Historian or the like, which was
as much as I could allow my self. I made choice of these three Plays as well
for their Modesty as Regularity, for above all things I would by no means give
the least Encouragement to Lewdness or Obscenity, which grow too fast of
themselves; and therefore I thought I could not choose better than after a Lady.
Amphitryon had the Name, and never failed of a general Approbation; Epidicus
was our Author's Favorite, and truly there is much Art in it, though it is a
little heavy; and Rudens is in several respects a better Play than any of
Plautus' s or Terence' s. I Am afraid Amphitryon will bear the worse in our
Tongue, upon the Account of Mr. Dryden' s, whose Improvements are very
extraordinary; but considering Mr. Dryden' s Management is of such a different
Nature, this will still be as useful and as proper for my Design, or at least
to School boys and Learners. I must do that great Man the Justice in saying,
that he has not only much improved the Humor, Wit, and Design in many places,
but likewise the Thoughts. I Will mention one, which just now comes into my mind.
Alcmena in the Second Act complains thus: How poor and short are this Life's
Pleasures, if once compared with the Sorrows we endure? It Is Man's Destiny, and
Heaven's Pleasure, to mix our Joys with bitter Potions; and for some few Hours
of Satisfaction, we meet with Ages of Ills and Troubles. Mr. Dryden, by the
help of Blank Verse, and a little more room, has bettered it extremely. Ye
niggard Gods! you make our Lives too long:
You fill 'em with Diseases, Wants, and Woes,
And only dash 'em with a little Love;
Sprinkled by Fits, and with a sparing Hand.
Count all our Joys, from Childhood even to Age,
They would but make a Day of every Year:
And to carry it on further yet, and to make it appear more fine and clear, he
says, Take back your Sev'nty Years, (the stint of Life)
Or else be kind, and cram the Quintessence
Of Sev'nty Years into sweet Sev'nty Days:
For all the rest is flat, insipid Being.
I mention this the rather, because it may serve for one Instance of what
Improvements our Modern Poets have made on the Ancients, when they built upon
their Foundations. For we find that many of the fine things of the Ancients are
like Seeds, that, when planted on English Ground by a Skilful Poet's Hand,
thrive, and produce excellent Fruit.

But I Am afraid this Preface has been too long and tedious for this small
Piece; but the Press stays, and the have I Am in will not permit me to make it
shorter, or so much as review it; yet before I conclude, I must inform the
Reader, that I had the Advantage of another's doing their Plays before me; from
whose Translation I had very considerable Helps, especially in the Jests and
Quibbles.

TO THE Ingenious TRANSLATOR.
SIR,
YOur learned Remarks and just Translation show
Old Rome's Applause was to her Plautus due:
From Flaccus' Censure you have set him free,
Kindly reversing the unjust Decree.
What Horace blamed, the World by you is taught
TO have been the Age's, not the Author's Fault.
But, oh, how hard the Task that you support,
To make him Entertainment for a Court,
Even where he but designed the Rabble Sport.
From your rich Vein you feed his starving Wit,
And match him where he cannot be out-writ.
To generous Thought you have improved what is mean,
And kept the Beauties of each perfect Scene.
Thus, when Mankind shall from the Grave arise,
To be from Earth transplanted to the Skies,
Our frailer Part a happy Change shall gain;
The Soul its own immortal Force retain.
N. TATE.

AMPHITRYON.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Jupiter, in Love with Alcmena. Mercury, in the Shape of Socia. Amphitryon,
General of the Th^ban Forces. Blepharon, Pilot of the Ship. Socia, Servant to
Amphitryon.
WOMEN.
Alcmena, Wife to Amphitryon. Bromia, Servant to Alcmena.
MUTES.
Thessala, Servant to Alcmena. Prisoners, Attendants, etc.
SCENE, Thebes, and the Street before Amphitryon' s Door.

TIME, about Nine Hours, beginning at Two or Three of Clock in the Morning.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mercury in the Shape of Socia.
GALLANTS,
AS y' ever hope for my Godships Assistance in your Merchandise, Buyings,
Sellings, and all other Things; that I make your Business and Accounts thrive
abroad and at home, and well and largely augment your daily Profits for the
present and future; that I ever bring ye good News for you and your Families,
and be the Messenger of nothing but the extraordinary Advantage of the Public,
(for y' all know how the other Gods have given and granted me the Preference as
to News and Gain;) and lastly, that I confirm all with a perpetual Supply of
Riches; I require of ye a favorable Attention, and a just and impartial
Censure (...) our Play.

Now, Gentlemen, I shall let ye know whose Orders, and what Business brought my
Worship hither, as also the Title I bear. By Jove' s Orders I came, Mercury' s
my Title, sent hither by my Father to beg your Attention: Though he knows he
might use his absolute Power, and is sensible of the due Fear and Reverence y'
have for him; yet still he commands me t'use nothing but gentle Expressions, and
obliging Entreaties. For, the truth o^'t is, this Jove, whose Messenger I am,
is as fearful a Fellow as some o'you; and no wonder if he be so, since his
Father and Mother were both Mortals. Now I, his own Son, am a little infected
wi' my Fathers Cowardice; therefore I Am come in a very civil way to offer ye
Peace. I desire nothing but what is reasonable and feasible, for it is a
reasonable God requires Reason from a reasonable People; but to require Roguery
from reasonable People, is base; and to expect Reason from Rascals, is
Nonsense; since such People neither know Reason, nor observe it. -- Pray,
Gentlemen, listen to what Im to tell ye. Your Wishes certainly ought to go
along with ours; for, my Father and I were always Favorers of you, and your
Republic. How often, in other Tragedies, have I seen the Gods, Neptune,
Virtue, Victory, Mars, and Bellona, bragging of those Favors to ye, which my
Father, the King of Heaven, has been the prime Founder of? But 'tisn't my
Fathers way, to hit grateful People in the Teeth with old Kindnesses, but
thinks all his Favors deservedly bestowed.

Now, Gallants, I shall first propose my Demands, then tell ye the Argument of
this Tragedy. -- *[He looks steadily on the Spectators] Why that Frown now? --
Is It because I call it a Tragedy? Why I Am a God; I Will transform it, if ye
please, out of Tragedy into Comedy, and never alter a Verse. Are ye willing or
not? But what a blockheadly Question was that for a Deity to ask, as though he
could be ignorant of your Pleasures? I know your Minds to a Tittle; and I Will
make it a Hodge podge, a Tragi-Comedy; for there is no Reason t'ha't all Comedy,
when Kings and Gods are Actors in it. But how shall we do, now a Slave has the
principal Part? Why, as I told ye before, 't shall be a Tragi-Comedy. Now,
Gentlemen, Jupiter entreats ye by me, to order the Guards to inspect Pit, Box,
and Gallery, and if they find any suborned to clap an Actor, to take his Cloak
for a Pawn. But to those Actors, who shall make Parties to gain the Prize,
either by Cunning, Letters, Messengers, or Themselves, or corrupt the Edils to
break their Oaths; Jove orders a Punishment equal to ones buying of Votes in
the Government for himself or others. He says, it is Merits make Conquerors, not
Ambition and Treachery; and why shou'dn't the Players Laws be as strict as the
Magistrates? Merit's the best Mark for Ambition, not Favors; but he who does
well, can want none, while he meets with impartial Judges. My Father likewise
commands me to have Inspectors over the Actors, that if any one has his
Emissaries to Clap, or by his malicious Bungling hinders another Applause, he
shall have his fine Cloths stripped over his Ears, and soundly lashed, I
would not have ye wonder now at Jove' s troubling his Head about the Players; nay
don't, good now! for he is to make one himself in this Comedy. -- [He pauses.]
Why make ye such a Wonderment? As though ye never heard of Jove' s turning
Player? A Year ago, when the Players invoked him in a pitiful Farce, he came to
their Assistance; and certainly he will in a Tragedy. I tell y' again, that
Jupiter himself is to play his Part, and my Godship with him: Therefore, pray
listen well to the Argument of this Comedy.

First, This City here is called Thebes; that House [Pointing to Amphitryon's
House] is Amphitryon' s, an Argive by Parents and Country, and married to
Alcmena, Electryon' s Daughter. He Is now General of the Theban Army against the
Teleboans; but before he went to the Campaign, he got his Wife wi' Child. (I Am
sure y'all know my Fathers Good Nature, his large Allowance upo' these
Occasions, and how much he makes of a Sweet Bit.) It seems, his Mouth watering
at Alcmena, unknown to her Husband, he borrows her upon Interest, fairly enjoys
her, and gets her wi' Child too. Now, that ye may well understand the Mystery,
she is now wi' Child by my Father and her Husband too. Jupiter' s this moment at
Bed with her, and for that Reason, this Night's made longer than ordinary, that
he mightn't be stinted of his Pleasure; and he has cast about so as to pass for
Amphitryon. But, Gentlemen, ye needn't be surpised at the sight of my fine
Garb here, and m' appearing under the Form of a Slave; for though I bring y' an
old Story, the Dress is new, and so shall my Dress be new too. For, as I said
before, my Father's now within Doors; there behold Jupiter fairly turned into
Amphitryon! All the S^rvants would swear it is their Master, he has got such an
excellent Knack at transforming himself. For my part, I have got my self the
plain Shape of Socia, one of Amphitryon' s Attendants at the Camp, the better
to carry on my Fathers Intreague, and prevent Servants Enquiries after my
Person, when they see me so frequently up and down the House: But now they take
me a Fellow Servants and Comrade of theirs, not a Soul asks me who I am, or from
whence I came. My Father, this minute, lies melting in Ioys, embracing his
lovely Object, telling her pretty Stories of what passed in the Camp, how
bravely he put the Enemy to the Rout, and what large Presents were made him;
she, poor Lady, all the while taking the Gallant for the Husband. The Presents
to Amphitryon we stole; and, ye know, nothing lies out of my Fathers Reach.
This Day Amphitryon comes home from his Army; and with him, his Servant Socia,
whose Shape I wear. Now, to distinguish us easily, I have little Wings upo' my
Hat, and my Father a Golden Tuft upon his, which Amphitryon knows nothing of.
You know these Marks, but not one of the Family does. -- [Discovering Socia at
a great Distance.] Ha, Ha, yonder comes Amphitryon' s Man Socia from the Port
with his Candle and Lanthorn. I shall soon send his Worship packing from these
Quarters. He Is a coming; I hear him. -- You Will have rare Sport, Gentlemen, to
see Jove and Mercury play their Parts.

[He goes up to Amphitryon's Door. ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Socia at the further End of the Stag (...), with a Lanthorn in his Hand.
Soc. to himself.] WAS there ever a Bolder, or Braver Hero than I? One that so
well knows our Night-walkers Mettle, as to trust his Person without a Convoy at
this time of Night? -- But in what a fine Pickle should I be, if Mr. Constable
and his Watch should pick m'up and in wi' me to Lobs-Pound? Out of which damned
Kitchen, to morrow must I be dish'd up for the Whipping Post; and not have the
Benefit of the Layety to plead in m' own Defense. My Lord himself could not save
me, nor should I persuade one honest Fellow to believe me innocent. Thus should
I have eight strongdock'd Rogues belabouring of my poor Corpse like so many
Smiths upon an Anvil; and this the public Reception from the Magistrates at my
first Entry. A pox of our Generals Politics, to disturb a Man's Natural Rest,
and force him from the Port at this fine Seal. Could Not Tomorrow as well
served his Turn? -- Well! it is a cursed Plague to serve one of these Lords;
especially when he hurries a body Night and Day to no purpose, and not allow
him a bit of Time to sleep in. These great Folks lie always Lolling and Dozing
themselves, and think they have got a License to do what they please. They reckon
Poor-mens Grease at Three Ha'pence a pound, and caren't a Fart whether their
Commands be reasonable or no. So this same Slavery's a damned thing; but I must
be their Ass, to receive and bear all wi' Patience.


Mercury listening.] Troth I Have most reason to complain for this Days Slavery:
Free by Birth, yet degraded by my Father to this Employment. This Scoundrel, a
Slave by Nature, have the Impudence to complain, when I, a Slave but in Name,
must bear as much. [Aside.


Soc. to himself.] Stay, it is just come into my Head to thank the Gods for my
safe Arrival, and the Rewards they have bestowed of me. But, in faith, if they
ga' me my due Rewards, they would set some sturdy Whores-bird to meet me and beat
out ha'f a dozen of my Teeth: For, to say the Truth, I have been a kind of an
ungracious Fellow to 'em.


Mer. This Fellow's a little singular; he fairly owns himself a Rogue however.
[Aside.


Soc. to himself.] Well, I see things fall out otherwise than either I, or any
other Citizen hoped for; that is, to have us come home alive again, and
Conquerors. Our Army's upon the March homewards, the bloody Campaign over, and
the Enemy routed and dispersed, who before had made so many wet Handkerchiefs
in Thebes. We Have stormed their Town too by the Valor of our brave Boys,
especially by the Authority and Conduct of my Lord Amphitryon, who divided the
Booty, Lands, and Corn, among the Soldiers, and firmly settled our Sovereign
Creon in his Theban Kingdom. My Honor's sent Express from the Port, to tell
his Lady how bravely he has acquitted his Charge, and the Success of these
noble Qualities. -- I Am studying what to say when I come in her Ladyships
Presence. -- Suppose I tell her some damned Wisker; why that is but m'old
Dog-trick; for I Am sure, when they were hottest in Fight, I was hottest in
Flight: However, I Will brag as though I had been in the midst of 'em, and tell her
all what I heard from other People. But first, I must consider wi' my self what
graceful Postures, and what Rhetoric to accost her Ladyship with. -- Thus then
I begin. [He sets down his Lanthorn, and bows.] -- Madam, At our first happy
Arrival at the Enemies Country, and the Disembarkment of our Troops, my Noble
Lord Amphitryon immediately chose out the Flower of all the Nobility, as Envoys
to the Teleboans, to declare his Pretensions: That if they would freely, without
any Constraint, deliver up their unjust Spoils, with the Authors of such
outrageous Actions, and make Reparation for what they had disposed of; he would
immediately retire home with all his Troops, send the Argives to their own
Country, and leave all things in a peaceable and quiet Posture: But if they
were so obstinate as to refuse these gracious Proposals, their Town must expect
the utmost Severities of Fire and Sword. At the Delivery of this Message,
according to my Lord's Orders, these haughty Men, proud o'their own Strength
and Courage, very roughly treated our Envoys, telling 'em, They knew how to
defend what they had got, by their drawn Swords; and therefore we had best
speedily draw off our Troops from their Dominions. Upo' the Receipt of this
rude Answer, Madam, my Lord advanced toward 'em with his whole Army. The
Teleboans did the like with their Troops from the Town, accouter'd with the
finest Equipage in the World. After the Approaches of these two numerous
Armies, each Man and Officer in his proper Post, they drew up their Troops in
Battalia, we after our own Way, and the Enemy after theirs. Next, Madam, the
two Generals advanced to the Fronts of each Army, and there parley'd; agreeing
to this Article, That the Vanquished should deliver up their Cities, Lands,
Gods, and Selves, to the Mercy of the Conquerors. Upon this, Madam, the shrill
Trumpets sound, the spacious Valleys echo, the Soldiers shout on all sides,
the Generals send their Prayers to Jove, and every where encourage their Men;
each single Man lays lustily about him, bright Weapons clash, great Lances
shiver, Heavens high Arch bellows wi' the Soldiers Clamors, a Cloud arises from
the gloomy Breath of the Combatants, and wounded Wretches sink beneath the
bloody Swords. -- At last, Madam, Fortune was so favorable to our Wishes, as
to make us Conquerors; the Enemy dropping on all sides, we broke in, and fell
upon 'em with dreadful Fury. Still not a Man turned his Back, or stirred a foot
out of the Place he fought in; they choosing Death sooner than quitting their
Posts, and fell where they stood, keeping their Ranks after Death. My Lord
finding such Obstinacy, ordered the Cavalry of the Right Wing to Wheel about
and Charge; these he poured in upon 'em with horrible Outcries, mangling and
treading under foot these Impious Men, with prodigious Slaughter. --


Mer. Thus far the Rogue's in the right; for my Father and I were both present
at the Action. [Aside.


Soc. going on.] -- In short, Madam, these resolute People fled for it; We took
fresh Courage, pursued, and cut 'em all in pieces. My Lord Amphitryon fell upo'
Pterelas their King, and cut off his Head with his own Hands. This Engagement
lasted from Morning till Evening, (I have the more reason to remember't, for the
De'el a bit of Dinner got I that Day,) but the Night put an End to this bloody
Contest. Next day came the Magistrates from the Town, all in Tears,
submissively acknowledging their Misdemeanors, promising, To deliver up all
Things, Sacred and Profane, their City, Wives, and Children, all at Discretion.
Last of all, Madam, my Noble Lord Amphitryon, as the prize of his undoubted
Valor, was presented wi' the great Golden Cup that Pterelas used to drink in.
-- All this will I tell my Lady. -- [Taking up his Lanthorn] I must now go and
enter the House, and there execute my Lord's Commission. [He advances nigher to
Mercury.


Mer. Ha, Ha! he is making his Approaches; but I Will confront him. I mustn't
suffer the Fellow to lodge within these Quarters to Night. Since I Have taken
upon me his Shape, I shall play fast and loose with him; and as long as I do
resemble him in Body, troth, it is but decent I should in Actions and Manners:
Therefore must I turn a damnable subtle, sly Varlet, to cut him down at his own
Play of Roguery, and send him packing. -- Hey-day! what now? -- He Is a
Star-gazing, but I Will watch his Waters for him. [Aside.


Soc. to himself.] Faith and Troth, if a Body may believe or know any thing, I
think Aurora went tipsie to Bed last Night, and is now in a dead Sleep. Why
yonder is Charles-Wain in the same Place still; the Moon hasn't stirred step
since she Rise; the Rock and Spindle, the Evening and Seven-Stars cannot get
down for their Lives; the Signs all obstinately keep their Posts; and the Night
will not budge a bit for the Day.


Mer. Hold to it, Goddess Night, to obey my Fathers Commission as you have begun.
You do a great God a great Service, and he will greatly gratify ye for it.


Soc. to himself.] I think there never was such a long Night since the
Beginning of the World, except that Night I had the Strapado, and rid the
Woodden-Horse till Morning; and of my Conscience that was twice as long. By the
Mackins, I believe Phoebus has been playing the Good Fellow, and's asleep too.
I Will be hanged if he ben't in for it, and has took a little too much of the
Creature.


Mer. Say ye so, Slave? What, treat Gods like your Selves? By Jove, have at
your Doublet, Rogue, for Scandalum Magnatum. Approach then; you will have but
small Joy here. [Aside.


Soc. to himself.] Where are your true Fornicators now, that cannot sleep
without a Wench? Here Is a Night for 'em then; now they may take their full
Swing of Whoring.


Mer. The Rogue has hit my Father to an Ace; for he has resolved to have his
full Swing of his dear Alcmena to Night. [Aside.


Soc. to himself.] Well, now for my Lord's Message to my Lady. -- [Goes nigher
and discovers Mercury.] But who a-duce is here by our Door at this time of
Night? I don't like his Looks. [Fearfully.


Mer. This is the most cowardly Milksop. [Aside.


Soc. Now I think better on it, this may be some Rogue to steal my Cloak off my
Back. [Softly.


Mer. The poor Dog quakes; I Will have a little Sport with him. [Aside, making
forwards.


Soc. turning on one side.] Good lack! how my Teeth chatter in my Head? The Man
infallibly stands here to gi' me a sound Welcome with his Fists. He has got
somewhat of good Nature I believe; and because my Lord keeps me waking, he will
sweetly lull me asleep with his Buffets. -- O this mortal Body o'mine! Lord,
what a brawney two-handed Dog it is? [Softly.


Mer. aside.] I Will raise my Voice a little, that he may hear what I say, and
shake and tremble the more heartily. [Aside, seeming not to see Socia.] Rouse
up, my stout Fists! you have half starved me this long time: Methinks it is an Age
since Yesterday you plundered four Men, and sent their Souls to Pluto.


Soc. overhearing.] I Am wretchedly afraid then, he will dissociate me to Quintus;
and to the four Souls he sent to Pluto, I shall be made the fifth. [Aside.


Mer. aloud.] Sa, sa! this is the Way. Holding up his Fists.


Soc. He has got 'em both ready; now he is in his mischievous Posture.


Mer. aloud.] He must never hope to escape; --


Soc. Who, I wonder? [Aside trembling.


Mer. aloud.] -- For that Mortal who approaches, by Jove he eats my Mutton
Fists.


Soc. A way with 'em, I never eat so late; besides I Have supped, thank God. Good
Sir, reserve that Dish, if you please, for better Stomachs. [Aside.


Mer. Methinks this Fist weighs pretty well. Shaking his Fist.


So. I Am a dead Man. He Is weighing out my Commons. [Aside.


Mer. What if I neatly dress it with Opium Sauce?


Soc. That would oblige me, for I ha'nt had one wink of Sleep this three
Nights. [Aside.


Mer. -- But now my Blood is up, it knows no such Gentleness; one Glance of it
changes a Man's Shape. --


Soc. Here Is a Fellow will change me from Head to Foot, and set me on a new
Skin. [Aside.


Mer. -- But a sound Buffet leaves no more Bones than a dressed Eel.


Soc. Troth, he designs to Spitchcock me, I believe. Would Old Nick had these
bloody-minded Fellows. If he spies me, I Am ho more a Man of this World. [Making
softly for the Door.


Mer. snuffing.] Some stinking Fellow offends me to his Destruction, --


Soc. Waunds! I ha'nt let fly sure. [Aside.


Mer. -- And he cannot be far off.


Soc. Far enough lately. -- This Man's the Devil. [Aside.


Mer. My Fingers itch to be at him.


Soc. If they are so hot for my sake, good Sir, cool 'em against the Walls
first. [Aside.


Mer. listening.] Some Voice flies this way, --


Soc. What a Blockhead was I, that didn't clip the Wings on it, since it flies
so nimbly! [Aside.


Mer. -- Which provokes me to curry his Asses Hide for him!


Soc. My Hide will not bear such Bundles. [A little louder.


Mer. I Will try ye with a Bundle of Cuffs.


Soc. Faith, Sir, I was so tired a Shipboard, I could scarcely crawl hither;
and now I Am Sea-sick. My Legs will hardly carry single, and you mustn't think
they will carry double.


Mer. Some body mutters there, I think. [Surlily.


Soc. Then I Am pretty secure; he sees me not. Who that same Some Body is, I
cannot tell; for I Will take my Oath I Have no other Name but Socia.


Mer. Methinks this grating Voice comes from the Right.


Soc. I Am plaguely afraid he will fall foul upo' my Bones instead of my grating
Voice. [Aside, coming forward.


Mer. Very well, my Gentleman comes nigher. [Softly.


Soc. Lord! How I tremble and quake every Joint of me. OF my Conscience, I
could not tell what Part of the World I Am in, if any body should ask me the
Question. Alas, I can no more stir than a Statue, I Am in such a Fright. My
Lords Orders are all vanished in Smoke, and poor Socia with 'em. -- However,
I Will bare up to him briskly, and seem as valiant as I can, to try if that will
save my Bacon. Aside, going up to the Door.


Here they both meet, and join Discourse. Mer. Whither away, Sirrah? you that
carry Fire in your Lanthorn.


Soc. Who made you an Examiner? you that make no more Bones of a Man than an
Eel?


Mer. Are ye a Servant, or a Gentleman?


Soc. I Will be both if I please.


Mer. Say so, in Faith?


Soc. I do, Faith and Troth.


Mir. Sirrah, you would be kicked.


Soc. You lie, Sir, for once.


Mer. But I Will soon make y' eat your Words.


Soc. There Is no Occasion for that.


Mer. I must know where you're going, who you belong to, and what is your
Business?


Soc. I Am going home; I belong to my Master. -- What are ye the wiser now?


Mer. Sirrah, I shall stop that damned foul Mouth o'yours.


Soc. It Is past your Skill, Sir. It Is kept as well and as clean as any Man's.


Mer. Still so quick? Pray what is your Business at this House?


Soc. What Is yours, if you go to that?


Mer. It Is the King's Command, that Guard be kept here every Night.


Soc. He does nobly to guard our House when we are in the Field. -- Prithee go
and tell the People within, that one of Amphitryon's Officers is come home.


Mer. I know nothing of your Office; but offer to stay a minute within these
Quarters, Mr. Officer, and I shall affront your Office.


Soc. I say, I belong to this House, and am Servant here.


Mer. Do You know what t'expect? If you ben't gone, I shall exalt your Worship to
the Honor --


Soc. Of what?


Mer. -- Of being carried home upo' Men's Shoulders; for I Will warrant ye past
walking, if I take a good Cudgel.


Soc. For all that, I affirm my self Servant to this House.


Mer. Mark me, you long for a sound Drubbing; and you sha'n't fail of it, if
you don't vanish immediately.


Soc. Do You pretend to keep me out of m' own House after such a Journey?


Mer. Your House, Sirrah?


Soc. Mine, I say.


Mer. Who Is your Master then?


Soc. Amphitryon, General of the Theban Forces, and Alcmena's Husband.


Mer. Hah, What Is your Title pray?


Soc. Socia in our Language, Son of Davus.


Mer. You Are come in an ill Hour, Monster of Impudence, with a parcel of mixed
Knaveries, and patched Lies.


Soc. I came indeed wi' patched Clothes, but not Lies.


Mer. That Is another Lie, Sirrah, you came wi' your Feet, not wi' your Clothes.


Soc. Right, seriously.


Mer. Now, seriously, take that for your Lie. [Beats him.


Soc. In Troth seriously, but I will not.


Mer. Troth seriously, it is all one; and Faith seriously, it is fixed, and not
as you please, Sirrah. [Beats him again.


Soc. Good Sir, be civil.


Mer. Have ye the Impudence to say you're Socia, when I am he?


Soc. O, I Am killed.


Mer. This is but a part of your Entertainment. -- Who Is Servant are ye now,
Sirrah?


Soc. Yours undoubtedly; for your Fists have paid the Purchase. -- [Mercury
beats him still.] Murder! Good Neighbors help!


Mer. Do You bawl, Jail-bird? -- Speak, Sirrah, what came ye here for?


Soc. To cut out Work for your Fists, Sir.


Mer. Who are ye?


Soc. I tell ye, Socia, Amphitryon's Servant.


Mer. You Will have the more for that nonsensical Lie. I say, Sirrah, I Am Socia,
and you not.


Soc. Would to Heaven you were; then you should be soundly beaten, and I not.
[Softly.


Mer. partly hearing.] Dog, do you mutter!


Soc. I Am as mute as a Fish.


Mer. Who Is your Master, I say?


Soc. Who you please, Sir.


Mer. And your self; what Name have ye now?


Soc. None, till you please to bestow one.


Mer. I understood ye, Socia, Amphitryon's Servant.


Soc. 'Twas my Mistake, Sir; I would have said, Sociated to Amphitryon's Service.


Mer. I was certain we had never another Servant of that Name. -- You Have lost
the Use of your Senses, --


Soc. Would you had lost the Use of your Fists. [Aside.


Mer. For I Am that Socia you personate.


Soc. Truce a little, Good Sir; and let us have a civil Word or two, without
Blows.


Mer. I agree to a Suspension of Arms, if you have any thing to propose.


Soc. Not a Dram of Proposals till the Peace be signed, since you're so
plaguely armed wi' those Cuffers.


Mer. Speak boldly, I Will not hurt ye.


Soc. May a Body trust ye?


Mer. Do You question it, Sirrah?


Soc. Suppose ye deceive me?


Mer. Then Mercury shall revenge it on Socia.


Soc. Now observe, Sir. Since I Have leave to speak freely, I am Socia,
Amphitryon's Man.


Mer. At it again, Sirrah? [Holding up his Fist.


Soc. Since the Peace is made, and the Articles signed; I affirm it to be true.


Mer. Rogue, look to your self.


Soc. You may act, Sir, as you please, as long as you are so plaguely armed wi'
those Cu^ers. Do your best, but, by Hercules, I ll not bate y'an Ace in this
Point.


Mer. As long as I Am here, you mustn't think to make me any thing but Socia.


Soc. Nor, Faith, shall you make me any thing but Amphitryon's Servant. I Will be
sworn, the^e's never another S^cia in our Family, that attended the General
in the Army.


Mer. The Fellow's possessed wi' Madness.


Soc. That Is your Worships Distemper. -- [He walks, and studies by himself.]
What a murrain, Am not I Amphitryon's Man Socia? Didn't I come to Night on
Shipboard from the Euboan Port? Was Not I sent ^ither by my Lord? Don't I stand
before our own doors? Is Not this a Lanthorn in my hand? Don't I speak? Am not I
awake? Was It not I soundly drubb'd just now? In good Faith, I was; and am most
sensible o'that, witness my poor Chops. -- But why aduce do I stand fooling
thus? Why don't I get into our House? [He makes for the Door.


Mer. getting between.] How, your House?


Soc. Certainly true.


Mer. Certainly a Lie from the Beginning to the Ending. I Am Amphitryon's Man
Socia; for this Night our Vessel returned from the Euboan Bay. We Took King
Pterelas's Town by Storm, entirely defeated the Teleboans, and Amphitryon cut
off Pterelas's Head with his own Hand.


Soc. aside.] I can scarce believe my Senses, when I hear him relate Things so:
Troth he remembers every Thing ad unguem. -- [To him] But hark ye, Sir, what
was Amphitryon Presented withal?


Mer. The Golden Cup that Pterelas used to drink in.


Soc. aside] He has hit it again. -- [To him.] But where is the Cup now, Sir?


Mer. In a Basket, sealed with Amphitryon's Signet.


Soc. What are the Arms?


Mer. Sol rising, with his fiery Chariot. -- Do You lie upo' the Catch, Rascal?


Soc. aside.] He has mawl'd me with his Arguments, and I must provide me
another Name. How a fire could he see all this? I shall trap him at last; for
the Devil's in him if he tells what I did by my self in the Tent, for not a Soul
was there besides. -- [To him.] If you be that individual Socia, How did you
pass away your Time in the Tent when both Armies were engaged? -- Tell me but
that, and I yield.


Mer. There stood a Pipe of Wine; from whence I filled out a Jack, --


Soc. Exactly right.


Mer. And swallowed it down pure, as it came from the Grape.


Soc. O the Devil! He must have hid himself in that Jack: Certainly so; for I
drunk it without a drop of Water in it. [Aside.


Mer. What now? Are ye satisfied you're none of Socia?


Soc. Will you prove it?


Mer. What need of Proofs, when I Am he?


Soc. By Jove I Am he, and it is as true as the Gospel.


Mer. By Mercury, Jove will not believe ye a Tittle: And I Am sure he will take my
Word, sooner than your Oath.


Soc. Who am I, if I ben't Socia? Answer me that.


Mer. When I Am weary of being Socia, you may be Socia again. But, now I Am he,
I Will beat ye to mummy, you scoundrel Dog, if you don't troop off.


Soc. looking round about him.] By the Mackins, now I view his Phiz well,
methinks I see the very same Air and Mien I Have often seen in a Glass, he is so
damnably like me. The very same Hat, and Coat, for all the World; he has a
plaguey Resemblance of me. Let me see, Calves, Feet, Height, Baldness, Eyes,
Nose, Teeth, Lips, Jaws, Chin, Beard, Neck; in fine, right me all over. If his
Back were but as well laced with some certain Scars, two Pease could not be more
alike. -- But now I recollect my self, know I Am undoubtedly the same Person as
ever, know my Master, know this House, find that I Have my Wit and Senses about
me, I Will be hanged if I believe a Word of this Stuff. I Will knock at a Venture.
[Offers at the Door.


Mer. Whither go ye, Sirrah?


Soc. Home.


Mer. Do; and were you mounted on Jove's Chariot in its full Career, it
shou'dn't protect ye.


Soc. May Not I deliver a civil Message to my Lady?


Mer. To your own Lady, what you please; but no Message to mine. If ye once
provoke me, I Will make all your Bones rattle in your Hide.


Soc. I Will use my Legs first. -- [Going off, the while he is speaking the
rest.] Heavens have mercy upo' me! Where should I lose this Shape of mine. Did I
leave my self behind me, or forget to take my self along wi' me to the
Campaign? for, troth, this Fellow has got all the Shape I ever had. He has
erected my Statue i'my Lifetime; I Will be sworn no body will honor me so much
after I Am dead and gone. -- Well, I Will beat it back upo' the Hoof to my Lord,
and tell him this strange Story. If he disowns me (as Heaven grant he may) I Will
immediately throw off my Slaves Habit, and take upo' me that of a Freeman of
the Town.


Exit Socia. SCENE II.
Mercury addresses himself to the Spectators, and goes on with the Prologue.
SO, Gentlemen, Things go rarely, and prosperously on our side. I Have removed the
greatest Obstacle, so that my Father may securely reap the Fruit of his
Cuckoldom. -- Now when this Fellow comes to tell his Master, That his Servant
Socia drive him from the Door, he will take it for a damned Lie, and believe the
Rogue was never there, as he ordered him. Thus shall I bring them two, and the
whole Family, into nothing but Mistakes and Confusion, till my Father have had
his Belly full of his Mistress. But at last they will come to a right
Understanding of all Things, and Jove will bring his Mistress into as great
Favor with her Husband as ever. For certainly, Amphitryon will be in a plaguey
fret, and call his Wife Whore; but my Father will reconcile all Differences.

Now, Gallants, for something about Alcmena; for I Have said little of her yet.
This Day shall she be brought to Bed of two Boys, one of ten Months growth, the
other of seven; the first by Amphitryon, the second by Jupiter; so the youngest
Child will have the Superiority by his Father, and the eldest the Inferiority by
his. Do You comprehend the Mystery? -- However my Father's so tender of Alcmena,
he will have both come together, and both the painful Labors at one Lying-in; and
likewise to prevent all Suspicions of Scandal on her side, and Cuckoldom on
his. It Is true, Amphitryon, as I said before, will know all. But granting that,
no body will think the worse of Alcmena for it; for it is beneath a Deity to
suffer a poor Mortal to bear the Blame of his own failings. -- Hold, I must
shorten my Story; the Door goes; and here comes Amphitryon in Effigy, with
Alcmena, a Wife he has taken up at Usury.

SCENE III.
Enter Jupiter in Amphitryon's Shape, with Alcmena in her Night-Dress, big with
Child; attended with Lights, etc. Iup. Farewell, my dear Alcmena: Pray be
careful of the main Chance, and don't worry your self; you see you're gone your
full time. I Am obliged to leave ye now, and prithee take care of the bringing
up the Child.


Alc. What pressing Affairs can ye have, my Lord, to drive ye away in such
haste?


Iup. Upon Honor, it is n't your Company, or any thing in the House I Am weary
of: But when a General's from his Army, Disorders will follow soone^ than good
Discipline.


Mer. Troth, my Daddy's the cleveres^ Impostor. How sweetly he smuggles the
Lady? [Aside.


Alc. Yes, indeed, I find what a wonderful Kindness ye have for your poor Wife.


Iup. Why, I love ye more than any other of your Sex; will not that satisfy ye?


Mer. Faith, Father mine; if your Lady should find out the Cheat, I Will be sworn
you would gladly change your Ioveship to be plain Amphitryon. [Aside.


Alc. I Would rather experience your Love, than fancy't. You leave me before you
were well warm in your Bed. You came to me at Midnight, and presently after,
you're gone; Is this kindly done?


Mer. aside.] I Will to her, and tickle her up as my Father has done. -- [To
Alcmena bowing.] As I hope for Mercy, Madam, I believe there is not a Man under
the Cope of Heaven so desperately loves his Lady, and so desperately lang^ishes
as my Lord does.


Iup. Rascal, I know your Tricks, Out of my sight. How dare you meddle in our
Business, Rogue? If I take my Cane, I Will --


Alc. Let him alone, my Dear.


Iup. Speak another Word, Sirrah --


Mer. My first wheadling Complement succeeded but very indifferently. [Aside.


Iup. For what you complain of, my Dear, in troth you must not be angry wi' me.
I left my Army Incognito, to fly to your Embraces, and be the first kind
Messenger of my Fortune in the Public, and of all that passed abroad. Could I
have done this if I loved after an ordinary rate?


Mer. Just as I said. How this stroaking chears her. [Aside.


Iup. I must return Incognito too; for if I Am once discovered, the censorious
World will say, I much preferred a Wife to the Public.


Alc. It Is a doleful Departure for your Alcmena. [Weeps.


Iup. Pray don't spoil those pretty Eyes. I Will be back in a moment.


Alc. 'Twill be a long time to that moment.


Iup. It Is wi' vast Regret I go, and part from ye thus.


Alc. So it seems, indeed, by your coming and parting in the same Night.


Iup. Why do hold me? It Is high time now; for I must be out of the City before
Daylight. IN the mean time I present ye wi' this Golden Cup, the Reward of my
Success, and the very same that Pterelas drunk in, whom I slew wi' my own hand.
[Gives her a Golden Cup.


Alc. Now you keep close to your old Kindness. -- By Heaven, a noble Gift,
worthy of the Giver.


Mer. bowing.] A noble Gift indeed, and worthy of the Receiver.


Iup. At it again, Rascal? Can I never beat y' into better Manners?


Alc. Pray, my Lord, ben't angry wi' poor Socia upo' my Account.


Iup. I can deny you nothing.


Mer. This same Gallanting has put him damnably out of Humor. [Aside.


Iup. Do want any thing else, my Love?


Alc. Nothing, my Lord, but to have ye love me absent as well as present.


Mer. Let Us be going, Sir; it is just Break of Day.


Iup. Go you besote, Socia; I Will follow immediately.


Exit Mercury. SCENE IV.
Jupiter, Alcmena, and Attendants. Iup. Have any thing more to ask?


Alc. Yes, my Lord, your speedy Return.


Iup. It shall be. -- I Will be wi' ye again before y'expect me: mean time, pray
be satisfied.


Exit Alcmena and Attendants. SCENE V.
Jupiter alone. Iup. looking up.] Now, Goddess Night, who has waited so long, I
dismiss ye. Make room for the Day, to cherish Mortals with a bright and
glorious Sunshine. -- [Going off.] This has been a longer Night than ordinary;
I Will make the Day the shorter, and set one against the other to bring Things to
rights again. -- I Will follow Mercury.


Exit Jupiter. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Amphitryon and Socia at the farther End of the Stage, with several
Prisoners bound. Amp. entering.] COme Sirrah, follow me. [Angrily.


Soc. That I will, and close at your Heels.


Amp. You Are the most villainous Rascal!


Soc. Why, good Sir?


Amp. For venting such Stuff, that neither is, was, or can be true.


Soc. Marry, Sir, you keep to your laudable Custom of never believing your own
Servants.


Amp. How, Sirrah, what Custom? -- By Heaven I shall snip that rascally Tongue
o'yours.


Soc. I Am your Slave, Sir, and you may use me according to your Pleasure and
Convenience. But I Have spoke nothing but Truth, and you cannot make me eat my
Words.


Amp. You impudent Dog, didn't ye say you were at home and here at the same
time?


Soc. 'Twas nothing but truth, Sir.


Amp. The Devil! -- take ye, or I Will kick ye to him.


Soc. I Am in your Power, and must bear it if ye do.


Amp. Slave, dare ye put Tricks upo' your Master? Have ye the Impudence to face
down that which never Man saw, or can see? Is It possible for a Man to be here
and there at the same time?


Soc. Faith, Sir, just as I tell ye.


Amp. The Devil lie ye for a Rogue.


Soc. How have I deserved this at your hands?


Amp. How, Rascal, when you make me your Maygame?


Soc. If I did, I should justly deserve it. But really, Sir, it is no Lie; I
tell ye nothing but plain matter of Fact.


Amp. The Fellow's drunk, I think.


Soc. Troth, would I were.


Amp. You Have that Wish already.


Soc. I, Sir?


Amph. Yes, you. -- Where ha'ye been drinking?


Soc. Not a drop have I drunk to day.


Amp. What manner o'Man was this --


Soc. Troth I told ye ha'f a score times. -- I say, Sir, I Socia am now at
home; (do you mind?) and the same numerical Socia am here too. Now, Sir, I think
I Have made Things as plain and clear as the Sun.


Amp. Plague! -- Out of my Sight.


Soc. Why, Sir?


Amp. You Are infected.


Soc. Why do you think so? Truly, Sir, I Am pretty well in Body and Mind, thank
God.


Amp. As sure as you're a Rogue, I shall make ye a little worse in Body and
Mind, i^ I get once well in. -- Come along, Rogue, you that abuse your Master
wi' such Stuff as would make a Dog sick to hear it. Because you shamefully
neglected your Business, you come impudently to jeer me with impossible and
unheard of Stories, you Rascal. But I Will have every Lie marked out upon your
Back.


Soc This, Sir, is the greatest Plague in the World to a good Servant; whenever
he tells his Master the Truth, he must have it ramm'd down his Throat.


Amp. How a plague could this be? Give me some reasonable Proof of your being
here and at home too: I Would fain see that.


Soc. Really, Sir, I am both here and there too. A Body would think it plaguey
strange. But, I Will swear, it cannot be more strange to you, than it is to me, Sir.


Amp. How do you mean?


Soc. I only say it is not more strange to you than me. For let me be hanged, if
this same Me-Socia believed a word of it, till that same I-Socia beat it into
my Head. He gave me such a particular Account of all that passed in the Army
this Campaign; then he had got my very Shape and Name, so that two drops of
Water are not more alike than the other I to Me. -- For when you, my Lord, sent
me betimes in the Morning from the Port, --


Amp. What then?


Soc. -- I came to the Door a good while before I arrived.


Amp. 'Sdeath what Stuff's this? -- Are ye quite mad?


Soc. Just as you see me, Sir.


Amp. The Fellow's bewitched, and fallen into some ill hands, since I sent him
away.


Soc. Ill hands indeed; for their Fists have mauled me confoundedly. [Shews his
Face swelled.


Amp. Who beat ye so?


Soc. The Other I beat Me.


Amp. Sirrah, answer me nothing but what I ask. -- First let me know who this
same Socia is.


Soc. He Is your Servant.


Amp. Mine? I Have one too many by you; but never had another Servant Socia since
I was born.


Soc. But now, Sir, I promise to show ye another Socia as soon as you get in, a
Servant of yours, Son of Davus, of my Shape, and my Age. In fine, your Socia's
become double.


Amp. These are all Riddles. -- But saw ye my Wife?


Soc. I was not permitted to enter the House.


Amp. What hindered ye?


Soc. That same He-Socia I Have been talking of; he who so belabour'd me.


Amp. What He-Socia do ye mean?


Soc. I tell ye I. How often must I tell it?


Amp. Hark ye, Friend, have not you been sleeping the while?


Soc. Not a Wink, Sir.


Amp. Perhaps you saw this Socia in a Dream?


Soc. I never used to dream out my Master's Commands. Awake, I saw him; awake,
I see you; awake, I talk; and awake I was, when that waking Dog beat me.


Amp. What Dog?


Soc. That I-He-Socia, I tell ye. Lord, cannot ye understand me?


Amp. How a plague should a Man understand this ridiculous Banter?


Soc. You Will immediately know --


Amp. What?


Soc. -- Your other Socia, my Partner.


Amp. Follow me then; for first I Will have this Business cleared. -- See that all
Things be brought from our Vessel as I ordered.


Soc. I Am as diligent and careful to obey you as possible. I have not swallowed
your Commands wi' my Drink.


Amp. Pray Heaven, all this don't prove true.


SCENE II.
Enter Alcmena, attended with Thessala, on the other side of the Stage. Alc.
How poor and short are this Life's Pleasures, if once compared with the Sorrows
we endure? It Is Man's Destiny, and Heavens Pleasure, to mix our Joys with bitter
Potions; and for some few Hours of Satisfaction, we meet with Ages of Ills and
Troubles. I now experience it, and my self's a plain Witness of this: How short
was this last Pleasure! I had the Privilege of one Nights Company with my Lord;
and then, snatched away before the Morning. Methinks I Am the most desolate of
Widows in the Absence of the Man I love 'bove all the World; and his Departure
carries more of my Soul away, than his Arrival brought with it: However this
joys my Heart, to see him Victorious over his dreadful Foes, and laden with
Honors; it is that I live upon. He Is gone; but since he returns with deserved
Glory, I Will patiently bear his Absence, with all the Firmness and Courage of a
Woman; and shall think my Troubles well rewarded, in a Husband crowned with the
Name of Conqueror. For Valor's of all Rewards the greatest; preferable to all
Things else; the sole Defender and Protector of our Liberties, Safeties, Lives,
Estates, Parents, Countries, and Children. Valor carries all Virtues in it
self, and all Perfections still attend the Valiant Man.


Amp. Heavens! how welcome shall I be to my Alcmena's Arms, where both our
Loves are mutual; especially after such a famous Victory, beyond all
Expectations, routing 'em in the first Battle by my own Command and Conduct.
Certainly she will be very impatient for my Return.


Soc. How, Sir? Do You think my Spouse will not be every whit as impatient for mine?


Alc. discovering them.] O, my Lord's come!


Amp. Keep close, Sirrah.


Alc. But why should he come back, when he seemed in such haste? Was it only a
Trial? If his Design be to see how I could relish his Departure, truly he shall
be welcome however.


Soc. starting back.] O, good Sir, we had better return to our Vessel.


Amp. Why so?


Soc. We shall have nothing to eat here.


Amp. How came that into your Head?


Soc. Because Dinner's over already.


Amp. How so?


Soc. Why there is your Lady has dined, by her Belly.


Amp. Po, Blockhead, I left her wi' Child when I went to the Campaign.


Soc. Then woe to poor Socia.


Amp. What Is the matter?


Soc. I Am come home in the nick of time to be worried to death with drawing
Water for her Bath; for, according to your Account, she is just upon laying down.


Amp. Pluck up a good Heart.


Soc. Do ye know what a Heart I Have got? For if once I begin to manage the
Bucket, Faith, Sir, I Am the very'st Rogue upon Earth, if I don't draw out the
Hearts blood of the Well.


Amp. Come along, I Will have another for that Employment; fear nothing.


Alc. I think, I shall better show my Respects if I go and meet him.


[Here they meet, and join Discourse.] Amp. embracing Alcmena.] Oh, how I Am
charmed to find my Alcmena in these longing Arms! whom I count beyond
Comparison in Thebes, and the World counts a Pattern of all Virtue. -- How has't
been wi' ye, all this time? Did not ye long for my Return, my Dear?


Soc. I see no wonderful Signs of longing. I Am sure no body can out-fawn a Dog.
[Aside.


Amp. I Am extremely glad to find ye so well, just upon your lying down.


Alc. In the Name of Goodness, my Lord, why should you play upon me thus? You
complement as if you had not seen me lately, but were just come from the Army;
and accost me like one long absent from his Wife.


Amp. True indeed; till now I had no sight of ye.


Alc. What makes ye say so?


Amp. It Is my Custom to speak Truth.


Alc. You don't do well to break so good a Custom. But is it for a Trial of my
Love? -- Raillery apart; why so soon returned? Was it some ill Omen, or
Weather, that stayed your going to your Army, as you lately told me?


Amp. Lately! How lately could that be?


Alc. Have ye any Design in that Question? -- Very lately, just now, but a
moment since.


Amp. Pray how is it possible, as you say, to be so lately, and but a moment
since?


Alc. Do You think, my Lord, I Would so meanly trifle as you do, when you pretend you
were not here, and left me but just now?


Amp. She seems much discomposed. [Aside to Socia.


Soc. A little Patience, Sir, till she has slept out her sleep.


Amp. Do You dream with your Eyes open?


Alc. No, by my Soul, I Am thoroughly awake; and without dreaming, tell you all
that passed: For I saw ye both, this Morning before Daylight.


Amp. At what Place?


Alc. Your own House.


Amp. I never was there.


Soc. Do'nt be too positive, Sir; our Vessel, perhaps, brought us from the
Port, and we all asleep.


Amp. Have you got into the same Vein too? [Angrily.


Soc. What would y'ha'me do, Sir? Don't ye know the old Saying, Cross a Madman,
and he is the Devil; humor him, and it is as good as Physic.


Alc. Hah, Rogue! --


Amp. Truly it is but reasonable to show some Anger, since she ga' me so cold a
Welcome. [Aside to Socia.


Soc. You Would as good piss in a Be Hive.


Amph. Hold your Tongue. -- Alcmena, answer me one Question.


Alc. What Question? Let Us hear't.


Amp. Is It Madness or Pride that has infected ye?


Alc. How came such a Question into your Head, my Lord?


Amp. Because in my former Journeys y'us'd to receive me as all other virtuous
Wives do: But now I meet with a quite different Welcome.


Alc. As I hope to live, yesterday I received y' as a Wife ought, my Lord;
inquired after your Health, pressed your hand, and met ye with a Kiss.


Soc. Did ye speak to my Lord yesterday, Madam?


Alc. And to you too, Socia.


Soc. My Lord, I was in hopes of your Honor's having an Heir; but of my
Conscience your Lady's not big with Child.


Amp. With what then?


Soc. With Fool.


Alc. Truly I Have no such Distemper, as I hope for a safe Deliverance. -- But if
my Lord would but gi' ye your due, Mr. Fortune Teller, you would soon reap the
mischievous Fruits of your saucy Predictions.


Soc. Yes, Madam, there are Fruits too, of Lying-in Women, and Fruits too, to
strengthen their Hearts, and keep 'em from swooning.


Amp. You see me here yesterday?


Alc. I say I did, if you must needs have it so often.


Amp. In a Dream, perhaps.


Alc. Nay, we were both awake as possible.


Amp. Mercy upon me!


Soc. What Is the matter, Sir?


Amp. My Wife's mad.


Soc. She Is melancholy, and that is the high Road to it.


Amp. When found ye the rise of this Disease, Alcmena?


Alc. Upo' my Soul I never was better, and sounder in my Life.


Amp. Why then do you pretend to have seen me yesterday, when I put into Port but
last night? There supped, and lodged all night in the Vessel. I never set foot
in Thebes since the Teleboan Expedition, till now we conquered.


Ac. 'Twas me you supped with, and me you lay with.


Amp. What say ye?


Alc. Nothing but truth.


Amp. By Heaven not i'this; in other things, I know not.


Alc. Betimes in the morning you went to your Army.


Amp. How can all this be?


Soc. Very right; she tells her Dream as it is fresh in memory. -- But, Madam,
Jove, the Disperser of such Prodigies, ought to have had his Cake, or his
Incense offered this Morning. [Ieeringly.


Alc. How sawcily the Fellow snaps me up; and you suffer him.


Amp. Leave your prating, Sirrah. -- You say I left ye betimes in the morning?
[To Alcmena.


Alc. Who else could tell me the Particulars of the Battle?


Amp. And heard ye of that too?


Alc. Why truly 'twas you told me how you stormed their chief Town, and slew
King Pterelas wi' your own hands.


Amp. I tell ye so?


Alc. Yes, you; Socia heard ye.


Amp. Did you hear me tell any such thing, Socia?


Soc. Where should I hear't?


Amp. Nay, let her tell ye that.


Soc. Troth, Madam, I never was present at any such Relation, as I know of.


Alc. No wonder if he says as you would have him.


Amp. Come hither, Socia; look of my Face --


Soc. I do, Sir.


Amp. Now speak the truth without the least Flattery. Did you hear me tell her
one word of what she pretends?


Soc. Bless me! have you your Senses too, and ask such a Question? Faith, Sir,
this is the first time I saw ye together.


Amp. Now, Madam, do you hear what he says?


Alc. Yes indeed, and know it to be false.


Amp. What, believe neither Servant nor Husband?


Alc. Neither; because of such Evidence, and the certainty of what I affirm.


Amp. D'y'affirm my Arrival yesterday?


Alc. Do You deny your Departure this Morning?


Amp. I do; and protest this is my first Appearance.


Alc. Good now, and you will deny you ga' me the Golden Cup too, which you say
was there presented ye?


Amp. Upon Honor, I neither gave it nor said it. It Is true, I was so designed,
and am still. -- But pray who told ye of that?


Alc. Your self was both Teller and Giver.


Amp. Hold, hold, I beseech ye. -- This is amazing, Socia, that she should know
of my being presented wi' this Cup. Except you saw her, and told her all.


Soc. Let me be hanged if I e're told, or saw her till now.


Amp. What Woman's that? [Looking on Thessala.


Alc. Would y' have the Cup produced?


Amp. By all means.


Alc. It shall then. -- Thessala, step into my Chamber for the Golden Cup my
Lord ga'me this Morning.


Exit Thessala. SCENE III.
Amphitryon, Alcmena, Socia, and Prisoners. Amp. Come this way, Socia. -- [They
walk a little on one side.] Really, if she has the Cup, the Mystery will be ten
times greater to me.


[Socia takes out a Casket from under his Cloak.] Soc. Can ye suppose that,
when I Have got it here in the Casket sealed wi' your own Signet.


Amp. Is the Seal whole?


Soc. Look, Sir, to be sure. [Holding it up.


Amp. Just, as I signed it. [Looking.


Soc. Pray, Sir, must we deal wi' my Lady as a Person cracked brain?


Amp. IN faith, and so we had need. For upo' my word she is overrun with
Extravagancies.


SCENE IV.
To them Thessala with a Golden Cup. Alc. What need of Words? Here Is
Demonstration! look ye.


Amp. Pray let us see it. [He takes it out and looks on it.


Alc. Come, view it well, you who so obstinately deny matter of Fact; and be
convinced before all the World. -- Is n't it the same you were presented with?


Amp. O Heavens! Where are my Eyes? The very same upon Honor. I Am all in
Confusion, Socia. [Returns the Cup.


Soc. Marry, here must be damnable Witchcraft, or the Cup's here still.


Amp. Come, break open the Casket.


Soc. Why should I break it open? the Seal's firm; and makes well for us. --
You, my Lord, has brought forth another Amphitryon; I, another Socia; now, if
the Cup has engendered too, we are all three double.


Amp. I Will have it broke open, and looked into.


Soc. Hold, Sir, look of the Seal once more, that afterward I may not be
brought in for Burglary. Amphitryon looks.


Amp. Open it quickly; she will run us down, and think us mad else.


Alc. Where think ye I should have this, but from you who ga' me't?


Amp. That Is my business to enquire into. [Socia opens it.


Soc. starting.] Heaven have mercy upo' my Soul!


Amph. What ails the Fellow?


Soc. The Cup's flown out of the Nest.


Amp. What say ye?


Soc. Nothing but truth.


Amp. An unlucky truth to you, if it be gone.


Alc. Why here it is apparently. [Holding it up.


Amp. Who gave't ye?


Alc. The same who asks the Question.


Soc. You're upo' the catch, my Lord. You stole slyly out of the Ship some
back-way, with the Cup, presented it to my Lady, then privately sealed up the
Casket again.


Amp. Hah! you sooth her in her Madness too. -- But once more, do y' affirm I
was here yesterday?


Alc. I do; and, at our first Enterview, saluted each other, and met with a
Kiss.


Amp. aside.] I could have spared that Kindness. -- [To her.] Proceed.


Alc. You bathed your self.


Amp. What next?


Alc. Sat down at the Table.


Soc. Ha, ha, best of all! now Catechize her, Sir.


Amp. Don't interrupt, Sirrah. -- On wi' your Story.


Alc. Supper was served up, we sat down, and supped both together.


Amp. At the same Table?


Alc. Yes.


Soc. Shame on it! I don't like that Entertainment.


Amp. Leave fooling. -- We supped together; what then?


Alc. You complained o'drowsiness; Supper was taken away, and together we went
up to Bed.


Amp. Where did you lay?


Alc. IN the same Chamber and Bed wi' your self.


Amp. Ruined then!


Soc. What Is the matter, Sir?


Amp. Stabbed to the Heart?


Alc. What ails ye, my Lord?


Amp. Let me alone. [Turning away.


Soc. What Is done to ye, Sir?


Amp. I Am a miserable Man; basely dishonored by my Wife in m' Absence.


Alc. In good earnest, my Lord, why this hard Censure from your Mouth?


Amp. Am I your Lord? Prithee don't gi' me a wrong Title.


Soc. A very pretty Business; if she has taken away his Manhood, and made him a
Lady. [Aside.


Alc. What have I done, to make y' use me thus?


Amp. You declare your Crimes, then ask me how you have offended.


Alc. Is It an Offense to lie wi' m' own Husband?


Amp. Wi' me? Was there ever such prodigious Impudence? If you had lost all Sense
of Honor, sure you might have borrowed of your Neighbors.


Alc. Our Family was never guilty of such Crimes; and if my Honor's Ruin by
your Aim, you will lose your Labor.


Amp. Bless my Soul! -- Sure you know me, Socia.


Soc. Pretty well, Sir.


Amp. Didn't I sup last Night in your Vessel at the Euboan Port?


Alc. I Have s^fficient Evidence to prove what I say.


Amp. Evidence, who are they?


Alc. Evidence I say.


Amp. What will they give in? -- But, one's sufficient; for, here was no body
but Socia.


Soc. Marry, I don't know what to make of all this, unless there be another
Amphitryon, who in your Absence takes care of your Business, and your Lady's
too. I thought it plaguey strange to find a Deputy Socia* but in faith a second
Amphitryon's a greater wonder. Certainly some Enchantments have been practiced
upo' your Lady.


Alc. By Heaven, and by all that is good, which Oaths to me are all sacred, I
never gave to any Man but you, the least Liberty that could call my Honor in
question.


Amp. Heaven make it true.


Alc. I affirm it is, but in vain, since you will not believe.


Amp. You're a Woman, and swear too boldly.


Alc. Innocence ought to be bold, and to vindicate it self with a Confidence,
and Haughtiness.


Amp. Here Is Boldness enough.


Alc. No more than becomes Virtue.


Amp. We Have your word for that. [Ieeringly.


Alc. I don't, like others, esteem a little Dirt my Portion, but my Continency,
and Honor, my Moderating my Passions, my Fear of Heaven, Duty to my Parents,
Love to my Kindred, Obedience to my Husband, my liberal Bounty to the Good, and
my Care over the Virtuous.


Soc. In Faith, if all this be true, certainly she is the very Map of Innocence.


Amp. I Am so strangely confounded, I scarce know where I am.


Soc. Certainly you must be my Lord Amphitryon still. But have a great care you
don't get into the new Fashion; for here is nothing but Metamorphoses since our
Arrival.


Amp. Madam, I Am resolved to search to the very bottom of this Business.


Alc. Do It a Gods Name.


Amp. What say ye? -- Answer me to this: Suppose I bring from the Port, your
Kinsman Naucrates, who came over in the same Vessel wi' me? If he disproves all
your Assertions, what Treatment do you deserve then? What Plea will ye find to
save your Divorce and Portion?


Alc. If I fail in my part, I Will urge none.


Amp. Agreed. -- Socia, Conduct these Prisoners into the House. -- I Will away to
our Vessel, and bring home Naucrates. Exit Amphitryon.


SCENE V.
Alcmena, Socia, Thessala, and Prisoners. Soc. Now we are by our selves, Madam,
tell me seriously, whether I have not within Doors a Brother Socia, just like me
for all the World?


Alc. Out of my sight, Rascal, who art fit for nothing but thy Master.


Soc. I Will vanish at your Commands. Beckons the Prisoners.


Alc. Bless me! '^is very strange it should come into my Lords H^d t'accuse me
thus wrongfully. Whatever the Matter be, my Cozen Naucrates will clear all.


Exeunt Omnes. The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Jupiter, addresses himself to the Audience, and goes on with the
Prologue. GEntlemen, I Am still Amphitryon, and have a Servant Socia; who, when
occasion serves, shall be Mercury again. My Lodgings are in the upper Garret,
where I Am Jove as often as I please. But when e're I come down, I change my
Garb, and become Amphitryon in a trice. -- It Is for your sakes, Gentlemen, I Am
come here now, to make the Comedy complete; and at the same time to protect
poor Alcmena's Honor against her Husbands false Accusations: For 'twould be a
piece of Baseness to suffer my Crimes to fall upon her Head. -- Now will I
reassume Amphitryon's Person, and once more put the grand Sham upo' the whole
Family: But then I Will clear all at last, assist Alcmena in due time, and at
once have her delivered of both mine and her Husbands Child, and that without
any pain. -- I ordered Mercury to be here immediately, and receive his
Commands. -- Now I Will go to her.


SCENE II.
Enter Alcmena at the other End of the Stage. Alc. to her self.] The House is
grown odious to m^ no^; since my Lord accuses me of Dishones^y, Shame and
Infamy. He denies plain Matters of Fact, and exclaims against me strangely; he
affirms what never was, and blames me for what I Am innocent of; after all,
thinks I Will tamely sit down and bear all. But as I Am a living Soul, he is
mistaken; for I Will not suffer the unjust Scandal of Whore: No, I Will part first,
unless he makes me ample Satisfaction, and swears he repents of his unjust
Accusation.


Iup. coming nigher.] That I must do in good earnest, if I ever hope for a kind
Reception. For seeing my Tricks fall heavy upon Amphitryon's Head, and my Love
proves injurious to this innocent Creature, I must expect some Anger and hard
Words for what I Am innocent of too. [Aside.


Alc. to her self.] Oh! here is the Person who accuses his poor Wife of Shame,
and Infamy.


[Here they meet, and join Discourse.] Iup. Madam, I Would willingly talk wi' ye.
-- [She turns from him.] Why do y'avoid me?


Alc. It Is my Nature to serve my Enemies so. [Angrily.


Iup. Bless me! your Enemies?


Alc. Yes truly, my Enemies; unless you will pretend this is false too. [She
frowns.


Iup. Now you're too nicely reserved. Offers to take her by the hand.


Alc. Pray let m' alone. -- I Am sure had y'either Wit or Discretion, or weren't
the greatest Fool in Nature, you would never hold Discourse, either in Mirth or
Earnest, with the Woman you believe, and declare a Strumpet.


Iup. If I did, you're never the worse, no not in my Opinion; therefore I
return to beg your Pardon, my Dear: For no Torment has been so great to me, as
the Apprehensions of your Displeasure. -- Why did name such a thing? I Will
clear all to ye. Upon Honor, I never mistrusted your Fidelity; I had only a
mind to try your Temper, and how you could bear what I said. 'Twas all but a
little harmless Raillery for sport-sake; ask Socia else.


Alc. But why was not my Cozen Naucrates brought hither, as you pretended, to
prove you never were here before?


Iup. What Is spoken in Jest, my Dear, ought never to be taken in Earnest.


Alc. I Am sure there was enough to make my heart ache.


Iup. Dear Alcmena, by this fair Hand, let me beg, and entreat ye, to forgive,
forget, and be pacified.


Alc. M' unspotted Honor's above all Scandal; and since you have owned me free
from all base Acts, I would be as free from all base Suspicions. -- Farewell,
keep your own Things, and let me have mine. Pray send my Women after me,
t'accompany me. [She weeps.


Iup. Sure y' ar' n't mad?


Alc. If you will not, I Will go alone; my Virtue shall be my Companion. [She
offers to go.


Iup. Pray stay; I propose this Oath to your Discretion. -- I do sincerely
believe my Wife to be most Virtuous; which if I falsify, may Jove's eternal
Wrath fall upon Amphitryon's head.


Alc. Ah, his Mercy rather.


Iup. I hope 'twill prove so; for I Am sure I Have truly sworn. -- Now I hope
you're satisfied.


Alc. I am.


Iup. I Am glad often. -- A Man in his lifetime, meets with a thousand such
Accidents as these, sometimes Pleasures, othertimes Troubles, by and by
Fallings out, then Reconciliations again. But whenever these little Love.
Quarrels happen, and those made up, the pleasing Passion's doubled.


Alc. Your ill Words might well have been spared, my Lord: but if you make me
such Satisfaction, I ought to forget all.


Iup. Pray order all my Sacred Vessels to be got ready, to perform those Vows I
made in the Campaign, if ever I got safe home again.


Ale. I will.


Iup. to the Servants within.] Send out Socia there; I must send him for
Blepharon, our Ships Pilot, t'invite him to Dinner. -- But not a mouthful shall
Socia get; and here'll be rare sport when I come to grapple with Amphitryon,
and send him packing. [Aside.


Alc. I wonder what he is talking of to himself. -- But the Door goes. -- Here
comes Socia.


SCENE III.
Enter Socia to them. Soc. O, my Lord, I Am ready: if there be occasion, lay
your Commands upo' me, and I Will obey 'em.


Iup. You're come in good time.


Soc. Pray, Sir, is it Peace or War between ye? -- I Am glad to see ye both in a
peaceable Posture, and it is a great Satisfaction to me. Truly it is a good
Servants Duty to sympathise with his Master, to be as he is, look as he looks,
be sad when he is sad, and merry when he is pleased. -- But, good Sir, tell me;
is there an amicable Accommodation?


Iup. You jeer now; you know we were only in laughing.


Soc. In laughing, said ye? IN faith, I thought ye never more in earnest in your
Life.


Iup. I Have satisfied her, and made my peace.


Soc. Excellent, in troth.


Iup, I Have a Sacrifice to make, according to my Vows.


Soc. I perceive as much.


Iup. You must go to Blepharon, the Pilot of our Ship, and desire him, from me,
to be here at the Ceremony, and take a Dinner wi' me.


Soc. I Will be back again before you can think me there.


Iup. Well, make haste then. Exit Socia.


SCENE IV.
Jupiter and Alcmena. Alc. Shall I go in, my Lord, and help to get Things ready
as occasion shall serve?


Iup. By all means, Madam; and prepare all Things as well as you can.


Alc. Come in as soon as you please, and you will find nothing out of order.


Iup. Very well* this is like a loving Wife.


Exit Alcmena. SCENE V.
Jupiter alone. So, both Lady and Servant over-reached, in taking me for
Amphitryon: Mistaken to some purpose! -- Now, immortal Socia, be ready at hand,
(you hear me though you're absent) and don't fail of finding some Artifice to
drive away Amphitryon when he comes: Remember't. I Would have ye trifle away the
time with him, while I conform my self to this same borrowed Wife. Don't
deceive me, but serve me according to my Intentions; and, besure be in
readiness to assist me, the mean time that I Am sacrificing to my self.


Exit Jupiter. The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Mercury at the further End of the Stage, running in great haste. ROom
here! Clear the way! All the World make room! and let not a Soul be so
desperately mad as to stop my Journey --


^le addresses himself to the Spectators, and finishes the Prologue. TRoth,
Gentlemen, why shou'dn't my Deityship gi' me the same Privilege of threatening
the Mob, when they stand in my way, as the Slaves in Comedies have? Their vast
haste is only for a Vessel safely arrived, an old Fellow upo' the fret, or so;
but I, Jove's Messenger, and sent by his Commands, have more reason to call for
room, and clear all before me. -- My Father he calls, I follow; his Word's my
Law, and I obey him with all the Submission of a dutiful Son. I sooth him in
his Wenching, encourage him, pimp for him, counsel him, and rejoice with him;
and whene're he receives a Pleasure, it proves ten times as much to me. Does he
long for a Girl? He does well and wisely to satisfy his longing; a Thing all
wise Men ought to observe, provided it be safe. Now it is my Father's Will and
Pleasure, to impose upon Amphitryon: Troth I do it nobly. -- I Will do it
immediately, Gentlemen, before your Faces. I Will whip on a Chaplet, pretend to
be drunk, and get my self above. From thence I Will send him with a Vengeance, as
soon as he approaches, and make him dry drunk, I Will warrant him. Next, Socia
must go to Pot; and be condemned for what I did. But what is that to me? It Is my
Business to obey my Father's Commands, and observe his Pleasure. -- [Looking
about.] O yonder comes Amphitryon. I shall make admirable Sport with him, if
you will please to favor me with your Silence. -- I Will in, and adorn my self
like a Drunkard: Then I Will ascend the House, and from thence do his Business
for him. Exit Mercury.


SCENE II.
Enter Amphitryon at the further End of the Stage, out of Breath. I could not
meet wi' Naucrates at his Vessel for my Life, nor at home neither, or so much
as a Soul in the City who had seen him. I Have been hunting for him through every
Alley, among the Armorers and Perfumers, at the Change, the Shambles, the
Race-Ground, the Markets, the Apothecaries and Barbers Shops, and at all the
Temples in Town. I Am wearied off my Legs, and no Naucrates to be found high nor
low. -- I Will e'e^ go home, and make a further Enquiry of my Wife, to find out
this Person that dishonored my Bed in my Absence. It Is more than Death to me
to let the Business thus hang in suspense. -- [He goes to his door, and tries
to open it.] They Have secured the Doors; very fine! This is like the rest of
their Tricks; but I Will make 'em hear me. -- [He knocks.] Open the Door! Soho,
within there! -- [Knocks louder.] No body to open the door?


SCENE III.
Mercury appears above, crowned with a Garland, and pretending to be drunk.
Mer. Who Is at the Door?


Amp. It Is I.


Mer. I; what I?


Amp. I, I tell ye. [Knocking again.


Mer. Sure the Devil and his Dam has possessed ye, for bouncing at our Doors.


Amp. How? --


Mer. So, as to make y' a poor Rogue as long as you have a day to live.


Amp. Socia!


Mer. That Is my Name indeed; except you think I Have lost my Memory. -- What Is
your Business?


Amp. Rascal, have ye the Impudence to enquire after my Business?


Mer. Yes marry have I. -- Why, you Blockhead, you have almost thrown the Door
off the Hinges. Do You think our Doors are made at the public Charge? -- What
makes ye stare so, Bufflehead? What Is your Business, I say? And who are ye?


Amp. Varlet, how dare y' ask such a Question? Thou cursed branded Rogue! As
I Am a living Soul, I Will drub ye to some tune for all your Sauciness?


Mer. Certainly you must have been a prodigal Dog in your time.


Amp. Why so, Sirrah?


Mer. Because in your old Days you're forced to come begging to me for a Beating.


Amp. Thy Back, Slave, shall soundly pay for all this.


Mer. Then I shall sacrifice --


Amp. What?


Mer. Something to your Worships Pa^e.


Amp. You, Jail-bird? -- If I live and do well, I Will hang y' up by the heels,
wi' your Skin stripped o'e^ your Ears, and make a Sacrifice of you. -- Out of
your Castle, you cursed Rascal.


Mer. Poor Phantom, do think to fright me wi' big Words? -- But if you don't
take ye to your Heels quickly, or offer to knock, or touch the Door with a
finger, I Will hit ye such a douce of the Chaps wi' this Tile, as shall dash out
your Teeth and Tongue together. [Holding up a Tile.


Amp Damned Villain, Will ye shut m' out of m' own House? and keep me from
knocking at m' own Door? I Will make the Doors fly presently. [He bounces at the
Door.


Mer. Do You persist, Sirrah?


Amp. Yes, Rogue.


Mer. Have at your Corpse then. He throws down a Tile upon him.


Amp. Cursed Slave, throw upo' your Lord and Master? If I do once lay hands on
ye, I Will make ye a perpetual Example to all Rogues.


Mer. Y' ought to get your Brains cleared, y' old Fool!


Amp. Why, Sirrah?


Mer. For calling me your Servant.


Amp. What if I do?


Mer. Then you would better be hanged; for I own no Master but Amphitryon.


Amp. aside, looking upon himself.] Sure I have not lost my Shape? I Am startled
at Socia's denying me. But I Will try him further. -- [To him.] Hark ye, tell me,
whom do I seem? Is It not plain that I Am Amphitryon?


Mer. Amphitryon? A Madman rather Didn't I tell ye, Old Fool, that your Brains
should be cleared, when y' asked others who you are. -- Begone, I advise ye, and
make no Disturbance here, for my Lord Amphitryon's just come home from the
Campaign, and retired with his Lady to Bed.


Amp. What Lady?


Mer. Alcmena.


Amp. But what Man is it?


Mer. How often must I tell ye? -- My Lord Amphitryon. Trouble us no further.


Amp. Who does he lie with?


Mer. Have a care your fooling wi' me don't bring an old House upo' your Head.


Amp. Nay, good Socia, tell me that.


Mer. Now you're a Peg lower. -- With Alemena then.


Amp. Lie with her?


Mer. Ay, I think so; and upon her too.


Amp. I Am a lost Man.


Mer. What he calls Loss, is clear Gains. For, to let out ones Wife, is as good
as farming out a barren piece of Ground to good Husbandmen. [Aside.


Amp. Socia!


Mer. What a plague mean ye by Socia?


Amp. Don't ye know me, Slave?


Mer. Yes, for an impertinent quarrelsome Coxcomb.


Amp. Still in that vein? -- Am not I thy Master Amphitryon?


Mer. Some Tom a Bedlam I think, not Amphitryon. How often must I tell ye so?
Would ye hea^'t once more? My Master Amphitryon's now at Bed with Alcmena. --
Stay here any longer, I Will send him out with a Devil to ye.


Amp. That I Would fain see. -- Pray Heaven my public Services ben't rewarded wi'
loss of Country, House, Wife, Family, and Shape too. [Aside.


Mer. I Will send him to ye; but in the mean time retire a while. For I believe
the Sacrifice is ready, and they will to Dinner presently. But if you chance to
be impertinent, you will go nigh to be sacrificed your self. [Mercury retires.


SCENE IV.
Amphitryon alone, walking discontentedly about his Door. Heavens bless me!
What strange Madness has seized upon our Family? What Prodigies have I seen
since this last Journey? Now I Am apt to credit the old Fable as true, that in
Arcadia, the Attick People were transformed into savage Beasts, so that their
Parents and Friends could never know 'em after. -- [He stands in amaze.


SCENE V.
Enter Blepharon and Socia at the further End of the Stage, talking together.
Ble. -- How Is this, Socia? It Is the strangest Story I ever heard. Did ye meet
with another Socia at the Door just of your own Shape, say ye?


Soc. Yes. -- But hark ye, Sir; since I Have spawned another Socia, and my Lord
another Amphitryon, who knows but you may another Belpharon. Would to Heaven
you were but as well convinced, at the Expense of a swelled Chaps, broken
Teeth, and an empty Belly as I am. For the other I-Socia, that am yonder,
swindg'd me, and made a poor Rogue of me.


Ble. Prodigious, I swear! -- But let us mend our Pace though, for yonder is his
Lordship staying for us; and truly my Stomach begins to wamble.


Amp. to himself.] -- But why do I mention Foreign Prodigies; since we are told
stranger Stories of our City's Founder? This mighty Prince, in quest of Europa,
slew the dreadful Monster, from whose scattered Teeth sprung Armed Troops, in
order ranged, where Brothers baited Brothers to Death. After all, Epirus saw
the same great Person and his Wife, crawl about in Serpents Shapes. All this
was great Jove's Will, and the Decree of Fate. The best of our Family have had
their noble Exploits rewarded with dire Misfortunes. It Is my Destiny, and I
must sustain these Shocks of Misery, and take off these unsufferable Potions.
--


Soc. Mr. Blepharon! [Fearfully.


Ble. What?


Soc. My Mind misgives me plaguely.


Ble. Why.


Soc. Look ye; yonder he walks before his Door, waiting like a Parasite to bid
his Lordship Good morrow.


Ble. It Is only to catch himself a Stomach.


Soc. Very ingeniously contrived: So he has secured his Doors for fear it
should come too soon.


Ble. You're in the jeering Vein.


Soc. Nor yet in the snarling. -- Observe a little, if you please. -- He Is
talking to himself, if I knew what it is; and I believe he is hammering at some
plaguey Business. -- I Will listen to his Discourse. -- Stand still a while.


Amp. to himself.] -- O how I fear that the Gods should bereave me of the
Honor of this Victory. I find my whole Family possessed with strange
Extravagancies. Then my Wifes Disloyalty and Infamy goes to the heart of me.
But the Cup quite startles me; for 'twas as well Sealed as possible. -- How can
it be? My Wife relates all the Particulars of the Battle, particularly that
Pterelas was slain by m' own Hands. -- Ho, ho, I Have found out the Trick at
last. This was all Socia's Roguery, who but just now had the Impudence to shut
m' out of my own House; --


Soc. overhearing.] So, my Name's brought up, but with a plaguey harsh Sound. --
Pray let us keep off a little while, till his whole Passion be discharged.


Ble. How you will for that.


Amp. to himself.] -- But could I but lay hands of that Rascal, I Would teach him
to deceive, abuse, and hector his own Master. [Very angrily.


Soc. Do You hear him, Sir?


Ble. Yes.


Soc. The Storm is just breaking upo' my Shoulders. -- We must go up to him;
for you know the old Saying --


Ble. I know nothing of your Sayings; but I Have a nigh guessing at your
Sufferings.


Soc. It Is an old Proverb, That an empty Belly and a slack Guest, makes one as
mad as the Devil.


Ble. Very true, we'll meet him immediately. -- My Lord Amphitryon!


Amp. It Is Blepharon's Voice. I wonder what is his Business wi' me. However, he
comes very luckily to be a Witness of my Wifes Baseness. -- [Here they meet and
join Discourse.] How now, Blepharon; what have you to say to me?


Ble. Has your Honor forgot you sent Socia to our Vessel this Morning t'invite
me to Dinner?


Amp. I never so much as thought often. -- But where is that Villain?


Ble. Who?


Amp. Socia.


Ble. There he is. [Pointing to him.


Amp. Where?


Ble. Just before ye. -- Don't ye see him?


Amp. Passion blinds me, and this Rascal has distracted me. -- I Will sacrifice
ye, you Dog; you mustn't think to escape. -- [Offers at Socia, Blepharon holds
him.] Prithee let me come at him.


Ble. Hear a little, I beseech ye.


Amp. Speak, I do hear. -- [He breaks loose, and strikes Socia.] Take that,
Sirrah.


Soc. Why this Usage, Sir? -- Have Not I been quick enough? -- If I had got
Pacolet's Horse, I could not have came sooner.


Ble. Hold, good Sir; we came as great a Pace as we could.


Amp. A Hare's or Snails pace, it is all one; I Am resolved to beat the Rascal as
long as he can stand. -- Imprimis, for the Housetop; -- Item, for the Tile; --
Item, for shutting me out; -- Item, for your mocking me; -- Item, for your
saucy Tongue; -- [Beats him at each word.


Ble. What has he done, Sir?


Amp. Done, quoth a? -- He shut the Door upo' me, and shamefelly abused me from
the Housetop.


Soc. I, Sir?


Amp. Yes you, who so insolently threatened me if I offered to touch the Door.
-- Dog, do you deny't too?


Soc. Why should n't I? Here Is a sufficient Witness to justify't; the same you
sent m' in all haste to invite to Dinner.


Amp. Who sent ye, Impudence?


Soc. You, Sir.


Amp. When, I pray?


Soc. Just now, very lately, but a moment since; when you and your Lady were
reconciled within.


Amp. The Fellow's bedevil'd sure.


Soc. I defy the Devil and all his Works. -- You ordered me to clean all the
Vessels, for you had a Sacrifice to offer: and then you sent me for this
Gentleman, to take a Dinner wi' ye.


Amp. Let me perish, if ever I set step within Doors, or sent him any where. --
Where did ye leave me last, Sirrah?


Soc. At home wi' your Lady; from whence I hastened to the Port, invited him as
y' ordered me, and here we are. I never had one Glimpse of ye since then.


Amp. Impudent Dog, wi' my Wife? -- Now you mustn't think t'escape my Hands.
[He offers at him.


Soc. avoiding him.] Mr. Blepharon! --


Ble. Good my Lord, spare him for my sake, and hear me.


Amp. Well, speak your Pleasure.


Ble. He has been telling of me wonderful strange Stories; and perhaps some
Juggler or Sorcerer, has bewitched your Family. Y' had best make a strict
Enquiry into the Business, and not use the poor Fellow like a Dog, before you
know a jot of the matter.


Amp. Come then, let us enter the House; I must have ye for a Witness in my Wifes
Case.


They move toward the Door. SCENE VI.
Enter Jupiter from Amphitryon's House. Jup. appearing at the Door.] Who Is that
made our Doors fly after such a vengenable rate? Who dares cause such a Riot
before my House? If I catch him, I Will sacrifice his Soul to the Teleboan
Ghosts. -- [He comes forward.] Nothing goes well wi' me to day. I left
Blepharon and Socia, to hunt up my Cozen Naucrates; him I cannot find high nor
low, and the other two I Have quite lost. -- O here they are. -- I Will go to 'em to
know how Matters stand.


Soc. O, Mr. Blepharon, that is my Master that comes from the House; it is this
is the Sorcerer.


Ble. Bless me! what do I see? -- This is not He, but the Other. And if this be
Amphitryon, troth that cannot, unless he be double.


Iup. Here Is Blepharon and Socia together: I Will begin with them first. -- [They
meet.] Are ye come at last, Socia? I begin to have a Stomach.


Soc. to Belpharon.] Didn't I tell ye this was the Sorcerer?


Amp. No, that is he, my Theban Neighbors, that has corrupted my Wife, and
heaped Dishonor upo' my Head.


Soc. to Jupiter.] My Lord, your Stomach may be empty, but I Am sure I Am come
wi' my Belly full of Cuffs.


Amp. Still in that Humor, Rascal.


Soc. to Amphitryon.] Get ye to the Devil, ye damned Sorcerer.


Amp. Call me Sorcerer, Slave? [Strikes him.


Iup. How dare you have the Insolence to beat my Servants?


Amp. Thine?


Iup. Yes Mine.


Amp. You lie, Sir?


Iup. Go in, Socia, and hasten the Dinner; while I make an Example of this
Fellow.


Soc. I go, Sir. -- [To himself, going off.] I fancy the Enterview between
This-Amphitryon and That-Amphitryon, will be just as civil as that between
I-Socia and Me-Socia. Well, the time they are squabbling abroad, I Will in and
ransack the Kitchen, lick all the Platters clean, and suck my sweet Face with
all the Liquor I can find.


Exit Socia. SCENE VII.
Jupiter, Amphitryon, and Blepharon. Iup. Dare ye gi' me the Lie?


Amp. Yes that I dare, thou cursed Corrupter of my Family.


Iup. For that Affront, I Will throatle ye. [Takes him by the Collar.


Amp. striking at him.] Oh, oh!


Iup. You should have had more Forecast then.


Amp. struggling.] Help, good Blepharon.


Ble. They Are so alike, I cannot tell which side to take; but I Will part the Fray
as well as I can. -- Pray One-Amphitryon, don't murder The Other Amphitryon. --
Good now let go.


Iup. Call ye him Amphitryon?


Ble. Why not? He was formerly single, now he is become double. Though indeed
you're the Man, he is still the Person: therefore pray let go.


Iup. letting go.] Well then. -- But in earnest do you take him for Amphitryon?


Ble. Faith both of ye.


Amp. Heavens bless me! Where got ye that Shape of mine? [Aside.] But I Will pump
him. -- Are you Amphitryon?


Iup. Are you he that deny't?


Amp. I am; since there is never another Amphitryon in all Thebes. --


Iup. But me, I grant ye; and, Blepharon, be you Judge.


Ble. I Will clear the Business by Tokens, if I can. -- Do you answer first then.
[To Amphitryon.


Amp. With all my heart.


Ble. What Orders did ye gi' me before the Battle wi' the Taphians?


Amp. When the Vessel was ready, not to part from the Stern a moment, --


Iup. -- Because if our Army were routed, I might secure m' own Retreat.


Amp. I ordered ye besides, to have an Eye to the great Bag of money I left wi'
ye.


Iup. How much?


Ble. Hold a little, Sir; that is a Question for me to ask. -- Do you know the
Sum?


Iup. Yes, it amounted to fifty Attick Talents.


Ble. Right to a Farthing. -- How many pieces of Gold were there? [To
Amphitryon.


Amp. Two thousand.


Iup. And twice as many Brass.


Ble. You Have both nicked it. -- Certainly one of ye must have been enclosed in
the Bag.


Iup. But observe Sir; to clear all, this right hand slew Pterelas; I received
his Spoils; his Drinking-Cup I had in a Casket; I gave't my Wife, and this day
did I bath with her, sacrifice with her, and lie with her.


Amp. That Word stabs me. I Am almost distracted: I sleep and dream wi' my Eyes
open, and perish wi' my Health and Senses about me. -- Certainly I am that
Amphitryon, Gorgophon's Grandchild, General of the Thebans, Creon's Friend,
Conqueror of the Teleboans, of the Acarnanians, and Taphians, and by my Courage
slew their King. There I made Cephalus Governor, the great D^oneus's Son; and
--


Iup. -- There by my Valor, defeated those Ravagers, who had killed Electryon,
and my Wife's Brothers; wasted Achaia, Etolia, and Phocis; and scoured the
Ionian, Egean, and Cretian Seas from their Privateers.


Amp. Bless me! I cannot believe my self, he has so hit upon every Punctilio. --
What say you, Blepharon?


Ble. There Is one Proof behind; if that be made out, ye must certainly be
double.


Iup. O, you mean the Scar of my right Arm, caused by the Wound Pterelas ga' me.


Ble. The same.


Amp. Well thought on.


Iup. Do You see? -- look here. [Uncovers his Arm.


Ble. Uncover both of ye, that I may see. Amphitryon uncovers.


Iup. We have; now look.


Ble. Heavens, what do I see? Both marked in the same Arm, in the same Place,
and exactly with the same Scar, a little reddish just like a late Wound. The
Proofs are equal, the Determination unfix'd, and I can go no further. -- You
two must decide the Business between both, for my Affairs call me away. --
Never did I see such a strange sight in my born days.


Amp. Good Blepharon, don't leave me in distress, but be my Counselor a while.


Ble. Adieu. -- What signifies a Counselor when he knows not which side to
plead of?


Iup. I Will go in. Alcmena cries out.


Exeunt Blepharon and Jupiter severally. SCENE VIII.
Amphitryon alone. Ruined for ever! Abandoned by my Friends and and
Counselors. But by Heaven, this damned Impostor sha'n't abuse me unrevenged,
whoever he be. I Will immediately to the King, and acquaint him with the whole
Business. As I hope to live, I Will severely punish this Hellish Sorcerer. who
has played such villainous Tricks wi' my whole Family. -- [Looking round about
him.] But where is he? -- OF my Soul, gone in; and I believe, to my Wife. --
Did Thebes ever produce a greater Wretch? -- What Course can I take? All the
World deny me, and make a Mock of me as they please. It Is fixed at last; I Will
break in upon 'em, and the first living Creature I meet, whether Maid or Man,
Wife or Stallion, nay Father or Grandfather, I Will murder upo' the Spot. Though
mighty Jove, and all the Gods, should interpose, I Would perfect my Design. Now
I Will enter the House. --


He goes to the Door; it thunders; he shakes, and falls into a Swoon. The End
of the Fourth Act.
It Thunders and Lightens between the Acts.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Bromia in a great Fright. Amphitryon in a Swoon upon the Stage. Bro. ALL
my Hopes and Means of Safety are fled; and I Have nothing to support my drooping
Spirits, since all Things, even Seas, Earth, and Heaven, seem to conspire
t'overwhelm and ruin me. -- Mercy upo' me! What shall I do? I Have seen so many
Prodigies within. -- O wretched! ready to swoon; O for a little Water, my Heart
chills and faints away, my Head ake^, my Ears and Eyes fail me, and I Am the
saddest shiftless Creature upon Earth; such strange Things befell my Lady. --
For when she was going of her Labor, she invoked the Gods. Lord, what Voices
and Noises, what Clashes and Flashes; how suddenly, how frequently, how
terribly it thundered! Every Soul fell flat at the Greatness of the Claps. At
the same time a mighty Voice was heard, crying, Alcmena, Succour's at hand,
shake off all dread; the great King of Heaven's come to you and your Family's
Protection. Rise all, who fell at the terror of my Voice. At that I got up; and
the House appeared so very bright, that methought 'twas all in Flames. My Lady
she called me, which r^is'd new Fears, suspecting her Safety. I went in all
haste to know her Pleasure; where I found her happily delivered of two Boys,
and that without the least Suspicion or Knowledge of any of us. -- But what is
here? What old Gentleman's this who lies before our Door? Is he Thunderstruck
by Jupiter? -- Really, I believe it is so. -- Bless me, he seems dead! -- I Will
go find who it is. -- O, it is my Lord Amphitryon. -- [She stirs him.] My Lord!


SCENE II.
Amphitryon comes out of his Swoon. Amp. stirring a little.] Alas!


Bro. Rise, Sir.


Amp. Ruined!


Bro. Gi' me your hand, my Lord. [She takes hold of him.


Amp. looking up.] Who Is that?


Bro. Your Maid Bromia.


Amp. rising up.] I tremble all over; Jove has so stunned me. -- I Am just as
tho I had been at Hell. -- Why came y' out?


Bro. We, poor Souls, were in as great a Fright as you, we saw so many
Prodigies within Doors. -- Alas, my Lord, I have not yet recovered my Senses.


Amp. Come, let us talk wi' ye. -- Do you indeed know me for your Master
Amphitryon?


Bro. Yes, Sir.


Amp. See that you be certain often.


Bro. I am.


Amp. She Is the only unmad Person'o' my Family.


Bro. Indeed, my Lord, we are none of us mad.


Amp. I Am sure my Wifes base Disloyalty has made me so.


Bro. I Will soon change your Opinion in that point, my Lord; and in few Words
show ye most apparent Proofs and Tokens, of both your Lady's Goodness and
Fidelity. -- First, you must know, she is brought to bed of two Boys.


Amp. How, of two Boys? [More concernedly.


Bro. Yes, Sir.


Amp. Heavens be favorable! --


Bro. Let me speak, and I Will tell ye how tender the Gods ha'been o'your Lady
and the whole Family.


Amp. Speak then.


Bro. When my Lady began to go of her Labor, and perceived the Approach of the
usual Pains; with her Hands washed, and Head covered, she implored the
Assistance of the Gods. Immediately it thundered so dreadfully, we first
thought the whole House would have fallen. Then every thing shined so
gloriously, as if they were made of Gold.


Amp. Pray ease me a little, now you have deceived me enough. -- What followed?


Bro. IN the mean time, your Lady was delivered, and truly without any Pains,
for not a Groan, or the least Complaint, was heard to come from her.


Amp. I Am glad of that, whatever she has deserved at my Hands.


Bro. Those things apart, and hear the rest. -- After her Delivery, she gave us
both the Children to wash. We took 'em, and the Boy that sell to my share, was
so big, and withal so vastly strong, that we could not bind him in his Blankets.


Amp. These are Wonders indeed; if all be true, I do not question my Wifes
particular Assistance from above.


Bro. You Will say there are greater behind. -- After he was laid in his Cradle,
two hugeous great Serpents came rolling down the Water-Spout into the Chamber,
both rearing up their Heads --


Amp. Lack a day!


Bro. You needn't fear any thing. -- The Serpents casting their Eyes about, and
spying the Children, immediately made for the Cradles. Upon this, I drew 'em up
and down, backwards and forwards, terribly afraid of the Children, and my self
too, they pursued 'em so fiercely. When the Child, I told y'of, saw this, he
immediately started out of his Cradle, fell furiously upon 'em, and suddenly
grasping each Serpent in his Hand, --


Amp. It Is wonderful strange. -- This is such a dreadful Business, as sets me a
shaking all over. -- But what is next? Proceed.


Bro. -- He destroyed both the Serpents at once. In the mean time, my Lady was
called with a loud Voice by --


Amp. Whom?


Bro. -- Jove, the great King of Heaven and Earth, who openly declared he had
layn wi' my Lady in your Absence, and how that very Child who slew the Serpents
was his; the other, yours.


Amp. In good troth, I like this well enough, to be Sharer wi' Jove himself in
his good Fortunes. -- Go in, and get all the Vessels ready for a Sacrifice
quickly, that I may thank him for his Favors with a great many Victims. Exit
Bromia.


SCENE III.
Amphitryon alone. I Will immediately to the Divine Tiresias, consult him in
what is fittest to be done; and tell him the whole Business from the Beginning
to the Ending. -- [He is going off, and it thunders again.] But what is the
meaning of this tho? -- How dreadfully it thunders! -- Heavens bless me!


SCENE IV.
Jupiter descends in a Machine, in his own proper Shape. Iup. Courage, Prince
Amphitryon; I Am come at last to calm all yours and your Families Troubles.
Shake off all Fears. Enquire nothing of Divines and Prophets, for I, great
Jove, can better tell of past and future Things than they. -- First, I enjoyed
Alcmena, by which she proved wi' Child; you had left her wi' Child too, when
you went into the Campaign; of which two, she is brought to bed at once. That
one that sprung from me, by his renowned Acts shall gain immortal Honor. As
for Alcmena, receive her to your former Favor. She has n't deserved the least
Reproach you gave her; for she could not resist my Power. -- Now I Will return to
Heaven.


Jupiter ascends. SCENE V.
Amphitryon alone. I Will obey your great Commands, and humbly beg the
Performance of your Promises. -- I Will now to my Wife, and let old Tiresias
alone. --


[He turns to the Spectators.] Gallants, for Honor's Sake, and Great Jove's
Cause, We hope you will crown us with one loud Applause.


Exit Amphitryon. The End of Amphitryon.
REMARKS UPON AMPHITRYON.
THE Subject of this Play is the most single that can possibly be, it being
only the Birth of Hercules, and likewise the most noble of all the Comedies of
the Ancients; not only for the bringing forth of such a Hero, but also for its
Attendance by no less than two Gods, and with Thunders and Lightnings. This
Subject, though great, is naturally very barren, especially if compared with many
others; but this makes the Poet's Art appear still greater, in finding
Incidents sufficient for a whole Play, when he had so little matter to work
upon: and in the natural Management of those, he is admirable.

The PROLOGUE.
THE Prologue is spoken by Mercury, not only because he was the most proper
Person to say and relate such Things as the Poet had most occasion for; but
likewise, because it would not have been so probable for another Person to have
been abroad at that time of Night.

Page 3. lin. 17. etc. By Jove' s Orders I came, Mercury' s my Title, sent
hither by my Father to beg your Attention.] Mercury, being in Disguise, and not
in a Machine, as soon as he could take breath after his long-winded Sentence,
he tells the Spectators who he is. For tho, from that Sentence, they might
pretty well guess at him, (more perhaps from his Offices than his Oratory) yet
the Poet takes care to make every thing perfectly clear, and intelligible, to
the Spectators; that, above all things, they might never be at a Loss as to the
Plot.

Page 5. l. 3. And I Will make it a Hodge-podge, a Tragi-Comedy.] Faciam ut
commixta sit Tragico-comaedia. This is the only Play among the Ancients, that
was called Tragi Comedy; and this but in jest neither. But Plautus meant no
such thing as we do by our Word Tragi-Comedy, as appears by the four following
Verses: For always among the Ancients, the Representation of Kings and Great
Men's Actions, made a Tragedy, and those of Common Persons, Comedy, whether the
Catastrophe's were prosperous or not, in either. If I had translated it, a
Tragical-Comedy, perhaps it might have been nigher the Author's Design, and as
agreeable to the Comical Humor of him who spoke it.

Ibid. l. 8. etc. TO order the Guards to inspect Pit, Box, and Gallery, and if
they find any suborned to clap an Actor, to take his Cloak for a Pawn.] Ut
conquisitores singuli in subsellia eant per totam caveam, spectatoribus, si cui
fautores delegatos viderint, uti iis in cavea pignus capiantur togae. The
Romans were so great Encouragers of Plays, that they constantly ordered a
Reward for him who played his Part best, which was paid him by the Edils, who
were sworn to do Justice; and this often caused great Contests and Parties
among 'em. I translated, Conquisitores, Guards; Subsellia, and totam caveam,
Pit, Box, and Gallery; and Togae, Cloak, because they are the same in effect. I
always take the like Liberty in such Cases, and that without any Design of
changing the Scene to London.

Ibid. l. penuit. etc. A year ago, when the Players invoked him in a pitiful
Farce, he came to their Assistance.] Etiam histriones anno cum in proscenio hic
Iovem invocarunt, venit: auxilio eis fuit. Some read it, Nannio cum in
proscenio, supposing it an Allusion to a Play called Nannium proscenium, from a
famous Courtizan of that name: But this is very doubtful; and though,
questionless, it is a sharp Reflection upon some Play in those times; yet, on
what, is uncertain. What Liberty is taken in the Translation, is only to make
the Satyr of it more intelligible.

Page 6. l. 5. First, this City is called Thebes; etc.] Here begins a Narration
of all that was done before the opening of the Stage. This was Plautus's way in
the rest of his Prologues, a thing which Terence never did; and truly Plautus
is not to be commended for this; for it may seem to argue a want of Dexterity
in doing of it by the Actors Mouths. But since the Prologue is no part of the
Play, all being entire and complete without it; and if these Narrations foretell
nothing, like those of Euripides, their principal Fault then is, their being
wholly Impertinent.

Page 7. l. 15. etc. Now, to distinguish us easily, I have little Wings upo' my
Hat, and my Father a golden Tuft upon his.] This is a second Instance of
Plautus's Care of preventing all manner of Obscurity, or Confusion, in the
Spectators; and though it is here done with no great Address, (since it is all in
a Prologue) yet it may serve for a hint of the great Exactness of the Ancients
in this Point; whereas the Moderns fail in nothing more than this; and by that
means often miss of Success in their greatest Beauties.

ACT I.
Scene the First.
Page 8. l. 8, etc. Out of which damned Kitchen, to morrow must I be dish'd up
for the Whipping-Post.] Inde cras e promtuaria cella depromar ad flagrum. The
Joak of this cannot easily be preserved in our Language; which chiefly consists
in the double Signification of the Word Depromo, which is either to Draw, or to
Take, or else a proper Term in Cookery, such as, to Dish, to Serve up, or the
like.

Page 10. l. 7, etc. Madam, at our first happy Arrival at the Enemies Country,
etc.] Here begins an admirable Narration of a Battle; excellent, first, for the
perfect Compleatness of the Description in so few Words, with an Air of
Grandeur, which makes it more diverting in a Servants mouth; but more
especially, for the extraordinary Address of the Poet by finding such an
ingenious Pretext for letting the Spectators know a thing so very necessary for
their understanding the Plot, and that by the mouth of a single Person; so,
both seriously informing, and comically delighting 'em the same time. If any
object, that the Language is too good for a Servant; it may be replied, that
Socia says not a word but what he heard from others, and what he says now, is
only to have his Speech perfect.

Page 12. l. 21, etc. Except that night I had the Strapado, and rid the Wooden
Horse till Morning.] Nisi item unam, verberatus quam pependi perpetem. Slaves,
when they were beaten, were often hung up by the Legs or Hands, and kept in
that Posture for a considerable while. For the Liberty I have taken, see the
latter part of the fourth Remark upon the Prologue.

Page 13. l. 6. This may be some Rogue to steal my Cloak off my Back.] Illic
hoc homo denuo volt pallium detexere. The Word Detexere, is a Weavers Term,
signifying to Put on to the Loom, and the like. Now Socia seeing Mercury in a
remarkable Posture, with his hands lifted up, he pleasantly intimates as though
he had stood ready to take his Cloak, and new weave it for him; but this is not
easily preserved in our Tongue. I believe it would have done better, and nigher
to the Author's Design, if I had translated it, I Am afraid this Fellow has some
great Business with my Cloak.

Ibid. l. 24. Dissociate me to Quintus.] Quintus fiam e Sosia. The Jest of
this, in the Original, is much greater than in the Translation: For it was
usual among the Romans, to call their Sons by the Names of Primus, Secundus,
Tertius, Quartus, Quintus, Sextus, etc. according to their Births; as likewise
their Daughters by the Names of Prima, Secunda, Tertia, Quarta, etc.

Page 14. l. 21. Far enough lately.] Verum long binc abfuit. As Madam Dacier
observes, it is Socia that says this, and not Mercury, as it is in all the
common Books.

Page 15. l. 19, etc. Whither away, Sirrah? you that carry Fire in your
Lantborn.] Quo ambulas, tu, qui Vulcanum in cornu conclusum geris? I do not see
how the Comicalness of this Passage can be preserved in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 27, etc. Sirrah, you will be kicked. Soc. You lie, Sir, for once.]
Verbero. So. Mentiris n^nc jam. The Jest here is wholly lost in the
Translation, which consists in the double meaning of the Word Verbero; which is
either a Noun, signifying, A Slave that deserves to be beaten; or a Verb,
signifying, I beat you. Now Mercury used it in the former Sense, and Socia took
it in the latter; and though it be but an ordinary Jest, it was agreeable enough
to Socia's Character.

Page 16. l. 1, etc. Sirrah, I shall stop that damned foul Mouth of yours. Soc.
It Is past your skill, Sir. It Is kept as well and as clean as any Man's.] Ego
tibi istam hodie scelestam comprimam linguam. So. Haud potes: been pudiceque
asservatur. This is exactly of the same Stamp with the last; playing upon the
double meaning of the Word Comprimo, which signifies, to Stop, Stay, or
Repress; as likewise, to lie with a Woman. It was used in the former Sense by
the first, and taken in the latter by the l^st; and has nothing of that ill
meaning which the Commentators and others imagine, they being most certainly in
the wrong. I have more successfully translated, or rather imitated, this than
the last, by making the Opposites, Foul and Clean, as he had done Comprimo and
Pudice; especially since, I Will stop your foul Mouth, is as common a Phrase
among us, as Comprimam linguam was among the Romans.

Ibid. l. 19. I shall exalt your Worship to the Honor.] Faciam ego hodie te
superbum. Some think that the Word Superbum, here signifies Death, and
Auferere, immediately after, being carried in a Coffin, or the like; and others
think Superbum, a great Swelling, by the Blows he would give him. But the way
that I have done it, seems to me to be much the more natural Sense, and to have
the most Wit in it.

Page 17. l. 4, etc. You came wi' your Feet, not wi' your Clothes.] Certe
pedibus, non tunicis venis. This, in its self, is one of the meanest Jests in
the Play; but considering that Mercury had to deal with a mean, cavilling,
quibbling Fellow, who wrested all his Words to a wrong Meaning, (particularly
his Verbero and Comprimo) and one whom he was to banter all the ways he could,
it seems proper enough in this place.

Page 21. l. 8, etc. He has erected my Statue in my Lifetime; I ll be sworn no
body will honor me so much after I Am dead and gone.] Vivo fit, quod nunquam
quisquam mortue faciet mihi. This is Wit in all Languages.

Scene the Second.
This Scene is a Part of the Prologue; for which our Poet is not to be excused,
not only for placing of it here, and so confounding the Spectators Attention by
mingling their Concerns with the Actors, but likewise foretelling in it, the
Catastrophe, which ought to have been carefully concealed from them. The first
of these Faults, to wit, his mingling the Actors and Spectators Concerns, he is
several times guilty of in other Plays, and when it is not by way of Prologue
neither; but the latter, he is guilty of no where but in his Prologue to
Poenulus, that I remember.

Page 22. l. 12. My Father's so tender of Alcmena.] Alcumena hujus honoris
gratia, pater curavit. As Madam Dacier observes, this Tenderness is in respect
of her Health and Body, and not of her Reputation, as the Word Honoris seem to
imply.

Scene the Third.
Page 23. l. 1. Take care of the bringing up the Child.] Verum quod erit natum,
tollito. It seems very odd to us, that Jupiter should leave such an impertinent
useless Command with Alcmena; but in those days nothing was more common, than
the exposing of their Children, so that this Order was very proper at that
time; and the Word Tollito alludes to that very Custom.

Ibid. l. 14. If your Lady should find out the Cheat.] Illa si istis rebus
te^sciat operam dare. It is a great doubt among the Interpreters, whether this
Illa means Iano or Alcmena; therefore I have done it in as general Terms as my
Author has.

Scene the Fifth.
Page 25. l. 8. This has been a longer night than ordinary.] Many Learned Men
have mistaken this long Night for that of Hercules's Begetting, and so have
thought this Play had continued nine or ten Months; whereas this, most
evidently, is that immediately before his Birth; our Poet not going according
to the common Fable, as they supposed he did.

ACT II.
THE first Interval is filled up with Socia's returning to the Port, to tell
his Master Amphitryon all the strange Things he had seen.

Scene the First.
It ought to be observed, that the whole time of this Scene's acting,
Amphitryon, Socia, and the Prisoners, are moving toward the Front of the
Stage, and Amphitryon's Door; which may well enough be, considering the
Vastness of the Roman Stage, being 180 Foot in the Front. This Scene cannot be
represented with nigh the Probability upon our small Stage.

Page 28. l. 23. The Fellow's bewitched, and fallen into some ill hands.] Huic
homini nescio quid est mali mala objectum man^. Our Phrase, Ill Hands, has the
same meaning that Mala manu has here, which signifies those of Witches, or
Sorcerers; therefore Socia's Jest, immediately following, is as effectual in
the Translation as in the Original. I added the Word Bewitched, to make it
still more clear.

Scene the Second.
Page 31. l. 16, etc. Why there is your Lady has dined, by her Belly. Amp. 'Po,
Blockhead, I left her wi' Child when I went to the Campaign.] I am apt to
believe, that this Jest of Socia's would scarcely pass Muster upon our Theater,
though in a Farce; yet still it serves to keep up the Character, and carry on the
Humor of a mean Slave, such as Socia was. But what is most remarkable, is,
that this insipid Jest should be a Preparation to the Main Incident, and there
is but one more in the whole Comedy, except in the Prologue, which in reality
is no part of a Play. If the Matter of a Preparation be ridiculous, it is
oftentimes the Poet's Art and Cunning, though I know not whether I may say it
(...) so here.

Page 33. l. 34, etc. Yes, Madam, there are Fruits too, of ^ying-in Women, and
Fruits too, to strengthen their Hearts, and keep 'em from Swooning.] Enimvero
pregnanti oportet and malum, and malum dari, ut quod obrodat sit, animo si male
esse occaeperit. The Wit (or whatever the Reader please to call it) of this
Passage, consists in Socia's playing upon the ambiguous Word Malum, which
Alcmena had spoken just before; and this signifies either a Mischief, or an
Apple; therefore nothing, that I know of, in our Language, could answer it so
well as Fruits, which may be taken in either good or bad Sense.

Scene the Fourth.
Page 38. l. 5. You complained of Drowsiness.] This is the middle of a
remarkable Narration, which is, by pieces, scattered through this and the
Second Scene. The Poet ingeniously contrives here, to tell the Spectators of
many considerable Matters, and yet, all the time, seems to have no manner of
Design for any such thing, but a quite different one. This sort of Address is
always to be admired, and as much to be imitated.

Ibid. l. 21. A very pretty Business; if she has taken away his Manhood, and
made him a Lady.] Haeret haec res: siquidem haec jam mulier facta ^st ex viro.
This is right Socia again, playing upon the Word Vir, which Amphitryon had just
upbraided his Wife with, signifying both Husband, and Man. Here, by luck, the
Word Lord has preserved the Jest as well.

Ibid. l. 13. I ne^re gave t'any Man but you, the least Liberty, etc.] Ut mi
extra unum te mortalis nemo corpus corpore contigit. If Plautus has made
Alcmena speak here according to her high Quality, as I doubt not but he has; it
plainly appears, that our way of expressing Things in this nature, is more
modest, clean, and genteel, than theirs usually was.

ACT III.
THE second Interval is filled up with Amphitryon's going to search for
Naucrates.

Scene the First.
This Scene is still but a part of the Prologue; and though it be a great Fault
to confound the Spectators Concerns with the Theatral-Action, and such as
cannot be vindicated; yet at the same time, it ought not to be forgotten, that
the Prologue is never any part of the Play, as I observed before.

Page 41. l. 3. My Lodgings are in the upper Garret.] In superiore ^ui habito
coenaculo. If this Passage be considered as spoken immediately to the
Spectators, it is very comical; for whether he be looked upon as real Jupiter,
or as a poor Player and Slave, whose Lodgings were always in the Garret, it
agrees exactly with him. But this is almost lost in our Tongue, even though a
better Word than Garret were used.

Scene the Second.
Ibid. l. penult. etc. The House is grown odious to me now, since my Lord
accuses me of Dishonesty, Shame, and Infamy.] The Poet had a very great
Occasion for Alcmena's appearing at this time, both for the Reconciliation, and
the notable Consequences thereof: But see what an ingenious Pretext he finds
for her coming there at that time; as likewise he has, at the two other times
she appears, when both the Hour and Place might have made it very improbable
for a Woman of her Rank and Quality. Whenever this Rule is not observed in a
Play, nothing seems more forced and unnatural, nothing more botch'd and bungl'd.

Page 43. l. 9, 10. Let me beg, and entreat ye, to forgive, forget, and be
pacified.] Oro, obsecro, da mihi hoc veniam, ignosce, irata ne sies. This
Place, among many others, may be an Instance of my binding my self so
scrupulously to my Author's Words, even when they have just the same
Signification, which often makes a Translation the worse, as, perhaps, in this
place. But whenever such be made to run well, it does not only show the
Translator's Skill, and the Copiousness of our Words or Expressions, but
likewise is very useful to teach young Scholars both Languages at once.

Ibid. l. 13, 14. Farewell, keep your own Things, and let me have mine.] Valeas,
tibi habeas res tuas, re^das mea^. This was the constant Form of Words used at
a Divorc^, and consequently the Beauty of it must be lost in our Language.

Page 44. l. 3, etc. I must send for Blepharon, our Ships Pilot, t'invite him
to Dinner. -- But not a mouthful shall Socia get; and here'll be rare sport
when I come to grapple with Amphitryon.] Jupiter's sending for Blepharon, was
an excellent Preparation of the Poet's, to cause all that Sport which happened
in the Fourth Act, and to bring about the Catastrophe more dexterously; but
still he took care to have a fair Pretense for so doing. His foretelling
something of this sport, in another place, would have been a Fault, but here it
serves purely to raise the Audiences Expectations; and nothing makes a Play
succeed better than doing of that well.

Scene the Fifth.
Page 45. l. ult. The mean time I Am sacrificing to my self.] Here ends the
Third Act, which is contrary to all the common Books, which make it end a Scene
after. Here is a manifest Cessation of Action upon the Stage, when in the other
there is none.

ACT IV.
THE third Interval is filled up with Amphitryon's looking for Naucrates,
Socia's for Blepharon, and with Jupiter's and Alcmena's Sacrificing.

Scene the First.
The greatest part of this Scene, makes the last Part of the Prologue, or at
least, it is so much of that Nature as properly enough to be called by that
Name, though it be not placed before the Play, as the Word Prologue, in the
most strict Sense, implies.

Page 46. l. 7, etc. Their vast haste, is only for a Vessel safely arrived, an
old Fellow upo' the Fret, or so.] This, and a Line or two before, was designed
by Plautus for a Satyr upon some of the Play-Wrights of his time, whose
chiefest Beauties, it seems, consisted in a Slave's running in vast haste with
some such News as before mentioned, and throwing down all he meets; so making
the Spectators laugh by such means, when they could not by better.

Scene the Second.
In this little Scene, there is a great deal of Art of the Poet, by making
Amphitryon so particularly tell the several places he had been at, to look for
Naucrates; for if it had been otherwise, the Spectators might all have wondered
that Socia did not meet him, since he was gone but a little before to the same
place; and their Meeting would have spoiled the whole Plot. This is an
excellent Instance of the exact Probability that the Ancients observed; and
what is still remarkable, is, that though at another time it would have been
undecent, and unlikely for a Man of his Quality to look himself at so many
places, yet now it was highly probable, since he was so extremely overcome with
Rage and Jealousy.

Scene the Third.
Page 48. l. 21. Thou cursed branded Rogue.] Ulmorum acheruns. That is to say,
One whose Back had consumed as much Brush-Wood as Hell could. A Verbal
Translation, in this place, would have sounded wretchedly. Perhaps, Thou Plague
to the Whipping-Post, might have done as well as any.

Ibid. l. antepenult. etc. Then I shall sacrifice -- Amp. What? Me^. Something
to your Worship's Pate.] Sacrifico tibi. Am. Qui? Me. Quia enim te macto
infortunio. The Jest of this Passage consists in Mercury's playing so comically
upon the Word Macto, which is a proper Term used in Sacrificing, and, in that
place, the same with Magis aucto, and Augeo; and whereas it is usually joined
to Honor, and the like, he merrily joins it to Infortunio, as it is in
Terence's Phormio. This cannot be preserved in our Tongue; yet this Translation
does in a great measure answer the Design.

Page 49. l. 1. You, Iail-bird?] Tun' me mactes, carnufex? All from this, to
nigh the End of this Act, is generally supposed to have been done by another
hand; but whether it be so or no, I shall not offer to determine. However, it
is undoubtedly very ancient, and the Plot and Incidents as well carried on as
Plautus himself could have done; and I believe that those Persons who seem able
to prove it not his by the difference in Style, will be less able to do it by
the difference in Spirit and Genius.

Ibid. l. 20. Y' ought to get your Brains cleared.] Bacchanal te exercuisse
oportuit. This is spoken in Reference to Drunkenness, or rather indeed Madness,
which Mercury lays to Amphitryon's Charge; and therefore the Word Bacchus,
about 18 Verses after, in that place, seems properly enough translated,
T^m-a-Bedlam.

Scene the Fifth.
It is pleasant to observe how naturally the Comical Incidents in this Scene,
spring from their Preparations in the second and third Scenes of the third Act.

Page 51. l. 19. But why do I mention Foreign Prodigies, etc.] All this
Monologue is of a right Tragical Strain; the Passion truly just and natural;
and the Thought as ingenious and moral. It seems to be writ exactly with the
same Spirit as that Monologue in the beginning of the Second Scene of the
Second Act.

Scene the Sixth.
Page 55. l. 11, etc. Nothing goes well wi' me to day. I left Blepharon and
Socia, to hunt up my Cozen Naucrates; him I cannot find high nor low, and
the other two I ve quite lost.] Many have mistaken the Design of this Place, and
have thought it was spoken by Amphitryon, or that something had been left out;
whereas Jupiter speaks this only to puzzle and confound Amphitryon, Blepharon,
and Socia, and so carry on his Design the better.

Scene the Seventh.
Page 56. l. 17. For that Affront, I Will throatle ye.] It may seem very indecent
for Jupiter and Amphitryon to scuffle at this rate, and not rather to have
drawn their Swords; but this agrees exactly with that Character which Mercury
in the Prologue gives of this Play, when he calls it Tragi Comedy. Besides,
drawing of Swords might have proved too Tragical.

Page 57. l. 15. Because if our Army were routed, I might secure m' own
Retreat.] The Application of this Passage is very Satirical, considering this
Play was acted before the Romans, whose Generals were never used to practice
such ways. The Sharpness of the Reflection is considerably lost upon our Stages.

Page 58. l. 22. And I can go no further*.] Quid agam nescio. Here ends all
that which goes by the Name of Supposititious.

ACT V.
THE fourth Interval is filled by Amphitryon's being in a Swoon upon the Stage,
and Alcmena's Labor. This Interval is very peculiar; and I don't know another
Instance of this nature among the Ancients, but in the Hecuba of Euripides: So
that an Act is finished whenever the Stage is without Action, whether there be
an Actor there or no.

Scene the First.
Page 59. l. ult. Mercy upo' me! What shall I do? I Have seen so many Prodigies
within.] The Poet had a particular Occasion for Bromia's appearing at this
time; therefore he has found a very fair Pretext for bringing of her there, to
wit, the great Fright she was in within Doors, which Reason she more
particularly alleges in the next Scene.

Page 60. l. 6, etc. What Voices and Noises, what Clashes and Flashes? How
suddenly, how frequently, how terribly it thundered!] Strepitus, crepitus,
sonitus, tonitrus; ut subi^, ut propere, ut valide tonuit? It seems, among the
Ancients, whenever Jupiter appeared like a God, it was always with Thunder and
Lightning. Since this is a sort of a rumbling Passage in the Original, I have
also made it so in my Translation.

Ibid. l. 24. My Lord!] Here ends the first Scene. Now if any should blame me
for making a Distinction of Scenes when the same Persons are still upon the
Stage; I reply, That the very same Thing that made the Distinction of Acts, as
Amphitryon's Condition did, must undoubtedly make the Distinction of Scenes.

Scene the Second.
Page 61. l. 16. First, you must know, she is brought to bed of two Boys.] This
is the Beginning of a pleasant and lively Narration, which is attended with all
its due Circumstances; to wit, the Place as well as the Party proper for the
Relation; the Person necessary to hear it; and, above all, the Design of
relating it, which was, The Vindication of Alcmena' s Honor. All these
Circumstances are not only to make it probable, but also to keep the Spectators
from supposing it made for their Information; which, though it is the principal
Design of all Narrations, yet nothing ought more industriously to be concealed
from them, than such a Design.

Scene the Fourth.
Jupiter's descending here, agrees exactly with Horace's Rule, Nec Deus
intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus inciderit. For a God could never come upon
a better Design, or in a better Time, to satisfy either Amphitryon, or the
Spectators.

Scene the Fifth.
Page 64. l. 4. And great Jove' s Cause.] Iovis summi causa. The Romans
believed that this Play made much for the Honor of Jupiter; therefore,
afterward, it was commonly Acted in Times of public Troubles and Calamities,
to appease his Anger.

The End of the Remarks upon Amphitryon.
EPIDICUS.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Periphanes, an old Rich Gentleman of Athens, and Father to Stratippocles.
Apecides, Another old Gentleman, his Neighbor. Stratipocles, A Young
Gentleman, Son to Periphanes, and belonging to the Army. Cheribulus, Another
Young Gentleman, his Friend and Companion. Epi^cus, The cunning Servant to
Periphanes, and Stratippocles. Thesprion, Armor-bearer to Stratipocles. A
Captain, Of Rhodes, a Braggadocio. A Banker, Of Thebes, of whom Stratippocles
had taken ^p Many.
WOMEN.
Philippa, A Woman of Epidaurus, kept by Periphanes in her young Days.
Thelestis, Beloved by Statippocles, who buys ^er at the Camp. ^polistis, A
Musick-Girl, beloved by Stratippocles, and by him set free in his Absence. A
Musick-Woman, that passes for Stratippocles's Mistress.
MUTES.
Servants, Attendants, etc.
SCENE, Athens, in the Street. On one Side of the Stage, stands Periphanes' s
and Apecides' s Houses; on the other, Cheribulus' s House.

TIME, About Five or Six Hours, beginning at Six or Seven a Clock in the
Morning.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Thesprion, wrapped up in his Cloak, in great haste; and immediately after,
Epidicus, who catches hold of him. Epi. STay, young Man.


These. Who Is that pulls me by the Cloak, when I Am in such haste.


Epi. A Friend.


These. So it seems. But you're a plaguey impertinent one.


Epi. Open your Eyes, Thesprion.


These. turning about] Bless me! Epidicus, is it you?


Epi. You may trust your Eyes for once.


These. O, good morrow to ye.


Epi. And a good Day to you. Well-come home with all my Heart.


These. Well, and what next?


Epi. Why next, Boy, I Will present ye with a Treat, according to th'usual Custom.


These. Upon Honor then --


Epi. What?


These. -- I Will accept often, if you do.


Epi. Well but how do you? How fares your Corpse?


These. My Face is a Sample o'that.


Epi. Now I have ye, rare Rogue! you are got to be fatter, and in better plight
than ever.


These. Ay, Thanks to this thriving Hand -- holding up his Hand.


Epi. -- Which ought t'ha' been cut off long since.


These. Pshaw, I Am grown more honest than formerly.


Epi. How so?


These. Because I steal more openly.


Epi. A duce on ye, for setting such plaguey large Strides. As soon as I laid
Eye on ye at the Port, I ran like a Race-Horse, but could n't come up wi'ye for
my Guts, till now.


These. Po, you're a puny Town-Chitterlin.


Epi. You're a hectoring Camp-Bully, I know.


These. It Is a little scurrilous, but speak your Pleasure.


Epi. Ha'ye been well e're since you went, what say ye?


These. Off and on --


Epi. -- The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate that damned Variety most
mortally.


These. Why, I told ye nothing but Truth.


Epi. Come, answer me me sincerely. -- What Is become of our Master's Son? How
does he do?


These. Lusty, and strong as Hercules.


Epi. Now you have told me the joyfullest News in the World: But where is he?


These. He came along wi'me.


Epi. How so? unless you brought him home in your Knapsack, or else in your
Pocket.


These. O hang ye.


Epi. Or you: -- I must examine you; hear me, and you shall be heard in your
turn.


These. The very Words of a Judge, in truth.


Epi. It becomes my Gravity.


These. You don't pretend to be Lord Chief Justice, do you?


Epi. Why, do you know a more honorable Person in Town than I?


These. But, Old Boy, you want one Accoutrement to your Office.


Epi. Prithee what is that?


These. Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honor's Pate.


Epi. You're a damned Rogue. -- But what is your Answer?


These. To what Question, pray?


Epi. What Is become of my Master Stratippocles's Arms?


These. Faith, fallen into the Enemy's Hands.


Epi. His Arms?


These. They went away with a Whip.


Epi. Don't ye banter now?


These. Troth, I Am in earnest. They have 'em in possession.


Epi. Mary, 'twas a plaguey Business.


These. Po, Achilles, and others ha'done the same before him. I Will warrant ye
'twill redound to his Honor.


Epi. As how, I beseech ye?


These. For following such noble Examples.


Epi. Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him; they were so plaguey quick
in going over to The Enemy. If our Son o'Thetis has lost his, the kind Nereads
will bring him more. But then he must be sure to supply th'Armorers wi'Stuff
and Materials, if ever he hopes to be plundered every Campaign.


These. Come, adone wi'this Discourse.


Epi. That Is as your Worship pleases.


These. Leave impertinant Questions.


Epi. But tell me, where is my Master Stratippocles?


These. There Is a certain reason why he daren't come wi'me.


Epi. Prithee what is it?


These. He has no desire to be seen of his Father.


Epi. Why so?


These. I Will tell ye. -- He has brought out of the Plunder, a young Captive Lass,
fair and sprightly, who seems of a good Family.


Epi. What Is this I hear?


These. The same that comes from my Mouth,


Epi. What did he buy her for?


These. Because he had a mind to her.


Epi. And how many Minds has this Creature got? I Am sure, before he went to the
Campaign, he left me in charge to buy him a Musick-Girl, he loved, of a certain
Slave-Merchant, and I Have executed his Orders. --


These. Just as the Wind blows, my Friend, so you must furl your Sails.


Epi. Alas! I Am broke all in pieces!


These. How; why so?


Epi. But -- what did this Lass cost?


These. Little enough.


Epi. That Is none of my Question.


These. What then?


Epi. How many Pounds?


These. So many [Holding up his Fingers.


Epi. What, a hundred Pounds?


These. Which he took up of a Banker at Thebes, and gives him above a Groat
in the Pound Interest for every Day he has it.


Epi. Lamentable!


These. The Banker's come over with him, and demands the Money.


Epi. Bless me? I Am ruined to the Devil and all.


These. How so? What Is the matter, my Friend?


Epi. He has lost me.


These. Who has.


Epi. The Gentleman who lost his Arms.


These. But why so?


Egi. Why, he was continually dunning me wi' Letters from The Army, to --
[Aside] But mum for that. It Is better for a Slave to set his Ears on work, than
his Tongue; that is the wisest course by half.


These. Troth, I cannot imagine why you tremble so. Poor Epidicus, you are in a
sad pickle: guilty of some damnable business i'my Absence, and thy very looks
betray thee.


Epi. Prithee, don't tease me so.


These. I Will be gone then.


Epi. Stay, you shall not go yet. [He holds him.


These. Why, not yet?


Epi. But is he really in love with the Girl he bought?


These. A pretty Question! -- up to the Ears, Man.


Epi. Then my poor Back must smart for it.


These. He loves her better than ever he did you.


Epi. And let the Devil love you.


These. Prithee leave that subject, -- He charged me not to go home to his
Fathers, but directly to Cherib^lus's here, till he came there himself.


Epi. Why so?


These. Because he would n't so much as meet, or see his Father, till he had
cleared all with his Banker.


Epi. This is Hell upon Earth!


These. Now let me go and meet him.


Epi. What will the old Man say, when he comes to know of this? However, let us
fall nobly, with our Swords in our Hands.


These. Fall how you please, what is that to me?


Epi. I Will not fall singly; I shall desire the same Civility o'you too, as one
Friend would of another.


These. Would Old Nick had you and your Projects too.


Epi. Go then, if you be in such plaguey haste.


These. If it be so, I never met with a more easy parting. [Exit Thesprion.


SCENE II.
Epidicus alone. He Is gone, and now you are alone: thou see in what a sweet
Condition you are in, Mr. Epidicus; and without speedy Relief, you are
undoubtedly blown up. So many tottering Ruins, and such vast Loads of Mischiefs
come tumbling upo' my ^ead, that it is impossible to subsist without a thousand
Props. And yet I cannot find one to help to sustain this confounded Shock. --
What a Rogue was I t'impose upo'th' Old Man wi'my damned Tricks, and make him
believe he had redeemed his Daughter, when 'twas only a Musick-Girl, his Son's
Miss, whom he ordered to buy when he went to the Camp. But now my Gentleman, to
please his Humor, has picked up another there, and my Skin must pay the
purchase: For when our old Fox comes once to smell out the Roguery, I shall be
flayed alive. Therefore have all your Wits about ye. -- Projecting's to no
purpose; for my Brains are all Confusion. -- [He looks upon himself] Epidicus,
you are an errant Ass. -- [In another Tone] But why so scurrilous, my Friend!
-- Because, Fool, thou'st left thy self to the wide Word. -- Why, what would y'
have me do? -- Why that Question to me? -- Because formerly y' use to be so
plaguey cunning at advising. -- What? -- What, I say? -- I must to work upon
something. -- But I Am too backward in meeting my Gentleman, to know how matters
stand. -- [Discovering Stratippocles and Cheribulus] O here he comes, in the
dumps too, with his Friend Cheribulus. -- I Will move on one side, to hear their
Discourse wi'more ease. [He stands on one side a little.


SCENE III.
Enter Stratippocles and Cheribulus, at another part of the Stage. Stra. Thus
I Have told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given ye a full Account of my
Troubles and Love.


Che. Sure, Stratippocles, thour't very childish for one of thy Age and
Courage. What, ashamed of thy Bargan, Man, when she is one of a good Family? Who
a duce can blame thee for this?


Stra. All those who envied me, have declared themselves m' Enemies upo' this
Account; though truly to her Chastity, I never offered the least Violence or
Incivility.


Che. This is a Virtue, in my Opinion, a degree above any common moderation in
Love.


Stra. Po, Words will give no ease to a Man in pain: He Is the Friend, whose
Actions supply one in a puzling Case, and at a pinch.


Che. How would y' have me help ye?


Stra. By lending me a hundred Pounds, to pay off the Banker I had it of.


Che. Really if I had it, you shou'dn't ask me twice.


Stra. What am I the better, when your Liberality lies wholly in Words, and
nothing at all in Deed^.


Che. Why, Faith, every day I Am teased, and worried to death with a parcel of
Duns.


Stra. I Would sooner see such Friends starve in Prison than live in a Palace. --
Well, I must borrow Epidicus's help, though I pay dearly for the use of 't; but I
shall send him to Bridewel with his Skin stripped over his Ears, if he does not
procure the hundred Pounds as soon as the last Word's pronounced.


Epi. aside.] I Am in a hopeful Condition: He promises well, and I don't
question his performance in the least. So then, my Back shall be nobly treated,
and all at free Cost. -- I Will e'n board 'em. -- [Goes to them.] My dear Master,
no Man's more joyful at your safe Arrival than your humble Servant Epidicus.


Stra. turning about] Where Is he?


Epi. Here, Sir -- I Am glad to see you well in Town again.


Stra. I don't question but you are, as much as my self.


Epi. Have ye been well all this time, Sir.


Stra. In Body, but not in Mind.


Epi. Why, Sir, I performed my Duty, and observed your Commands, to a tittle.
I Have bought up the Girl you sent so many Letters about.


Stra. You Have lost your Labor in that.


Epi. Lost, how, Sir?


Stra. Because at present, she neither charms, nor pleases me.


Epi. Then what occasion was there for so many repeated Commands, and Letters?


Stra. I loved her then, but now my Heart's otherwise engaged.


Epi. Faith it is very hard, to have one's Services so ill rewarded. My best
Endeavors are turned against me, by the fickleness of your Passion.


Stra. I was not Compos mentis, when I writ those Letters.


Epi. Must I atone for your crazy Tricks; and my Back pay the price of your
Indiscretion?


Stra. What Is all this prating? I Have occasion for a hundred Pounds down of the
Nail, which must be paid to the Banker with all Expedition.


Epi. Pray, where shall I have it? Of what Banker should I take it up?


Stra. Where you please. But if I have not the Money before Sunset, never expect to
see home again, but strait to Bridewell you go.


Epi. You, Sir, can talk of these things unmoved, without dread or danger. I Am
right sensible of m' Executioners, and the pain of a good Beating.


Stra. How then? Would you see your Master make way with himself?


Epi. Not so neither. -- I Will first run the hazard, as bold as it is.


Stra. Now I like ye: Thour't a brave Fellow in troth.


Epi. I Am resolved to undergo what you would have me.


Stra. What will ye do with the Musick-Girl you bought then?


Epi. I Will warrant ye, I Will have some Invention, some Expedient, or some Trick
to save all at last.


Stra. Faith thous't a fruitful Noddle, to my Knowledge.


Epi. I know a rich Euboan Captain, with Money at Command, who when he comes to
know of your buying of this, and your bringing home the other, he will earn estly
be at ye, to take her off your Hands. -- But where is the Girl you brought wi'ye.


Stra. She shall be forthcoming.


Che. What stay we here for?


Stra. Let Us to yours, and there make a jolly Day on it. [Exeunt Stratippocles
and Cheribulus.


SCENE IV.
Epidicus alone. Go in. The mean time, in these Brains must I have a Committee
of the whole House, to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies
to carry on this vigorous War. -- Well, Friend Epidicus, look well to thy hits;
for this is a plaguey sudden Business. The De'el a bit of time's here for
dozing, or delaying; for a swinging Battery must be raised against the old Man's
Pockets. -- In then, Epidicus, and keep thy young Master from straggling here,
least his old Father should chance to snap him up. [Exit Epidicus after them.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Apecides and Periphanes. Ape. entering. It Is a common failing in most
People, to use Modesty when there is no occasion for it; and when there is most of
all, they lay't aside. What need ye be ashamed of marrying one of a good
Family, though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you believe, you had your
Daughter by, that is now at home?


Per. I dread my Son's Reproaches.


Ape. Edod, I thought the Remembrance of your last Wife, had frighted you from
Matrimony; for you never can look upon her Grave, but y' offer Thanks for her
Departure: And truly you have reason, since y' had the good luck t'out-live that
cross Piece.


Per. O, I was a second Hercules in the time of her Reign. His Combat with the
Amazonian Queen, was nothing to what I endured.


Ape. Troth, the Money did well however.


Per. Ay marry, if I could have had it alone.


SCENE II.
Epidicus appears at Cheribulus's Door. Epi. to Stratippocles and Cheribulus
within.] St' St'! Silence! Courage, my Lads. Nothing but signs of good luck.
Then I Have a plaguey sharp Lancet to breath the best Vein in the old Man's Purse.
-- [Coming from the Door.] O yonder is he. -- Both the old Bubles as I could
wish, before Apecides's Door. Now will I turn Horse-leech, and suck out the
Hearts Blood of these old Fools, who pass for the prime Pillars of the State.


Ape. Marry him as soon as you can.


Per. I like your Advice.


Ape. I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I cannot tell.


Per. Ay, that goes to the Heart of me.


Epi. overhearing them.] In good Faith, I Have the Assistance, Bounty and Love of
all the Gods. For the old Men have now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make
Incursions, and snub 'em of their Money. -- About it then, Friend Epidicus, wrap
thy short Cloak about thee, and pretend t'ha' been looking the whole Town for
the old Man: Do all with a jerk. -- [He throws his Cloak about him, and seems
in vast haste.] Bless my Soul! what would I give to meet wi' my Master
Peraphanes at home. I Am tired off my Legs, wi' searching all the Town over for
him, at the Surgeons, the Barbers, the Race-Ground, the Market, the Perfumers,
the Armorers, and all the Bankers in the Town. -- I Am quite hoarse with asking,
and was nigh breaking my Neck a hundred times for haste.


Per. Epidicus!


Epi. Who calls Epidicus? [Surlily.


Per. I Am Periphanes.


Ape. And I, Apecides.


Epi. And, troth, I Am Epidicus. -- O, Sir, I Have met ye both in the best time in
the World.


Per. What Is the matter?


Epi. Hold. -- Pray give me a little time to breath in --


Per. Well, take time then.


Epi. O my Heart! -- Let me take breath --


Ape. Come, rest your self.


Epi. Now observe. -- All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are
discharged, and sent home. --


Ape. Who told you so?


Epi. I affirm it to be true.


Per. On your own Knowledge?


Epi. Yes, Sir.


Per. How came you to know it?


Epi. Because I saw the Streets as full of Soldiers as they could pack, with
all the Arms, and Horses. --


Per. This is extreordinary indeed.


Epi. Then they had a mort of Prisoners, with Boys and Girls, some two, some
three, and others five a piece. The People they all came thronging about 'em;
every Body crowding to see their own Sons.


Per. I faith, nothing could be better.


Epi. Then I believe the whole Corporation of Courtizans in the City came in
all in their Finery, to meet their Gallants, and charm 'em with their presence:
And, what was most observable, a great many of 'em wore Nets under their
Scarfs. When I had got to the Haven, there I found her, attended by four
several Musicians playing --


Per. Who, Epidicus?


Epi. She who your Son so many Years loved, and died for; and is in a fair way
to ruin his Riches and Reputation, his own self, and your Worship's self. She
stood waiting for him at the Haven.


Per. Damned Jilt!


Epi. She was richly dressed in her gold Lace, so neatly! so trimly! so modish!


Per. How a duce was she dressed then? With a Cloak, or a Robe, or had she a
Milliner's Shop upon her back? There Is variety enough.


Epi. A Woman carry a whole Shop upon her back?


Per. Where Is the Wonder? You may daily meet these Creatures in the Streets
with Houses and Lands upo' their backs. When their Sparks are assess'd for the
Taxes, they have no Money; but freely pay their Contributions when they are taxed
by their Whores. What a confounded Jargon of names do these Jades rake up every
Year for their Habits? There Is your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown,
your Loose-Gown, your Nightgown, your Riding-Gown, your Imbroider'd, and
Speckl'd Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs,
Tours and Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colors of the
Rainbow, and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and
Monsters, in the Universe. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys.


Epi. What are those, Sir?


Per. Your damned Night-Rails. -- This plaguey Catalogue of Names, often make
their poor Cullies Pockets smoke for it. -- But on wi' your Story.


Epi. There stood two Women behind me, discoursing to themselves; upo' which, I
gave way a little, and made as though I took no notice of what they said. I
could not hear every word perfectly, yet I Am sure I cannot be mistaken in the
main.


Per. I Would fain know what it was.


Epi. Said one of these Women to the other, --


Per, interrupting] What?


Epi. Patience, Sir, and you will hear all. -- After they had cast their Eyes
upo' your Son's Mistress. Good now, said one, What strange luck has this
Creature, to have her Gallant immediately pay her Ransom? Her Gallant, said the
other, why who is he? At that she named young Stratippocles. rich Periphanes's
Son.


Per. aside.] As I live, I must run my Country. -- [To Epidicus] but what is
this you tell me?


Epi. Nothing but the truth, Sir. -- Upon hearing of this Discourse, I began to
creep nigher, and nigher to 'em, by degrees, as though I had been forced that way
by the crowd.


Per. Very well.


Epi. But, said the other again, how know ye this? Who told ye so? Why, said
she, there came a Letter to day from Stratippocles to her, to let her know he
had taken up the Money of a Banker at Thebes, had it in his Hands, and was
bringing it home for that purpose.


Per. So then. -- All Is lost. [Aside.


Epi. She said, she had it from her own Mouth, and saw the Letter.


Per. How shall I do in this case? I must have your advice, Neighbor.


Ape. We must find out some effectual, and cunning Expedient; for, troth, I
verily believe, he will be here shortly, if he ben't already.


Epi. Might I presume, to instruct ye, I Would show ye such a clever way as you would
both approve of, or I Am much mistaken. --


Per. And what is that, honest Epidicus!


Epi. And you will say it is pat for the purpose.


Ape. Why do you keep us in suspense then?


Epi. Because you, who are wisest, ought to be heard first; I, afterward.


Ape. Po, let us hear't.


Epi. No, you will laugh at me. [Fawningly.


Ape. Faith, but we will not.


Epi. If ye like this Project, you may follow't; if not, another may be sought
for. For my part, I Am neither Inventor, nor Promoter often, any further than to
serve you.


Per. I thank ye for that -- Prithee let us hear your Contrivance.


Epi. It Is to choose a Wife for your Son immediately, and take a swinging
Revenge upo' this Musick-Wench he is now upon freeing, and so strangely
debauches him: Then to order Matters so as to make her a Slave as long as he
lives.


Ape. That Is right as can be.


Per. I Would do any thing to have it speedily brought about.


Epi. Why, truly, now is the time to do it, before he comes home: 'Twill be to
Morrow before he comes to Town, and not to day.


Per. How know ye that?


Epi. Very well, Sir. I saw one that came from him, who said he would be here
to Morrow Morning.


Per. Well, but go on: What must we do next?


Epi. This is my Opinion; that you ransom this Musick-Girl, as though you had a
mind to her, and was mightily stricken with her your self.


Per. And what of all that?


Epi. What? You may buy her out of your Son's Hands, before he returns, and
pretend it is to give her her Freedom.


Per. Well, I understand ye.


Epi. When you have once got her into your Hands, you may remove her to any by
Place from the City, if you think it so convenient.


Per. I Am clearly of that mind.


Epi. What say you, Sir! [To Apecides.


Ape. What should I? It Is a notable cunning Contrivance, I think.


Epi. By this means, you will cut off all your Sons hopes of marrying her; and
bring him to compliance at pleasure.


Ape. Thour't a cunning Rogue, and please me strangely.


Epi. Sir, what you're about, requires expedition.


Per. Very true, indeed.


Epi. I Have a Trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.


Per. Let Us hear't.


Epi. So you shall. -- Observe.


Ape. Aside to Periphanes.] This is the craftiest Son of a Whore.


Epi. I Am afraid we shall want one to pay the Money for this Wench. For 'twon't
be so convenient for you to go your self.


Per. Why so?


Epi. Lest the Merchant suspect you buy her upo' your Sons account, --


Per. Very right.


Epi. -- To hinder him of his Mistress; and so his Suspicions may chance to
cross your Designs.


Per. Where shall we find one proper to manage this Business?


Epi. This Gentleman is the fittest in the World. He understands a Bargain to a
Tittle, and has the Law at his Fingers ends.


Per. Epidicus, I gi' ye Thanks.


Epi. And I Will endeavor to deserve 'em: I Will find out the Master of the
Musick-Girl, carry the Money with the Gentleman, and bring her to ye.


Per. What Is the lowest price of her?


Epi. The lowest price? Perhaps you may get her for a hundred Pounds. But if
you send too much, it shall be returned faithfully. There can be no Cheat in it;
and your Money will not lie dead ten days, I Am sure.


Per. How so?


Epi. Because there is another young Spark has a Months mind to this Wench, a
Rhodian Captain, vastly rich, a stout Soldier, a terrible Fellow, and a grand
Braggadocio. He Will certainly take her off your Hands, and pay ye ready Money
with all his Heart. Do but venture upon her, and you may gain the Lord knows
what by the Bargain.


Per. Heavens grant I may.


Epi. Don't question it.


Ape. Will you go in, Sir, and bring out the Money? I Will away to the Piazza; and
be sure, Epidicus, do you meet me there.


Epi. Don't ye go from thence, before I come.


Ape. I Will stay for ye there.


Per. Come in, Epidicus.


Epi. Go in, Sir, and draw over your Money, I shall not make 'ye stay. [Exeunt
Apecides and Periphanes severally.


SCENE III.
Epidicus alone. Hang me, if I believe there is ever a piece of Ground in all our
Country yields half so well as this old Fellows Bags. For though they be never so
well secured and sealed up, sweep says my Worship with as much Money as he
pleases. But, Faith, I Have a plaguey Scruple that the old Man should find out the
Roguery on it, and stick as close to my Back as an old Rook to a rich Cully. One
thing puts me to my last Trumps; that is, to know which Musick-Girl I had best
show Apecides. -- O I have it in my Head. -- The old Man ordered me this Morning
to find up a Musick-Girl to sing for him at his Sacrifice. I Will soon produce
one, and teach her her Lesson, how to carry on the Cheat handsomely to our old
Gentleman. -- Now I Will in, and receive the Money of this old silly Put. [Exit
Epidicus.


The end of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Stratippocles, and Cheribulus. Stratip. entring] S Death, I Am torn
asunder, and eaten up with th'Expectation of all Epidicus's fine Promises. --
It torments me strangely; and I Would gi' the World to know whether there be any
Hopes or not.


Che. For all Epidicus's great Helps, y'ought to seek out elsewhere: For I could
have told ye beforehand, you weren't to expect any thing from his Brain.


Stra. I Am a miserable Man, in earnest.


Che. It Is childish i'you, to vex your self so.


Stra. As I Am a living Soul, if I once lay hands on him, 'tshall never be said
that a pitiful Slave abused his Master without Punishment. -- But what would ye
have him do, who has no Money; when you, who has so much at command, will not part
with a Penny, to keep a Friend from sinking?


Che. Upo' my Word, if I had it, I would with all my Heart. However you needn't
fear, but you will meet wi' something, by some ways, some means, from some Place,
or from some Body; and you have still some hopes o'sharing i'my good Fortune,
when I meet with it my self.


Stra. Po, hang such sneaking Fellows.


Che. What Is your Fancy in giving me this Language?


Stra. Because your Tongue ran all upo' your silly somethings, your some means,
your some Places, and your some Bodies, which are all nothing to the purpose.
I Will not weary out m'ears any longer wi'this Stuff; nor expect any more Help
from ye, than from one that is never thought of. [Angrily.


SCENE II.
Enter Epidicus on the other side of the Stage, with a Bag of Money. Epi. to
Periphanes, within.] Well, Sir, you have performed your Part; now must I mine.
After this care's over, you may set your Heart at rest. -- [He comes from the
Door] Condemned every Cross; and no hopes of a Reprieve. -- [He takes some of
it out] Faith, 'thas a plaguey alluring Eye. -- Trust m'agen, old Fool; it is an
ancient Trick entailed upon our Family. -- Gods! what a glorious, prosperous,
and lucky Day was this? But I Am plaguey backwards in carrying this rich Prize
into Harbor, Delays are very dangerous i'this case. -- But what is yonder? the
two Sparks, my Master, and Cheribulus. -- Well, what now? -- Here, Sir, take
it, if you like it. [To Stratippocles.


Stra. How much is there? [He takes it.


Epi. Enough, and more than enough; something overplus. I Have got above twenty
Guinea's more than you owe to your Banker. You see, Sir, as long as I can
please, and oblige you, I Am sufficiently prodigal of m'own Back.


Stra. Your Back, why so?


Epi. By making your Father guilty o'Bag-slaughter.


Stra. What a duce is that?


Epi. Nay, I don't mind your old and common Phrase, Hold up his Hand at the
Bar, but I make him hold up his Hand at the Bags. For I Have already paid off the
Slave-Merchant, wi' m' own Hands, for that Girl who goes for your Sister, Now
I Have hit upon a way, to put another Trick upo' your Father, and do you a good
turn into the Bargain. I had this Discourse wi^th' old Man, and persuaded him
all I could, to hinder you from getting this Musick-Girl, when you came home, *
by buying her himself, beforehand; and so to remove her to some by-place. Now
will I top another upon him, that shall do his business as well every jot. *


Stra. Rare Rogue!


Epi. She shall be here in a Moment, and pass for your Mistress.


Stra. I understand ye.


Epi. Your Father has commissioned Apecides to act in this Business, to see the
Bargain be secure. He now stays for me at the Piazza.


Stra. Well enough.


Epi. Now you see, the Wit's outwitted; for your Father has trusted his Money
to my Discretion. He Is making Preparations for your Wedding, as soon as you
come home.


Stra. Nothing can persuade me to that, but the Death of the dear Creature I
brought wi'me.


Epi. I Have another piece of Policy on foot too. -- I Will to the Slave-Merchant's
privately, and desire him, if any Enquiry be made whether he had received the
Money for a Musick-Girl, to say, Yes; and, instead of the threescore and fifteen
Pounds, to name six score Guineas: For the first Sum I had, but three days
before, paid him wi' m'own Hands for that Girl who goes for your Sister. Then
will this old Rogue ignorantly swear that he received the Money for the same
Girl who came along wi' you.


Stra. Y'out-do Matchivel, for Policy.


Epi. I Will go get some plaguey cunning Baggage, and grease her well in the Fist;
she shall pretend to be the same Party that is bought, and so make admirable
Sport wi' both the old Fools. Apecides himself shall conduct her to your Father.


Stra. Excellently contrived.


Epi. Well, I Will teach her how t'act her Part to a tittle, and send her
full-fraight wi'my Tricks -- Hold I Am a little too tardy; y' have made me lose
Time. Ye both know the Management of the business; now I Will be marching. [Exit
Epidicus.


SCENE. III.
Stratippocles and Cheribulus. Stra. Good luck attend ye.


Che. It Is a plaguey Dog at doing Mischief.


Stra. I Am sure his Contrivances have brought me off at a deadly Pinch.


Che. Now let us go in again.


Stra. Ay, and with a much lighter Heart than I came out. By the Courage and
Conduct of Epidicus, I Am safely arrived at the Camp wi'this rich Booty. [Exeunt
ambo.


The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Periphanes alone. There Is no such need for a Man to have a Glass to see
the Features of his Face in, as t'observe the very depth of his Discretion, and
the Passions of his Mind. The well viewing o'these, will bring him to reflect
how he passed away his Time in his young Days. My self experience it, by this
fretting for my Son, as though his Crimes were so heinous, and not the Sin of my
Youth as great. Faith, we old Men do dote sometimes; and certainly this Mirror
would be of excellent use. -- But here comes my Friend Apecides, wi' my Son's
Prize.


SCENE II.
Enter Apecides, and a Musick-woman finely dressed, with her Iustruments. Per.
O, welcome home wi' your Merchandise. -- How is it?


Ape. You see the Heavens smile on ye.


Per. They Have a promising Countenance.


Ape. Ay, all things promise well, and succeed too. -- Y' had best order some
Body to carry her in.


Per. going to his Door.] So ho! within there. --


SCENE III.
Enter some Servants to them. Per. Conduct this Woman in. -- [One of the
Servants takes her by the Hand] But do you hear?


Serve. What Is your Pleasure, Sir?


Per. Have a special care she ben't coupled wi'my Daughter, nor let her be seen
by her. Do You mind me? I Will have her into that little Room by her self. --
There Is vast difference between th'Education of a young Maid, and a Curtizan.
[Exeunt Servants with the Musick-woman.


SCENE IV.
Apecides and Periphanes. Ape. Spoken like a Man of Skill and Prudence. One
cannot be too careful of his Daughter's Honesty. -- Faith, we nicked the time
for snapping this Girl out of your Son's Clutches.


Per. Why so?


Ape. Because I heard one say, he saw him but just now.


Per. I dare swear, he was just ready for his Bargain.


Ape. Ay, Faith, sure enough. -- Without doubt you have an admitable Servant, of
great Value, and worth his weight in Gold. The poor Musick-Wench never so much
as dreamt of being sold to you, he carried off the business wi'so much Mirth
and Gayety.


Per. I wonder i'my Heart how he did it.


Ape. He flamm'd her off with a pretense o'your making a Sacrifice for your
Son's safe arrival.


Per. That was well carried on.


Ape. He made her believe he brought her only to serve at The Office, you was
to have at home. All the while, I did as though I was a silly Clod-pated Ass, that
could not say Bo to a Goose. [Laughing.


Per. You could do no otherwise.


Ape. I Have a business of Importance at the Court: I must go and assist a Friend
there.


Per. Prithee, let us ha'your Company as soon as you're at leisure.


Ape. I shall be back in a little Time. [Exit Apecides.


SCENE. V.
Periphanes alone, There Is nothing like a good Friend always at ones Elbow.
Then all your business is done for ye, with holding up your Finger. Now had I
trusted the management of this business to a Man o'less skill, and fewer
Brains, I should ha'been finely bob'd, and my Son might well ha'made me his
laughing Diversion. -- [Discovering the Rhodian Captain at a Distance] What
silly fellow's yon, who comes tossing and brandishing his Cloak so? But it is
ridiculous i am to blame others for a Folly I was so guilty of my self i'my
young Days: when I was a Soldier o'Fortune, if I once set in, I used to deafen
all Ears wi'the Stories of my great Acts.


SCENE VI.
Enter the Rhodian Captain, strutting, and walking very stately, with his
Servants. Cap. to one of his Servants] Have a care, Sirrah, you don't slip one
House without enquiring for Periphanes the Platean; and presume not to come
i'my presence before you have sped.


Per. Suppose, Spark, I show you the Person you want, what Thanks shall I
deserve at your Hands?


Cap. I Have achieved that by my great and mighty Valor, that all Mankind ought
to gi'me Thanks.


Per. But, young Soldier, this is no proper place to publish your Achievements
in, as you intend. For when a Man comes to brag of his Exploits before his
Betters, they make but a poor shabby Figure. -- But if you want Periphanes the
Platean, I Am he.


Cap. What he, so famed in his Youth at Kings Courts, who purchased an Estate
with his single Sword?


Per. The same, the bare naming of whose Exploits, would make you take ye to
your Heels, and run like a Devil.


Cap. By Hercules, I more want a Man to relate mine to, than one to tell me his.


Per. I tell ye, Spark, this is no fit Place; therefore you would best pitch upon
another Man, to pack off your Trumpery to.


Cap. By your leave then; to let you know what I come for, I understand you have
bought my Mistress.


Per. aside] Ho, ho! Now I know my Gentleman; the very Captain Epidicus told
m'of. -- [to him] it is very true, my little Soldier; I did buy a Woman.


Cap. Then I Have a Word or two to say to ye, if it be no trouble to ye.


Per. Faith, I cannot tell that, till I hear what it is.


Cap. Then it is to let me have her, and I Will pay ye honestly for her.


Per. A Bargain.


Cap. But why should I mince the matter? I intend to give her her Freedom, and
make her Partner i'my Bed.


Per. I Will make but two Words wi'ye. She cost me above sixscore Pounds, and for
an hundred and fifty, you shall have her, and do what you please with her;
provided you will take her away wi ye, and rid the Country of her.


Cap. Will ye sign, in good earnest?


Per. To those Articles, I will.


Cap. You Have made an excellent Campaign on it.


Per. to the Servants within] So ho, there! bring out this last Musick-Girl. --
You shall have all her instruments into the Bargain.


SCENE VII.
Enter the Musick-woman, with her Instruments, attended. Per. Here, Sir, take
her, if you please.


Cap. Staring on her] What a strange Frolic is this? Why these under hand
Tricks tho? Why don't y'order the Musick-Girl to be brought out?


Per. Why, this is she; i have no other.


Cap. Po, you cannot put Tricks upo' Travelers. Why don't ye produce her that is
called Acropolistis?


Per. I profess, this is she.


Cap. But I profess, it is not: P'shaw, do you think I don't know m'own Mistress?


Per. I declare this is the very same that my Son was so much stricken with.


Cap. But it is not the same.


Per. How! not the same?


Cap. No.


Per. Where a Devil did she come from then? As I hope to live, it is the same I
bought and paid for.


Cap. 'Twas foolishly bestowed, and a plaguey blunder this.


Per. Certainly it must be she; for I sent m'own Servant to buy her, one who is
acquainted wi'my Son's Amors.


Cap. Hah! then, Old Gentleman, your own Servant has bubl'd ye confoundedly.


Per. What! bubl'd me?


Cap. Nothing, but only a suspicion. I see this Musick-girl is topp'd upon ye
for the other. Poor Old Fellow, you are notoriously and damnably gulled.


Per. I Will find her out where ere she be. -- Farewell Bluff. [Exit the Captain
and his Servants.


SCENE VIII.
Periphanes, and the Musick-woman. Per. walking on one side of the Stage.] So,
so! thour't a brave Fellow, Epidicus, a brave Fellow, in troth; and have got
the day. Thour't a Man every inch of thee; and have led me by the Nose, as if I
had been the meerest Nicompoop in the World. -- [To Her] Hark ye, did not
Apecides buy ye to day, of the Slave-Merchant?


Mus. I never heard of the Man till now; besides, I Am past being sold, and have
had my Freedom above this five Years.


Per. Why came ye hither then? [Angrily.


Mus. I Will tell ye, Sir. -- I was brought hither to sing at a Sacrifice, an old
Gentleman was to offer.


Per. aside.] I must own my self the poorest Sot in all the Town and Country.
-- [To Her.] But do you know Acropolistis, the Musick-Girl?


Mus. As well as my self.


Per. Where dwells she?


Mus. I cannot tell at present, since she had her Freedom given her.


Per. How, her Freedom? Who gav't her? I Would fain know that, if you could tell me.


Mus. Sir, what I know my self, I Will tell ye. -- I heard young Stratippocles,
rich Periphanes's Son, took care to get her freed in his absence.


Per. 'Sdeath, I must run my Country if all this be true. -- It Is notorious
now, that Epidicus has squeas'd my Pockets most intollerably. [Aside.


Mus. This is what I was told. -- Please ye to command me any further?


Per. Yes, to get ye to the Devil as fast as you can, or out of my sight. [He
snatches one of her Instruments.


Mus. You Will gi' me my Instrument first?


Per. No, neither your Fiddle nor Bagpipes neither. -- [He takes her other
Instruments.] Be gone in a moment, as you hope to sleep in a whole Skin.


Mus. Well, I Will go; but I Will make the Devil to do, when I come back. [Exit
Music Woman in a rage.


SCENE IX.
Periphanes gives the Instruments to his Servants, who leave him alone. What Is
to be done now? Shall I who have signed so many Warrants and Edicts, suffer this
Rascal to go unpunished? Were I to lose as much more, I Would sooner do it than
pardon this palpable Affront, and notorious Villainy. They Have exposed me t'all
the World. -- But I was a Fool to think my self inferior to Apecides, who bares
the reputation of inventing of Laws, and settling of Rights. He highly applauds
his own Discretion; but without doubt the Axe must be preferred to the handle.
[Walks about discontentedly.


SCENE X.
Enter Philippa, at a good distance. Phi. to her self.] Sure there is no sort of
Affliction, or Misery in this World, but what I Have undergone; so many Troubles
fall upo' me at once, which overwhelm, and tear me all in pieces. Poverty, and
Fears possess my Soul, and I Have no ground for hopes. -- My poor Girl's fallen
into the Enemies Hands; and I can hear no tale or tidings of her.


Per. What Stranger can that be, who is so mightily full of Fears, and heavy
Complaints? [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] They said, Periphanes dwelt somewhere hereabouts.


Per. She talks of me: I fancy she wants Lodgings. [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] I Would willingly hire a Porter, to show me either the Man or
his House.


Per. Certainly I must know her. I Have seen that Face before, but I cannot tell
where. -- Is It she, that I imagine or no? [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] Bless me! I must have seen that Man before now. [She stands
still.


Per. Sure enough it is the poor Woman of Epidaurus, I had formerly to do with,
-- [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] The Case is plain, it is he that first enjoyed me at
Epidaurus.


Per. -- And there had that Daughter by her, who is now at home wi' me. [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] What if I go up to him?


Per. I don't well know whether I had best go see if it be she or no. [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] If it shou'dn't be he, as so many Years make me suspect, --


Per. Length of time makes me doubt of the Person, and fills my Head wi'
Scruples. For fear it should prove otherwise, I must go cunningly to work.
[Aside.


Phi. to her self.] -- Then I must use all a Woman's Shifts.


Per. I Will e'n up to her. [Aside.


Phi. to her self.] I Will fall into Discourse with him.


[Here they meet, and join Discourse.] Per. Good morrow to ye, Mistress.


Phi. I thank ye, Sir, both for me and mine.


Per. How then, Mistress?


Phi. A good day to you, Sir. There Is your Compliment returned, you entrusted
me withal.


Per. I don't blame your Fidelity. Or indeed have I any Acquaintance wi' ye?


Phi. If I ben't mistaken in the Person, Sir, I can rub up your memory of
former Acquaintance.


Per. Where did I ever see you?


Phi. That Is an unreasonable Question.


Per. Why so, Mistress?


Phi. Because you would have me put a Gloss upo' your Memory.


Per. You're very sharp.


Phi. No wonder for a Woman.


Per. I dad, better and better? -- D' ye remember me?


Per. Very well.


Per. In Epidaurus, --


Phi. Ah, that Word has brought me to life again.


Per. -- In your young days, how I relieved yours and your Mother's Wants.


Phi. Are you he, whose Love brought me so much Sorrow?


Per. I am. -- How do thou do?


Phi. Very well, and the better to see you so.


Per. Your Hand, my dear. [He takes her by the Hand.


Phi. Take it; and with it, the most sorrowful, and miserable Woman alive.


Per. What makes ye so sad?


Phi. My poor Daughter, I had by you, --


Per. What of her?


Ph. -- -- -- Since she is grown up, is lost: Fallen into the Enemies Hands.
[weeps.


Per. Cheer up and be satisfied, I have her at home, safe and sound. As soon as
my Servant told me she was taken Prisoner, I immediately produced the Money, and
redeemed her. He acquitted himself well and wisely i'this business; though he is a
damnable Rogue in other things.


Phi. Pray let me have a sight of her, if you would ha'me live.


Per. going to his Door] Ho Canthara! Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out; for
here is her Mother.


Phi. Now my Spirits begin to revive.


SCENE XI.
To them enter Acropolistis the Musick-Girl. Acro. Why did you send for me out,
Sir Father?


Per. To see thy nown Mother, Child. -- Go and meet her, and give her a Kiss.
[to Philippa.


Acro. What Mother?


Per. She there, that is ready to dye for want of ye.


Phi. Who Is that you would ha'me kiss?


Per. Your Daughter.


Phi. What this?


Per. Yes.


Phi. What kiss this Creature?


Per. Why not, since she is your own Daughter?


Phi. Sure you have lost your Senses.


Per. I?


Phi. Yes you, Sir.


Per. Why so?


Phi. Because I neither know this Creature, have had any Acquaintance, or so
much as laid Eye on her till now.


Per. I know whence comes your Mistake; she has got other Clothes and Dresses,
since you had her.


Phi. All Creatures ha'their several ways of knowing their Young. But I declare
I never knew this.


Per. aside.] Heavens bless us all! What strange thing is this? Have I made my
House a Bawdy House? have I brought Strangers into it, who have sucked up my
Mon^? -- Pray why did you kiss me, and call me Father? Why stand ye like a
Mum-chance? What are ye tonguety'd? [to Acropolistis very angrily.


Acro. What would y' have me say?


Per. She declares she is none o'your Mother.


Acro. If she will not, she may let it alone. By Iago, I Will be my Mother's
Daughter in spite of her Teeth. It Is n't fair Play to force her to be my
Mother, whether she will or no.


Per. But why a plague did ye call me Father?


Acro. That Is your Fault, not mine. Did I ever call you Father, till you called
me Daughter? And if she called me Daughter, I Would give her the Title of Mother:
But she disowns me for a Daughter, and I Will cast her off for a Mother. In
short, I Am not to blame; I Have only said as my Master Epidicus taught me.


Per. Undone! I Have pulled an old House upo' my Head. [Aside.


Acro. Have I offended ye in any thing? [Fawningly.


Per. By Cocks nowns, call me Father again, and I Will break your Neck, you
damned Bitch Whore.


Acro. I Will obey ye, Sir. When ever you have a Mind to be my Father, you may; if
not, do as you please.


Phi. What? Did you buy her, thinking she had been your Daughter? What tokens
had you for it?


Per. None.


Phi. What made ye believe her to be our Child?


Per. I had it from my Rogue Epidicus.


Phi. Tho your Servant has been mistaken, I hope you know her again.


Per. Know her, how should I? when I never saw her but once since she came into
the World.


Phi. I Am in a wretched condition [She weeps.


Per. Prithee, Woman, leave weeping; go in and cheer up. I Will warrant ye find
her out somewhere or other.


Phi. 'Twas a young Athenian Gentleman that bought her.


Per. I Will find him out: Be satisfied. Go in, and guard this young Shipton, the
Devil's Grandchild. -- I Will leave all Works to go hunt out this Dog Epidicus.
If I catch him, I Will put him past playing any more Rogues Tricks. [Exeunt
severally.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Stratippocles at one part of the Stage, and Epidicus at another. Stra.
to himself. THis Banker vexes me strangly, that he dosn't come for his Money,
nor bring the Girl I bought at the Army. -- But hold, yonder comes Epidicus.
What Is the matter with him, that he looks so damnable sowrly on it?


Epi. to himself.] If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods together,
they could n't save poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot. I saw m' old Master, at
a distance, buying some Manicles, and Apecides with him. Now I more than Fancy,
that these Fellows are searching for my Rogueship. They Have certainly smelt out
the business, and discovered all my damned Tricks.


Stra. How do thou, m'old Implement?


Epi. Wretchedly, Jove knows.


Stra. What Is befallen ye?


Epi. Prithee, gi'me something, and equip me for a March, before I be snap'd
up. For the two old Cullies are just at my heels, with their swinging great
Kill-Devils for Execution.


Stra. Pshaw, never flinch, Man.


Epi. Troth, no more I should n't, had I any hopes of relief.


Stra. I Will secure thee, my Lad.


Epi. Faith, these old Dogs will secure me better by half, if they catch me. --
But what young Lass comes yonder, with that reverend old Gentleman?


SCENE II.
Enter the Banker, with Thelestis, at a good distance. Stra. It Is the Banker,
wi'the Girl I bought at the Army.


Epi. Is yon she?


Stra. Is n't she just as I told ye? Mind her.


Epi. Is It indeed?


Stra. View her well, Epidicus: Nothing but Charms from Top to Toe. -- Is n't
she? Observe, look: There Is a delicate piece of Painting for ye.


Epi. You foretell as delicate a Piece upo' my Back; which old Apelles and
Zeuxes will both draw with their birching Pencils.


Stra. to the Banker.] Strange! I admire at your coming so slowly: a Fellow
wi'wooden Legs would ha'been here in half the Time.


Bank. Why, truly, I staid all this Time for her.


Stra. Nay, if 'twas her Pleasure, you came fast enough of Conscience.


Bank. Come, come; dispatch me, and tell m' out the Money, that I may not make my
Company stay for me.


Stra. It Is told already.


Bank. Take this Bag, and put it in [Gives him a Bag.


Stra. Wisely contrived! Stay a Minute, and I Will bring y' out the Money.


Bank. Pray be quick.


Stra. It Is within here. [Exit Stratippocles.


SCENE III.
Epidicus, the Banker, and Thelestis. Epi. Do my Eyes fail me, or not? Is Not
this Thelestis, Periphanes's and Philippa's Daughter, begot at Epidaurus, and
brought up at Thebes? [Softly.


The. over-hearing him] Who can this be, that knows mine and my Parents Name?


Epi. Don't ye know me?


The. Not for the present.


Epi. Can ye call to mind, how one Birthday o'yours, I brought ye some Golden
Bracelets?


The. I do, Friend.


Epi. Besides, a Crescent, and a Gold Ring?


The. Art thou he?


Epi. Yes indeed; and yon Gentleman's your Brother, by the same Father, tho by
another Mother.


The. Pray, is my Father alive?


Epi. Yes, and now you may set your Heart at rest.


The. If all this be true, the Gods have done for me beyond m'Expectation.


Epi. Nay, it is no advantage for me to deceive ye.


SCENE IV.
To them enter Stratippocles, with a Bag of Money. Stra. giving it to the
Banker] Here Is your Money, Mr. Banker: Just an hundred Pounds. If you find any
bad Money in it, I Will change it.


Bank. Very well, Sir. -- Your Servant, Sir. [Exit Banker.


SCENE V.
Stratippocles, Epidicus and Thelestis. Stra. to Thelestis] Now, my Dear,
you are mine.


The. Thy Sister, on good troth, as you will soon find -- Brother you're happily
met.


Stra. Has she lost her Senses?


Epi. Not for calling you Brother.


Stra. What a shame, am I transformed into a Brother, the Time I could go and
come back?


Epi. Be thankful, and receive your good Fortune without any Noise.


Stra. O Sister, you have lost me as soon as found me.


Epi. Hold your Tongue, Child. By my Art, I Have secured your Mistress, the
Musick-Girl, for ye at home; and by the same Art and Contrivance, have ransomed
your Sister.


Stra. It Is true, Epidicus.


Epi. Go in then, and order a Bath to be got ready. I Will tell ye the whole
Story at more leisure.


Stra. Come this way, Sister.


Epi. going toward Cheribulus's House] I Will send Thesprion over to ye. -- But
pray remember, if the old Man be in wrath, for you and your Sister to be of my
Side, and sweeten him up all what you're able.


Stra. That will be easy to do. [Exit Stratippocles and Thelestis.


SCENE VI.
Epidicus alone, by Cheribulus's Door. Good Thesprion, get the back way to our
House, and help to plead for me. It Is a plaguey Business, tho I Am less afraid
of the Old Fellows than before. -- [He goes from the Door] Well, I Would best go in
tho, and take care o'these New Comers. At the same time, I Will tell my Master
Stratippocles all I know of this business. I Will not flee for the matter, but am
resolved to stay at home. The Old Man shall never say, I had th'impudence to
challenge my Master at running. -- I Will enter then; I Have stayed too long
already. [He is going off, but espying Periphanes and Apecides, he starts, and
retires on one Side, observing them.


SCENE VII.
Enter Periplianes, and Apecides, with Bonds, etc. Apecides limping at a
distance behind. Per. entring] -- Has n't this Rascal damnably imposed upon us,
for Men of our gravity?


Ape. 'Sbudikins, you have almost walked me off my Legs tho.


Per. 'St, silence! Let me alone to catch the Rogue.


Ape. I tell ye, Neighbor, you would ten times better pitch upon another to go
wi'ye, instead of me: For by hobling after ye so long, I Have got such horrible
Swellings of my Knees that I Am quite foundered.


Per. What a devilish Company of Tricks has this Rogue played us to day? I Am
sure he has squeas'd out the Heart, Blood, and Guts of my Purse.


Ape. A Curse on him, for me; troth, I believe he is the Devil's Match-Lighter,
who burns all that touch him, and Scorches all that come nigh him.


Epi. peeping out] Pshaw, I Have a dozen Gods at command more than Heaven will
afford one, to stand up, and fight for me. I Have got my Guards and Supplies
within doors, for all my Rogueries. I laugh at m'Enemies Preparations.


Per. Where, a Duce, shall I find this Rascal?


Ape. Excuse my Attenda^e, and seek him in the bottom of the Sea, for me.


Epi. showing himself] Why do you look for me, Sir? Why all these Pains? or why
should ye weary the Gentleman? Here I am. Do You think I was running away;
leaving the House; or so much as avoiding your presence? I don't beg ye to
spare me. Would ye fetter me? I Am ready for ye. You Have got your Instruments; I
saw ye buy 'em. What stay ye for? About it, Sir.


Per. Strange! the Fellow calls for Punishment first.


Epi. Why don't ye bind me, Sir?


Ape. Faith, this is the most inveterate Rogue!


Epi. Truly, good Mr. Apecides, I don't desire you to interceed for me; you
needn't trouble your self.


Ape. That Is easily granted, Mr. Epidicus.


Epi. to Periphanes] Why stay ye, Sir?


Ape. For your advice, good Sir.


Epi. It Is my advice, not yours, that you bind me presently.


Per. That Is not my desire.


Epi. No, Sir? -- Bind me.


Per. I Would rather examine ye without it.


Epi. You Will get nothing out of me.


Ape. to Periphanes] The Dog is preparing some back stroke for ye: What new
Engine he has set a going I cannot tell.


Epi. Po, you lose Time, as long as I Am at Liberty. Tie me up, I say, and bind
me as hard as you can.


Per. I tell ye, I Would rather examine ye as you are.


Epi. And I tell ye, you will get nothing out of me.


Per. What shall I do wi'this Fellow?


Ape. What should ye? Humor him for once.


Epi. You Are a rare Man, Mr. Apecides.


Per. Let Us see your Hands Epidicus holds out his Hands. then.


Epi. Ay, with all my Heart. -- Come, bind 'em strait; and don't spare me a
Periphanes binds his Hands. bit.


Per. Now judge ye, if they ben't done well.


Epi. Very well. -- Now, Sir, examine me. Ask me what Questions you please.


Per. Imprimis, Rogue, upo' what Assurance did you say that Slave was my
Daughter, that was bought three Days ago?


Epi. My Pleasure, Sir: that Assurance.


Per. How? upo' your Pleasure, Sirrah?


Epi. Yes; and I Will lay any Wager wi'ye that she is --


Per. My Daughter, when her Mother disowns her?


Epi. If you be sure she is none of her Mother's Daughter, lay your Guinea
against my Penny.


Per. That Is all Trick. -- But who is this same Woman?


Epi. Not to mince the matter, she is your Son's Mistress.


Per. Didn't I gi'ye threescore and fifteen Pounds, to redeem my Daughter?


Epi. I own it, Sir; and wi'that Money I bought this Musick-girl, your Son's
Mistress, instead of her. -- In that Business, I fingered away threescore and
fifteen Pounds.


Per. But what made ye top this last Musick-girl upo' me?


Epi. Truly, Sir, I confess it; and found it proper for my Design.


Per. Then what is become of the Money I delivered to ye?


Epi. I Will tell ye, Sir, -- I gav't neither to a Miser, nor a Prodigal, but e'n
to your own Son Stratippocles.


Per. How dare ye do that?


Epi. 'Twas my pleasure, Sir.


Per. What a cursed impudent Dog is this?


Epi. You insult over me as though I were your Slave.


Per. I shall be glad when y' have got your Freedom.


Epi. And I deserve it now.


Per. You deserve it, sirrah?


Epi. Go in, and see; I Will soon convince ye that I do.


Per. What Is the meaning of this?


Epi. You Will see in a Minute: do but go in.


Per. Hah! Here must be something more than ordinary. -- Good Neighbor have an
Eye to the Rogue. [Exit Periphanes.


SCENE VIII.
Apecides, and Epidicus. Ape. Prithee, Epidicus, what is this business?


Epi. Faith it is a damned unreasonable thing that I should stand bound, for
helping of him to a lost Daughter. [Grumbling.


Ape. Ha'ye found his Daughter, say ye?


Epi. Yes indeed, and she is within too. How plaguey hard it is t'ha' my good
Services so ill rewarded:


Ape. We have been seeking ye all the Town over, till we are as weary as Dogs.


Epi. Faith, I Am as weary wi'your finding, as you wi' your seeking.


SCENE IX.
Enter Periphanes to them. Per. to them within] You need n't beg so heartily:
I Am satisfied of his Innocence, that he deserves to be let go. -- [to Apecides]
Come, unbind Apecides goes up to him. his Hands.


Epi. stopping Apecides] Let m' alone. [Surlily.


Per. Let him unbind ye.


Epi. No.


Per. That Is not fair.


Epi. Faith, I Will not suffer't, till you have given me satisfaction.


Per. That Is nothing but just and reasonable. -- Come, I Will give ye a new pair
o'Shoes, a good Coat, and a Cloak.


Epi. What else?


Per. Your Freedom.


Epi. But after that; when a Man's Time's just out, he ought to have some good
thing to be nibling on.


Per. You shall. -- I Will provide a supper.


Epi. Troth, if you will not ask me forgiveness, I Will not agree. [Merrily.


Per. Well, I do, honest Epidicus, and beg your pardon, if any of my foolish
Mistakes have done y' an Injury. But in recompense, here take your Freedom.


Epi. Troth, I Am loath to pardon ye; but I cannot tell how to help it. -- Come,
undo my Hands, as soon as you please. [Apecides unbinds his Hands.


SCENE X.
Enter the Company of Players, who take up Epidicus, and turn to the
Spectators. Comp. Here Is a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by
his Cunning. Up with your Clo^ks, Gallants, and vail your Caps;
Farewell: We beg your Favor, and your Claps.



[Exeunt Omnes. The end of Epidicus.
REMARKS UPON EPIDICUS.
THis Play, Plautus was always very fond of, and reckons it his best; but as
for the general Deserts of it, I shall determine nothing. The Subject of it, is
the Discovery of Thelestis, and all the Lines of the Play tend to that Center,
tho there is no manner of appearance of it till the Fifth Act, which makes the
Poet's Art the more fine and excellent. Tho the Subject is not perfectly
single, for Stratippocles loses a Mistress as he finds a Sister, yet there is
perfectly an Unity of Action, and, like the rest of his Plays, without any
Under-Plots. This Play is very short, yet there is great Variety in the Plot
and Incidents, and an excellent Management through the whole: So close it is,
tho perfectly clear, that it requires some Attention to comprehend all exactly,
at the first Reading. Besides this, it is very remarkable, That Plautus has
truly drawn the People of his Age, as the Distrust of Old Men, the Eagerness of
Young, the Vanity of Soldiers, the Impudence of Courtizans, and the Treachery
of Slaves.

ACT I.
The First SCENE.
THis First Scene explains the very same to the Audience, that Plautus's
Prologues generally used to do, which is far more natural than to do it in a
Prologue. This Scene, in the Original, is also very remarkable for an unusual
Air of Wit and Sharpness; and there are not many Scenes in this Author that
come up to it in its Fineness and Neatness of Railery.

Page 84. l. 11. You're a puny Town-Chitterlin] Scurra es. The Word, Scurra,
signifies properly, a Buffoon, or Parisite; but since these sort of People for
the most part seek after the softness and Luxury of Courts and Cities, and
abhor the Hardships of Camps, it here signifies, Urbanus, and is opposed to
Militaris; so that this Translation is the true sense, tho it may appear
otherwise at the first sight.

Ibid. l. 17, etc. Off and on -- Epi. The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate
that damned Variety most mortally.] Vary. Ep. Qui vary valent, caprigenam
hominem non placet mihi, neque pantherinum genus. That Word, Varius, was often
used by the Slaves of those Times in a jocose sense, to signify the streaks of
ones Back, after he was whipped, which was of Various Colors, as in the first
Act of Pseudolus, Ita ego vostra latera loris faciam ut valide varia sint.
Thesprion, by Vary, meant nothing but, Sometimes well and sometimes ill, or,
Off and on, as I have translated it; but Epidicus took it in this last sense,
and takes an occasion presently to call those who vary valent, those Laced
People, Caprigenam, ac pantherinum genus, that is, of the Race of Wild Beasts,
such as, Goats, and Panthers, whose Skins were of various Colors. A close
Translation here, would have lost much of the Beauty of the Original; therefore
I have taken a little more Liberty, and by that means, the Force of the
Repartee, is in a great Measure preserved.

Ibid. l. 30, etc. Hear me, and you shall be heard in your turn. These. The very
Words of a Judge, in truth.] Operam da: opera redibitur tibi. Th. Ius dicis.
The Phrases, Operam da, and, Opera redibitur, are proper Terms used in their
Courts by their Judges upon all occasions; and this made Thesprion answer him,
Ius dicis. If the Beauty of it be any ways lost in our Tongue, it is more
because it will not be so readily perceived, than for any other Reason I can
assign.

Page 85. l. 4. Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honor's Pate.]
Lictores duo, duo viminei fasces virgarum. It (...) customary for the Pretors
(which were much the same with our Lord Chief-Iustices) to have Rods carried
before them, and upon this Custom consists all the sharpness of the Jest, these
Rods being the most usual Punishment for Slaves. This is much lost in our
Tongue.

Ibid. l. 9. What Is become of my Master Stratippocles' s Arms.] This Question
would have been impertinent upon our Stage; but Thesprion being Stratippocles's
Armor-bearer, who ought to have had 'em with him at that Time, the Question
was very proper.

Ibid. l. 22. Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him, etc.] This, and a
good deal more, is an allusion to the Story of Achilles, and the sharpness of
it appeared more among the Romans, than it does to us; because they were far
better acquainted with this Story than we are.

Ibid. l. 31. Where Is my Master Stratippocles? etc] Here begins a Narration of
what passed before the opening of the Stage. It is very short, and extreme
lively; and the Poet most ingeniously manages it by the Mouths of two several
Persons, who both have a part in it; and this still makes it more diverting,
and more natural. But nothing can seem with less Design or Affectation than
Epidicus's part of it.

Scene the Second.
Page 88. l. 8, etc. What a Rogue was I t'impose upo' the Old Man, etc.] Here
Epidicus goes on with the Narration of what happened before the Action began upo'
the Stage, and that in so few Words, and so accidentally, that nothing could
appear more proper, and more Natural; and indeed scarce any thing seems more
difficult than making Narrations in Monologues appear necessary, and natural.

Scene the Third.
Page 89. l. 1, etc. Thus I Have told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given
ye a full account of my Troubles and Love.] It is to be supposed that
Stratippocles had told his Friend Cheribulus, all what Thesprion had told
Epidicus in the first Scene. Thus the Poet ingeniously contrives to make
Stratippocles go on just where Thesprion had left off; for if he had told the
whole Story upon the Stage, the Spectators would have been palled and tired out
with Repetitions.

Ibid. l. 9. Tho truly, to her Chastity, I never offered the least Violence or
Incivility.] This is an extraordinary material Passage, which ought not to be
forgot by the Spectators, especially when they come to know this Woman, he
talks of, to be his Sister. What is still more remarkable, is, the Poet's
finding such an ingenious Pretext for bringing it in.

Ibid. l. 23. I Would sooner see such Friends starve in a Prison than live in a
Palace.] Malim hujusmodi mihi amicos furno mersos, quam foro. This Passage is a
little difficult. Stratippocles's saying, He had rather see such Friends as
Cheribulus, in an Oven rather than the Market, was as much as to say, he had
rather have him dead than alive; or at least, he would have him in a miserable
confined Condition, rather than in a happy and free State; so that the Liberty
I have taken here, is a nigher Imitation of the Latin, than a close Translation
could have been.

Scene the Fourth.
Page 91. l. 26, etc. In these Brains must I have a Committee of the whole
House, to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to carry on
this vigorous War.] Ego de re argentaria jam Senatum convocabo in cord
consiliarium, cui potissimum judicatur bellum, unde argentum auferam. Here
Epidicus pleasantly alludes to the Senates Custom of raising Money for any Wars,
or the like; therefore I think it most properly translated in the Phrases, and
Terms, generally used in our Parliament House.

ACT II.
THE first Interval is filled up with Epidicus's Preparations to cheat
Periphanes, and with Stratippocles's waiting at his Friend's House for the
Success of 'em.

Scene the First.
Page 92. l. 8, etc. What need ye be ashamed of marrying one of a good Family,
though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you believe, you had your Daughter by,
that is now at home.] This is a very good Preparation for to make way for the
tenth Scene of the fourth Act.

Ibid. l 14, etc. For ye never can look upon her Grave, but y'offer Thanks for
her Departure.] Cujus quoties sepulcrum vides, sacrificas illico Orco hostiis.
It was a common Custom in those Days, when a Man has got rid of an ill Wife,
that makes way for another, to offer a Sacrifice to Pluto for his good Fortune.
But this was more than a Translation need to take notice of.

Scene the Second.
Page 93. l. 11, etc. I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I
cannot tell. Per. Ay, that goes to the Heart of me.] This is all designed by the
Poet, to help forward Epidicus's Cheat, and to make it seem more likely, and
probable.

Ibid. l. 15, etc. The old Men ha'now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make
Incursions, and snub 'em o'their Money.] Ipsi hi quidem mihi dant viam, quo
pacto ab se argentum auferam. The Original is a Metaphor taken from the
Magistrates, who, when they appear in public, have their Officers to go before
'em to clear the way. The Translation, is a Metaphor taken from the Campaign,
which, in our Language, is more intelligible, and comical, than perhaps the
other would have been.

Page 94. l. 10, etc. All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are
discharged, and sent home.] Here begins Epidicus's Story, by which he designed
to cheat the Old Man. Though there appears something of Grosness in it, yet it is
very ingeniously, and cunningly managed, and the Discourse very natural and
diverting. The Truth of the Peace, Epidicus's have, Apecides's surprise, and
Periphanes's concern for his Son, are sufficient Circumstances to have made it
pass with wiser Men. But what is most remarkable, is, the Poet's Design in
helping out the main Incident to it, Thelestis's Discovery, when Epidicus only
thought of obliging his young Master. This the Spectators could never foresee,
and is the chief cunning of a Dramatick Poet.

Ibid. l. 30. There I found her, attended by four several Musicians playing.]
Epidicus said this, to fright Periphanes with the great Pride and Costliness of
his Son's Mistress, and to bring about his cheating Designs the easier.

Ibid. l. antepenult. etc. And is in a fair way to ruin his Riches and
Reputation, his own self, and your Worships self.] Ubi fidemque, remque, seque,
teque properat perdere. The Imitations of Rhimes and Gingles, are often
dangerous to Translators; for, besides their being often affected, they as many
times come short of the Original. How far this is applicable to my self in this
Passage, I leave to every one to judge.

Page 95. l. 4, etc. How a duce was she dressed then? with a Cloak or a Robe,
or had she a Milliner's Shop upon her Back? There Is variety enough. Epi. A
Woman carry a whole Shop upon her Back? Per. Where Is the wonder? You may daily
meet these Creatures in the Sreets with Houses and Lands upo' their Backs.] Quid
erat induta? an regillam induculam, an mendiculam, an impluviatam? ut istae
faciunt vestimentis nomina. Ep. Utin' impluvium induta eat! Pe. Quid istuc est
mirabile? quasi non fundis exornatae multae incedant per vias. The Liberty I
have taken in this Passage, was to endeavor to preserve the force of the Jest,
which consists in the playing upon the Word, Impluviatam. To make it clear, the
Word, Impluvium, signifies a^ square open Place, which the Romans often had in
their Houses to let in Rain for their use; or a square Courtyard, that
received the Rain in at four Water Spouts; from whence, a Habit they had which
was made with four sides, or four Pieces, was called Vestimentum impluviatum.
Here Epidicus takes an occasion from this word to admire at a Woman's being able
to wear a Courtyard upon her back: Periphanes, carrying on the Humor, tells
him it is no wonder, since they frequently wear whole Houses and Lands, meaning
the value of 'em, which their Prodigal Sparks had bestowed on 'em. As for the
liberty I Have taken, where a Jest is lost in the Translation, another ought to
be invented, which comes nighest the Force and Design of the Original.

Ibid. l. 14. etc. There Is your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown, your
Loose-Gown, your Nightgown, your Riding-Gown, your Imbroider'd, and Speckl'd
Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs, Tours and
Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colors of the Rainbow,
and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and Monsters in
the Universe.] Tunicam rullam, tunicam spicam, linteolum caesicium, indusiatam,
patagiatam, caltulam, aut crocutulam, supparum, aut subminiam, ricam,
basilicum, aut exoticum, cumatile aut plumatile, cerinum aut melinum. Gerrae
maximae! I have been forced to take a more than ordinary liberty in this
Passage, because we want Words to answer those in the Original, though three or
four of the first may do tolerably well. In such a place as this, if the Humor
and Design of the Raillery be but carried on as in the rest of the Translation,
it is as much as I aim at. The explanation of these Latin words, can be of
little use in respect of the Beauties of the Play (the main thing which I aim
at in my Remarks) therefore I shall not trouble the Reader, nor my self, so
much as that comes to.

Ibid. l. 22, etc. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys. Epi.
What are those, Sir? Per. Your damned Night-Rails.] Cani quoque etiam ademptum
'st nomen. Ep. Qui? Pe. Vocant Laconicum. The Women, it seems, had a sort of
Dresses called Laconicks, and since many of their Dogs had the very same Name;
Periphanes satirically reprehends the Women of his time, as borrowing their
Dresses Names from Dogs. This is lost in our Language, therefore I have
attempted to preserve the sharpness of it another way, and for that Liberty,
see the last Sentence of the Remark before the last.

Pa. 98. l. 3. I Have a trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.]
This new Trick was a cunning Contrivance of Epidicus's, to keep Periphanes out
of the way, not doubting but to manage Apecides with ease.

Ibid. l. 23. Epidicus, I gi' ye Thanks.] Epidice, habeas gratiam. As Madam
Dacier observes, this is spoken by Periphanes, and not by Apecides, as it is in
all the common Books.

Scene the Third.
Page 99. l. 18, etc. And stick as close to my Back, as an old Rook to a rich
Cully.] Ne ulmos parasitos faciet, quae usque attondeant. That is, Lest his
Elming Parasites should eat me up, or, devour me to the Bone. This is a
pleasant Thought, but will not do in our Language, to have done it, His Rods
should stick to my Skin, as a Parasite to a Lord's Table, would have been no
more Liberty than was necessary to make the Thought clear in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 24, etc. I Will soon produce one, and teach her her Lesson, how to
carry on the Cheat handsomely to our old Gentleman.] This Trick of Epidicus's,
is an excellent Preparation by the Poet, for what happened in the seventh and
eighth Scenes of the fourth Act; not only for the pleasant Diversion to the
Spectators, but chiefly for the Discovery of Epidicus's Rogueries, and
consequently by bringing about the main Plot more dexterously. This neither
Epidicus or the Spectators could foresee, but the Poet had it in his Eye all
the time.

Ibid. l. ult. OF this old silly Put.] Ab damnoso seen. The word Damnosus, is
an excellent word in this Case, being both Active and Passive, and signifies,
One who has spent much, or, One who has suffered much. We have nothing to
answer it fully in our Tongue, that I know of, except those of Cully, Bubble,
or Put, will; and the true meaning of these, especially the two latter, seem
not yet well fixed.

ACT III.
THE second Interval is filled up with Epidicus's receiving the Money of
Periphanes; and with Stratippocles's waiting for him at Cheribulus's House.

Scene the First.
Page 100. l. 3, etc. I Would gi' the World to know whether there be any Hopes or
not.] It is very remarkable that throughout this Play, Stratippocles never met
with his Father on the Stage; and further, he endeavors to avoid him till the
latter end of the last Act, when Epidicus has brought about his Design,
therefore lies incognito at his Friend Cheribulus's House: Yet notwithstanding
all these Inconveniences which attend Stratippocles, the Poet has ingeniously
found very probable Pretexts for his appearing those four times he does, of
which this is a remarkable one.

Ibid. l. 17, etc. You Will meet wi' something, by some ways, some means, from
some Place, or from some Body, etc.] Here Cheribulus is hard put to it by
Stratippocles, therefore he is forced to talk a little obscurely, and with
hesitation; for the more clear discovery of which to the Reader, there ought to
have been Breaks, or Dashes at each Comma, in this Translation, but that defect
I did not discover time enough.

Scene the Second.
Epidicus came exactly in the right time to make up the breach between the
young Gentlemen; and here Plautus's Conduct is very remarkable in ordering his
Business so within Doors, that is, his receiving the Money and Instructions, so
that he must of necessity come at that time and no other.

Page 101. l. 20, etc. You see, Sir, as long as I can please, and oblidge you,
I Am sufficiently prodigal of m' own Back.] This is made use of by the Poet as a
fair Pretext for Epidicus's bringing in his new Tricks and Devices without any
affectation, or seeming Design of instructing the Audience; a piece of Art
which few of our Poets seem to observe, but Mr. Dryden. Another thing is very
remarkable, that is, Plautus's excellent Management in relating Epidicus's
Cheats by piece meal, some in this Scene, and others elsewhere, when the
relating all together, would have so much over-charg'd the Audiences Memory, as
to have dulled a great part of their Pleasure, a Fault too common in many of
our Comedies, than which nothing can be more dangerous to the ruining of the
whole Success.

Ibid. l. 24. By making your Father guilty of Bag-slaught^r.] Quia ego tuum
patrem faciam perenticidam. The Joke of this Passage consists in the sound of
the words, Perenticida, a Cutpurse, and Parenticida, a Paricide; therefore so
nigh as the sound of Bag-slaughter and Manslaughter, is to Perenticida and
Parenticida; and as much as Paricide is greater than Manslaughter, so much is
the difference between the Original and Translation.

Ibid. l. 26. Hold up his Hand at the Bar, but I make him hold up his Hand at
his Bags.] Peratim ductare: at ego follatim ductitabo. The whole Beauty of this
Passage, I believe, cannot be preserved in our Tongue. Epidicus here carries on
the fancy of Perenticida and Parenticida, and the Poet has luckily hit upon a
Line that exactly agrees with either. For the common punishment of Paricides,
was to put 'em into a Sack, with a Cock, Serpent, and Ape, and then throw 'em
into the River. Now the word, Ductare, signifies equally, To bring a Man to
punishment, or, to cheat him; so that the Phrase, Peratim ductare, agreed with
both cases, because Pera was either the Sack for the Paricide, or the old Man's
Purse. Follatim ductare, is the same thing, only Follis was a much larger Sack
than Pera. So that the natural sense of this, without any quibling, is, I don't
cheat him by dribling Purses, but by large Bags; but I would not do it that
way, for then I must have lost more of the design of the Original than now I
have. Madam Dacier has made no Translation at all for this and the last Passage.

Page 102. l. 4, etc. * By buying her himself, beforehand; and so to remove her
to some by-place. Now will I top another upon him, that shall do his Business
as well every jot.] None of this Passage is in the Original; but it is most
certain that there are some Lines lost, by what follows; therefore, I have been
forced to add this to make up the sense. The words are none of my own
Invention, but almost a just Translation of what Madam Dacier had filled up
this Place withal, to wit, Ut enim praestinet argento, priusquam veniat filius;
Ubi erit empta, ut aliquo ex urbe amoveat venificam.
Nunc ostendam ei fidicinam aliqua conductitiam.


Ibid. l. 25, etc. Instead of the threescore and fifteen Pounds, to name
sixscore Guinea's.] Argenti minas se habere quinquaginta. This Plot was well
laid, and ingeniously contrived, but this Passage has made it so obscure in the
Original, that several Interpreters have quite mistaken the sense; so that I
was forced to add above half a Line in the Translation to clear all.

Ibid. l. 32. Y' outdo Matchiavil for Policy.] Vorsutior es quam rota
figularis. That is, You're more crafty than a Potter's Wheel. But this does
poorly in our Language, therefore I have turned it. If I had translated it,
You Have as many turns as a Whirligig, it would have been nigher the Original,
and might have done tolerably enough in the Mouth of Epidicus, but not in
Stratippocles.

Scene the Third.
Page 103. l. ult. I Am safely arrived at the Camp wi' this rich Booty.] Cum
praeda in castras redeo Here ends the the third Act, as plainly appears from
the Cessation of Action upon the Stage, and other Circumstances. The Common
Books are all false in this Point, who make the third Act to end about 140
Verses further, where there is no clearing the Stage, nor no manner of Grounds
for it.

ACT IV.
THE third Interval is filled up with Epidicus's going to the Slave-merchants,
and procuring the Musick-woman for Apecides: And also with Cheribulus's waiting
for his Mistress at his Friend's House.

Scene the First.
This short Scene is very moral, and very natural for a considering cool-headed
Old Man to speak. It is observable that the Ancients were full of these sort of
grave Passages in their Comedies, as well as Tragedies, and our Author was not
much behind-hand, notwithstanding his Inclination to Merryment upon every
slight and trivial occasion.

Scene the Third.
Page 105. l. 7. There Is vast difference between the Education of a young Maid,
and a Curtizan.] The ancient Athenians, and Romans were rather more careful of
their Daughters Honesty than we; and to attempt the Chastity of a Virgin, was
no less than a Capital Crime.

Scene the Fourth.
Ibid. l. 17, 18. Without doubt you have an admirable Servant, etc.] Here begins
a very pleasant short Narration of what was done off the Stage; the very Plot
and Subject makes it so, and not the Style. But the chief Design of it is for a
Preparation to make the Seventh, but. especially the Eighth Scene of this Act,
more diverting. See more of that Preparation, in the second Remark in the third
Scene of the Second Act.

Page 106. l. 3, etc. All the while, I did as though I was a silly clod-pated
Ass, that could not say Bo to a Goose. Per. You could do no otherwise.] Ego
illic me autem sic assimulabam quasi stolidum, cum bardum me faeciebam. Per.
Imo ita decet. This, Imo ita decet, is an equivocal Answer to the foregoing
Sentence; as is, You could do no otherwise, the same; it being taken either in
a good or bad Sense. This is very pleasant when rightly apprehended.

Scene the Fifth.
Ibid. l. 18, etc. What silly Fellow's yon, who comes, tossing and brandishing
his Cloak so?] Sed hic quis est quem advenientem conspicor, suam qui undantem
chlamydem quassando facit? These two Verses are misplaced in all the Editions
of Plautus that I ever saw; they placing them the last in the Scene, whereas
they should go immediately before Atque haec stultitia'st, etc. Five Lines
before. And this has made many Interpreters force a Sense out of the Verse,
Atque haec stultitia'st, me illi vitio vortere, which the Author never intended.

Scene the Sixth.
That such a considerable Incident as the Rhodian Captain's coming, might not
seem to be made only to serve the Poet's Design, he has wisely taken care to
prepare it beforehand, in the latter end of the Second Scene of the Second
Act, so that here can be nothing precipitated, or any thing unnatural. This is
a Rule that ought to be carefully observed by all Dramatick Poets.

Page 107. l. 7, etc. I Have achieved that by my great and mighty Valor, that
all Mankind ought to gi'me Thanks.] It is observable, that Plautus seldom
brings a Soldier upon the Stage, but he is a blundring, rough-hewn, swaggering
Fellow. Terences's Thraso is just of the same Character, but more moderatly
drawn than Plautus's Soldier.

Page 108. l. 5, etc. I intend to give her her Freedom, and make her Partner
i'my Bed.] Here our noble Captain's Character is hansomly carried on, for he
does not only want Politeness and Civility, but you see he wants common
Discretion too,

Scene the Eighth.
Page 110. l. 9, etc. I heard young Stratippocles, rich Periphanes' s Son, took
care to get her freed in his absence. Per. 'S death, I must run my Country if
all this be true.] This was Acropolistis the Musick-girl, whom Periphanes
himself had freed, taking her all this while for his Daughter Thelestis, and
knew nothing to the contrary; which much startled him to hear that his Son had
freed, Acropolistis, one he knew nothing of. Periphanes's Complaints, were all
for Epidicus's last Cheats; for as yet he did not so much as suspect the first,
to wit his imposing upon him with Acropolistis instead of his Daughter. So that
here is an excellent Contrivance of the Poet's to raise new Troubles, and add
new Pleasure to the Spectators in the last Scene of this Act, and make it the
most diverting of all, by causing Periphanes Troubles to come one after
another, and such too as he thought himself most secure from.

Scene the Ninth.
Ibid. l. 25, etc. Shall I, who ha'signed so many Warrants and Edicts, suffer
this Rascal to go unpunished?] Qui in tantis positus sum sententiis, eamne ego
sinam impune? This is a very hard Passage, and Interpreters have explained it a
great many several ways; but here I have followed Madam Daciers Explanation,
which seems much more probable, and natural, than any other I have seen.

Scene the Tenth.
Page 111. l. 10, etc. My poor Girl's fallen into the Enemies Hands; and I can
hear no Tale or Tidings of her.] Here the Poet gives a very good reason for
Philippa's coming to Athens; so that this Incident is no ways forced or
unnatural. What is remarkable still, is, that though her Daughter had been fallen
into the Enemies Hands a considerable time; yet she, coming from Thebes, could
not arrive before this Time, because the Peace was but just now concluded on
and ratified. For more of the Preparations of this Interview, see the first
Remark in the second Act.

Page 113. l. 24. Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out.] Iube Acropolistidem
prodire filiam ante aedis meam. This Passage is undoubtedly false in all the
Editions of this Author, and instead of Acropolistidem, it ought to be
Thelestidem; for though her name was really Acropolistis, yet Periphanes took her
for his Daughter Thelestis. I suppose it was altered by some Person not well
acquained with the Plot.

Scene the Eleventh.
Page 114. l. 16. All Creatures have their several ways of knowing their Young.]
Aliter catuli long olent, aliter sues, That is to say, Puppies, and Hogs have
better Noses. It is a Proverb taken from nature, but too gross and base for the
refin'dness of our Conversation, therefore I have altered it a little.

Page 115. l. 1. I Have pulled an old House upo' my Head.] Plaustrum Perculi.
This is a Proverb borrowed from Husbandmen; who seldom knew a greater
Misfortune than the overthrowing of a Cart after it was well laden. It seems
mo^e expressive in this Place than our English Proverb.

ACT V.
THE Fourth Interval is filled up with Periphanes's searching for Epidicus, to
punish him; and likewise with Stratippocles's waiting for the Banker and his
Mistress.

Scene the First.
Page 116. l. 6, etc. If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods
together, they could not save poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot.] Here Epidicus
was really in a very sad Condition, and the Stage embarrass'd with all the
Difficulties that could be; yet soon after, our Poet finds a way to bring all
off, even when the Spectators were almost brought to Despair. The doing of this
well, does not only show the greatest Art of a Poet, but gives the Spectators
the greatest pleasure too; and this is the most taking part of a Play, and
indeed, there is nothing like Surprises, if they be natural.

Ibid. l. 17. The two old Cullies.] Duo defloccati senes. The word,
Defloccatus, signifies, Worn out, or, Bald; Epidicus called 'em so, because he
had fleeced 'em, and consequently, Cully is the proper Term in our Language.

Scene the Second.
Page 117. l. 16. A Fellow wi' wooden Legs would have been here in half the
time.] Pedibus pulmoneis qul perhibetur, prius venisset, quam tu advenisti
mihi. Madam Dacier says, That this Passage relates to some Man, brought into a
Proverb by reason of his slowness. The word, Pulmoneus, signifies, Soft, or
Swelled, but that would not have done so well in our Language, especially in
this Place.

Scene the Third.
In this short Scene is the Discovery, or the Unravelling of the Plot, which
seemed to have fallen out purely by accident, and all the Preparations to it
make it appear the most probable in the World. One cunning piece of Art of the
Poet's, is, his adjusting all Circumstances so as she must necessarily come
upon the Stage at this time and no other; and then to make Stratippocles advice
Epidicus to view her well, upon pretense of her Beauty, whereas it was designed
for her Discovery, for there was a necessity for that, since Epidicus had
almost forgot her. Many Observations might be made upon the Preparations to
this Discovery, which I want room to insert.

Scene the Sixth.
Page 120. l. 1. Good Thesprion, get the back way to our House, and help to
plead for me.] It is observable that Thesprion appears but once in the whole
Play, and that in the beginning. But in this case, our modern Poets would not
so soon have lost such a remarkable Character, but have carried it on through
the Play; and this, when it dos not confound the Plot, is an excellency of our
Stage above the Ancients. Plautus is guilty of this Defect in the more
remarkable Character of Artotrogus, in his Miles Gloriosus.

Scene the Seventh.
Ibid. l. 12. For Men of our Gravity.] Nos vetulos decrepitos duos. The word,
Decrepo, signifies to be at the, last gasp, and is a Metaphor taken from a
Candle just a going out, which makes some small Creekings; for this reason, old
Men were often called Decrepites, because as long as they had life, they were
in some condition of making a Noise, that is, of doing some good, either by
their Purses, or their Actions. Our word, Decrepit, being usually taken in a
reproachful sense, would not have well answered it, therefore I have
endeavored to preserve the comical part of the meaning.

Page 121. l. 7, etc. I Have got my Guards and Supplies within doors, for all my
Rogueries.] Epidicus's Supplies were Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philappa, and
Thesprion, whom he had got ready to plead for him; and since such a lucky
Discovery had been made, and the Girls Redemption too, both from Slavery and
the danger of Incest, all by his means, he knew they could not fail of
succeeding; and this made him so very insolent to the two old Men, to their
great Surprise, and the Spectators satisfaction.

Ibid l. 9. I laugh at my Enemies Preparations.] Apolactizo inimicos omnes. The
word, (...), is Greek, and signifies Calce summoveo, or Calce repello; but this
was not necessary to be taken notice of in a Translation.

Page 121. l. 15, etc. D' ye think I was running away; leaving the House; or so
much as avoiding your presence?] Number te fugi? number ab domo absum? number oculis
concessi tuis? Here are three Sentences signifying almost the same thing; and I
believe many Translators would have contented themselves with doing two, or
perhaps but one of 'em; but I always choose exactness when I can do it without
very much Injury to the English. For this see the second Remark on the second
Scene of the third Act of Amphitryon.

Page 122. l. 15. Lay your Guinea against my Penny.] In meum nummum, in tuum
talentum pignus da. That is to say, Lay your Talent against my Sesterce, 187
Pounds to nigh two Pence; this was to show the difference between Masters and
Slaves. This Translation keeps to the Design and Pleasantry of Epidicus e'n as
well as the other.

Scene the Ninth.
Page 124. l. 1. You needn't beg so heartily, etc.] Periphanes speaks this to
the Persons within, whom Epidicus had employed to plead for him. If any of our
modern Poets had had the management of this Place, they would undoubtedly have
brought Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philippa, and Thesprion on to the Stage; but
the Ancients had another taste, and were wonderful careful to avoid any thing
that looked like Confusion, sometimes too scrupulously in this case, as ours
too often offend the other way. Therefore a just Medium ought to be exactly
observed.

Scene the Tenth.
Page 125. l. 1. Here Is a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by
his Cunning.] Hic is homo est, qui libertatem malitia invenit sua.] Here,
perhaps, it may be thought, that Vice appears triumphant. I grant it would upon
our Stage if this were acted; but the Romans were of another Opinion in these
Cases, and they took a peculiar pleasure in seeing a witty Slave cheat a
covetous old Fellow, and the Ingenuity of the Action was often thought
sufficient amends for the Knavery of it.

I shall conclude all with this Remark upon the whole: That the Acts could
never have been more naturally divided. The First, contains the Arrival of
Stratippocles, and the opening of the Subject; the second, Epidicus's
Knaveries; the third, his success in his Knaveries; the fourth, the discovery
of 'em; and the fifth, the knowledge of Thelestis, and his recovery from the
danger of 'em. And in the management of all this, not one Actor appears upon
the Stage without a necessary Pretext of Business there.

The End of the Remarks upon Epidicus.
RUDENS.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Demones, an old decayed Gentleman of Athens, now living at Cyrene.
Pleusidippus, a young Athenian Gentleman, now of Cyrene, in love with Palestra.
Labrax, a Villainous Slave-Merchant of Cyrene. Charmides, his Boarder, a
wheedling Parisite. Trachalio, Servant to Pleusidippus. Sceparnio, Servants to
Demones. Gripus, Turbalio, Sparax. Fishermen, of Cyrene.
WOMEN.
Ptolemocratia, Priestess of Venus. Palestra, A young Gentlewoman, in love with
Pleusidippus, now belonging to Labrax. Ampelisca, her Companion, belonging to
Labrax.
MUTES.
Three Gentlemen, Servants, Attendants, etc.
SCENE, By the Seaside, in a Village nigh Cyrene, with many Rocks and Cliffs
at the further end of the Stage. On one side, appears Cyrene, at a distance; on
the other, Demones' s House, and a Temple of Venus, with a Court before it, and
in it, an Altar: Besides some scattered Houses at a distance.

TIME, About Eight or Nine Hours, beginning at Five or Six a Clock in the
Morning.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by Arcturus.
Gallants,
YE must know, I dwell in the Celestial Palaces above, a Subject of that mighty
God who shakes all Nations, Seas, and Earth. I Am a bright and shining
Constellation, as ye see me, Arcturus by Title, one who never failed to keep
regular Hours, both here and in Heaven. In the Nightime, I twinkle in the
Sky, and among the Gods; when day comes, I converse wi' Mortals, as the rest of
the Constellations do, who have the same Commission from above. Jove, the Grand
Monarch of Heaven and Earth, every day disperses us through all Countries,
t'inspect the Actions, Manners, Religion, and Fidelity of Mortals, that the
Goddess of Riches may reward 'em as they deserve. When ever we meet wi' Fellows
who hire Knights of the Post in Law-Sutes, and Rascals who for swear themselves
in Chancery, we return their Names in writing to Jove, who each day is informed
of all whom the Gallows groans for. He knows each Man that is perjured, or
bribes his Judge to gain his Cause; upo' which, he brings it about in the upper
Court, and sets a severer Fine upon his Head than the loss of his Cause would
have come to. The Names of the good Men he keeps in a Book by it self. Now these
Rogues fool themselves with a fancy that a lusty Present, and a Sacrifice, will
make amends for all; but they lose their Labor and Cost too: For Jove accepts
not the Prayers of perjured Villains. But the Prayers of an honest Man's heard
a thousand times sooner than of one of these Rascals. Therefore, good
Gentlemen, let m' advise ye, you who are honest indeed, and have always been
good and truehearted, never to recede from your Principles, that so you may have
the Comfort of 'em. -- Now, Gentlemen I Am ready to wait upon ye, and tell ye
the Argument of the Play.

First then, Diphilus calls this City, Cyrene. Here dwells Demones in the
Field, in a Neighboring Village by the Seaside; a good honest well-meaning
old Gentleman, forced to leave Athens, and take up here. 'Twas no ill Prank
that drove him from his Country; but his Generosity to others, proved so
injurious to himself, as it ruined his Estate at last. Sometime since, he had a
little Daughter, who was kidnapp'd away, and sold to a Villainous
Slave-Merchant, who brought her home to Cyrene. Now it seems, a young Gentleman
of this City, and formerly of Athens, by chance spies this Girl coming from the
Musick-School, and immediately is stricken with her; goes strait to the
Merchant, bargains with him to have her for threescore and fifteen Pounds,
gives him earnest, and swears him to Fidelity. Now this Son of a Whore, like
the rest of his Gang, valuing neither Promise nor Oath, goes immediately to a
Banker of his, a Sicilian of Agrigentium, an old Rascal as ill as himself, and
a public Bane to the City. This Man he wheedles with the huge Commendations of
this Girls Beauty, and others he had with him, so gets him to go over with him
to Sicily: For, says he, there the People are mightily given to their
Pleasures, and Women are their best Commodity, so you may get an Estate in a
little time. Upo' which, a Ship is prepared underhand; the Merchant claps all
his Effect on board, and flams off the young Gentleman, who bought this Girl,
with a pretense he was going to perform a Vow to Venus. -- This Temple here, is
the Place; where he has invited the Spark to Dinner. He immediately gets on
board, and carries off Bag and Baggage. The Gentleman upon hearing of this
News, goes strait to the Haven, and there finds the Ship got clear off from the
Shore. -- I, seeing the Girl thus forced away, resolved at once to save her,
and ruin the Rascal. Therefore I stirred up the blustering Winds, and swelled
the Oceans Waves: For Arcturus is the most turbulent Constellation in the
Heavens; outrageous when rising, but more outrageous sitting. -- At present,
both Merchant and Guest are thrown upon a Rock, which split their Ship in
pieces. This Girl I told y' of, and another with her, in a fright, are leaped
into the little Boat; and are now driven by the Tide, from the Rock toward the
Shore, and old Demones' s House, which is now unroof'd by the Wind; and this is
one of his Servants that is now coming out his House. The young Spark will be
here strait who bought this Girl of this Merchant. -- Gallants adieu, and may
your joyful Cries,
Be always formidable to your Enemies.


Exit.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sceparnio, with his Spade, and Working-Tools. HEavens bless us all! What
a plaguey storm has old Neptune sent us this Night! The Wind has all untiled our
House here. What shall I call it? It can be no Wind, but some Conjurer raising
the Devil; for all the Tiles are come rattling down, and the Windows shattered,
so we shall keep open House now. [He falls to digging


SCENE II.
Enter Pleusidippus at a distance, with three of his Friends. Pleu. to his
Friends] Well, Gentlemen, I Have taken ye off your Business, and still our
searching's to no purpose; for I could n't catch this rascally Bawd at the
Haven. But I would n't have my carelessness ruin my Hopes; and therefore, my
Friends, I Am forced to detain ye the longer. -- So now I Will visit the Temple of
Venus here, where the Fellow designed to sacrifice, as he told me.


Sce. digging] Upo' my honor, I shall take a new Course wi' this damnable
Clay, that has almost killed me.


Pleu. I hear some body's Voice just by.


SCENE III.
Enter Demones from his House. Them. Sceparnio!


Sce. Who calls me?


Them. He that bought and paid for ye.


Sce. As much as to say, I Am your Servant: Sir?


Them. We shall want a world of Mortar, therefore dig deep: The whole House must
be new-roof'd; for now 'twill no more shelter a Man than a Sive.


Pleu. going to them] Father, well met; -- and you too.


Them. Good morrow to ye, Sir.


Sce. Are ye Man or Woman, that you call him Father?


Pleu. A Man, undoubtedly.


Them. If so, you must seek elsewhere. I had once a little Daughter, which I lost
formerly, but never had a Son i'my Life.


Pleu. Heavens grant ye the Blessing of one.


Sce. And you the Plague of one, who ever you are; for troubling us wi' your
Tattle, when we have business enough of our own.


Pleu. Pray, do you live at this House?


Sce. Why that Question? You lay lurking here to break it open in the
nightime, do you?


Pleu. He had need be a rich and faithful Servant, who dares thus interrupt his
Master, and show himself so uncivil to a Gentleman.


Sce. And he a bold and impudent Fellow, who comes to be impertinent before
another Man's Door; who owes him never a Penny.


Them. Hold your Tongue Sceparnio. -- What is it you want, young Gentleman?


Pleu. T'ha' that Fellow kicked, for his Impudence in interposing before his
Master. -- But, if it be no hindrance to your Bu'ness, I Have a Question or two
to ask ye.


Them. Sir, it shall not disturb my business.


Sce. Prithee go into the Marsh, and cut Reeds for us to thatch our House with,
now it is dry Weather.


Them. Sirrah, be silent. -- Well, Sir, your Pleasure.


Pleu. Then let me ask ye, whether you saw ever a gray, frizl'd-crown,
villainous, perjured, wheedling Rascal?


Them. O, a multitude: For such as these, have been the ruin of me.


Pleu. He that I speak of, brought two young Women to the Temple of Venus,
either Yesterday or to Day, to prepare for a Sacrifice.


Them. Truly, Sir, I saw no such Person, nor has there been any Sacrifice, this
long Time; nor could there be, without my knowledge; when there is, they always
come hither for Water, Fire, Vessels, Knives, Spit, Seething Pot, or something
or other. In short, my Vessels and Well are for Venus's use, not mine; and I
can assure ye, there has been a cessation these many Days.


Pleu. By this, I perceive I Am ruined.


Them. Really, Sir, I wish I could help ye.


Sce. Hark ye, Sir, you that haunt the Temple for your Belly-sake; you would better
march home and dine on what you can get. I warrant ye, you were invited hither,
and the Fellow ga' ye the Slip, that is your Ailment.


Pleu. Very well? [Argrily.


Sce. Without Controversy, you may go home without your Dinner. You Had better
follow Ceres Governor of the Cupboard, than Venus Ruler of the Bed, for you're
more Sheep-stealer than Whore-master.


Pleu. The Fellow grows shamefully scurrilous.


Them. looking toward the Sea] Bless me! What People are yonder, nigh the
Shore, Sceparnio?


Sce. I fancy they are some damnable Gamesters.


Them. Why so?


Sce. Because they have lost all, their Ship and all.


Them. It Is true, they have.


Sce. And our House has nothing but Rubbish t'entertain 'em with.


Them. starting] Alas! poor little Souls, how many are there? -- Lord, how they
swim for their Lives!


Pleu. Pray now, where are they?


Them. Yonder, on the right hand; -- don't ye see 'em floating by the Shore?


Pleu. I do -- [to his Friends] Pray follow me. -- What would I give to find
that cursed Villain there! -- Fare ye well. [Exit Pleudisippus with his Friends.


SCENE IV.
Demones and Sceparnio. Sce. So we would without your bidding. -- [looking upon
the Sea] O Palemon, Neptune's best Friend and Companion, what a dreadful Sight
do I see! --


Them. Prithee, what is it?


Sce. I vow, two little Girls, all alone, in a small Boat. -- How lamentably
are the poor Creatures tossed! -- softly, -- softly, -- well recovered! -- The
Tide drives the Boat from the Rock to the Shore. A Pylot could n't do it better.
-- I think I never saw the Sea run so high, i'my born Days. -- They Are safe, if
the Waves don't catch 'em. -- Now, -- now, -- comes all the Danger! -- So,
there is one washed out; -- but by good luck, fallen upo' the Flats: She Will
easily get off. -- Huzzah! Do You see how the Billows have thrown her a shore? --
She Is upon her Feet, and makes this way: -- All Is well, all is well! -- O, the
other's leaped a shore too; and the poor Soul's upon her Knees in the Water for
fear. -- Very well! she is up, and upon dry Land. -- She Is taken to the right,
to her sorrow, I Will warrant her; for, faith, she may wander there all Day. --


Them. What does that concern your Work?


Sce. -- But if she chance to tumble down yon Cliff, she will make but a short
cut of her Ramble. --


Them. Nay, if you have a mind to sup wi'their Fare, Sceparnio, follow them; if
wi' mine, follow me.


Sce. That Is but reasonable.


Them. Come along then.


Sce. Well, Sir. [Exeunt Demones and Sceparnio.


SCENE V.
Enter Palestra, with her Clothes wet, from among the Cliffs, at the further
End of the Stage. How ill soever Men's Miseries are represented, they still
fall short of Truth and Experience. Is It Heaven's pleasure, to throw m' on
these unknown Coasts, in a dreadful Fright, and in this very Garb? Was I born
to be exposed to these Calamities? Is It the Reward of my strict Life? I should
not think these Miseries so severe, had I offended against Heaven, or my
Parents: But if I Have been so exact i'my Duty to both, it seems unbecoming, O ye
Gods, nay unjust, and unreasonable, t'afflict me thus. Ah what dreadful
Punishments must Villains meet with, if virtuous Persons be so hardly dealt
withal? If I could call to mind any of m' own or Parents Faults, I should bear
it better; but it is my Master's, I Am punished for; his Crimes fall heavy upo'
my Head. He has lost his Ship, and all he is worth, except me, the only
remainder of his Fortune; for my Companion in the Boat, is perished, and now I Am
all alone. Were she but safe, her Company would have been some relief to my
Griefs. But now, what hope, help, or Counsel am I capable of? I Am forced to
wander all alone i'these wild Deserts. On one side, craggy Cliffs; on the
other, the Ocean's foaming Surges; and not a living Soul to meet with. My
Clothes are my Riches; and I know neither where to find Sustinence, or a House
to hide my Head in. What desire can I have to live then? I Am a Stranger to this
Place; never was here before this Time. -- Ah would some good Body would but
direct m'into some Road, or Foot-Path. -- Shall I take this way, or that way? I
am n't able to resolve; and I cannot perceive a foot of Habitable Land
hereabouts. A Chilness, a Faintness, and the great Fright, have seized on all my
Joints. Alas, my dear Father and Mother! you know nothing of these sad
Afflictions. I was born a Gentlewoman, it avails nothing; I Am more miserable
than if born a Slave; for I can never be any Comfort to those who ga' me Birth
and Education. [she weeps.


SCENE VI.
Ampelisca appears among the Cliffs, with her Clothes wet, at another part of
the further end of the Stage. Amp. to her self.] What can be more proper, or
more necessary, than making way wi' my self, as long as I Am under these
Miseries, and Afflictions? I cannot be solicitous of Life, since I Am deprived
of the Person who made it easy to me. I Have wandered through all Places,
searched into every little Hole to find her, called, looked, and listn'd as
much as possible. -- I can find her no where, know not where to go, how to look
for her, or whom t'enquire of, for here is not a Soul to be seen. -- Sure
there is no such dismal Desert upo' the Face of the Earth, as this. But if she
be alive, and above ground, I Will never give over searching till I Have found her.


Pal. What Voice can this be here?


Amp. I vow, I Am strangly afraid. -- Who Is that so nigh me?


Pal. Blessed Hope, assist me! --


Amp. It Is a Woman's Voice, I know it by the Sound.


Pal. -- And free me from my Fears.


Amp. It must be a Woman's Voice, for certain.


Pal. Good now, is it Ampelisca?


Amp. Is It you, Palestra?


Pal. Why don't I call her by her Name, that she may know me? -- Ampelisca.


Amp. Hah! who is that?


Pal. It Is I, Palestra.


Amp. Prithee, whereabouts are ye?


Pal. Truly, amidst a thousand Troubles.


Amp. I Am your Partner, and have as large a share as you. -- I long strangly to
see ye.


Pal. And I as much.


Amp. Then let us follow by the Ear. -- Where are ye?


Pal. Here; come this way and meet me.


Amp. As fast as I can.


[They come forward and meet.] Pal. Your Hand, my Dear.


Amp. Take it. [They join Hands.


Pal. Art thou alive? Prithee tell me.


Amp. Yes, and so wish to live, while I touch thee, I can scarce believe I have
ye here. Pray let m' embrace thee, my Soul. -- [they embrace] Ah, what a
Refreshment it is after m' Affliction!


Pal. You Have prevented me from saying the same thing. -- But let us be going now.


Amp. Prithee, my Dear, which way shall we take?


Pal. Along the Shore, I think.


Amp. Which way you please, I Will follow.


Pal. Shall we go so, with our Clothes all wet?


Amp. For that, we must make as good a shift as we can -- But pray now, what is
that?


Pal. Which?


Amp. Prithee, don't ye see a Temple? -- D' ye see that?


Pal. Where?


Amp. OF the right hand.


Pal. I see the Gods respect this Place.


Amp. Then men can be no Strangers to it, the Situation's so delightful too. --
Who e'r's the God, I Will beg of him t'ease us Wretches in our Miseries, and to
grant us some Assistance, i'this poor and sad Condition. [They kneel down
before the Temple.


SCENE VII.
Enter the Priestess of Venus, out of the Temple. Pries. Who are these, that
beg my Patroness's Protection? Their Prayers have brought m'out to see who they
are. They Have certainly pitched upon the kindest, tenderest, and best natured
Goddess that could be.


Pal. Heavens bless ye, good Mother.


Pries. Bless ye both, my Children. -- Pray where were ye going, wi'your
Clothes so wet, in that pitiful Condition?


Pal. We came but a little way now: But it is a huge way from the Place we first
set out at.


Pries. You came in a Ship, by Sea then?


Pal. Yes, an't please ye.


Pries. Y'ought to ^ha come then to this Temple wi'your Proper Habits, and your
Offerings; for it is never usual to come in this manner.


Pal. Alas, what Offerings can y'expect, when we were both cast away at Sea? --
-- [They kneel to her] Therefore we beg of you for Heaven's sake, to have pity
upon a couple of poor helpless Creatures, without Knowledge or Hopes, to take
us into your House, and keep us from perishing; for we have neither Shelter,
expectation of any, nor nothing, but what you see about us.


Pries. Gi' me your Hands, and rise both of ye: No Woman can be more sensible
of your Miseries than I. But alas, my Children, mine is but a poor and mean
Place: I can scarce keep Life and Soul together, and have all my Dependence
upo' Venus here.


Amp. Pray now, is this Venu^'s Temple?


Pries. Yes, and I Am her Priestess. -- But you shall be heartily welcome, as
far as my poor Stock will go. -- Come along.


Pal. Truly, Mother, you have a kind and tender care of us.


Pries. It Is my Duty. [Exeunt omnes, to the Temple of Venus.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter some Fishermen, with their Lines, Nets, etc. 1. Fish. WE, Poor Folks,
have every way a lamentable Life on it, especially since we were brought up to
neither Trade, nor Calling; so we are forced to be content wi' that little we
have. Ye may guess how rich we are, by our fine Garbs. These Hooks and Rods are
all our Trade and Livelihood. We make Incursions, every Day, from the Town to
the Sea, for Forage; and all our Fights and Combats are against whole Beds of
Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Pinpatches, Coral, Muscles, and Cockles; after which,
we fall upon other Fish with our Hooks, and upo' those among the Rocks. We
table upo' the Sea; and if we chance to have no luck, we slink home, well
liquor'd wi' Salt Water, and go supperless to bed. -- Now it is such a hoaming
Sea, we have little hopes of Sport; and except we light of some Shellfish, we
must e'n make a Fast-Night on it, in Faith. -- But we'll pray first to kind
Venus, to send us good Luck. [They move toward the Temple.


SCENE II.
Enter Trachalio, at a little Distance. Tra. to himself] I Have been searching
with all the Eyes i'my Head, to find out my Master. When he first went out, he
told me he was gone to the Haven; but ordered me to meet him here at the Temple
of Venus. -- But hold, here are People very luckily to enquire of; I Will up
to'em. -- [Goes to the Fishermen] Well met, Old Sea-Filchers, Oyster-Crackers,
and Hook-Drivers; ye starved Generation, how do you do? Not drowned yet?


1. Fish. We do like poor Fishermen, full of Hunger, Thirst, and Hopes.


Tra. Did ye see ever a Young Gentleman, the Time ye were here, a genteel,
fresh-colour'd, lusty Man, and three Companions, wi'their Cloaks and Swords?


3. Fish. We saw no such Man, as you describe.


Tra. Then did ye see ever an old Bald-pated, Beetle-Brow'd, Gotch-Gutted,
Squint-eyed, Sowr-Fac'd Rascal, the very Canker-Worm of Heaven and Earth, and
Storehouse of Mischief, Roguery, and Villainy, leading of two good likely Girls?


2. Fish. A Fellow wi' these Virtues, and Graces, is a fitter Companion for
Hell, than the Temple.


Tra. If ye saw any such, speak.


1. Fish. I assure ye, we did not. -- Good morrow.


Tra. Adieu to ye: I thought ye might. [Exeunt Fishermen.


SCENE III.
T^achalio alone, Troth, I believe it is just as I thought 'twou'd be. My
Master's bubl'd; this Whore-son Bawd has changed Countries, embarked, and
carried off the Girls, and I find I Am a Conjurer. This Devil's Bird too, has
invited my Master to a Dinner here; and I think I had best stay his Coming. If
I light of the Priestess, I Will enquire of her, whether she can gi' me any
further account of this Business; I Will be as certain as I can.


SCENE. IV.
Enter Ampelisca from the Temple, with a Bucket in her Hand. Amp. to the
Priestess within] Very well; at the next Door to the Temple you would have me knock,
and desire a little Water.


Tra. Whose Voice is that?


Amp. Bless me! Who Is that? Whom do I see?


Tra. Is It Ampelisca, that comes from the Temple?


Amp. Is Not it Tracalio, Pleusidippus's Servant?


Tra. It Is she.


Amp. It Is the same. -- Trachalio, good morrow.


Tra. And to you, Ampelisca. -- How came you here?


Amp. By a miserable Chance, and undeservedly too.


Tra. I hope better things.


Amp. A wise Person ought to say and talk nothing but Truth. -- But Prithee
now, where is your Master Pleusidippus?


Tra. Pshaw, as tho he wan't within there.


Amp. Really, neither he, nor any one else came hither.


Tra. He is not come, then?


Amp. You say very true.


Tra. Which is none of my way, Ampelisca. -- But how forward's Dinner?


Amp. Prithee, what Dinner?


Tra. Why, your Sacrifice Dinner, you're to have here.


Amp. What Dream's this, pray now?


Tra. Faith, your Master Labrax invited mine to a Dinner here to Day.


Amp. Troth, it is a mighty surprise to me. If he has cheated both Gods and Men,
he has done like a Bawd as he is.


Tra. Is there no Sacrifice then, neither for you nor my Master?


Amp. You may swear 't.


Tra. How came ye here then?


Amp. Why, the Priestess took us in, both me and Palestra too, in a great
Fright, extreme Danger, and destitute of all Succor.


Tra. Pray, is Palestra here too, my Master's Mistress?


Amp. Yes indeed.


Tra. Dear Ampelisca, you have told me the pleasantest News in the World. -- But I
long mightily to know what Danger you have run through.


Amp. Why, honest Trachalio, our Ship was cast away last light.


Tra. How, cast away? -- What a Fib was that?


Amp. Prithee, didn't ye hear, how Labrax would have shipped us away underhand for
Sicily, and had got all his Goods aboard? They Are all lost now.


Tra. God a mercy, honest Neptune; never a Gamester of 'm all has half the
Cunning. Faith, 'twas an excellent Cast; 'thas quite gammon'd the Rascal. --
But where is the poor Devil now?


Amp. Dead drunk, of my Conscience. For the God invited him last Night to a Tub
of Roaring Liquor; and, troth, I believe the Whore's-bud has drunk more than he
could bear.


Tra. O how I could hug thee, dear Ampelisca! you are a Sweet, and charming
Creature. -- But pray, how escaped you, and Palestra?


Amp. I Will tell ye. -- When we saw the Ship running full upon a Rock, all in a
fright, we leaped into the Boat, and straight untied the Rope. While the rest
looked dismally on, the Storm parted us from the Ship to the right. All the
long Night, we poor Wretches were most desperately tossed by the Winds and Waves,
till just at Morning, we were thrown half dead a shore.


Tra. I know it is like Neptune; he is a plaguey hard Custom-Master, and staves
all prohibited Goods.


Amp. O hang your sweet Crops.


Tra. And thine, my little Rogue. -- I formerly smelt out the Trick this Dog
was playing, and often forewarned y' of it. I think I had best send for Gown
and Fur-Cap, and set up for a Fortune Tellers.


Amp. Since you fore-knew't, how bravely did you and your Master take care to
prevent it?


Tra. What could he have done?


Amp. Done, quoth a, for the Person he loved? He should have watched her Night
and Day, and been always upon Duty. But I see your Master's Care and Love for
his Mistress, may tally together.


Tra. Why so?


Amp. Nay the Matter's plain.


Tra. Po, don't ye see, when People go to the Bath, though they be never so
careful o'their Clothes, they are often snap'd up? Th'Owner knows n't whom to
susepct: The Thief has his Eye upo' the Owner; but the de'el a bit does
the other know the Thief. -- But bring me to Palestra: Where is she?


Amp. Go into the Temple there; and you will find her crying and sobbing like a
Child.


Tra. I Am sorry for that. -- What Is the matter with her?


Amp. I Will tell ye. -- She Is mightily concerned for Labrax's taking away a
Casket of hers; for there she had something to discover her Parents by, and she
fears it is quite lost.


Tra. Where was it put?


Amp. Aboard the Ship. This Rogue had secured it in a Port-mantle, to put her
beyond a possibility of finding her Parents.


Tra. O abominable! to keep her a Slave, when she ought to be free?


Amp. She believes it is sunk to the bottom of the Sea, together wi' the Ship,
and all Labrax's Gold and Silver. Now I fancy some one has dived for it, and got
it out. The poor Creature's in a lamentable condition for the loss of her
Things.


Tra. It Is the best way then to go to her, comfort her up, and keep her from
fretting so. I Have known a great many People who have found Relief when they
never expected it.


Amp. And I, those who have expected it, and have found none.


Tra. In those Cases, Patience is the best Remedy. -- I Will go to her, if you have
no occasion for my Assistance.


Amp. Ay, go. [Exit Trachalio to the Temple.


SCENE V.
Ampelisca alone. I Will go beg a little Water at the next House, as the
Priestess ordered; for she tells me if I ask in her Name, they will gi' me't
without Scruple. I think I never saw a Person more deserving of the Favor of
Gods and Men, than this good old Priestess. How hansomly, generously, honestly,
and freely, did she entertain us! When we were in Fears, Want, Wet, forsaken,
and ready to perish, she took care of us as though we had been her own Children.
How ready she is too, to heat the Water to wash us withal! -- Now I Will go ask
for some, that I might n't make her stay. -- [She knocks at Demones's Door] So
ho! who is at home here? -- Any Body here? -- None to come out? [Knocks again.


SCENE VI.
To her enter Sceparnio. Sce. Who Is that batters our Doors so incivilly?


Amp A Friend.


Sce. Hah, What luck's here? -- 'S bobs, as I hope to breath, a sinug-fac'd
little Rogue.


Amp. Good morrow to ye, young Man.


Sce. And to thee, my pretty young Woman.


Amp. I come to beg one Kindness --


Sce. Which I Would grant ye, if ye came at Midnight; but now I haven't the
convenience of supplying your Wants. -- -- What say thou, my feat little
Chuck? [Goes to embrace her.


Amp. How now? Methinks you're a little too free though.


Sce. Bless me! the very Picture of Venus! What sparkling Eyes! What a Shape!
What a fine black Complexion! I meant, a lovely brown! What Bubbies! What sweet
Lips are those! [Offers to kiss her.


Amp. turning away.] I Am not for every one's turn; therefore stand off.


Sce. What not one gentle Kiss, my pretty sweet Rogue?


Amp. When I Am more at leisure, I may allow ye to toy a little. But now I must
have an Answer, ay or no, to what I came for.


Sce. What would ye have then?


Amp. This Bucket of mine, shows clearly what I Would have.


Sce. And this Phiz of mine, shows as clearly what I Would have.


Amp. The Priestess of Venus sent me hither for a little Water.


Sce. I Am just like a Courtier, you will never obtain any thing without a plaguey
deal of waiting. The Well's deep and dangerous; and not a drop you get, without
a hundred fine Words and Caresses.


Amp. Why are you so sparing of your Water to me, which you give every Stranger
gratis?


Sce. And why are you sparing of your Favours' to me, which you give every
Citizen gratis.


Amp. Come, my Dear, I Will not stand for once. -- [He kisses her.


Sce. aside.] O rare, I Am ravished! She calls me Dear, too. -- -- Thou shall
have Water; I will not be loved for nothing. -- Gi' me the Bucket.


Amp. giving the Bucket.] Here. -- Prithee, make haste.


Sce. Stay. I Will be here in the turning of a Hand, my Honey. [Exit Sceparnio
with the Bucket.


SCNEE VII.
Ampelixa alone. What Excuse shall I make to the Priestess, for staying so
long? -- [Looking on the Sea.] How I quake when I cast m' Eyes upo' the Sea! --
But alas, who are you, on the Shore? -- Is It the Merchant my Master, and his
Sicilian Boarder? I was in good hopes they were both drowned in the Sea. These
are new Plagues, we never looked for. -- But why don't I run into the Temple,
and tell Palestra this News, that we may've time to take Sanctuary at the
Altar, before this old Devil come and take us? -- I Will make haste, for this was
a sudden Thought. [She runs off to the Temple.


SCENE VIII.
Enter Sceparnio, with his Bucket full of Water. Bless me! I never could have
thought I should have found so much pleasure in drawing Water. How merrily did I
go to it! Methought the Well not half so deep as 'tus'd to be; I drew it wi' so
much ease. -- But without Flattery, I was a great Owl for not falling in love
before now. Here Is the Water, my little Fubs ye? I Would have ye as civil to me, as
I to you, that I may love ye the better. -- Where art, my Duck? -- Here, take
thy Water. -- Where art thou? -- 'Sbud, she is in love wi' me, I believe; for
the pretty Jilt has skulk'd out of the Way. -- Whereabouts art? Will Not ye take
your Bucket? Where are ye? -- Come, you have carried the Jest far enough; take
the Bucket, and be serious. -- Where have ye hid your self. -- [Looks about.]
Troth, I cannot get one glimps of her: She has played the Jade wi' me. -- Faith,
I Will e'n set down the Bucket in the middle of the way. But then it belongs to
the Temple, and if some Rogue should come and steal it, I should be damnably
trounc'd. Zooks, I Am afraid the Jade has laid a trap t'ha' me seized wi' Church
Goods in my Hands. The Magistrate may fairly pop m' into a Dungeon, if I be
found wi' these in my Possession. For here is the Inscription, and that
proclaims the Owner. In good earnest, I Will call out the Priestess to take care
of her Goods. I Will to the Door. -- [Goes to the Temple.] Soho, Ptolemocratia,
take in your Bucket here; a young Woman brought it to me, but I cannot tell who.
-- I find I must march in with it my self. I shall have a fine time on it, if I
must be bound to draw Water for all Comers and Goers. [Exit to the Temple with
the Bucket.


SCENE IX.
Enter Labrax, and behind him Charmides with their Cloths wet, from among the
Cliffs at the further end of the Stage. Lab. If a Man has a mind to be a
Wretch, and a Beggar as long as he lives, let him trust his Life and Fortune to
Neptune's Hands: If he has any thing to do with him, he shall be sure to be
sent home in this sweet Pickle. Ah, Liberty, thour't a rare Goddess too, thou
never go to Sea with a Hero. But where is my delicate Boarder, who has ruined
me? -- O here he lags behind.


Char. Plague on ye, Labrax, where do you run so fast? 'Sbud, I can never keep
pace wi' ye.


Lab. Ah would ye had rotted upo' the Gallows in Sicily, before I laid Eyes on
ye; you that brought all these Plagues upo' my Head.


Char. And would I had starved in a Dungeon, the day I came within your Doors.
Pray Heaven, you may ever be plagued wi' such Guests as I.


Lab. When I took y' into my House, certainly Beelzebub attended ye. Why did I
listen to such a Rascal? Why was this Voyage? And why did I venture a
Shipboard; where I Have lost more than ever I was worth?


Char. Nay, Faith, I don't wonder the Ship was cast away, when 'twas laden wi'
such Ill gotten Goods, and a Villain to boot.


Lab. 'Twas you ruined me wi' your damned wheedling Tongue.


Char. I Am sure, 'twas a more fatal Supper to me, than ever Thyestes's, and
Tereus's was to them.


Lab. O, I dye; -- Sick at Heart! -- Pray hold my Head. [He vomits.


Char. Faith, would ye had spewed your Guts out.


Lab. Ah! Palestra, and Ampelisca, where are ye now? [He weeps.


Char. At the bottom of the Sea, I suppose, to dine Fishes.


Lab. Now may I go starve, for giving Ear to your Lying Rodomantades.


Char. Nay, y' ought to thank me; before ye were a fresh raw Fellow, now I Have
seasoned your Understanding, old Fool.


Lab. Would the Devil had ye for a Rogue.


Char. And you too: I Am sure I made broad signs to have him come for ye.


Lab. Lamentable! Was ever Mortal in a worse Condition than I?


Char. Yes, I Am in a worse by half.


Lab. How so?


Char. Because I never deserved it; you did.


Lab. O Reeds, Reeds, I envy your Happiness, that always preserve your dryness,
in the middle of the Water.


Char. Faith, I tremble like one ready to engage the Enemy; and my Jaws do so
quake, that my Words break out like flashes of Lightning.


Lab. O Neptune, thy Baths are as cold as Charity; for since I got out of your
Clutches, I Am almost frozen. This God cannot afford one Brandy-shop in all his
Dominions, but keeps nothing but salt and cool Liquors.


Char. What a happy Life have these Smiths, who are ever at the Fire, and always
warm?


Lab. O for a Ducks Life, say I; that comes out of the Water as dry as it goes
in.


Char. I fancy, I should make an excellent Snap-Dragon.


Lab. How so?


Char. Because I chatter my Teeth so nobly. -- The truth on it is, I deserve to
be sows'd as I have been.


Lab. Why?


Char. For venturing to Sea wi' such a Rascal, whose Villainies alone raised all
this Tempest.


Lab. 'Twas your damned Project; you gulled m' into a belief of getting the
Devil and all by Women in your Country, and told me 'twou'd rain Money there.


Char. Ye sharking Brute, did ye think to swallow up all Sicily at a mouthful?


Lab. Ah, what Shark has swallowed up my Portmantle, and all my Gold and Silver
that was in it?


Char. The very same, I believe, that swallowed my Purse full of Silver, that
was in the Bag^,


Lab. Alas, I Am reduced to this single Waistcoat, and shabby Coat. -- Oh,
undone, undone!


Char. Then let us form a new Company; for now we may go share and share like.


Lab. Were my young Women but safe, there would be some hopes still. -- Now If
Mr. Pleusidippus should find me, who ga' me earnest for Palestra, he will trounce
me damnably. [He cries.


Char. Why d' ye howl so, Blockhead? You Will never be in debt, as long as you
keep a Tongue that will swear any thing. [They go toward the Temple.


SCENE X.
Enter Sceparnio from the Temple. Sce. to himself.] I wonder in my Heart, why
these two Girls should cry so, and embrace the Statue of Venus in the Temple.
The poor Creatures are mightily afraid of some Body, and talk of being tossed all
Night long, and thrown ashore this morning.


Lab. Prithee, Friend, where are those you talk of?


Sce. Here in the Temple.


Lab. How many are there?


Sce. As many as you and I added together.


Lab. Certainly, they are mine.


Sce. Certainly, I can say nothing to that.


Lab. What manner of Girls are they?


Sce. Plaguey handsome. -- Faith, I could manage 'em both tightly, wi' the help
of a Cup or two.


Lab. Girls, say ye?


Lab. Say? I say you're plaguey impertinent: Therefore go look, if you please.


Lab. Sure ^ough, honest Charmides, they are my Girls.


Char. Confound ye for a Dog, be it so or no.


Lab. I Will go strait in.


Char. To Hell if you please. [Exit Labrax to the Temple.


SCENE XI.
Charmides and Sceparnio. Char. Prithee, honest Fellow, show me some place to
sleep in.


Sce. You may sleep where you please here, it is all common, and no Man will
pretend a Title to your Bed.


Char. You see I Have never a dry Thread about me; pray let m'into your House.
Lend me some other Cloths, while mine are a drying; and I shall be bound to
pray for ye.


Sce. I don't care if I gi'ye this Frock, m'own Coat and cover in rainy
Weather. -- Let me see your Cloths, and I Will warrant ye dry 'em for ye.


Char. For shame! Arn't ye content t'ha'the Sea wash all away, but you must be
for the same sport at Land too?


Sce. Be washed, and powdered too, I caren't a Straw: I Will not trust ye without
Money. You may sweat, freez, be sick, or well, I Will receive no outlandish Guest
within our Doors. We Have had enough from them already. [Exit Sceparnio.


SCENE XII.
Charmides alone. Gone already? -- Sure this Fellow's some Kidnapper by his
want o'Pity. But why stand I here in this woeful Pickle? I Will enter the Temple,
and sleep out this Debauch, that went so damnably against my Stomach. Old
Neptune put upon us with his Water, as though it had been Wine of the best; and
thought t'ha' split our Paunches with Salt Cups. In short, had he proceeded in
his Entertainment, he might have laid us asleep; however, he has sent us home
staggering. -- Now I Will go see what the Merchant, my Pot-Companion, is doing
of. Exit Charmides.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Demones alone. It Is a Wonder to see what Pastime the Gods make with us
Mortals; and what a parcel of wonderful Dreams they send us: They will not suffer
us to be at rest, though we are asleep. What a strange misshapen Dream had I this
Night? Methought, I saw an Ape climbing a Swallows Nest, to catch the young
ones, but could not come at it for its life. Upo' that, the Ape, methought, came
begging to me to help it to a Ladder. I presently made Answer, that Swallows
are of the Progeny of Philomel and Progne; and prayed it not to hurt any of my
Country. Upo' which, the Ape grew fiercer, seemed to threaten great Mischiefs,
and summoned me into Court. At last, methought, in a great rage, I cannot tell
how, I took the mischievous Beast about the middle, and clapped it into Chains.
Now cannot I imagine what to make of this Dream, nor what to gather from it. --
[A noise within.] But what Out-cry's that, at my Neighbors in the Temple? --
I Am strangely surpised at it.


SCENE II.
Enter Trachalio from the Temple, in great haste. Tra. aloud.] -- Oh, Cyrenian
People, your Assistance here; -- help, good Countrymen, Friends, and all the
Neighbors, help the Distressed, I beseech ye, and punish the worst of all
Rogueries; -- lest Innocence should be overpowered by Villains, so notorious
for their Crimes! -- O punish Rogues, and reward the Honest; and let us live by
the Laws, not Oppression! -- Make haste to the Temple here; -- once more I beg
your Assistance; all who are nigh, and within call. Succor them, who,
according to the ancient Custom, have fled to Venus, and her Priestess for
Protection! Nip this unjust Violence in the Bud, before it reaches any of you.


Them. What disturbance is this?


Tra. kneeling.] I adjure you by these Knees, old Gentleman, who ever you are,
to --


Them. Let my Knees alone, and tell me what is the matter, and why this Hubbub?


Tra. Let me pray and beg of ye, as ye hope for a good Crop of Herbs, and a
plentiful Harvest of Plants, with a good and safe Voyage to Capoua, and as y'
hope never to be blink-ey'd, as long as you have a day to live, --


Them. Are ye mad?


Tra. -- And as ye hope for a good store o'Seed for next Year, good Sir, don't
refuse your Assistance, to him who begs of ye.


Them. I adjure you too, by your Legs, Shanks and Sides, as ye' hope for a good
Crop of Birch, and a plentiful Harvest of Lashes, to tell me the occasion of
this Hubbub.


Tra. Why are your Wishes bad, when mine were all good?


Them. So were mine too, when I wished for your deserts.


Tra. Let that pass, Sir.


Them. Well, what is the business?


Tra. Two poor Innocent Girls in the Temple want your help; where they are
notoriously abused contrary to all the Laws and Privileges of the Place. Then
the Priestess her self is treated after a most Inhuman manner.


Them. Who dares offer Violence to the Priestess of Venus? But what Girls are
these? And what Injuries offered them?


Tra. Patience, Sir, and I Will tell ye. -- At present they hang about the Statue
of Venus; now there is a most impudent Rascal who would needs pluck 'em away by
main force, whereas they are both born free.


Them. What sacrilegious Fellow's that?


Tra. A cheating, wicked, murdering, perjured, lawless, impudent, prosigate
Villain; to sum up all, a Bawd: What need I say worse? --


Them. In good Faith, one who deserves to be stoned.


Tra. A Dog, who had the Insolence to take the Priestess by the Throat.


Them. As I live he shall pay sauce for that. -- [Goes to his Door.] Soho,
Turbalio, and Sparax, where are ye?


SCENE. III.
To them enter Turbalio and Sparax. Tra. Pray, Sir, go in, and help the poor
Creatures.


Them. I see I needn't call twice. -- Follow me. -- [To the Servants.


Tra. Go, pluck out his Eyes, and make Cats Meat of 'em.


Them. Drag him by the Heels like a Hog. [Exit Demones to the Temple.


SCENE IV.
The Servants go into the Court, and stand by the Door. Tra. listening.] They
make a confounded Bustle within. -- I fancy they have curried the Bawd's Coxcomb.
I Would give any thing t'ha' this Rascals Teeth beaten down his Throat. -- But
hold, here come the poor Girls, in sad fright from the Temple.


SCENE V.
Palestra and Ampelisca, appear in the Temple-Court, much disordered. Pal. Just
now, are we destitute of all Help, Succor and Defense; we can neither see
hopes of Relief, nor know which way to take, our Fears have brought us to such a
miserable pass. What Outrage, and Injustice have we met with from our wicked
Master within! who shamefully beat down the good old Priestess, used her most
barbarously, and dragged us both from the Statue. -- Considering the sad
condition we are in, we had better die; for when one's in Misery, Death's the
best Remedy.


Tra. What Is the matter? What Complaints are these? Why don't I comfort 'em up?
-- O, Palestra!


Pal. Who Is that?


Tra. And Ampelisca!


Amp. Prithee, who is it?


Pal. Who are ye, that names us?


Tra. Turn your Eyes, and you will soon see.


Pal. turning about.] Is It you, my hopes?


Tra. going to them.] Peace, pluck up a good Heart, I say.


Pal. Then pray take care, if it be possible, there be no violence offered us;
for that will force me t'use Violence upo' my self.


Tra. Prithee, you're too fearful.


Amp. Don't pretend to comfort us only with a few Words.


Pal. If you don't stand up, and defend us, we are both undone, for I Am resolved
to perish sooner than become a Prey to this old Rascal. -- I confess I Have but a
Woman's Heart, when the thoughts of Death come upon me; for really, the fear
o'that, makes me tremble all over.


Tra. Tho your condition's none of the best, take Courage however.


Pal. Pray, where shall I find it?


Tra. Don't be dejected, I say, sit ye both down by this Altar.


Amp. Can this Altar be a better Sanctuary for us than Venus's Statue within,
from whence he tore us with all the Violence imaginable?


Tra. Do but sit down, I Will secure ye both: This Altar shall be your Castle,
and I Will guard th'Outworks; and under Venus's Banner, bid defiance to the Bawd
and all his Works.


Amp. We'll observe your Orders. -- [They kneel by the Altar] Bright Venus, we
poor Wretches, embracing thy Altar, with Tears and bended Knees, implore your
Protection, and Preservation: Punish those Villains, who profane thy Temple;
and let thy Shrine be our Sanctuary, who suffered so much from Neptune this
Night: Refuse us not, nor impute any Crime to us, for approaching thee in this
undecent Habit.


Tra. Their Petition's reasonable, and it is nothing but Justice to grant it,
and to pardon their presumption; for 'twas fear alone caused it. They know that
you were born out of a Lobster, and therefore can be no Enemy to Cherry Cheeks.
-- But here comes the Old Gentleman, our Patron, very luckily.


SCENE VI.
To them enter Demones, dragging Labrax out of the Temple. Them. Come out, you
vile Sacrilegious Dog. -- [to the Women] Keep close to the Altar. -- Where are
my Men? [To Trachalio.


Tra. Here, Sir.


Them. Best of all.


Ser. We Are ready for Execution, Sir: Command M. Bawd but to draw nigh. [Labrax
makes for the Altar.


Them. to Labrax] Shall a Rascal of no Religion pretend to Sacrifice with us? --
[to the Servants] Beat his Teeth down his Throat, I say. [The Servants strike
him.


Lab. I receive the Affront, but 'tshall be to your Cost.


Them. Dos th'Impudent Cur grumble?


Lab. I Am robbed of my Goods, and my Women ravished out of my Hands!


Tra. Then appeal to the Senate's Determination, whether they be your Slaves,
or Freeborn; and whether your Rogueship don't deserve to lay in the ^ail as long
as the Walls hang together.


Lab. It Is none of my business to stand prating with a beggarly Slave. -- My
Business is wi' you. [To Demones


Them. Pray address your self first to him who knows your Worship.


Lab. Well, I do then.


Tra. So y' ought. -- Do these Girls belong to you?


Lab. Yes, they do.


Tra. Come on then, touch one of them wi' your little Finger, if you dare, Sirrah.


Lab. What if I do?


Tra. 'Sbud, you Dog, I Will toss your Carcass like a Football, and kick ye to a
Jelly, you perjured Rogue.


Lab. May n't I take m' own Goods from the Altar?


Them. No, Sirrah; and that is our Law.


Lab. I Have nothing to do wi' your Laws; but I Will straight away with 'em both. I
tell ye, Old Man, if your Mouth waters at one of 'em, pay me down the Ready.


Them. They Are Venus's Favorites now.


Lab. Let Venus pay for 'em then, and take 'em.


Them She pay for 'em, Sirrah? -- Hear what I say: Offer the least Violence to
'm, tho but in jest, I Will gi' ye such a trimming, that you shall not know your
self. -- [to the Servants] And hark ye, when I gi' the Sign, if you don't beat
his Eyes o^t of his Head, I Will lash ye, till your Backs be as (...) Furrows as
the Sea wi' Waves:


Lab. You would n't offer Violence?


Tra. Dare such a cankered Rascal as you reproach us wi' Violence?


Lab. You Hell-hound, dare you be so impudent to me?


Tra. Suppose I Am a Hell-hound, and you the honestest Man alive; these Girls
are freeborn ne'rtheless for that.


Lab. How freeborn?


Tra. Ay, Faith, and your own Mistresses too, Grecians both. One of 'em is an
Athenian, of a very good Family.


Them. What Is that you say?


Tra. pointing to Palestra] That this is freeborn of Athens.


Them. My own Country, as I hope to live!


Tra. Arn't you a Cyrenian, Sir?


Them. No; I had my Birth, Nourishment, and Education at Athens.


Tra. Pray, Sir, then stand by your own Countrywomen.


Them. Ah, my poor Daughter! the sight of this, brings my former Trouble to
remembrance. I lost her at three Years of Age, and if she be living, she is just
such another. [Aside.


Lab. I Am sure I paid honestly for 'em to th'Owner; what care I a Fart whether
they were born at Athens, or Thebes, since they are lawfully become my Slaves?


Tra. Pandering Dog, do you pretend to detain Gentlemen's Daughters, kid-napp'd
from their Parents, and make 'em a Prey to your silly Trade? Who the other is I
amn't be sure, but I know her to be ten times better than your self, you nasty
Carrion.


Lab. Prove that, can ye?


Tra. Strip then, and our Backs shall be Judge who is most to be trusted. If you
have not more Remembrances on yours, than there is Pins in a Man of War, I Am the
veriest Liar upo' the Face of the Earth. After your Skin be shown, mine shall;
and you will find it so clear, that never a Workman in the Land but will say it is
whole and tite enough for a Wine-Bag. -- But why don't I jerk this Dog as long
as I can stand over him? -- Why do you stare so at 'em? Touch 'em, and out-go
both your Eyes.


Lab. Because you say so, I Will have 'em both Going away. away


Them. Why, what will you do?


Lab. By Vulcan's Help, fire 'em out o'their Nests; for he is an Enemy to Venus.
[He goes out of the Court toward Demones's Door.]


Them. Where goes he?


Lab. by Demones' s House] So ho, within there! -- So ho!


Them. Touch that Door, Sirrah, and, Faith, I Will make ye glad to glean up your
scattered Teeth.


Ser. We keep no Fires; for we live all upon dried Figs.


Them. I Will help ye to Fire, if that Steel-Face will strike a Light.


Lab. 'Sbud, I Will find Fire somewhere.


Them. What will ye do, when ye have found it?


Lab. Make a swinging Pile upo' the Altar.


Them. What to sacrifice your self?


Lab. No, to burn 'em both alive, where they are.


Them. I Would fain see that. And, as I live, I Will catch ye by the Beard, throw
y'into the Fire, and hang y' up, half roasted, for Crows-Meat. -- Now I
consider of 't, this must be th'Ape I dreamt of, that would needs take the
young Swallows from their Nest, whether I would or no. [Aside,


Tra. Do You mind what I say, Sir? -- Good old Gentleman, defend the poor Girls
by main Force, while I go fetch my Master.


Them. Go, and find him out.


Tra. But have a special care this Rascal --


Them. He had better hang himself than touch one of 'em, or make the least
Disturbance.


Tra. going out of the Court] Take care, Sir.


Them. I Will warrant ye. -- make haste.


Tra. Take care too, that this Dog don't gi' ye the slip: For my Master's bound
in a Bond to deliver this Whore's Bud to the Jailer, upon Forfeiture of a full
Talent. [Exit Trachalio.


SCENE VII.
Demones, Labrax, Palestra, Ampelisca, and Servants. Them. to Labrax] It Is now
left to your Bawdships discretion, whether you will choose a good Beating, or a
whole Skin.


Lab. I caren't this, for what you say, Old Man. I Will tear 'em from The Altar by
the Hair o'their Heads, in spite of you, Venus, and Jove himself.


Them. Touch 'em, do.


Lab. Rot me, if I don't. [Going toward them.


Them. Come then, draw nigh.


Lab. Then order your Hang Dogs to draw off.


Them. Toward you, I will.


Lab. Faith, I can scarce believe that.


Them. What if they should?


Lab. I Would retire. -- But, old Fellow, if I ever catch y' in Town, and don't
expose ye to the whole World, may I never bear the Name of Slave-Merchant.


Them. Do what you please; but in the mean time, offer to meddle with either of
'em, and you shall be swing'd to some tune.


Lab. How swing'd?


Them. As a villainous Bawd ought to be.


Lab. Po, I laugh at your Threats; I Will have 'em both spite of your Teeth.
[Goes into the Court.


Them. Lay a hand on 'em.


Lab. That I will, IN Faith.


Them. Do then: You know what follows. -- Turbalio, run quickly for a Couple of
Cudgels. [Turbalio goes out of the Court.


Lab. Cudgels?


Them. Strong ones. -- make haste.


Exit Turbalio. SCENE VIII.
Demones, Labrax, Sparax, and Women. Them. Now, Sirrah, I shall give ye your
due, or I Am mistaken.


Lab. aside.] O lamentable! I lost my Headpiece too, in the Ship; if I had but
that, 'wou'd secure my Skull. -- [to Demones.] Will Not ye let me speak to 'em?


Them. No, Sirrah. -- O best of all! Here comes the Fellow with his Cudgels.


SCENE IX.
To them enter Turbalio, with two great Cudgels. Lab. Faith, they make m' Ears
tingle. (Aside.


Them. Sparax, take you the other Cudgel. -- One of ye, stand on the right, and
the other on the left side of the Altar. So, keep close, and mind what I say.
If the Rogue offers to lift up a Finger against 'em, give him his load so as he
shall not b' able to find the way home, or I Will hang y' up both by the heels. If
he calls one of 'em, do you answer; and if he offers to be marching, break both
his Legs wi' your Clubs.


Lab. What will ye keep me Prisoner too?


Them. I Have said enough. When your Servant's come back, who is gone for his
Master, come both of ye in: Observe exactly what I tell ye. [Exit Demones home.


SCENE X.
Labrax, Servants, and Women. Lab. walking on one side.] Bless me! OF my
Conscience, in this short time, the Temple's transformed from that of Venus to
Hercules, by the old Man's erecting his two Monuments, with Clubs in their
Hands. As I hope to live, I known't where to hide my Head, for both Sea and
Land are conspired against me. -- Palestra! [Sorrowfully.


Ser. What would ye have?


Lab. Hang ye, there is an ill meaning in it. Marry. The Palestra that answers,
is none of mine -- Hark ye, Ampelisca!


Ser. Have a care ye don't pull an old House about your Ears.


Lab. aside.] These Lubberly Dogs advise me well however. -- [to the Servants.]
Hark ye, it is you I speak to; will it be ever the worse for ye, if I come nigher
to 'em?


Ser. Not for us.


Lab. Nor for my sides neither?


Ser. Not if you be cautious.


Lab. What should I be cautious of?


Ser. Of having your Bones broken.


Lab. Good Boys, let me go. [Fawningly.


Ser. Go, if you please.


Lab. By Jove, that is honestly said; and I thank ye for your kindness. But I
had rather stay by my Slaves.


Ser. Then stay.


Lab. Faith, my Affairs are in a damned Condition. But I Am resolved to lay a
close Siege to these Girls to day.


SCENE XI.
Enter Pleusidippus, and Trachalio, at another part of the Stage. Pleu.
entering.] -- The rascally Merchant offer violence to my Mistress, and tear her
from the Altar by force?


Tra. Yes, Sir.


Pleu. Why didn't ye kill him upo' the spot?


Tra. I had never a Sword.


Pleu. A Club, or a Stone should have served then.


Tra. What, stone a Man like a Dog?


Pleu. Yes, such a Rascal as he.


Lab. 'Sdeath, I Am undone to rights! Yonder comes Pleusidippus too. He Will have
a confounded brush at my Coat. [Aside.


Pleu. Were both the Girls upo' the Altar, when you left 'em?


Tra. They Are there still.


Pleu. Who looks after 'em now.


Tra. An honest old Gentleman, a Stranger to me, who lives next door to the
Temple: He and his Servants, have done their best to protect 'em: I left 'em in
his Hands.


Pleu. Show me the Rogue, Labrax: Where is he?


Lab. meeting him.] Good morrow, dear Sir. [Fawningly.


Pleu. Hang your good morrows: -- Now, Sirrah, choose quickly, whether you will go
to Jail the usual way, or be dragged by the Heels.


Lab. I Will choose neither.


Pleu. Trachalio, run quickly to the Seaside, and desire my Friend there, to
meet me' at the Town-Gate, and help to carry this Dog to Prison; then come
back, and look after this Girls, I Will have this Devils-bird before the Judge
immediately. Exit Trachalio running.


SCENE XII.
Pleusidippus, Labrax, Servants, and Women. Pleu. Come, Sirrah; come before the
Judge. [Laying hold of him.


Lab. For what Crime?


Pleu. What Crime! Didn't you take earnest for a Girl, and then carry her quite
away?


Lab. I didn't carry her away.


Pleu. Will you Lie, Sirrah?


Lab. Truly, I only embarked her; alas, I could not carry her away. -- I
promised you to meet y' at the Temple of Venus. Am I worse than my word? Am I
not here?


Pleu. The Judge shall determine that: That Is the word for all. -- Come along,
Rascal. [Dragging him by the Ears.


Lab. aloud.] O help, good Charmides, help! I Am arrested here.


SCNEE XIII.
To them enter Charmides from the Temple, rubbing his Eyes. Char. Who calls me
there?


Lab. Don't you see I Am hurried away, vi and armis?


Char. I do, and am glad often withal my Soul.


Lab. Will Not ye help to rescue me?


Char. Who is it forces ye so?


Lab. Young Pleusidippus.


Char. Ay, you may bare it patiently; you would better by half go willingly. I Will
warrant ye, you will meet what a great many wish for.


Lab. What Is that?


Char. A Reward according to your Deserts.


Lab. Prithee come along wi' me.


Char. That Is like your Rogueship: You're going to Jail, and desire me to go
along wi' ye. -- What, do you hang an Arse?


Lab. O, undone!


Pleu. That Is it I Would have. -- My dear Palestra, and you Ampelisca, stay where
you are, till I come back.


Ser. Truly, Sir, I think it is far safer for 'em to go in with us, till your
return.


Pleu. Very well; I thank ye.


Lab. aloud.] O I Am robbed here! [He makes for the Women.


Ser. Who are the Robbers?


Pleu. Beat him off. [They beat him off.


Lab. O, good Palestra! [Exeunt Servants and Women.


SCENE XIV.
Pleusidippus, Labrax, and Charmides. Pleu. Come along, Hang-Dog.


Lab. Honest Boarder!


Char. I Am none of your Boarder; I renounce your Bed and Board.


Lab. What do you throw m' off at last?


Char. Yes, I Have enough of your Salt Meats, I thank


Lab. Then the Devil rot your Bones.


Char. And your Corpse in Prison. -- [To himself, following them at a distance.]
Troth, I fancy Men are often metamorphos'd into one Brute or another; and I
believe the Merchant's changed to a Stock-Dove; for by and by, he will be stocked
into the Pigeon Holes, where I Am afraid the poor Devil must make his Nest to
night. -- However, I Will endeavor to plead for him, and help over his Trial, as
soon as I can. [Exeunt omnes.


The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Demones alone. I Vow, I Am glad withal my Heart, that I should help these
poor Girls. I Am their Protector at present; and, troth, they are both young, and
wondrous pretty. But my jealous prying Wife watches me on all sides, for fear
I should be too sweet upon 'em. -- But I wonder what is become of our Man
Gripus, who went out a Fishing last night: Faith, he would have been wiser had he
kept his Bed: Certainly, he must have lost his Labor, and his Tackling too; the
Wind has been so high ever since. By the roughness of the Sea, I may venture to
fry all his Fish in my bare Hand. -- But hold, my Wife calls me to Dinner; I Will
go, but I shall have my Ears deafn'd with her foolish prattle. [Exit Demones.


SCENE II.
Enter Gripus alone, from among the Cliffs, at the further End of the Stage,
with a Portmantle, Nets, etc. Thanks to m' old Patron Neptune, King of the
Salt-fish Regions, for sending me home so well accouter'd from his Dominions,
and thus richly laden; and for preserving the little Boat that helped me to
this lucky new sort o'Fish, when the Sea ran so high. Faith, 'twas a wonderful
strange Bout, and the best that could be; for the de'el a Fish caught I to day,
but what is in this Net. I rose carefully at Mid night, preferred Interest to
snoring and sleeping, hazzarded my Carcass in a Storm, to relieve my Master's
Wants, and m'own Servitude. A lazy Rogue's good for nothing: I hate those
Cattle as I do the Plague. If a Fellow has a Mind to have his business go
forward, he must be up and be doing, and not lie lolling in his Bed for his
Master's Call: For such as these, gain nothing but a Jerking. Now I, who am
careful, have happened o'that, which, if I please, will keep me from all Care.
-- This I found in the Sea: What e'r's in it it is plaguey weighty: Faith, I
believe it is all Gold; and, what is worth all, never a Soul to come in for a
Snack. -- Now, my rare Gripus, is the critical Minute for the Magistrates to
make thee a great Man. Now, for my Policy, and Contrivance: I Will go cunningly,
and slily, to my Master, and offer him a little Money for my Freedom: After I Have
got that, I Will immediately purchase House and Land, and buy Slaves; then, send
out large Ships to trade to Foreign Parts of the World, and be as great as a
King. I Will have a Royal Sun for Pleasure, like the K -- of F -- and sail about
from Port to Port. When my Nobility and Splendour begin t'appear in the World,
I Will build a vast great City, and call it from m' own Name, Gripsburg, for the
Memory of my Illustrious Fame, and Immortal Actions; and there will I erect a
great and potent Monarchy. -- Faith, I Have great Designs in my Head; but first
and foremost; let me hide this Portmantle. -- After all, this Monarch here,
must dine to Day with a Brown George, and only Salt and Vineager Sauce. [He
moves forwards.


SCENE III.
Enter Trachalio from the Cliffs, just behind him. Tra. Stay, Friend.


Gri. What for?


Tra. Only t'unshacle your Rope, that hangs at your heels.


Gri. Prithee, Friend, let it alone.


Tra. Faith, I must help ye; for a good turn's never thrown away upon a good
Man.


Gri. I tell ye, Fellow, I Have no Fish, for there has been nothing but stormy
Weather since yesterday, therefore don't expect any. Don't you see I Have a wet
Net, and nothing in it?


Tra. I want no Fish, but only a little serious Discourse.


Gri. Po, I hate your baiting Impertinence, who ever you are. [Going off.


Tra. holding him] I must n't part wi'ye so. -- Stay, Man.


Gri. I Will break your Neck. -- Why a Pox d' ye hold me?


Tra. Hear me a little.


Gri. Not a Word.


Tra. Faith, but you must.


Gri. Another Time, as long as you please.


Tra. Oh, but it is a Matter of great Importance, and must n't be put off.


Gri. Speak then; what is it?


Tra. But does no Body dog us?


Gri. What Is that to me?


Tra. O much. -- Can y' advise m'in one point?


Grim. What Point? Prithee be quick.


Tra. I Will tell ye, upon Promise of not betraying me.


Gri. I promise I will not betray you, who ever you are.


Tra. Observe then: I lately discovered a Theft, and knew the Owner of the
stolen Goods. Whereupon, I goes straight to Mr. Thief, and offers him this
Proposal: I know the Owner, says I, o'your stolen Goods; and if you will gi'me a
share, I Will never discover't to him. The Fellow gave no Answer. Now what think
ye do I deserve? Half parts? I Will be judged by you.


Gri. Ay, Faith, and more too; or I Would discover the Rogue to th'Owner.


Tra. I Will follow your Advise: Now take notice, this all belongs to your Case.


Gri. Why, how can that be?


Tra. I knew the Owner of that Portmantle this long time.


Gri. What say ye?


Tra. And I know how it was lost.


Gri. And I how it was found; and the honest Man that found it, who now is
become Master often. In good Faith, it is nothing to you, to know the present
Owner, as I do; nor to me, to know the former, as you do. -- I Will part with it
to no Man, therefore pray don't flatter your self.


Tra. What not to the Owner, if he comes?


Gri. There Is no Owner but my self: I say, don't fool your self, for I caught
it a fishing.


Tra. Did ye so?


Gri. And is there any Fish which don't belong to me? All that I take, are
m'own, and I do what I please with 'em, no man pretending to take 'em away, or
come in for a Share. I sell 'em in open Market, as my own proper Goods. For
sure the Sea's common to all Men.


Tra. I grant it: And why should n't I come in for a common share often, since
it comes out of a common Place?


Gri. O Impudence, Impudence! If that be Law, poor Fishermen may go hang
themselves: For when they carry their Fish to Market, the de'el a bit would the
People buy, but all come flocking in for their Shares, pretending they were
caught in the common Liberty.


Tra. How, brazen Face? What compare Portmantles to Fish? Is there no
difference think ye?


Gri. It Is n't i'my Power to catch what I please: When ever I throw in my
Tackling, all is Fish that comes to the Net. And what is caught, is mine, in
spite of any Man.


Tra. No by Jove, if you catch a Bag instead of a Fish.


Gri. A fine Foolosopher!


Tra. Good Mr. Sorcerer, did y'ever kn^ a Man carry a Fish to Market called a
Portmantle? You musn't think to follow as many Trades as you please. You would
n't be Bag-maker and Fisherman at the same time, would ye? Either show me a
Fish called a Portmantle, or you carry nothing off without Scales, and that
is not bred in the Sea.


Gri. Prithee, Fellow, did never hear of a Portmantle-Fish?


Tra. You Dog, there is no such Fish.


Gri. Gadzooks, but there is tho? and you will give a Fisherman leave to know his
own Trade. I confess it is a very scarce Fish, and very few of 'em are caught
upon our Coasts.


Tra. You Would as good say nothing: Do think t'impose upo' me, Rogue? -- -- What
Color is it of, pray?


Gri. There are very few of this Color. Others are red; when they grow big,
they turn Black and Blue.


Tra. Very well. -- Faith, if you have not a care, I shall change you to a
Portmantle-Fish; make your Sides red first, then black and blue.


Gri. What unlucky Rogue have I happened on to day? [Aside.


Tra. We stand wrangling and lose Time: Consider to whom you will put the
Business.


Gri. To the Portmantle.


Tra. Say ye so, Goodman Fool?


Gri. God bu'y, Sir Solomon. [Going off.


Tra. holding him] You must n't carry it off so, without putting it into a
third Man's Hands, and leaving it to others determination.


Gri. Prithee, art mad?


Tra. As a March. Hare.


Gri. And I crazy, but not enough to part from my Goods.


Tra. Speak another Word, and I Will make Mustard of your Brains.


Gri. Let m' alone, or I Will squeez out all the Blood of your Belly like a
Sponge. If you touch it, I Will take ye by the Heels, and dash ye as dead as a
Herring. -- Come, I Will fight wi'ye.


Tra. Hang fighting, now we may divide the Spoil.


Gri. You Will get nothing but a broken Head here; therefore don't provoke me. --
-- Now I Will be gone. [Going ^ff.


Tra. holding the Lines] I shall make your Ship tack about; therefore stay.


Gri. If you be at the Head, I Will keep at the Steerage. -- Let go the Lines,
Rogue.


Tra. Shall I so? Do you let go the Portmantle.


Gri. By George, you shall not be a Sowce the better for what is in it.


Tra. Your denial argues nothing, unless you gi' me a Share, put it to
reference, or into other Hands.


Gri. What I caught at Sea?


Tra. And I found at Land.


Gri. At the Price of my Trouble, Pains, Nets, and Boat.


Tra. If th'Owner should come, should I, who see you take it, be counted a less
Thief than you?


Gri. No, without doubt. [Offers to go again.


Tra. Stay, Hang-dog. -- By what Law must I be the Thief, and not the Sharer?
make that out.


Gri. I don't understand your City Laws, not I; but only I know it belongs all
to me.


Tra. And I know it belongs as much to me.


Gri. Hold a little, I Have found out a Trick to prevent your being either Thief
or Sharer.


Tra. What Is that?


Gri. Let me go quietly one way, and go you another; you shall say nothing, and
I Will give nothing; you shall be secret, and I Will be silent. I think it is the
best and fairest Project in the World. Hah, Boy?


Tra. Will you make me no Proposals?


Gri. I have already: Those are, To let go the Lines, and be gone, and to leave
all Impertinencies.


Tra. Stay, and let me make Proposals too.


Gri. Prithee, make the best of your Way, and be gone.


Tra. Are y'acquainted hereabouts?


Gri. Wi' my Neighbors I am.


Tra. Whereabouts live ye?


Gri. O, a vast way up into the Fields.


Tra. Will ye put the Business to the Man of this House?


Gri. Let go the Rope a little, and I Will think and consider often.


Tra. Well then. [He lets go the Line.


Gri. walking by himself] Good, good! Things go rarely: This rich Prize is
every bit m'own. The Foolish Fellow carries me to m' own Dunghill, and refers
all to m' own Master. I Will be sworn, he will never gi' three ha'pence from his own
Servant. This poor Devil sure knows n't what he is about. -- [to him] Well, I Will
put it to reference.


Tra. What should you do else?


Gri. Tho my Conscience tells me it is my Right, I Would rather do so, than gi' my
self the Trouble of beating ye.


Tra. Now I like ye.


Gri. Tho you summons me before an unknown Judge, if he does Justice, he is a
notable, though unknown Man; if not, he is a most notably unknowing Man. [they
move toward Demones's House.


SCENE IV.
Enter Demones, Palestra, and Ampelisca, with the Servants behind. Them. -- IN
faith, seriously, my poor Girls, tho I should be glad to do you any Service you
can desire of me, yet I Am miserably afraid my jealous Wife should thrust m'out a
doors; pretending that I bring my Misses under her Nose, t'affront her. --
Therefore, pray retire to the Altar, or I must my self.


Pal. Amp. We Are in a miserable Condition. [they go to the Altar.


Them. I Will protect ye; fear nothing. -- [to his Servants] What do you follow me
for? No Body shall hurt 'em while I Am here. Go, I say, both of ye, and keep
Sentry by the Door. [they retire to the Door.


Gri. O Master, your humble Servant.


Them. How now, Gripus; how is it?


Tra. Is he your Servant?


Gri. Yes, and no disgrace to him neither.


Tra. I Have nothing to do wi'ye then.


Gri. Pray, be marching then.


Tra. Pray answer me, Sir. Is he your Servant?


Them. Yes.


Tra. So then, best of all! If so, I Am your Servant once more.


Them. And I yours. -- Arn't you the Person, who, a while ago, went to look for
his Master?


Tra. The same, Sir.


Them. What Is your business now?


Tra. But is he certainly your Servant?


Them. I tell ye, Yes.


Tra. That Is as good as could be, if it be so.


Them. Why, what is the matter?


Tra. He Is a great Rogue.


Them. What has the Rogue done to ye?


Tra. The Dog deserves to have his Legs broke.


Them. What Is the matter? What Contest is this between ye?


Tra. I Will tell ye, Sir.


Gri. No, I will first.


Tra. I think, I should, since I Am the Plaintiff.


Gri. If you're wise, go plant your self somewhere else.


Them. Observe, Gripus, and be silent.


Gri. Must he speak first?


Them. Peace, Sirrah. -- Begin. [to Trachalio.


Gri. Will you hear a stranger before your own servant?


Tra. How hard it is to stop his Mouth! -- As I was a telling ye, the
Slave-Merchant, that you drove from the Temple, had lost a Portmantle, and this
Fellow has got it.


Gri. I have it not.


Tra. Shall Not I believe m' Eyes?


Gri. aside.] Would they were both out. -- [To Trachalio.] What if I have it,
or what if I have not it, what need you concern your self?


Tra. The Concern is, by what title you hold it, whether a lawful one or no?


Gri. Had I got it on dry Land, you might lawfully hang me: But if I caught it
at Sea, why is it more yours than mine?


Tra. to Demones.] He equivocates; the Business is as I tell ye.


Them. And how is that?


Tra. If he is your Servant, beat him into better manners, and let the Accuser
speak first.


Gri. You Would have him serve me as your Master dos you, would ye? Though yours be
good at that sport, mine is not.


Them. There, Boy, you have outdone him. -- [to Trachalio.] Come, tell me, what is
your Business?


Tra. To speak sincerely, I neither require a share in the Portmantle, nor
pretend any right to it. But there is a Casket in it, belonging to this Girl
here, whom I told ye was free born.


Them. You mean her, whom you say is my Countrywoman?


Tra. The same: In that Casket, now in the Portmantle, are her Play-things she
had when she was a Child. They Will do him no good; and if he restores 'em,
'twill be a means to find out the poor Girls Parents.


Them. He shall restore 'em; be satisfied.


Gri. Gadzooks, I Will deliver up nothing.


Tra. I desire nothing but the Casket, and the Playthings within it.


Gri. Suppose they are all made of Gold?


Tra. What signifies it to you, whether they be Gold, or Silver, you shall have
Weight for Weight in kind.


Gri. Let me see your Gold then, and you shall see the Casket.


Them. Sirrah, beware of a beating, and hold your Tongue. -- [to Trachalio.] On
wi' your Business, Friend.


Tra. First, I must beg you take pity of these poor Girls, if this Portmantle
should prove the Slave-Merchants, as I suspect. It Is only a Conjecture, I Am not
certain it is his, --.


Gri. How the Rogue goes to hook him in!


Tra. Prithee, don't interrupt me. -- If it belongs to this Rascal, I was
talking of, these Girls can tell: Command him to show it openly.


Gri. How! show it openly?


Them. Why, there can be no harm in that, Gripus.


Gri. 'Sbud, 'twill do the greatest harm in the World.


Them. Why so?


Gri. Because if I do, they will infallibly say they know it.


Tra. You suspicious Cur, do you think every Body as great a Rogue as your self?


Gri. I can bare all this, as long as my Master's of my side.


Tra. But he is gone over to the other, and that the Casket will witness.


Them. Hold your Tongue, Gripus. -- [to Trachalio.] Tell me in short, what you would
have.


Tra. I have already; but, if you didn't rightly understand, I Will tell y' again.
-- -- As I was saying, these Girls are both born free; one was kidnapp'd very
young from Athens. --


Gri. Pray, what is this to the Portmantle, whether they be free, or not free?


Tra. You Rogue, you would have me begin again, and so spin out a whole day in the
Relation.


Them. Cease this ill Language, and answer me directly to what I ask.


Tra. There should be a small Casket of Ozier in the Portmantle, where the Play
things are, which she had whenfirst spirited away, and by which she might
discover her Parents, as I said.


Gri. Would the Devil and his Damn had ye. What say ye, Sorcerer? The Women are
both dumb; arn't they of Age to speak for themselves?


Tra. They Are quiet as Lambs, for a silent Woman has always the whip Hand of a
Talker.


Gri. Then, Faith, by your discourse, you're neither Man nor Woman.


Tra. Why so?


Gri. Because you can neither talk nor be silent to any purpose. -- Pray, Sir,
shall I never speak? [To Demones threatening him.


Them. Speak another word, Sirrah, and I Will crack your Fools Pate.


Tra. As I said before, Sir, do but command your Servant to deliver up the
Casket; if he requires any thing for the finding, he shall have it; and let him
take the rest of the things besides.


Gri. O, now you're in another tune, when you see it is my right: Just now, you
came swoop for half Parts.


Tra. So I am still.


Gri. So I Have seen a Kite come swoop at a Chick, but snapp'd short though.


Them. Will nothing but Blows stop your mouth?


Gri. Let him hold his Tongue, and I will mine; but if he talks, sure I may
speak in my turn.


Them. Gripus, let me see the Portmantle.


Gri. I Will trust it in your Hands, upon condition you return it, if none of his
things be there.


Them. I will.


Gri. Here, Sir. [Gives him the Portmantle.


Them. Palestra, and Ampelisca, hear what I say. Is this the Portmantle that has
your Casket in it?


Pal. It Is the same.


Gri. Hey brave! my business is in a hopeful condition, before she can well
see it, she cries it is the same.


Pal. I Will make the Business as clear as the Sun: The Casket's made of Ozier:
I Will name ye every thing in it, one after another, before I see 'em. If I ben't
in the right, it shall be nothing; you shall take all you find. If I be, pray
then, restore me my Things.


Them. Very well, it is nothing but Justice in my Opinion.


Tra. Troth, and in mine too.


Gri. What if she be a Witch, or a Devil, and can tell every thing that is
there, shall she have 'em for her pains?


Them. She shall have none unless she speaks truth; her Witchcraft shall do her
no good. -- Come, open the Portmantle, that I may know the truth of the
business.


Gri. tearing it open.] -- So; -- There then; -- now it is open: -- O, the
Devil! Here Is the Casket.


Them. to Palestra.] Is this it?


Pal. Yes, yes. O my dear Parents, I have ye both enclosed there, there lies
all my Wealth, and hopes of discovering ye.


Gri. Marry, you will never come to good, who ever you are, for cramming your
Father and Mother into such a pitiful narrow place.


Them. going on one side.] Gripus, bring it this way: Your Business shall be
cleared. -- Now, my Girl, without stirring from your place, name every thing in
the Casket, and how they are made. Troth if you mistake in the least, and speak
never so much truth after that, you would as good talk to the Wind.


Gri. That Is nothing but right.


Tra. Far unlike your Worship, who is neither for Right nor Reason.


Them. Now speak, Palestra. -- Gripus, observe, and hold your Tongue.


Pal. There are Children's Play-things.


Them. I see 'em.


Gri. Troth, I Am felled at the first Blow. -- Hold, Sir, don't show her 'em yet.


Them. What are they? Answer in order.


Pal. First, there is a little Sword of Gold, with an Inscription upon it.


Them. Tell me, what is it.


Pal. My Father's Name. In another part of the Casket, lies a small two edged
Axe of Gold, marked w^' my Mother's Name. --


Them. Stay. First, tell me your Father's Name on the Sword.


Pal. Demones.


Them. Heavens! where are my hopes?


Gri. And mine, by Iago. [Aside.


Them. Prithee, go on.


Gri. Softly, Sir. -- Or would you were hanged. [Aside.


Them. Tell me your Mothers Name on the Axe.


Pal. Dedalis.


Them. The Gods have preserved my Happiness.


Gri. And damned mine. [Aside.


Them. She must be my Daughter, Gripus.


Gri. So she may for all me. -- [to Trachalio.] Would old Beelzebub had ye, wi'
your plaguey prying Eyes, and me too, when I drew out the Net, without looking
about a hundred times, to see if the Coast were clear.


Pal. Then there is a small two handled Dagger of Silver, and a little Sow, --


Gri. Go and be hanged, wi' your Sows and Pigs together. [Aside.


Pal. -- Besides a little golden Bottle, which my Father ga' me of my Birthday.


Them. It Is certainly she, I must embrace her. -- [Embracing Palestra.] Bless
ye, my Daughter; I Am thy own Father: I Am Demones and your Mother Dedalis is
within.


Pal. O, my dear unexpected Father!


Them. My dear Child; how I joy t'ha' ye in my Arms!


Tra. And I, to see your goodness thus rewarded.


Them. to Trachalio.] Good Boy, take this Portmantle a little, and bring it into
the House; come along.


Tra. taking the Portmantle.] See the effects of Gripus's Rogueries. -- Honest
Sir, I congratulate your good success. [to Gripus.


Them. Come in, my Child, to thy Mother, who can better judge of the Proofs, and
is much more acquainted with the Tokens.


Tra. Let Us all in, since we are all concerned in the matter.


Pal. Come you too, Ampelisca.


Amp. I Am almost ravished to see Heaven so favorable to ye. [Exeunt all but
Gripus.


SCENE V.
Gripus alone. Well, I Am the dam'dest Puppy in nature, in finding such a Prize,
and not hiding often in some cunning hole or other. Faith, I thought as much,
that 'twou'd prove a plaguey bitter Business to me, since I found it in such
bitter stormy Weather. Zooks, I do verily believe there is a World of Gold and
Silver in it; and what wiser Course can I take, than to slink away and hang my
self; at least for a while, till this plaguey Sorrow's over. [Exit Gripus.


SCENE VI.
Enter Demones alone. Heavens! was ever Man more fortunate than I, so
unexpectedly to find a Daughter? Is Not it plain, that when Heaven bestows its
Favors, it is upo' the account of Men's Pieties? Thus have I accidentally found
my poor Girl, beyond both my hopes and belief; and I intend to bestow her upon
an Ingenious young Gentleman, of a good Family, and my Countryman. I wish some
Body would desire him to come hither. I ordered his Servants to follow me, and
step to the Town for him: I wonder why he dosn't come, for my part. -- I think
I had best go to the Door. -- [He goes to the Door, and looks in.] But what is
here to do? My Wife hugging my Daughter? These Caresses are too formal and
tedious. -- [to his Wife within.] Enough, Wife, leave your kissing, and prapare
for a Sacrifice, to thank our Gods for our Families Increase. We have Lambs,
and holy Pigs on purpose. -- [to the Women within.] Why do you hinder Trachalio
from coming? -- O, here he is as luckily as may be.


SCENE VII.
To him enter Trachalio. Tra. I Will find out my Master, if he be above Ground,
and bring him to ye.


Them. Tell him what good luck has befallen my Daughter; and pray him to leave
all Business, and come hither.


Tra. Well.


Them. Tell him, he shall have my Daughter, --


Tra. Well.


Them. That I Am acquainted with his Father, and he is my Countryman.


Tra. Well.


Them. But make haste.


Tra. Well.


Them. While you're a going, we'll provide a Supper.


Tra. Well.


Them. Is every thing Well?


Tra. Very well. -- Sir, do you know my request? To remember you promised to
procure my Freedom.


Them. Well.


Tra. Persuade my Master, what you can, to perform it.


Them. Well.


Tra. Get your Daughter to speak a good word for me; she will easily obtain it.


Them. Well.


Tra. And that I may marry Ampelisca, when I Am free. --


Them. Well.


Tra. That my Services may appear to have been grateful to ye.


Them. Well.


Tra. Is every thing Well wi' you too?


Them. Very well. -- And I thank ye for it. -- But run to the Town, and back
again, as fast as you can.


Tra. Well. -- I Will be wi' you instantly. The mean time, get all things in a
readiness.


Them. Well. -- A duce on him, for his Wells and Waters, he has stuffed my Ears
wi' nothing else. Whatever I could say, all is Well. [Exit Trachalio running.


SCENE VIII.
To him enter Gripus. Gri. I Would speak a word wi' ye, Sir, when you're at leisure.


Them. What Is the matter, Gripus?


Gri. And concerning the Portmantle too. If you know what belongs to your
Profit, secure what Heaven has sent ye.


Them. D' ye think it just to lay claim to what is none of m' own?


Gri. Didn't I find it in the Sea?


Them. So much the better for him who lost it; but it is none of yours the more
for that.


Gri. It Is this Honesty of yours, that makes ye so poor.


Them. O Gripus, take notice, there are a great many Hooks laid to catch
Mankind, which often entangle 'em. And, troth, they are commonly so well baited,
that if any covetous Fool chance to snap at 'em, they are caught, and must pay
Sauce for their greediness. But the Man who carries himself warily, carefully
and cunningly, may long enjoy his well-gotten Goods. I Am persuaded it will be
more for our Profit, to return this Prize to the Owner, than to keep it: And
shall I pretend to keep what, I know, belongs to another Man? That Is none of
your Master Demones's ways. Wise Men can never be too cautious in this Case,
for fear they become Partners wi' their Servants ill Actions. The satisfaction
of returning it to the Owner, is sufficient Reward to me, for the finding of it.


Gri. I Have often seen the Comedians of the Stage, applauded for the wise and
moral Instructions they taught the People; but when every one's got home, he
never observes 'em.


Them. Go in, and don't be troublesome, or saucy; I Will not gi' ye a Farthing
often, don't deceive your self.


Gri. Then be it Gold, Silver, or any thing else, Heaven grant it be all
consumed to Ashes. [Exit Gripus very angrily.]


SCENE IX.
Demones alone. This same joining wi' Servants, is the reason we have so many bad
ones. If I harken to his Proposals, I shall become guilty of his Crime. While
he imagines he has a Prize, he is mine himself; so one Prize takes another. --
But I Will in to the Sacrifice, and then give order for the Supper. [Exit Demones.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Pleusidippus and Trachalio. Pleu. entering.] TEll all again, my dear
Trachalio, my Deliverer, my Patron, or rather, my Parent. Has my Palestra found
out her Parents?


Tra. Yes, Sir.


Pleu. And is she my Country-Woman?


Tra. I think so.


Pleu. Shall I marry her too?


Tra. I imagine so.


Pleu. Prithee, do you think her Father will make up the Match to day?


Tra. That Is my Opinion.


Pleu. Should I congratulate her Father for the Discovery?


Tra. That Is my Advice.


Pleu. And her Mother too?


Tra. That Is my Advice.


Pleu. What is it, that you advise?


Tra. What you ask.


Pleu. What Is your Advice worth?


Tra. Mine? I advise --


Pleu. Leave advising, and don't be always a Councellor.


Tra. That Is my Advice.


Pleu. Shall I run?


Tra. That Is my Advice.


Pleu. Or had I better go softly?


Tra. That Is my Advice too.


Pleu. Shall I salute her at the first entrance?


Tra. That Is my Advice.


Pleu. And her Father too?


Tra. It Is my Advice.


Pleu. Then, her Mother?


Tra. It Is my Advice.


Pleu. What then? Shall I embrace her Father at the first entrance?


Tra. That Is not my Advice.


Pleu. Nor her Mother?


Tra. That Is not my Advice.


Pleu. Nor her self?


Tra. It Is not my Advice.


Pleu. 'Sdeath, the Fellow has changed his Note, and has advised me to a fine
purpose.


Tra. You're out of your Wits; come along, Sir.


Pleu. Where you please, my Patron. [Exeunt Ambo.


SCENE II.
Enter Labrax alone. Was ever Mortal in a more miserable Case than I?
Pleusidippus has cast me before the Judges; they 've given him Palestra, and I
may go hang my self. I Am persuaded that all Merchants of my Faculty were born
to make the World sport, every Body's so mightily pleased when they light upon
any Misfortune. -- Well, I Will to the Temple, and take her who is left behind,
for she is all the Goods I have in the World now.


SCENE. III.
Enter Gripus, with a Spit in his Hand. Gri. to his Master within.] By the Lord
Harry, you shall not see Gripus alive at night, if I have not the Portmantle again.


Lab. I Am ready to swoon at the Name of a Portmantle; the very word goes to the
Guts of me. [Aside.


Gri. to himself.] This Dog Trac^alio has got his Freedom; but I, who found the
rich Prize, am denied every thing.


Lab. Bless me! The Fellow makes me prick up my Ears. [Aside.


Gri. to himself.] 'Sbud, I Will post it up every where in Letters as big as
Milstones, That if any one has lost a Portmantle full of Gold and Silver, let
them repair to Gripus. They shall not carry't off as they think.


Lab. OF my Conscience, the Fellow knows of my Portmantle. -- I must board him.
Now Heaven prosper me.


Gri. to them within.] What do you call m' in for? I Will scour the Spit here. [He
cleans the Spit.] Faith, I think it is all made up of Rust, not Iron; the more I
scour it, the more yellow, and slender it is. Zooks, I think 'thas got a
Consumption, it falls away so wretchedly.


Lab. Bless ye, young Man.


Gri. And you too, wi' your bald Pate.


Lab. What are y' about?


Gri. Scouring this damned Spit.


Lab. How fares your Corpse?


Gri. Why that Question? Are ye a Mountibank?


Lab. No, Faith, I Am another sort of Bank.


Gri. What then, a Bankrupt?


Lab. Thou'st nicked it.


Gri. It agrees wi' your Complexion. -- But what is the matter?


Lab. Why, last Night I was cast away, my Ship sunk, and I Have lost all I Am
worth.


Gri. What have ye lost?


Lab. A Portmantle, full of Gold and Silver.


Gri. Do You remember what was in it?


Lab. What matters that; since all is gone to the bottom of the Sea?


Gri. Nothing: Let Us talk of something else. -- Suppose I know who found it;
I Would willingly be told the Marks.


Lab. There was 800 pieces of Gold in one Purse, and 100 Philips in a little
Bag by it self.


Gri. aside] As I live, a noble Prize; I must require a swinging Reward for
finding of it. The Gods are generous, and I shall be damn'dly rich: I see it is
his Portmantle. -- Go on wi' the rest.


Lab. A whole Talent of Silver, in a great Bag; besides, a Basin, an Ewer, a
Boat, and a Goblet.


Gri. O living! You were a plaguey rich Fellow!


Lab. That same were, is a miserable hard Word, since it is gone and past.


Gri. Come, what will you give the Party that shall find it, and bring it to
ye? Speak quick; in a twinkling.


Lab. Three hundred Pieces.


Gri. It Is three hundred times too little.


Lab. Four hundred.


Gri. Four hundred Farts.


Lab. Five hundred then.


Gri. A Fiddle's end.


Lab. Six hundred.


Gri. You Would as good bid so many Farthings.


Lab. I Will give seven hundred.


Gri. Have ye swallowed a Fire-Coal, that you cannot open your Mouth?


Lab. I Will give a thousand then.


Gri. Po, you bid nothing.


Lab. Not a So^ce more. Go.


Gri. But hark ye; troth, if I once go, you find me no more here.


Lab. Will a hundred more do?


Gri. Sure you nothing but dream.


Lab. Prithee, tell me, how much will.


Gri. Not to make ye bid twice, a great Talent's the Price, and not a Farthing
to be abated of that! therefore say, Ay, or no.


Lab. aside] I see I Am forced to it. -- I Will give it then. [to him.


Gri. going to the Altar] Come hither then. Venus shall be witness of all.


Lab. Command what you please.


Gri. Lay your Hand upo'th' Altar.


Lab. I do.


Gri. You must swear by Venus, to --


Lab. To do what?


Gri. What I dictate to ye.


Lab. Dictate what you please -- [aside] I Am so well furnished with
Equivocations, I need n't borrow of my Neighbors.


Gri. Take hold of the Altar.


Lab. I do.


Gri. Swear to pay me the Money, as soon as you have your Portmantle.


Lab. I will.


Gri. and Lab. together] I do promise here before Venus of Cyrene, if I find
the said Portmantle, I lost in the Ship, together with all the Gold and Silver,
therein enclosed, and it comes safely into my Hands and possession, --


Gri. That I will give to this present Gripus -- Lay your Hand upo' me, and say
after me.


Lab. That I will give to this present Gripus. --


Gri. and Lab. together] A great talent of Silver. So help me Venus.


Gri. If you equivocate, wish Ven^'s Curse to rot your Head and Joints all
over. -- [aside] And may it come to pass, as soon as you have finished your Oath.


Lab. If I break my Oath, may Venus send all the Plagues of Bawds upo' my Head.


Gri. aside] Ay, and tho you keep it. -- Stay here; I Will bring out m' old
Master to ye: Be sure to challenge him wi' the Portmantle. [Exit Gripus with his
Spit.


SCENE IV.
Labrax alone. Tho he does help me to my Portmantle, the De'el a Farthing shall
the Dog get of me. I Am Master of my own Tongue, and I Will do as I please. -- But
mum for that. Here he comes and the Old Gentleman with him.


SCENE V.
To him enter Gripus and Demones with the Portmantle. Gri. Come this way, Sir.
But where is this Womanmerchant? -- Hark ye, ho, ho! This Gentleman has your
Portmantle.


Them. I have so, and own it; and if it be yours, you may have it, and all
that is in it, just as you lost it. Take it if it be yours.


Lab. O wonderful! it is mine. -- Welcome, my dear dear Portmantle. [hugging it.


Them. Is It yours?


Lab. D' ye question it? Faith, if it fell into the Hands of Jove, it is mine
nevertheless.


Them. There Is nothing touched, but only one small Casket, and a few
Play-things, which helped to discover my Daughter?


Lab. What Daughter?


Them. Your Palestra is found to be my Daughter.


Lab. Truly, Sir, I Am glad of it; and receive an extreme Satisfaction in
finding things fall out so happily on your side. [fawningly.


Them. I can scarce believe your Compliment.


Lab. Then, Sir, to show you my Intentions are real, I deliver up all my Right
to your Daughter, without demanding a Farthing of ye.


Them. That Is a piece of Generosity indeed.


Lab. O dear, Sir, it is more yours than mine. [taking the Portmantle.


Gri. Hark ye, Friend, are ye possessed of your Portmantle?


Lab. Yes.


Gri. Then make haste.


Lab. To do what?


Gri. To pay me my Money.


Lab. Marry, I Will not pay ye a Souce, nor do I owe y' any.


Gri. What Roguery's that? Not owe m' any?


Lab. No, Faith, not I.


Gri. Did n't your swear to me? --


Lab. I did swear, and so I will again, if I think fit. Oaths were designed to
make a Man, not to break a Man.


Gri. You perjured Dog, pay me the Talent y' owe me.


Them. What Talent do you demand, Gripus?


Gri. He promised me upon Oath, to gi' me --


Lab. 'Twas my pleasure to swear: Are you a Magistrate to punish me if I break
my Oath.


Them. Upon what account did he promise this Money?


Gri. If I helped him to this Portmantle, he swore to gi'me a great Talent of
Silver.


Lab. Get one to go before the Judge wi'me then, where I Will prove your Demands
all Trick and Cheating, and that I Am older than your Worship by 25 Years.


Gri. Here Is one ready. [pointing to Demones.


Lab. I Have nothing to say to him.


Them. I Will not part with it thus, till things be a little clear. -- Did you
promse him this Money?


Lab. I don't deny't.


Them. What you promised my Servant, belongs to me. Therefore, good Sir, you
mustn't think to sham us off wi' your Bawdships Legerdemain Tricks.


Gri. Sure you think you have to deal with a mere Bubble. Come, down wi' the Money
fairly, and I Will give it my Master for my Freedom.


Them. Since I Have been so civil to ye, and by my means, your Goods were saved, --


Gri. interrupting] Troth, Sir! 'twas by mine, therefore don't say, by yours.


Them. to Gripus] Hold your Tongue, Fool. -- [to Labrax] You stand obliged
t'acknowledge the Favor.


Lab. True, because you defend my Right so well.


Them. 'Twou'd be ridiculous to defend it wi'the loss of m' own.


Gri. I Am pretty secure: The Woman - Trader's brought a Peg lower, and that
foretells my Freedom. [aside.


Them. He found it, and he is my Slave, therefore I Have kept it for ye, and all
the Money safe.


Lab. I thank ye for it, and now I find t^re's no Reason to hinder ye of the
Talent I so solemnly promised.


Gri. Hark ye, give it me quickly, if you're wise.


Them. Will you never be silent?


Gri. You pretend to be my Friend, and it is all for your self. But, as I live,
you shall not trick m' out of this, as you did the Portmantle.


Them. Sirrah, speak another Word and I Will cane ye.


Gri. Ay, Faith, you may kill me too; but I Will never be quiet, till my mouth's
stopped with a Talent.


Lab. It Is all for your good, therefore hold your Tongue.


Them. Come this way, Labrax.


Lab. Well then. [They walk on one side.


Gri. Don't act underhand, I Will have none of your close Committees, and
Whisperings.


Them. Tell me, what did you give for Ampelisca, the other Girl?


Them. Shall I make a good proposal to ye?


Lab. With all my Heart.


Them. I Will divide the Talent.


Lab. Very well.


Them. One half shall go for her Ransom, and the other, he shall have, --


Lab. Best of all.


Them. -- And I Will give him his Freedom for it, who was the cause of your finding
your Goods, and of my finding my Daughter.


Lab. Well decided, Sir; a thousand Thanks to ye.


Gri. Well, and shall I have the Money?


Them. The Matter's made up, Gripus: I have it.


Gri. Faith, I Would rather have it my self.


Them. Troth, there is nothing for you, Gripus, therefore you must n't expect it.
I Would have ye discharge him from his Oath.


Gri. Zookers, I Am undone: I must go hang my self, or else I Am a dead Man. You
shall never deceive me a second Tim^.


Them. Labrax, you must sup wi' me to night.


Lab. I Will accept of your Kindness, Sir.


Them. Come along both. -- [Turns to the Spectators] Gallants, I would invite ye
all, but I Have nothing to entertain ye with, nor any good thing to set before
ye, and I presume you're all engaged elsewhere. But, if you please to give us
one good Applause, I invite ye to a Collation on this Day sixteen Years. -- [to
Labrax, and Gripus] You two, sup wi' me to Night.


Lab. We will.


Them. to the Spectators] Kind Gentlemen, your Approbation. [Exeunt omnes.


The End of Rudens.
REMARKS UPON RUDENS.
THis Comedy is called Rudens, or the Cable, but with so little Reason, that
Madam Dacier changed the Name in her Version, and called it L'Heureux Naufrage,
the Happy Shipwreck, which indeed is the more proper Name of the two. The
Subject of this, as well as the last Play, is not so noble as that of
Amphitryon, it being chiefly the Discovery of Palestra, yet the variety of
Incidents affords more Diversion than Amphitryon, and the Decorations of the
Stage, is finer than either that or Epidicus; or indeed, than any of his, or
Terence's Plays. The Catastrophe ends more to the satisfaction of the
Spectators than Epidicus, for here is not only the Discovery, but the Marriage
of Palestra. The Poet's Management is the more remarkable in this Play, for
bringing to pass so many several Incidents in such a private, and almost
unfrequented Place, without offending the least against Probability.

The PROLOGUE.
THE Prologue is spoken by a God, because, only such a one can be supposed to
know all what is there related; and by Arcturus in particular, because he was
most generally believed to raise Storms and Tempests in the Sea, therefore the
more proper for this Narration. The Forepart of this Prologue, exactly shows
the Opinions, Morality, and Doctrine of the Pagans in these Times.

Page 152. l. 19. Diphilus calls this City, Cyrene.] This was Diphilus the
Greek Comedian, from whence Plautus borrowed the Subject of this and some other
of his Comedies.

Ibid. l. 20. Here dwells Demones, etc.] This is the beginning of a Narration
of all what passed before the opening of the Stage, a thing very inartificial
in a Prologue, because it is spoken immediately and directly to the Audience.
This was Plautus's usual way in the rest of his Prologues, though not in so ill a
manner as in that of Amphitryon, where he foretells the Catastrophe, which of
all things ought to be concealed. The principal Fault of this, is the letting
the Spectators know that Palestra is Demones's Daughter, which takes away much
of the Pleasure of the Surprise; and seems but one Degree beneath that of the
Discovery of the Catastrophe.

Page 153. l. penult. etc. The Girl I told y' of, and another with her, in a
Fright, are leaped into the little Boat; and are now driven by the Tide, from
the Rock toward the Shore*] This is the latter end of the Shipwreck, and here
the Stage opens; and the Poet (as in the two foregoing Plays) has contrived it
as nigh to the Catastrophe as it is possible; but the several Incidents, he has
laid, and prepared beforehand, still put it off, and furnishes matter
sufficient for five Acts. This is one of the principal Secrets of a Dramatick
Poem.

ACT I.
Scene the First.
Page 155. l. 4. It can be no Wind, but some Conjurer raising the Devil.] Non
ventus fuit, verum Alcumena Euripidi. This is an Allusion to that Tragedy in
Euripides, called Alcumena, where a dreadful Storm was so lively represented,
that it became a Proverb at last for all Tempestuous Weather. This is lost
among us, therefore I have taken a little Liberty. Madam Dacier observes, that
it was not strange for a Slave of Cyrene to speak of this, because he was
supposed to have long served his Master in Athens, where he might have often
seen that Play acted.

Ibid. l. 6. The Windows shattered, so we shall keep open House now.]
Illustrioris fecit, fenestras indidit. It ought to be Illustriores, and refers
to Aedes, understood. It is taken in a comical Sense, not without something of
a Pun; therefore Open House, or, if you please, Splendid House, seems a true
Imitation of the Author's Design.

Scene the Second.
The three Gentlemen whom Pleusidippu^ brings along with him, are all Mu^es. If
any of our modern Poets had had the Management of 'em, they would undoubtedly
have made 'em speak several things, and perhaps with Reason, it being somewhat
improbable they sho^'d be silent all the Time they were there: But the
Ancicients, in this point, were extreme fearful of embarassing the Stage, and
often to a Fault, and too great a limitation to the variety of the Discourse.
They had commonly more Actors, and we have usually more Speakers.

Scene the Third.
Page 156. l. 12, etc. Father, well met. Them. Good morrow to ye, Sir. Sce. Are
ye Man or Woman, that you call him Father? Pleu. A Man, undoubtedly. Them. If
so, you must seek elsewhere. I had once a little Daughter, which I lost
formerly, but never had a Son in my Life.] Demones's mentioning the loss of a
Daughter, was a very necessary Circumstance for the Audience to take notice of,
and an excellent Preparation for the main Incident: But for the manner of
bringing of it in, though there appears little design of instructing the
Audience, and consequently well in that respect, yet, methinks, it might have
been better, or at least more civil after this manner. Pleu. Father, well met.
Them. Ah, Sir, that word, Father, brings my poor Daughter to remembrance, that I
lost formerly.

Page 157. l. 32. Hark ye, Sir, you that haunt the Temple for your Belly-sake.]
Heus tu! qui fana ventris caussa circumis. This was a very high Affront to a
Gentleman, in those days. But Pleusidippus takes no notice of it, either
because his Thoughts were otherwise employed, or rather (as Madam Dacier
observes) from the likeness of the word Ventris to Veneris, and, by means of
the pronunciation, he might mistake the sound. But this I could not preserve in
my Translation. It is observable besides, that the Scurtility, and the low
Jests of Sceparnio, which seem so very odd to us, do very well show the Nature
and Disposition of the poor Slaves of those Days.

Page 158. l. 8, etc. I fancy they are some damnable Camesters. Them. Why so?
Sce. Because they have lost all, their Ship and all.] Ut mea est opinio, propter
viam illi sunt vocati ad prandium. Dae^ Qui? S^ Quia post coenam, credo,
laverunt heri; confr^ navis in ma^i est illis. This is a very difficult
Passage, and is founded upon a Custom of those days, of sacrificing to Hercules
before they made a Voyage, and all what they could not eat, they burned, so
that nothing was left behind. From this Custom, Scep^rnio takes an occasion to
s^y, that those People on the Sea, propter viam illi sunt vocati ad prandium,
that is, they had sacrificed for a Voyage, because, says he, post coenam
laverunt, that is, had consumed all, for Lavo, here, and in several other
Places of Plautus, signifies to Lose, to Destroy, to get rid ^ff, and the like;
and the word, Coenam, signifies the Meal they made at that Office. This is
undoubtedly the true explanation of this Passage; but the Jest is lost in our
Tongue, therefore I have made something that has much of the same Force and
Design.

Ibid. l. 22. Fare ye well.] Here Pleusidippus goes to the Assistance of the
Persons Ship-wrack'd, but finds 'em not, though he had seen 'em just before. This
may seem improbable for a Man of his amorous Temper to look so negligently; and
Madam Dacier reckons it a considerable Fault. But in answer to this, it may
easily be supposed, that the Rocks and Cliffs, and the distance of the Shore,
might make him miss of 'em, and come too late, for they were landed immediately
after his leaveing the Stage. If it be asked, why did he not give this, or some
other Reason for it, when he came next on to the Stage? It may be replied, that
neither his Haste, Business, nor the Subject would admit of such a Narration at
that time. But if this be not allowed as an Answer, and it still be counted a
Fault, yet thus far must be allowed, that our Author has not such another in
all the three Plays.

Scene the Fourth.
Ibid. l. 27. I vom, two little Girls, all alone, in a small Boat, etc.] In the
Original, nothing can be more natural and lively, than Sceparnio's Discourse
about the two Women in the Boat: And this is a sufficient Instance of Pla^us's
excellent Strokes upon an occasion.

Scene the Fifth.
Palestra was separated from her Companion, first by the greatness of her
Fright, which made her suppose her drowned; then by the different ways they
took through the Cliffs and Precipices; and this makes her appear alone upon
the Stage. What she says is very natural for one of her Circumstances, and
agreeable to the Doctrine and Religion of her time.

Page 160. l. 26. I was born a Gentlewoman, it avails nothing; I Am more
miserable than if born a Slave.] These Words seem to have been spoken with no
other Design than to express Palestra's concern at this time, and they appear
only the natural effects of her Passion; but the Poet designed 'em a
Preparation toward the main Incident, her Discovery.

Scene the Sixth.
Page 161. l. 27. Prithee, whereabouts are ye?] Ampelisc^ could not see her
Companion, because of the Cliffs between each other, at the further end of the
Stage; though at the same time, the Spectators might do both.

Scene the Seventh.
Page 163. l. 10, 11. It Is a ^uge way from the Place we first set out at.] In
reality it was but a small distance from Cyrene, the Place where they put to
Sea at, but the Fright, and Ignorance of the Girls, made 'em think it a vast
way off.

Ibid. l. 12. You came in a Ship, by Sea then?] Nempe equo ligneo per vias
caeruleas estis vectae. This seems to have been taken from some Greek Tragedy,
it being so like their way of Expression, and particularly to that of Homer,
(...). But this Expression would by no means do in English Comedy.

ACT II.
THE First Interval is filled up, with the Priestesses care about Palestra and
Ampelisca, and with all what passed in the Temple.

Scene the First.
This Scene of the Fishermen, and their Discourse, is a good Preparation for
the second Scene of the Fourth Act; and Plautus's lucky choice of a Place, to
bring 'em there with probability, is remarkable. The only Fault is, their
speaking a little too directly to the Audience, so mixing the Representation
with the Theatral Action, but not in so open a manner as he does in some other
of his Plays.

Page 164. l. 13. We make Incursions, every Day, from the Town to the Sea, for
Forage.] Ex urbe ad mare hu^ prodimus pabulatum. The word, Pabulatum, is a
proper military Term, signifying Forage, and here by a comical Metaphor
applied to Fishing; therefore the Translation, I believe, is just.

Ibid. l. 19. We slink home, well liquor'd wi' Salt Water.] Salsi la^tique pure
domum re^us clanculum. The Comicalness of this Passage cannot be well preserved
in our Language, consisting in the equivocal meaning of the Phrase; which, as
Madam Dacier observes, signifies either, A fine Treat of Salt Meats, or, A
washing, and cleansing with Salt Water, which was the truest sense in this
Place. The equivocal meaning of the Phrase, well liquor'd, seems to preserve a
little of the Design, though not much.

Page 165. l. 12. Not drowned yet?] Ut peritis? This is instead of, Ut valetis,
which is, How do you? and that makes the thing so comical; it being a perfect
opposition of Terms which will not do in our Tongue: Therefore I thought the
best way to preserve it, would be to have a word proper to their Trade.

Scene the Fourth.
Page 167. l. ult. etc. Faith, 'twas an excellent Cast; 'thas quite gammon'd
the Rascal.] Profecto nimio lepide jecisti bolum: perjurum perdidisti. The
Beauty of this does in a great measure consist in the double signification of
the Phrase, Iacere bolum, which is equally applied to casting of a Net, and to
casting of Dice, therefore it has the greater propriety in this Case; and
likewise to the different meanings of the word, Perdere, which signifies either
to Perish, and to Ruin, in a strict sense, else to Lose, or to Break in a
Gamester's sense. All these things I could not preserve in my Translation.

Page 168. l. 5. Troth, I believe the Whore's-bud has drunk more than he could
bear.] Credo hercle (...) datum quod ^iberet. This is an Allusion to the Custom
in some of their great Feasts, of finishing all with a larger Cup than
ordinary, which every one was obliged to drink without losing a drop; and this
was called Anancaeum poculum, (...), a Cup of Necessity. So that in effect,
Ampelisca said, That Neptune had invited the Rogue to a Feast, and had killed
him with his Cup of Necessity. But this could not so well be taken notice of in
a Translation. Some think it alludes to that deadly Cup given to some sort of
Criminals; and others, to the Water of Lethe; but neither of these is very
probable.

Page 168. l. 16. Just at Morning, we were thrown half dead ashore.] Here
Ampelisca finishes her Narration, which is very short and to the purpose. It is
very remarkable how hansomly and judiciously the Poet leaves out all that
latter part of the Shipwreck, which the Audience were already informed of by
Sceparnio, in the fourth Scene of the first Act. This is a thing that ought
carefully to be observed by Dramatick Poets in all Narrations.

Ibid. l. 18. He Is a plaguey hard Custom-master.] Eastidiosus Aedilis est. Part
of the Business of the Edil's was to inspect Merchants Goods, examine Weights
and Measures, and the like. Therefore Custom-master is the most proper for us,
to make it intelligible.

Ibid. l. 23. etc. I think I had best send for Gown and Fur-Cap, and set up for
a Fortune teller.] Capillum promittam optumum'st, occipiamque ariolari. The
Latin signifies, I Will let my Her grow, etc. It was usual for their
Fortune Tellers, and such kind of People, to wear extreme long Hair; but that
being a Custom not known among us, I thought it not necessary to observe it in
a Translation, the force of it being preserved after a more intelligible manner.

Page 169. l 8, etc. She Is mightily concerned for Labrax' s taking away a
Casket of hers; for there s^e had something to discover her Parents by.] It
ought to be observed that this, and six or seven lines further were designed by
the Poet to interest Trachalio more firmly in Palestra's concerns, and to give
a fair Pretext for demanding the Casket in the fourth Scene of the fourth Act,
without which the main discovery could never have been brought about. So it is
an excellent Preparation for that; but the Spectators could by no means foresee
it.

Scene the Sixth.
Page 171. l. 3, 4. What a fine black Complexion* I meant, a lovely brown!]
Subvolturium! illud quidem, subaquilum volui dicere. The Word, Subaquilum,
signifies Brown, that is, Nigh the Color of an Eagle: Now Sceparnio aiming at
that Word for Ampelisca's Skin, could only call to mind it was the color of
some great ravinous Bird, therefore forges the Word Subvolturium* and therein
consists the comicalness of this Expression, which cannot easily be preserved
in our Tongue. Some think, that after Sceparnio had compared Ampelisca's Skin
to a Vulture, by reason of its brownness, he, recollecting himself, calls it,
Subaquilum, as being much of the same Color, but the nobler Bird of the two.
This Explanation agrees best with my Translation, but is nothing so good as the
other.

Ibid. l. 6. I Am not for every one's turn.] Non ego sum pollucta pago. The
Word, Pollucta, is a Term borrowed from the Sacrifices, and is not to be
expressed in our Tongue. When they offered to Hercules, that little part of the
Beast which was burnt upon the Altar, was called Porrectum; and the rest, which
was exposed to the People's eating, was called Polluctum: So that the beauty of
the Word consists in the Allusion to that Custom, and the figurative sense,
which is lost to us. If I had done it, I Am no Pie for every one's cutting up,
it would have been somewhat nigher the Design, but not so modest.

Scene the Eighth.
Page 172. l. 16. Without Flattery.] Praefis^ine. This Praefiscine, was always
used as a molifying word when one commended himself, and signifies properly,
without Envy. The Pleasantry of this place, consists in Sceparnio's applying it
to a quite contrary thing, namely, to his calling himself Great Owl,
immediately after.

Ibid. l. 17. I was a great Owl for not falling in Love before now.] Not so
much for the Pleasure of the Amor, as the ease of drawing of Water with half
the Pains; a Fancy natural and comical enough, when rightly apprehended.

Scene the Tenth.
Labrax and Charmides were both cast away at the same Time with Palestra and
Ampelisca, but yet it is a considerable while after, that they appear upon the
Stage, because they were thrown ashore on a distant Place from them, sometime
after too, and the mean time were searching for what they had lost,

Pa. 173. l. 22. Oh, Liberty, you are a rare Goddess too, thou never go to
Sea with a Hero.] Edipol, Libertas, lepida es, quae nunquam pedem vol^isti in
navem cum Hercule una imponere. This Passage is founded upon the Story of
Hercules's Voyages, which were undertaken against his will; from whence, the
People afterward took an occasion to say, Liberty never much cared for an
Hero's Company at Sea.

Page 174. l. 16, 17. 'Twas a more fatal Supper to me than ever Thyestes' s, and
Ter^us' s was to them.] Thyestes, and Tereus, had their Children served up to
'em at Supper. This Story is not so well known among us, but for want of a
parallel one in our Ages, to preserve the Force of this Passage, I was forced
to take it as it is.

Ibid. l. 27, etc. You were a fresh raw Fellow, n^w I Have seasoned your
Understa^g.] Te ex (...) salsum f^ci opera mea. The Jest of this consists in
the equivocal meaning of the Word Salsus, which signifies either, Sa^ed, or
else, Cunning, Subtle, and the like; but the equivocal Words, Fresh, R^w, and
Seasoned, have done e'n as we^ in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 30, etc. Would the Devil had ye for a Rogue, Char. And you too: I Am
sure I made broad signs to have him come for ye.] Quin tu hinc is a me in
maximam malam crucem. Chapter Eas: easque res agebam commodum. I will not
positively affirm that I have hit of the true Sense of this Passage; but
however the beauty of Charmides's answer consists in the playing upon the word,
Eas, which is either a Verb or a Noun, and that makes such a double meaning, as
I do not find our English Tongue is capable of expressing.

Page 175. l. 4, etc. Faith, I tremble like one ready to engage the Enemy; and
my Iaws do so quake, that my Words break out like Flashes of Lightning.]
Equidem me ad velitationem exerceo: nam omnia corusca prae tremore fabulor.
This is a very difficult Passage to understand, and more to translate, by
reason of the harshness of the Simile in our Tongue. V^litatio, signifies a
Skirmish, which was usually made by the Velites, that is, the Light-harness'd
Soldiers; and these Men always made ^se of Darts, whose Points would glitter at
a distance, sometimes one way, and sometimes another. Now Charmides, trembling
with Cold, compares himself to these Velites, or Skirmishers, who never keep
their Place; and his Words, which came out broken and by piecemeal, to the
unequal Glitterings or Flashes of their Darts. This is the best Interpretation
I can find of this Place, and the little Liberty I have taken, could not be
avoided.

Ibid. l. 9. This God cannot afford one Brandy-shop in all his Dominions.] Ne
thermopolium quidem ullum instruit. There Thermopoli^, were certain Public
Places, common in Greece and Italy, where they drank hot Waters, sometimes
mingled with Wine and Honey; but this could not be taken notice on in a
Translation.

Ibid. l. 15. I fancy, I should make an excellent Snap-Dragon.] Quid, si aliquo
ad ludos me pro ma^duco locem? The Ancients had their Mand^ci, and their
C^riae, to march before their great Sights and Triumphs; the first were certain
Antic Figures with wide Mouths, like our Snap-dragons for Mayor's Shows, and
the second were somewhat like our Merry Andrews.

Scene the Tenth.
Page 176. l. 10, etc. The poor Creatures are mightily afraid of some Body, and
talk of being tossed all Night long, and thrown ashore this Morning.] By these
Words of Scepernio's, Labrax finds out his Girls, whom he supposed to have been
drowned, which most naturally clears the Stage and finishes the Act. The Poet's
Conduct in bringing about this material Discovery, is excellent: Ampelisca is
sent out in the fourth Scene for Water to Demones's House, and upon that
depends the greatest part of the Act. The Time Sceparnio is gone in to draw
Water, she is frighted off the Stage, which occasions him to follow her to the
Temple; and in his Return, he drops these Words accidentally, so that nothing
could have been brought about more naturally.

Scene the Eleventh.
Page 177. l. 13, etc. For shame! Arn't ye content to have the Sea wash all
away, but you must be for the same Sport at Land too? Sce. Be washed, and
powdered too, I care n't a Straw.] Eho! an te poenitet in mari quod elavi, in
hic in terra iterum eluam? Sc. Eluas tu an ex^ngare, ciccum non interduim. The
Word, Eluo, is equivocal, signifying either, Washing, or Ruining; upon which
depends Sceparnio's answer, El^as tu an exungare, where I rendered Exungare,
Powdered, because Anointing is not known among us. The Word, Ciccum, signifies
that Skin or Membrane which parts the little Cells or Holes of a Pomgranate,
and contains the Kernels; and is here mentioned as a thing of the smallest
value in the World.

Scene the Twelfth.
Ibid. l. ult. Old Neptune put upon us with his Water, as though it had been Wine
of the best.] Quasi vinis Graecis Neptunus nobis suffudit mare. In those times,
they always mingled Seawater with all Greek Wines when they transported 'em,
except that of Chio, which makes Horace call it, Chium maris expers. The
natural Sense of this Passage, is, Neptune has mixed us with Seawater as though
we had been Greek Wine; but the Wit of it is in a great measure lost to us.

ACT III.
THE second Interval is filled up with what passed in the Temple between
Labrax, Palestra, and Ampelisca: And here Plautus's Judgment is very remarkable
in concealing Labrax's Sacrilege from the Spectators Eyes, who, in those Days
would have been much disgusted at the Sight.

Scene the First.
This Scene begins exactly like the first Scene of the second Act of Plautus's
Mercator; and this Dream is an ingenious Preparative for some things that
follow, but more especially designed for a Pretext to bring Demones from all
Company, and to consult by himself upon the Stage.

Scene the Second.
Page 179. l. 23, 24. As ye hope for a good Crop of Herbs, and a plentiful
Harvest of Plants.] Si spe^ tibi anno multum futuro Sirpe and Laserpitium. This
Sirpe, is a Species of Benjamin, from whence sprung an odoriferous Liquor,
called Laserpitium, quasi, Lac Serpitium, which was so common in Cyrene, that
it was called Laserpicificerae Cyrenae. These Names, being unknown to us, and
making but an indifferent Sound, were not so necessary to be taken notice of in
a Translation.

Scene the Third.
Page 181. l. 4. Pluck out his Eyes, and make Cats Meat of 'em.] Iube oculos
elidere, itidem ut sep^s faciant coqui. That is, Pluck out his Eyes, as Cooks
do those of Cuttle-Fishes. This relates to a Custom of those Times which,
perhaps we know nothing of; and consequently unfit for a close Translation.

Scene the Fifth.
Page 183. l. 15, etc. They know that you were born out of a Lobster, and
therefore can be no Enemy to Cherry-Cheeks.] Te ex concha natam esse autumant:
Cave t^arum conchas spernas. More closely thus; They are sensible you were born
of a Shellfish, therefore despise not their Shell-Offerings; for since they
had lost all, they had no other Offerings but Shells, things usually
consecrated to Temples nigh the Sea, which were much garnished by them. But
still the principal Joke lies in his metaphorically calling these Girls (...),
because they were empty; and that made me translate it as I did.

Scene the Sixth.
Page 184. l. 23. I Will straight away with 'em both.] Equidem istas jam ambas
educam for as. The word, for as, is spoken here only with respect to the Entrance
into the Temple-Court, in which almost all this Scene passed.

Ibid. l. ante-penul. I Will lash ye, till your Backs be as full of Furrows as
the Sea wi' Waves.] Quasi myrteta juncis, item ego vos virgis circumvinciam. In
the Temples of Venus were several Bundles of Myrtle hung up, and consecrated to
her, and these were bound up with Rushes: From these, Demones takes an occasion
to threaten his Men, to bind 'em (or rather to line 'em) like these Bundles of
Myrtle. But the Beauty of it is lost in our Tongue, which made me take this
Liberty in my Translation, though perhaps not with equal success with some other
Passages where I was forced to take the like Liberty.

Page 185. l. 10. One of 'em is an Athenian, of a very good Family.] This
Passage does not only help to interest Demones in the Girls Affairs, but is
also a further Preparation for the main Discovery in the fourth Act, though this
does not appear so to the Audience, the concealment of which, makes the great
Cunning of the Poet.

Ibid. l. ante-penul. If you havn't more Remembrances on yours.] Ni
offeramentas habebis plures in tergo tuo. That is to say, Lashes, or Streaks of
a Whip. The word, Offeramenta, is a Religious Term, signifying Offerings or
Presents, and is very comically applied in this place; but the beauty of it is
lost in our Tongue. I could not think of a better word to answer it than
Remembrance, which well enough bears a double meaning.

Page 186. l. 16, 17. Faith, I Will make ye glad to glean up your scattered
Teeth.] Iam hercle tibi ^ssis in ore fiet mergis pugneis. The word, Merga,
signifies a Pitchfork, and the true meaning of this Passage is paraphrastically
thus; As they lift up their Pitchforks to heap Corn, so will I lift up my
Fists, and heap a whole Harvest of Cuffs on your Face. But this Simile will not
do in our Tongue, therefore I have altered it, still preserving as much of the
Allusion as I could.

Scene the Ninth.
Page 188. l. penul. Give him his Load.] Ni istunc istis invitassitis. The
word, Invito, is a Term borrowed from Feasts and Treats where there is hard
Drinking. This Metaphor is comically applied to Blows, and happily enough,
since they have often the same stupifying effects with Drink. The Translation
seems as lucky as the Original, though its Design is not so well perceived at the
first sight.

Scene the Tenth.
Page 189. l. 9. By the old Man's erecting his two Monuments.] Ita duo
destituit signa. The word, Dest^to, is a term of Husbandry, and signifies to
Set, Plant, or the like. The word, Plant, might have done well enough here, but
only Erect, joined to Monument, makes the truer Propriety of Terms.

Ibid. l. 14, 15. Marry, the Palestra that answers, is none (...)' mine.] Haec
equident Palaestra, qua respondit, non mea est. This Palaestra, was a Place of
public Exercising, over the Gate of which was a Statue of Heroules, with an
Inscription, PALAESTRA; now Labrax finding this stout Fellow with his Club,
whom before he had compared to Hercules, answering instead of Palestra, he
wittily alludes to that Statue, and says, that Palestra was none of his. So
that the Beauty of this Passage can never be preserved in our Tongue.

Scene the Eleventh.
Page 190. l. 13, 14. What, stone a Man like a Dog? Pleu. Yes, such a Rascal as
he.] Quid ego, quasi canem, hominem insectarer lapidibus nequissimum? This
Passage is wrong in all the common Editions; it ought to be spoken by two
Persons, not one, and must be read thus. Quid ego, quasi canem, hominem
insectarer lapidibus? Pl. Nequissimum?

Ibid. l. 16. He Will have a confounded brush at my Coat.] Converret jam hic me
totum cum pulvisculo. That is, He Will not leave a bit of Dust on me, or, He Will
make nothing but Dust of me. My Translation will answer either way, and would
be as comical, were it less common.

Ibid. l. penul. Whether you will go to Iail the usual way, or be dragged by the
Heels.] Rapi te obtorto collo mavis, an trahi? When any Person was brought
before the Praetor, they always threw his Gown or Cloak about his Neck, and led
him that way; and this was called, Rapi obtorto collo. But this could not be
well taken notice of in a Translation.

Page 191. l. 3. Meet me at the Town-Gate.] In urbem ire obviam ad portum mihi.
It ought to be read, Portam, and in this the common Editions are all false.

Scene the Twelfth.
Ibid. l. 11, etc. I didn't carry her away. Pleu. Will you Lie, Sirrah? Lab.
Truly, I only embarked her.] Non avexi. Pl. Cur negas? Lab. Quia pol provexi.
This same playing upon the Words, Avexi and Provexi, is not easily preserved in
our Tongue.

Scene the Fourteenth.
Page 193. l. 5, 6. I believe this Merchant's changed to a Stock-Dove, for by
and by, he will be stocked into the Pigeon-Holes.] Illic in columbum, credo, leno
vortitur: nam in colambari collum haud multo post erit. The word, Columbar,
signifies either a Dove-house, or a certain Iron Collar used for the Necks of
Prisoners, something of the nature of our Stocks, and this word occasioned this
Pleasantry. Our Stocks being often called Pigeon-Holes, in merriment, has made
the Translation every way up to the Original, in that respect.

ACT IV.
THE third Interval is filled up with Pleusidippus's carrying Labrax before the
Praetor, and his Trial, and likewise with what passed in Demones's House.

Scene the First.
Page 193. l. 13, 14. But my jealous prying Wife watches me on all sides, for
fear I should be too sweet upon 'em.] This seems to have been spoken with no
other design than Demones's complaining of his Wife; but in reality, it is an
Ingenious Preparation of the Poet's, for Demones to have a good Pretext for
bringing out the two young Women in the fourth Scene of the Act, when there was
a necessity for their coming upon the Stage. This is a neat cast of our Poet's
Skill.

Ibid. l. 15. What Is become of our Man Gripus, who went out a Fishing last
Night.] This is a Preparation for Gripus's appearing in the next Scene.
Methinks his coming might have looked somewhat more natural if Demones had
dropped these Words somewhere in the last Act, perhaps in the finishing of the
Ninth Scene when he left the Stage, and not so immediately before his
Appearance; but then there would not have been such a plain Pretext for
Demones's appearing this Time, for the looking for Gripus, may be supposed to
be one Reason of his coming on the Stage.

Scene the Second.
Pa. 194. l. 15, etc. Now I, who am careful, have happened of that, which, if I
please, will keep me from all Care.] Nam ego nunc mihi, qui impiger fui,
repperi, ut piger, si velim, siem. There seems a peculiar happiness in the
Latin Tongue for these sort of Turns, of which both Plautus and Terence have
many elegant ones. If my Translations in these Places, will teach the Air of
the Original but in a tolerable degree, it is as much as I can hope for.

Ibid. l. 27, 28. I Will have a Royal Sun for Pleasure, like the K -- of F -- ]
Post animi causa mihi navem faciam, atque imitabor Stratonicum. This
Stratonicus was Treasurer to Philip of Macedon, so rich as he became a Proverb
among the Grecians, as Crassus among the Romans. If any one blame me for taking
too much liberty; after owning it is the most I have taken throughout my
Translation, I must say, I could not make it so intelligible to an English
Reader without this, or something like it.

Page 195. l. 6. 7. After all, this Monarch here, must dine to Day with a Brown
George, and only Salt and Vineager-Sawce.] This was the most ordinary Diet of
the Slaves in those Days, therefore wittily enough remarked by Gripus.

Scene the Third.
Ibid. l. 10. Only to unshackle your Rope, that hangs at your Heels.] Dum hanc
tibi, quam trahis, rudentem complico. This Cable gives Name to the whole Play,
because upon this, depends the discovery of Palestra; but by the same Reason
the Poet might as well have called the Play's Name, Portmantle, Casket, etc.

Page 197. l. 3. No Man pretending to take 'em away.] Nec Manu asseruntur. The
Phrase, Asserere manu, properly signifies giving Freedom to a Slave, which
thing Gripus comically applies to Fishes, and immediately after, says, Vendo
pro meis venalibus; for Slaves were called Venales. These are not easily
preserved in our Tongue.

Page 199. l. ult. Will ye put the Business to the Man of this House?]
Trachalio had all the reason that could be, to get the business referred to
Demones, he being the only Man he knew thereabouts; and Gripus had as much
reason to allow of that Person, since he was forced to admit of a Reference,
because he was his own Master: These two things ought to be observed. Now
Trachalio's Design was only to assist the poor Girl, whose Interests he had
most justly espoused; but the Poet's Design was greater, to wit, Palestra's
discovery, which could not so easily be foreseen by the Spectators. This is one
great piece of Art in Dramatick Poetry.

Scene the Fourth.
Perhaps some may think that there is too much Trifling in this Scene, and that
Gripus makes too many Delays; but this is so far from being faulty, that it is
an extraordinary piece of Art, which covers, and conceals the Poet's Designs,
and makes the Discovery seem still more unaffected and accidental; and nothing
can be more probable than Gripus's unwillingness of parting with so rich a
Prize.

Page 205. l. 22. So; -- There then; -- now it is open.] Been: Hoc habet: soluta
'st. Gripus, taking much Pains, opens the Portmantle, then cries, Hoc habet,
the grace of which consists in its being the Gladiator's Phrase, and therefore
is not to be preserved in our Tongue.

Page 206. l. 16. First, tell me your Father's Name] Here comes the main
Discovery; and this, as well as that in Epidicus, is attended with both the
Admirable, and Probable; the Amirable, in the great Surprise on all sides, in
finding a Daughter, after so many Years missing of her; and the Probable, in
adjusting of all Circumstances so as to fall out necessarily. The Probability
appears more clearly by the Audiences knowing that Demones had lost a Daughter,
and that Palestra wanted Parents.

Ibid. l. antepenult. And a little Sow.] Et sucula. The Word, Sucula, signifies
both a Sow, and the Barrel of any Engine to draw up great Weights; and by
reason of this double signification, Gripus makes answer, Quin tu i dierecta,
cum sucula, and cum porculis, that is, Go and be hanged, with your Sow and Pigs
together. I could not preserve this, without I had called it a Ram, which
signifies an Engine as well as a Beast, but then I must have wanted a fit Word
for Porculis.

Scene the Seventh.
Page 210. l. 1. A duce on him, for his Wells and Waters.] Hercules istum
infeliciter cum sua licentia. Demones, says this, because of the Word Licet,
Trachalio had so often repeated just before, of which, Well, was a true
Translation; upon which account, I was forced to translate Licentia, Wells and
Waters, rather as an imitation of what Plautus would have said in this Case,
supposing him an Englishman, than what he really did as he was a Roman.

Scene the Ninth.
Page 211. l. ult. But I Will in to the Sacrifice, and there give order for the
Supper.] Here ends the fourth Act, which is contrary to all the common Books,
who make it end a Scene after; a thing very usual in most of our Author's Plays.

ACT V.
THE fourth Interval is filled up with Trachalio's going to find out his
Master, and Demones's Sacrifice within Doors, as likewise Labrax's Trial.

Scene the First.
In this Scene our Poet has drawn Pleusidippus both amorous and foolish, and
all Trachalio's Trifling is chiefly to laugh at him.

Page 212. l. 21. Leave adviseing, and don't be always a Counsell^r.] At sum
quidem, ne censionem semper facias. Here Pleusidippus plays upon the equivocal
meaning of the Word, Censeo, so often used by Trachalio, which is either to
Pass Judgment upon a thing, (...) a t^rm of Sale which signifies to Prize a
thing, s like. The little Liberty I have taken does in some measure answer the
Design.

Page 213. l. 16, 17. 'S Death, the Fellow has changed his N^te, and has
advised me to a fine purpose.] Per^ delectum dimisit, nunc non censet cum volo.
Now Pleusidippus runs upon another Meaning of the Word, Censeo, which is
likewise a proper Term of the Censors, signifying to List or Muster Soldiers
When Trachalio had changed his Note and came to his Non censeos, Pleusidippus,
taking it in his own Sense, did in effect say, Alas, I Am come too late, he will
receive no more Soldiers. I could not preserve this in my Translation.

Scene the Second.
Ibid. l. 22, etc. I Am persuaded that all Merchants of my Faculty were born to
make the World Sport.] Nam lenones ex gaudio credo esse procreatos. More
closely thus, I believe that all Slave-Merchants were born (or produced) out of
Joy. But this would not do in our Language.

Scene the Third.
Page 214. l. 21, 22. I think 'thas got a Consumption, it falls away so
wretchedly.] Namque quidem hoc Vere natum est veru, ita in m^nibus consen^scit.
More closely thus, I think it is like the Spring-Flowers, that wither as a Man
touches 'em. I altered it because the Simile will scarce do in our Language,
and I suppose it was made upon the account of the likeness of the Words, Ver
and Veru.

Ibid. l. 28, etc. Are ye a Mountibank? Lab. No, Faith, I Am another sort of
Bank. Gri. What then, a Bankrupt?] Number medicus quaeso es? La. Immo edepol una
littera plus sum, quam medicus. Gr. Tum tu mendicus es? By the help of a little
Liberty, the Humor of this Passage is preserved, but that is more owing to the
Language than the Translator.

Page 215. l. penult. Have ye swallowed a Fire-Coal, that you cannot open your
Mouth?] That is, for fear the Wind should get in, and blow it up afresh.

Scene the Fifth.
This Scene finishes the Play, and it is very remarkable, that the Ancients
often ended their Plays with few Actors, and with a small Appearance upon the
Stage; and they scarce ever used an Actor but with an absolute necessity of
carrying on, or unravelling the Plot. Our modern Comedies generally end with a
multitude of Actors; now if this be done with Probability, and Necessary
Pretexts of Business, and likewise without embarrasing the Stage, or
confounding the Audience, it is undoubtedly a Perfection that the Ancients
seldom or never aimed at.

Page 221. l. 1. Gallants, I would invite ye all, etc] Here Demon^s speaks
directly to the Spectators, but since it is upon the finishing the Play, it has
few or none of those Ill Consequence^ it would have had in another place.

The End of the Remarks upon Rudens.
Some Books lately printed for, and to be sold by Abel Swall and T. Child, at
the Unicorn, at the West End of S. Paul' s Churchyard.
TErence's Comedies, made English, with his Life, and some Remarks; by several
Hands. Octavo.

The Courtiers Oracle, or the Art of Prudence; written in Spanish by Baltazar
Gracian, and now done into English. Octavo.

The Essays or Counsels Civil and Moral of Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount St.
Albans: To which is added, his Wisdom of the Ancients. Octavo.

The Evangelical History: Or the Life of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
comprehensively and plainly related, with practical Inferences and Discourses
thereupon. Written in French by L. E. du P. and Englished by a Divine of the
Church of England, with Additions: Adorned with Copper Cuts. Octavo.

The Gentleman's Journal for the War; being an Historical Account and
Geographical Description of several Strong Cities, Towns and Forts of Europe;
with Authentic Draughts of the Fortifications of every Place engraven on
Copper Plates, together with an Explication of the Terms of Art used in
Fortification. Quarto.

Travels through Flanders, Holland, Germany, Sweden and Denmark: Containing an
Account of what is most remarkable in those Countries; particularly a
Description of the Fortified Towns in Flanders and Holland, with exact Draughts
of Dunkirk, Maestricht, Charleroy and Aeth. Together with necessary
Instructions for Travelers, and a List of the common Passage-Boats in Holland,
and the Hours of their going out. Written by an English Gentleman, who resided
many Years in Holland in a public Capacity. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the Architecture of Vitruvius; (...) a System of the whole
Works of that Author; Illustrated with Copper Plates. First done in French by
Monsieur Perault, and now Englished with Additions. Octavo.

C. Jul. Caesaris quae Extant, interpretatione and notis illustravit Joan.
God^inus in usum Delphini (juxta Edit. Pari^.) Octavo.

Justi Lipsii Roma illustrata, sive Antiquitatum Romana^um Breviarium; and Geo.
Fabricii Veteris Roma cum Nova Collatio. Ex nova recensione Anton. Thysii, cui
acc^sserunt in hac editione Just. Lipsii Tractatus peculi^res de Scriptura,
Pecunia, Nominibus, Conviviis, Censu, and de Anno Veterum Romanorum. Octavo.

(...) Sco^iae: A Description of the principal Cities, Towns, Castles, Palaces
and Colleges, as also of the Ruins of many ancient Abbeys, Churches and (...)
in the Kingdom of Scotland; with Prospects of every Place very curiously
engraven in Copper, as large as the Sheet, and printed on Royal Paper.
Published by their Majesty's Authority, and by the Encouragement and Assistance
of the Nobility of that Kingdom, by John Sleezer, Captain of the Artillery
Company, and Surveyor of their Majesty's Stores. Folio.

A new History of the Lives and Writings, with an Abridgment of all the Works
of the Primitive Fathers and other Ecclesiastical Writers that flourished from
the Time of our Savior to the End of the Eighth Century of Christianity. With
a preliminary Dissertation of the Authors of the Old and New Testaments.
Written in French by L. Ellies du Pin. Folio, ^rice bound in three Volumes 38
shillings.

FINIS.

