Saint PAUL'S POLITIQVES, OR, A Sermon against NEUTRALITY;

PREACHED At Margarets Westminster, on the LORD'S DAY December. 13. 1644. Diverse
of the Honorable House of Commons being present.

By Laurence Palmer, Rector of the Mediety of Gedling, in the County of
Nottingham, And Captain of a Troop of horse raised for the service of the King
and Parliament.

Exodus 32.26, 27. Moses stood in the gate of the Camp, and said, who is on the
Lords side? Let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves
together unto him.

And he said unto them. Thus says the Lord God of Israel. Put every man his
sword by his side, etc.

Imprimatur,

Charles Herle.

London Printed for Robert White, 1644.

To the Right Worshipful Gilbert Millington Esquire, one of the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons.
Worthy Sir,
NExt to the glory of God, the maine white at which all actions ought to be
levelled: I have ever held the care of preserving, advancing, and promoting the
common good, the welfare of Church and State, is most noble, necessary, and
best beseeming a Christian. A thing acknowledged by most, but practiced by few,
I had almost said none, and if I had, the Apostle would have borne me out,
Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, and none the things of Jesus Christ.

Truly it has been matter of no small grief, and trouble unto me of late, to
behold and take notice of the strange declination, and degeneration of men's
spirits (to speak nothing of the Epidemicall disease of cursed Neutrality,
long since spread through the whole Kingdom) the lukewarm, heartlesse,
indifferensie, the palpable partiality, the gross dissimulation and hypocrisy
of those, who pretend wholly the common cause, and intend nothing but their
private ends, discover themselves every where too apparently, in these times of
the Church and Kingdoms greatest calamity. A clearer proof whereof we cannot
have, then daily experience, for who sees not how many of those, who with much
zeal and impetuous violence, were all for the public, whilst pay and profit,
honor, and applause, good success and victory attended the cause of God, but
when it and those were parted, how shamefully have they deserted it in the open
field. The more then certainly to be admired, and for ever honored, are those,
who continue constant in the public service, and will not leave the cause, no
not when that seems to leave them, and theirs, to the merciless fury of the
enemy; Who are so far from cooling by disasters, that they are but as the frost
in winter, to the fire, which serve to intend their heat and resolution; Of
which number, Sir, the Town and County that chose and sent you hither, esteem
you to be; Who, of all that were chosen throughout the whole County of
Nottingham, only stand for the welfare both of it and the whole Kingdom. The
Lord who has hitherto graciously kept up your Spirit; Will I doubt not, bless
and prosper you, and at last crown your faithfulness, and unwearied
constancy.

It was your request, and the importunity of diverse Friends caused me to preach
this Sermon; But the sending of it to public view, was by the earnest
solicitations, and undeniable entreaty of many, both Friends and Strangers;
yet not without your consent and approbation; And indeed the rather do I full
fill their desire, and present it to you because it is well known to all that
know you, that your practice is a lively expression of what I preached, which I
wish for the imitation and encouragement of others, may be as public as this
paper; my discourse shows what in these times, should be done, your example
and practice lets the world see what is, and may be done.

Another necessity also is laid upon me, to commit this short and unpolished
Sermon to the Press. Diverse that heard it preached, professed they were much
affected with it, and told me, that it awakned and roused up some, that were
grown cold, and indifferent, to zealous resolution, to set upon the work of the
Lord with more diligence, and therefore they concieved, that if the preaching,
much more the printing might be of singular use in these cold declining times.
Now if I had refused herein to satisfy them; My mouth would have been stopped
with this Dilemma and unanswerable argument. That seeing my Theme and whole
discourse, tends wholly to invite and urge all sorts within their spheres to be
as serviceable as may be, for the promoting of the public; If the printing
may conduce more to this end, then the preaching, there would have been a
manifest jarre betwixt my preaching and practice, if I had denied. Well, the
blessing of God go with it, and make it effectual for the encouraging of the
faithful and constant, the inciting and awakening the drousie and indifferent,
the shaming of the Neuter, and the discovery of the hypocrite. Sir, This is the
prayer of him, who in what he is able desires ever

To serve you, and the public, Laurence Palmer.

Saint Paul's POLITIQUES: Or, A Sermon against Neutrality, delivered at
Margarets Westminster, upon
PHIL. 2.4. Look not every one on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others.


NOt to tire your patience with any curious division, either of the Epistle in
general, or of this Chapter in particular: nor with any tedious coherence of
these words, with those which have gone before. Be pleased to take notice, that
the Apostle in this Chapter from the first verse to the 12. does exhort the
Philippians to unity and agreement; he lays down the means how to attain it,
namely by humbleness of mind after the example of Jesus Christ, ver. 1.2, 3,
5, etc. Now because my Text is (as it were) interwoven with this Argument. I
desire you to observe, something from the Apostles method.

That pride of Spirit is the ground of strife and contention.

So far as a man is proud, he is contentious.

It is a Doctrine from the grnerall, I will be very brief in the handling of
it. It is confirmed,

Prove. 13.10. Only by pride comes contention.

Example, In the Apostles of Christ, Luke 22.24. When once they began to seek
for priority of place, by and by they were at ods.

Pride. The sin of this age is Pride, and the Pride of this age is intolerable.
These be Saint Paul's Tempora novissima, the Winter of the world: Wherein pride
and contentions do daily meet each other. 2 Timothy 3.12.

In the Church; the pride of sin carries them so far, as that they would all be
Apostles, they would all be Prophets, and teachers, Docerent antequam
didicerunt.

That Arius may maintain his damnable error, Anno 358. since revived, says,
that God did reveal it to him: and Montanus called himself Paracletum, or the
holy Ghost. Here is pride with a witness, now what contentions did arise from
hence, the history of Theodoret, and others set forth. I suppose, it may be
truly affirmed, that it is nothing but Pride and self conceitedness, that make
so many become Separatists, from whence arises so many hot contentions in
these days.

In the State or Commonwealth, pride is the cause of all Contentions. The
servant would be as his Master, the peasant as the Prince, the Cobbler as the
Courtier, Currus sequitur Curiam, and hereby all things are brought into
confusion. What is the ground of disaffection amongst Ministers? Dislike and
jarring amongst Commanders? Falling out amongst soldiers? scolding amongst
Neighbors? but only pride, not having learned this of the Apostle ver. 3. Let
nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let
each esteem other better then themselves. And therefore

Pride, that contentions may cease: God will pull down the mighty from their
seat, but he will exalt the humble and meek: he will feed the hungry with good
things, but the rich be will send empty away. Pride will have a fall, a great
pride will have a greatfal.

Herod by his Pride fell from a throne of gold, to be eaten of Lice, a great
fall! Nebuchadnezzar by his Pride fell from the State of a King to the quality
of a beast, and became like an Ox that eats grass: Adam fell from innocence
to mortality: And yet see a greater fall then all these; By Pride the Angels
fell from heaven to hell, from felicity to misery, are now reserved in chains
under darkness to the judgment of the great day, Jude ver. 6. And therefore
take heed of it. And that our contentions, the fruits of our Pride may
determine.

1. Pass by an offense, it is a wise man's glory, Prove. 19.11. And it is St.
Paul's command, Col. 3.13. 2. Forget an injury, Lev. 19.18. It is storied of
Phocion in Plutarch, that being railed upon in the night by a sort of base
fellows, he gave his man order to light them home. And of Julius Caesar it is
reported, that nihil praeter injurias oblivisci solebat: he was never wont to
forget any thing but injuries. 3. Part with some of your right, so did Abraham
for quietness sake, when he was to deal with his kinsman Lot, Genesis 13.8, 9.
and Paul with Philemon. In that Epistle to Philemon ver. 8, 9. 4. Be ready to
requite good for evil to such as have done us wrong, Prove. 25.21, 22. and Romans
12.20.
These things might be enlarged, but it is a doctrine from the general. I
therefore pass it, and come more particularly to the words of the Text.

(...), etc.

Look not every one on his, etc.

I may fitly style my Text, St. Paul's Politiques. In which we have:

1. His little care for his own private; Look not, etc. 2. His great care of
the public: But every one, etc.
I know the words will admit of a subdivision, but I cannot have time to
prosecute these generals so fully as I can desire.

The words are very plain, not any thing difficult in them, unless you inquire
what it is to look upon. The original word comes from (...) Circumspicio,
whence comes (...) which signifies Meta, Scopus ad quem sagittarii collimant
and tela sua dirigunt: The mark at which Archers aim, and direct all their
Arrows. So that when the Apostle says, Look not every one, etc, It is all one
as if he had said thus, (My bloved Philippians) as you desire to approve your
selves followers of Christ, and desirous of true Peace; It is your duty, not so
much to propose your own private commodity to your selves in your undertakings,
at the scope and end of your actions: but your care and aim should be at, and
for the welfare of others.

Hence the Doctrine,

It is the duty of all Christians to have respect unto, and carefully to look
after the good of the public, as well, yea rather then their own private and
particular.

Care must be had for every man's private, for he that does not take care of his
own, and especially those of his own house, has denied the faith, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and is worse then an Infidel: But this care must not justle out the care of
the public; Nay rather, Cedunt privata publicis. But for proof of the point
so 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. In 2
Cor. 11.28, 29. so a plain proof, Besides those things that are without, that
which comes upon me daily, the care of all Churches, v. 29. Who is weak, and
I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? In which place you may
observe, how that holy sympathy that Saint Paul had toward the State of the
Church of God in general, begat in him a care of all Churches; and that in
respect of his outward and inward carriage toward them, for he says, Beside
the things that are without, etc.

It is his command to the Galatians 6.10. Do good unto all.



Abraham the father of the faithful, Genesis 14.14. Abraham no doubt might have
lived in his own house, and defended that; or he might have complied with
Chedorlaomar, and with Amraphel, etc. (Who would have been glad if he would
have sat still) But Abraham is a man of a more public spirit, he scorns any
compliance with such cursed enemies of God, and his cause hates neutrality, and
therefore musters up, and marches out with his own hushold servants, 318. and
does great service for the Church of God.

Moses: You may read what great offers God made him, what great good God would
do for him in his own particular: But when Moses looks on the misery was
likely to come on the people of God, by that his preferment, he modestly, and
absolutely refuses the same at Gods hands. You may see it Exodus 32.9, 10, 11.
etc.

Nehemiah, What place of employment he had in respect of his own particular,
you may guess by that, Nehe. 1. ver. last, he was the Kings Cupbearer, and yet
he is very sad and discontented, v. 4. the reason of it, is the consideration
of the deplored State of the people of God, for some had told him, that the
remnant that were left of the Captivity, were in great affliction, and
reproach; the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the gates thereof were
burnt with fire, ver. 4. upon this see the good man's spirit; The King observing
his discontent, and finding the reason of it, gives him a Commission to be
Governor of Jerusalem; Well, when he comes there and has his power in his
hand, does he seek himself too much, his own Coffers, to prefer his own
friends? or is his care to advance the public? I wish all Governors and
others, would read his story, and follow his example. Neh. 5. from the 14. ver.
to the end of the Chapter.

Hester, She might have been quiet and contented with the Kings favor, being
assured that Hamans bloody policy against the Jews, could not have plucked her
from the Kings bosom; seeing she was such a one as the King delighted in: But
alas her people, the people of God, were in great distress and perplexity,
which makes her she cannot be quiet, and thereupon puts forth her self to do
service for the public, Hest. 4.15, 16.

Non nobis solum nati sumus, etc.



1. Of God the Common father of us all. 2. Of Christ our head and elder
brother. 3. Of the Church, the Common Mother to us all. 4. One of another, as
partaking all of the same common spiritual Ordinances, etc,
And therefore reason why not any of us should chiefly seek his own, but very
man also the things of others.

That grace of God that brings salvation, will teach us to deny ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in the present
evil world, Tit. 2.11, 12. As we must live soberly in respect of our selves,
godly in respect of God: so we must live righteouslytowards others, profitably
in respect of the public, every noble spirit laboring to preserve, maintain,
and bring honor to his own family.

Babylon, Ierem. 29.7. they were to pray for the peace of the City, whither
they were carried captive, because in the peace thereof they should have peace.



1. It may serve to let us see that the actions of many men who neglecting
their own things, and wholly look after the things of others are warrantable;
And that such men as aim more at the public then their own private, are not
to be condemned. I remember what Vriah said to David 2 Samuel 11.11. The Arc,
and Israel, and Judah, are in tents: and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my
Lord are in the field, and shall I then go into my house to eat, and to drink,
and to lie with my wife? As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do
this thing, I cannot find Vriah any where condemned for this his resolution;
Nay the spirit of God does give a very large encomium of such a public
spirit, as you may see Judge. 5.9. It is the speech of Deborah concerning the
volunteers in the service of the Church and State. My heart is towords the
Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly: Bless ye the Lord.
And Saint Paul in this Chapter ver. 29, 30. speaking of Epaphroditus a
faithful Minister, commands the Philippians to recieve such in the Lord, and
to hold such in reputation. Because for the work of Christ, he was nigh to
death, not regarding his life to supply your lack, of service. And therefore
surely men of such public spirits, should not be disheartened with any
tediousness, or burthensomnesse in the work, nor discontented by such as have
employed and called them forth for the service; It is an employment very
warrantable and agreeable to Christianity.

Vnusquisque sibi, Every man for himself, and God for us all. No my Brethren, I
beseech you know, that where every man is for himself, the Devil will be for
all, for consider you sin. 1. Against the Law of Nature, 2. Against spiritual
relations. 3. Against the end of our Redemption: 4. Against the public.

And yet alas, how many be there, that let a Kingdom sink or swim, so they may
be in peace at home, they matter not.

Isachar, Genesis 49.14, 15. They are strong Asses, couching down between two
burdens, seeing rest to be good, and the land pleasant, they are contented to
bow their shoulders to bear, and so become servants unto tribute.

Laish, Judges 18.7. Careless, quiet, and secure, they sit (it may be under
their own Vine, etc.

Succoth and Penuel dealt with Gideon, Judge. 8.5, 6.

by scornful men, who bring the City into a snare, Prove. 29.8. and these not
our professed enemies: but such as pretend themselves to be for the same Cause.
But I wish sad experience had not taught me at this time to speak so much.

To these, if any here present, I shall humbly desire to commend these few
considerations.

1. Let them consider that they lie under a most heavy curse, Judges 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof: Why, Alas what has Me^oz done? She came not to the help of the Lord,
to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Meroz is not in Arms against the
Lord, yet curse ye Meroz. These Citizens of Meroz delighted more in the
bleating of sheep, in the lowing of their oxen, to enjoy their own at home,
then to engage themselves, or their estates for the public: They would
willingly sleep in a whole skin: therefore Curse ye Meroz: I beseech you take
notice of the wretched state of a cursed Neuter: set out,

1. The curse of the Church lies on him: Curse ye Meroz.

2. The Curse of God lies on him said the Angel of the Lord; and then the
bitterness of the Curse; Indefinenter maledicite, or omnio maledicite, Curse
ye bitterly: So that this cannot but prove terrible to all those that will not
be persuaded, out of respect to their own base private ends, and aims, to
labor for the upholding of the public.

2. I wish that they would consider that in this very neglect of the public,
they are enemies to their own private and particular. The state of the Kingdom
is called Respublica, the Common wealth: In which every private and particular
man has his interest: And therefore, in whatsoever thou, or I shall neglect
the public, we do therein neglect our own private and particular.

3. Let them consider, that herein they sin even against Christ himself. I make
it a sin against the Gospel, Christ has said it, Mat. 12.30. He that is not
with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad: All
the world is divided into two squadrons: Those that are ashamed of Christ here,
Christ will be ashamed of them hereafter, Mark. 8. last, Whosoever therefore
shall be ashamed, etc.

4. Let them consider that for the most part none are worst dealt with, then
your halting Neuters, men of such base and private spirits: That we (that are
employed abroad in the service of the Kingdom) see it by experience, that both
sides fall upon them, and neither side will protect them: Memorable is that
story, Judges 8.5, 6. etc. It was thus, Gideon desires food of the men of
Succoth for his faint and weary Soldiers, they deny it him, and not only so,
but jeere him; Why say they, Are the hands of Zeba, and Zalmunna now in thy
hands, that we should give bread unto thine Army? Their meaning is this, if
thou had conquered Zeba and Zalmunna, then we would join with thee, but
until then, it cannot be safe for us, least they should fall upon us: What is
the issue of this Neutrality? I pray see Gideon falling upon them the Princes
of Zeba and Zalmunna not able or desirous to relieve and succor them, ver. 15,
16, 17.

So that these things considered, I hope you will in time be affrighted out of
your cursed Neutrality and base privatenesse of Spirits.

Exhortation, to persuade us to two things.

1. That you would think well of men of public spirits.

2. That you would labor to get public spirits your selves: for first, if it
be our duties to have respect unto, and carefully to look after the good of of
the public; as well, yea rather, then our own private or particular: Then I
humbly beseech you all, let men of public spirits be precious in your esteem,
and do not think they go beyond their bounds, when you see them enter upon
such actions for the public, as it may be, do entrench upon some men's private,
and particular: (you know) when the Town is on fire, every man has leave to
run into his neighbors house to break open Chests, to throw out Trunks, to save
what goods he can. Something (questionless) may be done when the Kingdom, the
State, the Church, is all in a combustion for the safety of the public, which
at other times may be more then questionable.



Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego withstood the Idolatrous decree of King
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. All the people of the land had been bound to have
fallen down and worshipped his golden Image. Had it not been for Daniel, who
stood up for the priority of Gods worship; there had been no prayer made, but
what others should put into their mouths: I confess if there had not been some
such Shadrachs, etc. some such Daniels in our Kingdom, we might have had peace,
but I fear little or no holiness would have been left amongst us.

But 2. I answer, and deny the objection, for that in these miserable, sad, and
distracted differences, we are not the Plantiffs, we are defendants, only I
beseech you read, Genesis 26.18. etc. There is a contention falls out between the
Philistines, the inhabitants of Gerar, and Isaac, and it is about wells of
water which Abraham ( Isaacs father) had dug; the men of Gerar will have the
Wells, Isaac will not so part with his right; Now if the contention becomes
very hot, I pray consider who is in fault? I know you can easily apply these to
our present condition: And I desire you would let us not part with those wells
of water, those liberties, and Privileges, which our fathers purchased for us,
to the Philistines, but let it cost them something: And therefore
notwithstanding this objection, I shall again, and again entreat you to have a
high esteem of all those public spirits, that either are, or have been
faithfully employed in, and for the Parliament.

Especially now at this time, seeing they have voted themselves out of all
their places of honor, and profit, that they more freely attend the business
of the Kingdom to be agitated in the houses. And for that; First, their
employment is for the Church: It is Church work they are about, to cast out all
manner of Superstitions, and superstructions; and to establish a pure worship
and service of God.

And secondly, their employment is for the State, it is for your lives, and
Liberties, it is for your Rights and Privileges: to bring to condign and
deserved punishment, all those that have hatched and acted evil against you,
And shall we think or speak evil of these? Nay,

2. Rather, I beseech you in the second place, be exhorted, and persuaded every
one of you to labor for public Spirits your selves: You see it is your
duties: I might urge many Arguments, or motives hereunto.

Psalm. 47. ult. Our Translation reads it. The Princes of the people are
gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham: The Margin out of
the Hebrew reads it, The voluntary of the people are gathered unto the people
of the God of Abraham. Note that those who voluntarily offer themselves, to
assist the people of the God of Abraham, are styled Princes: It was the
voluntary offering themselves did enoble Zebulun and Nephtali, Judges 5.18.

Partim patria, partim parents, etc. There is no creature that is made for it
self, none acts for it self, none lives to it self. The sheep, the Bees,
the Birds, the Beasts, pay tribute of their labor to man: Sic vos non vobis,
etc.



Me thinks, if I were to reason the case with some men of private spirits, My
question should be, what interest can any man have, or promise himself in his
private or particular, when the public is lost? Every man's Cabine in the ship
consisting in the safety of the ship. If the ship sinck, what is become of any
man's particular cabine? I remember what Jeremy said to Baruch, Jere. 45.4, 5.
The Lord faith thus, Behold, that which I have built I will break down, and
that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land; And seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not. And I wish it may be spoken to
all the nation: God is breaking down, God is plucking up, I entreat you then
let none of us be seeking great things for our selves.

Abraham, Moses and Nehemiah, and Hester? But he has precious thoughts of
them? so it cannot but afford a man much comfort when he shall come to dye, and
all other Comforts in respect of wordly things fail him, and forsake him; See
this in Hezekiah a great Statesman Isay. 38. Remember (now) O Lord I beseech
thee how I have walked, etc. And in Nehemiah a great Governor, in the
forequoted Neh. 5. where after he had remembered what great care he had of the
public, and how he had spent his strength and estate in the service thereof,
he concludes with this; Think upon me my God, for good, according to all that
I have done for this people. And in this sense I suppose Saint Paul may be
understood, 2 Corin. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, but more
abundantly to you-wards. Where amongst other Characters, of a conversation that
can afford comfort and rejoicing to a man's conscience, this is one, that he
has been beneficial to others. So that all these considerations laid
together, I hope there are many will be parswaded to labor for more public
spirits for the cause of God then hitherto they have had.





Alpha and Omega. Nemo sapit qui sibi non sapit, is a proverb in nature. It is
nothing but grace in the soul, that does enlarge both the heart and hand to
seek, or do good to others, it were easy to prove it, both by the examples of
all those good Statesmen, formerly mentioned, Abraham, Moses, Nehemiah,
Hezekiah, etc. and show what good men they were, and also by the examples of
all those Kings and Councillors that have brought ruin on their States and
Kingdoms, Jeroboam, Manasses, etc. and show what wicked men they were, the
Apostle Paul does hint such a thing to us. 1 Thessalonians 2.8. and Act. 4.34,
35. Well then, so long as we or any other employed for the public, continue
Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers, Hypocrites. It is impossible we can be truly
public spirited.

If any man will come after me (says Christ) let him deny himself, etc. No
coming after Christ, no serving of the public, but by self-denial: hence the
Apostle 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. joins (...) and (...), self-lovers, and men without
natural affections together. Let us seriously lay our hands on our hearts, and
see what selfishnesse there is in any our actions,

Iudicium regni est certa vivendi regula. The Paliament is the rule of right
reason to a nation. Let every man be a Reformer, but let it be of himself; not
of those that are set in place and power, to reform things that are amiss
both in Church and State. Let us follow, not go before the authority set over
us.

Whatsoever thou find to do, do it with all thy might, Hoc age, make the
public thy business. Many both in Church, and Common wealth will be found to
do much mischief, by doing little good: by keeping men more active then
themselves out of their places; I suppose it to be true in some Ministers, in
some Magistrates, in many Parliament men, and in some Commanders. If therefore
we will be men of public spirits indeed; let us in managing of the public,
act ad ultimum vicium, to our utmost power, and abilities. Let not any of us be
as so many Ciphers that serve for nothing else but to fill upon the room, and
to make up the number.

If these things were rightly practiced, there would not be so many that would
seek their own things, and not the things of others. But now least any man
should be disheartened, I shall conclude all with a word of comfort and
encouragement to all those that are public spirited men indeed.

Ezech. 9.4. That those who did mourn for the abominations that were committed
in the land, had a mark set upon their foreheads, to the end that when the
destroyer did pass through the land, they might be spared. There be two things
in a common calamity, there is a common destruction, and a common distraction,
or as it is Deuteronomy. 32.25. there is the sword without, and the terror within. I
cannot promise any, the best man in the world freedom from the common
destruction, or the sword without. But this I dare promise you, because God
has promised it, Isa. 43.2, 3. that you shall be freed from the common
distraction, from fear within: Besides, this argues truth of Christianity:
when we seek not every one his own things, but every one also the things of
others.

FINIS.

