THE LOYAL SPEECH OF GEORGE PLAXTONE, M. A. Minister of Sheriff-Hales in
Shropshire; Spoken at Shifnal, in the same County, upon the Proclamation of his
Sacred Majesty, King JAMES the Second, etc.
Gentlemen!
YOU have laid the greatest Task upon me, that I ever under-went in all my
Days: You have obliged me to speak of the most important Matters of our Nation,
and allowed me scarce one Minute for Thought or Premeditation: But may that
Almighty Power, by whom Kings reign, instruct me! and may an Heart and Soul
full of Loyalty, furnish my Tongue with Argument and Elocution!

My Undertaking is great and difficult: Who can speak of Kings, without Awe and
Reverence? Or, Who can be an Orator, when those Two contrary Passions of Grief
and Joy, at once struggle in his Breast? I cannot look back to the Peaceful
Days of Charles the Second; I cannot remember the lasting Happinesses of his
Reign, but I must drop a Tear upon his Hearse: Nor can I look forwards, toward
the present Glories of James the Second, but I am overwhelmed with Joy, and a
Loyal Transport seizes me. We have lost One of the Best of Princes, which ever
swayed these British Scepters, Charles the Gracious; a Prince, who was the Care
of Heaven, the Darling of his Subjects; whose Life was a Miracle, and his whole
Reign one continued Blessing: Mercy and Justice were the Supporters of his
Throne; and Peace and Good Wishes the Legacy he has left us. I cannot relate
the last Words of that Incomparable Prince, without a Sigh; I dare not name
them, without Tears for our general Loss: Thus he remembered us in his dying
Words, if such a Prince may be said to die: Brother! I am now going to resign
up my Self to God, and my Crown and Government to You; Grant me these few
Requests.

I. In all Your Undertakings, set the Fear of God before Your Eyes, and let
that direct you. II. Remember to maintain the Church of England, as now by Law
Established. III. Govern Your Subjects with Mercy, Ease and Peace. IV. Be good
to my Queen, and Children.
This was the Royal Legacy which he left us; a Legacy, truly becoming such a
Prince as Charles the Second. But this is not all, though a great deal more
than we deserved, the greatest Blessing is still behind; He has Jest us his
Royal Brother, JAMES the Second, to Succeed him in his Throne, and Virtues:
This must wipe away all our Griefs, this must make our Joys Perfect, and Crown
our Lives with a lasting Happiness. The Sun is set with us; but no Night
follows: Charles the Gracious, is only exchanged for JAMES the Just: And though
our King be dead, yet the Monarch lives. We are blessed again with a Gracious
Prince; A Prince, whose Virtues need no Panegyric; and to Praise him according
to his most Excellent Greatness, is above the feeble Power of Oratory and
Eloquence. What Virtues can we wish for in a Prince, which our present
Sovereign brings not to his Throne? What Joys are wanting to make us Happy,
which he will not bestow?

Would we have our Religion secured? We have the Laws on our side, and the
Royal Word of a King for it: The King has declared, That he will maintain our
Religion, as now by Law Established; and do what in him lies, to make the
Church of England flourish.

Gentlemen! Where the Word of a King is, there is Power: And what the King has
declared, he will make good; for no Prince is juster to his Word, than he is.
Would we have our Rights and Liberties preserved? We have a Prince of the
greatest Justice upon Earth. Whilst he was a Subject, he was the most Faithful
Friend, and the Best of Masters to his Servants; and, I hope, a good Master
will never make an ill King. But more; We have his Royal Promise, That he will
walk in the Steps of his dearest Brother. Would we have the Glories of our
Kingdom maintained; would we see the Old English Bravery once again Flourish!
We have now the most Victorious and Warlike Prince in Christendom; a King, who
dares attempt any thing, but an ill Act; a King, who has been a Soldier almost
from his Cradle. I need not tell you, how he signalized his Valor under the
Protestant Marshall Turenne in France: I need not speak of his Magnanimity
under Don Juan of Austria, against the French King then in League with the
English Rebels: I need not remember you of the Extraordinary Hazards of his
Royal Person, in the Dutch Engagements, fighting for the Rights and Honor of
our Nation, and exposing himself in a Shower of Fire and Bullets; Bullets,
which distinguish not the greatest Prince from the meanest Soldier.

Gentlemen! He was then the Joy and Treasure of our Nation; and our
Representatives in Parliament, did not only gratefully acknowledge his
Services; but did almost Loyally chide him, for hazarding his Royal Person in
War, in whom all our Hopes and Expectations were centered. He is still the same
JAMES the Just, the Valiant, and the Brave; though we (I wish I were not to
name it, for the Honor of my Nation) ingratefully revolted from him.

Away then with all Phanatick Fears and Jealousies! Can the Grandchild of
James the Peaceful, can the Son of Charles the Martyr, can the Brother of
Charles the Gracious, can the Victorious and Just James Duke of York and Albany
prove an ill King? It cannot be. Can he, who has been an Obedient Subject for
Fifty two Years together; can the justest Master, and the firmest Friend, and
the most Faithful Brother, prove an ill King? It cannot be; and God forbid,
that any one should think it.

Gentlemen! Let us remember our Duties, and endeavor all we can to be Loyal;
and then we need not doubt, but God will bless us with a Merciful and a
Gracious King. Our Submission to his Rule, our Content and Cheerful Obedience
under his Government, will return to us in Showers of Mercy, Kindness and
Justice.

Good Subjects do generally make good Kings; and if our King should prove
otherwise, it will be our own Faults. What shall I say more? Charles the
Gracious still lives in JAMES the Just. We have only changed the Name, not
altered the Sovereign.

Away then with those odious Names of Whigg and Tory; let them be forgotten and
buried: Let us remember, that we are Christians, and Englishmen; the former
will teach us Loyalty and Allegiance to our King; Love, Unity, and Good Wishes
toward one another: the latter will engage us to maintain the Glories and
Peace of our Church and Nation; and to preserve the Best of Kings, and the
Happiest of Governments. Let us all, with one Heart and Mind, Bless God for
these Mercies; and say,

God save King JAMES the Second.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Richard Grosvenor, Bookseller in
Wolverhampton, and are to be sold by A. Jones, at the Flying-Horse in
Fleet Street, 16


