THE PRESENT STATE of NEW ENGLAND Impartially Considered, In a LETTER to the
CLERGY.
Reverend Sirs.
TWo Months have already past away, since with Astonishment I have beheld the
most deplorable Condition of our Country; Into what a Chaos of Confusion and
Distraction have we run our selves? And in what a Labrinth of Miseries and
Perplexityes are we involved? It Is High Time now to make some serious
Reflections on the state of our Affairs.

In the First place therefore, 'Twill be Necessary to Examine our selves, and
to Consider,

1. For what Reasons, and to what End did we take up Arms?

2. Whether those Reasons be Substantial, and such as carry with them Weight
enough to justify the Act; And whether the proposed End can be obtained by
such Methods?

3. If not, What will be the Event, and whether any way be left open to us for
a peaceable and friendly Settlement?

Although there be some (not of the meanest Capacities) among us, who are of
Opinion, that a few persons to gratisie their Malice, Ambition or Revenge have
been the plotters and contrivers of our unhappy Troubles, and the better to
carry it on have made use of the deluded Country men, as the Monkey did the
Cat's foot to pluck the Chestnut out of the fire* Yet I shall not lightly be
over credulous in that matter, nor give Entertainment to such Suggestions; I
shall only therefore instance such things as Conversation and Report have
brought to my Knowledge, or as I shall find obvious in the Declaration; the
sum of which is,

That above ten years since, there was an horrid Popish Plot in the Kingdom of
England, in which the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion was designed.

That there was great Reason to Apprehend the Reformed Churches of New England,
were to be overwhelmed in the same pit of Ruin and Destruction.

That the better to effect it, our Charter (the only hedge which kept us from
the Wild Beasts of the field) was both injuriously and illegally Condemned,
before it was possible for us to appear at Westminster in the legal Defense of
it, and without a fair Leave to Answer for our selves

That by an illegal Commission we were put under a President and Council,
which was soon superseded by another more Arbitrary and Absolute to Sr. Edmond
Andros, giving him Power, by the Advice of his Council, to make Laws and levy
Taxes as he pleased, to muster and employ all persons resident in the
Territory, as Occasion should require, and them to transfer to any English
plantation.

That several Red-Coats were brought over, to support what should be imposed
upon us, and more threatened.

That Preferments were principally laden on Strangers and Haters of the
people.

That we were Squeezed and Oppressed by a Crew of abject persons from New York,
who took and extorted extraordinary and intolerable Fees.

That it was impossible to know the Laws that were made, and yet dangerous to
break them.

That by some in open Council, and by the same in private Converse, it was
affirmed, that the People in New England were all Slaves, and the only
Difference between them and Slaves, was their not being bought and sold; and
that it was a Maxim delivered in Open Court, by one of the Council, That we
must not think the Privilege of English men would follow us to the End of the
World.

That we were denied the privilege of Magna Charta, and that Persons who did
but peaceably object against raising Taxes without an Assembly, were for it
severely fined.

That Juries have been picked and packed, and that some people have been fined
without a Verdict, yea without a Jury.

That some People have been kept long in Prison, without any Information
against them, or being Charged with any Misdemeanour, or Habeas Corpus allowed.

That Jurymen were fined and imprisoned, for Refusing to lay their hand on the
Book, as they came to be Sworn, contrary to the Common Law of New England.

That there was a Discovery made of Flaws in the Titles of our Lands: and that
the Governor denied that there was any such thing as a Town among us.

That Writts of Intrusion were issued out.

That the Governor caused our Lands to be measured out for his Creatures, and
that the Right Owners for Pulling up the stakes have been grievously molested.

That more than a few were by Terrors drawn to take Patents at excessive
Rates.

That the Forceing of the people at the Eastward thereto, gave a Rise to the
late unhappy Invasion by the Indians.

That Blanke Patents were got ready, to be sold at great prices, and several
persons had their Commons begged.

That the Governor and five or six of the Council, did what they would, and
that all such who were Lovers of their Country were seldom admitted.

That all manner of Craft and Rage was used to hinder Mr. Mather's Voyage to
England, and to ruin his person.

That allthough the King promised Mr. Mather a Magna Charta for Redress of
Grievances, and that the Governor should be writ unto, to forbear those
Measures that he was upon; yet we were still injured in those very things which
were Complained of.

That our Ministers and Churches have been discountenanced.

That we were imbriared in an Indian-Warre, and that the Officers and Soldiers
in the Army were under popish Commanders.

That the rest of the English plantations, being alarmed with just Fears of the
French, who have treated the English with more than Turkish Cruelty, could not
but stir us up to take care for our own Preservation, lest we should be
delivered to the French, before Orders could come from His Higness the Prince
of Orange, and the Parliament of England.

That we have for our Example the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of England, and
above all we esteem it our Duty to God so to have done.

Thus far have I traced the Declaration, and do not know that any one thing
material is omitted, I shall now mention some other things which have occurred.

'Twas credibly reported,

That Boston and all the Inhabitants were to be destroyed, and to that end the
Mahawks were to be brought down.

That there were several Fire-workes prepared in the Fort, and Vaults dugg
under ground to blow up the Town.

That the Soldiers at the Eastward were all poisoned with Rumm.

That there were Thirty sail of French Frigots upon the Coast. With several
other things which I cannot recollect.

These are the principal Reasons alleged for our taking up Arms: now the End
can be no other than the Redress of those evils complained of.

The next thing then to be considered of is, Whether all or any of the Reasons
aforesaid, are sufficient to justify our Proceedings, and Whether the proposed
End can be attained by such Measures.

First then, That there was an horrid popish Plott, is without doubt, and if
England at that time had fallen under the Yoke of Roman Tyranny and Thraldom,
it is as certainly true New England must have undergone the same Fate: but that
this should be used or introduced as a Reason or Argument for Vacating our
Charter is beyond my conception; for Fire and Sword were the designed
instruments and ministers of their barbarous and hellish Contrivance: and if
they had once prevailed, how weak a Rampart would our Charter have been against
so cruel and powerful an Enemy? Would a blood thirsty and conquering Papist
have made Westminster Hall the Arbiter? Certainly, No; we must have received
our Law from the mouth of the Cannon, and our Hedge would have been broke down
with a great deal of ease. Is it reasonable to imagine, that after they had
waded through the blood of King and Nobles to their wished-for End in Old
England, they would make use of Politics in New-? And as preposterous and
unreasonable to fancy, That for that end our Charter was called in question,
especially when we consider that more than four Decads of years have already
past since the Crown of England first thought it not fit for us to hold any
longer, and several years after the popish Plot was discovered before the
Scire facias issued out.

2. That the Charter was injuriously and illegally Condemned, without giveing
us timely notice of it, or allowing us to Answer for our selves, might bear
some weight with it, if true: but it will appear quite other wise, and that we
had opportunity enough to have made defense on behalf of our Charter, if we
had so thought fit, for several years before the proceedings to the
Condemnation thereof. Our late Sovereign King Charles the Second, by His
Letters signified to us the many Complaints that were made to him of our
Encroachments, and ill-Administration of the Government, and commanded that we
should send over Agents sufficiently Authorized, to Answer the same, which we
at length so far complied with, as to send Agents, who when they were called to
hear and Answer the said Complaints, always excused and avoided the principal
parts thereof pretending they were not sufficiently empowered for that purpose;
and after, other Agents fully empowered to Answer, but not to submit or
Conclude any thing: And when His Majesty was pleased to cause a Writ of Quo
Warranto to be sued forth, against our Charter, and sent over with his Gracious
Declaration, and Proposals of such Regulations to be made therein, as might be
agreeable with His Majesty's Service and the good and welfare of his subjects
here, and required an entire Submission from us therein; our General Court
would not submit to, or comply therewith; only a Letter was sent to the Right
Honorable Sr. Lionell Jenkins, then Secretary of State, dated the 10. of
December 1683, Subscribed by the Governor and Eight of the Assistants only;
wherein after the acknowledgement of their having had a Copy of the Quo
Warranto and His Majesty's Declaration, they say that the major part of the
Magistrates have for several Weeks declared their Opinion, and voted to lay
themselves at His Majesty's feet, by an humble Submission and Resignation of
themselves to His Majesty's pleasure; not being willing to Contend with His
Majesty in a Course of Law, but by the next Opportunity to dispatch their
Agents fully empowered to make their submission according to His Majesty's said
Declaration, but by no means can at present obtain the Consent of the Deputyes
whereby to make it an Act of the Corporation, and therefore have agreed with
them to a power of Attourney-ship, to save a Default, in hopes that further
time will prevail to dispatch their Agents accordingly, and shall earnestly
endeavor to give the people a better Understanding before the next Ships sail
from hence:

His Majesty by this finding that all the easy means He had used could not
bring us to any Answer, for the Crimes and Misdemeanors laid to our Charge,
nor produce any thing else but Bassles and Delays, gave Order to His Attorney
General to sue out a Writ of Scire facias out of the High Court of Chancery,
against our Governor and Company, which was accordingly done, directed to the
Sheriffs of London etc. and made returnable in Easter Term, in the 36 year of
His Majesty's Reign, wherein they were Required to make known to the said
Governor and Company at London, that they may appear in His Majesty's High
Court of Chancery at Westminster, on the day of the Return thereof, to show
cause wherefore the said Charter for the Reasons in the said Writ of Scire
facias mentioned and contained, should not be made void, null, and cancelled,
and the Liberties and privileges thereby granted to the said Governor and
Company be seized into the King's hands; upon which Writ the said Governor
and Company not appearing, another Writ of Scire facias of the same Tenor
issued forth, Returnable in Trinity Term then next following, when the said
Governor and Company appeared by their constituted Attorney and Council, but
refused to plead to the said Writ, only moved for time to send hither, which
not being agreeable with the Rules and Practice of the Court in such Cases,
could not be allowed: But in favor to them a Rule was made, that unless they
pleaded by the first day of the then next Michaelmas-Terme, Judgment should be
entered by Default. And in that Term for Default of pleading, Judgment was
enterd on His Majesty's Behalf, and the said Charter adjudged to be void,
Null, and Cancelled, and that the Liberties and Privileges of the said
Governor and Company be Seized into the Kings hands, which was accordingly
done, by the Exemplification of the said Judgment in the Reign of King James
the Second, and by His Majesty's Commission to a President and Council to take
the Government of this Country: All which proceedings are most just and and
Legal, according to the Rules and practice of the Law of England, and
agreeable with many Precedents of the like nature, both Ancient and Modern.

Besides: All Companies, Corporations, or Bodies politic, made or granted by
Letters Patents or Charter from His Majesty, for any parts or places beyond the
Seas, are by themselves or Agents, to be always ready to answer His Majesty in
any of his Courts at Westminster, when He shall think sit to Order any Suite,
or Writ to be sued and prosecuted against them; and are supposed to be
Resident in or about London or Westminster for that purpose, as the East India,
Royall-Affrican, Bermudas, and Hudson-bay Companies are, who have their Trade,
Factories, Colonies and Plantations abroad in Asia, Africa, and America: and
in the like state and Condition ought the Company and Corporation of the
Massathusetts Bay in New England to be, According to the Capacities given them
by their Incorporation of Sueing and being sued, Pleading and being Impleaded;
wherein if we have neglected our Duty, as well as exceeded our Powers and
Privileges granted, and would not put our selves into a Condition to be heard
when we ought and might, it is not His Majesty nor the Proceedings of His
Courts that are to be blamed but our selves.

3. That there was a Commission sent to the President, and the successive one
to Sr. Edmond Andross, are both true, but that they were illegal, is a
position a little too confidently asserted by the Penman, who seems to be more
a Clergyman than a Lawyer; but because the well clearing up of this point will
be of great Service to the subsequent Discourse, 'twill not be amiss that it be
thoroughly considered. I shall therefore lay down this as a certain Maxim,
both consonant to Reason and the Laws of the Land: That Those Kingdoms,
Principalities, and Colonies which are of the Dominion of the Crown of
England, and not of the Empire of the King of England, are subject to such
Laws, Ordinances and Forms of Government as the Crown shall think fit to
establish. That New England and all the Plantations are subject to the Dominion
of the Crown of England, and not to the Empire of the King of England:
Therefore, The Crown of England may Rule and Govern them in such manner as it
shall think most fit. For the proof of which I shall instance Wales, which
was once a Kingdom or Territory governed by its own Laws, but when it became
of the Dominion of the Crown of England, either by Submission or Conquest, it
became subject also to such Laws as King Edward the first (to whom they
submitted) thought fit to impose: as may plainly appear in the Preamble of the
Statute of Rutland. Leges et Consuetudines, partium illarum hactenus usitatas,
coram nobis et proceribus Regni Nostri fecimus recitari, quibus diligenter
auditis, et before intellectis, quasdam illarum de Consilio Procerum
predictorum delevimus, quasdam permissimus, et quasdam correximus, et etiam
quasdam alias adjiciendas et faciendas decrevimus, et eas de caetero in terris
Nostris in partibus illis perpetua Firmitate, teneri et observari volumus, in
forma subscripta. In English thus, We have caused the Laws and Customs of
those parts hitherto used, to be recited before Us and the Peers of Our Realm,
which being diligently heard and more fully understood, some of them, by the
Advice of Our Peers aforesaid, We have obliterated, some We have allowed, and
some We have corrected, and have also decreed that some others shall be made
and added to them; and We will, that for the future they be holden and observed
in Our Lands in those parts with perpetual firmness, in manner herein after
expressed. --

Then follow the Ordinances appointing Writts original and judicial in many
things varying from those of England, and a particular manner of proceeding.

And again in the Close of the said Statute, et ideo vobis mandamus quod
permissa de caetero in omnibus observaetis, ita tantum, quod quotiescunque et
quandocunque et ^bicunque Nobis placuerit, possimus praedicta Statuta et eorum
parts singulas declarare, interpretari, addere sive diminuere pro Nostrae
Libi^o voluntatis prout securitati Nostrae, et Terrae Nostrae viderimus
expediri: And therefore We Command you that from hence foreward you observe the
premises in all things so only, that as often, whenever and wheresoever We
please, we may declare, interpret, add to and diminish from the said Statutes
and every part of them according to Our will and pleasure, so as We shall see
it expedient for the safety of Us and Our Land aforesaid.

In the Next place I shall instance Ireland: That it is a Conquered Kingdom is
not doubted, [Co. Rep. fol. 18. a.] but admitted in Calvin's Case, and by an Act
of the 11 th, 12 th, and 13 th, of King James, acknowledged in express words,
Viz. Whereas in former times the Conquest of this Realm by His Majesty's most
Royal Progenitors Kings of England, etc.

That by Virtue of the Conquest it became of the Dominion of the Crown of
England, and subject to such Laws as the Conqueror thought fit to impose,
until afterward by the Charters and Commands of H. the Second, King John, and
H. the 3. they were entitled to the Laws and Franchises of England; as by the
said Charters, Reference being thereunto had, may more fully appear. I shall
only instance two.

The first is out of the close Rolls of H. the 3. Wherein the King, after
Thanks given to G. de Mariscis* Justice of Ireland, signifies, That Himself and
all other his Leiges of Ireland should enjoy the Liberties which he had granted
to his Leiges of England, and that he will grant and confirm the same unto
them: [Claus. 1. H. 3. dorso 14] Which afterward in the 12 th year of his
Reign he did: as follows, Rex dilecto et sideli suo Richardo de Burgo
Justiciar^; suo Hibern*, Salutem: Mandavimus vobis firmiter precipientes,
quatenus certo die and loco faciatis venire coram vobis, Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Cometes and Barons, Milites and libere Tenentes,
et Balivos singulorum Comitatuum, et coram eis public legi faciatis Chartam
Domini Johannis Regis, Patris nostri, cui Sigillum suum appensum est, quam
fieri fecit, et jurari a Magnatibus Hiberniae de Legibus et Consuetudinibus
Angliae observandis in Hibernia. Et precipiatis eis ex part Nostra, quod Leges
illas and Consuetudines in Charta praedicta contentas, de caetero firmiter
teneant et observent. The King to His faithful and beloved Richard de Burg
Justice of Ireland Greeting; We have Commanded you, firmly injoining you, that
on a certain day and place, you make to come before you, the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Freeholders, and the
Baylifs of every County, and before them you cause to be publicly read, the
Charter of the Lord King John our Father to which His Seal is affixed, and
which He caused to be made and sworn to by the Nobility of Ireland, concerning
the Laws and Customs of England, to be observed in Ireland. And command them
on Our behalf, that for the future they firmly keep and observe those Laws and
Customs contained in the Charter aforesaid,

By all which it is evident that after the Conquest, and before the recited
Charters, the Inhabitants there, although composed of many freeborn English
Subjects who settled themselves among them, were neither governed by their
own Laws, nor the Laws of England, but according to the good pleasure of the
Conqueror: and if you will take the opinion of Sr. Edward Cook in his
Annotations on the Great Charter, he tells you plainly That at the making
thereof it did not extend to Ireland, or any of the King's foreign Dominions,
but after the making of Poynings Law, which was in the 11 th year of H. the 7
th (long after the Great Charter) it did Extend to Ireland.

I have only one Instance more, and that is the Usage of foreign Nations in
their Plantations and Settlements abroad.

The Government of the United Provinces and Denmark are well known in Europe,
and yet in all their Plantations, their Governments are despoticall and
absolute; all the power is in the hands of a Governor and Council, and every
thing is ordered and appointed by them; as is well known to those that are
acquainted with Batavia, Surinam, Curasao, New-Yorke (when formerly in their
hands) and the Island of St. Thomas.

By which it is it evident that Those Kingdoms and Principalities which are of
the Dominion of the Crown of England, are subject to such Laws, Ordinances,
and Methods of Government, as that Crown shall think sit to establish.

The next thing then to be proved is, That New England, and all the English
Colonies are subject to the Dominion of the Crown of England, as Wales and
Ireland are, and not to the Empire of the King of England, as Scotland is,

It Is a Fundamental Point consented unto by all Christian Nations, that the
First Discovery of a Country inhabited by Insidells, gives a Right and
Dominion of that Country to the Prince in whose Service and Employment the
Discoverers were sent. Thus the Spaniard claims the West Indies, the
Portungals, Brasile, and thus the English these Northern parts of America; for
Sebastian Cabott employed by King H. the 7 th. was the first Discoverer of
these parts, and in his name took possession, which his Royal Successors have
held and continued ever since, therefore they are of the Dominion of the Crown
of England, and as such they are accounted by that excellent Lawyer Sr. John
Vaughan, in his Reports [Vaugh. Rep. Craw versus Ramsey.] which being granted,
the Conclusion must necessarily be good, and it will follow, That Englishmen
permitted to be transported into the Plantations, (for thither without the
Kings License we cannot come) can pretend to no other Liberties, Priviledes or
Immunities there, than anciently the subejcts of England who removed themselves
into Ireland could have done: For it is from the Grace and Favor of the Crown
alone that all these flow and are dispensed at the pleasure of him that sits on
the Throne: which is plain in the Great Charter it-selfe; where after the
Liberties therein granted by the King it concludes thus, -- tenendas and
habendas de Nobis and Haeredibus Nostris in perpetuum, To HAVE and to HOLD of
Us and Our Heirs for ever, which by the learned Sr. Edward Cook is thus
explained: These Words (says he) are not inserted to make a legal Tenure of
the King, but to intimate that all Liberties at first were derived from the
Crown. [Instit. Page 2. Fol. 4.] Barbados, Jamaica, the Leeward-Islands and
Virginia have their Assemblies, but, it is not sui Juris, it is from the Grace
and Favor of the Crown signified by Letters Patents under the broad Seal.
But these Assemblies have not power to enforce any Act by them made above one
year; the King having in all the Consessions granted them, reserved unto
Himself, the Annulling or Continuance of what Laws they make, according to His
pleasure.

New England had a Charter, but no one will be so stupid to imagine that the
King was bound to grant it us: Neither can we without impeaching the prudent
Conduct and discretion of our Forefathers, so much as think, they would put
themselves to so vast an expense, and unnecessary Trouble to Obtain that which
as Englishmen, they thought themselves to have a sufficient right to before: We
owe it only to the Grace and Favor of our Sovereign, and if we had made
beter use of it to promote the Ends for which it was granted, the weight of
those Afflictions under which we now groan would not have lain so heavy upon
us, at least we should have less deserved them.

Besides, The Parliament of England have never by any Act of theirs favored
the Plantations, or declared or enlarged their Privileges; but have all along
plainly demonstrated that they were much differenced from England, and not to
have those Privileges and Liberties which England enjoyed; being in all Acts
relateing to the Plantations, Restrained and burdened beyond any in England,
as appears by the several Acts made for the Increasing of Navigation and for
Regulating and securing the Plantation Trade.

I think I have both by good Authority, Practice and Precedent, made it plain,
that the Plantations are of the Dominion of the Crown of England, and without
any Regard to Magna Charta, may be Ruled and Governed, by such ways and
methods, as the Person who wears that Crown, for the good and advancement of
those Settlements, shall think most proper and convenient. Therefore* Neither
the Commission to the President, nor that to Sr. Edmond A^dros can be said to
be illegal.

Since then such an one might lawfully be granted, we have great reason to
commend the Moderation of the Gentleman, who was entrusted with it, and so
return thanks to Almighty God for placeing over us a person endued with that
prudence and Integrity, that he was so for from exceeding his Commission, that
he never put in execution the powers therein granted him. Have there been any
Taxes laid upon us, but such as were settled by Laws of our own making, any
part whereof might be retained and in force after the Condemnation of our
Charter that the King thought ^it. Who has been Transferred out of this
Territory? Or did we ever pay fewer Rates than we have done under him?

And whereas it is also Alleged in the Declaration, that there were Courses*
taken to damp and spoil the Trade, etc. the same is altogether Mistaken,
(unless by that is meant the irregular Trade, used heretofore with Foreigners
and Privateers, contrary to the Acts of Navigation and the Laws of the Land)
For the very considerable Advance of His Majesty's Revenue ariseing by Customs,
does sufficiently demonstrate that the lawful Trade of this Territory, was
very much increased under the Government of Sr. Edmond Andros.

4. 'Twill be but time lost to say any thing of the Red-Coats, for no man can
be so void of Sense and Reason to think that so many Thousand men, which at
this day inhabit this Colony, could be imposed upon by one hundred Red-Goats,
and if any body has been so vain as to threaten us with more, I look upon it
an effect of Passion or Folly; for Experience, which certainly is the most
convinceing Argument in the world, tells us there is no such thing.

and Haters of the People, I must confess, I cannot easily comprehend* unless
to inhabit fourteen or fifteen years within the Territory will make a man such.
Is their any one Gentleman of the Council, that has either been displaced or
put into that station by the Authority here? Which of our Judges are strangers?
Were not Three of them brought up amongst us and of our own Communion? and was
not the other in the same Employment in some part of this Territority at the
time of the Annexation? From whom had the Secretary and Collector his
Commission? certainly from no body here. Did the Alteration of the Government
change our Treasurer? Is it not the same Sr. Edmond found here? Is he not a man
of estate, good Credit and Reputation, and one of our own Country men? Were
not all Officers in the Government, as well Magisteriall as Ministerial,
natural borne Englishmen, and Subjects to the Crown of England? How then are
Strangers and Haters of the people preferred, when there is not one that can
reasonably and justly be so termed in any place of Trust or Office throughout
the Dominion?

6. Who are meant by abject persons from New-Yorke, wants an Explanation: for
none of the Gentlemen that came from thence now in any Authority, but are well
known to have lived there for a long time in esteem and Reputation enough to
merit a better Epethite of all good and honest men; and I believe it will one
day appear, that their faithful Discharge of their Duties, their Constancy and
Steadiness to the Church of England, and unshaken Loyalty and Fidelity to the
Crown was their greatest Crime.

I am not well acquainted what Fees were taken, but this I know, that a
Committee of the Council were appointed to make a Settlement of Fees, for all
Officers throughout the Government, which was effected, approved of, and sent
to England, and if any one have exceeded those Limits they deserve to be called
to Account: but it ought to be in a due Course of Law. For the personal
Miscarriages of a ministerial Officer, are no sufficient Warrant for an
Insurrection; neither ought the Whole Government to be subverted because Tom,
or Harry are ill men. The Authority can but provide good and wholesome Laws,
for the Punishment of evil Doers, and cause those Laws to be put in Execution
against Offenders; but if any one does me a personal Wrong, for which* I have
a Remedy by Law, and I will not take it, I ought not to quarrel with the
Government, for it is my own* Fault, and I might have Redress if I would.
Personal Orimes must be censured personally: and a Government ought no more to
be scandalized and aspersed, because an Extortioner is in it, than because
there is a Felon or a Traitor.

7. I need not tell you that the Statute Laws of England are printed at large,
and that many Abridgements of them are so Likewise, and easy enough to be
procured, neither can it be but very well known that all the Acts of the
Governor and Council were solemnly published with Sound of Trumpet as soon as
made, and authentic Copies afterward transmitted to the Clerks of each
respective county throughout the Territory: why then it should be said, that It
was impossible to know the Laws, I see no reason, unless by it is meant the
Common Law, and if so, we may as well quarrel because we do not understand
Euclide, or Aristotle; For the Knowledge of the Law cannot be attained without
great Industry Study and Experience, and every capacity is not fitted for such
an Undertaking. Ex quovis Ligno non fit Mercurius. If this was a Grievance,
what a miserable Condition are we in now, that instead of not knowing the Law,
there is no Law for us to know.

8. What rash or indiscreet Expressions may fall from any single person of the
Council, either in his private or politic Capacity, I will not undertake to
justify; all men are not endued with Qualifications alike, every one in that
station ought to give his Opinion, as he himself understands the matter; and
if any one have unadvisedly uttered words so disagreeable, I know no body
injured by it, neither can the Government be justly censured for it.

9. That the Privileges of Magna Charta, and other liberties of English men
were denied us, is a thing which can never be made appear, however admitting
it, I have sufficiently discussed that point in the third Article.

10. By the persons said to be severely sined, for peaceble objecting against
raising of Taxes, without an Assembly, I conjecture are meant the Ipswich men,
who were so far from a peaceable objecting, that they assembled themselves in a
riotous manner, and by an Instrument conceived in Writing, did associate and
oblige themselves to stand by each other in opposition to the Laws of the
Government, and by their Example influenced their Neighbors to do the like.
And this by the Law is esteemed an offense of that Nature, That it is next door
to Rebellion, for which they were Indicted, Tried, and Convicted, either by
Verdict or their own Confession*

11. I cannot justify that Sheriff who does either pick or pack a Jury, it is
both repugnant to the Law and his Oath, and he deserves no Favor that can be
guilty of such a Crime, but let him first be known, and the thing proved, for I
do not Remember any one that has been Convicted, nor so much as accused for
such an Offense.

12. Judgment upon Deumrrers and Defaults are so practicable and warrantable
by the Law, that nothing can excuse the Enumerating them amongst the
Grieviances in the Declaration but the Penman's want of Knowledge in that
Profession. It Is a Maxim, Volenti non fit Injuria, and when both Plaintiff and
Defendant do by a joint Consent submit to the Determination of the Court, or by
their own Negligence make Default; who has the Wrong? Where is the injury?
This has been a Practice so frequently used in our former Government, that no
body can be ignorant of it.

13 That any one has been long imprisoned, without being charged with Crime or
Misdemeanour, is an Allegation which I dare be bold to say can never be proved.
I have heard an Habeas Corpus was in one particular case denied, I will not
enquire into the reasons of it, nor pretend to justify it, although much may
be said in that matter; Admitting the Fact, 'twas but a personal injury, for
which the Law gave an effectual Remedy, and if the party grieved would not
make use of such, must the Government be in fault? If we do but consider well
how many persons are now under far worse Circumstances, I am sure we cannot
but blush when we read that part of the Declaration.

14. That Jury men were fined and imprisoned for Refuseing to lay their hands
on the Book, I presume is a mistake, probably they may have been fined for
their Contempt, and sent to Prison for not paying that fine, which by the Law
may be justified; for every Court may fine any man for a Contempt in open
Court, and they themselves are Judges of the Contempt.

Whether it be a forceing of Conscience or not, I shall leave to the Casuists,
but I am very well-satisfied it is not comprehended within the late Indulgence,

Yet admit it were, the Judges are sworn to do their duties in their office
according to the Laws of the Land, Prescription is a good and sufficient Law,
the form of Laying the hand on the Book has been the only modus of Swearing,
Time out of mind; Therefore the Laying the hand on the Book in Swearing is a
good Law, and the Judges cannot dispense with it salvo Sacramento, if they did,
a Judgment in such a Case would be erroneous and reversable: and It Is
dangerous to admit of Innovations,

The Common Law of New England is brought in to warrant the Lifting up the
hand; but I take that to be the Rara avis in terris, for I challenge the whole
Territory to produce one Precedent of such a resolved Case: but perhaps by it
Prescription is intended, if it be, that will as illy serve the turn as the
other; for the Colony has not been long enough settled to claim any Advantage
by that Right, or if it had, could it be admitted without apparent Violation of
our Charter, being absolutely repugnant to the Laws of England.

15. Fully to discuss the question concerning the Titles of our Lands, would be
a Subject to copious for this present design, Therefore I shall only glance
at it as I pass by, being Resolved, when time shall serve to declare my opinion
more amply on that Subject; in the mean time let every considering man examine
well our Charter, which is the very Basis of all our Rights, (unless we will
set up a power above the Kings) and then let him tell me in whom the Fee
Simple of that Tract of Land betwixt Charles River and Mirrimack remains: if
in the Grantees or their Heirs, how do we derive our Titles from them? If in
the Governor and Company of the Massathusets Bay, we must enquire whether
pursuant to the Directions and powers to them granted, it is by good and
sufficient Conveyances in the Law derived unto us, if we find it so, we must
not be disturbed with Fears and Jealousies, for nothing can hurt us: if not, we
are infinitely obliged to those persons who have made us sensible of our
Weaknesses, in a time when by His Majesty's Letters Patents the Governor was
empowered to supply all such defects, and not upon Terms either excessive or
unreasonable, but upon such as were both easy and moderate, which will plainly
appear to any man who will but give himself the trouble to peruse the Table of
Fees, settled and allowed by the Council. Yet still every man was at his own
Liberty to take a Patent of Confirmation or to let it alone, which is Apparent
enough by the many Petitions now lying in the Secretaries Office, which
although his Excellency was always ready (so far as in him lay) to Grant, yet
the more necessitous Affairs of the Government, which both he and all about him
ever preferred to their private Advantage, took up so much of his time, that
not above Twenty ever past the seal, and I am very well assured, that not one
Example can be produced that the least compulsion was ever used in this Case to
any man living within this Dominion.

16. That Writts of Intrusion were issued out, is doubtless true, and the
Government would have justly merited a severe Censure, if all Ways should have
been free and open for the Subject to attain his Right, and none left for the
King. We should think our selves highly injured to be refused a Capias or any
other Common Writ, and I Am sure the other is as peremptory a one in the Kings
Case, and had the Pen*man been never so little acquainted with the Natura
Brevium, or the Register, he would have been ashamed to have stuffed up the
Declaration with such matter which can be of no other service, than to amuse
and deceive ignorant people* have their been any Writts of this kind dureing
Sr. Edmond*s Administration, taken out against either poor or ignorant persons
that had neither purses nor brains to defend themselves: has it not been
against such as both for their Estates and Capacities, are sufficiently known
to be eminent? And the business of Deer-island was brought on for no other
Intent than that Right might be done to the King here, and that the party, if
agrieved, might in a Regular way have brought it to the Council board in
England, for their determination: and I think if this matter were rightly
understood, it would be of excellent Service to the Country, for such a
Judgment would sufficiently instruct us what we have to trust to;

17. If the Governor did say, there was no such thing amongst us as a Town,
what can be inferred from thence? It Is not to be presumed but his discourse
tended only to a Body Corporate and politic, for we generally call that a
Town in America, where a number of people have seated themselves together: yet
its very well known, it is so in name only not in fact: I take that Body of
People to be a Town, properly so called, who by some Act of Law have been
Incorporated, and in that sense there is no such thing as a Town in the
Massachusetts, neither was there a power to make such before his Excellencies
Arrival. For One Corporation cannot make another. [the case of Suttons
Hospital. Co Rep.]

18. I am totally ignorant what is meant by Blank Patents, for it is the first
time I ever heard of such a thing; neither indeed can such a thing be. For he
that takes a Patent for his Land, does it in such a Form as best pleases
himself, or as he shall be advised to by his Council, and how any man living
can so far know my mind, to prepare such an Instrument for me, I leave the
world to judge.

This Notion did arise from one Roll of Parchment only, brought over by Capt.
Tanner, and if we do but consider, that all Law process was then in Parchment,
it would serve but a little while for that use; for it contains not above sixty
sheets.

I am likewise gropeing in the dark, to find out how the Forceing of the
people at the Eastward to take Patents (although I know of no such thing done)
gave a Rise to the late unhappy Invasion by the Indians, unless by that meames,
they were deprived of those Quit-Rents and and Acknowledgements, which by a
base and dishonorable Agreement the people of those parts some time since
submitted to pay them, as their Lords and Masters.

19. That our Commons might be begged, is not very strange, but that the
Governor must be criminal because such a thing is asked of him, is the most
wonderful thing in the world. To whom have they been granted, or for which of
his creatures have they been measured out? If Lieut' Col' Lidge^ be instanced,
how came he to be the Governor's Creature, that has so long lived among us in
Reputation equal to the best of us, and whose Fortunes were not so narrow that
he needed a dependancy upon any body, and estate and interest in Charlestown
Lands equalled if not exceeded any man's there, so his Right to the Grant ought
to be preferred.

If Clarks-Island, (granted to Mr. Clarke of Plymouth) I must tell you it is not
within the Plymouth Patent, and therefore grantable at the pleasure of the
King, which was the Opinion of the Council in that Case, and neither of the
beforementioned Grants, nor indeed any other, did ever pass without their
Approbation and consent; and this is all that I know of that can be objected.

20. What an Age do we live in now, and how wonderful a thing is it, that it
should be counted a Crime in a land so well governed as once New England was
after a legal Trial and Conviction, to punish and fine men for a Riot and the
Contempt of Authority, in the highest Nature imaginable? For what less was it
for the Number of three or more to meet together, throw down and remove the
Land*marks set up by the Surveyor General thereunto Authorized by the
Governors Warrant? And thus is the Case and no otherwise.

21. That any of the Council were ever denied Admittance to that Board* is a
thing so appar^^tly false, that I Am sure not a man amongst them but must
justify the Governor in that point; who was always so far from such a method,
that although there was a certain day appointed ed for their Meeting every week,
well k^^w^e to them all, yet it was a frequent thing for him, to send on
purpose to Salem, and other Neighboring parts, for the Gentlemen that lived
there: and I have seen the Messengers Account, wherein he Charge a
considerable sum of money for Horse hire on those Errands. It Is very well
known, his Excellency has waited many hours for several of the Gentlemen
that live in Town, and would never sit, until they came. And as he has never
done, nor ordered the least matter relateing to the Government, without their
Advice and Consent, so he never did it without a sufficient Number to make a
Quorum, which was Seven.

22. There was never any other course taken, to hinder Mr. Mather's Voyage to
England, than what the Law allows, neither can the Government, without a great
deal of Injustice, be charged with any thing relating to that matter, for none
in place knew his errand.

There was a particular difference between Mr. Randoph and him, and I never
heard of any other course taken by Mr. Randolph than the ordinary Writ in such
Cases usual, which was so far from Retarding his Voyage, that an Attourny's
entering a common Appearance in that Case, would have been sufficient to have
discharged him if the Writ had been served.

23. Suppose his Majesty promised Mr. Mather a Magna Charta, for redress of
Grievances, and that his Excellency should be wrote unto, to forbear the
measures he was upon, yet no such thing being done, he was Obliged to the
Observance of his Majesty's Commands, before Signified to him in his Letters
Patents, which was a sufficient warrant to him, until he should receive
something subsequent to contradict it.

24. That our Churches and and Ministers have been discouraged, is so general
an head, and the rest of the Declaration so particular, that it gives me cause
to suspect the Truth of it, and I shall hardly alter my Opinion, until any one
of you be instanced who kept himself within his Province, and only meddled
with that which belonged to him.

It Is the Church of England, that have most reason to Complain, onley we cry
whore first. Has not their Minister been publicly Affronted, and hindered from
doing his Duty? What scandalous Pamphlets have been printed to vilify the
Liturgy? And are not all of that Communion daily called Papist dogs and Rogues
to their Faces? How often has the plucking down the Church been threatened? One
while, it was to be converted to a School, and anon it was to be given to the
French Protestants; and whosoever will but take the pains to survey the Glass
Windows, will easily discover the marks of a malice not common. I believe it is
the First National Church that ever lay under such great disadvantages, in a
place where those that dissent from her must expect all things from her grace
and favor.

25. Should I undertake to recount all the particulars of the late Indian
Rebellion, this would swell to a bulk bigger than ever I designed it, I shall
only tell you, we must look at home for the Reasons of those troubles, which
is well known began when his Excellency was at New York* and that the Folly
and Rashness of the people, drew it on their own heads. The Governors Conduct
in that affair has been so prudent and discreet, that I have no Reason to doubt
but the Council, into whose hands all the Papers relating to that business did
fall, are very well satisfied with it. Things were brought to that pass, that
if our unhappy domestic Troubles had not intervened, the War before this time
would have been advantageously finished, without any Rates or Taxes on the
Country, for by His Excellencies good husbandry, the standing Revenue would
have desrayed the Charge. It Is true, We have lost some of our friends and
Relations, in that Expedition, but could the Governor keep them alive? Are not
Diseases in Armies, as fatal to men as the Sword? When Death comes, it is not to
be avoided; and we see that all our art and care has not been sufficient to
preserve our dearest friends at home, from the greater Mortality which has run
through the Country. Did any of them dye Neglected? Which of them wanted any
thing to be had in these parts? Did his Excellency lie upon Beds of down, and
fare deliciously every day? No, the same Meat, the same Drink, the same Lodging
in their Quarters and Marches, were common to all, only He was generally the
last taken care for. To what a degree of Madness and impiety are we then grown,
so falesly and maliciously to recriminate a person who has so generously
exposed himself to the hardships of that cold and uncomfortable Climate, and
the Fatigues of War, against a barbarous and savage people? And certainly if
God Almighty has not given us over to believe lies, our eyes must be by this
time open, and we cannot but know, we have been put-upon, shamm'd and abused*
who are Popish Commanders in the Army? Will any man barefaced averr so great
an Untruth? It must be confessed, there was one Commander and no more under
that Circumstance; but what had he to do with the Forces? His Post was the
Command of the King's Soldiers and Fort at Pemaquid, and was not
Commissionated for the Army; besides if he had, has he not lived long amongst
us? Did any one ever question his ability, Courage, Fidelity or Conduct, and
ought not that Liberty of Conscience, which has been so hotly preached up, even
to the Encouragement of immoral Acts amongst us* to be equally beneficial to
him with other men? Especially when the Gentlemen in the Country were so far
from offering their Service in the Expedition, that some of the most eminent
amongst them have absolutely refused the service. And I have been told, the
Governor's proposalls to the Council, about his going to the Eastward met
with no Opposition, lest some of the Millitary men there, should have been
bound in Honor to have taken that Employment upon themselves.

26. That some of the English Plantations in the West Indies, which are
contiguous to the French, should be Alarmed, is no wonder, for they were ever
jealous of their Neighborhood, and always stood upon their Guard; But that We
should be afraid of being delivered up to the French; when there is neither War
betwixt the two Crowns, nor any Frenchmen that we can yet hear of, to receive
us, is one of the most unaccountable things in the world. From what parts must
they come? from Canada we know they cannot; they have Reason enough to look to
themselves, for they are more afraid than we: France have their hands full at
home, and its well known they cannot spare any from the West Indies; they made
their utmost effort against Estatia, and by the best intelligence we can get in
that Service or War, there was not one Friggat. Must they then drop out of the
Clouds, or do we expect a Fleet from Vtopia? Certainly this must needs convince
any considering man that we have been extremely abused; and we must be stupid
and senseless to think that Sr. Edmond Andros, and ten or twelve men more (for
that is all the number said to be concerned in this wonderful plott) could
they be guilty of so horrid a wickedness and impiety) were able to deliver so
many Thousand men well appointed, into the hands of a few French men, who from
God knows whence, were to come the Lord knows when.

27. That it was either our Duty to God, or that we had either the Nobility,
Gentry or Commons of England, for our President, I cannot by any means allow,
and I am amazed to see Christians call that a Duty, which God has so remarkably
showed his displeasure against in all Countries and Ages. Is not Rebellion as
the sin of Witcheraft? Numb. 11. 12, 16. Who was it that sent the Leprosy
amongst the children of Israel for their Murmurring? Psalm. 78. Or how came the
Sudden fire with which they were burnt up? How many Thousands perished* by the
Pestilence? Or were they a few that were stung to death with the fiery
Serpents? Do we not read, that The earth opened and swallowed up some of their
Captains, with their wives and Children quick, which horrible destruction fell
upon the Israelites for their murmurring against Moses, whom God had appointed
their Head and Chief Magistrate? What shall I say of Absalom? What of
Achitophel? Or what of Sheba? Holy Writ is so full of Examples of the like
nature, that no body can esteem that a Duty which is so often testified
against. And as it is far from being our duty to God, so there is no parallel
between the proceedings of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in England and
ours here; for the Design of establishing Popery and Arbitrary Government
there, was so evident, that no room was left for the least doubt of it. That
there could be a Contrivance to introduce Popery here, is altogether
ridiculous, and incredible: For, who was to have effected it? Could these few
of the Church of England, who with the hazard of their lives and fortunes so
lately opposed it in Europe, and that in all Ages have been the only Bulwark
against it? Or were the (...) Independents, or Annabaptists to have brought
this about? It must have been one of these, for I dare be bold to say, there
are not two Roman Catholics betwixt this and New-Yorke; and I think the others
are not likely to accomplish it; which makes it plain to me there could not be
any such design.

I have sufficiently demonstrated in the third Article, the little Right we
have to any other Government in the Plantations, and that we cannot justly call
that Arbitrary, which by the Law we are obliged to submit to: so that betwixt
their Condition and ours, there can be no Parity.

As their Reasons and ours were different, so are the Measures which have been
taken: for His late Highness the Prince of Orange, having well weighed and
considered the tottering Condition of the Protestant Religion all over Europe,
thought it was high time for Him to take up Arms, as well for His own
Preservation; as that of his Neighbors and Allies. We do not find, that,
notwithstanding the danger that hung over their Heads, the people of England
took up arms to right themselves, but instead thereof, they became humble
suppliants to His Highness for his Favor and Protection, which He was pleased
to grant them. Neither do we find, that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
assumed any Authority, for which they had no color of Law: as they are Peers,
they are invested with the highest Authority, are the Grand Conservators of the
Peace of the Nation: they never left their Duty and Allegiance to his late
Majesty, until he first left the Kingdom, and all things were transacted in
his Name, and by his Authority until the very minute the Prince was
proclaimed, who came, not by Force to Conquer and Subject the Nation to a
foreign power, nor to subvert and destroy the Lawful Government; but to
maintain and support the same in a peaceable manner, by a Free Parliament, for
which his Majesty issued forth his Writts, and had he thought fit to have
stayed until their sitting, all Griveances might have been redressed: the
Prince or Peers never abrogated nor altered any of the lawful powers of the
Nation, but strengthened and confirmed all that were capable of bearing Office,
by which there was always a due Administration of Justice: The Sword was never
said to rule and s^ay, and by consequence that Confusion and Disorder avoided
which our Il^^gall and Arburary Proceedings have precipitated us into.

As to the Fancifull Stories of Macquaes, Subterranean Vaults, Fireworks,
French Friggots, Poisoning the Soldiers to the Eastward etc. they are so
apparently false and strangely ridiculous, that by this time no man in his wits
can believe them, and I need no Argument to confute the Credit of those
monstrous follies, since time and Experience have sufficiently demonstrated
them to be mere Lies and Inventions.

And now I hope all sober thinking men are convinced, That the before alleged
Reasons, are in themselves either absolutely false, or of little moment, and
consequently no sufficient grounds for us to take up Arms. All that remains on
this head therefore, will be to show,

1st. That If all the Reasons had been true, yet it could not justify our
Proceedings. And,

2. If our Condition had been as bad, and our Grievances really as great as we
were made believe, these measures could never Mend the one nor Redres^e the
other.

The most excellent Grotius has so learnedly wrote upon the first of these,
that I shall presume to use no other Argument than his own upon that head,
which pray consider.

Private men may without doubt (says he) [Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis lib.
1. cap. 4. Quaest. 1.] make War against private men, as the Traveller against
the Theife or Robber: So may Sovereign Princes and States, against Sovereign
Princes, as David against the King of the Ammonites. Private men may make war
against Princes, if not their own, as Abraham against the King of Babylon and
his Neighbors. So may Sovereign Princes against private men, whether they be
their own subjects, as David against Ishbosheth and his party; or Strangers,
as the Romans against Pirates. The only doubt is whether any person or
persons, public or private, can make a lawful War against those that are set
over them, whether supreme or subordinate unto them: And in the First place,

It is on all hands granted, That they that are Commissionated by the highest
powers, may make War against their Inferiors, as Nehemiah against ^obi^ and
Sanballat, by the Authority of Artaxtrxes. But whether it be lawful for
Subjects to make war against those who have the supreme power over them, or
against such as act by, and according to their Authority is the thing in
question. It is also by all good men acknowledged, That if the Commands of a
Prince shall manifestly contradict, either the Law of Nature, or the Divine
precepts, they are not to be obeyed: for the Apostles when they urged that
Maxim, (Act. 4.) Deo magis quam hominibus obediendum, That God is rather to be
obeyed than man, unto such as forbad them to preach in the Name of Jesus, did
but appeal to a principle of right Reason, which Nature had insculp't in every
man's breast: and which Plato expresses in almost the very same words. But yet,
if either for this or any other cause, any Injury be offered unto us, because
it so please him that has the Sovereign power, it ought rather to be
patiently tolerated than by Force resisted: For although we do not owe an
active Obedience to such commands of Princes, yet we do owe a passive; though
we ought not to violate the laws of God or of Nature to fulfill the Will of the
greatest Monarch, yet ought we rather patiently to submit to whatsoever he
shall inflict upon us for not Obeying, than by Resistance to violate our
Countries Peact. The best and safest Course we can steer in such a case, is,
Either by Flight to preserve our selves, or resolvedly to undergo whatsoever
shall be imposed upon us.

2. War against Superiors as such, is unlawful. And naturally all men have a
Right to repel Injuries from themselves by Resisting them (as we have already
said) but Civil Societies being once Instituted for the Preservation of the
Peace, there presently succeeded unto that Commonwealth, a certain greater
Right over us and ours, so far forth as was necessary for that end. And
therefore that promiscuous Right that Nature gave us to r^ssst, the
Commonwealth, for the maintaining of good Order and public Peace, has a
Right to prohibit, which without all doubt it does; seeing that otherwise it
cannot obtein the end it proposes to it self. For in case that Promiscuous
Right of forcible Resistance should be tolerated, it would be no longer a
Commonwealth that is a Sanctuary against Oppression, but a confused Rabble,
such as that of the Cyclops, whereof the Poet thus, -- Where every Ass
May on his wife and children judgment pass.


A dissolute Company, where All are speakers and none hearers: like to unto
that which Valerius records of the Bebri^ii, -- Who all Leagues and Laws disdain
And Justice, which men's minds in peace retain.


Salust makes mention of a wild and savage people living like Beasts in Woods
and mountains, without Laws and without Government, whom he calls Aborigixes:
and in another place of the Getuli, who had neither Laws, good Customs, nor
any Princes to govern them. But Cities cannot subsist without these, Generale
pactum est societatis humanae Regibus ob^ai^^; All humane societies (says St.
Augustine) unanimously agree in this, to obey Kings; So Aeschylus, Kings live
by their own Laws, Subject to none.


And Sophocles, They Princes are, obey we must, what not?


To the same Tune sings Euripides, Folly in Kings must be with patience born.


Whereunto agrees that of Tacitus, Principi summum rerum arbitrium Dii
dederunt, etc. Subditis obsequii gloria relicta est; God has invested a Prince
with Sovereign power, leaving nothing to Subjects but the Glory of Obedience.
And here also, Base things seem noble when by Princes done;
What they Impes^, bear thou, be it right or wrong.
[Sen.] Wherewith agrees that of Salust, Impune quid vis facere, hoc est Regem
esse; To do any thing without fear of punishment, is peculiar to Kings: for as
Mark Anthony urged in Herod 's Case, If he were accountable for what he has
done as a King, he could not be a King. Hence it is, that the Majesty of such
as have Sovereign power, whether in one or more, is fenced with so many and so
severe Laws, and the Licentiousness of Subjects restrained with such sharp
and exquisite Torments; which were unreasonable, if to resist them were
lawful. If a Soldier resist his Captain that strikes him, and but lay hold on
his Pa^tizan, he shall be cashiered; but if he either break it, or offer to
strike again* he shall be put to Death: For as Aristotle observes If he that
is an Officer strike, he shall not be struck again.

3. The Unlawfulness of making War against our Superiors, is proved by the
Jewish Law. [Jos. 1. 18. 1. Sam. 8. 11. Dent. 17. 14.]

By the Hebrew Law, He that behaved himself contumaciously against either the*
High Priest, or against him who was extraordinarily by God ordained to govern
his people, was to be put to death; and that which in the eighth Chapter of the
first Book of Samuel, is spoken of the Right of Kings, to him that thoroughly
inspects it, is neither to be understood of their true and just Rights, that
is, of what they may do ^ustly and honestly (for the Duty of Kings is much
otherwise described Deuteronomy 8 11.) nor is it to be understood barely, of what he
will do: for then it had signified nothing that was singular or extraordinary,
for private men do the same to private men: But it is to be understood of such
a Fact as usurps or carries with it the privilege of what is right, that is,
that it must not be restisted although it be not right; for Kings have a Right
peculiar to themselves, and what in others is punishable in them is not. That
old saying, Summ^m jus, summa injuria, Extreme right is extreme Wrong, is best
sitted to the Case of Kings, whose absolute power makes that seem right, which
strictly taken is not so. There is a main difference between Right in this
sense taken, and Just; for in the former sense, it comprehends whatsoever may
be done without fear of Punishment: but Just, respect only things lawful and
honest. And though some Kings there be, who are (what Servius in Cicero's
Philippicks is commanded to be) Magis justitiae quam Juris consulti; more
regardful of their honor and duty than of their power and prerogatives: yet
this does not diminish their Sovereign Right; because if they will they may do
otherwise without the danger of being resisted. And therefore it is added in
that place of Samuel before cited, That when the people should at any time be
thus oppressed by their Kings, as if there were no Remedy to be expected from
men, they should invoke His help who is the Supreme Judge of the whole Earth.
So that whatsoever a King does, though the same done by an inferior person would
be an Injury, yet being done by him is Right. As a Judge is said Jus reddere,
to do Right, though the (...) he gives be unrighteous.

4. By the G^s (...) When Christ in the New Testament Commanded to give Caes^r
his due, doubtless he intended that his Disciples should yield ^s great, if not
a greater Obedience, as well active a^ passive unto the higher power, than what
was due from the Jews to their Kings: which St. Paul, (who was be^^ able to
interpret his Masters Words) expounding Romans 13. does at large describe
theduty of Subjects; Charging those that resist the power of Kings, with no
less Crime than Rebellion against God's Ordinance, and with a Judgment as great
as their Sin: For, says he, They that do so resist shall receive unto
themsel^^s damnation. And a little aser he urges the Necessity of our
Subjection, Not altogether for fear but for conscience, as knowing, that he is
the (...) of God for our Good. Now if there be a necessity of our Subjection,
then there is the same necessity for our not resisting, because he that resists
is not subject. Neither did the Apostle mean such a necessity of subjection as
^ris^th from an apprehension of same worse inconvenience that might follow upon
our resistance, but such as proceeds from the sense of some benefit that we
receive by it, whereby we stand obliged in duty, not unto man only, but unto
God; So that; He that Resists the power of the sapream Magistrate, incurrs a
double Punishment (says Plato) First from God, for breaking that good Order
which he has constituted amongst men. And Secondly, From the Common Wealth,
whose righteous Laws, made for the preservation of the public peace, are by
Resistance Weakened, and the Commonwealth thereby (...) For can thou believe
(says Plato) that any City or Kingdom can long stand, when the public Decrees
of the Senate shall be wi^fully (...) and trampled upon by the over-swelling
power of some private men, who i^ (...) against the Execution of the Laws, do,
as much as in them lies, d ssolve (...) Commonwealth, and consequntly bring
all into confusion. The Apostle therefore sortisies this Necessity of public
Subjection to Princes with 2 main Reasons: First because God had constituted
and approved of this order of Commanding and Obeying; and that not only under
the Jewish, but under the Christian Law: Wherefore the powers that are set over
us are to be Observed (not servilely, superstitiously, or out of Fear, but with
free, rational, and generous Spirits) tanquam a Diis aa^ae, as being given by
the Gods, says Plato: or as St. Paul, tanquam a Deo ordina^ae, as if ordained
by God himself. Which Order as it is Originally God's, so by giving it a Civil
Sanction, it becoms ours also: For thereby we add as much Authority to it as we
can give. The other Reason is drawn ab utsli, from Profit: because this Order
is constituted for our good, and therefore in Conscience is to be obeyed and
not resisted.

But here some men may say, That to bear injuries is not at all profitable unto
us, whereunto some men (happily more truly than aposi^ely to the meaning of the
Apostle) give this Answer, That patiently to bear Injuries, conduces much to
our Benefit, because it entitles us to a Reward, far transcending our
Sufferings, as St. Paul testisies. But though this also be true, yet it is not
(as I conceive) the proper and genuine sense of the Apostles words, which
doubtless have Respect to that Universal Good, whereunto this Order was first
instituted, as to its proper end; which was the public peace, wherein every
particular man, is as much concerned, if not much more than in his Private.
(for what Protection can good Laws give, if Subjects may refuse to yield their
obedience to them; whereas, by the Constant observance of good Laws, all
Estates, both public and private, do grow up and flourish together) [Plato.]
And certainly these are the good Fruits that we receive from the supreme
Powers, for which in Conscience we owe them Obedience. For no man did ever yet
wish ill to himself. (But he that resists the power of the Magistrate, and
wilfully violates the Laws established, does in effect (as far as in him is)
dissolve his Countrey's peace. and will in the end bury himself also in the
ruins of it.) [Plato.] Besides, the Glory of Kings consists in the prosperity
of their Subjects, When Sylla had by his Cruelty, almost depopulated, not Rome
only, but all Italy, one seasonably admonisht him, Sinendos esse aliquos
vivere, ut essent, quibus imperet; That some should be permitted to live, over
whom he might rule as a King. [Floras. Aug. de. civ. Dei. Lib. 3. cap. 28.] It
was a common Proverb among the Hebrews, Nisi Potestas publica esset, alter
alterum vivum deglutiret; Were it not for the Sovereign Powers, every Kingdom
would be like a great Pond, wherein the greater Fish would always devour the
Lesser. Agreeable whereunto is that of Chrysostom, Unless there were a power
over us to restrain our inordinate Lusts, Men would be more sierce and cruel
than Lions and Tigers, not only biting, but eating and devouring one another.
Take away Tribunals of Justice, and you take away all Right, Property and
Dominion: No man can say, this is mine House, this my Land, these my Goods or
my Servants: but Omnia erunt Fortiorum, the longest Sword would take all.
[Chrys de statuis 6. ad Ephesians.] The mighty man could be no longer secure of his
estate than until a mightier than he came to dispossess him; The weaker must
always give place to the Stronger: and where the strength was equal the loss
would be so too; and this would at length introduce a general Ataxy, which
would be far more perilous than a perfect Slavery. Wherefore seeing that God
has Established (and humane Reason upon Trial approved of) Soveveraign Empire
as the best Preservative of humane Societies, that every m^n should yield
Obedience thereunto is most rational: For without Subje^ ion there can be no
Proctection.

Obj^ct. But here it will he objected, That The Commands of P^irces do not
(...) to the Public Good, and therefore when they (...) from that and for
which they were ordained, they ought not to be obeyed. To which I answer.

That though the Supreme Magistrate does sometimes, either through Fear, Anger,
^^st, Coveteousness, or such like inordinate (...) the ordinary p^^h of Justice
and Equity, yet are these (...) but seldom ^ to be passed over as personal
blemishes, which (a^ Tacitus rightly observes) are abundantly recompensed by
the more frequent examples of better Princes. (Besides the Lives of Princes are
to be considered with some grains of allowance, in respect of those many
provocations and opportunities they have to offend, which private men have not;
All men have their Failings, we our selves have ours; and in case we will admit
of none in Kings, we must not rank them amongst men but Gods. The Moon has her
spots; Venus her Mole; and if we can find nothing under the Sun without
blemish, why should we expect perfection in Kings? He is very uncharitable that
judges of Rulers by some few of their evil Deeds, passing over many of their
good ones. Seeing therefore that there is in all men's lives, as in our best
Coin, an intermixture of good and evil; it is sufficient to denominate a Prince
good, if his Virtues excel his Errors. Besides, to charge the Vices of Kings
upon the Government, as they usually do who affect Innovation, is but a Cheat:
For what is this, but to condemn the Law for the Corruption of some Lawyers: Or
Agriculture, because some men do curse God for a Storm? Si mentiar, Ego
mentior, non Negotium; If I do lie, (says the Merchant in St. Augustine) it is
I that am to be be blamed not my Calling. And if some Princes do prevaricate in
some things, they and not their Function are ^o be blamed. But as to Laws, tho
they cannot be so made as to fit every m^n Case, yet it suffices to denominate
them good, if they obviate such (...) as are frequently practiced, and so do
good to the generality of the People. But as to such cases which because they
rarely happen cannot so easily be provided against by particular Laws, even
these also are understood to be restrained by general Rules. For though the
Reason of the Law being particularly applied to that special Case hold not; yet
in the General, under which special Cases may lawfully be Comprehended, it may.
And much better is it so to do, than to live without Law, or to permit every
man to be a law to himself. Very apposite to this purpose is that of Seneca,
[Lib. 7. de Benef cap 16.] Better is it not to admit of some excuses, though
just from a few, than that All should be permitted to make whatsoever they
please. Memorable is that of Pericles in Thucydides, [Lib. 2.] Better it is for
private men, that the Commonwealth flourish, though they thrive not in it,
than that they should abound and grow rich in their own private estates, and
the Commonwealth pine and Wither: For if the whole be ruined, every private
man's Fortunes must needs be ruined with it: but if the Commonwealth flourish,
every private man's estate, though in it self weak, may in time be repaired.
Wherefore, since the state if well ordered, can easily support any private man's
fortunes, but a private man's estate, though never so well ordered, cannot
repair the loss of the public state: why do ye not rather contribute your
utmost care to advance the Public, than (as ye now do) seek to build your own
private Fortunes upon the public Ruins? Wherewith agrees that of Ambrose,
[de Off. Lib. 3.] Eadem est singulorum utilitas, quae Universorum; The Profit
which the Commonwealth receives, redounds to every private man. And that also
in the Law, Semper non quod privatim interest ex sociis; sed quod communi
societate expedit, servari debet; Evermore, not that which particularly
avails any one party, but that which conduces to the Benefit of the Common
Society is to be observed. (When the Common people in ^ome began to Mutinee by
reason of some Taxes extraordinarily imposed on them, Laevinus the Consul
exhorted the Senate, to encourage the people by their own example; and to that
very end advised every Senator to bring into the Senate House, all the Gold,
Silver and Brass Money he had* that it might be delivered to the ^r^umo^ri for
the publ ck service: adding this reason, If our City overcome, no man needs to
fear his own (...) but if it fall, let no man think to preserve his own [Liv.
l. 26.]) For as Plato rightly observes, What is common strengthens a city, but
what enricheth private families only, weakens and diss lves it: And therefore
it concerns both Princes and subjects to prefer the Affairs of the
Commonwealth, before their own either pleasure or Profit) It is a very true
Observation of Xenophon's, He that in an Army behaves himself sedi^ion sly
against his* General, sins against his own Life. And no less true is that of
Jamblicus, No man should think himself a Loser by what the Commonwealth gains,
for every private man's loss is sufficiently recompensed in the public profit:
For as in the natural body, so doubtless in the Civil, In totius Salute, Salus
est partium; the well being of every part, consists in the safety of the whole.
But without doubt, among those th ngs that are public, the chief and principal
is that aforesaid Order of we^^ Commanding and well-Obeying: which cannot
consist where private Subjects assume that License of resisting the public
Magistrate: which is excellently described by Dion Cassius, whose words sound
much to this s^^se, I cannot concei^e it seemly for a Prince to submit to his
subjects, for there can be no safety, wh^^e the free are advanced above the
Head, or where they undertake to govern, whose Duty it is to be governed. What a
dismal Confusion would it introduce in a Family if Children should be permitted
to despise their Parents or Servants to dispute the Commands of their Masters?
In what a d^sperate Condition is that Patient, that will not be ruled in all
things by his Physician? And what hopes can there be of that Ship, where the
Mariners refuse to obey their Pilot? Surely God has ordained, and humane
Reason upon trial has found it necessary, that for the preservation of (...)
me Society, some should Command, and some Obey. To the Testimony of St. Paul,
we shall add that of St. Peter, whose words are these, Honor the King,
Servants, be ye subjects to your Masters with all fear, and not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is thank-worthy, if a man
for conscience sake ^^^ourd God endure Grief, suffering wrongfully, for what
glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults ye take it patiently? But
if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God. 1. Fet. 2. 17, 18, 19. And this he by and by confirms by Christ's own
Example, which Clemens also in his Constitutions thus expresses, The servant
that seareth God, says he, will serve his Master also with all faithfulness,
yea, though he be impious and unjust. Whence we may observe two things: First,
That under the subjection that servants are in even to hard Masters, is also
couched that of Subjects unto Kings, though Tyrannical. And therefore, as a
little before he commanded Subjection to every humane Ordinance; that is, to
the Laws and Constitutions of Princes without distinction, (for when that
Epistle was written, there were very few Princes that were not Idolaters) yet
submit we must, says St. Peter, for all that; and that, p^opter Dominum, for
the Lord's sake. So what follows in the same Chapter being built upon the same
foundation, respects the Duty as well of subjects as of Servants. And so
requires the same Obedience, as well passive as Active; Such as we usually pay
to our Parents, according to that of the Poet, Thy Parents love if good, if bad
yet bear.
And also that of Terence, To bear with parents, piety Commands.
And that likewise of Ciccro in his Oration for Claentius, Men ought not only
to c^nce^l the injuryes done unto them by their parents, but to bear them with
(...) A young man of Erc^ria that had been long educated under (...) being
demanded, What he had learned? Answered, Meekly to bear ^is ^rath. So Justin
relates of (...) That he endured the Reproaches of the King, with the same
calmness of Spirit, as if he had ^een his Father. [I^b. 15.] ^^renda sum (...)
ingeria, The Humors of Kings most be endured: says Tacitus: [Ann. 16. Hist.
6.] And in another place he tells us, That Good Emperors are to be wished for,
but whenever they are, they must be obeyed. So also Livy, As the R^ge of our
Parents, so the Cruelty of our Country are no ways to be (...) but by patience
and Sufferance. For which Claudius highly ext^ls the Persians, who obeyed all
their Kings equally tho never so cruel.

5. Neither did the Practice of the primitive Christians swerve from this Law
of God, which is an undeniable Argument that they so understood it. For though
the Roman Emperors were sometimes the very worst of men, and deadly Enemies to
the Christian Faith; yea, though there wanted not such under their Government,
who under the specious pretense of freeing the Commonwealth from Tyranny and
Oppre^^^on, took Arms against them, you could the^ never persuade the
Christians to join with them. In the Constitutions of Clemens we read, ^^giae
potestati resistere Nefas, To (...) the power of a King is impious. ^e^tullian
in his Apology writes thus, What was that Cassius that ^^nspi^^d against the
life of Julius Caesar? What was that Polcennius N g^r that in love to his own
country, took Arms in Syria, as Clodius Albinus did in France and Britain,
against that bloody Emperor Septimius Severus? Or What was that Plautianus,
who to set the Commonwealth free from Tyranny, attempted the Life of the same
Emperor in his own palace? What was that Aelius Laetus, who having s^st
po^sened that infamous Emperor Commodus, fearing it should not take that
effect which he desired, did afterward hir^ Narcissus a strong Wrestler to
strangle him? Or What was that Parthenius, (whose fact Tertullian does so much
detest) who being Chamberlain to that execrable Tyrant Domitian, yet killed him
in his own Chamber? What (says Ter^ilian) were all these? Surely not
Christians, but Romans. Nay, So abominated they were by Christians, that
Tertullian seems to glory in this, that though Christians were every where
reproached as Enemies, nay Traitors to the Imperial Crown, yet could they never
find any of them, either stained with that Crime, or so much as favoring those
Treasonable Practices of either Cassias, Niger. or Albinus. When St. Ambrose
was commanded by the Emperor Valentinus to give up his Church to be Garrisun'd
by Soldiers, though he took it to be an injury done, not only to himself and
his Congregation, but even unto Christ himself; yet would he not take any
advantage of the commo^^ ^s it made among the People, to make Resistance. [S^^
Gratian c. 23. q. 8.] If the Emperor (says he) had commanded what was in my
power to give, were it mine House, Land, Goods* Go^d or Si ver, how readily
should I obey; Whatsoever is mine I would wi^ingly offer: hat the Temple of
God, I cannot give away, (...) to any man: Cum ad cust^di^ndum, n^n (...) (...)
it was commit^ed to m^e to defend and to (...) And where^s the people being
^^raged thereby, (...) to repel the Soldiers, he re^used it saying, (...)
Though provoked and compelled thereunto, yet withstand or resist I cannot;
grieve and weep, and mourn I can, against Arms, Soldiers and Coths: I have no
other weapons but Tears: for these are the only Forts and Mu^ments of a Priest:
Aliter nec debeo n^c possum resistere, Otherwise I neither ought nor can
resist. [Lib. 5. Orat. in A^xen.] And presently after, being commanded to
appease the Tumult, he replied, That not to excite them was in his power, but
being exasperated and enraged, to appease them was in the sole power of Him,
who when He pleased, could ^^^ll the ragings of the Seas and the madness of the
people. [Epist. 33.] And in another place he writes thus, Will ye hale me to
prison, or cast me into chains? I am willing to suffer, neither shall I guard
my self with multitudes of people who offer themselves to defend me. Neither
would he make use of the Forces of Maximus, when offered against the Emperor,
though an Artan, and a grievous Persecutor of the Church. In imitation of whom,
Gregory the Great, in one of his epistles confesses, That if he would have
engaged himself in the Death of the Lombards, that Nation had at that day, had
neither King, Dukes, nor Earls, but had been reduced into extreme Confusion.
[Greg. l. 6. Ep. 1.] Nazianzen informs us, That Julian the Apostate was
diverted from some bloody designs he intended against the Church, by the Tears
of Christians: Adding withal, That These are our best Preservatives against
Persecutions. [Naz* Orat. 1. in Julian.] And because a great part of his Army
were Christians, therefore his cruelty toward them, would have been not
injurious to the Church of Christ only, but would at that time have much
endagerd the Commonwealth. Unto all which we may also add that of St.
Augustine, where expounding those places of St. Paul, he says, Even for the
preservation of our own Lives, we ought to submit to the supreme Power, and not
to resist them in whatsoever they shall take away from us.

6. (...) Magistrates ought not to resist the Supreme. Some very learned men
there are even this age, who accommodating themselves t^o servil^l^ to the
times and places wherein they live, do persuade themselves l^st, and then
others, That though this license of Resisting the Supreme power be inconsistent
with the Condition of private men, yet it ag^ee with the Rights of inserior
Magistrates; nay, further, that the^ sin in case they do it not: which Opinion
is to be exploded, us For as in Logic there is a Genus which is called (...)
which though it be comprehensive of all that is under it, as a living Creature
comprehends both man and Beast; yet has it a Cenus above it, in respect
whereof it is but a Species: As a living Creature is to a body, which
comprehends all sorts of bodies, both animate and inanimate. The like we may
say of Magistrates, some are Supreme, who rule all, and are ruled by none;
others are Subordinate, who in respect of private men, are public Persons,
governing like Princes; But in respect of the Supreme Magistrate are but
private men, and are command^d as Subjects. For the power or faculty of
Governing, as it is derived from the Supreme power, so it is subject unto it,
And whatsoever is done by the inferior Magistrate, contrary to the Will of the
Supreme, is nu^^, and reputed but as a private Act, for want of the Stamp of
public Authority. All Order (say Philosophers) does necessarily relate to
somewhat that is first and highest, from whence it takes its Rise and
Beginning. Now they that are of this Opinion, that inseriour Magistrates may
resist the Supreme, seem to introduce such a state of things, as the Poets
fansied to have been in Heaven before Majesty was thought on, when the lesser
gods denied the prerogative of Jupiter. But this Order or Subordination of one
to another, is not only approved of by Common Experience, as in every Family
the Father is the head, next unto him the Mother, then the Children, and after
them the Servants, and such as are under them: So in every Kingdom, Each power
under Higher powers are -- And, All Governors are under Government -- To which
purpose is that notable saying of St. Augustine, Observe (says he) the degrees
of all humane things: If thy Tutor enjoin thee any thing, thou must do it; yet
not, in case the Proconsul command the contray: neither must thou obey the
Consul, if thy Prince command othertherwise: for in so doing thou can not be
said to contemn Authority, but thou chusest to obey that which is highest:
Neither ought the lesser powers to be effended, that the greater is preferred
before them, for (...). [Grat. c. 11. q. 3, Qui^ (...) And that also of the
some Father concerning Pilate, Because (...) he) God h^d invessed (...) such a
power as was it self subordinate (...) of (...) But (...) approved of by Divine
Authority, For (...) enjoins us (...) unto Kings otherwise than unto
Magistrates: To ^ings as (...) that is, absolutely, without Exceptions to any
other Commands than those directly from God: who is so far from justifying our
Resistance, that He commands our passive Obedience: But unto Magistrates, as
they are deputed by Kings, and as they derive their Authority form them. And
when St. Paul subjects every soul to the higher powers, (Romans 13.) doubtless he
exempts not inferior Magistrates. Neither do we find among the Hebrews (where
there were so many Kings utterly regardless of the Laws both of God and Men)
any inferior Magistrates, among whom, some without all question, there were
both pious and valiant, that ever arrogated unto themselves this Right of
Resisting by force, the power of their Kings, without an express command from
God, who alone ha^^ an unlimited power and Jurisdiction over them. But on the
Contrary, What duties inferior Magistrates owe unto their Kings, though wicked,
Samuel will instruct us by his own Example, who though he knew that Saul had
corrupted himself, and that God also had rejected him from being King, yet
before the people, and before the Elders of Israel, he gives him that Reverence
and Respect that was due unto him, (1. Sam. 15. 30.) And so likewise the state
of Religion publicly professed, did never depend upon any other humane
Authority, but on that of the King, and Sanhedrim. For in that after the King,
the Magistrates with the People, engaged themselves to the true Worship and
Service of God, it ought to be understood, so far forth as it should be in the
power of every one of them. Nay, the very Images of their false gods which were
publicly erected, (and therefore could not but be scandalous to such as were
truly religious) yet were they never demolished, so far as we can read of, but
at the special Command either of the people when the Government was popular, or
of Kings, when the Government was kingly. And if the Scriptures do make mention
of any Violence sometimes offered unto Kings, it is not to justify the fact,
but to show the Equity of the Divine providence in permitting it. And whereas
they of the contrary persuasion do frequently urge that excellent Saying of
Trajan the Emperor, who delivering a Sword to a Captain of the Praetorian
Band, said, Hoc pro me u^ere, si recte impero; si male, contra na: Use this
Sword for me if I Govern well, but if otherwise, against me. We must know, that
Trajan (as appears by Pliny's Panegyric) was not willing to assume unto
himself Regal power, but rather to behave himself as a good Prince, who was
willing to submit to the Judgment of the Senate and people; whose Decrees he
would have that Captain to execute, though it were against himself. Whose
Example both Pertinax and Macrinus did afterward follow* whose excellent
Speeches to this purpose are Recorded by Herodian. The like we read of M.
Anthony, who refused to touch the public sure without the consent of the Roman
Senate.

7. Of Resistance in case of inevitable Necessity.] But the Case will yet be
more Difficult, Whether this Law of not-Resisting do oblige us, when the
Dangers that threaten us be extreme, and otherwise inevitable. For some of the
Laws of God Himself, though they sound absolutely, yet seem to admit of some
tacit Exceptions in cases of Extreme Necessity: For so it was, by the wisest
of the Jewish Doctors, expressly determined concerning the Law of their Sabbath,
in the times of the Hasamonaeans, whence rose that famous Saying among them,
Periculum animae impellit Sabbatum; The danger of a man's Life drives away the
Sabbath. When the Jew in Synesius, was accused for the breach of the Sabbath,
he excuses himself by another Law, and that more forcible, saying, We were in
manifest jeopardy of our lives. When Bacchides had brought the Army of the Jews
into a great Strait on their Sabbath day, placing cing his Army before them and
behind them, the River Jordan being on both sides; Jonathan thus bespake his
Soldiers, Let us go up now and fight for our lives, for it stands not with
us to day, as in times past. (1. Mac. 9. 43, 44, 45.) Which case of Necessity
is approved of, even by Christ Himself, as well in this Law of the Sabbath, as
in that of not eating the Shewbread. And the Hebrew Doctors pretending the
Authority of an ancient Tradition, do rightly interpret their Laws made against
the eating of meats forbidden, with this tacit Exception: Not that it was not
just with God to have obliged us even unto death, but that some Laws of His are
conversant about such matters as it cannot easily be believed that they were
intended to have been prosecuted with so much Rigor as to reduce us to such an
Extremity, as to die rather than to disobey them, which in humane laws does yet
further proceed. I deny not, but that some Acts of Virtue are so strictly
enjoined, that if we perform them not, we may justly be put to Death: As for a
Sentinel, to forsake his Station. But neither is this rashly to be understood
to be the Will of the Lawgiver. Nor do men assume so much Right over either
themselves or others, unless it be when, and so far forth as extreme Necessity
requires it. For all humane laws are so constituted, or so to be understood as
that there should be some allowance for humane Frailty. The right understanding
of this Law of Resisting or not-Resisting the Highest powers in cases of
inevitable Necessity, seems much to depend upon the Intention of those who
first entered into Civil Society, from whom the Right of Government is devolved
upon the persons governing: who had they been demanded, Whether they would have
imposed such a yoke upon all Mankind as death it self, rather than in any case
by force to repel the Insolences of their Superiors; I much question whether
they would have granted it, unless it had been in such a case, where such
Resistance could not be made without great Commotions in the Commonwealth, or
the certain Destruction of many Innocents, for what Charity commends in such a
case to be done, may, I doubt not, pass for an humane Law. But some may say,
that this rigid Obligation, ^o dye rather than at any time to Resist Injuries
done by our Superiors, is not imposed on us by any Humane, but by the Divine
Law. But we must observe, That men did not at first unite themselves in Civil
Society, by any special Command from God, but voluntarily, out of a sense they
had of their own impotency to repel force and Violence wh lst they lived
solitarily, and in Families appart; whence the civil power takes it Rise: For
which cause it is that St. Peter calls it an humane Ordinance, although it be
elsewhere called a Divine Ordinance, because this wholesome Constitution of
men was approved of by God Himsef. But God in approving an humane Law, may be
thought to approve of it as an humane law, and after an humane manner. Barkly
(who was the stoutest Champion in defending Kingly Power) does notwithstanding
thus far allow, That the People or the Nobler part of them, have a Right to
defend themselves against cruel Tyranny, and yet he confesses, that the whole
Body of the people is subject unto the King. [Barkley. Lib. 3. contra
Monarchomach. c. 8.] Now this I shall easily admit, That the more we desire to
secure any thing by Law, the more express and peremptory should that Law be,
and the fewer exceptions there should be from it; (for they that have a mind to
violate that Law, will presently seek shelter, and think themselves privileged
by those Exceptions, though their Cases be far different;) yet dare I not
condemn indifferently either every private man, or every, though lesser part of
the people, who as their last Refuge, in cases of extreme Necessity, have
anciently made use of their Arms to defend themselves, yet with respect had to
the Common Good. For David, who (saving in some particular Facts) was so
celebrated for his integrity, did yet entertain first four hundred, and
afterward more armed men; to what end, unless for the safegaurd of his own
person, against any violence that should be offered him? But this also we must
note, That David did not this until he had been assured, both by Jonathan, and
by many other infallible Arguments, that Saul sought his life; and that even
then, he never invaded any City, nor made an offensive War against any* but
lurked only for his own security, sometimes in Mountains, sometimes in Caves,
and such like devious places, and sometimes in foreign Nations, with this
Resolution, to decline all occasions of annoying his own Contrymen. A Fact
parallel to this of David's, we may read in the Maccabees: For whereas some
seek to defend the Wars of the Maccabees upon this ground, That Antiochus was
not a King, but an Usurper; this I account but frivolous: for in the whole
Story of the Macabees, we shall never find Antiochus mentioned by any of their
own party, by any other Title than by that of King; and deservedly: For the
Hebrews had long before submitted to the (...) Empire, in whose Right Antiochus
succeeded. And whereas the Hebrew Laws forbad a Stranger to be set over them,
this was to be understood by a voluntary Election, and not by an involuntary
Compulsion, through the Necessity of the times. And whereas others say, That
the Maccabees did act by the peoples Right, to whom belonged the Right of
Governing themselves by their own Laws, neither is this probable: For the Jews
being first conquered by Nebuchad^osor* were by the Right of War subject unto
him, and afterward became by the ^ame Law subject to the Medes and Persians,
as successors to the Chaldeans, whose whole Empire did at last devolve upon
the Macedonians And hence it is, That the Jews, in Tactius are termed The most
servile of all the Eastern Nations; neither did they require any Covenants or
Conditions from Alexander or his successors, but yielded themselves freely,
without any Limitations or Exceptions, as before they had done unto Darius. And
though they were permitted sometimes to use their own Rites, and publicly to
exercise their own Laws, yet was not this due unto them by any Law that was
added unto the Empire, but only by a precarious Right that was indulged unto
them by the Favor of their Kings. There was nothing then that could justify
the Maccabees in their taking of Arms, but that invincible Law of Extreme
Necessity which might do it so long as they contained themselves within the
bounds of Self-Preservation, and in imitation of David, betook themselves to
secret places, in order to their own security; never offering to make use of
their Arms unless violently assaulted. In the mean time, great Care is to be
taken, that even when we are thus enforced to defend our selves in cases of
certain and extreme danger, we spare the person of the King; for they that
conceive the carriage of David toward Saul, to proceed not so much from the
Necessity of Duty, as out of some deeper consideration, are mistaken: for David
himself declares, that no man can be innocent that stretches forth his hand
against the Lord's Anointed: (1. Sam. 26. 9.) Because he very well knew that
it was written in the Law, Thou shall not ^^e Gods, that is the Supreme Judges:
Thou shall not curse the Rulers of thy people. (Exodus 22. 28.) In which Law,
special mention being made of the Supreme power; it evidently shows That some
special Duty toward them is required of us. Wherefore Optatus Melevitanus
speaking of this Fact of David, says, That God's special Command coming fresh
into his memory, did so restrain him, that he could not hurt Saul, though his
mortal enemy. Wherefore he brings in David thus reasoning with himself, Volebam
hostem vincere, sed prius est Divina praecepta observare, Willingly I would
overcome mine Enemy, but I dare not transgress the Commands of God. [Lib. 2.]
And Josephus speaking of David after he had cut off Saul's Garment, says, That
his heart smote him: So that he confessed, Injustu^* facinus crat Regem suum
occidere, It was a a wicked act to kill his Sovereign. And presently after,
Horrendum Regem quamvis malum occid^re, poenam enim id factenti imminere
constat, ab eo qui Regem dedit, It is an horrid act to kill a King, though
wicked, for certainly He, by whose providence all Kings reign, will pursue the
Regicide with vengeance inevitably. To reproach any private man falsely is
forbidden by the Law, but of a King we must not speak evil, though he deserve
it; because as he that wrote the Problems (fathered upon Aristotle) says, He
that speaks evil of the Governor, scandalizeth the whole City. So Joab
concludes concerning Shimei, as Josephus testifies, Shall thou not dye, who
presumest to curse him whom God has placed in the Throne of the Kingdom? The
Laws (says Julian) are very severe on the behalf of Princes, for he that is
injurious unto them, does wilfully trample upon the Laws themselves.
[Misopogoris] Now if we must not speak evil of Kings, much less must we do evil
against them. David repented but for offering violence to Readiness Garments, so
great was the Reverence that he bare to his person, and deservedly: For since
their Sovereign power cannot but expose them to the General Hatred, therefore
it is sit, that their security should especially be provided for. This, says
Quintilian, to the fate of such as sit at the Stern of Government, that they
cannot discharge their Duty faithfully, nor provide for the public safety,
without the envy of many. (And for this cause are the persons of Kings guarded
with such severe Laws, which seeem, like Draco's, to be wrote in blood,) as may
appear by those enacted by the Romans, for the security of their Tribunes,
whereby their persons became inviolable. Amongst other wise Sayings of the
Esseni, this was one, That the persons of Kings should be held as sacred. And
that of Homer was ast noable, His chiefest care was for the King,
That nothing should endanger him.
And no marvel: For as St. Chrysostom well observes. If any man kill a sheep,
he but lessens the number of them, but if he kill the Shepherd, he dissipates
the whole fl^ck. The very Name of a King, as Curtius tel's us, among such
nations as were governed by Kings, was as venerable as that of God. So
Artabanus the Persian, Amongst many and ^^^se most excellent Laws we have, this
seems to be the best, which commands us to a^ore our Kings as the very image of
God who is the Savior of all. And therefore as Plutarch speaks, Nec ^as, nec
l^i^um est Regis corpori manus infer, It is not permitted by the Laws of God
or man, to offer violence to the person of a King. But as the same Plutarch in
another place tells us, The principal part of (...) is* to save him that saves
all. If the eye observe a blow threatening the head, the hand, being instructed
by nature, interposeth it self, as preferring the safety of the head (whereupon
all other members depend) before their own. Wherefore, as Cassiod^^e notes, He
that with the loss of his own life, Redeems the Life of his Prince, does well;
if in so doing he propose to himself the freeing of his own soul, rather than
that of another man's body, for as conscience teaches him to express his
sidelity to his Sovereign; so does right Reason instruct him to prefer the life
of his Prince, before the safety of his own body. But here a more difficult
question arises; as namely, Whether what was lawful for David and the
Maccabees, be likewise lawful for us Christians: Or whether Christ who so often
enjoins us to take up our Cross, do not require from us a greater measure of
patience? Surely, where our Superiors threaten us with Death upon the account
of Religion, our Savior advised such as are not obliged by the necessary
Duties of their Calling to reside in any one place, to flee, but beyond this,
nothing. St. Peter tells us, That Christ in his suffering left us an ensample,
who though he knew no sin, nor had any guile found in his mouth, yet being
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but remmitted
his cause to him that judges righteously (1. Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.)* Nay
he advises us to give thanks unto God, and to rejoice when we suffer
persecution for our Religion: and we may read how mightily Christian Religion
has grown and been advanced by this admirable gift of patience, wherefore how
injurious to those anc ent Christians (who (living in or near the times of
either the Apostles themselves or men truly Apostolical) must needs be well
instructed in their Discipline, and consequently walked more exactly according
to their Rules, yet suffered death for their says) how injurious I say, to
these men, are they, who hold that they wanted not a Will to resist, but rather
a power to defend themselves at the approach of death? Surety Tertullian had
never been so imprudent, nay, so impudent as so considently to have affirmed
such an untruth, whereof he knew the Emperor could not be ignorant, when he
wrote thus unto him, If we had a will to take our private Revenge, or to act as
public Enemies, could we want either num^^rs of men, or stores of warlike
Previsions? Are the Moors, Germans, Partisians, or the people of any one
Nation, more than those of the whole Worl^? We, though strangers, yet d^ fill
all places in your Dominions; your Cities, Islands, Castles, Forts, Assemblies,
your very Camps, Tribes, Cour^s, Palaces, Se^^ es; only your Temples we leave
to your selves: For what war have we not always declared our selves sit and
ready, though in Numbers of men we have sometimes been very unequal? How comes
it then to p ss, that we suffer Death so meekly, so patiently, but that we are
instructed by our Religion, that it is much better to be killed than to kill?
Cyprian also treading in his Masters steps, openly declares, That it was from
the principles of their Religion, that Christians being apprehended, made no
Resistance, nor attempted any revenge for injuries unjustly done them, though
they wanted neither numbers of men, nor other means to have resisted, but it
was their confidence of some divi^e Vengeance that would fall upon their
persecutors, that made them thus patient, and that persuaded the innocent to
give way to the nocent. [Lib. 5.] So Lactantius, We are willing to conside in
the Majesty of God, who is able, as well to revenge the contempt done to
Himself, as the injuries and hardships done unto us: Wherefore, though our
sufferings be such as cannot be expressed, yet we do not mutter a word of
discontent, but refer our selves wholly to him who judges righteously. And to
the same tune sings St Augustine, When Princes err, they presently make Laws to
legitimate their errors, and by those very laws they judge the innocent, who
are at length crowned with Martyrd^m. [Ep 166.] And in another place, Tyran's
are so to be endured by their subjects, and hard Masters by their servants,
that both their temporal lives (if possible (...) may be preserved, and yet
their eternal safety carefully provided for: Which he illustrates by the
examples of the primitive Christians, Who though they then s^ journed upon
earth as (...) numbers of (...) them, yet ^h^se rather patiently to s^ffer all
manner of torments, than forcibly to resist th^^e persecutors: Neither would
they sight to preserve their (...) lives, but chose rather not to sight, that
so they might ensure unto themselves an eternal. For they endured Bonds,
S^^ipes, imprisonment the (...) the Fire, the Cross; they were ^lead alive,
killed, and quartered, and, ye^ they multiplied; they esteemed this life not
worth the sighting for, so that with the loss of it they ^ight purchase what so
eagerly they panted after, a better. Of the same opinion was Cyril, as may
appear by many notable Sayings of his upon that place of St. John, where he
treats of Peter's Sword. The Thebean Legion, we read, consisted of 6666.
Soldiers, and all Christians, who when the Emperor Maximianus would have
compelled the whole Army to sacrifice to Idols, first removed their Station to
Agaunus, and when upon fresh orders sent after them, they refused to come,
Maxin^tanus commanded his officers to put every tenth man to Death, which was
easily done, no man offering to resist: At which time Mauritius (who had the
chief Command in that Legion, and from whom the Town Agaunus in Switzer-land
was afterward called St. Mauritz, as Encherius, Bishop of Lions, records) thus
bespake his fellow soldiers, How fearful was I lest any of you under the
pretense of defending your selves (as was easy for men armed as ye are to have
done) should have attempted by force to have rescued from death those blessed
Martyrs? which had you done, I was sufficiently instructed by Christ's own
example to have forbidden it, who expressly remanded that Sword into its sheath,
that was but drawn in his own defense; thereby teaching us that our Christian
Faith is much more prevalent than all other arms. This tragic Act being past,
the Emperor commanding the same thing to the survivours, as he had done before
to the whole Legion, they unanimously returned him this answer, I ^i quidem,
Caesar, milites sumus, etc. We are thy Soldiers, O Caesar, we took arms for the
defense of the Roman Empire; we never yet deserted the war, nor betrayed the
trust reposed in us; we were never yet branded with fear or cowardice, but have
always observed thy commands, until being otherwise instructed by our
Christian Laws, we refuse to worship the devil, or to aproach those altars that
are polluted with blood. We find by thy commands, that thou resolvest either to
draw us into Idolatry, or to offright us by putting every tenth man of us to
death: make no further search after those that are willing to lie concealed;
but know that we are all of us Christians, all our bodies thou have indeed
under thy power, but our souls are subject only to Christ our redeemer. Then
Enuperius being the Standardbearer to that Legion thus bespeak them, Hukerto,
Fellow-Sol^i^^s, I have carried the Standard before you in this secular war,
but it is not unto these arms that I am now to invite you, it is not unto these
wars that I now excite your valor, for now we are to practice another kind of
waarfare; for with these weapons ye can never enforce your way into the kingdom
of heaven. And by and by he sends this Message to the Emperor, Against thee, O
Caesar, Desperation it self (which usually makes even Cowards valiant) cannot
prevail with us to take arms. Behold, we have our weapons sixth, yet will we not
resist; because we choose rather to be killed by thee than to overcome thee, and
to dye innocents, than to live rebels to either God or thee. And a little after
he adds, Tela projicimus, etc. We abandon our arms, O Emperor, and will meet
thy messengers of death with naked breasts, yet with hearts strongly munited
with Christian Faith. And presently after followed that general Massacre of the
Thebean Band, whereof Eutherius gives this Narrative, It was neither their
Innocence nor their Numbers, that could exempt them from death, whereas in
other more dangerous tumults, a multitude though offending, are rarely
punished. The same story in the old Martyrology we find thus recorded, They
were every where wounded with swords, yet they cried not out, but disdaining
the use of their Arms, they exposed their breasts naked to their persecutors:
It was neither their numbers nor their experience in war, that could persuade
them to assert the equity of their cause by their swords, but placing His
example always before them, who was led to the slaughter dumb, and like a Lamb
to be sacrificed, opened not his mouth; they also in imitation of Him; like the
innocent slock of Christ, suffered themselves to be worried and torn in pieces
by an herd of persecuting wolves. Thus also do the Jews of Alexandria, testify
their innocence before Flaccus, We are, as thou see, unarmed, and yet we are
accused unto thee as public enemies to the state: these hands which nature
has given us for our defense, we have caused to be pinnacled behind us, where
they are of little use, and our breasts we expose naked to every man that has
a mind to kill us. And when the Emperor Valens cruelly persecuted those
Christians, which according to the Holy Scriptures, and the Traditions of the
Ancient Fathers, professed Christ to be (...), that is, Co-essential with the
Father; though there were every where great Multitudes of them, yet did they
never attempt by arms to secure themselves. Surely, wheresoever Patience in
times of persecution is commended unto us, there we find Christ's own example
held out unto us (as we read it was to the Thebean Legion) for our imitation.
As therefore His patience, so ours, should have no bounds nor limits but death
it self. And he that thus loses his life, is truly said by Christ Himself to
find it.

Secondly. These measures could never better our Condition, nor redress our
Grievances, unless we should be so vain to imagine our selves capable of waging
war with the Crown of England, and all its Allies. Is the KING so petty and
inconsiderable a Prince that He should be forced? Or can we think that the
noise of our Thousands and Ten Thousands will frighten Him into a Compliance?
Without doubt if we do, we shall too too late find our mistake, and a woeful
experience will quickly teach us, that the sole want of Their Majesty's
Protection, will in a very short time reduce us to the most miserable and
deplorable condition in the world.

But perhaps we may fancy that this action of ours has exremely obliged Them,
and that all things now are become justly due to the merits of our services:
'twill do very well if it be so understood, but I cannot see the least
probability of such a Construction; for we have sufficiently manifested in our
Declaration, that Self-interest was the first and principal motive to our
Undertaking, and our Progress does plainly demonstrate, that we have only made
use of Their Names, the better to effect our own Designs; whilst every thing
that has any Relation to Them, lies neglected and unregarded, without any
recognition of Their Authority over these Dominions, or the least
Acknowledgment of our Submission to such orders as should come from Them;
saving what particularly related to some few ill men (as we call them) whom we
have imprisoned and detained without any Law or Reason; so that we have rashly
and imprudently adventured our All upon a chance, (not an equal one) whether it
will be well, or ill taken: if well, we can expect nothing more than what we
should have had by sitting still and quiet, unless it be a vast Charge, Trouble
and Expense, which we have inevitably brought upon our selves: if ill, what
will be the Event?

In the first place our Country, which has been so remarkable for the true
Profession and pure Exercise of the Protestant Religion, will be termed a Land
full of Hypocrisy, REBELLION, Irreligion, and what not; and we our selves a
degenerate, wicked people, that have fallen from the practices of our
Forefathers, and the purity of our first principles.

2. In all our Pamphlets and Discourses, we have so magnified our Action, and
boasted of the vast numbers we can bring into the Field, that it must be of
great import to the Crown of England to curb us and in time to reduce us to our
former obedience; and no body will imagine it consistent with the interest of
that Crown, any more to trust Government in the hands of a people, so ready and
so able upon all occasions to set up for themselves, and the stronger we are,
the more need there will be to keep us under.

3. And lastly, We shall realy endure and undergo all those Miseries and
Calamities which we sancied to our selves under the late Government; and become
the Scorn and Byword of all our Neighbors.

What then remains, but that whilst it is yet called today, w^ should endeavor
to settle our selves in such a Posture, as may at least mitigate, if not wholly
prevent the beforementioned inconveniences. If our Charter be restored such a
Condition cannot burt us; but the (...) of it may; for we are accountable for
every Action and every false Step we make after the date of it, and render our
selves liable to be Questioned and Quo-Warrant^'d for our Male*feazance
whenever the Supreme Authority shall think it meet; if not, it must be of
great service to us to be found in a submissive and humb^e posture, sit and
ready to receive Their Majesty's Commands; lest while we (...) our selves too
much, upon our own merits, we become unwor^ (...) Favor in a most gracious
pardon* without which (...) we will) we never can be safe and secure from the
severity of (...) which we have indisputably violated, in matters of the
highest (...) consequence imaginable.

(...) good man will seriously and impartially consider the foregoing (...) and
suffer himself to be guided by the Dictates of Reason, and not of Humor or
Prejudice, and then I am well assured, it will be evident enough, that we have
mistaken our Measures, and that a timely recess, willsno^e. Ad^antage us than
an obstinate and wilful perseverance, and that nothing but such a Remedy can
restore our almost*perishing and und^ne C^un^rey, to a lasting Peace and happy
Settlement: Which that GOD of His mercy would grant us, shall ever be the
hearty prayers of

F. L.
POSTCRIPT.
I Was principally induced to direct the precedent Discourse to you, Gentlemen,
because I would rightly be understood, which I Am sure I can never fail of by
persons of your Learning and Worth, and I hope you will be so kind to me and so
just to your Country, to let me know in the most public manner you can,
wherein I have mistaken the matter either in point of Fact or Judgment; but if
I have been so fortunate to Convince you, that wrong measures have been taken,
and that the people had no reason for what they have done, nor no bott^^ for
what they are yet doing; let me tell (...) your (...) not only to admonish them
(...) to such a temper as becomes (...) men and good Christians, for which you
will have the praise and God the Glory.



FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 6. line 1. dele may. p. 10. l. 2* (...) Por^^gals. p. 12. the first line
of the fifth Article is wholly omitted, which read thus [5 thly Wh^t is meant
by I^ferments, and who are called strangers*] p. 14. l. ult. dele the. p. 25. l
6. r. Summum. p. Ibid. l. 37. r. arises. p. 27. l. 27. r. Protection. p. 28
line 13 for menttor, r. mentior. p 30. l. 30. r. Regnum. p. 32. l. 25. r.
endangered. l. 31. r. even in this age. l. 32. r. too. l. 37 r. Genus. p. 30.
l. 37. r. Treasure. p. 38. l. 11. dele a. l. 37. r. as notable.


