To all Lovers and Practitioners OF MUSIC.
Courteous Reader:
I Was desired by some Masters to Print the Scale of Music, or Gam-ut, in a
half sheet of Paper, to put in a Scholars Book, to save the pains of writing;
which I intended only to have done; but upon second thoughts I have altered my
mind, and made the addition of some necessary plain Rules for the better
understanding thereof, and the help of Beginners. I confess, men better able
then my self might have spared my pains, but their slownesse and modesty
(being as I conceive unwilling to appear in Print about so small a matter) has
put me upon the Work, which I count very useful, though with the danger of
not being so well done, as they might have performed it. The Rules of all Arts
ought to be delivered in plain and brief language, and not with flowers of
Eloquence; and so this Work is more suitable to my abilities.

The Work as it is I must confess is not all my own, some part of it was
collected out of other men's writings, which I hope will the more commend it:
and if the brevity, plainness, and usefulness thereof may beget acceptance
with thee, it will encourage me to do thee more service in other things of this
nature.

Thine to the utmost of his endeavors, John Playford.

CHAP. I. Of the Scale of MUSIC, called the Gam-ut.
THe GAM-UT is the Ground and Foundation of Music both Vocal and
Isntrumental, and as Ornithop^^chus reports, it was composed by Guido
Aretinus about the year 960. who also in six syllables, which he found in the
first Saphick of the Hymn of S. Johannis Baptista.

VTqueant laxis REsonare fibris
MIra gestorum FAmuli tuorum
SOLve poluti LAbii reatum.
It is supposed he drew the six names of the Notes, viz. UT, RE, MI, FA, SOL,
LA, which were so generally taught and practiced in the same order, ascending,
and descending: but in these latter times four of them are only in use, which
are SOL, LA, MI, FA; so that UT and RE are changed into SOL LA, and these four
being found to be sufficient for the expressing of the several sounds, and
less burdensome to the memory.

Besides these names of the Notes there is used in the GAM-UT seven Letters of
the Alphabet, which are set at the beginning of each Rule and Space, as G. A.
B. C. D. E. F. and of these there are three Septenaries ascending one above the
other, G. being put first, which is according to the third Letter in the Greek
Alphabet called Gamma, and is made thus r, in token that the first derivation
thereof was from the ancient Greeks.

These seven Letters of the Alphabet are called the 7 Cliffs, or more properly
Cleaves, the other names or sylables adjoined to them, the Notes: And by these
three Septenaries are distinguished the several tones or sounds, which the
Scale is divided into: First the Basse, which is the lowest part; the second
the Mean, or middle part; the third, the Treble, or highest part, so that
according to these three Septenaries, Gam-ut is the lowest Note, and Ela the
highest: And this the usual Gam-uts in Mr. Morley and others, do not exceed;
but it is well known that there are many Notes in use, both above and below
exceed that compass, both in Vocal and Isntrumental Music, and therefore
ought not to be omitted; for the Compass of Music ought not to be confined:
for though there be but three Septenaries in the Gam ut of the Alphabet, which
express the several sounds, yet if occasion requires, you may ascend one more
higher, for it is but the same again, only eight Notes higher; or if occasion
require, you may descend lower then Gam-ut another Septenarie, they will be the
same to those above, only eight Notes lower, and it is usual to distinguish
them thus:

Those above Ela are called Notes in Alt, as F fa ut, and G sol re ut, etc. in
Alt: And those below Gam-ut are called double Notes, as Double F fa ut, E la
mi, etc. as being Eights, or Diapasons to those above Gam-ut, I have therefore
in the Gam-ut of this Book expressed them in their right places: The Gam-ut is
drawn upon fourteen Rules, and their Spaces, which comprehend all Notes or
sounds usual in Musicks either Vocal or Isntrumental, though when any of
these parts which it is divided into, come to be pricked out by it self, five
lines is only usual, as being sufficient to contain the compass of Notes
thereto belonging, if there be a Note that extends higher, it is usual to add
a line in that place with a pen. But for Lessons for the Organ, Virginalls, or
Harp two staves of six lines together are required, one for the left hand or
lower Keys, the other for the right or upper Keys.

Therefore he that means to understand what he sings or plays, must study to
be perfect in the knowledge of the Gam-ut, and to have it perfectly in his
memory without book, both forwards and back, and to distinguish Cliffs and
Notes, in Rule and in Space; for by knowing their places, their names are
easily known.

This Scale or Gam-ut has three Columns which show the names of the Notes
ascending and descending in their several Keys: the first Column is called B
Duralis or B sharp, as having no flat in B mi: the second is B proper, or B
Naturalis which has a B flat in B mi only: the third is called B fa or B
Moralis, having two B flats, the one in B mi the other in E la mi, and in these
three observe that that what name the Note of any Cliffe has, the same name
properly has his eight above or below him, be it either in Treble, Mean, or
Basse.

There is an old Meeter, though not very common, yet it contains in it many
pithy Rules of the Theorick part of Music, which are to be observed of those
who are young beginners, and as it falls in our several Chapters I shall insert
it; it begins thus:

To attain the skill of Musicks Art,
Learn Gam-ut up and down by heart,
Thereby to learn your Rules and Spaces,
Notes names are known knowing their places.
The Gamvt or Scale of Music with the Names of the Cleaues and Notes in there
Several Keys
The Treble or highest Keys aa la mi re la la mi gg sol re vt sol sol la ff fa
vt fa fa sol E la la mi fa D la sol sol la la C sol fa fa sol sol B fa mi mi fa
fa A la mi re la la mi G sol re vt * cleave sol * sol * la The Mean or middle
Key's ff fa vt fa fa sol E la mi la mi fa D la sol re sol la la C sol fa vt *
cleave fa * sol * sol B fa mi mi fa fa A la mi re la la mi G sol re vt sol sol
la F fa vt * cleave fa * fa * sol The Basse or lowest Keys E la mi la mi fa D
sol re sol la la C fa vt fa sol sol B mi mi fa fa A re la la mi G Gamvt sol sol
la FF fa vt fa fa sol EE la mi la mi fa DD sol re sol la la CC fa vt fa sol sol
1 B D$$alis 2 B Naturalis 3 B Mollaris

A Second Table of the Scale or Gam-ut, in which every Key or Note is put in
his proper place, according to the two signed Cleaves of the Basse and Treble.
* D la sol ^ E la ^ F fa ut ^ G sol re ut ^ A la mi re ^ F fa ut ^ G sol re ut
^ A la mi re ^ B fa mi ^ C sol fa ^
* A la mi re ^ B sa mi ^ C sol fa ut ^ D la sol re ^ E la mi ^ B mi ^ C fa ut
^ D sol re ^ E la mi ^ F fa ut ^ G sol re ut ^ CC fa ut ^ DD sol re ^ EE la mi
^ FF fa ut ^ Gam ^ ut ^ A re ^

CHAP. II. Of the Cliffs or Cleaves.
IN the Gam-ut (as I said before) is contained three Septenaries of Letters,
which are, G.A.B.C.D.E.F. these 7 Letters are set at the beginning of each Rule
and Space, and are called the seven Cleaves; of these seven, four is only
usual: the first is the F fa ut Cleave, which is only proper to the Basse, or
lowest part, and is thus signed or marked * The second is the C sol fa ut,
which is proper to the middle, or inner parts, as Tenor, Counter-Tenor, or
Mean, and he is thus signed or marked * The third is the G sol re ut Cleave,
which is only proper to the Treble, or highest, and is signed or marked thus *

These three Cleaves are called the three signed Cleaves, because they are
always set at the beginning of every line of a Song, or Lesson; for Cleave is
derived from Clavis, which signifies a Key, for by this Key the places of all
the Notes in the Song are known.

The fourth is the B Cleaves, which is proper to all parts, as being of two
natures or properties, that is to say, Flat and Sharp, and does only serve for
that purpose for the flatting and sharping of Notes, and therefore he is called
B fa, B mi: the B fa signifies Flat, the B mi Sharp, The B fa or B flat, is
known by this mark and the B mi, which is sharp by this.

But these Rules observe of them both: First the B fa or B flat does alter both
the name and property of the Notes before which he is placed, and they are
called Fa, making them half a tone or found, lower then they were before.

Secondly, the B mi or B sharp alters the property of the Notes before which he
is placed, but not their names; for he is usually placed either before fa or
sol, and they retain their names still, but their sound is raised half a tone
or sound higher.

CHAP. III. A brief Rule for the proving the Notes in any Song or Lesson.
FIrst observe with what Cleave your Song or Lesson is signed with at the
beginning, if it be the G sol re ut, then if the Note be above, you must begin
at G sol re ut, and assign to every Space and Rule a Key according to your
Gam-ut, ascending till you come to the Rule or Space where he is set: If a Note
below your Cleave, then you must prove downwards to him, saying your Gam ut
backward, assigning to each Rule and Space a Key, till you come to his place.

CHAP. IV. Containing a plain and easy Rule for the naming your Notes in any
Cleave.
HAving observed the foregoing Rule of prooving your Notes to know their
places, you may easily know the names also, if you follow this Rule: First
observe that Mi is the principal or master Note, which leads you to know all
the other; for having found out him, the other follows upon course, and this
Mi has his being in four several places, but he is but in one of them at a
time; his proper place is in B mi: But if a B fa, which as a B flat (as is
mentioned in chap. 2.) be put in his place, then he is removed into Ela mi,
which is his second; but if a B flat be placed there also, then he is in his
third place, which is A la mi re; if a B flat come there also, then he is
removed into his fourth place, which is D la sol re, so that in which of these
he is, the next Notes above him ascending, are Fa sol la, Fa sol la twice, and
then you meet with your Mi again, for he is found but once in eight Notes: In
like manner, the Notes next below him descending, are La sol fa, La sol fa, and
then you have your Mi again: I shall here insert the old Meeter, with examples
of the Notes, for the more easy understanding thereof in the several places.

No man can sing true at first sight,
Unless he names his Notes aright,
Which soon is learnt if that your Mi
You know where ere it be.
1.
If that no flat be set in B,
Then in that place stands your Mi.
Example. ^ Sol la Mi fa Sol la fa Sol.

2.
But if your B alone be flat,
Then E is Mi be sure of that.
Example. ^ Sol la fa Sol la Mi fa Sol.

3.
If both be Flat, your B and E,
Then A is Mi here you may see.
Example. ^ La Mi fa sol la fa sol la.

4.
If all be Flat, E, A and B.
Then Mi alone does stand in D.
Example. ^ La fa sol la Mi fa sol la.

The first three Notes above your Mi,
Are fa sol la here you may see,
The next three under Mi that fall,
Them la sol fa you ought to call.
Example. ^ Sol la Mi fa sol la fa sol fa la sol fa Mi la sol fa.

If you will sing true without all blame,
You call all Eights by the same name.
Example. Sol la fa Sol Sol fa la sol. ^ Sol la fa sol Sol fa la sol.

CHAP. V. Of Tones, or Tunes of Notes.
OBserve that the 2 B. Cleaves before mentioned are used in Song for the
altering of the tone or tune of Notes. the B flat changes mi into fa, making
him a semitone or half a note lower: and the B sharp raises the Note before
which he is set half a Tone higher, but alters not their names, so that from
Mi to fa, and likewise from la to fa is but half a tone, between any two other
Notes is a whole tone, as from fa to sol, from sol to la, and from la to Mi are
whole Tones, and this may be easily distinguished if you try it on the Frets
of a Viol, you shall perceive plainly that there goes two frets to the stopping
of a whole Note, and but one fret to a half Note; so that is observed that Mi
and fa do serve for the flatting or sharping the other ordinary Notes in the
Scale, and they being rightly understood, the other Notes are easily applied to
them; for if G sol re ut have a sharp set before him, it is A la mi re flat,
and B mi flat is A re sharp, and C. fa ut sharp is D sol. re flat, etc. as
being of one and the same sound. And it is observed that a Diapason or perfect
eight contains five whole tones and two half tones, that is in all the seven
natural sounds, or Notes besides the ground, what flats or sharps soere there
be. But for this I shall refer you to Doctor Campions excellent discourse or
Preface which is added at the end of this Book.

Time, Tune and Ear must now be used,
Or else sweet Music is abused.
CHAP. VI. The Notes, their names, proportions, and their Rest or pauses, with
directions for keeping Time.
The Notes. Their Rests or Pauses.
Large. Long. Brief. Semibrief. Minim. Crochet. Quaver. Semiquaver 8 4 2 2 4 8
16 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * By Augmentation. By Diminution.

IT is to be observed, that Notes have two names, one for Tune, as Sol la mi
fa; the other for Time, or prolongation of sounds, as first the Large, 2. the
Long, 3. the Brief, 4. the Semibriefe, 5. the Minim, 6. the Crochet, 7. the
Quaver, 8. the Semiquaver: and these eight Notes are thus distinguished, the
Large being the first and longest sound, the rest as they follow one another
are half the proportion of the Note before him. The Semibriefe being the
Master Note; for in Songs or Lessons all Times are kept to his value, which is
the hand up and down: If it be a Long (which is a Note of Augmentation) it is
four Semibriefs, which is the hand four times up and down: If Notes of
Diminutions as Minims and Crochets, then such a proportion of them as amount to
the value of one Semibrief is a Time, which is the hand up at one Minim and
down at the other.

These Notes have often times an augmentation or addition of a prick which
follows them, which is for the continuing or prolonging of the sound of that
Note it follows, and the prick is half as much as the note which it follows:
for example, if a prick be set after a Sembriefe, that prick adds a Minim more
to him, and the Semibriefe which before but two Minims is now made to contain
three Minims* the like is to the other Notes.

Example.
^

The usual Moods may not here be mist,
In them much cunning does consist.
CHAP. VII. Of the Moods or Proportions of the Time, or measure of Notes.
THere are four Moods, that is to say, The Perfect of the More, The Perfect of
the less, The Imperfect of the More, The Imperfect of the Less: all these
four have been of much use in former times. but what our late Masters of Music
have composed either for Voice or Instrument, make use only of the two latter;
that is to say, the Imperfect of the More, the Imperfect of the Less, one
being called the Triple Time, the other the duple, or Common Time: however I
will give you the definition of all four in their order, and be more large
upon the two latter, because of most use to all young Practitioners.

The Perfect of the More is when all go by three, as three Longs to a Large,
three Briefs to a Long, three Sembriefs to a Brief, three Minums to a Sembrief,
and his sign or mark is thus {timeperf-prolatperf}3. Example. The Perfect of
the More.
* *** * *** * *** * *** * ** * ** * **


The Perfect of the Less is when all go by two, except the Sembriefs, as two
Longs to a Large, two Briefs to a Long, three Sembriefs to a Brief, two Minims
to a Sembriefe, etc. and his sign or mark is made thus
{timeperf-prolatimperf-str}3. Example. The Perfect of the Less.
* ** * ** * *** * ** * * * ** * **


The Imperfect of the More, is when all goes by two, except the Minims, which
goes by three, as two Longs to a Large, two Briefs to a Long, two Sembriefs to
a Brief, three Minims to a Sembriefe, with a prick of Augmentation (else it
would not bear the proportion of three Minims, which is called a Time) and two
Crochets to a Minim, etc. his Mood is thus signed * and this is called the
Triple Time. Example. The Imperfect of the More.
* ** * ** * ** *^ *** * ** * ** * **


This Mood is much used in Ayery songs and Galliards, and is usually called
Galliard or Triple time, and this Triple time is in some Lessons, as Coranto's,
Sarabands, and Jigs brought into a Measure, as swift again, for as before
three Minims or Sembriefs with a prick made a Time, in this three Crochets
makes a Time, or one Minim with a prick, and this measure is known by this
sign or mark 3j, which is usually called Three to one. Example.
*^ ** *^ *** *^ *^** *^ *^*** *^ ******


The fourth and last Mood, which is the Imperfect of the Less, is when all
goes by two, as two Longs to a Large, two Briefs to a Long, two Sembriefs to a
Brief, two Minims to a Sembriefe, two Crochets to a Minim, etc. and this is
called the Duple or Sembrief Time, and this Mood is thus marked *, and is
usual in Songs, Fantasies, Pavins and Almans, and the like. The Imperfect of
the Less.
* ** * ** * ** * ** * ** * ** * **


Having in this Chapter given you the Definition of the four Moods now used
and their proportions, I think it not amiss to give you a short account of the
five Moods used by the ancient Graecians in their several varieties of their
Music, out of Mr. Butlers learned Treatise of Music.

CHAP. VIII. The five Grecian Moods their Names. 1. The Dorick, 2. the Lydian,
3. the Aeolick, 4. the Phrygian, 5. the Ionick.
1. THe Dorick Mood consists of sober slow timed Notes (or counterpoint) which
in composition of parts goes Note for Note, be they of two, three, or four
parts, as is usual in Church Tunes to the usual Psalms, by Mr. Ravenscroft
and others in four parts, and other pious Canticles in Meeter; and this Dorick
had his name from Doria, a civil part in Greece near Athens.

2. The Lydian Mood was used to grave, full, solemn Music, the Descant or
Composition being of slow time fitted to sacred Hymns, as Anthems, or
spiritual Songs in prose, sometimes in verses alone, and sometimes in a full
Chorus of four or five parts. This Mood had its derivation from the famous
River in Lydia called Pactolus, and the winding retrograde Meander,
representing thereby the admirarable varieties of sounds in Music in its
passing by the chief Cities of Philadelphia and Sardis, being the Royal seat
of the Rich Croesus.

3. The Aeolick Mood was that which was of a more Ayery and soft pleasing
sounds, as your Madrigals, or Fa la's of five and six parts, which were
composed for Viols and Voices by many of our Excellent English Authors, as Mr.
Morley, Wilkes, Wilbey, Ward, and others, and had his derivation from Aeolia (a
Kingdom of Aeolus) whence he is feigned to send his rushing winds, the which
do resemble this Mood, that is so commixt with fancy and Ayery sounds.

4. The Phrygian Mood was a more warlike and courageous kind of Music,
expressing the Music of Trumpets and other Instruments used of old, exciting
to Arms and activity, as Almans, and the like. This Mood had it derivation from
Phrygia (a region bordering upon Lydia and Caria) in which is Cios that
martial Mare Town, and the most high hill Ida famous for the Trojan war: and
many Historians have written of its rare effects in warlike preparations. (
Suidas in litera T.) writes of Timotheus a skillful Musician, that when
Alexander the Great was much dejected in his mind, and loath to take up Arms,
he with his Phrygian Flute expressed such excellent sounds and varieties of
Music that the Kings passions were immediately stirred to war, and ran
presently and took up Arms But the story of Ericus Musician, passes all, who
had given forth that by his Music he could drive men into what affections he
listed, being required by Bonus King of Denmarks to put his skill in practice,
he with his Harp or Polycord Lyra expressed such effectual melody and harmony
in the variety of changes in several Keys, and in such excellent Fugg's and
sprightly Airs, that his Auditors began first to be moved with some strange
passions; but ending his excellent voluntary with some choice Fancy upon this
Phrygian Mood, the Kings passions were altered and excited to that height, that
he fell upon his most trusty friends which were near him, and slew some of
them with his fist for lack of another weapon, which our Musician perceiving
ended with the sober Dorick: the King came to himself and much lamented what
he had done. This is recorded at large by Kranzius lib. 5. Dania cap. 3. and by
Saxo Grammaticus lib. 12. Hist. Daniae and others.

5. The Ionick Mood was for more light and effeminate Music, as pleasant,
amorous Songs, Coranto's, Sarabands and Jigs, used for honest mirth and delight
in Feasts and other merriments. This Mood had its derivation from the Ionian of
Ionia, which lies between Aeolia and Caria a situation full of all pleasure,
whose plenty and idleness turned their honest mirth into lasciviousness. By
this Mood was the Pythagoreans Huntsup or morning Music, which wakened and
roused their dull spirits to study and action. The abuse of this Mood is soon
reformed by the sober Doricke, for what this excites above moderation, the
other draws into a true Decorum.

Here follows three plain Songs for the first Tuning of the voice.
For the ascending and descending eight Notes.
^Sol la Mi fa sol la fa sol sol fa la sol fa mi la sol la sol. ^Sol mi la fa
mi sol fa la la fa sol mi fa la mi sol la sol.

Ascending. ^Sol la ^a sol mi sol la mi fa sol fa sol la mi fa sol sol sol sol
^la mi fa sol la sol la sol la mi fa sol la fa sol fa sol la mi

Descending. ^fa sol la fa sol sol sol sol fa la sol la sol fa la sol sol sol
^sol fa la sol fa sol fa sol fa la sol fa mi sol mi sol fa la sol ^fa mi la sol
la sol fa la so. f mi la sol sol sol fa sol la sol sol sol fa sol mi sol la sol

Adjuncts, or Characters used in Music.
A Direct * Which is placed at the end of the line to direct where the first
Note of the next line stands. A Double Bar:: Which divides the strains of a
Song or Lesson. A Repeat:S: To repeat over such a part of a Song or Lesson
again. A Hold * Or a Close, put at the end of a Song or Lesson.
A Table of the Names of the Notes in all usual Cleaves.
^ Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^ la mi fa sol la fa
sol la la fa sol la mi fa sol la ^ fa sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol
la fa sol ^ sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol la ^ mi fa sol la
fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa sol la fa ^ fa sol la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa
sol la fa sol ^ sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^la mi fa
sol la fa sol la la fa sol la mi fa sol la ^ la fa sol la mi fa sol la mi fa
sol la fa sol la mi ^ fa sol la mi fa sol la fa f-sol la fa sol la mi fa ^ sol
la mi fa sol la fa sol sol la fa sol la mi fa sol ^la mi fa sol la fa sol la la
fa sol la mi fa sol la
A Preface, or Brief Discourse of the nature and use of the Scale or Gam-ut.
By Dr. THOMAS CAMPION.
THere is nothing does trouble, and disgrace our Traditionall Musician more,
than the ambiguity of the terms of Music, if he cannot rightly distinguish
them, for they make him incapable of any rational discourse in the Art he
professes: As if we say a lesser Third consists of a Tone, and a Semi-tone;
here by a Tone is meant a perfect Sound, or (as they name it) a whole Note: But
if we ask in what Tone is this or that Song made, then by Tone we intend the
Key which guides and ends the whole Song. Likewise the word Note is sometime
used properly, as when in respect of the form of it, we name it a round or
square Note: in regard of the place we say, a Note in Rule, or a Note in Space;
so for the Time, we call a Brief, or Sembriefe a long Note, a Crochet, or
Quaver a short Note. Sometime the word Note is otherwise to be understood, as
when it is signum pro signato, the sign for the thing signified: so we say a
Sharp, or flat Note, meaning by the word Note, the sound it signifies; also we
term a Note high, or low, in respect of the sound. The word Note simply
produced, has yet another signification, as when we say this is a sweet Note,
or the Note I like, but not the words, we then mean by this word Note, the
whole Tune, putting the part for the whole: But this word Note with addition,
is yet far otherwise to be understood, as when we say a whole Note, or a half
Note, we mean a perfect or imperfect Second, which are not Notes, but the
several distances between two Notes, the one being double as much as the
other; and although this kind of calling them a whole and a half Note, came
in first by abusion, yet custom has now made that speech passable.

In like manner there can be no greater hinderance to him that desires to
become a Musician, than the want of the true understanding of the Scale, which
proceeds from the error of the common Teacher, who can do nothing without the
old Gam-ut, in which there is but one Cliffe, and one Note, and yet in the same
Cliffe he will sing re and sol. It is most true, that the first invention of
the Gam ut was a good invention, but then the distance of Music was cancelled
within the number of twenty Notes, so were the six Notes properly invented to
help youth in vowelling, but the liberty of the latter age has given Music
more space both above and below, altering thereby the former naming of the
Notes: the curious observing whereof has bred much unnecessary difficulty to
the learner, for the Scale may be more easily and plainly expressed by four
Notes than by six, which is done by leaving out Vt and Re.

The substance of all Music, and the true knowledge of the Scale, consists in
the observation of the half note, which is expressed either by Mi Fa, or La
Fa, and they being known in their right places, the other Notes are easily
applied unto them.

To illustrate this I will take the common Key which we call Gam-ut, both sharp
in Bemi and flat, as also flat in Elami, and show how with ease they may be
expressed by these four Notes, which are Sol, La, Mi, Fa.

I shall need no more then one eight for all, and that I have chosen to be in
the Base, because all the upper eights depend upon the lowest eight, and are
the same with it in nature; then thus first in the sharp:

^ sol la mi fa sol la fa sol fa la sol fa mi la sol

First observe the places of the half Notes, which are marked with a half
circle, and remember that if the lowest be Mi fa, the upper half Note is La
Fa, and contrariwise if the lowest hafe Note be La Fa, the upper must be Mi Fa.

It will give great light to the understanding of the Scale, if you try it on
a Lute, or Viol, for there you shall plainly perceive that there go two frets
to the raising of a whole Note, and but one to a half Note, as on the Lute in
this manner the former eight may be expressed.

Here you may discern^ that between A and C, and C and E, is interposed a
fret, which makes it double as much as E and F which is mark for the half Note,
so the whole Note you see contains in it the space of two half Notes, as A C.
being the whole Note, contains in it these two half Notes, A B and B C.

Now for the naming of the Notes, let this be a general rule, above Fa ever to
sing Sol, and to sing Sol ever under La.

^ sol la fa sol la mi fa sol fa mi la sol fa la sol

Here in the flat Gam-ut, you may find La Fa below, and Mi Fa above; which on
the Lute take their places thus:

^The lower half Note is between C and D, the higher between E and A: but
next let us examine this Key as it is flat in Elami, which being proper to be
set in Are, so is it to be sung with ease, La instead of Re, being the right
limits of this eight.

^ la mi fa sol la fa sol la sol fa la sol fa mi la

Mi fa here holds his place below, and La Fa above, but yet removed a Note
lower. The same on the Lute.

^You shall here find the upper half Note placed a fret lower than it was in
the example of the flat Gam ut which was set down next before, by reason of the
flat in Elami, which makes that whole Note but half so much as it was being
sharp.

This is an easy way for him that would either with aid of a Teacher, or by
his own industry learn to sing, and if he shall well bear in mind the
placing of the half Notes, it will help him much in the knowledge of the
cords, which have all their variety from the half Note.



Here follows some plain Directions for the Basse Violl, or Violl de Gambo.
THe Basse Violl is that which usually plays the ground or lowest part, which
is called the Basse, and has six strings, which are usually named thus: The
first is called the Treble, the second the Small Mean, the third the Great
Mean, the fourth the Countertenor, the fifth the Tenor or Gam-ut, the sixth
the Basse: Or they may be called by the Notes they are tuned in; the first or
Treble is D la sol re, the second A la mi re, the third E la mi, the fourth C
fa ut, the fifth Gam-ut, the sixth Double DD sol re; and these six strings have
seven frets, on which are stopped all Notes either flat or sharp, as appears by
the following Table,

For the tuning thereof I shall give you two Rules, the first is by the Notes,
the second by Letters. By Notes thus: first raise your Treble or first string
as high as you conceive it will hold without breaking, then tune your second to
be four Notes lower, and the third four Notes lower then the second, and the
fourth three Notes lower then the third, and the fifth four Notes lower then
the fourth, and the sixth four Notes lower then the fifth, and sometimes it is
tuned five Notes lower then the fifth, as being an eight or Diapason to the
fourth string.

The second Rule for tuning is by eight Letters, which are A. B. C. D. E. F. G.
H. and they are thus known, A is the string open, the other seven Letters are
assigned to the seven Frets on the Neck of the Violl, B. being the first Fret,
C the second, etc. First raise your Treble as high as it will bear, and then
stop your second string in F. and tune it till it agree in sound with the
Treble, then stop your third in F. and make it agree in sound with your second,
then stop your fourth in E. and make it agree in sound with your third, then
stop your fifth in F. and make it agree in sound with your fourth, then stop
your sixth string in F. and make it agree in sound with your fifth: This being
exactly done, your Violl will be perfectly in Tune. The next thing to be known
is your Notes according to the Gamut on the 6 strings of your Violl, for which
follows an easy Rule.

A Table to find all Notes usual on the Basse Violl, either flat or sharp,
beginning at the sixth string, and so upwards to the rest, still ascending to
the highest Note on the first or Treble string, according to the seven Frets.
6 ^Double D sol re. Double E la mi Flat. DD E la mi. Proper. DD F fa ut. DD F
fa ut Sharp. Sixth string. open. Sixth string. first fret. Sixth string. second
fret. Sixth string third fret. Sixth string. fourth fret.

5 ^Gamut. Gamut sharp. A re B mi fret. B mi proper. Fifth string open fifth
string first fret fifth string second fret fifth string third fret fifth
string. fourth fret.

4 ^C fa ut C fa ut, sharp. D sol re E la mi, flat. Fourth string open fourth
string first fret fourth string second fret fourth string. third fret.

3 ^E la mi F fa ut F fa ut, sharp. G sol re ut G sol re ut, sharp. Third
string open third string first fret third string. second fret third string.
third fret third string. fourth fret.

2 ^A la mi re B fa b mi, flat. B fa ^ mi, proper. C sol fa ut C sol fa ut.
sharp Second string open second string first fret second string second fret
second string third fret. second string. fourth fret.

1 ^D la sol re E la mi, flat E la mi F fa ut F fa ut, sharp. G sol re ut.
first string open first string first fret first string second fret first string
third fret first string fourth fret first string. fifth fret.

These Directions for the Basse Violl will also serve for the Treble Violl, for
G sol re ut upon the Basse is also G sol re ut on the Treble, and the strings
of the Treble are tuned according to the strings on the Basse, only eight
Notes higher.

The Tenor Violl is an excellent inward part, and much used in consort,
especially in Fancies or Airs, of three, four, and five parts, and is tuned
in the same manner, as the Basse and Treble is, but betwixt both; for it is
tuned four Notes higher then the Basse, and five Notes lower then the Treble,
and the first string or Treble of it is G sol re ut, the 2. D la sol re, the 3.
A la mi re, the 4. F fa ut, the 5. C fa ut, the 6. Gamut: For the Notes and
their names and proportions of Time I have before mentioned them, for the same
Gam-ut and Notes that serve for Vocal Music do also serve for Isntrumental.
Thus I have briefly given you these Rules of the Theorik part, the practick
remains on your part, in the which I daily wish you a good success.

Two short Lessons to begin on the Bass Viol.
^

a. 2 parts. Bassus. Alphon. Ferabosco.
^ Almaine.

a. 2 parts. Treble. Alphon. Ferebosco.
^ Almaine.

Music Books lately Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop
in the Inner Temple; near the Church door.
MR. William Child's set of Psalms for 3 Voices, after the Italian way, with a
through Basse cut in Copper. A Book of select Airs and Dialogues for 1, 2,
and 3 Vo^ces to sing to the Theorbo or Basse Violl, composed by Dr. Wilson, Dr.
Colman, Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Laws, and other excellent Masters in
Music. A Book of Airs and Dialogues for 1, 2, and 3 Voices, by Mr. Henry
Laws. A Book of Catches, Rounds, and Canons, collected and published by Mr.
John Hilton. Musicks Recreation, or choice Lessons for the Lyra Viol to
several new tunings, composed by several excellent Masters. A new Book of
Lessons and Instructions for the Cithern, and Gittern. A new Book, entitled,
the Dancing Master, or plain and easy Rules for the dancing of Country
Dances, with the Tunes to each Dance, to be played on the Treble Violin. A brief
Introduction to the skill of Music, for Song and Violl, by J. P.
Books shortly to come forth.
A second part of Musicks Recreation, containing Almaine, Airs, Corants, and
Sarabands, for a Treble and Basse Violl, never before Printed. Also an
excellent Book, entitled, a new way of composing Counterpoint, by Dr. Tho.
Campion, with Observation, and Annotations thereupon by that excellent Master
of Music Mr Christopher Simpson.
Also all sorts of ruled Paper and ruled Books ready bound up.

FINIS.

