THE Natural History OF STAFFORDSHIRE

BY ROBERT PLOT. LLD. Keeper of the ASHMOLEAN MUSAEUM And PROFESSOR of
CHEMISTRY in the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

Ye shall Describe the Land, and bring the Description hither to Me. Joshua 18.
v. 6. printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD Printed at the THEATER, Anno M.DC.LXXXVI.

Imprimatur.

TIMO. HALTON, Vice-Can. OXON.
APRILIS 16. 1686.
DIEU ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms To the Most Sacred Majesty OF
JAMES the SECOND KING of Great BRITAN, FRANCE and IRELAND Defender of the
FAITH, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
THE Character Your Majesty was pleased publicly to afford the History of
Oxfordshire, when You last vouchsafed your University of Oxford the Honor of a
visit, gives me confidence to lay the like account of Staffordshire at Your
Majesty's feet, and appeal once more to Your Roial Judgment; wherein if
succesful, I shall little value what other men think; but cheerfully acquiesce
in Your Majesty's decision, as in duty becoms

Your Majesty's most Loial, and most Obedient Subject ROBERT PLOT.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
HAVING for the most part persued the very same Method in writing this History,
that I used in that of Oxfordshire, I shall have little occasion further to
enlarge my self here, than to acquaint the Reader with those few alterations he
will find I have made, which I doubt not he will judge, so advantageous and
reasonable, that he will easily approve of what I have done, and excuse me of
all levity, and unsettledness of temper.

The first and chiefest of which alterations, he will meet with in the Map;
where he will find many Letters, as well as figures set over the Sheilds, and
these divided with lines drawn between them; the figures on the right hand each
Escocheon, showing what Arms belong to the Houses, as they did in Oxfordshire;
and the Letters and figures on the left hand division, showing on the contrary
what Houses, belong to each Arms: so that whereas in Oxfordshire upon the
sight of a house, one could easily find the Arms that belonged to it; in this,
upon sight of any man's Arms (which are easily met with, being all placed in
alphabetical order) one may as quickly find the house belonging to them; by
seeking the same Letters and figures over the Arms, in the Western and
Northern Limbs of the Map, and finding where they meet in a right angle: the
houses (as well as parishes and villages, whereof there is an Index also annexed
to this History) being always within or somewhere at lest touching the lines of
the squares, wherever these Ltters and figures meet; that are set over, or
after, those Arms, or parishes. So that the Reader hereby though never so great
a stranger, may not only when he sees a Gentleman's seat with figures annexed,
quickly find whose' it is; but (which is of greater use) if he know but any
persons name in the County, he shall as quickly find his Arms, and whereabout
he lives; as he may also any Town, Parish, or village, if he read any thing
remarkable in this History, found or done there, and would know whereabout it
is situate in the County.

Concerning the distances, and Scale of Miles in the Map, they were taken after
the same manner as in the History of Oxfordshire, and set off in the Map at the
rate of two miles in an inch, as may be found upon comparison of a Rule with
the Scale, and of the Scale with the squares, the mean or middle sort of
reputed Miles of this County (which I have followed here as I did in
Oxfordshire) containing for the most part about 10 furlongs, of which about 55
answer a degree, so that 92/100 parts of a mile or 9/10 and 1/3 make a minute;
according to which computation the degrees of North Latitude are divided into
minutes on each side the Map, being chiefly made off from the Latitude of
Stafford, which has been observed to be situat in the 52d minute of the 52d
degree, proxime; the 53d degree beginning at the line passing betwixt Knighton
and Radwood on the West side of the Map, and so through Hanchurch, Trentham,
Blurton, Huntley, Bradley, and Denston: by which division't is easy to know to
a minute of a degree, nay almost to a second, in what latitude every Town,
Parish, Village, and Gentleman's house, is seated.

Which is all wherein the Map differs from the former: and as for the History
it self, I have so little reason to repent me of the Method I followed in that
of Oxfordshire, that I hope it differs not from it at all; unless in case of
meliority, viz. in a greater variety of parallel Histories, whereby the more
unusual ones, I met with in this County, have been all along confirmed; and in
the determination of more difficult Questions; whereby there is scarce a
Chapter in this History but has been rendered the more considerable, I mean in
the stating of some one, or more of them: which I hope all men will find done
with that accuracy, that they will accept of them in excuse of the long delay,
that has partly been made upon that account, in the publishing this History; it
having been really so far from a prejudice, that I think I can satisfy any
reasonable man, that this History could not have possibly been, what (I hope)
it is, in a much less time.

I know 'twill be objected I published it in print, that this History should be
exstant by such a time precisely, now long since past; which I here as publicly
deny, as ever it 'twas asserted: for the truth whereof I appeal to the very
papers subscribed by the hands of the Nobility and Gentry, who encouraged the
work, and if it be found otherwise then is here profess't, let me never enjoy
the benefit of them; nor of any thing there mentioned, if I do not literally
and with advantage, make all good I there promised: which I hope is as much as
will be expected of me, by any judicious unprejudiced persons, and for others,
I am not concerned to give them satisfaction.

To the most Sacred Majesty OF JAMES the SECOND Upon occasion of Dr PLOTS
presenting to HIM THE NATURAL HISTORY OF STAFFORDSHIRE
DEscribe the Land, Israel's Commander said
And the glad Artists strait the word obeyed,
Here Jordan flows, and here Asphalte stands,
See Beth'lem's fields, in which the skillfull hands
Let fall the Chain, and silent stop their pace,
Retained by 'th' mighty Genius of the place,
Some boding glimpse of wonder they descry,
Rejoice and tremble, but they know not why:
You Sir are Israel's King and it is by You,
That we enjoy A happy Canaan too;
Not only land and sea attend your State,
But all the Muses on Your triumphs wait,
Our lives and fortunes by the laws are due,
And gratitude directs our pen's to You,
Thus the great Owner of the Stars and Skies
Takes some small offering for a sacrifice;
These Lands of old did own the Mercian sway,
And now rejoice Your Scepter to obey;
Trenta, and Tama raise their awful Brow
Proud to become a present unto You,
As Sacred groves approaching Gods perceive,
And hushed in silence do attendance give;
So when just Fate conducts You to the throne,
These Aged Stream's do thus the blessing own.
Now JAMES'S East does mighty beams disperse,
A Genial warmth spreads through our Universe;
We feel the God --, see how winged Vict'ries fly,
And crou'd with laurells through the glittering Sky;
When on our banks old Bards did Chant his name,
The listening waves danced to his dawne of Fame;
The joyful murmurs hastened to the deep,
Where waiting Tryphons Neptunes court do keep;
Here angry waves their heads do prostrate lay
And lowly bow t'oth Master of the sea:
Nigh Majesty does bless Thames elder Stream,
Let us do something may be told to Him.
Thus spoke the Aged Sires, and Nymphs prepare,
In have to execute the pleasing care;
Winter its cold and garments lay's aside,
And February takes up Aprils pride,
Then Staffords Fields new youth and vigor gain
And seem to date their birth from JAMES'S reign,
Aquarius hasts these wonders to descry,
Produced ('it is said) by tears that flow from joy.
When great Augustus in his steady hand,
The Earth and Sea's and plenty did command,
When Janus slept retired from civil rage,
And time seemed to return the golden age,
When cares and fears and even Treche'ry fled
And hid in darkness its dishonest head,
Described Provinces Aethicus in his Cosmography ( which was transcribed by
Orosius tells us the whole Empire was Surveyed and described in the Reign of
Augustus, and gives the names of Those, who had the care of it, v. Voss. de
Lat. Hist. l. 1. c. 13. and Casp. Barth. l. 14. c. 8.
his Empire greet
And throw their plenty at his glorious feet,
The Naked Rhine and Nitred Tigris come,
And crou'd to bow unto Victorious Rome;
Parthia resigns her Spoils, the fruitful Nile
Presents his Palm's, and thirsty Crocodile;
Octavian's triumphs do Your Temple's bless,
And in Your Sunshine can our Muse be less?
Reproachful Rebell's vain attempts do show
How much of Heaven's care belongs to You;
It Is for Your sake Nature resignes her laws
And Warlike Muses dare assert your cause,
Soft as their shades, and as retired as Night,
They could in Arms, and Rebell's blood delight;
So does chaste Pallas for her Helmet call
And see's proud Giants by Joves thunder fall:
But now in Albion's Feilds rich Laurells g^ow,
Such as become Sir Your Victorious Brow,
Your Learned Athens brings such gifts as these,
And at her Altars thanks You for her Ease.
Fair Isis and ye conscious Groves declare,
Whose name from every tunefull Swain you hear;
It Is JAMES the Second fill's each Echo's voice,
And with his praise does every shade rejoice,
Each Science feels new warmth, her wandering eyes
Beholds Apollo mount the Eastern skies;
Our Author does not give but just restore
What Your great Genius had inspired before:
Thus Pearls and Gold and all that men call great
Do owe their birth to the Suns ruling Heat.
Nature, whose scorn does common Mortals fly
Is proud to be the object of Your Eye,
She decks herself, sets all her stores in view,
That she may recommend herself to You;
Thus Philips Son, when in his arms he bore
A Conquered World and weeping wished for more,
Receives the Labors of the Stagarite,
And Learning fills the Hero's appetite:
Though Sir Your Empire, so expanded lie
That its vast bounds no setting Suns descry,
Yet does it not to this its greatness owe,
It Is therefore great, because possessed by You.
THO. LANE M. A. and Fellow of Mert. Coll.

To Dr. PLOT on his Natural History of Staffordshire.
1
WHAT strange Perversity is this of Man!
When it was a Crime to taste the inlightning Tree
He could not then his hand refrain,
None then so inquisitive, so curious as He:
But now he'has liberty to try and know
God's whole Plantation below,
Now the Angelic fruit may be
Tasted by all whose arms can reach the Tree,
H'is now by License careless made,
The Tree Neglects to Climb, and Sleeps beneath the Shade.
2.
Such restive Sedentary Souls have they
Who could to Patriarchal years live on
Fixed to Hereditary Clay,
And know no Climate but their own.
Contracted to their narrow Sphere
Rest before Knowledge they prefer,
And of this Globe wherein they dwell
No more than of the Heavenly Orbs can tell,
As if by nature placed below
Not on this Earth to dwell, but to take Root and grow.
3
Dull Souls, why did great Nature take such care
To write in such a Splendid Character
If man the only thing below
That can pretend her hand to know,
Her fair-writ Volum does despise,
And though designed for Wisdom will not be Wise?
The Allmighty getts no Praise from this dull kind,
The Sun was never Worshipped by the Blind.
Such Ignorance can never Devotion raise,
They will want Wisdom, and their Maker Praise.
4
They only can this Tribute duly yield
Whose active spirits range abroad
And traverse ore all Natures field
And view the great Magnificence of God.
They see the hidden wealth of Natures store,
Fall down, and Learnedly adore.
But they most justly yet this tribute pay
Who don't Contemplate only, but display,
Comment on Natures text, and to the sense
Expose her latent excellence.
Who like the Sun not only travel ore
The world, but give it light, that others may adore.
5
In the head of these Heroic Few
Our Learned Author first appears in view,
Whose searching Genius like the Lamp of day
Does the Earth's furniture display,
Nor suffer's to ly buried and unknown
Natures rich Talent, or his own.
Drake and Columbus do in thee revive,
And we from thy Research as much receive.
Thou art as great as they, for it is all one
New Worlds to find, or nicely to describe the known.
6
On mighty Hero, our whole Isle survey,
Advance thy Standard, Conquer all the way.
Let nothing but the Sea control
The progres of thy active Soul.
Act like a pious Courteous Ghost
And to mankind retrieve what is lost.
With thy Victorious Charitable hand
Point out the hidden Treasures of our Land.
Envy or Ignorance do what they will
Thou have a blessing from the Muses Hill.
Great be thy spirit as thy Work's divine,
Show thou thy Maker's Praise, We Poets will sing thine.
J. NORRIS M. A. and Fellow of All Souls Coll.

Ad Authorem Historiae Naturalis Comitatus Staffordiae.
Haeserunt alii tenui sub cortice Mundi,
Vix strinxit summas sterilis Geometria glebas;
Intima scrutaris Matris penetralia Terrae,
Ignotosque aperis, Populo mirante, recessus.
Infans Caesareo partu producitur aurum,
Lucinam supplente Stylo; Ferrumque ligonum
Impatiens, paret Calamo; Pennamque sequutum,
Non magis ire lubens, quamvis Magnete procante
Gestit in amplexus; vel si quando evocat ardens
Mulciber ad Fulmen Siculi fornacibus antri.
Ipsum etiam Fulmen sub Te Vibrante, priori
Exaitur Flamma: Sic mittit tela secundo
Jupiter augurio; liquidum sic Aethera inaurat
Dum castigato Semelen Uxorius igne
Quaerit, and innocuos Baccho inspirare calores.
Caetera, quae volitant super Era corpora, nobis
Naturam absolvens, plene Tua Pagina miscet.
Roscida Virgilii non sic depingitur Iris,
Quando aversa comam resecat morientis Elisae,
Quamvis Mill trahens varios a sole colores.
Hoc coelo nitidus majore Parhelius orb
Splendet, nec solum demonstrat Apollinis ora,
Te quoque reflectit, geminata luce superbus,
Quam been sic junctos ostendit in Aethere vultus.
Sed quae Te digne celebrabit Musa, relinquat
Parnassi exhaustos latices, siccumque Helicona.
Aeternas aperis Lymphas, hoc Font Camoena
Non Labra, at Vestra se totam proluat Urna.
Oblitusque maris, veterisque oblitus Amoris,
Phoebus in hoc aliam venetur Tethya Ponto.
Hic Pater Oceanus vastas dispensat aquarum
Justus opes, Nymphis ferri sua dona per orbem
Hinc jubet; huc iterum desertis Naiades antris
Cum redeunt, liquidae referunt dispendia Gazae;
Humoris quantum cogit frondescere Plantas;
Quanto Flora sui variavit sidera coeli;
Quicquid and in solidas jussit lapidescere quercus.
Quod superest, nec plus Cybele satiata requirit,
Per plures Rivos, per Flumina mill revertens,
Maternos repetit blando cum murmr Fluctus.
Quam sibi Scriptorem Foelix Staffordia plaudit
Adjecta Oxonio! quid plus vel vota rogabunt,
Ni postquam Vestra lustrata Britannia cura est,
Men's Majora sonans, totum percurreret Orbem,
Quaque patet Natura, extenderet impigra Regnum.
S. WELSTED.

DIRECTIONS For a right understanding of the Map.
1. Let the Reader take notice that the Arms of the Nobility and Gentry, and
the fgures over the right hand of each Shield, are put according to the
Alphabetical order of the names, and numeral order of the figures, except when
the Persons live in Lichfield or Stafford, in which case, those of Lichfield
are marked with an *, and those of Stafford with quartered square.

2. That the Arms on the top of the Map are to be reckoned first; those on the
right hand next; those on the left hand in the third place; those on the bottom
last.

3. That every Nobleman and Gentleman's Seat in the Country has a certain number
annexed to it, which being easily found by the numeral order of the figures over
the right hand division of some Shield of Arms in the Limb of the Map, shows
the Arms of the Person whose Seat it is, with his name and quality under them.

4. That as the figures over the right hand of the Escocheons show what Arms
belong to the Houses: So the Letters and figures over the left hand division
show what Houses belong to the Arms, by finding the same Letters and figures
near the Western and Northern Limbs of the Map, and where they meet in a right
angle; The Houses (as well as Parishes and Villages above mentioned) being
always within, or somewhere touching the lines of the square where these
Letters and figures meet, that are set over or after those Arms or Parishes.
So that wherever the Reader (though never so great a stranger) sees a house with
figures annexed, he can quickly find whose it is: Or if he know but any persons
name in the County, he shall as quickly find his Arms, and whereabout in the
County his house is situate.

A
Abbots Castle t 5 Acton h 5 Acton-Trussel o 8 Adbaston l 3 Admaston m 11
Adsall m 11 Agersley m 12 Aldersley r 7 Aldrich r 11 Almore n 5 Alstonfield e
13 Alrewas o 13 Alrewas hay o 13 Alston n 6 Alveton h 11 Amblecot w 7 Amerton m
9 Ammington k 2 Anslow m 14 Apedale g 5 Apeton n 6 Aqualat n 3 Arley x 4
Arley-street x 4 Armitage o 11 Ashenbrook p 12 Ashenhurst e 10 4 Ashes w 5
Ashley i 3 Ashmers r 8 Aspley k 5 Aspley q 7 Aston h 3 Aston k 7 Aston m 7 L
Aston r 12 Audley f 4 Avis-Hieron m 13 Auscot t 11
B
Badiley f 8 Badnall k 6 Bagnall f 9 Balterley f 3 Bancroft n 12 Barleston i 7
Barnchurst r 7 G. Bar s 10 Barbeacon s 11 Barton n 6 Barton o 14 Basford f 9
Bassets pole s 13 Baswich m 8 Baudy slade o 10 Beamhurst k 11 Beaudesart p 11
Bednal n 8 Beech i 6 Belmot m 14 Bemersley green f 7 Bently s 9 Beresford e 13
Bescot n 4 Bescot s 10 BETLEY g 4 Bickford o 6 Biddulf d 7 Biddulf Hall d 7
Bignal-Hill f 5 Billbrook r 6 Billington n 6 Bilston s 8 Birchen-bough a 10
Bishops-wood q 5 Bishton n 10 Biterscot r 14 Biterton p 5 Bitham o 7
Blackladyes q 6 Blaklands u 5 Blakeley k 6 Blazing-star h 11 Blithe-Br. i 9
Blithe-Br l 11 Blithefield m 10 Blithebury n 11 Blomesbury o 4 Blore g 13 Blore
k 2 Blore-heath k 2 3 Blore-pipe l 3 G. Bloxwich r 9 L. Bloxwich r 9 Blundells
u 6 Blunts green k 11 Blurton h 7 Blymhill p 5 Bobbington u 5 Bold m 10
Bonehill r 14 Boothen h 7 Bothom f 9 Botlow g 7 Bourne s 11 Bowers k 5 Bradeley
n 6 Bardley h 11 Bradley t 8 N. Bradnup e 10 O. Bradnup d 10 Bradwall f 6
Bramshall k 11 Brasnill m 6 Braunston n 15 Brereton o 11 Brewood p 6 Brickley
Logd m 14 G. Bridgford l 7 L. Bridgford l 7 Brierley t 8 Brinepits m 9 Brineton
o 5 Brinsford q 7 Britwell w 7 Broadmeddow c 12 Brockmeer u 7 Brockton n 9
Bromley u 7 Bromley Bagots m 11 Bromley Gerards k 4 Bromley Hurst n 12 Bromley
Kings o 12 Bromly N. Wood m 12 Bromley O. Wood m 12 Bromley Pagets m 11
Bromwich-heath u 10 Brookend i 12 Broom x 7 The Brough i 4 Brough-Hall m 5
Broughton k 3 Brownedg e 7 Brown hill q 10 Browns-green t 10 Bucknall g 8 Buddy
Lees f 3 Burch-hills s 9 Burlauton p 4 Burnell green r 4 Burnt wood p 11
Burslem f 7 Burston l 8 Burton n 7 BURTON upon Trent n 15 Bushbury r 8 Bushens
m 15 Buttermilk hill l 12 Butterton e 11 Butterton h 5 Butterton n 7 Byanna l 5
C
Calcot hill x 8 Caldmore s 10 Callingswood n 14 Callowhill m 11 Camphills h 4
Cannall r 13 Cannock p 9 Caraway-head r 13 Castern f 13 Castle croft h 10
Caverswall h 9 Cauldon g 12 Caulton g 12 Charley p 11 Charnes k 4 Chartley l 10
Charterley f 6 Chatkill k 4 G. Chatwall o 4 L. Chatwall o 4 Chawton on the hill
i 5 Chebsey l 6 Checkhill u 6 Checkley i 10 CHEDLE h 10 Chedle-eaves h 10
Chedle-grange h 10 Chedleton e 9 Chell f 7 Cheslin-hay p 9 Chesterfield q 12
Chesterton g 5 Chillington q 6 Chorlton i 5 Church-eyton o 6 Clanford gr. m 6
Clayton h 6 N. Clent x 7 V. Clent x 8 Clieve s 5 Clifton Camvill p 15
Clough-Hall e 6 Coats k 6 Cocknage i 8 Codsall r 6 Cadsall Wood q 6 Coldmeese k
6 Cold-norton l 6 Colseley t 8 Colton n 11 Colwich h 13 Colwich n 10 Combach x
8 Combridg i 12 Compton s 7 L. Compton w 5 U. Compton w 5 Congreve o 7 Copenal
n 7 Copley s 5 Coton k 9 Coton l 13 Coton n 5 Coton q 14 Coton Clanford m 6
Coton end n 5 Cotton g 11 Cotwall t 7 Cotwallton k 8 Coven q 7 Counslow b 11
Cowley n 5 Crakeford q 7 Crakemarsh k 12 Creswell t 9 Creswell m 7 Crighton k
11 Cronckwall r 7 Croxden i 11 Croxton k 4 Cumberford q 14 Cunsall g 9
Curborough p 12
D
Darlaston k 7 Darlaston s 9 Daw-end r 10 Darnesdale n 6 De la Cress d 9 Delves
s 10 Denston h 12 Derrington m 7 Dilhorn h 9 Dimsdale g 6 Dodsley k 10
Dove-head b 11 Doxy m 7 Draycot i 9 Draycot l 13 Drayton o 7 Drayton Basset s
14 Drineton m 10 Dudley Cast. u 8 Dunsley w 6 Dunstal n 14 Dunstal r 14 Dunston
n 7
E
Eardley f 5 Eaves g 11 ECCLFSHALL l 5 Ecton-hill e 12 Edgiall q 11 Edingall p
14 Eland-Lodg m 13 Elford p 14 Elford Low p 14 L. Elkston e 11 U. Elkston d 11
Ellaston h 13 Ellenhall l 6 Ellerton grange m 2 Elmhurst p 12 Endon e 8 Enfield
u 5 Engleton p 7 Enson l 8 Essington r 8 Essington-wood q 9 Etingsall t 7
F
Fairfield head c 11 Fairoak k 3 Fair-Oake o 9 Fald m 14 Farewell p 11 Farley h
11 Faseley r 14 S. Fenton h 7 L. Fenton g 7 Fernyford d 11 Ferny-hill e 10
Fetherston q 8 Field l 10 Finspot-hill t 9 Fisherwick p 13 Flash b 11
Flashbrook m 3 Fold d 10 N. Fold k 11 O. Fold k 11 Ford f 11 Ford green f 7
Ford houses r 7 Forge o 10 Forge r 13 Forge w 8 Forge houses q 7 Forton n 3
Fossbrook i 9 Foterley r 12 Four Crosses p 8 Fox f 11 Freford q 12
Frenchmansstreet x 4 Frodley p 13 Frodswell k 9 Frog hall f 10 Frog hall q 10
Fulford i 9
G
Garshall k 9 Garston g 11 Gastilea i 4 Gayton l 9 Gentleshaw p 11 Gnosall n 5
Golden hill f 6 Goldsich b 10 Goldthorn s 7 Goscot r 10 Gospel-end t 7 N.
Gournall u 7 O. Gournal t 7 Graton e 8 Gratwich l 11 Gratwood l 4 Grindon f 12
Grinley l 10 Gritbridg t 9 Grit green u 9 Grityate i 11 Grubbers ash g 5 Gun c
9 Gunston q 6
H
Hackley t 9 Hafcot w 6 Hales k 2 Halfhead l 6 Hall a wood f 4 Hammerend f 4
Hammerwich q 11 Hamstead t 10 Hanbury m 13 Hanchurch h 6 Hanford h 7
Hanley-green g 7 Hansacre o 12 Hansworth u 11 Hanton p 15 Harborn w 10 Harding
r 9 Hardingsbooth c 11 Hardwick k 8 Harlaston p 14 Hartley-green l 9 Has^lour p
14 Hatherton p 8 Hatton i 5 Hatton q 7 Haughton n 6 Haukbach y 4 L. Hay r 12
Hay-end n 12 Heath hill o 4 Heath houses s 8 Heatley m 11 Heaton c 8 Hedgford p
9 Heracles d 9 Heydon Cross w 9 Heyley Cast. g 4 Heylins Park n 14 G. Heywood m
10 L. Heywood n 10 Heywood Park n 9 Hickson m 9 High-hall p 5 Hilcot l 5
Hilderston k 8 The Hill s 5 Hill-house l 3 Hilton o 4 Hilton q 8 Hilton Ab. g 8
Himley u 7 Hoggs-hall q 14 Holbeach u 7 Holesclough c 11 Hollies n 5 Hollies w
5 Hollingbury-hall l 12 Hollington i 11 Holloway w 7 N. Holme d 10 N. Holme g 8
M. Holme c 10 O. Holme c 10 O. Holme h 8 N. Hoo u 6 Hope f 13 Hoppas q 14
Hoppas-hay q 13 Hopton m 8 Hopton heath m 8 Hore-cross m 13 Horninglow m 15
Horsebrook p 6 Horseley l 4 Horseley t 9 Horton d 8 Horton hay d 8 Hound hill l
13 Hudlesford p 13 Huntington o 8 Huntley h 10 Hyde n 7 Hyde q ^ Hyde w ^ Hynts
r 13
I
Iberty u 9 Ilam f 13 Ingestre m 9 Johnson l 5 Ipston f 10 Ivelley x 6 Ivetsey
p 5
K
Keel g 5 Keel-hall h 5 Kidcrow e 6 Kiddimoore gr. q 6 Kinfare w 6 Kingsley g
12 Kingstanding t 11 Kingston l 11 Kingswinford u 7 Kingswood r 5 Kinnerston p
7 Knaves-Castle q 10 Knenhall i 8 Knightley m 5 Knightley Park m 5 Knighton i 3
Knighton l 3 Knoll-end f 4 Knutton g 6 Knypersley e 7
L
Landy-wood q 9 Lapley p 6 Laynton m 4 Lea m 10 Leacroft p 9 Lea lane n 11
Leaton u 5 LEEK d 9 Lees g 10 Lees i 9 Lees hill l 11 Leigh k 10 Levedale o 7
LICHFIELD p 12 Lindon t 10 Linedon w 5 Linehill o 7 Lockwood g 10 Long burch q
6 Longcroft n 13 Longdon o 11 Longnor c 12 Longnor o 6 Longsdon d 9 Longton h 7
Low c 12 N. Loxley l 11 O. Loxley l 11 Ludchurch b 9 Lyn q 11 Lyswis p 12
M
G. Madeley h 4 L. Madeley g 4 Madely Manor h 4 Marbrook c 9 Marchington l 13
Marchington woodlands l 12 Marston l 8 Marston o 5 Mathfield h 13 N. Mathfield
h 13 U. Mathfield h 13 Mayford k 7 Mear h 8 Mear i 4 Mearlane-end h 8 Mere u 5
Meerton n 3 Merrydale s 7 Middleton gr. k 10 Milldale f 13 Millgreen m 11
Millgreen r 11 Millmeese k 5 Millton f 8 Millwich k 9 Mitton o 6 Modersall i 8
Mole-cop d 7 Monmoore gr. s 8 G. Moore s 5 L. Moore s 5 Moore-end n 5 Moore
house e 9 Morfe u 5 Morton l 13 Morton m 10 Morton o 4 Moseley q 8 Mos^lie f 10
Muchall s 7 Mucklestone i 3 Murry n 13
N
Narrowdale e 13 Nashend x 4 Nechels s 8 Needwood forr. m 12 NEWCASTLE under
Lyme g 6 Mewbold lands n 14 Newborough m 13 Newhall g 3 New Inn u 10 New-land n
11 Newton m 10 Nobot k 11 Norbury m 4 Normacot h 8 Northwood h 13 Norton p 9
Norton in the Moors f 8 Nurton s 5
O
The Oak t 9 Oakley i 2 Oakley p 14 Oaken r 6 Shire Oaks r 11 Offley-Bishops
l 4 Offley-high l 4 Okeover g 14 Okeymoore h 11 Oldfallings r 8 Old-hill u 9 On
high o 5 On Little o 5 Oncot e 11 Oncot m 6 Onneley h 3 Orgrave o 13 Orslow o 5
Otherton o 7 Overend o 11 Overton c 7 Overton t 6 Oulton i 7 Oulton s 5 L.
Oulton n 4 V. Oulton m 4 Oxley r 7
P
Packington q 13 Pantons in the dale g 12 Park-hall h 8 Pateshull r 5 Patingham
s 5 Paynly-hill k 11 Paynsley i 10 Peackstones h 11 Pelsall r 10 N. Pen t 6 O.
Pen t 7 Penford r 7 Penkhull h 6 Penkridge o 7 Persall l 5 Pillaton p 8 G. Pipe
p 11 L. Pipe p 11 Pipe hill q 12 Plardwick n 5 Pleck s 9 Podmer i 4 Portway u 9
Preston o 7 Prestwood h 12 Prestwood w 6 Purton s 6 Pury-barr t 11 Pury-Hall t
11 Pyre-hill l 7
Q
Quicksill h 12 Queislet t 11
R
Rednor-lane n 4 Radwood h 3 Ramsor h 12 Ransall g 3 Ranton m 6 Ranton Ab. m 5
Redmoor p 10 Red-street f 5 N. Rewle n 5 O. Rewle n 5 Ricarscot n 5 Ridware
Hamstall n 12 Ridware Hill o 11 Ridware Mavesyn o 11 Ridware pipe o 12
Roach-grange c 10 Rocester i 12 Rodbaston p 7 Rollestone m 15 Rouden lanes r 8
Rough-coat h 8 Rounall f 9 Rouse-end p 11 Rowley u 9 Rowley m 8 Rudge k 3
Rudyerd d 9 RUGELEY n 10 Rushall r 10 Rushton James c 8 Rushton Spencer c 8
S
Salt l 8 Sandborough n 12 Sandon l 8 L. Sandon l 8 Sandwel t 10 G. Sarden p 8
L. Sarden q 8 Scierscot q 14 Seasdon t 6 Seawall r 8 Sedgley t 7 Seighford m 6
Severley-green i 9 Shallowford l 6 Shareshall q 8 Sharpcliff f 10 Shatterford x
4 Sheabridg h 5 Shebben poole m 3 Sheen d 12 Shelfield r 10 Selton g 7 Shelton
under Harley i 5 Shenston r 12 Sherriff Hales p 3 3. Shire-heads a 11 Shire
lanes u 10 Shobnall m 15 Shredicot o 6 Shutborough n 9 Shutland-head h 5
Shuttend u 7 Slindon k 5 Small rise k 8 Smallwood-hall l 12 Smethwick u 10
Snails green t 10 Sneyd green f 7 Summerford q 7 Span h 11 Spot-grange k 8
Spout t 10 STAFFORD m 8 Stafford Cast. m 7 Stallbrook m 7 Stallington i 9
Standon k 5 Stanley f 8 Stansop f 13 Stanton h 13 Statfold q 15 Stitchbrook p
12 Stile-Cop o 10 Stoke k 8 Stoke super Trent g 7 N. Stonall r 11 O. Stonall q
11 STONE k 7 Stony low e 8 Stourton w 6 Stourton Cast. w 6 Stow m 10 Stramshall
k 11 Streethey p 13 Streeton m 15 Stretton p 6 Stubby lane l 13 Stubwood i 12
G. Sugnall k 4 L. Sugnall k 4 Sutton m 3 Swindon u 6 Swinerton k 6 Swinfen q 12
Swinscoe g 13 Swinshead i 5 Swithamley b 9
T
Talk e 5 Tamhorn q 14 TAMWORTH r 14 Tatenhill n 14 Tattershill s 5 Teddesley
head o 9 N. Tene i 10 O. Tene i 10 Terley Cast. k 2 Tetesworth d 10 Tettenhall
r 7 Thatchmoore p 13 Thickbroome r 12 St. Thomas m 8 Thorncliff d 10 Thorns q
11 Thorny-lanes m 12 Thorny Lee c 9 Thorp Constantine p 15 Throwley f 13
Thursfield alias New Chapel e 7 Tipton t 8 Tipton green t 8 Tittensor i 7
Tixall m 9 Tixall heath m 8 Tole-end t 9 Totmonslow i 10 Tower hill t 11 N.
Town o 12 Treasle t 6 Trentham h 6 Trescot s 6 Tubney o 12 Tackhill u 4
Tunstall f 6 Tunstall l 4 Tunstall m 11 Tunstall r 7 Tutbury l 15 Tutbury Cast.
l 14
U
UTTOXATER k 12
W
Wall q 12 Wall-grange e 9 WALSALL s 10 Walsall-wood r 10 Walton k 7 Walton l 6
Walton n 8 Walton-grange o 4 Warslow d 12 Warton m 3 Water-eaton p 7 Waterfall
f 12 Wednesbury s 9 Wednesfield r 8 Weeford r 13 Weeping cross n 8 Weetmoore m
15 The Werges r 6 Westbromwich t 10 Weston i 5 Weston l 9 Weston-coyney h 8
Weston Jones m 3 Weston under Lyzard p 5 Westonwood m 4 Westwood d 9
Wetley-moore g 9 Wetton e 12 Wetwood k 4 Weverhills g 12 Wharnford b 10 Wheaton
Aston p 6 Whichnor o 14 Whiston g 11 Whiston o 6 Whitchurst g 9 Whitgrave l 7
White-hough f 10 Whitmore h 5 Whitnell end w 5 Whittington q 13 Whittington w 6
Wigginstall d 12 Wightwick s 6 Wiginton q 14 Wildmoore hol^ies p 10
Willbrighton n 4 Willeford p 13 Willenhall s 9 Willingsworth t 9 Willowbridg i
3 Winington i 3 Winkle-hill f 11 Winyates c 10 Withington k 10 Wollaston o 6
Wollgaston o 8 Wolseley n 10 Wolstanton g 6 WOLVERHAMTON s 7 Womborn t 7
Wood-eaton o 5 Wood-end m 13 Wood-end r 12 Wood-end s 10 Wood-end t 7
Wood-house t 7 Wood-house g 13 Wood-house k 8 Wood-house m 14 Wood-houses n 13
Wood-houses s 5 Wood-mill n 13 Woodsatton t 7 Woodseaves l 4 Woodseaves x 4
Wooton h 12 G. Worley p 9 L. Worley q 10 Worsley w 7 Wotton l 5 Wrine-hill g 4
Wrine-hill-hall g 4 Wrottesley r 6
Y
Yarlet l 7 Yarnfield k 6 Yoxal n 13
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF Staffordshire.
CHAP. I. Of the Heavens and Air.
1.HAVING already in the Introduction to my Natural History of Oxfordshire
prescribed my self a Method, whereof I have no reason to repent me Not. Hist.
of Oxford-sh. Chap. 1... 1, 2, 3.
, I shall forbear all further Preface to this, than to acquaint the Reader in
short, that I intend the same again, not only in the Whole, but in the
particular Chapters; and that I shall make all Relations (as formerly) in a
plain familiar Style, without the Ornaments of Rhetoric, least the matter be
obscured by too much illustration; and with all the imaginable brevity that
perspicuity will bear; it being an indisputable truth, that an Author by
enlargeing to the utmost compass of his Theme, sometimes advances his Papers to
so disproportionable a Bulk, that by writing too much, He had almost as good
have writ nothing, Experience convincing us that voluminous Works have but few
Buyers, and much fewer Readers.

2. Upon this account too, I have industriously set my self this irrepealable
Law, to remain inviolable in all other Histories I shall write of this kind:
That whatever I meet with in one County, already described in another, shall be
only just mentioned as found, seen, or heard of, at such or such a place,
always referring the Reader for the Description, or Philosophical account of
it, to the former Book; unless the thing differ in some considerable
circumstance, or be but imperfectly described: thus whatever Curiosity either
of Nature or Art (be it of the greatest moment) that I have met with in
Staffordshire, if sufficiently described already in Oxfordshire, shall be but
barely mentioned here, reference being made to the Chapter and Section of that
History, where it has been discoursed on before: Nor need I doubt but the
Staffordshire Nobility and Gentry (Learning and Ingenuity being so frequent
amongst them) will allow me this privilege, without the least imputation of
detracting from their Country, since hereby I avoid all vain repetitions, and
yet shall amply repay them again, if I live to write the History of any other
County, by referring in like manner as much or more to theirs; which it is
manifold odds, but I shall certainly do, if I ever meet hereafter with the like
noble encouragement, that they have so plentifully and generously afforded me.

3. To come then forthwith to the subject in hand, the Natural History of the
County of Stafford; the first thing I met with relating to the Heavens, and one
of the first too that I heard of after I set to work in earnest, was a pretty
rural observation, of late years made by some of the Inhabitants of the Town of
Leek in the Moorelands, of the setting of the Sun in the Summer Solstice, near
a Hill called the Cloud, about six miles distant, in the confines of
Staffordshire and Cheshire; which appearing almost perpendicular on the
Northern side, to such persons as are standing in Leek Churchyard, the Sun
seems so nicely at that time of year to cut the Edg of it at setting, as in
Tab. 1. Fig. 1. that notwithstanding what is taught by Astronomers, that the
Sun whilst it occupies that Cardinal point, appears Stationary for some time
without giving any sensible increase or decrease to the length of the days;
they can plainly perceive by the help of this Hill, that no two days are equal,
but that there is a sensible difference every day: just as at the Temple of
Tentiris in Egypt where there are as many Windows as days in the year, so
placed, that the Sun rising in a different degree of the Zodiac every day, it
also sends in its beams every day into a distinct Window from the day before H.
Vanslebius's present State of Egypt chap. ult. p. 246.
.

For when the Sun comes near the Solstice, the whole disk of it at first sets
behind the Hill, after a while the Northern Limb first appears, and so every
night gradually more, till at length the whole Diameter comes to set Northward
of it, for about three nights; but the middle night of the three, very sensibly
more remote, than the former or the following, when beginning its recess from
the Tropic, it still continues more and more to be hidden every night, till at
length it descends quite behind it again.

4. Which Phenomenon though worth notice for its own sake alone, yet might be
rendered of much more use to the Public, would the Curious that for the most
part reside thereabout, make annual and more strict observations for the future
by suitable Instruments, noteing every year the day precisely, that the Limb of
the Sun first cuts the edge of the Hill, and how many Digits or parts of
Digits, of its own Diameter, it daily advances; also carefully noteing the
nearest distance 'twixt the edge of the Hill, and the Rim of the Sun, on the
very day of the Solstice, and lastly the Mean between both: For by this means
in time the Suns greatest Northern Declination (which Astronomers say is less
now than heretofore Joh. Bapt. Riccioli Almagestum Nov. Lib. 3. Chap. 27.
) may be gradually adjusted, and at length perhaps limited; Which I take to be
an Experiment of so valuable a Consideration, that I cannot but recommend it to
my worthy friends the Worshipful Thomas Rudyerd of Rudyerd Esquire, Mr. Parker,
and Mr. Thomas Gent; at least that they would take care in some one year or
other, when there is least of Refraction upon account of the Atmosphere, from
some fixed point, so to adjust the distance betwixt the Hill and the Sun on the
day of the Solstice by an Azimuthal Quadrant, the new Micrometer, or some other
agreeable Instrument, that future Ages however (if it cannot be in this) may
see the difference.

5. Next the true and genuine, the Spurious or Mock-Suns that have been
frequent in this County fall under consideration, so frequent indeed (their
causes already having been hinted in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxford-sh.
Chap. 1.. 5.
) that they scarce deserve any; at most but bare mentioning: Such were the
Parelia seen about twenty years since, by that great Example of Valor and
Fidelity to his Prince, the Worshipful Colonel John Lane and Mr. Persehowse of
Nether Gournall; as they were walking between Bentley and Willingsworth (near
Darlaston) they appeared in the West, the Sun not above half an hour high
standing in a line parallel to the Horizon; and so did the Mock-Sun seen July
12. 1678. by the virtuous, learned, and most ingenious Gentleman the Worshipful
Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire, and Mr. Fisher Dilke as they were walking
on Hopton Heath. I was also informed by the same ingenious Gentleman Mr. Fisher
Dilke that on August the 28. 1679. He saw much such another at or near
Haselour, neither of them having any Circle of light about them, or passing
through the Disks of Mock or true Sun, as is usual, and both of them of so
strong and even a light, as hard to be distinguished from the true Sun; only
differing in this, that the first Mock-Sun appeared about ten degrees to the
South of the true one, and the latter to the North, but both of them in
Almicantars or lines parallel to the Horizon.

6. And thus it seems they generally do, nec supra ipsum nec infra, says Pliny,
sed ex obliquo, neither above nor beneath the true Sun, but on either side; nec
noctu, sed aut Orient aut Occidente Not. Hist. Lib. 2. Chap. 31.
, nor in the night season, but when the Sun either rises or sets, only once
indeed he says in the same Chapter, that such were reported to have been seen
at noon day in Bosphoro Ibidem.
; and we are informed by the learned Monsieur Hevelius that near Marienburg in
Borussia Feb. 5.1674. He saw in the Evening the true Sun sending forth very
long reddish rays tapering gradually upward for 40 or 50 degrees toward the
Zenith, and under it a Mock-Sun nearer to the Horizon of the same bigness (to
sense) with the true one, and in the same Vertical or Azimuth line Philos.
Transact. Numb. 102. p. 26 how this may be, see Des Carts Meteororum Lib. 10..
5.
.

7. Which though instances amongst Authors so very rare, that we hear of but
these two, now in sixteen hundred years, yet one of them seems to have happened
so very lately as Dec. 4. 1680. and to have been carefully observed, by my
worthy, learned, and most ingenious friend, the Worshipful Francis Wolferstan
of Statfold Esquire, who riding between his own house and Clifton Campvill, as
near as he could guess about twelve at noon, His Man first espied somewhat
unusual in the Heavens, which not without amazement quickly showing to his
Master, He presently perceived about the Azimuth or hour line of two ( viz. two
hours before the Sun or thereabout) a more than ordinary brightness of the same
altitude with the Sun, which through the tenuious clouds that were passing over
it, appeared for a while not unlike another Sun, the true Sun shining at the
same time.

8. But immediately after (the clouds passing away) there appeared in the same
place the usual colors of the Solar Rainbow, somewhat of an oval form, with
smaller beams issuing from each side, and a larger white ray or stream of light
darting downward from the bottom, as in Tab. 1. fig. 2. most remarkably
differing from the Phenomenon of Hevelius, the ray of light in his issuing
from the true Sun and tending upward, this from the Mock-Sun (for I can call it
no less) and tending downward: Its colors whilst it continued in that form
were strong and beautiful, but languishing by degrees, it became at length a
small portion or Segment of a Solar Iris as in Tab. 1. fig. 3. which because so
notoriously imperfect, and thus irregularly posited in the Heavens, may deserve
perhaps as much or more of our admiration, as was given the imperfect Iris
drawn by the great Master Aristides C. Plin. 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 35. Cap. 11.
, beyond what would have been afforded to the most perfect one he could have
painted: not only because appearing in the South contrary to the known rule
amongst the Meteorologists, nullae ad Austrum pinguntur Irides, but for
overthrowing in a manner the whole doctrine of Rainbows. As first that the
Center of the Sun, the Rainbow, and the Eye of the Beholder, must be in one
right line; secondly the Spectator between the Sun and the Rainbow; and thirdly
the horns or shanks of the Bow always terminating in the Horizon: whereas this,
being but 30 degrees from the Sun, the Concave toward it, and the Unequal
Westward from it, and consequentially the Cornua one above another in the same
Vertical, can be no way agreeable to any such Axioms.

9. Nor yet was this Phenomenon so very irregular, but that somewhat of this
kind seems to have happened before, for says Fortunius Licetus, bis jam vidimus
Irides in Meridiano ad Austrum, Fort. Licet. de novis Astric and Cometis, Lib.
6. cap. 2.
that He had twice seen Rainbowes in the South; And Cornelius Gemma acquaints
us that on the 25 of September in the morning Anno 1560. He saw a Rainbow of a
like in the whole, though quite contrary position to ours in the parts, Stabat
enim convexa part Solemn versus, concava vero versus cujusdam Parhelli
subobscurum typum, qui quasi ad Circium annuebat Corn. Gemm. Cosmocrit. Lib. 2
cap. 1.
Cornua igitur, says Fromondus, non in Terram spectabant, sed aversa ab
exoriente Sole, direct in Occidentem intendebantur Lib. Fromond. Meteorolog.
Lib. 6. cap. 1. Art. 1.
: For it stood, says He, with its Unequal part toward the Sun, and its Concave
toward a somewhat obscure representation of a Mock-Sun to the Southward; whence
Fromondus rightly concluded, that the Horns could not respect the Earth, but
being averse from the rising Sun, must needs be stretched to the Westward. And
what comes yet nearer to the business, Gisbertus ab Isendoorn saw two exactly
of the same kind with ours at the same time Apr. 8. 1645. both of them standing
with their Concavities to the Sun clasping it on each side at equal distance,
whereof He has given us a Diagramme in his Medulla Physicae Lib. 2. cap. 5.

10. To these add an Iris seen about nine years since, at the Parish of Tresle
by Mr. William Barnesley, a good old Gentleman, whose assistance in riding
about and showing me the Country (notwithstanding his Age) must by no means be
forgotten, which though perfect indeed in figure, was yet irregular in
position; the Horns of the Bow terminating in the Horizon, the Centers of it
and the Sun, and the Eye of the Beholder being also in the same right line; But
the Spectator not between the Sun and the Rainbow: for it appeared it seems in
the Clouds on the same side of the Hemisphere with the Sun it self, and not on
the opposite; so that the Sun and Spectator were the two extremes, and the Iris
in the middle, and not the Beholder: A Phenomenon (if not a Segment of some
vast Halo Coronam si diviseris Arcus erit L. An. Senecae Not. Quest. Lib. 1.
cap. 10.
) I think not very easy, if at all to be paralleled: But I am inclined indeed
to believe it was only so, for though Seneca acquaints us with certain
Graecians that denied there could be any such Circle about the Sun Ibid. Lib.
1. cap. 2. sub finem.
; to whom Epicurus also seems to give his assent, only mentioning them to
happen about the Moon Diogenis Laertii Lib. 10. in Epist. Epicuri ad Pythoclem
(...).
; and though Aristotle himself (who allows them indeed to both Planets) is
positive that they still appear of a uniform white color, and not adorned with
the colors of the Solar Rainbow Aristotelis (...) Lib. 3. cap. 3.
: yet so frequently has there appeared such about the Sun (not to mention those
two eminent instances of Seneca and Cardan, to be met with almost in all
writers on this Subject) that Gassendus alone professes he had seen them
himself at least an hundred times Pet. Gassendus in Lib. 10. Diogenis Laertii
de Meteorologia Epicuri, Tom. 2. p. 1129.
: And that they are many times large enough for such a purpose, especially when
the Sun is near seting, is also evident from the joint concurrence of all
Authors, who assert the Diameters of these Circles to take up usually 45
degrees, an eighth part of the Heavens.

11. And such a large Halo as one of these it was, that was seen about the Sun
May 17. 1681. at Edingall in this County, by the above mentioned curious and
observing Gent. the Worshipful Francis Wolferstan Esquire, and many others,
having the lively colors of the Solar Rainbow, and extending its Diameter as
near as he could guess (for he had no Instrument with him) about 40. degrees;
which yet was not so remarkable in these respects, as for the unusual form it
appeared in, for though the colors were apparent in all the parts, yet the
Circle was not every where (as commonly they are) equally broad, but narrower
on each side to the East and West, and much broader above and below the Sun,
toward the Zenith and Horizon as in Tab. 1. fig. 4. And in this form it moved
along with the Sun from half an hour past ten in the Morning, to as much past
one in the Afternoon: what should occasion this Phenomenon indeed is hard to
determine, yet certainly it must arise from some peculiar position of a rorid
cloud or vapor, whose parts were made up of small threads (as it is also in
Parelia's and Rainbows) having the figure of equilateral triangular Prismes
which cause the colors, that must accompany the Sun for all that time; for
should it be ascribed to the Sun it self, we should certainly before now have
heard of others of the kind: I know it is the opinion of the ancient
Philosophers, that the motion of this Meteor is not true but apparent, i. e.
that the same Halo does not continue, but that a new one is still generated, as
the Sun holds on its course Lib. Fromondi Meteorolog. Lib. 6. cap. 2 Art, 2.
, as may sometimes be seen by some faint remains of the old ones left behind in
the Clouds which the Sun has deserted; yet certainly in this case of ours it
must be granted to be otherwise, unless we shall groundlesly allow that the
same Cloud, of the same make and position did stretch it self before the Sun
for 45. degrees together (for that the Halo continued in this form no less than
three hours) which seems to lie under so great an improbability, that it can
hardly be admitted.

12. But that which seems to put all out of doubt, on the Tuesday sevenight
following May 24. being Whitsun-Tuesday, either the same, or another of the
like kind, was seen again by the same worthy person, which appeared also for
several days in the following week, and was seen not only in Staffordshire,
but at Oxford, and Rochester in Kent by my worthy friend Robert Conny M. B. of
Magd. Coll. Oxon. Whence it plainly appears probable, not only that the same
Cloud did accompany the Sun for some time at least; but also that
notwithstanding the ancient Philosophers, have restrained the Clouds to the
middle Region, viz. that they never transcend the tops of Mountains, yet they
are sometimes mounted much higher, being strongly attracted by the Rays of the
Sun, and then easily upheld, and thus carried about with it for some
considerable time; for otherwise how could such a Halo be seen at so far
distant places as Staffordshire and Kent, at the same time.

13. From the Sun, both Nature and my Method direct me, to descend to the Moon,
and the Accidents attending Her, which are much of the same kind with those of
the Sun, though they happen not so frequently, such as Irides Lunares whereof
(though Aristotle professes that He could see but two in above fifty years
Meteor. Lib. 3. cap. 2. I. An. Senecae Not. Quaest Lib. 1. cap. 3.
) there have as many been seen here in less than two years; One at Tunstall
near Wolverhampton in October 1678. by Mr. Franc. and Mr. Jo. Wightwick; and
another the very next year following Aug. 6. 1679. by the ingenious and every
way accomplished Gentleman the Worshipful Thomas Broughton of Broughton Esquire,
who in the way between Lichfield and Ashinbrook in company with six other
persons, about Nine at Night, the Moon then wanting five days of the full, and
at that time of night possessing the S. S. W. part of the Hemisphere, saw an
Iris Lunaris of a faint whitish color, entire and well determined, which after
a quarter of an hours time spent in beholding it, they left as strong and
complete as they found it, not knowing how long it had been there before they
saw it, or how long it continued.

14. Which is not the first time that two of these have happened in so few
years, for Willebrordus Snellius in his description of the Comet in November
Anno 1618. tells us of two that were seen in the same space, one in December
1617. and another the day before the Calends of January 1618 Willebrordi
Snellii Descrip. Cometae Anno 1618. cap. 5. p. 33.
: That which is most remarkable is, that the increasing Moon presently upon her
entrance into the second quarter (being then but (...) and of a weak light)
five days before the full, and so near her Southing, should cause such an Iris,
for they have always hitherto been thought never to happen, but at, or very
near to the full of the Moon, and when few degrees above the Horizon. And yet
Albertus gives us an instance almost equal to this viz. that He saw such a
Lunar Iris, when the Moon was (...), in her decrease, and possessing at that
time the very point of the Meridian, the Bow being in the North Lib. Fromondi
Meteorolog. Lib. 6. cap. 1. Art. 16.
. Which shall suffice at present for Lunar Irides the nature of them, and why
not adorned with those beautiful colors we see in Solar Rainbows, having been
already discoursed of in the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxford-sh.
Chap. 1. 7.
.

15. Next to these impressions made in the clouds, I descend to others made
from them, such as the amazing and sometimes deplorable effects of Thunder and
Lightening, which though they most commonly happen together, yet because the
Lightening first affects the Sense, I give it the precedence as is usual
amongst Naturalists. That Lightening should happen in the VVinter-quarter has
been always accounted a great rarity; yet not only this, but a more unusual
accident (perhaps not to be met again in many Ages) was showed me at Statfold,
by the forementioned worthy Gentleman the Worshipful Francis Wolferstan
Esquire, who having built a new Gate before his house Anno 1675. and placed
fair Globes of the finest and firmest stone over the Peers of it (whereon He
depicted with his own hand two Globe Dials in oil colors, and on the
terrestrial the several Empires and Kingdoms of the World, that He might see
how day and night succeeded in each of them) in January 1677. had them both
struck with lightening in the same point (where the great Meridian of the
World, and the North part of the Polar circle meet) there appearing first a
little hole just in that place, and cracks radiating from it to all parts on
that side, and the stone it self swelling forth so far as the cracks went, and
quickly after dropping from the rest of the Globes (the parts coming away being
as soft and as much disjoined as moist Sand) as in Tab. 1. Fig. 5.

16. Yet the Globe on the left hand the gate going forth, seemed to have been
stricken first, and the other not till the day following; which if so, the
accident was so much the more strange, that they should be stricken exactly in
the same point at different times: But doubtless they both received these
impressions the same instant, and that by Lightening too, which being of a very
subtle nature ( Des Carts thinks like Aqua fortis Ren. Des Carts Meteoror.
Cap. 7.. 9.
) and solvent of the parts of bodies to that degree that it is said by the
Ancients, to melt Swords in their Scabberds Quod contigit M. Antonio Mureto
Romae.
, and Money in men's pockets L. An. Senecae Not. Quaest. Lib. 2. cap. 31, and
cap. 52. Vid. etiam Plutarchum Sympos. Lib. 4. Quaest. 2.
, did doubtless dissolve the parts of the stone (all being made of Salt and
Sulphur) by consuming the Sulphurous parts, which knit the Saline ones of the
stone together; as it happens in the burning of Lime where the Sulphurous
parts of the Limestone being burnt away, the Saline parts separate and swell
to a greater bulk upon the access of moisture; as I suppose these Globes did,
being exposed to the rains and mists, that frequently happen at that time of
year.

17. And here perchance by the way it may be no great digression, to enquire
into the nature and efficient cause of those Rings we find in the grass, which
they commonly call Fairy circles: Whether they are caused by Lightening? or are
indeed the Rendezvouzes of Witches, or the dancing places of those little
pygmy Spirits they call Elves or Fairys? And the rather, because 1. a Question
(perhaps by reason of the difficulty) scarce yet attempted, and 2. because I
met with the largest of their kind (that perchance were ever heard of) in this
County: one of them showed me in the grounds between Handsworth Church and the
Heath being near forty yards Diameter; and I was told of another by that
ingenious Gent. (one of the most cordial encouragers of this work) the
Worshipful Sir Henry Gough Knight, that there was one in his grounds near
Pury-Hall but few years since (now indeed plowed up) of a much larger size, he
believed near fifty, whereas there are some of them not above two yards
Diameter; which perhaps may be near the two extremes of their Magnitude.

18. Nor is their difference only in the extent of their Diameters, they
varying also in diverse other respects, though not proportionably so much: for I
have always observed that the Rims of these Circles, from the least to the
bigest, are seldom narrower than a foot, or much broader then a yard; some as
bare as a path way in many parts of them, others of a russet singed color
(both of these having a greener grass in the middle) and a third sort of a dark
fresh green, the grass within being of a browner color; the first kind seldom
less than five or six yards Diameter, and the other two of various Magnitudes;
And all these parts of a Circle, others being Semicircular; some of them
Quadrants, and others not above Sextants of their respective Circles.

19. Now that Wizards and Witches have sometimes their field Conventicles, and
that they dance in such rings, we have ample Testimony from diverse good
Authors, some of them Judges, who received it in confession from the Criminals
themselves condemned by them, all agreeing (if to be believed) that their
dances were always circular, but that as they served a different Master, so
they performed this exercise in a different manner from other Mortals; Porro
circulares esse omnes Choros qui sic agitantur, atque ab aversis saltatoribus
tripudiari affirmant, says Nicholaus Remigius Nich. Remigii Demonolatriae Sag.
Lib. 1. cap. 17.
, i. e. that they affirmed all their dances to be circular, their faces being
turned away from one another; for which he alleges the Confessions of Achen
Weher, Johanna Gerardina, Dominicus Petronius, Hennel Armentaria, Anna Ruffa,
Zabella the Wife of John Deodat, Odilla Gaillarda, and many others; to which
Sybilla Morelia it seems added another circumstance, that the Circle was always
led to the left hand, as Pliny observes the ancient Gauls did, though they
danced single, totum corpus circumagendo, quod in Laevum fecisse, Galliae
religiosius credunt Not. Hist. Lib. 28. cap. 2. vid. etiam Lucanum Belli
Civilis Lib. 1. v. 450.
.

20. Which Relations (especially if compared together) being somewhat obscure
may in part at least be cleared out of Baptista Codronchius, who speaking in
like manner of the same Conventicles and dancings, which they call Dianae
ludos, the sports of Diana; Choreas, says He, a nostris penitus absimiles
ducunt; foeminae namque post dorsum masculis in haerentes retrocedendo saliunt,
terga dando inclinant, caputque non ante, sed retro, etc. Bapt. Codronchii de
Morb. Venef. Lib. 3. cap. 8.
that the dances they lead are quite unlike ours, for the Women's faces standing
to the Men's backsides, they dance retrograde, bowing their bodies forward, and
their heads backward, as the same Codronchius says they worship the Devil, non
faciem, sed terg a illi obvertentes, caput que non in pectus, sed in scapulas
inclinantes Ibidem.
, not turning their faces, but their backs toward Him, and bowing their heads
not downward toward their breasts, but backwards upon their shoulders: which
though it pretty well explain the phrase of Remigius [ab aversis saltatoribus,]
yet how this posture can agree with leading the Ring always to the left hand
according to Sybilla Morelia's information, I freely confess I do not
understand.

21 But to come close to the business, let us return again to the forecited
Remigius, who was a Judge in Lorrain, and perhaps the best skilled in matters of
this nature that the world has yet known (having had the Examinations,
Confessions and Condemnations of no less than nine hundred Wizards and Witches
in fifteen years time) who, to omit many others of the like kind, gives us a
most remarkable relation of such a Conventicle, and no less suitable (if true)
to our present purpose. On the eighth of the Calends of August (says He) An.
1590. one Nicolaea Lang-Bernhard having been grinding at a Quern not far from
Assenuncuria, and returning about noon, as she walked by a hedge side, saw in an
adjoining field, an assembly of Men and Women dancing in a Ring, but in a
quite different manner from the usual practice of others: for says my author,
aversi terga ostendentes id faciebant, i. e. that they did it turning their
backs upon one another; but at length viewing them more attentively, she
perceived some amongst them to have cloven feet like Oxen and Goats, at which
being sore astonished, and almost dead with fear, and calling upon the
auxiliary name of Jesus to help her well home, they forthwith all vanished
except one Petter Gross-Petter, whom quickly after she saw snatched up into the
Air, and to let fall his Maulkin (a stick they make clean Ovens withal before
they set in their bread) and Her self was also driven so forcibly with the
wind, that it made her almost lose her breath, and when she was got home to
keep her bed no less than three days.

22. The fame of which matter being quickly spread by her self and Relations
through the whole Village, this Petter at first brought an action of slander
against Nicoloea, but knowing his own guilt, and fearing to proceed too far, he
desisted again; which breeding suspicion in the Judge, upon enquiry into his
life and manners, he was at length apprehended, and at last freely confessed the
whole matter, and discovered others of his Companions, as Barbelia the wife of
Johannes Latomus, Mayetta the wife of Laurence Super Major, both which though
examined a part, yet confessed expressly in the same words, de saltato a se
aversis una cum intermediis Cornupedibus choro, etc. i. e. that they had danced
intermixed with those cloven footed creatures at what time Petter was amongst
them.

23. And for further evidence of the business John Michael Herdsman did also
confess that while they thus danced, he played upon his crooked staff moving his
fingers upon it, as if it had been a Pipe, sitting upon a high bough of an Oak;
and that as soon as Nicolaea called upon the name of Jesus, he tumbled down
headlong to the ground but was presently caught up again with a whirlwind and
carried to Weiller Meddows, where he had left his herds a little before: Add
hereunto (which is most of all to the purpose) that there was found in the
place where they danced a round circle, wherein there were the manifest marks
of the treading of Cloven feet, as plain as are made by Horses that run the
Ring, as was testified by Nickel Clein, Desiderius Vervex, Gasper Suitor, and
diverse others that had been to see it, and were examined by the Judge as
Witnesses upon it: which circle remained from the day after Nicolaea had
discovered the business, till the next winter when the Plow cut it out Nich.
Remigii Daemonolatria Sag. Lib. 1. cap. 14.
.

24. And a the Devils and Witches do sometimes leave the lively marks of their
dancings after they have held such Conventicles, so Athanasius Kircher expressly
acquaints us from the informations of Cysatus and Schulzius, that the Viruli or
Virunculi montani, little Pygmy Spirits that infest the Mines of Helvetia and
Hungary, do sometimes also leave the prints of their feet in the moist sand and
soft tenacious earth of the Mines, about the bigness of the feet of Children of
three years old Athonas. Kirch. Mundi subterr. Tom. 2. Lib. 8.. 4. cap. 4.
: whence some men perhaps may think it probable enough, that some few of these
Circles (especially the bare ones that have but little grass) may sometimes
indeed be made by the forementioned mixed dances of Devils and Witches, and
others by those little dwarf Spirits, we call Elves and Fairies.

25. Not that there are any Creatures of a third kind distinct from Men and
Spirits of so small a stature, as Paracelsus fancied, which he was pleased to
style non-Adamical Men; but that the Devils as they are best pleased with the
sacrifices of young Children (which are frequently offered by Midwife-VVitches
in some Countries, their fat being the chief ingredient wherewith they make the
Ointment indispensably necessary for their transportation to their
Field-Conventicles Bapt. Codronchii de Morb. Venef. Lib. 3. cap. 8. and Joh.
Bodini Mag. Daemonomaniae. Lib. 2. cap. 5.
) so it seems they delight themselves chiefly in the assumtion of the shapes of
Children of both Sexes, as we are credibly informed by sober Authors, such as
Georgius Agricola Geo. Agricola de Animantibus subterraneis sub finem.
, Wierus Joh. Wieri de praestigiis Daemonum Lib. 1. cap. 22.
, and others; who affirm them so frequent, especially in the German, Hungarian,
and Helvetian (Mr. Bushel seems also to hint the same in our Welsh Silver
Bushell's Remonstrance of his Majesty's Mines Royal in Wales An. 1642. see also
Mr. Hooks Lecture de Potentia Restitut. p. 41.
) Mines, that they have given them diverse names in their respective places, as
in Germany those in the shapes of Men they call Cobalos, and those in the
shapes of Women, Trullas, and Sibyllas albas; so in Italy they call them
Folletos and Empedusas, and in other places Screlingeros, Gutelos, Bergmanlin,
etc. Athanas. Kircheri Mund. subterr. Tom. 2. Lib. 8.. 4. cap. 4. and Lib. 10..
4. cap. 11.
More particularly such were the Annebergius and Snebergius of Agricola, and
the Hutgin of Trithemius. Nay so frequent has been the appearance of these
Demunculi (as some report) in the more Northern parts of the world, that
perhaps it has given the occasion to the stories of Pygmies mentioned by Olaus
Magnus Olai Magni de mira natura Rerum Septentr. Lib. 1. cap. 11.
and the ancient Geographers, Ctesias having given them a most agreeable color
making them all Negroes, and placing them in the midst of India, (...) are his
very words, i. e. that in the midst of India there are a sort of black men
called Pygmies which are very little ones Ex Ctesiae Indicis excerptae
Historiae a Photio p. 681. Edit. Steph. An. 1592.
: For it is hard to believe there is, or ever was, any such dwarfish sort of
people considering them nationally, and not as rare and single instances;
notwithstanding the Testimonies of the ancient Poets and Historians; or now of
late, of Van Helmont, who would persuade us from the Relation of a Canarie
Merchant, that there were formerly of them in those Islands Joh. Bapt. Van
Helmont Demonstr. These. p. 432. Edit. Venet. An. 1651.
; or of Marcus Marci who belyes Pigafetta making him say that he saw Pygmies in
the Isle Aruchet near the Molucca's Joh. Marc. Marci Idearum Operatr. Idea,
cap. 6. de Pygmais and Gigantibus.
; whereas indeed he only says, that an old Pilot of the Molucco's told his
Company of such, that lived in Caverns there, and had so very long Ears that
they slept upon one, and covered themselves with the other; but that the wind
and stream being against them thither, and his Men distrusting the relation,
would not go to see them Viaggio de'l Sign Ant. Pigafetta atorno il Mondo. tra
gli Viaggi raccolti da Gio. Bart. Remusio p. 368. Stanpat. Venet. An. 1588.
. Which makes me also suspect that he may also abuse the two Oderici, whom also
he cites to have found such in their Travels.

26. And not only the bad but the good Genii also appear in the shapes of young
Children, if we may credit the relation of a pious man an acquaintance of
Bodinus, who had constantly the assistance of such a guardian Angel, which
indeed he never saw but once, and that when he was in great danger of his Life,
it appearing to him in the likeness of a Child, clad in white raiment somewhat
inclining to purple, of a most lovely visage and delicate form Joh. Bodini
Mag. Daemonomaniae Lib. 1. cap. 2.
. And to come nearer home if we may believe the story of Anne Bodenhom the
Witch of Fisherton Anger in the County of Wilts, set forth at large by Edmund
Bower, and the Reverend and Learned Hen. More D. D. The Spirits which she
raised (as confessed by Anne Styles who was frequently at her Conjurations)
always appeared in the shape of little ragged boys, who ran round the house
where the Witch had drawn her Staff, her Dog and Cat dancing with them, etc Dr.
More's Antidote against Atheism, Lib. 3. chap. 7.
. Some of the Witches also executed at Exeter An. 1682. unconstrainedly
confessed, that the Devil appeared to them like a short black Man about the
length of one 's Arm. All which put together seems not a little also to favor
the opinion that such Demunculi may be the Fairies so much talked of, and that
they may indeed sometimes occasion such Circles; but herein every Man is left
to choose his own Creed.

27. For my part though my faith be but weak in this matter, (notwithstanding
it cannot be denied but the bad as well as good Angels may be Ministering
spirits and converse with Mankind) yet if I must needs allow them to cause some
few of these Rings, I must also restrain them to those of the first kind, that
are bare at many places like a pathway; for to both the others more natural
causes may be probably assigned: As first according to the opinion of the
ingenious Mr. Lister, that at least some of them may be occasioned by the
working of Moldwarps, which however for the most part irregular they may be,
yet may have a time when perhaps by instinct of nature they may work in
Circles; as it is certain fallow Deer do in the time of Rutting, treading the
same Ring for many days together: indeed the strange fertility of these green
Circles, even upon the most barren Heaths, beyond any place else about them,
does argue some extraordinary dung or compost, which he supposes to be the
Excrements of Moles, or Moldwarps: others have fetched their Origin from the
dung and urin of Cattle fed in winter time at the same pout of hay, for their
heads meeting at the Hay as the center, and their bodies representing as it
were so many radii, has made some imagine that such Circles are described by
their dung and urin falling always from them in due distance, and fertilizing
the ground in a more than ordinary manner by the largeness of the quantity.
Others again have thought them described by the water and some of the Hay it
self, falling plentifully in wet weather from the Eaves of round hay-stacks,
that have been situate within them, which rotting into dung thus fertilizes the
Earth in a circular manner; and indeed it is possible that some of them may be
made either of these ways.

28. But for the Circles mentioned. 17. of this Chapter of 30, 40, and 50 yards
Diameter (too too large for the situation of any Hay-rick, or to be described
by Cattle feeding at a hay-pout) and some of them running through hedge and
ditch as shall be shown in fit place, we must seek for other causes: In order
whereunto (having good opportunity in New-Parks near the City of Oxford, where
there is always plenty of them) I thought fit to examine the nature of the Soil
under the Rims of them, especially how it differd from the adjoining earth, and
found by digging up several, that the ground under all of them, was much looser
and dryer than ordinary, and the parts interspersed with a white hoar or vinew
much like that in moldy bread, of a musty rancid smell, but to taste insipid,
and this scarce any where above six inches deep, the earth again below being of
its due consistence and genuin smell, agreeable to the rest of the soils
thereabout.

29. Whence it being equally plain that I was no longer to enquire for the
origin at least of these larger Circles, either from any thing under or upon
the ground; it remained that I should look for some higher principle, and
indeed after a long and mature deliberation, I could think of none nearer than
the middle region; viz. that they must needs be the effects of Lightning,
exploded from the Clouds most times in a circular manner; perhaps for this very
reason by the ancient Naturalists called fulmen discutiens: which though of a
viscous sulphurous consistence, yet taking fire and violently breaking the
Cloud wherein it was pent, must naturally expand it self every way obliquely,
for the most part in a uniform conical manner so as at due distance to become a
Circle as in Tab. 1. Fig. 6. and in that form to strike the Earth as may be
seen sometimes in arable grounds, but chiefly in wide and open pastures,
whether Meddows or Vplands, where Trees and Hedges interrupt least.

30. And not only in a single, but sometimes in a double and treble Circle one
within another, as was lately shown me by my Worthy and Ingenious friend John
Priaulx M. A. of University College in the field between St. Giles's Church
near Oxon and the garden called Jericho: They are rarely also seen of a
quadrangular form, encompassed with another larger of the Circular kind, as in
Tab. 1. Fig. 7. whereof there were shown me no less than two examples by my
Ingenious and observing friends John Naylor and Hugh Todd M. M. A. A. and
Fellows of University College in the same St. Giles's fields: which yet may
all be reconciled to the same Hypothesis; the former proceeding from three
different flashes, the second widening the orifice of the Cloud more than the
first, and the third than the second, and so consequently the Circles; the
latter from the Clouds breaking first in a quadrangular, and after in a wider
Circular form as in the same Tab. 1. Fig. 7. All these Rings and Squares being
greater or less in proportion to the distance of the Cloud from the Earth, and
tenaciousness of the matter, and all appearing at first of a russet color, the
grass just then being singed with the Lightening; but the year following of a
dark luxuriant green, the earth underneath having been highly improved with a
fat sulphurous matter (received from the Lightening) ever since it was first
stricken, though not exerting its fertilizing quality till some time after.

31. Yet we must not esteem this improvement by Lightening to be so natural and
genuin, as what is made by our ordinary Compost, for these only stimulat the
principles of vegetation, whereas in this case the bonds of the natural mixtion
seem to be dissolved, the parts of the body opened, and the true spirit of
vegetation flying away, the Salt also and Sulphur (having lost the spirit which
was their common vinculum, and preserved the temperament) endeavor a divorce,
get into exaltation, and joining with the adventitious sulphur of the
Lightening, seem unnaturally to enforce this luxuriant vegetation, leaving
behind them in the dry effete earth, that hoary white substance, of a musty
sour smell, which I take to be the faeces of both sulphurs; in which opinion I
am the rather confirmed for that the Cattle which feed in these pastures,
unless driven to it by extreme drought, will never touch this rank sort of
grass, it not having the genuin taste of the rest.

32 And hence it is that so many Borasco's, or storms of Thunder and
Lightening have such effects upon liquors, as to make them stink and acquire a
soureness viz. by opening the bodies of them, and leting fly that spirit that
before secured the temperament, by restraining the Sulphur; which being also of
a volatile nature and the principle of odours, geting into exaltation (in this
dissolution or rather corruption of the Compositum) endeavors the like divorce
and causes the stink; as the Salt in like manner freed from the bonds of the
Sulphur, gets at length the dominion and causes the sourness; which no question
they likewise did under the Rims of these Circles, for having kept some of this
earth by me but a natural day, it smelt just like the sour tappings of dead
beer in a Cellar.

33. Yet that this is the true Philosophical account of them, I will not be so
confident as firmly to pronounce; but for the matter of fact that they are
caused by Lightening, I take it to be most certain, having not only observed
them my self after Thunder and Lightening to be first russet and afterward of
a dark luxuriant green; but received it also from diverse other sober persons of
indisputable credit: more especially we may rely on the faithful testimony of
one Mr. Walker a man eminent not only for his skill in Geometry but in all
other accomplishments, who by chance one day walking in a Meddow amongst Mowers
(with whom he had been but a little before) after such a storm of Lightening
presently espied one of these Rings about five yards diameter, the Rim whereof
was about a foot broad, newly burnt bare as the color and brittleness of the
grass roots did plainly testify, which the year following came more fresh and
verdant in the place burnt, than in the middle, and at mowing time was much
taller and ranker grass than any in the Meddow Communicated in a Letter from
the ingenious Mr. Jessop of Broom-hall in Yorkshire, to my Learned and
Ingenious Friend Martin Lister Physician at York, Philosoph. Transact. Numb.
117. p 394.
.

34. If it be objected; that if Lightening causes these Circles, it must also
be allowed that it descends vertically; which we know to be seldom or never
seen. And that secondly if their origin be ascribed to Lightening, they must
always remain of the same magnitude, never enlargeing themselves to a greater
diameter than they had at first; which yet we cannot but acknowledge some of
them certainly do; having not only took notice of the thing my self, but had
it from others of unquestionable fidelity, that remarked the same in two of the
Circles mentioned. 17. of this Chapter: That at Handsworth having been observed
for diverse years by the Reverend Mr. Ange Rector of the place, who seriously
told me that when he first knew it, it exceeded not 4. yards diameter at most,
whereas when I measured it Anno 1680. it was increased almost to 40. having
run through the hedge into another field: As that other at Pury-Hall, being in a
field near the River (as I was informed by the aforementioned Sr. Henry Gough)
so increased from a smaller to a larger extent, till at length it came to be of
near 50. yards diameter, and to run into the water. If I say these matters be
objected,

35. It must be answered first, that though it be true, that Lightening indeed
seldom descends vertically, yet that it is as seldom found too that any of
these Rings are Mathematically round, (unless they happen to be on Hills or
Banks sides, which may be obverted in right Angels to any point of the Heavens
between the Zenith and Horizon) most of them being rather of a parabolical
figure, coming so much the nearer to a round, or receding farther from it, in
proportion as the Lightening comes forth nearer or more remote from the Zenith:
whence also it comes to pass that when Lightening is exploded (as most
frequently it is) in an oblique Line, these Circles are imperfect, and that
there are more Semicircles, Quadrants, and Sextants amongst them, than any
other, according to the aforesaid proportion as the Lightening breaks forth of
a Cloud more remote from the Zenith, or nearer to the Horizon; thus if it
proceed from a Cloud not above 15. degrees above the Horizon the lower part
only of the circular explosion will brush the surface of the Earth as in Tab.
1. Fig. 8. and will make perhaps but the Sextant of a Circle; if 22. degrees
and above it, a Quadrant; if 45, a Semicircle; if 67, three fourths of a
Circle, and so proportionably more or less in the intermediat degrees.

36. And as to their growth, though it press much harder than the former, yet
the difficulty appears not so insuperable, but that it may be replied, that
as the Explosion of Lightening when it first breaks the Cloud presses equally
outward on every side, so it is like it may retain the same tendency after it
has stricken the Earth in such Rings as are entire, such being supposed to be
made by streams of lightening descending in a Conical figure, and to strike the
Earth in oblique lines on every side pointing all outward, which possibly too
infecting the Earth (for I look on them as a disease) with some noxious quality
that may have somewhat of the nature of the Herpes (...), a sort of Shingles
which Sennerius describes to be Morbus, qui una part sanescente, in proxima
serpit, or Malum ubi medium sanescit, extremis procedentibus Dan. Sennerti
Oper. Tom. 3. Lib. 5. part 10. cap. 17.
, i. e. a Disease that creeps on in the out parts, the middle growing well;
these Circles I say being infected thus at first from the Clouds with something
of this nature, may continually perhaps extend themselves in the like manner.

37. Wherein I am the more confirmed, having observed some of the imperfect
Segments of these Circles, especially the Semicircles, and such as obtain three
parts of a Circle, to grow inward in the middle, where the Lightening has
struck the Earth strongest, much faster than elsewhere, so as to render them on
that side irregular and crooked, as in Tab. 1. Fig. 9. which had they not done
might have been an unanswerable objection against this Hypothesis it being
impossible indeed that such as these, made by a circular explosion of
Lightening, that only brushes the earth on the lower side, the upper part
vanishing in the thin Air should extend themselves otherwise. And thus much for
these Circles, and enough too perhaps may the Reader say to break my promise so
solemnly made in the first. of this Chapter, of not enlarging to the utmost
compass of my theme; but herein I do not doubt but he will easily give me
pardon (as in all other subjects of the like kind) it having scarce ever been
treated on before, by any other Author that I could either meet with, or hear
of.

38. Next Lightening I proceed to the effects of Thunder that have sometimes
happened in this County, which though not quite so deplorable as many mentioned
by Authors, yet being as wonderful in operation as any of them, are therefore
no less remarkable: That Thunder now and then proves mortal to Animals, where
the bolt has fallen any thing near though it never touch them, is evident from
what happened at the Town of Vttoxater Anno 1678. at the House of the worthy
and most courteous Gent. the Worshipful Thomas Kinnersley Esquire where the bolt
piercing the roof of his new Stable and cleaving the Timber in several places,
and passing through two floores, and so through a Saddle that hung by the Walls
into the pavement, though it never touched Mr. Wodenoth's horse of Rocester
then in the Stable (that could be perceived by any mark upon him) yet killed
him out right: But that Thunder should mortally affect Animals at a great
distance, and not near any probable fall of a bolt, is a much greater
difficulty; and yet even this we find asserted from long experience, as I was
informed by the forementioned worthy Gentleman the ingenious Thomas Broughton
of Broughton Esquire who June the 14th 1680. having 15. dosen of Crevices brought
him by a poor man that made it his business to catch them, and finding the
better half of them dead, made enquiry of him what the reason might be; to whom
the Man gave this ready reply, that the late Thunder had done it, and that he
had observed it to have the same effect on them diverse times before; wherein I
am very much inclined to believe him, having found it also at Queenborough in
the Isle of Shepey in Kent, to kill their Lobsters in the like manner, and more
especially those of the larger sise, a fish so altogether analogous to a
Crevice, that they seem only to differ in magnitude, and place of abode.

39. Now that the Horse was killed by the pestilential sulphurous steam that
the bolt brought with it (as I suppose all other Animals are in the like
Circumstances) is plain from the Testimony of the Groom, who had he not been
near the door had hardly escaped it: But how the Crevices should be thus
secretly destroyed where no such stench is perceptible, at least to human
sense? is a much harder problem; nor can it be resolved but in such general
terms, as that the Air is certainly endued by the Thunder with a peculiar
quality that pestilentially affects the juices of these Animals so as to
destroy their temperament; perhaps in the same manner as in. 32. of this
Chapter, which yet may not be perceptible to other Animals: Nay it has
sometimes fallen out that a certain Individual of the same species of Animals
has had a temperament so peculiar as to be violently moved by Thunder, though
at a great distance, others of the same kind being wholly indisturbed, as is
avouched to us by the Learned Dr. Nathaniel Fairfax, concerning one Mrs.
Raymond of Stow-Mercat in the County of Suffolk, who when ever she hears
Thunder even a far off, begins to have a bodily distemper seize on her,
growing faint, sick in her stomach, and ready to vomit, etc Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 29. see more of the secret operations of Thunder Numb. 127.
.

40. After Thunder, that which next falls under consideration, are other more
uncommon Meteors, that have been observed here; such as that seen at a place
called Broad-heath in the parish of Seighford between that and Ranton Abbey
about seven at night near Michaelmass time Anno 1676. by Mr. John Nas^ the
worthy Vicar there; which at a distance (he told me) appeared like a great
fire, but coming nearer, its form and motion were plainer to him, it being of
a globular figure, moveing by jerks and making short rests, at every one of
them letting fall drops of fire, which were part of its body, for it decreased
in magnitude the farther it went, and the oftener it dropped, so that it wholly
disappeared at about 3 quarters of a mile's distance: which upon computation of
time, and other circumstances, I take to be the very same mentioned in our
Philosophical Transactions that was seen in so many distant places of England,
Sept. 20. 1676. about the same time of night, viz. in Kent, Essex, Sussex,
Surry, Hamp-shire, Devon-shire, Sommerset-shire, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire,
Northamptonshire, Worcestershire, and (1 believe I may add) Staffordshire;
whereof there being already so large an account given by the Reverend and
Learned Dr. John Wallis Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of
Oxford Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 135. p. 863, 864.
, I shall add little more concerning it.

41. But that, notwithstanding it appeared at Oxford and Seighford in somewhat
a different shape, and motion; at Oxford somewhat long with a round knob at the
end, and moveing equally swift; at Seighford globular, and making short rests;
yet it still might be the same individual Meteor, which (not to mention the
mistakes perhaps occasioned through the inadvertency of the surprised Relators)
might possibly alter a little in so great a distance: However the thing were,
it was certainly no other than one of the Meteors called Caprae Saltantes, for
I find them both of a round and long figure, and to be so called, not from any
thing they have of a goat, but their moveing by jerks, somewhat like the
lascivious leaps of that Animal, and the little languets of fire that hang at,
and sometimes fall from them, which antiquity has been pleased to fancy like
the beard, or locks of a Goats wool: These frequently fly so high
(notwithstanding they seem very low) that Meteorologists have placed them in
the upper Region, but have not so firmly fixed them there, but that they allow
the like also in the middle, and lower: How high this might be is not easy to
determine, but certainly it could not be very low, it being seen at so many
distant places both in Longitude, and Latitude, so near the same time; which I
presume that an ordinary Meteor in the lower Region could by no means be,
though we allow its motion never so swift. Such a Capra it was that was seen
about the bigness of the Moon, when Paulus Aemilius waged War against Perseus
King of Macedon, Nos quoque vidimus (says Seneca) non semel flammam ingentis
pilae specie, quae tamen in ipso cursu suo dissipata est, i. e. that he also
had seen a flame in the form of a great ball which dispersed it self in its
flight: such another he says was seen upon the departure of Augustus; another
upon the Tragedy of Sejanus; and that the death of Germanicus was signalized by
another L. An. Senecae Not. Quaest. Lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

42. To which add another Meteor also of a globular figure, seen Nov. 22, Anno
1672. about 12. or one at night, not in motion but stationary, against the West
door of Wednesbury Church, by the Ingenious Mr. Miller Vicar there, and two
others in his Company; which shon so bright, that it gave them light (though a
very dark night) at half a miles distance; where it continued for about of an
hours space, and then of a sudden disappeared; whereupon there immediately
followed a great storm of Hail and Rain: And of such as these we have also
plenty of parallel Examples in ancient Histories, Si minore vi mittuntur ignes,
defluunt tantum and insident, non feriunt, nec vulnerant, says Seneca, i. e.
that many times these fiery Meteors only slide down and rest upon fit subjects,
such as the Masts of Ships at Sea, the Spears and Ensigns of Soldiers at land;
Gylippo Syracusas petenti, visa est stella super ipsam lanceam constitisse; in
Romanorum castris visa sunt arderepila, ignibus etc. in illa delapsis, says the
same Seneca Ibidem.
, that there was a fiery Meteor in the shape of a Star that sat upon the spear
of one Gylippus as he was marching to Syracuse, and that the like were
sometimes seen, to be fixed upon the Javelins, amongst the Tents of the Romans.

43. Nor want there instances of the like kind near our own times, for
Fromondus informs us that such another fire sat quietly upon the Standard of
the valiant Colonel William Verdug before the decisive battle of Prague Anno
1620. All which, together with this of ours at Wednesbury, I take only to be
the Helena of the Ancients foretelling great storms and ensuing devastations,
such as the Rape of the Lady whose name they bear, brought upon Greece; the
Physical reason whereof perhaps may be assigned right enough by the Ancients,
viz. that while the Meteor remains compact and indisperst, it is a sign that
the matter of the ensuing tempest is no where spent, as it proved in this of
ours at the Church of Wednesbury, a great storm of hail and rain immediately
following it; whereas when such Meteors are divided, the prognostic is quite
different, it being thence presumed that the matter of the tempest is weak and
broken, the parts whereof anciently were called Castor and Pollux, Deities it
seems so favorable to Seamen, their appearance always boding a prosperous
voyage, that they usually made them the (...) of Ships, as we find them on the
Ship of Alexandria in which St. Paul sailed from Melita to Syracuse Acts 28. v.
11.
.

44. Nor have the Heavens and Air only presented the Eye with unusual Objects,
but also the Ear has sometimes been as much surprised from them: for not to
mention some unknown noises pretended to have been heard about Alrewas, nor the
shreeks as it were of persons about to be murdered said to be heard about
Frodley: We need go no farther for an instance than the same Town of
Wednesbury, where the Colyers will tell you that early in the morning as they
go to their work, and from the Cole-pits themselves, they sometimes hear the
noise of a pack of bounds in the Air, which has happened so frequently that
they have got a name for them, calling them Gabriels hounds, though the more
sober and judicious take them only to be Wild-geese, making this noise in their
flight; which perhaps may be probable enough, for upon consulting the
Ornithologists I find them one of the gregarious migratory kind, to fly from
Country to Country in the night, noctu trajiciunt says Aldrovandus of them
Ulys. Aldrovandi Ornithologiae Lib. 19. cap. 18.
, and to be very obstreperous either when wearye with flying, or their order is
broken, they flying ordine literato after the manner of Cranes.

45. And this perhaps may be the Music that was heard in the Air by Francis
Aldridg of Hammerwich a sober person about two in the morning near Michaelmas
An. 1668. though he described it to be a sort of whistling in the Air, and the
tune more melodious to him than any he ever heard in his life time, before or
since; it being performed he said (as he judged) by some winged creatures, for
he could hear their wings beat the Air, though he could not see any thing by
reason of the darkness: Though some will needs have it a consort of Angels
transporting some blessed Soul that expired hereabout at that time, from grace
to glory, having the unquestionable Testimony of St. Augustine, Nicephorus,
Gregory the great, and diverse others, that such things have happened; for he
said they seemed to take the tune from one another, as if they bore different
parts in the same Antiphone for a quarter of an hour together; much after the
same manner as Johannes Herbinius reports it happened upon the death of
Christopher Suessenbach Pastor of Bicine in Silesia, where such a Consort was
heard also for a quarter of an hour together, all the Town over; some thinking
it in the Tower of the Church, others in the Townhouse, others upon the Walls;
nay so distinctly was it heard, that the Organist of the Town being present,
attempted to prick it down as a celestial pattern for all Church Music, but
all to no purpose, it so far transcended his skill Joh. H^rbinii de Cryptis
Kijoviensibus cap. 6.. 8. com. 7.
.

46. More common are the noises of Storms and Tempests whether of Hail, Rain,
or Wind, though sometimes too, these happen to be very extraordinary, as at
Chebsey the Sunday before St. James tide An. 1659. there fell a storm of Hail,
the stones near as big as pullets eggs, which beat the young apples and leaves
from the trees, and the Cabbage leaves from the stalks so that they appeared
naked; nay so violent was it that it raised a steam in the street so thick that
they could not see cross it; and yet falling perpendicular it broke none of
their windows; as did another storm of Hail that on June 16. An. 1676. fell at
the Village of Dunstall in the Parish of Tatenhill, which as I was informed by
my worthy friend Mr. John Bott also cut the stalks of the Wheat and Barley
(then in spindle) quite asunder, and so the very grass it self; the stones
being some of them near four inches about, and most of them of unequal various
figures. It spoiled also the Peace that were then upon the ground, yet they came
so well again as to be fit for fodder; the Barley also sprang again so well
that they had little less than they expected, only some of it was lighter and
not so fit for Malt: Both which storms were but of small extent, the former
of the two being circumscribed every way within a furlong of the Town; and the
latter (as appeared by the mischief it did) not above a quarter of a mile
broad; and about a mile, or a mile and long.

47. Hither also must be referred all unusual sorts of Rain, whereof the
Ancients have transmitted to us some very prodigious ones, as of Milk, Blood,
Flesh, Iron, Wool, Tiles, bricks, and great Stones C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist.
Lib. 2. cap. 56.58.
; to which Munster, and others add Rats, Mice Vid. Olaum Wormium, Musaei. Lib.
3. cap. 23.
, and Froggs, the latter whereof has been thought by some to have happened in
this County at the Parish of Tixall, at the house of the right Honorable Walter
Lord Aston, and more especially about the Bowling-green, where after a shower
of Rain they have appeared so thick, that it has been found difficult not to
tread on them in walking: Nor will it suffice to say that they came out of
their holes where they lay hid before, upon taste of the sweetness of the
celestial distillattion as some have fancied; for as I was told by that
severely inquisitive Gent. the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire a
near neighbor to the place, they have been sometimes found in great numbers
upon the Leds of the stately Gate House there; whither how they should be
brought otherwise, has been thought equally strange, as that they should come
thither by rain; it being very improbable that they should either crawle up the
walls, or leap up the stairs (could they come at them) they being always but
small, and all of a Size; which too seems to imply that these are not produced
in the ordinary course of Nature, for then we should have had them of different
sizes, according as the Spawne came to perfection sooner or later; so that
Cardan's opinion seems almost necessary to be embraced, that the Spawn or Seed
of Frogs may be either blown from the tops of Mountains, or drawn up with the
vapors out of uliginous places, and be brought to perfection in the Clouds,
and discharged thence in Showers.

48. And indeed I think we must have acquiest in it, but that the same
difficulty seems to press this opinion, as the former; for why should they not
fall from the Clouds, as well as come forth of their caverns, in different
sizes? Besides in all likelihood we should find them all bruised against the
ground, trees, or building, and half dead with their fall, should they come
from thence; than which nothing less: Much rather therefore should I think them
produced upon the surface of the earth. and tops of houses where they are first
found, by a fermentation excited in the dust (which in some places may have a
peculiar disposition for it) by the fall and commixtion of rain water with it,
in hot soultry weather. The ingenious Mr. Bohun Fellow of New-Coll. Oxon,
acquaints us that Sr. Thomas Roe in his East India Voyage met with a sort of
rain, that accompanies the Tornado blasts of that Country, so noisome that it
made their clothes who stirred much in it, to stink upon their backs; and that
the water of those hot and unwhosome showers, would presently bring forth
worms, and other offensive Animals R. Bohun's discourse concerning Winds: page
240. 241.
: And we are told that the rain that falls in the plain called Magotti Savanna
in the Isle of Jamaica, as it settles upon the seams of any Garment (where
dust, if any where, usually lodges) turns in half an hour to Maggots Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 27. p. 500.
.

49. Now if some rains or earths be disposed for the production of worms and
Maggots, why may not others for frogs? especially since the opinion seems to be
strengthened by the concurrent Testimonies of Scaliger and Fallopius: Nos
complutam terram sola aqua (says the former) sine ranis, Gyrinulis tamen post
semihoram scatere totam vidimus, i.e. that he had seen the ground wet only with
water at first, and no frogs appearing, which yet within half an hour has
abounded with imperfect ones Jul. Scaligeri de Subtilitat. Lib. 15. Exercit.
191.
: To whom agrees the latter. vidi inquit aliquando cecidisse guttas quasdam
magnas in pulverem, and statim abortas esse ranulas, that he had sometimes seen
great drops of water fall into dust, and presently after frogs to spring thence
Gabr. Fallopii Tract. de Metal. cap. 9.
. Which solves all the difficulties of their being found on the tops of houses,
as well as below on the ground, that they are all of a size, etc, it being
allowable enough, that an agreeable dust for such a purpose may be carried with
the wind, or otherwise, to such high places, where meeting with rain also well
disposed for the same purpose, may produce such animals there, as well as
below. And thus I suppose it comes to pass for the most part, that some places
on a sudden are thus infested with frogs; I say for the most part, for if it be
true what the ingenious Author of Mercurius Centralis delivers to us viz. that
there is one at this time living, that walking through a low marish ground in
England a foggy morning had his hat almost covered with little frogs that fell
on it as he walked Mercurius Centralis p. 24. 25.
; we must allow Cardan's opinion at least sometimes to be true.

50. As to such rains as are usual and frequent amongst us, I met with nothing
observable concerning them, but an uncommon prognostic when they should
happen, communicated to me by the learned and ingenious Gent. Edwin Skrymsher
of Aqualat Esquire who had it from one Samuel Tailor a person belonging to the
Severne, but employed by Mr. Skrymsher in making his boats for the large, deep,
and most pleasant Mere that stretches it self before his house for above a mile
in length; who foretold them by the Winds backing to the Sun as he called it,
i. e. opposing its course; viz. the Sun moving from East by South to West and
North and so to East again; and the wind from West by South to East and North
and so to West again: Ex. gr. suppose the wind now in the North, if it shift
thence to the East agreeable to the Suns course, it most times proves fair; but
if it back to the Sun and shift Westerly and thence Southerly, etc. so as to
oppose its motion, it seldom fails of bringing rain Vid. Camdens Britannia in
Staffordsh. and chap. 2,. 15. of this History.
; and so in all the other Cardinal and intermediat points: The reason whereof
may be, that the Sun by the same power by which at first it raised the vapors
(of which Clouds consist) now drawing them along with it from East to West, and
the Westerly winds compressing the contrary way, does so condense the spungy
parts of them upon meeting in the South, that thereby they become aqueous, too
weighty for the Sun any longer to sustain, to preponderate the subjacent Air,
and so to descend in showers or rain: whereas when the winds accompany the
motion of the Sun impressed upon the Clouds, as they do from the East, they
attenuat and disperse them, and force a serenity; which seems to be the thing
that Virgil intends by his Juppiter Densans and Rarefaciens.

-- Et Juppiter humidus Austris
Densat erant quae rara modo, and quae densa relaxat Pub. Virgilii Georglc.
Lib. 1. v. 418.

51. Much more accurat and certain was the same Samuel Tailor in predicting the
winds, than the rains that attend them, though even in this too he made use of
the Clouds themselves, which when ever he perceived to rise in the form of the
letter V, jagg'd on each side, and therefore called by the watermen the
Harts-head; he forth with concluded infallibly that the next point of the
Compass to which the wind should shift, would be either the opposite one to the
most patulous part of the V or Harts-head (which though happens but seldom) or
the point to which the acute angle of the same Harts-head seems nearest to
direct it self, and this most frequently happens, always one of the two; which
I am told is a truth that no water-man whatever that sails the Severne will
call into question: And indeed I do not doubt but the latter of the two must
needs be most frequent, since we see in Aeolipiles, Winde-Guns and all other
explosions of Air, that it still spreads as it proceeds from the terminus a
quo; well therefore may it be concluded that the wind must proceed from that
quarter, whence the Clouds appear more patulous and open; as the Ancients
observed it in Halo's, which if entire and well defined argued a calm season,
but if rent or broken on any side, they expected a wind from that point of the
Heavens, on which the Cirque of the Halo was interrupted: Inde ventum Nautici
expectant, unde contextus Coronae perit, says Seneca L. An. Senecae Not. Quest.
Lib. 1. cap. 2.
, that the Mariners expected a wind from that quarter of the world on which the
parts of the Circle were discontinued: with whom agrees my Lord Verulam, who
amongst his prognostics numbering this, qua part is Circulus se aperuerit,
expectetur ventus says he Hist. de Ventis inter prognostica ad Artic. 32., 8.
, let the wind be expected from that point of the Horizontal arch, where the
Circle opens it self.

52. Which perhaps indeed may be some of the most certain prognostics we can
hope for of winds, but then we must restrain them to such as have their origin
in the middle Region, from the rarefaction of vapors by the Sun, either before
or after their coalition into Clouds: which rarefaction making a greater
repletion, and consequently a protrusion that way where the Medium is most
yiedling, causes a wind from such or such a peculiar point of the Compass
rather than any other, and is certainly shown by the opening of the more loose
and floating Clouds (those whence we expect wind being not so dense or opacous
as those pregnant with showers) which are sensible of the impression for some
time, before the Air here below is assimulated to the motion begun at so great
a distance; where nothing intervening to control or interrupt its course, it
is propagated in a right line, and is much more certain than any wind generated
either from the Aeolian caverns of the Earth, or the lower Region, which are
obnoxious in great measure to the situation of the Countries through which they
pass, making Maeanders, deflections and undergoing various repercussions,
according as they meet with Forests, Promontories, Mountains, or winding
Valleys betwixt them, in their way; though indeed in the wide Seas, and open
level Countries, these winds are near as regular, as those that blow aloft; as
they really would be every where, were the terraqueous Globe of a uniform
superficies.

53. Nor heard I of any thing more relating to winds, but that not long since
betwixt Offley-hay and Slindon, there happened a Typhon or Tornado-wind, which
though not above forty yards broad (as appeared by the mischief it did) or
extending it self in length above three or four Miles, yet was so powerful as
it passed through a Coppice near Sr. John Pershal's house of great Sugnal that
it tore up the greatest Oaks by the roots and made as it were a Vista through
it, as was showed me by the courteous and obliging Gent. Mr. Bosvile of Byanna,
which I take to have been done by a dip of wind, expressed obliquely from a
narrow passage betwixt two Clouds as in Tab. 1. fig. 10. which meeting with
some cross wind or denser part of the Atmosphere at A, was thrown violently
toward the ground at B which take for Offley-hay, was strongest at C which
suppose to be Sugnal, and rose again at D which may pass for Slindon, and so
mounted into the Air again to E, out of all distance for doing any further
harm, curleing it self into a Helix after the manner of Tornado's, as Mr. Bohun
in his discourse of the Origin of Winds has ingeniously expressed it R. Bohun
of Winds. p. 19.
: whence it is easy to collect both the reason of the narrowness and brevity of
this wind, and why the greatest force must be needs in the middle. As also of
the narrow and short storm of Hail that happened at Dunstal, mentioned. 46. of
this Chapter.

54. And now having so long entertained the Reader with the serious and
sometimes Melancholy effects, let me refresh him a little with the Sports, of
Nature; such as a new discourse with the Nymph Echo, a Mistress notwithstanding
what is discovered in Oxfordshire, yet has new intrigues, and must farther be
courted, before she will thoroughly be understood; not but that I think the
distribution and admeasurement of Echo's is rightly and fully assigned in that
History; but that I have met with some here, that though they may all be
reduced to some one or other of the species there mentioned Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. cap. 1.. 14.
, yet differ from them all in some considerable circumstances, by no means to
be past by without observation: And such is the Echo near the Church at the
parish of Tatenhill, which will return four or five syllables at least, though
spoken almost with as low a voice as we ordinarily use in our common discourse;
the object of which Echo or the Centrum phonocampticum, is certainly enough the
Tower of the Church, and the place of the speaker or centrum phonicum an
opposite Hill due Westerly from it, upon the bank side under the Hedge, whence a
line being drawn to the Tower, directly falls upon it at right angles; the
distance between the two Centers being not above 70. yards or thereabout, which
is the thing wherein this Echo is extraordinary: for whereas Blancanus will not
admit that any one syllable can be returned clear and distinctly under 24.
Geometrical paces, 120 feet, or 40 yards distance from the object Jos. Blancani
Echonometria Theorem. 5.
; and Mersennus by no means under 69 feet or 23 yards: this returns a
syllable in 42 feet or 14 yards. i. e. five syllables at least in 210 feet or
70 yards accounting modestly (for I believe it will return more if spoken
quick) which is the most by far in so little a space, that I ever yet read or
heard of.

55. At the same Town of Tatenhill I was told of another by the Reverend Mr.
Masters Rector of the place, that near his Parsonage house, there was once an
Echo that so strangely depended on Frosty weather, that it returned an answer
at no other time: And I was informed by the ingenious Mr. Miller Vicar of
Wednesbury that there is a very distinct Echo there, when the windmill windows
stand open toward the Church, otherwise none at all, two of the three windmils
there, answering the five Bells orderly and distinctly, which seems to be a
cogent argument that though the Cavities 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Offley Hay. o o Slindon.

To the learned and ingenious Gent. FRANCIS WOLFER STAN of STATFOLD Esquire This
first Table consisting chiefly of ^uch matters as relate to his own
objecvations, in memory of his asai^tance is gratefully dedicated by R. P. L.
L. D.



Burgh. sculp.
of buildings do contribute to Echo's, yet they avail but little, unless there
be actual admission of the voice into them. Both which are extraordinary in
their respective kinds, but wholly depend upon the authority of the Relators,
for being at Tatenhill in August, and at Wednesbury when the wind did not serve
for my purpose, I had no opportunity of examining either.

56. Other Echo's there are none so very different from those of Oxfordshire as
the three above mentioned, nor indeed are there any of the same kind, so very
considerable as that of Woodstock Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 1.. 15.
; the best polysyllabical articulat Echo's we have in this County, are 1. that
of Dunston in a field west of the Chapel, where in the path way at due
distance from it, you may have a return of seven or eight syllables; and so you
may 2. From Elmhurst-Hall in a Meddow to the South-East of it. But 3. that
which comes nearest to Woodstock, and indeed is the best of the kind in the
County, is that at Norbury, North-easterly from the Manor near a little bank
under the wood side about 80. poles or 440. yards distant, which in a still day
will repeat 10. or a 11. syllables distinctly, or 12. or 13, if spoken quick;
the Object whereof must needs be the Manor for there can be none nearer
whatever there may be further off, and yet in this, as at Woodstock (however it
was at Tatenhill) if we take the Manor for the object, there will go 120 feet
or 40 yards to each syllable, or if further off (for the voice methinks seems
to pass by the Manor, to the trees on the left hand of it) perhaps twice as
much; which instructs us we must allow a much greater Latitude in these
matters; though of the same kind, than has hitherto been thought of.

57. But as for Tautological polyphonous Echo's, such as return a word or more
often repeated from diverse objects by simple reflection, there are as good
here, or perhaps better than any in Oxfordshire; there being one at Beaudesart
in the little Park about the middle of the path that leads from the pale to the
House, that from a treble object answers distinctly three times: And another
near Hampsted (The seat of the much honored and my truly noble Patron, the
right worshipful Sr. John VVyrley Knight.) on the bank side in a field
South-easterly from the house, that from a quadruple Object, answers as
distinctly four times, though the objects indeed be as obscure as the matter of
fact is plain und evident; which perhaps may be as good an one of this kind, as
one shall easily meet with, all the objects and returns being still more
remote, and weaker, than one another; the second than the first, the third than
the second, and the fourth than the third, and so onward; so that after four
returns, the fifth is most commonly out of the reflex action of the voice.

58. Unless in such Echo's as have diverse objects placed so near together, and
near at hand, that though they scarce will admit of a Dissyllable, yet by
numerous reflections to and froe from one object to another, will return a Hum
or clap with the hands much more quick and frequently, perhaps some of them ten
or a dosen times or more, the voice or clap fadeing as it were, or dying away
by degrees in a trembling manner, rateably to the remoteness and weakness of
the reflections. And such a tremulous Echo there is (for I cannot fit it with a
better Epithet) at Elmhurst-Hall on the tarras walk in the Garden behind the
house, where the various windings and angles of the walls, return a hum or clap
with the hands (the weather being calm) ten or a dosen times, so thick and
close that it admits of nothing articulat unless we may account a monosyllable
so. Which was shown me by the Worshipful Michael Biddulph Esquire the Proprietor of
the place, whose favors have been so signal in promoting this work, that I
could do no less in gratitude than represent the House in Sculpture Tab. 2. it
being one of the chief seats of the Family, and as uniform, splendid, and
commodious a building as most in the County.

59. And these are all the Echo's I thought worthy notice, whereof I have only
given a summary discourse relating chiefly to matter of fact, the Philosophy of
them having been already laid down in my History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. chap. 1. from. 14. to 31.
, whither for brevity sake I refer the Reader least I should seem as
Tautological as some of the Echo's: Nor have I more to add of Aerial matters
but a very odd experiment relating to sounds, which as I was informed by the
learned and ingenious the Worshipful William Chetwynd of Rugeley Esquire is
constantly practiced amongst the Operators in Iron, who carrying on their work
day and night, and sleeping by turns, notwithstanding the great noise of the
water and Hammers, take their rest as quietly and indisturb'd as other
Mortals, yet when their time allowed for sleep is expired, and there is
occasion for them, are all awakened with a little blow (or tanck) upon a pair
of their tongues (which is the common means they use for that purpose) though a
noise incomparably less, than what was made in the Mill before, during the time
of their rest: Whence we may infallibly conclude that great noises if they are
customary and constant do not affect so much as lesser noises provided they are
sudden and unusual; nor sometimes so much as no noise at all; the absolute
privation of a customary noise being as disturbing as an unusual one: as was
attested to me by a Reverend Clergyman who living next door to a Brasier,
though To the Wor^p the generous and much honored Gent. MICHAEL BIDDULPH of
ELMHURST Esquire This 2nd. Table Showing the N. E. Front of ELMHURT HALL as a pledge
of my Gratitude for recevi'd favors is humbly dedicated by, R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers detin. et sculp.
depiction of Elmhurt Hall indeed he was disturbed at first, yet the noise at
last grew so agreeable to him, that removing after to a Parsonage in the
Country, he wanted his Brasier so much, that he protested to me he could not
steddily apply himself to his business till after he had been there a
considerable time. And as it is in sounds, so it is in motion, the absolute
privation whereof, if it have been (though but a small time) constant, will
disturb ones quiet, as I have found it by people a sleep in a Coach, who during
the motion notwithstanding the jolts and rubbs, have continued their rest but
upon the Coaches stoping though gradually done, have all presently awakened.

60. To conclude, these are all the observations I could make my self, or hear
of from others relating to the Heavens and Air, and to this County; unless I
should have taken upon me to have given some account of the late prodigious
Comet in Dec. 80. which I might indeed have done from the accurat observations
of my worthy Friend the worshipful Francis Wolferstan of Statfold Esquire but
having lodged them in a much better hand than my own for that purpose, and the
Comet it self relating as well to other Countries and Kingdoms as this, I
choose rather to pass it by, only taking notice that they generally happen in
Winter; upon or after considerable Frosts; and (with Gaffarel) that they
occasion great droughts, which inflame Men's blood and drive them into Frensies
J. Gaffarel 's unheard of Curiositys Part. 4.. 11.
(witness this following year 81) and as my Lord Bacon well observes, that
those droughts bring an open beginning of winter, the former heat still bearing
the sway, and yet hindering a sufficient multiplication of vapors Not. Hist.
Cent. 9. Experim. 814.
. All which having happened precisely after this, will I hope procure our
observation of them, after another Comet.

CHAP. II. Of the Waters.
1. THe learned, and therefore truly Noble Philosopher, my Lord Viscount St.
Albans, in his History of Life and Death, or prolongation of Life; as well
considering the consumption of the body of Man, as reparation of it; the one
being as much to be prevented, as the other promoted; in the former of these
makes the ambient Air of eminent concern; some sorts of it being as predatory
and wastful of the body, as others again are comfortable and refreshing: Whence
it is that Persons of plentiful Estates, that have (as we say) the world at
will, and are not tied to a single Seat; either build or make choice of one for
their most common residence, that is situat in a good and wholesome Air: where
by Air they intend not the simple Element of the Ancients, for in this sense
all Air (if there be any such thing) is equally pure; but that somewhat grosser
substance that immediately incompasses the terraqueous Globe, wherein we daily
breath, live, and have our being; which is commonly filled with all sorts of
Exhalations, and is comparatively good or bad, healthy or otherwise; as it
partakes more or less, of wholesome or noxious, vapors or fumes; exhaled either
from quick liveing streams, or stagnant pooles and uliginous boggs; from dry
wholesome Soils, or mineral Earths. Which seeming indeed the more immediate
causes of sickness or health than the pure Air, that being only the vehicle of
diseases, and not fundamentally good or bad, but by participation, as was
hinted in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 1.. 32.
; it is plain that the consideration of the health of this County, rather
belongs to this place, and the following Chapter, than to the former of Air.

2. But that the Reader may not only be amused with generals, let us treat of
this matter more distinctly than usual, and strictly examine whether this Air we
breath in, do indeed so much affect the body of Man as is commonly pretended;
and if so, which it is that comfort and conserveth it most, and which most
preyeth upon it, so as to hasten its consumption; that certainly being to be
esteemed the most healthy, that prolongeth; and that the most unhealthy, that
abridgeth its duration: Wherein I shall not need to trouble the Reader with any
of the nice Experiments of the Air-Pump, whereof some not unfitly might have
been reduced to this subject; nor with a profound explication of the flammula
Cordis, or what ever else it is that continually gives accension to our blood,
and is cherish't by the gentle refocillations of the Air: It being sufficient
for my purpose, and evident even to rural Observators; first that the Air,
impregnated with vapors and fumes (such as is the Atmosphere wherein we breath)
does sensibly affect the body of Man; witness the common fumigations made in
hysterical diseases to recall the Spirits, and the too too common Experiment of
Drunkenness; with which no question its more inartificial operations bear some
proportion, though they are not so sensible.

3. It being plain then that the Air as it may be variously qualifyed does
affect the Spirits and humors, and consequently the whole Crasis of the body:
it remains secondly that we show which Airs they be, that most refresh and
preserve it; and on the contrary which prey upon it, so as either to consume it
gradually, or destroy it on a sudden: for the clearer disquisition of which
matter I must premise some postulata, which I need not to doubt (I think) but
will be easily granted, since they are such only as are universally agreed on:
As first that the blood principally, and other humors; are the subjectum in
quo, or vehicle of the spirits by which the Animal operations of the body are
performed; and 2. that the more the spirits, flammula, or heat do prey upon the
humors, or the humors oppress the spirits, so much the shorter is the
continuance of that body; and that therefore 3. in order to a lasting duration,
the spirits ought to be kept in such a moderate temper, that (as the Lord Bacon
well observes Hist. of Life and Death, Intent. 1. Operat. 1. Numb. 10.
) they should be in their substance; dense, not rare: in Quantity; sufficient
for the offices of life, not redundant or turgid: in heat; strong, not eager:
in motion; sedate, not fluttering and unequal: And 4. that the humors should
also be moderatly dense; not thick, or too fluid: sufficient; and not
multiplied to excess, so as either to clog or extinguish the spirits: all which
being granted (and I think no body will deny them) it will naturally follow

4. That Air too much heated either by the reflex beams of the Sun, or by
Mineral fumes (above the heat of the ambient Air of the Clime) must be none of
the healthiest: for (to omit the inflamed scorching Air on the banks of
Euphrates that sometimes suddenly stifles passengers, and the burning-winds of
Arabia and Persia, in their Annals there called Bad Semum Bohuns disc. of the
Origin of Winds. p. 177, 178, 180.
) this even in Europe frequently exalts the spirits to such a redundancy, that
they become eager and violent in their motion, so as to occasion Feavors,
Frensies, Calentures; which do not sip, but rather carouse upon the juices,
till at length they are all exhausted, and the body brought to a final
Arefaction: Or at least so opens the pores, and rarefies the spirits that some
of them fly away, which thickens the blood and humors by a sort of Evaporation,
and so gradually desiccates them, and at length brings the body to an early old
Age, as it happens in Africa amongst the Negroes, whose lives, says Leo, are
are very short Leo Afer his description of Africa. Lib. 1.
, their bodies undergoing through the heat of their Clime so quick an
arefaction, that as Crescentiensis reports, they are old at thirty Petri
Crescentiensis de Agricultura, Lib. 1. cap. 5.
To prevent these depredations of over heated Air, even in this temperat Zone,
the Ancients were so careful, that they declined not either the trouble or
charge, of anointing their bodies all over with Oil, thereby filling up the
pores, and preventing both the flight of the spirits, and all manner of other
injuries from the external Air.

5. Thus Pollio Romulus (and Johannes de temporibus, as my Lord Verulam also
acquaints us Hist. of Life and Death. Intent. 1. Operat 2. Numb. 13.
,) who was above a hundred years old, preserved it seems his body to that
extreme old Age; for being ask't by Augustus (who then lodged at his house)
what means he had used to maintain that vigor of body and mind, he saw, he
enjoyed; answered intus mulso, foris oleo C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist. Lib. 22.
cap. 24.
; i. e. that he used Metheglin within, and Oil without: which, says Roger
Bacon upon the place, in the MS. Preface before his book de Retardatione
Senectutis (which was never printed with the book it self) was an Oil
mentioned in the Chapter de his quae naturalem virtutem excitant, whither I
refer the Reader for satisfaction about it In Praefat. ad Libellum de
Retardatione senect MS. in Bib. Bodl.
. The same Roger Bacon also further acquaints us that a certain British Lady
whom he calls Dominam de Tormeri Alias de Nemore in Epist. Baconi ad
Parisiensem, cap. 7.
found an ointment wherewith her Woodward having anointed himself all but the
soles of his feet, lived three hundred years without any pain but in his feet
In Libello, de mirabili potestate Artis and Naturae, di^to.
. The ancient Britans painted their bodies with woad and were exceeding long
lived; and some have thought the Picts had their name from hence; it is certain
the Brasilians paint themselves at this day, and are very long lived; as if
painting did preserve the living body, as oil colors and varnish do dead wood
and Iron.

6. Yet much worse is this Air if both heated by the Sun, and filled with
noisome stinking vapors, exhaled from stagnant waters, Moors or Boggs, nothing
more quickly or certainly induceing putrefaction than the concurrent operations
of excessive heat and moisture; the former procuring a more easy access for the
vapors judicial than the primary ones could have possibly been without them;
such Foggs and Steams stagnating in the valleys and amongst trees, and heating
much more there than in any plain, the rays of the Sun being contracted and
strengthened in these hollowes, much after the manner we see they are by a
Concave glass; whereas if either happen in an open Country, or upon riseing
ground, without woods or groves within a competent distance, there is seldom
such a calm, but that the Wind at least will ventilate, if not strongly
disperse them, so that they can be little prejudicial to the adjacent
Inhabitants: And therefore says Petrus Crescentiensis, qui loca elegit
habitabilia, cognoscere debet quommodo ejus exislit dispositio secundum
altitudinem and profunditatem, discooperturam and cooperturam -- and si sit
ventis exposita, aut in terra profunda Pet. Crescentiensis de Agricult. Lib. 1.
cap. 5.
i. e. That whoever makes choice of a seat, must be satisfied how it is situat,
whether on a Hill or in a Vale; open, or close covered; whether exposed to the
winds, or in a deep hollow Country: whereof which is the better, is determined
both by Varro M. Ter. Varronis de re Rustica, Lib. 1. cap. 12.
and Baptista Porta J. Bapt. Portae, Villae Lib. 1. cap. 22.
, potius in sublimi loco aedificet, qui quod perflatur, etc. rather let him
build, say they, in a high place that is continually ventilated, where if any
thing incommode him it will easily be dispersed by the brisk piercing gales.
Which naturally brings me next

9. To the consideration of that acute purifying air, which being neither
heated above the usual constitution of the Clime, nor filled with moist thick
slimy vapors, but rarified by the Sun to a useful serenity, and sharpened by an
agreeable portion of Niter, so cooles and cherishes both the spirits and humors
by a gentle ventilation (carrying off the fuligines arising from the accension
of the blood whether in the Lungs or Heart) that both are kept in due temper;
neither prevailing, but both mutually preserving each other to a most lasting
duration: And this it is we may justly call healthy Air, that has heat enough
to cherish that Platonic flame Ignis ille qui (...), Lumen and splendour
nuncupatur, qui lucct, sed non ardet. Plato in Timaeo.
in the blood, so as to make it shine, but not burn; and moisture enough to
help to conserve that gentle fire, but not drown or extinguish it; all which
seems most evidently made out to be thus indeed by the Aerial Noctiluca of the
Honorable Mr. Boil, and by the solid Phosphorus of my ingenious Friend
Frederick Slare M. D. made for the most part out of Urine, and might as well
(He thinks) have been out of blood, could it have been procured in as great
quantities, since Urine is its Recrement separated by the Kidneys; which
whenever exposed to the air in its ordinary temper (as I saw it in Nov. 1681.)
only shines illustriously, but if held to the fire, breaks out into a violent
flame, and if immerged into water, is presently restinguisht.

10. And this, I say this, is that subtle refined air, that refrigerates the
spirits, that cherishes the humors, and gives them both their due condensation;
neither exalting the one or the other so far, as that the spirits either fly
away or prey upon the humors; or the humors overwhelm or drown the spirits;
that renders a Man long-lived, most healthful and free from all manner of
infirmities both of body and mind; that keep him sound, lusty, vegete and
nimble; and makes him cheerful, quick, witty, subtle, and what not? Which
whoever would enjoy in the highest perfection, must ascend the dry gravelly
barren hills, and place his seat there, as the Emperor Constantine advises,
(...) Constantini Caesaris Pogonati dict. (...).
. We ought to build, says he, in high places where there is a delicate
prospect, where one may see all over the Country; where the reflected beams of
the Sun are but of small force, at least not strong enough to make the air any
thing predatory by reason of heat; or of moisture, upon account of the drought
or barrenness. I know

11. Cato and Columella commend a rich fruitful Soil whereon to place their
Villa Columellae de re Rustica Lib. 1. cap. 2. M. Porcii Catonis de re Rustica,
Lib. 1. cap. 1.
; but they describe the Farm, where indeed the commodity is commonly more
regarded, than health; and not the Hall or Manor (as the Gentleman's seat is
usually called in this County) which ought to be situat, not upon or near the
best Soil which commonly yields the worst air, but on a dry riseing ground at
least, if not on a Hill, where there are no standing Waters or Mines in the
valleys below, to occasion vapors or fumes, nor thick woods or groves to hinder
the dispersing them, whenever they do (if at any time) happen, or preclude the
pleasure of a far and wide prospect. Where by the way, let the Reader take
notice, that I only exclude stagnant Waters, Mines in low and close valleys and
thick woods; and not so far mistake me, as if I thought plenty of waters and
mines, or large woods and groves a dishonor to a County; for in these consist
both the pleasures and riches of it; where the waters flow from quick and
living springs, the Mines are work't on high or open Countries, and the woods
lie dispersed at due distance, and if any thing large, have lawnes or vista's
cut through them; as they are usually found all over this County, as shall be
shown of each in their respective places.

12. Though it be true indeed that those places that are situate highest, and
enjoy the fewest waters, mines and woods, must undoubtedly be the healthiest,
in proportion as they are free from one, more, or all of them; Upon which
account I take Swynerton, the Village of Beech and all the Hill Country betwixt
that and Trentham (being void of most, if not all of these) to be the
healthiest spot of Ground in all the County, which seems amply to be made out
by an observation they have there, viz. that they have three Christenings for
one Buryal: Nor comes the Town of Wolverhampton far behind it, being situat
high and where they have but four weak Springs to supply that large Town, which
too rise all together behind the Cock-Inn (so that they may be esteemed but as
one) having different names appropriated to their respective uses, as the
Pudding-well, the Horse-well, the Washing-well, and the Meat-well, from which
last they fetch all the water they use for Meat or Drink all over the Town in
great leather Budgets or Boraccia's laid cross a horse with a tunnel at the top
whereby to fill them, such as they use much in Spain, and some other Towns in
England as York, Worcester, etc. bringing to the other three, their Tripes,
Horses and Linen. From which scarcity of waters and high situation it is, that
notwithstanding the adjacent Cole-mines they enjoy a more settled health than
most of their Neighbors, as breathing a more subtle and refined Air, and that
too so liable to ventilation that if at any time fumes do arise from the Mines,
they are quickly dispersed: Whence perhaps it comes to pass, that the Plague
has scarce ever been known in this place, but the small Pox frequently, both
signs of salubrity as has been shown in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh.
cap. 2.. 9.
.

13. To which may be added the Parish of Cannock (vulgarly Cank) and all the
dry hills and gravelly plains of Cank-wood, as Tropically so called as Lucus a
non lucendo, now the woods are most destroyed, and the Wind and Sun admitted in
so plentiful a manner between the Coppices, which at due distance now only
crown the summits of some few hills, such as Gentle-Shaw, Stile-Cop, etc. and
afford a most pleasant prospect to Passengers: the Plains or Hays below in
great part being covered only with the purple odoriferous Ling, as that
excellent Poet, Mr. Masters of New College in his Iter Boreale is pleased to
call it, who (having past by Cank town) thus most exquisitly describes it Tho.
Masteri Iter Boreale, page 5.
. Hinc mihi mox ingens Ericetum complet ocellos,
Sylva olim, passim Nymphis habitat a ferisque:
(Condensae quercus, domibus res nata struendis,
Ornandoque foco, and validae spes unica classis)
Nunc umbris immissa dies; Namque aequore vasto
Ante, retro, dextra, laeva, quo lumina cunque
Verteris, una humili consurgit vertice planta,
Purpureoque Erice tellurem vestit amictu,
Dum floret, suaves and naribus adflat odores:
Haec ferimus saltem amissae solatia sylvae.
The Parish of Aldridge in the confines of Cank seems also to partake of the
like dry gravelly constitution, lying high, and solo sicco as Hippocrates would
have it Hippocrat. (...).
; and Mr. Burton seems to commend the Parish of Hanbury in the Margin of
Needwood for such a lofty situation Anatomy of Melancholy, Part. 2. Sect. 2.
Memb. 3. sub finem.
;

14. Both which no doubt enjoy a fresh, pleasant air, though I must confess I
should have liked them considerably better, had they been thinner beset with
trees and enclosures; unless the buildings had surmounted the tops of them all,
so as to have been more exposed to the ventilations of the Air, as at Dudley
Castle whose magnificent ruins as well as habitable part (built on a lofty
rock) notwithstanding the shrubbs and trees all about it, are mounted so high
above them all, as not only to afford a most wholesome air, but a delicat
prospect over the County below it, as the Reader cannot but be satisfied it
must needs do from the Sculpture of it Tab. 3. which notwithstanding its ruins
(the marks of its Loyalty in the late Civil war) yet remains the Seat of the
right Honorable Edward Lord Ward Baron of Birmingham, a person of most
exemplary fidelity to his Prince, and a most noble encourager of this Work, and
is therefore here represented wrought off a Copper plate, that I might
gratefully render his Lordships munificence as immortal as the brass. Had, I
say, Aldridg or Hanbury thus lifted themselves up above the trees and
enclosures, their Situations had certainly been much better; and therefore I
much wonder that the observing Mr. Burton should omit the Situation of Tutbury
Castle, being so near a neighbor, mounted on a hill toping all the trees and
buildings near it, and overlooking Darbyshire and all the Country round to the
East, West and North, like Acrocorinthus the old Castle of Corinth, whence
Greece, Peloponnesus, the Ionian and Aegean Seas were semel and simul at one
view to be seen. Abbots, alias Apwood Castle in the Confines of Shropshire has
much such another situation, overlooking that County to the South and West to a
vast distance: But that which excells them all for a prospect is the old Castle
hill above Beaudesart, which is elevated so high above all the Country near,
that it commands the Horizon almost all round, whence it is said may be seen the
nine several Counties of Stafford, Darby, Leicester, Warwick, Worcester, Salop,
Chester, Montgomery and Flint.

15. And indeed this County is full of such high situations that must needs be
happy in a cool, serene air, as Bentley, Bradwal, Aulton and Stone Lodges, and
many others; but such as these most commonly having too little water, and
sometimes (in winter) too much Wind, for the coldness of our Clime: Others have
thought more expedient to build their Seats somewhat lower, still provided on a
dry and gravelly Soil, as Gerards Bromley, Trentham, Drayton Manor, etc. of
which more in due place: or else at most but on the sides of hills, for the
more convenience of water and shelter from the wind when in some points of the
Compass, as Beaudesart and Ingestre-Hall; which is also agreeable to the
Emperor Constantines directions, for says he (...) Constantini Caesaris
Pogonati dict. (...).
. The most healthy places are both on the tops and descents of hills faceing
the North, the winds from thence blowing cool and dry, whereas those from the
South are hot and moist, and therefore unwholesome: Yet Baptista Porta on the
contrary will by all means have the front of a house to stand to the South Joh.
Baptist. Pertae, villae, Lib. 1. cap. 22.
, to whom agrees Stephanus a Frenchman, approving especially the descent of a
hill to the South ot Southeast, with trees to the North Praedii rustic. Lib. 1.
cap. 4.
; which indeed may both be true or false, according to the different Clime for
which each opinion was calculated, the Emperors being most agreeable to the
Southern, and the other to the more frigid Northern regions, especially where
the East and South wind which in other places usually brew rains, bring fair
weather; as Mr. Camden observes they do in this County, unless (as was observed
chap. 1.. 50.) when the wind turns from West to South.

16. For the South, says Porta, is not every where unhealthy Auster non ubique
insalubris. Ibidem.
, but as Palladius also accounts it, most comfortable in the Winter and cool in
the Summer, and therefore advises, Totius fabricae tractus unius lateris
longitudine in quo frons erit meridianam partem respiciat, in primo angulo
excipiens or tum solis hyberni, and paululum ab occidente avertatur hyemali;
ita proveniet ut per hyemem sole illustretur, and calores ejus aestate non
sentiat Rutilii Pallad^^ de re Rustica, cap. 8. de Adificio.
, i. e. that the tract of the whole building all the length of that side in
which the front is designed, be placed to the South, so as at the first corner
or end to receive the rays of the riseing Sun in winter, and that it be turned
a little away from the winter West; whence it will come to pass that it shall
enjoy the Sun all winter, and the shade all Summer. To which last prescriptions
there are two Seats in this County viz. Ingestre and Enfield Halls, so exactly
conformable, that neither Stephanus or Palladius themselves, had they had the
building them, could have possibly contrived them more to their own minds; both
being situat upon declivities, fronting the South and open to the East, and
fenced to the West (as all agree buildings ought to be, the western winds being
the most pernicious of any) with trees that are also fit for shade in the
Summer, and both well watered; which perhaps may be two as agreeable patterns
for an English situation, as can any where be met with.

17. For whatever the ancients have written in commendation of the lofty, dry,
and open situations (which perhaps may be best in hotter Climes) ours in
England ought neither to be without trees for shade, which may be Oak, Ash or
Elm planted pretty thick and close to the building to the West and North, that
they may serve too for shelter against the injuries of those Quarters; and if
it shall seem good to have any for walks or other ornaments to the East or
South they ought to be set further off, and had best either be trimmed Cypress
or Yew, or best of all Firrs, these being most pervious to the wind, as at
Ingestre Hall: Nor ought the English situation to be altogether dry, but
watered if possible with a quick and clear stream as at Enfield Hall; wherein
these two delicat seats mutually excel one another: there being little danger
of foggs riseing at all, much less of their continuance, where the trees are
planted sparsim and always capable of ventilations, and the Currents be swift
as they are generally in this County. which brings me next to

18. A more close consideration of waters, wherein perhaps it may be expected
that I should determine also their goodness and badness, as before of Air; but
the healthyness and unhealthyness of the Air depending so much upon the
goodness and badness of the waters as has been shown above, it seems so far to
have been performed already, that it may well suffice here to add in general
(which perhaps may pass for an Aphorism) that as that air is counted best that
comes nearest the pure Ether, and that the worst which is filled most with
Exhalations and comes nearest water; so that is to be esteemed the best water
which comes nearest air, and that the worst which is stagnant, muddy, and
filled with terrestrieties, and comes nearest Earth: In a word, would thou
have a wholesome water indeed for thy common use? choose that which has neither
color, taste, or smell, from Salts or Sulphurs, or as little of them as may be;
for these will some way or other affect thy meats or drinks, or whatever else
thou employest them about, otherwise than thou did intend they should. that
is to say choose those that will receive heat, and cool sooner than others;
into which a glass Hydrometer or water-Gage, or any other natant weighty body
will sink deepest; or which will cause least refraction; all which argue a
freedom from Salts and Sulphur, wherewith waters are sometimes so highly sated,
that an ordinary fire will scarce stir them; that they will bear an Egg, and
much magnify and refract an object seen through them:

19. Whereas the waters that are thin, clear, and void of these, and come any
thing near the nature of air, quickly boil; are less buoyant; and scarce will
show any sensible refraction; whereof Vitello gives us an eminent example of
one that he saw in the subterranean cavity of a Mountain at a place called
Cubalus between Padua and Vincentia that was so very thin and clear, that what
ever was put in it, would appear of the same figure and magnitude to sense, as
if only air interposed Vitellonis Opticae, Lib. 10. Theorem. 42.
: And we are told that the water of the River Silos in India, is so rare and
tenuious that it will not support the weight of Ships Lib. Fromondi Meteorolog.
Lib. 5. cap. 3, artic. 3.
. Both which no question, and all others that come near them, must needs be
excellent for all common uses, being so indifferent to all; having few or no
Salts or Sulphurs whereby to introduce any extraneous unagreeable tastes or
odors: I say for all common uses relating to meats or drinks, or other household
affairs; all the Saline and Sulphurious waters having also their uses, variety
of mixture commending the Medicinal, as much as purity does the ordinary
springs: of both which in their order.

20. And first of those of more common use; whereof though there be none indeed
that come very near, much less equal those of Cubalus and Silas; yet I am
confident there are as many, perhaps more clear limpid Springs, as free from
foreign qualities, that rise in this County, as in any part of England, of
the like quantity of ground: For besides that the great and profluent river of
Trent (which says Camden is justly reputed the third River of England Camdens
Britannia in Staffordsh.
) rises in this County, out of New-poole (belonging to the right worshipful
and ingenious Gent. Sr. John Bowyer Baronet one of the noblest Promoters of
this design) and two other Springs near Mole Cop, and Horton Hay; its
subservient branches of Sow, Penk, Tame, Dove, Churnet, Blithe, Tene, Manyfold,
Hans or Hamps, Rewle, Black-brook, Lyme, Swarbourn, Dunsmoore, Endon, and
innumerable other Rindles that fall into them, also rise within the County, and
most of them within less than thirty miles of the Western Sea; yet all make
Eastward, and discharge themselves with Trent into Humber, and so at length
into the German Ocean, near an hundred miles from their first rise. Whence the
learned and ingenious Sr. Simon Degg Knight (whose assistances I must always
gratefully acknowledge) has some thoughts that the Eastern, may be much lower
than the Western Sea; the descent of Trent through Staffordshire, Derbyshire,
Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire seeming much greater, than the Dane, and some
other branches of the River Wever, that rise about Biddulph, Talk on the hill,
Audley, Betley, and Madeley, can possibly have through the level County of
Chester into the Irish Sea. Of which perhaps more hereafter in due time and
place Vid... 84, 85, 86. of this Chapter.
.

21. Nor has Trent only and Wever these great supplies of water from the
fountains of this County, but many branches of the Severn (the second River of
England) have their rise here also, as the Terne, Smestal, Flashbrook, and the
others that come forth Aqualat and Snowdon poole: To which add that the Meese,
Stour, and Severn it self (the only navigable River in it) also pass through
this County: All which summed up together, we find at the foot of the account,
that it is watered with no less than 24. Rivers of name, though a Mediterranean
County; besides the endless number of anonymous Rindles and small brooks that
must needs attend them; a number perhaps that very few Countries of the like
extent can be found to surpass, if any that equals, it. And some of these too
of so rank precipitant streams especially the Dove and Dane (there being here
and there in them, near the fountain heads some small Cascades) that in time of
floods they break down Bridges, and remove stones of immense magnitude, and the
Dove sometimes will change its channel; which I suppose has been the cause
that a part of Staffordshire in the parish of Mathfield lies on Derbyshire side
the River, and a little below (near the bridge you pass over to Snelston) a
part of Derbyshire on the Staffordshire side: Nay so very sharp too are some of
the lesser brooks upon sudden rains; that, as I was seriously told by that
ingenious Gent. Mr. Philip Hollins of Moseleie, the little Rivulet called Cowms
brook that runs betwixt his house and Basford, into Churnet; once removed a
stone of three or four Tun, at least a bows shoot.

22. The Currents also of most of the other Rivers are rapid enough, but some
of them indeed muth quicker then others, as the Trent than Sow, and Sow than
Penk; yet all of them so swift, as to prevent any vapid noisome vapors from
ascending thence to infect the Air, though it must needs indeed be rateably
better or worse, according as their streams be swifter or flower. Beside the
Rivers, the Meers and Pools of this County are many and large, whereof that at
Aqualat is 1848 yards long, and 672 yards broad, which it holds within a trifle
more or less, almost from one end to the other; and Ladford poole is said to
contain about threescore Acres; to which add Cockmeer, Eccleshall Castle
pooles, New-poole, the poole at Mare, with diverse others: All which either
having Rivulets that continually pass through them, or being fed with liveing
Springs, and plentifully stock't with Fish which perpetually move the Waters,
they are always kept so clear and free from stagnation, that in a manner they
send up as few noxious exhalations as the Rivers themselves.

23 Amongst which we must not forget the Poole or Lake mentioned by Mr Camden
out of Gervase of Tilbury, who in his Otia Imperialia to Otho the fourth, says
that in the Bishopric of Coventry and County of Stafford, at the foot of a
Hill, which the inborn people of the Country have named Mahull, there is a
water spread abroad in manner of a Mere, in the territory of a Village which
they term Magdalea; in which Mere, or Marsh there is a most clear water, which
has such an effectual virtue in refreshing of bodies, that so often as
Hunters have chased staggs, and other Dear until their Horses be tired, if in
the greatest heat of the scorching Sun they taste of this water, and offer it
unto their horses for to drink, they recover their strength of running again
which they had lost, and become so fresh as one would think they had not run at
all. Camden's Britannia in Staffordshire sub finem.
. But where about this should be, says Mr Camden, I cannot yet learn, nor
indeed could I hear of any such Hill, though that at Heyley Castle having a
great poole at the foot, seems agreeable enough to it, being near also to the
village of Madeley, perhaps anciently called Magdalea; which I so little doubt
will refresh a Horse if he drink thereof after he is tired with running, that I
firmly believe all the pooles in the County, will do the very same, being
generally clear and brisk; and but few flat or vapid.

24 It Is true indeed in the Moorelands where they burn much Peat, their pits are
usually filled by the frequent rains brought by the Tropaean winds from the
Irish Seas in which the water being sated with a crude Sulphur, and stagnating
besides, must needs emitt contagious vapors; yet are not these neither so bad
as some have fancyed the water is of the black-Meer of Morridge, which I take
to be nothing more than such as those in the peat-pits; though it be
confidently reported that no Cattle will drink of it, no bird light on it, or
fly over it; all which are as false as that it is bottomless; it being found
upon measure scarce four yards in the deepest place, my Horse also drinking
when I was there as freely of it as I ever saw Him at any other place, and the
foul so far from declining to fly over it, that I spoke with several that had
seen Geese upon it; so that I take this to be as good as the rest,
notwithstanding the vulgar disrepute it lies under.

25. Though indeed they are all unwholesome enough in themselves, and would be
so to the Inhabitants, but that the Moorelands is an open Country lying high,
and the Hills clothed neither with woods or groves, so that being liable to
the smallest brises of wind, the noxious exhalations whenever they arise
(except in deep Calmes which are every where unwhosom) are always dispersed;
which is so sovereign a remedy, that the Mooreland Country notwithstanding
their Boggs, is really as healthy perhaps as the best part of the County; if
the great Age and constant health of the Inhabitants, that have been lately,
and are now living there, may pass (as sure they ought) for sufficient proof of
the matter, of both which, were I put upon it, I could no where find such
pregnant instances; The Worshipful Mr. Biddulph of Biddulph (as I was informed
by diverse) having not long since had twelve Tenants all living at a time within
the two Parishes of Biddulph and Horton, whose Ages put together made up a
thousand years: And the Worshipful William Leveson Gower of Trentham Esquire
having now four Tenants all living at Cocknage in the edge of the Moorelands
that one with another make 360 years; which I take for such cogent and
insuperable Evidences (to omit many others of the like kind) that nothing more
need be added in this place; the Longevity of persons belonging to another.

26. And so much for the waters of more common use, as they are ordinarily
found in Pooles, Springs, or Rivers; come we next to consider those that have
somewhat unusual in them, whether in their Exit, course, or saturation with
Sulphurs or Mineral Salts, or howsoever remarkable upon any other account: And
first of the Pooles; whereof there is one at Penford, which though a standing
Lake yet is seldom dry, and tolerably clear in settled fair weather, only
against rain it becomes troubled, riseing full of bubbles, and in a little time
thickening at the top into a yellow Scum, which presently as it rains vanishes
away, and the water recovers again its former color and clearness: All which
has frequently been observed and found to be true by the worthy Mr. Fowler an
inhabitant of the place, who freely confessed that he had often been admonisht by
it in time of harvest to fetch in his Corn, and at other times made the same
use of it, as we do of weather-glasses or other Hygroscopes, so that as to the
matter of fact I doubt not at all, though I had not opportunity of making
Experiment of it.

27. But how this should come to pass is the great question? in order to the
solution whereof I could not but call to mind that upon the approach of Rain
there are few standing pooles that do not rise in bubbles, which some have
attributed to the Eeles or other fish, which they would have to be as sensible
of approaching storms as we daily see birds and beasts are, and perhaps so
they may: whether this Poole were stock't with fish or no I did not enquire,
nor matters it much whether it be or no, since I am sure the same happens where
there are none; beside, that it would be somewhat unaccountable too, how they
should raise a yellow Scumme: It seems therefore in my judgment much more
probable, that the pores of the Earth being at such times unlock't (bodies much
more compact also yiedling and expanding themselves against rain as we see it
in our wainscots, in the boards of Mr. Conniers's Philosoph. Transact. Numb.
127. and 129.
, and coards of the Sieur Grillet's new Hygrometer Weekly Memorials, Numb. 1.
p. 8.
) many steams breath forth, which being as various as the earths from whence
they proceed, produce as different fermentations in the mud and water, which
thicken it and occasion those bubbles to ascend; whence passing into the Air,
and repelling its pressure, they may be as likely too, to cause the falling of
the Quicksilver in our Barometers, as any thing perhaps that has hitherto been
thought of.

28. The ascent of these steams that thus disturb the Mud etc. I take also to
be the occasion that Ducks and other water foul clap their wings and rejoice
upon approaching rains, and are after so busy with their heads under water, I
suppose, to see what they can catch by the way: Which if true in the general,
let us now come home to the particular case in hand, and see how it comes to
pass that such a yellow scumme should be sent up thus to cover the face of the
water. Wherein though it cannot very well be expected that I should allege very
many, or very probable reasons, being unhappily prevented of seeing the place,
by ill weather and approach of night; yet perhaps I may not over much miss of
the mark, if I guess it may be done by the ascent of Niter or some nitrous
fume, that mixing with a Sulphur in the bottom of the Lake, and sharply
corroding and separating its parts, may thus send them up to the surface of the
water, which may be repelled or dispersed again upon the descent of the rain: in
which conjecture I am not a little confirmed, because at Codsall not far off
there is sulphur enough in the earth as shall be shown in due place, which yet
I am not sollicitous should longer pass for the reason, than till a better can
be brought to supply its room.

29. And as this foretells Rain, so there are several other Pooles that
prognosticat a dearth, either by riseing, or overflowing: such is the Moss
poole near Mearton in the parish of Forton; and Drudemeer in the parish of
Aldridge; the riseing of the former, and exundation of the latter, (which
generally at other times is near dry) being taken for certain signs of a
dearth of Corn: and perhaps so they may indeed not without reason, our dearths
here in England being most frequently the consequents of great Rains. But that
which excells all the rest in this feat is Hungry pit, situat in a field below
the old fortification not far from Billington, but in the parish of Seighford,
so called I suppose, for that contrary to the rise of Nile upon the pillar of
Mikias in the Isle Roud or Garden F. Vanslebius his present State of Egypt.
Cap. of the Pillar Mikias.
which brings plenty, this predicts scarcity by its rise upon sticks, set
upright in the mud, which the people place there every one for their own
particular observations; forejudging the rise or fall of corn in the Mercats,
by the rise or fall of the water on these sticks, and so either keeping or
vending it accordingly: wherein it so little reguards the quality of the
weather, that it overflowes sometimes in the greatest droughts (as I saw it do
in the dry Spring Anno. 1680.) and as often has nothing in it after great falls
of rain; as was testified to me from the frequent observations of diverse sober
persons now living thereabout: who also assured me that the remarks made upon
it had been so profitable to some (whether by casualty or not, they could not
tell) that they had advanced their fortunes considerably by it.

30. How many concurrent causes and circumstances attending them, may unite in
produceing of such an effect, though it be hard to determine, yet thus much I
think we may pronounce for certain, that it must needs be done by the mediation
of Springs: into which opinion I am the rather induced, because I find the same
intermissions in many fountains, particularly in the Well South of Whittington
Church, which though it want not water at any time whatever, yet overflowes
(they say) extremely against a dearth of Corn: But in the Church field not far
from thence, in a piece of ground called Hunger-moore-slade belonging to Mr.
Nicholas Harvey of Whittington, there is a Spring that breaks forth (according
to the opinion of the people) only before a time of great dearth, being at all
other times dry though at the wettest seasons, as I found it in Autumn An.
1680. after a full Months rain: And when it does break forth (which for the
most part happens not in several years Nonnulli [fontes] ad multum tempus
cessant effluere, deinde rursus emergunt. Geo. Agricolae de Natura Eorum quae
effluunt ex terra Lib. 3.
it then seldom runs above thirty poles, at which distance it sinks into the
Earth again.

31. Near Ashwood bridge in the parish of Kings-Swinford and not far from
Swyndon, I was showed another Spring with a small Lake before it, by my worthy
friend Mr. John Paston Rector of Himley, somewhat agreeable to this, commonly
called Hunger-wall, because it is usually either quite dry, or at most stagnats
and runs not at all, but (as the vulgar will have it) against a dearth of
Corn: which how true it may be I shall not here dispute, but most certain it
is, it does not always run; and when it does, it sometimes they say comes forth
with such a noise, that it has frightened people, that have then happened to
be near it, as particularly they will tell you it did some Rabbit-stealers,
that were not far off, when it once thus happened to burst out: much after the
same manner I suppose as at that celebrated Spring in the Peak of Derbyshire
called Weeding Well, which as my worthy, learned, and most ingenious friend,
the Worshipful Charles Cotton of Beresford Esquire in his historical Poem of the
wonders of the Peak, also acquaints us, sends forth a hollow murmering noise
Wonders of the Peak, p. 26.
, before the approach of the waters, that it emitts in like manner but at
certain times; and that too at such inequal periods, that it is a hard matter to
hit the time of its flowing; so untruly is it said to keep correspondence with
the Sea, so as to observe its Tides; and so abusively for that reason do some
call it Tides-well; for says the ingenious Mr. Hobbs Fons hic temporibus nec
tollitur (ut mare) certis;
Aestibus his nullam praefigit Ephemeris horam Thomae Hobbs de mirabilibus
Pecci Carm.
.


32. And quickly after he tells us, that it is so uncertain, that it ebbs and
flows sometimes thrice in an hour, and sometimes again not above once in a
Month; which frequency of ebbing and flowing he ascribes to the rains, and the
infrequency to droughts, to whom the ingenious Mr. Cotton objects, Though here
it might be said if this were so
It never would but in wet weather flow;
Yet in the greatest drought the Earth abides
It never fails to yield less frequent Tides,
Which always clear and unpolluted are,
And nothing of the wash of Tempest share Wonders of the Peak p. 29.

so wholly independent thinks that ingenious Gentleman this Spring to be of the
temper of the season, though it has not indeed the repute of foretelling
dearths, and other strange Revolutions, as this of ours has; for which very
reason and its breaking forth with a noise, I take it to be the Lake of
Alexander Neckham, to which he ascribes the very same qualities, and expressly
says it is in this County, the Title of his Poem concerning it being De Lacu
Staffordiae.
Rugitu Lacus est Eventus praeco futuri,
Cujus aquae fera se credere nulla solet,
Instet odora Canum virtus, mors instet acerba,
Non tamen intrabit exagitata Lacum Camden in Staffordsh. sub finem.

of which other quality, that no wild beast will in any wise enter it, though I
must confess I heard nothing, yet this being the most agreeable to it of any I
could hear of in the County, must either be it, or perhaps (which is more
probable) there is none such at all.

33. Walter of Hemingburgh tells us of such intermitting prophetic waters
called Vipse's, which Gulielimus Neubrigensis says were in the Province of
Deira near the place of his birth, and that he knew them from his childhood to
run but now and then against a time of dearth, non quidem jugiter sed annis
interpositis, several years being interposed wherein they were dry, which
drought too they esteemed as a certain sign of plenty Guliel. Nubrigensis
Rerum Angl. Lib. 1. cap. 28.
. And I was told of such a Spring near Spot-Grange not far from Hilderston that
breaks forth only against a dearth, which had then been dry for three or four
years. The little fountain in Cank-wood so much observed by the right
Worshipful Sir Brian Broughton Bar t. may also be reckoned another of this
kind; it running as well in dry, as wet weather, and sometimes in neither: All
which put together: with some others hereafter to be mentioned, may pass I
suppose for evidence enough, that there are indeed in the World such
intermitting springs, that have no dependence at all upon the weather: but
whither there be any such connection between the profluence of these, and
dearths, wars, plagues, and many other like prodigious Events as are said to
follow them, I am very diffident, and want confidence either to assert, or
insert them here.

34. For quite contrary to these I find St. Hellens well at Rushton Spencer so
plentiful a spring that joined with another but of equal force, they supply an
overshot Mill not far distant from their rise, for many years together; yet so
sometimes it comes to pass that this well will grow dry, after a constant
profluence perhaps of eight or ten years, and this not by degrees, but
altogether of a sudden; as well in wet, as dry years; and always about the
beginning of May when the springs are commonly esteemed highest, and so usually
continues, as I was credibly informed by the Worshipful the ingenious Robert
Wilmot of Eardley Esquire till about Martin mass following: And this the vulgar too
imagine, never happens but before some stupendous Calamity, of dearth, Wars, or
other grand Revolution: thus they will tell you it grew dry before the last
Civil-warr; again before the Martyrdom of K. Charles the first of ever blessed
memory; again about 10 years since before a great dearth of Corn; and lastly
in An. 79. upon our late disturbances. Now that the same things should be
portended, by the contrary operations of the same cause, upon the same Subject,
seems pretty hard, that I say not unreasoneable, to be allowed; so that I fear
there is more of Casualty and credulity in the matter, than of any dependence
that can probably intercede, the flowing and dry'th of these Springs, and such
deplorable Events.

35. Much better therefore will it be, and much more instructive to the Reader;
wholly to wave all consideration of these rustic opinions, imposed gratis on
the incurious Multitude, and apply my self closely to a further consideration
of these temporary Springs; and the rather, because they seem to conduce not a
little (together with some others hereafter to be mentioned) to the
illustration of the Question so much controverted by the Learned, viz. Whether
the Springs are supplied with that great Expense of water, that we see they
daily vent, from Rains, Mists, Dews, Snows, Hail etc. received into the Spungy
tops of Mountains and sent forth again at the feet of them, or somwhere in
their declivities; or whether they are furnished from the Sea through
subterraneous passages, as from the great Treasury of the waters, and are
returned again thither by the Rindles, Brooks, and Rivers? Or in short, whether
they have their Origin from the Sea by a superior Circulation through the
Clouds; or by an inferior, through Channels in the bowels of the Earth? or
from both? which though it be stated by so very many Authors, and so fully too,
as that some of them have written whole Treatises about it, so that one would
think there should nothing material remain unsaid upon this Subject, Yet having
seen in my travels great variety of Springs, and observed many particulars in
this County relating to them perhaps altogether unknown, at least not minded by
others; I make bold to produce them, since it must be of concern that any thing
can be added, to a Subject that has so fully been enlarged upon already.

36. And this that I might do with as much brevity as may be, I have excluded
all the wild extravagant opinions of Nicholas Papin and others, in the very
proposal of the Question; supposing all others that have any tolerable pretense
may be reduced to one or other of it is branches, without much force or
constraint: To come then close to the matter without further preface, let us
first consider (that we may do it too with perspicuity) how many sorts of
fountains we have to treat of, for by this means it will be evident, whether
all sorts of Springs belong either to this, or that Member of the Question? or
wherher some to the one, and the rest to the other? which upon weighing the
whole matter as they stand related to this Problem I find best distinguished by
the manner of their Exits, time of duration, and their saturation with mineral
Salts, sulphurs, or bitumen's; from which Topics they naturally divide
themselves, into Springs that are Either Temporary, such as have no constant
flux, and these again are either Regular, and these too are either uncertain,
which yet constantly follow Rains. certain and periodical, that constantly
observe a certain time of the year.
Irregular, which too are either annual, that happen every year, but at
uncertain times of that year. septennial, decennial, etc. that run or stop in
7, 8, or 10 years.

Perennial, that have a constant flux, and these again are

either Pure clear water, which too are either weak, and weeping. strong, and
profluent.
Mixed, and these are either Saline, whereof some are Hot, as in Bathes. Cold,
as in the Saltworks, and some medicated waters.
Sulphurous. Bitumenous.


under some of which heads I suppose there is no sort of fountain whatever but
may be most comodiously reduced without straining of Courtesy, at least none
in Staffordshire, which whether they all come from rains, mists, dews, etc? or
all from the Sea? or some from one, and some from the other? is the Question to
be debated.

37. In the decision whereof, I think I may be peremptory that amongst the
Springs that have no constant flux, those which in the Summer time are commonly
dried up, but after plentiful falls of rain, or competent moist weather, are
constantly either profluent, or have a moderat stream; in short, that the
temporary regular uncertain Springs, must certainly depend on rains, dews, etc.
And I believe most of those perennial Springs that are near the tops of Hills
(whereof I have had the opportunity of viewing many) which I generally find to
be but weak and weeping rather than running, such as that upon the Bruff hill in
the Parish of Mare, in all probability too must either come from rains, or the
mists that we see usualy hang on the Summits of them, when it is clear and dry
weather below in the valleys: And not only these, but as Vitruvius, Peter
Martyr, Cardan, Molina, Bernard Palissy, Gassendus, Le Pere Iean Francois, and
another Anonymus French Author, Printed at Paris An. 1674. Mr. Ray, Mr. Hook,
etc. are of opinion, all other Springs and running waters whatever, owe their
origin and continuation chiefly to rains, dews, etc. The probability whereof
they insinuat principally by the following reasons, which I shall here repeat
as faithfully and as succinctly as may be.

38. First because great inundations or overflowing of Rivers manifestly
proceed either from the rain that immediately falls, or from the melting of Snow
or Ice that has formerly fallen upon the more eminent parts of Mountains. 2,
Because many Springs quite fail in dry Summers, and generally all abate
considerably of their waters. 3, Because no Springs break out either on the top
of a hill, or so near the top, but that there is always earth enough above them
to afford a supply, considering the condition of high Mountains which are
almost continually moistened with Clouds, and on which the Sun beams have but
little force. 4, Because it is observed that there are no Springs rise in any
plain, unless there be hills so near that one may reasonably conclude they are
fed from thence. 5, Because in Clay Grounds into which water sinks with
difficulty, we seldom find any Springs, whereas in sandy, gravelly, rocky,
stony, or other grounds into which rain can easily make its way, we seldom fail
of them. 6, Because we are assured by those that have experimented and
calculated it, that communibus annis and locis there falls water enough from
the Heavens in actual rain, mists, dews, snow or hail, upon the surface of any
Country, to supply all the water that runs into the Sea by the rivers of that
Country. 7, Because they who would have Fountains to arise from, and to be
continnually fed from the Sea, have not as yet given any satisfactory account,

39. First, that there are any such Caverns or subterraneous passages in the
Earth that come from the Sea; or 2. If there be, how water can ascend to the
tops of Mountains and have its efflux there, since the Sea can have no such
protuberances or elevated parts above the rest, as the earth has; and that no
water will ascend above its own Level. or 3, How the water (if from the Sea)
should become thus fresh, since it seems so far from being done by
transcolation, that it cannot be so done by distillation though frequently
repeated, but it will retain a brackish taste; for that seawater, as Varenius
asserts, has a volatile as well as a fixed salt, which latter though it can be
separated either by percolation or distillation, yet the volatile cannot, it
being so spirituous that it will ascend with the most rarifyed water. Nor 4. do
they give any satisfactory account, why the passages through which these
percolations are made (if the salt be continually left behind in them) are not
long since stopped up with the salt that has perpetually been left behind in
them from the beginning of the World. Nor 5. why the Sea is not long before this
become all fresh, since we cannot but suppose that the whole mass of water has
once at least past through the body of the earth since the Creation of the
World, if not many more times than there are years since the beginning, as those
that do hold the contrary opinion do freely admit. And these are the chief
reasons (nor are they slight ones) upon which the Authors above mentioned have
grounded their opinion, which is the most applauded one too, and most
universally received; in relation whereof I have been so far from abateing any
thing of their strength, that I think I have proposed some of them with more
advantage than the Authors themselves.

40. And yet this opinion seems to be pressed with more, and more insuperable
difficulties than the other of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Virgil, Seneca, Pliny,
the Philosophers of Conimbra, Scaliger, Dobrzenzki, Van Helmont, Lydiat, Pierre
Davity, Des Carts, Du Hamel, Le Pere Schottus, M. Jaques Rohault, Petrus
Barbay, and the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's, who
all hold with little difference that some Springs at least are furnished from
other waters in the bowels of the Earth, which most of them agree too must be
supplied from the Sea by subterraneous passages, and that they are returned
again thither by the Rindles, Brooks, and Rivers, by the inferior Circulation:
It is pressed I say with far more inexplicable difficulties, than that of Homer,
Plato, etc. for beside that it is altogether unreasonable to admit that any of
those temporary irregular Springs mentioned in the 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. of this
Chapter, (considering their circumstances) should by any means possible come
from rains, dews, etc. though the waters they send forth indeed are but few and
inconsiderable; it is altogether as improbable (that I say not impossible) that
the temporary regular periodical Springs should have their origin thence: for
besides that they constantly observe their terms whether in wet or dry weather,
some of them happen at least (if not so directed by some unknown secret
operation of Nature) either to flow only in the dry Summer quarter, or to be
most profluent then, though in an extreme drought.

41. Thus the famous horary Fountain Lers, that rises out of a vast deep Cave
in the mountains of Foix, near Belestat in Languedoc, and waters the Mazerean
plains near Toulouse, Hic (says Emanuel Maignan) per aestatem singulis horis,
quadrante paulatim succrescit, non sine multo aquarum immugientium fragore, mox
quadrante in uberrimum fluvium exundat; deinde alio quadrante subsidet, ac
demum quadrante etiam inter quiescens, aret Emanuelis Maignan Tol^sati
Perspectivae horariae Lib. 1. Prop. 1.. 3.
. i. e. that this Spring in Summer (which Du Bartas says holds for four Months,
Gassendus but three, and that it first breaks forth in May, June, or July) ebbs
and flows every hour, riseing and increasing with a great noise the first
quarter, and flowing plentifully the second; then subsideing again the third
quarter, and growing dry the fourth: in both which excesses it is so
considerable, that as Du Bartas testifies, for one half hour one may pass it
dryshod, and the next scarce at all; part of whose Poem upon it, Gabriel
Lermeus has thus translated, Per menses aliquot dum Sol utramque revisit
Thetida, sex quater ille vices oriturque caditque;
Nunc siccis pedibus siccae calcantur arenae,
Nec mora dimidiae spatium uix fluxerit horae,
Ecce tibi subito ruit impete Lersus abundans
Spumeus, and Cursus magnarum imitatur aquarum Gassendus tells us of another of
this kind, which he calls Fontem Collis Martiensis, that Ebbs and Flows 8.
times in an hour. Phys. Sect. 3. Memb. pr. Lib. 1. cap. 7. And Dr. Merret
acquaints us with one near Kilken in Flintshire that ebbs and flows 4 times in
an hour, Pinax Rerum Not. p. 222.
.


42. Amongst these temporary regular periodical waters, we may also reckon
those of Niger, Ganges, and Rio de la Plata, these having their rise at stated
times, as well as those of the great River Nile, which beginning its decrease on
the 24 of September, and so continuing till May following, is then so low and
weak, that it seems rather to stagnat than run; but precisely about Sun riseing
on the 12 of June or Baoni of the Copties, which is the 17th of ours, in the
height of Summer, it begins to increase, and so continues till the 17 of their
September which is our 24th, in the mean time overflowing and strangely
fertilizing the whole Country of Egypt: The Origin of which increase the
learned Vanslebius (who lived there some years and carefully observed it)
thinks chiefly to proceed from the fall of certain drops, somewhat like dew,
that mixing with the waters cause such a fermentation and corruption in them,
that they expand themselves and swell to a great height, long before it can any
way be possibly effected by the great rains in Habessia, which according as
Ludolfus was informed by the Habessian Abbot Gregory do not fall till their
winter, which begins not till the 25 of June Jobi Ludolfi Hist. Aethiop. Lib.
1. cap. 5.. 34.
, and must have some time did they precisely fall on that day (and were not
stopped by the Cataracts) to run that vast tract of Land between Goiam (where the
Nile rises) and Egypt; though Vanslebius says they fall not till July, August,
and September, so that they can neither be the first nor sole cause of its
increase Vanslebius's present State of Egypt, Chap. of the River Nile.
.

43. During this rise, occasioned by the fermentation, there is a green kind of
Scumme superinduced upon the water, which endures betwixt twenty and forty
days, more or less according as the great rains fall sooner or later in
Habessinia, which when they come down into Egypt turn the River red, being so
tinged with the earth by the way before they come thither, the Soil of Egypt
being black and therefore unlikly to do it. The learned Cambraeus as cited by
Gassendus thinks this fermentation to be caused by Niter, wherewith the Country
and especially the Channel of the River is acknowledged to abound, which being
heated by the Sun, thus dilates it self and makes the River to swell Petri
Gassendi Physicae Sect. 3. Memb. pr. cap. 3. and 5.
: Wherein if he intend that sort of Niter which we call Borax (I mean the
natural and not the factitious) otherwise called Chrysocolla, described by
Rulandus and others to be a green sort of Earth Mart. Rulandi Lexicon Alchemiae
in verbo Chrysocolla.
, and that every body knows (though we have none but the factitious) huffs and
swells with heat, I readily subscribe to him: And the rather because we find it
mentioned to be plentiful in Egypt, and that the waters in the Rivers cause an
itching over the body, as Vanslebius informs us upon its first increase
Vanslebius 's prejent State of Egypt, Chap, of the River Nile,
, which seems also to argue that the pungent particles of Niter, or perhaps of
the Natron of Egypt, which too is a species of Niter Observations Sur les Eaux
Minerales par le Sieur Du Clos. p. 83.
, are then very active: And thirdly because hence we can give some rational
account of the green scumme, which I take to be nothing but the froth of the
fermentation made by the heat of the Sun whilst it works on the Borax or green
Earth, which says Wormius is the better, by how much the nearer it comes to the
color of a true Smaragd Musei Wormiani. Lib. 1. Sect. 3. cap. 10.
. Not but that I know too that common Niter in its detonation or alcalisation
with coals, acquires a green color, which perhaps it may also yield, upon the
excessive heats of the Sun, in that Country.

44. Nor is the River only liable to this remarkable fermentation, but the
Ponds and Lakes too any where near it, and they are also covered with the same
green Scumme, which Vanslebius says in the year 72. was thicker than it had
been known to be, for many years before; more particularly the waters of the
Well of Argenus or Gernus a Monastery of the Copties near Benhese a Town in
the middle of Egypt, is observed to be sensible of the fall of the drops or
dew, and to rise the very same night, and in the same manner with the River,
which having no possible communication with the rains in Habessia, shows
evidently that the increase of the water in the River, comes partly at least
from another cause, and most likely from the fermentation made by the Niter,
which however it comes to pass seems to leave its own pits (whereof there are
abundance in Egypt) at the time of the increase and go into the River; Pliny
saying expressly that whilst Nile rises and flows, all their Niter pits are dry,
and that when it falls again and returns within its channel, then they yield
their nitrous juice again for 40. days together. Excedente Nilo siccantur,
decedente madent succo Nitri. Not. Hist. Lib. 31. cap. 10
Which too is further confirmed by this one very strange, but true Experiment
viz. that if you take of the Earth of Egypt adjoining to the River; and
preserve it carefully, that it never come to be wet, nor any way wasted, and
weigh it daily, you shall never find it more or less heavy till the 17. of
June, at which day it begins to be more ponderous, and augmenteth with the
increase of the River, whereby they have as infallible knowledge of the state of
the future Deluge, as by the River it self: the humidity of the Air no
question having recourse through all passable places and mixing with the same
Niter in the Earth, increases the same as it does the water, as was confirmed
to Alpinus from the frequent Experiments seen of it, by Paulus Marianus Venetus
the French Kings Consul there, Bapt: Elianus a Jesuit, Franciscus Saxus,
Franciscus Bonus, and one John Varot an English Gentleman Prosp. Alpini de
Medicina Aegyptiorum. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
; which has put me upon deliberation whether there may not fall such diurnal as
well as annual dews (that may also vary with the changes of the Moon) which in
some measure may cause the flux and reflux of the green Sea (in proportion to
the parts of the World where the Tides are great, small, or none at all) by
such fermentations.

45. Nor less unlikely are the wonderful periodical waters of the Zirchnitzer
see, or rather Lake of Carniola, to depend upon rains; of which though Georgius
Wernerus has written at large, Geo. Wernerus de admirandis Hungariae aquis. sub
finem.
and made a Map of the Lake; yet the learned and ingenious Dr. Edward Brown
has much better, and I believe more truly described it: Which He says is about
2 German miles long, and one broad; unequal in the bottom, being in some places
but 4 foot, but in the Valleys (whereof there are 7 more eminent that have
names) twenty yards deep; in these valleys there are many fish as Carps, Tench,
Eeles etc. which together with the water, some time in the Month of June, all
descend annually under ground through many great holes at the bottom; the Earth
while the waters are thus sunk, making a speedy production of grass yielding
food for their Cattle in the Winter season: which in the Month of September
following, as certainly return again by the same holes, the waters springing or
mounting up to the height of a Pike, and running and overspreading the whole
place again (as Wernerus describes it) with that velocity, that they will
overtake a swift Horseman. It being remarkable too, that this recess of water
(as the rise of Nile) is foreknown to them by a stone there is in it, called
the Fishers stone; the Prince of Eckenberg, whose Lake it is, giveing all
people Liberty then to take the fish, which they do by standing in the water by
the holes, and intercepting their passage Dr. Brown's account of his Travels
into Hungary, etc. p. 127, 128.
.

46. But we need not run so far either as France, Egypt, or Carniola, to find
out intermitting periodical waters that have no dependence on weather, for
(though I find none in Staffordshire) go we but to Lambourn in Berks and there
we have a Rivulet as remarkably such, as any of the forementioned, as I have
been informed by many, but more particularly by the ingenious J. Hippisley Esquire
an Inhabitant of the place, and late high Sheriff of the County, who has been
pleased to favor me with diverse Letters concerning it; importing chiefly that
the Rivulet there called Lambs-bourn, which very likely as Mr Camden thinks
gives name to the Town, runs much more plentifully in the Summer than Winter,
and that the Springs in the Town it self are sometimes so low in the latter
Season, that they are commonly forced to digg their Wells deeper for want of
Water: And expressly writing to Him to know how the Springs held the last great
drought in 81, He sent me word that they were so far, from failing, that (if
there were any sensible difference) the Springs and Rivulet then were rather
higher than ordinary, and failed not till about the middle of September (the
usual time) before which there had fallen rain enough, yet then not a drop to
be seen in the Channel, till about the middle of Febr. when the springs as
customarily, began to recover themselves again.

47. Nor has this been only observed of late, but admired and celebrated also
in former Ages, though by none so signally as the Poet Sylvester in his
Translation of Du Bartas, who lived long at Lambourn in a house now of Mr.
Hippisleys, in quality of a Steward to the ancient family of the Essexes, which
for many Generations flourish't there; where He compares it to the
forementioned Lers of Du Bartas, and describes its Qualities as follows, And
little Lambourn though thou match not Lers,
Nor had the Honor of Du Bartas verse;
If mine have any thou must needs partake, See Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap.
2.. 17.

Both for thy own, and for thy Owners Sr. William Essex.
sake,
Whose kind Excesses thee so nearly touch,
That yearly for them thou do weep so much,
All Summer long (while all thy Sisters shrink)
That of thy tears a million daily drink,
Besides thy Waast; which then in have does run
To wash the feet of Chaucers Donnington Dennington Castle upon this Rivulet,
once a seat of Sr. Geofry Chaucer's, our famous English Poet.
.
But (while the rest are full unto the top)
All Winter long thou never show'st a drop
Nor send'st a doit of needless subsidy
To Cram the Kennet's wantless Treasury.
Before her stores be spent and Springs be staid:
Then, then alone, thou lend'st a liberal aid,
Teaching thy wealthy neighours ( mine of late)
How, when, and where, to right participate
Their streams of comfort, to the poor that pine,
And not to grease still the too greasy Swine:
Neither for fame nor form (when others do)
To give a morsel or a mite or two,
But severally, and of a selfly motion,
When others miss, to give the most devotion Sylvester's Translation of Du
Bartas the third day of the first Week. p. 55.
.


48. I know Mr. Ray says that the Rivers which flow from the Alps run lowest in
the Winter, and abound most with water in the Summer time, so that sometimes
they overflow in the hotest Months when no rain falls; and that He testifies
the same of the River Rhodanus; but attributes it wholly to the melting of the
Snows at that time of Year, which lie thick on those Mountains for 6 months
together, no rain falling on them all the winter Season (excepting the lower
parts) but only Snow, and perhaps indeed it may be so Observations
Topogrophical, etc. p. 103.
: I know also that Gassendus alleges the same cause for the flowing of the Lers
in the Summer Months Pet. Gassendi Physicae. 3. Memb. pr Lib. 1. cap. 7.
: However it may be with those, I am sure there is no pretense for the same
cause at Lambourn, for having strictly enquired, as there are no Hills
thereabout considerable enough to preserve Snow on their tops any longer than
in other parts of England, nor large Clefts or Caverns in them that might
conserve it so long as to be melted only in Summer, and then to make this
copious flux; So could I not hear of any other known means whereby this might
be done, More than for the great River of St. Francis the chief of Pharnambuck,
which as Piso acquaints us, by some hidden cause in Nature overflowes in this
manner in the Summer time when all other Rivers are lowest Guil. Pis^nis de
Med. Brasil. Lib. 1. p. 7.
: Or for the fountain near Pesquera in Spain which as Cardan informs us begins
to run in the Spring, overflowes in the Summer, begins to fail in Autumn, and
is quite dry in Winter Hieron. Cardani de subtilitate, Lib. 2. sub finem.
. To which let me add the Gips upon the Woolds in Yorkshire, which says the
Worshipful Edward Leigh of Rushall Esquire in the drought of Summer, when all other
Springs seem to be dried up, burst out and rise up five or six yards in height
and so fall into the Dales and make a little River, by which the Towns near
refresh their Cattle, when the Valley Springs fail England described by Edw.
Leigh, in Yorkshire, p. 219.
.

49. Of which sort of Springs and Rivers there are so many in the World that
the day will scarce serve me to recount them all: The wells near the Lake
Ascanius says Agricola, Hyeme siccari, aestate usque ad labra repleri solent,
i. e. that they use to be dry in winter, but in summer full to the very brim;
he tells us also of the Valesian Spring ad calidas Lucenses that runs
plentifully all the summer from May to September but then grows dry *: And
Varenius acquaints us that at the Town of Villa nova in Portugal there is a
fountain that flows only from the Kalends of May, to the Kalends of November,
and then grows dry; and of another in Wallisland near the bathes of Leuckerbad
that ceases to run in Autumn, and begins not again till the May following;
Another of this kind he says there is in Spain 2 miles from Valladolid; and
another near the Church of St. Iean d' Angely somewhere in Aquitan in France
Bernh. Varenti Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 17.
: To which Wernerus adds one at Psevers a town of the Grisons, which
constantly fails in October, and springs forth not again till May; and another
in Switzerland that always becomes dry in August, and runs no more till June
following Geo. Wernerus de admirandis Hungariae Aquis sub finem.
; with many others that I omit, least I hurt the patience of the Reader.

50 And as it is improbable that any of these Temporary Springs (Except such as
never run but after rains, and fail upon all droughts) so it is altogether as
unlikely that Constant waters that abate not at all in the greatest siccity,
should wholly depend upon so uncertain principles as Rains Snows etc whereof
there are plenty in this County; particularly of a sort of fountains which
Agricola mentions, Qui semper abundant Aqua, sed nunquam effluunt Geo.
Agricolae de natura Eorum quae effluunt ex terra, Lib. 3.
, that are always full of water but never overflow so as to make any stream;
such are those pits of water in the moorish ground near Eccleshall Castle,
which they will tell you are bottomless because always full and never failing,
yet never running over: There are Geo. Agricolae de natura Eorum quae effluunt
ex terra, Lib. 3.
much such wells too in Dunsmoore Meddowes near the village of Rudyerd over
against Heracles in the parish of Leek, which all stand equally full in the
greatest drought and the wettest season; when I was there in July 79 they were
all brim full, though the Rivulets near them were in a manner dry; they are 8
or 10 in number, and all very deep, yet none of them empties it self into the
River, but the bigest which my worthy friend Mr. Thomas Gent found by the
plummet to be but 9 or 10 yards deep, though they had always before been
esteemed bottomless. And

51. Dr. Boat informs us that the Springs in Ireland (where there are very
many) for the most part of them are of this fashion, like to a small pit full
of water to the brim, and running forth at the lower side, without noise or
bubling Ger. Boat's Not. Hist. of Ireland, Chap. 7. Sect. 1.
, as the biggest of those at Dunsmoore does; and another of this kind on
Alrewas Hays near the North-West Angle of the Plate course, which thus always
overflowes, and by the vulgar is falsely reputed bottomless; though indeed it be
not inconsiderable, that being 4 foot square at the top, which it holds for as
many foot deep, and after turning into a round of two foot and diameter, and
situat in a fine plain almost level, without any thing deserving the name of a
hill to assist it, the forementioned ingenious Mr. Wolferstan found the plummet
to descend in it 42 foot, before it reached the bottom: For if the greatest
rains as Seneca asserts sink into the Earth never above ten foot L. An. Senecae
Not. Quaest. Lib. 3. cap. 7.
, or if as the Anonymous French Author believes, who seems to have taken a
great deal of care in this matter, they never wet above a foot and a half De
L'Origine des fontains Party second, p. 167.
; and if as the same Author thinks all rains that fall upon plains are spent in
the nourishment of Plants, etc. I see not how this sort of Springs, whether
they run or not, that lie so deep, and are constantly full if they do not run,
as well in droughts as wet weather, should have their supply from rains, snows,
etc. or from any other place, but some Magazine of waters in the bowels of the
Earth.

52. But it may be it will be objected that though these Springs are constant,
yet they are but weak, and some of them never profluent, so that a very small
supply even from the superficies of the Earth may keep them so; which though
scarce to be granted, yet let us admit for once that it may be so; but what
then shall we say to those mighty perennial Springs that constantly throw forth
great quantities of water, without sensible abatement in what season soever?
whereof there is one near Acton Trussel, and Forwel Spring in Cank wood may
pass for another, that do constantly so; but those which excel all the rest of
this County (as well upon this, as other accounts hereafter to be mentioned)
are the Springs at Willowbridge, belonging to the Right Honorable the Virtuous
and most Accomplished Lady, Jane Lady Gerard Baroness Gerard of Gerards
Bromley, the first actual Encourager of this Design, the Prospect of whose
Paternal Seat, is here most deservedly added, Tab. 4. whereof there is one,
that (notwithstanding it is oppressed with a vast weight of water always lying
upon it) throws out constantly at least 6 cubick Inches of water (and so does
the Spring at the foot of Berry bank near the Village of Darlaston) beside 60
more great and small (that yield from six to one cubic Inch of water) which all
rise beside it, within less than 20 yards square; and yet no considerable Hills
near, like to receive rain enough to supply these waters; that from the Wells
to the Lodge being but an easy ascent, and those 'twixt Madley Park and Mare,
and of Ashley heath, at too great a distance; and (if they do contribute any
thing) supplying the Expense of other Rivulets either flowing from them, or
running between them and these Springs, as the River Tern does between
Willowbridge, and all the Hills near Madeley and Mare.

53. I know that the right Worshipful the Learned Sr. Christopher Wren the now
worthy President of the Royal Society has contrived a Rain-bucket to measure
the quantity of Rain that falls, which as soon as it is full, empties it self
into a Cistern, and so receives more; which how often it performs is recorded
by a Weather Clock, as may be seen in the Repository of the R. Society at
Gresham College Hist. of the Royal Society part. 2. sub finem.
, by which it might easily be computed whether sufficient rain falls communibus
annis upon the declivities of ground toward any Spring, to supply the constant
flux of it; which yet I think has never been duly observed for a whole year
round: But the forecited anonymous French Author has been so industrious and
curious in this point, that he computed the rise of rainwater in a
Conservatory for diverse years, and found the mean rise to amount to 19 Inches
and 2 lines; He made also an Estimat of the course of the River Seine from the
spring head to Ainay le Duc, 3 miles off (where there enters another Rivulet
that swells it) with the declivities of the ground for a mile on each side,
which was all he could reasonably think might contribute to its flux, and this
space of three miles long and two broad, he made the Conservatory of the
rainwater to furnish the River for a whole year: Upon which Tract of ground,
being six miles square in surface, supposeing that during a whole year, there
have fallen rain to the height of 19 Inches and 2 lines as aforesaid, it
amounts he says to 280 Millions 899942 Muids of water.

54. Now that he might give a gross Estimat (for he pretends not at all to be
precise in it) of the Quantity of the water running away in this River, compared
with the quantity of rain that fell upon that tract of ground before mentioned,
he computed (from comparison made with the River of the Gobelines near
Versailles where it has 50 Inches of water by measure) that this River could
not have above 1000 or 1200 Inches of water always running, compensating the
lesser quantity that it has at its source, with the greater that it has
toward Ainay le Duc: And following those that make profession of governing and
conveying spring waters., he judged that a cubick Inch of water yielded in 24
hours 83 Muids, agreeing with those that say that a cubical vessel whose side
is two foot Paris measure holds one Muid of water: Or (which is the same thing)
that a vessel which contains 83 Muids of water will make an Inch of water run
continually for 24 hours; so that for a whole year (which is near 366 times as
much) there will be required 30378. Muids to make an inch water flow
constantly: which 83 Muids (to put them into English measure) make 68 Hogsheads
and 42 Gallons, Ale or Beer measure; every French Muid containing 16777
216/1000 cubic Inches English, which is 59 49^/1000 or 59 Ale or beer Gallons
and proxime; so that accounting 72 Gallons to the Hogshead, the Muid contains
scarce 5/6 of a Hogshead.

55. These particulars being granted him, he concludes that if one Inch of
water require 83 Muids for a day, then 1200 Inches require 99600 Muids,
wherefore for a whole year, which is near 366 times as much, there, will be
required 36453600 Muids; which being deducted from the 280899942 Muids, which
he supposed to fall annually upon the Conservatory or tract of Land of six
miles square that he judged might contribute to the flux of that river, there
remains 244446342 Muids, i. e. 'twixt 6 and 7 times as much as was spent in the
maintenance of the River: which he thinks so abundantly exceeds what is
ordinarily required for other occasions and losses, such as the nourishment of
Plants, supply for vopors, extraordinary swellings of the River whilst it
rains, and deviations of the water other ways, that there needs but the sixth,
at most but the fifth part of the rain and snow water that falls, to make a
River run the whole year De L' Origin des Fontains second party. from page
198. to page 207.
. Which indeed is so vast a disproportion, that one would think at first sight
that the question were determined; and there is no question but it had been so,
did all the Conservatories and Springs in the world hold such a disproportion,
though it were less by one half.

56. But let us see what this Author must very likely have concluded in case he
had considered such Springs as those above mentioned at Willowbridge 52, where
the bigest constantly throws out (without any sensible abatement) at least six
cubick Inches of water, beside 60 more that yield other different proportions,
from 6 inches down to one, and all these within (perhaps little more) than 10
yards square so that they may all without difficulty be esteemed as one; Had, I
say, this Author but lighted on such Springs as these, whose Conservatory too
must be very narrow, for the River Tern running close by them, cuts of all
contribution from one side, and receives in great measure what else might have
been supposed to come from the other, he had found perhaps near as great a
disproportion between the Spring and the Conservatory, as he did before between
the Conservatory and the Spring: For granting Willowbridg Park to be the
Conservatory for these Springs, whose surface we will also allow to be a mile
square, and that the rain annually falling upon its superficies does amount to
19 Inches and 2 lines, yet supposing too (what cannot be reasonably denied)
that great part of the water that this tract of ground contributes is received
all along into the River both above and below the Springs, it cannot well be
thought (the whole Conservatory being but part of that for the Seine) that it
can furnish 1/100 part of water in 10 yards square, for which the French Author
allowed no less than three miles in length.

57. But we will grant notwithstanding the differences of the latitudes of the
Consetvatories, and of the longitudes for the issues of the waters, that the
waters of the Conservatory of Willowbridg do so concenter (which is very
improbable) as to furnish ^/10 part within that little space, of what the
French Authors did in 3 miles in length, that is 28089994 Muids of water in a
whole year, yet the disproportion will be great between these Springs and their
Conservatory: For the greatest of these Springs alone (at the rate of 83 Muids
for every cubic Inch) vents 2988. Muids or 2469 Hogsheads daily; that is,
1093608 Muids, or 903654 Hogsheads yearly; to which add the other 60 Springs
venting different proportions from 6 cubic Inches down to one, the mean whereof
will be each 3 cubic inches, they vent each 546804 Muids, or 451827 Hogsheads
yearly; that is all of them together 32808240 Muids, or 27109620 Hogsheads;
which 32808240 Muids being added to the 1093608 Muids of the greatest Spring,
amounts to 33901848 Muids, which is 4811854 Muids more then 'twas supposed the
Conservatory could furnish in a year: without allowance made for the great
quantities that must needs be spent in the nourishment of Trees and other
Plants, and the much greater in Exhalations: For if we may believe experience,
the vapors that are exhaled into the Air for Clouds and distill again in rains,
come not so much from the Seas, as from the moisture of the Earth; thus we see
that in uliginous boggy Countries (such as Ireland) the rains are frequent,
whereas in the Sandy deserts of Afric and Arabia they have no rains at all: Not
to mention with what difficulty salt waters do evaporat, or that our most
lasting rains come from the East and South i. e. from the Landward and not from
the Sea: to which add that the greatest rains obstruct the pores of the Earth
by filling them with dirt, so that they cannot descend above a foot and (which
is owned by this Author) and are therefore for the most part carried away in
floods: Whence it is yet plainer how unlikely it is that such mighty Springs as
these should be maintained by rains falling on such a Conservatory.

58. And yet how inconsiderable are these Springs at Willowbridg, in comparison
of some others there are in the world, and particularly of one in the French
Authors own Country, the fountain head of the River la Sorgue in the County of
Venaissin; which says Gassendus, ab ipsa statim scaturigine evadit navigabilis,
i.e. that comes from so great a Spring, that it is navigable presently at its
very rise Pet. Gassendi Phys. Sect. 3. Memb. pr. Lib. 1. cap. 3. near Blawbeher
in the Dukedom of of Wurt^mberg in Schwabenland is much such another, that
vomits up water in so great abundance that the River at the mouth of it is a
furlong broad, Joh. Herbinii de Cataractis. Lib. 1. cap. 11.
: whereof had he delivered us so nice an account as he has done of the other,
he had certainly given himself and the world better satisfaction. But for
clearer evidence of the matter in hand, because the Conservatories for single
Springs are always as uncertain as they are unequal, let us consider the
immense quantities of water that are disembogued into the Sea by all the
Rivers, and make an estimat whether an annual rise of 19 inches and 2 lines
over the whole face of the Earth will suffice for them; the question seeming to
be rendered much less difficult, by how much it is enlarged, there being now but
one, an the other, to be considered, whereas before every little Spring was a new
question. To come then quick and close to the business,

59. I will found my computation upon that of Ricciolus in his Almagestum
novum, where he tells us that the Eridanus or Po being but 1000 paces broad,
and 15 foot or 3 paces deep (a very inconsiderable River in respect of some
others) pours forth into the Adriatic 18000000 of cubical paces of water every
hour (supposeing it to run but six miles in that time) that is 432000000 per
diem, which is near 15552000000 of cubic paces per Annum Joh. Bapt. Riccioli
Almagesti novi, Lib 2. cap. 13.
, and yet I take this to be a River of the third and lowest Class of great
Rivers, scarce so big as the Thames or Severn in England, or the Rhosne in
France, whereof there may perhaps be above a hundred in the world (as well as
these) not thought considerable enough to be numbered by Varenius in his second
Class: In which he places the Rhine, the Elve, Euphrates, Tanais, Borysthenes,
Petzora, Pesida, Tabab, Yrtiis etc, to the number of twenty: And in his first,
the Nile, Niger, Danow, Oby, Ganges, Jeniscea, Parana, Rio de la Plata,
Orellana, Maragnon, Omaranna, Canada or of St. Laurence, Jansu, Volga, etc. to
the number of 16 or 17 Bernh. Varenit Geograph. General. Lib. 1. cap. 16. Prop.
27.
: The last whereof [the Volga] alone (as the same Varenius has computed it)
throws forth water sufficient within a year into the Caspian Sea to cover the
whole Earth Ibid. Prop. 5.
; which allowing for the depth of the innumerable Valleys, will amount at least
to as much as the 19 inches and 2 lines can come too: Nor surely can that of
St. Laurence pour forth less, it running as the same Author informs us 600
German miles, and being broad at the mouth as Ricciolus declares, no less than
60 (I suppose he means Italian) miles Joh. Bapt. Riccioli Geograph. and
Hydrograph. reformatae, Lib. 6. cap. 19.
.

60. Now if the Po do vent into the Adriatic Sea 15552000000 of cubic paces in
a year, the River of St. Laurence being 60 times as broad (not to mention the
likelihood of its being much deeper) must vent at least nine hundred thirty
three thousand, one hundred and twenty Millions of cubical paces of water,
which (to depend upon Varenius's supputation, and the near equality of the two
rivers, to avoid multiplicity of Arithmetic) must either of them expend water
enough to cover the superficies of the whole Earth to the height at least of 19
Inches and 2 lines: But if neither of these will be thought sufficient to do
it, certainly it cannot be denied to the Argyropotamus or Rio de la Plata
otherwise called St. Christophers which I take to be the bigest River in the
World, the same Ricciolus expressly asserting that Nilus, Ganges, and Euphrates
put all together will not equal it; its mouth being 90 miles broad, and running
with such violence into the Sea, that it makes it fresh for 200 miles forward
Ibidem.
. Yet if any Man will be so unreasonable as to grant it to neither of these,
nor to all three together, surely it will be difficult to find one, that will
be so hardy as to deny it these, and 1000 more at least that there are in the
World of all magnitudes, which put together, in my weak judgment cannot but
exceed the 19 Inches etc. upon a modest account less than three, if not five
hundred times over: Whence the Reader may be satisfied that a Conservatory of
water over the surface of the Earth of such a height, is not like to supply all
the Rivers of the World.

61. And if the cold fresh water Rivers be not furnished from rains, much less
sure can the hot, Salt, or bitter ones have their origin thence; for such we
find there are in very good Authors: Whereof Peter Martyr says there is one in
Cuba so large that it is navigable, and yet so hot that one can hardly endure
to touch it Sommario de L' Indie Occidentali del S. Don Pietro Martire cap. 7.
p. 6. Stamp. Venet. L' Anno 1565,
; and there is a Spring in Ireland that is as hot as water can possibly be made
with fire; and in Japan another yet much hotter, it retaining heat as Caronius
writes 3 times longer than other water heated with fire Bernh. Varenti
Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. Prop. 7.
: As unlikely too are the Salt or bitter Rivers such as Exampeus near
Callipadum in Asia minor Ibid. prop. 9.
, to have their maintenance from rains; or any Bathes, Saltworks, or other
Medicated waters; nay so far are they from it, that by the fall of rains, they
are all much prejudiced, if not rendered wholly useless by them, at least for
sometime; the Bathes being cooled, the brine weakened by the mixture with the
freshes, and all Medicinal Springs so diluted, that they become thence
ineffectual, till these rain waters are carried off again.

62. Not that the rains descend so low as where the waters are heated by
fermentations or otherwise, or made salt by the Mineral glebes they pass
through; but by mixing with them here above at their exit: for it is plain that
most of the rain-waters (as shall be further proved hereafter) which are not
presently carried away by the Rivulets, stand in ponds, highways, or other
hollows in the ground, till the Sun exhales them into Clouds again; and never
descend into the solid Earth (which is sufficient for the nourishment of all
sorts of Plants) above ten foot at most; whereas the heats for the Bathes lie
very deep: For who ever met with any near the surface of the Earth sufficient
to make waters so hot as they are here in England at the Bath, or St. Vincents
rock, or at Porcet near Aken in Germany, where they have a little hole in the
street which they call Hell covered with a moveable Grate, the water whereof is
so hot, that the neighbors round about in the Summer time, when they have no
fire, boil their Eggs in it (letting them down in a Net) which it will do to
hardness, in a little space Lod. Rowzce M. D. Treatise of Tunbridg waters. cap.
4.
: Or whoever met with any rocks of natural salt so near the day (as they call
it) like to make such brine as they have at the saltworks in Cheshire, or at
the Brine pits in the Parish of Weston in this County: The Medicated waters
indeed are very weak in comparison of these, yet being spoiled with rains as
well as the rest, it is probable at least that none of them come from rains,
dews, etc.

63. Further add that if it be so unlikely that the cold or hot, fresh or Salt
Springs come from rains where there fall plenty of them; more improbable is it
still (that I say not impossible) that the Springs in such Countries where there
falls little rain should be supplied from it: and yet we are credibly informed
that the Springs in such places flow as plentifully as elsewhere. In the Isle
Mayo (one of those of Cape Verd) which lies in the Torrid Zone 13 degr. and 30
m. North of the Equator, it never rains but 3 weeks in July in the whole year,
yet there rises a Spring of pure fresh water, making a Rivulet about 14 foot
wide and two deep in the middle of the Island, before it has run above half way
to the Sea; of which dimensions it was found by the ingenious Mr. James Young
of Plymouth after ten months drought; nor could he perceive by the banks that
it could run much larger after the showers in July, than it did then after so
long a want of them Lecturae Cutlerianae de potentia Res^ itutiva p. 28.
: Whence it is evident there may continue a constant large flux of water for ten
or eleven months together without recruits from rains. Which being so
remarkable a case, I cannot but recommend it to the examination of our curious
French Author, desireing him to let us know, after allowance made for what the
dry and parched Earth does drink up of the showers (the Island being sithat in
the Torrid Zone) how many Inches there will be left (and lines too, for I know
he must be critical) to supply such a Current. And after he has done with that,
let him next consider another at Rotunda in the West Indies where it rains in
like manner but once a year, which though a very small Island, has a Spring
riseing in the middle of it, so very profluent, that as we are told the whole
Island would be short in proportion for a Conservatory sufficient to supply it,
though it rained there constantly all the year round Ibid. p. 32.
. As perhaps might the Strophades, which as the learned and ingenious Sr.
George Wheeler tells us, are Islands judged distant about fifty miles from Zant
and thirty from the Morea, lying very low, and the biggest not above five miles
in circuit; nevertheless they report (says he) that there is such plenty of
fresh water there, that one cannot thrust a stick into the ground but the water
gushes out in the place. Much less still would the rock in the Thracic
Bosphorus, on which stands the Sconce called the Maiden-Tower, be sufficient
for this purpose, which, as the same worthy Author also tells us, though not
above 30 yards about, and encompassed with a deep Sea, yet has a fountain of
fresh water springing from it Sr. Geo. Wheelers ^^^ages p. 45, 46. and 208.
vide etiam ^ardanum de varietate Lib. 1. cap. 6. in initio, ubi d^ (...) du^cis
aquae in Maris scopulo: of which ^ee 77. of this Chapter.
.

64. And as there are Springs where there is little or no rain, so in many
places in the World there are no Springs at all, though there fall rain enough,
and all other requisites in being that this Hypothesis demands, such as lose
pervious Earth to receive, Mountains to contain, and a well luted bottom to
support; as the same ingenious Mr James Young observed at Lipari an Isle near
Sicily where all these concurred, and yet there Springs in it not one drop of
water Ibidem. p. 30.
; whence it manifestly appears (whatever is pretended) how unapt rains are to
cause Springs, though they may and do sometimes accidentally increase them:
But we need not go so far as the fruitful Isle of Lipari for satisfaction in
this point, it being plainly so in a large tract of ground in the County of
Kent, there riseing not one Spring all along between the Dover road to London
and the ridge of hills above Charing, Lenham, and Maidstone; from Ospringe to
the banks of the River Medway; which I take to be about 17 miles in length, and
about 5 in breadth, and yet the Earth in all this Country is bibulons enough of
rain, and has Hills (if they be so requisite) for Cisterns to contain it, and a
close firm bed of Chalk at 10 or 15 foot distance underneath to support it,
that it sink not too deep into the Earth: Underneath which Chalk it is true
there are plentiful Springs enough; but no man that knows the place, or is well
informed about it, can imagine that these can come from the rains; the bed of
Chalk underneath the uppermost mould, being altogether impervious, and
sometimes threescore, but very seldom less than ten or twenty fathom thick:
which too certainly must be the reason that the Sea Springs do not rise here
as in other places, the bed of Chalk being as impenetrable to them below, as to
the Rains from above.

65. Thus having made it probable at least that most Springs do not so much
depend upon rain as some would have us believe, let us proceed from negative to
positive arguments, and see whether we cannot prove that the Springs are
actually furnished by subterraneous passages from the Sea, or that there is
really such an inferior Circulation of waters between them, as that the Rivers
never fail, nor the Sea ever grows full. That some Springs are maintained
immediately from the Sea, I take to be so certain, that there is scarce a
maritime Town in any nation but will readily subscribe it, their waters being
generally brackish, but more or less according as they are nearer, or more
remote from the Sea: Putei effossi quo magis a mari distant, eo minus sunt
salsi says Cardan Hieron. Cardani de subtilitate Lib. 2. p. 166. Edit. Basil.
An. 1582.
, and so the aforesaid Mr. James Young found it at Plymouth Lect. Cutlerian. de
potentia restitut. p. 31.
, and thus I know it to be upon most of the Seacoasts of England; thus Caesar
in his distress at Alexandria, digging on the Shores found great quantities of
fresh water springing into his pits in one nights time A. Hirtii Pansae
Commentar. Lib. de Bello Alexandrino cap. 9.
; and the same Mr. Young tells us, that the River at the Isle Mayo
disembogueing it self into the Sea, remote from the Roads at an inconvenient
place for boats, the Mariners are constrained to dig wells in a bank of sand,
which though between the Ocean and the pickle of a Salt pond that lies between
this bank and the Island, yet in 24 hours they can get 3 or 4 foot in depth of
clear water, which visibly trickles through the sand and cannot possibly be
other than Sea water, by reason of the situation of the bank and Well; yet
tasting so little of Salt, that it is drinkable, and fit to boil meat in
Lectur. Cutler. de potentia restitut. p. 29. and 32.
: From all which I think it is pretty manifest in the first place, that Salt
water will gradually become fresh by transcolation.

66. So that it only remains to show, that it may and does convey it self to
great distances not only by this means, but by mighty indroughts, which perhaps
are after divided into smaller passages, that at length diminish (before they
come very near the Spring head) into capillaries, and lastly being somewhat more
obstructed, become the Calenders themselves; which that it really does, it is
more than probable, from the sudden stoppage, and intermissions of Rivers
without mention of droughts, and from the change of fresh water Rivers into
Salt ones: For how should such Rivers as the great River Trent that rises in
this County become dry of a sudden as it was observed to be at Nottingham (and
no question was so at other places) An. 1110. temp. H. 1. from the morning till
3 in the afternoon as Knighton informs us Hen. Knighton Canonici Leycestrensis
de Eventibus Angliae Lib. 2.
, had not its Springs been supplied by such subterraneous passages, which being
casually stopped by the fall of Earth, could not furnish water till such time as
it could work its way again, through that fallen Earth, or find some other
passage. Four years after on the sixth of the Ides of October. An. 1114. as Simeon
Dunelmensis and John Bromton acquaint us, the River Medway in Kent for several
miles together did so fail of water, that for two whole days the smallest
vessels could not pass upon it Simeon Dunelmensis Hist. de gestis Regum Ang.
and Chronicon Joh. Bromton. in Anno 1114.
: The same Authors also tell us that the River Thames suffered the same lack of
water at the same time, but Matthew Paris says expressly it was on the fourth
of the Kalends of April half a year before, when he relates it was so dry for
two days that the Sea it self also failed of reaching the shore for 12 miles
forward, also for the same two days Matthew. Paris Hist. Ang. in Hen. 1. An. 1114.
; the other Authors adding, that Children could wade over between the Bridge and
the Tower, and that it was not above the knee under the Bridge it self.

67. And yet they give us no account of any drought that occasioned any of
these; nor indeed was it likely since their durance was so short; they must
most probably therefore happen upon some stoppage of the great master Pipes
that supplied them, which lie deep in the Earth, so that they could not run
again till they had forced their passage: which perhaps may be also the true
natural cause of the sudden standing of the Rivers Elva, Motala, and Gulspang
in Sweden sometimes for 2 or 3 days, which Biazius, Herbinius, and Loccenius
tell us, happened in the years 1566. 1632 Joh. Loccenii Historiae Suecanae Lib.
7. p. 370. and Lib. 8. p. 606. Edit. Franc. and Lipsiae An. 1676.
. 1638, 1639 Joh. Biazai Senioris Historiae Eccles. Su^c. Lib. 8. cap. 14.
. 1665 Joh. Herbinii de admirandis mundi Cataractis Lib. 4. Dissert. 8. cap. 17.
. For we cannot well suppose that such mighty things should happen from any
stoppage of the small ductus's of rains and dews, which are many, and lie
dispersed at great distances, and cannot in any likelihood be stopped thus
together: whereas upon the obstruction of any of the great Canales that lie
deep and come immediately from the sea; it is easy to apprehend how the
capillary Tubes proceeding from them may be all stopped together. And as the
Communication between the springs and sea seems probable from the obstructions
of the passages between them, so it seems to be manifest from the too much
opening of them: Whence it is that sometimes fresh water springs have turned to
salt ones; the sea water which supplied them (having gotten a wide open
Channel) being upon this account not sufficiently percolated, and so remaining
salt: as it happened once in Caria as Pliny reports, where the River near the
Temple of Neptune which was known before to be fresh and potable, turned all
upon a sudden into salt water C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist. Lib. 31. cap. 5.
, which it could hardly have done (I think) had it been supplied by rains.

68. But these subterraneous communications appear yet more manifest, from the
many Springs in the World that ebb and flow with the Sea, such as that
mentioned by Camden in the Cantred of Bichan in Caermarthinshire, upon the Hill
where Careg Castle stood Camden in Caermarthynsh.
; that of Marsac in Gascony, which says Varenius exactly observes the Tides of
the Garonne at Bordeaux B. Varenii Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 17.
; and another that Gassendus mentions in a little Island at the mouth of the
River Timavus Pet. Gassendi Phys.. 3. Memb. pr. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
: But these are inconsiderable in comparison of that on the top of a high
Mountain in the Province of Connaght in Ireland which though it punctually
observe the motions of the Sea, yet we are told is a Spring of fresh water; and
so is that called Lou-Zara among the mountains of Cabret in Gallaecia in Spain,
which also ebbs and flows, though it be distant no less than 20 leagues from
the Sea Bern. Varenii Geogr. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 17.
; To which let me add (what exceeds all the rest) that on the top of that part
of the Mount Erminius in Portugal, which lifts it self up above all the rest in
the manner of a Pyramid, (which part the Inhabitants for distinction call Mount
Cantari) summo in cacumine in the very top of this says Vasconcellius, there is
a Lake (many paces about) that most accuratly observes the reciprocation of the
Sea Ant. Vasconcellii Descriptio Regni Lusitan. cap. 5.
. Which I suppose may be enough to justify my sentence, should I pronounce it
for certain, that there are such communications between the Springs and Seas.

69. Yet for further Evidence it must not be omitted, that there are many Lakes
in the World of Salt water, that have no superterraneous Vents into the Sea,
and some of them full of Sharks and other Sea fish; as that in the Valley of
Cajovani in the Province of Baeinoa in Hispaniola called Haguygabon, which says
Peter Martyr is 30 miles long and 12 broad, and though it swallow no less than
24 Rivers of fresh water that flow from the Mountains, yet such mighty
quantities of sea waters sometimes boil into it (which bring Sharks and other
sea fish along with them) that it is salt notwithstanding; And as it sometimes
throws forth, so at other times again it ingulfes the waters with that mighty
violence, that it often draws in the Fishermen, boats and all, which it never
throws up again upon the shoars, as things usually are that are swallowed by
the sea. He tells us also of another of this kind in the same Island, that
answers the former in all respects, but in greatness Petri Martyris Anglerii de
Orb novo Dec. 3. cap. 8.
. And Varenius informs us that there is another in the Isle Cuba two leagues
round, that is also salt, and has sea fish in it, though it likewise receive
fresh Rivers. He tells us also of another in Peru; another in Madagascar; and
the Lake Asphaltites, though it receive the fresh water River of Jordan, is not
sweet; and may pass for another Bernh. Varenii Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 15.
prop. 7.
.

70. To which add the vast Lake or rather Caspian Sea, which though it take in
all the waters of the Volga which as has been said before throws into it enough
in a year to cover the whole Terraqueous globe, beside many other great Rivers;
yet is salt water, has Sea fish in it, and never overflowes; No more than the
Mediterranean sea it self, which in regard it never vents it self into the sea,
but receives water from it at both ends, from the Atlantic by the straights of
Gibraltar, and from the Euxin through the Thracic Bosphorus, as it were from
two Rivers; may pass too for a Lake: and yet I say though this Sea perpetually
receives those vast influxes of water, it never overflowes so much as the low
Country of Egypt. Hither too may be referred all Rivers that are swallowed by
the Earth and never rise again, such as those in the Province of Caizimu in
Hispaniola, where there are several, that after they have run fourscore and ten
miles, fall all into a great Cave, under the root of a very high Mountain Petri
Martyris Anglerii de novo Orb Decad. 3. cap. 7.
. Now how these Lakes should come at all to be salt, or how Sea fish should be
brought into them? or what should become of the mighty quantities of water
received into such vast Lakes as the Caspian and Mediterranean Seas that never
overflow, or into that great Cave in the Province of Caizimu? unless there are
such cummunications between the Seas and such Lakes, for the conveyance of salt
waters and fish, and for expense of the others, in supplying of Rivers; will be
difficult I am afraid to be resolved to satisfaction.

71. Again that there are such passages is further evident, from the many
heterogeneous bodies belonging to the sea, that are many times found by diging
in the bowels of the Earth, such as the shells of Sea fish, Masts, Anchors,
parts of Ships etc. such were the subterraneous Cockle, Muscle, and Oyster
shells found in the diging of a Well at Sr. William D'Oylies in Norfolk many
foot under ground, and at considerable distance from the sea, of which the
ingenious Author of Mercurius Centralis has given us an account; and such was
the Mast He mentions dug out of the top of a high hill in Greenland with a
pulley hanging to it Mercurius Centralis. p. 74.
: But the most prodigious story that we have of this kind, is that of Baptista
Fulgosus, Ludovicus Moscardus, and Theodorus Moretus, who tell us that at the
village of Bern in Switzerland An. 1460. in a Mine 50 fathoms deep, there was
dug up a whole Ship, with its Anchors and broken Masts, in which were the
Carcases of 40 Mariners, together with their Merchandise: which Fulgosus more
particularly tells us, as a thing done in his own time, and seen by many grave
and sober men, from whom (qui in repraesentes fuere) He says He received a
personal account of it Bapt. Fulgosi Dict. and Fact. Mem. Collect. Lib. 1. c.
6. Museo di Lud. Moscardo, Lib. 2. cap. 111. Theo. Moreti Tract. de Aestu maris
cap. 21.. 275.278.
. And yet this will not seem so very strange neither, if we consider what
mighty Charybdes there are in the World, whereof Andreas Moralis informs us He
met with one upon the coast of Hispaniola (which no doubt was it that supplied
the Lake aforementioned. 69. of this Chapter) where the water was drawn with
that violence into the Earth, that notwithstanding their utmost endeavors, the
Ship hardly escaped being sucked into it And. Moral. Decad. 7. cap. 8.
.

72. But that which exceeds all the rest in the world (to omit that on the
coast of Sicily, that in the River Sum in Picardy betwixt Amiens and
Abbeville Bernh. Varenii Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 16. Prop. 28.
, and that of Paulus Warnefridus Pauli Warnefridi de gestis Longobardorum Lib.
1. cap. 6.
) is the fluxus Moschonius, the Moskoestroome or Maalstroome, between the Isles
of Moskoe, Weroe, Roest and Loufouden, on the coast of Norway, now by some
called the Mousk; but anciently (...) by Homer Homeri Odyss. (...) v. 50.
; umbilicus Maris by Paulus Diaconus; anhelitus Mundi, by Mela; Nares Mundi by
Solinus; Acheron by Suidas, and Orpheus in his Argonautics; and (...) by Plato
and Aristotle; Which as Ortelius describes it, is no less than 40 miles round,
and upon the Tides comeing in, swallows in a manner the whole sea with an
incredible noise, drawing in Ships, Whales, or whatever else comes within its
compass, and dashing them to pieces against the sharp rocks, that there are in
the descent of this dreadful Hiatus; and then upon the Ebb throwing them out
again with as prodigious a violence, in so much that some have attributed the
whole flux and reflux of the sea (and not without some reason) to this vast
Vorago Abrah. Ortelii Thesaur. Geogr. in verbo Umbilicus.
. Now though indeed it be unlikely that the Ship found at Bern should be drawn
in here, and carried underground to so great a distance, all things sucked in
here being supposed to be thrown out again as Peter Clausson and the learned
and ingenious Olaus Rudbeck have described it, who think too with Brinckius
that there is no bottomless subterraneous passage Olai Rudbeck Atlanticae Lib.
8.. 1.
, though it is hard to think what less could receive such a prodigious Mass of
waters vid. Rations Joh. Herbinii de Cataractis marinis Lib. 2. Dissert. 4.
cap. 9. ubi etiam Mappae hujus Voraginis.
; Yet who knows what vast Indraughts there may be in the Mediterranean (if not
done by that near Sicily) that may be sufficient to perform it? For that there
must be such passages and immense ones too, must be taken for evident from the
constant consumption of the waters that are so constantly thrown in, unless any
Man can show us which way else they are disposed off.

73. I know it has been conjectured that the waters received into the
Mediterranean and the Baltic (to which also the water always sets inward
through the Sound) are carried forth again by an under current in the straights
leading into those seas: and it must not be denied but there may be such a
thing as a contrary motion of water in the same channel: thus the Watermen at
London will all tell you, that at the turning of the water in the river Thames,
it will be tide of ebb by the shore for some time, when it is yet flood in the
middle; and so vice versa, flood by the shore, when yet ebbing in the middle.
So in the Downs they will tell you, where the Sea runs tide and half tide (as
they call it) it will be ebbing water, or flood upon the shore, three hours
before it is so in the offing, 1 e. off at Sea: which it may be cannot well be
conceived without an under, as well as upper Current. Though these home
Experiments, I say, cannot well be denied, yet I find it little more than
gratis dictum, or founded at most upon conjecture or slender authority, that it
is so in the Sound, or straights of Gibraltar: But admit it should; I am still
at a loss which way the under current should go that carries away the water
that comes into the Mediterranean from the Euxin Sea, unless carried away by
the same under current which carries away that which comes in through the
straights of Gibraltar; and if so, the under current must be at last 3 times
bigger than the upper one, making allowance for the waters that increase this
vast store from the Rivers of Europe, Asia, and Afric, that flow into the
Mediterranean on this side the Hellespont: which if ever well made out I shall
rest satisfied as to that particular. Yet still this will not account either
for such Lakes as ebb and flow with the Sea; or that have salt water in them
and sea fish, yet have no superterraneous communication with the Sea; that
receive great numbers of fresh water rivers into them yet never overflow, such
as the Caspian Sea, Lacus Asphaltites, Haguygabon, etc. mentiond. 69 and 70 of
this Chapter.

74. Hitherto from Philosophy and profane History having made it probable at
least that few Springs come from rains, Snows, etc, and manifest that many of
them (if not all that are considerable do come form the Sea through
subterraneous passages: Let us next add (what should put all out of doubt with
a Christian Reader) the constant uniform concurrence, of Holy Writ; where they
are expressly called the Springs of the Sea Job. 38. v. 16. Amos. 9. v. 6.
, and the fountains of the Deep Genesis 8. v. 2.
; the whole Circulation whereof is more fully declared by the Wise Man in
Ecclesiastes, where He says, that all Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is
not full, unto the place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again
Eccles. 1. v. 7.
. Which Text, if well considered, seems to include a Problem, and in the latter
part, the Wise-Man's answer; The Question in the first part being, How it comes
to pass, that all the Rivers running into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full? To
which He plainly answers; unto the place from whence the Rivers come, thither
they return again. i. e. that there is a perpetual motion or circulation of the
waters through the Globe of the Earth, and that the Sea sends as much forth
again for the supply of the Rivers as it received from them; which manifestly
shows us why the Sea is not full. I know that Mr Ray would have this performed
by the superior Circulation through the Clouds, and not by subterraneous
passages, that is, that the Sun exhales water out of the Sea, which being
poured down again from the clouds upon the Earth from part thereof falling upon
and soaking into the higher grounds, He would have the Springs and Rivers
arise; and that this way, whence the Rivers come, they should return again Joh.
Ray his Observations Topographical etc. p. 300.
.

75. But I can by no means allow this for a solution, since it manifestly
infringes the whole Analogy of the Scriptures; for beside that we find there
issued a River from the Earth, as the Vulgar Latin and Septuagint translate it
(which in all probability was the same that went out of Eden) before God had
caused it to rain upon the Earth Genesis 2. v. 5.6.
, the Deep is plainly said to send forth Her Rivers Ezekiel 31. v. 4.
; And God Himself expressly distinguishes between the waters of the Deep
(whence Spring the fountains) and the waters of the Clouds, intimating their
different origines and motions: For when God destroyed the world by the flood,
the same day were all the fountains of the great Deep broken up, and the
Windows of Heaven were opened Genesis 7. v. 11.
, most manifestly hinting that the waters of the former were to move as
violently upwards; as the latter, downwards: Again, when this dreadful
Judgment was overpast, the fountains of the deep, and the Windows of heaven
are said to have been stopped Genesis 8. v. 2.
: God is said also to establish the Clouds above, and to strengthen the
fountains of the Deep Prove. 8. v. 28.
: Likewise Jacob blessed Joseph with the blessings of heaven above (the dews
Deuteronomy. 33. v. 13.
) and with the blessings of the deep that lies under Genesis 49. v. 25.
, So that unless one could conceive a thing to operat before it had being, or
could reconcile Contrarieties, and make things the same which God himself has
distinguished, by so many repeated and so different expressions, the
abovementioned solution can be no way admitted.

76. Agreeable to which Dictates of the Word of God, and particularly that of
Solomon (which says Ricciolus we are not to esteem as a saying of the vulgar,
but an Aphorism of the divine wisdom Joh. Bapt. Riccioli Almagesti novi Lib.
2. cap. 13.
) we find the Sentiments of most of the Ancients; who generally thought the
Springs and Rivers to have their Origin from an Abyss or great Deep, which
Homer calls -- (...)
(...)
(...) Homeri iliad. (...) v. 195.
.
the great power of the Ocean, out of which flow all the Rivers, all Seas, all
Fountains, and all deep wells; which he at another place, some other of the
Poets, Plato, etc. call also Barathrum and Tartarus: Only by these, it is plain
they did not so much intend the Sea, as a vast collection of waters within the
bowels of the Earth, derived from the Sea through a prodigious gulf; (...),
into which hiatus or gulf, says Plato, all the Rivers flow, and from which
again they disperse themselves abroad Plato in Phaed. p. 112. Edit. Hen. Steph.
An. 1578.
. And it is plain from Aristotle and Seneca that many more of the Ancients were
of this opinion Aristot. Meteorolog. Lib. 1. cap. 13. and 14. L. An. Senecae
Not. Quaest. Lib. 3. cap. 4.5.
, and so were most of the Authors (with little difference) mentioned 40 of this
Chapter: Which too being agreeable to holy Writ, the Deep and the Sea being
distinginsh't in Job, the Deep says it is not in me, and the Sea says it is
not in me Job Chap. 28. v. 14.
; we cannot but subscribe, and allow it for authentic; and be induced to think,
that by the word deep, the Scripture does most times intend not so much the
Sea, as such a vast provision of waters in the Caverns of the Earth; and that
where the fountains are called the Springs of the Sea, the mediation of the
Deep ought to be understood (as perhaps it also should through the whole State
of the Question) and when Solomon says, unto the place whence the Rivers come,
thither they return again; there ought to be understood the mediation of the
Sea.

77. Which being the Sum of what I have to say for this part of the Question,
let us next see whether the objections brought against it 38 and 39 of this
Chapter, may not more easily be solved, than the arguments for it perhaps are
like to be: The first whereof, that great Inundations etc See 38. of this
Chapter.
, I judge to be so very inconsiderable, that it seems rather to make for, what
it designs to overthrow, than any thing against it: For if the great rains,
and the meltings of snow and Ice, go away in floods; thence should I rather
argue that these could not be the causes of Springs, there being so little left
for the Supply of them; an allowance for exhalations, and the nourishment of
plants, being also to be deducted. And to the second I answer that for such
Springs that quite fail in summer we have already granted them 37 to depend
wholly on rains; though with the Reverend and learned Dr. Stillingfleet I might
justly perhaps have rather imputed this failure to the Suns exhaling by his
continual heat, those moist vapors in the Earth that should constantly have
supplied these Springs, than merely to the want of rain Stillingfleeti Origin.
Sacr. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
; And for such as considerably abate of their

77. Which being the Sum of what I have to say for this part of the Question,
let us next see whether the objections brought against it 38 and 39 of this
Chapter, may not more easily be solved, than the arguments for it perhaps are
like to be: The first whereof, that great Inundations etc See 38. of this
Chapter.
, I judge to be so very inconsiderable, that it seems rather to make for, what
it designs to overthrow, than any thing against it: For if the great rains,
and the meltings of snow and Ice, go away in floods; thence should I rather
argue that these could not be the causes of Springs, there being so little left
for the Supply of them; an allowance for exhalations, and the nourishment of
plants, being also to be deducted. And to the second I answer that for such
Springs that quite fail in summer we have already granted them 37 to depend
wholly on rains; though with the Reverend and learned Dr. Stillingfleet I might
justly perhaps have rather imputed this failure to the Suns exhaling by his
continual heat, those moist vapors in the Earth that should constantly have
supplied these Springs, than merely to the want of rain Stillingfleeti Origin.
Sacr. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
; And for such as considerably abate of their waters, though we cannot allow
them entirely to be supplied from rains, yet we are not so sanguine neither
(nor does it prejudice our cause) but that we may readily yield that most
Springs (if not all) may receive augmentation, though not their essence from
them.

78. To the third, which infers that Springs must needs be from rains, because
they are never found on the tops of Hills, which otherwise sometimes they might
be, at least where the Hills exceed not the surface of the Sea in height; it
may plainly be replied, that we are well assured from very good hands, that
there are Springs on the tops of high Mountains, such as the fountain head of
the River Marsyas which says Q. Curtius rises e summo montis cacumine, out of
the very summit of the Mountain Q. Curtii Rufi Historiarum Lib. 3. in initio.
: and Cardan acquaints us that there is another does the like in the Isle of
Bonicca near Hispaniola Hieron. Cardani de subtilitate Lib. 2. p. 92. edit.
Basil. An. 1582.
: He tells us also that from the very top of the highest rock of the Isle of
May in the Fyrth of Forth upon the coast of Fife in Scotland, there Springs a
fountain of fresh water, though the whole rock or Isle be scarce two miles
about Hieron. Cardani de rerum Varietate Lib. 1. cap. 6. in initio.
, which might also well have been considered 63 of this Chapter: As might too
what I find amongst the remarks of the Honorable Mr. Boil, who traversing the
maritim Country of Warterford in the Kingdom of Ireland, saw a Mountain from
whose higher parts there ran precipitously a pretty broad River, that within
but two or three years, before first broke forth without any manifest cause
from a great Bog that had been immemorially at the top of that Mountain, and
has supplied the Country with a River ever since; which had it proceeded from
rains or Snows, I suppose would have been there long before. Beside we are
assured by Scaliger that in a field near his own house, there issues forth a
spring from the top of a Hill, than which there is no ground higher any where
near: who also further adds that there is a Lake with liveing springs in it, in
a plain upon the top of mount Cinis, amongst the Cottian Alps between Savoy and
Piedmont, than which very high and spacious Level there is no place higher Jul.
Scaligeri de Subtilitate Lib. 15. Exercit. 46.
, to afford any such supply as is suggested in the Objection.

79. Which too partly might have past for a tolerable answer to the fourth
Objection, which concludes in like manner (as the other from Hills) that all
springs must needs be from rains, because there is none rise in plains: But the
ingenious Dr. Boat expressly informs us, that in Ireland which is a place very
full of springs, they frequently rise in flat and champain Countries; that sort
of fountains, which forcibly burst out of a rock, or the foot of a Mountain,
being rare to be found in that Kingdom G. Boat 's Not. Hist. of Ireland chap.
7.. 1.
: Nor are springs riseing in plains only found there, but in many other
Countries, some of the greatest Rivers in the World having their Origin in
plains; thus Pyramus in Cappadocea, which though Strabo calls (...) navigabile
flumen, yet he says it breaks out (...) Strabonis rerum Geograph. Lib. 12. p.
536, edit. Paris. An. 1620.
in the middle of a plain field: And Agricola tells us that the great River
Tanais rises in campestri planicie Moscoviae in the champain fields of Muscovy
Geo. Agricolae de natura Eorum quae effluunt ex terra Lib. 3. in initio.
: To which add Danubius the greatest River in Europe, whose fountain head says
Cluverius (notwitstanding it is perennial and so capacious that it takes up 26
foot in length and 18 in breadth is in humo plana at que aperta in plain ground
in the village of Eschingen or Donasching; or as Jornandes will have it, in
arvis Alemanicis, and not as Herodotus, Tacitus, Pliny, and Marcellinus say, at
the foot of a hill or great Mountain Phil. Cluverii Vindeliciae and Noric.
chap. 6.
. To the fifth it may be answered, that the reason why we find few springs in
stiff Clays, is not so much that rains cannot sink into them, as that the
springs cannot force themselves from below up through them, as the ingenious
Mr. Young found it at Lipari Lecturae Cutlerianae de potentia Restitut. p. 34.
, and as was further hinted in the bed of Chalk 64 of this Chapter. And the
Sixth seems to have been sufficiently enervated Ibidem, in all the Paragraphes
from the 56. to the 60th.

80. Though it may be further added that the rains, Snows, etc. are so far from
supplying all the water that runs into the sea by the Rivers, that bateing what
is spent in the nourishment of Plants; most, if not all the rest, is exhaled
again into vapors for the supply of rains and dews; whence it is, that dry and
barren Countries have but little rain, and that the draining of bogs and fens,
and cuting down woods and groves (which cause the Air to stagnat, and so
engender moisture, and preserve it by their shade) will so alter the very
temper of the Heavens, that the Country which before was cold and wet, shall
become warm and temperatly dry. Thus Pliny tells us of old, that the Country
about Philippi, being made dry by sluices, and artificial trenches, the whole
disposition of the Air and weather was thereby altered, and the very habit of
the heavens above their heads changed C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist. Lib. 17.
cap. 4.
. And thus we are credibly informed that in our foreign Plantations by
destroying the woods, and laying all open to the sun, the rains are much
abated, there being not half the rains now in Barbados, that there were
heretofore; and that the rains still diminish in Jamaica, as they extend their
Plantations Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 27. p. 497.
; As I am told they have also in Ireland, and in Lincolnshire and Cambridgshire
in England, upon draining the bogs and fens in those Countries.

81. And lastly to the Seventh and its several branches, viz. that those who
would have the fountains supplied from the Sea, have not satisfied the world,
first that there are such Caverns or subterraneous passages that come from it;
I think I may safely say they have had full satisfaction from. 67.68.69.70.71
and 72 above written. And to the second, that if such Caverns should be
allowed, it does not yet appear, how water should ascend to the tops of
Mountains, etc. I answer first, that in case it should be admitted, that the
Sea, can have no such elevated parts, as to be the cause of any Spring on the
top of a Mountain, yet this hinders not but it may be of those in the Valleys
(these being as much below the surface of the sea, as the Mountains are above
it) which is as much as we contend for, it having been readily granted. 37 that
the Springs on, or near the tops of hills, if weak and weeping, may proceed
from rains: But indeed if such as those mentioned 77 (especially that from the
rock in the Isle of May, which cannot well be supposed to come from rains) be
intended in the argument, the case is more difficult, and requires secondly a
more strict and direct answer; for if all water compose it self to a Level,
above which it will never ascend in a Tube or other passage, how it should thus
be conveyed to the tops of Mountains, is a Question indeed worthy of Solution:
which yet we find not so insuperable, but that it may be said,

82. First, that notwithstanding it is true, that water continuing in an equal
state, and vessel, ascends not naturally above its own Level; yet that when
there is an unequal weight between the water descending and the water
ascending, as there is between the salt water of the sea, and the fresh of
fountains; the former descending in large passages, and the latter ascending in
tapering Tubes, diminishing into capillaries; the sea water being presst too
with a vast weight of Air which is always incumbent upon its spacious
superficies: I see no reason (these circumstances being well weighed) but that
such water may well ascend above its own Level, so far as to issue forth from
the top of the highest Mountain; just as the Quicksilver ascends in the Tube of
a Barometer by the pressure of the Air upon the stagnant poole of Mercury
below. To which 2. let me add the great assistance afforded toward the
performance of this work, by the constant heat in the lower Regions of the
Earth, which warming the streams as they run along, there are continually
riseing some vapors, or little particles of water which nimbly pass through the
pores of the Earth, till they come toward its superficies in the Caverns of the
Mountains, which being environed with cold, these vapors are there condensed
again into perfect water as in the head of a Cucurbit or Still; and as Des
Carts and Dr. Stllingfleet learnedly observe, being now more gross, cannot
descend again through the same pores, through which they ascended when vapors
Ren. Des Carts Princip. Philosoph. Part. 4. 64. and Stillingfleeti Origin.
Sacr. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
, and therefore seek out some wider passages near the surface of the Earth or
Mountains, through which descending obliquely, and uniting in the way with all
other vapors arrested in like manner, they grow at length into a considerable
body of waters, which finding a fit vent at the foot of a Mountain or any
declivity, they become at length a Spring, that is perpetually maintained, by
the like as perpetual Evaporations and Condensations.

83. Now that there are such hypogeal heats or Estuaries in the third Region of
the Earth, which that most acute Philosopher the Honorable Robert Boil upon
good grounds places lowest, and to commence at about 80 or 100 fathom deep, is
evident from the testimony of Morinus and other ingenious persons cited by the
same noble Author; who visiting the deep Hungarian mines, at the orifice of the
Grooues found them temperatly warm, much as the Air above, but descending
lower they felt it considerably cold, till they came to 80 or 100 fathom; which
being past, they came by degrees to warmer regions, which still increased in
heat as they went deeper and deeper Mr. Boyles tract of the temperature of
Subterraneal regions. cap. 2.
: in some of these Mines Dr. Brown also acquaints us that He found it so hot
at bottom, that to refresh Himself he was constrained to go with his breast
naked, though he had only Linen clothes on, for which reason too the Workmen,
he says, were also forced to work naked Dr. Brownes account of his Travels into
Hungary, etc. p. 90.
: But I have met with such heats at a far lesser depth as may be seen in the
Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire chap. 6.. 61.
whence I am induced to believe that there is a great latitude to be allowed in
this matter, and that the heats lie deeper or nearer the surface, according as
the principles do, from whence they proceed; which whether from fermentations
or subterraneous fires, being indifferent to my purpose, I shall not dispute;
wanting time indeed, as perhaps the Reader may patience, to attend the decision
of so nice a point.

84. Moreover 3. there may be subjoyned another social cause that may
contribute not a little to the elevating water above its own Level, I mean
the vast quantities of Sand, Gravel etc. through which the Sea water is
percolated in the Earth, in which it is plain from the Experiment of Magnanus,
that water will ascend above its own Level De L' Origin des Fountains premier
party p. 125.
: wherein the Reader may satisfye Himself, if he take a glass tube of an inch,
or inch bore or thereabout, and fill it with sand, being first stopped at bottom
with a clout, and set it in a basin of water; He shall presently see the water
gradually ascend in the Sand, at least a foot higher than its superficies in
the Basin, the grains of Sand wetting one another by approximation, as the
threads in a filtre; which I have found true upon frequent Experiment of it: But
then indeed, as the forecited French Author objects, though I made an orifice 4
or 5 inches above the water in the Tube, and affixt a slender pipe to it, into
which I also put a filtre already wet, yet I could not by these, or any other
means I could think of, procure the water to make any signs of droping forth
Ibidem second party, p. 154, 155.
; though I do not doubt but it would, could the Experiment be so ordered as
that the water might ascend in vapor, and be condensed again above, so as not
to be capable of returning, as the process was shown above, to be performed in
the Earth. Not to mention that the water may ascend of it self in the ductus's
of the Earth when they become capillary without further help, as we see it
naturally does in capillarie Tubes De quibus vide Joh. Christopheri Sturmii
Collegium Experiment. Tentamine 8.
; or like the sap in trees, and descend again, so as to flow forth, as in the
wounded Birch.

85. But 4. waveing all that has hitherto been said, if the Seas at some
places be higher than at others; or at some places and times, be violently
thrown up as high as any Mountains that have Springs upon them, there will be
no need of making use of any of the former allegations, of the unequal weight
of the Sea water, pressure of the Air, hypogeal heats etc. for either of these
being proved, the Axiom in Hydrostaticks [that water ascends not above its own
Level] needs not at all be infringed, to convey water to the top of the highest
Mountain, for if one Sea be not high enough to perform the feat, another may:
Now that Seas at some places are higher than at others, seems not only probable
from what was alleged 20. of this Chapter to prove our Western, higher than our
Eastern Sea; but from the judgment of many ancient Mathematicians and
Philosophers, such as the Grecian Architects, who affirming, as Eratosthenes
relates it in Strabo, the Corinthian Sinus, to be higher than that [the
Saronic] at Cenchreae, diverted Demetrius Poliorcetes from cutting the
Corinthian Isthmus Strabonis rerum Geograph. Lib. 1. page 54. edit. Paris. An.
1620.
; Which very consideration also, that the Ionian was higher than the Aegean
Sea, caused Julius Caesar, C. Caligula, and Nero, who all attempted the same
thing, to desist in like manner, least the City Aegina should thereby have been
drowned Joh. Bapt. Riccioli Geograph. and Hydrograph. Reformatae Lib. 1. cap.
16.
.

86. It was upon this account too that Sesostres King of Egypt, Darius the
Persian, Ptolomaeus; and since them, the Sultans of Egypt, and the Emperors of
Turkey, each in their respective reigns, proceeded not in their cuting the
Arabian Isthmus between the red Sea, and the Mediterranean, or Nile; for that
the red Sea being found by the Egyptian Mathematicians, to be three cubits
higher than the land of Egypt, they feared an irrecoverable inundation over
that Country Ibidem, and C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist. Lib. 6. cap. 29.
. Nor have the Ancients alone been of this opinion; for Cabaeus informs us
that it is evident even to sight, that the Ligustic Sea or Mar di Genova, is
much higher than the Adriatic, to any body that stands on the mount la
Bocchetta, where it is plain it seems, that the Ligustic Sea is level with a
place called Serraval, whence there continues a descent to Tortona, thence
lower to Pavia, and thence yet lower to Venice Cabaei Meteor. Lib. 1. text. 9.
q. 9. and text. 73.
. and Ricciolus tells us that the Fathers of the Society of Jesus informed Him,
that standing upon the Mountains of the Isthmus of Panama, where they could see
both the Northern and Southern Seas of America; it was plain to them that the
former near Nombre de Dios, was much higher than the latter near Panama Joh.
Bapt. Riccioli Geog. and Hydrog. reform. Lib. 1. cap. 16.
.

87. The reason of all which is, that the Bottoms of some Seas are higher than
others, which is so far from a new observation, that it was taken notice of as
long ago as Aristotle, who not only names several Seas that are higher than one
another (though I think Him out in his Method) but expressly asserts the most
waters to come from the North, because the Earth is highest there of any part
of the World Aristot. Metecrolog. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
: For which very reason too, both Fromondus and Van Helmont own the Tides to
run swifter from North to South, than any other way, etiam adverso vento,
though the Wind be against them Libert. Fromondi Meteorologic. Lib. 5. cap. 1.
Art. 5.
; Nay so peremptory is Van Helmont in this point, that though He allows the
Corpus Terraqueum to be round from East to West, yet He scruples not upon this
account to deny it to be so from North to South, and proves it rather to be
Parabolical, from the Observations of such as have sailed far North, who
affirmed to Him, that they saw the Sun there a whole Month sooner than they
should have done, had this united body of Earth and Sea been perfectly round;
which so much exceeding the effect of a Crepusculum, He seems justly to ascribe
it to the excessive height of the Northern Regions and Seas above the more
Southern, instancing particularly in the Mediterranean, and Countries about it,
which He thinks to be the lowest of any Joh. Bapt. Van Helmont Ortus Medicinae
Cap. Aqua. page 34.35. edit. Venetiis An. 1651.
: And perhaps indeed they may be so, the Northern Seas flowing into the
Atlantic, and the Atlantic into the Mediterranean, as the Volga (if the Caspian
have any Subterraneous passage into the Euxine Sea) Danubius, Tanais, and
Boristhenes also do, which running through vast tracts of Land from the North,
and descending all the way, most evidently demonstrate it a much lower place
than the Northern Countries are, whose Seas too being so high, may well furnish
the more Southern highest Mountains with Springs enough.

88. But admitting the sublunary world to be Globular, yet if its Center of
Gravity be never so little removed from the Center of Magnitude, by reason of
the lightness of the water on one side the Globe, in comparison of the much
more weight of the Earth on the other; the water on that side will so much
exceed the highest Mountain on the other, in altitude; i. e. will be so much
further distant from the center of gravity than the top of any mountain can be,
that I cannot see what should hinder but the water should ascend naturally
(waveing all other helps) to the top of the most elevated Mountain in the
World, its level being higher, i. e. more remote from the Center of gravity,
than the top of any Mountain. Now if we seriously consider the terraqueous
globe, we shall indeed find such an unequal distribution of Sea and land, that
the Center of its gravity must needs be removed from the Center of Magnitude at
least as much (though I might say more) as between the surface of Mare del Zur
or the Pacific Sea, and the bottom of it; that sea, if we begin on the coast of
China at the 150 degree of Longitude and number to the 260th, containing very
near one third part of the Globe, and the Earth the other two: so that
admitting that there are but as many depths or inequalities at the bottom of
this sea, as there are Mountains on the Earth opposite to it, it may easily be
apprehended how it may send water to the tops of any of those Mountains.

89. Nor can it be objected that if the Center of gravity were thus removed
from the center of Magnitude, the Pacific sea (to bring them together by an
equal libration) must necessarily overflow a great part of Asia and America:
for the shoars of all seas being dry sand, beach, or rocks, and somewhat higher
than the rim or selvege, though lower than the gibbous bulk of its waters
further off in the Main, (not to use herein the aid of the Omnipotent power of
God, who has set a bound to the waters that they turn not again to cover the
Earth Psalm. 104. v. 9.
, and has said to the sea, hither shall thou come and no further Job. 38. v. 11.
) not I say to make use of this supernatural restraint, the shoars being dry,
and a little elevated above the rim of the sea, may contain it (without
violence offered to nature) notwithstanding its protuberance in alto mari, just
as water or other liquor will be contained within the dry brims of a glass,
though it be as much elevated above it, or perhaps in proportion more, than the
sea need be above its shoars, to send water to the top of the highest Mountains.

90. And if the Sea considered in its quiet state (as it has been hitherto) may
do this, much more sure may it, in its disturbed condition; when the waters of
it are gathered together in a heap Psalm. 33. v. 7.
, when God works his wonders in the deep, when He raises the stormy wind,
which lifts up the waves thereof, so that they mount up to Heaven, and go
down again to the depths Psalm. 107. v. 24, 25, 26.
; as the profane as well as inspired Poet, has also expressed it, in the midst of
his troubles Me miserum quanti montes volvuntur aquarum!
Jamjam tacturos sidera summa putes.
Quantae diducto subsidunt aequore valles!
Jamjam tacturas tartara nigra putes Pub. Ovidii Nasonis Tristium Lib. 1. Eleg.
2.
.
in which condition, it is very frequently in the gulf of Lione, and the gulf
de las Yeguas between Spain and the Canaries, in the Bay of Biscay, the Japan
and China Seas, and near the cape of Good Hope Joh. Ba^t. Riccioli Geograph.
and Hydrograph. reformat. Lib. 10. cap. 1.
, which alone might supply water enough for the Springs on the tops of
Mountains, they being but few, at least till there happen new storms, though
possibly they may have them interchangeably, which solves the difficulty
better. But the Sea indeed is never at rest, having always its flux and
reflux; and at some places boiling up, by the ascent of hot subterraneous
exhalations, like a seething pot: by one, more, or all which ways together, or
else by some other yet unthought of (useing more of them, or less, according to
the condition of the place) the Sea conveys its waters to the tops of Mountains.

91. For that Salt water some way or other does ascend in the Earth above its
own Level, I am perfectly convinced from some wells that I am assured we have
in England near the sea side, which being situat on so elevated ground that
their bottoms lie not near so deep as the surface of the sea, yet by some means
or other are constantly supplied with brackish water; a thing that could hardly
be, unless the salt water did ascend above its Level: Which being matter of
fact is not to be disputed, though we cannot infallibly assign the Method
whereby it is done. I say is not to be disputed, at least not by such
Adversaries, as allow that the sea water exhaled by the sun, is really
separated not only from its fixed Salt, but volatile too, before it descends
again in rain, merely because matter of fact, though they can no more tell how
nature performs it in the Air, than we can, how she does it in the Earth. Which
may pass for an answer to the third branch of the Seventh Argument, which
equally concludes against our Adversaries, as us; for if it be done in the Air
by a celestial distillation alone, though it cannot by an artificial; much more
should I think it might, by a subterraneous percolation and evaporation too; it
being absurd to think, says Aristotle, and the learned Lydiat, that the same
thing should not as well be performed under ground as above it, by the same
principles [the power of heat Tho. Lydiati Disquisit. Physiolog. de origin
fontium Cap. 2. in initio.
] whereof if they can give us no tolerable account, there is little reason they
should expect it from us; though it is easy to imagine how it must needs be done,
if one reflect on the many thousands of percolations and evaporations that
water may receive in its passage through a mass of Earth of four or five, or
perhaps of six or seven thousand miles thick.

92. And to the fourth branch of the same Argument, which requires
satisfaction, why the passages through which these percolations have been made
from the beginning of the world, are not long since stopped up? it may briefly be
answered that in all probability they are so far from being stopped, that it is
next to certainty that they daily grow wider; it being found by sad experience
amongst Seamen, who when they want fresh water, sometimes percolate salt water
through a Tub of Sand or earth, that though at first the water comes tolerably
fresh, yet upon repeated transcolations, the passages grow so enlarged, that at
last it comes forth again but little altered: Whence we cannot but conclude
these passages in the Sea (where the great Voragines are) must needs by this
time be so very large, that they are altogether unlikely to be any way stopped:
Yet granting they should; there is no salt, and but little Earth of so close a
texture, but it will admit of percolation: Some few Clays indeed there are, and
some other Earths perhaps there may be, whose parts are so fast and united that
nothing will pass through them, nor is there any necessity it should, for few
of these indraughts here and there intersperst, will (and I suppose do) serve
for this purpose; whence it is that Springs, as the learned Dr. Stillingfleet
very well observes, are not indifferently every where to be found, but only in
the paticular channels wherein they are included like the blood in an Animal,
which if pricked in some parts sends forth blood immediately, but if the
incision happen between the sinews, or in the more callous parts, the blood
either comes not at all, or not till it be made very deep Stilling flecti
Origin. Sacr. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
.

93. Thus if you dig in some places incredibly deep, you shall hardly meet with
water, whereas at another, though but a coyts cast distant, you shall find it
plentifully, and near the day too; whereof I have met with several considerable
instances in this and other Countries; particularly that at Barlaston near New
castle under Lyme is very remarkable, where in the South Chancell of the Church
belonging to the worthy Mr. John Bagnal, there rises a Spring whenever they
have occasion to dig a grave (notwithstanding it is always sheltered from
rains) that quickly fills it with water; whereas if they dig in any other part
of the Church or Churchyard round about it, they find the Earth as dry as in
most other places; whereof the same Mr. Bagnal gave me a very cogent though
uncomfortable Testimony from his own Well hard by, which though 22 yards deep,
had scarce any water in it in winter, much less in Summer. Thus at Tetnall also
in Staffordshire upon the Hill above the Church, the Springs rise within 3
yards of the surface, whereas the Wells near the Church 20 yards below, are all
betwixt 20 and 30 yards deep; so that the Springs on the Hill, lie at least 40
yards higher than those in the Vale, though they are not distant above 200
yards. So at Longdon as well within the Church as Churchyard, though upon
higher ground, the Springs lie so near, that many times the Coffins are covered
with water, when they put them in their Graves; whereas at the Parsonage House
that stands on a much lower ground, and but just without the Churchyard wall,
the well is 30 yards deep at least, and sometimes wants water. And in the
Church and Churchyard of St. Michael at Lichfield, is found the same thing,
though the Church stand on the very summit of a Hill (the ground falling every
way from it) and that no small one neither.

94. But the most eminent Instance of this kind, that ever I met with in all my
Travells, is at Blounts Court in the Parish of Rotherfield Pypard in the County
of Oxon: where though they dug a Well on one side of the House (as I received
the account from that great Encourager of all ingenious designs, the
Worshipful Tho. Stonor of Stonor Esquire Proprietor of the Place) above 60 yards
deep, yet could procure no water, it remaining a dry well to this day, 48 yards
deep, 12 yards and upwards being since filled up with Timber and other Rubbish
thrown into it; whereupon attempting another but on the other side the House,
43 yards distant, upon higher ground, they found so plentiful a spring at 15
foot deep, that it sometimes stands (as the forecited worthy Gent. lately sent
me word) 12 foot deep in water, though situat in a high, fast, and stony
Country. Nor is the water of springs only conveyed in particular Channels, but
as the blood in the veins of Animals also ascends in them, whereof we have a
very remarkable inflance at Tixall in this County, where the Spring near the
Church, which serves the Town whith water, has been sometimes exsiccated, (as
I was informed by the learned and observing Gent. Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre
Esquire) when the right Honorable Walter Lord Aston has had occasion to cleanse
some of the ditches in his grounds below, betwixt the River and the Town, the
water being thereby intercepted in the way, which could by no means be, unless
the water did ascend thence, in such ductus's or channels up to the Town.

95. Lastly to the fifth, which requires of us, how it comes to pass that since
we allow that the whole mass of Sea water may perhaps have annually past
through the body of the Earth, that the Sea is not long since become fresh? it
is obvious to reply, that upon the many percolations of the Sea water through
the sands and other Earths in the bottom of the Sea, the salt and grosser parts
of it must needs in great measure be left immediately there; by which, together
with the many and great rocks of natural Salt, that are here and there latent
in the Sea, as well as land, and perpetually washed by its fluxes and refluxes;
all the waters poured into the Sea by the Rivers, are sated again with Salt as
fast as they arrive: by the immense quantities of Salt, I say, left in the
bottom of the Sea, which cannot be dissolved by the Sea water, because
sufficiently impregnated with it already, but may by the freshes. Now that
there is indeed such a vast quantity of Salt more in the bottom of the Sea than
near the surface, is more than probable, from the much greater coldness of the
Sea water at the bottom (unless in some few places where there are hot Springs
or subterrestrial Exhalations) than near the top, as is universally verifyed by
all Vrinators that have had occasion to descend thither to recover goods lost
by Shipwreck, or to fish for pearl or Coral; the cold still increasing with
the depth Mr. Boil of the temperature of Submarine regions Chap. 3. and 4.
; which I take as certainly to proceed from the greater quantity of Salt, as
that by the help of it, every Rustic can show the Experiment, of freezing a pot
by the fire: Nor is this only found true in the lower region of the Sea, but
also in our inland Salt-works, where the water is also coldest at the bottom of
the pits, insomuch that when the Briners go to cleanse them, they cannot abide
in them above half an hour, though for all that time, they drink nothing but
strong waters Philos. Transact. numb. 53. and in Mr. Collins's discourse of
Salt and fishery p. 9.
.

96. Beside the great quantities of Salt left at the bottom of the Sea by means
of percolations, it is as certain that there are also vast rocks of natural
Salt which contribute not a little to the Saltness of the Sea, and will
perpetually do so, whatever quantities of freshes may be poured into it to the
end of the World: Thus the Rivers Ochus, and Oxus, as Pliny tells us, are made
Salt, by great pieces or fragments of rock Salt that fall into them from the
adjoining mountains C. Plinii 2li, Not. Hist. Lib. 31. cap. 7.
: and all our inland brines no question are thus made by the passage of waters
through inexhaustible rocks of mineral Salt, which doubtless are as frequent in
the Sea, as Land; whereof the Isle Ormus is so eminent an Example that I need
add no more, it being nothing else (as Du Hamel informs us) but a rock of
white Salt Joh. Bapt. Du Hamel Phys. part. 2. Tract. 2. cap. 4.
, a few such instances being sufficient for the purpose, notwithstanding the
boundless extent of the Sea, especicially if we consider that the Sea water is
not not so salt as some imagine; 5 or 6 gallons of it not yelding so much Salt,
as one of Cheshire brine. And thus I have as briefly as so difficult a point
would bear, given the grounds of my present opinion concerning the Origin of
Springs, which as I have not assumed merely out of a spirit of contradiction to
other worthy Authors, but upon mature deliberation; So I shall always be as
ready, when the reasons I have brought be solidly answered, and more cogent
ones urged to the contrary, retract it again: For I would have the Reader take
notice that I write nothing dogmatically in any part of this Work; but cum
animo revocandi whenever I shall be better instructed, either by my own, or
the more accurate Observations of Others.

97. Hitherto having treated of the waters of this County, only as they have
some way or other related to the matters of health, or origin of Springs: let
us next consider the Rivers of this County, and then the fountains, that have
any thing otherwise unusual attending them. Amongst the former whereof, the
Rivers Manyfold, and Hans alias Hamps (two branches of the Dove) have this
remarkable in them, that they are not only (like the Nile in Aethiopia, Tigris
in Armenia Geo. Agricolae de Ortu and Causis subterraneorum Lib. 1.
, Ganges in India See the map of Ganges in the English Atlas of East India.
, the Rhine above Bon in Germany, the Danow in the upper Pannonia, the Po in
Italy, Anas in Spain Geo. Agricolae de natura Eorum quae effluunt ex terra,
Lib. 3.
, and diverse others mentioned by Seneca L. An. Senecae Not. Quaest. Lib. 3.
cap. 26.
, Agricola, and Pictorius Geo. Pictorius de fluminibus miraculoses.
) swallowed up, and run under ground for about 3 miles, but have also these
other peculiarities: 1. That each of them have, not one, but many Inlets; the
first that receives the Manyfold being near Wetton Mill, and the first that
swallows Hamps a little below the water Houses, on the River side betwixt
Waterfall and Cauldon; both of them, when they swell so high that the first
will not receive them, having diverse others below at no great distances that
usually do it all the Summer. 2. That though for the most part they run under
ground all the Summer, yet they do not so in Winter; for when their waters are
so high, that all the Inlets will not suffice to swallow them, then they have
Channels (which lie dry all the Summer) wherein like other Rivers they are
conveyed above ground meeting near Beeston Torr, about a Mile North of
Throwley, and so running on to Ilam, joining the Dove a little below, North of
Blore Park. And 3. though in Summer they fall into the ground at 2 miles
distance, yet as above in Winter, so below in Summer, they join again
somewhere under the great Hills through which they pass; for we find but one
exit for them both, which is a little below Mr. Ports House near Ilam Church;
unless we shall rather say, that either, or both of them, never come forth
again at all, and that the Spring at Ilam may have no dependence on them; which
may be easily tried, were Feathers thrown into the water at the Indraught of
one, and Chaff (or some other agreeable materials) at the other: But having no
opportunity of making the Experiment my self, I recommend it to the ingenious
Charles Cotton Esquire and the worthy Mr. Port, next neighbors to them, who
jointly may try it with little trouble.

98. Beside, there is a Rivulet comeing from West of Broughton Chapel, and
running by Fair-oak, that two meddows below the houses, falls into the ground
within Blore Park, belonging to the right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Lichfield, which but two Meddows beyond, rises again under a slat stone before
it comes to Blore Pipe: This it is true is but inconsiderable, it being but a
small Rindle, and running underground but a little way, and not very deep; yet
the greatest flood (as I was told) never causing it to run above ground, as
Hamps and Manyfold do, I thought it worth mentioning. To which let me add some
other such waters, which though not constant, yet in all Landfloods run
violently from the Hills, and are received below into rocky subterraneous
passages, whereof there are two under Cauldon Low, but whither they convey the
water no man knows; and there is another such Indraught at the foot of Ribden
that also swallows the Land floods, which it is believed come out again at
Criftage, but not certain; however it be, the water that comes from Criftage,
certainly falls in under a rock at the foot of Reeden, and what becomes of it
after, no man knows: of which no more, but that Ribden, Reeden etc. under
which these Cryptae lie, are Hills between Ramsor and Pantons in the Dale. Nor
have I more to add concerning Rivers or Rivulets but that the Manyfold is
fuller of windeings (whence doubtless it has its name) than Maeander it self,
if its turnings are no where thicker than about Palatsha, whereof the learned
and ingenious Sr. Geo. Wheler has given us a draught Whelers Voyages Lib. 3.
page 186. and 268.
; and that there are two branches of the Trent and Dane, that though they run
quite contrary ways yet have their Origin from the same Spring in New poole
belonging to the right worshipful Sr. John Bowyer Baronet, one of the most
cheerful Encouragers of this work, it emptying it self when full at both ends,
and supplying in part both those Rivers. Which brings me next

99. To the Springs that have any thing peculiar belonging to them, whereof
there is one at Park-hall in the parish of Caverswall, belonging to the
Worshipful and most obligeing Gent. William Parker Esquire which not only sends so
full and uninterrupted a stream, that it drives a Mill within less than a bows
shoot, but also makes such a noise in its Exit, that it may be heard at some
distance without any difficulty; these Springs the Germans call Bolderbourns,
whereof because I have given an account already in the Hist. of Oxfordshire
Not. Hist. of Oxford sh. Chap. 2.. 21.
with the reason of the noise, I forbear it here. And proceed to another Spring
of a more unusual kind, which riseing very plentifully from under a rock in the
ground of Mr. Tho. Wood between over and nether Tene, on the West side of the
River, and called the Well in the Wall, produces all the year round, except in
July and August (as I was assured by the Proprietor of it) small bones of
different sorts and sizes, most of them like the bones (as the people will have
it) of young Sparrows or very young Chicken, some of them like pinneon bones,
others like thigh bones near two inches long, but of these but few; most of
them being but an inch, or inch and half long; some few indeed there are like
rib bones, but these also very rare: they break like bone, being all of them
(except those like ribs) hollow, and seeming to have had marrow in them; and
are sometimes so plentiful (about the fall of the leaf) that as Mr. Wood
seriously told me, He had often seen near half a peck of them at a time.

100. Mr. Camden in his Britannia tells us of just such another Well near
Richards Castle in the County of Hereford, which is always full, says He, of
little fishes bones; or as some rather think, of small frog bones, though they
be from time to time drawn ^^^te out of it Mr Camdens Britannia in
Herefordshire.
, whence it has justly merited the name of Bone-well, as ours might as well
have done, from the multitude of such bones most times found in it. What bones
they should be, whether of frogs or other Animals I could not indeed presently
determine, because the Bones of the other parts, of the head, back etc. were
here wanting, nor could I imagine the reason of it, nor what should have become
of them; till comeing in Aug. An. 1681. to the Worshipful Leveson Gower's at
Trentham Esquire I found several Frogs, in the Fountain in the Garden lying dead at
the bottom of the Basin, and the fleshy parts of most of them so consumed that
there was nothing left but the Skeletons of them; the Cartilaginious parts of
the head etc. in some of them yet remaining, but in others quite consumed;
which comparing with the bones, I had from Tene, I not only found them to be
frogs bones, but also quickly apprehended the whole process of Nature in the
manage of the business, viz. that Frogs in July and Aug. being in a declining
condition, do creep into such Caverns of rocks, as whence this Spring comes,
and are there killed by the excessive coldness of the water; and not only their
fleshy but gristley parts too, there consumed as soon at least as the ligaments
that hold the leg and rib bones together, which are the only parts solid enough
to resist the dissolving power of the water: Whence it is that we meet only
with these at the mouth of the Spring, and no others, brought out by the
violence of the water, and in the most plentiful manner about the fall of the
leaf, quickly after the death and dissolution of these Animals; which being
taken away, there come forth gradually fewer every Month all the year after,
the whole stock being usually spent about 2 Months before the return of the
year, which is the occasion that there are none, or very few, to be found there
in the Months of July and August.

101. Another sort of Springs I have met with in this County, that have this
yet more surprising Quality with them; that though they are all cold, yet never
will freez in the hardest weather; such is the Spring that feeds the Millpool
at Overholm near Leek, and the Spring which serves the Mill at Tittensor,
whence it is that the Mills of both those places, never fail of goeing in the
severest frosts: There are Springs also about Hynts that do not freez, nor
will the standing pooles that have these Springs in them: Thus Clayers pool in
the Corner of the Park at Enfield never freezes in the hardest winter, being
fed by a Spring (comeing out of a spout) called Shadwell, under which though
cold (as I was seriously informed by a very worthy person) if you set a vessel
of water frozen, it will certainly thaw it. Of this sort both Cardan and
Varenius inform us, there is not only a River but a great Lake too in Scotland,
that have this strange quality. In Scotia Lacus est and fluvius Nessa, qui
calidus quidem non est, nunquam tamen frigore congelatur Bernh. Verenii
Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 7.
; and the waters of the Chalybeat Spring I mention in my Hist: of Oxfordshire
that did not freez in the hard winter An. 1676 (when all the Rivers were frozen
up) but continued open and smoking all the time, was as cold notwithstanding as
any water whatever. Now what these waters should have in them, that should thus
prevent freezing (...), none but the industrious shall ever find. Cardan I know
attributes the not freezing of the River and Lake Nessa, to the great abundance
of bitumen (which He says is hotter than salt) found in those waters; which if
true, perhaps indeed may solve the difficulty in that instance, for Experience
teaches us that no oleagenous substances will easily freez, and some of them
never Hieron. Cardani de rerum Varietate. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
:

102. But I do not remember I must confess that any of the Staffordshire or
Oxfordshire waters seemed to carry with them any sign of a Bitumen, or any
other oily substance: Much rather therefore should I think them accompanied
with some fine insensible fumes of Spirit of Niter or other Salt, prepared by a
more subtle Chemistry in the bowels of the Earth, that might do this feat;
for we find that the Spirits of Niter and Salt will neither of them freez Mr.
Boyle's Hist. of Cold, Tit. 3.
; and that their fumes are not hot Mr. Boyle's Tract of the temperature of
Subterraneal Regions chap. 9.
. Or else that their freezing is p^^^^ented by some unknown fermentation (made
by some cer^^^n salts) which may produce coldness, as others do heat: For that
there are cold fermentations as well as hot, is evident from a mixture of the
Honorable Robert Boyle's, that emitted steams plentifully enough; of whose
being rather of a cold than hot nature, He says there was this (though he might
have said more than) probability, that the mixture whence they ascended, even
whilst its component ingredients were briskly acting on one another, was not
only sensibly, but considerably cold. Which too has been made most evident by
my worthy Friend Dr. Fred. Slare, by mixing a volatile Salt of human blood, and
Spirit of Verdigrease; which though they make so high an ebullition, that they
take up much more room than before, and will not be contained in shallow
vessels, yet produce a cold sensible to the touch, and most conspicuous on the
weather glass Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 150.
. And as these will not freez by reason of a cold fermentation there may be in
them, so there are others that will not upon account of a hot one; whence it is
that our Bathes are always open, for that' it is most probable they are all
heated by fermentations, I think is sufficiently evinced by Monsieur de Rochas
and the ingenious du Hamel Joh. Bapt. Du Hamel de Fossilibus Lib. 2. cap. 3.
: But of these there are none here very considerable; a little Spring there is
indeed near Beresford house (which though dry in the Summer) in the winter time
flows forth briskly, is repid, and in the Extremity of frost and Snow smoaks
like a Pot, upon which account I suppose' it is, they call it Warm-wall. And I
was told of another at Hynts by the Worshipful Matthew Floyer Esquire that in the
Winter Season was sensibly Warm. But these being so mean and inconsiderable in
their kind, that it is not worth while to give an account here what salts or
other Minerals they be, that most likely may cause fermentations sufficient to
produce such heats as we find in some waters, I therefore pass them by (though
I think I know them pretty well) and proceed next

103. To the salts that make the salt-springs in diverse parts of this County,;
Amongst which the most considerable are those at the Brine-pits in the parish
of Weston, belonging to the right Honorable Robert Lord Ferrers Baron of
Chartley not far distant; which ancient seat of the Ferrers's of Chartley, his
Lordships great and noble Ancestors, is here justly placed Tab. 5. as a
thankful remembrance of his Lordships munificence in promoting this work. The
Salt Springs I say that are most worthy notice, are those of the Brine-pits,
made so no doubt by a Mineral Salt there is, that their waters pass through not
long before their Exit: Which though not very strong (by reason of the poverty
or hardness of the glebe of salt, or its somewhat too great a distance from the
Pits; so that either the water cannot easily dissolve it, or if it do, its
weakened again by the way) yet they make as good white salt for all uses perhaps
as any is in England, though not to so great advantage indeed as in
Worcestershire and Cheshire; where at Vpwich and Middlewich the brine is so
strong, that they yield a full fourth part of Salt; and at Northwich and
Namptwich a sixth Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 53. and 142.
; whereas here in Staffordshire it affords but a ninth; three Hogsheads of
brine (without giving it the advantage of the brine left in the bottom of a
former Pan, which is commonly done to make it work the better) scarce yielding
a strike of salt; but with the help of that brine at first, and five times
filling the Pan, they usually procure nine strike, i. e. 15 Hogsheads of brine,
makes nine strike of salt, which is 16 hours in evaporating away.

104. The Pit from whence they pump this brine, is nine yards deep, and two
square, that which comes from the bottom being much the stronger both in
Saltness and stink, and of a clearer complexion; that on the top having
contracted a yellowishness, I suppose from the freshes that now and then break
into it notwithstanding all care: And the Pans wherein they boil it are three
in number, made of forged Iron, 2 yards long, and, 1 yard broad, and their fuel
Pit-coale; whereof when the Pans are all kept going, they spend two Tuns to a
drawing. Dureing the boiling of the brine the salt is cleared from sand, of
which there is some (at least will be after it has exhaled for some time) in
all brines whatever; which is thrown off (the fire acting most violently upon
the middle of the Pan) toward the Corners of it, where are placed small square
Iron pans to receive it, this brine which is evaporating so long, yielding
ordinarily from the five fillings, 10. Pans of Sand, each of them weighing ten
pounds, i. e. in all 100 pounds of sand; which is above one fourth of as much
sand as salt, allowing a bushel of salt to weigh about 50 pounds. About 3 hours
before the Evaporation is finished, i. e. before they begin to draw (at the
fifth filling) they clarify the brine with the white of one Egg, which being
broken into a bucket, and mixed both with cold, and some of the hot brine; by
the motion of the hand is brought into a Lather, and gently sprinkled all over
the Pan; Where upon there presently appears a scum, that thickens by degrees as
the impurities rise, which thus caught and detained, I suppose by the
viscosity of the white of the Egg; before the brine boiles again, is drawn over
the side of the Pan with a thin oblong square board, fixed to a staff or handle,
called a Loot or Lute.

105. After the scum is taken off, they boil it again gently till it begin to
Corn, which that they may have done according to desire, if they intend a
large Corn, and have but little time to let it corn by a gentle fire of it
self, they put into it about the quantity of a quart of the strongest and
stalest Ale they can get, which corns it greater or smaller according to the
degree of its staleness: Or if they would have it finer than it usually corns
of it self, they either draw it with a quick fire, which will break the corns
small, or sprinkle the surface of the brine with fine wheat floor, which will
make the salt almost as sine as the sand which comes from it; which being both
the finest and whitest that I ever saw any, it gives me reason to suspect that
it may be of admirable use in the making of glass. But (to return again to the
matter in hand) during the time of its corning they generally slacken their
fire, supplying the furnace now, rather with the Sinder of the Coal (which is
the smaller sort of it fallen into the Ashes and gotten from them with a Seive)
than the coal it self; this giving the brine a gentle heat without flame, and
corning it better than a forcible fire, which (as I said above) breaks it
small: Quickly after it has spent some time in corning, they begin to draw, ie,
to take the corned salt from the rest of the brine with their Loot or Lute,
which they put into wicker baskets they call Barrows, made in a Conical form,
and set the bottom upwards, each containing a bushel; through these being set
in the Leach-troughs, the salt drains it self dry in 3 hours time, which
draining they call their Leach-brine, and choicely preserve it here to be
boiled again, it being stronger brine than any in the Pit.

106. This draught of the corned Salt continues here for about six hours, and
is performed gradually, the Salt-workers getting first about two bushells or
Barrows full, then by a gentle fire they corn it again, in half an hour, for
the three first pair of Barrows, but afterward not under an hour, the brine
being then thinner, and the Pan cooler: They do not evaporate all the brine
out of the Pan, but leave some in the bottom toward the next filling; which
together with the addition of the Leach brine, heightens the weak liquor, and
much advances and facilitates the following operation. After the Barrows are
fully drained, they are removed into the hot-house, behind the Saltern to dry,
and are set over the brick conveyance of the flame from under the Pans to the
tunnel of the Chimney (which passage for that purpose is made about six or
seven yards long) where after they have continued for 24 hours, the Salt will
become so dry, that it is fit for carriage, or public sale.

107. And this is the tedious process of making of Salt in this County, which
though much more chargeable than in Worcestershire or Cheshire, where they
spend not ordinarily above half the time or fire (nor need they above a
quarter) of what the great quantity of brine they must use here, necessarily
requires for its evaporation; yet its being always clarifyed with Eggs, and not
with bullocks blood, as it is most commonly in Cheshire, which gives the Salt
an ill color and savor; and its being better cleared from Sand by long
boiling than either Cheshire or Worcestershire Salts are; have given it such a
reputation amongst considering Men, that the Undertaker is encouraged still to
prosecute the work: Which perhaps might be improved to better advantage, were
the brine either ripened on Clay before boiling, or laved on hovels covered
with Mats, made of reeds straw or flaggs, as they serve a weak brine they have
at Halle in Saxony; which by being ventilated in the Air, and percolated
through the Mats, as we are assured by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire Mr
Collins's discourse of Salt and Fishery. p. 7.
is so beneficially exhaled and enrich't by the Sun, that were ours served so,
no doubt a great part of the Expense of coals (if not time) might be saved.

108. Beside the salt above mentioned, they have another sort, that dureing the
Operation grows to the bottoms of the Pans, which they are forced to scale
thence with an instrument called a picker: This at the Seals at Droyt-witch
they term Clod-salt, and is there the strongest salt of all, being used to salt
Bacon and Neats tongues, which it makes redder that any other salt, and renders
the fat of Swine close and firm, though fed with Mast: The Women also put it in
their Runnet pots, it making (as they say) the best Cheese: And upon the
scales of it laid upon the coals, the Brine-men and others will broil their
meat Ibidem p. 9.
But I could not find it put to any of these uses at this Staffordshire work,
nay so insignificant was it here, that they had no name for it, nor told they
me any thing concerning it, but that once in three weeks or thereabout they
scaled it off their Pans; and indeed it seems here to deserve little more, for
whatever it may be in Worcestershire, upon examination I found it here very
weak, and to consist much more of sand than salt, which doubtless is the cause
that it will not dissolve in fresh water, though it has salt in it.

109. And thus I had done with the Brine pits of this County, but that upon a
hint given me by the worthy Mr Collins in his accurate discourse of Salt and
Fishery, that the great quantities of sand which we find in all brines, is not
in the brine before it is boiled, but produced by a sort of petrification
dureing the Evaporation Ibidem p. 52.
, I thought not fit to pass by so odd a Phenomenon, but to examine whether this
(as He says all brines may) could be strained through a most pure fine Holland
of eight foldings, and yet no symptoms of any sand left behind in the Filtre:
Wherein (being now at a great distance my self) I was bold to request the most
ready assistance of that careful Observer the Learned Walter Chetwind of
Ingestre Esquire who together with his ingenious Chaplin Mr. Charles King M. A. and
Student of Chapter Chapter were so strict and nice in making the Experiment that to
the eight folds of fine Holland, they added as many more of fine Cambrick,
through which though they strained a whole bottle full of brine, yet found
nothing left in this very close Colander, but a little black dust; which they
imputed only to the foulness of the water, it appearing nothing like sand,
either to the touch, or in the Microscope.

110. Yet notwithstanding this Experiment, upon further trial, they had good
grounds given them strongly to suspect, that the sand must needs be in the
brine before, and not produced in the boiling; For having carefully observed it
with an excellent Microscope before they strained it, though they mist of the
sand, yet they found (what they expected not) a great multitude of very minute
Animals (much smaller than those that are in pepper water) swiming about in it,
and withal a very many small transparent plates, some of them a little bigger,
and some less than the insects, and all of them of a rectangular oblong figure:
Yet both these and the Animalcules so very small, that they all pa'st through
the Holland and Cambrick though of 16 folds. For viewing the brine again after
it was strane d, they found them swiming as thick in it then, as before: But at
this they did not wonder, because the pores of the Holland did appear in the
Microscope (though it was extremely fine) to be at least twenty times greater
than either the Animalcules or plates; yet these they judged to be the
component particles both of the Sand and Salt, which as the brine exhaled in
boiling, only gathered together, and made greater corns of each.

111. Wherein they were confirmed by looking with the Microscope upon some of
the strong brine that dropped from the Barrows when the Salt was first put in,
which appearing full of those oblong particles, as they looked upon them they
could sensibly perceive them to gather together, and club to make greater
bodies, till at last they appeared as the water dried off the glass, as bigg
and not unlike a large Table-diamond: Which made them think that the Sand too,
might probably be produced after the same manner, it being very white, and
seeming nothing else to them (pardon the expression) but an insipid Salt, whose
parts are not so sharp and pointed as the other, but rounder and blunter, and
consequently not so pungent on the Tongue. To clear which point I endeavored to
dissolve some of the sand again in fair water, to see whether I could discover
any of its principles, but without success, the parts of the Sand being so
inseparably fixed that it would by no means dissolve; I also tried the Salt,
which though it dissolved, yet would not render it self again into plates: so
that I can only add, that as it seems to be pretty certain that the Salt is
made out of the oblong plates, so it is very agreeable to the Method of Nature,
in the production of the gravelly Caddis-houses in the Not. Hist. of
Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Chap. 7. 25.
, that the Sand should also be produced of those minute bubbles (that move like
Animals in pepper water, yet perhaps are nothing so) which being of a glutinous
nature and sit to receive the Terrestrieties of the brine, may be easily
hardened into sand, by the power of heat.

112. Beside the Salt Springs above mentioned there are other weak brines that
gently rise out of the earth about Enson, St. Thomas, and in the parish of
Ingestre, in a ground called the Marsh belonging to the much Honored Walter
Chetwynd Esquire where the brine of it self breaks out above ground, and not only
frets away the Grass, but the very earth also, so that it lies in a plash half
a foot lower than the turf all about it, just as a sort of weak brine is said
to do in some boggy places at Nantwich and Droytwich Philosoph. Transact. Numb.
53 and 142.
: Now if such weak brines spontaneously issuing forth of the earth, are
indicative (as good reason they should) of much stronger, deeper in the earth,
as they are at the Towns above mentioned: what might one suspect in the Marsh
at Ingestre? where the subterraneous brine is so strong, that the Cattle
standing in it in Summer time and throwing it on their backs with their tails,
the Sun so candies it upon them that they appear as if covered with a hoar
frost. In Pensnet Chase South from Dudley about a mile and half there is
another weak brine belonging to the right Honorable Edward Lord Ward, of which
his Lordship once attempted to make Salt; but the brine proving to weak, He
thought fit to desist, though possibly it might have been advanced to profit by
the Art of tunnelling much used in Cheshire to keep out the freshes. In Newbold
grounds about midway between Burton and Braunston there are also Salt-Springs,
where one Mr. Fownes about 10 years since (then owner of the Lands) attempted
to make Salt; but the mixture of the freshes proved so univoidable to Him, that
his laudable endeavors were also frustrated.

113 Between blew-Hills and Clusterburyedg, about a mile from Over-Holm in the
parish of Leek, I met with a stream comeing out of a Sough belonging to the
Coale-Mine in blew-Hills, as Salt as any of these, tingeing the stones and
earth all along as it runs of a rusty color, and the button moulds of the poor
people (who employ themselves here much in making of buttons) of a black color
(especially if made of Oak) in half an hours time: with the least infusion of
powder of Galls, it presently turned as black as Ink: all which showed it to be
a strong Vitriolic water. Yet endeavoring to evaporat several Gallons of it
away in a Iron pot, I could procure no Salt; which beside the tincture it gave
the stones, evidently convinced me that it held some quantity of the mineral of
Iron; it being certain that a Salt water which contains any Metal in it,
cannot be sodden to Salt in a vessel of the same Metal which it self contains,
except Vitriol in Copper Vessels Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 7. p. 128.
: Wherefore procuring about the quantity of six wine-quarts, by the assistance
of the Worshipful Tho. Rudyerd Esquire Proprietor of the place, to be boiled away
in an agreeable Vessel, there remained about of an ounce of a strong vitriolic
ferrugineous salt; though I cannot but think it must also contain somewhat of
Copper; for after solution, filtration, and evaporation, so far only as to be
set to shoot, it would tinge my knife, being put into it, of a copper color,
just like Hungarian or Cyprian Vitriol, which our common English Vitriol,
though sated with Iron, will by no means do.

114. That Petrifications arise from the coalition of minute, though obutse
parts of salt, having been fully showed already in Oxfordshire, with the
several Species and Methods nature uses in the production of them Not. Hist. of
Oxfordshire chap. 2. from. 23. to 31.
; I shall add no more here but that they belong to this place: Nor indeed do
the waters of this County that have this quality deserve any great matter of
consideration, those in Cunsall woods, and below the Iron Mills on the River
Churnet, and that in Pensnet Chase about a mile eastward from Bromley in the
parish of Kingswinford, only incrustating sticks and the fibers of moss with a
gravelly kind of stone: The best of this kind being performed by a sulphurous
sort of water (as I believe most are) in some grounds of the right Honorable
Robert Lord Ferrers, about midway betwixt Sandon and Gayton, where the branches
of the Moss are so delicatly petrifyed, that its form is preserved even in the
capillary parts. The best I say, unless the hard stone found in Church-Eyton
Lordship, by my hospitable Friend Mr. Walter Jennings, Rector of the place
(which pretty well shows indeed the grain of the wood) should be a
petrification, it being beside two inches thick, and must be (if at all) a
petrification per minima.

115. Having done with the salt, and Petrifying waters; come we next to those
of Medicinal use; that have, are, or may be taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, for the prevention or cure of diverse distempers: such was anciently
the water of the Well of St. Erasmus (to begin with the sulphurous oleagenous
waters) in the grounds of the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd Esquire which was of so
great esteem for merly, that there was a Chapel built near it, and I think
endowed by some of that ancient Family; where the offerings were so
considerable that the Rector of Ingestre (in whose parish it is) yet pays at
this day for the Dismes of them, more than for the profits of the whole parish
beside, notwithstanding its Revenew with all other such Lands given to pious
uses, were taken into the Kings hands at the Reformation, and the Chapel be
now demolished, and all applications thither long since ceased. Though I doubt
not but the water remains as good and might be as beneficial as ever it was;
for notwithstanding it lies now wholly neglected, and overgrown with weeds, yet
the water is still clear, and so exactly of the color of Sack, that compared
with it (in the judgment of several Honorable persons that were at the trial)
they were indistinguishable to the Eye, which is its only Characteristic
wherein it sensibly differs from other waters, it having no very eminent either
smell or taste: So that what should be the ingredients to give it this color,
proved hard to be found, without the trial of many, and those very nice
Experiments.

116. For having assayed it with the infusion of powder of Galls, the solutions
of Vitriol, Tartar, and sublimat; the Spirits of Niter, Vrin, etc. (as well
alcali's as acids) yet none of them would either stir it or change its color,
but a solution of Saccharum Saturni, and Syrup of Violets; whereof the former
did precipitat its yellow color to the bottom, leaving the water above, white
and limpid; and the latter changed the amber to a grass-green color. Beside
upon distillation of about 3 pints of it in a glass body and head, when about a
moiety of it was come over in clear water, in the remainder there plainly
appeared to the naked Eye an ineffable number of bluish shining films or
plates flooting about in it, which were of so thin and curious a substance,
that they could not by any means be so separated from the water, as to remain
visible upon any other body, nor indeed had I then any other means whereby to
examine them.

117. But since the ingenious contrivance of those sort of Microscopes whereby
we see the Animals in pepper water, and by the help whereof the worthy Mr.
Chetwynd has so happily discovered such thin plates in the brine of the
Salt-works not far from this well, I am inclined to believe these come from
Salt too, and that the Minerals wherewith this water is impregnated, are Salt
and Sulphur, notwithstanding the little taste or smell it has; and the rather
because the brine that spontaneously issues forth above ground in the Marsh
aforementioned. 111. is but a little way from it in the same Gentleman's Estate;
and why may there not as well be a sulphurous glebe too? which being fretted
away by the incisive particles of the Salt, may be brought away with them in
the waters, as invisible as the particles of any Metal dissolved in its proper
Menstruum, only imparting the color, as Gold does to the water, in the
preparation of the Crocus or Tincture of Gold N. Lemery's Course of Chemistry.
chap. 1.
: Which Salt and Sulphur in all probability do so involve one another, that
their mutual embraces hinder the exertions of each others virtues, i. e. the
Sulphur by its viscidity, does so flatten the edges, and so sweeten the
pungency of the Salt; and the Salt on the contrary so condense and lock up the
volatility of the Sulphur, that notwithstanding the great quantity of both in
this water, yet it sends forth no very smart, either smell or taste.

118. Which may also be the reason that though Salt and Sulphur be both Acids,
yet this water seems impregnated with an alcalizat Salt; the acrimony of its
Salt being so close locked up by the viscous particles of the Sulphur, and
rendered so dull and unactive, that it seems to have nothing of the power of an
acid: Whence it came to pass that it lather'd well with Soap, and would not
turn milk; having not pungency enough to insinuat it self into the pores of the
alcalizat Salt in the Soap, nor astringency so to compress the pores of the
Milk, as thereby to cause any precipitation. Whence also it came to pass, that
having put on the vizor of a fixed Alcali, with Syrup of Violets it gave a green
tincture; and its yellow color was precipitated by a solution of Saccarum
Saturni, the acidity of the distilled Vinegar (used in the preparation of that
Salt) acting upon the Salt of this water as an Alcali, and so opening its
parts, as to force it to let go the sulphur it so closely embraced; and yet no
other acid (I could think of) would do it but this; whence we may reasonably
conclude that the edges of all acids are not alike, but some better fitted for
the opening of one body, and some of another.

119. Near Codsall-wood there is such another Sulphur well, but the Salt and
Sulphur not so equally mixed in the water, for though the Sulphur have so
sufficiently rebated the acidity of the Salt, as to render it wholly as unactive
as an Alcali, so that it lathers well with Soap, will not turn milk, and gives
a green tincture with Syrup of Violets; yet the salt is too weak to lock up or
restrain the volatility of the Sulphur; for it always emits a sulphurous
smell; but in winter, and sometimes against rain, the odor is so strong, that
with advantage of the wind, one may smell it now and then at least 20 yards
off: nay so volatile is it, and so little restrained, that set over the fire,
it flies away so fast, that the water quickly looses its smell, I tried it with
Galls and Oak leaves, with the solutions of sublimat and Tartar, and with
several Acids; but none of them would either throw down the Sulphur, or
change its color, but spirit of Vrin; which turned it of a faint redish color
like Champane wine: perhaps a solution of Saccarum Saturni might have made a
precipitation; had I any with me, or known the secret.

120. The water of this well is much clearer then that at Ingestre, and yet is
most certainly sated with sulphurous particles; for about 40 or 50 years
since, some persons hereabout curious of knowing whence such waters should
come, both dug and boared the ground near adjoining, and met with a sort of
mineral Earth that crash't in the boaring (as some of the described it) like
rotten wood; which being carried to London was found sulphurous, and I suppose
must needs be the native sulphur, depauperated of its richest particles by the
incisive atoms of the Salt, and left so spungy that (as some of them told me)
it would swim on the water. This water was accounted in ancient times (when
Leprosies were frequent) a sovereign Remedy for such as were troubled with that
foul distemper, for whose better accommodation, there was a house built near
it, which retains to this day the name of the Leper-house; and is in use at
present against Scabs and Itch, both in Man and Beast, purging both by Seige
and urin, and not only raking the body within, but most effectually driving
forth all ill humors; It also sometimes vomits according to the constitution of
the Patient: They commonly drink about 3 quarts at a time, less scarce working;
except by vomit, where it meets with weak stomachs. The Inhabitants hereabout
brew their drink with this water, especially at that they call the Brimstone
Alehouse; and boil their meat with it; upon which it is observed, that none of
them are ever troubled either with Scabs or Itch, or such like Cuticular
diseases.

121. But the water that carrys with it the most rectifyed Sulphur is that of
the well in Willowbridg Park, it being hardly visible in the water it self,
which appears (not like others) of a yellow, but a clear Chrystalline color,
only on the sides of the glasses, after they have been used a while, one my
perceive (with good attention) a bright oilyness, which is so volatile that
upon distillation it came over before the water, as volatile Spirits do, and
then (being embodyed) was of a bright yellow: to which putting a few drops of
solution of sublimat, it presently turned of a deep Sack-colour, whereby it
seemed like the other waters (the Salt being rebated by the viscosity of the
Sulphur) to have somewhat of a Lixiviat Salt with it; but so very weak, that it
made this deep yellow instead of the Orange tauny precipitat. Upon which
account it was too (that like the other Sulphur waters) it latherd well with
Soap, would not turn milk, nor would the crude water with Syrup of Violets turn
either of the red or green color, though we know there is an acid in it, that
puts on the Nature of an Alcali; Nor could I procure the least sign of any
Salt, though I evaporated diverse Gallons of it away, so subtle are the Salt
and sulphur, wherewith this water is impregnated.

122. The crude water indeed would answer to nothing but the infusion of
solution of saccharum Saturni, which inclined me to think it of the same nature
with the sulphur water of Ingestre, only impregnated with much finer and more
subtle steams; though the effect in this was quite different from that: for
instead of precipitating the sulphurous particles, this only turned the whole
body of the water, first of much such a blew-yellowish color as is made by the
infusion of the chips or shaving of Nephritic wood in common water, which after
a while faded into a muddy white. A Phenomenon I must confess much more
unaccountable, than the means whereby it cures so many diseases, which most
certainly it performs by its balsamic virtue, and great subtilty and
volatility, easily permeating the closest texture, and most unaccessible parts
of the body, when once heated by the stomach if taken inwardly, or but by the
external heat of the skin if applied outwardly by way of Bath; for so sensible
is it of the least heat (as I plainly saw in distilling it in a glass body and
head) that its oil or sulphur came over the Helm upon the first heat, and was
all in the Recipient before the least drop of water appeared. How extensive its
sanative virtue may be, indeed is hard to determine, but I dare pronounce it
proper, wherever the syrup of Diasulphur of the famous Dr. Willis has been so
successfully administered; though if one might take an estimat from the many
attested Cures it has done, it comes as near a Panacea as any Medicin in the
World Fons Sanitatis, from p. 9. to 36.


123. Of which water there is so great plenty, that I computed no less than 60
springs of it, of a most uninterrupted profluence (whereof enough. 57 of this
Chapter) all riseing within the space of 10 yards square, in Willow-bridg Park,
the Propriety of the right Honorable Digby Lord Gerard of Gerards Bromley, a
most noble Patron of this Work; whose stately Seat at Bromley within two Miles
and, the most magnificent Structure of all this County, is here gratefully
placed Tab: 6. The Property I say of these Wells is in this Noble Lord, but at
present they are held in Ioynture by His most accomplished Mother, the right
Honorable Jane Lady Gerard Baroness Gerard of Gerards Bromley, by whose most
exquisite sagacity and perspicacious insight into the most hidden recesses of
Nature, the restorative virtues of these waters were first discovered; and at
whose charitable expense, several of the Springs have been enclosed with
squared stone, to preserve them pure and fit both for bathing and drinking; and
diverse appartments built for lodging the poorer sort of diseased impotent
people: So that it is hard to determine whether the World stands more indebted to
this Honorable Lady's Philosophical, or Theological virtues? Whether to Her
knowledge as first finder, or Her Piety, as founder of these Sanative Wells.

124. I say Sanative Wells, for (whatever some may talk) most certain it is
that diverse strange unaccountable Cures have been here performed; and more
there might be, were these waters attended (as some others are) with a skillful
Physician, to prepare the body before hand, direct the use of the waters, and
how to order the body after drinking or bathing: The success of useing
Medicinal waters depending much upon Method, as my Lord Bacon well observes it
is with some other Medicines, which unadvisedly administered will do no Cures,
but orderly applied, produce geat ones Not. Hist. Cent 1. Experiment 60.
. Nor let any Man wonder that there should be any such thing as a cold Sulphur
Bath (as some have done) since Baccius informs us of diverse such in Italy, and
elsewhere Andr. Baccii de Thermis Lib. 4. cap. 15.
; and Wernherus tells us that there are salutares frigidae in the Kingdom of
Hungary Geo. Wernberus de admirandis Hungariae aquis p. 69.
; Much less that there should be waters holding an oily substance and salt
together, as this, and the two other mentioned above are said to do. Since
Cardan teaches us that Sal Terrae, by which I suppose he means mineral salt
(such as which perhaps this water may wash in its passage) does always partake
of sulphur, and holds much oil in it, and that in some parts of the Indies
they procure their oil from salt: Whence he concludes too, that it comes to
pass, that the Olive Tree flourishes best near the sea side, salsum enim solum
non leviter pingue est, for that a saltish soil most commonly is fat and
unctuous Hieron. Cardani de subtilitate Lib. 5. p. 285, 286. edit. Basil. 1582.
.

125. With whom also agrees our great Master Aristotle (...), i. e. that
fatness always accompanys a salt juice, whereof (says he) we have this certain
sign, that in hot weather an oil may be separated from it Aristotelis
Preblematum Sect. 23. quaest. 9.
. Again, that the seawater yields an oil, we have also the testimony of the
same great Philosopher, (...). i. e. that oil is gotten out of sea brine
Ibidem, quaest. 15.
. Nay so frequently are oiles found joined with salts, that none of them will
mix with water per minima (as they do in those above mentioned) without a fixed
salt, as we see it does not in soap, from which as soon as ever the salt is
sequestered, the oil, parts from the water, and swims at top; whereas whilst
joined with it, Salt exercises so absolute a dominion over oil, that it will
carry it along with it through all the parts of water, and therefore is said by
the Philosopher (...), to be as it were a subject to it Ibidem, quaest. 32.
. Which is all can well be said concerning this matter, and I hope the Reader
expects no more: I shall only therefore add that such oily springs are not so
very rare, but that there are of them, in Italy, Sicily, Zante, Saxony,
Schwabenland, and in diverse other places mentioned by Pliny Plinii Not. Hist.
Lib. 31. cap. 2.
, Baccius Baccii de Thermis, Lib. 5. cap. 15.
, Cardan Hieron Cardani de subtilitate, Lib. 2. p. 176.
, and Varenius Bernh. Varenii Geograph. Genesis Lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 8.
, and as Paulus Venetus tells us near Arzinga in Armenia, and as Athenaeus, at
Nissa in the Province of Megaris in Greece, upon the Saronic sinus.

126. Beside these, there are other sulphur waters at many other places in this
County, though not so clear and well concocted as these; being generally thick,
of a bluish color, and emitting unpleasant fetid odours, like the sulphur
well at Knarsbrough in Yorkshire; because proceeding I suppose rather from a
crude Bitumen, than a well digested sulphur: Such is that at Tatenhil on the
high way side near the pound, which in the summer time (if undisturbed by
foul) has been observed to lay down a sediment almost of all sorts of
colors; and might possibly have the same use that other stinking spaws have,
were it but kept clean. And so might that stinking water which crosses
Watlingstreet way, not far from Horsebrook, and another of this kind betwixt
Willenhall and Bently, could it be kept from a mixture with other water. There
is another of these in a watery Lane not far from Eccleshall, and I was told of
another near Hartley green, beside that, which also petrifyes, between Sandon
and Gayton mentioned. 113 of this Chapter. And there is another at Butterton in
the parish of Mathfield by How-brook side, which like the Baths of Banca in
Hungary will tinge silver of a blackish color in an hours time Dr. Brownes
travells into Hungary, etc. p. 87.
.

127. There are other sulphur waters in this County that have a Vitriol joined
with them, whereof there is one in a ditch in the Park Meddow under Broughton
Park pale, and another at Monmoore green near Wolverhampton, both which will
strike with Galls, of so deep a red, that they become after a while of a
bluish, and at last almost of a blackish color. And I was showed another at
Grindlestone edge about a quarter of a mile Eastward of Horton Church, that
though it turned red both with Galls and Oak-leaves, yet took Soap well enough,
whence it plainly appeared though it were impregnated with an Acid, yet its
edges were so flattened by the viscosity of some sulphur, that it could not act
its part upon Soap, as such. Nor indeed met I with any water purely Vitriolic,
but only one in Needwood-Forrest, about a mile and South easterly from Hanbury,
which with Oak-leaves or powder of Galls turned of a faint red like Champane
wine, and seemed to be much like that at Astrop in Northamptonshire, and Worton
in Oxfordshire, only scarce so strongly impregnated with the mineral. I was
told (I must confess) of another at Burslem near Newcastle under Lyme, but
finding upon trial that it would not strike with Galls, though several that
stood by, testified they had seen it do it, at another time; yet I choose to
pass it by: Or at most can but refer it to that sort of water mentioned in
Oxfordshire, that in winter time will turn with Galls, but not in summer,
whither I also refer the Reader (if it be found to do so) for the reason of
the thing Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, Chap. 2.. 62.
.

128. Hither also must be referred all milky waters, as holding somewhat of a
Vitriol in them, whereof because at large in the Hist. of Oxfordsh. Ibidem
Chap. 2.. 64.
. I shall only mind the Reader here that the water of the Well at Hampsted, the
Seat of the right Worshipful Sr. John Wyrley Knight, whose most cordial
furtherance of this work must by no means be forgotten, seems to be such an
one; And so forthwith shall proceed next to the aluminous waters, which though
they will not strike with Galls, yet will coagulate milk, will not take Soap,
and with spirit of Vrin, turn of a milky color: of these the most remarkable
are at Draycot in the Clay, in the Parish of Hanbury, and near Hore-Cross
Westerly from the Hall, by a brook side in a ground called Broadfield,
belonging to the Worshipful Robert Howard Esquire. The water of the Well at
Hore-Cross Hall the Seat of the same most obligeing Gent. seems also of this
kind, for though it will not turn milk, or strike with Galls, yet it takes not
Soap, and discolours the meat reddish, that is boiled in it, both signs of an
acid, though it seems not strong enough to compress the pores of milk; whence
it is plain that the trial of waters with Soap, is much more nice than with
milk. The well water of the house of Mr. John Cumberlege now Mayor of Walsall,
is also aluminous; and so is the fountain head of the Rivulet called Stichbrook
between Lichfield and Elmhurst; which is so apparently such, that the very Alum
slat may be seen sticking in the bank side, whence the water issues.

129. Beside these, there are many other waters, not apparently (at least to
sense) of any mineral virtue, that will not answer these Experiments, yet no
doubt carry with them some more subtle steams whereby they perform
unaccountable Cures: such is the water of the well near Gawton stone in
Knypersley Park, which has some reputation for cure of the Kings-evill, and so
has the Spring called Salters wall, near Newcastle under Lyme; And such is the
water of the three wells near Shuston house, and of St. Ediths well, both in
the Parish of Church Eyton, of the two St. Modwen's wells, at Burton and
Cannal, and all the Holy-wells in the Country; which the people still adorn at
some certain times of the year, with green boughs and flowers, in grateful
memory of the good they have formerly done. And amongst these must be reckoned
all sorts of Eye-waters, such as that of Elder well betwixt Blymhill and
Brineton, and many others of the kind all over the Country. And so must the
Spring in a narrow Lane about mid way betwixt Wolverhampton, and a house called
Sea-wall, which was anciently of such repute that it still retains the name of
the Spaw. Which are all the waters of note in this County; for as for the
Colepit waters, especially those they call Cankered waters, that kill all the
fish wherever they fall into the Rivers, I hold them not worthy to have any
place in this History.

CHAP. III. Of the Earths.
1. STaffordshire, bounded on the North with Cheshire, East with Derbyshire and
Leicestershire, on the West with Shropshire, and on the South with Worcester
and Warwickshires; is divided by the Trent into the North, and South, or rather
into the North-East and South-West parts; And the North-East, as Mr. Erdeswick
and some others will have it, subdivided again into the Moorelands, and
Woodlands Mr. Sampson Erdeswick's view of Staffordshire in princip.
; which latter lying between the Trent, Tene, and Dove, others choose rather to
call the middle part of Staffordshire: Whereof the Moorelands are the more
Northerly mountanous parts, lying between Trent and Dove, from the three shire
heads Southwardly, to Draycot in the Moors, yielding Coal, Lead, Copper, Rance
Marble, and Millstones; and the Woodlands the more Southerly level part of
that Country, from Draycot, to Whichnor, Burton, etc. between the aforesaid
Rivers; including Needwood Forest with all its Parks, also the Parks of
Whichnor, Hore-Cross, Bagots, Chartley, Loxley, Birchwood, and Paynsley (which
anciently I suppose were all but as one Wood that gave it the denomination)
produceing Salt, black Marble, and Alabaster, beside great quantities of very
good Timber; and both Moorelands and Woodlands, as goodly Cattle, large and
fair spread, as Lancashire it self, and such as the Grasiers say will feed
better; the warm Limestone Hills of the very Moorelands producing a short, but
a fine sweet grass, and large Oxen, though in an open cold Country, as Drayton
in his Polyolbion, speaking of the Moorelands, also plainly testifies; She from
her chilly site, as from her barren feed,
For body, horn, and hair, as fair a Beast does breed
As scarcely this great Isle can equal Mich. Drayton's Poly^lbion, Song the 12.
--


2. And if amongst the mountains of the Moorelands, much more can they breed
and feed Cattle too, in the rich Meddows that adorn the banks of Trent, Blithe,
Tene, Churnet, Hamp^x all ^^anyfold, all in this quarter of the Country; and
more especially still upon the famous Dove-bank, esteemed by many, the best
feeding land of England; which lying upon a Limestone as Mr. Camden imagins,
sucks such fertility from it (though I think with the right Worshipful and most
worthy Loyal Gent. Sr. Rowland Okeover of Okeover Knight, it rather proceeds
from the Soil, especially the Sheeps dung, thrown down into the Meddows from
the Hills in great rains) that in the very midst of winter the Meddows are
adorned with a pleasant verdure; and if the River happen, as it does frequently
(holding its course all along betwixt great Hills, which give it a sudden rise)
to overflow them in the spring, it enriches them as the River Nile does Egypt,
and makes them so fruitful, that the Inhabitants thereabout upon such
occasions, usually chante this joyful Ditte, In April, Doves flood, is worth a
Kings good Camden's Britannia in Staffordsh.
. whereof the forecited Michael Drayton renders this very good reason, --
Because the dainty grass
That grows upon its bank, all other does surpass Mich. Drayton's Polyolbion
Song the 12.
.
as he says the land of Needwood (wherein truly I think he is not mistaken)
does the land of all other Forests in England. -- Needwood does surmount
In excellency of Soil, by being richly placed
'Twixt Trent and battening Dove, and equally embraced
By their abounding banks, participates their store;
Of Britans Forrest's all (from the less unto the more)
For fineness of her Turf surpassing Ibidem.
--


3. From which Limestone hills, and rich Pastures and Meddows, the great Dairys
are maintained in this part of Staffordshire, that supply Vttoxater Market with
such vast quantities of good butter and cheese, that the Cheesmongers of London
have thought it worth their while to set up a Factorage here, for these
Commodities, which are brought in from this, and the neighboring County of
Derby, in so great plenty, that the Factors many Market days (in the season)
lay out no less than five hundred pounds a day, in these two commodities (...).
The butter they buy by the Pot, of a long cylindrical form, made at Burslem in
this County of a certain size, so as not to weigh above six pounds at most, and
yet to contain at least 14. pounds of butter, according to an Act of Parliament
made about 14 or 16 years ago, for regulateing the abuses of this trade, in
the make of the Pots, and false packing of the butter; which before sometimes
was laid good for a little depth at the top, and bad at the bottom; and
sometimes set in rolls only touching at the top, and standing hollow below at a
great distance from the sides of the pot: To prevent these little country
Moorelandish cheats (than whom no people whatever are esteemed more subtle)
the Factors keep a Surveyor all the summer here, who if he have ground to
suspect any of the pots, tryes them with an instrument of Ion made like a
Cheese-Taster, only much larger and longer, called an Auger or Butterboare,
with which he makes proof (thrusting it in obliquely) to the bottom of the pot:
so that they weigh none (which would be an endless business) or very seldom;
nor do they bore it neither, where they know their Customer to be a constant
fair dealer: But their Cheese, which comes but little, if any thing short of
that of Cheshire, they sell by weight as at other places.

4. Nor comes this Northern part of Staffordshire much behind the South in
breeding of Sheep, which indeed are but small, have generally black noses, and
their wool but course; Nor (now of late years) in the production of Corn: for
though the land employed for tillage for the most part indeed be naturally but
mean, yet where the industry of the Husbandman has any thing showed it self,
in marling, limeing, or mixing lime with Ess (as they do commonly in the
Moorelands) and so laying them together on their heathy grounds, as shall be
shown hereafter in fit place; it produces Corn of all sorts (according to the
condition of the ground) plentifully enough. The black moorish and gouty
grounds of the Moorelands, with the best helps are fit indeed only for Oats
and Barley; but the arable lands about Marchington, Draycot in the Clay,
Rolleston, Horninglow, and some other Towns about Needwood, are of so rich a
Clay; that they produce as good Hard-corne (i. e. Wheat and Rye) Peace, Beans,
etc. as any in the South, though not so much; the quantity of arable land
there, being much greater than it is in the North: the Sheep too of the South,
bear somewhat a finer fleece, and it produces more and better Coal, and Iron
stone; of each of which, hereafter in their proper places.

5. Beside Wool, for the supply of the Clothing trade and Felting, which are
chiefly exercised about Tamworth, Burton, and Newcastle under Lyme; they sow
both Hemp and Flax all over the Country in small proportions, whereby they are
furnished too, in some measure with Linnens: so that all things considered this
seems to be terra suis contenta bonis, a Land that can as well subsist of it
self, without the help, either of any domestic, or foreign Countries, as any
in the Kingdom; yielding Lead, Copper, Iron, Marble, Alabaster, Millstones,
Coal, Salt, Cattle and Corn of all sorts, both Linen and Woolen, and what
not? and yet a third part at least, if not half this County, must be confessed
when all is done, to be barren heathy, and gorsy grounds, and woodland: which
yet are so far from being any disparagement to it, that these yield some of the
chief profits, as well as pleasures of the Country; for though the surface be
barren, yet the subterranean riches (which are considerable here) I mean the
Mines, are usually found in such uncultivated places; and of this sort of Land
is the Chase of Canck-wood, and most of the Warrens and Parks of the Nobility
and Gentry, whereof before the late unhappy Civil War, there were near 50 in
this County stock't with Deer, and about 33 or 34 yet remaining; so great
plenty is there of this kind of Land, stored not only with Mines, but with all
sorts of Game both for Hound and Hawk; so happily are the profits of the Gentry
of this County, mixed with their pleasures, Vtile dulci.

6. This heathy, broomy, gorsy, barren sort of Soil, for the most part too is
a gravelly fast land, whence it is that in Canck-wood, and most of their Parks,
they have so pleasant and secure pursuit of their Game. Hence it is too, that
their highways are so universally good, except in the most Northerly parts of
the Moore-lands, where between the three shire heads, and Longnor, the Hills
and Boggs are such, that a Horse can scarce pass between those two places; and
indeed many of the Mountains of that part of the Country, which they call
Roches, Clouds, Torrs, Edges, Cops, Heads, etc. are hardly passable, some of
them being of so vast a height, that in rainy weather I have frequently seen
the tops of them above the Clouds; particularly those of Narrow-dale, are so
very lofty, that the Inhabitants there for that quarter of the year, wherein
the Sun is nearest the Tropic of Capricorn, never see it at all; and at length
when it does begin to appear again, as at Lanthony in Monmouth-shire Camden's
Britannia in Monmouth-shire, in initio.
, they never see it till about one by the clock, which they call thereabout,
the Narrowdale noon; useing it proverbially when they would express a thing
done late at noone. Such Mountains as these I say are hardly passable, but
these are but in a little skirt of the Country, the most of it being as level
as most other Countries usually are, and the earth so fast, and the ways so
good (except where now and then they pass through a Marle, and a little about
Wednesbury, Sedgley, and Dudley, where they are uncessantly worn with the
carriage of coal) that it is reported King James, speaking jocularly of this
County, should say, 'twas fit only to be cut out into thongs, to make highways
for the rest of the Kingdom.

7. And thus much in general of the Lands of Staffordshire: Let us next
consider such particular Earths, as have any thing remarkable belonging to
them: And first, before we begin to break the turf; of such Soils as have any
thing peculiar in their surface. Amongst which those which induce upon the
teeth of Cattle a golden Armature (though they be pretty common) are not
altogether unworthy our consideration; and such are some grounds at Aston near
Stone, belonging to the Worshipful Walter Heveningham Esquire, who having killed a
Cow just before I came thither of his own feeding, its teeth were found tinged
(on the outside chiefly) with a golden or rather a brazen color; which the
ingenious Mr. Lister Physician at York, imagins might proceed from its feeding
on some plants, of the Erica kind; or rather the viola lutea grandiflora
montana C. B. which he observes to be a great part of the food for their Cattle
in May and June, in the mountanous pastures of Westmorland, where such gilded
teeth are every where met with: Whether any such plants did grow hereabout, I
must confess I observed not; however I rather guess that this was superinduced
the same way, the like Armature was, over the Cornua Ammonis mentioned in the
History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 5.. 88, 89.
, by some urinous kind of Salt in the juice of the grass, which in some plants
is so great, that as Virgil acquaint us, it may sometimes be tasted in the very
milk of the Cattle. Et Salis occultum referunt in lacte saporem P. Virgilii
Georgic. Lib. 3. v. 397.
. with which guilding quality, the Lago di Rieti in Vmbria is so strongly
impregnated, that the hoofs of the Cattle that go into it, are covered with
such a shineing brazen Armature Geo. Pi^lorius de paludibus and stagnis.
.

8. It must also be ascribed to the Saltness of the Soil and Grass, that if
any Horned Cattle of never so deep a black or other color, be put to feed in a
place called the Clots in Newbold grounds, in the Parish of Tatenhill, about a
mile East of Dunstall, they will certainly change the color of their coat to a
whitish-dun (like a Daws head) in a Summers running; and so they will if put
upon Tatenhill Common; or into Buck-slew, another parcel of Newbold grounds:
Nor does only the Grass, but the Hay of these grounds, will also turn Cattle to
this whitish-dun, which it is said they recover not in two or three years time,
though put into grounds that have nothing of this quality. As for Horses, they
are improved upon these grounds, at a great rate; only they make them dappled,
be they of what color soever. All which proceeds no doubt from the Saltness of
the Soil, that not only communicates it self to the grass but to all the
waters thereabout, making them brackish at least, as was shown above Chap. 2..
111. Salt being of a hot nature, drying up, and so restraining the succus
nutritious, that none or very little can be afforded for the hair, which (as it
does in old age) upon defect of moisture turns white, justly called by my Lord
Bacon, for this very reason, the penurious color Not. Hist. Cent. 1. Number. 93.
. Pliny, indeed and Pictorius, tell us of diverse Rivers that will effect the
same, and yet they do not say that any of them are Salt, or so much as
brackish, but certainly they must be impregnated with some such thing, which
they lick from the Earth as they pass along, at least if it be true, that Melas
and Cephyssus, comeing forth the same Lake, do make Sheep of quite contrary
colors C. Plinii secundi Not. Hist. Lib. 2. cap. 103. vid. etiam Pictorium de
fontibus and fluviis miraculosis.
.

9. Another Earth there is at Ranton Abbey, the Seat of the virtuous Madam Anne
Cope, that is also eminent for giving a color, which it does at diverse places,
but more remarkably under a Closet that hangs over that corner of the Cloister
which is next the Steeple; where I was shown on the ground, a reddish place,
that looked much as if a calfe or sheep had been killed there; upon which the
water falling whenever it rains, is presently turned of the color of blood.
This at first I thought might proceed from the nature of the soil, or stones,
or covering of the House; but upon strict examination by diging the Earth, I
found it a hasle mould, very unlikely to give the water any such tincture; the
stones of a light gray, and the House covered with Shingles, both as unlikely
as the Soil; so that at present I judged it a thing unaccountable: But since
having more fully considered the matter, I have thought that the Shingles being
made of Oak, may first give the water a gallish tincture, which falling upon an
Earth that may possibly be vitriolic, the water may come to turn of this
blood-red tincture; just as vitriolic waters do, upon infusion of powder of
galls, which are but the fruit of an Oak, and have both of them the same
astringent qualities.

10. It is also worth notice that one of Occamsley pits (whereof there are
about 16 upon the Watlingstreet way, betwixt Knaves-Castle and Frog-Homer)
never contains any water, or has any seen in it, for the least moment of time,
after the most sudden shower, or most durable rain; though all the neighboring
pits at the same time are filled to the brim: of which truth I had an excellent
opportunity (to my sorrow) of making an Experiment, for after above a Months
constant rain, I found that one pit, as dry and hard, as the highest gravelly
ground in the street-way, the weight both of my self and Horse, not making
any visible impression in the bottom of it, though all the rest about it, stood
then brim-full of water; and to all appearance lying higher i. e. not being so
deep as this, and nothing interceding but a spungy heathy soil; which I must
confess to this day remains unaccountable to me: Unless it be sufficient to
suspect, that the bottom of the dry pit (though hard and sound) yet may be a
very loose open gravel, through which the water may presently descend; and the
sides and bottoms of the rest, either a stiff clay, or some other Earth at
least fit to hold water.

11. That the Earth is informed at least with a vegetative Soul, was the
opinion of the Pythagoreans, Platonists, and Stoics: amongst whom says Plotinus
(...), i. e. that any one may be convinced that the earth has a vegetative
Soul by those things which are produced by it Plotini Operum Ennead. 4. Lib.
4. cap. 22.
: Yet seeing it seems not to be nourish't by any aliment internally received,
or to have any offspring of its own Species, more viventium, it may well indeed
be doubted, whether it be endued with vegetation, in a strict sense. But that
the Earth in many places does receive augmentation, is very evident from all
old buildings, whose very windows (which certainly were never built so at
first) are now level with the ground; more especially in great Towns, such as
Lichfield and Newcastle, which it is very plain stand on higher ground now, than
they did formerly; other pavements being many times found about a yard below
these they now use, when they have occasion to sink Wells or dig Cellars: which
I suppose may have come to pass upon rebuilding these Towns after some general
conflagration. It is also likely, if not certain, that all valleys rise by
atterration i. e by Earth continually brought down from the tops of mountains
by rains and Snows, whence all Mountains are become lower than they were
formerly, and the Valleys risen higher; So that in time all the Mountains
(except the rocky, such as the Roches in the Moorelands) will by great shoots
of rain be quite washed away, and the whole earth levelled:

12. Whereof the ingenious Mr. Ray gives us a very pertinent confirmation from
the steeple of Craich in the Peak of Derbyshire, which in the memory of some
old men yet liveing, could not have been seen from a certain hill lying between
Hopton and Werksworth, whereas now not only the steeple, but a great part of
the body of the Church may be seen thence, which without doubt comes to pass by
the deterration or sinking of a hill between the Church, and place of view Mr
Rays observations Topograph etc. p. 8.
: And I am told of just such another example of a hill between Sibbertoft and
Hasleby in Northampt. by my worthy Friend Mr. Maurice Wheeler, whence yet we
may only infer, that the parts of the earth do change their Situation,
giveing as much increase (in proportion) at one place, as it takes away at
another, without any augmentation, or diminution in the whole. But we are told
by the Learned Sr. George Makenzie his Majesty's Advocat for the Kingdom of
Scotland, that near his dwelling house, and at another farm of his 20 miles
distant, He has two plots of ground out of which for these many years he has
dug a stiff, clayish, moist earth (used there for a soil to barley land) which
in two years time, though dug a foot deep, will grow up again and fill the
excavated place Philosoph. Transa^t. Number. 117. p. 396.
: And the banks of the black Mere in the parish of Norbury in this County, do
yearly grow forward upon the surface of the water, 3 or 4 yards in seven years,
the water standing under them; perhaps the Moss near Hixon may have been such a
Mere too, now grown totally over from the bank side as it is supposed this would
be, were not the banks cut away to prevent the loss of Cattle, which has
frequently happened here by reason of these hollow banks. In which two last
instances, there being an increase of bulk, without deterration from any other
place, possibly some may conclude somewhat of a genuine vegetation: For my part
I think the same of them, I do of the peat pit earths of Oxfordshire, which
will grow up again in some years Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Chap 3.. 41.
, by virtue of the stringy roots that are always found in them, and are
perpetually putting forward, which no more argues any vegetation in the earth
it self, than any other plant does that grows upon it.

13. Of such kind of stringy bituminous earths ( roots and oily substances
being very boyant) the floating Island, so much talked of, and admired in many
parts of the world are most certainly constituted, whereof there are two about
20 foot broad, but about 30 or perhaps 40 foot long, in Kinson poole, belonging
to the courteous, and most obligeing Gent. Walter Fowler of St. Thomas Esquire
which An: 1680 began in March to move from under the Hill on the N. W. side of
the poole, and came together like the Symplegades, first to the S. W. corner,
where after they had continued about 3 weeks, they began to move again, and
were come in May (when I was there) to the S. E. corner, lying just in the
passage of the water out of the poole toward the Mill: I was told also of such
in Aqualat Mere, which it is like at first might be nothing but a kind of Scum
upon the water mixed with a few weeds, covered over above in part, with dust
brought by the winds, and supplied at the same time underneath, with other
viscous terrestrieties, elevated by the vapors from the bottoms of the pooles;
and so in process of time becomeing a fungous sort of earth, bearing weeds,
dwarf willows, and such kind of trash, and floating above water. And from such
small beginnings as these, the floating Island in the Lake Loumund in Scotland
Hieron. Cardani de Rerum Varietate Lib. 1. cap. 7.
, others in the Lago di Bassanello, the great Tarquinian Lake, and diverse other
Lakes in Italy, mentioned by Pliny and Baccius C. Plinti 2di Not. Hist. Lib. 2.
cap. 95. and Andr. Baccii de Thermis Lib. 4. cap. 15.
, may have also their Rise (for ought I know) as well as these.

14. Having done with the Soiles in general, and the peculiarities attending
some of them in their very surface, come we next to break the turf, which they
cut in the Moorelands in the Spring time with an instrument called a push-plow,
being a sort of spade, shod somewhat in the form of an arrow, with a wing at
one side, and having a cross piece of wood, and the upper end of the helve,
after the manner of a Crutch, to which they fasten a pillow, which setting to
their thigh and so thrusting it forward, they will commonly dispatch a large
turf at two cuts; and then turn it up to dry; which in good weather is done on
one side in eight, on the other, in 4 or 5 days at most: when dried, if they
intend them for fuel in winter, they pile them up round in manner of a Hay-rick
10 or 12 foot high, and let them stand all Summer: But if for manuring their
land, they heap it up round a good quantity together on the ground, and set it
on fire, which it will take of it self, if it be dry; otherwise they give it
the assistance of wood: These heaps they will keep burning sometimes 3 weeks
together, still covering them over with new turf, as the old ones burn away,
only giving them vent by Air-holes, which they make with a stick: The Ashes of
these turfs they call Ess, which laid on their Meddows, Rye, or Barley lands,
some are of opinion goes further than dung or Lime. And these are all the uses
they put their turf too; only as in Oxfordshire (beside for bowling-greens, and
grass-walks in Gardens) they use it frequently to ridg and head their meaner
houses, and sometimes wholly thatch them with it Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Chap.
3.. 40.
.

15. Under the uppermost turf, in their moorish boggy grounds, they also digg
peats, which because they order much after the same manner, as has already been
described in Oxfordshire Ibid. 41.
, I pass them over, and proceed to another black, moist, and rotten sort of
Earth, that lies just under the turf in heathy soiles, such as Archer moore
near Beresford, and upon a hill called the Gun above Rudyerd-Hall, where, as I
was seriously told by the Worshipful and most ingenious Charles Cotton Esquire Tho
Rudyerd of Rudyerd Esquire and Mr Gent of Ashbourn, if one ride in a dark night in
so wet a season that a Horse breaks through the turf, and throws up this black,
moist, spungy sort of earth, He seems to fling up so much fire, which lies
shineing upon the ground like so many Embers; by the light whereof one Horse
may trace another, though at some distance, and it be never so dark; it
continuing light upon the ground, and being gradually dying away, for near a
quarter of an hour. To which let me add another agreeable relation, whereof I
was informed by that worthy Loyal Gent. Capt. Tho. Lane of Bentley Esquire who
endeavoring to help a friend and Kinsman of His (one Mr. Jones) who casually
fell into a ditch in Bescot grounds in the night time, and having stirred the
mud and dirt pretty much in performing that good office; they presently found
their gloves, bridles, and horses, as fas as the water or dirt had touched
them, all in a kind of faint flame, much like that (as He described it) of
burnt brandy, which continued upon them for a miles rideing.

16. Of which odd Phenomenon, though I might be reasonably excused from giving
any account, having seen neither of them my self, the Gent: above mentioned
having also been too incurious of the circumstances, to afford me any more than
a bare relation: Yet that the Reader might not be left wholly in the dark
concerning these matters, let us consider how many things there are beside fire
(for we may well presume this to be none) that give any light; and in what
state and condition they are, whilst they do so; and then whether the shining
of the earths and mud above mentioned, may not be reduced to some one, or more
of them, at least so far forth as that a tolerable conjecture may be raised
from the comparisons. First then upon enumeration of such luciferous bodies,
that send forth a light, and yet have strictly nothing of the nature of fire, I
find some of them to be animate, and others inanimate: As to the animate, it is
evident that our English Glow-wormes, as well as the American, or flaming-flyes
Sr. Tho. Brownes Enquiryes into Vulgar Errors Lib. 3. cap. 27.
, have a luminous juice in their tails which shines in the dark: And it is as
certain if we may believe the learned Monsieur Auzout, that the clammy moisture
of Oysters that shines in the dark of a violet color, comes from luciferous
worms that have their holes in the shells, whereof He distinguishes no less
than three sorts Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 12. p. 204.
.

17. It is as true also, as it is a common experiment, that a Cat rubbed upon the
back in the dark against the hair, sends forth luminous sparks. And there is a
Master of Arts of this University that when He shifts Himself, emits such
sparks so violently that they have been heard to crackle like the sparks of
fire: all which (with other instances that might be brought) seem mightily to
confirm that there are such accensions, or Platonic flames in the juices of
Animals, which shine only, and do not burn, as were hinted and proved, from
the Aerial Noctiluca, and solid Phosphorus mentioned. 9 of the second Chap. And
as for the inanimate luciferous bodies, beside the Bononian and Balduinian
stones; the Phosphori, Smaragdinus and Fulgurans, and of Dr. Kunkelius: Every
body knows that rotten wood, and loaf Sugar scraped, shine in the dark, and
that the Salt water of the Sea, more especially when the wind is South East, or
in any point 'twixt South and East, gives so great a light, that being dash't
with Oars, it seems to run off them, just like liquid-fire; Nay it has been
observed at some places to be so very luminous in strong gales of wind (near
the Isles of Cape-verd) that Passengers have seen the very Keel of their ship
by it, and fishes playing underneath it Ligon's Hist. of the Barbados p. 7.
.

18. Secondly, as to the state and condition these luciferous bodies are in,
whether animate or inanimate, during the time of their shineing; it is plain
that (as fire it self) they shine only while they are in motion, upon expense,
or both: Thus all the Phosphori spend themselves, and some of them shine most
(that I say not burn) when any violence is offered them: Sugar sparkles not,
but when it is scraped: Nor does the Sea water appear like liquid flame, but
when dash't together by storms, or stricken against Ships, rocks, or with Oars.
The Cat sends not forth its luminous spirits, but upon rubing against the hair,
and opening the pores, whereby no doubt there is some expense of them too, as
there is also of that Gentleman's, that emits them so freely. As for the
Glow-wormes whether English, or those of Iamaica, and the worins on Oysters,
they shine no longer than whilst they are living, and their luminous humors are
kept in motion. My Lord Bacon indeed confesses that they do continue their
shineing a little after their death Not. Hist. Cent. 4. Number. 352.
: Dr. Stubbs informs us that those of Jamaica will also hold their light for
some days after Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 36.
: and the learned and most ingenious Sr. Thomas Brown ownes that its true that
a Glow-worme will afford a faint light, almost a days space after many conceive
it dead: But then (says He) this is but a mistake in the compute of death, and
term of disanimation; for indeed it is not then dead, but if it be distended
will slowly contract it self again, which when it cannot do, it cease to
shine any more Sr Tho. Brown's Enquiries into Vulgar Errors Lib. 3. cap. 27.
. Beside in case it would not thus contract it self, it would be too peremptory
notwithstanding to determine an Insect to be dead, when it ceases to move; for
that many times they are not so, though they afford not the visible evidences
of life, as may be observed in flies, which when they appear even quite
forsaken of their forms; by virtue of the Sun, or other warmth, quickly
convince us, by their motion, they had never lost them.

19. Now though it be possible indeed that there may be small subterraneous
Animals, such as the Oyster worms etc. that may be bred and live in such
black, bituminous, moist, rotten earths, or the mud of ditches, and upon sudden
commotions may send forth such lights as were at large above mentioned; Yet me
thinks they may rather proceed from some salino-sulphureous mixtures that may
be in those Earths and Mud, which being smartly moved as in the ditch, or
violently stricken with the Horses feet, as the Seawater with Oars (which is
also salino-sulphureous as was plainly shown above Chap. 2.. 124) may more
likely occasion such lights from the same principles (howsoever they operate)
as in the Salt water of the Sea, though others more probably may think (both
earths and mud seeming in a state of putrefaction) that they may become
luciferous by the same means, that rotten-wood and stinking fish are so: which
yet shine not so much upon account of their rottenness as they do of their
moisture (as it is in these Earths, and the liveing tree in Jamaica, which
shines most vividly after a shower of rain Trapham's Hist. of Iamaica Chap. 2.
p. 29.
,) both of them ceasiing to shine rateably as they become dry. Nor can it be
objected that these are neither in motion or expense, since putrefactions are
nothing else but gradual consumptions, having all of them also an inward
motion in them, as well as fire or light.

20. At Pipe-hill in a hallow Lane S. W. from Mr. Bulls house, about two
bow-shoots down the Lane on the left hand, in the side of the bank which seems
to be of anorange colored clay, I found a another shineing sort of Earth (but
not in the dark as the former) also of an orange color, though made up in
great part, with silver colored Laminae, somewhat weighty, very unctuous, and
guilding the hands if rubbed upon them; of which I was informed by my most
worthy Friend, Sebright Repington of Ammington Esquire who though a Warwickshire
Gent. yet so zealous was He for the promoting this work that He became none of
the least Encouragers of it: I was shown the same again at the sign of the
Starr at the foot of Brereton Hill, by the Worshpfull William Chetwynd of
Rugeley Esquire where in digging a Cellar they found great quantities of it. These
at first I thought might be the Mica arenosa of the Naturalists, which the
Germans call Catsilver or Glimmer, for being dried it became friable; but
bringing it to a fiery trial in a Crucible, I found it of so obstinat a
nature, that it would neither change its color or substance by it, which all
the sorts of Micae are said to do Geo. Agricola in Bermanno.
. Then I tried it with the strongest acids I could get, and diverse other
things, but it would not stir or make Ebullition with any of them; so that I
presently concluded it to be a sort of Talc, which says Caesalpinus, in igne
perennis est, neque enim funditur, neque comburitur, neque colorem amittit, and
therefore by the Ancients called Argyrodamas, quasi argentum indomitum, it
remaining invincible even to fire it self Andreae Caesalpini de Metallitis Lib.
2. cap. 59.
: Whence the Chemists find it so difficult to draw an oil of Talc, which yet
in this sort seems already done to their hands, for between the fingers it
feels as soft and oily as butter, though it have somewhat too of the nature of
the Schistus, its Laminae lying all the same way so as to give it a grain; but
they are not so large, but it may be easily broken contrary to it: nay when
dried it becomes so very friable, that it serves very well in stead of sand to
strew upon Letters, like the Ammochrysos mollis friablis of Caesalpinus Ibidem.
and Kentman Io. Kentmani Nomenclaturae rer. fosse. tit. 4.
, which is the only use I can yet find it has, though I have made many trials
with it in relation to guilding, painting etc.

21. Amongst the underturf Earths, the next that present themselves, are the
arable soiles, which to mention more particularly than above, are either Clay,
marly, sandy, gravelly, light mould, blackland, moorish and gouty land; each of
which they fit with their most agreeable grains and manures, but the due
application of them belonging to the Chapter of Arts, I shall consider only
here the several sorts of Marles, which though manures to other lands, yet
being Earths too themselves, they plainly appertain to this place. Whereof I
find in Staffordshire about four or five sorts. 1. a red fat earthy sort,
having some veins of blew (which is the most common) found upon the Trent side
about Ingestre, Tixall, Heywood etc, lyeing generally about 18 inches or two
foot under the surface, though sometimes it lies so ebb (as they call it) that
they plow up the head of it, otherwise that which covers it, is a hungry clay,
which yet makes them this recompense, that it holds the Marle so together
above, that undermining it, they can have a fall of seven or eightscore loads
at a time, which could not be, were this taken away, beside being commonly
blended with 3 or 4 yards depth of good marle underneath, it is hardly seen,
much less does any hurt. 2 About Swynnerton, and the more Northerly parts of
the Country they have a stiff bluish sort Marle with red veins; and 3 another
sort mixed for the most part blew and red, that is not so stiff, much better for
corn; both which (like the former) will fall with undermining, and are
commonly dug for 4 shillings 6 pence the hundred load, each load containing 12
measures: And 4 the learned and inquisitive Sr. Simon Degg told me of another
blew Marle, somewhere about Kinston, much like Fullers earth, which but that it
differs in color, I should otherwise have thought to have been the
Gischromargon of Pliny Plinii Not. Hist. Lib. 17. cap. 8.
.

22. Beside these, about Charnes, Broughton, Swynerton, Beech, Ellarton, and
Heywood, they have harder, stony, slatty sorts of Marles, at some places called
Slat, at others Dice-Marle; which will not be got by falling like the former,
but must be dug with pick and Crow, and costs at some places 8 or 9s the
hundred getting, it riseing sometimes in great stones as much as two Men can
load: of this sort there is white, red, and blew; the latter whereof perhaps
may be the Columbine Marle of Pliny, rather than any of of the rest, by reason
of its color, though they all equally fall under his definition, being fetched
out of the ground in clots or lumps Ibidem.
: Which though most of them very hard, yet by the help of frosts, Sun, and
rains, they dissolve like Lime, and spread well enough upon the ground in a
little time, though at some places for expedition they apply a little Iron
mallet. And these last are the Marles preferred by the Husbandmen much before
the Clay earthy Marles, which bind and stiffen their lands upon long tillage;
whereas these loosen the stiffest clay, and make it yield much better grass
than otherwise it would. In short these seldom are known to fail the
expectation of the Husbandman, upon whatsoever sort of land they have occasion
to lay them, whether for corn or grass: Besides, these are accounted more
beneficial than the others, because spending themselves but gradually and
lasting longer upon the ground, though the other's it is like may fatten it
sooner; according to that of Agricola, Quanto quaeque marga est pinguior, tanto
magis ea pinguescunt arva; quo durior, eo plures annos durat antequam solvatur.
which is all I can think off at present coucerning Marles as they relate to
Husbandry, only in general that they seem amongst Earths, to be analagous to
the fat in Animals; and that they are commonly reputed the better, the deeper
they are dug; which it is like may be true enough, because their Salts in the
uppermost parts in all probability may indeed be spent in the production of
Plants.

23. But beside the use of Marle in matters of Husbandry, they have another use
of them here in order to building, very good bricks being made of the reddish
clay marle, whereof I saw great quantities at Mr. Chetwynd's at Ingestre, and
many other places: They have very good brick-earth likewise about Ricarscot
near Stafford, and on a bank by the way side, betwixt Newcastle and Keele, I
met with a peculiar sort of brick-earth, which when burnt became all over blew,
those bricks only which were placed furthest from the fire, having any redness
in them: The Romans seem to have made use of some such Clay as this for making
their Vrns, those found at St. Albans, and near Newington in Kent being many of
them blew; Whence we may reasonably conclude that there must be such clay in
many other places, were they so well searched out elsewhere, as they have been
in Yorkshire, by that curious Observer Martin Lister Esquire who informs me that
such clay is found in many places amongst the mountains of that County. Beside
for the Bricklayers, there are Earths also useful in many other Trades found
in Staffordshire, such as Terra Saponaria Fullers earth, whereof I met with
some, much like that of Wobourn, near Statfold, but in no great quantity; what
there might be found, were search made, remains uncertain; However it may not
be amiss for the ingenious Proprietor of that Estate, upon this hint, to be
mindful whenever He has occasion to digg thereabout, what sorts of Earths are
thrown up; for could He meet with a quantity of this, I need not acquaint, what
would be the advantage.

24. As for Tobacco-pipe clays they are found all over the County, near
Wrottesley House, and Style Cop in Cannock-wood, whereof they make pipes at
Armitage and Lichfield, both which though they are greyish clays, yet burn very
white; There is Tobacco-pipe clay also found at Darlaston near Wednesbury, but
of late disused, because of better and cheaper found in Monway-field betwixt
Wednesbury and Willingsworth, which is of a whitish color, and makes excellent
pipes: as does also another of the same color dug near the Salt water poole in
Pensnet Chase, about a Mile and South of Dudley. And Charles Riggs of Newcastle
makes very good pipes of three sorts of Clay, a white and a blew, which He has
from between Shelton and Hanley green, whereof the blew clay burns the whitest,
but not so full as the white, i. e. it shrinks more; but the best sort He has
from Grubbers Ash, being whitish mixed with yellow, it is a short britle sort of
Clay, but burns full and white, yet He sometimes mixes it with the blew
beforementioned. But the Clay that surpasses all others of this County, is that
at Amblecot, on the bank of Stour, in the parish of old Swynford yet in
Staffordshire, in the lands of that judicious and obliging Gent. the
Worshipful Harry Gray of Enfield Esquire whose beautiful Mansion, perhaps the
best situat of any in the County, is here represented Tab. 7. I say the most
preferrable clay of any, is that of Amblecot, of a dark bluish color, whereof
they make the best pots for the Glass-houses of any in England: Nay so very
good is it for this purpose, that it is sold on the place for sevenpence the
bushel, whereof Mr. Gray has sixpence, and the Workman one penny, and so very
necessary to be had, that it is sent as far as London, sometimes by Wagon, and
sometimes by Land to Beaudley, and so down the Severn to Bristol, and thence to
London: the goodness of which clay, and cheapness of coal hereabout, no doubt
has drawn the glass-houses, both for Vessels and broad-glass, into these
parts; there being diverse set up in different forms here at Amblecot,
old-Swynford, Holloways-end and Cobourn brook.

25. Other Potters-clays for the more common wares, there are at many other
places, particularly at Horsley-Heath in the parish of Tipton; in Monway-field
abovementioned, where there are two sorts gotten, one of a yellowish color
mixed with white, the other bluish; the former stiff and weighty, the other
more friable and light; which mixed together, work better than apart: of these
they make diverse sorts of Vessels at Wednesbury, which they paint with Slip,
made of a reddish sort of Earth gotten at Tipton. But the greatest Pottery they
have in this County, is carried on at Burslem near Newcastle under Lyme, where
for making their several sorts of Pots, they have as many different sorts of
Clay, which they dig round about the Town, all within half a miles distance,
the best being found nearest the coal, and are distinguished by their colors
and uses as follows. 1. Bottle clay, of a bright whitish streaked yellow
color. 2. Hard-fire clay of a duller whitish color, and fuller intersperst
with a dark yellow, which they use for their black wares, being mixed with the
3. Red blending Clay, which is of a dirty red color. 4. White-clay, so called
it seems though of a bluish color, and used for making yellow-colour'd ware,
because yellow is the lightest color they make any Ware of.
all which they call throwing clays, because they are of a closer texture, and
will work on the wheel;

26. Which none of the three other clays, they call Slips, will any of them
do, being of looser and more friable natures; these mixed with water they make
into a consistence thinner than a Syrup, so that being put into a bucket it
will run out through a Quill, this they call Slip, and is the substance
wherewith they paint their wares; whereof the 1. Sort is called the Orange
Slip, which before it is work't, is of a greyish color mixed which orange
balls, and gives the ware (when annealed) an orange color. 2. The white Slip,
this before it is work't, is of a dark bluish color, yet makes the ware
yellow, which being the lightest color they make any of, they call it (as they
did the clay above) the white Slip. 3. The red Slip, made of a dirty reddish
clay, whcih gives wares a black color.
neither of which clays or Slips must have any gravel or Sand in them; upon
this account, before it be brought to the wheel they prepare the clay by
steeping it in water in a square pit, till it be of a due consistence; then
they bring it to their beating board, where with a long Spatula they beat it
till it be well mix't; then being first made into great squarish rolls, it is
brought to the wageing board, where it is slit into flat thin pieces with a
Wire, and the least stones or gravel picked out of it; This being done, they
wage it, i. e. knead or mould it like bread, and make it into round balls
proportionable to their work, and then it is brought to the wheel, and formed as
the Workman sees good.

27. When the Potter has wrought the clay either into hollow or flat ware, they
are set abroad to dry in fair weather, but by the fire in foul, turning them
as they see occasion, which they call whaving: when they are dry they stouk
them, i.e. put Ears and Handles to such Vessels as require them: These also
being dry, they then Slip or paint them with their several sorts of Slip,
according as they design their work, when the first Slip is dry, laying on the
others at their leisure, the Orange Slip making the ground, and the white and
red, the paint; which two colors they break with a wire brush, much after the
manner they do when they marble paper, and then cloud them with a pensil when
they are pretty dry. After the vessels are painted, they lead them, with that
sort of Lead-Ore they call Smithum, which is the smallest Ore of all, beaten
into dust, finely sifted and strewed upon them; which gives them the gloss, but
not the color; all the colors being chiefly given by the variety of Slips,
except the Motley-clour, which is procured by blending the Lead with Manganese,
by the Workmen called Magnus. But when they have a mind to show the utmost of
their skill in giving their wares a fairer gloss than ordinary, they lead them
then with lead calcined into powder, which they also sift fine and strew upon
them as before, which not only gives them a higher gloss, but goes much further
too in their work, than Lead-Ore would have done.

28. After this is done, they are carried to the Oven, which is ordinarily
above 8 foot high, and about 6 foot wide, of a round copped form, where they
are placed one upon another from the bottom to the top: if they be ordinary
wares such as cylindricall Butter-pots etc. that are not leaded, they are
exposed to the naked fire, and so is all their flat ware though it be leaded,
having only parting-shards. i. e. thin bits of old pots put between them, to
keep them from sticking together: But if they be leaded hollowwares, they do
not expose them to the naked fire, but put them in shragers, that is, in course
metall'd pots, made of marle (not clay) of diverse forms according as their
wares require, in which they put commonly 3 pieces of clay called Bobbs for the
ware to stand on, to keep it from sticking to the Shragers; as they put them in
the shragers to keep them from sticking to one another (which they would
certainly otherwise do by reason of the leading) and to preserve them from the
vehemence of the fire, which else would melt them down, or at least warp them.
In 24 hours an Oven of Pots willl be burnt, then they let the fire go out by
degrees which in 10 hours more will be perfectly done, and then they draw them
for Sale, which is chiefly to the poor Crate-men, who carry them at their backs
all over the Country, to whom they reckon them by the piece, i. e. Quart, in
hollow ware, so that 6 pottle, or 3 gallon bottles make a dosen, and so more or
less to a dosen, as they are of greater or lesser content; The flat wares are
also reckoned by pieces and dosens, but not (as the hollow) according to their
content, but their different bredths.

29. Having done with the Smectic and figuline Earths, come we next to such as
are used in coloring and painting; amongst which we may reckon the yellow and
red Ochres, sometimes met with (but in small quantities) near Stansop in the
parish of Allstonfield; the yellow Ochre found upon Willenhall green about a
yard deep, which they beat up upon boards, and separate from gravel, and then
make into oval Cakes which they sell abroad for 4 pence per dosen for the
Glovers use; as they do also a sort of blew clay found at Darlaston near
Wednesbury amongst the Iron stone, which beat up after the same manner and made
into cakes, are sold also to the Glovers, to give their wares an ash color.
Ruddle or Red-Ocher they dig very good at the parish of Ipston, which they
observe to lie chiefly in their best lands. I was told there was of it also
about Dilhorne, and at Kingswood poole, within Wrottesley park. And I was
informed of a sort of black Chalk found between the beds of Chirts, and the
beds of gray Marble, sometimes a finger thick, and sometimes less, in Langley
Close near Stansop (but in the parish of Wetton) belonging to the right
Honorable William Earl of Devon. To which add a sort of fine reddish Earth,
which I found under a rock where the Springs came forth near Himley Hall,
belonging to the right Honorable the Lady Dudley, that when dry, proved near as
good a red Chalk, as any we have from France. As for Medicinal Earths I met
with but few in this Country, the most likely to be such is a red sort of
Earth, near Tennal Hall in the parish of Harborn by the way side, which
discolours the hands, and strongly adheres if put to the tongue, like the Bolus
Armenus; but whether as useful as that, I left to the trial of the learned and
ingenious Sr. Ch: Holt a near Neighbor to it, whereof I have not yet had the
favor to hear. I was told also at Treasle by Mr. William Barnesley, that they
had thereabout a sort of white pebbles containing a mealy substance within
them, that perhaps may be the Agaricus mineralis of the Naturalists, of which
because at large in my History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, Chap.
3.. 26. and 30.
, no more of it here.

30. And these are all the Earths strictly so called (amongst all those
179001060 different sorts of Earths reckoned up by such as have written de Art
combinatoria) that I could find of use in this County; yet I must not conclude
this Chapter here neither, the other media Mineralia such as Sulphurs,
Bitumens, etc. of a middle nature betwixt stones and Metalls, being also taken
in under this head, by most (if not all) the Geoponic writers. Upon which
account the History of Pit-coal, otherwise called Sea-coale (though in this
inland Country, and seldom carried by water, much less by Sea) belongs to this
place: Whereof there being great plenty of diverse kinds found here, I shall
first give an account of the several Species of them. 2. of their dipping,
basseting or cropping, and their Rows or Streeks, 3. of the measures or floores
there are of them, their partings or Lamings, with the terms of Art for them in
different places, 4. of the damps that attend them, by what means they seem to
be occasiond, and how cured, 5. how the coal-pits come so many of them to take
fire, and 6. of their several ways of finding and working them, which last
though more properly belonging to the Chapter of Arts, yet the right
understanding them for the most part so intimatly depending on some of the
particulars just preceding, I thought fit rather to misplace them here, as I
did the Art of Pottery above, than render either of them the less intelligible
to the Reader: And the rather too that this chapter might bear some proportion
with the rest, the Arts relating to Earths being sufficient beside, to fill up
a competent share of their own Chapter.

31. But first of the several Species's or rather sorts of Coal; which though
they differ some what in all pits, nay in the several measures of the same pit,
yet none of them so signally as to obtain a distinct name, except the
Cannel-coal, and the Peacock-coale, from the common pit coal of Wednesbury and
other parts; which yet all come under the common Genus of Lithanthrax or
Stone-coale, they being all of a competent hardness, and seem to be nothing
else but Bitumen indurated by subterraneal heats, though not equally; the
Cannel-coal being the hardest, and of so close a texture, that it will take a
passable polish; as many be seen in the Choir of the Cathedral Church of
Lichfield, which in great part is paved Lozengy, black and white (as other
Churches with Marble) with Cannel-coale for the black, and Alablaster for the
white, both plentifully found in this Country; which when kept clean, so well
represent black and white Marble, that to an incurious heedless Eye, they seem
to be the same: It turns like Ivory into many pretty knacks, such as
Ink-boxes, Candlesticks etc. They cut it also into Salts, Standishes, and carve
Coats of Arms in it, witness that of the right Honorable William Lord Paget,
in the Gallery of his stately Seat at Beaudesart, which as a thankful memorial
of the Encouragement He so readily afforded this Work, is here represented Tab.
8. And the rather here because this Coal is dug in the Park adjoining, also
belonging to his Lordship, about 20.30. or sometimes 40 fathoms deep, lyeing
between other beds of a softer kind, and is the best in Staffordshire, or any
where else that we know of, except that in Lancashire, which (they say) has no
grain, and therefore not cleaving as this will do, upon which account esteemed
somewhat better for making such Vtensills as were mentioned above.

32. And yet this at Beaudesart will work so very well, that the Kings
Majesty's head is said to have been cut in it by a Carver at Lichfield
resembleing Him well: In the working whereof especially turning it, they use no
edged tools, it presently rebating them; but at first they use rasps, then
finer files, and last Sealskin and Rushes, these giveing the ultimat gloss,
which is sometimes so high, that it has been thought to be the lapis
Obsidianus of the ancients; but its non performance of the office of the
Basanitis in touching gold and silver, as Caesalpinus asserts the Obsidian
stone will do, gives full satisfaction it cannot be so: much rather could I
afford it to be a Species of the Gagates Lapis, which all agree to be nothing
else but indurated Naphtha or Petroleum, and to take fire like this, only this
has not that Electricity of drawing straws and chaff, which Rulandus and others
say that Jeat has; so that they must not be allowed to be the same, though
they agree in their original principles, color, and curious politure.
Notwithstanding which, the chiefest use they make of this coal, is for
fireing, wherein they much observe the grain of the coal, for if they would
have it burn slow (as the poorer and thriftier sort of people are best pleased
it should) they lay it slat ways upon the fire, as it lay before in the bed or
measure; but if they would have it burn quick and flame clear (as the Gentry
commonly will) they surbed it, i. e. set it edgways, the cleaving way next the
fire, by which means it so easily admits it, that it presently flames as bright
as a Candle, whence parhaps not unlikely it may receive its name Canwyll in the
British tongue signifying a Candle, from Cann, candidus; and Gwyll, tenebrae;
eo quod albere, h. e. lucere faciat tenebras, says the learned Dr. Davies in
his British Dictionary.

33. The Peacock-coal dug at Hanley-green near New Castle under Lyme, is much
softer than the Cannel, not exceeding the common sorts of other pits in
hardness, the blocks of both being divided into much more sensible plates or
Scaiae, of about a of an inch thick, which appear to the naked Eye; whereas the
Cannel though it have a grain, yet the joints are not visible; upon which
account this is no more capable of politure than the common coal, yet is more
gay to the sight, than if it were; it most vividly representing all the colors
of the most glorious feathers in a Peacoks train (whence it borrowes its name)
and that not emphatically, like the colors in a glass Prisme, or of variable
silk, which are evanid at lest, if not fantastical: but solidly and genuinly,
the colors remaining fixed in all manner of obversions of the coal, though not
so vivid when turned from the light. Whence it is plainly deducible that this
coal has great variety in its texture, and that its parts and pores are not all
of a shape, as it is probable they are for the most part in the Cannel, and the
common coal of other pits, which appear uniformly black in all parts alike;
diversity of colors in opacous bodies (such as this of the peacock-coal is)
seeming to arise from the various figure, situation, and order of the
inunmerable superficieculae that are differently obverted to the Eye, and to
one another, whereof some reflect the light mingled with more, others with less
shade There is much such a Coalmine bordering upon Mendip which they call there
by the same name, that Mr. Beaumont thinks receives it is resplendency from a
sulphury tincture, and so perhaps may ours. Philosoph. Collect. Numb. 1.
. Nor must it be objected that the superficies of this seems as smooth and
polite as any other coal: for howsoever it may apear to our dull sight and
touch, it is certainly only so in a popular, or at most a physical; but by no
means in a rigid Geometrical sense. From which great variety of protuberancies
it is, that the body of this coal must needs be of an open texture, whence it is
like it comes to pass that it burns so swift, and is therefore better for
Smithy's, than Kitchen fires.

34. Which are much better supplied by the common coal of the Country,
especially that of Wednesbury, Dudley, and Sedgley; which some stick not to
prefer even to the Cannel it self; the texture and other qualities thereof
being, such viz. that it is a fat shineing coal, having a pretty open grain,
lying seldom in a level with the plane of the Horizon but most times some what
inclining to it (according to which it cleaves into blocks at the discretion of
the Workman) that it burns away with a sweet bright flame, and into white
ashes, leaving no such Cinder as that from New Castle upon Tine. Of which sort
there is so great plenty in all parts of the County (especially about the three
aboue-mention'd places) that most commonly there are 12 or 14 Colerys in work,
and twice as many out of work, within 10 miles round; some of which afford 2000
tuns of coal yearly, others three, four, or five thousand Tuns, the upper or
topmost beds above the Iron-stone, lying sometimes ten, eleven, or twelve yards
thick: nay I was told by Mr. Persehouse of nether Gournall, that in his grounds
at Etingsall in the parish of Sedgley, in a place called Moorefields, the bed
of coal lies 14 yards thick; in so much that some acres of ground have been
sold hereabout for a 100 pound per acre; I was informed of one acre, sold for
150 pound, and well indeed it might be so, since out of one single shaft there
have sometimes been drawn 500 pounds worth of coal. Nor indeed could the
Country well subsist without such vast supplies, the wood being most of it
spent upon the Iron-works, for it is here (as well as other Countries that
fetch their winter stores from hence) thought not only fit for the Kitchen, but
all other offices, even to the parlour and bedchamber.

35. And not only in private Families, but now too in most, if not all the
Mechanic professions (except the Iron-works) that require the greatest expense
of fuel; witness the glass-houses, and Salt-works, brick-making, and
maulting; all which were heretofore performed with wood or charcoal, especially
the last, which one would think should hardly admit of the unpleasant fumes of
such fireing: nor indeed does it, no more than of wood; for they have a way of
Charring it (if I may so speak without a solecisme) in all particulars the same
as they do wood, whence the coal is freed from these noxious steams, that
would otherwise give the malt an ill odor. The coal thus prepared they call
Coaks, which conceives as strong a heat almost as charcoal it self, and is as
fit for most other uses, but for melting, fineing, and refining of Iron, whch
it cannot be brought to do, though attempted by the most skillfull and curious
Artists. In the glass-houses, Salt-works, and Brick-clamps, they use the raw
coal as brought from the pit; in the former whereof, as to the proportion, I am
not so certain; but in the Staffordshire Salt-works, they spend two Tuns to a
drawing; and for burning a Clamp of 16000 bricks, they use about 7 Tunns of
coal. The last effort that was made in this Country for making Iron with
pit-coal, was also with raw coal, by one Mr. Blewstone a high- German who built
his furnace at Wednesbury, so ingeniously contrived (that only the flame of the
coal should come to the Oar, with several other conveniences) that many were
of opinion He would succeed in it. But experience that great baffler of
speculation showed it would not be: the sulphurous vitriolic steams that issue
from the Pyrites, which frequently, if not always, accompanies pit-coal,
ascending with the flame, and poisoning the Ore, sufficiently to make it render
much worse Iron, than that made with char-coal, though not perhaps so much
worse, as the body of coal it self would possibly do.

36. In digging all sorts of coal (that appears not to the day, as the Miners
speak) after the Soil or arable, and the gravel, Sand, grit, and clays are
removed, which keep no course; all the Bass, Freestone (of what sort soever)
Clunches, Bats, and Partings lie one above another, and keep a regular course;
wherein the things most observable are their rise, croping or basseting; their
diping; and the row or streek; which after the Species or sorts of coal, were
the next things proposed to our consideration. In the handling whereof I must
first acquaint the Reader, that coal generally in this, as in all other
Countries, lies in the earth obliquely i. e. neither in plano Horizontis, nor
perpendicular; but riseing one way toward the surface of the Earth, till it
comes within a foot or two, sometimes a yard or more, of the superficies, which
the workmen in this Country generally call basseting, others croping; and
diping into the earth the other way so deep, that it is seldom or never
followed to the end, or indeed any thing near it (except where a Mine lips or
crops up again, as sometimes it does, as well in the dip as the row) by reason
the Workmen are either prevented by waters, or too deep a draught. This
basseting, and diping of coal is various, sometimes greater and sometimes less,
sometimes approaching to a perpendicular, cutting the superficies almost at
right angles, which sort they call a rearing Mine, whereof I was told there was
one at Biddulph that runs down perpendicularly. Others are again that come so
near to a plane of the Horizon that they dip not above one foot in 10, 20 or
sometimes 30 foot: these they call flat Mines by reason of their even and
almost level course. The open works at Wednesbury seem to be of this kind,
where there being but little earth lying over the measures of coal, the
Workmen rid off the earth, and dig the coal under their feet and carry it out
in wheel-barrows, there being no need for these, of windless, roap, or carf,
whence these sort of Coale-works are commonly called Foot-ridds, or Footrills.

37. Though there are too of these, in the third and most common sort of coal,
that dips one foot in three, or one in five, which they call hanging coal; but
they cannot be made but where the coal is found to rise in proportion to the
ascent of a Hill; in which case indeed the Coaliers can work a cuniculus into
the side of the Hill, according to the course of the row or streek of the coal,
for some hundreds of yards in a direct line upon a level, through which they
bring forth the coal as easily altogether as in a flat open work; as they do
at the Footerill at Apedale belonging to the right Worshipful Sr. John Bowyer
Baronet one of the most noble promoters of this work, of which more in due
place, when I come to treat of the ways of working of coal. Yet from that
little has been said, it is easy for the Reader to conceive, how perferable
these are to the other more common hanging mines, in which they are forced to
follow the coal to a great depth, to be at the expense and labor of drawing
all up by hand, and sometimes of freeing the Mine from water, both which are
saved in this sort of hanging Mine, as well as in the flat open works. And that
yet they fall short of the latter, in regard it is a long time (if ever) in
these, before the Colliers can reach so far forward as to be hinderd in their
work either by want of Air or any long draught, and so are longer workable;
whereas the former riseing with the Hill (though it is true they may work a vast
way forward) before they want Air, yet having but one way to work beside viz.
by making setings up with the croping of the coal, they must work out at last,
and cannot hold on so long, as where they may work every way round them, and
perhaps further forward than the others can too.

38 However these are as preferable to other hanging Mines, as those are to the
rearing ones, which are the worst of all: the Colliers quickly reaching to
their utmost workable depth every way; though it must not be denied but that
the coal of these, and the common hanging Mines, is most times more firm, and
better for burning, than that of the others; it being certainly true as well in
coal as stone, that the deeper it is fetched the harder and better; and the
nearer they come to the surface, the softer and worse; till at last they are
converted, if stone, most commonly to a little better than sand; and if coal,
to a shale, smut, or dross, that will not burn. Which is all I could hear of
concerning the rise and diping of coal; but that sometimes it will alter its
dip to a rise, and crop to the same point of the compass it dipped before, which
the Workmen call leaping. Nay so sportive sometimes does nature seem to be in
this matter, that the coal which has cropped to the same point of its first
diping, as in the forementioned example; before it has reached the surface and
cropped out, has taken another dip agreeable to the first, and then again another
crop agreeable to the former; but these are but rarities not often to be met
with.

36. Nor does it leap only in the diping, but also in the row or streek, as I
was informed by Mr. Poole of Hardingswood a person very skillfull in these
matters; which as it leaps the Workmen accordingly follow, till (as sometimes
it does) it leaps down again into the same range it lay at first. The rows of
coal lie ordinarily one under another at certain distances, yet seldom so near,
as that ever any body dug through one row down to another, though sometimes
they will draw much nearer together at one place than another, as the same Mr.
Poole informed me they do at Hardingswood, where the row or streek lyeing to
North and South, they draw together to the Northward and spread to the South to
a good distance, and then run parallel. Of which there is little more worth
notice, but this general rule (I think without exception) that to what points
soever the rise and dip direct their course, the row, side basset or streek,
lies quite contrary: as supposeing a Coalery dip East, the two points that the
dip and rise respect, must be East and West: whence it necessarily follows that
the row must run (as it does here at Hardingswood, about New Castle, and as
some are of opinion, it most times does) North and South, and so in all the
intermediat points of the compass; as about Chedle where the coal dips S. W.
and by S. or as the Miners call it to the two a Clock-Sun, there the rise must
be to the N. E. and by N. and the row or streek must lie N. W. and by N. and S.
E. and by S. the two courses of the diping and row, always cuting the compass
into right angles, proxime; not Geometrically such, but such as are passable
enough, in so gross a body as a coal-Mine is.

40. Hitherto we have considered this mineral of Coal, in two of its
dimensions, viz its longitude and latitude; it remains that we now treat of the
third, its profundity, or thickness as it lies between the roof and the warrant
or pavement; which are most times bass or freestone above, and Ironston or
earth, below; or what ever else the substances be, that lie above the coal, or
below it. wherein we shall give account of the measures, or floors; and the
partings or lamings which the coal has in it self; which was the third thing to
be discour'st on: all coale-Mines beside the sepa ation they have from all
other bodies by their roofs and pavements, having diverse partitions in the
body of the coal it self, made by thin substances called partings or lamings;
which are sometimes no thicker than a crown or a crown, but sometimes 1, 2, 3,
4. or 5 inches thick; each division differing somewhat in texture and goodness:
whence amongst the Workmen they obtain different names, which are not the same
all over the Country, but vary almost in every Coalery, though but 3 or 4
miles distant. For example at Wednesbury, upon the surface they meet first with
earth and stone, 2. blew clunch, and in the 3 place, coal. which they divide
into an upper and nether coal: in the upper coal there are the following
divisions, with their respective depths, and different denominations. 1. The
top or roof floor, 4 foot thick. 2. The overslipper floor, 2 foot. 3. The gay
floor, 2 foot. 4. The Lam-floor, 2 foot. 5. The Kit floor, 1 foot thick. 6. The
bench floor, 2 foot and 7. The spring floor, 1. foot. 8. the Lower slipper
Floor, 2 foot and.
then a bat between 1 and 3 yards thick, which being past they come next to the
nether coal, wherein there are the like divisions, with their respective
depths, and different names. 1. The slip floor, 1. foot. 2. The lam floor, 2
foot. 3. The Oary floor, 1 foot. 4. The bench floor, 1 foot. 5. The spring
Floor, 2 foot. 6. The slipper Floor, 2 foot.
between every one of which floors, both in the upper and nether coal, there
are substances called partings of the thickness above mentioned, of consistence
between an earth and a coal, or soft bat, then below the nether coal before
they come to the ironstone, they have 1. Earth, 1. foot. 2. The Me Floor, 1
foot. 3. Bat, 1 foot and. 4. The Omfry floor, 2 foot, and. 5. Iron stone
Earths, of diverse thicknesses. 6. Iron stone.
In all from the surface 22 different partitions: whence it appears as was
hinted in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 3.. 14.
, how much the earth here, as also in the following instances, seems to be of a
bulbous nature; several folds of diverse consistencies still including one
another, after the manner of the coats of a pearl, or an onyon.

41, At Amblecot in this County where the coal lies deep, they have first the
top earth, 7 yards thick. 2 a rock of 14 yards. 3 an earth called blew-clunch,
3 yards. 4 stones parted with earth, called the three frogs. 5 catch-earth, 1
yard thick, mixed with wild Iron-stone, which covers or lies upon 1. The white,
or top coal. 2. Heath, or tough coal. 3. Fine coal, or sea coal. 4. The veins.
5. The long-coal. 6. Rough coal. 7. Spin coal. 8. Top of the suder height. 9.
Bottom Bench. 10. Back-stone. 11. Iron-stone, 3 yards thick earth and all. 12.
Heathen coal.
between every one of which measures of coal, lies a laming or parting of
various thicknesses. About Dudley as I find it in the Metallum Martis of Dud.
Dudley Esquire Metallum Martis p. 38.
; the three uppermost measures, are called the white measures, from the white
Arsenical substance contained in them. 4. the shoulder coal. 5 the toe caol. 6
the foot coal. 7 the yard coal. 8. the slipper coal. 9 the sawyer coal. 10 the
frisley coal, all which 10 measure of coal make up one with another 10 yards in
thickness. Next them lie the several measures of Iron stone; and then coal
again 2 yards thick, called the bottom, or heathen coal. These if they lie
close and firm together, as generally they do in this County, and the coal it
self and partings, but tolerably clear of the Pyrites, and arsenical mixtures,
are workt so much the more free from danger: not only upon account that if the
coal be full of rifts, it is so much the more apt to colt in upon the Workmen,
but from the natural fitness that such clefts have to admit either corrupted
Air, or the poisonous vapors of such minerals; mortal to all Animals (except
the Rat) which they call.

42. Damps, the fourth thing promised to be treated on relating to this
mineral, which though they happen not so frequently in this County, as in some
others, by reason (as I said) of the firmness and closeness of the measures of
most coal there; yet because they do sometimes fall out, and the knowledge of
the means whereby they seem to be occasioned, may not perhaps be thought less
profitable to the Philosopher, than the cure of them to the Collier: I have
thought fit to give some account of all the Species of them I have yet heard
of, with their respective Cures. The Species of them naturally divide
themselves into. Damps Subterraneal Positive Simple, Air alone corrupted.
Compound Invisible Smoak-damps. Peas-blossom-damp.

Visible Formed, the Globe-damp, in shape of a foot-bal. Not formed, the Fire,
or Fulminating damp.


Privative, want of Air.
Superterraneal, in the open Air above ground.

All which, whether super or subterraneal, I take in general to proceed from
stagnations in the subterranel Vaults of the Earth, for want of due
Ventilations, and commerce between the inferior and superior Air. The material
causes it is true may be various, either simple or compound: as the mere
corruption of the simple Air alone upon a long stagnation in the Coal-rooms,
and the rifts and clefts of the rock of coal it self, may be its material cause
indeed, but the causa sine qua non of such a damp, I take to be the want of
motion in those cavities, without which, the Air would never have corrupted; no
more than water which never corrupts till it stagnates, when indeed like the
Air it becomes poisonous, though possibly not to that degree, the Air being a
body much finer, and conveyed to the more tender parts of the body.

43. Whence it is that in the old works, wherein there has been no digging for
a long time, no laveing, drawing, or pumping of water, all which keep the Air
in motion, and the water from canckering, these damps are most frequent and
most dangerous. Whence it is too that the Works where the bed of coal is thin,
and admits of but few or no such rifts or clefts for the Air to stagnat or
corrupt in, are seldom or never troubled with them. Upon which account it is
likewise that though a bed of coal have many of these rifts, and large ones
too; yet as long as there is a profluence of water through them, there is no
danger of their entertaining such damps; which as soon as made dry by a Sough
or free-Level, the same Mine shall become much more liable to them; the wholesome
Air that was in them whilst kept in motion by the flux of the water (having
little or no communication with that above ground) now stagnating and
corrupting to that degree, that it not only extinguishes the glowing heat of
coals, and the flame of candles, torches etc. but the flammula vitae too in
most living creatures, so that the Animal which respires it, some times expires
with it too. And as it is in simple damps made out of corrupted Air only, so it
is in the compound ones of one or more minerals, whether visible or invisible;
whether ariseing from the smoke of coal it self, or as some will have one of
them, from the scent of vegetables, or 2 from the steams of the Workmens
breath, and sweat of their bodies, together with the smoke of the candles they
work by; or 3 from sulphurous, arsenical, nitrous, or other such mineral
steams that may be incident to Coalworks: for to all these they ascribe a
particular sort of Damp.

44. The first sort whereof, which arises from the smoke of coal it self, is
said to happen only in such grooves where they make use of great fires to
soften the rocks to make them yield to the pick-Axe, which sending up with the
smoke a sulphurous or perhaps an arsenical vapor, in probability may so
infect the quiet Air in such deep caverns, as to render it unfit for
respiration: it having been long indeed observed that such mines are seldom or
never free from damps. And of this sort perhaps are the damps of the coalworks
about Chedle; where above the Mines they have a rock of a greyish color,
called Pox-stone, so very hard, that where they do not luckily meet with a
cleft, they are forced to put fire to it, which in some time will make it flaw,
or at least so soften it, that the pick-axes will enter it, which otherwise
would not work away so much in a day, as will fill a hat. And yet these damps
are neither visible nor noisome, nor will they take fire, but are so gross and
moist that they extinguish it and are suddenly mortal. Nor is the peace blossom
damp (whereof we have an account from the learned Martin Lister Physician at
York Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 117.
) either visible or noisome, it being so called, as they say, because it smells
like the blossoms of peace, though they fancy it proceeds from the multitude of
red trifoyle flowers, with which the Lime stone meddows of the Peak (where they
have this sort of damp) do much abound: and as it is not noisome, so neither
was it ever heard that this was mortal to the Workmen, the scent perhaps
freeing them from the danger of a surprise. Of this sort I enquired in the east
part of Staffordshire, where the Moore-lands bound upon the Peak-Country of
Darbyshire, and found it not only there, but as far as I could learn, to be the
most common damp in the Country, it making their candles first to diminish, to
burn round, and at length to go out, perfuming the Stauls at the same time
with a faint sweet smell, as those in Darbyshire do, only with this
difference, that here they are said to be sometimes visible, showing like a
thin smoke, which may be seen not only in the grooves, but fuming out at the
top of the pit. But here they are wiser (where they go for their coal 40 or 50
yards deep, and have no such thing as trefoil; for many miles, and yet have
this damp) than to think it proceeds either from peace or trefoil; it being
rather apprehended to arise from the Workmens breath and sweat, mixed with the
steams of the golden Marchasite or brass lumps, than any thing else.

45. Not much unlike that (only in its fatality) we call the Globedamp, thought
to be compounded of the Workmens breath etc. and sweat of their bodies,
together with the smoke of the candles they work by, which ascending to the
uppermost parts of the grooves, there condense so much, that they become
visible in the form and bigness of a foot ball, seeming to be covered with a
skin, of of the thickness and color of a Cobweb. These if by any casualty they
come to be broken, they immediately disperse themselves, and suffocat all the
company, being altogether as mortal though not so violent; as the fulminating
damps mentioned by the same worthy Gent. and the ingenious Mr. Jessop of
Broomhall in Yorksh: to have happened not long since at Hasle-berg-hills, and
at Wingersworth within two miles of Chesterfield An. 1675 Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 117. and 119.
. where the vapors taking fire at the candles of the Workmen, they found
themselves presently environed with flames, their faces, hands, hair, and
clothes in great part, being very much burnt, and one of them having his arms
and legs broken, and the rest of his body strangely distorted: the now
enflamed damp of one of them goeing forth of the mouth of the pit like a clap
of Thunder, shooting off the Turn or Windeless, and shakeing the very earth so
much, that a Workman in another Bink hard by, feared the roof would have fallen
in upon Him and buried Him. The ingenious Mr Beaumont tells us they have this
sort of Damp too, in some Coal-works bordering upon Mendip hills Philosoph.
Collect. Numb. 1.
, and that in the most Easterly ones of them, they are so very frequent, that
scarce a pit fails of them, many Men of late years having been there killed,
many others lamed, and a multitude burnt: many having been blown up at the
works mouth, and the turn beam which hangs over the shaft, thrown off the frame
by the force of it. It is also said to be in Scotland by Mr. Geo. Sinclar in a
land called Werdy, West of Leith G. Sinclar's Miscellan. Observe. p. 292. 293.
; which they there from its effects (that are very much like ours) are please'd
to call Wildfire, thinking it to proceed from a fat sort of coal, wherein
there is a certain fire resembling an Ignis fatuus, which even in the day time
is sometimes seen in the Coalworks in little holes shining like kindled
sulphur, which uniting in the night when the workmen are gone home, if it meet
with any fire at their return, it breaks out which such violence that it kills
whomsoever it finds in its way.

46. Yet neither of these were comparably strange to the fire-damp that happend
at Mostyn in Flintshire in the Coalworks there, belongeing to the right
Worshipful Sr. Roger Mostyn Knight. Lord of that Manor Philosoph. Transact. Number.
136.
, in the same year with that at Wingersworth; which upon making a Witchet, for
drawing down the Spring that hindered their further wining of Coal, as soon as
they were scanted of Air, the fire-damp appeared in the crevisses or slits of
the coal, (where water had been before) in a small bluish flame, which whilst
the Colliers continued their work, was not so troublesome, as upon the
intermission of 48 hours, within which time it got so much strength, that the
Workmen looking into the Pit, could see it shooting from side to side like
sword blades, cross one another, so that none durst venture to go down into
it. Upon this they took a pole and bound candles to it, which they no sooner
put over the Eye of the pit, but the Damp would fly up at them with a long
sharp flame, and put them out, leaving a foul ill scented smoke behind it. But
finding this would not do, they tied many candles to the end of a hook fastend
to a roap, and lowerd them down a little way into the pit, when up came the
damp immediately, and blew them all out, burnt their hair, beards, and clothes,
struck down one of them, in the mean time making a noise like the roaring of a
Bull, but louder, leaving a stink behind it worse than the former; so heating
the water that though drawn out of another distant pit, it was bloodwarm at
least. After 3 days cessation more, the Steward going down with some others to
contrive conveyance of Air, one of them unadvisedly putting his candle over the
Eye of the pit, the damp immediately fired at it, burnt and tore their clothes
from their backs, and flew to and fro all over the hollows with a great
roaring; carrying most of the Men 15 or 16 yards from their first station, and
one of them out of the pits Eye above 30 yards high, with a noise like a
Cannon, only somewhat shriller, which was heard no less than 15 miles off: it
also forcibly drove up the buckets and rope, with the Trunk or barrel that
wound them up, of a 1000 weight, and tore it to pieces, though fastened to a
strong frame with locks and bolts, and bound about with Iron.

47. What should be the material causes of such prodigious effects as these,
though it be hard to determine, yet I think I may be positive that the cause
assigned by Mr. Geo Sinclar is insufficient G. Sinclar's Mistellan. Observe. p.
293.
, though it may indeed be allowed to be a social cause: the oyliness and
fatness of the coal may be necessary indeed for its so quik taking fire, but
this will not account for its violence and noise: there must therefore certanly
be somewhat of Niter, joined with the bitumen and sulphur in the coal, to
perform this feat. That bitumen must be a concurrent cause of such damps, I
take to be evident indeed from hence, that in the relation at large of the fire
damp above, it is said that it would play upon the surface of the water of a
rainbow color; and that Sulphur must also be an ingredient, I take to be as
plain, for that in the same relation, it is expressly said, that in working the
roach of coal 5 yards thick, when they came near the bottom, where the water
was not mixed with sulphurous and brassy Metalls, the fire-damp was neither
seen or heard of; and that Niter must also have a share in such dreadful
Scenes as these, I take to be as manifest as the facts themselves, since no
such explosions can be made without it, and that the smoke that follows the
fireing such damps, is on all hands confessed to have the smell and color of
Gunpowder. But of this matter further, when I come to consider, how it comes to
pass that so many of the coal-pits take fire of themselves.

48. There is another sort of damp they call want of Air. i. e. want of Air
sufficient for the breathing of Animals, and burning of Candles. This sort of
damp (improperly so called) is that they commonly meet with in long Soughs for
conveyance of water from the coal; or when to avoid charge they run in their
work as far underground as possible, for wining of coal, without leting down a
new shaft. The cause of which sort of damp is cetainly nothing else, but the
want of communication with the Air above ground, it being found by experience
that the further a Man goes, into one of these coal-levels, the flame of his
candle will gradually grow less and less, till it goes quite out, and his
difficulty of breathing greater and greater, till he cannot breathe at all, and
vice versa in his return. And so I found it in my entrance into the above
mentioned Footerill at Apedale, where before we came 200 yards into it, 2 of
the 3 candles I had in with me, went quite out, and the third was just
expiring, in so much that I was forced to make a retreat. This sort of damp is
nothing so dangerous as some of the former, because not surprising, but comeing
so gradually, that a man may relieve Himself at pleasure, though it be true
enough too, that this will kill Animals, as well as extinguish coals or
candles, if they be far enough removed from the Air above ground, and continue
long enough there.

49. And these seven (including one that is to follow) are all the Species of
damps I have hitherto met with, which as so many diseases, have their
respective cures, known by most Coalyers: amongst which that of the first, or
smothering damp, is the most difficult of any, it being sudden and surprising,
comeing upon them unawares when they little think on it, and then too not always
equally pernicious, the uncertainty whereof the most sagacious Workmen say
depends upon the Wind; which if it sit toward the face of the work (as they
call it) there is no danger, the subterraneal Air complying with that above,
and by this means rather pressing the corrupted Air in the rifts and clefts,
further into the coal-Wall, then bringing it forth: Whereas if it sit toward
the old Wastes, the Air in the coal-rooms also presses that way, and as it were
leads the corrupted Air forth, every thing naturally moving that way, where
there is the ^east resistance. And therefore the prudent Coalyer that knows his
work liable to these inconveniences, always minds the Wind, which is the only
way they have to avoid this sort of damp. The second sort of damp occasioned by
smoke, they dispel either by water, where they have no Air pits, and in winter
time; but chiefly by fire, which they let down in an Iron cradle, they call
their Lamp, into the shaft or by pit next to that they intend to work, which
making a great draught of Air from the bottom of the works, the smoak-damp must
necessarily come away, and fresh Air from above come down the other pit, where
the Workmen went down, and the Coal is drawn forth. Which very way they use
about Chedle, and it is a secure one too, but very chargeable; the charge of one
of these shafts, by reason sometimes of the hardness of the rocks, vastness of
the depth, drawing water etc. often equalling, if not exceeding the ordinary
charge of the whole Work: to remedy which, I think the expedient divised and
practiced about Luyck or Leigh, communicated to the Royal Society by Sr Robert
Murray, seems preferable to all others, for efficacy, ease, and cheapness
Philosoph. Transact. Number. 5.
.

50. As for the peace blossom damp, the scent most times frees them from danger
of a surprise, which it is likely indeed is the occasion (more than the
innocence of the thing) we seldom hear that this is mortal: but if the Workmen
at any time through too much rashness, do happen to be stricken with it, they
presently bring them up into the open Air, dig a hole in the ground, and lay
them flat upon their belleys, with their faces in the hole, which (if not too
far gone) infallibly recovers them. And for the pestilential damp that appears
in the roofs of the coal-works in form of a foot ball, Mr Lister Ibid. Number. 117.
tells us they have a way by the help of a stick and a long roap, of breaking
it at a distance; which done, they purify the place well by fire, and then
enter it again without much scruple. Much after the same manner as they also
avoid the fire or fulminating damp, which says Mr Sinclar G. Sinclar's
Miscellan. Observe. p. 294.
, in Scotland is prevented by a person that enters before the Workmen, who
being covered with wet sackcloath, when He comes near the coal-wall where the
fire is feared, He creeps on his belly with a long pole before him, having a
lighted candle on the top on it, with whose flame the wildfire meeting, it
breaks with violence, and running along the roof, goes out with a noise at
the mouth of the sink; the person that gave fire escaping by creeping on the
ground, and keeping his face close to it, till it be over past. Just as they
did at first with the fire damp at Mostyn v, where the workmen every morning
before they went down into the pit, used to send a resolute Coalyer before,
whose manner was to put on the worst rags He had and wet them in water, and as
soon as He came within danger of it, He fell grovelling down upon his belly, and
went in that manner forward, holding in one hand a long rod or pole to which he
tied candles burning, and reached them by degrees toward it, then the damp
would fly at them, and if it mist of putting them out, it would quench it self
with a blast, leaving a noisome ill scented smoke behind it.

51. The privative damp or want of Air, is best cured the same way the smoaky
damp is, by setting down a shaft to the adit, as soon as the candles begin to
burn orbicular and to lessen, and the Workman is any thing sensible of a
difficulty of breathing; which infallibly cures it. And these are the peculiar
remedies for each respective damp, most whereof may plainly be reduced to
motion, Philosoph. Transact. Number. 136.
which I take to be the catholic remedy of all damps, which confirms me in my
first opinion that the causa sine qua non of all damps, is want of motion: for
come they either from corruption of Air alone; from smoke; from the scent of
vegetables; from the sweat or breath of Men's bodies; from the steams of noxious
minerals etc. though never so mortal; or from want of Air; yet grant but a
circulation of Air in the coal-chamber, or let the waters that commonly annoy
such Mines, be drawn thence, not by a Sough, or free natural course, but by
force, as by laving, buckets, pumps etc. either of them shall be so broken,
dispersed, and at length gradually brought (with the motion of all other things
that way) through the Eye of the Pit into the open Air, that they shall have
little or nothing of the effect, which if sufferd to unite (through cessation
of labor or otherwise) they would certainly have. Whence it is that Coal-works
that are wet, and always require a forcible drain; are much more wholesome, than
those made dry, by a free course of water, as by a Sough, which by a constant
unforc't descent, quickly exhausts the rifts of a coal-work, and fits them for
the reception of corruptible Air. Whence it is also that in Mines not draind by
a Sough, when the Springs are low, and fill not up the passages in the coal,
nor require so prepetual and forcible a drain as they use to do; that then, at
that time of the year, at the latter end of Summer, the coal-works are most
liable to poisonous damps, that the Air stagnates in the void spaces and
corrupts, and is quietly impregnated with noxious mineral steams.

52. Which are sometimes so very strong, that they force their way through the
pores of the earth, where there has never been any Sough or shaft set down to
give them vent, and are very noisome though in the open Air above ground, which
may pass I think for a seventh sort of damp, though the same materially with
some of the former: whereof there are two manifest instances in this Connty,
near the same place; one, under the bank of the South side of Tettenhall wood,
where passengers sometimes in mornings and evenings, meet with a very offensive
troublesome damp, of which they can give no account, which yet no question must
come from some such principles as were the causes of the forementioned
subterraneal damps, though I have not heard that any met with here, have proved
mortal, as another of this kind (for I cannot imagine it any think else) which
in the year 1671 in a house in Tettenhall, struck 5 men and no more, of 200
that were then present at the monthly meeting of Justices, whereof 3 dyed
quickly after, the other two recoverd in some measure, but are still troubled
with vertigo's or disyness in the head, which I take to be some remains of the
first poison. But how it should affect the^^^^ and no more, in so great a
crowd, is hard to determine, unless we may think that it shot like a ray of
light or Sun-bean through a cloud, and so only struck those five within its
narrow compass: which fancy of mine (to call it no more) I am the more willing
to favor, because the fire-damp at Mostyn, it seems affected that figure; it
being said to shoot from one side of the pit to the other, like sword blades,
cross one another; and that it would fly up at a candle in a long sharp flame
Ibidem
.

53. These things being premised, an answer to the question how it comes to
pass that so many of the coal pits take fire, which was the sift thing to be
considered, is easily had. For if it be true (as it seems to be) what
Caesalpinus relates concerning Bitumen, Peculiare est in bitumine accendi aqua
Andr. Caesalpim de Metallicis Lib. 1. cap. 31.
; which Pliny also asserts of the Thracian stone C Plin. 2di. Not. Hist. Lib.
33. cap. 5.
, by some translated pit-coal; and that the fire-damp at Mostyn did appear in
the watery crevisces of the rocks, and shine upon the surface of the water in
the bottom of the pit, of a rainbow color; if too the same fire-damp were
found only where the water was mixed with sulphurous and brassy Metalls, and
that these subterraneal fires were found actually kindled without any
cooperation of Man Philosoph. Transact Number. 136.
, as Mr. Geo. Sinclar also asserts they are in like manner found in some cole
mines in Scotland G. Sinclar's Miscel Observe. p. 293.
, and as Mr. Beaumont ownes he heard one Colemine did, in or near Mendip
Philosoph. Collect. Number. 1. p. 8.
; to which add that it has always been observed, that heat and moisture, do
highly promote all sorts of damps: All these things (I say) being put together,
what can there else be concluded but that some Coal-pits may and do take fire
of themselves; as it is unanimously agreed they do at Wednesbury (where the
coal-works now on fire take up eleven Acres of ground) Cosley, Etings all, and
Pensnet in this County, as Mr. Camden will have it, whereas indeed the place He
mentions then on fire Camden's Britannia in Staff.
, was Broadhurst on Pensnet in the Parish of Dudley and County of Worcester,
where He says a Colepit was fired by a Candle through the negligence of a
Groover; and so possibly it might; but as for the rest (which are in
Staffordshire) it is agreed they all fired natural of themselves, as they
expect the shale and small-coal in the hollows and deads of all the old works,
will do and have done, beyond all memory.

54. Which they say is occasioned by a mixture of the Laming (that lies between
the measures of the coal) and the sleck (more especially when very much mixed
with brass lumps) which lying together in the old cancker'd waters of the pits,
heat to that degree, that they fire the small coal left there, which continues
burning till it is all spent, and then goes out of it self as soon as it comes
to the rock of coal, which if it have no rifts or clefts in it, admits it not:
insomuch that the inhabitants of these places are not concerned at it, nor have
half the dread upon them for it, that those have that live remote, far enough
out of its reach. The Worshipful Dud. Dudley in his Metallum Martis Metal.
Martis p. 37.
says that small coal with sleck thrown moist together (not mentioning any
thing of Laming) by reason of its sulphurousness, will do the same thing;
which I am inclined to believe since I find amongst Dr. Powers observations
that the Pyrites aureus being exposed to the moist Air, or sprinkled with
water, will smoke and grow exceeding hot, and if many be laid in a heap and
watered, will turn red hot of themselves, as He says He had seen them Himself.
whereof He acquaints us with a very unhappy example, that fell out at Ealand a
neighboring Town to Him in Yorksh. where one Wilson having piled up many
Cartloads of them in a barn of his (for some secret purpose of his own) the
roof being faulty, and admitting rain water to fall copiously in amongst them,
they first began to smoke, and at last to take fire and burn like red hot
coals, so that the Town was in an uproar about the quenching of them Dr.
Po^^er's Microscop. Observe. p. 62, 63.
. Now if the golden Marchasit or brass lumps alone will thus take fire, much
more will they sure when mixed with small coal: whereby as Dr. Jorden assures us
whole heaps of coals mixed with this sort of Pyrites (called metal coals) have
taken fire at Puddle wharfe in London, and at New Castle, and been burnt before
their time Jorden of Mineral waters chap. 14 in fine.
.

55. Whence it is plain how likely it is that the Coal pits at Wednesbury etc.
take fire of themselves, in which there is so much Sulphur which sublimes by
the heat of the fire from the pyrites in the coal, that there lies great
quantities of it upon the burnt surface of the earth a fire underneath, in its
true color fixed to the Cinders and poxstone, all striated, I suppose by the
ascent of the heat and smoke: out of which, if not already so much burnt, as to
be become effete, possibly some advantage might be made, either by casting it,
as it is into rolls or Magdaleons, by making great quantities of flowers of
brimstone, or oil of Sulphur per Campanam: with which, where there is mixed a
due proportion of Niter, there is the true natural Gunpowder in all probability
produced, that when fired, has much greater sorce and noise than the
artificial: for it is this no question when fired, and pent up within the earth,
that puts it into those convulsions we call Earthquakes; such as happened in
this County in the Christmas time An. 1677 about 11 at night which came with a
noise plainly to be heard before the shaking: it was considerable about
Willenhall near Wolverhampton, but very short, giving the earth but one shock,
and moving (as they thought by the noise) from South to North. The same
Earthquake was felt also at Hanbury upon the confines of Darbyshire, but as Mr.
Villiers of that Town, a sober grave Gent. assured me, it happened there about
8 in the evening, which argues its motion must be from East to West, and very
slow; or else not the same earthquake; neither whereof can certainly be
coucluded, for that no body knows in what Maeanders, the caverns of the earth
run; nor with what obstacles it might meet by the way, to retard and prolong
the time of its motion.

56. Nov: 4. 1678 there happend another Earthquake in this County, it was most
dreadful of any place I could hear of, about Brewood, whither it came with a
noise, not like a clap, but a flat rumbleing distant Thunder, yet so great that
it wakened people in their beds, at 11 a clock by the night, about what time it
began, and continued till toward two in the morning; the earth moving very
sensibly three times, at about an hours distance, each motion from the other.
The night following there happened another, but not so great, yet not without
noise, as I suppose very few do; if any, it must be where the fire damp
kindles so deep in the earth, that the explosion cannot be heard through so
dense a body as it may be thence to the superficies, though the convulsion may
be sensible. That which was felt at Oxon: about 7 in the morning Sept: 17.
1683, was also accompanied with a noise like distant Thunder, the murmuring
sound (as it appeard to me) preceding the shock about two Seconds of time.
October: 9th in the same year, about eleven at night there happened another in
Staffordshire and all the adjoining Counties, which as I have it from good
hands, was not without a noise neither; whence I conclude that few or none
happen without, and that all of them have their origin from the kindling and
explosion of fire-damps; though I do not remember I must confess that the
earthquake at Bushbury, that fell out there (they will tell you upon opening
the Friars Tomb) within the memory of man (for I spoke with one that remembered
it well) had any that attended it, though it was so considerable as 'to make
the pewter clatter in their houses, and the great pot they boiled their meat
in, at Bushbury hall, to leap up from the ground: but this indeed needed not
any great explosion, for it was so very peculiar, that it did not extend beyond
the bounds of the parish; nor was it valuable any where, but about the Church.

57. If it be objected that Air is so necessary to the being and duration of
fire, that a subterraneal one, though actually kindled, could hardly continue
long without extinction, and surely much less be kindled there. And secondly
that if these noises which attend earthquakes, proceed from the kindling and
explosion of natural Gunpowder made up of coal, Sulphur, and niter, as the
artificial is; we should find it some where, or some time or other, break forth
of the earth and show it self, which yet we hear little or nothing of. And
thirdly that earthquakes many times happen, where one at least, if not more of
these materials, were never known to be; as at Oxford above mentiond; and that
therefore in such places however, it is by no means likely, that earthquakes
should proceed from the assigned causes. To the first I answer, that Air is so
unnecessary to that sort of fire kindled from the principles, and in the
circumstances abovementioned, that we find it in the relation of the fire damps
at Mostyn, they never began to appear till the Workmen perceived a want of Air,
that being esteemed a great nourisher, as the immission of Air, from above, a
destroyer of them Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 136. p. 897. and 898.
. Which may give an account in some measure for the perpetual Lamps of the
ancients shut close up in Tombs or other subterraneal Cells, which could have
no communication with external Air, and were preserved by it, the oil perhaps
being somewhat of this kind, all Histories agreeing that they were all
extinguish't presently upon the least immission of external Air. Not to mention
that our hot Bathes may be also accounted for, this way, this sort of fire
heating water as well as any other, as was plain at Mostyn, and as it is at
Mount Hecla or Hecklefield in the cold Country of Ice-land, which sometimes
throws forth scolding hot water, and from whence it is they have springs so hot
in that Country, that in a quarter of an hour they will sufficiently boil
great pieces of beef Mr Collins's account of Iceland. p. 78.
.

58. And to the second it may be replied, that though in most cold regions,
where the Earth is not so plentifully stored with Minerals as it is in the hot;
and where the pores of it are shut in the time of earthquakes, which commonly
happen here toward winter, and most commonly upon frosts, these fires seldom or
never break out, but in all probability are extinguish't after some time with
their own filthy smoke: yet that in foreign Countries of a warmer Climat,
where the earth is commonly replenish't with Minerals, and the pores of it
always open with heat; there is nothing a more certain attendant of an
earthquake, than an eruption of fire somewhere within its verge. The
earthquakes that so frequently (that I say not always) precede the eruptions of
flaming Mountains, make good this; whereof Pliny who was of this opinion, and
compares Earthquakes to thunder C. Plinii 2di. Hist. Not. Lib. 2. cap. 79.
, gives us an extraordinary instance which fell out near Rome, Lucius Martius
and Sex. Julius being Consuls; when two Mountains were seen to assault one
another with a very great noise, smoke and fire issuing from between them at
their congress and regress, a multitude of Roman Knights, their servants, and
Travelers, looking on the while from the Aemylian way Ibid. Lib. 2. cap 83.
. And all Vulcano's indeed upon their greatest eruptions have earthquakes
preceding them, as whoever consults those of Vesuvius or Aetna, whether ancient
or modern, will always find them prefaced with such passages as these;
praecedente horrido terraeinotu: post ingentes terrae concussiones: whereof
there fell out a very terrible example March 8. 1669, when Eatna took fire
after a most dreadful earthquake. Ioh. Alphons. B^relli de Incendiis Aetnae
cap. 4.
. The like happened not long after in the Isle de la Palma, one of the Canary's
Nov. 13. 1677. where about a of an hour before Sun set, an earthquake began
which continued to the 17th with a thundering noise in the bowels of the earth,
more especially in the plain called the Canios; where, and in diverse other
places, the earth opened several mouths, to the number of 18. whence with the
same thundering noise, issued fire and smoke, melted rocks, and fiery stones,
which it threw so high into the Air, that the people lost sight of them Lectio
Cutler. de potent. restit. p. 52.53.
. Mount Hecla too, which is always burning more or less, has also in proportion
as constant an earthquake attends it, as Martineir informs us, who with his
companion and two guides traveld up it about half a league, when it was
reckoned pretty quiet, yet found it then to tremble so under their feet, and
heard such a strange crashing and rumbleing within, that they were glad to get
back again as fast as they could, for fear of being swallowed Martineir's
Northern voyage p. 134.
; and if it trembled in this manner in its quietest condition, what must it do
when it burns with its greatest vehemence? when, as we find it in the Geologia
Norwegica, it makes a terrible rumbleing like loud thunder, whereas in other
Counties where there is less exuberance of matter, these explosions (which are
ratably weaker) must be stricktly pent up to make an earthquake, which let
loose through any ductus into the open Air, would cause no such matter, and
this I take to be the reason why we have no such fiery eruptions upon
earthquakes here, as they have abroad.

59. It Is true indeed that about Oxford we have no such matter as coal that yet
we know of, and yet have earthquakes now and then which was the third
objection; and is answered already by Dr. Power 54, where He says that the
golden Marchasit or brass lumps moistened with water, are sufficient to produce
heats and actual fire without coal; to which add niter, of both which there is
plenty about Oxford, and we have sufficient materials to supply for an
earthquake, and the noise too, that commonly attends them. Beside the pyrites
or Marchasits about Oxford lie generally, if not always, in a dark blew clay,
which after further concoction of many Ages perhaps many come to be coal:
however as it is, it seems to be somewhat like the laming that lies between the
measures of coal, which according to one opinion 54 was looked upon as one of
the materials as productive of heat and fire, as any of the rest: which if so,
this blew clay perhaps may supply the place of coal in the process of nature
for begetting an earthquake, as perfectly and well, as if coal were at hand,
though I must confess were there any other circumstances favorable, this would
induce one to think coal could not be far off. Which brings me

60. Lastly, to the signs whereby they find coal, and the methods they use in
finding and diging them; which though they properly indeed belong to the
Chapter of Arts, yet for the reasons above mentioned, I shall treat of them
here. For finding of coal, if in a place where never any have bin discovered,
they first consult the springs if any near, to see whether they can find any
coal water i. e. an acid water having a Car, or yellow sediment: above ground
they look for a smut as they call it, i. e. a friable black earth: when they
meet with either of these, they reckon themselves under circumstances tolerably
good for the finding of coal, which prompt them next either to boar or sink a
pit; the former whereof if they think the coal lies shallow, is the better of
the two; but if it lie deep, it becomes almost as expensive as sinking a pit,
the drawing the rods of the Augre expending very much time, in reguard they are
many, and that it must be done frequently; besides its leaving the Searcher
under great uncertainties, in respect of the course of the coal, the draining
it, its goodness and thickness; all which are very considerable in the search
of coal. Whereas by sinking, all these uncertainties are removed, only the
charge is certain, for that in all virgin grounds where the coal lies entire
and untouched, there is always a great affluence of water, which many times
brings the unfortunat inquisitor, not only under a necessity of a great expense
for drawing of water, but sometimes too, to let Himself know that the work can
never turn to account: However of the two, this is reekon'd the better, for the
reasons above mentiond.

61. As it is also where search is made, where coal is already known to be,
either by their appearing to the day any where, as by Rivers fides, or having
been dug not far of: the ranges of the Metalls already known, and their
distances, with their diping, and the rise of ground above them, giving
directions almost infallibly where they shall set down their pit. For these
being known, it is no great difficulty to judge whereabout they will crop out; that
which lies lowest, comeing forth furthest; and that which uppermost, nighest to
the place foreknown: So that supposeing the worst that can befall the Searcher
in the use of this Method, that He should find Himself mistaken in seting down
his Pit, and meet either with a Metal that lies above, or under the coal; in
the first case all He has to do, is to move in proportion so much backward,
and in the latter so much forward, and He sinks his pit just upon it. In
finding of coal the most skillfull Workmen give much heed to the roof, whereby
they will not only tell what mine they are over, but the quality of the coal
too, as to its goodness or badness; a roof of loose rotten stone without any
certain beding or diping, being a certain Index of ill rotten coal; as a firm
roof, vice versa, is of a good one.

62. When the coal is found, they work it according to the greater or lesser
diping: if it be a rearing mine or edg-coal as some call it, cuting the
superficies of the earth at right angles, if yet of a sufficient thickness to
be thought worth working at all, they sink a pit as deep as the water will give
leave, and work along the row or streek as far as they think convenient: if it
rise or crop with the ascent of a hill, and is fit for a footrill, as at
Apedale, they follow the row or side basset of the coal, as far as the want of
Air will permit them, and at due distances make setings up acoording to the
croping of the coal, i. e. as other Coal works are dug with a side dip, so
these in an up dip. The footrill at Apedale is driven in thus upon a level
about 200 yards, in which space there are 12 setings up, having pillars at
each side which they call ribs, between which they must carry up their work,
though the coal has leiths or joints in it that run otherways, according to
which yet they cannot work it as they do in the Flat and hanging mines; which
they divide into partitions or wallings as they call them, more or less in
number according as the mine dips: if but little, which they call a flat mine,
the wallings are so many the more, in regard it is workable a great way, before
either the Mine will dip to the water, or crop to the grass: if a hanging mine,
so many the less, in proportion likewise to the diping.

63. I went down into one of these hanging mines at Hardingswood belonging to
the aforementioned Mr. Poole of this County, where He showed me a level of 35
yards of roach as it lay in an oblique diping line above the water, which came
to 35 foot perpendicular, diping one foot to every yard: in this Level He had
five wallings or Stauls, out of which they dug the coal in great blocks;
between the wallings there were ribbs left, and passages through them called
thurlings, which give convenience of Air, and passage for the coal out of one
walling into another, which in all coal mines stand thick or thin, partly
according to the substance of the coal; most commonly thiner in the lower
wallings, which are therefore consequently wider; and thicker in the upper
wallings, which must be therefore narrower, the coal of the upper wallings
being generally nasher; i. e. softer and more friable then that of the lower
wallings, which are more firm and solid: whence they compare the coal of the
upper wallings to brush wood, as burning swifter, sweeter, and clear from soot;
and that of the lower wallings to hard wood, as being more solid and lasting,
though making more soot. But in this point they mind not so much the coal as
the roof, the wallings or staules being made narrower or wider, according as
that is found better or worse, which sometimes being nothing but a bass, full
of joints; and perhaps soluble in the Air, they are forced then to leave a yard
of coal that lies next under it for a roof, and make their wallings narrow:
whereas on the contrary where there is a strong rock next the coal, and no
bass, they will then venture their roof so far sometimes as to make their
wallings 8 or 9 yards wide, which roof of rock puts me in mind that it is time to
shut up this tedious discourse of coal, and proceed to the succeding Chapter of
Stone.

64. But before I enter on it, perhaps it may not be amiss to add a word or two
concerning the Methods they use in laying their coals dry, when any thing
troubled with water, which because they are not so frequently, or so much, as
in some other Countries, they are not forced upon such variety of expensive
Engines. The ordinary ways they use are by Sough or by Gin. The former when
they have the advantage of fall of ground enough, which they try by the Level,
and then either dig a trench open to the surface, like a great ditch as deep as
the coal, or drive in a cuniculus about a yard diameter to the pavement (if
they can) of the lowest dip, of the lowest measure of coal, which without more
ado will lay all the coal so dry, toward the Crop, that it may be workt
without difficulty. But when they have no fall, they draw it up by Gin, which
is made either bigger, or less, according to the exigence of the work; the less
they call a Jack, which is either turned by Men, as requiring less strength; or
by Horses, according as the Owner thinks most fit. But the Gin is always work't
by Horses, which likewise is twofold, either by chain, or by barrells: the
chain is made with leather suckers upon it at lit le distances, which bring up
water, and discharge themselves into a trough set near the Eye of the pit,
whence it is carried off by a small trench. The Gin by Barrells, whereof always
one goes up as the other goes down, will also void great quantities of water,
provided they be constantly followed day and night, else upon the least
neglect, the water will get such head, that much time will be spent before it
can be mastered again, which Engines being so common, and so easy of
apprehension, as not to deserve a Cut, or the Readers view; I have saved my
self the expense, and Him the trouble, both of the one and the other.

CHAP. IV. Of Stones.
1. IN the two preceding Chapters, having run through the Mineralia media; the
Earths, Salts, Sulphurs, and Bitumens; the order of Nature next requires me to
descend to the Stones and Metalls, the two remaining species of the Mineral
Kingdom, which will be both absolved in this, and the following Chapter. How
all stones were chiefly made out of Salts with a mixture of earths and
sulphurs, was shown in general, in the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. chap. 2.. 25.
, I shall only add here the particular Method nature seems to use in the
production of them, and then consider the several species worthy notice in this
County. It has been an opinion that challenges no great seniority, that Stones
are coagulations of Salts and earths, which if finely mixed, sublimed and
percolated by the means of heat, and after condensed by cold, make a
transparent stone; and if but grossly mixed with little or no percolation, an
opake one; wherein though I cannot deny but there may be somewhat of truth,
yet I think it will be more particular, and more home to the business, if we
further add, that this coagulum or petrification is rather made upon the
meeting of the solutions of acid and Alcalizat salts; and that these do
compound transparent, semiopake, and opake stones, according as they are more
or less mixed with sulphurs, and earths, of different finenesses and
purifications.

2. And this I take to be very probable, because we know of no things in nature
that unite so strictly as these two do, making a coagulum in bodies that at
first sight seem very unlikly to perform any such matter; witness the offa
alba of Helmont, a thick gross substance, far from the nature of a liquid, made
out of the spirits of wine and urin highly rectified; and another such like
Offa made of the spirits of Vitriol and Salt, by a solution of Saturn made
with distilled Vinegar Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 117. page 408.
; to which add the coagulum made out of equal quantities of spirit of Sal
Armeniac and spirit of Wine mixed, and shaken together in a Viol; and all these
upon union of the acids, alcali's, and sulphurs, or whatever other principles
they be, that constitute these bodies. Thus transparent stones having little or
nothing of those terrestrieties the opake ones have; seem to be made of pure
solutions of such like salts, and transparent Sulphurs, or Ambers, all purifyed
by filtrations through the closest colanders, and then fixed upon meeting. Thus
a calcarious or Tartarious Salt meeting with a pure solution of Sal gemmae, and
white-ambrine Sulphur or bitumen, it is like produces an Adamant or Diamond. The
same alcali's meeting with a pure solution of native Cinnaber make a Ruby, with
a solution of blew vitriol (for there is a natural blew Vitriol as well as an
artificial) a Saphir, with solution of green vitriol a Smaragd or Emrauld, with
solution of Orpiment a Topaz, and so for stones of all other intermediat
colors, or mixed of these in proportion as they partake more or less of one or
the other. But such stones as these I shall have little occasion to trouble the
Reader with in particular, there being but few transparent found in this
County; I shall therefore in the first place consider the opake ones, and
especially such first as hold any of these principles more signally than
others: then 2. such as serve to supply the necessities of Mankind: and lastly
such, whether opake or transparent, that serve for the ornament or delight,
either of his person, or buildings.

3. On the banks of the River Stour between Prestwood and Stourton Castle (a
place remarkable for the birth of Cardinal Poole) now both of them the Seats of
the virtuous and much honored Philip Foley of Prestwood Esquire both here
represented in Prospect Tab. 9. as a grateful recognition of his eminent
favors: On the banks I say of that river, about midway between the aforesaid
places, I was shown a large rock at the foot of a hill, at which it has been
observed that birds do lie frequently pecking and licking it, and it is
supposed for the salt they find in it: that many birds delight in licking of
Salt, especially pigeons, is very certain, but that there is any in this rock
I must confess I could not find, though I endeavored it nicely, perhaps they
may rather come for a sort of gravel in this rock, that may be fitter than
ordinary for breaking the corn they have eaten, which in such Animals as these
that have no teeth, is performed in the gizzard by the help of gravel: yet
neither can I conclude that there is no salt in the rock, because I could not
taste it, for I very well know that most other animals are nicer in their Senses
(having no way debauched them) than Mankind is, so that nothing hinders but the
birds may be sensible of a salt in the rock, though I was not: if there be such
a salt, in all probability it must be a good fire-stone, such as they use for
the Hearths of their Iron furnaces; and if so, were the Iron-works at that
height in this Country, they were formerly, this rock could have never fallen
into a better hand, than its present Proprietor.

4. For there is nothing in nature, except Talc and Amiantus, that supports the
force of fire equally to Salts, whence it is that some sorts of stones endure
fire much better than others, when they are well sated with Salts, and have but
little sulphur, and the parts of those salts well adapted to one another
without cavities; for wherever there are iuterstices betwixt the parts, there
must be rarefactions upon the advent of fire, whence follows flawing at least,
if not flying of the stone; neither of which can be endured in a furnace. The
stone most prized for this purpose, of any I could hear of all over the County,
is a sort they dig on Whiston moor, not far from Chedle, in the Moorlands; and
at Huntington upon the edg of Cank-wood; these they try first in their Forge
fires, to see whether they will flaw or fly or no, and if the stone of any
quarry pass two or three trials, they then conclude upon the whole, and take it
thencforward for good, without further trial: which is all concerning it: but
that the best stone for this purpose, is generally observed to lie in Clay; and
that if the texture of it happen not to be close and firm, it is apt to run
upon frosts and moist weather; of which sort I take the stone to be, called
Glum-metall, about Bradwall in the Moorelands, which as I was told by the
ingenious Ralph Sneyd Esquire though as hard to digg as any rock; yet the Air,
rains, and frosts, will mollify it so; that it will run as if it were a natural
Lime, and no question would they use it, must be good for land. And this brings
me next to consider.

5. The Limestone rocks, whereof to their great benefit they have plenty enough
almost in all parts of the Country, it being a sort of stone not so much
useful here for their buildings, as for fertilizing their heathy, gorsy, and
broomy lands; for though when burnt, it part with most of its sulphur, yet at
the same time it admits fiery particles, which upon moisture, together with its
salt now cleared from the bonds of Sulphur, it freely dispenses to the cold
poor ground, giving it at the same time warmth, and saltness, the chief
principles of vegetation; forceing the ground to exert it self to so prodigious
a rate (which is its only fault) that it sometimes beggars it for ever after:
wherein they say marling is to be preferred before it, that cherishing and
improveing the innate strength of the Land, and continuing so to do for a long
time; this only hightening the present vigor, but preying upon it (like brandy
upon the Spirits of an Animal) and quite extinguishing it in a little time.
However it must needs be good for their cold, moist, black, bituminous earths;
whereof there is great quantities in the Moors of this Country, which without
it would scarce produce any thing at all.

6. It is dug in great plenty upon the banks of Dove, from Beresford downward,
and has been reputed to give the ^^ddows on that river their great fertility,
but I think it can do but little before it is burnt, its salts being then
clogged and fettered with Sulphur, a better and truer cause of that fertility
having been assigned before, Chap. 2. 2. of this book.

6. At Waterfall also on this side the Country, it rises in tables or slats
about two inches thick, of so very fine a grain and close texture that it
polishes like Marble, whereof in the arbours up and down the Country I found
tables made of it: but it is so far from a wonder that Limestone should be
marble; that most marble (that I say not all) will burn to Lime, and is
consequently a Limestone, though all Limestone be not marble. They dig
Limestone also at Madeley on the other side the Moorelands in the Lordship of
the Worshipful John Offley Esquire beside good coal, and Marle, which should have
been mentioned before: but the best of all is said to be in the Southern parts
of the County, in Hurstfield within the Manor of Sedgley belonging to the
Honorable William Ward Esquire and in the old Park near Dudley Castle belonging to
the right Honorable Edward Lord Ward; and all about Walsall, particularly at
Rushall, in the lands of the learned Henry Legh Esquire

7. Where it lies in beds for the most part Horizontally, and is broken up with
Iron wedges knocked in at the partitions with great sledges, and prized up with
great leavers with rings round them, to stay the feet of the Workmen who get
upon them, whereof some weigh at least 150 pounds: Notwithstanding which vast
force the stones will not rise, unless softened by fire, which upon that
account they are constrained to make on it. When they have gotten the stone,
they burn it in oblong pits, made in the ground, about seven yards long, 3
wide, and but 6 or 7 foot deep at the but of the pit: wherein first they lay a
little wood or gorse to keep the coal from the ground, which is laid under the
stone, the first stratum but thin, not above 3 inches thick; then a stratum of
stone about 6 inches deep; the next floor of coal they make 10 inches thick,
and the layer of stone above that, 18 inches: the next of coal above that, is
usually about a foot thick, and the floor of stone over it double the
thickness; then the 4 layer of coal is but 10 inches, and the 4 of stone but
18; then above all another stratum of coal about 2 or 3 inches, which they
cover with parget or mortar, made with slak't lime and water to keep in the
heat: the coal laid in this manner with the stone S. S. S. burning it gradually
into Lime in about a weeks time. Which sort of Lime pit has this peculiar
convenience above all others I ever yet saw, that they can take away the Lime
that is first burnt while the rest is on fire, and can make up the but of the
pit, whilst it is yet burning at the mouth.

8. Beside, in this Method and manner of burning of Limestone, the Workmen seem
not to run the hazard other Lime-burners do, who burn it with wood after the
common practice of other Countries; who if they keep not their fire still
forward as they call it, but suffer it to slacken never so little before the
stone is quite calcined, shall never after be able to make Lime of them at all:
for if the flame which has once opened the pores of the stone be but checked a
little before the work is finished, the pores will some way or other so close
themselves up, and the whole matter so sink into a lump, that twenty times the
fuel that would have kept them open, and the mass of stone asunder, will never
recover them so as admit the flame again, which cannot now rise amongst the
stones, there being none of those interstices now left either in the body of
the stone it self, or between them, for it to pass through as before. Whereas
in this way of Lime burning, by stratification, as it seems morally impossible
for the Workman to be so negligent as to slacken a fire which still burns on of
it self; so it seems naturally so, that a mass of stone should ever so fall
down into a lump, being thus divided by coal, as either way to be rendered
incapable of being made into Lime.

9. Next the stones holding a signal quantity of Salt, I proceed to such as
have a mixture of Sulphur, and such are all that with a steel, or by a quick
attrition with any other fit body, will strike fire, or kindle its parts into
sparks, all which by the Naturalists are aptly enough styled pyrites; under
which genus we may reckon Sands, pebbles, and Marchasits, of each of which, as
many as I find any way remarkable, as briefly as may be. And first of sands,
which says Ferrante Imperato are the least form of a stone Dell' Hist. natural
Lib. 1. cap. 21. sub finem.
; whereof I met with a sort at Bilston or Bilson that I think is so indeed, so
very fine that it is hardly palpable, it is of a deep orange color, and is
sent for by Artists living at a great distance, and used by them as a spaud to
cast Metalls with. Other sands of use I met with none, but sands for the
glass-houses, whereof I was told of one that excelled the rest, dug somewhere
near West Bromwich; and a sort of sand they have at Gaston in the parish of
Ipston, which being first washed from the dirt, then dried and sifted from the
smaller sand, and in another sieve from the pebbles it has amongst it, they
then use it, being strewed upon a greasy boar'd, as an excellent sand to whet
their Sithes, whence it has the denomination of Sithe-Sand. Unless we may
reckon a sort of friable stone of a deep yellow color found sparsim in lumps
amongst the stiffest and fattest Marles at Eardley in the parish of Audley,
amongst the sands: which I think I need not scruple much to do, since I find
them to crumble between the fingers, yet so very fine are its parts that at the
same time they give a color, and as the ingenious Robert Wilmot of Eardley Esquire
in whose grounds they are found, sent we word, are some sorts of them used by
the painters, and by the workmen all called by the general name of
Rosemary-stones.

10. What these should be, and how come to be produced in a substance of so
quite a different nature from them, as a stiff sat Marle; was a problem that at
first sight gave me some trouble: till remembering that in Oxfordshire I met
with much such yellow lumps growing sparsim here and there amongst the Chalk in
most of the pits of the Chiltern Country, there called Iron moulds Not. Hist.
of Oxfordsh. chap. 3. 51.
; and that the learned Martin Lister Esquire mentions the same found in Chalk by
the name of Rust balls near Foulmore in Cambridg-shire, and in the Woolds in
Yorkshire, which upon due calcination would apply to the Magnet Mart. Lister de
font. Med. Angl. cap. 2.. 9
. Calling these things to mind, and that chalk was a substance as quite
different from the Rust balls and Iron moulds, as Marle could be from these
Rosemary stones, and as unlikely to produce any such effect: I resolved to try
both the one and the other, according to the prescription of Agricola cited by
Mr. Lister; which I did with that success, that I found within an hour that
both the Iron moulds and Rosemary stones did acknowledge the Magnet; whence it is
plain that notwithstanding they were all found in beds of such dissimilar
substances, that yet they are all certainly Iron-Ores, and these our Rosemary
stones, of the arenaceous kind; part whereof upon ignition being made into
Iron, owned it self such upon application of the Magnet.

11. That pebbles as well as sands are also pyrites, beside their strikeing
fire, we have this further evidence, that some pebbles at least are made out of
Sand; wherefore if sands themselves are pyrites, the pebbles made of them must
be so too. Now that some pebbles are made of sand, I was amply satisfied at
Bentley hall the seat of the Worshipful Tho: Lane Esquire (of which more
hereafter) where I was shown a large sort of oval pebbles of a reddish color,
dug up with the brick-earth near the dog-kennel poole, whose outward coats were
hard and smooth, but within containing only a bulk of sand equal to the
intended bigness of the stone; some of them having little more than an outward
shell; others hardened half way; others stone, and sand only at the center; and
some quite petrifyed; the induration seeming to increase gradually inward in
process of time, till at length the petrification is completed in the Center;
just as I found it in the round flints in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh.
chap. 5.. 180.
, which contain chalk within, and have coats thicker and thiner according to
the seniority of their induration. As I suppose also those white pebbles have,
that contain a mealy substance in them, found about Treasle, which I take to be
the Geodes of Dioscorides, or Aetites Plinii, 4ti generis, Taphiusius dictus C.
Plinii 2. di. Hist. Not. Lib. 36. cap. 21.
. Nor are these the only Examples that I have seen of this kind, for I have now
a stone by me of a dark reddish color, brought out of Northamptonshire and
given me by the learned Dr. Robert Pit fellow of Wadham College and of the
Royal Society, that has a firm coat without, yet is filled up within, with
nothing but a loose sand; which whether a pebble or no, though I cannot safely
say, yet I think verily I may, that it must be produced after the same manner.

12. Yet Nature does not seem to use the same process, in production of stones
though of the same kind and color, for in a ground called Castle-croft
Northward of Nether-Pen in a red clay, the pebbles sensibly grow of the same
color with the earth about, but always commence their induration at the
center, being gradually softer toward the out side, ending in a substance
nearer to a liquid than the earth at some distance, which is more agreeable to
the Hypothesis of all stones having been once liquids, and of their
augmentation by juxta position. The latter whereof seems to be strongly
confirmed, by a firm pebble that was shown me by my worthy friend the
Worshipful Francis Wolferstan Esquire having a smooth hole through it about the
bigness of a Rye straw, out of which He picked the entire rind of some sort of
wood which was rotted away, whence He rationally collected that the pebble must
have grown round it. The same worthy Gentleman still prosecuting the same
argument, sent me not long after another pebble with an incrustation of clay
and sand mixed, adhering to it; whereby it was plain that stones do contract
other substances to them, and gradually convert them into their own kind; and
hence He most ingeniously showed too, how it comes to pass, that even the
pebble (as this was) is frequently diversified with different colors, these
being the stones of all others most liable to be removed from place to place,
whence they contract matter to them of different textures and qualities, and so
consequently thence, are of various colors.

13. Whence in all probability the opake pebbles on Satnall hills, and all over
Cank-wood have their variety of colors, these being places of great action,
and so the stones the more likely to have frequent disturbance; than which I
never sawany more plesantly variegated, or fitter for Cabinets, hafts of
knives, or other Lapidaries work. Of this sort I was shown several finely
polisht by the virtuous and most ingenious Jane Lady Gerard; and had others
given me by the hopeful young Gent. Francis Wolferstan jun. and his virtuous
Sister Ms. Ann, of their own gathering about Statfold; I had also another
presented me with bluish veins, by a fair Lady at Lyswis: which all took so
specious and elegant a gloss, that they seemed at least to equal, if not
surpass the Achat. But no more of these here, they being so very fine that they
should rather have been reckoned amongst the stones of Ornament. Nor have I
more to add concerning this sort of stones, but that in the hollow way between
the hills on Weeford heath, as you pass between Swynfen and Cannel yate, there
lie diverse little heaps of them, and one great one at the top of the hill at
Weeford Park corner, which according to the tradition of the Country, was
placed there in memory of a Bishop of Lichfield, who rideing thither with a
large attendance, was set upon by Robbers; and Himself and all his men being
slain, that these heaps of stones were laid where each dead body was found:
whence by the Country people and travelers they are called the Bishops stones.
But this is merely a fable of them, the truth follows, as I received it from
the learned and judicious Antiquary Sr. Willam Dugdale Knight. Garter King at Arms.

14. About the later end of the reign of King Henry the 8. or shortly after,
John Vessy then Bishop of Exeter, a man of a public spirit, and borne close
by, at Sutton Cofield in Warwick shire, resolving with himself to become a
benefactor to that place and the parts adjacent, procured for that town not
only a Market and fairs, but got it also incorporated by the name of a Warden
and fellowship, building also a great number of houses upon the large wastes of
that parish, intending to set up the manufacture of Kerseys there, as it was
practiced in Devonshire where he was Bishop: during these transactions at
Sutton Cofield the good Bp. was frequently thereabout, and finding the road
above mentioned much annoyed with these rolling pebbles, which frequently
occasioned travelers horses to stumble and sometimes to fall, amongst others
of his works of Charity, He hired poor people to gather them out of the way,
and lay them thus on heaps; and this is the true reason they are called the
Bishops stones. Which relation was given in, and testified for truth, in King
James's time, by a woman that lived at Black-brook hard by, who was examind
upon a commission out of Chancery, then executed by one Mr. John Brandreth of
Weeford, and others, concerning the extent of Common of the Parishes adjacent.

15. Hither also may be referred the Micae, aurea and nigra, if all that strike
fire belong to this place; whereof the former was found in the Fold-yard near
Statfold house, and given me by the Worshipful Francis Wolferston Esquire and the
latter on the banks of Aqualat mear, and on Seasdon heath, which may otherwise
be called the rock Mica, it having been found so great in bulk, and so very
hard, that they have made Mill stones of it. This, as I am informed from the
Cabinet of the learned Martin Lister, is also to be met with at Arncliff in
Yorkshire Vid. Scrinium Listeri in Musaeo Ashmolian. Loculo 14.
; which though it seem to be a white marble filled with black sparks, He is
pleased to demominat Talcum aureum, because after calcination these black
sparks turn of a golden color as ours also do, and some of them own the
Magnet; whence it is clear they carry somewhat of an Iron-Ore with them, as well
as a sulphur; and may the rather upon that account be reckond amongst the
Pyrites aurii, though they carry not so much either of the one or the other as
the golden Marchasite or pyrites aureus strictly so called, or the pyrites
argenteus; the former whereof is found in every coal pit, and has so much
sulphur, that it is the principal ingredient that sets them on fire; the latter
it is true is more rare in this County and has less sulphur, but I met with it
at Sedgley in the hands of Mr. Ievon of that parish, who gave me a piece of it
which was found, as He told me, somewhere there about: both which calcined
apply to the Magnet, and conf^^s themselves in part to be the Ores of Iron, and
lead me next to consider

16. The other Iron Ores of Staffordshire, they being all of them stones, and
so falling under this chapter: which lie in some places but thin, others
thicker, and as the coal is, divided into measures of different donominations.
In Tunstall field, in the Royalty of the right Honorable Digby Lord Gerard, in
diging for Iron-stone, they meet first with a small bass, then a strong bass,
then a sort of stone from its color called blew-cap, good for nothing; and
after that the Iron-stone of a darkish blew color, which ordinarily lies here
not above two foot in thickness. On Mear-heath they observe in digging for Iron
stone, that if they meet with roches, sand, gravel, and clay, that the head of
the mine is quickly eaten out; especially the last, which so keeps down the
head that it comes to nothing presently, all which they count bad, the works
being thinner and more chargeable to dig: but if they meet with Mine-earth (as
they call it) which is white, then they promise themselves good mines both of
Iron stone and coal, which as at most other places lie here together, the stone
above the coal, between four fingers and a foot thick, having bass above and
below it; in which sometimes they also meet an Iron Ore, they call ball-stones,
distinct from the vein; and then indeed it is thicker: this where the Iron stone
and coal lie together, they call the deep mine which is not the best, the
chalky-Mine, and the little-Mine being preferred before it; yet they are all
work't by Mr. Foley of Longdon a village hard by.

17. About Dudley where the Iron-stone lies, under the ten yards thickness of
coal, and above the heathen coal, of a considerable thickness; it is divided,
as I said the coal was, into diverse measures of different denominations; which
take as follows 1. The Black-row-grains, 2. The Dun row-grains, 3. The
White-row-grains, all so called from Earths of those colors in which they lie
4. The Rider-stone, 5. The Cloud-stone, 6. The Bottom-stone 7. The Cannoc or
Cannot Stone.
at Walsall and Rushall they also divide their Iron-Ore into several sorts,
such as 1. Black bothum, 2. Gray bothum, 3. Chatterpye, being of the color of
a Magpye, 4. Gray measure, 5. Mush, 6. White measure.
the two first whereof are seldom made use of, they are so very mean; the two
middle sorts but indifferent; the two last the principal sorts; but Mush the
best of all, some of it being a small combystone, other some round and hollow,
and many times filled with a brisk sweet liquor which the Workmen drink
greedily, so very rich an Ore that they say it may be made into Iron in a
common Forge. Also at many other places, as at Cheslinhay, Red street,
Ape-dale, Wednesbury, Darlaston etc. they digg Iron-stone, the several measures
whereof have also obtained different names, though gotten but at little
distance from one another, which I forbear to enumerat, those above mentioned
being sufficient, for a specimen of them.

18. And thus I had finished my account of the Iron-Ores found in this County,
but that I think the sweet liquor that attends some of them, may deserve a
little further consideration, whereof I received a most accurat account from
the Worshipful Henry Legh of Rushall Esquire in whose lands, particularly in the
Mill-meddow, near the furnace in the Park; in the Moss-close near the old
Vicaridg-house; and in the furnace piece or Lesow: it is frequently met with
amongst the best sort of Iron-stone called Mush; in round or oval blackish and
redish stones, sometimes as big as the crown of ones hat, hollow and like a
honeycomb within, and holding a pint of this matter; which according to the
color of the comb within (whatever the stone be without) is either red, or
white, and whether the one or the other, of a sweet sharp taste, very cold, and
cuting, yet greedily drank by the Workmen. The whitish sort whereof was also
met with at Sherriff-Hales in this County, by the ingenious George Plaxton
Rector there, especially in that sort of Mine, the Country people call the
White Mine, which yields the best Iron-stone, where the Workmen commonly upon
breaking a stone find it enclosed in the Center, sometime to the quantity of a
Hogs-head in one cavity, of a sweetish taste, but accompanied with a Vitriolic
or Iron like twang Philosoph. Transact. Number. 100.
.

19. The same, as we find in that Letter of the inquisitive Mr. Iessop of
Bromhall in Yorkshire communicated to the Royal Society by the learned Martin
Lister, seems also to have been met with in a coal-Mine in Darbyshire 49 yards
deep, by one Captain Wain a diligent and knowing person in Mines, who sent Mr.
Iessop a whitish liquor, resembling cream both in color and consistence, found
there in great quantities Ibidem.
. Mr. Webster also acquaints us that an experienced Miner found it in a hard
stone, by his direction, in the Lead-mines of Darby-shire, which was of a
whiteish color and some of it very thin and liquid, and some of it soft like
butter Webster's Hist of Metalls chap. 3. p. l 51.
. What this substance should be, or whence it should come, none of the workmen
or others that I discour'st about it, could give me satisfaction, and indeed it
is hard to determine any thing in these secrets of Nature: but if I may have
liberty to give my opinion which is not altogether groundless, I take it to be
the Gur of the Adeptists, i. e. the matter of Metalls before it be coagulated
into a Metallic form, or the Metalla in suis principiis: for taking some of
this white liquor found in the Iron-stone at Rushall which I brought away with
me and was now dried pretty hard, and burning it in a Crucible, it was quickly
maturated into Iron, and applied to the Magnet; as I believe that would have
done which was found at Sherriff-Hales, and in the Coal-mine and Lead-Mine of
Darby-shire, for though found in Mines of a different denominations, yet every
body knows how frequently Iron-stone accompanys coal, out of which it might
issue; and that possibly the stone in which this matter was enclosed in the
Lead Mine might be an Iron-stone too, it being usual for Metalls to be found
mixed; though I must not deny neither, but that it might be the Gur of Lead,
that being affirmed to be of much the same color and consistence.

20. Of the above mentioned Ores they make several sorts of Iron, differing in
goodness according to the richness or poverty of the Ores, and having names
somewhat agreeable to the qualities of each Metal. The first and meanest
whereof, they call yellow share an ill sort that runs all to dirt and is good
for nothing, and such is the Iron made of the Cannock or Cannot stone, the
lowest measure of Iron Ore about Dudley, which is so very sulphurous and
terrestiall, that its not fit to make Iron: this sort some others are please'd
to call Redshare, because says Dud. Dudley in his Metallum Martis D. Dudley's
Metallum Martis p. 41.
, if a Workman should forge out a sheare of this for a plough, it is so brittle
it would crack in the red-heat, so unfit is it to make a Husbandmans sheare.
The second sort of Iron they style coldshear which though it will not break
when red hot, yet in hot heat or cold, the biggest bar of it may be broken with
a small blow upon an Anvil, if it be perfect coldsheare Iron; the Ore for this
Iron the have at Cheslin-hay, Redstreet, and Apedale, the worst and leanest
being that from Cheslin-hay, the next from Redstreet being a red stone, and the
best of the three from Apedale, being of a bluish color, and called Boylom;
yet these three are commonly mixed together, and sometimes with others stones to
make them better or worse: the only uses that I could hear of for this sort of
Iron, being to make small nails not above two penny, and sheering nails for
ships having broad heads and short shanks, to keep the timber from being eaten
by grubs.

21. The third sort of Iron they make in this County they call blend-metall, of
which they make nails from three shillings to ten shillings, and all sorts of
heavy ware, such as Hammers etc. and in some Countries Horshooes; for which
they have the Ore from Wednesbury and Darlaston. The fourth and best sorts of
Iron they call tough-Iron of which they make all sorts of the best wares, there
being nothing so good but may be made of this, for which thy have their Ore
chiefly at Rushall in the grounds of the Worshpfull Hen: Legh Esquire They have
some also from Walsall but not so good, whereof the several measures were
enumerated above. Of the Iron made of these (I say) they make their best wares,
either mediatly or immediately, the best Iron of all being made out of the
fileings and pareings of the Locksmiths, which they make up into balls with
water, and dry them by the fire into hard balls; then they put it into the fire
and melt it by blast, licking it up with a rodd of Iron as they do glass at
the glas-houses, and then beat it into a bar, which they use chiefly for keys,
and other fine works.

22. When they have gotten their Ore, before it is fit for the furnace, they
burn or calcine it upon the open ground, with small charcoal, wood, or
sea-cole, to make it break into small pieces, which will be done in 3 days, and
this they call annealing it, or fiting it for the furnace. In the mean while
they also heat their furnace for a weeks time with charcoal without blowing it,
which they call seasoning it, and then they bring the Ore to the furnace thus
prepared, and throw it in with the charcole in baskets vicissim, i. e. a basket
of Ore, and then a basket of coal S. S. S. where by two vast pair of bellows
placed behind the furnace, and compressed alternatly by a large wheel turned by
water, the fire is made so intense, that after 3 days time the metal will
begin to run, still after increasing, till at length in fourteenights time they
can run a Sow and piggs once in 12 hours, which they do in a bed of sand
before the mouth of the furnace, wherein they make one larger furrow than the
rest, next the Timp (where the metal comes forth) which is for the Sow, from
whence they draw two or three and twenty others (like the labells of a file in
Heraldry) for the piggs, all which too they make greater or lesser according to
the quantity of their Metal: into these when their Receivers are full they let
it forth, which is made so very fluid by the violence of the fire, that it not
only runs to the utmost distance of the furrows but stands boiling in them for
a considerable time: before it is cold, that is when it begins to blacken at
top, and the red to go off, they break the Sow and pigs off from one another,
and the sow into the same length with the pigs, though in the running it is
longer and bigger much, which is now done with ease; whereas if let alone till
they are quite cold, they will either not break at all, or not without
difficulty.

23. In melting of Iron-ore some have great regard to the make of the furnace,
and placeing of the bellows; which that the Reader may the better apprehend, He
must be informed, that the hearth of the furnace into which the Ore and coal
fall, is ordinarily built square, the sides descending obliquely and drawing
near to one another toward the bottom, like the Hopper of a Mill: where these
oblique walls terminat, which they term the boshes, there are joined four other
stones, but these are commonly set perpendicular, and reach to the bottom
stone, making the perpendicular square that receives the Metal; which four
walls have the following names; that next the bellows, the tuarn or tuiron
wall; that against it, the wind-wall or spirit-plate; that where the Metal
comes out, the Timp or fore plate; that over against it, the back-wall: and
these according as they may be pitched less transhaw, or more borrow; will
mend, they say, or alter the nature of the Iron; if transhaw or transiring from
the blast, the Iron will be more coldshear, less fined; more indeed to the
Masters profit, but less to him that has the manufactorage of it, and to him
that uses it: whereas the Iron made in a borrow work, is much more tough and
serviceable. Nor is the ordering of the bellows of less concern, which have
usually their entrance into the furnace between the bottom of the Hopper or
boshes, and the bottom stone, and are placed nearer or farther off according as
the Ore and Metal require. It Is also of importance in melting of Iron Ore, that
there be five or six soughs made under the Furnace (as it is at Mare) in
parallel lines to the stream that turns the wheel which compresses the bellows,
to drain away the moisture from the furnace, for should the least drop of water
come into the Metal, it would blow up the furnace, and the Metal would fly
about the Workmens ears; from which soughs they must also have a conical pipe
about 9 inches at bottom, set to convey the damps from them into the open Air,
which too otherwise would annoy the Workmen even to death.

24. From the Furnaces, they bring their Sows and pigs of Iron when broken
asunder, and into lengths, to the Forges; which are of two sorts, but commonly
(as at Cunsall) standing together under the same roof; one whereof they call
the Finery, the other the Chafery: they are both of them open hearths, upon
which they place great heaps of coal, which are blown by bellows like to those
of the Furnaces, and compressed the same way, but nothing near so large. In
these two forges they give the Sow and piggs 5 several heats before they are
perfectly wrought into bars. First in the Finery they are melted down as thin
as lead, where the Metal in an hour thickens by degrees into a lump or mass,
which they call a loop, this they bring to the great Hammer raised by the
motion of a water-wheel, and first beat it into a thick square, which they call
a half bloom. Then 2ly they put it into the Finery again for an hour, and then
bring it again to the same Hammer, where they work it into a bloom, which is a
square bar in the middle, and two square knobs at the ends, one much less then
the other, the smaller being called the Ancony end, and the greater the Mocket
head. And this is all they do at the Finery. Then 3. the Ancony end is brought
to the Chafery, where after it has been heated for a quarter of an hour, it is
also brought to the Hammer, and there beat quite out to a bar, first at that
end; and after that, the Mocket head is brought also 4. to the chafery, which
being thick, requires two heats, before it can be wrought under the Hammer,
into bars of such shapes and sizes as they think fittest for Sale.

25. Whereof, those they intend to be cut into rodds, are carried to the
slitting Mills, where they first break or cut them cold with the force of one
of the Wheels into short lengths; then they are put into a furnace to be heated
red hot to a good height, and then brought singly to the Rollers, by which they
are drawn even, and to a greater length: after this another Workman takes them
whilst hot and puts them through the Cutters, which are of diverse sizes, and
may be put on and off, according to pleasure: then another lays them straight
also whilst hot, and when cold binds them into faggots, and then they are
fitting for sale. And thus I have given an account of the Iron works of
Staffordshire from the Ore to the slitting Mills, as they are now exercised in
their perfection; the improvement whereof we shall find very great, if we look
back upon the Methods of our Ancestors who made Iron in foot blasts or
bloomeries, by Men's treading the bellows, by which way they could make but one
little lump or bloom of Iron in a day, not 100 weight; leaving as much Iron in
the Slag as they got out. Whereas now they will make two or three tuns of cast
Iron in 24 hours: leaving the Slag so poor, that the Founders cannot melt them
again to profit. Not to mention again the vast advantage they have from the new
Invention of slitting Mills, for cutting their bars into rodds, above what
they had anciently.

26. Thus I say the Iron-works are exercised in their perfection, and all their
prncipal Iron undergoes all the forementioned preparations; not but that for
several purposes, as for the backs of Chimneys, Garden-rolls, and such like;
they use a sort of cast-Iron which they take out of the Receivers of the
Furnaces, as soon as it is melted, in great Ladles, and pour it into moulds of
fine sand, in like manner as they cast the other softer Metalls. Thus the
ingenious Will. Chetwynd of Rugeley Esquire at Madeley furnace, cast Iron-Rolls for
gardens, hollow like the Mills for Sugar Canes, of 5, 6, 7 or 800 weight a
piece; the hollows whereof being filled with timber, and wedged up close, the
other Iron-work of the Roll, is fastened to the wood in the same place as in
other rolls, which are weightyer and more substantial than any other rolls I
have elsewhere seen. For such purposes as these, this serves well enough, but
for others it will not, for it is so brittle, that being heated, with one blow
of a hammer it will break all to pieces.

27. And thus one would have thought, I should have done with the Iron-works,
and all relating to them, as indeed I verily thought I had; but upon
examination of a reddish stone very much like Cinnaber, very weighty, and being
wet with the tongue, drawing red lines; found somewhere in the grounds of the
worthy Mr. Wightwick of Wightwick, which I thought might have held some other
Metal; upon calcination, according to the prescription of worthy Mr. Lister, I
found it to apply to the Magnet, and to be nothing else but a Haematites, which
for that reason he very rationally makes one of the species of Iron-Ores M.
Listeri de Font. Med. Angl. cap. 2.
. And of this kind are the red stones found in Tene brook, which are also very
weighty, and draw (being a little wet) red lines like ruddle, whereof I have a
very large one in my Staffordshire Cabinet, given me by the truly Honorable,
because truly virtuous and learned, Jane Lady Gerard 1
2.
3.
4.
To the Worsp.^^ the learned and most ingenious Gent CHARLES COTTON of
BERESFORD Esquire

This 10 Table, Showing the Design of a foreign Engine, used formerly near
Him, in memory of his favors is gratefully dedicated by. R. P. L. L. D.



MBurghers sculp.
diagrams of Gerards Bromley, which Her Ladyship truly named the Sanguine or
blood stone, which they use it see us, by way of signature, to give in new
milk, and sometimes in Ale warmed, to their Cattle that make a mean, or bloody
water, and this with constant success: whereat I do not so much wonder, since
every body knows what stiptical qualities, always attend ferrugineous bodies.

28. The Copper Ores of this County must also be referred hither, not only as
they are Stones, but also as they include much Sulphur, whereof there has been
dug diverse sorts, out of Ecton Hill in the Parish of Wetton, belonging to the
right Honorable William Earl of Devon: there is of it too about Beresford, near
the most ingenious Mr. Cottons; and at upper Elkston, and some think at
Madeley, both in the Lands of the Worshipful John Offley Esquire but none were ever
thought worth diging but at Ecton Hill, where the Mine was workt several years
by my Lord of Devon himself, Sr. Richard Fleetwood, and some Dutch men, but
they had all left it off, before I came into the Country as not worth their
while; Copper comeing cheaper from Sweden than they could make it here; so that
the workmen being dispersed I could learn little more concerning it, but that
the veins lay from eight, to fifty yards deep, but all dipped North-Easterly;
that they broke the rocks with Gunpowder, and got 3 sorts of Ore; 1. a black
sort which was the best; 2. a yellow sort, the worst; and 3. a mixed sort of
both; which they Smelted at Ellaston not far off, where they had Mills etc. for
the purpose; but all was out of order before I came thither, and the famous
wooden bellows that had no leather about them, carried away to Snelston in
Darby-shire whither I went to see them; where though so laid up in an out house
with other cumbersom matters upon them, that I could not take them down, so as
to examine them strictly, yet I could see so much of them that by the help of a
smaller pattern in the Repository of the Royal Society, I have made shift to
give a draught, and some tolerable account of them, as in Tab. 10. where,

Fig, 1. Represents the whole Instrument as it appears on the out side; the
Cover a.b.c.d. being lifted up at every blast, and compress't with the water
wheel, as is usual in other furnace bellows, and turning upon the pin, e.

Fig. 2. Is the lower part of the bellows which stands always fixed, and is
covered by Fig. 3. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. are square sticks which lie loose,
being only thrust under the hooks of Iron marked h. i. k. l, m. n. o, two ends
being staid by one hook or hold-fast, every one of which sticks, has a spring
of Iron on the inside marked p. q. r. s. which keep them still close to the
inside of the outward Cover, Fig. 3. and so keep in the Air. The valve in the
bottom board is marked T. and the pricked lines show the hole under it, to let
in the Air.

Fig. 3. is to be whelmed upon Fig. 2. so that A. in Fig. 3. touch A. in Fig.
2. and then they appear as in Fig. 1.

Fig. 4. Is the valve or door, which when the Air enters in rises at b. and
dips at a. and when it goes out, dips at b. and falls upon a woolen list tackt
round the hole in the bottom board, and rises at a. turning upon the pin, at c.

29. After the Copper, come we next to the Lead-Ores of this County, which also
belong to this place; for beside that they cannot be said to be Earths, it is
dug here in a yellowish stone, with Cawk and Spar, in Fowns field belonging to
one Townley on the side of Lawton park; where the workmen distinguished it into
three sorts, viz. round Ore, small Ore, and Smithum; the two last whereof are
first beaten to pieces with an instrument called a Knocking-bucker, and the Ore
separated from the stone with another called a Limp. and then washed in a Sieve
made with Iron-wyer; yet further to clear it from terrestrieties: which done,
it is sold to the Potters at Burslem for 6 or 7 pound per Tun, who have
occasion for most that is found here for glaseing their Pots. There has been
Lead-ore also dug at Ecton-Hill; where, some of it, lies so near the day, that
it was first found by the plough: Here also they distinguished it into three
sorts, but under different names from the former; the best being called Bing;
the middle sort, Bowse; and the Lead dust, Smithum. And there was Lead-Ore dug
formerly by the right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury at Ribden, but none of
these works were ever very considerable, nor is it likely any such should ever
be found here, it being observed that wherever there is much coal, there is so
much the less Lead, its sulphurous spirit being too strong for the production
of that Metal: upon which account, when near Mendip there was found 2 or 300
weight of very good Lead-Ore growing to a vein of Coal, it was looked upon by
all, as a very great rarity Philosoph. Collect. Number. 1.
.

30. But nothing so great, as what was told me lately concerning this Metal,
by the Worshipful Philip Foley of Prestwood Esquire viz. that notwithstanding
amongst Metalls, Lead holds the third place after Gold and Quicksilver, it
being lighter than Gold about a third part, and heavier than Silver about a
fourth; yet that Anno 1682. there was a Leaden-Coffin, of one of the Honorable
family of Skeffington of Fisherwick, laid in the Vault of St. Micheals Church
at Lichfield (which as I noted before is frequently floated) that swam so
cleverly in 9 inches water, that one might thrust it to and fro with a common
walking stick; which he told me too, was actually done, by that judicious Gent.
Mr. Swinfen of Swinfen. This, by the vulgar being looked upon as little less
than a Miracle, I thought it concerned me, having occasion to spoke of this
Metal, not wholly to pass it by, but to let them know that it is so far from a
wonder, that if the Coffin were so thin, and the body so consumed (as no
question they were) as to be lighter than that quantity of water which is equal
to the bulk of the Coffin, the rules of Hydrostaticks require it must be so,
and could no more be otherwise, than that a lighter body should not give place
to a heavyer, which would have been a wonder indeed: No bodies whatever sinking
deeper in water, than to that point, where the immerst part of the floating
body becomes equal in bulk, to as much water as is equal in weight, to the
whole body.

31. Having done with the Stones holding Salts, Sulphurs, and Metalls, the next
that offer themselves to my consideration, are such as only supply the
necessities of Mankind in some peculiar manner; such as he diggs forth the
Quarries for building, for grinding stones, Millstones, etc. of the former
whereof there is plenty almost every where, within little distance, which for
the most part as in Oxfordshire is gotten and workt easy, yet endures the
weather so well, that it improves in it, to a competent hardness: There are
several sorts of it differing in grain and color; some finer, some courser;
some reddish, some white; some mixed of both those colors; and some streak't
with black: about Lichfield they build chiefly with a reddish sort of stone,
and so about Newcastle, and at Leek; at which last place they cleave it with
wedges as they see the grain run, which is not always agreeable to the plane of
the Horizon, or a little declining from it, but sometimes perpendicular to it.
They have also a whiter harder stone, that is a good weather, but not a good
fire stone, made of a finer grit, (as most white stones are than red) and
working to a finer Arris. Much of this color and consistence is the stone of
the Quarry betwixt Ingestre and Salt, and about Beech; pretty white and hard,
but not without a cast of redness here and there, and sometimes marked with a
yellowish sort of vein. The whitest and freest from any of those stains, being
that dug at Fulford and Chapel Charlton, which are purely white, and of a fine
grain enough.

32. But it would be endless to enumerat the Quarries of this County, should I
continue to prosecute such as those above mentioned; wherefore I shall now
restrain my self only to such as are some way or other more remarkable than
others: amongst which I think I may reckon the Quarry at Penford in the Lands
of Mr. Fowler, which lies in depth 14. or 15. yards as has been seen by many,
some of the workmen assert it at least 20. yards thick, indeed they certainly
know no bottom; the deeper they go the finer the grit; and for color it is
whitish at the top, then redish to 10. or 12. yards, and then whiter than at
top, for 5. or 6. yards more; it being all of it good weatherstone, but not
enduring the fire. As the stone of the Quarry in Purton park will, which is
both a good weather and fire stone too, and so free from clefts, that a stone
may be had of any Magnitude, as big as any of the Guglia's at Rome, nay I was
told by one of the Masons that he could undertake to get a stone at this Quarry
fifty yards long, and that but two or three years before I came thither, they
actually had gotten one (though they had no occasion for any such) about fifty
foot long: of these large stones there are very good examples in Purton house
belonging to the right Worshipful Sr. Walter Wrottesley Baronet, a Person of
that great reputation in his Country, that his memory will never dye; till
Loyalty and Integrity, Prudence and Ingenuity, be overborn by Faction,
Impudence and Ignorance, and become unregarded, and of no esteem amongst us.

33. The Quarry at Bilston is also very remarkable, it lying in beds in plano
Horizontis, one under another, 12 beds deep; every bed being thicker then that
above it, an inch or more; so that the lower bed is about a yard thick of which
they make troughs, cisterns etc. Some of the Tables of stone rising so large
and even, that Mr. Hoo of Bradeley got one here 8 yards long, naturally so very
even, that in the whole length it did not bevel, or depart from a true level,
above an inch. Some of the stone dug at this Town is also curiously streaked
black, whereof there are elegant patterns, in the Garden at the right
worshipful Sr. Henry Gough's at Pury-Hall. I met likewise with a white stone
thus marked black, used in the building of the new Dormitory at Kingston Church
by the right Worshipful Sr. Simon Degg Knight, but whereabout it was dug I must
confess I forgot to ask, but suppose it could not be very far off.

34. The stone of the Quarry above mentioned at Purton serves also for Grinding
stones, which gives me occasion to treat of them next: which I find are
esteemed so much the better, by how much they are made of a finer Grit: whence
it is that the Grinding-stones dug near Biddulph-Hall of a red larger grit are
not accounted so good as those dug at Heaton, a Village between Swithamley and
Rushton Spencer, which are of a grayish color, and of a fine small grit. But
not so fine as those dug at Bilson, which are of so small a grit, that they are
useful only for fine thin edged tools, such as Knives, Cissers, Razers, etc.
and are better than the Grinding-stones brought out of Derby-shire, which are
used chiefly for thicker edged tools, such as Axes, Hatchets, Chisells, Adds,
Twy-bills, etc. Or those lately found, about 5 years since, at Over Arley, near
the Parsonage house, and in the manor of Heck-stones adjoining to the glebe
land, which yet serve for most sorts of Sithe-grinders, Smiths, or Cutlers
wares, especially for those of the thicker edges, so that the trade to Darby
shire for such Grinde-stones is quite ceased in these parts. Also in the lands
of Mr. Persehouse at Cotwall-end they dig excellent grindingstones, as good as
those at Bilson for thin edge tools; and on the Windmill-bank at
nether-Gournall in the same parish of Sedgley, they dig others for thick edged
tools, which must be of a grit both harder and courser; whereof some have
proved as good as the Darby stones. Whether they dig any Grinde-stones now at
Braunston or not? I did not hear; though Mr. Erdeswick informs us it was
anciently famous for them Mr Sampson Erdeswicks view of Staffordsh. M. S. in
Braunston.


35. Another sort of Grinding stones are those we call Milstones, the Grit
whereof need not be so fine, provided it be hard and do not sweat in moist
weather, which would both prejudice the Meal and clog the Mill. Of these some
are made out of great loose stones, others dug out of Quarries. Of the former
there have many been made out of great round pebbles found on Braden heath
between Sherriff Hales and Blymhill, and so there has at Seasdon, where on the
Heath there lie some pebbles so vastly great, that as I was told, there have 3
Millstones been made out of one of them. These Millstones out of Pebbles they
use for grinding wheat, and some think them not short of the Colen stones. At
Mole Cop in this County they dig them as in a Quarry, which they cleave from
the rock with a great number of small wedges, driven with as small strokes,
least the stone should crack or flawe; when they have got it from the rock,
they presently bind it round with a joynted hoop of Iron, which they call a
Rivet-hoop, and this they straighten hard about it also with wooden wedges,
driven in between it and the edg of the stone, that it break not in the
working.

36. Which it so frequently does notwithstanding their utmost care, that there
is but very few of them that are not made up of two or three pieces, thus bound
together with a hoop; nay so very subject is it to crack and flaw, that
whenever it happens that they finish one entire, yet it must be bound about
thus with an Iron hoop to remain upon it even in the Mill, to preserve it from
falling asunder in the motion. Nor is it any wonder that it should be thus,
since it consists of a large angular shining grit, so knit together, that there
are interstices between the parts, which are filled with a kind of mealy
substance; this some people fancy tastes like meal, and amongst the Workmen the
stone that has most of this (as it were by way of signature) is counted the
best, though no question it must needs be so much the weaker. and yet as weak
as it is, it lies well enough in building, the parish Church of Biddulph, which
is a reasonable fair one, being built with it. These are seldom used for
grinding of Wheat, because these grind Bran and Meal altogether, whereas the
blew stones only bruise the husk from the floor; but chiefly for Rye, Barley,
and Malt, or for shaling of Oats: nor do they ever use two of these stones
together, but always pair them with a white sort of Millstone brought out of
the Peak; the Molecop-stone being always the runner, and the Darby-shire stone,
the Legier.

37. Which is all concerning stones of any peculiar use, unless that I may have
liberty to suspect, that at Rowley Regis, in the corner of a ground formerly
part of the lower Moors, adjoining to grounds called Freebody's, there must be
that miracle of Nature, we call the Loadstone: For that, one Mr Deeley about 10
year ago being appointed to measure the lands there, for the right honorable
Edward Lord Ward, found that in that place his Needle varyed so very much, that
his work was out of order, which put Him to no small trouble, till He began to
suspect what must needs be the matter. Sept: the 23. 1680 for further
satisfaction, having procured the company of the same Mr. Deeley, I was willing
to make the experiment over again, wherefore seting up a stick with a
hand-kerchif on it at one end of the ground, and goeing to the other with my
Compass, I found the hand-kerchief to bear upon such a point of it; but
removeing the hand-kercheif and Compass interchangeably, when I came to view
the hand-kercheif upon the opposite point to that upon which I had seen it
before, I found it wide of the mark by six degrees. So that upon consideration
of the matter, I could not imagine how this should come to pass otherwise than
by the Magnet, unless by some old Armor that might be buried hereabout in the
late civil War: Which might easily be determined, and at which end of the field
this matter lies, whatever it be, that thus affects the Needle; were the true
Meridian of the place first taken, and a touched Needle hung upon a thread and
carried about: for whether it be a Loadstone mine that occasions this
difference; or such Armor, or other Iron, that may lie hid hereabout; the
Needle will discover it by diping, whenever it comes over it, or any where near
it.

38. After the stones of a restrained peculiar use, let us next consider those
of no use at all, at least that are put to none; which yet possibly may not
altogether be unworthy our admiration, though no tolerable account, can be
given of the condition, or present state they are in: and such are the vast
Rocks or Roches as they call them, that bear no grass, but here and there a
turf in some cleft or hollow, but standing as bare as a stone wall; some of
them kissing the clouds with their tops, and running along in mountanous ridges
for some miles together. The first of these I met with was on Wetley Moore,
which at a distance I took for some prodigious ruins, these representing them
as much bigger than truth, as the Florentine stones do it, less: but when I
came to Leeke, and saw the Hen-Cloud, and Leek Roches, I was quickly
undeceived, though my admiration was still heightened to see such vast rocks
and such really stupendous Prospects, which I had never seen before, or could
have believed to be, any where but in picture: and that which yet further
increast my wonder, was how they should come thus bare, having no turf upon
them, or earth to produce one: which whether so from the Creation, or uncoverd
by the flood, or the perpetual deterrations which have happend since upon rain,
to all Mountanous parts, as was not irrationally conjectured Chap. 3. 11. 12.
of this History, is hard to account for. Though possibly too, some of them may
come to be thus, first by cutting the turf from them which they use for feuel
much in this Country, and then the deterrations by rains, will easily answer
for the rest.

39. And yet so far are these Roches from any further diminution, that I think
some of them carry such evident marks of growth, that I cannot avoid beleiving
it so. For in such rocks as these, as you pass through the hollow way at little
Sandon; and in another cut in the rock, about midway betwixt Draycot and
Chedle; there are pebble stones plainly included in the body of the rocks, and
so there are in the rocks near Alveton Lodge by the way side as you pass thither
from Wooton: whence it must be concluded that these pebbles must have had a
being before the rocks, and that the rocks themselves grew to be such, since
that time. But the most indisputable evidence of the growth of such stone, we
have from the ingenious Mr. John Beaumont, who tells us that at Daulton on the
South side of Mendip, the Workmen saw out of great blocks of stone of four or
five Tun weight, dug in the Quarrys there, large pieces of fair cleft Oak
included in the midst of them Philosoph. Collect. Number. 2
This I say is as indisputable a proof as any I have met with, except one at
New Castle under Lime in this County, where at a place called the Gallow-tree
(the ancient place for the execution of the Malefactors of that Town) there
was found, within memory, in a firm block of stone dug out of the Quarry there,
an entire Skull of a Man with the teeth in it, etc. whereof Mr. Weever an
Alderman of the Town, told me he had one, long in his possession: which place
when used for executions, it is like might be nothing else but sandy Land
wherein they used to bury the executed bodies, which in process of time has
thus turned into stone.

40. The variety of Caverns and great clefts in these Roches, are also worthy
my recounting, and the Readers notice, whereof some are dry, and others receive
water: to the former of these belong the Caverns at Holloway in this County,
near Stourbridg in Worcester shire, cut out of the living rock into diverse
partitions and offices, with holes forth at the top instead of Chimneys;
wherein several people of meaner rank have their constant habitations, much
after the manner of the Ethiopian Troglodites, who are a subterranean
Commonwealth bordering upon the Arabian Sinus and the Empire of Habessia. But
we need not run so far for Examples of this kind; for we are told of such in
Italy near Viterbo, at Buschet in the Isle of Malta; Athanasii Kircheri Mundi
subter. Tom. 1. Lib. 8.. 4. cap. 3.
and at Nottingham here in England. Near Peakstones in the parish of Alveton,
under long-Hurst hill, there is also a hollow in the rock called the
Thurse-house, where a family now lives, and wherein about 4 or 5 years since
lived one Helen Millard a widow woman of about 115 years old, who had she not
chanced to dye a violent death by fire, might have lived much longer. There is
also another Thurshouse or Thursehole, sometimes called Hob-hurst Cave, near
Wetton mill (where the Manyfold falls first into the ground, on the Easterly
side of the dry Channel,) which goes into a great Mountain, from the mouth to
the further part, about 44 yards and is in the middle, as near as I could
guess, about 30 foot high, the roof being supported by a rough natural pillar,
which also in a manner divides it into several partitions or rooms: where I was
showed in the roof, the natural effigies of a Man with a curled beard, looking
out of a hole, not very unlike what it was said to represent, though I suppose
wholly casual, and never designed by nature,

41. But a little way from this, on the Westerly side on the same dry Channel
in the Lordship of Grindon, belonging to his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, there
is a great hole through Yelpersley Tor, that goes from the bottom to the top,
at least 40, if not 50 yards high. Under Kinfare edge there is also a hole
going into the rock, wide at first, but after low and narrow, called Mag a
Fox-hole, for that foxes here use to shelter themselves; and at Kinfare Town,
by the River side near the bridge, there go another hole into the rock a great
way, called whirleyhole, from the Eddy of water the River makes at the mouth of
it; how far either of these holes go is very uncertain, but it is the tradition
of the Town, that though their mouths are at a long miles distance, yet that
they meet under ground. And now I am come to Caverns that receive water, I must
not forget those that receive the Rivers Manyfold and Hans, especially those
under Yelpersley Tor, which are very large ones, that will receive a Man
standing upright; nor the rocky indraughts under Cauldon Low, Ribden, and
Reeden, that swallow the waters of the land floods, that run violently from the
Hills thereabout, though mentioned before Chap. 2. 97, 98. of this History. To
which let me add, the stupendous cleft in the rock between Swithamley and
Wharnford commonly called Lud-Church, which I found by measure 208 yards long,
and at different places 30, 40, or 50. foot deep; the sides steeped and so
hanging over, that it sometimes preserves Snow all the Summer, whereof they had
signal proof at the Town of Leek on the 17 of July their Fair day, at which
time of year a Wharnford Man brought a Sack of Snow thence, and poured it down
at the Market Cross, telling the people that if any body wanted of that
commodity, he could quickly help them to a 100 load on it.

42. Beside the Stones that serve the necessities of Mankind, there are others
in this County that will serve to adorn, both his Buildings and Person; such as
Alabaster, wherewith the Chore at Lichfield, jointly with Cannel-coal (as I
noted before) is delicatly paved in imitation of Marble Chap. 3.. 31.
: as well indeed it may, rather with this, than any thing else; Alabaster being
accounted amongst many of the Naturalists to be Marmor incoctum sive
imperfectum, quod si cultro scindi possit, gypsum rectius dixeris, says Job.
Scroder Joh. Schroderi Pharmacop. Medico-Chym. Lib. 3. cap. 8.. 2.
Of the latter sort whereof, I could hear of none in this County, that dug near
Frodswell Hall (where there is a small vein fit only for flooring rooms, not
thought worth the pursueing) and in Heylinds park, where too it was anciently
gotten; being, as I was informed, as hard, as that which is gotten South of
Marchington Church, which being likewise but of a courser kind, is prepared for
making plaster for floors, seelings, and the walls of Needle Work houses, in
this Method: First they lay on the ground a stratum of wood (which is best) or
a load of wood and coal mixed together, upon which they pile as much rough
Alabaster; then fireing the wood they let it burn together till it is out, which
makes the Alabaster so soft and brittle, that it needs only thrashing to reduce
it to powder, the greater parts whereof being separated from the smaller by a
seive, the former mixed with water are used for flooring, and the finer for
seeling and walling of Houses.

43. When they lay their floors whether for dwelling, or Maulthouses, they wet
a whole tub full and throw it down together; but when they seel or parge with
it, they wet it by degrees, which they call gageing; and in both cases lay it
on, and spread it as fast as they can, for it hardens, (as Plaster of Paris)
in a very little time: the Walls and Seelings made with it having this
convenience, that they are presently sweet, having nothing of the ill smell, of
those made with Lime and hair; and the walls of their houses enduring like
stone, if the plaster fall not out from between the Timber, as it sometimes
does for want of grooving it round within side before the plaster be laid on;
which if done, it enters the grooves whilst it is soft, and cannot any way fall
out of them, when once it is hardened.

44. This sort of Alabaster, but yet of a courser sort, is found also at Coton
under Hanbury, and there has of it been dug at Draycot in the clay: indeed the
whole bank of red Marle between the Forest or Chase of Needwood, and the River
Dove, from Marchington to Tutbury, has Alabaster in it; but that at Castle-Hays
is incomparably the best, of which they make Grave-stones, Tables,
Pavingstones, Chimney-pieces, etc. and in smaller things, Mortars and Salts:
they torn it also into Candle-sticks, Plates, and Fruit dishes, or whatever
else the buyer desires: in some of it there are veins of a dirty red color,
which yet are not very unsightly; but they have a sort which is harder and
stronger than the rest, bearing a better polish, and finely watered with a
bluish color, much esteemed by Artists, it making as good work almost as
Marble, upon which account it is carried hence at a great charge, and made use
off in some of the choicest works, in many parts of the Nation.

45. Nor have they only in this County imperfect Marble, but the perfect too,
and that of different kinds; some of them exceeding any of their Species (as I
have been informed by Artists) that we yet know of, that have been brought from
beyond Seas; whereof too, there is so very great quantities (were there but
tolerable portage) that it would have sufficed, I dare say, to have rebuilt
London: there being whole Mountains of it in the Lordship of Grindon belonging
to his Grace the Duke of Albemarle. It is a Rance Marble i. e. of a white,
hard, shining grit, striped red; Yelpersly Torr (as one may see where the River
Manyfold enters it) and most of the Hills thereabout, seeming to be all of this
Marble; which receives so good a polish, that it has been thought fit for
Chimney pieces, Monuments etc. though I scarce think any has been made use of
for this purpose, since I first discovered it. And at Stansop, not far off, in
the parish of Alstonfield, I was showed a gray marble not inferior in its kind,
by Mr. Jackson of that Village, who told me there were also quantities of it
for any purpose, though never yet made use of.

46. Add to these a very hard black shining stone found at Powke-hill near
Bentley Hall belonging to the Worshipful Thomas Lane Esquire which upon polishing
proved a tolerably fair black Marble, all the fault that the Artists could find
with it, being a hard pin as they called it, which renders it scarce worth the
labor to work it: However burnt and powdered it makes a very good Emery, as I
was certainly informed by the ingenious Jonas Grosvenor of Wolverhampton Esquire
which way possibly it may turn to a better account, than to be workt as Marble.
At Rowley Regis in the lands of the right Honorable Edward Lord Ward, I met
with the same stone again, and scattered here and there all over the Town:
whereof yet there is one more remarkable than the rest, about a mile N. W. of
the Church; as big, and as high, on one side, as many Church Steeples: at the
bottom of which on the highest side, if one stamp with ones foot, it returns a
hollow sound as if there were a Vault, which made me suspect that some great
person of ancient times might be buried here, under this natural Monument (for
I scarce think so great a thing could be put here by art, it much exceeding
those of Stonehenge or Aubrey in Wilts) but diging down by it as near as I
could (where the sound directed) I could find no such matter.

47. In and about the second Inlet of Manyfold, under Yelpersley Tor, I was
showed by the ingenious Charles Cotton Esquire many of the block stones which they
call Crow-stones, sometimes entire of themselves, and sometimes growing on the
Limestone; some of them wholly black, and some streaked white; which polisht so
well, that I have seen them set in Rings, and have been taken at least for the
black Achat or Melanoleucus of Aldrovand Ulys. Aldrovandi Musaei Metal. Lib.
4. cap. 1.
. And I had given me at Wolverhampton by Mr. Richard Cumberlege, a reddish
semiopake Flint, found somewhere there about, so very agreeable to the
description of the Sardachates of the Lithographers, that I have been inclined
without fear to pronounce it the same. Which brings me next to treat, of the
transparent stones; whereof the two finest and best I met with in this County,
were in the same Town, one set in a Ring of Mr. Jonas Grosvenour's, of an
excellent luster, being part of a large transparent pebble found on Coven
heath; and the other worn also in a ring by Mr. Henry Bracegirdle, Sacrist of
the Collegiat Church of Wolverhampton, of an Amethystine violaceous color, and
a genuin luster, which was found at Barrow-hill in Pensnet Chase, where there
have many other transparent stones been heretofore dug of an dodecaedrous
figure, cut off at the top much like natural Crystal, but somewhat harder. At
Fetherston the ingenious Mr. John Huntbach, was pleased to bestow on me, a
transparent pebble of a peculiar form; and the Worshipful Tho. Broughton of
Broughton Esquire showed me another of the same kind, but different form, which
belong not to this place; but are only mentioned here, to give me an apposite
transition to the next Chapter, of formed Stones.

CHAP. V. Of Formed Stones.
1. ALL informed Stones whatever, being upon no slight grounds, thought chiefly
to have their Origin from the mixture of Salts, it may much more certainly be
concluded of those which are formed; for as much as all figure (as has fully
been shown elsewhere Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 2.. 23, 24, 25. and chap.
5.. 124, 125, 126. etc.
) seems wholly to be attributed to that principle: the mineral Salts in the
Earth being no less busy and luxuriant in production of formed bodies there;
than the volatile ones in the air, in the pleasant figurations they make in the
Snow, as has been shown by Des Carts Des Carts Mete^ror. cap. 6.
, Mr. Hook Mr. Hook's Micrograph. Obs. 14. Schem. 8.
, but much more fully by my worthy Friend the Learned and Ingenious Mr. William
Cole, Surveyor of his Majesty's Customs in the Port of Bristol, who it is hoped
will speedily oblige the World with his curious remarks upon that Subject, and
many others. The mineral Salts, I say, are no less exercised in the curious
formation of bodies in the bowels of the Earth and rocks, than the volatile
ones in the Heavens; for it suffices it them not to represent only sublunary
things, but celestial ones too, either by reflection, or in solid; as in the
Selenites and Asteriae, both which though rarely found in this County, yet
those which I have met with here of each kind, are quite different from those,
I ever met with elsewhere.

2. The Selenites so called, not that it corporally contains the figure of the
Moon, but only by representation, if obverted to it in right angles, as it were
in a glass; as it will the Sun as well, and therefore otherwise more rationally
called lapis specularis; is so very rare in this County, that I could hear of
it but in two places, viz. at Hartley green and the village of Slindon, where
it is dug in the Marle-pits: from the latter of which places I had a piece
given me by Mr. J. Sergeant of Mill-Meese of a different figure from all those
in Oxfordshire: for the Stone Selenites though it have nothing of the shape of
the Moon in any of its phases, yet it is commonly found in some certain figure
always agreeable to the Salts of the body wherein it grows, as it does at
Slindon in a Cubico-Rhomboideal form, all the pieces of it being constantly
Hexaedra of equal obliquangular sides, or oblique angled Parallelepipeds, as in
Tab. 11. Fig, 1. and upon that account as was conjectured in Oxfordshire either
formed by a Tartarious Salt in the Earth Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 5.. 130.
, or as the learned Dr. Lister perhaps would rather conclude, out of an
immature vitriolic one, having found the Chrystals of that Salt somewhat of
this figure Martini Listeri M. D. de fontibus Med. Angl. Exercitat. pr. cap. 5.
. As for texture, these of Slindon seem to have much the same, with the
Selenites of Oxfordshire, and upon slitting (like them) briskly to represent
the vivid colors of the Solar Rainbow, only the Scaiae of these are much more
strongly cohering, and not so easily divisible, or into so thin plates, and
therefore not so fit for many of the uses it was anciently put to, mentioned in
the History of Oxfordshire, whither to avoid repetition I referr the Reader.

3. But the form of the Selenites is not so different from that of the Moon,
but the figure of the Asteria is on the contrary as agreeable to that of a
Star, as we commonly paint them; all of them being branched with 5 principal
Rays, of equal length, shape, and make; all issuing from a Center, which is
either solid or hollow, where they join in angles of 72 degrees. Of these, as
of the Selenites, I met with very few, and but at two or three places, viz. at
Beresford near the Seat of the most ingenious Mr. Cotton in the rocks by the
Dove side; in Willmon-field, betwixt Heatley and Bagots Bromley; and on
Newton-hurst, and Harley field, near Abbots-Bromley; and these all of them
differing in somewhat or other, from all those described in my History of
Oxfordshire, and by the most accurat Dr. Lister in the Philosophical
Transactions Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 112.
: for though they are found here heapt upon one another in Columns, all seeming
to be fragments, and no entire bodies, some having 3, some 4, and some 12, or
more joints as in Tab. 11. Fig. 2.3.4. every joint consisting of 5 angles, and
issuing from a Center: yet none of them seem to be made up of lamellae or
plates lying obliquely to the Horizontal position of the Star, as those in
Oxfordshire; and some of them having their angles so very sharp, and
consequently their sides deep channell'd, that they seem, most of any thing, to
represent the rowel of a Spur, not admitting any Sculpture, or indented suture;
and those that do, of a quite different kind from any yet described.

4. The first kind whereof is carefully represented Tab. 11. Fig. 2. standing
in a quinquangular case in a flinty sort of stone Like the Pentagonus of
Lachmund (...). 3. cap. 18.
, the Rays issuing from a solid Center, of a coal black color, not bigger than
an ordinary pin, yet plainly a flat quinquangle, the angles of this inner one,
not pointing against the sharp Rays of the outer, but against the deep channels
between them, both being smooth joynted, without any hatching or engravement.
The second exhibited Fig. 3. is indeed a flat, not hollow-sided piece, such as
represented to us by Dr. Lister This worthy Gent. since the printing the
beginning of this History, upon account of his extraordinary Merit, had a
Diploma sent him for his Doctors degree in the Faculty of Physic, from the
University of Oxford, ex mero motu, without his knowledge or seeking.
in the Philosophical Transactions Numb. 112. Tab. 2. Fig. 5.8.11. but the
hatchings of it are very different from all his, and any I have yet elsewhere
seen, as the Reader may see expressed Tab. 11. Fig. 3. where there is one
principal radius extending it self from the Center to the extremity of each
angle, with oblique lines issuing from it upwards, so that it not unnaturally
represents so many boughs of a Tree. The third described Fig. 4. is also
flat-sided, but the joints or internodia all unequal, one being always more
protuberant than his neighbor, and so alternatly through the whole column of
them; which though a pretty large and long one, consisting of 12 joints, the
hollows of each angle are neither hatched on the top, nor is the column bent,
or the least inclining, as commonly those are which have any considerable
length. Concerning which, I have little more to add to what is said in
Oxfordshire, but that their admired quality of moving in Vinegar, seems to have
been known to Roger Bacon near 400 years ago, who in one of his Epistles ad
Parisiensem, mentions a Stone that would run in Vinegar Ad Parisiensem. Epist.
6.
.

5. Next the formed stones relating to the heavenly bodies (in the handling
whereof though in a particular Chapter, I shall observe the method of the whole
Essay) I descend next, to such as are thought at least, to come from the
inferior heaven, to be generated in the Air amongst the Clouds, and discharged
thence in thunder showers, whence they are termed by Authors Brontiae and
Ombriae: whereof I met with one in this County, in the hands of the Worshipful
Thomas Broughton Esquire (which cannot be so well referred to any other Species of
natural bodies that I yet know of) that though it have no Vmbelicus, Modiolus,
or Center; or rays made up of points; or transverse lines; or points surrounded
with single, or double Annulets; as those in Oxfordshire: yet is a much finer
stone than any of them: it being a regular solid Hemisphere (which may be
apprehended well enough without a Cut) as transparent as Crystal; and much
harder, most likely, of any sort, to be of the pebble-kind. As I think I must
also reckon a more oblong sort of transparent Ombriae, of a triangular form,
near two inches long, and an inch broad; the bottom and sides not flat, but
protuberant, and carried up round at the ends, till meeting with the top ridge;
the angles not sharp like the Prismaticall glass, nor representing any of those
vivid colors though held to the Eye in the due posture; but more obtuse, as
engraven Tab. 11. Fig. 5. which was found near Fetherston in this County, and
given me by the ingenious and most oblieging Gent. Mr. John Huntbach of the
same Village. These transparent pebbles are sometimes also found in a globular
form, whereof the most exquisitly transparent, without any blemish, was shown
me by the virtuous young Lady Madam Ann Bows of Elford in this County, in
whose Closet I take it (amongst many others) to be a principal rarity.

6. I saw another of these expressed Fig. 5. found near Lichfield, in the hands
of Mr. Zach. Babington of Whittington, and there are many of them in the
Ashmolean Musaeum at Oxford, and in that of the Royal Society at Gresham
College London. They are not found in digging, either amongst Gravel, or in
Quarries, as most other formed stones, but upon the surface of the earth, as
the ingenious Mr. Beaumont also says they are in Somersetshire and
Glocestershire, in the roads, where the earth is bare; and produced, as he
thinks, in clear Evenings by a coagulation of dew falling on nitrous steams, as
the hexangular Chrystalls are observed to be, by M. Antonino Castagna, and P.
Francisco Lana, at a place called Mezzane in the Val Sabbia in Italy, only in
certain dry places, naked and bare of all greens Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 83.
: and perhaps as those octaedrous Chrystalls are, mentioned by Scheffer to grow
upon the dry rocks in Lapland, which the people of that Country use instead of
flints to strike fire with Joh. Scheffer's Hist. of Lapland Chap. 33.
. Whether this be the true method nature uses in the production of these
stones, though I dare not pronounce; yet it moves me not a little, that the
hexangular Chrystalls of the Val Sabbia being all gathered from those bare and
steril places overnight, there will be others found next morning, whenever
there happens to be a serene and dewy Sky. Howbeit, they still come from the
inferior heaven, and are placed here for a much better reason than ever was
thought of before; and most commodiously have afforded me an apt transition
from the heavens, into the Atmosphere or inferior Air.

7. Which though thought incapable till now of giving any figure to stones, yet
has many of its Inhabitants in part, if not in whole, represented in them;
which before I descend to those belonging to the waters, I think ought to be
considered here. Whereof that which deserves the first place, is a Perdicites,
which I gathered in the Horse-way near Hollingbury-Hall, the Seat of the truly
Loyal and Valiant Gent. Captain Richard Minors, a person of approved courage,
from his youth upwards, both at Sea and Land; which I call a Perdicites, not
for the same reason other Authors do, for this has nothing of the color of
the feathers on a Partridges breast Vid. Joh. Kentmanni nomenclat. rer. fos.
tit. 5. cap. de Avibus.
, but that in solido it represents a Partridges Skull, in the true shape and
bigness, having the Eyes and short beak, and hollowed behind, just as if the
brains had been taken out, as most faithfully exhibited Tab. 11. Fig. 6. To
which I must annex another pretty stone, belonging also to the feathered
Kingdom, found near Church-Eyton, and bestowed on me by the Schole-Master
there, which from its most accurate resemblance of a Pullets heart, with the
fat near the basis of it, and the Coronary Vessels descending from it, as most
exactly delineated Tab, 11. Fig. 7. I think I must call Alectoricardites, this
being a more restrained name than the Anacardites of Aldrovand Uyss. Aldrovandi
Mus. Metal. Lib. 4.
. Both which also seem to be of the pebble kind, but whether they ever were the
designs of nature, or but casualties only, there being no more of their kind,
I shall not dispute; but leave them wholly to the determinations of each Readers
judgment.

8. As some stones have their figures from aerial waters, or dews, falling on
nitrous steams, so there are others as likely formed by such steams and
subterraneal waters; and such I take the Chrystals to be, found in diging in
Barrow-hill in Pensnet-Chase, belonging to the right Honorable Edward Lord
Ward, which I have not scrupled to style Chrystalls, because many of them are
composed of two hexagonal Pyramids, and an intermediat Column, likewise
hexagonal as in Tab. 11. Fig. 8. which according to Steno, is the very
definition of a Crystal Nich. Stenon. Prodrom. de Chrystallo. p. 53.
. Some indeed of them seem only to be dodecaedrums, having only one hexagonal
Pyramid, and the hexagonal Column; the other hexagonal Pyramid being hid in the
rock wherein it grew, and left there, when the rest was broken off; which were
the stones mentioned. ult. of the former Chapter; but they are all (I believe)
really octodecaedral when gotten entire, and true Chrystals: whenever therefore
they appear otherwise, they may be suspected to be imperfect, and broken either
in the getting or some other way. They are sometimes stained with a violacious
color, and perhaps may admit other tinctures sometimes, though it was not my
fortune to meet with any of them; but they are ordinarily found of their own
Chrystalline color, the planes both of the pyramids, and Columns, being all
naturally polish't.

9. From the same Origin I think I must also deduce (because not able to
assign any better) another sort of formed Chrystals, shown me by the same
noble Lord, though shooting forth of his Limestone rocks, near Dudley Castle;
whereof his Lordship was pleased to favor me with that large pattern,
described Tab. 11. Fig. 9. in which though the Chrystalls are set very
confusedly, yet they are all strictly of the same figure, with that engraven a
part, Fig. 10. made up as it were of 12. Pyramids joined in base, all cut
obliquely off at the top, making two hexagonal hedrae there, and 12
Trapeziums, which are so joined by pairs at their broader ends, in the middle
of each Crystal, where they are consequently biggest; that the acute Angles
of one combination, meet with the obtuse ones of the opposite pair, and divide
each Crystal with an indented ridg, as is evident to view in the forecited
figure. Which though plentiful enough in the Limestone rocks here, yet is not
mentioned, that I know of, by any Author.

10. But though these Chrystalls may be supposed to have been made out of
water, congealed by the steams of niter rather than any other Salt, because of
its hexagonal shooting; yet I could never hear that any of these, were ever
found to include any water in the Center of them uncongealed, as some have been
said to do. But there are a round or oval sort of blackish or reddish stones,
hollow and like a honeycomb within, found amongst the Iron Ore at Rushall, not
to be past by here, because of their constant form, though mentioned before
Chap. 4.. 18. that always hold a red or white liquor fluctuating within them,
of a sweetish taste, greedily drank by the workmen; of which the Poet Claudian,
might with as much admiration enquired, as he did of the Crystal, Lymphae,
quae tegitis cognato carcere lymphas,
Et quae nunc estis, quaeque fuistis aquae;
Quod vos ingenium junxit? qua frigoris art,
Torpuit and maduit prodigiosa silex?
Non potuit toto mentiri corpore gemmam
Sed medio mansit proditor orb latex.
Sollers lusit hyems, imperfectoque rigore
Nobilior, vivis gemma tumescit aquis.
Auctus honor, liquidi crescunt miracula saxi,
Et conservatae plus meruistis aquae Cl. Claudiani Epigram. 6, 7, 8.
.
in which verses the very Poet seems to intimate, the true cause of these
Enhydri (of which kind I must needs esteem them) viz. that they are as it were
but the imperfect works of nature, which has not yet performed its utmost; the
included matter of these stones (as was fully proved in the place above cited)
being nothing else but the matter of the Iron Ore, not yet coagulated into a
Metallic form. Which is all concerning formed stones that purely relate to
liquids, unless one may take a verrucose stone found near a petrifying Spring
(of which more anon) in some lands of the right Honorable Robert Lord Ferrers
between Sandon and Gayton, to be a sort of Stalagmites, generated of pearls of
dew etc. as in the Hist. of Oxfordshire, whereof also there is a Cut so exactly
representing this of Staffordshire, as well as those of that County Tab. 3.
Fig. 8. that it would be nauseous to repeat either of them here again. Yet I
must not pass so by another of this kind, in the possession of the right
Honorable Walter Lord Aston, which being of a very fine texture, almost as
white as Ivory, and the best of the kind I ever yet saw, I have caused it to be
represented here Fig. 11.

11. After Stones made out of waters and resembling inanimate figures, come we
next to such as represent the forms of Animals, the Inhabitants of that
Element; whether Fishes of the marine, or fresh water kind: of the latter
whereof (as in Oxfordshire) I met with only one, and that of the same species,
but of a different color; it being a reddish yellow stone, found somewhere
about Clifton Camvill by the Worshipful Francis Wolferstan of Statfold Esquire not
unaptly resembling the middle part of a Barbel; like that mentioned in
Oxfordshire, and expressed there in sculpture Tab. 3. Fig. 11. But as for stones
found like Seafish, though in this Mediterranean County, I have met with many,
and of many sorts; but chiefly resembling Shellfish of the testaceous kinds,
both univalves and bivalves; and of the former of these, some not turbinated,
and others again of the turbinated kind. Of the first sort whereof, viz. Stones
representing univalves not turbinated, I had two bestowed on me by the curious
Observer the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire so altogether unlike
any of the living Shellfish, that alone they are sufficient to convince any
unprejudiced person, that all these formed stones cannot be shaped in Animal
molds.

12. The Shellfish that comes nearest them is the Nautilus, or Coquille de
Porcellain, or as Rondelet calls it the testaceous Polypus, as may be seen by
their draughts Tab. 11. Fig. 12. and 13. the place of the head being in the
utmost curle of the stone, and the tail in the center, but so hidden and
covered with the common coat, that the first turn is only visible, as it is in
the Nautilus: the largest of the two, seems also to have three or four obscure
joints cuting the large outer turn in right angles, as some of the Shells of
that Fish seem likewise to have (the texture of them all running that way) and
the lesser, two cavities or orifices; one, on each side the first turn as it
passes under the place of the head toward the center, and striated from a
straight line on the ridge of that turn, toward the place of the head, somewhat
like a feather, neither of which agree to the Nautilus: nor is that part for
the head near patulous enough in either of our patterns, to give sufficient
ground for any body to think them, ever to have been the spoils of that fish;
not to mention how much they fall short of the magnitude of the Nautilus, the
biggest of the stones not exceeding a fair Nutmeg, and the least scarce
equalling an ordinary field pea.

13. Yet if any body will be so obstinat, as to hold me to it, that these may,
and must be reduced to the Nautilus; he shall and must excuse me then, from
ever yielding that the Ophiomorphites, or Cornua Ammonis, can owe their
figuration to that fish, the turns and ribbs of all these being numerous and
protuberant, and visible from the place of the head to the center, neither of
which are found in the Nautilus, whereof I have met with an Arch of one sort,
amongst several other entire ones, found in the Limestone rocks near Dudley
Castle, given me by the right Honorable Edward Lord Ward, quite different from
any of those mentioned in Oxfordshire Not Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 5. from. 87.
to 95.
, and therefore engraven Tab. 11. Fig. 14. its ribbs on each side joining in
large protuberances near the inner part of the Arch, and tending obliquely
toward the unequal part where they terminat in as large and distinct
protuberances, but not right against one another, but the protuberance of one
ribb, pointing between two others on the opposite side of the stone, and so
alternately on each side: and these protuberances not separated at the back,
with a riseing ridg as usual, but with a deep furrow as expressed in the
sigure: whereof I have since met with another Sample, but not in this County,
it having in proportion to the stone as deep a furrow in the back, though not
interceding near so large protuberant ribbs. And these are all the Stones
representing Vnivalves, except the large Strombites, or turbinated Univalve, of
Georgius Agricola Agricolae de natura fossilium, Lib. 7.
, of a plain superficies, found somewhere in this County and readily bestowed
on me by the generous Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire which because already
described in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 5.. 63.
, is omitted here.

14. But for such as resemble the (...) or bivalvular Conchae there are great
plenty here, as well of kinds as individualls, such as Cockles, Escallops,
Oysters, etc. whereof there are some curiously lineated, and others plain, with
but few or no such Ornaments; and some of them found always single with their
shells a part, and some of them joined. And all these (except a Pectinites or
stone representing a Escallop shell, found in Ingestre field, and at Beresford
M. List^ri Cochlitarum Angl. part. 2. memb. 2. cap. 1. tit. 50.
, and another resembling the Concha fasciata of Rondelet Gul. Rondelet^i de
Testaceis. Lib. 1. cap. 33.
, or rather the Tellina of Buonanni, found too somewhere thereabout, and most
accuratly expressed by his 44 Fig. F. Buonanni osservation' delle Chiocciole
Part seconda class seconda.
) quite different from all those described in Oxfordshire, and from any of the
shells I have yet met with, either in the Ashmolean Musaeum, my own small
collection, or any where else: So little seems Nature to have needed Animal
molds for these productions. Witness first a sort of Ostracites or (...) shown
me by the ingenious Mr. Cotton in the rocks near his house at Beresford by the
Dove side, which though as large and shaped somewhat like Oysters, yet
certainly were never such, their striae not being bent to the commissure as
those of all oysters are, but descending quite contrary from the commissure to
the rim as in Tab. 11. Fig. 15. having 3 or 4 Lacunae or furrows much larger
and deeper than the rest, including 4 or 5, and sometimes 7 or 8. of the lesser
Striae, that descending from the commissure through the middle of the stone
being always the biggest.

15. These are always found single with their shells a part, striated without
as in the aforementioned figure, and some of them within too, having a deep
depression in the middle, in form of a heart, as in Fig. 16. But others there
are somewhat of this kind, having always the deep Lacuna descending from the
commissure over the middle of the stone, and only that large one, beside the
common smaller ones, found always with their two shell-like stones conjoined
like large Cockles, but the commissure never close, having a large striated
furrow between the rostra of the shells, as in Fig. 17. to which I can find
nothing like amongst the Bivalves, but the 73 or 80 of Filippo Buonanni Ibidem.
, and the Concha (...) of Fab. Columna Fab. Columnae Purpura. cap. 11.
, but then neither of those, have that deep furrow cuting the middle of their
shells, as these of stone have. Upon which account too, and because they have
no manner of show of ever having had Ears, of both, or one side; though their
Striae are equally spread from the commissure to the rim, they cannot be
reduced to the Pectines or Pectunculi, i. e. to any sort of Escallopshells; nor
can they be referred to the Chamae Striatae Pectiniformes of Aldrovandus Ulyss.
Aldrovandi de Testaceis Lib. 3. cap. 69.
or the Pectunculi of Belonius, (which he expressly says have no Ears) nor the
Conchae Striatae, or streaked Cockle-shells; because neither of an oblong
figure, as all the former are; or bearing more toward the one, than the other
side, as the Conchae Striatae do: but spreading themselves to so great a
circumference that they almost absolve a semicircle; the two uppermost striae
wanting but little of meeting in a right angle at the commissure, which I do
not find agreeable to any sort of bivalves.

16. The most critical Observer Mr. Chetwynd of Ingestre, gave me some others
of this kind, much less than the former, scarce striated at all, or having any
other perfect furrow, but that descending through the middle of the stone,
graven of its natural fife Fig. 18. which I can no more parallel with any sort
of Shellfish, than those above mentioned. Nor with any yet described formed
stone; that which comes nearest them of any thing I have yet met with, is the
Pectunculites anomius (...) of Fabius Columna Fab. Columnae Purpura, cap. 15.
, and Dr. Lister M. Listeri Cochlitarum Angliae part. 2. memb. 2. cap. 2. tit.
57.
, whereof I had two presented me by the worshipful Fran. Woolferstan of
Statfold Esquire about two inches round, so exactly answering those described by
Columna in their colors (one being wholly of a yellow, and the other of a
bluish near the commissure, but more obscure and yellowish toward the sides)
that he had not, I believe, two more agreeable patterns, when he made that
description. These, I think indeed, have some small resemblance of the stones
above mentioned, yet so far are they still from seeming ever to have been cast
in Animal molds, that (as the worthy Dr. Lister freely own's Ibidem.
) neither can these be matched amongst the living Conchilia, no more than the
others.

17. I met with the same also at Dudley Castle, found in the Limestone rocks,
but these very small, not exceeding the Rouncival pea in bigness; and yet still
less about Ingestre, some whereof not so bigg as the smallest Vetch; yet all
consisting of two anomalous valves, of which (contrary both to Columna and Dr.
Lister) I take the most protuberant, though hid at the commissure by the
rostrum of the other, to be the bigger; that having two long Lobes, and but one
short one: and the more depressed valve, the less; it having but one long one,
and two short ones: which shut into one another alternatim, as the teeth of the
smaller striae do, also betwixt one another: two straight lines passing
between the three longer Lobes as may be seen in the Cut, Fig. 19. and 20.
which I have caused to be graven, notwithstanding they are to be found both in
Columna and Dr. Lister Locis supra citatis.
, those books being in but few hands, and almost as rare as the stones
themselves, beside, not well designed in either of them.

18. To which add two Chamae, or Couchites striati, found somewhere about
Ingestre, and given me by the most ingenious Walter Chetwynd Esquire Lord of the
place; whereof one has both valves conjoined, one of them being unequal, and
the other not flat but a little concave, as in Fig. 21. and both striated from
the commissure to the rim, somewhat like the Pectunculus of Bellonius Gesneri
de Aquatilibus Lib. 4. p. 813.
; only I do not remember, that I ever met with any shellfish whose flat shell
was thus excavated; much less whose protuberant shell was striated within-side
as that above mentioned fig. 16. and our other Conchites or Chamites striatus,
given me by Mr. Chetwynd which was found single, set in a hard pebble, as
exactly represented fig. 22. on which yet I lay not so much stress, as upon any
of the rest; because the unequal side being hid by the pebble, it may be argued,
that this is only the bed of a petrifyed Chama, though I could not learn, that
any such thing lept forth it, upon the breaking the pebble.

19. Having done with the formed stones relating to the waters, I hasten on
(according to the Method I prescribed my self in the beginning of this Chapter)
to such as bear any similitude to terrestrial bodies, and amongst them, first
of such as belong to the mineral Kingdom; some of the Ores both of the noble
and viler Metalls, having been found shot into certain figures: thus as I was
told by Mr Persehouse of nether Gournall, a parcel of Silver Ore that was
found in the hard rock in digging a well in his Garden (of the Metal whereof
He showed me a tooth-pick) was all figured like the shells of Escallops; nor
need we much to wonder at it, if we reflect upon a relation of Peter Martyr
Counselor to Charles the fifth, who expressly tells us that in Hispaniola, not
only the Ore, but pure native Gold it self, is found so naturally formed, that
it is thought to be a living Tree springing and spreading from a root through
the soft pores of the Earth, and putting forth branches even to the day it self;
showing beautiful colors instead of flowers, round stones of golden earth
instead of fruit, and thin plates instead of leaves: some of the branches being
as small as threads, and others as bigg as a Man's finger, according to the
largeness or straightness of the rifts or clefts of the earth or rocks, wherein
it grows Petri Martyris Anglrii de Orb novo. Decad. 3. cap. 8
.

20. The truth of which History is amply confirmed by that noble Philosopher
the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire who tells us that He spoke with a very skillfull
and credible person, that being in the Hungarian Mines had the very good
fortune to see a Mineral that was there dug up, wherein pieces of Gold of
the length, and almost of the bigness of a human finger, grew in the Ore, as if
they had been parts and branches of trees Mr Boyles Skeptical Chemist. p. 375,
376.
. And the Reverend and learned my very good Friend Dr. Robert Huntington,
Provost of Trinity College near the City of Dublin, has told me more than once,
that he received it from very good hands, that native Gold has been thus found
in the form of a Tree in Habessia, as well as Hungary and 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
To y^ if right Worsp^^. the much honored and judicious Gent.

SWALTER WROTTESLEY Bar.

This itth. Table of formed Stones, in acknowledgment of his many and eminent
favour^ is gratefully dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.



MBurghers delin et sculp.
depictions of stones Hispaniola, whereof an excellent pattern, was sent as a
present from the Emperor of that Country, to the great Mogul. Nor are these
instances so new, but something like them was known as long ago as Virgil, who
seems to speak of this matter more like a Philosopher than a Poet, -- Latet
arbore opaca
Aureus and foliis and lento vimine ramus,
adding a little after, -- primo avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo Pub. Virgilii Aeneidos Lib. 6. v.
136, 137. and 144, 145.
.


21. The same is also asserted by Munster of native Silver, which He tells us
has been found naturally shot in the form of Trees, rodds, twiggs or hairs
Munsteri Geograph. Lib. 1. cap. 9.
, whereof I have seen my self a tolerable pattern: But not such an one as
Wormius was possessed of, given Him by the Lord Stenon Beck the Kings Treasurer,
which was an elegant Mass of native silver 12 Ounces weight, that imitated a
Vine with all its branches variously spread abroad, and embraceing one another,
growing thick toward the root, and gradually tapering into the slenderest
twiggs and claspers Musaei Wormiani Lib. 1. 3. cap. 3.
: Or that other branched piece of of Silver of two Ounces weight growing out of
a Specular stone, of a leaden color without, but white within, also resembling
a Vine, brought Him out of the Mines of Norway by Nicholaus Fossius Ibidem.
. Now if Metallic substances do thus usually take upon them the form of
Vegetables; why not sometimes may they not of Animals too, as well as other
stones? though we do not very often find Histories of it: let that of Valehius
in his Commentary upon the Klein Baur mentioned by Mr Boil serve for all; who
tells us that at Maria Kirch near Strasburg, a Miner upon opening the hollow of
a rock, found a Mass of pure Silver of 500 pound weight standing upright in
form of an Armedman Mr Boyles Scept. Chym. p. 365, 366.
: a much stranger thing than that Silver Ore, should shoot in the form of
Escallops.

22 And as the Ores of the perfect and more noble Metalls sometimes take upon
them the forms of Vegetables and Animals; so those of the baser and more
imperfect kinds, do sometimes shoot too into certain forms, but much more
simple ones; which I have found true in this County, in the Ores both of the
hard and soft Metalls. In the hard, which require ignition before fusion (not
to mention again the Iron Ore impregnated with the milky liquor found at
Rushall, which is mostly, if not always, of an oval figure without, and like a
honycomb within vid. supra chap. 4.. 18. and chap. 5.. 10.
) In the Lime-work called Radley also in the parish of Rushall, and in those
North of Dudley Castle, in the very body of the stone they sometimes find the
pyrites aureus (which if torrefy'd according to Agricola and Dr. Listers Geo.
Agricolae de re Metallica. Lib. 7. p. 194. and M. Lasteri de fontibus med.
Angl. Exercit. pr. cap. 2.
directions prove all Iron Ores) not only granulated, but sometimes formed in
oblong squares, or right angl'd parallelpipeds set irregularly in a common bed
of Limestone, as in Tab. 12. fig. 1. which very pattern was found at
Radley-work, and kindly bestowed on me by Mr William Strong of Harding alias
Hawarden, and is the third of Gesner, which He calls pyrites quadratus altera
part longior in opposition to the cubic one Conr. Gesneri de figuris Lapid.
cap. 1.
,

23 Which too in the Limestone hills of the Moorelands in this County, is
frequently met with, about of an inch square, of a purpleish color, mixed with
yellow shining parts without, but wholly gold-like ones within, such are also
found upon the Woolds in Yorkshire, and reckoned by Dr Lister amongst the
Iron-Ores M. Listeri de fontibus Med Angl. Exercit. pr. cap. 2.
. Wormius also tells us they have them at Osterdale in Norway, but reputed
there to be the Ore of Copper Musaei Worm. Lib. 1.. 3. cap. 5.
. Whether ours be one, or the other, I shall not dispute, it being sufficient to
justify it is being placed here, if it hold either Metal. However they seem to
be the true Ludus Paracelsi, which says Helmont is so termed, quod tali,
tessarae, aut Cubi forma semper eruatur J. Bapt. Helmanti^ de Lithiasi cap. 7.
n. 22.23.
, there being no other stone I have ever yet met with, near so agreeable: which
pulverized calcined, and mixed with a circulated Salt, and then set in a cool
moist place to run per deliquium, and after digested gr. 2. till the Ludus
swims like a thick oil, upon the water contracted from the moist Air of the
Cellar Ibidem.
, is the great Arcanum against the Duelech or lapis spongiosus, generated in
human bodies, of a middle nature between a Tartar, and the ordinary Calculus
humanus.

24. The Ores of the softer Metalls, which have fusion before ignition, do
also sometimes shoot into a certain figure, witness a sort of Lead-Ore given me
by the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire but found in Ecton hill near
Warslow, and sent him, I think, by the ingenious Mr Cotton, of an Octaedrous
form, made up of eight solid triangles, as in Tab. 12. Fig. 2. one of the
acuminated parts being somewhat blunt where fixed to the rock. The ingenious Mr.
John Beaumont jun. of Stony-Easton in Sommerset-shire, informs us that
Lead-Ore is often found in that County in a pyramidal form, much like the
Sparrs that hang from the roofs of many Grotto's Philosoph. Transact. Number. 129.
p 734.
. He also further adds in the same discourse, that the rust which often lies
there over the veins of Lead-Ore, shoots up pyramidally in many places, and is
bounded round with six angles and sometimes with five; and that not only the
rust, but the Lead-Ore it self, often shoots also pyramidally with rough
irregular lines round it, and in some places bounded round very regularly with
4 angles, and in other places branched like a plant Ibid. p. 736.
. But I do not find him or any other Author, that it was ever found before in
this form, unless that which he says ascends in 4. regular angles, be the same
which ours, the other inferior 4 angles being hid in the rock.

25. After the formed stones of the Mineral, I proceed next to those relating
to the vegetable Kingdom, whereof there are some that resemble entire plants,
and such is a fungites or Tuberoides which I found near Hedgford in the forest
of Canck, much such another as that described and engraven in the Hist. of
Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 5.. 132.
, and therefore not repeated here. To which add the fungi lapidei coralloides
of Fabius Columma, which He honestly ownes, never to have had their origin, ex
fungorum cadaveribus, sed propria vegetatione ortum ducere; that they were
never fungus's and now petrifyed, but lapides sui generis, that have their
growth and form, from another principle of their own Fab. Columnae
dissertatione de Glossopetris. p. 39.
; and this He seems to prove, for that they have their striae, in the upper
part, and not the lower as the terrestrial ones have (and therefore perhaps by
Bauhinus called fungi pileolo inverso Joh. Bauhin, in paralipom. in fine Hist.
admirabilis. fontis Bollensis.
) the pedicle being smooth (says He) as Clusius has drawn themn. In which
particular only, ours differ from His; ours being most of them, striated from
the lower part of the pedicle, to the very cup, and some of them further
adorned with transverse protuberant circular edges, as may be seen in the fig.
3. and 4. which were freely bestowed on me amongst many others (whereof some are
about an inch, others about 3, others 6 inches in compass) by the same worthy
Gent. Walter Chetwynd Esquire who had them from about Beresford, and the fields
about Heatley, and Bagots Bromley.

26. These, says the same Columna dissertatione de Glossopetris p. 39.
, have their vegetability the same way, with the porous species of Coral, of
Ferrante Imperato, which He calls Madreporae dell' Hist. Natural di Ferrante
Imperato Lib. 27. Cap. 4.
, whereof too I had an elegant pattern given me by the ingenious Chapter King M. A.
and Student of Chapter Chapter Chaplain to Mr. Chetwynd, which was found at -- in this
County, and the most of any vegetable resembles a stool of reeds or rushes
cemented together by some lapedescent juice; but that this too Lib. 6. Exot.
must be a stone of its own kind, is evident from its being striated like the
fungi coralloides at the top of every cylindrical branch, from a very promanent
sharp center, as in fig. 5. which the inner parts of reeds or rushes, neither
of them are; the former being hollow, all but the joints; and the latter having
a pith altogether informed. So far are these stones from being petrifications,
or ever having borrowed their form from plants. As some stones, on the other
side, as evidently do: witness the petrified moss or rather Equisetum
mentioned before Chap. 2. 114 of this book, and represented here fig. 6. which
is so certainly nothing else but a petrification of Equisetum coralloides
foliis mansu arenosis (whose leaves are always full of sand and therefore of
excellent use for scouring of Glasses) that in the boggy ground above mentioned
betwixt Sandon and Gayton, some of it may be had half petrified, and half
remaining still verdant.

27. Amongst the stones that have the shape of whole plants, we must also
reckon one, found on Hall's furlong, at the village of Stansop, in the parish
of Alstonfield, and kindly sent me thence by Mr. Rich. Hall, to whom I am
indebted for many other favors, so exactly resembling the muscus pyxidatus, or
Cup-moss as in fig. 7. that possibly it may once have been really so, as well
as the Equisetum in the preceding paragraph. But I have another sent me by
Capt. Jackson of the same Village, a person curious in such natural
observations, that though it ascend from a common root tapering upwards
branching it self forth from several internodia as in fig. 8. so that it may
not unfitly be reckoned amongst the flores arborescentes internodiis distincti;
yet it seems not at all probable that it ever was a plant, not only for that it
would be a difficult task, to find to what species to referr it, but to account
also for its being thus enclosed in a stone: much rather therefore should I
conclude it, to have been heretofore some petrifying juice, that following the
hollows of the rock, which casually were before of this figure, might naturally
give it self this form in the concretion, just as in a mold; though we see
nature without any such help, does perform more excellent pieces of work than
this; so that I must not deny neither but she might do it, from an internal
principle, as well as an external.

28. Hither also must be referred a most excellent Specimen of Mineral Coral,
given me by the learned Walter Chetwynd Esquire much like that of Mr. Beaumont
mentioned and engraven in the Philosophical Transactions Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 150.
, only the branches are not ruled up as his is: but what is more remarkable,
they seem all to be joynted, as Mr. Ray informs us some of it is, as in fig. 9.
very much resembling the Corallium Tubulatum of Ferrante Imperato Historia
Natural di Ferrant. Imperato Lib. 27. cap. 4.
: which whether ever made in a corralline mold in this inland County, or a
(...) sui generis, out of principles of its own, let the Reader determine.
Somwhere about High-Offley, they have the fresh water Adarce such as that
described and engraven in the Not. History of Oxfordshire Not Hist. of
Oxfordshire Lib. 5.. 139. Tab. 6. Fig. 10.
, which was bestowed upon me by the right Honorable Lady, Jane Lady Gerard of
Gerards Bromley, but this being rather an incrustation of an entire plant, or
rather a plant sheathed within a stone, having its form ab alio, and not from
any internal principle of its own; I pass it by, as not properly a rock-plant,
though perhaps not improperly mentioned in this place.

29. Other stones there are that only represent the parts of plants, such as
the Stelechites, that are, or should be, like trunks of Trees; whereof there
lies one indeed near Dudley, betwixt Merryhill and Clyers-lane which they call
a Pox-stone, i. e. a stone scarce vincible by fire; that so well resembles wood
petrifyed, that I really thought it at first sight the stump of a Tree. But the
Stelechites stibii facie of Aldrovand Musaei Metallici Lib. 1 cap. 9
, whereof there are many in the rocks at Beresford, and Stansop, and the rubble
stones that lie loose above ground in the fields, near Heatley and
Bagots-Bromley, seem not to deserve the name half so well; they being a sort of
annular stones regularly joynted, and as regularly striated at top and bottom
as in Tab. 12. Fig. 10. and therefore both as unlike the trunk of a Tree
(though some of them are branched) or having the striae of Antimony (which are
commonly irregular) as a thing can well be; nor can they indeed any way
reasonably be compared to the trunk or stalk of any plant whatever. Wherefore
the ingenious Mr. Ray has more rationally thought them, to be the Spinae
dorsales or tail-bones of Fish petrified Mr. Rays Observation Topograph. etc.
p. 116.
, they consisting for the most part of several plates or pieces sticking
together like so many Vertebrae of the backbone of some Fish; though at the
same time he most ingeniously acknowledges, that these pieces are much shorter
and thinner than the Vertebrae of any fish he had then observed. I am sure ours
are so, the thickest of them scarce exceeding of an Inch, some not a 1/24:
though Dr. Lister tells us, he found some about Stock in Yorkshire full a
quarter of an Inch thick Philosoph. Transact. Numb 100.
.

30. Many of these being perforated some with a round, others with foliated or
asterial inlets of 6 or 7 points, anciently when found single or but double or
treble as in Fig. 11 they were strung like beads, particularly by St. Cuthbert,
which gave occasion to their other name of St. Cuthberts beads: and because
thick set with small rays drawn from these perforated Centers or modioli to
the rim, like the spokes of a wheel, by Agricola Geo. Agricolae de Not.
fossilium Lib. 5.
, and after him by Gesner Conr. Gesneri, de figuris Lapidum, cap. 5.
, Boethius Boetii de Boot, de lapidibus and gemmis Lib. 2. cap. 227.
, Kentman Johan. Kentmanni rerum fossilium Catalog. tit. 4.
, Wormius Musaei Wormiani Lib. 1.. 2. cap. 10.
, and Lachmund Fred. a Lachmund. (...).. 3. cap. 16.
, aptly enough called Trochitae; and if compounded or piled upon one another,
as in Fig. 12. Entrochi, or wheels within wheels; the rilieve rays of one
Trochite, always lying in the intagli or furrows between two protuberant rays
of the other, as in the Sutures of a Skull. As for the species of them we find
at the places above mentioned, most of those described and engraven by Dr.
Lister and Mr. Beaumont in the Philosophical Transactions Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 100.129.150.
; with all the varieties of their length, greatness, joints, cements, bores or
piths, lineations, indentures, smoothness of some, ridges, knots, and branches
of others; with all the accidental injuries that have befallen them: all
seeming to have been dejected and broken; many of them depress't and crush't;
and some of them having their very Trochit's dislocated.

31. I met too with some few of them, which had every second, third, or fourth
joint, larger than the intermediat ones; and with one of those tapering at both
ends, and swelling in the middle like a barrel, marked with but obscure rays,
as most of the old Authors say they generally are. But as for the Summitates
(by Lachmund called lapides figura penis absque praeputio Fred. Lachmundi
(...).. 3. cap. 16.
,) the Radixes, and the several varieties of pentagonous, and hexagonons
plates, supposed to incrustate them, found at Braughton, Stock, and Bugthorp in
Yorkshire, at Wansford-bridge in Northamptonshire, and in the Mendip hills in
Somersetshire, by Dr. Lister and Mr. Beaumont; whereof we have great variety in
the Ashmolean Musaeum Vid. Scrinium Listeri in Musaeo Ashmoleano.
; I met with none of them here, though possibly there may be enough, had I had
time to have searched narrowly. However I have caused neither the one or the
other to be engraven here, that have been done already, by either of the
aforesaid worthy Authors, in the forecited places: but shall content my self to
proceed upon such matters only relating to them, which either they have wholly
omitted, or but imperfectly described.

32. And first as to their texture, though Agricola and the rest after him,
have observed that they are made out of Lamellae or little thin Spar-like
plates as the lapis Judaicus, running 3 different ways, as that stone is
described in the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. chap. 5.. 136.
: yet none of them have taken notice that the rays inscribed on the top of
these stones, are made out of the edges of one of these courses of Lamellae set
obliquely like a pack of Cards, end ways or edgways, according as the striae
appear long or short; and that the rays of the following Trochite are made
also out of the edges of such Lamellae set obliquely too, but quite contrary to
those of the former Trochite, and so alternatly; as may be seen in the edges of
each Trochite, in the Entrochus graven fig. 13. though in some of them again
the courses of the Lamellae seem not to be terminated within the verge of every
Trochite, but (which is very surpriseing) though the whole Entrochus seem
without side regularly divided into Trochit's, and radiated on the top; yet the
courses of the plates pass sometimes undivided through several of them, so that
they will not break off in the joints, as I have made trial upon diverse; but in
deep indentures passing through two or three Trochit's. Nor have they remarked,
that upon breaking or scraping them, they emit a fetid nauseous odor, like the
Wolf stone of Sweden, which the Lapis Judaicus of Oxfordshire or Palestine will
neither of them do; which is a probable argument that notwithstanding they
appear outwardly to have the same texture of parts, yet that they must arise
from far different principles.

33. Also in the radiation of them I have met with one sort, given me by the
Worshipful Walter Chetwynd Esquire that I do not remember any where noted before,
it having a double order of rays; the first reaching from the modiolus or
Center (which is in the form of a cinquefoil) about half way to the peripherie,
where they are cut off with a deep hollow trench, taking up about half the
remaining distance to the rim, the other moiety being striated again as in fig.
14. I have another too procured me by the right Worshipful the generous, and
very obligeing Gent. Sr Walter Bagot of Blithefield Baronet, that has four very
near equidistant rays, much greater and more prominent than any of the rest,
as in fig. 15. And I had another sent me by Capt. Jackson of Stansop, that has
an invecked Line running through the rays near the periphery of the Trochite,
as in fig. 16. Which are all the differences I have found in the Entrochi of
Staffordshire, relating to the rays, only that some of them, have ridges
within side as well as without, with deep furrows between them, that are also
striated from an open pentagonous bore, as in fig. 17. which too is a sort of
center or pith, no where mentioned, that I know of by any of the aforesaid
Authors.

34. The Entrochi of Staffordshire, especially those of Beresford, are also
much larger, longer, and therefore consequently compounded of more Trochit's,
than either those of Yorkshire or Sommersetshire: for I have one by me, given
me by the most ingenious Mr. Cotton 3 inches and about, the center whereof is
also full an inch 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
To the right (...) Sr. JOHN ^OW^^^ of KN^^^^ (...). This 12. Table. of (...)
a^ a gr^^t^full N^m^^r of (...) recei^d (...) your^ (...) hu^^^^^ offered by
RP. LL. D.



depictions of stones MBurghers delin et sculp^^t.
over; and He showed me another in one of the rocks near his house about the
same bigness, near a foot long; but it was so fast enclosed in the rock, that I
could not possibly get it out entire: How many Trochit's it might be compounded
of, I must confess I did not compute, but I have one by me (the gift of the
same worthy person) which though but 2 inches and long, is made up of no less
than 35 of them; a number I think exceeding any they mention. And this is all I
can find different from what they have observed concerning this kind of
Entrochus; but that in ours, those which have the thickest roundest joints or
Trochit's, such as the 11.12.13 and 18 of Dr. Lister; and those whose joints,
as Mr Beaumont says, show like a parcel of little Barrells piled upon another,
have generally, if not always, the smallest bores; and those which the thinnest
joints, the largest.

35. But both at Beresford, and Stansop; and about Heatley, and Bagots Bromley,
they have another formed stone, that seems withoutside, to be made up of thick
Trochit's that have no bore at all; nor have they any rays on the top issuing
from any solid Center as in fig 18. which I wonder not at, since upon breaking
and cuting them, I do not find they are compounded of such plates as the
others are; nor do they upon scraping or breaking send forth an odor: which
different properties have induced me to believe, that these may be rather the
Columnettae of Imperato Historia Natural di Ferrante Imperato Lib. 24. cap. 22.
, than Entrochi composed of Trochit's, though like them, they will rather break
in the joints, than any where else. Another sort they have too at all the
aforesaid places, that seem to be made up of joints as the Entrochi are, but
neither do the Trochit's appear round or square in their utmost rims, but sharp
like the edg of a screw tapering from the place of their joining, whence too
they are only striated as in Tab. 13. fig. 1. so that the rays of one, do not
enter into the furrows of the other, neither do the Trochit's or rays join
with the modiolus or center (which in these is a large cylinder of black flint)
in right angles, as the former do.

36. Neither are these all of them cylindrical as the former, some of them
tapering upwards from a broad basis, the lower most rings being the greatest,
and so gradually in the ascent decreasing in magnitude, as in fig. 2. And so
far are they from having suffered any accidental injuries (scarce any of them
seeming to be crush't or dislocated, much less broken and imperfect) that they
are generally, if not always substantially terminated at each end, and skreen'd
as it were from harms by a cavity of hard stone, in which they are commonly
found as in fig. 3. so that it is hard to conceive they were ever otherwise,
since they show not the least sign either of a root or top. Nay so very
different are these from the former, that some of them have also a thin
striated plate passing from the edg of each annulet, to the sides of the
Cylindrical concave, as in fig. 4. so that there appears a fair cavity betwixt
each ring. And some again have others included in them as in that represented
fig. 5. enclosed, says Dr. Lister, like a pair of screws: how His might be I
cannot tell, but ours are so far from the nature of a screw (more than in the
riseing of the edges, from which reason only the Country people call them
screw-stones) that they run not helically, but stand like annulets parallel to
one another: nor do the protuberant edges of the one, enter into the furrows
of the other, as the male and female screws do.

37. There are diverse others too found in the same places, and given me by the
same worthy Gent. that stand fenced thus in cavities, some of them in the form
of five columns barely joined, as in Tab. 13. fig. 6. others bound together by
thin annulets, not striated, standing pretty thick and equidistant, as in fig.
7. Some again knit together by the same sort of rings, but by pairs, some
distance interceding each pair, as in fig. 8. And others by four in like
manner, as in fig. 9. To these add another sort fenced the same way, that are
some of them cylindrical, of equal bigness from the bottom to to the top,
curiously wrought with small rings, first with two at some distance, then four
close together, then two again, and so 2 and 4 alternatly, the whole length of
the stone, as in fig 10. and others wrought in the same manner, but bigger both
at top and bottom, in form of a pillar with pedestal and capitel as in fig. 11.
Lastly there are some very small ones that stand in such cavities, like
straight smooth pillars, only purled with a row of knobbs on each side; and
others there are that look like so many buttons piled upon one another: but
many of these seem rather to be dacayed great ones than any thing else, the
hollows in which some of them stand, being as large as the rest, though the
pillars very small.

38. Other stones there are formed like the fruits of trees, whereof I had one
bestowed on me by the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire in form and
bigness, most exquisitly resembling the bell or King-pear; in all points the
same with that described and engraven in the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist.
of Oxfordshire chap. 5.. 134. Tab. 6. fig. 3.
; only this is a pebble, and that a black flint; and this but 9 inches about,
whereas that was eleven: but not differing at all in form, I have forborne to
give any sculpture of it. And I had a stone given me, by a poor man of the
Town, found on Whittington heath, tho not so very like the stone of an Almond,
as some one would wish, it having 4 or 5 ribbs running the length of the stone
as in Tab. 13. fig. 12. yet it being very agreeable to the Amygdaloides of
Aldrovand Ulyss. Aldrovandi Musaeum Metal. Lib. 4. cap. 1.
, and not easily referrable any whither else, I have ventured (with favor) to
give it place here. And I must beg the same license for another of this kind,
though one of the greatest curiosities of this nature I ever met with, for
notwithstanding it represents in general the true shape of the bicapsular seed
vessel of Digitalis ferruginea, or of some of the Verbascum's, as may plainly
be seen fig. 13. having that patilous fissure at the top, that the seed-vessel
of that plant naturally has when it is ripe: yet in the most protuberant part
near the bottom, it is perforated with a small hole, round which there are
several striae or lineations bent (not equidistant) but according as the form
of the stone does permit, which indeed are not found in the seed-vessels of
that plant, but in all other matters it truly resembles them, both in shape and
magnitude: which being all concerning the lapides (...), but that this last was
found at Beresford, and given me by the worthy Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre
Esquire,

39. I proceed next to the stones relating to Animals, and first to those of
the Insect kind, whereof I have one sent me by Capt. Iackson of Stansop, so
accuratley representing the combs of Bees, that the orifices of each cavity are
all hexangular as in fig. 14. just as honycombs are. Others there are that seem
to have been Reptiles petrified, of which some, found at the same place, and
bestowed on me by the same worthy Gent. have the true resemblance of
landsnailes; which because already described and expressed in Sulpture in the
History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire chap. 5.. 140. Tab. 6. fig. 11.
, are omitted here. And I saw part of a stone found amongst others in a
Marle-pit between Aqualat house and the Park, that prettily represented a Mole
or Want both in head and tail, but more especially in the foot, which was so
very exact, that it was divided into claws, and was like the foot of that
Animal in all particulars. The learned and ingenious Edwyn Shrymsler Esquire
Proprietor of the place, told me also that there was found in the same pit, a
stone resembling a dog couped about the reins, with nose and eyes so very
perfect, and the hair standing up, as when that Animal is angered, yet without
legs; but this I did not see, it being some way disposed of, before I came
thither. The same worthy Gent. gave me diverse other stones found in the same
pit; some Vmbilical, having the form of a Navil, as in fig. 15. others in odd
unaccountable shapes, yet having enough to show Nature was designing somewhat.
All which, in their consttutive parts, seem to be nothing else but a sort of
petrified Marle, having all of them a small hole peirceing them in some part or
other, whereby I suppose they received the Mineral steams, or whatever else it
is that gives them form and augmentation, as the ingenious Mr. Beaumont
observes the rock Plants do in Mendip hills Philoseph. Transact. Number. 12^.
.

40. Amongst the stones that any way show the parts of Animals (to pass by the
impressions of the Cow and Calves feet, on the great pebble, lying in the
middle of the street at little On, with the fable belonging to them) I think we
may reckon the Orchites, or Lapides testiculares, for I know not what else to
term them, found near Rudyerd Hall at the Conygrey there, which are much more
proportionable to those parts in Animals, than those mentioned in Oxfordshire
Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire chap. 5.. 144. Tab. 7. fig. 5.6.
but then we find them hear much more extravagant in their combinations; for
hear you may gather not only the Diorchis and Triorchis, of Aldrovand Ulyss.
Adrovandi Musaeum Metal. Lib. 4. cap. 1.
; but the Tetrorchis, Pentorchis, Hexorchis, and Heptorchis, such as described,
figures the 16.17.18. and 19. The Monorchis too (if I may so call it, because
found together with the rest) or single round stone, is plentiful here, all of
them granulated as shown in the figures, and lapides sui generis, never cast in
any Animal mold. To which add a Thrichites, so called because composed of short
filaments like the hair of beasts, found in the bottom of the Marle-pits in the
grounds of my worthy friend Mr. John Bott of Dunstall in a place called the
Riddings in Barton-liberty, much like that of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. chap. 5.. 145. Tab 6. fig. 7.
, only it is of a whiter color, and neither channell'd or joynted; however may
so well be apprehended by that, that there needs no new representation of it.

41. Of stones that are strictly like the parts of Men, I have met with only
two in this County, one found at Whittington near Lichfield, and given me by Mr
Babbington, and the other at Drayton Basset, both so well resembling the foot
of a child, that both may well enough be termed Andrapodites, and expressed in
the same sculpture, fig. 20. they both seem to be of the pebble kind of a
murrey color, each between 4 and 5 inches long, but differing somewhat in
bigness, yet so exactly of the shape of a child's foot, that I doubt not they
might serve well enough for lasts, for childrens first, and second shoes. Nor
has Nature been content to imitate the parts of Men in stone, but to delight
Him with the representations of many Vtensills of Art relating to Him, such as
a Pipe for his Tobacco, found in the same Marle-pit near Aqualat
abovementioned; which as the worthy Mr. Skrymsher seriously told me, so well
resembled that instrument both in the boll and heel (but broken off at about an
inch long in the shank) that it needed nothing of the strength of imagination
to help it.

42. In the same Pit, was found another stone of a greenish-blew color, with a
bore through the middle, and furrowed from each orifice round the sides, like a
Cloak button, as in fig. 21. which most certainly would really serve for a
button mold of that form. Nor has Nature only provided Man with buttons to his
clothes, but with a barrel too, for his drink, as appears from a slone (were
it hollow) found at Alrewas, and sent me by the worshipful John Turton Esquire
swelling in the middle and tapering at both ends, divided with such equidistant
lineations the whole length of the stone, as are usually made by the staves of
a barrel, as in fig. 22. but having no hoops: however perhaps it may well
enough deserve the name of a Cadites. She seems also to have furnished Him with
a Saddle for his Horse, if the Ephippites of Aldrovand, such as are frequently
found in the Mountains near Bononia Ulyss Ald^ovandi Musaeum Metal. Lib. 4.
cap. 1.
, will serve his turn; ours, found about Walstanton of a slinty substance,
being exactly like his, only it has not the lists round it, which contribute
little to the name: how ever it being somewhat different, and but rarely met
with it, I have caused it to be engraven fig. 23.

43. But amongst all the things of Art imitated by Nature, there seem none to
be so surprising, as the rings of stone, Iron, and Copper, found about the
stalks of Gorse, in the lands of the right Honorable Jane Lady Gerard of
Gerards Bromley; which I doubted not at all, when She gave me the first
relation of it, were so shown to her Ladyship, but always feared an imposition
by some waggish hand: till I met with parallel Histories from other Countries,
of what had been found of the like nature both in stones and Metalls. The
former whereof is amply confirmed from Iamaica by the ingenious Mr. Stubbs,
where He says they find plants with stony accretions about their boughs, which
are often loose and moveable, as beads upon a string Philoseph. Transact. Numb.
36. p 701.
. And Bobuslaus Balbinus in his History of Bohemia, tells us that'tis so
frequent in that Country for the perfect Metalls to conform themselves to the
nature of the things among which they grow, that Gold and Silver is found in
stalks amongst Corn, in threads about Vines, and sometimes growing in the
insides of Trees about their pith Mr. Beaumonts Weekly Mem. Numb. 4. p. 29.
. Now if so, why may not these imperfect Metalls (in a Country fruitful of
them) grow in rings without side the stalks of Gorse, as well as the perfect
both without and withinside other plants, in other Countries. However, these
Examples of natural rings growing about Shrubs, Trees etc. afford me a fair
introduction to the next Chapter of Plants.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
To the right Hon.ble THOMAS Lord LEIGH of STONESEY and HAMSTALL RIDWARE in the
County of STAFFORD This 13 Table of Formed stones in memory of his favors is
gratefully dedicated by RP. LL. D.



MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depictions of stones

CHAP. VI. Of Plants.
1. Having done with the Mineral, the order of Nature directs me next to
consider the Vegetable Kingdom, the Plants of this County, whether Herbs,
Shrubbs, or Trees; amongst which (as in Oxfordshire) I shall only treat of such
as are Either 1. wholly underscribed by any Author we yet know of, or described
but imprefectly. 2. that have not been found by the learned Mr. Ray to be
Indigenae of England. 3. that have never till now been found to be
Mediterranean plants. 4. that have any unusual accidents attending them. 5.
that are not commonly cultivated in the fields, where by the way, some of the
Agriculture of the Country.
in which order, I shall consider all the aforesaid three Species of Plants, as
far as each of them will bear it, and then proceed to the Animal Kingdom. And
first of the Herbs; such as have a carnous substance, and will never become
lignous; of which those that are indigenous, and wholly undescribed, or
described but imperfectly, are these that follow.

2. Muscus multiformiter pyxidatus, capitibus sive apicibus coccineis. Which
beautiful Scarlet-headed Cup or Chalice-Moss, in its flourishing condition, is
of an ash color, sometimes darker according to the season of the year, and
grows thick upon mole hills in in Cank-wood, about Wildmoore Hollies, Fair Oak,
and Wolselypark, of the sise, and sometimes of the figure of a Clove; the Calix
now and then being square at the top, and sometimes round, and oval; never very
deep but always set round or purled with scarlet eminencies about the bigness
of small pins heads as in Tab. 14. fig. 1. which was first discovered to me by
the learned. and judicious Edward Brych of Leacroft Esquire and is so certainly an
undescribed plant that I find nothing like it in any of the books: yet I cannot
number this, nor any other Cup-moss amongst the plants properly so called as
other Authors do, neither of them produceing either flowers or seeds, that
have been yet discovered; wherefore I rather choose to reckon it among the
fungus's, which ushers in another undescribed fungus, that perhaps may not
unfitly be styled,

3. Fungus ramosus candidissimus ceranoides, sive digitatus minimus, nonnunquam
corniculatus. This white branched finger formed Mushrom, whereof some of the
blades are curled round, divided and jagged like the Spellers of a Bucks-head,
as in Tab. 14. fig. 2. found plentifully both in Chartley and Ingestre Parks,
ascends from a conjunction of many small branches at the bottom, about 3 or 4
inches high, commonly straight and somewhat flat, each blade (especially the
greatest) channell'd near the top. The most like of any plant yet described to
the Digitatus of Parkinson Parkinson's Theatrum Bo^^tanicum. Tribe 14. chap. 63.
, only none of the blades of his are divided or horned, which perhaps may be
accidental; yet it cannot be either his major, or minor, or the Digitelli of
the Italians: which though a diminutive term, are so large notwithstanding,
that one of the white fingers (says he) will suffice a man for a meal. It
remains therefore, that it must be an undescribed Fungus; and so must the

4. Fungus pulverulentus, cute membranacea, substantia intus spongiosa,
pediculo brevi crassiori, in oras fere ducto. Which sort of fungus found near
Packington, and first observed by Mr. Walter Ashmore of Tamworth, and after on
Alrewas-hays near the deep spring mentioned Chap. 2. 51. by Francis Wolferstan
Esquire is very large, sometimes 4 or 5 inches diameter, and near two inches thick,
and rises from a short thick pedicle, narrow at bottom, and extending it self
broader almost to the brims of the fungus, like an inverted Cone as in Fig. 3.
somewhat like the fungus tuberosus esculentus albus, fusco permixtus of J.
Bauhin I Bauhini Hist. Plantarum Lib. 40. cap. 16.
: and the fungus durus Arborum sive igniarius of Parkinson Parkinson's Theatrum
Botanicum Tribe 14. chap. 94.
. But can be nether of them, this being soft, and covered with a tough
membranaceous skin, and the substance within much resembling a Sponge both in
texture and color; the Cavities whereof when it is ripe, are filled with just
the same dust or fine powder, which flies from the Lupi crepitus or Fuss-ball
upon which account I choose to referr it to that kind of fungus, though it
differ much from any yet described in the pedicle, and carnous substance; which
as Mr. Ashmore orders some of it, is much like Spunk, or the downy part of
Artimesia Aegyptiaca, and I believe if boiled in Niter, like the fungus
igniarius, might be rendered as useful ad ellychnia, as any fungus whatever.

5. At Bentley in the park and lanes there about, at Oldfallings, and almost
any where within 3 or 4 miles of Wolverhampton, the Fungus phalloides, or
phallus Holandicus of Hadr. Iunius, is frequently found in old dry ditch banks
(about the middle of July and sometimes if a warm Autumn, as late as
Michaelmass. They are ordinarily betwixt 8 or 9 Inches long, and seem to be
made up of 3 ditinct parts: the Volva or round bagg at the bottom representing
the Scrotum; the Coals or body; and the Capitulum Glandiforme, or nut of the
yard; of which in their order. The Volva which is sometimes bigger than a
Tennis-Ball (and seems to draw its nourishment by one or two small fibers,
which are so tough that a man must pluck pretty hard to break them) is covered
with a whitish tough membrane, which contains a thin pellucid gelley of an
amber color; under which there is another very white tunicle, that includes a
dirty green farinaceous matter, which Bauhinus compares to the tunica
elytroeides of the testicles; J. Bauhini Hist. Plantarum Lib. 40. cap. 60.61.
and then a third, smooth on the inside next the cavity in the center of the
Volva, and faviginous like a honeycomb or tripe, without; out of which last
membrane, both the body and nut of the yard, seem to grow; the whole length of
the scapus or coals being faviginous without, and hollow within (the Cavity
tapering at both ends, and growing wider in the middle in proportion as the
scapus does) and the capitulum glandiforme also smooth underneath and
faviginous without, the Cavities whereof are filled with that dirty green
substance, that lay next it in the Volva; which corrupting becomes liquid, and
sends forth that fill thy stink, by the help whereof they are commonly found;
though often too passed by, upon that very account, many thinking it to be
Carrion, lying hid somewhere near, and so heeding it no further.

6 All which may be clearly and fully understood by the exemplification of it
Tab. 14. fig. 4, which I have caused to be engraven, because none of the Cuts
either in Bauhinus or elsewhere, seem agreeable to ours: wherein a. Shows the
exterior membrane of the Volva. b. The pellucid gelley within it. c. The second
tunicle, including the farinaceous matter. d. The third membrane, faviginous
without, and smooth within. e. The hollow under it. f. The Veretrum, faviginous
without. g. The hollow within, tapering at both ends. b. The capitulum
glandiforme, smooth underneath. i. Faviginous without,
in the Cavities whereof lies the stinking gelley, which is of the consistence
of Tarr, first of a dark greenish color, growing sadder by degrees as the
plant decays, till it approaches a black. Standing in the Sun or rain it seems
to admit of no alteration from either; all it has, proceeding from its self,
which is very quick; its whole duration (after they begin to stink, till which
time they are seldom found) seeming not to be above 3 or 4 days. Near the
phallus here described, were found two other baggs, full of the same sort of
matter as the Volva, joined together with a tough fiber, having other roots or
fibers issuing from it, as in fig. 5. which I take to be two distinct Volvae,
that had not yet sent forth their phalli, and not at all belonging to the
entire phallus, but upon what account thus knit together, I must freely confess
I do not understand.

7. Which are all the indigenous plants either wholly undescribed, or described
but imperfectly, that I met with in this County; and these too, only fungus's,
plants improperly so called, having neither flowers or seeds, that we yet know
of. Nor do I much wonder at it; the most ingenious and most industrious Mr
John Ray having lived so many years in the confines of this County, and no
doubt searched it diligently. However I heard of one growing on the paper-Mill
dam poole in Heywood park, though described by other Authors, yet not noted by
that worthy person to be of English growth, viz. Tithymalus Characias
Monspeliensis, or sweet wood- Spurge, the Eighth of Gerard Gerard's Hist of
Plants enlarged by Johnson Lib. 2. chap 139.
; or great French wood-Spurge, the Second of Parkinson Parkinson's Theatrum
Botamcum Trib. 2. chap. 16.
, which seem by the Cuts to be much the same, and are so well described by both
those Authors, that I shall supersede any here.

8. And as for such as were never found till now to be Mediterranean plants, my
worthy friend Mr. Charles King, Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon: and Chaplin to Mr.
Chetwynd, showed me the Turbith of Serapio, the Tripolium vulgar minus, or at
least the Tripolium minus Germanicum, the Sea Starr-wort of Germany, well
described, and whereof there seems to be a good Cut in Johnsons enlargement of
Gerards History of Plants. Which though generally said to grow upon the
Seacoasts, especially in Salt marshes where the tide ebbeth and flows, as
Lobel says the Tripolium vulgar minus does at the mouth of the River Po
Matthiae de Lobel Plantarum and Stirpium Hist. page 158.
, and Johnson at the foot of the fort at Gravesend, in the Isle of Sheppey, and
near Sandwich in Kent, all near to Salt marshes Johnson upon Gerard Lib. 2.
chap. 93.
; yet here it is found in an inland Country, at least 50 miles from the Sea, in
the grounds of the worthy Mr. Chetwynd of Ingestre, within two miles of
Stafford; and yet not much to be wondered at neither: for though found thus in
a Mediterranean Country, so far from the Sea, it seems not at all to have been
out of its natural abode: for it grows here in a ground called the Marsh,
mentiond before in this Hist. Chap. 2.. 112. near the place where the brine of
it self breaks out above ground, frets away the grass, and makes a plash of
Salt Water. Just as Cordus says the Tripolium minus Germanicum, or Anthyllis,
grows in the Salt Marshes, that are nigh unto a Lake of brackish water, near
Staffurt in Germany, which in all probability too is an inland Town Val. Cordi
Variar. Observat. Sylva p. 222.
; as if this plant were confined to grow in places of the like situation and
name, though in inland Countries, and far remote from the places of its usual
growth.

9. As for extraordinary Accidents, that have happened amongst the indigenous
herbaceous plants I have met with but few; and those I suppose arising chiefly,
either from the soil; or from the season wherein the seed of them was sown;
or from some other external accidents. From the first whereof, it most
certainly comes to pass, that plants sometimes produce flowers of different
colors from what they usually do; as I have reason to suspect a Digitalis or
Fox-glove that I found by the way side near Norton in the Moors might possibly
do, from the poverty of the Soil there about, which ordinarily produces a
preternatural whiteness, as was fully shown in the Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire
Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 6... 17, 18, 19, 20. and 38.
. Or else that the seed of this plant by some casualty or other, was not
committed to the Earth in due time, which experience has taught us will make
the same alteration in the color of flowers as was found by that most
skillfull Botanist Mr. Jacob Bobart of Oxford, who seriously told me He once
sowed stock-Gillo-flower seeds in the Spring which produced red flowers, and
others again three months after, out of the same paper of seeds, which brought
all white ones: so very nicely does the color of flowers depend, upon the
agreeableness of the season, as well as soil.

10. Nay so very unaccountable are the colors of the flowers of plants, that
as the same worthy person told me more than once, from the seeds of the same
Anemone, which was all of the same color, and sown in the same place, were
produced Anemone's of as great variety of colors, as if He had sown a mixed
seed from diverse: to which I can further add, that flowers of two different
colors shall sometimes grow upon the same stalk, which may well be presumed to
come from the same individual seed; as I was shown it by an excellent Florist
at Bescot in this County in the Caryophyllus hortensis, where there grew a red
one and a white, on the same stalk: which whether to be attributed to the seed,
or soil, seems to be an insuperable difficulty. Much more certain is it, that
the thickness of the husks of the Corn of this County, which is another
accident, proceeds solely from the soil it being held here for a certain Rule,
that the colder any Country is, the thicker will the husk of any sort of grain
be; as if Nature defigned to fence it against the severity of the Clime.

11. And these are all the accidents relating to Herbaceous Plants, I met with
in this Country; except we may reckon untimely flowring, and bearing of fruit,
for one; such as happended in the garden of one Mr. Jobber of Acton-Trussell,
who had once Strawberrys fresh and fragrant three days before Christmas: the
same I once saw in Merton College garden in the University of Oxford. The
reason whereof because not so commonly known, has the rather induced me to
mention it here, and to let the Reader know that this may come to pass no less
then two ways. 1. By Nipping the Budds before they come to Flower, and so
putting them so far back, that they cannot recover this injury so as to produce
their Fruit before the season above mentioned. Or else 2. By Transplantation,
which is much the better and surer way, if one design to have Fruits out of
season (for the Budds nip't, sometimes will never make a second attempt,) thus
Strawberrys transplanted before they Flower, and transplanted again in Autumn,
if the Winter prove mild and temperate (which is absolutely necessary in both
cases,) they may and do perhaps, more frequently then noted, produce their
Fruit about that time of year.

12. Of unusual Herbaceous Plants now cultivated in the fields, the Vicia
Sylvestris, sive Cracca, the wild Vetch, here called Targrass has been observed
in some parts to do so well in Meddows, that it advances all starven weak
Cattle above any thing yet known. And the Pisum album majus or garden-
Rouncival has been sown in the common fields in the Parish of Millwich, which
notwithstanding their great length, were found to run upon the ground without
inconvenience, and to kern well. This as I was informed was first attempted by
Matthew Philips of Coton in that Parish, with such success, that at first he
sold these Peace for ten Shillings the Bushel in many other places in the
Vicinage, to such Neighbors as were satisfied with the advantage of his good
husbandry.

13. At Mr. Traffords of Swythamley in the most Northerly Moorelands, I was
first told (but found them almost every where else,) of a sort of red-Oate
sown thereabout, which upon examination I found indeed quite different from
any sort of Oate any where cultivated in the South of England, the grain being
redder, larger, and fuller of Flower, and requiring a stronger Soil then other
Oats do, of which they make their best oaten bread in that Country. And at
Burton upon Trent I was showed by one Mr. Tomlinson the Avena nuda or naked
Oat, sown there by Him that very year, which grows in all points like other
Oats, saving that they are much smaller, without husk, and are indeed perfect
gritts naturally, requiring no Mill to make them into Oatemeal, as all other
Oats do.

14. To which I may add Zeopyrum, Tritico-speltum, or Hordeum nudum, naked
barley, which I found sown at Brocton and Ellarton grange, where they otherwise
call it Bare-barley, I suppose because without husk; and Wheat-barley, because
though its Ear be shaped like barley, its grain is like Wheat, without any
husk. For which very reason the Latins have termed it Triticospeltum, it having
the stalk, joints, and bearded Ear of the true Zea or Spelt of Lugdunensis
Gul. Rovilii Lugdimens. Hist. Plantarum Lib. 4. cap. 4.
, though the Corn be like Wheat, and not husked, as all Spelt is. At Rowley in
the Parish of Hamstall Ridware where it is also sown, they call it
French-barley, because so like that which we buy in the shops under that name.
In short it is a plant between wheat and barley, in goodness as well as form;
it giving a flower, as worse then wheat, so better then barley; and is
therefore sown that it may be used instead of wheat (for bread,) in a scarcity,
and by the poorer sort at any time. It runs to malt as well as other barley,
and makes a good sort of drink: but the great advantage lies in the increase,
it producing sometimes in an agreeable soil near twenty fold.

15. Yet a more improper sort of wheat then that above mentioned, is sown in
the barren hungry lands of this County, viz. Ocymum Cereale sive Tragopyrum,
commonly called Buck-wheat, not that it has any likeness either in the herbage
or grain to any sort of wheat, but I suppose because the Seed of it serves
among the meaner sort for the same use, for making of bread. It is sown either
alone, or mixed with other corn, as I saw it mixed with barley on Heyley-Castle
hill, and so it is made into bread and eaten; which though less nourishing then
Wheat, Rye, or barley, yet more then Millet, or Panick; and that nourishment
good: for the Country People of diverse places in Germany and Italy feed only
upon this, and yet are strong and fit for the hardest labor. It digests easily
and fattens quickly, especially Cattle and Poultry, which if not speedily
killed after they are thus fatted, it is said, will dye of themselves,
suffocated with their own fat.

16. Triticum multiplex or double-eard wheat, described in Oxfordshire Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 6.. 27.
, has been also sown at Rowley Regis in this County by Hen. Warrant tenant to
Mr. Amphlet of N. Clent. And in Worcestershire and the S. W. parts of this
County, Triticum Polonicum, sive Triticum spica albicante aliqualiter aristata,
glumis foleaceis sive folliculis avenaceis, granis rufescentibus, has been
sometimes sown: and I was told by one at Hilderstone An. 1681. That he intended
to sow it there the year following. This sort of wheat generally received by
the name of Poland, is presumed originally to have come from thence; which
rising from a fibrous root, grows 4 or 5 foot high more or less according to
the quality of the land, with a larger stalk, and leaves, then other wheats
usually have; bearing at the top a long Ear, with long spreading foleaceous
husks, each about an Inch long; amongst which about the bottom grows the grain,
which is longer and thicker then any other wheat; and is ordinarily some of it
found to divide its Ear into smaller ones toward the lower part, somewhat like
Triticum multiplex. Which being no where described that I yet know of, I have
here caused to be graven Tab. 14. Fig. 6. And should have been numbered amongst
the undescribed plants in the beginning of this Chapter, but that it is no
native of England, and only cultivated here.

17. After the herbaceous plants I should have proceeded next to the
undescribed Shrubbs, had I met with any in the County, but having failed
therein, I immediately apply my self, to those not noted by Mr. Ray, to be of
English growth: whereof I met only the Sambucus fructu albo, growing
plentifully in the hedges near the Village of Combridg, which differs not at
all from the common Elder, in the growth, pith, scent, leaves, or flowers; only
in the color of the fruit and rind; which last in this, is also somewhat
whiter. This says Parkinson, was first found by Tragus, in the Woods of
Germany, not so much as imagining it grew any where in England: but I hear it
grows also somewhere near Maidstone in Kent, as well as here at Combridg. The
accidents attending shrubbs, also are not many, nor very considerable ones
neither. At the Honorable Harry Grays of Enfield Esquire there grows a Woodbine in
the garden 6 or 7 foot high, having several substantial branches, altogether
independent of any support. And at Millwich at the South end of the Vicaridg
house, grows an Ivy Bush which ascending to the top of the roof and twisting it
self about a wooden pinnacle there, and having no higher support, after spreads
into branches like an Oak or Elm, and carrys a fine round top standing of its
self like the Cissos of Pliny C. Plinis 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 16. cap. 34.
: which I could not but note as extraordinary in these two plants, they usually
elsewhere requiring dependence.

18. Much more remarkable is it that happened to a Vine in the garden at
Aqualat, which formerly bore a red Muscadel, now a very pleasant sweet white
Grape. That flowers will change their color from red to white upon the penury
of the Soil, has been fully shown in this, and the History of Oxfordshire Vid.
Supra. 9. of this Chap. and Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 6.. 38. Chap. 7...
13.14.15.
: but that fruits should also do it, is new to us; and yet that this must be
the reason seems to be more then probable, because this very Soil that has so
changed the color of the Grapes, has changed flowers too; both whereof have
been noted by the prudent and careful observer Edwyn Skrymsher Esquire the
Proprietor of the place, who could not well be deceived, having frequently
eaten Grapes from it of both colors, and the Vine standing by it self, free
from all others.

19. Thus having dispatched both herbs and Shrubbs, I come at length to the
Trees; amongst which some will needs have St. Bertram's Ash, that grows over a
spring which bears the name of the same Saint, in the Parish of Ilam, to be of
a different undescribed species from all others; and indeed it has a narrower
sharper leaf, then ever I saw any: but whether this may not be ascribed to the
age and decay of the tree, I much suspect. However it be, it is certain the
common people superstitiously believe, that it is very dangerous to break a bough
from it; so great a care has St. Bertram of his Ash to this very day. And yet
they have not so much as a Legend amongst them, either of this Saints miracles,
or what he was; only that he was Founder of their Church, where they show you
his Monument; of which I shall endeavor some account in the Chapter of
Antiquities.

20. Much rather should I think the yellow Yew near Smethwick Hall to be an
undescribed Tree, which has some branches with all the leaves of a bright
yellow- color: this I though at first might proceed from some disease, or that
those branches might have been wounded; but upon examination I found them all
found: Nay so far was this part of the tree from weakness, that it had berrys
on it, when the green part had none; and yet it differing from other Yew-trees
only in color, and not in any of the Essentials; I can neither afford to
pronounce it a distinct species, not allow it for an undescribed plant; the
difference seeming but accidental, though perhaps hard enough to be accounted
for.

21. As I suppose the spots may be upon the leaves of a birch in the Copice
South of Ranton Abbey, which in the spring time are as red and shining as if
fresh blood had fallen on them; upon which account it is reasonably enough
called the bloody Birch: in August indeed when I was there, the spots were of a
somewhat darker hue; and the tree standing under an Oak, I suspected they might
be caused from the dropping thence: but the hasells, and other underwood
standing close by it, having no such matter on them; unless there be some
secret quality betwixt an Oak and a birch that produces this dye, I cannot
conceive how it should come to pass. However this is certain, that here is no
sufficient ground to multiply the species.

22. No more then there is for a sort of thorn that grows in a hedgrow Westerly
from Whichnor Chapel twixt that and the Park, which produces leaves in the
Spring some years, of a brisk yellow or straw color, which seemed to me, the
leaves being less then of other thorns, and recovering their greeness (as was
confessed,) by St. James-tide, rather to be the effects of a disease; or the
frequent cutting it for presents, then any thing else. Nor can I multiply the
species for the sake of a Black-Cherry, growing in the Court before the house
of the Honorable Harry Gray of Enfield Esquire- of so peculiar a vinous taste, that
there are no others like them any where in the County; nor will they if
transplanted to a competent distance, preserve the same goodness: which argues
they have this quality from the agreeableness of the Soil, as the Kentish
Cherrys have, which transplanted from that part of the Country which is eminent
for them, all degenerate more or less according to the quality of the Soil.

23. As for trees not noted to be of English growth by the learned Mr. Ray, the
Sorbus pyriformis is not the only one I met with here, which grows wild in the
Moorelands at many places, and is sometimes transplanted into their gardens: it
is described by L'Obelius, Mathiolus and Bauhin, who unanimously place it in
France, Italy and Germany: but the first that ever found (at least noted,) it
to be a Native of England that ever I heard of, was the skillfull Botanist Mr.
Edmund Pit Alderman of Worcester, who met with it in a Forest of that County
and sent this description of it to the Royal Society. It resembles (says he,)
the Ornus or Quicken-tree, only the Ornus bears the flowers and fruit at the
end, this on the sides of the branch: next the Sun the fruit has a dark red
blush, and is about the bigness of a small Jeneting pear; in September of so
harsh an astringent taste, that it almost strangles one, but being then gathered
and kept till October it eats as well as a Medlar Philosoph. Transact. Numb.
139.
. Which description being agreeable, and very sufficient, I forbear any other.

24. This I say is not the only tree not observed by Mr. Ray to be of English
growth, that I met with in this Country, for though he mention the Firrs that
grow near Worton in the Estate of the right Worshipful Sr. Charles Skrymsher
of Norbury, yet he makes them to be the Abies conis deorsum spectantibus, which
is our common firr or Picea Dodonaei alba s. faemina C. Bauhini, whose leaves
are round, all over green, and thick set on all sides of the branches: whereas
indeed these are the Abies conis sursum spectantibus of J. Bauhin, the Abies
legitima vel mas Bellonii, or the Abies of Parkinson, whose cones or apples
always stand upright, the leaves flat, of a fresh green on the upper side, and
white underneath, thick set on the branches only on two sides, so that they
appear flat, and show (as Parkinson will have it,) like the teeth of a comb.
Adding withal that they grow every where in Muscovy, Poland, Denmark, and
Germany, in some parts of Italy and Greece, and as some say in Scotland; but
not in Ireland or England, saving where planted q: giving up the Question,
whether there were ever any growing naturally in England at any time heretofore?

25. In all which I fear (through the inadvertency of the Age, and his own ill
luck in not lighting upon these,) he will appear mistaken: for beside that
there is no doubt that these firrs (which are 36 in number, for I told them
often,) stood in the hedges and fields where they now grow, when he wrote; in
all probability they are natives of the place too; which I gather, not only
from their disorderly natural situation, and excessive natural height, to which
planted trees seldom arrive; but chiefly from the stools or stumps of many
trees, which I suspect to have been firrs found near them, in their natural
position, in the bottoms of mosses and pooles (particularly of Shebben poole,)
some of the bodies whereof are daily dug up at Laynton, and in the old pewet
poole in the same Parish where these now grow: so that I am apt to believe,
that these are only some remains of the old natural stock that grew here
anciently, of which more hereafter.

26. As for the accidents attending trees we find none more remarkable than the
excesses of them, and particularly in their growth, where they happen to be
planted in an agreeable soil; a Specimen whereof we have in the walks before
Fisherwick house, whose front is here engraven Tab. 15. it being the seat of
the right Honorable John Lord Viscount Massereen, Baron of Lough-Neagh, etc.
one of the noblest Patrons of this work: where the trees planted but few years
since (I think not much above 20,) are grown to a magnitude (for so many
together,) almost Parkinson's Theatrum Botanicum, Trib. 16. Chap. 96.
beyond belief. Yet if we descend to single instances, I was told of two (I
think,) that exceed these: one growing of an acorn set in a hedg-row between
Colton and Blithefield by one Ralph Bate, which he lived to see a stout Oak
bearing 2 foot square at the buttend, whereof the first ten foot which was
sawed into boards (it being lately cut down for building,) contained near a
Tun. The other was an Ash that grew in Elford Churchyard about ten years
since, which though planted within the memory of man, about 80 years before,
had a body 7 or 8 foot in diameter, i. e. 7 or 8 yards in the girth, the timber
of it being valued at thirty pound.

27. But if we step higher to trees sans date, scarce any County e're produced
such Monsters as this; to which the great Oak at Norbury that grows 'twixt the
Manor and the Windmill, that is six yards in the girth; and the fair-Oake now
standing in Cankwood, which is nine and; are but dwarfs in comparison: whereof
there lies one (the trunk of an Oak cut off at the bole,) near the Lodg-House
in Ellenhall park, of so vast a bulk, that my Man upon a horse of 15 hands
high, standing on one side of it, and I also on horsback on the other, could
see no part of each other: nay so far were we from it, that we judged the two
tallest men in the County upon horses of 15 hands could scarce have don it.
What this tree might be in girth we could not measure, the under part of it
being buried in the ground, but I judge it may be just such another Oak (only
the trunk of that grew as it were triangular,) as was felled about 20 years
since in Wrottesley park, which as the worthy Sr. Walter Wrottesley (a man far
either from vanity or imposition,) seriously told me, was 15 yards in the
girth, and lay so high when felled that two men on Horsback on each side the
tree could not see one another.

28. Bohuslaus Balbinus tells us he measured the body of an Oak in the parish
of Chodow in Bohemia just of the same bigness, viz. 45 foot in compass Bohust.
Balbini Miscell. Hist. Regni Bohemia.
: how many Tunns these trees might contain is not related, but I scarce think
either of them held so many, as the prodigious Witch-Elm that grew at Field in
this County, and was felled within memory by Sr. Harvey Bagot, which according
to an original paper put into my hands by the right Worshipful Sr. Walter
Bagot Baronet the present Proprietor, and as I had it from the mouth of Walter
Dixon yet living, who was surveyor of the work, was so very great and tall,

That two able workmen were 5 days in stocking or felling it down.

That it fell 120 foot or 40 yeards in length.

That the Stool was 5 yards 2 foot diameter, i. e.

That the tree at the butt-end was 17 yards in circumference.

That it was 8 yards and 18 inches, i. e. 25 foot about by girth measure in the
middle.

That 14 loads of Firewood, each as much as 6 Oxen could draw to the house at
Field, being not above 300 yards distant, broke off in the fall.

That there was 47 loads more of Firewood (as large as the former,) cut from
the top.

That they were forced to piece 2 Saws together, and put 3 men to each end, to
cut the body of it in sunder.

That there was cut out of it 80 pair of Nathes for Wheels, and 8000 foot of
sawn timber in boards, and planks, after six score per Cent. Which at 3s per
Cent. came to 12 pounds.

All which is attested (as a thing, I suppose, they foresaw in a little time
would otherwise become incredible,) under the hands of Sr. Harvey Bagot.
William Cowper Steward Roger Shaw Baylif Walter Dixon Surveyor Lawrence Grews
Cutters. Humphry Chettom Cutters. Francis Marshall Stockers. Thomas March
Stockers.


29. And as to the number of Tunns according to the scantlings first above
mentioned, they computed it to contain (after their gross Country way of
measure,) 96 Tuns of timber; a vast quantity indeed for one tree, and well
requiring ample testimony to render it credible: but whoever will take the
pains to cast it nicely and more artificially, according to the above mentioned
scantlings, will find that it must contain a 100 Tuns at least of neat Timber,
a fifth part (which is sufficient in such large batts,) being allowed for the
wast of rind, chipps, etc. For supposing that this tree did taper regularly
from such a base, to such a length; multiplying the area of the base, by a
third part of the length, a 100 Tuns will be found a very modest account, all
allowances for wast being granted that can reasonably be desired.

30. How much less in bigness and number of Tuns the Oak might be that grew in
the new-park at Dudley, and made the table now lying in the old Hall in Dudley
Castle is not remembered, much less can it now be computed, but certainly it
must be a tree of prodigious height and magnitude, out of which a table, all of
one plank, could be cut 25 yards 3 inches long, and wanting but two inches of a
yard in breadth for the whole length; from which they were forced (it being so
much too long for the Hall at Dudley,) to cut off 7 yards 9 inches, which is
the table in the hall at Corbins-hall hard by, the ancient seat of the Corbins,
of which family my worthy Friend Tho. Corbin Esquire is the present Survivor. What
this might want in bigness (I say,) of the former tree, is hard now to
determine, but sure it could not want much in height; for the tree that could
bear near a yard diameter at 75 foot high, may well be presumed to run up at
least forty foot higher.

31. But whether this equaled it or no, the Firr-trees above mentioned now
standing in that part of Warton which is in the parish of Norbury, it is likely
may; several of them being presumed to be about 40 yards high; but one there
is amongst them, which though but 6 yards about, above the spurrs; yet runs up
to 47 yards, at least 7 yards higher then the aforesaid Witch-Elm, as was
agreed upon by the admeasurement of it by three several persons at distinct
times: out of which perhaps as wonderful a piece of timber might be cut, as
was out of the Larch-tree mentioned by Pliny, brought to Rome with other timber
for rebuilding the bridge Naumachiaria in Tiberius Caesar's time, that contained
in length 40 yards or 120 foot, and carried in thickness every way two foot
from one end to the other; which the Emperor would not use, but commanded it to
be laid in a public place in open view as a singular and miraculous Monument
to all posterity, where it remained entire, till the Emperor Nero built his
stately Amphitheater s. And yet neither of these seem to equal the Firrs that
Chabraeus mentions were growing in his time in the wood called Thannen-wald in
the Territory of Bern, whereof some were 230 foot, i. e. above 76 yards high,
exceeding the tallest of these in Staffordshire by near 100 foot, or full 33
yards Dominici Chabraei Stirp. Schiagraph. in Appendice ad Classem 8vem. p. 608.
.

32. Beside the excesses of the Witch-Elm and other trees in the growth of
their Trunks, the excess of their force also in that growth, is not altogether
unworthy our consideration; it not being the privilege of the Palm alone,
crescere sub pondere: whereof we have a very eminent instance, in an old
Witch-Elm growing on Powk-Hill near Bentley-Hall, that has embraced and lifted
up from the ground with the growth of its root a great Stone of at least 200
weight. But we need not so much wonder at this, since we have all seen the
roots of trees undermine buildings, (particularly those of the tender Ivy,)
which could otherwise have withstood not only the batteries of time, but also
of the greatest attillery, with small or no damage: so great is the force of
insensible motion, in vegetation, as well as Art. Pliny tells us of Stones thus
embraced and enclosed within Trees; and that carried about C. Plinii 2di Not.
Hist. Lib. 16. cap. 40.
women with Child, they prevent abortions, and help them to go out their full
time u; which I thought fit to note, that if any body in this Country have
faith enough to believe it, they might know whither, upon occasion, to apply
themselves for a remedy.

33. Many other accidents there are beside the aforementioned that have
befallen the Trunks of trees in their growth; such as that trees of different
species should grow so united, as to seem to be the same, at least to grow from
the same root: whereof we have a very remarkable Specimen in the broad-Lesow
near Chartley, of an Oak and an Ash that thus grow together; and in Sr. Walter
Bagots park there are many hollies that grow thus conjoined at the root with
Oaks. Other trees there are again that though they grow from different roots,
are more strangely conjoined some height above ground; and these both of the
same, and different Species's: such are the two Ashes in the way betwixt Gnosal
and Walton-grange, which though they issue out of the ground about 8 foot
asunder, yet are joined by a cross piece passing between them about 4 foot from
the ground; much after the same manner, and caused I suppose by the same means,
as the Gallow-tree mentioned in the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. (...) 78.
. Thus there is also an Ash and an Elm near great-Sugnall, though of different
species's, and issuing from different roots, yet joined together about a foot
above ground; and at Drayton Basset, in the walk before the Manor, the seat of
the right Honorable Thomas Viscount Weymouth, there grows an Oak that so
intimately clasps a Thorn, that the Thorn seems to pass through it at several
places. The Oak is certainly a very old tree, yet the thorn must be older, for
that having the lesser body by much, it could never pass through the greater,
but must rather be enclosed by it, whence we may conclude (though we know
little of the Age of trees,) that a thorn will stand as long, if not longer
then an Oak. But these are not so remarkable as the former, because their roots
not so far distant.

34. Other trees there are that grow so conjoined, that they seem (after the
manner of some sort of Animals,) to prey upon one another: whereof I was shown
a very remarkable instance by the ingenious William Chetwynd of Rugeley Esquire in
a pasture ground in the parish of Longdon, but by the way side leading from
Hansacre to Brereton, where there grows a very fair holly on the bole of an
Oak; and so there does much such another in the way betwixt Womborn and Himly
near beggars bush; and in Womborn town near the brook side, there grows a Yew
thus on the top of an Ash. But the most signal example of this kind, is the
large C. Plinii 2di Not. Hist. Lib. 16. cap. 39.
fair birch, about the bigness of ones thigh, that grows on the bole of Oak, in
the Lane leading South from Adbaston Church, which has sent down its roots in
six branches perpendicularly through the whole length of its trunk, and
fastened them in the ground, which might be seen at a hole cut in the bottom of
the Oak; having eaten out the bowels of the old tree (as all the rest will
do,) that first gave it life, and then support. All which are occasioned no
doubt by the seeds of those trees dropped by birds in the mould on the boles of
the others, that lies commonly there, and is made of the annual r^ttings of
their own leaves.

35. But of all the accidents that ever befell the trunks of trees, there is
none more unaccountable than their being found in diverse Countries buried under
ground; as in many of the maritim parts of Holland, Zealand, Friesland, and
Groningland Mart. Scoockii Tract. de Turffis cap. 12.
: so on the coasts of England, in Suffolk near Dunwich Mr Ray's Observat.
Topograph etc. p. 7.
; in the fenns of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, particularly in the Isle of
Axholm Sr W^. Dugdales Hist. of Inbanking and drayning the Fenns chap. 27.
; and on the coast of Pembroke-shire in Wales Camdens Britannia in Pemb.
. And not only on the Sea shores, but also in diverse inland, and sometimes
up-land Countries too, as near Bruges in Flanders; where, as Boethius de Boot
relates it, they find at ten or twenty else deep, whole woods of trees, with
their trunks, boughs and leaves so distinctly appearing, that one may plainly
discern the several kinds of them, and the series of leaves which have fallen
yearly Boetii de Boot de Lapid. and Gemm. Lib. 2. cap. 158.
. Much after the same manner as Scoockius informs us they find them in the
territory of Peland near Bois le Duc in the province of Brabant Mart. Scoockii
Tract. de Turffis, cap. 12.
. And as Wormius acquaints us, in the highest and most craggy mountains of
Iceland, where no body dares venture to them, but such as have been trained up
to climb precipices from their youth, where too they must digg some else deep,
before they come to them Musaei Wormiani Lib. 2. cap. 16.
.

35. In England we have them too in many places far enough from the Sea, as in
Chatmoss in Lancashire, several parts of Yorkshire and Cheshire, and here in
many parts of Staffordshire: viz. at Laynton above mentioned, and the old Pewit
pool in the parish of Norbury; in Shebben-pool in the parish of High Offley; in
the mosses near Eardley: in the parish of Audley; and near the town of Betley:
and all these in the high Country of the Moorelands. They are found too in the
lower more Southerly parts (but these still further from the Sea) in Cranmoor
near Wrottesley; in rotten-Meddow under Wednesbury-hall; on Doreley Common in
the parish of Gnosall; in a place called Peatmoore in the lands of my worthy
Friend Mr. Rowland Frith of Thorns; and in the Moors of Handsworth: and all
these in an in land County, the nearest part whereof is at least thirty, and
some of the places above mentioned, above fifty miles from the Sea.

37. Now what sort of trees these are, whether mineral or vegetable? and if
vegetable, of what Species of trees? and if of this or that species, by what
means thus buried? are great difficulties that have disturbed many men's
thoughts, and are the points I shall endeavor to make as clear as I can. That
there is a mineral substance called lignum fossile found in the earth
representing the stumps, and parts of the trunks of Trees which never grew
above ground like other vegetables is very certain; whereof Agricola mentions
some found in the Bishopric of Hildesheim Geo. Agricolae de natura Fossilium
Lib. 7.
; and Pet. Gassendus in the life of Peireskius tells us of more found at Aqua
Spartana in Italy An. 1637 Petr. Gassendi vitae Peireskii Lib. 5. ad An. 1637.
. which are those I suppose Franciscus Stellatus Lynceus has written a whole
treatise of; Aqua Spartana being in Vmbria in Italy, where his was found, of
some parts whereof he has given us figures in sculpture; and Scoockius is of
opinion that many of the stumps and trunks of trees found in Holland, Zealand,
and Friesland, are of this mineral sort of wood; for which He brings diverse
reasons, the chief whereof are, that most of them are found without roots or
knots; without the marks of any boughs cut off; and that if ever these
subterraneous trees had grown in woods (as is presumed by their numbers) their
would have been some others found beside Firrs and the Picea, especially in the
Low Countries, where neither of these trees were ever known to grow Martini
Scoockii Tract. de Turffis cap. 12.
.

38. For which very reasons, but chiefly for the last, He would have us to
believe that the trees we find here (which indeed are most like Firrs) in the
mosses of England, are also nothing else but mineral trees: and the rather here
in England than Holland it self, because Caesar (says He) in his Commentaries
expressly tells us, that there was no firr in Britan. But by Scoockius's favor
these arguments of his, much less any of the rest alleged in the same place,
are not sufficient to bring us over to his opinion: for beside that we find
several of these trees with their roots joined to them, and the stumps of their
branches issuing from them; the timber of them swims in water, which lignum
fossile will not do, and is still as liable to the Axe, Chisel, Saw, or Plane,
as any wood whatever: so far are these trees found in our mosses here from
being mineral substances, and so well satisfied are we that they were once
vegetables. Much less still does the second argument drawn from Caesar's
Commentaries prevail upon us; for were that conclusive, by a parity of reason
we should have no beech in England: for in the very same place Caesar also
tells us, speaking of Britan, that there was there, Materia cujusq generis, ut
in Gallia, praeter abietem et fagum Jul. Caesar. Commentar. de bello Gal. Lib.
5. sub initium.
, than which last, there is no other wood more plentiful; so little heed is
there to be given to that testimony of Caesar.

39. Yet so far has this, with the present unlikelyhood that firrs were ever
natives of England, prevailed upon some; that being fully satisfied that these
subterranean trees were once vegetables, and the most likely of any sort to be
the trunks of firrs; they have rather fancyed (than that ever they grew here)
that they were brought hither from foreign parts by some vast deluge, and
particularly that of Noah, and lain here ever since in these low mosses,
whence the water went off last, when God stopped the windows of heaven, and the
fountains of the deep, and caused a wind to pass over the earth, that the
waters were assuaged Genesis chap. 8. v. 1.
. Nor seems it very impossible they should lie so long, since the plenty of
bitumen wherewith these mosses abound, may well be presumed to have preserved
them as well, as it has the dead carcases of the Egyptians for thousands of
years. But that which renders it unlikely, that I say not impossible, they
should be brought from foreign parts by Noah's flood is, that we should then
have found them indifferently in all vales alike, in the South as well as North
of England, than which nothing less: for who ever heard of them in the vales of
Evesham or Aylesbury? in the vales of white or red horse? though as fit for
their reception as any of the mosses aforementioned.

40. Beside such of these trees as are met with without their roots, appear
either to have been burnt asunder near the ground, or are found with the marks
of the Axe still remaining upon them whereby they were severed from their
stools, which are also found now standing in the same posture of growth as
when the trees stood upon them, as may plainly be seen in Shebben pool in a dry
Summer when the waters be low, where are the stumps of several, which upon
examination I found to be the same wood with that of the trees found at Laynton
and the old Pewit pool above mentioned. And Mr Skrymsher of Aqualat also told
me he had of these stools in the black Lake near Aqualat mere in the same
posture; and so they are found in the Isle of Axholm Philosoph. Transact. Numb.
67.
; which are no slight arguments that these trees were not far fetched, of
whatsoever kind they may be, nor required such a flood as that of Noah to bring
them hither.

41. Which has driven others, who are better satisfied that this moss-wood (as
some call it) grew not far from where found, than they are that it is Firr, to
think it must rather be the timber of Birches or Alders, trees that delight to
grow in such moist places, which being soak't so many years in a bituminous
turf, may become at length so well impregnated, as to imitate Firr both in the
smell and burning; which too are more agreeable to the sizes of these
subterranean trees than Firrs are, there being few of them found above a foot
diameter at the butt-end, whereas Firrs sometimes grow here in England (as may
be seen at Norbury) to be two yards in diameter. To which it may be answered,
that one reason why these subterranean trees are found so small, may be, that
all what we now find, is only the heart of the tree, which was much bigger
before the sapp was consumed; which too may be the reason that though they are
commonly found small, yet they are very long, several having been taken up in
the Isle of Axholm in Lincolnshire 30 yards long; and one not many years since
by Robert Brown of Haxey 36 yards in length beside the top, lying very near its
root which stood as it grew, from which it was burnt asunder and not cut from
it Philosoph Transact. Numb. 67. and Sr William Dugdale's Hist. of Inbanking
and draining the Fenns Chap. 27.
, as many in this County seem also to have been.

42. The very length of which trees seems conclusive enough (whatever may be
thought of ours in Staffordshire) that they never were the trunks of Birches or
Alders: though I have an argument too perhaps altogether as cogent, that some
of ours in Staffordshire must also have been Firrs as well as they, there
having been one of them taken up in Peatmoore by Mr Brown of Footerley and sent
to Captain Lane (who also well remembers the thing) that had its branches
issuing from it in a circular form at annual distances, as all Firrs have, but
birches and alders never. Not to mention again that in Staffordshire firrs yet
seem to grow naturally (as was shown. the 25 of this Chapter) not far from
Laynton and the old Pewit poole, where they are found underground; which
perhaps might be young trees not worth notice, when the others were cut down,
and have remained since untouched to this very day.

43. It being plain then that these trees thus found underground, are neither
lignum fossile, Birches, or Alders; and that it is unlikely they should be left
in the places they now are, by Noah's, or any other flood whatever: it remains
only that we show the most probable cause of their being thus buried in diverse
parts of the Nation. Which that I may do with all brevity and clearness, I
must distinguish between those found near the Sea coasts, and those in the
inland Countries; the former no doubt being overthrown and covered, either by
the violent encroachments of the Sea if near the shore, as those on the coast
of Pembrok-shire Camden in Pembr.
; and the wood that ancient writings mention was a mile and to the East of
Dunwich, which is now so far in the Sea, and may possibly some time or other
be discovered again in succeeding ages by some raking storm Mr. Ray's Observat.
Topograph. etc. p. 7.
as those in Pembrok-shire were, in the time of Hen. 2. Or else if further
within land in a flat Country such as the fenns of Lincolnshire, such effects
may follow from the stoppage of the mouths of Rivers (as the learned Sr.
William Dugdale conjectures) by vast quantityes of Mudd and Sand brought into
them by Tides, so that the waters recoyling and overwhelming such flat
Countries, may easily so loosen the roots of the trees by overmuch moisture,
that the next wind must needs overthrow them, and bury them at length in the
filth which the Rivers and Sea have jointly contributed ever since and mixed
with the stagnant water, to make such Fenns Sr. William Dugdale's Hist. of
Inbanking and drayning the Fenns. Chap. 37.
. And thus I suppose the woods of Holland and Brabant might be covered
anciently by the choking of the Rhine near the Arx Britannica, and so in some
of the Mosses and Fenns of England.

44. But where they are found in inland Countries fenced from the Sea with
hills; or in Mountainous parts, such as those of Iceland; the case must needs
be different: whether Firrs are found alone, as it is commonly in
Staffordshire; or mixed with other timber, as in some parts of Yorkshire;
whether burnt, or cut off at the Kerf, as in both places, the stumps still
remaining in the same posture they grew in the firm Earth below the moors.
That Firrs should be found any where alone, seems indeed somewhat odd, there
being other timber enough near all the places I have yet seen, where they are
so found: but if a relation be true that I met with in my travells, which as I
was told had foundation too in some ancient writings in the hands of the right
Honorable the Lord Visc. Gormanston first Viscount of Ireland, the case is not
difficult; only admitting that these Firrs were never Natives of England, but
planted here (as the story informs us) by the Danes and Norwegians. Who when
they had gotten good footing in the Land, as they had for many years; like
other Conquerors endeavored to make this as like their own Country as they
could, and planted these Firrs. Which after they had grown for about 200.
years, either upon the total destruction of them throughout England in a day,
in the time of King Ethelred Joh. Speed's Hist. of great Britan. Book 7. Chap.
44.
; or their final loss of all dominion here, after the death of Hardi-Canute;
that no memorial whatever might remain of them, the trees they had planted were
also cut down, and as many of them as grew in low moist lands (lying
inconvenient for portage,) neglected, and so thus covered in process of time by
atterration; those cut down upon the hills and higher grounds (lying readyer at
hand,) having been spent in diverse uses, many ages ago.

45. For the better understanding of which new doctrine, let the Reader take
notice, that the low grounds where these trees are now found, when they stood
and flourish't, in all probability were tolerably dry land; for the trees
whilst growing (notwithstanding the moisture shot into the valleys then, as
now,) continually spent it in their nourishment, and their as constant
exhalations; which when cut down, there being no expense for it, the valleys at
length grew into pooles; the waters whereof being thickend with perpetual
deterrations, or Earth brought from the hills and higher grounds by showers in
wet, and winds in dry weather, they came at last to be Mosses or Fenns thus
covering the trees as we now find them: which I take to be the first original
of many of our Mosses, though afterward they increase by new grass and sedg
annually growing upon the rottings of the old of the former year, and so onward.

46. Other Mosses there are too made upon the stoppage of springs by the like
deterrations, or falls of Earth, and the annual rottings of the grass, sedg,
etc. growing upon it. Now that there are such deterrations or perpetual
diminutions of all hills (except the rocky,) by every shower and wind, so that
they all grow lower, and the valleys higher; we have a remarkable instance
(beside those above mentioned Chap. 3.. 11, 12,) near the City of Gloucester,
where there was a hill that within memory interposed it self to that height
'twixt it and Churcham, that People were wont to go up into the upper rooms
of Churcham Manor house to see the pinnacles of the Cathedral of Gloucester;
whereas after some few years they could see them on the ground: and as I was
informed by the Reverend Dr. Gregory, Rector there, and Prebend of Gloucester,
whereas about 12 years since they could see out of the Churchyard at Churcham
but down to the top of the upper windows of the Steeple, they can now An. 1684.
plainly see the leads of the Isles of the Church, with most other Churches, and
some houses in the Town. So great have been the deterrations from this hill in
a few years, and no question are so from all others, in proportion to the
qualities of their respective soiles.

47. Whether the History above mentioned (it supposing firrs no natives of
England,) or the method dame Nature seems to use in making Mosses and burying
timber, gain belief of the Reader, shall not concern me much, for if they serve
only for his diversion I am abundantly satisfied: there being many other causes
assignable of such wast of timber, and the sepulture of it; such as making room
for Agriculture, which was done in the inland parts of Kent no longer ago then
our Grandfathers days, where they cut it down and made trenches by the side of
each tree, and so tumbled it in, its sale not being worth the portage even
there, so few years ago Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 6.. 56.
. So they cut and burn it down (for the greater expedition,) at this day in
Muscovy for the very same reason, as I guess some of this might be, several of
the trees still appearing to have been burnt, though they have lain so long in
these Mosses; or else if cut down for uses, wars might come on (which were
anciently very frequent,) and prevent what 'twas designed for, either by the
death of a single person, or ruin of a Family; so the timber still lying where
'twas first felled, might quickly be overgrown, and at length forgotten.

48. Which how soon it will be done, and how fast these Mosses grow, we have a
clear evidence in a parcel of timber cut down near Bishops-Castle in the
County of Salop by Sr. Robert Howard in the late civil War, which as the
Reverend and learned Mr. Obadiah Walker Master of University College told me,
being neglected by reason of the war, in six years time was half overgrown by
such a moss where it lay: though by the way it must be noted, that such weighty
bodies as timber, sink much more in proportion the first years, than ever they
do after: for it is probable from another instance, communicated by the same
worthy person, that these mosses do not rise much above an inch in a year,
from a lump of Coins of Edward the fourth of England (supposed to be lost in a
purse or cloth now rotted away,) taken up in such a moss in Yorkshire 18 foot
deep, which being about 200 years since, whoever pleases to compute it, will
find that this moss grew but about one foot in eleven years, i. e. But one inch
per annum and 1/12 proxime.

49. Hitherto having considered trunks of trees in the whole and externally
only; let us next look into them, and there we shall find perhaps as odd
Phenomenon as any attending the former: witness a rotten Crab-Tree (which I
shall not reckon amongst fruit trees, it growing wild,) cleft asunder by a
servant of Francis 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
To the right Worsp^. Sr. JOHN WYRLEY of HAMSTEAD R. This 14 Table of
Undescribed Plants in memory of his Beneficence is gratefully dedicated by RP.
LLD.



Mburg. delin. et sculp.
depictions of plans Wolferstan Esquire somewhere in the grounds near Statfold, a
part whereof he sent me hither to Oxford, wherein there are several
cylindraceous cavities generally running parallel with the grain of the wood,
except where they communicate with one another, and where the entrance is into
them; and these for the most part filled with pellets or Cartrages of the same
form, of an inch, and sometimes of an inch and long; made not of the leaves of
the same tree wound up close together, as Mr. Wolferstan thought, but plainly
of the Rose; (though they are so little scrupulous in the choice of their
leaves, that they will sometimes make use of exotic plants Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 160.
;) the side leaves always being of an oblong figure, and those of the ends
round, but bent to a convexity at one end, and a concavity at the other, the
number of both uncertain: all which if the Reader please to look back to Tab.
14 Fig. 7. He may see represented in Sculpture: where a shows the piece of
rotten Crabb-tree. b, a single Cartrage. c, one of the side leaves. and d. one
of the end leaves, both as eaten out of the Rose-leaf at e, which how
performed; by what Animal; and for what purpose; remains next to be considered.

50. Wherein I shall be short, the main having been discoverd already by Dr.
Edmund King (who had such Cartrages sent him in a piece of old Willow by Sr.
John Bernhard of Northamptonshire,) and Francis Willoughby Esquire who had them
shown him by one Mr. Snell near Astrop in the same County, also in old willow;
who unfolding the leaves and examining the inside of the Cartrages, found in
the concave end of some of them, white maggots, in others great numbers of
mites, etc. By which maggots, being kept till Summer, they found the whole
operation to have been performed by bees, to secure their eggs, and such
provision as is necessary for the Nymphae ( i. e. when they become maggots,) in
winter; which in Summer all turned to bees, eat their way forth, and so took
their flight Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 65.
. Of the corruption of which bee-maggots or Nymphae, when they happen to
miscarry, are bred (says Mr. Willoughby) 1. Little hexapodes, 2. Maggots which
produce flies; 3. mites, which produce perhaps millipedes, Xylopthori or vermes
arborei, or Scolopendrae, such as were indeed found in this rotten Crabb-tree
by Mr Wolferstan, and thought to be the operators of these Cartrages Ibid
; but had he kept any to their due time, he would have found some of the
Nymphae turned to bees, and some of them corrupted into mites, etc. As I after
did, as in the Cartrage at f. These having all stings like other bees Dr. King
thought no other then the common be; but Mr. Willoughby more nicely
considering their shape and forcipes, would not allow them to be the common
hony-bee, yet does not assign of what species it is, which I wonder at, since
upon an ordinary search he might have quickly found it to be the Musca
apiformis, which indeed is of a larger sise than the common be, has a sort of
sting, but a very imperfect one, less virulent by much than those of hony-bees:
which being all I have to add (above the necessary description,) more than what
has been discoverd by Dr. King, Dr. Lister, and Mr. Willoughby in the
Philosophical Transactions Philosoph. Transact. Number. 65.74.160.
, and the Journal des Scavans Journal des Scavans June 22. 1682.
, I referr the Reader thither for further intelligence.

51. Yet more strangely than these have other Animals been found in the body of
a tree somewhere near Biddulph, where two workmen sawing the body of a solid
Oak, one of them at length perceived blood to follow the Saw, which though it
startled them not a little, yet resolving to go on and see the issue, when
they had cut on to the end of the batt, they split it asunder, and found the
Saw had past through the body of a Hardishrew or Nursrow (as they here call
them,) i. e. a field-mouse, two others that lay by it, escaping away alive as
soon as the tree was split, which being examined and found in all parts sound,
the case remains an inexplicable riddle to all thereabout to this very day. But
methinks to any one that considers the superstitious Custom they have in this
Country of making Nursrow-trees for the cure of unaccountable swellings in
their Cattle, the thing should not seem strange. For to make any tree, whether
Oak, Ash, or Elm (it being indifferent which) a Nursrow-tree, they catch one or
more of these mice (which they fancy bite their Cattle, and make them swell,)
and having bored a hole to the center in the body of the tree, they put the
mice in, and then drive a pegg in after them of the same wood, where they
starving at last, communicate forsooth such a virtue to the tree, that Cattle
thus swollen being whipped with the boughs of it, presently recover: of which trees
they have not so many neither (though so easily made, but that at some places
they go 8 or 10 miles to procure this remedy.

52. Now though it may be improbable enough that the swellings of their Cattle
arises from the bites of these mice, but rather from the Sting of the Buprestis
or Burst-cow; the Pityocampe of Dioscorides Dioscorid. de Material. Medicina.
Lib. 6. cap. 8.
; the staphylinus of Aristotle Aristot. de Hist. Animal. Lib. 8. cap. 24.
; or those red Phalangious spiders like Cantharides mentioned by Moufet Tho.
Moufeti Insect. Theatri Lib. 2. cap. 12.
; all which have been observed to be pernicious to Cattle: yet what hinders
(since it is apprehended that these mice do it,) but one may well imagine, that
some person not far distant might according to the superstitious custom of the
Country make this Oak (unknown either to the owner or workmen) a Nursrow-tree
but a little before it came to be cut down and sawn asunder, by pegging in
these mice: Just as the Irish serve the Connough worm (a sort of Catterpiller)
which they think poisons their Cattle, though it have no poison in it, which
they shut up in a hole thus bored in a tree, where when the worm is dead, the
bark and leaves of that tree bruised and steeped in water, and given to the
Cattle they apprehend thus poisoned, ever after gives them an infallible cure
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 168.
. To which let me add the superstitious veneration that some People give in
this Country, especially in the Moorelands amongst the ancienter sort, and
sometimes those of pretty good fashion too, to the Fraxinus sylvestris or
Quicken-tree, which they firmly believe will certainly preserve them from all
fascinations, and evil spirits; upon which account many are very careful to
have a walking staff of it, and will stick the boughs of it about their bedds.
But of these trifles, I fear, more than enough.

53. Which is all concerning whole trees and their trunks, but that in general
the timber of this Country (though much of it has been destroyed of late years)
is as large and good perhaps as in any part of England; witness the very great
quantity of very good timber in the park of the right Worshipful Sr. Walter
Bagot, amongst which the Queche-Oaks are very remarkable: But the timber that
surpasses all in the County, both for quantity, greatness, and goodness, is
that in the park at Madeley-Manor, the seat of that courteous and generous
Gentleman John Offley Esquire which in memory of his many and signal favors, is
here engraven Tab. 16. where in the first place, there is so much, that as it
has been computed by indifferent judges, the whole has been thought worth 20000
pounds sterling; out of which might be culled 1000 trees, worth 8000 pounds;
and out of these again 100, that scarce would be sold for 1500 pounds; Not to
mention the great quantities of excellent timber, to be seen in many other
parks all over the County.

54. Beside the unusual accidents of whole trees and their trunks, there are
some also which have happened to their branches, fruits, and leaves; amongst
which I cannot but reckon a great parcel of Matrices or Insect-husks of the
purple-Kermes kind, adhering not only to the underside as usually, but set
quite round a branch of Thorn, found (and given me by the Worshipful Capt.
Tho. Lane of Bentley Esquire) at great Sarden: which are not the excrescencies,
much less the fruit or berries of any tree, as the Scarlet-Kermes has been too
long believed to be of the Ilex, but artificial things contiguous to the
plants, made there by Insects to preserve their Eggs and nourish their young,
as has been clearly demonstrated by the learned Dr. Lister Philosoph. Transact.
Number. 71, 72, 73.
, a man wonderfully happy both in natural discoveries, and imposing suitable
names, as he has done to these of Patellae Kermi-formes, from their form, and
manner of sticking to the branches of many sorts of Vegetables, just as
patellae do to rocks; and their giving a purple or murrey tincture; which they
perform best when the Insect is in vermiculo: for when the Insect comes to
maturity, the Husk grows dry, and the dye seems to be spent, as it was in these
of Sarden before I had them, so that I could neither tell what color they
yielded, nor what Insect they might be made by; if by the bee-kind, it must be
a wonderful small one. the patellae of ours being much smaller, than any of
those described by Dr. Lister.

55. Yet the same Dr. Lister as fortunate as he has been in the above mentioned
discovery; as himself confesses, could never discern (whatever diligence he
used) any Eggs in the center of that by-fruit that grows on the leaves of the
Oak, which we call Galls, or Oak-balls; but a worm constantly, even at their
very first appearance Philosoph. Transact. Number. 75.
; not doubting however but that diligence would some time or other discover the
Eggs themselves: which was indeed happily done An. 1680 by that curious
Observer Walter Chetwynd Esquire now high-Sherriff of the County and his ingenious
Chaplain Mr. Charles King Student of Chapter Chapter who by the help of a Microscope
observed several minute Eggs in a small Oakball, taken from the ribbe on the
back side of an Oak-leaf gathered in the field below Ingestre house; whence it
plainly appears that though it be true that these by-fruits do grow up
together with their respective worms in them, from small beginings till they
arrive at their perfection; and that these worms are furnished with food in,
and from them: yet that neither the plants on which they grow, nor their
excrescensces, do any way contribute to the generation of these insects, as
Redi imagined Franc. Redi de generat. Insectorum page 234.
; but that they have their origin from a parent-Insect which first fixed its
Egg, where the Gall rose and included it.

56. As the accidents attending the leaves of herbs and shrubbs, were chiefly
in their variation from the ordinary color, so it is in trees; and I suppose
may be met with, one where or other, in almost all kinds of them. Near
Hammerwich in the highway growing over a pond, I found a Holly-shrub bearing
leaves prettily edged with yellow; and was told of others near little-Aston
striped with the same color, whereof we have plenty here at the Physick-garden
at Oxon; and in the fine gardens at Ingestre, the lesser Maple grows thus
curiously striped. Nor do these stripings only affect the inferior sorts of
trees, but timber trees also, as may be seen in a large Ash that grows in the
hedge row (by the highway side) of the same close where the great witch-Elm
abovementioned formerly grew, near Field-hall, whose leaves are some of them
all white, (whence it enjoyes the name of the white-Ash) others striped both
white and green. And in the Park of the right Worshipful Sr. Walter Bagot
Baronet, one of the noblest promoters of this design, whose ancient and well
situat house at Blithefield is here annexed Tab. 17. there grows an Oak near
the Hill-stile with just such leaves as his Ash at Field, part of them all
white, and part white and green: which how it comes to pass that plants thus
vary in the colors of their leaves, has been so often taught already that it
would be nauseous to repeat it, therefore no more of it here Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. 6.. 38. and Chap. 7.. 13, 14, 15.
.

57. After the Timber, I proceed next to the Fruit Trees of this County that
have any thing extraordinary either in their growth, flowers, or fruit; for the
first whereof, there is an appletree within the moat of the Parsonage house at
Leigh, that spreads from boughs end to boughs end 1^ or 18 yards, in
circumference supposing them to spread uniformly, 54 yards; shading in dry
weather, and dropping in wet, upon 244 square yards of ground; under which,
allowing 3 square yards for a horse to stand on (3 yards long, and one broad,
seeming a competent proportion) and 4 square feet for a Man; above eighty
Horsemen, or 549 Footmen may be sheltered from the injuries either of Sun or
rain: a vast number for an Appletree; yet the quantity of fruit it sometimes
bears, seems equally to demonstrate the excess of its greatness, it having born
some years no less then 50 strike of apples. To which let me add the odd growth
of an old pear tree in that part of Warton which is in the Parish of Forton in
the Hortyard of Edward Low of that village, which though fallen flat on the
ground, has 6 or 7 young trees sprung perpendicularly out of the body of it, in
right angles, as it lies in plano Horizontis; each, one with another a foot in
diameter, and most of them 40 foot high.

58. As for trees that have any thing remarkable in their flowering, the
Peartree at Colmoore at the house of the heirs of Mr. Thomas Hawe, seems to be
very extraordinary, which (like Glastonbury thorn) though in frost and snow,
puts forth blossoms at Christmas: and so does a peartree in the gardens
belonging to the Castle here at Oxford: now what should occasion the early
flowering of this tree, so long before other trees of its kind, is hard to
determine, this overforwardness seeming rather to argue an excess of vigor,
than an effect of weakness; though it be worthy notice that all striped trees,
which are sick and diseased, do put forth their leaves and blossoms sooner,
than others of their kind: but should we rather grant it to be an excess of
strength, it may nevertheless (as all extremes are) be a vice in the tree, it
being commonly found in many other trees, that are over early and luxuriant in
their production of flowers, that they bear little fruit, as I have ground to
suspect neither of these do.

59. Quite contrary to a peartree I saw at one Jane Arnolds at Hamstall
Ridware, that blossoms and also bears twice in a year; When I saw it in June
An. 1680. it had large pears on it, and the blossoms at the same time for the
second Crop, which they told me would not be ripe till about Michaelmass, and
thus it does every year, like those mentioned in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordshire Chap. 6.. 86.
: which how it should come to pass, I can no way divine, unless it should arise
from a strange unaccountable mixture which may sometimes happen betwixt the
woods of the graft and the stock; when either an early fruit is grafted upon a
late stock; or a late fruit upon an early stock; the woods whereof growing up
jointly together, yet so as not to mix Sapvessells, may both produce fruit in
their respective seasons: as I have seen the same tree do Oranges, and Limmons
together, and not only upon the same branch, but in the same individual fruit,
part of it being an Orange and part a Limmon: wherein I am the more confirmed,
the first and second crop of such trees as these, seeming most commonly of
different species's, at least are of quite different sizes, the last Crop being
always less than the first.

60. And this had been all concerning fruit trees, but that I think it worthy
notice that all sorts of fruits both in Hortyards and Gardens are cultivated
here of late years, much more than anciently they were, and at some places to
that height, that they seem to endeavor to equal the best planted Counties.
For Apples I shall instance in the parish of Arley, where all the grounds and
hedges are planted, much after the manner of Worcestershire (into which indeed
it runs with a long nook) there being scarce a Cottage that has not some
proportionable plantation belonging to it, having all sorts of Pippins of the
best, and so of other fruit; the Red-streak indeed thrives not over well with
them, but the Jennet Moyle exceedingly, insomuch that it is thought that were
not their fruit sold abroad, they could make in this parish at lest 200
Hogsheads of Cider per Annum, whereof I drank some that was excellent in its
kind, at the right Worshipful Sr. Henry Lyttleton's Baronet, a worthy Patron
of this work.

61. And for Cherries, the plantations at Packington upon the estate of the
Worshipful -- Gage Esquire are so very extraordinary, that they seem even to vye
with Kent it self; the Trees being all planted in the Quincunx order, thriveing
well, and producing fair and well tasted fruit; and this not for a little spot
or two, but in as large gardens as I have seen any where, there being one wholly
of Cherries, of 23 Acres. And for fruits of the Parterre or House-Gardens,
there are as choice at Ingestre, as in most gardens of the South; though I
think the greatest variety of all kinds is to be found in the Gardens of the
Worshipful Rowland Okeover of Okeover Esquire one of the noblest Encouragers of
this work, whose ancient Seat is here represented Tab. 18. where there are now
growing 60 different sorts of Apples; 20 sorts of Pears; 16 sorts of Cherries;
35 sorts of Apricots, and other plumms; and 7 sorts of Nectrons and Peaches; of
all which I have Catalogues by me: but having already (I fear) tired the
Reader with too tediouse a travel through the vegetable Kingdom, I forbear
their recital, and proceed with all speed to the Animal-one.

CHAP. VII. Of Brutes.
1. UNder the title of Brutes I comprehend (as in Oxfordshire) all Animals
whatever that have sense and locomotion, except the rational; whether they are
the inhabitants of the Air, Water, or Earth; such as Birds, Insects, Fishes,
Reptiles, and Quadrupeds: in the handling whereof as in the Chapter of formed
Stones, I shall pursue the Method of the whole work, and treat first of such as
have their abode in the Air; then descend to the Inhabitants of the Waters; and
lastly conclude with the terrestrial Animals; and in each of these species (as
in the former Chapter) I shall consider only such, as are 1. either wholly
undescribed, by any Author I have yet met with; or 2. have not been noted by
the learned Mr. Willughby or Mr. Ray to be indigenae of this County; or 3. have
had very extraordinary accidents attending them.
Which if sufficient for a Chapter in the small County of Oxford, there is no
great danger but they may be so in this, without addition of what relates to
rational Animals, which I shall therefore reserve for the succeeding Chapter.
And first of the Birds of this County.

2. Which have been so nicely inquired into, by the learned and indefatigable
Mr. Willughby and Mr. Ray, that I have met with but two that I can safely say
are wholly undescribed; which are 1. a sort of Swan they have upon the Trent
near Rugeley, whose legs are never black, or rather of that leaden color
which other Swans are; but of a blushy red like those of a tame Goose, whence I
think I may take the boldness to give it the Epithet of Cygnus Anseroides.
These at first indeed I thought might be Hoopers or wild-Swans whose feet are
not black, but of a dusky yellow; but when I understood that they were as large
and white as the tame Swan, which the wild-Swan is not; and as the ingenious
Mr. Chetwynd of Rugeley told me, that the Cygnets of some of these were as
white as the old ones; I could not then but conclude, but it must be a
different kind from any yet described in any Author I can find. To which
perhaps I might add another whole-footed water foul that they have about
Amerton, which they call French geese, and no question they are of the Goose
kind, differing in nothing from the common, but in the bill which is black, and
in the noise it makes, which is like that of a Bittern: But in all probability
it is the Anser Cygnoides Guineensis Mr. Willughby's Ornithology. Book. 3 Sect.
6. Memb. 1. Chap. 2.. 5.
, so called I suppose from the blackness of its bill, though I do not find in
Authors it has the voice of a Bittern.

3. Much more sure am I that a cloven-footed water-fowle, a sort of Loone or
Doucker shown me by my worthy Friend Francis Wolferstan Esquire in his Parlour at
Statfold, but killd at Combeford, is an undescribed bird: for though it agree
with other Loons, in having a narrow straight sharp-pointed bill, no tail,
small short wings disproportionable to the body, and the legs set on so near
the rump, and so far from the center of gravity in the bird, that it can
neither fly, nor conveniently walk; but seems wholly contrived for quick swiming
and easy diving; which is also further evident from its broad flat legs and
finned toes, which though not webb'd together, yet have lateral membrans all
along both sides of them, and broad claws like human nails: though I say in all
these it agree with the cloven-footed, fin-toed Douckers that want tails (for
there are some that have them) yet it differs in the head from all others I
ever saw, or could meet in the books; it not being only crested, and horned,
with two long tuffts of feathers, set on about the crown of the head; but
adorned also underneath the throat with two as remarkable tuffts hanging down
like an old fashioned divided beard as in Tab. 22 Fig. 1. whence it may justly
claim the name of Colymbus cristatus cornutus barbatus, it being quite
different, if we may believe the Cut, from the crested Loon of Aldrovand Ulyss.
Aldrovand. Ornothol. lib. 19. cap. 52.
; and the horned one of Mr. Willughby Willugh^y's Ornithol^gy Tab. 61.
, which has longer wings; and legs not set on so near the rump, as this has.

4. But of unusual Birds not noted by Mr. Willughby to be indigen^e of this
County, there are several that have, and are daily met with, whereof some of
the (...), or greater rapacious diurnal kind, witness the Eagle in Beaudesart
Hall killed in the park: some of the lesser rapacious kinds, have been also
found here; such as the Lanius or Collurio, suspected to be the Tyrannus of
Aristotle, the Butcher-bird or Wierangel, here called the Shriek or French-Pye,
whereof there was one killd at Sierscot in the parish of Tamworth, in the
estate of the right Honorable the Lord Visc. Massereen. There is of them also
in Needwood, and in Bramshall park, they are of the color and bigness of a
Thrush, and most commonly seed upon Insects; yet often they prey not only upon
small birds, but even Thrushes themselves, upon which account they have
sometimes been reclaymed by Falconers to fly at small game. And for birds with
streighter, or less hooked bills, of the poultry kind, that feed on leaves and
berries; the Vrogallus minor, the Heathcock, Grous, or black-game, is frequent
here amongst the mountains in the Moorlands; and so is the Lagopus altera
Plinii, in some places called the Gorcock, here the red-game, which lie on the
very tops of the mountains, but are not quite so common, whence more esteemed
than the former: said only to be found here, in the Peak of Darby, and
mountains of Wales; but Mr. Willughby says they have them too, in Westmorland
and Yorkshire Ornithology Book. 2. Sect. 1. chap. 12.. 7.
.

5. Of unusual small birds here are also several, both of the soft and slender,
and the short hard beak'd kinds; such as the Hirundo apus or black Martin, here
called the Martlet, which I believe indeed is the bird intended by that name in
Heraldry, and not the Hirundo agrestis sive rustica Plinii, it having so very
long wings, and so short legs and small feet, that it cannot easily rise from
the ground unless it be very plain, and free from grass; wherefore it either
always flies, or sits upon the tops of Churches, Towers, or else hangs on other
ancient buildings by its sharp claws, from which it falls and so takes flight:
of these I saw at Share shall, near Hilton, and Beaudesart; where too in a
Quarry near the house, I saw the Hirundo riparia or ground Martin, of a
dark-dun or Mouse-colour, which is the least of all the Swallow kind, and makes
holes into the sides of banks and cliffs about a yard forward in plano
Horizontis, where it builds its nest. To which add the Fringilla montana sive
Montifringilla, the (...) of Aristotle, the Brambling or mountain Chaffinch, of
the short hard beak'd kind; found plentifully about Venice, and described by Mr
Willughby Ibid. Book. 2. Sect. 2. memb. 2. Chap. 6.. 2.
, but rarely in England; this I have, was killed and given me by the ingenious
Mr. Miller Vicar of Wednesbury near the Vicaridg house. Nor must the
Coccothraustes or Gross-beak be forgotten, a bird says Mr. Willughby rare in
England Ibid. Book. 2. Sect. 2 Memb. 2. Chap. 1.. 1.
, yet found and killed somewhere about Madeley-Manor, and now in the possession
of the virtuous Madam Offley, a Lady that has an excellent artifice in
preserving birds.

6. And of unusual birds frequenting the water, here are also diverse kinds,
some of them cloven footed and piscivorous, though they build their nests on
the tops of trees; as the Ardea cinerea or common Heron or Heronshaw, whereof I
saw diverse siting on the tops of the highest trees in Norbury park. Bellonius
indeed denies that they breed in England, but there are many other instances
whereby he may be confuted beside this, in diverse parts of the Nation, though
this I think is the best in this County. The Colymbus major the great Loon or
Arsfoot is also found in this County, whereof I had one given me by the
Honorable Lady Jane Leveson Gower, killed somewhere near Trentham, in all parts
corresponding with the cloven-footed fin-toed Loones without tails, described
as above. 3. of this Chapter. Of whole footed water foul the Avosetta Italorum
or Recurvirostra, is also found here, as well as in the Eastern parts of
Norfolk and Suffolk, there having been of them killed at the black- Lakes near
Aqualat, eight of them being seen first in the morning, and but six at night
when they shot; which needs no other description, but that its bill is reflext
upward, which is peculiar to this bird, ending in a thin slender weak point,
somewhat of the consistence and strength of a Whale-bone of the same size.

7. But the strangest whole-footed water foul that frequents this County is
the Larus cinereus Ornithologi, the Larus cinereus tertius Aldrovandi, and the
Cepphus of Gesner and Turner Cour. Gesneri de Avibus Lib. 3.
; in some Counties called the black-Cap, in others the Sea or Mire-Crow, here
the Pewit; which being of the migratory kind, come annually to certain pooles
in the Estate of the right Worshipful Sr. Charles Skrymsher Knight to build
and breed, and to no other Estate in, or near the County, but of this Family,
to which they have belonged ultra hominum memoriam, and never moved from it,
though they have changed their station often. They anciently came to the old
Pewit poole above mentiond Vid. supra Chap. 6.. 36.40.42.
, about amile S. W. of Norbury Church, but it being their strange quality (as
the whole Family will tell you, to whom I referr the Reader for the following
relation) to be disturbed and remove upon the death of the head of it, as they
did within memory, upon the death of James Skrymsher Esquire to Offley-Moss near
Woods-Eves, which Moss though containing two Gentleman's land, yet (which is
very remarkable) the Pewits did discern betwixt the one and the other, and
build only on the Land of the next heir John Skrymsher Esquire so wholly are they
addicted to this family.

8. At which Moss they continued about three years, and then removed to the old
pewit poole again, where they continued to the death of the said John Skrymsher
Esquire which happening on the Eve to our Lady Day, the very time when they are
laying their Eggs, yet so concerned were they at this Gentleman's death, that
notwithstanding this tie of the Law of Nature, which has ever been held to be
universal and perpetual, they left their nest and Eggs; and though they made
some attempts of laying again at Offley-Moss, yet they were still so disturbed
that they bred not at all that year. The next year after they went to Aqualat,
to another Gentleman's Estate of the same family (where though tempted to stay
with all the care imaginable) yet continued there but two years, and then
returned again to another poole of the next heir of John Skrymsher deceased,
called Shebben poole in the parish of high Offley where they continue to this
day, and seem to be the propriety, as I may say (though a wild-fowle) of the
right Worshipful Sr. Charles Skrymsher Knight, their present Lord and master.

9. But being of the migratory kind, their first appearance is not till about
the latter end of February, and then in number scarce above six, which come as
it were as harbingers to the rest, to see whether the Hafts or Islands in the
pooles (upon which they build their neasts) be prepared for them; but these
never so much as lighten, but fly over the poole scarce staying an hour: about
the sixth of March following, there comes a pretty considerable flight, of a
hundred or more, and then they alight on the hafts, and stay all day, but are
gone again at night. About our Lady Day, or sooner in a forward Spring, they
come to stay for good, otherwise not till the beginning of April, when they
build their nests, which they make not of sticks, but heath and rushes, making
them but shallow, and laying generally but 4 eggs, 3 and 5 more rarely, which
are about the bigness of a small Hen-egg. The Hafts or Islands are prepared for
them between Michaelmass and Christmas, by cutting down the reeds and rushes,
and putting them aside in the nooks and corners of the hafts, and in the
valleys to make them level; for should they be permitted to rot on the Islands,
the Pewits would not endure them.

10. After three weeks sitting the young ones are harch't, and about a month
after are almost ready to fly, which usually happens on the third of June,
when the Proprietor of the poole orders them to be driven and caught, the
Gentry comeing in from all parts to see the sport; the manner thus. They pitch
a Rabbit-net on the bank side, in the most convenient place over against the
hafts, the Net in the middle being about ten yards from the side, but close at
the ends in the manner of a bow; then six or seven Men wade into the poole
beyond the Pewits, over against the Net, with long staves, and drive them from
the hafts, whence they all swim to the bank side, and landing run like Lapwings
into the Net, where people standing ready, take them up, and put them into two
penns made within the bow of the Net, which are built round, about 3 yards
Diameter, and a yard high or somewhat better, with small stakes driven into the
ground in a circle, and interwoven with broom and other raddles, as in Tab. 19.
at the bottom whereof is represented in Sculpture, the poole, and whole method
of taking these Pewits; and Norbury Manor at the top, the seat of the
Proprietor, a most generous Encourager of this work.

11. In which manner there have been taken of them in one morning 50 dosens at
a driving, which at 5s per dosen (the ancient price of them) comes to twelve
pounds ten shillings: but at several drifts that have been anciently made in
the same morning, there have been as many taken as have been sold for thirty
pounds, so that some years the profit of them has amounted to fifty or
threescore pounds, beside what the generous Proprietor usually presents his
Relations, and the Nobility and Gentry of the County withal, which he
constantly does in a plentiful manner, sending them to their houses in Crates
alive, so that feeding them with livers, and other entrals of beasts, they may
kill them at what distance of time they please, according as occasions present
themselselves, they being accounted a good dish at the most plentiful Tables.

12. But they commonly appoint 3 days of driving them, within fourteen days or
thereabout, of the second or third of June; which while they are doing, some
have observed a certain old one that seems to be somewhat more concerned than
the rest, being clamorous, and striking down upon the very heads of the Men;
which has given ground of suspicion that they have some Government amongst
them, and that this is their Prince, that is so much concerned for its
Subjects. And it is further observed that when there is great plenty of them,
the Lent-Corn of the Country is so much the better, and so the Cow-pastures
too, by reason they pick up all the worms, and the Fern-flyes, which though
bred in the Fern, yet nip and feed on the young corn and grass, and hinder
their growth.

13. Other birds there are here that are more commonly seen, and do not only
breed, but remain constantly in the Country, and are therefore called
perennial; which yet many of them have had something extraordinary either in
their colors, limbs, eggs or time of production, that has rendered them
remarkable. At hill-Ridware I was told of a white Poppinjay; and at Apedale
near the house of one John Middleton, for three or four years together, there
were white Crows hatched in the same neast with black ones, whereof some they
sold as rarities for half crowns a piece: which in all probability must come
to pass, by a hen-crow of an ordinary color, being trod by a cock of the
Royston-breed, or from Norway, or Greenland where they are commonly white, or
vice versa; as we see it often falls out in dogs and other Animals. Which is
further confirmed to me by a white Sparrow killed at Aldrich, which built about
Mr. Jourdans house there, and produced young ones, some white, some gray, and
others speckled with white and the usual color, of other Sparrows.

14. And in their beaks and legs, I met with so many deformities, and unusual
excesses, that it would be endless to recount them: the chief are these. In the
Hall at Bentley there is a Ravens head whose bill is crook't both ways, the
Mandibles crossing one another, like those of the Shell-Apple or Cross-bill,
the lower chap turning upwards, and the upper downwards. And in the
Coffee-house at Lichfield, I was shown another Ravens head, whose upper
mandible turned downward, and crossed the lower; but the under one straight,
only much longer than the upper as in Tab. 22. Fig. 2. At great Bridgford there
was a Pidgeon produced with two heads; and there was a Pewit caught at Norbury
with 4 legs. Not to mention a Goose, I was told, was hatched at Shelfield with
three legs, the third issuing from about the rump, and hanging loose, being of
no use to the Animal, as indeed few of these excesses of nature are: which
perhaps may arise, as Fabricius thinks, either from Ova Gemellifica, that is,
Eggs with two Yolks, two Whites, two Chalazae or treddles, two Cicatriculae
etc. i. e. that have every thing double Hieron. Fabricii ab Aquapedente de
formatione Ovi and pulli. p. 19.
; or as Harvey rather thinks, when two Yolks are included within one white; and
are so joined, that the Cicatriculae expanded, make but one colliquamentum Gul.
Harvei de Generat. Animalium Exercit. 23. de Ovis gemellificis.
: which latter indeed seem much the likelyer of the two.

15. Which brings me next to consider the Eggs of birds, and their time of
hatching, wherein I also met with diverse Anomalies of Nature: the ingenious Mr.
Miller vicar of Wednesbury amongst his tithe-Eggs, met with one whose Yolk was
as perfectly white, as that we usually call so, the separation betwixt them
remaining as distict as in ordinary Eggs i. e. He met with an Egg with two
whites including one another, such as Aristotle calls imperfect, improlific
Eggs, which will never produce Chicken, and Hieronymus Fabricius, Ova centenina
Hieron. Fabr. ab Aquapend. de format. Ovi and pulli. p. 10.
; they being a sort of Eggs (as he would have us believe) which hens lay at
last, after they have excluded a hundred before; or the last they lay, after
they have made an end of laying for that year; which whether true, or no,
depends upon the credit of the Author: But that such Eggs as these (as
Aristotle says) must be imperfect and barren, is certain enough; the Yolk in an
Egg being equally necessary for the production and maintenance of a chick as
the white, and vice versa Gul. Harvei de Generat. Animalium Exercit. 35.
: for which reason too, the Eggs mentioned by Aristotle, that were all Yolk
(which the Augurs looked upon as very wonderful) must also be numbered amongst
the imperfect Eggs Aristot. de Hist. Animal. Lib. 6. cap. 2.


16. As to the frequency of Hen's laying their Eggs, Dr Harvey tells us that
some there be in England that will lay an Egg every day, yet that these are not
the most fruitful; which for the most part lay an Egg for two days together
(in the morning of the first day, and toward evening the second) and rest the
third Gul. Harvei de Generat. Animal. Exercitat. 12.
. But as I was informed by the ingenious Tho. Broughton of Broughton Esquire there
was a Hen then belonging to Ann Biddulph of Edgiall, when I was traveling this
County, that would ordinarily lay 3 Eggs in a natural day, or 24 hours; and
that the same thing in a manner had been found in Ducks, at Mr. Noble's of
Charley, where eight Duckes being shut up all night; sometimes laid 9,
sometimes 10, and once no less than 12 Eggs in a night; which was looked on by
the good-housewives as very extraordinary: and yet little less than this we
find was observed as long ago as Aristotle, who not only tells that the
Hadrianic hens laid every day, but that there were some tame Hens laid twice
per diem; but then that the former ordinarily broke their Eggs, and so
destroyed their young; and the latter themselves, by their over much
fruitfullness Aristot. de Hist. Animalium Lib. 6.
; which whether either of ours have been liable too, I neither enquired, nor
heard.

17. The time of hatching their Eggs, by some sort of foul, has also been
noted here in some places, to be very extraordinary: Thus the worthy Mr.
Chetwynd in his park at Ingestre observed young Ravens to go to bough on
Newyears day, which therefore must be hatched in the winter near Christmas; as
some also were in Ashmers Park near Wolverhampton, An. 1665, by a Raven that
constantly built there for many years. Thus as Cardan acquaints us, in the 16
year of the reign of David King of Cardan acquaints us, in the 16 year of the
reign of David King of Scots, which was An. 1347. the sheep in that Country
brought forth no young; nor the Crows and Daws in the Summer, but all in the
Winter, which he observes that year was a very warm one, and fit to promote
fruitfullness in oviparous Animals, as (he says) has been long since noted by
the best housewives, who if they would have Hens lay plentifully in Winter,
always shut them up in a warm room Hieron. Cardan de Varietate Rer. Lib. 2.
cap. 13.
. Which it is probable might be the occasion that the Ducks at Charley laid so
many Eggs more than usual, being shut up all night in a warm house, which had
they been left abroad perhaps they might not have done.

18. But before we take leave of the Inhabitants of the air, let us next
consider what flying Insects there be, worthy our notice, which I put after
birds, because they fly ordinarily lower, contenting themselves for the most
part with the air most immediately circumambient of the terraqueous globe:
amongst which, that which justly claims the first place, both for rarity and
strangeness, is the Lampyris or (...); otherwise from its shining in the night
(...); and because the light arises from two small specks on the under side of
the tail, near the end, (...) or (...); in Latin Cicindela, from cis and
candeo; in opposition to the (...), the Cucujus or Indian Glow-fly of Moufet;
and Pyragonus of Aristotle; in English the flying Glowworm, or Lanthorn-fly,
because it can show or cover its light at pleasure, having as it were the
command of a natural dark-Lanthorn. Of which there have been several seen near
Bradwall in this County by the learned and ingenious Ralph Sneyd Esquire about the
year 1678; but first noted to be in England from the testimony of an
Eyewitness by Mr. John Ray Mr. Ray's Observations Topograph. etc. p. 409.410.
; since that met with again about Midsummer in the years 1680 and 1684 at
Northaw in Hertfordshire by the ingenious Richard Waller Esquire fellow of the
Royal Society, who has given us accurate Cut, and I think the best account we
have had of it yet Philisoph. Transact. Number.
.

19. For I find him to have determined two or three controversies amongst
Authors, concerning this Insect; as first that there are femal
flying-glow-worms as well as males, which he asserts also to have been known to
Julius Scaliger, but I do not find it in my edition of his Exercitations, the
expression there being; Primum scito, Cicindelam a me cum suo mari deprehensam
in coitu, without the Epithet, volantem Jul. Caes. Scaligeri Exercitat. Lib.
15. Exercit. 191.
; it suffices however that he himself caught both male and female coupled,
betwixt which he could perceive no difference but in the Size (the female being
a little the larger) both having wings alike: whereas it was always supposed
before by Moufet Th. Moufet. de Insectis cap. 15.
Tho. Bartholin Tho, Bartholini de Luce Animalium Lib. 2. cap. 12.
and Mr. Ray J. Ray's Observat. Topograph. p. 409. 410.
that these winged Glowworms were nothing else, but the males of the common
creeping unwinged ones, we see so commonly shining in the bottoms of hedges.
Nor does the testimony of Fabius Columna, brought by Mr. Ray (which I cannot
find neither in my edition) viz. that Carolus Vintimiglia of Palermo saw a
flying Glowworm couple with many unwinged ones, one by one, after the manner
of Silkworms; hinder but there may be also winged females: for how often do
we see, different species of more perfect animals than these, couple together;
and yet we do not hence conclude, that one of these Species must therefore
needs be the female to the other, and that they have none beside.

20. He asserts too, that the male as well as female, he saw coupled, both
shined alike, and that when the tails of one of them was cut off, it continued
to shine but a very little while (no longer he supposed than life remained in
that part) but sensibly decayed till at last it went out: whereas Mr. Ray upon
the credit of an Eyewitness asserts, that the males do but rarely, if at all
shine with us Ibid
. And Scaliger brings in Cardan asserting (though I cannot find it in him)
Marem alatum hic quoque esse, sed non lucere, i. e. that the winged Cicindela
does not shine Jul. Cas. Scaligeri Exercitat. Lib. 15. Exercit. 194.
And as for their shining after death Fabius Columna is express, that the
tails of his Cicin felae continued to shine after they were cut off, as long
as they had any moisture in them Fab. Columnae, Aquatil. and Terrestr.
Observat. cap. 17.
; and Dr Stubbs is as positive, that the fire-flyes of Jamaica do continue
their light some days after they are dead Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 36.
; Sr. Tho. Brown also grants that a glowworm will give a faint light for near
a days time after it is conceived to be dead: but then he answers himself, and
the former Authors too, by suspecting that this is by a mistake in the
computation of death, for that the parts of Insects (as Mr. Waller also
observes) do live a long time after they are separated, though they show not
any visible evidences of life D. Thomae Brown Pseudodoxiae Epidemicae Lib. 3.
cap. 27.
; so that as long as the luminous moisture in these Insects has the least
motion given it from any life left in them (though insensible to us) we may
afford them to exert their shining quality, but not after.

21. Amongst the winged Insects it is also worth notice, that at Throwley, the
Seat of the right Honorable the Countess of Ardglass, I was shown by the most
ingenious Charles Cotton Esquire the forficula or Ear-wigg of a milk white color,
which are ordinarily of a Chestnut. And it is very considerable that another
curious Observer of this County, opening a small fly de genere (...) sive
vaginipennium, by the help of a Microscope, saw two living Insects come out
from within it, both alive, exactly alike, and very nimble, which in this state
most resembled Cheese-mites of any thing he knew; only they were something
bigger and had longer horns, but wanted bristles and were of a reddish color,
which by a strong reflection of light from their backs, and the variety of
colors caused thereby, he could perceive they were of the crusty or
sheath-winged kind, which yet had been observed before by the learned Dr.
Lister, though not published till in June 84 Philoph. Transact. Numb. 160.
. So that this observation seems as well to be this Gentleman's, as Dr. Listers,
who are altogether unknown to one another.

22. The same worthy person opening another Insect next door to flying (it
being called a flea, as some would have it, a verbo to fly, quia adeo
celeriter saltat, ut volare videatur) found in those of them of a reddish
color, not only Eggs of an ellypticall form, but in one that he opened (by the
help of a Microscope) a young flea completely formed in all its parts, of a
whitish color, wherein it seems they not only agree with the Moors in being
viviparous Animals, but also in that they produce their young white, though
they become black after, which too hang to the old ones for some time after
they are excluded, whence it is so frequent to catch an old flea and a young at
the same time. From which two instances, Jacobaeus may be instructed, that the
Scorpion is not the only insect that brings forth its young alive and perfect,
without laying eggs Tho. Bartholmi Act. Med. and Philosoph. Hafn. vol. 5.
, the Flea laying none: for who ever saw any nits of a flea, any where
excluded, as those of a louse are, upon hair, cloth, etc?

23. There are another sort of insects too de genere (...), which in some sense
also may be allowed to fly, such are all Spiders (except those long-legged ones
we call Shepherds, which never spin any thread) which in October chiefly, will
turn up their tails and project one or more threads with that violence, that
they shall reach cross rooms over rivers, and be fastened betwixt trees, in
plano Horizontis, at several fathoms distance; and sometimes will dart them
into the Air to such a length, that the Spiders leaping up after them, will be
carried into the air, and there sail at the end of these threads to a great
height and distance: by which means it is that the trees, hedges, stubble, and
the air it self, is so filled with these threads, some single and some
complicated, as we frequently see they are at that time of year. The discovery
whereof seems to have been made much about the same time both by Dr. Lister and
Dr. Hulse as plainly appears in the Philosophical Transactions Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 50. and 65.
. Since which, the same thing has also been observed by diverse others,
particularly in this County by the ingenious Mr. King, Chaplain to Mr.
Chetwynd, from whose notes I shall only add such matter, as was not so fully
observed by the aforementioned Authors.

24. As first, that in their projecting a thread cross a room in plano
Horizontis (which they do for their easier and more direct passage) they raise
themselves on their legs as high as they can, setting them very straight and
stiff, and turning their hinder parts up higher than usual, they will shoot out
a thread to a great distance, which when fastened where they would have it, with
their fore legs they will wind up the thread shorter till it is very straight,
as the Funambuli strain their roaps, and then like them too, will get upon it,
and run from one end to the other. And as to their sailing at the ends of these
threads, he further observed, not only that they sailed much swifter, than any
wind then stirring could carry them, but that at the same time they constantly
sailed all the same way, which was not directly with, but as he once noted at 8
points distance, as it were with a side-winde; which plainly shows that they
do not only row, but steer too, with the motion of their feet, according as
directed by some secret instinct they have in them.

25. Having done both with the Insects that really fly, and that do so only
in a larger sense, I proceed next to such as live in the waters; whereof my
worthy friend Francis Wolferstan Esquire sent me one, out of many, he found swiming
about in filthy water, that stood a yard deep, in the bottom of a large hollow
Elm; which I cannot find after long search, but is wholly undescribed: the
bodies of them being better than an inch long, and of an inch diameter; full,
white, and round; and the outer Skin upon back and belly made up from head to
tail of protuberant Ridges, those under the belly at a not shooting right
against those on the back or sides, but against the furrows between them, which
counterchanging of the ridges make the the indentures on the sides; the head
striated, with antennae issuing from a flat roundish face; the body filled with
so thin a white matter, that they are in a manner transparent, in so much that
a sort of peristaltick motion may sometimes be perceived in them; having 14
short feet (7 on each side) much like those of a Maggot two being placed in the
ends of every other semicircle of the belly; and a joynted tapring tail four
or five inches long as in Tab. 22. Fig. 3. which they can contract to an inch,
and extend it again at pleasure to its full length. Whence it is plain that it
is a sort of Eruca, but such an one as I find not described, which perhaps may
not unfitly be styled eruca glabra caudata aquatico-arborea, but I tie not up
the Reader from his better choice, of a more agreeable name, if hereafter from
further knowledge of the nature of the Animal, he can impose a better on it.

26. Thus being come to the waters, and having done with the Insects; nature
directs me next to proceed to the Fishes, the most frequent Inhabitants of that
element: which, here in this inland Country, being only fresh, such as is
contained in Rivers, Lakes, and Pooles, nothing must be expected concerning
fish here, but such only as are either (...) usually living in Rivers; (...)
commonly found in Lakes; or (...) that are kept in ponds or Stews; or in one,
more, or all of these. Of which kinds there are so many in this County, that
some have fancyed no less than thirty sorts in the River Trent, as if a corrupt
name by contraction from triginta; but this I take but for the imagination of
some fond Etymologist: however I think there may be as many here of all these
kinds, as in any other such inland County, where there can be none of the
(...), that for certain intervalls of time live both at Sea, and in rivers: and
yet I could hear of but one amongst them all, that I think undescribed, and
that one of the smooth sort, without Scales, and for its solitary way of
living, of the (...), there having not above four of them been caught, that I
could hear of, within memory, and these all single without any company, no not
so much as of their own kind.

27. Whereof this represented here in Sculpture Tab. 22. Fig. 4. was taken in
the river Tame in the damm near Fasely bridge, by Goodyer Holt Free-Mason, as he
was repairing it Aug. 11.1654. who presented it to Colonel Comberford of
Comberford, who caused it to be drawn to the life, and placed it in his Hall,
where it still hangs, and whence this draught was taken in a less proportion:
its length in the picture being 20 inches long, from the fore finn on the back
to the belly 4 inches, of a greenish-ash color, powdered all over with small
round yellowish spots; the Iris of the Eye of a bluish color; having two
small Cirri or wattles issuing out of the nose near the mouth, and one larger
one out of the jaw; and four finns near the gills, the two smaller placed
foremost, and the larger hindmost; with a straight line running from the upper
part of the gills to the setting on of the tail; having also under the belly,
a fin reaching from the exit of the excrement, almost to the tail, with
another on the back somewhat longer, and a fore-fin preceding it, the tail
roundish, not at all forked; in all which particulars it agrees pretty well
with the Mustella vulgaris of Rondelet Gul. Rondeletii de Piscibus marinis.
Lib. 9. cap. 15.
but not in the broadness of the head; largness and roundness of the finns at
the gills; nor smoothness of those both on the back and belly; which in
Rondelet's Mustella, are prickly like those of a Perch, and which is more than
all, the Mustella a Sea, and this a fresh water Fish.

28. Nor yet must we call it the Mustella fluviatilis, or Lota of Rondelet Gul.
Rondeletii Lib. de piscibus lacustribus cap. 19.
which though found in rivers and lakes; having most of the things common with
ours, that the Mustella vulgaris has; yet remarkably differs, in that its head
is not near so broad; being a squammous fish; having but one barb or wattle
under the lower jaw, none in the upper; the tail sharp; and as thick powdered
with black spots, all over the body, as ours is with yellow. The most like it
of any that I have met with in Authors is the Mustela fluviatilis of the Lake
of Constance, by Gesner called the Gwell fish, which is of the smooth kind, and
in the general, shape of body and head answers ours well enough; only like the
Lota it has no wattles comeing out of the Nose; the two smaller fins at the
gills being also divided, whereas ours are round; and as thick marked all over
with black spots as ours is with yellow Conr. Gesneri de Aquatilibus Lib. 4.
cap. de Mustela.
So that either this is not the same fish, or else so ill described by Gesner,
that there was need enough of a new one. However we may allow it to be a
Mustela fluviatilis, though in Staffordshire by some, it is called a Burbot or
bird-bolt, perhaps from that sort of Arrow rounded at head, somewhat like this
fishes; by others, from the oddness of the shape, and rarity of meeting them,
the Nonsuch; there having never but four (that I could hear of) been found
within memory; this at Faseley-bridg; another at Willeford near Fisherwick; a
third near Colton Mill; and a fourth near Alrewas: which either were not at
all, or never till now at lest well described, and so will be found by any,
that can give themselves leisure to consult the ancient Ichthyographers.

29. But though I heard only of this single fish that I think undescribed (for
that there are a sort of Crevices in the stream that passes by Overend and
Longdon, that will not boil red, is only accidental, as was shown before in
Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 7.. 31.
) yet I was informed of diverse very unusual observations, concerning scaled, as
well as smooth fish, relating either to their breeding, habitation, feeding, or
magnitude; perhaps worthy knowledge: such as their breeding and living in
Coal-works, whereof there is an indisputable instance, in the drowned
Coal-pit-open-works S. W. of Wednesbury, into which Pike, Carp, Tench, Perch,
etc. being put for breed, they not only lived, but grew and thrived to as large
a magnitude, as perhaps they would have done any where else, and were to the
palate as grateful: so that though the canckerd waters that are long stagnant
in the hollows of the old works, will destroy fish, as was hinted in the end of
the second Chapter of this Book Chap. 2. 129.
, yet it is not so in waters that fill up the open-works, which constantly
enjoy the ventilations of the Air, and the sweet influences of the heavens both
night and day.

30. There are other fish too, both of the scaled and shell'd kinds, that will
live and breed in places very uncommon to their species: thus Gudgeons and
Crevices live well and breed in the pooles at Bentley, and thrive to a just
magnitude, but then these ponds are always fedd with Springs. Others there are
again, that though they will live in unsuitable places, yet will never spawn
there; and such were the Carps the right Honorable the Lord Ferrers took forth
the poole at Drineton, whose spawn still lyeing in their bodies and increasing
yearly, distended their bellys into such various ill shapes, that they appeared
monstrous, the spawn when boiled being of the color and consistence of red
wax; and yet the fish as good meat as others of the kind. Other waters again
are so very disagreeable, that though fish may live in them, yet they will not
thrive, but rather pine away, as Mr. Chetwynd found it in a parcel of roaches
he put into a pond in his park at Ingestre, whence after some time being taken
forth again, they were all grown slenderer than when first put in, and become
almost of the shape of herrings.

31. But for breeding, and living, there is no fish so wonderful amongst all
the scaly or shelly kinds, as there is one amongst the smooth ones, viz. the
common Eele; which is not only viviparous, as may be easily found in the Month
of May, as has been observed by the ingenious Walter Chetwynd Esquire by cutting
open the red and swelled fundaments of the females, whence the young Eeles will
then issue forth: but will live, and sometimes take journeys in arido, passing
over land from Lakes and Pooles they do not like, to others they like better:
by this means many times stocking waters of themselves, which were not so
before. Thus it is said the waters of the Coal-pit-open-works S. W. of
Wednesbury were stockt with Eeles; and so I was told was the poole at Bescot
the seat of the ancient family of Mountfort; never any Eeles having been put
into either of them, for breed, or otherwise. Insomuch that some have imagined
upon such accounts as these (never so much as dreaming they could be night
walkers) that Eeles are many times produced of a peculiar dew (no melt or spawn
being ever found in them) falling in May and June upon the blades of the grass,
whereof turffs being cut, and the grassy sides clapped together, and then laid on
the warmest side of a wellpromising poole, thence by the Suns heat in a few
hours will spring a competent number of young Eeles by Equivocal generation. In
which Experiment Abrah. Myllius Abrah. Mylii de origin Animalium Lib. 10.
and G. Marhofius D. G. Marhofii de Metallorum ^r^^mutatione p. 38.39.
, seem so well satisfied, that they give the process of this affair, as
practiced by the Dutch, who use this Method with success, to stock their
fish ponds with Eels.

32. Now though I dare not pronounce either that Lakes or pooles, are
impossible to be stock't after this Belgic manner; yet I think it much more
probable of the two, that it may be done the traveling way: for most certain
it is that Eeles are such night-walkers, as was suggested above, having been
actually caught in the very fact near Bilston, creeping over the Meddows like
so many Snakes from one ditch to another, by Mr. Moseley of Moseley, who
seriously told me they not only did it for bettering their station, but as he
apprehended, also for catching of Snails in April and May, the best time of
year for them. Which yet I could have hardly believed (though the Gent. gave me
license to quote him for it) but that I have since met with so many Authorities
both ancient and modern, that seem to render the thing probable, if not almost
certain. Insomuch that Seneca amongst the rest, makes it a pleasant wonder,
that any body should doubt it: Quid est autem (says he) quare pisces in terram
non transeant, cum nos maria transimus L. An. Senecae Not. Quest. Lib. 3. cap.
17.
? Now there are indeed so very many fishes that will do this, that M. Aurel.
Severinus has writ a whole Treatise of them, which he styles, de Piscibus in
sicco viventibus, being a Commentary upon Theophrastus Eresius, on the same
subject Impres. Neapoli. 1655.
: where the Reader amongst the rest will find the Eele, which as Pliny notes
will live for six days out of the water C. Plinii 2di. Hist. Not. Lib. 9. cap.
21.
; well therefore may they bear traveling over a few Meddows, for a nights time
or so.

33. That they will make them holes in the banks of Rivers, which the people in
Somersetshire ordinarily discover by the hoar frosts not lying over them, as
elsewhere, and so dig them out in heaps Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 129.
; as they also do the fossile fish in Lancashire Camden in Lancashire.
; and the Prides in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Chap. 7. 27.28.
; seems not reach our business: but that which fully answers, and amply
confirms it, is that of Albertus as quoted by Gesner, who expressly says that
An. 1125, it being a very cold winter, a parcel of Eeles got out of the water
into a Meddow upon the dry land, and there went into a Hay-stack, where they
were found bedded in arido, to preserve themselves from cold Conr. Gesneri de
Aquatilibus Lib. 4. cap. de Anguilla.
: now if for one convenience they can do this, why not for another? such as
bettering their habitation; and for necessary aliment; both which equally tend
to self-preservation, with their provision for themselves, against the violence
of a frost. Thus as Rondelet acquaints us, the Oraena or polypus is frequently
found at land embracing the Olive with its long winding claws, and sometimes
the Figg-trees that grow near the Sea, and eating the fruit Gul. Rondeletti de
piscibus marinis Lib. 17. cap. 7.
: nay they have been known to leave the Sea, and to pass over land to robb the
Fish-mongers stews of fish, whereof Pliny tells us a most remarkable story C.
Plinii 2di Not. Hist. Lib. 9. cap. 30.
. The Exocaetus will lie and bask it self in the Sun, and sleep a shore, whence
it has its name Gul. Rondeletii de piscibus Marin. Lib. 6. cap. 15.
. And Aristotle discovered that the Cerean and Paphlagonian fishes, wandered up
and down on the dry sands, and so ran back to Sea again Aristot. in Lib. de
mirabil. Auscult.
. As Geo. Pictorius asserts certain fishes of Cherati a River of India also
usually do Geo. Pictorius de fluminibus miraculosis.
. All which, both Eeles, and those other fish, perform (as Rondelet thinks) by
the benefit of the narrowness of the rima of their gills; all fishes living a
longer or shorter space out of the water, according as their gills are more
narrow or patulous: the fishes that have wide and open gills being too much
oppressed with the free amd sudden appulses of the Air Gul. Rondeletii de
Piscibus. Lib. 4. cap. 9.
, and so dying presently.

34. There are very many fishes too that take a great latitude in the variety
of their feeding, as well as habitation; which too amongst some of them is very
unusual and surprising. Mr. Fisher Dilk An. 1679 laying a Dace-bait for a Pike
near Salters bridge in the river Tame, caught a large Barbel with it; and the
same Mr. Dilk found a good trout in Stafford Castle choked with a Crevice;
which it seems they will not Perch, for Mr. Morse Vicar of the Collegiat Church
of Stafford, caught several of these in July with Crevices in their bellies;
the same Mr. Morse once caught a Trout in Dunsmoore river, with Neuts, Efts,
or Askers in its belly; and the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire in
a pit near the high way in Heywood field, caught large Chubbs, with Toads in
their gorges. The ravenous Pike too, will not only swallow venomous toads and
froggs without being harmed by them, but will devour things sometimes bigger and
longer than his gorge will receive, swallowing one part, and letting the other
remain in his mouth till the former is digested, and then taking in more, and
so putting it over by degrees Is. Walton's complete Angler. chap. 8.
.

35. Nor does this fresh water Wolf only seize Froggs and fish, but upon foul,
and other Animals not of that Element. Thus in the moat at Himley, the Jacks
are so bold with the young Ducks, that as the Reverend Mr Paston Rector of the
place seriously informed me, a whole brood of young ducks had been destroyed
there by them in a days time; and this the larger Jacks will do, even when
these ducks are grown near as bigg as the old ones: whereof one was caught
(having taken in such a duck the wrong way) that could not gorge it so far,
but that the Ducks head hung out of his mouth; in which posture both Jack and
Duck, were hung up in the Hall of Himley house, to be admired, as long as the
stench would permit. Which very well agrees with what Gesner affirms (though it
come not quite up to it) that a Polish Gentleman of Cracow did faithful assure
Him, that He had seen two young Geese at one time in the belly of a Jack Conr.
Gesneri de Aquatilib. Lib. 4. (...) de Ia^^to.
. Nay of so bold and greedy a devouring disposition is this Tyrant of the
Rivers, when He is in the height of his hunger, that as Mr Walton acquaints us,
there have been instances of it, that a large Pike has bit at, and devoured a
dog, that has been swimming in the water Is. Walton's complete Argler. Chap.
8.
.

36. Neither yet need we wonder much at this, if we consider what Gesner
further adds concerning the excessive boldness of this fish, who tells us of a
Man going to water his Mule in the River Rhodanus, that had one fastened so
boldly on the lips of the Mule, where He hung so close, that the Mule could not
otherwise but draw Him out of the water, by which means his Master got the Pike
Conr. Gesneri de Aquatilib. Lib. 4. cap. de Lucio.
. To which the same Gesner yet further subjoynes, that a maid in Poland had her
foot bit by a Jack as she was washing clothes in a fish pond Ibid.
. And Mr Walton, tells us he heard, that the same once happend to a woman in a
pond near Killingworth in Warwickshire Is. Walton's complete Angler. Chap. 8.
. Which though wonderful Examples of the ravenous disposition of this Animal,
yet it is plain that many times they do not so much as kill the prey they
swallow, with their teeth by the way; whereof I met with two signal instances
that fell out lately in this County.

37. One at the Black-Lake near Aqualat, where Mr. Skrymsher having caught a
Jack, that his Cousin Skrymsher of Norbury, who was present at the fishing,
suspected might have a Carp in his belly, upon opening his mouth found he had
gotten one so large, and so very lately, that they could visibly perceive the
tail of it stir, which Mr Skrymsher of Aqualat by stroaking him on the belly,
quickly made Him disgorge, there remaining so much life in him (the digestion
having only a little touched his Eyes) that being put into the water, after
some time, it swam away leasurably as if not at all disturbed. And the other at
Rugeley, where Mr Chetwynd of Ingestre being fishing with his Cousin Chetwynd of
the same town, amongst many other fish they caught a Jack with somewhat a bigg
belly, which being opened, they found diverse fishes had been swallowed by it,
and amongst the rest a Roach so entire (the end of its nose being only a little
touched with the concoction) that being put into a Cistern, it showed quickly
so much life, that after a while being put into the River it swamm briskly away.

38. Lastly, as for the unusual magnitude of fishes, those which have exceeded
most of any I heard of; are, 1. a large sort of Gudgeons in the black-brook;
whereof some have been taken in the Lordship of Hynts, belonging to the
courteous Mr. Matthew Floyer, from the tip of the nose to the fork of the tail
7 inches long, and 4 inches about. 2ly. Carps; of which kind there are vast
ones in the Mere at Aqualat, but two there were taken (as I was punctually
informed by the learned and ingenious Proprietor of the place Edwyn Skrymsher
Esquire a most generous promoter of this History, whose pleasant seat is here
represented Tab. 20.) more remarkably great: One, a Melter 33 inches long and
19 inches about, weighing 15 pounds. And the other a Spawner, which though not
above two foot 6 inches long or thereabout, yet was 20 inches round, weighing
14 pounds, and sold for 14 shillings; the Scales of each being near as broad,
as one of our milled half Crowns. And 3ly. Jacks; whereof there hangs a
picture of one in Cumberford hall taken in the River Tame, Dec. 16, 1673, an
Ell and 2 inches long when first taken, but as drawn there in the picture but a
yard and and an inche from the tip of the nose, to the fork of the tail; and
there are of them in the moat at Himley a yard and half long. And yet even
these would be found but of an inconsiderable magnitude, if compared with the
Pikes of the Lake of Geneva, where they sometimes catch them of 80 pounds
weight, reckoning too (according to the account of Geneva) 18 ounces to the
pound Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 86.
.

39. Which is all I met worthy notice relating to fishes; and yet I have not
done neither with the inhabitants of the waters; for though I come next to
treat of the Quadrupeda (...), digitated Quadrupeds, there being some of them
oviparous, as almost all fishes are; and sometimes at least frequenting the
same Element; I must in all reason first dipatch what I have remarkable
concerning such Animals, before I proceed to others that are purely
terrestrial. Amongst which the Toad must be reckoned as one; which though
living both at land, and in the water, is sometimes most wonderfully excluded
from both, having been frequently found close imprisoned within the middle of
solid blocks of Stone, without any perceivable rift or cleft, either whereby
they were first admitted, or were supplied with Air, during their abode there;
a thing so frequent in this County, that I met with instances of it in diverse
places: and first at Horton, at the house of Mr. Edg, where in his barn wall,
he showed me a hollow Stone which being clove by the Mason had a live Toad
included in it; this he told me he saw himself, and that it dyed quickly, after
it was taken forth.

40. The same happened again at Knypersley near by, at the right Worshipful
Sr. John Bowyers Baronet; at Ingestre at Mr. Chetwynds; and as I was told by
Mr. Launder, at the Village of Brocton; the learned Dr. Pierce Physician at
Bath, in a Letter to the ingenious Mr. William Musgrave Secretary of the
Philosophical Society of Oxford, sent us lately an account also of such a Toad
found in the Center of a hard limestone, laid as a step-stone for passengers
in the middle of a Cartway between two rills that ran of each side it; where a
croaking noise being a long time heard, and the parts near searched and nothing
found, this stone at length was resolved should be broke, where in a cavity
near the middle, a large Toad was found as bigg as a man's fist, which hoped
about as briskly, as if it had been bread in a larger room; but for how long
time he does not say Letter Book of the Philosoph. Society of Oxon. Mar. 17.
1684/5;. and Apr. 11. 1685.
. But the Toad that was found in the most astonishing manner, certainly that
ever was heard of, was that at Statfold, if the tradition they have of it there
be true, where as the story goes, the Steeple being to be taken down to prevent
falling, the top-stone of the Spire or Pinnacle being taken off, was thrown
down whole into the Churchyard, but breaking in the fall, there appeared a
living Toad in the Center of it, which (as most of the rest are said to do)
dyed quickly after it was exposed to the Air.

41. Nor has this sort of imprisonment of Toads in solid Stones, been only
observed of late years, but in many ages backward; for Gulielmus Neubrigensis
relates, that a Toad was found thus included in a stone in his time, which was
near 500 years ago; and the publisher of that Edition of him, printed at
Heidelberg An. 1587. upon that place notes, that in the Coal-mines near Leigh,
there are oftentimes found hard round smooth flints, with living toads in them,
without any visible cleft or passage for Air Gul. Neubrigensis Rerum Angl. Lib.
1. cap. 28.
. In the same manner Johnston assures us, they are found at Toulouse in a
reddish sort of freestone; also that a Stone-cutter of Antwerp met with one
thus enclosed in hard marble; and Agricola writes (as quoted by Johnston) that
they are sometimes found in the Quarries of Millstone Joh. Johnstoni Hist.
Not. de Quadruped. Lib. 4. cap. 1. Art. 2. punct. 1. in fine.
. Certum est (says Fortunius Licetus) inter viva saxa contineri quandoque
bufones Fort. Liceti Litheosphor. cap. 54.
; and of later days, my Lord Verulam pronounces it for certain, that Toads have
been found in the middle of Freestone Not. Hist. Cent. 6. Experim. 570.
. And not only within Stones, but

42. They are also sometimes met with in this County as closely included in the
bodies of firm trees: thus out of a great Oak that grew at Lapley of about 6
Tunns of timber, brought to Elmhurst, by the right Worshipful Sr. Theophilus
Biddulph Baronet for the new bulding the house, represented above in Tab. 2.
there was a great Toad sawn forth of the middle of the tree, in a place which
when growing, was 12 or 14 foot from the ground; the tree being sound and
entire in all parts quit round, saving just where the Toad lay, it was black
and corrupted, and crumbled away like Sawdust. Also at Bently there was another
sawn out of a solid tree, in that part of it, that when growing, might be about
a yard from the ground; the tree sound underneath next the root, and in all
other parts, only where the toad lay, there was a hollow about the bigness of
the crown of ones hat, which (as those enclosed in Stone) also presently dyed,
as soon as exposed to the Air. Now how these Animals should come at all to be
thus included, in the middle of such entire and solid substances? and when
enclosed, how maintained either with breath, or aliment? and how long they may
have been presumed, to have continued there? seem questions indeed worthy the
consideration of the most profound Philosopher; whom that I may honestly
provoke to give a better, I shall here offer the Reader some account of my
own, which though a slender one enough, yet may serve his turn, till he can
get a better, and in some measure to evince the probability of the thing.

43. To come then close to the business, upon presumption that the matter of
fact is indisputable; it is easy to apprehend how Toads creep into the clefts
and hollows of rocks and trees (which they always do in August, when they are
in a declining condition) to preserve themselves in the winter: where during
their rest for about eight months, they grow somewhat bigger, and the clefts or
holes of the rocks or trees, as much less; so that at the return of the year
(like the Fox in the Fable) they cannot get out, where they came in, and so are
forced to remain where they are, in that solitary condition, as long as they
live; the clefts and holes of the rocks and trees in the mean time growing
quite up, and enclosing them in an entire and solid case. And thus I suppose
these animals may come to be enclosed in the rocks and trees, upon or near the
surface of the earth. But how that Toad in the tree at Lapley, should come to
be thus imprisoned 12 or 14 foot high? is a difficulty yet harder, and that
requires yet nicer considerations.

44. For the Solution whereof, we must either suppose that the Toad was
produced in a hole at that height when the tree was young, of an agreeable
dust, brought thither by the wind and a sort of rain as well disposed for the
same purpose; like the worms and maggots bred of dust, and the rains that
accompany the Tornado blasts, and fall in the Maggoti Savanna in Jamaica, by
equivocal generation, as was shown in Chap. 1.. 48, 49. of this book: or else
according to the opinion of Cardan, generated of the seed of a Toad blown from
the top of the some Mountain; or drawn up by the Sun into the Clouds, and so
discharged thence in a shower, and lodged in the bole of this tree whilst
young: whence fearing to leap in the Summer, and creeping down low in the dust,
usually lodged in the boles of all trees, in the Winter, and there keeping its
Station for a long Season; the wood of the tree in a little time might thus
grow over it, so that the tree being trimmed up, and a taller body given it,
the Toad at length thus appeared to be enclosed in the body of the tree at that
height.

45. Nor is it at all improbable that the Spawne of Toades, or indeed that
Toades themselves, should be thus drawn up by the Suns heat, since we see what
vast quantities of water it supports in those wonderful exhalations they call
Spouts at Sea, in which there are such mighty weights of water, that they
overwhelme the best Ships, if any thing near them, and disturb the whole Sea
for a good distance, with the violence of their fall: in these Spouts together
with the water, the fish many times in the Sea thereabout are also lifted up,
which sometimes being carried by the winds over land before their fall, has
often occasioned the wonderful raining of fish, as it did Whitings, at
Stansted in the parish of Wrotham in the County of Kent Anno. 1666. Letter Book
of the Philosophical Society of Oxon. Mar. 27. 1685.
; and herrings in the South of Scotland, Anno 1684. as his most Sacred Majesty
King JAMES the Second most Judiciously determined the Problem there. Now most
certainly the force that could elevate these, may very well be allowed to
attract the Spawne of Toads, or large Toads themselves, which being carried by
the wind (that blows where it lists) to any place whatever, may also be let
fall as well in any the like indeterminat place, and so possibly upon the bole
of a tree as well as any where else.

46. Thus having shown the most probable means whereby these Animals are thus
enclosed in solid Stones and trees, both near the surface of the Earth, and at
some height above it; it remains that I proceed to the second difficulty; how,
when thus imprisoned in so narrow a Cell, they are supplied with the
necessaries of Air and Aliment. to which I answer, that these Animals require
very little of either, to support them: not of Air, as is plain from their long
continuance under water without it, nor of other Sustenance from ones living in
a Glass above a Month without any at all, it being the property of Animals that
have but a weak heat included in cold viscous juices, and do not perspire, to
retain the Spirits of life a long time without any foraigne maintenance; for
where the heat is too weak to master the tough juices, there can be no
rarefaction or separations of parts, and consequently no transpiration or
consumption. Thus the Tortois, Porcupine Journal des Scavans Jul. 24. 1681.
, and some sorts of birds that are (...), live at least half a year without
meat; and thus (as de Laet will have it) live a sort of Solenes (which the
Venetians call Cape long, and the English Pirot) all their time, they being a
kind of Shellfish deep bedded in a solid rock, in which are no clefts, holes,
or moisture to be found, but what is in the fish it self; nor can they have any
nourishment conveyed to them, except the dews of Heaven, which as de Laet
thinks, the rocks imbibe, and transmit to the fish Joh. de Laet de Gemmis and
Lapidibus Lib. 2. cap. 7.
.

47. Which if all they have, and that sufficient to support them; our Toads
included in Stones and trees, may pretend to the same, and perhaps somewhat
more; for I do not conceive them wholly deprived (though so close prisoners)
either of Air or Aliment: for the cavities they are lodged in, are generally
somewhat bigger than themselves, and they have the Salts of the Stones, and
juices of the trees, to suck and lick, which together with the transcolation of
such fine dews, may very well support an Animal of so slender a diet; that no
way spends it self in perspiration; and is D. Abercromby's discourse of Wit.. 5.
absolutely shut up from all other expense of its juices or Spirits, in
swimming, traveling, generation, or otherwise. And by the same means no
question lived the two Animals somewhat like Evets or Newts, but as big as
Ratts, being a spanlong, of a very yellow color, whereof we had an account
from the same Dr Pierce of Bath above mentioned, which were found embraceing
one another head to head, and belly to belly, in the hollow of a solid
Freestone, somewhat bigger than themselves, dugg up 2 foot and, or 3 foot
under ground, which being enlarged crawled about, and were kept alive some time
Letter Book of the Philosoph. Society of Oxford. Mar. 17. 1684/5 and Apr. 11.
1685.
. But of these no more, because I am unwilling to prevent the ingenious Mr.
Beaumont, now most laudably designing the Natural History of Somersetshire,
wherein I heartily wish him all imaginable encouragement.

48. Also by this means these Animals seem not only to be precluded from all
injuries they might otherwise receive from foreign Enemies, and from the
changes of the seasons of the year, they remaining always as it were in an
equal state, without any change either of Air or diet, things no doubt on it
that conduce not a little, to the prolongation of life; but to what period of
time, in Animals thus imprisoned, and secluded from observation, is not easy to
conceive, much less to determine; though I believe one may venture in general
to pronounce it a pretty long one: for upon supposition that the Toad in the
tree at Lapley was dropped on the bole of it when young, or otherwise generated
in some hole or cleft it might then have; it must necessarily have continued
there a long time, the tree when felled carrying a full yard square where the
Toad lay, which it could not arrive to, in a few years. And if the story of the
Toad in the top Stone of the Steeple at Statfold, may be allowed to be true, we
must then perhaps afford them some hundreds of years, to have continued in this
State (the Steeple being grown so old, that they took it down to prevent
falling) which too in all probability would have been prolonged to a much
greater period, had it never been found and exposed to the Air.

49. After the oviparous digitated quadrupeds that sometimes frequent the
waters; I come next to consider the others, that are also oviparous and
digitated, but wholly terrestrial; whereof I had one sent me by my worthy friend
Francis Wolferstan Esquire plowed up in his grounds at Statfold, where too they are
sometimes seen in frosty weather on the Sunny-side of old hedges, in the
bottoms whereof they have their holes, which they recover so nimbly, that it is
a hard matter to surprise them. In the length, and general make of their body,
they most of any thing resemble a Newt: but in some things are so different
from that and all others of the Lizard-kind that I can find in Authors, that
either it must be wholly or but imperfectly described, though we allow it a
place under the Genus of Lizards. For beside that it differs in color from all
the Newts or Ascars that ever I saw, being of a dirty yellow on the back and
tail, and blue under the throat, and most part of the belly; it has a round
tail, skipping like a Squirrel and strongly raising up its head when it runns:
whereas the tails of Newts, Evets, or Ascars, are always flat, lying still
when discovered or crawling but little.

50. And whereas the back of the Evet or Newt is covered with a tough membran,
these both back and tail are Scaled all over; the Scales, especially those on
the tail, lyeing in oblong squares like the tiles or shingles of a house, only
they have wider joints at some certain distances than else where, as in Tab.
22. Fig. 5. in which it pretty well agrees with the green Lizard or Liguro of
Bononia Joh. Jonstoni Not. Hist. de Quadruped. Tab. 76.
, only in the color, and magnitude, it is quite different; so that the fittest
description I can think of for it, is, the Lacerta terrestris lutea squammosa
Anglica, which whether agreeable, to the land Ascar (as Dr. Lister thinks it
may) or not agreeable, is indifferent to me, even that being only named, and
not described, in any Author that I can find.

51. Amongst the viviparous digitated Quadrupeds though I met none undescribed,
yet some there were attended with so very unusual accidents, that they must not
be past by; and such was the Rabbit taken in Salt warren, that had two teeth
growing out of the lower jaw, that turned round over the nose above the upper
jaw, with that length and compass, that they almost touched the forehead in the
return, as in Tab. 22. Fig. 6. which surely must so incommode the animal in
feeding, that I see not which way it could perform to it self, that most
necessary good office, unless by licking in its food on each side the mouth:
but this inconvenience it seems was not so great, as what it met with at last
upon account of these teeth, by which it was taken, and killed, being hanged by
them in a hedge; so that though they did not occasion it is death by starveing,
it did it as effectually another way. And yet for a Rabbit to have such teeth
as these, is not so very extraordinary, but there have been others seen like it
at other places, particularly as I was told by the Lady Offley, at Sr. John
Crew's at Vtkinton in Cheshire, though not thus suffering death by the misfortune
of them.

52. Another as uncommon an Accident, as perhaps ever befell any of the
viviparous digitated Quadrupeds, or that one shall hear of in an Age; was found
in a Hare, about the year of our Lord 1667 by Sr. Willoughby Aston, John and
Tho. Offley Esq's Mr. Clayton of Onneley and diverse others, who goeing a
coursing for an Easter Hare, killed one on Birch-hill 'twixt Madeley Manor, and
Onneley, which being opened and her entralls taken out was hung upon a beating
pole at one of their Servants backs; where as she was carried, Sr. Willoughby
Aston espied a protuberance in her flank, which he having a curiosity to open,
there was found in it a young Hare, with the furr on, that could see, which was
taken out by Mr. Tho. Offleys man, and kept a live nine days after with milk;
the most remarkable circumstance being this, that it was out of due place, and
no rupture that could be perceived offered, either in the killing, or opening
the old Hare: it is rememberd also that it had a ductus to its navel, but where
it terminated in the old Hare, they were too incurious to observe.

53. Which how it should come to pass is hard to conceive, otherwise than
either by the stoppage of the Cornua Vteri by the corruption of the Faetus of
some former impregnation; or a too long stay of the Egg in the Ovarium, where
it acquired a growth too great before it fell, to pass the Tube into the Womb:
in both which cases the Embryo must necessarily continue and be formed in the
Testicle, whence by the extension in its growth, it must also as necessarily
force its way through it, into some part of the Abdomen. As it was in the case
of a hound Bitch of the right Honorable James Earl of Abbington, which being
with whelp, by an unfortunate blow, had her Faetus dyed in her, whereof she
discharged a great part in putrid matter and flesh by the Pudendum, and was
afterward able to run again in the pack: but the bones, firmer muscles, and
thicker Skins of the Embryos yet remaining within her, so stufft up the horns
of her Womb, that the Eggs upon a second impregnation, finding no passage
there, were forced back into diverse parts of the Abdomen, whereby (her belly
being distended into very ill shapes) she after some time dyed. Being dead, his
Lordship being very curious, and knowing her to have been twice with Puppy and
never to have whelp't, he sent her over to his skillfull Surgeon Mr. Pointer
of Oxford, who opening her carefully in the presence of diverse Physicians,
found the Cornua Vteri so stufft as above mentioned, and several whelps i^
diverse parts of the Abdomen: whereof the Reader may see a more full account in
the Philosophical Transactions t.

54. As he also may of the other case where the Egg stayed so long in the
Ovarium, and grew there so great before it fell, that it could not pass the
Fallopian Tube: this happened in a human Faetus of Madam de St. Mere a French
Lady, which staying in this manner, as was supposed, so long in the Testicle
(for in this case neither the Womb or Tube were stopped with the remains of any
dead Embryo) at length extended it self to that greatness in its growth, that
it broke the Ovarium long-ways and in the middle of the side (as was found by
Monsieur de S. Maurice M. D. her Physician who was present at the opening her
body after she was dead) and forced its way into the right flank, whence it was
taken forth so perfectly formed, that they could manifestly discover in it the
Sex of a Boy Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 150.
. And this last was most likely the the case of the Hare, though it be very
strange it should be taken forth alive, after such a course, and death of its
damm; or that it had not killed her long before, which certainly it must have
done in a little time, it being very unlikely that the damm could have any way
litter'd it, so as either to have preserved her young one, or self.

55. Which is all I met worthy notice concerning viviparous digitated
Quadrupeds, but two dogs (which are also reckoned amongst these) indeed so
curious and strange, that I thought not amiss even to represent them in
Sculpture. Tab. 22. Fig. 7. and 8. the former whereof, begotten I suppose
between a Guinea Dog and an English Spaniel, was English in his foreparts, and
Guinea in his hinder, so that he always naturally appeared as if newly trimmed,
with single tuffts left on his back and the end of his tail, as is usually done
to trimmed Spaniels. This former belonged to Mr. Chetwynd of Ingestre and was
called Guiney, not I think so much for the sake of the Country whence he had a
moiety of himself, as for the price he cost his Master; and the latter to Mr
Pargiter of Mavesyn Ridware, which descended I suppose from the same stock with
the former, though not so equally divided betwixt the two Countries, this being
curiously spotted, and for the most part naked, his head only adorned with an
English Peruque, and his tail with a single tufft at the end.

56. Next the viviparous digitated, the Quadrupeda (...) the cloven-footed
Quadrupeds, fall under consideration; whereof some, neither chew the Cudd, nor
are horned; others, do chew the Cudd, but have no horns; and others again,
both. Of the first Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 147.
kind of these, are reckoned only Swine; and the Hippopotamus, no where found
in these parts of the world; but of the former they have a race in some places
in this County, much larger than ordinary: of which I saw, and measured a Bore,
at the right Worshipful Sr. Brian Broughton's of Broughton Baronet (whose
beautiful Seat is here annexed Tab. 21.) 4 foot and one inch, i. e. 'twixt 12
and 13 hands high, the bristles pressed down on his back; from the tip of the
nose to the setting on of the tail, 7 foot 2 inches; and the tail it self 15
inches long: a stature not much short, if not fully equalling the great Hogg of
upper-Tadmerton in the County of Oxon Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 7. 37.
. They have of these large sized Hoggs also about Statfold in this County, one
of the teeth whereof (if one may guess by the bigness) was sent me by Mr.
Wolferstan, which has another little one growing out of it, much like the
smaller Ears of Triticum multiplex out of the great one, as in Tab. 22. Fig. 9.
And Mr. Inge of Thorp-Constantine sent me at the same time, an irregular bone
taken out of the Omentum or Caul of a female Swine of one of his Tenants which
they call a Gilt, which grew just against the place where she had been spay'd,
the form whereof is exactly represented Tab. 22. Fig. 10. which being single
Enormities of Nature, are hardly to be accounted for.

57. Of Animals that chew the Cudd, but have no horns, there are none in this
County, this Species being so narrow, that only Dromedaries, Camels, and
Camelopardi, are found of it; unless we should reckon the Ews and Weathers,
that indeed Chew the Cudd, and have no horns, under this Species: but the Ews
of some places being horned like the Ramms, and seeing the Weathers all would
be so, if not prevented in some by cutting, they are reasonably enough all
counted cornigerous. Where by the way perhaps it may not be altogether unworthy
the enquiry, or the Readers knowledge; how it comes to pass, that there is so
great a connection between the Testicles and the horns of some Quadrupeds, ut se
mutuo ponant and tollant; as it is in some Sheep, and all red and fallow deer,
whose doucets if taken away, whilst calves or fawns, before they come to be
Knibbers or Prickets, i. e. before they have horns, will never have any at
all: whereas in Oxen it is quite contrary, whose horns are much larger than
they would have been, had they remained Bulls, or never been castrated. A
Question scarce started before, that ever I could hear of, much less considered
or stated, amongst the Philosophers, or Georgical writers.

58, Which that I may do in some tolerable manner, rather to incite others to
do it better, than out of any hopes I have to determine the thing: let it be
noted, first that all Animals (as well as plants) do always throw off some
(...) or superfluous juices, and that out of these [in Animals] spring, horns,
nails, hoofs, hair, wool, scales, feathers, etc. as Leaves, moss, fungus's,
etc. do out of Trees. Secondly, that horns, hair, wool, etc. (though in
respect of the body on which they grow, they may in some sense be said to be
excrementitious) yet having once acquired vegetation, and growing out of the
Skin as out of their proper earth, not by apposition, but extending themselves
organically, in their cavities, length, breadth, and thickness, and in all these
proportionably; they cannot I think but (without a Metaphor) be referred suo
modo to the family of plants; as has been most fully made out by the learned
Dr. Glisson Fran. Glissonii Tractat. de partibus continentibus, cap. 6.. 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6.
. And thirdly, that horns, hair, and wool, though they seem so different, yet
as trees in some measure partake of the Soil in which they grow, so all these
seem to be constituted of the same common matter with the Skin it self, and to
be of the same lineage or family, and so all the membrans, nerves, and nervous
fibers, wheresoever in the body: which most evidently appears in their being
exposed to the fire, all shrivelling up after the same irregular manner,
breathing the same fetid odor, and being of the same Medical use: qualities
that never are found in things of different Species's.

59. Thus horns, wool, or hair, exposed to the flames, are furled up, and send
forth the same nauseous sent; so that hair, and wool, seem to be nothing else
but imperfect horn, or the fibers of horn separated, and not fasciated
together as they are in entire horns and hoofs, and as the stalks of some
plants are, when there is an exuberancy of matter: hair, wool, or weak horns
being then produced, when the Juices whence they spring, are some way
depauperated; and strong horns, when they abound and are vigorous. Whence it is
that Bulls whose blood and seminal juices, are spirituous, hot, and plentiful;
have thick, short, and strong horns, in proportion to the hair of Men of robust
Constitutions, which is commonly short, course, and curled: whereas Oxen, whose
blood and juices by castration is in great measure enervated, produce but a
thin, weak, and long horn, in proportion to the hair of women, which is
generally longer, finer, and less curled, than that of Men. But in some Sheep,
and all deer, whose blood and seminal juices are much less vigorous than that
of Bulls, the superfluous juices that give both birth and augmentation to
horns, are so diminisht and weakened in them by castration, that they can
afford no supply for the production of them at all, but only of wool or hair
which as I said before are an imperfect sort of horn; whence it comes to pass
that Weathers (these superfluous juices being now wholly spent in the production
of wool) are said to have greater fleeces than other sheep; and that Staggs and
Bucks if gelt, never mew their heads like other deer, there being now no new
matter to cause a new horn to put up, and thrust off the old one.

60. Yet in some sort of Sheep these superfluous juices are so very plentiful
and strange, that they produce 4 or 6, and sometimes eight horns upon the head
of the same Sheep; whereof there are plenty with four in this County, at
Gnosall, Knightley, Blore, and Ingestre parks; and as I was told there were of
them formerly in the park at Loxley; Johnston gives us a Cut of one of them,
calling it Hircus Cotilardicus with six horns Joh. Johnstoni Not. Hist. de
Quadruped. Tab. 27.
; and Dietericus Brinckius, tells us there are of them in the Isle of Loufouden
on the coast of Norway, with eight Dieter. Brinckii Prodrem. e Norwegia cap. 8.
. Dr. Grew in his Catalogue of the Rarities in the Musaeum of the Royal Society
at Gresham College, calls these Moscovy Ramms, and perhaps not amiss, the
description of which Animals, or their horns, he says he could meet no where
Neh. Grew. Musaei Reg. Societ. part. 1. Chap. 2.
: But had he consulted the Natural History of Oxfordshire printed 7 years
before his Edition of that Catalogue, he might have found some account, and
Cutts of them too: there having been of them living many years before my
traveling that County in the right Honorable the Earl of Abbingtons park at
Ricot, and in diverse other parts both of England and Wales Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. 7.. 39. Tab. 10. Fig. 10, 11.
. Now whether castration of these, whose juices are so strong, will wholly take
away, or any way diminish the number or magnitude of their horns, as in some
other Sheep; or augment them as in Oxen? perhaps may be another Question yet
undecided, and worthy the observation and communication of the Naturalist.

61. Sheep then being reckoned amongst the cornigerous Quadrupeds, as seldom
being otherwise but upon accident only; let us return again after this long,
but I hope not impertinent digression, to such uncommon accidents as have been
found to attend them in this County. For I account it but accidental, that they
have in the Moorelands a peculiar sort of them, that have all black noses,
which thrive well enough on the barrennest Soil, and produce pretty good wool,
yet too long for the use of the Felt-makers of New Castle, unless for childrens
hatts, which they attribute wholly to the Limestone rocks on which it is bred;
the best being produced upon dry Sandy Soils, such as Beech, Swynnerton, Mare,
Chedleton, and Drayton, of which (being pretty short and fine) they make some
use; but chiefly of the wools of Shropshire, and Lemster: most of the shortest
and finest wools of this County being ordinarily sold into Warwick and
Gloucester shires; and their longest, which are bred in the moister Soiles,
which they otherwise call broad-wools, into Yorkshire and Lancashire, where
they make courser clothes.

62. It being ordinary for Sheep to breed but once in a year, it may perhaps be
remarkable, what was told me by the worthy Mr Bott of Dunstall, viz. that he
had a Sheep about 12 years ago, that brought him one Lamb at Christmas, and
another at St. James tide after; and another Ewe that had two Lambs about three
weeks before Christmas, a third about a week after Midsummer, and a fourth
upon twelft day following; so that within thirteen months she brought 4 Lambs
at three yeanings: the latter whereof were both superfetations, occasioned no
question by goeing to Ramm at so many distant times. Whence it is plain that
such Animals as these will admit of coition after impregnation as well as Mares
and Women; in the former whereof though Aristotle allows no superfetations to
have ever happened, yet in the latter he affords us several Examples: more
particularly of an Adulteress, who was delivered of one child like her husband;
and of another after, like the Adulterer; and of two others that had two
children at a birth, and a third five months after Aristotelis Hist. Animal.
Lib. 7. cap. 4. and Plinii Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 11.
. And of later years Dr. Harvey tells us of a Servant Maid gotten with child by
her Master, that was sent to London in September to hide her shame, where being
brough to bed well, and returning home, had another unexspectedly in December,
whereby her own and Masters faults (before successfully concealed) were
unhappily discovered Gul. Harvei Tract. de Partu. p. 261.
. And this is all I heard of extraordinary relating to Sheep, but that Ano.
1679, a Lamb was yeaned at Bentley green with the two hind legs wreath't
together, so that it went per saltum, with the thighs on the ground, drawing
the double Leg after it.

63. It is also very remarkable in the breeding of Deer (which are also
reckoned amongst the horned Animals that chew the Cudd though the females never
have any) that they sometimes cast Fawnes with their lower jaws so short, that
they cannot suck, and so consequently all dye; and it is no less observable,
that these short jawed Fawnes are all white ones, as if this were a color of
imperfection in Animals, as well as in Plants Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Char.
6.. 38. and Chap. 7.. 13, 14, 15.
. Of these the worthy Mr. Chetwynd had several cast in his Park at Ingestre An.
1680; and so had the right Honorable Robert Lord Ferrers at Stanton in
Leicestershire; the same I also met with long since at Watlington-park,
belonging to the Worshipful Thomas Stonor Esquire in my travells through
Oxfordshire, but looking upon it then as a single accident, I took no notice of
it in that History. In the breeding of Deer, it has also been observed at
Chartley In November. An. 1679.
, and elsewhere in this County, that upon killing of them, there has been
sometimes found the bones of young Fawnes in the matrix's of the Does, which
doubtless have dyed in them upon some unfortunate blow or other accident, as in
the case of the bitch abovementioned. 53. of this Chapter.

64. The same I have heard has likewise happened to a Do in Woodstock park in
the County of Oxon. And at some other places: and in the park at Ingestre a
Hare was killed some time since, that had all the bones and furr of a young
Hare in her, complicated up together into a round ball: which accidents are so
far from always proveing mortal to these Animals, that they may possibly be
impregnated after them, and produce other Fawns, or Hares, these bones of the
former dead Faetus's still remaining within them: for I know not why a Do or
Hare should not be capable of this, as well as a Cow or Woman: there having
been a Cow killed at Hopton in this County that had an entire perfect calf, and
the bones of another found in her; and Katherine Parry of the parish of
Kintbury in Berkshire having been deliverd of a child An. 1668 after she had
had a human Faetus dyed in her: as appeared from a great quantity of
corruption, with several pieces of flesh and skin, that came from her two or
three days after her delivery, and from diverse bones that she voided with her
monthly evacuations, with several parts of a Skull, and some of the larger
bones of the body of a Faetus, that work't their way through her flesh above
the Os Pubis five years after: within which time she conceived again 3 several
times, and had 3 children more at 3 following births, after the last of which
only these bones came away Journal. Book of the Philosophical Society of Oxon.
Session of October. 7. in An. 1684.
: as the bones of a former child did, from a Citizens wife of Wenden in
Livonia, a year after she had been delivered of a perfect living child, as was
testified by a public instrument under the common Seal of the City Tho.
Bartholini Histor. Anatom. Cent. 4. Hist. 14
.

65. Beside these unusual accidents in the breeding of Deer, there are many
others worth notice that have happened to some of them, since their being cast,
in relation to their heads: many of the redd deer in Chartley park having no
heads at all, others being Unicorns, and those that have but one horn, that but
a dwarf one neither, and commonly very irregular; the deer notwithstanding
being as well grown in their bodies, and as warrantable in their season, as in
any of the neighboring Forests or Parks, where they put up as fair heads, as
in any parts of England. Which abatement therefore of their heads, must needs
proceed, either from some defect in the Park; or some accidental alteration of
the soil; as it happened at Cornbury in Oxfordshire, where the stocking the
park with Conys only, made all the deer thus abate of their heads, upon what
account see the History of Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 7.. 45.
. But the reason there given having no place here, I can assign no other so
probable as the want of brouse in this park, the underwoods being but
inconsiderable in respect of its extent, and the trees most of them dead, as
represented in the Map, the leaves and young Cions of plants supplying it seems
fitter matter for the heads of deer, than grass or other forage. But whether
this will hold at Wyse-wood in Glocestershire, where I hear there are also
Staggs, some with no horns, others with very short ones; I have yet had no
opportunity of learning.

66. Other irregular Bucks-heads I met with at Ingestre and Dudley, and some
other places: that in the Hall at Ingestre being a large head of a full grown
Buck, which put up all the time from the burrs only two smooth beams, having
indeed brow-Antlers, but no back ones, palm, or spellers, as in Tab. 22. Fig.
11. Such another head as this I met with at Tortworth in Glocestershire, in the
Hall of the right Honorable the Lady Viscountess Down; so that I cannot look
upon this as a single accident, but one that happens sometimes, though not
frequently. The other at Dudley, is of a living white- Buck, kept within the
Castle by the right Honorable the Lord Ward, which puts up annually form the
burrs only two beams, without either brow or back-Antlers, palm, or spellers,
ascending pretty straight, and adorned at the top with balls or knobbs, as in
Tab. 22. Fig. 12.

67. Olearius in his Itinerary tells us of whole herds of such, called Ahu
deer, he saw in the Province of Mokan in Persia, whose heads had no
brow-Antlers, but were smooth to the top like ours, only that they bent
backwards like the horns of a Goat Voyages of Adam Olearius Book 5.
; which (beside the unlikelyhood that this should be brought thence) is enough
to show that it cannot be referred to that species of deer: though no body
knows whence this came, it being taken alive by the Colliers in an old
Coal-work, and brought to the Castle bound in a Wheel-barrow. Contrary to these
I met with some other heads spread into three branches, having all their
Antlers, palms, and spellers whereof there is one at Chartley, and another (I
think) in the house at Sandon: and I was told by the Worshipful Colonel
Edward Vernon deputy Lieutenant of that Forest of Needwood, that there was a
buck now living in the Forest, that had a head spread into 4 branches; which
as the former were defects, are excesses of Nature; and proceed no question
from the exuberancy of Matter that supplys these parts. And so much for Deer.

68. Let us next proceed to Cows, Oxen, and Horses, and so conclude this
seventh Chapter: of the former of which, my worthy friend Mr. Bott of Dunstall
had one so prolific near 30 years ago, that she brought him 2 Calves at a
time, 3 times together; and the fourth time three; so that she had 9 Calves in
3 years time. One Thomas Laurence of Wombourn also had a Heifer, that at two
years old brought him 3 Calves, then two, then two more, and at last 3 again;
having ten Calves within the same time. Nor has the fecundity of this Animal
been more conspicuous, in the multitude and frequency of its Offspring, than
in the earliness of it; there having been a Cow-calf at Cannal in this County,
the Seat of the right Worshipful Sr. Francis Lawley, that (like Mrs. Dunches
at Newington in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 7.. 41.
) had another presently after she was eleven Months old, viz. 3 weeks and some
odd days, before she was a Twelve-monthing. I have it also from very good
hands, that Tho. Bratt jun. of Wolverhampton Butcher, bought a Cow at Tole-end
in the parish of Tipton, with a calf by her side, which promising well, he
forbore to kill, letting it go with the Damm till it weaned it self, by reason
(as it is thought) the Damm was so far gone with another calf, that it liked not
the milk; or else because gone as far it self with calf, at the same time; they
both calving within a week of each other, the Heifer wanting a fortnight of
being 12 Months old.

69. Which sort of Cattle goeing nine Months, we must either admit that these
calves took bull at about two Months old; or that their Damms cast them at
first pregnant with others, like the Hungarian Cow mentioned by David
Spilinbergerus, which brought forth a Calf with a great belly, wherein was
found another with all its limbs perfect Miscellan. curi^s. Med. Phys. G^rman.
^^n. 1. observe. 36.
; and as it was in a Lamb of Thomas Grove of Rowley Regis in this County, which
he sold to a Butcher, who killing it, found another Lamb in its belly. As it
has also hapened in a human Faetus, and in some other Animals Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Cap. 7.. 42.
. Now how such wonderful productions should come to pass is hard to determine:
I am sure Bartholin's conjecture; [that Nature in these at first intended only
Twinns, and that by some casualty, one of each of these Faetus's might be
thrust into the bel^y of the other, over which a Skin might be easily
superinduced Tho. Fartholini Anatom. Med. rar. Hist. 66.
] seems very improbable: for why should one Faetus tarry in the Womb twice as
long as another? when supposed to be begotten at the same time. Therefore much
rather shall I allow in our two cases, that these calves took bull at about the
age of two months, since the Goat is said to begin to use coition at 7 days old
Sr. Th. Brown's Enquiries into vulgar Errors Book. 5. Chap. 20.
, upon which account the Emblematists usually expressed fecundity by that Animal.

70. At Frodley in this County, Elizabeth Scofield widow, had a cow that cast
a calf of a monstrous shape, having a horn, the elder, and two legs of another
coming out of its back; which lived a long time, and as it filled it self with
sucking or otherwise, so did the calf on its back: so that Nature indeed in
this case seemed to have designed two calves, which possibly might be some way
thrust into one another, according to the sentiment of Bartholin, as it is like
it might also happen in the instance he mentions of Lazarus Colloredo and his
brother Baptist Ibid.
But this will not reach the case of the Hungarian Cow; or the Sheep of Mr.
Grove of Rowley abovementioned; the Spanish Mare of Nierembergius; or of Joan
the wife of Nicholas Peter of Vleslovia in Fionia; each of which brought forth
Animals of their own kind, impregnated with others, duly placed in the Womb Not
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 7. 42.
. The Calves that were cast near Shredicot, and at Rewle, in the same parish of
Bradeley, each with 5 legs, must also be reckoned amongst the monsters of this
Species; and so must that cast at Roycroft in the parish of Rushall, which was
a yard and an inch high at 2 days old, and had horns on its head an inch long,
and (being a Cow-calf) milk in its elder; the former whereof perhaps might be
occasioned, as the supernumerary legs of birds, from ova gemellifica Gul.
Harvei. de Generat. Animal. exercit. 23.
; and the latter by the Cows goeing beyond her time. It must also be remembered
before I have done with the accidents relating to Calves, that there was a Cow
at Thorp Constantine about 12 years since, that being observed not to cast her
calf in due time, was fatted up, and killed; in whose Matrix (when opened)
there was found the Sceleton of a calf, all the bones hanging entirely together
as in Tab. 22. Fig. 13. lying in a reddish weighty substance somewhat like
red-lead or bole Armeniac the fleshy parts being either wasted by corruption,
or dried up by the heat of the Womb, like the Calf of John Huswig Minister of
Fredericks-burg mentioned by Bartholin Tho. Bartholini Historiar. Anatom. Cent.
2. Hist. 2.
. Which no question had been killed by some unfortunate accident, as the
Faetus's of the Hare, Do, and cow above mentioned, the bones still remaining
thus within their bodies, though not perhaps in so good order as these.

71. It is a pretty common thing amongst this sort of cattle, to have balls of
hair found in their Stomachs covered over with a smooth shining coat or shell,
occasioned I suppose by their licking themselves (which they do most whilst in
proof) and swallowing the hair that then comes off them in plentiful manner;
of which, elaborated in the (...), or reticulum, the first or second ventricle
(where they are most times found Geo. Hieron. Vel^^^^ (...) Med. Philosoph. de
Agagropilis p. 8.
) these balls of hair are often formed, and compacted together much after the
manner that the wool of a Hat is, by the hand of the workman; which lying in
the Stomach some considerable time, has ordinarily a pretty thick and tough
coat superinduced over it, by the plenty of slime it there meets with: if it
lie there long, it is usually of a chestnut; if a lesser time, of an ash color;
of the former of which I met with a large fair pattern at Mr. Fowk's of little
Worley in the parish of Norton; and of the latter had one sent me from Mr.
Jackson of Stansop in the parish of Alstonfield. But if taken out of the
Stomach quickly after it is elaborated, as it is sometimes in young calves that
are killed, the hair is not found covered with any coat at all, nor complicated
like the former, the outer parts of the hair of them standing up loose, but
lyeing parallel and winding, like the hair on the crown of a Man's head, which
not being so common I have caused to be engraven Tab. 22. Fig. 14. which was
given me by the Worshipful Jonas Grosvenor of Wolverhampton Esquire and taken (as
he told me) out of the Ventricle of a young calf, not of age I suppose either
to spare phlegm from its aliment, or afford time, for the superinducing of
such a smooth shining coat or shell, wherein these balls are commonly found
included.

72. Which Pliny would have only to be met with in the reticulum, or second
ventricle, calling them tophos nigricantes C. Pimis 2. Not. Hist. Lab. 11. cap.
3^.
; and Ferrante Imperato, Topho di Giovenca Dell Hest. Natural ^ab. vigesimo
ottavo. cap. 1. in finc.
; whom Wormius follows and styles tophos Invenci Mus^^^ Wormian. Lab. 1. 2.
cap. 8.
; but they do not always stay either in the first or second stomach but
sometimes pass on even into the intestines, as Bauhinus also ownes Casp. Bauhou
de lapide Bezaar. cap. 12.
, and are cast forth by Seige: whereof I have one by me found in the dung of a
Cow at Statfold in this County and given me by the Worshipful Francis
Wolferstan Esquire of a cineritious color, not shining, and an oval figure, made
so perhaps by the compression in its exit. Which is also confirmed by Wierus
who tells us of one drawn out of the Colon of a heifer at the City of Pisa De
praestigus Daemonum Lab. 3. cap. 5.
. Nor are they only found in the intestines of cows, but of horses too; the
same Mr. Wolferstan having met with another of them amongst the dung of a Horse
at the fame place; light, exactly sphericall, of a dun color; but not so bigg
as that cut out of the Horse of Crenkus a Lippa An. 1562 which was as bigg as a
goose egg, and two pounds in weight, preserved amongst the rarities of
Rudolphus King of Hungary Casp. Bauhini de lapide Bezaar. cap. 14.
. Scaliger also informs us out of the Commentaries of Moses Kimbi, of a horse
that voided many of these tophi by Seige, whereof he had one in his possession
Jul. Scalig. Lab. 15. de subtilitate Exercit. 125.
. And Chilianus Hattomanus of Breslaw in Silesia had a horse that excluded many
of them, being at last killed by one of an extraordinary Sise, of which we have
an account both in Bauhin Ibidem.
and Schwenckfeld, In Thertotrophro Stlefiae. titulo Equus.
which they call Hippolithos, and from its supposed virtues Bezoar equinum.

73. There are such balls too found in the Stomachs of horses made up of the
slender stalks of Spartum minimum Anglicum or small English mattweed, first
discovered to me by the ingenious Mr. Cole Surveyor of his Majesty's Customs at
Bristol and by him called Spart balls or pilae mansae; which I found also true
in one that I had by me that was taken out of the Maw of a Sheep, and given me
by a Country man (whose name I have lost) of Stanley in in this County; there
is also a fibrous ball taken out of the Stomach of a Sheep in the Repository of
the R. Society at Gresham College London Musaeum Reg. Societat. Part 1. cap. 2.
in append^ce.
; both much such other things I guess, and perhaps of as much virtue as the
balls thus made out of the roots and fibers of plants, that are so commonly
found in the Stomachs of the Shamois in the Alpine Countries, by Bauhin and
others called the German Bezoar, having a grateful Aromatic smell even before
they are opened Casp. Bauhini de lapide Bezaar. cap. 13.
: which is not so much to be wondered at, being made up of the small roots and
leaves of the most odoriferous Alpin plants numbered up by Velschius in his
treatise de Aegagropilis Geo. Hieron. Velschu dissert. de Agagropilis page 35,
36, 37, 38.
(which he thinks the most proper name for these balls) and not so much of the
roots of Doronicum, as Baubin would have them; the Samois frequenting many
parts of the Alps where no Doronicum grows, the roots too of these balls being
generally smaller than those of Doronicum; yet for Bauhin's sake he does not
wholly reject them.

74. That such balls should be found in the Stomachs of Animals, is indeed a
little odd; but it would be strange if any such heterogeneous body should be
naturally fast lodged in any of the vital parts: and yet even this has been met
with at Caldmore in this County, at the house of one Mr. William Hawe; where
about Christmas An. 1679 there was a large bone (considering the place) taken
out of the heart of a Beeve, of the form and bigness as described in the Cut,
Tab. 22. Fig. 15. just two inches long, and pretty thick at one end; but there
it has holes in it as represented in the figure, which show it to be hollow and
thin, yet it is very hard and solid. Such bones as these are commonly found in
the hearts of Staggs, and are thought to be a help for the stronger and more
steady motion of the muscles of them M^^cum Reg. Se^t^t part. 1 Chap. 2.
; to be a good cordial in Physic; and very useful in preventing abortions
Job. S^r^dr^ Pharmac^p. Med. Chy^^ Lab* 5. cl^s. 1.
; for all which such a bone as ours out of the heart of an Ox, may perhaps be
as well substituted, and as soon trusted.

75. Nor is it less strange what happened at Wasall in this County, relating to
one of these Cattle; where one Richard Nichols a butcher of the Town killing a
bull bred at Rugely, not at all diseased, or any way differing from others of
its kind that could sensibly be perceived, its tallow was found to shine so
vividly in the dark, that they could see any part of the room by it; held to
the Chimney, they could so plainly see all the joints of the bricks, that they
could number them; the hand laid upon it might be seen in all its parts; and
others for experiment counted Money by the light of it; held up to the ceiling
it shon so strongly against it, that it made a circle of light upon it;
continuing thus to shine for about 10 days, notwithstanding much prejudiced by
peoples frequent handling it, that came in multitudes daily to see it. That the
flesh of this species both young and old, will sometimes shine in the dark, Mr.
Boil and Dr. Beal have both afforded us ample proof, in two necks of Veal, and
a piece of beef; it has also been observed by the same worthy persons in a
pullet and in hoggsflesh; and in all these whilst fresh and good, before
putrefaction Phil^^oph (...) Na^^. 89. and 125.
: but I have no where found that either the fat, suet, or tallow of any Animal,
was ever liable to this quality, though I see no reason but that they might
become luminous upon the same principals that flesh, and many other things
sometimes are so, the niter of the Air exciting the oily sulphurs in them,
which because discoursed of elsewhere in this work Chap 3.. 19.
, I forbear mentioning them here,

76. And proceed to the most memorable accidents I heard of in this County to
have at any time befallen the Solipedous Animals: whereof there was a Mare at a
place called Broadheath betwixt Sighford and Ranton, that cast a monstrous colt
with two hind legs only. There was also a Mare at Bagnal in this County, in
which dame Nature erred in excess, as in defect in the colt, she having five
feet though but four legs; the fifth coming forth about the fetlock of one of
the legs, and hanging loose and useless (as most monstrosities of excess do)
which yet they were forced to shoe as well as the other four, it coming to
ground, and therefore requiring the same preservation, the rest did. We may
also reckon it an excess in a Mare, to cast two Colts at a time, it being very
rare that this sort of Animal produces above one: yet that they sometimes do
we have ample testimony, from the Mare of Mr. Caldwall Minister of Millwich
that foled two at a time, which lived and thrived well; in the rearing whereof
this was only observable, that the natural affection of the Mare toward them
was so impartial, that she never admitted them to suck but together. To which
add a Mare of Mr. Thomas Offleys, that had all its limbs perfect and
proportionable, without excess or defect, and was five years old; yet was but
one yard, and three inches high: a stature so inconsiderable, that many who
bestrid it, reached the ground with their feet, so that they seemed to ride and
walk at the same time. Nor must it be forgotten that at Thorp Constantine in
the Lordship of Mr. Inge, there was a Mare bred that had a bony substance grew
out of the hollow of her Ear, somewhat like to one of the Molar teeth of a Man
at the upper end, but no branches or fangs at the bottom, having only a
cartilagineous substance there, obtuse at the end, as in Tab. 22. Fig. 16.

77. And thus I had done with Horses, but that I was presented with a rarity
relating to them by the Worshipful Francis Wolferstane of Statfold Esquire which I
cannot but mention in confirmation of a truth much doubted by many: it being a
true Hippomanes, or Languet of flesh of a dark purple color near four inches
long, that dropped from the forehead of a Colt newly foled in his grounds at
Statfold, and brought him by one of his Servants; which he was satisfied was
true, finding it agreeable upon application with it is impression yet remaining
upon the foles forehead when he went to visit it. Such as which (they say)
adhere to the foreheads of all Colts, and unless prevented, presently eaten by
the 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
(...)



(...)
depictions of animals and bones Mares; but if taken from them, they never show
love to those colts more, nor will admit them to suck: whence it has always
been esteemed so prevalent in procuring of love, that dried powdered and mixed
with the blood of the Lover, and drank by the Mistress, it drives her to such an
unbridled height of lust, as equals the madness of a Mare when she desires the
Horse, and upon this account has gained the name of Hippomanes: which is no new
thing, it being mentioned by Virgil, Ovid, Juvenal, Tibullus, Propertius; and
Aristotle, Pliny, Solinus, and Columella; and most of the other old Poets and
Naturalists, as a thing of this virtue; and used as an ingredient among the
other odd materials of Witches and Conjurers. Which whether true or false; or
of any such virtue to deserve the name it enjoys; I do not, nor care not to
understand; it being sufficient to me (though Aristotle explodes it Aristot. de
Hist. Animal. Lib. 8. cap. 24.
) that there is such a thing.

78. And thus I had done too with all the (...) or Solipedous Quadrupeds, but
that I was presented with the lower jaw of some Animal with large teeth in it,
dugg up in a marle-pit somewhere in the grounds of the Worshipful William
Leveson Gower of Trentham Esquire who has been so noble a Maecenas in promoting
this Work, that I could do no less than present the Reader with a double
Prospect of his magnificent Seat, Tab. 23. and 24. Which jaw upon comparison I
find so agreeable with the Elephants Skulls in Mr. Ashmoles Musaeum in the
University of Oxford, that I dare not pronounce it any thing else but the jaw
of a young Animal of that Species; and therefore rightly placed here, the
Elephant being one of the whole-footed Quadrupeds. All the difficulty is, how
it should come hither, this Animal being a rarity even at this day in England:
to which we must answer, that it must be the jaw of a young Elephant, either
kept for the state or pleasure of some great person hereabout; or brought
hither for Show, which dyed and was here buried; as the Dromedary brought into
this County within memory for the same purpose, dyed by the negligence of his
Keeper and was buried (where he dyed) in Tixall field: whose bones hereafter if
ever found, may create as much wonder as this has done.

CHAP. VIII. Of Men and Women.
1. MAN, the Subject matter of the following Chapter, being but a single
Species of the Animal Kingdom, and that too which the Logicians call
specialissima, whereof there is no variety of inferior Species's that can be
hoped to be found, into which it may be subdivided, so as to advance any
matter; one would have thought at first sight should have been so narrow a
Theme, that it might well have been considered in the former Chapter among the
other Animals without danger of prolixity: but Man being appointed by his
Creator the Lord of all below, having the ordering and disposing of all things
here both in relation to Himself and the inferior Animals; and not living so
much within bounds as he should; but debauching his constitution with too many
sensual delights of all kinds; has rendered Himself liable in the manage of all
these policies, to so many unusual accidents and distempers in the course of
his life; that I guess I may find the relation of them, together with those of
his birth and death that have happened but within the narrow verge of this
County, sufficient to supply matter for another Chapter. Which I shall treat of
(as I ought at least in a Natural History) according to the order of Nature:
beginning first with such uncommon accidents as have befallen Mankind at or
before his birth, then in his course of life, and lastly at his death.

2. But before I enter upon the births of Men and Women, it may be worth notice
perhaps that I met with one at Millwich of a 11 years old, the child of one
Philips, that seemed to be neither; the Sex not being to be distinguished by
the usual marks, nothing appearing in the place but an unusual aperture of a
raw membrane; which I guess might be nothing else but the neck of the bladder,
the child's urin constantly distilling thence: upon which account of the
uncertainty of its Species, being in all other parts perfect and well
proportioned, it was Christened Franc. this being a name in common speech
indifferent to both Sexes. But I think they needed not have been so nice in
this matter, had they well considered; for though it is plain Nature was
disappointed in perfecting this child, yet she has done enough to show what she
intended; the child seeming to have somewhat of a Scrotum below the aperture,
though none of the other essentials of Manhood,

3. All unusual marriages must also be precedent to the births of children;
and so must the unseasonable times of their Parents getting them; a Man it is
true may marry at what age he pleases, but he seldom does after eighty years of
age; much less can he get children after that time: wherefore Pliny mentions it
as an extraordinary thing that Cato Censorius, and Volusius Saturninus, begat
Sons after they were past that age; and that King Massinissa begat his Son
Mathimathnus at eighty six years old; and for Women he says in general they are
past childbearing at fifty C. Plinii 2ll. Not. Hist. Lab. 7. cap. 14.
; which seem to be the ultimate limits of time, after which neither Men or
Women marry, or can get children. Yet both these fall short of what I met with
in this County (and which is more extraordinary) in the same married couple:
one John Best of the parish of Horton a man of a 104 years of age, having not
many years ago married a woman of 56. Upon whom he got a Son so very like
himself (as I was told by Mr. Smith of the same parish who was Godfather to the
child) that no body doubted but he was the true father of it. Which is more
than what Levinus Lemnius relates from the Testimony of a Master of a Ship
worthy of credit, that being at Stockholm in Sweden, he was called by the King
himself to be present at the marriage of a Man 100 years old, who taking a wife
of 30, had many children by her Levini Lemnis de ^ccult. Not. ^^irac. Lib. 4.
cap. 24.
.

4. Before the birth of Children, so powerful is the Pica or Longing of a
Woman, that in case she be not presently supplied with the object of her
unreasonable extravagant appetite, she frequently marks her child with some
resemblance of it: whereof we daily see so many examples, that it would be
impertinent here to instance in any. But the marks she sometimes gives her
child upon a fright, are so very observable, that they must not be passed over;
these being many times more than Skin deep: as I noted it in a Gentlewoman I
once saw at London that had the figure of a Mouse on her cheek standing fourth
protuberant in mezzo rilievo with the furr on, given her by her mother upon a
fright she received from that Animal, whilst she went with child of her. Nay
so strong impressions do such frights sometimes make upon women; that they
will break the very Skins of the Faetus in the Womb, as we read in the
Transactions of a Soldiers wife that had seen some body sore wounded and
disfigured, produced a child wounded after the same manner, pieces of flesh in
the shape of Pistolbullets hanging to its body, etc. as it is there represented
Fig. 13 Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 160.
.

5. But I never met with an instance in all my Travells where any of these
impressions were so very strong that they dismembered the Faetus in the same
part the object was, which gave the fright, till I came to Leek, where
Elizabeth the wife of Jeremiah Tomkinson having heard that one John Heath a
Blacksmith who lived in her house, upon reading that of St. Matthew Chap. 5.
v. 30. [if they right hand offend thee, cut it off] had repaired to his
brothers house a Wood-man of Cunsall, and taken opportunity with one of his
brothers instruments to cut off his right hand; was so affected with it, being
then about the time of her conception (though she saw not the fact, nor heard
of it till next day after it was done) that she brought forth a man child (whom
I saw my self An. 1681) without a right hand, couped at the wrist much about
the place where John Heath had cut his hand off. Which I take to be almost as
strange an instance of the kind, as any of those mentioned by Bapt. Van
Helmont: who tells us of a Tailors wife of Mechlin who seeing a Soldier loose
his hand in a conflict before her door, was so terrifyed with it, that she
presently was delivered of a daughter with one hand, the other being cut off,
and the child bleeding to death of it. And that the wife of Mark de Vogeler a
Merchant of Antwerp, in the year 1602 seeing a Soldier begging, who had his
right Arm shot off by a bullet at the Seige of Ostend, which he carried about
with him bloody, I suppose to move pity; was presently brought to bed of a
daughter also without a right Arm, who was after married to one Hoochcamer a
Merchant of Amsterdam, and was living in An. 1638 Joh. Bapt. Van. Helmont cap.
de injectis materialibus page 383. Edit. Venetiis An. 1651.
.

6. Also before the birth of Children, so many and so apparent are the usual
Symptoms commonly known by Women, about the time of conception; during their
goeing with child; and when near their travel; that one would think a woman
truly with child, could never be so mistaken, as I was told the wife of Samuel
Ward of Mearton in this County really was: who after she had been married two
years, was brought to bed of a daughter, both her self and husband, so little
knowing, or so much as thinking she was ever with child, that growing ill near
the time of her labor, they sent for a Physician instead of a Midwife. For one
to have all these signs, and yet no child at last, is pretty common amongst
women; nay so far is it from a miracle that they are sometimes incident to
ancient women past the age of child bearing, whereof Mrs. Bromwich of the
parish of Newland in the Forest of Dean in Glocestershire, who had all the
Symptoms of a pregnant woman at near 80 years of age, is a most remarkable
instance Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 172.
: but to have a child in this manner, and none of the concomitant signs, is so
very rare, that I have not yet met with a parallel History in all my reading.

7. Amongst the unusual accidents in the birth of Man we must reckon the
surprising production of Monsters, whether in excess or defect; to the former
of which the ancient Historians have usually referred such as are born with
teeth, it having been always looked upon very extraordinary to be so born,
children seldom breeding them till the seventh month after their birth. Yet
Sarab Wood of Brineton in the parish of Blymhill An. 1670. was thus born with
two teeth, which was anciently accounted very unfortunate both to Men and
Women, as in the instances of Valeria, and our Richard the third King of
England, who were both thus born, and one of them the cause of the ruin of
Suessa Pometia a most flourishing City C. Plinii 2l^. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap.
16.
, and the other of a no less flourishing Family. But such observations as these
I take to be more beholding to superstition than truth; for we find that M.
Curious (upon this account surnamed Dentatus) and Cn. Papyrius Carbo to be both
born with teeth, yet came to be very great men, and right honorable personages
Ibidem.
.

8. More deservedly by much are the Monsters of defect, I have met with in this
County, referred hither; such as that of Elizabeth the wife of John Bird of
Whittington near Lichfield, who An. 1679. was brought to bed of a child without
upper lip, nose, or eyes; the hands turned upon the arms, and the feet upon
the legs, one of the heels extravagantly large, and a hole in the back without
any backbone; it could not suck, but took milk and beer freely enough, whereby
it lived 3 days, and then dyed. Which it is true was a birth imperfect and
deformed enough, yet not near so much as that of the wife of one Tailor of
great-Heywood, who in January 1684. as I received it in a Letter from my very
good Friend Mr. Sampson Birch Alderman of Stafford, beside a a perfect
still-born child, was delivered of another monstrous body, made up of a large
Cystis or bagg about the thickness of a Man's Scrotum, smooth on the out side,
and somewhat reddish, filled with a liquid slimy matter, but not fetid: in the
upper part whereof was a round protuberant bone 3 inches and in compass coverd
with a thick fleshy Skin beset with short hairs, in which were placed 8 dentes
molares in a circular form, having a small hole in the middle which led not
far: below these in another bone were placed 5 other teeth, also of the molar
kind, four of them almost in a straight line, and the fifth a little below the
two uppermost, which in shape, whiteness, etc. all so well resembled teeth,
that they could not be thought to be any thing else.

9. Out of the Skin of the Cystis a little below the uppermost bone, in which
the eight teeth are set, grew a large lock of hair of a bright brown color,
whose end was intricate and entangled in a larger quantity fastened in the
other end of the Cystis opposite to the eight teeth of a more yellowish color:
all which may be conceived well enough by the figure of it Tab. 25. where it is
exactly graven in its just magnitude. Now for a just account of this Embryo or
preternatural body though it cannot be expected, yet I think I may pronounce
without any great diffidence, 1. that it must come from an Egg that descended
from the Ovarium through the Tube to the womb, as well as that of the perfect
child; 2. that Nature in this birth at first intended Twinns; and 3 that the
bony and fleshy parts, out of which grew the hair, and the two setts of teeth,
were some rudiments designed to form a head: but how dame Nature came thus to
miscarry in her plastics, whether from some external violence which might break
the Egg after it came into the womb? or whether the Egg it self at first was
imperfect or subventaneous, out of which Nature being unable to form a perfect
Faetus, made the best of what the matter could afford? as the learned Dr. Tyson
more probably thinks, who has written more at large of it Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 150.
; I shall not determine, but leave the Reader freely to use his own judgment.

10. Nor has it been usual only amongst the Natural Historians to transmit to
posterity such imperfect births as these; but the most perfect ones too, when
they have proved extraordinary: whence it is that the birth-places of Princes,
and Men any way famous, either for Arts, or Arms; for Piety, or Munificence;
have been constantly noted: and if by chance so neglected that they have become
dubious; what contention has there been between Citys and Countries for the
honor of the birth of a famous Man? Thus no less than seven Cities strove for
the birth of Homer; and thus Middlesex and Oxfordshire contest the birth of
Chaucer our famous English Poet See the Life of Chaucer by John Speght.
; and here in Oxfordshire Ewelm and Wood-stock both pretend to him. To prevent
such altercations, Cardinal Poole Archbishop of Canterbury; and William
Giffard (of the family of Chillington) Archbishop of Rhemes; William Dudley
Bishop of Durham: Edmund Stafford Bishop of Exeter, a great Benefactor to
Exeter College Oxon; Edmund Audley Bishop of Rochester, Hereford, and
Salesbury; who built the Chore of St. 1.
To ye right Wor^p. Sr. JOHN FLOYER Knight. and Dr. of PHYSJCK This 25. Tab.
Representing a very Extraordinary birth that happend in this County with all
due respect is humbly offered by RP. LL D.



sculp
Mary's Church in Oxford; all Nobly born and great Prelates: are already
recorded to have been born in this County See Godwin de praesulibus in their
respective Diecesses.
.

11. To whom let me add the most Reverend Father in God Dr Gilbert Sheldon late
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the most munificent Founder of the Theater in
Oxford, who was born at Stanton in this County, where goeing to visit the house
of his Nativity, in the very room where he was said to have drawn his first
breath, I found these Jambicks. Sheldonus ille praesulum primus Pater,
Hos inter ortus aspicit lucem Lares,
O ter beatam Stantonis villae casam!
Cui cuncta possunt invidere Marmora.


Which it seems were left there by the right Reverend Father in God Dr John
Hacket Ld. Bp. of Coventry and Lichfield, who out of his extraordinary devotion
to this great Prelat, had purposely made a journey thither not many years
before, to visit the place of his birth, where after he had given God thanks
for the great blessings he had afforded the world in that place, he sat him
down and wrote those verses.

12. Nor has it only furnished the Church with Prelates, but the Court with
Lawyers; the famous Thomas Littleton Author of the Tenures; and Edmund Dudley
father to John Duke of Northumberland, one of the Judges of his time, being
both presumed to be born in this County See Fullers Worthies in Staffordsh.
: as William de Shareshull Lord chief Baron, and chief Justice of the Common
pleas, temp. E. 3; Sr. Tho. Bromley Lord chief Justice and Lord Chancellor of
England temp. Eliz. and St. Gilbert Gerard Master of the Rolls more certainly
were. The Camp too has been supplied out of this County with many eminent
Soldiers; such as Ralph F. of Stafford, and Sr. James Audley; two of the first
Knights Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, who in all
probability were born in this County: as S. Hugh Wrottesley another of the
first Knights of the same Order most certainly was The Jnstitutions Laws and
Ceremonies of the most noble Order of the Garter by E. Ashmole Sect. 3. chap.
26.
. We may well too presume that Hugh Kilpeck Lord of the goodly Manor of Norbury
as Mr. Erdeswick calls it, and upon account of his tenure of some other lands,
the Kings Champion at the Coronation (from whom it descended to the Marmions
and Dymocks) was a good Soldier, and born in this County Erdeswicks view of
Staffordshire M S in Norbury.
.

13. John Bromley Esquire lineally descended from Sr. Walter Bromley of Bromley
(the now seat of the Lord Gerard) in Com. Stafford Knight. temp. R. Johan. who
retook the Standard of Guyen 4. Hen. 5. lost to the French in a fierce charge
on that wing which Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier (his near Kinsman) then
commanded, for which eminent service he had not only the dignity of Knighthood
conferred on him, but many lands and offices in those parts, and the said
Standard of Guyen given him for the Crest of his Arms: which is born to this
day by his lineal Descendant William Bromley of Baginton in Com. Warw. Esquire
truly heir of the worth, as well as Estate of his Ancestors Dugdales
Antiquities of Warwicksh. illustrated p. 153.
. This valiant Sr. John Bromley was certainly (I say) born in this County. And
so it is like too was John Duke of Northumberland who may be reckoned a good
Captain having frequently given proof of his abilities this way, and with good
success in all, saving his last Enterprise for the Crown, after the untimely
death of King Edward the sixth.

14. To these Mr. Erdeswick adds Ralph and Nicholas sons of John Bagnall born
at New Castle under Lyme in this County, who raised again their sunk ancient
Family (once seated at the village of their own name in this County) by their
valor only, for which they were both graced with the Order of Knighthood; one
at Mussleborough in Scotland; the other in Ireland. Mr. Sampson Erdeswick's
view of Staffordsh. M. S. in Bagenhall.
. To whom give me leave to subjoyn Coll. John Lane of Bentley Esquire (of whom at
large hereafter) and Colonel William Carlis, born at Bromhall in this County,
who for his approved valor under his late Majesty at Worcester, and fidelity
to him in his distress after, upon whose lap he rested in the Royal Oak; had
his name changed to Carlos (which is Charles in Spanish) and a most suitable
and honorable coat of Arms granted him by Letters Patents under the great Seal
of England, in perpetuam rei memoriam. viz. in a field Or on an Oak proper a
Fess Gu. charged with 3 regal Crowns of the second, by the name of Carlos. And
for his Crest, a Civic Crown or Oken garland, with a Sword and Scepter crossed
through it Saltir-wise. And for Sea-Captains (though an inland County) it has
produced some very eminent; witness Sr. Richard Leveson Vice Admiral of
England; and Sr. Edward Spragg one of the Rere-Admirals in our days, who as I
am credibly informed, was born in this County. The Family of the Minors's of
Hollingbury-Hall in the parish of Vttoxater seems also to have been peculiarly
addicted to the Sea; whereof one William Minors is said to have sailed to the
East Indies eleven times: whither he has been followed by Captain Richard
Minors the present Proprietor of that Seat: who has not only signalized himself
in our Engagements at Sea against the Dutch, but at land too, against the
Rebels (more particularly at Colchester) in the late Civil Wars.

15. It has also obliged the World with as many learned Writers (for a County
so little provided for in the Universities as this is) as can reasonably be
expected: whereof the ancientest, are John Stafford a Franciscan Friar, both a
Philosopher and Divine, but chiefly a Historian, which he showed in writing a
Latin History, de illustrium Virorum rebus gestis, to the time wherein he
flourisht, which was about the year 1380 Joh. Pitscus de Illustrib. Angl.
Script. in Anno citato.
. Thomas Asheburn also born in Stafford, and bred in the University of Oxford,
where he was Dr. of the chair: a great opposer of Wicliff's doctrine, against
which he not only preached and wrote many books, but caused a Convocation to be
called at London An. 1382. wherein it was solemnly condemned Ibidem in Anno
citato.
. Which yet was mantained notwithstanding by his contemporary and Countryman
Peter Pateshull born I suppose at the Town of his own name in this County, but
bred also at Oxford, where he proceeded Dr. and was sometimes Professor of
Divinity; a man of a sharp wit, an acute disputant, and an eloquent preacher.
He wrote many things against the Monks and Friars of his time, particularly the
Augustins, by whom he was persecuted accordingly: yet was made Chaplin at the
same time (if we may believe Bale) to Pope Urban the 6. by the procurement of
Walter Dyss an English Carmelite, his Legate here Joh. Balei de Scriptoribus
Britanniae Cent. Sept.
. William de Lichfield Dr. of Divinity, Rector of Allhallows the great in
London, wrote many books in his own faculty both in prose and verse, whereof
Pitseus has given us a Catalogue Joh. Pitsei Illustr. Angl. Script. Append.
Cent. 2.
, and was so great a Preacher that as Mr. Stow says, he left behind him when he
dyed An. 1447 no less than 3083 Sermons of his own writing, which would have
been accounted a prodigious number in this preaching age, but was much more so
in that Stows survey of London in Down gate ward.
.

16. Robert Whittington also born at Lichfield, was a great Grammarian, Poet
laureat of Oxford, and Protovates Angliae, as he styles himself in the
title page of his Grammar printed at London by Wynkyn de Word An. 1517. He
wrote many other books of Schole-Learning the Titles whereof may be seen in
Pitseus Joh. Pitsei Illustr. Angl. Script. in An. 1530.
. Henry Stafford Son of Edward Duke of Buckingham attainted and beheaded 12.
Hen. 8. 1521. was likewise born in this County, Vir in melioribus quibusque
disciplinis insigniter eruditus, says Pitseus of him Idem. in An. 1558.
, who to avoid the fate of his Ancestors, was contented with the Barony of
Stafford only, and leaving all thoughts of State-affaires, applied himself to
his studies, and wrote many things in Latin politely enough both in verse and
prose. John Robyns, first Fellow of All Souls Coll after Canon of Chapter Chapter Oxon
and Prebend of Windsor, the greatest Mathematician of his time, also had his
Nativity here v; he wrote a book de portentosis Cometis Joh. Pitsei illustr.
Angl. Script. Append. Cent. 3.
, and being much addicted to the study of Astrology, lest many books on that
subject, whereof there are several MSS. in the Bodleyan Library in the
University of Oxford MS. Fol. inter Cod. Digby numb. 143.
. The famous Thomas Allen of Gloucester Hall, a great Antiquary, Philosopher,
and Mathematician, was likewise born at Bucknall in this County, being
descended of one Alanus de Buckenhall temp. Edw. 2. according to the opinion of
Mr. Sampson Erdeswick Mr. Samps. Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in Bucknall.
. Who was also born at Sandon in this County, venerandae Antiquitatis cultor
maximus, says Mr. Camden of him Mr Camden in Com. Staff.
, which he has fully made good in the MS. view of this County, by him written.

17. Of later years, Robert Waring M. A. and Student of Christ-Church, was born
at Lea house near Wolver hampton, a great Poet, Orator, and Historian, of the
latter whereof he was public Professor at Oxon. He published several tracts,
of which there is an account in the History and Antiquities of the University
Anth. a Wood Hist. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. Lib. 2. in Coll. Chapter Chapter
. Robert Burton also of Chapter Chapter Oxon, commonly otherwise called Democritus
junior, the learned Author of the Anatomy of Melancholy, is also generally
believed by the Inhabitants thereabout, to be born at Fald in this County,
where I was shown the very house (as they said) of his Nativity. And William
Burton in the selvedg of his Picture before his description of Leicestershire,
ownes himself of Fald in this County. Though Mr. Anth. a Wood in the
Antiquities of the University says they were both born at Lindly in the County
of Leicester Ibid.
. Edward Chetwynd Dr. of Divinity of Exeter Coll. of the ancient Family of
Ingestre in this County, is likewise placed here, he was Chaplin to Queen Ann,
and Dean of Bristol, a great preacher, and published many Sermons beside other
Tracts Ibid in Coll. Exon.
. To these add, Sr. Charles Wolsely Baronet now living, a cordial Encourager of
this work, who though a Layman, has written many things in Divinity. And the
learned and ingenious Charles Cotton of Beresford Esquire who beside several
Translations, has published diverse other curious pieces, so well known to all
ingenious persons, that they need not be named.

18. Lastly, the Worshipful Elias Ashmole Esquire of Brasen-Nose Coll. Oxon, was
born at Lichfield in this County, who for his Anth. a Wood Hist. and Antiq.
Univers. Oxon. Lib. 2. in Coll. Omn. Anim.
general skill in all the politer sorts of Learning, such as Heraldry,
Antiquities, Chemistry, Astrology, Natural Philosophy, etc. was made first
Windsor Herald, and had the supervising and ordering the Kings Cabinet of
Coins, and made Catalogues of those in the University of Oxon. Which
University upon account of his extraordinary merit, sent him a Diploma for his
Drs degree in the Faculty of Physic, ex mero motu without his knowledge or
seeking. He was also honored in the Jnns of Court with the title and degree of
Barrister at Law. Lastly our late dread Sovereign K. Charles the Second being
conscious of his great knowledge, industry, and fidelity, made him Controller of
all the Excise in England and Wales. He has obliged the learned world with
many curious books, and lately the University of Oxford with the best History
of Nature, Arts, and Antiquities, to be seen any where in the world; not in
print, or Sculpture, but in a generous donation of the real things themselves;
wherewith they have furnished the new Musaeum lately there erected, and
gratefully styled it (as a perpetual memorial of so noble a benefaction) the
Musaeum Ashmoleanum.

19. And as the Naturalists took care to transmit to Posterity the birth-places
of Men eminent for any sort of Virtue, so likewise they did too of all numerous
Offsprings; such as that of one Dilk the foot-post of Lichfield, whose wife
was so prolific that she brought him 5 children within the year, and these not
at one, but two regular births, without any such superfetations as those
mentioned above in the former Chapter Vid. Chap. 7. 62.
; or by Pliny in his Examples of numerous births C. Plinti 2di. Not. Hist. Lib.
7. cap. 11.
. Raro nostro seculo Trimelli perfecti sunt aut Vitales, says Thomas Bartholin.
i. e. that it seldom falls out that three children are born together either
perfect or living Tho. Bartholin. Hist. Cent. 4. Hist. 83.
; and yet this happened too at Barton in this County, there being one Tailor
that lived in a little Cottage near the place where the Chapel now stands that
had three Sons at a birth, which being presented as a rarity to King Hen. the
7th as he came that way (perhaps to hunt in Needwood) he ordered that care
should be taken of them, so as to be put to Schole, etc. who all lived to be
men, and as the tradition goes all came to be Doctors, and to good perferment:
which it is like is true enough of the youngest, but it is certain the eldest
did, as appears by several inscriptions both within and without the Chapel,
which he gratefully founded there, in the place of their Nativity; of which
more hereafter.

20. There are also in this County some remarkable customs relating to births,
that must not be omitted: whereof that of Borow-English at Lapely and Alrewas
may pass for one, which is a customary descent of Lands to the youngest Son or
Brother, before the elder; and this in some places is indefinite, but here at
Alrewas of the Copy-hold-lands only, not the Fee-Simple. That the younger Son
or Brother should thus inherit Lands of any sort, before the elder, may seem
indeed to some not a little unnatural, but the famous Littleton renders us this
reason why in some places they enjoy this privilege, for that in Law they are
presumed the least able to shift for themselves. Upon which account in Kent
where the youngest sometimes enjoys the benefit of Gavelkind, though not the
whole inheritance; they have the privilege of the Astre, or herth for fire, in
the Mansion house, in their division; because the youngest being the tenderest
have the greatest reason to be kept warm at home I^ Astre demorra al pune, on
al punee. Lambard's Usages and Customs of Kent. p. 5^4
.

21. Which are reasons that appear plausible enough, but I guess the more
substantial cause of this custom may rather be, that the places where now
Borow-English obtains, were anciently liable to the same ungodly custom granted
to the Lords of Manors in Scotland by King Evenus or Eugenius, whereby they had
the privilege of enjoying the first nights lodging with their Tenants brides
Hecl. Boetu Hist. Scot. Lib. 3. cap. 12.
, so that the eldest Son being presumed to be the Lords, they usually settled
their lands (and not without reason) upon the youngest Son whom they thought
their own; which being practiced a long time, grew at length to a custom. Now
that this custom obtained as well in England as Scotland, we may rationally
conclude from the Marcheta mulierum (which King Malcolin orderd the Tenants to
give their Lords in liew of it when he took it away Genesis Buchanant Rer. Scot.
Hist. Lab. ^. (...). ^^.
.) that was anciently paid here as well as there: for which we have the express
testimony of Bracton. Tranavit (says he) totam Angliam Marcheti hujus
pecuniarii consuetudo in mancipiorum filiabus maritandis Bra^ton de Legib. and
Consuetud. Angl. Lib. 2. tit. 1. cap. 8. number. 2.
. i. e. that this custom was spread all over the Nation, etc.

22. Whereof I have seen a particular Record of one Maynard of Berk-shire, who
held his lands by this tenure of the Abbot of Abbington, in these words.
Willielmus Maynard qui tenuit terras in Heurst, cognoscit se esse Villanum
Abbatis de Abbendon; and tenere de eo in Villenagio, and per villanas
consuetudines, viz, per servitium 18 d. per annum, and dandi Maritagium and
Marchetum pro filia and sorore sua ad voluntatem ipsius Abbatis, etc k. Nor did
it only prevail in England and Scotland, but as I have heard in the Isle of
Guernsey; and in the Kingdom of Ireland too; where, as I am told by the
Worshipful Colonel Edward Vernon P^a^na de Banco in die Pasc. 34. Hen. 3. Rot.
20. Berks.
(deputy high Steward of the Honor of Tutbury, and deputy Lieutenant of the
Forest of Needwood) it is called Lohempy.

23. At Terley Castle in this County, the Lordship whereof belongs to the right
Honorable the Lord Gerard of Bromley, Sr. Charles Skrymsher Knight. and Richard
Church Esquire the Lords enjoy another odd custom, or privilege of Lotherwits or
Lyerwits at this day; that is, the liberty of taking a compensation or
amercement for bastards got or born within the Lordship, so called from the
Saxon Ledger or Logher a bed, and wit a penalty; whence Fleta expounds the word
Lierwit to import as much as mulcta Adulteriorum Fl^ta. Iab. 1. cap. 47.
. Which anciently as the books unanimously inform us, extended only to such as
did defile a bondwoman within the Manor without license. But the Charter of
this Manor it seems extends further, for here the delinquent, oath being made
that the bastard was begot within the Manor, and paying ten shillings to the
Lords, not only avoids the cognizance of the Bishop and all Ecclesiastical
Courts, and discovery of the Father: but also if a bastard child be brought
hither from without the Lordship, paying 1lb -- 19s -- 11d. -- ob. to the
Lords, they shall have no cognizance of it neither. Nay so great a privilege
had a certain Oak in Knoll-wood, 3 miles South of the Castle but within the
Lordsh. in this respect, as Sr. Charles Skrymsher told me, to whom the wood
belongs, that in case oath were made that the bastard was begot within the
umbrage or reach of its boughs, neither the Bishop, or Lords of the Manor
themselves could take any cognizance of it.

24. After the births of Men and Women, their Christenings usually follow;
wherein it is remarkable that about New Castle and in the Moorelands, the men's
names are most commonly Ralph or Randal; and about Stafford and the more
Southerly parts, the name of Walter is as common; these two names prevailing
much in number above any other thereabout: occasioned (I suppose) by the great
Estates and Authority of the Earls of Chester and Essex, each in their
respective Quarters: Ranulph Earl of Chester's name still prevailing in the
North; and Walter Earl of Essex's (who lived after him at Chartley) having
since carried it in the South. It is also worthy notice that here are some
Familys that have constantly christened their eldest Sons of the same Name for
many generations; thus the Parkers of Audley have been all Richards for many
descents; and the Family of Littleton of Pillaton are so nice in this point,
that unless the eldest Son be named Edward they think it cannot live to enjoy
the Estate: upon on which account they have been all Sr. Edwards ever since
Hen. 6th. time, the present survivor being the ninth of that name. Which custom
of christening the Son constantly of the Fathers name, yet Mr. Erdeswick does
not approve, upon consideration that if a controversy should arise, wherein a
man should be forced to prove his descent, this Identity of Name will so
perplex it, that it will be very difficult to distinguish the Donor from the
Donee, etc. whereas when the Names are often, or but alternately changed (as
it is common in some familys) the descent thereby is so obvious, that no man need
fear any hazard in pleading it Mr. Samps. Erdeswick's M. S. view of
Staffordshire. in Burweston.
.

25. Thus having done with the births of infants, etc. I proceed next to the
most remarkable passages that have happened in childhood or youth; amongst
which the imposture of William the Son of Thomas Perry of Bilson or Bilston
Yeoman, a boy not above 13 years of age (but far exceeding it in wit and
subtilty) must not be forgotten: who in An. 1620. 18. Jac. being unwilling to
go to Schole, and instructed by an old Man called Thomas that carried a cradle
of glasses at his back, in a close where none could see them, but six times;
yet proved so towardly in these few trials, that he learned presently to groan,
pant, and mourn; next to roll and cast up his eyes, that nothing but the whites
should appear; to wrest and turn his neck and head both toward his back, and
then to gape hideously with his mouth, to grind his teeth, etc. and after that
to convey crooked pins, rags, etc. into his mouth so that he might seem to
vomit them up; he was instructed also that though people should put him to pain
by pricking, pinching or whipping, yet that he must endure all patiently;
lastly the old man taught him to say he was bewitched, and advised him to
accuse some body (whom he had heard to be accounted a witch) to have bewitched
him; and that whenever he heard the 1 verse of the 1. Chap. of St. John's Gospel
repeated, he should fall into these fits: all which he was contented to do,
and undergo, to avoid going to Schole, and to move compassion in the beholders
who brought him many good things out of pity when they resorted to him Boy of
Bilson, or a true discovery, etc. printed at Land. for Will. Barret. 1622.
. To which he added of his own, as occasion required, a wilful abstinence; a
trick of rolling up his tongue, and so placing it in his throat, that it
appeared hard and swollen; and mixing Ink with his Vrin, to make people believe
it came so immediately from him Wilsons Hist. of the life and Reign of K. James
the first in An. 1617.
.

26. In the practice of which instructions of the old Man, and contrivances of
his own, he grew in a little time so cunning and expert, that most people (his
own Parents not excepted, who were honest folks of sufficient ability, and
altogether ignorant of the practices of their child) believed him indeed
bewitched: for in his fits he appeared both deaf and blind, writhing his mouth
aside, continually panting and groaning, and although often pinched, pricked
with needles, and once whiped with a rod, beside other like extremities; yet
could not be perceived either by shrinking or shreiking to bewray the lest
passion of feeling. Out of his fits he took (as was thought) no sustenance he
could digest, but together with it did void and cast out of his mouth rags,
thread, straw, crooked pins, etc. His belly by his continual and wilful
abstinence, was almost as flat as his back; his throat was swollen and hard, his
tongue stiff and rolled up toward the roof of his mouth, so that he seemed
always dumb, saving that he would speak once in a fortnight or 3 weaks, and
that in but very few words. Of all which he accused one Joan Cock or Coxe a
poor old neighboring woman that he said had bewitched, or caused him thus to
be possessed; whom he would cunningly discern, and then fall into a fit,
whenever she was brought near the place where he was, though never so secretly,
as was once tried before the Bishops Chancellor at Lichfield Ibidem.
; again before the Grand Jury Boy of Bilson, etc.
; and a third time before the whole Bench, at the Assizes at Stafford Wilson's
Hist. of the life and reign of K. James the first.
.

27. Where Aug. the 10. An. 1620. She was tried for a Witch, before the right
Worshipful Sr. Peter Warburton, and Sr. John Davis Knights, then his Majesty's
Justices of Assize for this County, before whom were brought some slender
circumstances vulgarly esteemed strong proofs of Witchcraft, but these
appearing to the Judges but fantastical delusions, the woman was freed by the
Inquest, and the care, and (if it might be) the cure of the boy committed by
the Judges to the right Reverend Father in God Dr. Thomas Morton Lord Bishop of
the Diocese then and there present. Who after a Months observation of his
Actions and temper at Eccleshall Castle, not only suspected, from the easy and
equal beating of his pulse in his strongest fits; his quiet rest and sleep
commonly the whole night; his clear complexion, and spitting forth from him as
naturally as any body in perfect health, which could not possibly be done with
a tongue turned upwards as was pretended, etc. that he did but counterfiet: but
evidently proved it from his falling into fits upon repetition of the 1. verse
of the 1. Chap. of St. John's Gospel [ in the beginning was the word, etc.] in
the presence of his Father, and an Aunt that came to see him in October.
following Boy of Bilson, or a true discovery, etc.
.

28. When, being out of his Fit, the Bishop calling for a Greek Testament, said
to him; Boy, it is either thou or the Devil that abhorrest those words of the
Gospel: and if it be the Devil, he (being almost 6000 years standing) knows
and understands all languages in the world, so that he cannot but know when I
receipt the same sentence out of the Greek: But if it be thy self, then art thou
a most execrable wretch who playest the Devils part, in loathing that portion
of the Gospel of Christ, which (above all other Scriptures) does express the
admirable union of the Godhead and Manhood in one Christ and Savior, which
union is the chief pillar of man's Salvation. Wherefore look to thy self, for
now thou art to be put to thy trial, and mark diligently whether it be the same
Scripture which shall be read unto thee, at which thou do seem to be so much
troubled and tormented. Then was read unto him the 12. verse of the said 1.
Chap. of St. John's Gospel [(...), etc.] which he supposing to be the first
verse, did accordingly as he was wont fall into one of his Agony's. Which being
quickly over, next was read unto him in the same language the first verse being
indeed the aforesaid Text [(...), etc.] yet he suspecting it not the same Text,
was not troubled at it Ibidem.
.

29. By this means was his fraud so far discovered, that he was not a little
confounded; however stareing still with his Eyes, and casting his head on both
sides the bed whereon he lay, that he might cover his disimulation the better,
he told the company he was troubled at the sight of two Mice: and that he might
be freed from further trial and sent home to his Father, he complained of
extreme Sickness, and by writing, as well as he could, did signify that he had
a great pain in his belly, and the morning following making water in a Vrinal,
it was found as black as Ink, for there was some that wrote very legibly with
it. Two days after he seemed to make water of the same color again, which that
he might the more craftily dissemble, he vehemently groaned at the making of
it, whereupon one comeing into the room to him, the boy showed him his manner
of making water, whereof a little remain came then from him of the same
tincture, which he had purposely reserved within his praeputium, to make it
seem as if it came so immediately from him Ibidem.
.

30. To find out this too, the Bishop ordered a trusty Servant to watch him
through a hole that opened into the chamber toward the bed, which the boy knew
not of; by whose diligent observation, the third day following he was espied to
take out an Ink-horn which he had hid in the straw or Mat of his bed, and to
make water in the Vrinal through a piece of the Cotton in his hand, nimbly
conveying the Ink-horn into the same place again: whereof as as soon as the Man
had acquainted the Bishop, he came to him presently and asked him how he did?
who according to his usual manner pointed to his water looking ghastly at it;
then the Bishop who now meant to deal roundly with him, told him plainly that
he knew he had Ink in his bed-straw, with which he used to black his water, and
calling in his Man took the Ink-horn out of the place where he had hid it, the
Man justifying at the same time that he saw him make water through the Cotton.
Which (with the Bishops threatening to send him to the house of Correction)
struck him with such a terror that he rose from his bed, fell upon his knees,
and burst out into plentiful tears, confessing all to his own shame and Gods
glory, not only what the old Man had taught him, but also what he had contrived
of himself Wilson's Hist. of the life and reign of K. James the first, etc.
.

31. Amongst other things being asked, why he accused the poor old woman of
Witchcraft? he answered that the old Man told him he must lay the cause of his
being possessed, upon some old woman, and she being known unto him, and of a
scolding humor, he fixed it on her; and confessed that he was once minded to have
made his picture in clay, and to have conveyed it into her house, for the
better proof of her bewitching him Boy of Bilson, etc.
. Then the Bishop asking him how he came to be so sensible of the woman's being
near him, before she appeared in the room both at her examination and
arraignment, his back being toward her? for the first at Lichfield, he said, he
heard some about him whisper [she is here] which made him cry out, she comes,
she comes: and for the other at Stafford, he said he heard the people remove,
and her chains clink as she came, which gave him the sign. Lastly being asked
how he made his throat swell? he showed it was by thrusting his tongue (which
was very long) down his throat Wilson's Hist. of K. James the first, etc.
. After which sincere confession and acknowledgment, he continued at Eccleshall
Castle, till he was recovered of his weakness, and was finally brought again to
the following Summer Assize held at Stafford Jul. 26. An. 1621. before Sr.
Peter Warburton and Sr. Humphry Winch Knights, his Majesty's Justices of
Assize, and the face of the whole Country there assembled: where he first
craved pardon of almighty God; then desired the poor woman there also present
to forgive him; and lastly requested the whole Country, whom he had so
notoriously and wickedly scandalized, to admit of that his so hearty
confession, for some measure of satisfaction Boy of Bilson, etc.
. After which as Mr. Wilson says he was bound Apprentice by the Bishop, and
proved a very honest Man Wilson's Hist. of K. James the first, etc.
.

32. The strange facility and readiness wherewith this boy of Bilson in a
little time could personate all the gestures of one bewitch't or possessed, puts
me in mind with what impulses or peculiarities of temper some are inclined
(especially in their youth) to imitate motions and sounds: for which
Doterel-quality, I remember a young Scholar of Magd. Coll. Oxon. so very
excellent, that he would personat a Changeling; counterfiet the barking of a
Dog; the grunting and squeeking of a Sow and piggs; and diverse other gestures
and noises so very indistinguishably, that a Stranger, or any other person not
privy to it, could not but think them the very same. So in Darby-shire I was
shown a Youth that could most exactly imitate a Hunters horn with his voice
only. And I saw one William Creswell an Apprentice to Anthony Bannister of
Rugeley in this County, who could whistle so artificially, that scarce any body
out of sight, could distinguish his notes from those of a Flagelet. Which
imitations being voluntary, at the pleasure of the Agent, perhaps may arise
only from the frequent representations of the gestures and sounds their Parents
or Nurses accustomed them to, during their infancy, which may possibly have so
much influence (at these years) in molding the texture of the Brain and
Spirits, as to dispose them to the imitation, of such motions and notes, rather
than others.

33. But when this imitating quality is so very strong, that it becomes
involuntary, as it is in Donald Monro of Scrachbogie in Scotland, who pulls of
his hat, and puts it on; wipes his nose; wrings his hands; stretches forth his
arms; and imitates all other actions he sees any man do, though much against
his will, with so much exactness and such a natural and unaffected an Air, that
no man can suspect he does it with design; and yet with so strong an impulse
(as the Reverend and learned Dr. Garden informs us) that if his hands be held,
he cannot forbear pressing to get himself free to do the same thing. Nay so
contrary to his mind does he Ape these motions, that to hide his infirmity, he
casts down his Eyes when he walks the streets, and turns them away when in
company, wherein too it is hard to make him stay, once he finds himself observed
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 129.
. When I say this imitating quality is thus so very strong, that it becomes
involuntary, the impressions given by parents or nurses seem not sufficient to
account for it, it being more probably grounded in some peculiar crasis in the
Spirits, or distemper in the imagination, nothing less being adequat to such
effects.

34. After those of Children and youths, Method directs me next to consider the
uncommon accidents that have at any time attended more adult persons; and first
of such as have befallen the female Sex, which according to the custom of
England has always the place: amongst which I take it to be very extraordinary
that I met with at little-Worley in the parish of Cannock, where I saw one Mary
Eagle who could draw two quarts of milk from her breasts per diem, beside what
her child sucked, whereof she could have made (had there been vent for it) two
pounds of butter per week, ever since she was brought to bed, which was about
five Months past, when I was there. She gave me some of the butter, which was
made up fresh, without Salt, it needing none (as she told me) to preserve it,
which she sold to some Apothecaries hereabout at a good rate, it being useful
(as she said) in all sorts of swellings, Aches of the head, sore Eyes, etc. but
I believe it was so made only at their directions, for I found that she gave
me, to grow rancid in a while, and to stink at last. Borellus in his
observations tells us of much such another woman, one Mary Caron a Tailors wife
of Boulogne, who could afford milk enough every day for the noursing two
children, and to make butter beside; which she also did, at the earnest request
of a certain Apothecary, who used it, not against swellings, etc. as here in
Staffordshire, but as a great nostrum or secret against Consumptions, for which
he thought it the best remedy of any whatever Petr. Borelli Histor. and Observe.
Medice-Phys. Ce^t. 3. Obs. 82.
.

35. Amongst such accidents as these, we may also reckon what befell one Mary
Foster of Admaston, now the wife of John Stone of Burton upon Trent, who
casually falling into a well was so frighted with it, that for about a
fortnight she rested but little, but at length fell into so sound a sleep that
she wakened not again in 14 days and nights. About two years after she went to
live at Vttoxater, where she slept again (as I was informed) three days and
nights more: but she her self told me it was but two nights and a day. Now
though it may seem a little odd that such dreadful impressions which one would
think at first sight should rather keep one waking, should cast a person into
so profound a sleep; yet upon further consideration that nothing disorders and
tires the Spirits more than sudden frights and anxieties of mind, me thinks it
should not seem any great wonder, if to recruit themselves again, they incline
to rest, and dispose the person to sleep a longer or shorter time, in
proportion to the expense and disturbance they have had.

36. Which in all probability was also the case of a little girl about 8 years
old mentioned by Dan. Ludovicus, who being first beaten by a sever stepmother,
and then sent hungry with a bever to her Father in the field who was a poor
herdsman, and not forbearing to eat part of it; when she saw it half gone,
fearing more stripes, went no further on her way but turned aside into the next
grove or wood, where full of tears and sobbs, she laid her self down covering
her face on all sides with leaves and moss, and at last fell into so deep a
sleep, that she waked not again in seven days: nor is it likely she had then,
had she not been found by some boys, that went thither to set snares for birds,
who discovered her to her parents, by whom being carried to the next house as
dead (without any symptoms of life beside the softness of her flesh, and
flexibility of her joints) where Ludovicus by chance was in company with a
friend: having first washed from her face a glutinous phlegm mixed with the moss
and leaves that had covered it, with hot water; and cleared her mouth and
nostrills from a viscid substance that had stopped them; he then gave her a
spoonful of Spirit of Wine, which seeming to pass, upon giving her another she
began to groan, and after a third she opened her Eyes, and so came at length to
her self by degrees Vid. Miscellanea Curios. Medico-Phys. German An. 8. Observe.
68.


47. Yet these Slept not so long, but there are others in this County that have
fasted as wonderfully; one William Francis of Fisherwick being Melancholy-mad,
having once wilfully fasted 14 days together, notwithstanding all means used
to force him to eat. Which yet was nothing to what was also wilfully done by
one John Scot a Scotchman, who being cast in a suit of Law, and knowing himself
insolvent, took Sanctuary in the Abbey of Halirudhouse, where out of a deep
discontent, he abstained from all meat and drink 30 or 40 days together.
Public rumor bringing this abroad, the King himself resolved to have it put to
trial, whereupon he was shut up in a private room in the Castle of Edinburgh,
whereunto no man had access, and had a little bread and water set by him, which
he was found not to have tasted, in 32 days. This proof of his abstinence being
given, he was set at liberty, and went to Rome, where he gave the like proof of
it to Pope Clement the seventh; at Venice; and in his return, at London; where
inveighing against Hen. 8. for his divorceing Q. Catharin, and his defection
from the Sea of Rome, he was thrust into prison, where he continued also
fasting for 50 days together Joh. Spotswoad's Hist. of the Church of Scotland.
Book 2. in An. 1539.
.

38. Not comes the femal Sex much behind in such extraordinary fasting, for I
find in the Records of the Tower of London, that in the 31. of Edw. 3, there is
a pardon of execution of Judgment granted to one Cicely de Rygeway, though
indicted and condemned for killing her husband, for that she had fasted for
forty days together in arcta prisona without meat or drink, which because a
very remarkable instance, I care not if I gratify the Reader, with a Copy of
the Record.

Ex Rotul. Paten. de Anno regni Regis Edvardi tertii 31o. part 1a. Membr. 11a.
REX omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod
cum Cecilia quae fuit uxor Johannis de Rygeway nuper indictata de morte ipsius
Johannis viri sui, and de morte illa coram dilect. and fidelibus nostris
Henrico Grove and Sociis suis Justic. nostris ad Gaolam nostram Notyngh.
deliberand. assign. allocuta, pro eo quod se tenuit mutam ad paenam suam
extitit adjudicata ut dicitur, in qua sine cibo and potu in arcta prisona per
quadraginta dies vitam sustinuit via miraculi, and quasi contra naturam humanam
sicut ex testimono accepimus fide digno. Nos ea de causa pietate moti ad laudem
Dei and gloriosae virginis Mariae matris suae unde dictum miraculum processit
ut creditur, de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus eidem Cecilie executionem
judicii praedicti; volentes quod eadem Cecilia a prisona predicta deliberetur
and de corpore suo ulterius non sit impetita occasion judicii supradicti. In
cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. XXVo. die Aprilis.

per Bre. de privato Sigillo. Convenit cum Record. Laur. Halsted deput. Algern.
May mil.


39. These it is true are as eminent Instances in their kind, and the truth of
them backed with as good Authorities, as one could expect or desire: and yet
neither of them much exceed the perpetual fast (as I may call it) of one Mary
Vaughton of Wigginton in this County, who from her cradle to this day has lived
with so small a quantity both of meats and drinks, that all people admire how
nature is thus sustained without any sensible exhaustion; she not eating in a
day a piece above the size of half a Crown in bread and butter; or if meat, not
above the quantity of a pigeons leg at most: she drinks neither wine, ale, or
beer; but only water, or milk, or both mixed; and of either of these scarce a
spoonful in a day. And yet she is a maiden of a fresh compleplexion, and
healthy enough, very piously disposed, of the Church of England, and therefore
the less likely to put a trick upon the world; beside it is very well known to
many worthy persons with whom she has lived, that any greater quantities, or
different liquors, have always made her sick.

40 Now to give a satisfactory reason of the long abstinence of these persons,
who have lived thus with little, or no food at all; or to pronounce how it
comes to pass that death, or at lest a signal Marasmus or destructive
consumption has not insued; though I dare not pretend: yet I cannot for bear so
far to gratify the Reader, as to let him know, that I think the case to be no
otherwise with these, than it is with Leeches, Lizards, Snailes, and the
Tortoises, Porcupines, and Toads, abovementioned Chap. 7.. 46.
: in all which the natural heat and moisture is either so justly counterpoised;
or else their viscid juices do so overbalance and restrain the activity of
their heat, that it is unable to rarify, or separate the parts of their
moisture; whence there cannot follow any perspiration or consumption; and so no
need of reparation by meats or drinks: upon which account some of them have
lived diverse months, and others half a year together without any visible
supply. Now what frequently is seen in so many Species's, may sometimes fall
out too in Individuals, of other Species's, in which it is not so usually met
with, when they happen to be qualifyed with the like constitution, as I suppose
these persons were; who by a peculiarity of temper, without imposture or
miracle, might fast as above mentioned.

41. But I have more wonderful passages relating to Women, than any of these
yet to declare, whereof the first and strangest is of one Mary Woodward of
Hardwick in the parish of Sandon, who loosing her hearing at about 6 years of
age, by her extraordinary ingenuity and strickt observation of the peoples
lips that convers't with her, could perfectly understand what any person said,
though they spoke so low that the by standers could not hear it: as has been
frequently experimented by the right Honorable the Lady Gerard, and diverse
others of her neighbors now living, with whom she would go to Church, and
bring away as much of the Sermon as the most attentive hearer there: all which
she did, not with difficulty, but so much ease and satisfaction, that if one
turned aside and spoke, that she could not see his lips, she thought her self
much disobliged. Nay so very well skilled was she in this Art (which we may
call Labiomancy) as it is generally believed (though I could get no personal
testimony of it, some persons being dead, and others removed into Ireland who
sometimes lay with her) that in the night time when in bed, if she might lay
but her hand on their lips so as to feel the motions of them, she could
perfectly understand what her bedfellows said, though it were never so dark.

42. For confirmation of the possibility and truth whereof, there are many
parallel Histories sent us from abroad, of persons that have done the same in
all particulars: of which Borellus affords us one, of a certain Seaman of
Xantoigne who lost his hearing at 5 years old, by the violence of a distemper,
that was supplied by nature with so admirable a Sagacity, that he could
apprehend what was spoken with the lowest voice, by the motion of the lips
only, though no sound were made, and give an answer accordingly: trial whereof
was made by Isaac Tho. de Riolet a learned Physician of that Country who held
discourse with him at 25 foot distance, with a voice so low, that he could not
hear himself speak. Of which Dialogue Borellus has given us the particulars in
his historical Observations Pet. Borelli. Histor. and observe. Medice-Phys.
Cont. 4. Obs. 23.
. As Job a Meek'ren also has, of the like discourse between Gulielmus Piso and
another deaf man, who understood in like manner all questions put to him by the
motion of the lips, as appeared by the answers, though spoke with so low a
voice, that they moved the lest imaginable; till at last Piso speaking Latin,
the deaf man then only answered, that he spoke a language he did not
understand: which certainly was as satisfactory, as a direct answer could have
been. Nor did he only answer single questions, but like Mary Woodward could
understand Sermons Jebi a Meek'ren Observe, Medico-Chirurg. cap. 21.
, as Petrus a Castro informs us one John Ireunde a Cabinet maker of Salsborn in
Silesia can also do by the motion of the lips only, understanding better such
as whisper to him, than those which speak loud Miscellanca Medico Phys. German.
An. 1. ^^^rv 35.
.

43. Tulpius likewise tells us of one Simon Didericus a Hollander who was made
deaf by a fall from a Tower, that could repeat Sermons he had seen or learned
at Church, by the motion of the Preachers lips, which he apprehended ratably
better or worse according as the speakers lips were smooth or hairy, lean or
fat Nic. Tulpii Observat Medic. Lib. 4. cap. 18.
. Upon which account he could talk with women, with much greater freedom than
he could with men. The like whereof has been seen here in England as the
reverend Dr. Meric. Casaubon acquaints us, if we may credit the relations of
two grave divines; one, telling him of a Man; the other of a Woman; both, deaf
and dumb: who nevertheless at a certain distance by diligent observation of the
motion of the mouth and face, could readily tell what was spoken unto them, but
the Woman not unles the party speaking was close shaved, or beardless; which is
probable enough, the muscles of the mouth having peculiar motions, according to
the variety of the formations of words M. Casaubon's Treatise of Enthesiasme
Chap. 4. in initio.
. And Mr. Carew tells us of one Grisling of Saltash in the County of Cornwall,
who was also deaf and dumb, that if one spoke deliberatly could do the same
Carew's Survey of Cornwall Book. 2. p. 113.
.

44. Nor is it much less a wonder that I am now about to relate of Madam
Skrymsher of Aqualat, a Lady of much honor and virtue, who having felt for some
time a pricking in her Arm, upon her frequent complaint to her tender husband,
who pertook of the grief, and was officious to remove it, upon squeesing her
Arm he forced thence from about the Basilical vein, first a pins point, then a
good part of it appearing, he firmly took hold of it with a pair of Cissers,
and immediately drew it forth all but the head, which came off, and remaining
behind in the skin, was there sensible to the touch for some time after. Now
beside that the Lady does not remember that ever she swallowed a pin, or if she
had, or did otherwise at unawares take it in with her meat, how it should pass
the Lacteals, or with the blood through the other small capillaries, though it
were never so little, is altogether as unintelligible, as that it should be
gotten in any other way without knowledge.

45. Wherefore I much rather believe that it was some way or other swallowed
insensibly, and that it pierced by degrees the coats of the stomach, and so
past through the flesh by unknown ways to the place where it came forth, as the
Needle did, that was swallowed by Henricus Alvarus at six years old, which as
Scultetus informs us came forth again out of one of his thighs when he was
twenty four: eighteen years after Job. Sculteti Trichiasis admirandae page 19.
. Or as the brass Bodkin mentioned by Benivenius, which being swallowed by a
Woman lay in her stomach a whole year without trouble, after that beginning to
boar the coats of the Ventricle, it put her to great pain, in which after she
had continued (without help from Physicians) for about ten years, out dropped the
bodkin through a small hole it had made for it self through the stomach, and
the outward skin over against it Antonit Bemvemi de abditis Morbor. and Sanat.
causis cap. 20.
.

46. Amongst the unusual accidents that have attended the femal Sex in the
course of their lives, I think I may also reckon the narrow escapes they have
made from death. Whereof I met with one mentioned with admiration by every body
at Leek, that happened not far off at the black Mere of Morridg, which though
famous for nothing for which it is commonly reputed so, as that it is
bottomless; no Cattle will drink of it; or birds fly over or settle upon it
(all which I found false) yet is so, for the signal deliverance of a poor
woman, enticed hither in a dismal stormy night by a bloody Ruffin, who had
first gotten her with child, and intended in this remote inhospitable place, to
have dispatched her by drowning. The same night ( Providence so ordering it)
there were several persons of inferior rank drinking in an Alehouse at Leek
whereof one having been out, and observing the darkness and other ill
circumstances of the weather, coming in again said to the rest of his
Companions, that he were a stout man indeed that would venture to go to the
black Mere of Morridg in such a night as that; to which one of them replying,
that for a Crown or some such Sum he would undertake it; the rest joining
their purses said he should have his demand. The bargain being struck, away he
went on his journey with a stick in his hand, which he was to leave there as a
testimony of his performance; at length comeing near the Mere, he heard the
lamentable cries of this distressed woman, begging for mercy; which at first
put him to a stan^, but being a man of great resolution and some policy, he
went boldly on however, counterfeiting the presence of diverse other persons,
calling Jack, Dick, and Thom, and crying here are the rogues we looked for,
etc. which being heard by the Murderer he left the Woman and fled, whom the
other man found by the Mere side almost stripped of her clothes, and brought her
with him to Leek, as an ample testimony of his having been at the Mere, and of
Gods providence too.

47. Yet much greater was the deliverance of one Margery Mousole of Arley in
this County, who being convicted of killing her bastard child, was, much more
justly than Ann Green at Oxford, accordingly condemned and executed at Stafford
for it, where she was hanged by the neck the usual time that other Malefactors
are, yet like Ann Green and Elizabeth the Servant of one Mrs. Cope of Oxford
Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 8.. 12. 20.
, she came to life again, as it has been much more common for women to do in
this case, than it has been for men: I suppose for the same reason that some
Animals will live longer without Air, than others will, as was showen above
Chap. 7.. 46. and Chap. S.. 40.
; the juices of Women being more cold and viscid, and so more tenacious of the
sensitive soul than those of men are. Which appeared most wonderfully in the
case of Judith de Balsham, temp. Hen. 3. who being convicted of receiving and
concealing thieves, was condemned and hanged from 9 by the clock on Monday
morning, till Sunrising on Tuesday following, and yet escaped with life as
appears by her pardon, which for its rarity I shall here receite verbatim.

Ex Rotulo Paten. de Anno Regni Regis Henrici tertii 48o. membr. 5a.
REX omnibus, etc. Salutem. Quia Inetta de Balsham pro receptamento latronum ei
imposito nuper per considerationem Curie nostre suspendio adjudicata and ab
hora nona diei Lune usque post ortum Solis diei Martis sequen. suspensa, viva
evasit, sicut ex testimonio fide dignorum accepimus. Nos divine charitatis
intuitu pardonavimus eidem Inette sectam pacis nostre que ad nos pertinet pro
receptamento predicto and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus. In cujus,
etc. Test Rege apud Cantuar. XVIo. die Augusti.

Covenit cum Recordo Lau^^ Halsted Deput. Algern. May mil.


How unwillingly the cold viscid juices part with the sensitive soul,
appeared, I say, most strangely in this case: unless we shall rather say she
could not be hanged, upon account that the Larynx or upper part of her
Windpipe was turned to bone, as Fallopius tells us he has sometimes found it
Gab. Fallopii oper Tom. 1. Observe. Anatom. Tract. 6.
, which possibly might be so strong, that the weight of her body could not
compress it, as it happened in the case of a Swiss, who as I am told by the
Reverend Mr. Obadiah Walker Master of University College, was attempted to be
hanged no less than 13 times, yet lived notwithstanding, by the benefit of his
Windpipe, that after his death was found to be turned to a bone: which yet is
still wonderful, since the circulation of the blood must be stopped however,
unless his veins and arteries were likewise turned to bone, or the rope not
slipped close.

48. Thus having done with the Women solitarily considered, I shall next treat
of the Men and the accidents that have attended them during the course of their
lives in the like manner. And first of the extraordinary perfections of Men
whether of body or mind, and then of their defects. As for the perfections of
the body, I take that of strength to be one of the chiefest; wherein I met with
some that excelled so much, that unless I had seen the things done my self, I
should have though them incredible: particularly that of one Godfrey Witrings a
butcher of New Castle, whom I saw take a form, at Robert Launders in the
Lane, 6 foot 10 inches long, and 56 pounds weight, by one end in his teeth
(holding his hands behind him, and bearing the legs of that end next him
against his breast) and lift the other end the whole height of the parlour,
striking it 3 times against the boards of the room above. Now supposeing the
legs to stand about 10 inches from the end of the form, toward the middle, or
center of gravity, which is near of the distance betwixt the end and the
Center; by computation he lifted thus with his teeth about 168 pounds weight.
Which is not so much as what was done by a Juglar Cardan tells us of, who took
up the mast of a small boat with his teeth, and threw it first upon one
shoulder, whence he removed it to the other, without touching it with his hands
Hieron. Cardani. de Subtilitate Iab. 11.
.

49. Nor so much as was performed by one Nicholas Cooper of Acton-Trussel, who
was also a man of so extraordinary strength in those parts, that he could lift
a sack of wheat of 4 strike with his teeth; which accounting but 50 pounds to
the strike (than which searce any weighs less) amounts to 200 pounds weight,
but reckoning at 60 pounds per bushel (as some wheat weighs) he lifted 240.
But this was not the utmost he could do neither, for once upon a wager, he
took up a man, by a coard tied round him, of 300 weight, and set him on a
Table. Nor was he strong in his teeth only but in the whole frame of his body,
having taken up at a time 3 sizeable men, one under each Arm, and a third in
his teeth. Which is not much less than that mentioned by Cardan, who saw a man
dance with two under his arms, as many upon his shoulders, and one hanging
about his neck Ibidem.
. And formerly being desired to give a specimen of his strength, he set his
back under the Axle-tree of a Cart laden with 3 horsload and of coals, and not
only lifted it wheels and all, but turned it quite round. The same person
having a Lesow quite overrun with well grown broom, near a man's height; whereas
others are forced to stock or root up such broom with Matocks and other
instruments; he plucked up all his by the roots with his hands, though the
ground was 4 Acres. To whom let me add that one Thomas Wall of Wolver hampton
was once so strong in his teeth, that he could readily bend a large nail or
tenterbook, and set it straight again with them: for the better performance
whereof I was told his teeth were molares before, instead of incisores; but
upon examination I found them not so, only indeed his incisores were of an
unusual thickness.

50. Not at all inferior to any of these in matters of strength, was one Walter
Parsons of West-Bromwich in this County, though his was not so much to be
admired as theirs, who were Men but of a middleing ordinary size, whereas
Parsons had a stature proportionable to his strength; being so very tall when
he was a young apprentice, that they were forced to digg a hole in the ground
for him to stand in up to his knees, when he struck at the Anvil (for he was
first a Blacksmith) or sawed wood with another, that he might be at a Level
with his fellow-workman. At length he became Porter to King James the first,
where he behaved himself so generously, that though he had valor equal to his
strength, yet he scorned to take advantage to injure any person by it; upon
which account we have but few experiments left us of his great strength, but
such as were sportive: as that being affronted by a man of ordinary stature, as
he walked London streets, he only took him up by the wastband of his breeches,
and hung him upon one of the hooks in the shambles, to be ridiculed by the
people, and so went his way: and that sometimes by way of merryment, he would
take two of the tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under
his Arms, and carry them as he pleased (in spite of all resistance) about the
Guard Chamber: where (if I am not misinformed) that is his picture which hangs
at the end next the stairs, leading down into the Court toward White Hall Gate.

51. There is another picture of him, as I have been told also by some, in the
great room at the Pope's Head Tavern, in Pope's Head Alley: but whether they are
the true pictures of him or not, it being uncertain that they were drawn in the
just proportion, I took not the pains to have them measured; choosing rather to
collect what his height might be, from a true measure of his hand yet remaining
upon a piece of Wainscot at Bentley-Hall: by which it appear that from the
Carpus to the end of the middle finger, it was eleven inches long, and the palm
6 inches broad: which (abatements being made interchangeably) is much about the
size of the hand of Edmund Malloon a youth of 19 years old, born at
Port-Leicester in Ireland, for his extraordinary stature shown publicly here
in Oxford in 1684, which though from the Carpus to the end of the middle finger
it were 12 inches long, yet the palm was no more than five inches broad. i. e.
it sell as much short of Parsons's hand in the breadth, as it exceeded it in
length.

52. Now the proportion of the stature of Edmund Malloon to this hand, being as
7 and to 1. that is being 7 foot 6 inches high, thence we may rationally
conclude that Parsons must also be thereabout; both much about the height of
John Tates born at Schoonhoven in Holland, the length of whose Cubit (as Mr.
Ray tells us) was 25 inches and the length of his hand to the wrist 11 inches,
and his middle finger 7 inches Mr. Ray's Observations Topograph, etc. p. 6.
All short of the stature of Martin Wierwski a Polander who at the age of 42
years being presented to the Emperor Maximilian the second as a rarity of
nature, was found full eight foot high Dr. Brownes Travels through Germany. p.
3.
And so was one of the Someries; Baron (and Founder of the Priory) of Dudley;
if we may believe either his Statue, or hollow of the stone chest in which his
body lay, both which as Mr. Erdeswick testifies measured 8 foot, than which had
the body been any thing shorter, it could not with convenience have been laid
there Mr. Sampson Erdeswick's view of Staffordshire in Dudley Casta.
considering how they anciently cut their stone coffins. Who yet were neither
of them so tall as John Middleton, commonly called the child of Hale in the
County of Lanc: whose hand from the Carpus to the end of his middle finger was
17 inches long, his palm 8 inches and broad, and his whole height 9 foot 3
inches, wanting but six inches of the height of Goliath, if that in Brasen-Nose
College Library (drawn at length, as it is said, in his just proportion) be a
true piece of him.

53. As for the perfections of the mind, chiefly shown by good works, though so
much in our own choice, they are as rarely acquired to any great eminence, as
those of the body are given; yet some evidences there have been too of such as
these, as well here as elsewhere: in the relation whereof, I shall decline the
foundations of Religious houses, Hospitals, and Schools, these having been the
subjects of other pens; and apply my self only to such as have been omitted by
others, viz. the founding or rebuilding of Churches and Chapels, which have
been so seldom done by private hands, that the contrary to it has grown to a
Proverb. There have been some notwithstanding in all ages (not excepting our
own) whom God has raised up for these purposes, whereof the first that I
find any memorial of, is one David Kenric born at Ashley in this County, a
Soldier under Edward the black-Prince who notwithstanding the little piety
that attends the Camp, was the Founder or rebuilder of this Church, where there
remains to this day a Statue of him to the shoulders, and against the wall
within such a border as are commonly put about the Sentences in Churches, this
inscription in perpetuam rei memoriam. Manubias Deo.
David Kenricus (Pietas ejus memoriae)
Hoc virtutis praemiolum dicavit.
Mira cano, Pietas saevis reperitur in Armis;
Aedificat bellum sternere quod soleat.
Hanc sacram struxit miles memorabilis Aedem,
Principe sub nigro, quem meruisse ferunt.
David Kenricus, Davide beatior illo,
Templum cui superis aedificare nefas.


54. In the year of our Lord 1515. one Thomas Rolleston founded or rebuilt the
Tower at least of the Church of Mathfield in this County, as appears by this
Inscription over the West door of the same steeple. Hoc Opus inceptum per
Thomam Rollestone An. Dom. 1515. and another over the West window of it. viz.
Ainsy et mievix peult estre. i. e. Thus it is, and may be better. Thomas
Rollestone petit Orationes. By which it is evident, that this Thomas Rolleston
was of the ancient family of the Rollestons of Rollstone, under whose Arms in
the Church there I found the same Motto, though the French not so old. Quickly
after in Anno 1517. John Tailor Dr. of Laws, Archdeacon of Darby and
Buckingham, and Master of the Rolls temp. Hen. 8. one of the Trimelli
mentioned. 19. of this Chapter, built the Chapel of Barton upon or near the
place where the Cottage stood wherein he was born, as is plain from the
Inscriptions in Saxon Characters in rilieve work over every other Pillar of the
North and South sides of the Navis of the said Chapel.

I. T. horum trium Gemellorum Tr^^^^lorum, it should have been.
natu maximus. being over the first pillar, Decretorum Doctor, and sacrorum
Canonum Professor. over the third, Archidiaconus, Derbiae and Bukkyngham, nec
non and. over the fifth, and Magister Rotulorum illustrissimi Regis H. VIII. An.
Reg. sui 20. over the seventh.
these Arms, viz. Sa. on a Chev. Arg. 3 violets slipped, the flowers of the
second, the stalks and leaves Or. between 3 childrens heads couped at the
shoulders also of the second, haired and vested of the third in a chief of the
same, a text T Az. between two Roses gu. seeded of the chief, being placed
interchangeably over the 2.4.6. and 8th. pillars, there being but eight pillars
in all, viz. 4 on each side the Chapel, which is a neat piece of work,
somewhat of the form of Hen. the sevenths at Westminster, perhaps so built in
honor and imitation of his great Patron, who gave him his Education and
perferment afterward.

55. The ancient Family of Okeover of Okeover have also built them such a
beautiful Oratory or house of prayer adjoining to their Seat; whereof if the
Reader please to look back to Tab. 18. he may have a prospect: which Chapel
they have endowed with maintenance for a Chaplin: but exempted it from all
ordinary Jurisdiction (as all Royal Chapples are) I suppose by Charter from the
King: for as the King can create or found a Donative exempt from the visitation
of the ordinary; so he may by his Charter license any Subject to found such a
Church or Chapel, and to ordain that it shall be a donative and not
presentable; and to be visited and regulated by the Founder, and not by the
Ordinary Lord Cock's Institutes of the Laws of England. Part 1. Lib. 3. Sect.
648.
Upon which account the Founder or Lord of this Manor presently upon election
of his Chaplin, takes bond of him for the safe keeping the Seals of his
Church, that he might not lease out the tithes to his prejudice. Also the
worthy Thomas Broughton of Broughton Esquire built such another Oratory or Chapel,
near their Seat, for the use of that family, at his own charge, only 100 lb.
was left by his Uncle Peter Broughton Esquire in order to it, who also endowed it
with 20 lb. per Annum, toward the maintenance of a Chaplin. And the generous
Dr. Pie Anno 1606 comeing to visit some Relations at Darlaston near Wednesbury,
upon occasion that some of his Servants going to ring in the old Steeple which
was of wood and weak, had been in danger of their lives; profer'd the Town,
that in case they would be at the charge of bringing stone, he would find
Workmanship, and build them a Tower, which accordingly he did: in memroy of
whose charity, in allusion to his name, they put this inscription on the
outside of it. Pietati and Piis
Vive pius, and moriere pius


56. But he that has exceeded all in a public benefaction of this nature, is
the worthy Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre Esquire who being Patron of the place, and
considering that the Church stood very incommodiously, and was so ruinous, that
it must be better to rebuild, than repair it: in An. 1672 most generously
petitioned the most Reverend Father in God Gilbert by divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury that he might accordingly rebuild it at a more
commodious place. In order whereunto the said Archbishop of Cant. by an
instrument bearing date May the second 1672 did Commission Sr. Edward Bagot of
Blithefield Baron t. William Chetwynd of Rugeley Esquire Richard Harrison B. D. and
Canon of Lichfield, and William Jennings Clerk Rector of Church Eyton, all of
the County of Stafford; in his stead to enquire into the state and condition of
the said Church; to judge what might be most expedient in this matter; and to
transmit the same to him under their hands and seals. The 19th. of July
following the Commissioners above mentioned upon view of the said Church,
within and without, did find it so ruinous, that they judged it rather fit to
be pulled down and wholly demolished, than repaired; and that the place designed
by the said Walter Chetwynd Esquire was a much more fit and congruous place; which
they accordingly signified under their hands and Seals the 22 of July
following.

57. Whereupon the said Archbishop consenting to the religious desire of the
said Walter Chetwynd, by an Instrument bearing date at Lambeth Apr. 12. 1673
did grant a faculty to the said Walter Chetwynd to build his designed new
Church, and convert the materials of the old one to that use u. The foundation
accordingly was laid the same year; milled shillings, half pence, and
farthings, coined that year, being put into hollow places cut fit for that
purpose, in the large corner stones of the Steeple, by Mr. Chetwynd himself and
other Gentlemen. And in Anno 1676 it was wholly finished, being built in the form
of a Parish Church, not great, but uniform and elegant; the out walls being all
of squared freestone, with a well proportiond Tower at the west end, of the
same; adorned round the top with rail and ballister, and flowerpots at each
corner. The Chancell within paved throughout with black and white marble; the
Windows illustrated with the Arms and matches of the Chetwynds in painted
glass; and the Ceilings with the same in Fretwork; the side-walls beautifyed
with funeral Monuments of the Family, curiously carved in white marble; and the
whole vaulted underneath for a dormitory for it, whither all the bodies
belonging to it were removed out of the old Church, and decently deposited.

58. The Navis or body of the Church separated from the Chancell Ez Chartularia
Familia de Chetwynd. M. S. penes eundem Walterum Chetwynd Armig.
with an elegant skreen of Flanders Oak, garnish't with the Kings Arms, and
great variety of other curious carvings; at the South corner whereof stands the
Pulpit, made of the same wood, adorned in like manner with carved work, and the
Iron-work about it curiously painted and guilt. The Seats are also made of the
same Oak, all of an equal height and goodness through the whole Church; the
Lord himself not sitting in a finer Seat (only somewhat larger) than the
meanest of his Tenants; so humble is this truly Wise man, in the midst of all
this magnificence. Near the entrance within on the feft hand, stands a curious
Font all of white marble, the whole Church too being Ceiled with the finest
plaster, garnish't also with deep and noble Fretwork. And over the Entrance
without, which is under the Tower, on a small Table of white marble, only this
modest Inscription in laid black.

Deo Opt. Max. Templum Hoc a sundamentis extructum WALTERUS CHETWYND (Walt.
fill. Walt. Equ. Aur. nepos) L. M. D. D. D. Anno Aerae Christianae 1676. 59. The
Church being thus finished at the sole Charge of the said Walter Chetwynd, in
August An. 1677 it was solemnly consecrated by the right Reverend Father in God
Thomas Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield; the Dean of Lichfied preaching
the Sermon; and some others of the most eminent Clergy, reading prayers;
baptizing a Child; Churching a woman; joining a couple in Matrimony; and
burying another; all which offices were also there performed the same day: the
pious and generous Founder and Patron offering upon the Altar the tithes of
Hopton a Village hard by, to the value of fifty pounds per Annum, as an
addition to the Rectory for ever; presenting the Bishop and Dean at the same
time, each with a piece of plate double guilt, as a grateful acknowledgment of
their Service; and entertaining the Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, both Men and
Women, of the whole County in a manner, which came in that day to see the
solemnity performed, with a most splendid dinner at his house near adjoining,
which together with the new Church are both here represented, Tab. 26. Where
all things were carried with a Sobriety and gravity suitable to the occasion,
concluding the day with hearty prayers for the prosperity of the Church; and a
universal applause of the piety and generosity of the noble Founder; and the
whole manage of the work, from the foundation to the end. A work indeed worthy
of his name and Family, and more to be esteemed than all his Gentility and
Learning, though both be great: which I seriously wish for the Readers sake and
His, may some way or other hereafter be made known to Posterity by a better
Pen: by such a Pen (I mean) as can make his praise as immortal as his merits,
and give the unborn world a complete pattern of generosity and piety for their
perpetual imitation.

60. After the perfections of the bodies and minds of men, Logic directs me
next to treat of the imperfections of both: and first amongst those of the
body, I think none more deplorable than the want of sight; which yet by the
wonderful sagacity of some that want it, is so strangely supplied; that as
some abovementioned have learned to hear with their Eyes, so others in like
manner by their exquisit touch, and nice hearing, have taught themselves to see
with their hands and ears. By which means it is that Edward Ingram of
Heath-hill in the parish of Sherriff-Hales, though he has been blind from the
fourth or fifth year of his age, can yet go to Church by himself, and all about
the Country; he can also mend shoes; and glase windows; make his own shirts;
and most sorts of Joyners work; lays floores, etc. and does almost any kind of
Handiwork; and all only by the help of his Ears and hands.

61. Thus as I am credibly informed by the ingenious Joseph Brown of
Woodchester in Glocestershire, (the excellent Graver of the Map of this County)
one Richard Clutterbuck of Rodborough a neighbor of his, though perfectly
blind, has so very curious an Ear, and hand; that he can hear the sine Sand of
an hourglass fall, by which means he can make a most accurat judgment of many
actions and things: and so exquisit is his feeling, that (like Martin Catelyn
mentioned by Guicciardin Lud. Guicciardini Comm. de r^bu^ Memorab. maxim in
Beigin.
) he performs almost any sort of curious work: makes excellent heads for
staves or Canes; and all sorts of string-musical instruments; which he plays on
too by notes, cut in their usual form, and set upon protuberant lines on a
board; he takes a Watch to pieces, and sets it together again; and so an Organ
or Virginals; and puts them in june; and has contrived so many pretty
Mechanical devices for diverse uses, that it would be tedious to recount them.
And yet neither of these come near Van Eyck the Organist of Vtrecht, who though
he has been blind from two years old, does every thing as nimbly, as if he
carried his Eyes in his hands; plays on all sorts of Instruments; and can tell
you in a crowd of Virgins and young women, which is the fairest. More yet is
performed by Peter of Mastrict, who as Job Meek'ren informs us, though
perfectly blind, plays at dice and cards; and distinguishes the colors of
cloth by the touch Jobi a Meek'ren Observe. Medico Chirurg cap. 20.
.

62. To the imperfections of the body, the unusual distempers and diseases of
it, must also be referred; and such no doubt on it I may reckon a strange
Boulimy or rather Pica, that seized one Brian Careswell of the parish of
Forton, who would know and eat both Linen and Woollen: nay to that height of a
habit. (or what else I may call it) was he brought at length in this matter,
that he would eat ropes, and the very blankets of the bed whereon he lay; and
this not only waking, but the sheets, and his shirt from his back as he slept.
That a woman should have longed to have done such things as these, had not been
so extraordinary, it being usual for them in that condition to desire
unreasonable things; such as to suck the wind out of bellows; to hear the
crackleing of Cinders under their feet P^^^^^ph. (...) N^^^. 29.
; and (as Borellus tells us one did) to eat human Excrements dried and powdered
Petr. Borelli Hister. and Observe. rar. Medico-Phys. Cent. 4. Observe. 2.
; but that a man should thus long after such uninviting things, I think is
rarely heard of. However this alone will serve to show us, that these
distempers do not always (as some have thought) arise from malignant vapors of
the Vterus only, which thus mislead the fancy; but sometimes also from a
depravation of the menstruum of the Stomach, which may infect the brain as
well, and occasion the like inordinat appetite.

63. It may also be reckoned amongst the uncommon distempers, that one George
Holden a butcher of Walsall was long sick of a periodical Asthma, which
constantly came upon him once in 14 or 20 days at most; of which at last
dyeing, and his body being opened, yet all his Viscera (the Lungs especially)
were found well and sound, there being no signs left either of Phlegm or
viscous humor that had ever affected them; or of any stagnation of the blood in
the veins; nor was there any thing met with unusual in him (as the learned Dr.
Needham informed Dr. Willis) but that many stones were found in his
Gallbladder (...) Willisii de morbis convulsiv^^ cap. 12.
Not that these learned Men did think the dyspnaea or disease of the person,
was to be ascribed to these stones, but to a convulsion of Nerves about the
Lungs, or amongst the Muscles subservient to breathing, which possibly might
arise either from severe vellications in the Intestines by sharp humors; ill
separation of the nervous juice in the brain; or obstruction of them in the
nerves themselves; either of which might cause such a convulsive cough, without
any affection of the lungs at all.

64. It may also not unreasonably be accounted a distemper (provided it be not
an effect of temperance) that some men have not the usual quantity of spittle,
that others have; it being so necessary a concurrent at lest, for the
performance of concoction: which how it is performed in those that have none,
perhaps may not be unworthy our consideration. Now that there are such, I can
instance in one James Plimmer, well known at Roucester, who though a great
Tobacconist, never spits in the smoking of ten pipes together, nay some people
told me that he never did spit though he smok't never so many, and I spoke with
a Nephew of his, that lives in the same house with him, who told me he never
saw him spit in his life. I am also credibly informed of one Ricarby of
Cokermouth in the County of Cumberland a great smoker, etc. that never spit in
his life. And Borellus tells us of a certain Physician his familiar
acquaintance, though fat and phlegmatic, that never either spit or vented mucus
at the nose, yet enjoyed notwithstanding perfect health; nor was he ever very
thirsty, which made Borellus conjecture, that these excrements being obstructed
in the nose, etc. were swallowed down the throat, and so bedewed the Larynx,
that there was little or no need of any other beverage Petr. Borelli Hister.
and Observe. rar. Medico-Phys. Cent. 2. Observe. 68.


65. Which I believe in great measure may also be true, of most, if not all of
those that don't spit: for though it be certain what Hippocrates asserts, viz.
(...), etc. i. e. that mucus and Saliva be repletionis indices Hippocrat. Coi
de Vict. rat. Lib. 3.. 4.
; and qui parce edunt and parce bibunt nunquam humoralibus tentantur morbis
Idem, de intern affection.. 5.
; which I know to be true of a person of Honor of my own acquaintance, that
only upon account of his strict temperance does not spit perhaps once in a
Month; upon which account too we may well presume that Antonia the wife of
Drusus mentioned by Pliny never spit C. Plinii 2^^. Hist. Not. Lib. 7. cap. 19.
; and so perhaps those people he mentions in Aethiopia, who though five Cubits
high yet did never spit Ibidem cap. 2.
. Though (I say) there may be many that do not spit, upon account of their
temperance, yet I do not believe there are any men so wholly free from spiting;
but they have enough to suffice for moistening the Larynx; for mixing with
their food; and assisting digestion; though they have no superfluity to throw
off in spitle, as those who live plentifully commonly do.

66. Next the imperfections of the body, follow those of the mind; which are so
much greater as the Soul is more noble than the body: those who are void of
understanding being more helpless and miserable; than such as are either lame,
deaf, or blind. Yet even these sometimes have such natural assistances, that
they can perform things scarce attainable by the quickest parts or most solid
understandings. Whereof Dr. Willis gives us a most remarkable instance, of a
certain Fool who having been long used to repeat the strokes of a Clock near
which he lived with a loud voice; comeing after to live where there was none,
yet retained so strong impressions of it, that he could exactly distinguish the
horary distances, and would personate so many strokes of the Clock with a loud
voice as often as an hour past, successively increasing the number of each hour,
according as the time required, from which he could not be diverted, by any
sort of business they could set him about: being become in a manner a natural
living Clock, so strongly had Custom wrought this upon him.

67. Which impressions as the learned Dr. imagins, were chiefly made upon his
Animal spirits; which having been accustomed to be excited at such stated
times, were brought at length by long imitation, to distinguish those periods
of their own accord The. Willisii de Anima. Brutorum Part. 1. cap. 16.
: by the same means as most people naturally know the usual times of dinner and
supper; and sleep, and wake in the morn about the same time they have usually
done, without the help of a Clock. But I was told of a mere Natural, one
Richard Morse, kept generally by the Familyes of Draycot and Fowler, at
Paynsley and St. Thomas whose strange sagacity in distinguishing times much
exceeded that instance, and cannot be solved by any such customary motions of
the Animal spirits. For he would not only tell you the changes of the Moon; the
times of Eclipses; and at what time Easter and Whitsuntide fell; or any other
moveable feast whatever; but at what time any of them had, or should fall, at
any distance of years, past or to come. Which is so great a wonder, that had I
not received it from very sober hands, and of the best quality; I could no more
have believed it, than I am now able to resolve the Reader, by what natural
means it could possibly be done: only that in general it could not be
performed by any thing that relyes upon the force of Custom; these Feasts being
movable: and that therefore it must be referred, to some other more remote
unknow impressions (unless he had been taught some easy rule for it) intimately
and purely seated in the soul it self.

68. Many of the Vices of Men may also be reckoned, imperfections purely of the
soul it self, whereof there have been some as extraordinary here, as any of
the Virtues above mentioned, were they as fit to be related. I shall only
instance in one; which because lately done, and most wonderfully punished, may
possibly be beneficial in deterring others from committing the like wickedness,
which brought down so dreadful a Judgment upon one John Duncalf a strong lusty
young man of about 22 years of age, born at Codsal in this County, but bound
apprentice to Tho. Gibbons wheelwright of Kings-Swinford; who though he could
write and read, yet for a long time having wholly neglected all manner of
service and worship of God, and given himself up to Idleness, Stealing, Lyeing,
Cursing, Swearing, drunkeness, etc. amongst many other villainies, he at length
stole a Bible, at the house of Humphry Babb of the Grangemill, whilst his wife
drew him some small drink that he begged of her; which he sold to a maid
living near the Heathforge, not fare from the place where he had lately stole
it: by which means Goodwif Babb quickly heard of her bible, and by whom it was
stole. This being noised about the Country and comeing to his ears, he not only
denied it with great fierceness, but execrated and cursed himself, wishing his
hands might rot off, if the thing were true.

69. After this he went and wrought with one Thomas Osborn a Joyner of Dudley
about a fortnight, but his flesh beginning to grow black at the wrists, within
few days after he made the execration, and his whole body weak and feeble, he
endeavored to return toward his acquaintance again: but finding himself in the
way not able to go further, he laid himself down in the barn at Purton, the
seat of the right Worshipful Sr. Walter Wrottesly, where being found after two
days and nights or thereabout, he was kept at the charge of the parish of
Tettenhall, til the next monthley meeting of the Justices of Peace, when it
being found upon examination that the parish of Kings-Swinford was the last
place of his abode he was carried thither, and committed to the care of one
John Bennet of Wall-Heath-side Mr. Illingworth's Narrative of this sad Judgment.
. By this time his hands and legs, being both deprived of all sense and
motion, looked blackish and dyeing; a Circle as it were like a Ligature (as was
observed by an ingenious neighboring Gentleman) compassing each wrist and knee
at the joint; dividing the sound from the dying parts, and prohibiting any
nourishment to pass those bounds; so that the blood and spirits being
wonderfully stopped in their circulation, it necessarily followed, that the parts
thus deprived of their wonted supply, must wither and dye as as a leaf in
Autumn: which sad progress they made till both hands and legs, from the wrists
and knees, became dead and dried, black and hard like Mummy, before they fell
off at the joints, which at length they did insensibly to the poor man
Observations of an ingenious Neighboring Gentleman.
, who perceived it not, till his keeper told him, and showed them him, holding
them up in his hands.

70. Above the forementioned Circles the flesh at first both at his wrists and
knees rose in great tumors or knots, which after a while began to break and
run; the nourishing juice (designed by nature to have fed the lower parts)
emptying it self by those corrupted sores in a quitture or Sanies, so
insupportably stinking that few of his visitants (though they were many
thousands) could endure the room without some strong odoriferous defensative.
Shortly after the flesh began to shrink from the bones at those places where
the putried matter came forth, many little worms issuing from the rotten
flesh: but when the dead limbs were dropped off, the joints and flesh above
looked pretty well and healthy, seeming free of the former mortification; the
flesh indeed still being raw, but sweet; and so quick and sensible, that he
complained grievously upon the lest touch: insomuch that many were induced to
believe, that an easy cure might have been made of it; for the stinking
ichorous humor was once quite gone; whereof the poor man himself was also
persuaded; saying, that now the execration wherewith he had cursed himself was
fully come to pass ( in that his hands were rotted off) he was persuaded now it
would go no further. But the poor creature wanting all assistances both of Art
and good Medicines, save what the application of the leaves of Mullein
afforded, which were used by his Keeper to defend the raw parts; after some
weeks there issued again the like thin stinking humor as before, so that his
flesh began to wast and his spirits to fail, which soon put a period to his
miserable life. Mr. Ja. Illingworth and Mr Jonath. Newey's Narratives of this
deplorable Case.
.

71. The wonderful escapes of death that some men have made in this County
must also be reckoned amongst the remarkable accidents that have attended them
in the course of their lives. Amongst which it was a very fortunate one, that
happened to John Dawe of Lapley in this County, who as I was told upon the
place, being a Soldier in the Garrison there for the King in the late Civil
war, and commanded out upon a Salley, or as a Scout, found a horshooe by the
way which he stuck in his girdle so wonderful happily, that in a skermish he
fell into not long after, he received a shot just upon the horshooe, which had
it not been there, in all probability he had lost his life: whereby he as
evidently made good the Proverb, that a little Armor well placed is as good as
a whole suit, as the Gentleman did in the unhappy expedition into the Isle of
Ree, who having but one Jacobus in his pocket, which luckily lay flat-ways
against his belly, received a shot likewise just upon it, that bent it quite
round, yet prevented any entrance into his body, and so saved his life Ja
Howell's familiar historical Letters.
.

72. Men have also been strangely preserved in the Coal-pits of this Country,
whereof at Wednesbury I was told of two remarkable instances; one, of a Man of
Castle-Bromwich who comeing to Wednesbury coal pits very early in the morning,
two hours before day, having mist his way, and guiding his fore-horse by the
head, unluckily fell horse and all (the geers or harness breaking off) down
into a Coal-pit 20 yards deep: yet had so little harm, that both horse and man
were drawn out again so well, that the horse drew his part of the load, and the
man (after 3 hours rest in a bed, whereby he recoverd that little distraction
the fall had given him) waited on his team home the same night. The other
instance is of one Dashfield a Coalier of Wednesbury, who being searching for
coal in some old hollows, and wanting Air, repaired to an old shaft that had
been filled up some years before, where loosening some earth at the bottom, in
hopes it would crack to the top, and give him Air; it so suddenly coped or
colted down upon him, that being on every side environed with it, he could not
return, insomuch that all people concluded him smotherd. But he (whilst they
debated how to get him out) by the help of his Maundrill, by degrees so wrought
away the earth over head, and getting it under his feet so raised himself still
higher and higher, that at length he came out above ground safe and sound,
having work't thus upwards at lest 9 yards in an hours time: which even the
people thereabout who understand these works, look upon to this day as so
strange performance, that the Man (now living) is still called Witch Dashfield.

73. But of all the preservations of the life of Man that ever happened in this
County, or perhaps any where else, wherein the providence of God appeared most
miraculously, was that of his sacred Majesty of ever blessed memory King
Charles the second, and of many of his followers that came along with him from
the battle of Worcester: who though he first allighted about break of day at
White-Ladies in Shropshire, whither he was conducted by Mr. Charles Giffard a
Gent. of the ancient family of Chillington in this County, yet as soon as he
was disrobed of his Princely Ornaments, and had otherwise disguised himself by
a Country habit of one of the Penderells; cuting off his hair: and rubbing his
hands against the back of the Chimney, and with them his face; he was conducted
first by Richard Penderel out at a back door, into the obscurest part of
Rinshaw wood or spring Coppice in this County, where he was sheltered from the
rain (the Heavens weeping bitterly at these calamities) sitting upon a blanket
borrowed of Francis Yates, under one of the thickest trees in the wood, which
not being well noted has lost the honor, that was after given the Oak near
Boscobel house; whither (after an unfortunate journey to Madeley in order to
pass the Severn, and so into Wales) his Majesty removed two days after, and
sat in the Oak; which though in the County of Salop yet even there he rested
in the Lap of a Staffordshire Gent. Colonel William Carlis of this
Neighborhood, who having constantly followed his Majesty's fortunes, with much
difficulty had also made his escape from Worcester.

74. Having rested at Boscobel two days, one in the Oak; the night in a privacy
behind the Chimney in one of the Chambers; and the other in the house and
garden; the night following he removed to Moseley to the house of the loyal Mr.
Thomas Whitgreave of this County, where he was better accomodated with Linen,
and attended by Mr. Whitgreave Mr. Huddleston and my Lord Wilmot who met him
there: the several passages during his stay here were many of them remarkable,
whereof I received an account from Mr. Whitgreave himself, which being
punctually the same with those in the book called Boscobel, or Claustrum Regale
reseratum. I remit the Reader thither Boscobel, or Claustrum Regale reserat.
part. 1.
. Hence after two days stay he was removed to Bentley by the most loyal and
faithful Colonel John Lane, pursuant to a resolution taken up, that it was
most expedient his Majesty should move Westward (the Rebels most probably
pursueing him Northward) which they had contrived should be done, under
protection of a pass, accidentally procured before by the Colonels Sister Mrs.
Jane Lane, for her self and a man to go beyond Bristol, to see Mrs. Norton her
special friend, then near her time of lyeing in.

75. Being now come to Bentley, whither my Lord Wilmot had removed before, and
was now ready to receive him; after his Majesty had eaten, and conferred with
my Lord and the Colonel about his intended journey toward Bristol next
morning; he went to bed; where he rested not long being called up by the Coll.
by break of day, who taking away his leather doublet and patch't green
breeches, now clothed him with a Suit and Cloak of Country gray cloth like a
farmers son, putting 20 pounds in his pocket to bear the charges of the journey
Ex Chartularia familiae de Lane MS. penes Tho. Lane Armig.
Being thus accoutred, after he had refresht himfelf and taken leave of the
Lord Wilmot, he was conducted by the Coll. a back way into the stable, where
after a few instructions how to act the part of a Tenants son (which they
thought a quality more convenient for their intention, than that of a direct
servant) he brought the horse to the gate with his hat under his arm, having
assumed the name of William Jackson, and took up Mrs. Jane Lane behind him;
and so in company with Mr. Henry Lassels and Mr. Peter and his wife the
Collenels Sister, who were then accidentally at his house and were now goeing
homewards, they took their journey toward Stratford upon Avon, taking leave of
Bentley; which having been the Royal Asylum of so great a Prince in his
extremest distress, and now the Seat of the Worshipful Tho. Lane, Esquire (one of
the noblest Patrons of this work) son of that great example of fidelity and
loyalty Coll. John Lane, is here represented Tab. 27. in a copper Cut, that the
memory of it might be made as lasting as the brass.

76. For which signal services his Majesty upon his wonderful restoration to
his Kingdoms in An. 1660. did not only remunerat all persons concerned in his
miraculous preservation with Royal pensions, payable out of the Exchequer,
proportionable to each man's quality and service: but honored this Gent. more
especially (as he did Coll. Carlos) even after his death with a Royal badg or
acknowledgment, of his loyalty and fidelity, by adding to his coat Armor a
Canton of England, to be set up and used in memory of them by his Posterity for
ever; and out of his singular gratitude to him, would have had his body buried
amongst the Kings at Westminster, had not this Hero before his death most
modestly refused it. All which appears from the Letters Patents and warrants of
the King; Earl Marshal; Kings and Heralds at Arms; and the Epitaph upon his
stately Tomb at Wolverhampton, set up by the Worshipful Tho. Lane Esquire son and
heir of his virtues as well as Estate: which for the singularity and further
notoriety of the thing are here annexed.

TO all and singular to whom these presents shall come. We the Kings, Heralds,
and Pursuivants of Arms, send greeting. Whereas the right Honorable Henry Earl
of Peterborrow, Deputy with his Majesty's approbation to the right Honorable
Henry Earl of Norwich Earl Marshall of England, has under his hand and Seal
of the Earl Marshalls office, signified unto us his Majesty's royal will and
pleasure touching an Augmentation to the paternal Arms of John Lane of Bentley
in the County of Stafford Esquire lawfully issued, in these words.

WHereas the Kings most excellent Majesty has under his Signet and Sign
Manual, signified unto me Henry Earl of Peterborow, Deputy ( with his
Majesty's approbation) to the right Honorable Henry Earl of Norwich Earl
Marshall of England his Royal pleasure touching an Augmentation to the paternal
Coat of the descendants lawfully issued from the body of John Lane of Bentley
in the County of Stafford Esquire in these words;

CHARLES R.
To our right trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Councellor Henry Earl of
Peterborow, Deputy to our right trusty and right well beloved Cousin Henry Earl
of Norwich Earl Marshall of England, greeting.
We calling to mind the great and signal service performed to us by John Lane
of Bently in the County of Stafford deceased: in his ready concurring to the
preservation of our Royal person after the battle of Worcester, at which time
contemning the threatenings published by the murderers of our Royal Father
against any who should conceal or assist us, and disdaining the rewards
proposed to such as should be instrumental in the discovery and destruction of
our Person, and not valueing any hazard his Family might run: with the duty of
an unspotted Allegiance, did by his great prudence and fidelity so conduct us,
that we were able at length to retire to places of safety beyond the Seas; have
therefore of our own free will and proper motion given and granted unto the
descendants lawfully issued from the body of the said John Lane this Honorable
remuneration as a notable mark or badge of his constant fidelity: that is to
say, henceforth they shall bear in augmentation to their paternal Arms, three
Lions passant guardant Or in a Canton Gu. and our will and pleasure is that you
do require and command our Servants the Kings and Officers of Arms to
marshall and set up in all proper places, and upon all occasions the paternal
Arms of the said John Lane with the Augmentation aforesaid; and that you also
direct and require the Register of our College of Arms to cause this our
Concession to be duly entered upon Record in our said College. Given under our
Royal Signet and sign Manual this 12 day of July An. 1677. and in the 29 year
of our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command. J. WILLIAMSON.


THese are therefore according to his Majesty's Royal will and pleasure,
signified to me by his said receited Grant, to will and require you the Kings
and other Officers of Arms and every of you, to do and perform from time to
time as occasion shall require all and every the duties and services, which by
his Majesty in and by his said grant are signified and appointed to be done by
you or any of you, for or on the behalf of the descendants lawfully issued from
the body of the said John Lane: and for your so doing these shall be to you
and every of you a sufficient warrant. Dated under my hand and the Seal of the
Earl Marshalls Office, this 18th. day of July 1677. and in 29 of his Majesty's
reign.

PETERBOROW.


KNow ye therefore that in pursuance thereof, we have caused the same to be
Registered in the Records of our College, and have Marshalled the said
Augmentation with the paternal Arms of their Family viz. party per Fess Or and
Azure a Cheveron Gu. betwixt 3 Mullets counterchanged of the field. Given under
the common Seal of the College of Arms this 21 day of July in the 29 year of
the reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, Annoque Domini 1677.

Which Arms are set up, together with the Augmentation, upon a noble Monument
erected in his memory in the North Isle of the Collegiat Church of
Wolverhampton amongst others of the Family, with the following Epitaph.
Mortales Exuviae
Praevalidi Johannis Lane Armigeri
Faeliciter reanimari expectantes
hic repositae.
Vir supra Titulos, vel cujus meritis
Tituli desunt.
In turbis nuperis intestinis sub Rege Car, 1
Et deinde in bello Batavo sub Rege Car. 2.
Tribuni militum dignissime officio fungebatur.
Regis and Patriae Liberator.
Nempe cum Car. 2. e praeliis Vigorniis
Aegerrime elapsnm and undique insectatum
Summa pietate, summa fide, summa virtute,
ultimo denique Capitis periculo,
Iniquis Tyranni usurpantis, and suorum insidiis
Fortiter eripuit.
Factum inter praeclarissima
praeclarissimum;
Vt ipse Monarcha etiam non tacit agnovit
Cum Augmentatione Regali ex insigniis Regiis
Ad insignia antiqua nobilis LAN. Familiae
Filium THO. LANE (digni Patris dign. Haer.)
In loco defuncti decoravit and retribuit.
Cujus ossa insuper Rex gratus and pius
In Mausoleis Basilicis Westmonast.
Amoris ergo munifice condi voluit
Ni ipse Heroes moriens istis honoribus
Modeste obstetisset.
Natus est VIII Kal. April. Ao. MDCIX.
Et pride. Kal. Sept. Ao. MDCLXVII.
Mortem obiit comploratam.


77. Many of his Majesty's followers were also wonderfully preserved by the
great prudence aod fidelity of some of the Inhabitants of this part of the
County: particularly the Lord Wilmot narrowly escaped at Brewood Forge, and
Coven brook, by the care and conduct of John Penderel and William Walker, and
was after faithfully concealed at Brinsford at Mr. Huntbaches house, and so at
Mr. Whitgreaves at Moseley, and lastly at Bentley where he parted with the King
when he went Westward. The Duke of Buckingham, Lord Leviston, Colonel Blague,
Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, and Mr. Hugh May, likewise found great fidelity in
Blore-park whither they betook themselves by a by-way after they had quitted
their Horses, and received refreshment at an obscure house of Mr. Geo.
Barlow's, the Duke changing habit with an honest workman he met in an adjoining
wood, in which disguise by the assistance of Mr. Barlow and his wife, after
some days he was conveyed by one Nicholas Matthews a Carpenter, into
Nottinghamshire. At the same time the Lord Leviston, Coll. Blague, Mr. Darcy,
and Mr. May, also disguised themselves and severally shifted away; only Coll.
Blague remained at Mr. Barlows house at Blore-pipe, where with Mrs. Barlows
privity and advice he hid his Majesty's George under a heap of dust and chips,
whence it was conveyed through the trusty hands of Mr. Robert Milward of
Stafford to Mr. Isaac Walton, who conveyed it to London to Coll. Blague then in
the Tower; whence escaping not long after, he carried it with him beyond Seas,
and restored it to his Majesty's own hands.

78. Having done with Men solitarily considered, come we next to treat of such
unusual things as concern more than one of them; Pliny in his Natural History
has a large chapter, of examples of Men extremely alike, where he instances in
many that strangely resembled one another, though no way related in
consanguinity or affinity C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 12.
: but I have long observed that it falls out most commonly in brothers and
sisters, and then most indistinguishably when they happen to be Twynns, such as
Matthew and Thomas Seal of Edingale in this County, whom (if clothed alike) as
I am credibly informed, it is hard to distinguish. Yet scarce so difficult
neither, as the Reverend Henry Fairfax DD. and fellow of Magdalen College Oxon.
and his Twynn brother, who as he told me himself were so very like one another;
that their nearest relations, nay not their Parents themselves, even when grown
Men, could any way distinguish them: insomuch that he has received
considerable gifts from some of them, intended for his brother; and a dispute
would have been raised (had an elder brother to them both, dyed without issue)
which should have succeeded in the Estate; the Midwife, Nurses, etc. having not
well observed which was born first.

79. What concerns Men and Women jointly together also belongs to this place,
upon which account their marriages purely considered may be referred hither:
amongst which perhaps it may not be unworthy our notice, nor much beside our
purpose, that William Overton Bishop of this Diocese married two wives, which
lie buried with him under the same Tomb in Eccleshal Church: which how
agreeable to the 1. Tim. 3.2. let the divines determine. All I shall say
concerning it is, that the Apostle seeming here to intimate that a Bishop
should be chaste in a higher degree than other Christians, it cannot well be
understood that a Bishop here is only forbid to marry another wife after
divorce from a former, which our Savior forbids all Christians whatever under
the penalty of Adultery: but that it was not expedient at lest, he should marry
a second wife after the death of the first, though allowable in others. Which
being consonant to the 17 and 18 Apostolical Canons Vid Canones Sanct. Apost.
Canon. 17.18.
; and the third Canon in Trullo Vid Canones Concilii Sexti in Trullo. Canon. 3.
; seems to be the sense of the Church too in this matter. Theodoret it is true
did ordain Irenaeus Bishop of Tire though a Digamist in this sense, which
action he defended in an Epistle to Domnus Patriarch of Antioch, where he names
one Diogenes, and Domninus Bishop of Caesarea, that had been thus ordained
though under the same circumstances B. Theodorets Operum Tom. 3. Epist. 110.
. Tertullian also ownes that the Canons concerning Digamy were not always
observed, mentioning a Bishop of Vthina at that time, that was a Digamist Q.
Sept. Flor. Tertulliani de Monogomia cap. 12. vel. 13.
. which possibly Bishop Overton thought were instances sufficient to justify
Him. Yet it was not even then the Judgment of the Church, the Emperor
Theodosius causing the same Irenaeus to be deposed for suspicion of
Nestorianisme, and Bigamy, as having been ordained against the Canons of the
Church Caes. Baronii Annalium Eccles. Tom. 5. in An. 431.
. And Tertullian at the same time he owned that the Canons in this point had
not been observed, confessing it seemed contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostle. Quot enim and Digami praesident apud vos, insultantes utique Apostolo;
certe non erubescentes, etc. Vide supra loco citato.
. being his very words.

80. Hither also must be referred what concerns whole families, whereof I was
told that at Wheaten-Aston there were ten or twelve, all of a name [all
Sawyers] hard to be distinguished at Lapley Court, of which many of them hold;
and at Blymhill there are many of the name of Blackmoore and Turner, who either
upon account of consanguinity, or interchangeable marriages, are most of them
some way or other akin. I am also informed by the reverend and learnd Dr. John
Wallis, Professor of Geometry and President of the Philosophical Society of
Oxford, that at Thingdon in Northamptonshire (whence he is originally
descended) there were not long since no less than 13 families of his own name,
who by marriages or otherwise, are all thus related. Yet I find not that these
are so strict in their marriages, that they care not to marry out of their own
kindred, as I have heard of a place in Spain where all the inhabitants are thus
related, that by no means will marry out of their own Town; and I am certainly
informed by Mr. John Hough fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon, and Chaplin to his Grace
the Duke of Ormond, that in the Barony of Forth in the County of Wexford in
Ireland, the inhabitants (who are English and have resided there, ever since
the conquest of Ireland by Hen. 2. still retaining their now unintelligible
English) are so strict in this point, that they will not marry out of their own
district, for the greatest advantage.

81 Towns being made out of families, and the whole County out of Towns, all
unusual matters relating to either, as odd Customs, etc. most naturally follow:
such as that of the parish of Gnosall, where the Minister and Churchwardens,
annually choose a Jury of 12 Men or more, who not only join with them and the
sidemen in making the presentiments to the Official (in being a peculiar) but
are impannell'd, and bring in their Verdict in all Ecclesiastical causes that
fall out amongst them for the year following. Which is the only instance where
a Civil-Law Judge determins according to the Verdict of a Jury, that ever I
heard of; except in the case of Pyracy or robbing by Sea, it being provided by
act of Parliament, chiefly because Mariners and Shippmen (which were commonly
the only witnesses in these cases) by reason of their frequent voyages do not
stay long on shore, and so could not easily be had, to the great damage of the
Prosecutors; that in all Treasons, Felonies, robberies, etc. committed upon the
Sea, or any Creek or place within the Admiralls Jurisdiction, shall be tried
and judged in such shires and places of the Realm, as shall be limited by the
Kings Commission directed to the Admiral or his deputy, and 3 or 4 other
substantial persons to be appointed by the Lord Chancellor, who shall enquire
and determine of such offense or offenses, by the oaths of 12 good and lawful
inhabitants of the Shire limited in the Commission, in such like manner and
form, as if such offenses had been committed on the land, in the same shire
Ferd. Pulton's Collect. of Statutes 28. Hen. 8. chap. 15.
.

82. At Walshall in this County, they have also at this day, an unusual ('it is
true) but a very good custom, of distributing annually a certain dole of one
penny and no more on Twelfth Eve to all persons then residing within the Town or
Burg of Walshall; and in all the Villages and Hamlets belonging thereunto; viz.
Walshall-wood, Shellfield, great and little Bloxwich, Harding, Goscot, Woodend,
Caldmoore, Bescot, the Pleck, and Burch-hills, which they call the foreign:
and not only to the constant Inhabitants of these places, but to all Strangers
too then found in this Town, or within any of the aforesaid Villages within the
Liberties of it; whether young or old, rich or poor, Men women or children, of
what quality or condition soever they be. This dole-penny is also given to all
persons then residing in the parish of Rushall under the same circumstances,
which upon this account is thought to have been formerly part of the foreign
of Walshall. Which general benevolence they call Moseley's dole, being given by
one Thomas Moseley an Inhabitant of this Town (who lived, as is supposed, at a
house now one Mr. Sheppards, where they will show you the heads of Moseley and
his wife) as tradition goes upon this account, viz. That the said Tho. Moseley
walking the streets of this Town on the Eve of Epiphany, heard a child crying
for bread which raised his charity to such a strain, that he presently vowed
that no person hereafter of what condition soever, should ever want bread in
that Town or Liberties on that day again: whereupon he immediately settled his
Manor of Bascot in Warwickshire upon the Corporation for ever, for the use
abovementioned.

83. But the truth of the matter seems rather to be, that this settlement
(which he made by deed of feoffment dated on St. Nicholas day 30 of Hen. 6.
granting it to William Lyle and Thomas Magot for the use of the Town Sr. Willam
Dugdales Antiquities of Warwickshire illustrated in Bascot.
) was for maintenance, in part at lest, of an obit for his soul and the soul
of his wife Margaret, to be celebrated in the Parish Church here, and in the
Abbey of Hales-Owen: it appearing by the accounts of Tho. Nowell 30 Hen. 8. one
of the Masters of the Guild of St. John Baptist (whereof there were three) who
received the Rents and kept the Courts at Bascot, but made their accounts to
the Major; that he claymed an allowance of 13s. 4d. upon his account for that
Dole, paid to Sr. John Dudley possessor of the Ecclesiastical rights of the
Monastery of Hales-Owen to procure an Anniversary to be performed by the
religious men of that house, for the souls of Thomas Moseley and Margaret his
wife; and that he claimed allowance of 15s. 4d. for the like Anniversary in the
parish Church of Walsall, which seems to have been all was paid out of it,
though another paper also mentions nine marks paid annually to the Abbey of
Hales-Owen Ex ipsis Augtog. penes Majorem and Burgens. de Walshall.
, the rest of the Income wholly accrewing to the benefit of the Town, which they
since converted to the maintenance of this yearly benevolence, there being no
such dole given or instituted by Moseley either by will or Feoffment, nor any
mention made of it till the 30 of Hen. 8. when 7lb. 10s. 9d. discharged it all.

84. However the Corporation by way of Gratitude, he having indeed given the
Estate which maintained it, called it Moseleys Dole, sending the Bell-man about
the Town that day, to excite the people to repair to Church to pray for the
souls of Thomas Moseley and Margaret his wife, upon which account it was
quickly after seized by the Crown, as all other lands were, esteemed any way to
be put to superstitious uses; where it continued to the 28 of Q. Elizabeth (yet
was still rented by the Town for the use of the dole) when it was given by the
Queen to Sr. Jacob Crofts Controller of her household, who sold it to one Shaw
and Headock Esquire and they again to the Mayor and Communalty of Walshall, who
possess it to this day, and put as much of it to the same use, as the number of
persons both in the Burg and Foraigne, and parish of Rushall, require, which
commonly now amounts to about two or three and twenty pounds, the whole manor
yiedling them a hundred pounds per Annum, or thereabout Ibidem.


85. To these add the Cusioms relating to the County, whereof they have one, of
admitting Men into the Society of Free-masons, that in the moorelands of this
County seems to be of greater request, than any where else, though I find the
Custom spread more or less all over the Nation; for here I found persons of the
most eminent quality, that did not disdain to be of this Fellowship. Nor indeed
need they, were it of that Antiquity and honor, that is pretended in a large
parchment volum they have amongst them, containing the History and Rules of the
craft of masonry. Which is there deduced not only from sacred writ, but profane
story, particularly that it was brought into England by St. Amphibal, and first
communicated to S. Alban, who set down the Charges of masonry, and was made
paymaster and Governor of the Kings works, and gave them charges and manners as
St. Amphibal had taught him. Which were after confirmed by King Athelstan,
whose youngest son Edwyn loved well masonry, took upon him the charges and
learned the manners, and obtained for them of his Father a free-Charter.
Whereupon he caused them to assemble at York, and to bring all the old Books of
their craft, and out of them ordained such charges and manners, as they then
thought fit: which charges in the said Schrole or Parchment volum, are in part
declared: and thus was the craft of masonry grounded and confirmed in England.
It is also there declared that these charges and manners were after perused and
approved by King Hen. 6. and his council, both as to Masters and Fellows of
this right Worshipful craft Ex Rotulo. membranaceo penes Camentariorum
Societatem.
.

86. Into which Society when any are admitted, they call a meeting (or Lodge as
they term it in some places) which must consist at lest of 5 or 6 of the
Ancients of the Order, whom the candidats present with gloves, and so likewise
to their wives, and entertain with a collation according to the Custom of the
place: This ended, they proceed to the admission of them, which chiefly
consists in the communication of certain secret signs, whereby they are known
to one another all over the Nation, by which means they have maintenance
whither ever they travel: for if any man appear though altogether unknown that
can show any of these signs to a Fellow of the Society, whom they otherwise
call an accepted mason, he is obliged presently to come to him, from what
company or place soever he be in, nay though from the top of a Steeple, (what
hazard or inconvenience soever he run) to know his pleasure, and assist him;
viz. if he want work he is bound to find him some; or if he cannot do that, to
give him money, or otherwise support him till work can be had; which is one of
their Articles; and it is another, that they advise the Masters they work for,
according to the best of their skill, acquainting them with the goodness or
badness of their materials; and if they be any way out in the contrivance of
their buildings modestly to rectify them in it; that masonry be not dishonored:
and many such like that are commonly known: but some others they have (to which
they are sworn after their fashion) that none know but themselves, which I have
reason to suspect are much worse than these, perhaps as bad as this History of
the craft it self; than which there is nothing I ever met with, more false or
incoherent.

87. For not to mention that St. Amphibalus by judicious persons, is thought
rather to be the cloak, than master of St. Alban; or how unlikely it is that
St. Alban himself in such a barbarous Age, and in times of persecution, should
be supervisor of any works; it is plain that King Athelstan was never married,
or ever had so much as any natural issue; (unless we give way to the fabulous
History of Guy Earl of Warwick, whose eldest son Reynburn is said indeed to
have been married to Leoneat the supposed daughter of Athelstan Joh. Rowse's
Hist. of Guy E. of Warw.
, which will not serve the turn neither) much less ever had he a lawful son
Edwyn, of whom I f^^d not the least umbrage in History. He had indeed a Brother
of that name, of whom he was so jealouse though very young when he came to the
crown, that he sent him to Sea in a pinnace without tackle or oar, only in
company with a page, that his death might be imputed to the waves and not him;
whence the Young Prince (not able to master his passions) cast himself headlong
into the Sea and there dyed. Who how unlikely to learn their manners; to get
them a Charter; or call them together at York; let the Reader judge.

88. Yet more improbable is it still, that Hen. the 6. and his Council, should
ever peruse or approve their charges and manners, and so confirm these right
Worshipful Masters and Fellows as they are called in the Scrole: for in the
third of his reign (when he could not be 4 years old) I find an act of
Parliament quite abolishing this Society. It being therein ordained, that no
Congregations and Confederacies should be made by masons, in their general
Chapters and Assemblies, whereby the good course and effect of the Statutes of
Laborers, were violated and broken in subversion of Law: and that those who
caused such Chapters (...) Congregations to be holden, should be adjudged
Felons; and those masons that came to them should be punished by imprisonment,
and make fine and ransom at the Kings will Ferd. Pulton's Collect. of Statutes.
3. Hen. 6. Chap. 1.
. So very much out was the Compiler of this History of the craft of masonry,
and so little skill had he in our Chronicles and Laws. Which Statute though
repealed by a subsequent act in the 5 of Eliz Lord Cooks Institutes of the Laws
of Engl. part. 3. chap. 35.
. whereby Servants and Laborers are compellable to serve, and their wages
limited; and all masters made punishable for giving more wages than what is
taxed by the Justices, and the servants if they take it etc. Ferd. Pulton's
Collect. of Statutes. 5. Eliz. chap. 4.
, Yet this act too being but little observed, it is still to be feared these
Chapters of Free-masons do as much mischief as before, which if one may
estimate by the penalty, was anciently so great, that perhaps it might be
useful to examine them now.

89. They have also a Custom in this County which I observed on holy-Thursday
at Brewood and Bilbrook, of adorning their wells with boughs and flowers: this
it seems they do too at all Gospell-places, whether wells, trees, or hills:
which being now observed only for decency and custom sake, is innocent enough.
Heretofore too it was usual to pay this respect to such wells as were eminent
for cureing distempers, on the Saints day whose name the well bore, diverting
themselves with cakes and ale, and a little music and danceing; which, whilst
within these bounds, was also an innocent recreation. But whenever they began
to place Sanctity in them, to bring alms and offerings, or make vows at them,
as the ancient Germans Phil. Cluverii Germania Antiq. Lib. 1. cap. 34.
and Britans Joh. Seldem Marmora Arundel. in notis ad Auctorioli V.
did, and the Saxons and English were too much inclined to, for which St.
Edmunds well without St. Clements near Oxford, and St. Laurence's at
Peterborough were famous heretofore In Registro Sutton, in Officio Registrarii
Ecclesiae Lincoln. fol. 8.
: I do not find but they were forbid in those times, as well as now, this
superstitious devotion being called (...) which Somner rightly translates
well-worship Gul. Somneri Dictionarium Saxonico-Angl in verbo.
, and was strictly prohibited by our Anglican Councills as long ago as King
Edgar (...) Lambardi in Canonibus sub. Edgaro. Canon 16.
; and in the reign of Canutus Hen. Spelmani Conciliorum Tom. 1. inter Leges
Eccles. Canuti Regis part. 2. cap. 5.
; not long after again in a Council at London under St. Anselm Archbishop of
Cant. An. 1102 Phil. Labbei Conciliorum Tom. 10. ad An. Chr. 1002.
. as it was also particularly at those two wells near Oxford, and at
Peterborough by Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln Vide locum supra citatum.
.

90. Thus having run through the many and most uncommon passages that I could
find to have attended Mankind in this County, at or before his birth; and
during the course of his life; both separatly, and in consort: I should
immediately in the next place have proceeded to those of death and the grave,
but that I must not forget a certain forerunner of them, Extreme old age: which
whether not much abated now in the wane of the world, has been a Question much
controverted in these latter ages. In the stating whereof, I think I may fairly
exclude the Antidiluvian Patriarchs, and those after the flood, till about
Jacobs time, whose lives no question God did protract to a much greater length
than ours are now, for the first peopleing of the world, and replenishing it
again after its destruction: which being done, the common age of Man seems to
have been limited to the standard, of threescore years and ten, or thereabout;
and if by reason of strength [some] came to fourscore years, yet their strength
[then] was but labor and sorrow Psalm. 90. v. 10.
; as it continues to this day. Some indeed there were then that exceeded that
period, and so there have been still in all times and Nations down even to this
last age, that have outrun it as much as ever the ancients did, since Jacobs
days, as will be found by the agreement of the Hislories of our forefathers,
whether sacred or profane, with what I have met with relating to this subject
in our days; though I confine my self within the narrow bounds, chiefly of
this, and two or three other English Counties.

91. In the collation of which instances, I shall give the civility of
precedence as heretofore to the Women, notwithstanding the holy Penmen seem to
have neglected their ages, not so constantly setting them down, as those of
Men. Sarah it is true is recorded to have been 127 years of age Genesis 23. v. 1.
, but she was the Grandmother of Jacob, and so not within the time since when
we affirm, there has been no abbreviation of the Longevity of Man: however I
think we shall be able to bring a parallel even to her within memory. Anna the
Prophetess, as may be collected from St. Luke, seems to have arrived to a
hundred and six years of age, or thereabout Luke 2. v. 36.37.
. And in profane History we find it noted that Helena the mother of Constantine
the great, was fourscoure years old Lord Bacons Hist. of life and death p. 17.
; and that Pliny thought it worthy remark, that Livia the wife of Rutilius
lived to 97; and Statilia a noble Roman Lady to 99 years of age C. Plinii 2di.
Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 48.
; which yet both are exceeded by one Mrs. Swynbourn of Yoxall in this County,
who was living when I was there, and upwards of an hundred; as they were also
by a long Catalogue of Italian Women (as well as men) reckoned up by Phlegon,
who all reached an hundred Phlegont is Tralliani Lib. de Longaevis cap. 1.
. So much were they out, who fixed the great Climacterical 63 (or Androclan of
the Egyptians) as the ultimate term of human life Censorini Lib. de die Natali.
cap. 14.
; and so were Plato, who thought it consummated in 81 being the square of 9
Ibidem.
; and Staseas in 84 Ibidem.
, which Herodotus also calls (...) Herodoti Historiar. Lib. 3.
; to whom add Hesiod C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 48.
, and after him Ausonius who advanced it to 96, which period of years they
thought none could surpass Dec. Ansonii Idyllio 10. vel. 18.
.

92. Nor were the Egyptians of Alexandria Censorini Lib. de die Natali cap. 17.
and Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 11. cap. 37.
, or Gaius the Civilian ff^ de usufructu. Leg. Ususfrucius. five D. Lib. 7.
Tit. 1. Leg. 56.
, who thought no person could exceed 100 years, less deceived than the former:
for beside that Phlegon has collected so many (whereof part are women) who
survived that date, that their very names fill a whole Chapter Phleg. Trall.
Lib. de Longaev. cap. 2.
; there was one Mrs. Hill of Kidlington in Oxfordshire, that was born and lived
there above 100 years Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 2. 3.
; Ann Scot of Ashley in this County was above 100 when I was there, and Dr.
Lister acquaints us that one Frances Woodworth of Charlton in Yorkshire, dyed
in 1662 of the age of 102, and some odd months Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 160.
; not wanting much of the age of Terentia the wife of Cicero who was 103; or of
Galeria Copiola an actress on the stage in the days of Pompey, who was 104 C.
Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap 48.
; who yet both fell short of one Elizabeth Pain of Gnosall in this County, who
was 105 and living when I was there in 1680, and perhaps by this time may have
arrived to near the age of Anna the Prophetess; who was not so old as Mary
Allenson of Thorley in the parish of Skipton in Yorkshire, who dyed as the same
Dr. Lister informs us in 1668 aged about 108 Philos. Trans. loco. supra citat.
; to which very year one Demetrius in Plutarch, that he might include the
longevity of such persons as these, yet enlarged the limits of human life;
appointing 54 for the increase of strength, and as many for its declension,
founding his notion upon this, that each 54 was compounded, ex unitate, primis
duobus planis, duobus quadratis, and duobus cubis Apud Plutarchum (...).
, which possibly might be 1, 4 6, 4 4, 8 27, these making up the number, though
some of them may not be so properly assigned.

93. But this seems altogether as insufficient a boundary as any of the rest:
for I was told of one Goodwife Nip that lived near Gentle-Shaw in this County
that was 109; and I know one Goodwife George of the City of Oxon now living,
who is of the same age; but one year younger than Munantia Procula, and Polla
Donata of Bononia noted by Phlegon Phlegontis Trall. Lib. de Longaevis cap. 2.
, or Samula mentioned by Pliny out of Asconius Paedian^s that all lived to 110.
Who also acquaints us, that Clodia the wife of Ofilius arrived to 115 Loco
supra citato.
, in which very year of her age Katharin Millard abovementioned Chap. 4.. 40.
, unfortunatly dyed in the Thrushouse near Peakstones in this County, where she
might otherwise in all probability have lived somewhat longer. To take in such
Macrobians as these, Berosus yet advanced the term of man's life to 117 C.
Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 49.
, but to as little purpose as the former: for Phlegon mentions one Julia
Modestina living in his time at Bressello in the Dukedom of Modena 120 years
old Lib. de Longaevis cap. 3.
; of which very age I saw one Ann Harvey at Okeymoor (but born at Ellasion) in
this County; and I was told of one Goodwife Estwick of one of the Oultons, who
had not been dead above 2 years before I came there, that was of the same age.

94. Upon account of such instances as these, certain Mathematicians mentioned
by Trebellius Pollio enlarged the period to 120. Doctissimi Mathematicorum
(says he) centum viginti annos homini ad vivendum datos judicant, neque amplius
cuiquam concessum dicunt Treb. Pollio in vita Divi Claudit ad Constantium.
. With whom agreed the Oracle of Sybilla Eythraea according to Phlegon, in
whose tract de Longaevis I find these verses. Viginti and centum revolutis
protinus annis
Quae sunt humanae longissima tempora vitae Lib. de Longaev. cap. 4.
.


both whom I find yet were also deceived as well as the rest: for I heard of a
maid that lived at Stafford-green, whose diet was chiefly scraped cheese,
sugar, and brown bread, that lived to the age of 122. the very year to which
Epigenes the Astrologer affirmed (as Pliny tells us) it was not possible for
any body to live C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 49.
. Wherefore Petosiris and Nesepsos, grounding their calculation upon their
Tetartemorion or Quadrant, more wisely determined that human life might be
protracted to 126 years, but not further Ibidem.
: which yet we see confuted in the life of Sarah, who was 127 Genesis 23. v. 1.
; and of Marsli Stent of LLansilin in Denbyshire, who as I am credibly informed
dyed lately about 1680. aged 132. And Pliny himself tells us of a woman of
Faventia who lived to 132; and of another named Tertulla who was known (he
says) to be 137 years of Age Loco supra citato.
.

95. Wiser yet was Asclepiades and his Sect of Astologers, who tho they
affirmed the length of human life did depend on the' influence of the stars,
yet touching the utmost term thereof would set down nothing definitively; lest
it should be exceeded some time or other, by some rare example of human
Longevity Ibidem.
: as all hitherto mentioned have been, by the old Countess of Desmond, who as
St. Walter Raleigh says (who knew her well) was married in Edward the fourths
time, and lived to the year 1589, and many years after v; and was reputed (as
my Lord St. Alban's further acquaints us) 140 years old Lord Visc St. Albans
Not. Hist. Cent. 8. Experim. 755.
. How old Mary Cooper was of Kings Bromley in this County, not long since dead,
I could not certainly learn, but sure she must be a very old woman, for she
lived to be a Beldam, that is to see the sixth generation, and could say the
same I have heard reported of another viz. Rise up daughter, and go to thy
daughter, for thy daughters daughter has a daughter: whose eldest daughter
Elizabeth now living is like to do the same, there being a female of the fifth
generation near marriageable, when I was there. Which is much the same that
Zuingerus reports, of a Noble Matron of the family of the Dalburges, descended
of the Camerarii or Chamberlains of Worms, in the Archbishopric of Ments, who
could thus speak to her daughter, as the same Zuingerus gives it us in a Latin
distic. 1 Matter ait 2 natae, dic 3 natae filia, 4 natam
Vt moneat, 5 natae plangere 6 filiolam Theodori. Zuingeri Theatri humanae
vitae vol. 3. page 1057.

that is, the Mother said to her daughter, daughter bid thy daughter tell her
daughter, that her daughters daughter cries.

96. Nor have these limits of human life been less transgresst by Men, in all
times and nations, than they have by women; which will easily be made appear
also, by a short comparison of the ages of men taken out of the sacred and
profane Histories since Jacobs days, with those of our own time. For first, if
we look into the Scriptures beginning as low as Solomon, and running up as high
as Jacob, which takes in about 700 years; we shall find that Solomon, though his
age cannot be certainly determind by holy writ, yet those that assign him the
greatest number of years, think that he passed not above 50 or 60 at most: yet
it is said of him when he was old, that his wives turned away his heart after
other Gods 1. Kings. 11.4.
. And as Dr. Hakewill St. Walter Raleighs Hist. of the World, Book 1. part. 1.
Chap. 5.. 5.
Ric. Verstegan's restitution of decayed Antiquities Chap. 10. p. 253.
notes, of all the Kings of Judah and Jerusalem who succeeded him, the greatest
part came not to 50, very few to 60, none full home to 70 Dr. Hakewill's
Apology, Lib. 3. Sect. 4.
. King David indeed was threescore and ten when he dyed 2. Sam. 5.4.
, upon which account he was styled old (as men are now at that age) stricken in
years 1. Kings 1.1.
, and full of days 1. Cheon 29.28.
, insomuch that when they covered him with clothes he gat no heat. And his
good Subject Barzillai, whom the Scriptures term a very aged man, yet even he,
by his own confession, was but fourscore years old 2. Sam. 19. v. 32.35.
. Joshuah, and Joseph each lived 110 Judges. 24.29. and Genesis 50.26.
, and Moses and Aaron each 120 Deutr. 34.7.
, Levi brother to Joseph Exodus 6.16.
, and Amram father to Moses and Aaron were both 137 Exodus 6.20.
. And Jacob himself was but 147 years old Genesis 47.28.
.

97. Which ages if compared with those above 1000 years after, and those of the
present times, we shall find matters standing then and now (as to this
particular) in much the same posture: the days of our years (as Moses says)
being still threescore and ten, which when any by reason of strength have
exceeded, they have always been noted (just as Barzillai) for very old men.
Thus it has been recorded as remarkable, that Solon the Law giver; Anacreon
the Poet, and the Emperor Gordian the elder; arrived to 80 years; Plato the
Athenian to 81; Valerian, and Anicius Justinian the Emperors to 83; St. Luke
the Evangelist to 84; Anastatius Dicorus to 88; Protagoras of Abdera, old
Simeon in the time of our Savior, St. Hierom and Dionysius Areopogita, to 90;
and St. John the beloved disciple of our Lord, to 93. Which are ages so common
even now, that as my Lord Bacon affirms, there is scarce a village in England,
that is tolerably populous, but it affords a man or woman of 80, or upwards
Lord. Bacon's Hist. of life and death. p. 20,
; and Mr. Carew in his survey of the County of Cornwall assures us upon his own
knowledge that fourscore, and fourscore and ten years of age, is ordinary there
almost in every place Carew's survey of Cornwall, Book. 1. p. 63.
. Wherefore I have not cited my Authors for the ages above mentioned, the
present ages of men rendering them so credible, that it seems altogether
needless.

98. To proceed therefore to men of yet greater Longevity, Zeno of Citium,
Isocrates the Athenian Lord Bacon's Hist. of life and death. p. 16.
, and Marcus Perpenna according to Pliny, lived 98 years; and Marcus Valerius
Corvinus 100 complete C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 48.
; and so did a great number of others, Italians only, reckond up by Phlegon
Phleg. T^all. Lib. d. Longaev. cap. 1.
. Pliny further adding that in the last taxation, numbering, or review of the
Provinces, taken under the Caesar's Vespasians Father and Son, both Emperors and
Censors, there were six men all of the town of Velleiacium, that brought in
certificats that they had lived 100 years apiece; and that in the review taken
of the eighth region of Italy only, there were found no less than 54 persons
100 years of age C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7 cap. 49.
. In my travells through Oxfordshire I met with one Geo. Green of Woodstock,
and William Carter of Curbridg in the parish of Witney just of that age Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 2.. 3. and Chap. 8.. 54.
, with many others near it; and in Staffordshire so many that I thought them
not worth noting. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and Appollonius Tyaneus both
exceeded a hundred Lord Bacon's Hist. of life and death p. 18.19.
; and Thuanus has recorded it, that one Robert Constantine born at Caen in
Normandy lived to 103 Jac. Aug. Thuant Historiarum Tom. 5. Lib. 134. ad An.
1605.
; of which very age one Brian Stephens dyed lately at Woodstock Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. 2.. 3.
. Gartius Aretinus great grandfather to Petrarch Dr. Hakewill's Apology Lib.
3. Sect. 7.
, and Hippocrates Cous the famous Physician lived each of them to 104 Lord
Bacon's Hist. of life and death. p. 19.
. In which year of his age John Best of Horton, as was said above 3, found
himself so strong, that he married a wife and got her with child though a woman
of 56. St. Anthony the first founder or restorer of Monks lived to 105 Ibid. p.
18.
; and so did an old man I heard of at Rushton Spencer in this County; at which
years Cardinal Bellarmin also tells us he himself knew an old man so lusty and
strong, that he was likely to live many years longer Disputationum Roberti
Bellarmini Tom. 1. Lib. 1. de verbo dei. cap. 7. sub finem.
. Mr. Carew acquaints us that in the County of Cornwall, one Beuchamp arrived
to 106 Carew's Survey of Cornw. loco supra citato.
; to which very year, William Cox, and William Ketley of Womborn in this
County, both attained before they dyed; and the Reverend Dr. Hakewill says he
was credibly informed, that William Pawlet Marquess of Winchester, and Lord
high Treasurer of England, who was born in the last year of Hen. 6, and dyed in
the 10th. of Q. Eliza. having lived in 9 Kings and Queens reigns, was near a
hundred and seven Loco supra citato.
.

99. To advance yet higher, Gorgias a Rhetorician lived to 108 Lord Bacon's
Hist. of life and death. p. 15.
; and so did Thomas Wiggen of Carlton in Yorkshire, as Dr. Lister tells us, and
some months over Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 160.
; wanting but little of Democritus of Abdera who reached 109 Lord Bacon's Hist.
of life and death. p. 16. Carew's Survey of Cornw. Book 2. p. 131.
. There lived one Park in Cornwall as Mr. Carew informs us, that was 110 e;
and in the reivew of the eighth region of Italy above mentioned, they found no
less than 57 that had arrived to the same C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7.
cap. 49.
in which year of their ages Joseph and Joshua dyed. T. Purennius Tutus, as
Phlegon informs us, was 111 Phleg. Trall. de Longaev. cap. 3.
; and Josias Pierce late of Witney in Oxfordshire; and J. Sagar of Burnley of
Lancashire, lived to 112; yet both fell short of L. Antistichus Soterichus who
was 113, and of L. Petrus Corneliensis, and Richard Clifford of Bolscot in the
County of Oxon, who reached 114. Johannes Temporarius in his Chronological
demonstrations speaks of a poor man he knew, that got his living by his
labor, of 116 Joh. Temporarii Chronolog. demonst. Lib. 1. cap. 4. sub finem.
, which was older than Paul the Hermit who advanced but to 115 Disputationum
Rob. Bellermini Tom. 1. Lib. 1. cap. 7. sub finem.
; but not so old as William Postell a Frenchman who held out almost to 120 Dr.
Hakewill's Apology Lib. 3. Sect. 7.
. At the taxation aforementioned under the Vespasians, there were three found
at Parma that had completed that age C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 49.
, and so did Simeon the son of Cleophas Bishop of Jerusalem Lord Bacon's Hist.
of life and death p. 18.
: Arganthinus King of Cadiz C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 48.
, Romuald of Ravenna a famous Hermit Fran. Petrarchae Epist. Rerum Senilium,
Lib. 16. Ep. 2.
, and Brawn the beggar of Cornwall Carews Survey of Cornw. Book. 1. p. 63.
, who were all as old as Moses and Aron, 120 apiece.

100. Which was an age thought so attainable An. 1553, that one Thomas of
Ravenna writ a book printed at Venice, which he didicated to Julius the third
then Pope of Rome: de vita hominis ultra 120 annos protrahenda, prefixing this
title to his 5 Chapter. Qui aevo nostro praesenti ultra annos 120 supervixere.
Where he numbers up several that had then exceeded it. In the review
abovementioned of the eighth region of Italy, there were 2 persons found of 125
C. Pl nii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 49.
; and one at Bressello at the taxation of the Vespasians; and another at
Placentia that was elder by a year, i. e. 126 Ibidem.
. Felix Platerus late Professor at Basil also reports that his Grandfather was
126 Felcis Plateri Quaestion. Medicarum parodox, and eudox. Quaest. 74.
; and Dr. Lister says he spoke with one Robert Montgomery living at Skipton in
Yorkshire, but born in Scotland, of the same age Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 160.
; who yet were both exceeded by Ralph Lees of Totmonslow a sheapard of this
County who numbered 127 years; yet could give no account beside the providence
of God, of what might conduce to his Longevity (as he told my worthy Friend Dr.
Richard Morton who saw and discoursed him) but that he never took Tobacco, nor
Physic in his life, nor drank between meals, always alleviating his thirst by
rolling pebbles in his mouth: which what satisfaction these reasons could give,
let the Reader judge, he being an old man before ever Tobacco came into common
use; and never so sick in his life as to want Physic; nor sure could the last
conduce much, there being many that thus never drank between meals, that scarce
arrived to the moiety of this man's age.

101. Who yet was not so old as one Polzew of Cornwall, who as Mr. Carew tell
us extended his age to 130 Loco supra citato.
; and so did the old man of Eversden in Bedfordshire mentioned by Dr. Willet,
who dyed in An. 1600 yet could remember Bosworth field at the comeing in of
King Hen. 7. being then as he said about 15 years old Dr. Andrew Willet's
Hexapla in Genesis Chap. 5. v. 5.
; of which very age, in the aforesaid review of the eighth region of Italy they
found no less than four, as they did also that had arrived to 135 C. Plin^i
2^^. Not Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 49.
. L. Tertius of Bononia as Phlegon reports was likewise of that age; and he
says he saw one Faustus a servant to Caesar who was 136 Phleg. Trall. Lib. de
Longaev. cap. 4.
. In the same review just now mentioned, there were also found four of 137 Loco
supra citato.
; in which year of their age Levi the brother of Joseph, and Amram the father
of Moses and Aaron, both dyed; falling short of James Sands of Harbourn in this
County who dyed Dec. 6. 1588 Ex Registro Ecclesiae de Harbourn.
, having attained to the age of 140, and outlived 5 Leases of 21 years each,
made him after his marriage; and Dr. Lister tells us of an old man summoned as
a Witness in a cause out of Dent in Craven to the Assize at York An. 1664, that
wanted not half a year of the same age, yet could make fish hooks as small as
would take a trout with a single hair Philosop. Transact. Numb. 160.
. Which yet is not so much as is told us by Buchanan of a certain Scotchman,
quicentesimum quadragesimum annum agens, saevissimo mari in sua navicula
piscatum prodibat Geo. Buchanni Rerum Scotic. Hist. Lib. 1. in ipso fine.
. who at sevenscore years of age was able to go out a fishing in tempestuous
weather in his own little boat: though he wanted not much of Jacob himself who
was but 147.

102. L. Terentius of Bononia, and M. Apponius of Ariminum, as appeared by the
taxation of the Caesar's Vespasians both reckoned 150 years; to which age many
of the inhabitants of the mountain Tmolus, anciently called Tempsis (as
Mutianus testifies) ordinarily lived; at which age also Titus Fullonius, of
Bononia, likewise entr'd his name into the subsidy book, at the time that Cl.
Caesar held the general tax C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 48, 49.
; Arganthonius King of the Tartessians according to Phlegon was also 150 Phleg.
Trall. Lib. de Longaev. cap. 4.
; and Franciscus Alvares says he saw Albuna Marc chief Bishop of Ethiopia, who
was of the same age Rich. Verstegan's restitution of decayed Antiq. cap. 10. p.
253.
. Who yet all were exceeded by our famous Thomas Parr who was 151, being born
at Winnington in Shropshire, Anno 1483 the last of Edward 4, and living to 1634
the 9th. of Charles the first, 10 Kings and Queens reigns; and Epimenides the
Gnossian, as Theopompus affirms lived to 157 C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 7.
cap. 48.
. Which is probable enough, since Roger Bacon tells us, pluries experti sumus
nostris temporibus, quod homines rurales sine consilio Medicorum vixerunt
centum sexaginta annos Rog. Bacon de mirab. Potest. Art. and Not. p. 511. 512.
edit Basil. 1593.
. i. e. that they had frequent examples in his days of Country Swayns that
without the help of Physicians reached 160. But so have Princes too, for as
Pliny tells us Cynaras King of the Cyprians was of the same Age Loco supra
citato.
. Which I suppose may be enough sufficiently to demonstrat, that for above 3000
years downward, the length of man's age is nothing abated; not to mention the
fabulous improbable longevities, of Johannes Buttadaeus the wandering Jew De
Quo vid. Guidon. Bonati Astronomiae part. 1. Tract. 5. Consul. 141.
; Artesius the Philosopher; or the German mentioned by Roger Bacon, who by the
help of Art (as appeared by the Papal credentials) had prolonged his life to
500 years Loco supra citato.
: in comparison of whom, the Paracoussy of Florida; Xequepeer of Bengala; and
the other old Man mentioned by Ferdinand Lopes of Castegned; though all about
300, were but young men Dr. Hak^will's Appologie Lib. 3. Sect. 7.
.

103. Beside the remarkable Longevity of Men and Women solitarily considered,
we find it sometimes attending them jointly and in consort, both Man and Wife
being met with now and then of extraordinary ages. Thus as Thuanus informs us,
one Demetrius and his wife in the Low Countries, one being 103 and the other 99
years of age, having been married threescore and fifteen years, dyed within 3
hours space of one another, and were both buried at the same time at Delft in
Holland Jac. Aug. Thuani Historiar. Tem. 5. Lib. 134. ad An. 1605.
: just like one William May and his wife Joyce of Longdon in this County, who
dyed so near together that they were both buried in a day, being brought to
Church on the same Bier and laid in the same grave, he being 108, and she 98
years old: not forgetting that the wife of James Sands of Harbourn above
mentioned (who was 140) lived also to 120 years of age; which is more than what
is reported of Aquila and Priscilla, who lived together in such a happy
wedlock, but till they were a 100 each Lord Bacon's Hist. of life and death. p.
18.
.

104. Nor has extraordinary Longevity only attended married Couples: but
sometimes too (though perhaps a little more rarely) whole Families together,
whereof several Generations have been living at a time: thus as Thomas Ravenna
informs us, there was a Seaman in his time in the Venetian fleet, who though
threescore years of age, yet had his Father, Grandfather, and great
Grandfather still living, the eldest whereof was not 120 Tho. Rav. de vita
hominis ultra 120. annos protrahenda Cap. 5.
. To which though it be hard to bring a parallel instance, yet I met with one of
the kind that is somewhat remarkable, in the person of one Mr. Doody of
Hanchurch in this County, who was a Grandfather and a Grandchild at the same
time, i. e. he became a Grandfather himself before his own Grandfather dyed,
there being five generations living together. Which is much the same thing that
happened in the family of the right illustrious Princess the Lady Letice
Countess of Leicester, Eve, and Essex, Viscountess of Hereford, Baroness of
Denbigh, and Ferrars of Chartley; Sister to William Lord Knolles of Greys,
Viscount Wallingford and Earl of Banbury Knight. of the Garter, who had the
happiness to see living the Grandchildren of her Grandchildren; as is
declared in her Stemm at the Manor of Drayton Ex Chartularia honoratissimi Dni.
Thomae Vicecomitis de Weymouth Dni. Manerii de Drayton.


105. Now that there should be five generations living at a time, as in the
present examples; or six, as in the instance of Mary Cooper above mentioned, is
not indeed so wonderful; since if People marry young enough, it may well be
so: as in the case of my Lady Child in the County of Salop, who as I was
credibly informed being married at 12, had a Child in the 13th. year of her
age; which Child being married as young, had another also at 13, so that this
Lady was a Grandmother at 27, and might possibly have been a great
Grandmother at 40, a great-great-Grand-mother at 53, and a Beldam at 66: but
the marriages in our instances being not so early, the cases are the more
remarkable. However this case of my Lady Child, compared with that of the
Venetian Soldier mentioned by Ravenna will serve to show how many generations
it is possible may be existent at the same time: for if there may be six
generations whereof the eldest need not be above 66, and that 4 generations
have been living at a time, whereof the youngest has been 60, and the eldest
not 120, (which how much longer they continued we have no account) it is
plainly possible, that 9 generations may be existent together, as will plainly
also appear by dividing 120 by 13. Or in case a man should live to 160, as
Roger Bacon says 'twas common for Country men to do in his time Loco supra
citato.
: by the same rule it is evident, provided such a Man's offspring all marry so
young, that it is possible 12 generations of men may be all contemporaries.

106. Nor have many generations of the same family been only living at the same
time dispersedly here and there, but some times several of them in the same
house: thus at Horton-hay in this County, at one Goodman Stantons, there were 4
generations all living together, just like the matchless family of the
Fairfaxes of Barford within two miles of Warwick, whereof there were also 4
generations, and 3 of them double, that for diverse years dwelt in the same
house together, and eat at the same table, the pariculars whereof are put into
Latin verse by Tho. Dugard Rector of the place See England described by Edw.
Leigh in the Preface.
And not only Familys, but some Villages and parishes have also been remarkable
for Longevity, there having been 4 buried at Horton not many years since that
made up sixteenscore, and 7 or 8 at Ashley all above fourscore. The Worshipful
William Leveson Gower Esquire (as was mentioned above Chap. 2.. 25
) having 4 Tenants all living at Cocknage when I was there, that one with
another made up 360; nor is it long since that Mr. Biddulph of Biddulph had 12
Tenants all living at a time in the adjoining parishes of Biddulph and Horton,
whose ages put together made 1000 years. Which comes pretty near the
Morris-dance of Herefordshire mentioned by my Lord Bacon performed by 8 men,
temp. Jac. 1. whose ages computed together made 800 years Lord Bacons Hist. of
life and death p. 20.
; or that other temp. Car. 1. performed in the same County by 5 Men and 5
Women, whose ages jointly together amounted to 1000; what some of them wanted
of 100, in both instances, being supplied by others that exceeded it as much.

107. Beside extreme old age, we must not forget to reckon amongst the
forerunners of death, those signal warnings that some families have, before the
approaches of it, such as the knocking before the death of any of the family of
Captain Basil Wood mentioned in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire Chap. 8,
33, 34, 35, 36.
, which has not only been further confirmed since my writing that History, by
the like signal given before the death of the said Captain Wood himself: but
from its attendance in like manner upon the family of Cumberford of Cumberford
in this County; three knocks being always heard at Cumberford-Hall, before the
decease of any of that family, though the party dyeing be at never so great a
distance. Thus I was told also at Ammington by the Worshipful Sebright
Repington Esquire that a noise somewhat like a Drumm was heard about 8 or 9 a Clock
at night, for 6 or 8 weeks together in a stack of Chimneys of his house at the
death of his first Lady, which they say is always heard upon departure of any
of the family of Burdet, whence that Lady came. And thus as I was informed
concerning another family in this County, there is also a noise of bees heard
in one of the farms belonging to it, before the death of any of them, of which
it is common for the Tenants to give them notice when perhaps there is none of
the family ill, yet in a little time some of them certainly dye; as those of
the family of Oxenham in the County of Devon likewise infallibly do, upon the
appearance of a bird with a white breast fluttering about their bedds Epist.
Hoelianae, Vol. 1. Sect. 6. Epist. 9.
.

108. In the very article of death I have met with nothing observable, nor
indeed any thing in the grave it self, but certain bones of an extraordinary
make and size: at Tamworth in the Charnel house, I was shown a great collection
of Skulls, amongst which there were many, that had a Suture that came down
from the Coronalis through the middle of the forehead to the top of the nose:
these as the Clerk told me were all Women's skulls, and that this was a certain
Characteristick whereby one might know a Woman's skull from a Man's: but by his
favor I guess they might as well be Men's as theirs, provided they dyed young:
for I find this frontal suture is but a continuation of the Sagittalis, which
in all children till two or three years old, and in some till eight or ten
(more rarely in adult persons) is thus continued (cutting the Coronalis) down
to the very ridg of the nose; seldom any footsteps of it appearing after those
ages Isbr. Diemerbroeck Anatom. Corpor. human. Lib. 9. cap. 4.
: though Diemerbroeck acquaints us that he had a skull by him of a person that
dyed at 50, wherein this frontal suture was very perfectly to be seen, but then
the Coronalis and Hypsiloides were both grown up Ibidem.
.

109. In the digging open a Low on Ecton hill near Warslow in this County,
there were found men's bones as I was told of an extraordinary Size, which were
preserved for some time by one Mr. Hamilton Vicar of Alstonfield; and I was
informed of the like dugg up at Mare in the foundation of the Tower; but these
being buried again, or otherwise disposed of before I came there, I can say
little to them. Yet that sometimes men are produced of unusual statures as well
in excess as defect, I received a certain proof from Mr. William Feak Alderman
of Stafford, who gave me the jaw bone of a Man or Woman, with a tooth yet
remaining in it, near double the magnitude of those men ordinarily have, which
was found in the South Chancel of the Collegiat Church of St. Marie in
Stafford, where now lies the gravestone of Ann the wife of Humphry Perry;
which is enough to show that Mankind is no more abated in stature than it is in
age, the world still affording us a Goliath now and then, as well as of old; as
was more fully proved above. 50, 51, 52.
.

110. And thus I had finished the eighth Chapter, but that I must beg leave
first to acquaint the Reader that since the printing the 12. of it, I have
sound that one Sr. Robert de Broc who was Marshal of England and Forester of
Cannoc temp. Ric. 1. might well have been numbered amongst the men of Valor of
this County Sr. William Dugdal's Antiquities of Warwicksh. Illust. p. 374.
especially if this were the man (as some think) who was so hardy in those
days, as in disgrace of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Cant. to cut of his horses
tail as he past through Stroud near Rochester in Kent according to Polydore
Virgil, or at Canterbury it self as the Quadriloge of his life: for which he
amongst others was publicly excommunicated on Christmas day by the Archbishop
himself, and all the Offsprings of his Abettors cursed with tails to posterity
Ranulfi de Diceto Ymagines Historiarum in An. 1171. See also Mr. Lambards
Perambulation of Kent, in Stroud.
. Whence some think it has come to pass that all the Inhabitants of Kent, and
all Englishmen abroad, by way of Mockery are call Sileni or long-tailes to
this day. And that it should have been remembered amongst the Lawyers, that John
Tailor Dr. of Laws abovementioned. 54. born at Barton in this County, was Mr.
of the Rolls temp. Hen. 8. that Sr. Peter Warburton father to Mr. Warburton of
Abbots-Bromley, was one of the Justices of the Kings bench temp. Eliz. and Jac.
And that Richard Weston Esquire grandfather to the present Mr. Weston of Rugeley
was one of the Barons of the Exchequer temp. Car. 1.

CHAP. IX. Of Arts.
1. BEfore I enter upon considering any particular Art, it may not perhaps be
unnecessary to acquaint the Reader, that Arts are not treated of here as a
(...), appendix, or accession to the Work, but as properly falling under a
Natural History; Art being nothing else but Nature restrained, forced, or
fashioned, in her matter or motions: things of Art (as my Lord Bacon well
observes) not differing from those of Nature in form or essence, but in the
efficient only a. In the handeling whereof I shall still pursue my
forementioned Method, and treat first of such. Arts as relate to the Heavens
and Air; then of fire and waterworks, and thirdly such as tend to the
improvement or better management of Earths, Stones, or Plants; and lastly of
such as any way respect Men or Women; under which I comprehend the new
invention or advancement of any Mechanic or other Art; which I doubt not may
suffice for the following Chapter.

2. And first in relation to the Heavens and Air, I have met with nothing new
here, either concerning a further discovery of the Magnitudes, or determination
of the Motions of any of the heavenly bodies; unless a new sort of Dyal (such
an one at lest as was so to me) that I met with at the house of the Worshipful
Alexander Harcourt Esquire of Ranton in this County; made of three boards
representing a book opened, six inches deep; with some of the middle leaves
standing up between the Covers and some other leaves at six inches distance on
each hand, all faceing the South, and so elevated as to stand parallel with the
Axis of the World. Upon the East side of which middle leaves, the hour lines of
4 5 6 and 7 were drawn at their due distance to one another, the leaves and
cover of the East side of the book being the Gnomon, to them; and on the West
leaves and covers, the hour lines of 8, 9, 10, 11. the middle leaves of the
book, elevated as above being their Gnomon; till the Sun comeing to the
Meridian and striking them at right angles, casts no shade at all, which gives
the hour of 12 as in other dyalls. Thence the Sun now having cut the Meridian
(these middle leaves becoming De Augm. Scient. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
the Gnomon again) throws the shade upon the Eastern leaves of the book; and
there describes the hours 1, 2, 3, 4. and thence on the West side of the middle
leaves 5, 6, 7, 8. the Western covers being the Gnomon to them. Which sort of
dyall being easy and pretty, and I think new (at least not commonly known) I
thought worthy the mentioning.

3. As I should also have done a most compendious, instrument first invented
and made by the Worshipful Francis Wolverstan of Statfold Esquire which he most
properly calls a dyall Quadrant; whereby he not only obtains with speed, ease
and exactness, the declination of all planes, with their verticals whether
inclining, reclining, or declining, without giving himself the usual trouble of
observing the obliquity or irregularity of them: but with great facility and
accuracy also marks out the Center and substile of the designed dyall, with the
several hourlines, and parts of hours, that the plane will admit. In short by
this instrument he performs all sorts of dyalling with much less trouble than
was anciently used. Which I should (I say) more particularly have described,
but that it has been printed already though surreptitiously in An. 1668 by one
A. M. under his own name, without either the acquaintance or consent of the
first Contriver; and that the like has since also been published by diverse
other Authors. Which is all concerning the Heavens and Air: but that my worthy
frind Mr. Walter Jennings Rector of Church-Eyton showed me a very easy and
cogent Experiment, proving the force of the rarefaction of the latter, by the
Sand of an Hourglass, which running very freely, was stopped by holding a coal to
the lower part of the glass; which as soon as withdrawn, the Sand ran again
freely, and so toties quoties.

4. It being very improbable, that there is any other fire but such as that we
call Culinary (that in the Concave of the Moon being a mere fancy of the
Ancients) the Arts relating to the fire, must follow those of the Air. Amongst
which it is not of the least consequence, that they improve their land here
much by the help of fire, burning their turf first to ashes, either in their
houses, or after the manner as described Chap. 3.. 14, which they call Ess, and
then laying them on their Meddow, Rye, or Barley grounds, which as some are of
opinion bring more profit to the husbandman, than any other dung or soil
whatever: the steril juices according to Virgil being destroyed in these, --
Omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium, atque exsudat inutilis humor Georgic. Lib. 1. v. 87, 88.
:
and the fertile salts only remaining, which dispose the land principally to the
production of Seed, whereas the dung of beasts and most other Soils, tend more
to the sending up a rank straw or haum, and breeding of weeds. Upon which
account says the same Virgil. Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros,
Atque levem stipulam crepitantibus urere flammis Ibid. v. 84, 85.
.
and Palladius in his Chapter de Sterquilinio, numbering up the several
composts, concludes at last, porcinum pessimum, Cineres optimi Pallad. Rutilii
de re Rustica Lib. 1. Tit. 33.
.

5. Upon these ashes, especially in windy weather, to prevent their blowing
away, it is a common thing to cast parings of the earth near by, upon the most
flaming parts, then turf or stubble again, then earth, and so stratum super
stratum, and this they call burn-beating, and in some places Denshiring their
land. Which I guess was also in use anciently, Virgil also asserting that they
did in his time, Effaetos cinerem immundum jactare per agros Georgic. Lib. 1.
v. 81.
. And in a close about high-On, I saw them add to their ashes and earth, all
the bushes, furse, broom, fern and other rubbish, they could find about the
ground, which burnt together, so calcined the earth above and below, carrying
away the cold steril juices, and substituting in its room such fertile Salts,
that it yielded thereupon an increase far exceeding the charge and labor
bestowed on it, and so I was told it would continue to do, if laid upon dry
land for 7 years together: but if upon moist washy land not above two. They
also mix their ashes sometimes with Lime, which also belongs to this place
being prepared by fire, which is so good a compost for their poor heathy land,
that they often think it worth while to carry it twenty miles for this purpose:
but of this no more, because of the manner of preparing it, its qualities, etc.
at large elsewhere Chap. 4. sect;. 5, 6, 7, 8.
.

6. Nor do they only burn their turf, earth, bushes, and fern, to improve
their land, but the latter of these in June when green, for another use: which
that they may perform the better, they most commonly do it on the side of a
hill (as I saw them near Marbrook) lyeing to a fresh gale of wind. I was told
they burnt it green, that the ashes might not fly away during the operation,
which they certainly would do, if the fern were suffered first to wither
before it is burnt: but I guess the true reason may rather be, that whilst it
is green, it has an oilyness in it which does not quite consume, but remaining
mixed with its ashes, makes them the fitter for the use they are ordinarily put
to; these made up into balls of about 3 inches diameter by the poorer sort of
people with warm water, being sold at 5 or 6 a penny to wash their buckings
with, all the year about; wood ashes not being easy to be had, in a Country
where their fuel is so generally coal, as it is in this.

7. The Art of making Fryingpans may also be referred hither, the Secret in
great measure consisting in the regulating the heat, that is given the plates
whereof they are made, before they are brought to the Anvil. Which together
with other matters relating to the trade being found so difficult, that a
Novice many times is little the better though he serve a double Apprenticeship
to it; and so ingenious and indeed wonderful, that I thought it incredible,
what I heard related of it; I shall not scruple to give the Reader the full
process thereof. First then in order to them, there are flat round plates
hammered out of bars at a forge for that purpose at the parish of Keel in this
County, not far from the fair Mansion of the Worshipful and judicious William
Sneyd Esquire a worthy Benefactor to this work, which is here represented Tab. 28.
the forge little differing from those of other Iron-works carrying a hammer of
about 500 weight. In hammering of this flatwork they beat the plates first one
by one, then two, three, or four together as they grow broader and thinner,
which stick not together, having not a heat given them sufficient for that: yet
such an one they have, as will continue longer (the plates being forged many of
them together) than if each plate had been forged single with a much higher
heat, by which means the work is done not only with greater expedition, but
profit too; the plates in this manner not only mutually preserving their heat,
but keeping each other also from scaleing, or being beaten too much away into
Cinders or wast.

8. When the flat-work is thus finished at the Forge at Keel, they are then
brought to another forge at New Castle under Lyme, where John Holland, who is
Maste^ of both forges, works them into shape, nine fryingpan-plates being
commonly laid upon one another, and claspt together by turning up 4 Labells
which are ordinarily fixed to the lower plate, and so turned one within another
like a nest of Crucibles or Boxes, the lowermost being always the biggest, and
the uppermost the least; the whole nine, being turned nine times sooner than
one single Pan: for the nine together mutually preserve their heat so long,
that they are all turned during one heat; whereas one single pan will cool so
fast, that it will require at least nine heats, before it can be forged, nor
will it then be a good fryingpan neither: for it will so Scale away in the
heating and forgeing, that it will at last be but a thin infirm Pan. Now that
which renders this Art of making fryingpans so difficult, is not only the
bringing them to a just heat, which shall hold a sufficient time and yet not
make them liable to stick in the hammering; but the number of hammers used in
this work, which are not less than twenty of several sorts: which so few know
how to manage, or are capable of learning; that there are but two Master
Drying Pan makers (as I am credibly informed) in the whole Kingdom: one, here
at New Castle, and another at Wansworth in Surrey. They make also Dripping-Pans
at these Forges, the plates being work't at the former, and the pans turned at
the latter: but these being forged singly, and not in nests like the
frying-pans, there is not the same difficulty, and consequently not the same
ingenuity required, in the fabricating of them.

9. Also at New Castle under Lyme, the Tiles burnt in a Kill the usual way
being found not to last: one Mr. Thomas Wood of the same Town first contrived
to burn them (which we may look upon as an Art relating to fire) in a Potters
Oven: wherein he made them so good and lasting, that notwithstanding they have
been put to the hardship of dividing the parts of Gardenknots, to endure not
only the perpetual moisture of the earth, but frost, snow, and all sorts of
weather: yet they few of them decay, scarce 5 Tiles in 500 having failed in 20
years time; so that now he has been followed by all the Country thereabout. It
may also be looked upon as an Art not altogether foreign to fire, that Prince
Rupert showed at Stafford in the time of the Civil-warr temp. Car. 1. where
standing in Captain Richard Sneyd's garden at the high-house there, at about 60
yards distance, he made a shot at the weathercock upon the Steeple of the
Collegiat Church of St. Mary with a screwed Horsmans pistol, and single bullet,
which pierced its tail, the hole plainly appearing to all that were below:
which the King then present judging as a Casualty only, the Prince presently
proved the contrary by a second shoot to the same effect: the two holes through
the weather-cocks tail (as an ample testimony of the thing) remaining there to
this day.

10. To the fireworks succeed the Arts relating to waters; whereof some are
for profit only, others for pleasure: amongst the former of these, the way of
making a firm substantial Milldamm is not of the least consideration: which
they do here especially if they meet with a quick running sand by laying the
foundation with unslaked Lime, which upon slaking amongst such sand turns as
hard as stone, and so gives a sure foundation. But such as will not be at this
charge, lay it first with water clay, and then a stratum of Moss, then clay
again, and then Moss, and so S. S. S. yet ramming them together so close that
they become as it were a mixture. The superstructure next the water they face
with turf, which again they face with a thatch of heath or ling, that enduring
the water the best of any thing; then they lay gravel next, except near the
Floodgate, where it must be clay. In the middle they lay a Key of clay, and
gravel again toward the back of the damm, and then face it there too with turf,
but not with ling, because the water beats not on it there, though sometimes
they mend a breach also behind with it. Which is all relating to Mills; but
that at Hamsted Hall there is a Corn-mill that pumps water up into a lofty
house near it, whence all the Offices of the Hall are served, the Pump working
as the Mill-wheele goes to grind the Corn; much after the same manner as at the
Water-house near the bridge at London. And that at Mr. Parker's of Park-hall in
the parish of Caverswall, I was showed an Oat-Mill, that husk't the Oats and
winnow'd them, and then ground them to meal: the last Mill that ground them,
being not turned immediately by the water, but by two wheels, whereof one was
fastened to the runner of the first Mill, and the second to the runner of the
grinding-Mill, a great rope interceding.

11. This, I say had been all relating to Mills, except we may add, (as I think
we may) that at the Honorable Harry Gray's at Enfield Hall, the Spits in the
Kitchen are turned with a Mill, the water being let through a Cock of above an
inch bore into a little wheel of wood, made with Ladles to receive it exactly
after the manner of an overshot Mill, which being placed without at the back of
the Kitchen Chimney, turns a spindle of Iron that passes through the
brick-wall, at the end whereof is a round wooden box which receives a
Jack-line, that goes also through another box which turns a second spindle
above in the Chimney, that also carries a box at the other end next the
Mantle-tree, in which go the lines that turn the spitts: all which the Reader
may readily apprehend by Tab. 32. Fig. 1. where a. represents the Cock whence
the water runs. b.b. the Mill-wheel that receives it. c.c. the Spindle that
passes through the Chimney, and turns the first box at the end of it. d. the
lines that pass between the boxes of the first and second Spindle. e.e. the
lines that pass between the boxes of the second Spindle, and those of the
Spitts.


12. But before we leave the Arts belonging to the waters, we must also
remember they have an Art in this County of making good Ale: which being a
liquid, and nothing else but boiled water impregnated with malt, must be
referred hither. In the management whereof they have a knack of fineing it in
three days time to that degree, that it shall not only be potable, but as clear
and palatable as one would desire any drink of this kind to be: which though
they are unwilling to own it, I guess they do by putting Alum or Vinegar in
to it whilst it is working, which, as Dr. Willis asserts, will both stop the
fermentation and precipitate the Lee, so as to render it as potable, as when it
has stood a competent time to ripen Tho. Willisii Diatrib. de Febribus cap. 3.
The former whereof, as I am also informed by my ingenious firiend Mr. William
Elward Rector of Bignor [anciently Bykenore] in Kent, is made use of at
Frinsted in that County, to fine their water, where they have little but that
of ponds, which is ordinarily muddy: and that it is a most effectual remedy for
curing Cider of a flying Lee which sometimes attends it, and cannot be removed
by ordinary means; as he has found by experience, having cured such Cider so
successfully thereby, that it has been drank with good credit amongst competent
judges.

13. As for the Waterworks of pleasure, there are none very extraordinary in
this County. In the Court of my Lord Ferrers's house at Chartley there is a
fair ancient fountain, whereof the the Reader may have a view if he please to
look back to Tab. 5. And in the curious garden South of Trentham Hall there is
another that sends up a large Column of water falling into a basin of 10 yards
diameter, which from the parlour (the folding doors opening just against it)
yields a pleasant prospect: but much better would it be, were it made to toss a
golden ball (as easily it might) and the designed Vista were cut through the
adjoining wood; which lying upon a riseing ground, and taking up a mile in
length must necessarily give it a great advantage. But the best Waterworks
here, and the greatest variety of them, are at Sr. Richard Ashleys at Pateshull
in this County, where within a large Rotundo fenced about with a high wall of
brick, opening with fair Gates of Iron-work against the Front of the house,
there is a curious large fountain that throws up a column of water near an inch
diameter much higher than the former, which falls into a basin underneath, also
proportionably larger, yiedling a most grateful prospect not only toward the
house, but to the walks above it. And in a garden on the left hand of the
passage to the house is a Cock to which belongs another Instrument, to be put
on or taken off at pleasure, that turns after the manner that the pipe does in
our common water Engines, which will cast water any way according to the
discretion of him that governs it. In the garden North of the house the water
passes through a barrel into the Cistern in the Bird-cage, into which were
there put as occasion should serve, now and then a piece of Turnsole; it would
prettily represent a vessel of Claret always running. And Eastward of the house
is a long fair Canale, walled about with squared stone, at the South end
whereof is a delicat Grotto designed, which when finished will add much to the
perfection of this Seat, of which more hereafter.

14. Next the waterworks, follow the Arts belonging to Earths, which chiefly
respect the tillage, or formation of them; matters according to some scarce
worth consideration: but I must crave leave to inform them, that Agriculture
was ever of high esteem, having exercised the pens of many learned Men, and
challenges our attention not only in point of profit, but difficulty too: the
products of the earth being the most universally beneficial, and its true
culture requiring as nice and critical a judgment, as any Art whatever: which
made Columella declare, illud procul vero quod plerique crediderint, facillimam
esse ac nullis acuminis Rusticationem, that it was a great mistake that there
was no difficulty or cunning in Agriculture Jun. Mother. Columellae de re
Rustica in praefat ad. Silvinum. in fine.
: the true manner of preparing the several sorts of land; fitting them with
their proper manures and Seeds; and curing them of their diseases; quid recuset
collis, quid compestris positio, quid Sylvester ager, quid humidus and
graminosus, quid siccus and spurcus; asking so long an uninterrupted a study,
that the same Columella tells us he feared, ne supremus ante Se dies occupet,
quam universam disciplinam ruris possit cognoscere In cadem praesatione non
long a fine.
. That his whole life would not suffice to acquire it.

15. It Is true indeed that in his time, as well as now, this rural learning
turpi consensu (as he is pleased to phrase it) was in a manner neglected: the
good man complaining, and not without reason, that in all other Enterprises,
every body did consultissimum Rectorem adhibere, take advice of the most
skillfull in the matter in hand. Sola res rustica, quae sine dubitatione
proxima, and quasi consanguinea sapientiae est; tam discentibus egeat, quam
magistris. And a little after, Agricolationis neque Doctores qui se
profiterentur, neque discripulos cognovi Idem in cadem praefat. sub. initium.
. i. e. that he neither knew any Professors of Agriculture, nor Scholars that
learned it. Which yet was the fault of those times, as well as of these: for no
question, we might as well and perhaps more reasonably give a Guinea or more
according to the length of the journey, to a Land-Doctor to instruct us how to
manage or cure the diseases of a piece of ground; as to a Physician to direct
the health of our bodies; or to a Lawyer for his advice in our plaints or
defenses. I say more reasonably, for that such Doctors as these (as the same
Author argues) seem the more useful and necessary to a Common Walth: Nam sine
Medicis, atque etiam sine Causidicis olim satis felices fuere, futuraeque sunt
urbes: At sine Agricultoribus nec consistere mortales, nec ali posse manifestum
est. For that Citys have flourish't well enough either without Physicians or
Lawyers; but that they cannot subsist without good Husbandmen is plain and
evident Ibidem.
.

16. It being clear then that the best methods of Cultivating, appropriating
Seeds and manures, and cureing the diseases of land, are of consideration; it
remains that we give a particular account how each of these are managed here,
whether the lands are Clay, Marly, Sandy, Gravelly, light mould; or Heathy,
Broomy, Gorsy, Gouty, Boggy, or Cold black-land. And first of Clay ground:
which if it lie in common field as generally it does in this County, they have
it always in tillage, sowing it two years, and letting it lie fallow the third:
they lay it in ridges, or otherwise according to the temper of the land, and
make their fallows about the latter end of March or beginning of April. After
this a little before the second tilth or plowing, which is commonly about the
middle of June, they give it its manure, which is generally Cow or Horse-dung,
unless when folded with Sheep, and then immediately spread it, and cast it under
furrow with the plow, lest the rain and Sun should weaken it. About the latter
end of August they plow it again to kill the weeds, and turn up the manure,
that so they may return it again to their seed at the last plowing when they
sow, which is usually the week before or after Michaelmass.

17. The land being thus prepared, they sow it with wheat, which is its most
proper grain, and if a strong stiff clay, or cold land, with red Lammas, or
bearded wheat; otherwise, with white Lammas; and sometimes with both mixed, it
yiedling (as some think) the best that way; allowing of either two strike to an
Acre, whereof if they have twenty strike per Acre again, they think it a good
increase. The next grain they sow in their common feilds after a crop of wheat,
if the land be in good heart, are usually Beans, the French white and red, or
horse-beans; according to that of Cato, Fabam in locis validis non calamitosis
serito. i. e. that beans ought to be sown in the strongest healthiest land M.
Catonis Lib. de re Rustica tit. 35.
. But if otherwise Peace, either white or gray, or peace and beans mixed; for
these they plow at Candle-mass, and sow in the decrease of the Moon, having
found (as they say) by long experience that they Codd much better, and are not
so apt to run into straw: for seed they allow four strike of peace, and five of
beans to a statute Acre, whereof if they have again 20 strike of the former,
and 30 of the latter per Acre, they reckon they have had a competent Crop. And
this is the manner of tillage that is also given light or hasel mould as well
as Clay, wherever it is found and laid in common field: both also lyeing
fallow the third year, for wheat again.

18. But if either Clay, or light-mould, lie out of the commonfield, so that
they may be tilled at the pleasure of any single Proprietor, they are also both
capable of improvement by marle, especially by the dice or slat-marle; which
with rain runs like lime, and never binds the stiffest Clay; but rather
loosens it so, that after it has afforded eight or nine cropps, it will yield
very good grass: whereas clay-marle laid on the same, so binds the surface of
them; that though they will not fail indeed of giving seven or eight crops of
Corn, yet they are renderd hereby ill disposed at lest for grass: unless the
ground after all be well muck't, or manured with muck and lime mix't together,
which some lay upon a fallow, others when they plow for corn; either of which
ways it will yield 2 or 3 crops more, and so mollify the binding quality of
this marle, that the land will yield as good grass as if otherwise improved. If
it be a mixed sort of land, either of Clay and Gravel, or Clay and Sand, which
is not often very rich, they give it also much the same tillage they do their
Clay and light-mould, by marleing it, etc. only they sow it with Muncorn or
Miscellane in the place of wheat: and this is that sort of land they call in
the Moorelands their Main-land, which is indeed the best they have, there being
little wheat sown there, because no clay-land, such as at Heywood, Hixon,
Marchington, Rolleston, Wheaten-Aston, etc.

19. And as for pure Sandy gravelly ground, such as about Swinerton, Hatton,
and Beech; which will naturally bear nothing but Rye, French-wheat, or Oats,
nor these neither unless well muck't, and then not above three years together,
but it must rest again; by the help of these marles (used as above) lime, and
good muck, they are made as good for all sorts of corn, bearing as many crops,
as any land whatever: which marles they lay on either upon the green turfe, or
upon fallows, which at some places at lest they make in December and January,
but they account it the best of the two, to lay it on the turfe, quite contrary
to Pliny, who says that all ground must be plowed first, before any sort of
marle be laid on it, that it may be the sooner impregnated C. Plinii 2di. Not.
Hist. Lib. 17 cap. 8.
: which they say here is of so ill consequence (it being the nature of marle to
work downward) that if you have not a skillfull plowman, you may loose all
your marle in two crops whereas if you lay it on the green sword, it
incorporates with your land but gradually, and is so much better preserved. Nor
is it any objection, that by this way of manage they loose their grass that
year; for if they spread their marle as soon as laid on, the grass immediately
springs through it: but admitting they loose a little grass the first year, yet
upon account they will have double the quantity the next, and much the better,
this way is still the more preferable.

20. But whether soever way of these they choose to marle their land, they make
their fallow (as I said) in order to sowing in December or January: and in the
lataer end of June or beginning of July they stir their fallows, and then (if
new-broken ground) they cagel it with harrows to break the turf, and then plow
it again to lay it in order against September, when they sow it with wheat,
which they do in the beginning of the Month, if their land be cold, with
red-Lammas, or Pollard-wheat, that enduring cold best: but if it be warm sound
land, they let it alone to the latter end of the Month, and then sow it with
white-Lammas or Poland-wheat, sowing them both under furrow, and allowing of
each two strike to an Acre, as in the common-fields. After their wheat is off
the land, they plow in the stubble in December, and if the weather proves
frosty to mellow it, they seldom plow again till April, when they sow it next
with barley, and amongst the several sorts of that grain, if the land be any
thing rank, with sprat barley; but if otherwise, with the long-ear'd or common
barley; whereof the former is esteemed the bolder grain, and makes better
malt: but the latter yeildeth a better increase: though some think they yield
best when sown mixed. For Seed, they allow three strike to an Acre, which
generally yields them about thirty again.

21. The next grain they sow on their marled lands after Barley, are usually
peace, for which they plow but once, viz. in the beginning of February, and sow
then too: allowing for seed three strike to the Acre. And next after peace (if
they intend for six cropps) they sow wheat again, upon the brush (as they call
it) i. e. upon the peace stubble; sowing their wheat first, and then plowing it
in under furrow, which many times proves as good a crop, as the first. The fifth
year they sow barley husbanded as before: and then for the last Croop, red
Oats: and so lay it down again. Not but that they could, and do many times,
take two or three cropps more, intermixing cropps of beans, and sometimes
Vetches according as discretion directs them; but that they think it better to
leave their land in some tolerable heart, which will then bear such grass after
it is laid down, as will feed beef and mutton to a good mercatable fatness.

22. For the heathy-land of this County, it is seldom enclosed; but when they
intend it for tillage, which is never for above five years neither, and then it
is thrown open to the Commons again. But when they do enclose any part of it
for this purpose, they generally proceed in the manner following. First they
stock up the heath with mattocks, etc. and then fallow it in Winter, and in the
Summer ensuing give it its proper manure, which is Lime prepared as before
described Chap. 4. allowing four loads to each Statute Acre, each load
containing four quarters of Lime: which when slaked or quenched, is spread on
the ground with shovels, and plowed in under furrow about the middle of
September; and in the latter end of it, or beginning of October, the land being
thus prepared, sowed with Rye, allowing for seed two strike to the Acre, which
if it yield them twenty five strike again, as commonly it does, they reckon
they receive a competent increase.

23. After Rye, they sow Barley upon this heathy sort of Land, in order to
which they make their fallows about Candlemass, and give it another plowing in
April and then sow it, affording for seed three strike to an Acre, which
generally yields them thirty again. And next Barley, white peace; for which they
plow but once, and that is in March; and then sow them, allowing three strike
to an Acre. Fourthly after peace, they sow Oats on this land, either red, or
white, if it be in good heart; but if poor and week, black-oats; for either of
which one plowing is sufficient (which generally is in March) and so are 4
strike of Corn for seed. Lastly, they sow oats again (for their common heathy
grounds will seldom afford above one Crop of barley) and then their enclosures
are thrown open to the commons again.

24. In the Moorelands they sometimes Lime this heathy sort of land three or
four years before they plow it, I suppose for the same reason that some lay
their marle on the green-sword, Lime also working downward: others plow in the
heath it self under furrow, only harrowing the surface of the reverse of the
turfe, then sowing, and then harrowing it again: and the year following
harrowing and sowing as before: letting the heath in the mean time still remain
under, to be fully killed and rotted, and enjoying two cropps from one plowing,
which has been often done at Ipston in this County. But the best way in most
men's opinions hereabout to manage this land, is to digg the turf and burn it
upon the place in May, and to blend the Ess with Lime before Michaelmass, and
then plowe it, and sow the spring following: for this way their land will last
4 years, and give them 4 cropps in this order; first a crop of Barley, then
Oats, then Rye, and then Oats again; and then laid down as long, may be plowed
again, which they do but once for any grain whatever all over the Moorelands.

25. Their broomy, gorsy or fursy, hot Sandy land, they first clear of those
encumbrances, either by stocking them up with the Mattock, or drawing them up
by the roots by a certain instrument (which is much the quicker way) that I saw
at the Red-Lyon at Brereton in this County, made like a strong Lever, armed at
about 18 inches or two foot from the greater end, with an iron hook or
demi-pheon ingrail'd within, as they are commonly in Heraldry; having on the
other side, but not diametrally opposite, also another hook fixed, like our
barbarous figure of 7, as in Tab. 32. Fig. 2. with which, putting the greater
hook under the branches of broom, furses, or bushes, and if stronger than
ordinary, returning them under the second hook to prevent slipping, and then
setting their shoulder under the further end (the instrument being about 3
yards long) they easily prize up bushes, furses, or broom by the very roots.
This being done they then manure it with marle, which does not only so
fertilize it, as that it shall yield the husbandman 7 or 8 cropps, but as some
conceive frees it from the annoyance of these plants for ever after: though for
my part I believe it is rather the long tillage that usually follows this
manure, than the marle that does it: for let such land be tilled but for 4 or 5
cropps, and then be laid down, this trumpery will certainly return again
(especially the gorse) though not so full as before.

26. The manure being laid on, they plow and sow this as the heathy lands are,
only in some places the broomy hot sandy land, they first sow with French or
Buck wheat, for which they make their fallows in winter, and stir them May
ensueing, allowing one strike to the Acre, which generally affords them sixty
again, and so brings their land in order for Rye, that they sow it upon it
after once plowing, allowing the same quantity of seed as above, and expecting
the same return. Their gouty, moorish, peaty, cold black land, they husband
also much after the same manner they do the heathy lands in the Moorelands,
only they burn the earth to a greater depth; yet these will bear little else
but Oats; white Oats upon the gouty; and black, upon the moorish and cold black
lands; these being the terrae cariosae, the moist spungy lands that Cato warns
all people to be well aware of. Terram cave cariosam tractes M. Catonis. Lib.
de re Rustica, tit. 34.
.

27. Having done with the methods of ordering their lands, let us next consider
their manures and seeds a little more particularly in their quantites and
choice. As to the former whereof, I find they use a great latitude, especially
in their Cow, horse, or mixen dung; which Men many times lay on not so much
according to their judgment, as according to the stock they have of it. Nor is
the condition of the soil altogether to be unreguarded: for I find (for
Example in marling their lands) that upon their sound grounds whether Clay or
Gravelly, they seldom lay above eight or nine score, or two hundred loads on an
Acre: whereas if it be cold black land; loose and sandy; or loose wormey
ground; they will commonly lay on three, nay I was told of some that laid on
four hundred loads: and indeed for such land as that, it cannot be over-marled.
Where by the way let it be noted, that though I say they lay on 400 loads, yet I
intend no more than on the Statute Acre, and not the customary Acre they have
in some places amongst their Copyhold lands, which is of no certain quantity;
it containing sometimes at lest 7 Statute Acres, and at other places again
perhaps not above one.

28. But though there is little danger of overmarling such sorts of lands, yet of
some others there may: and therefore in some places they always observe the
thickness of their mold above the Catbrain (as they call it) i. e. a sort of
barren clay and stone mixed; which if they find but thin, they marle that land
proportionably less; but if thick, they also marle it accordingly: for to lay a
great deal of marle upon thin land, will produce but a mean, if any cropp at
all. In short, this sort of improvement howsoever variously used, stands
recommended to us, not only from it is long and continual use here amongst us,
ever since the days of Pliny, who expressly says, that the Britans used it in
his time; but from its keeping the ground in heart beyond all other composts;
Pliny asserting that it will hold for 50 years together C. Plinii 2di. Not.
Hist. Lib. 17. cap. 7.
. We find indeed now that it does not last to any great effect above 8 or 9
cropps, yet I believe the land may be the better for it for so long time: for
this always in some measure keeps up the heart of the soil, and does not eat it
out after the manner of Lime. They generally marle their lands in May and June,
but for no other reason, but that they have most leisure then, it being betwixt
seed-time, and harvest.

29. Beside the manures above mentioned, there are several others I met with in
the Country that must not be past by: such as dung, lime, and mould, rotted
together, which laid upon arable land makes a good improvement. At another
place I was told by an experienced Farmer, that he caused all the Chamber lie
made in his house to be thrown on his dunghill, which he professed he found to be
very beneficial. Another told me he had laid drift-Sand taken out of the roads
on his low black land to very good effect. But the oddest sort of manure that
ever I met with, was at Harbourn in this County, where they sometimes sow
Vetches upon their poorest land, with no design to reap them, but to plow them
in under furrow before they are kidded, merely as a manure, where rotting away
they so fertilize the land, that it certainly brings a good cropp the next
year. This at first I must confess I thought a strange piece of husbandry, but
upon consultation found it to be no new thing; Varro and Palladius both
acquainting us of old, that they did not only Viciam pabularem, but also
Lupinum, cum necdum siliculam cepit, ac nonnunquam fabalia, si ager macrior
est, pro stercore inarare M. Terent. Varronis de re Rustica Lib. 1. cap. 24.
and Palladii Rutilii de re Rustic. Lib. 1. tit. 5.
. i. e. that they did not only plow in Vetches to fertilize their land, (as I
found it here at Harbourn) but also Lupins, and sometimes beans, for the same
purpose. At other places in like manner, on their poor light shallow land,
that will neither bear hard-corn nor barley, they sow a small white pea, which
when ripe they never reap, but turn in as many hoggs as they think the piece
will fatten, and there let them lie day and night; whose dung will so enrich
it, that it will bring a good sword, which being continually stock't, and
grased afterward, will remain so many years.

30. As to the quantities of Corn sown on the Statute Acre, and the increase
they ordinarily yield, having spoken above: it remains only that we recount the
varieties of each kind sown here; and by what rules they are guided in the
choice of their seed: there being as many sorts used here, and perhaps more,
than in some richer Counties. For beside the white-flaxen, and bright red-wheat
(which are the ordinary grains of the Country) they now and then sow the
Triticum Multiplex or double-eard wheat; Triticum Polonicum or Poland wheat;
and Tragopyrum, Buck or French-wheat; all described above Chap. 6. And for
barleys; beside the common long-eard, and sprat-barley, which are most used;
they sow sometimes the Tritico-speltum or naked barley, of which also above
Chap. 6. And amongst the Oats: beside the white, black, and red Oats; at Burton
upon Trent I found they also sowed the Avena nuda or naked Oat; described,
Ibidem.

31. About Swinerton, Yarnfield, and Shelton under Harley, beside the little
white and gray peace; they sow the white Rouncival, the bigg-brended pea, and
the early ripe pea. And beside the Summer and Winter Vetches; the Vicia
Sylvestris, sive Cracca, the wild Vetch or Tarr-grass is sown in some places,
but these only in Meddows. Contrary to that of Cato, Viciam and faenum Graecum
quamminime herbosis locis serito; that one ought not to sow Vetches or
Fenu-Greek in grass grounds M. Catonis Lib. de re Rustic. tit. 35.
. About Weeford they also sow dills or Lentills on their poorest land, which
serve to feed sheep and other cattle in winter; they sow hemp, and flax too, in
some places, in small proportions; and for mixed grains, beside their Muncorn,
or wheat and Rye mixed; they sow white and red wheat, common and sprat barley,
both mixed, as was hinted above; and upon their poorer lands, barley and French
wheat mixed, as I saw it at Heyley Castle; and barley and red Oats mixed, as at
Swinerton and elsewhere.

32. In the choice of their seed ( here as in Oxfordshire) they have a double
respect; first, to the grain it self; and secondly, to the land it grew on. As
to the former of these, they take little care, especially in their seed-wheat,
how small or shrank it be, so it be even corn, and free from smut and seeds:
for as strong and fair seed may sometimes degenerate and produce that which is
small and lean; so vice versa, that which is thin and shrank (as they call it)
will more ordinarily produce that which is fair and full breasted: contrary to
that of Columella, quod vero protinus exile natum sit, nunquam robur accipere
manifestum est s. that lean seed, can never produce a fair full Corn. Little
more reguard have they of their seed-wheat, in respect of the soil; for they
matter not how poor or hungry the land be their seed comes off, though to be
sown on their strongest rankest soil: in general they choose corn for seed that
grew on land of a quite different temper, from that it is to be sown upon; thus
they almost constantly choose their seed-barley that is to be sown on their
clay-lands, from the sandy; and their seed-barley that is to be sown on the
sandy-lands, from the Clay.

33. And upon this account it is, that in the Southern parts of the County,
they sometimes send for their seed-wheat out of the Moorelands (the corn that
grew Northerly, thriving naturally better in a warmer Clime) and so do the
Moorelanders out of the South: not only for that the corn that is fetched afarr
off, sucks a somewhat different juice, and so is a better seed than that
possibly can be that grew there before: but also because if they should sow
seed that grew in the Moorelands, it would degenerat in few years, in that wet
moorish Country, into corn little worth: and therefore here they always supply
themselves with the fairest fullest corn they can get from the South. Which is
very agreeable to the advice of Palladius, who after he has told us that all
seeds do locis humidis citius quam siccis degenerare, immediately adds, quare
subinde succurrat electio Pallad. Rutilii de re Rustic. Lib. 1. Tit. 6.
, that they must therefore often help themselves by a new choice. For should
they still go on to sow the degenerate seed of their own Country, it would
certainly come at last to be very bad corn; not to say that it would turn into
another species: which though a point one would not easily be brought to yield
to, yet there being so many Examples of such transmutations of wheat into Rye
upon such accounts as these, alleged by so many good Authors, I cannot but
recommend the Experiment of it, to the Worshipful Rowland Okeover, Charles
Cotton, and Thomas Rudyerd Esqrs; their habitations lying most convenient of
any for this purpose.

34. For whose encouragement herein, I take leave to acquaint them, that one
grain will sometimes bring forth others of a quite different species; as is
testified not only by our own Countryman the famous Mr. Goodyer, who in An.
1632 found three or four perfect grains of Oats, in the middle of an ear of
white-wheat Gerard's History of Plan. enlarged by Johnson Lib. 1. chap. 46.
: but also by Olaus Wormius who had an ear of barley, found and given him by
the Revd. Michael Biturp Rector Jun. Mother. Columellae de re. Rustic. Lib. 2.
cap. 9.
of the Churches of Greffue and Kildebrond, that contained in it a moiety of
Rye; the whole ear being made up of 4 rows of corn, whereof one was of
barley, and the other of Rye, alternatly Olai Wormii Musaei Lib. 2. cap. 7.
. Nor have we only instances of such partial transmutations, but also in tota
specie; which though very strange, yet there being so many says Theophrastus
that have found it true by woeful experience, it can hardly be denied: (...).
Many as they say having sown wheat and barley, and yet reapt nothing but
darnel Theophrast. Eresii de Causis Plant. Lib. 4. cap. 6.
: with whom Virgil in his Eclogs seems fully to agree, Grandia saepe quibus
mandavimus hordea sulcis,
Infaelix Lolium, and steriles dominantur avenae Pub. Virg. Eclog. 5. v. 36, 37.
.
intimating hereby, that barley did not only degenerate into Rye or darnel, but
sometimes into Oats too.

35. Which transmutations as Theophrastus acquaints us, most frequently happen
amongst such sorts of plants as are pretty near akin. (...), as it has also
fallen out (says he) in spelt and Oats Theophrasti Eresii de Causis Plant. Lib.
4. cap. 6.
: but most commonly of all betwixt Wheat and Rye: wheat not only degenerating
in moist spungy land into Rye: but Rye also in strong and good fertile land,
being improved into wheat. Whereof Pet: Laurembergius from the testimony of one
Manlius gives us two pregnant Examples that happened at Witteberg, and in
Thuringia; at the first of which places, and at Leipsick, if you dig (says he)
a pit, and return the same earth again into it, that was taken thence, it will
not fill it; a certain sign of a light lean soil: on the contrary in
Thuringia if you dig a ditch, and fill it again with its own earth, there will
always remain an overplus; as certain an argument of a strong and close soil:
in the former whereof wheat being sown, in three years time it degenerated into
Rye; and Rye sown in Thuringia in the same space of time, improved it self into
wheat P^t. Laurembergii Horticulturae. Lib. 1. cap. 2.. 3. and Lib. 1. cap.
13.. 1.
. Now whether any where in the Moorelands there can be found such an Earth so
hollow and spungy, as not to fill its own pit, as at Witteberg and Lipsick, I
also recommend to the trial of the same worthy persons.

36. That wheat will thus degenerat and turn into Rye, I find also confirmed by
Columella and Palladius, Authors of unquestionable credit in these Georgical
matters, both unanimously asserting, Omne tritcum solo uliginoso post tertiam
sationem converti in siliginem Jun. Mod. Columellae de re Rustica Lib. 2. tit
9. and Pallad Rutilii de re Rustic. Lib. 1. tit. 6.
But that Rye on the contrary should be improved into wheat, I can only allege
the Authority of Manlius for it: though that most skillfull Botanist Mr. Bobart
of Oxford, gives us an instance that comes pretty near up to it, from his own
experience; having improved the seed of primula veris or common wild primrose
to that height, that it has produced the primula polyanthos or Oxlip, which
falls out not much short of the former instance. These strange transmutations
of one species into another, Theophrastus ascribes only to the great
diversities of Airs and Soiles Theophrasti Eresu de Causis Plant. Lib. 4. cap.
6.
: But Varro will needs add (and perhaps as truly) that the same will come to
pass upon defects in the seeds, particularly instancing in the seeds of
Coleworts, which it is reported says he, if sown older than they should be, will
change the species, and produce rapes or turnips, and so vice versa will
rape-seed coleworts M. Terent. Varronis de re Rustic. Lib. 1. cap. 39.
. which if true are instances more remote, and consequently more wonderful
than any of the former: though their union in the Coli-rape seems to argue a
probability.

37. If their Lands be subject to blasting, smutting, Meldews, or birds, they
endeavor to prevent them either in the preparing, or choice of their seed
before sowing; or after their corn is come to seed again. To avoid blasting,
and smutting, they steep their grain in brine before they sow it, which they
esteem a very probable, if not a certain remedy for this desease of corn: it
having been found by experience, that part of a field of wheat, the seed
whereof was brined, has been clear of blast and smutt; whereas the other part
where the seed was sown without brineing; has suffered much by both. To prevent
Meldewing, the most pernicious of all the annoyances, that enclosures and rich
lands are liable to, Thomas Cartwright parish Clerk of Womburn in this County,
either mixes his corn with soot before he sowes it, or sowes soot upon it after
the wheat's in the ground: by which means he has preserved the corn from being
Meldewed, in lands always observed to have been liable to it, and this not for
one or two, but for ten years together: the more soot he has mixed or sown,
proving so much the better, tho of the two, he finds mixing to succeed the
best. Which being matter of fact, and the cure considerable, because the
disease is so; it may be worth while perhaps to look into the causes of this
annoyance, and how it comes to pass that this proves a Medicin for it.

38. First then, as to the causes of Meldews, some have thought them much
occasioned, by an unseasonable time of sowing, and therefore have sown very
early, as judging corn most subject to this desease when sown late: but this
cause is certainly but ill grounded, some land meldewing at what time soever
they are sown. Others again have placed the origin of meldewing in making small
enclosures, corn not being so liable to this evil in the common open fields:
which though it must be confessed in part, yet this can be but an accidental cause
at most; for let the enclosures be never so small, so the land be poor, the
corn that it bears shall rarely be meldew'd. It remains therefore that the
adequat original cause of this malady, must be in the richness of the soil,
especially if not naturally, but made such by dung, which fattening it, and
sending up a moist viscous steam, that upon congelation in the Air falls down
upon the corn again in a dew of the sweetness and consistence of honey, and
there sticking to the straw, and further hardened by the Sun, so binds up the
pores of it, that the nourishing juice in great measure is prevented thereby,
ascending to the ear: whence the grain becoms shrank, as we commonly see it in
all corn affected with this distemper. And this I take to be the true origin,
and process of Meldewing.

39. Now if this steam when ascended, be any way hindered, being dispersed by
the wind, or shaken off the stalks of the corn, when fallen on them, by the
height or narrowness of enclosures, it must be owned that they are thus far an
accidental social cause of Meldews: but for their true original I believe it to
be nothing else but that viscous steam raised by the heat of the Sun out of the
fattness of the dung, which if sucked up, or kept down by any dry adust matter,
that it cannot ascend at all, as I suppose it is by the soot, the annoyance
thereby is fully prevented: and any other such matter what ever else it be that
may hereafter be found out that will do this, may also very well be thought a
proper remedy for this distemper. If it be objected that this medicin is to
narrow for the disease, there not being quantities of soot to be had in
proportion to the lands that are liable to meldews: I answer that this hinders
not but that it is a true antidote as far as it will go; and that where this
cannot be had plentifully enough, other remedies must be used, such as sowing
bearded wheat, whose ailes catching the dew, do prevent in great measure its
falling on the straw, and doing the mischief abovementioned.

40. But if there be any such land that lies so untowardly (as perhaps there
may some) that neither of these can be conveniently had or used; my advice is
then, that the order of sowing it be wholly inverted; that is, that they do not
immediately sow wheat after the dunging such land, but first barley, then peace,
and wheat last: because by this means the stock of matter in the dung that
occasions these Mildews, will be spent in the time of the barley and peace that
are not, before the corn comes to be sown that is, liable to them. To prevent
any grain's being destroyed by birds, presently as soon as sown, both limeing,
and mixing it with soot as above, have been found effectual: but when come to
seed again (I mean whilst in the ear) I met with no device here that would
secure it from them, only in a hemp plat in the way betwixt Whitemore and
Ashley I found empty egg-shells hung upon most of the stalks of the seed-Hemp,
which they told me was a contrivance to preserve them from the birds, which
being a very odd one, I could not without injury to the Readers diversion, but
take notice of it.

41. Thus having given some account of the tillage of this County, their
several manures, the quantities and choice of seeds, and the methods of
preventing the annoyances of corn: I proceed to the Instruments they use in
their tillage. And first of the ploughs, which are generally the same here,
with those of other Counties, nor met I with any thing uncommon relating to
them, any where but at Frodswell, where one Mr. Fernyhough showed me an
instrument of Iron of his own invention set through the plow-beam behind the
Coulter, and through the plow-head, steeled with an edg forward, of excellent
use in plowing new stock't grounds, it cuting roots asunder as bigg as ones arm
without prejudice to the plough; which were it not for the strength that is
also given it by this Irons goeing through the plow-beam and head, must needs
quickly be torn in pieces with such work as that. Yet now I remember Mr.
Ashmore of Tamworth also sent me an account of much such a plow with two sharp
wings of iron made fast to the plow-share, and following the Coulter on each
side, that he had likewise contrived for the same purpose. They also draw their
ploughs here both with Oxen and Horses; but at many places rather with the
former than latter, because of their turning to a more certain profit, and
having less of hazard in them: Oxen always increasing in price with their
fatness; and if sick, or comeing to any mischance, yet may be killed to some
profit, which a Horse cannot be. They generally plough with their Oxen in
pairs, but with their Horses in a string, to prevent poching the land: and so
they do in some places with their Oxen too, in very wet seasons, being
furnished with half yoaks for that very purpose.

42. After their Corn is sown they cover it with Harrows, not much differring
from those of other Countries; only in the Moorelands I observed they were
somewhat less than ordinary, but very strong ones. But in the Moorelands they
never roll their barley, I suppose because they mow none, and therefore have no
such instrument as a Roll among them. When their Corn is come up (especially
their Oats and Barley) if sown on a binding land, and it prove a dry time; at
and about Church-Eyton they sometimes harrow them again, to break the clodds
and loosen the earth, which will make them flourish much the better: for though
it may pluck some up, yet it making more spring by half than it destroys, they
account it advantageous. After the Corn is in the blade, if it grow too rank,
as at some places they eat it off with Sheep: at Alrewas in this County they
mow off the topps of it before it spindles, which they do with a reaping-hook,
not a Sith. And before their Corn is ripe, about the latter end of May or
beginning of June, they weed their Wheat, Rye, and Barley, and sometimes Oats,
with an Iron digger, and another instrument like a pair of Smiths-tonges jagged
like a Rasp on the inner sides to take the firmer hold; with which they pluck
up the weeds by the roots, which being perennial plants, springing annually
anew, I look upon as much a better instrument, than the hooks of other
Countries, which only cut them off above ground, so that if weeded early, they
grow up again before the Corn's ripe, at lest the next year, from the same root.

43. When time of harvest is come, they reap their wheat and bind it after the
manner of other Counties, and so they do their Rye; when bound they gather
nine sheaves together, and set them upon their butt-ends, and cover them with
three, and so let them stand ten or twelve days, according as the weather
proves, before they carry them; the Corn thrashing the better, the longer it
stands. Their barley they mow with the Sith and Cadar in the South parts of
the County, and in some places where the land was never rolled, especially
where light and easily clodded; but in the Moorelands as they roll not, so they
never mow their barley, but reap it with hooks, the land being generally so
grasy there, that they would loose half their Corn should they go about to mow
it, especially should there happen a wett season, for that it could hardly then
be ever got dry again. In the Southern parts if clean and free from weeds, they
bind and cock it as they do Wheat and Rye: but if grasy or have weeds in it;
they let it lie to wither two or three days, then rake it together and cock it
as in the Moorelands, letting it stand five or six days before they carry it.
Their Oats they harvest much after the same manner they do their barley. But
their beans and peace they seldom mow, but reap them with hooks, letting them
lie in reaps 12 or 14 days, and never turning them but once, viz. the day
before they carry them.

44. For Waynes, Carts, and Wagons, they use the very same for carriage of
their Corn, and other matters, that they do in other Counties; only some of
them I met with that had certain pecularities that I never saw elsewhere;
particularly betwixt Normacot and Weston Coyney I met with a Cart that had its
floats supported, with standards erected upon the ends of the Axles without the
nathes of the wheels; which seeming much firmer than the usual ones resting on
the out timbers of the bed of the Cart, I thought them worth mentioning. And
at Pillaton-Hall the Seat of the Worshipful Edward Littleton Esquire I was shown a
sort of carriage indifferently serving for a Cart or a Tumbrel, the Cart-ladder
or thripple both before and behind being to be taken off at pleasure, and the
Tumbrel to be made fast to, or loosed from the Thilles; like the Whiplade of
Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 9.. 105.
. But the oddest carriage of all I saw at Dimsdale near Wolstanton (used
chiefly I suppose for the portage of Hay) made only of two strong pieces of
timber dragging on the ground, and a thripple behind, with which they could
carry a pretty parcel of Hay, or any such like commodity.

45. When they have carried their Corn, though they lodge it in a barn, it is yet
subject to the damage of mice and ratts; to free themselves of which Vermin
many have been the contrivances of ingenious men: but none that I know of so
clear of inconveniences, as what was reported to me by Mr. Alsager of Standon,
who seriously told me there was nothing would more infallibly drive these
mischeivous Animals (especially the Ratts) from a house or barn, than laying
bird-lime in their haunts: for though they are nasty enough in other respects,
yet being very curious of their furr, if but daubed with this stuff, it is so
troublesome to them, that they will even scratch their skins from their own
backs to get it off, and though he thinks not they ever destroy themselves upon
this account, yet they will never abide the place where they have suffered in
this manner. If they have not room to imbarn their Corn, they commonly set it
up in ricks upon staddles as they do in Oxfordshire, and thatch it with broom
or heath to preserve it from rain, laying at the bottom next the timbers that
lie on the staddles, a range of furse-faggots, which perhaps prevent the ascent
of mice and ratts better than the staddles themselves. Which is all concerning
Corn whilst in the blade or straw, but that at some places they still thrash
it, after the ancient manner sub dio, as I saw them upon the pavement in the
open streets at Burton upon Trent. And that they dry their Oats in great
measure with their own husks, which thrown upon turf set archwise as in Tab 32.
Fig. 3. burn freely enough.

46. As for Meddow and grass-grounds, the County being so well watered as has
been shown above Chap 2. 20, 21. as they must be numerous, so they are most of
them very fertile, being not only made so by the land-floods, but (as on
Dovebank, and many other places) by the sheeps dung washed down from the hills
adjacent to them, which of all cattle next that of Asses is esteemed the best
Palladii Rutilii de re rustic. Lib. 1. tit. 33. and Jun. Mod. Columellae de re
Rustic Lib. 2. cap. 15.
. So that as such lands as these want no other improvement, the Reader must not
expect any Methods or Rules whereby they receive any: nor of the cure of any
diseases incident to them, such as Mosses, Rushes, Sedges, etc. for that I
found upon enquiry, they were little subject to them. But such grounds they
have too as well as other places, their boggy, peaty, and cold-black-lands
producing all these, which they cure by draining, and manuring with ashes: Thus
Mr. Jobber of Acton Trussel having a piece of wet ground overrun with Moss, by
cutting of trenches, and spreading it all over with the ashes of Pit-cole
destroyed all the Moss the first year, wherein he agrees with Columella, who in
his Chapter, quemadmodum prata colantur prescribes the same Method, quorum
neutrum tantum prodest, quantum si cinerem saepius ingeras, ea res muscum
enecat. i. e. that nothing is so good to lay upon Meddows as ashes, for that
they kill the Moss Jun. Mod. Columellae de re Rustic. Lib. 2. cap. 18.
. Which I guess they do upon the same principle, that soot prevents Meldews,
imbibing the steril juices that produce such trumpery, and substituting good
wholesome clover in the room; which not only the ashes of coal, but of wood, and
fern too, are all observed to do; whereof about 30 strike serve an Acre, which
they choose to lay on in the spring, rather than Winter, for that the rains wash
them away and destroy their virtue.

47. But though such trenching and ashes will perform this cure, yet if it be but
barely trenched, there is danger of a relaps, because such trenches as these in
a little time will swell, and fill up of themselves, and then the cold steril
juices will return again, destroy the Medicin, and quickly produce the same
disease. To prevent which inconveniency, Mr. Astley of Tamhorn drains such
Grounds much after the manner as described in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. 9.. 82.
, digging his trenches deep, and laying pebbles or other stones in the bottoms
of them, and over them Heath-faggots to prevent the earth's falling in 'twixt
the interstices of the stones; and then covering all with earth, the whole
remains an everlasting Sough: the heath enduring the wet, and supporting the
earth, till such time as it is settled again into firm land. And this way of
trenching one would think were sufficient to all intents and purposes; yet Mr.
Sylvester of Weeford seems further to have improved it, by the invention of an
instrument to make such a Sough without breaking the ground, but at some
certain distances; being much like a shovel about 4 foot long, with which he
first diggs a hole deep and large enough to receive a Man, together with his
instrument; then he excavates the hollow-black-earth as far as his instrument
will reach both ways, i. e. eight foot beside the diameter of the hole, leaving
the upper turf a yard thick above it; then at the same distances on a line,
from eight foot to eight foot, he makes other holes, and so still on as the
work requires: and then putting in Alders (whereof they have commonly great
plenty in all moorish grounds) or other fit materials, as brush-wood, etc. to
keep the earth from falling in and choking the Sough, it will drain the ground
to that rate, that many times it will sink a yard or more: which he after
improves with all sorts of Ashes laid on dry as above; which kills the Moss,
etc. produces the Meddow-trefoile, and brings it at last to be good
Meddow-ground.

48. Nor are such boggy, peaty, and cold-black-lands, that bear little else but
rushes, etc. only improved by draining and laying them dry by Soughs: but where
there is convenience also, by being artificially watered or overflown. The best
instance whereof that I met with in this County, was at Drayton park belonging
to the right Honorable the Lord Visc. Weymouth, a most noble Patron of this
work; where his Lordship having the advantage of the black-brook passing
through it, though esteemed but a lean hard water, yet by cutting a fleme or main
carriage 18 foot broad and scarce a yard deep, on the upper side of about 35.
Acres (at one place) of such land; and smaller carriages or trenches 40 or 50
yards asunder, not above 4 foot wide, all issueing from the said main fleme;
each of these smaller carriages having a yet smaller drain of a foot wide, to
carry off the water again at discretion, as it was brought on by the greater:
his Lordship by this means has so improved this land, though the water but bad,
(yet much better it seems than that steril juice that it had before, which is
hereby drawn off) that in 2 years time, whereas it was thought to be dear of
three, it became worth at lest 30 shillings an Acre. The 35 Acres in An. 1682
bearing 40 loads of good Hay, the grass after being worth 10 or 12 pounds
beside. Another improvement of this sort of Land, if it be full of Mossy,
Sedgy, Heathy Hillocks, as many times it is; is by levelling them by a short
strong Sith about 2 foot long, fitted with a strong Snead, with which a man at
three blows, can cut up a Hillock a yard and, or 2 yards wide; and will do as
much in a day as 4 Men can of the same work, in the same time, with their
shovels.

49. And thus having shown the several Methods of preserving both arable and
pasture grounds from their inbred Enemies, let us see what other uncommon Arts
have been used to secure them from those without, such as spoil by cattle,
Hunters, etc. that is, what extraordinary sorts of fencing have been found out
here, for preserving of their grounds unusual elsewhere. Amongst which for a
living-fence, I met with none so artificial and serviceal as those, made by the
planching of Quicksets i. e. cuting them half through, and laying them cross
the ditch upon the adverse bank, and laying some earth upon them to keep them
down, first hacking each branch to make them sprout, by which means there may
be made as many hedges, one within another as shall be thought fitting, all
still proceeding from the first roots. And for a dead-fence, none certainly
better (where the grounds afford them) than those heathy-turf walls made by Mr.
Ashmore on Packington heath, which he orders thus: the turf being quickly cut
by a strong plow, the Workmen then have little more to do in order to them,
but to cut the plowed turf into suitable pieces of two foot long; which, laying
the rough side outmost, and filling up every course close, with such mould or
sand as the place affords, will make walls so firm (notwithstanding they will
shrink near a quarter part, which must be allowed for in the making) that with
little repairs it is believed may stand at lest 20 years, if well made at first,
especially if betwixt Michalemass and Christmas, for then a great part of the
turf will grow for several years, so that these are not absolutely dead-fences
neither: however they are found of singular use, especially for sheltering
Sheep from cold storms and blasts, which they do to that effect, that Sheep
will now abide that heath and feed upon Ling all the hardest winter, which they
could never be made to do, before this contrivance.

50. Having done with the tillage and productions of the Earth, I should have
come next to the Arts of forming them into diverse shapes for their respective
uses: but having treated already of the whole Art of Pottery Chap. 3. from. 25.
to. 28. inclusive.
, I have little to add, but that Charles Riggs of New Castle, has a sort of
Engine I never saw elsewhere, with which he punches the bolls of his
Tobaccopipes much quicker and truer than others of his trade, unacquainted with
this instrument; which being invented as he told me in the Kingdom of Ireland,
in justice to the Country I forbear more of it here. And proceed to a sort of
arched-Bricks they make about Wednesbury, bent round to sit the Eyes of their
Cole-pits, which are generally about 2 yards in diameter, by which they are
secured from colting in, much better than by timbers, as I saw some pits near
that Town, thus walled up with them for two yards deep, there being no
necessity of doing it lower there, the clay being after stiff enough to uphold
it self. To which we may add that their Quadrells of peat, are made into that
fashion by the spade that cutts them, which is nothing else but a thin iron
plate bent to a right angle with equilaterial sides, so that it makes the half
of an oblong rightangled parallelepiped cut diagonally. being somewhat like the
composing stick of a Printer, which at two cuts brings out one of these
Quadrells, which they set to dry, as described in Oxfordshire. Not. Hist. of
Oxfordsh. Chap. 3.. 41
.

51. Next these, follow the Arts relating to Stones, whereof having already
given an account at large of the Ores of Mettalls (which are generally Stones)
the ways of smelting and refining them, hammering, slitting, etc. I have little
more to account for of this kind, but what relates to Architecture, the
buildings of this County being for the most part Stone. One house indeed I past
by 'twixt Chedle and Okeymoore, built only of turf in a Conical manner, much
like the houses of the Indians near the straights of Magellan See Sr. John
Norbury's Map. of the faid Straights.
: but for the buildings of any note, they are either of brick or squared stone,
whereof some are private, others public; and the latter, either civil or
Ecclesiastical; and may all be considered either in the whole, or parts. Of the
private structures, the most eminent in the County, are those whose prospects,
the Reader has or will find engraven in this Work, wherefore I shall forbear so
much as nameing them here. Yet it must not be denied but there are as fine
buildings not represented in Sculpture, as any that are; such as the Seat of
the right Worshipful Sr. Thomas Wilbraham at Weston under Lyzard, the Front
whereof I could have gladly engraven, but that forbidden by the Proprietor,
(though a generous contributor to this work) whether out of modesty, or any
other private respects, I pretend not to know.

52. The Seat of the right Worshidfull Sr. Richard Astley at Pateshull built
all of squared Stone, which if taken altogether with the Gardens and
Waterworks, the Vista's and Walks, set with double rows of trees for number
length and breadth exceeding all in the County; not forgetting the many stately
gates of iron-work curiously painted and guilt, leading into them; with the
Mounts and places of Repose at the ends: which, I say, if taken all together,
is certainly the most accomplished and delicious Mansion in the whole County,
should also have been exhibited in tail-douce. And so indeed it was intended,
but that the Design of the Graver fell so very much short of the real thing it
self (the many trees, gates, and buildings hiding each other) that it had been
an abatement or disparagement to its true worth to have given the Prospect of
it. The Seats of the right Worshipful Sr. Walter Wrottesley, at Wrottesley and
Purton; of Sr. Henry Littleton of over Arley Baronet; of Sr. John Pershall of
great Sugnall Baront; of Sr. Francis Lawley of Cannal Baront; of Sr. Henry
Gough of Pury-Hall Knight. of Sr. Thomas Whitgreave of great Bridgford Knight; of Ralph
Sneyd of Bradwall Esquire of Thomas Kinnersley of Loxley and Vttoxater Esquire and
diverse others; do all likewise show a great deal of present, or past
magnificence: and yet in all these eminent private Gentlemen's Seats, could I
find little or nothing extraordinary in the whole.

53. But in the parts of several of them there are diverse things observable:
particularly the Gate House of Tixall-Hall, the Seat of the right Honorable
Walter Lord Aston an eminent Encourager of this design, is a curious piece of
Stone-work, well worthy notice; and is here presented together with the house,
to the Readers view, Tab. 29. it is remarkable also that the windows of the
house, though very numerous, are scarce two alike; and so it is at Chillington,
the Seat of the ancient family of the Giffards. It is observable likewise that
the tunnells of the Chimneys in both these houses are very numerous, the Hall
Chimney at Chillington having no less than 8 tunnells to one hearth; the
fretwork of the tunnels also in both these Seats being so very various, that
scarce two agree: whence it is easy to collect that the beauty of a structure in
those days (which seems to be temp. Hen. 8) did not consist, as now, in
uniformity; but in the greatest variety the Artist could possibly show.

54. The Stone-rail upon the wall built about the Green-court before Trentham
house, is a pretty piece of work, it being supported with Roman Capital Letters
instead of ballisters, containing an Inscription not only setting forth the
name of the ancient Proprietor and builder of this Seat, but the time when it
was done: the Numeral Letters put together making up the year of our Lord, when
it was finished viz. An. 1633, which will appear by the Numerals, set in Roman
Capitals, in the Inscription here annexed: the other Capitals being all set in
Italick. CAROLO BRITANIAE REGE RICARDVS LEVESON
EQVES BALNEI AEDES HASCE HIC FIERI VOLVIT.
there being two D Ds; four C C C Cs; four L L L Ls; five V V V V Us; and eight
I I I I I I I Is; which make up that Date. And the conveyance away of the water
which commonly comes in under outer doors of houses that lie open to the
weather, which I saw in the Summer House of the Garden at Aqualat was
effectually done by a groove cut in the Stone-Threshold just under the door,
and a hole from it through the body of the Stone to let out the water, is a
useful contrivance. Which is all I met with remarkable in Stone-work, unless
it be worth notice, that they sometimes make their Ovens in the Moorelands of
this County (which are often of Stone as well as brick) at a distance from
their houses; whereof I saw one near Madely park-pale, the remotest of any, but
for what convenience so placed, there being no body at home, I could not learn.

55. Of public buildings whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, the most eminent in
the County is certainly that of the Cathedral of Lichfield, it challenging a
due observance at a great distance by three such lofty Spires, procul veluti
salutantes advenas, as no Church in England can boast the like; and reverence
near at hand, being finely adorned with Studds and carved work: ut juxta
intuentibus (as Erasmus says of the Church of Canterbury) religionem incutiat
Desid. Erasim Rot. Colloq. de peregrinatione Religionis ergo.
. The tracery in the Stone-work of the West-window, as well as the glasing, the
gift of his present most Sacred Majesty King JAMES the second, is a curious
piece of Art, and commands due attention: and so does the Imagery at the West
end of the Church, which falls little short of that of Wells in the number,
though the Stone not so good. In short, the Architecture of this Church if taken
all together, though most highly commendable; yet there is one thing in it, that
seems not so artificial, it not being placed due East, and West, as other
Churches are, but declining no less than 27 degrees from the true points; as I
casually found by my Compass when I was upon the battlements of the middle
Steeple, to take the manner of its bearing to other places in order to my Mapp:
the East end declining so much to the North, and the West end to the South.
Which as it shows how ignorant they were in those times, as to matter of
accuracy, even in the meanest parts of Mathematics; so it seems to instruct us
on the other hand at what time of the year the Church was founded.

56. For whether the Compass were first brought in use in this Western part of
the World, by Paulus Venetus, who as some believe learned the secrets of it in
China, and brought it into Europe An. 1260 Gul. Gilberti de Magnete Lib. 1.
cap. 1.
; Or was first invented by John Goia a Citizen of Malfi in the Kingdom of
Naples An. 1300 Ibidem.
; yet both these being long after the foundation of this Church, they could
have no help from this Instrument to guide them in the placing it. So that it
is very probable all the direction they had in those elder times, was from the
Sun it self; which rising in the Summer more or less to the Northward, and in
Winter proportionably to the Southward, of the Equinoctial-East; in all
likelihood might occasion so many Churches not to respect the due East, and
West points, but to decline from them more or less, according to the early or
late season of the year, wherein they were founded. Which if granted (as I
cannot see why it should not) this Church must be begun either on the 27 of
April, the Sun then possessing the 17 degree of, in its access to the Summer
Solstice; or on the 30 of July the Sun then being in the 17 of in its recess
from it; the Sun in the respective degrees of both those Signs being exactly
removed 27 degrees from the Equinoctial East, Northward.

57. For which very reason also the Church of Alveton in this County, which
declines in like manner from the true East 32 degrees Northward, seems to have
been founded either on the 3d. of May, the Sun being then in the 22 of, in its
access to the Tropic of; or on the 23d. of July, the Sun being then in the 10
of, in its recess from it; the Sun in the mentioned degrees of both those
Signs, being distant from the Equator (Northward) just 32 degrees. And so vice
versa, may the foundations of the Churches that decline Southward, be computed
according to the distance of their respective recesses. If it be objected that
the foundation of the Church of Lichfield is faithfully Recorded, and that it
agrees not at all with the above mentioned Conjecture; the Cronicle of
Lichfield expressly acquainting us, that it was founded on the 2 of the Calends
of January, An. 700 Ex Vet. Codice M S. Chronicon Lichfeldense, nuncupat. in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
. It must be answered that the Church mentioned in the Chronicle, is not the
Church now standing, there having been two before this; one, built by Jormannus
the immediate predecessor of St. Ceadda An. 666 Fran. Godwini de Praesulibus
Angl. inter Coventr. and Lichfeldenses.
. and the second by Hedda, Bishop of Lichfield and Legecester, who translated
the body of St. Ceadda into it, which is the Church that was founded the second
of the Calends of January as above alleged: this now standing being built by
Roger de Clinton who was made Bishop of this See, An. 1128. temp. Hen. 1. Qui.
Ecelesiam Lichfeldiae erexit tam in fabrica, quam in honor Ex eodem vet.
Codice M S. supra citat.
. which, as I guess by the standing of it, he began about one of the times
above specifyed.

58. Now whether the declination of Churches from the Equinoctial East, ought
to be esteemed any diminution to them, or not? depends wholly upon the
reasonableness of the usual preference of that quarter of the World, in this
respect, before the rest; which remains to be considered. In the examination
whereof I find it plain, from the ancientest Records of time whatever, that the
Deity was ever thought to have a more special presence in the Eastern parts, as
well amongst heathens, as the Worshippers of the true God. (...) (says the
great Philosopher) (...). i. e. that the first Mover must necessarily be either
in the Center, or Circumference, (...) but motions are most rapid near the
first impression, (...). therefore the Mover must be there Aristot. Physicorum
Lib. 8. cap. 15. text. 24.
. Now we all know by the motions of the Stars, that the Heavens move swiftest
in the very Equator, therefore the first Movers place must be in that Line. Nor
did the Philosopher think neither, that he was present alike to all parts of
that line, (...), but that all motion was more especially accommodated to that
part (...), whence the motion did begin Aristot. de Coelo. Lib. 1. cap. 2. text
5.
: which to such as imagined the Earth to be a rotundum planum terminated by the
Horizontal Segment of the visible Heavens, could not appear any other than the
Eastern part, where the Sun arose. Upon which account Aben Rushed or Averroes
also bears us witness, quasdam Leges adorasse Deum versus Orientem Avirrois
Cordub. in Physi. Aristot. Lib. 2. text. 3.
. And Porphyrius acquaints us (...), that the habitations of the Gods were in
the Eastern parts Porphyrii Philosophi de Antro Nympharum Lib. 13. p. 182.
Edit. Romans 1630.
. Which is the reason given by Cinnius Capito, as quoted by Mr. Gregory (who it
seems spoke like an Astronomer looking Southward) why the left, or Eastern
Omens, were always esteemed more prosperous than the South J. Gregory's
Observat. upon some passages of Scripture Chap. 18.
.

59. Also the Jews ( God having planted Paradise, Eastward in Eden, and the
tree of life in the East part of that Garden, as appears by the Cherubims, and
flaming-sword, placed there to keep the way of it) always showed the greatest
reverence to this quarter of the World, and worshipped that way; as the Hebrews
deliver Adam himself did, nor is their tradition unreasonable: for it cannot be
imagined upon what other account it was, that when he gave names to things by
divine institution, he should call the East, Kedem, which is before the face;
and the West, Achor, i. e. the back part; and consequently the North, Smol,
that is the left; and the South, Teman, or the right hand Ibidem
. Nor did God only show a particular reguard to this quarter, presently after
the Creation; but took occasion all along, in after ages, in the times of the
Prophets, to show it to be the place of his more special presence. Thus in the
Visions of the Temple, we read, that the glory of the God of Israel came from
the way of the East Ezekiel 43. v. 2.
, and entered the Temple through the Eastern gate; wherefore this gate was shut
up, that no man might enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel had entered
in by it Ezekiel 44. v. 2.
. Nor indeed could it be otherwise, since it seems plain enough that the throne
of God is placed in this part of the heavens; David in his exhortation to
praise God for his wondrous works, expressly bidding us, to Sing unto him that
rides upon the heavens of heavens Eastward Psalm. 68. v. 32, 33.
, as the LXX rightly read it, the same word Kedem being used here as in Genesis 2
v. 8. where God is said to have planted Paradise in Eden, Eastward, not [which
was of old] as it is rendered in our common English Bible, which would have been
very incongruous. To which add that when Lucifer exalted himself above the
stars of heaven, he said in his heart, He would sit in the sides of the North
Isaiah 14. v. 13.
that is says Magius in the left side of the North or Eastern part of heaven,
where the throne of God is thought to be Hieronimi Magii de Mundi exustione
Lib. 5. cap. 9.
.

60. Upon which account not only Adam, but the whole world beside, till about
Abraham's time, for the space of 3328 years, worshipped toward the East, as the
learned Mt Gregory tells us from the testimony of Rabbi Maimon, the great St.
Ephrem and others, in the Arabic Catena: which original principal, and (as it
ought to have been) everlasting Ceremony, by an error of the Persian and
Caldean Worshippers degenerating into an Idolatry of the Sun; Abraham (says
the same Rabbi Maimon) by the instinct of God, appointed out the West for the
Hebrew worship after Mr. Gregory's Observations upon some passages of
Scripture. Chap. 18.
: and that therefore the Temple and Tabernacle were placed that way, and that
all their sacrifices were offered up Westward; as all the ordinary services and
devotions of the Temple were in Aarons time Ibidem.
, except that solemn Anniversary of Lev. 16. v. 34. in performance whereof, he
placed himself notwithstanding, as the same Rabbis say, on the wrong or
backside of the Ark, and sprinkled (as he was commanded) the blood of the
Bullock and Goat upon the mercy seat Eastward, to make an atonement for the
sins of himself and people Levitieus 16. v. 14, 15.
: whereby he prefigured him, who by his own blood entered in once into the
holy place, and obtained eternal redemption Hebrews 9. v. 12.
, whose name God the Father was pleased to admit should be called the East
Zach. 6. v. 12.
: so peculiarly appropriated was this part of the world to the divine presence.

61. Nay God vouchsafed himself to call his beloved Son by that Name. Adducam
Ego (says he by the Prophet Zachary) Servum meum Orientem. Behold I will bring
forth my Servant the East, as it should be rendered Zach. 3. v. 8.
. Again says the same Prophet, Ecce Vir, behold the man whose name is (...)
Tsemach, that is, the East Zach. 6. v. 12.
: which I am not ignorant Mr Poole and other learned men, render Germen, a
branch, and so our English version now in use Vid. Matt. Poli. Synopsin
Criticorum, in Loca.
: but as Scaliger and Mr Gregory both well observe, not so rightly, the
Prophecy being to be read, as translated by the LXX. (...). behold the Man
whose name is the East. Which being the very (...) that is referred to by St.
Luke, where he says that our Savior is (...) Luke. 1. v. 78.79.
, it cannot well be rendered Germen, it immediately following, to give light to
them that sit in darkness Mr. Gregory's Observat. upon some passages of
Scripture Chap. 18.
. And thus as it is plain that God vouchsafed our Savior should be called by
the name of the East, so it seems as evident, that this was the place from
whence he was to come: and therefore says Baruch (...), etc. Look about thee O
Jerusalem toward the East, and behold the joy that comes unto thee from God
Baruch. 4. v. 36.
: (...), i. e. says Severus and Olympiodorus, as quoted by Mr. Gregory (...)
Mr. Gregory, loco supra citato
. toward our Lord Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness, who was to come down
from heaven and be made Man. Who is also the righteous man the Prophet Isaiah
prophetically says, God raised, that is, would raise, from the East to rule
over Kings Isaiah 41. v. 2.
; and was to be the ravenous bird, God said he would call from the East, to
execute his counsel upon the unrighteous Ezech. 46. v. 11.
, yet should rise with healing in his wings unto such as feared his Name
Malachi 4. v. 2.
; and the righteous East of Jeremiah, that God promised he would raise unto
David, to reign, and execute judgment and justice in the Earth Jeremiah 23. v.
5.
.

62. Nor is it less remarkable, that at the time of his birth, his starr
appeared in the East Matthew. 2. v. 2. and 9.
, and brought the Wise Men thence too Matthew. 2. v. 1.
; neither must it be omitted that the Angels sent from God with the Gospel of
this Nativity, came also from the East, as Mr. Gregory informs us, from the
Nubian Geographer Mr. Gregory's Observations, loco supra citato.
; it is observable likewise that he was born in the Eastern parts of the world;
and as our Countryman Venerable Bede acquaints us out of Adamannus, in quodam
naturali semiantro in Orientali angulo Civitatis Betheleem, in a kind of
natural Cave in the Eastern part of Bethlehem Bedae Presbyteri Ecclesiast.
Hist. Lib. 5. cap. 17.
. Also at the time of his death as Durandus testifies, Dominus crucifixus ad
Orientem respiciebat, he was crucified with his face toward the East Gul.
Durandi Rational. Divin. Officior. Lib. 5. cap. 2.
; and after his death at his resurrection according to the most ancient
traditions of the Church, he ascended again from whence he came, into the
eastern part of heaven, (...) says Damascen, when he was received into heaven
he was carried up Eastward Joan. Damasceni Orthodoxa fidei Lib. 4. cap. 13.
; with whom agrees Origin, in Coelum post resurrectionem ad Orientem ascendit,
that at his resurrection he ascended into heaven toward the East. As he was
seen after by John the Divine, having the Seal of the living God, the Angel
that ascended from the East (or rising of the Sun) being pronounced by some of
the best of the ancients, to be Christ himself Revelat. 7. v. 2.
. Under which name it was, as Tacitus informs us (though altogether unacquainted
with the meaning of the thing) that, not many years after his resurrection, he
triumphed over the Jews in the destruction of Jerusalem; expressly saying that
many were persuaded antiquis Sacerdotum literis contineri, that it was found at
that time amongst the ancient Records kept by their Priests, eo ipso tempore ut
invalesceret Oriens, that about that time the East should prevail C. Corn.
Taciti Historiar. Lib. 5:
.

63. And if he ascended toward the Eastern part of heaven, we need not much
doubt but he will return the same way, at his second coming: which is not only
made good says Paulus de Palacio (as quoted by Mr. Gregory) by the common
consent of all Christians, Credentium quod in Orient humanitas Christi sedeat,
ab eo ergo loco veniet ubi nunc est, beleiving that our Savior as to his human
nature sits in the East, and that thence therefore he shall come Mr.
Gregory's Observat. loco supra citat.
; and more particularly by Damascen, who not only asserts that he ascended
Eastward, (...), but that the Apostles also prayed to him the same way, and
that he should return in like manner, as they had seen him go into heaven Joan
Damasceni, loco supra citat.
; but seems most amply confirmed by the Scriptures themselves, he himself
having said, that as the Lightening comes out of the East, and shines in the
West, so should his coming be Matthew 24. v. 27.
; and the Galathians being admonish't, that he should come in like manner, as
they had seen him go into heaven Acts. 1. v. 11.
: which texts compared together, prove as well that he ascended, as that he
shall come again Eastward: from the place where the thrones of the living God:
and the Lamb are; from the heavenly Paradise or place of abode of the Souls of
just men made perfect; which as Irenaeus tells us, he received it, ab
Apostolorum discipulis, was in the Eastern part of the third heaven, whither
St. Paul was caught up, and heard unspeakable things D. Irenaei Lugdunens.
Episc. adversus Gnostic. Haeres. Lib. 5. cap. 5.
. Which glorious place the scholiast Pletho most aptly calls (...), the all
enlightened recess of Souls Vid. Plethonis Scholia in Oracula Magic. Zoroastri.
in princip.
; and Psellus yet more agreeably, (...), a Choir of divine powers encircleing
the Father Vid. Pselli Scholia in Oracula Zoroastri Caldaica. p. 87. edit.
Paris An. 1599. Matthew 24. v. 36.42. and Mark. 13. v. 32.
; where he seems to reside in a more special manner, together with the Son,
from whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: for though it be
true that God is in all places, and in some respects in all places alike; yet
it is certain he is otherwise in heaven, than hell: and so in all likelihood,
in one part of heaven, than another; and though it be said of the hour of the day
of Judgment no man knows l, yet it is not so of the place from whence he
shall come to it.

64. All which being considered, the Christans as well as Jews, seem to have
had very good reason to make their addresses that way, they were so well
assured the divine Majesty had his chief abode: as indeed they were appointed
to do by the Apostolical Constitutions, (...). Then rising up unanimously, and
turning toward the East, let them pray unto God which sits upon the heaven
of heavens in the Eastern part (...).
: whence it is plain that the more special presence of the Deity, that was
anciently believed to be in that part of the world, was the true Original of
this Christian custom; notwithstanding what is alleged by Durandus, that Pope
Vigilius instituted this practice, to distinguish the Christans, from other
Sects; the Mahometans worshipping toward the South, and the Jews toward the West
Gul. Durandi Rational divin. offic. Lib. 5. cap. 2.
. Nor did the Christans only pray toward the East, but upon this account also
built their Churches, and placed their Altars, suitable to this purpose: which
Belethius thought of so great concern, that he judged it absolutely necessary,
and omnino quoque necessarium est ut aedificaretur uersus Orientem, hoc est,
versus solis ortum Aequinoctialem, nec vero contra aestivale solstitium, ut
nonnulli and volunt and faciunt, i. e. that it was altogether necessary that a
Church should be built to the Equinoctial East, and not toward the Summer
Solstice, as some say and do D. Job. Belethii divin. offic. Explicat. cap. 2.
in fine.
. And thus we find Patiens Bishop of Lions, as Sidonius acquaints us, built his
new Church.

Aedes celsa nitet, nec in sinistrum,
Aut dextrum trahitur, sed arce Frontis
Ortum prospicit Aequinoctialem Apollin. Sidenii. Epistol. Lib. 2. Ep. 10.

65. Which having been the practice of the ancient Church, and by how much no
question the more accuratly done, by so much always esteemed the better, I
cannot but allow, that this great declination of the Church of Lichfield from
the Equinoctial East (especially if examined by the ancient rule) must be some
blemish to it: unless it may be thought, that its pious founder Roger de
Clinton, upon reading the 14 and 13 of Isaiah, with Hieronymus Magius Vid.
Hieron. Magium de mundi exustione, Lib. 5. cap. 9.
, did rightly expound the sides of the North, not to be due East, but some
distance from it Northward, and that the throne of God might be placed there,
and for this cause set his Church industriously so. However it were, I am sure
his Successor Walter Langton, who founded our Lady's Chapel beyond the Choir,
150 years after, thought it ill placed, having rectifyed the mistake of his
predecessor, and built it pointing more Eastward, whence it is that the walls
of the Chapel stand quite bevil to those of the Church, as may easily be
perceived even by an incurious Eye. The Church notwithstanding deserves its due
praise, and should have been here represented in Sculpture, but that it has
been done already in two other Histories, once by Dr. Fuller at the charge of
Mr. Ashmole Dr. Fullers Church History of Britan, Lib. 4.. 2. Cent. 15.
, and again by Sr. William Dugdale in his Monasticon Angl D. Gulielmi. Dugdale.
Monastici Angl. Vol. 3. page 216.
. Wherefore I have chose rather to give the prospect of it, together with that
of the loyal City of Lichfield, which the Reader may here view, Tab. 30.

66. To which let me add in mitigation of the dishonor of this Churches
declination from the Equinoctial East, that the Ancients did not think that
praying that way, much less setting their Churches or Altars, Eastward (though
they usually did both) so essential to their devotion, but that upon valuable
considerations, one, or both might be altered: for we find that Pope Leo the
first of that name, to distinguish the Christians, from the Manichees who
adored the Sun, forbid them to worship toward the East, reproving all such, qui
priusquam ad Basilicam beati Petri perveniant, superatis gradibus quibus ad
suggestum arae superioris ascenditur, converso corpore ad nascentem Solemn se
convertant, and curvatis cervicibus in honorem splendidi Orbis inclinent, which
he spares not to call spiritum paganitatis, and damnandam perversitatem; that
upon the stepps before they came to St. Peter's Church turned themselves about
to the rising Sun, and bowed their necks in honor of it, which he spares not
to call the Spirit of Paganism, and a most damnable perverseness Sti. Leonis
mag. Sermon. 26. seu. in Nativ. Dom. Sermon. 7. cap. 4.
.

67. Which prohibition continued till after 1300, above eight hundred years,
about which time Cardinal Stephanesco Nephew to Boniface 8. (as Casalius notes)
hired Giotto the famous painter to make that St. Peter's ship which was after
removed into the Palace by Urban 8, of Mosaic work, and to set it in such a
place, as when they worshiped toward the East their adoration might be toward
it Joh. Bapt. Casalii de Vet. Sacr. Christianor ritib. cap. 3.
. Since which time the Church seems to have been more indifferent, both in
directing their worship toward the Equinoctial East, and in setting their
Churches or altars that way, some of them being placed so as to point toward
Jerusalem (in honor of our Savior's having suffered there) and upon that
account (here in our Northern part of the world) not set parallel to the
Equator, but declining from it Southward, as (if I mistake not) the
Metropolitical Church of Canterbury does. Others not placed toward the East at
all, as Paulinus testifies: Prospectus vero Basilicae, non ut usitatior mos est
ad Orientem spectat. i. e. that the Church he there speaks of did not, as
usually, point to the East. Sti. Paulini Episc. Nolan. Episcolar. Lib. 2. Ep. 4.
. Others again being set directly West, and having their Altars placed there,
as I am told both St Clements and St Martins, the two oldest Churches in Rome,
and St Peter's it self, the seat of the Papacy, all of them do. Nor seem our
Chappells Royal at Westminster, at all to reguard the Equinoctial East. so
that, whatever it might be formerly, the declination of a Church from that
point, seems no dishonor now.

68. The body of the Church of Pateshull lately rebuilt at the sole charge of
its munificent Patron the right Worshipful Sr Richard Astley Knight and Baront,
whose exemplary Piety should have been commemorated above Chap. 8. is a good
piece of Stone-work; and for other parts of Ecclesiastical buildings, the tower
of the Church of Dilhorn (anciently Dulvern Ex munimentis Copwoodi Hollin S
Gent.
) is somewhat remarkable, it being built eight square; and so is the tower of
the Collegiat Church of St Marys in Stafford, which was once adorned with a
lofty Spire thought to be one of the highest in England, which being blown down
at twice (part I suppose at one time, and part at another) An. 1593, beat down
the Church likewise on every side, which yet was repaired again at great charge
An. 1594 Ex ipsis Autogr. penes Majorem and Burgens. de Stafford.
. as appears by the date engraven in a stone, on the N. W. side of the
battlements of the steeple, just under the spout. But the most unusual piece of
Stone-work, and the most extraordinary of any piece of Ecclesiastical building,
that I have any where met with, is the Staircase in the S. W. corner of the
steeple of the Collegiat Church of Tamworth; being made of a double Cochlea
within the same Cylinder, both winding about the same pillar or Newel, over one
another, so that the floor of one is the roof to the other, having two
entrances, one within the Church, the other in the Churchyard, and two exits
at the top; by which two Men may ascend or descend together, and never see one
another all the way; or one may ascend and another descend at the same time,
and never meet.

69. For the better understanding of which curious piece of Architecture, the
courteous Reader may be pleased to consult Tab. 32. Fig. 4. where the said
double Cochlea is represented in a diagramm, divested of the exterior
Cylindrical wall within which it is built, as contrived and given me by the
Reverend Mr Langley Minister of the place: wherein aa. show the small pillar or
Newel, about which both the Cochleae wind; b, the entrance within the Church;
c, that in the Churchyard; d 1 at the bottom; and 10 u at the top, the widness
of the cylinder within the walls, which is 6 foot; so that the widness of each
Cochlea from the newel to the out walls, is 3 foot or a yard. Now if a Person
enter within the Church at b, he ascends first (winding about the pillar or
newel, aa) to d; thence (which must be conceived on the backside this plane
where the pricked lines are) to e; thence to f; thence to g; thence to h;
thence to i; thence to k; thence to l; thence to m; and thence out at n, at the
top. Another person entering at c, winding about in like manner the same Newel,
first to the figure 1; thence to 2; thence to 3; thence to 4, etc. coming out
at 10 at the top; the Cochlea's being floores and roofes to each other
interchangeably all the way up: the floor 1.2 being the roof to b d; and the
floor e f to the roof 1.2; and so 3.4 to e f; and g b to 3.4; and sic vicissim
to the top. The use whereof I guess might be, that the Decani, Copiatae, or
(...), that took the care of ringing the bells and burying the dead, the (...),
as Epiphanius calls them Sti. Epiphanii contra Haeres. Lib. 3.
, in English the Sextons; and the Diaconi or Sacristae, the Deacons or
Sacrists, that made the responses, and took care of the Vestments and Vtensills
of the Church; might do their duties apart; each having by this means the
power of the steeple, without disturbing the other. Or else that the
Clock-keeper might execute his office, without troubling either of them. Which
conveniences it is possible might be the occasion of building this staircase
thus.

70. Nor could I perceive any inconveniency it it, but that the stairs were
somewhat deeper, and the ascent somewhat more steep, than ordinary, as indeed
the nature of the thing requires: for it being necessary that the floors and
roofs should be distant at lest a man's height, one must needs ascend in a
single revolution of the Cochlea or spiral, as much as between d and f, i. e.
twice the height of a man; whereas had there been but a single pair of stairs,
the ascent need not have been but from d to 2, a single man's height, and so in
each revolution. Whence it is easy to conclude that though there may be made as
many of these helical stairs, winding round the same Newel, as the Architect
pleases; yet more than these, by reason of the necessary steepness that must
follow, would scarce be tolerable. Nay I have not yet heard of another Example
of such a double Cochlea, built within the same Cylinder, any where in England;
perhaps beyond Seas, there may be others of the kind, there being a Model of
much such a staircase as this, in the Repository of the Royal Society of
London, the entrances whereof are opposite to each other, and the Cochleae
making a parallel ascent within the same Cylinder, agreeing with ours in all
things but the Newel, which in this is hollow and built with long apertures, to
convey light from candles placed at the bottom, and in the sides of the Newel,
into both Cases Musai Regalis Societat. part. 4.. 2.
: whereas ours at Tamworth, is enlightened from without, by apertures made in
the Cylindrical case. Yet I am told this Model was sent hither from Hamborough
as a new Invention, and so not unlikely it might be to them, this not being the
first time, that the same thing has been reinvented: I am sure it cannot be
very new with us, for though I find not certainly how old this Church is, yet it
being made Collegiat by one of the Marmions Lords of the Castle here John
Speed's Hist. of great Britan. Book 9. chap. 21.
, the last whereof dyed temp. Edw. 1 See Sr William Dugdales Antiquities of
Warwicksh. illustrated, in Tamworth Castle.
. it must be so old at lest.

71. Which I think is all I met with worthy of remarke relating to Churches,
but that the Churchyard of St Michaels in the City of Lichfield, is the
largest of the kind that ever I saw, it containing within its limits as near as
I could guess at lest 6 or 7 Acres of good pasture ground. And that in the
Church of Wolverhampton are seven bells rung together in peal, which how
immusical it must needs be, the Reader may easily judge: for whether he
considers them as the first seven, or the last of Eight; the sound they make
can never be grateful: for if the former, they must needs end in a flat third;
or if the latter (which if I mistake not they seem to be) they must then begin
with four whole notes together; either of which is very inharmonious: beside
that their number excludes them, from ever being brought, either into common or
treble-time, which also must needs be unagreeable. And as for civil public
buildings, the most beautiful that I know of any where in the County, is the
Town Hall of Stafford built all of Squared Stone, the whole being supported
with a curious Portico of archwork, which gives not only shelter from the Rain
and Sun at the Assizes, Sessions, and Market days; but to the Towns people at
all times: the front whereof is here deservedly offered to the Readers view
Tab. 31.

72. But the most notorious piece of work of a civil public building, in this
County, or any where (of the kind) perhaps in England, is the great bridge at
Burton upon Trent, built in the time of Bernard Abbot of Burton (as Mr
Erdeswick proves at large Mr Samps. Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in Burton.
, who dyed in An. 1175. the 21. of Hen. 2 D. Gulielmi Dugdali Monastici Augl.
vol. 1. in Abbatia de Burton.
) all of squared freestone, strong and lofty, and containing in length as I
found it by measure, near about 515 yards as the Cart goes, i. e. a quarter of
a mile and better than of a furlong more, the River Trent, over which it
stands, dividing it self there into three Channels, as may be seen in the Map,
and passing under it through 34 arches whereof 33 had water running under them
when I were there: that betwixt Shutborow and great-Heywood not being near so
long though it have more arches, these (it being but a horse-bridg) being but
small in comparison. Which though it is likely may be longer than any bridge in
England, yet is very inconsiderable if put in competition with the bridge of
stone built by the Emperor Adrian over the Danube described by Dion, which was
near 7 furlongs or of a mile in length: and yet more inconsiderable still if
compared with that of wood at Mursa or Essec, built partly over the Drove, and
partly over the Fenns, which as Dr Brown tells us, is at least five miles long
Dr. Browns Travells through Hungary, etc. p. 5.
.

73. Nor is this all yet belonging to stones: for the Ores of Metalls being
generally such, the Arts relating to them, at lest after they are refined, also
belong to this place, those only of smelting and refining them, having been
treated of already in the Chapter of Stones: and these will chiefly reguard the
making up of some of the Metalls into wares, in order to their retail. Amongst
which I shall first consider the Arts, either unusual or curious, that some way
respect the working of Iron; which for some of their finest work, they commonly
harden in order to their receiving a better polish, according as the subject
matter in hand requires: and this they performed anciently with the hooves, and
horns of Cattle, Sand, and Salt, whereof Sea Salt, (or Bay Salt) has been
always preferred, which they formerly used to put into a Coffin made of Clay,
fitted to the Iron intended to be hardened, and so committed to the fire. But
of late they have used diverse other materials for this purpose, and after a
different manner; it being done at Wolver hampton, with burnt hoofs, and
horns, fountain and bay salt, sublimat, Vrin, old burnt leather, and Tartar,
all mix't together, and reduced into powder, in which rolling their Iron first
made red hot, it will stick to it, and is thus returned into the fire again to
receive its hardening, which it does not quite through the whole body of the
Iron, but only on the outside for about the thickness of a shilling at most,
which is highly sufficient to receive a polish.

74. But out of these, and some few other materials, they have observed that
two sorts of hardening arise, viz. tough-hardening, and brittle-hardening; the
former whereof they perform with old-shoos burnt, Vrin, and Wood-soot, with
which when any Iron is hardened it will not scale in the lest; and the latter,
with old shoos, tupps horns, bay salt, and Argal or Tartar; which harden Iron
to the height, and give the brightest polish, though they render it brittle: but
I was told by others that the toughest-hardening was made, by the juice of
nettles, Man's urin, and Linseed-oyle; and the highest, by quenching red hot
Iron in the juice of Mouseare; which processes are understood by most Smiths in
the County: and so they were most of them anciently, as may plainly be seen in
Baptista Porta, de re ferraria Joh. Bapt. Portae Magiae. Not. Lib. 13. cap. 4,
5, 6.
. Yet the matter of fact in these operations being not known to so many, but
the reason of it is unknown to more: it remains that I render some
Philosophical account of it, which I conjecture may be this: viz. that all
these being Alkali's, do kill and destroy the acid-Vitriolic salt of the Iron
that kept its pores open, and so condensing its parts, makes it more compact.
If it be objected that fountain and bay salt, sublimate, etc. are themselves
acids, and therefore unlikely to destroy the Vitriol of Mars in the pores of
the Iron: it must be aswered, that though the aforementioned Salts are indeed
acids, and are always so reckoned, if considered simply; yet if compared with
Vitriol may be esteemed alkali's, the points of these being much grosser then
those of Vitriol, and so consequently will break and destroy them, as we see
they do in diverse Chemical preparations, such as the white precipitate, and
the precipitation of Lead dissolved in Vinegar, etc. wherein the common-salt
acting the part of an alkali, destroys the Chrystalls of Niter and Vinegar,
which before had dissolved the Mercury and Saturn, in order to these
preparations.

75. Beside the aforesaid hardenings, which are only superficial; at the
Tile-house at Bromley in the parish of Kings-Swinford, one John Heydon hardens
whole bars of Iron quite through, i. e. makes them into Steel, which he does
not out of English, but Spanish or Swedish bars, here called bullet-Iron; the
manner thus. He has a round Oven built of brick, not unlike those used by
Bakers at the top, having a grate in the bottom near the middle, about a foot
and or 2 foot wide, where he lays the coal; on each side whereof, and at the
end beyond it, he lays his Iron enclosed in Cossins made of Amblecot-clay to
keep it from melting; the Coffins being proportioned to the bars of Iron,
which are broken into lengths, of between 3 and 4, or 4 and 5 foot long; the
longest being placed at the end of the Oven, and the shortest on each side;
each Coffin containing about half a Tun of Iron. When the fire is put to it, it
is constantly tended day and night till the operation is performed, which
according to the goodness or badness of the coal is done in a longer or shorter
time, sometimes in 3 days and 3 nights, other times in 4, and sometimes not
under a weeks time, the critical-minute in which the operation is finished being
the great secret of the Art of making Iron into steel. Which when done, they
cut it into narrower bars about half an inch over, and then break it into
short pieces of an inch, or two inches long, called Gadds, whereby the buyers
may see whether it be good or bad (for there may be both in the same bar)
otherwise they care not to buy it.

76. And this is the Method they proceed in here to make steel, which seems
somewhat agreeable to the practice in Aristotle's time, it being then performed
by frequent ignition Aristot. Meteorolog. Lib. 4. cap. 6.
, as it is now by a long one; whereby the Vitriolic-Salt of the Iron being thus
strongly press't by the Violence of the fire for so long a time, is forced out
of the pores of it, wherein it was lodged; and rises in vapors as in the
distillation of the acid spirit of Vitriol, and flies quite away, leaving the
Iron wholly void of all Salt to the center, and diminishing its bulk, in
proportion to the parts that are thus carried off. Whereas in the former
operations, the Vitriol of Mars was only superficially destroyed, either by the
superinduction of an opposit-Salt, or dipping it red hot (whilst the parts are
open) in some peculiar juices, which also superficially dissolve the Salts, and
so take them away, as common-water it self will likewise do, though perhaps not
so well as some of the juices there mentioned; those being certainly the best,
that are highest impregnated with some alcalizate Salt: as I have reason to
suspect the waters of Bilbao and Taracona in Spain, Sulmo and Como in Italy,
are; which places though they yield no Iron-Ores of their own, yet have always
been esteemed (upon account of their waters) famous for this Metal C. Plinii
2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 34. cap. 14.
Which additions of so many various materials beside heating the Iron for
superficial hardening, makes me suspect that there must be some other
applications for the central hardening or making of steel, beside what John
Heydon was willing to impart, it being evident that heating of Iron only, and
letting it cool in the fire, does rather soften then harden it, as we plainly
see in the annealing of Wire, and other Irons; which often heated, and suffered
to cool in the fire as it goes out of it self (provided it be not hammered)
will thereby be much softened Joh. Bapt. Portae. Magiae. Not. Lib. 13. cap. 2.
.

77. For which knack of softening, they have also frequent occasion, in order
to their Iron works, as well as for hardening; which they do too with oil,
wax, suet, butter, Asa-foetida, sulphur, and indeed with any fat unctuous body;
it seeming to amount almost to an Aphorism, in re ferraria, durum pinguibus
remollescere: the Iron being daubed over with any of these, and then heated red
hot, and suffered after to cool in the fire by degrees, as it goes out of it
self. Thus I find in the Journal of the Philosophical Society of the University
of Oxford, that an ingenious Smith of that City usually softens his Iron, first
heating it moderatly, then daubing it all over with tallow, and after heating
it red hot, and letting it cool in the fire as it gradually goes out Journal
Book of the Philosophical Society of Oxon. Sess. of October. 26. 1683.
. The Iron thus prepared, is used both by the White and Black-Smiths of this
County, according as the condition of their wares require; it being forged by
the former, into Sithes, Reaping-books, Axes, Hatchets, Bills, etc. (for each
whereof they give their Iron a different heat and temper) which being ground at
the blade-mills to a bright edg (whereof there is one at Himley, another near
Swindon, and others on all the little-waters thereabout) they have given this
sort of Artisans that make them, the name of White-Smiths. And by the latter,
it is wrought into plow, cart, and fire irons, into horse-locks and shoes,
bolts, and hinges for doors, bars for windows, squares for trunks and coffins,
staff-heads, buckles, and nails; for making the last of which there are so
prodigious numbers here, that in the parish of Sedgley alone, there are thought
to be no less than 2000 of the trade, reckoning boys as well as men.

78. But the greatest excellency of the Black-Smiths profession, that I could
hear of in this County, lies in their making locks for doors, wherein the
Artisans of Wolverhampton seem to be preferred to all others, where they make
them in Suits, six, eight, or more in a suit, according as the Chapman bespeaks
them; whereof the Keys shall neither of them open each others lock, yet one
Master-key shall open them all: so that these locks being set upon the doors
of a house, and the inferior Keys kept by distinct servants, though neither of
them can come at each others charge, yet the Master can come at them all.
Beside the Master turning his key in any of the Servants locks but once
extraordinary, the Servants themselves cannot come at their charge, neither
shall the Servant spoil his key or the lock in endeavoring it; for his, after
the Master-key has given the lock a second turn, will only run round in it
backward and forward, without either stopping at, or prejudiceing it any thing.
Nay so curious are they in Lockwork (indeed beyond all preference) that they
can contrive a Lock, so that the Master or Mistress of a family sending a
Servant into their Closets, either with the Master Key, or (if they permit an
inferiour-Key) with their own, can certainly tell by the Lock how many times
that Servant has been in, at any distance of time; or how many times the Lock
has been shot for a whole year together: some of them being made to show it
300, 500, or 1000 times; nay one of the chief Workman of the Town told me
(might he have Workmans wages) he could make one should show it to 10000 times.
Farther yet, I was told of a very fine Lock made in this Town, sold for 20
pounds, that had a set of Chimes in it, that would go at any hour the Owner
should think fit. And these Locks they make either with brass or iron boxes so
curiously polish't, and the keys so finely wrought, that it is not reasonable to
think they were ever exceeded, unless by Tubal-Cain the inspired Artificer in
Brass and Iron Genesis 4. v. 22.
.

79. Nor are they less curious in their Iron works as the Town of Walsall,
which chiefly relate to somewhat of Horsemanship, such as Spurrs, Bridles,
Sturrups, etc. in the two former whereof they are so very nice, that neither of
them are perfected without the joint concurence of several Artisans: as in the
making of a Spurr, there is first the Head or Spurr-maker that makes the body
of the Spurr, which he makes either plain, joynted, broad, narrow, wire, etc.
and these with swan-necks, feather-necks, rough-necks; or long, short, or
middle-necks; and all these again either white, sanguine, or inlaid with some
Metal. Secondly the Hook or Button-maker. Thirdly the Spurr-Buckle maker, who
makes the buckle, the chape, tongue, and roll. And lastly the Rowell maker, who
makes the 5, 6, 7, 8, or 10 pointed rowells, of iron or steel, which he cuts in
a mould at one stroke, making a great many of them in a little time, and then
files them, They make also great variety of bridles, both Snaffles and Bitts:
such as the wheel and joynted Snaffle, the neck-Snaffle, wreath-Snaffle,
prick-Snaffle, etc. to the ends or sides whereof belong these fashions, viz.
the Rippon, acorn, spoon, trumpet, bobbing, and knob'd end. They make likewise
Colt-snaffles and trenches, Cabbinsons and Musrolls; which are all commonly
made too by different persons, though sometimes the same makes them all himself.
And of Bitts, they make the Canon or port bitt, the Million Mouthed bitt, the
snaffle mouthed bitt, the half checked bit, the Coach bit, and watering bit,
which are made by one workman; and the Harness to them, viz. the curbb,
watering-chain, bolts, and rings, by another.

80. Of Stirrups they also make these several sorts, the swivel, barred,
Rippon, and plain stirrup, and these either with broad or narrow bottoms. They
make also all the Iron work belonging to a Saddle, viz. sivels, bars, plates,
the two former being made by one workman, the latter by another: also the great
variety of buckles that belong to the pack and hackney-Saddles, such as setts,
black or oiled buckles, sanguine buckles, crupper buckles, breast plate buckles,
and sussingle buckles: and all sorts of shoe, and garter buckles, whether
round, square, oval, or cut buckles, which too are all or most of them made by
different Tradesmen. There are diverse other buckles also made promiscuously
amongst these, such as the Hester buckle, plain and knobb'd, for the white
bridle; and the open and plain crown buckles, for the black; and so the Poland
buckle, the pease buckle, chased buckles, Dutch and Irish buckles, which are
brass, and made by the Coppersmith. Who also makes bosses of all sorts,
pendants, stars, and Labells, coach nails, studds, etc. Also they cast in
this Town, Iron, Copper, and brass potts of all sizes; in perfecting of which
wares, as also of their spurs, bridles, stirrups, etc. they use a great deal of
Tin which they superinduce over them, to give a better luster, and preserve
some of them from rusting; and prevent others from giving a taste of the Metalls
to things boiled in them.

81. For the performance whereof they use such Methods and materials, as each
Metal requires; viz. for Iron they proceed in this manner: they melt in a pan
a parcel of Tin proportionable to their work, and a ratable quantity of yellow
Rosin mix't, which will swim above the Tin to the thickness of a Crown piece;
into which, the wares being first soaked in old sharp clarifyed Whey to cleanse
them from all filth, and duly heated, and then dip't into this mixture and
shaken about, by mediation of the Rosin they become Tin'd all over. And for
tinning other smaller brass commodities, they observe this method; they put
them all together in an earthen pot, and heat them over the fire to a due
proportion, then they put in a suitable quantity of Tin, to which when melted,
they cast in as much as will suffice for the purpose of Sal Ammoniac or
Armeniac (by the mediation whereof the brass admitts the Tin) which when shaken
together the work is finished, only they cast them immediately into a pan of
cold water to wash off the faeces of the Sal Ammoniac, and to cool them quickly
to preserve their color, which they will not keep, if long in cooling. But in
tinning greater brass Vessels such as potts, kettles, etc. first they give the
vessel its due heat, then they sprinkle the Sal Ammoniac in dust all over it,
and then they apply a rod of Tin cold to it (the vessel being hot enough to
melt it down) which when done in a proportionable quantity to the vessel, they
then brush it all over it with hurds or combings of hemp (which licks not up
the Tin as any thing else will) and the work is finished.

82. In tinning of Copper whether small or great vessels, they use the Methods
as above, only instead of Sal Ammoniac they apply black-Rosin (which I am told
is nothing else but the yellow refined) to unite the Metalls, with which they
rub the vessel all over first, and then apply the tin, and so proceed ut supra.
The matter of fact of which operations, viz. that the matters are so, all the
Workmen know; but why these materials rather than any other, should perform
these feats? is a Question perhaps that has scarce yet been proposed, much less
determined: nor shall I pretend it. But if the Reader please to accept of a
conjecture, till such time as he can meet with a more satisfactory account; let
him take notice first, that Iron, Copper, and Brass, all hold Vitriols of their
respective kinds, and that Tin is a very open porous body and of a rough
superficies: now as for Sal Ammoniac every body knows it to be an Alkali, and
to seize upon acids where ever it finds them, and so likewise upon Tin, as is
plain by the sublimation of Jupiter by it Nich. Lemery's course of Chemistry.
part. 1. Chap. 3.
; whence it seems very probable that the Sal Ammoniac unites the tin and brass,
by seizing and destroying the Vitriol of Venus, and so inserting one end of its
Chrystalls into the pores of the Brass where the Vitriol was, and the other
into the open void pores of the Tin. In like manner as the glutinous Rosins
do, which are nothing else but the sediments of Clarified Turpentine that also
carry an Alcalizat Salt with them, whose points destroying the Vitriols both of
Mars and Venus in the Iron and Copper, easily lodge themselves in the place, and
so in the patent pores of the Tin, and thus with assistance of the concomitant
Viscosity, unites them so strictly as we see they usually are.

83. And these are all the Arts that I found remarkable here, attending the
Earths and Metalls: only that for preserving some of their finished Iron-works
from rust, such as Sword-hilts, Shoo-buckles, Armor, etc. they use Litharge
pounded and searced fine, mixed with oil of Spike, and so laid on with a
feather: or if they have occasion to lay by any of these curious wares for a
considerable time, such as their curious thorough work't Keys, buckles, etc.
they commonly bury them in Lime powdered, which being a strong Alcali, repells
the relenting of the Vitriol of Mars, which seems to be the only thing that
occasions this Metal to contract rust. Next these, I proceed to treat of such
Arts as belong to plants, or the dependants on them, whereof the first that
present themselves are those that concern the herbaceous kind. Of which sort we
may reckon two ingenious contrivances and profitable ones also, that I met with
in this County relating to hemp and rushes, whereof they make ropes; which I
found about Tamworth (especially those they had for their Wells) were not made
of Hemp alone, but mixed with hair: the advantage whereof above those of hemp
only, they told me was this, that the ends of the hair sticking roughly out
beyond the hempen strands, did so cast off the water, that these ropes were
preserved from rotting, and lasted much longer, than any others did; which
seems probable enough. And at Parke-hall in the parish of Caverswall I was
shown a rope, that past between the runners of the Oat-mill above mentioned 10.
made only of the pillings or rinds pulled off the pith of the juncus laevis
panicula sparsa major, or juncus laevis vulgaris Vid. Joh. Raii. Catalog.
Plantar. Angliae and Joh. Parkins. Theat. Botan. Trib. 13. cap. 30.
, both which it seems are Candle-rushes, which they told me would not only last
a year, i. e. longer than one of hemp, but that it would not stretch as hempen
ones do, which it seems is a great convenience in the working of such a Mill.
Which are all the Arts that any way concern herbs, but that about Shenston, as
I was informed by the worthy Mr Erith of Thorns, they frequently used the Erica
vulgaris, heath or ling instead of hopps to preserve their beer, which as he
also told me gave it no ill taste. And that they sometimes here make malt of
Oats, which mixed with that of barley, is called Dredg-mault, of which they make
an excellent fresh quick sort of Drink.

84. Having done with the herbs, the Arts relating to the Shrubs and
Subfrutices naturally follow, whereof I was told of one, by the right
Worshipful Sr Walter Bagot of Blithefield Baronet, of very good use, viz. that
Acorns are best sown for the propagation of timber with the genista spinosa,
i.e. gorss or furs, amongst which they will grow securely out of all danger,
wanting no other fence, and when they come to top them, will quickly shade, and
so kill them. At the Worshipful Thomas Kinnersley's of Vttoxater Esquire I saw an
attempt for a hedge of the same plant, how it has succeeded since, I have not
been informed; but it being so hardy a plant, I suppose there need be no great
doubt made, either of its growing, or admitting of formation by the Gardiners
sheers. Hither also must be referred what concerns the Vine, which has been
improved by the right Worshipful Sr Henry Lyttleton to that advantage at
Over-Arley, which is situate low and warm, being surrounded with hills, that he
has made wine so good there, that it has been altogether undistinguishable from
the best French wines by the most judicious palates: but this I suppose was
done only in some favorable over hot Summer, though if the Vines were placed
very advantageously it is possible it might be done in an indifferent year, the
Reverend and Learned Dr Ralph Bathurst, President of Trinity College and Dean
of Wells, having made as good Claret here at Oxon. An. 1685, which was a very
mean year for that purpose, as one would wish to drink. Which is so far from
wonder that we are informed they planted vinyards, and made wines anciently all
over the Kingdom; for though Tacitus says it bore all sorts of fruits, praeter
oleam and Vitem Corn. Taciti. de vita Julii Agricola Cap. 12.
, yet we find in Vopiscus that the Emperor Probus for some good service done,
permitted the Britans to plant them vinyards, which had been no great favor,
could they not have made wines Flav. Vopiscus Syracus. in vita Probi.
.

85. As to the Arts used here in the ordering of trees, they may be
distinguished first either into such as concern Timber, or Fruit trees; and the
former again either into such as are applied to them during their vegetation,
or when felled, and disposed of for uses, as timber; Under the first of which
conditions, the Planter and Gardener make them into pleasant walks and Topiary
works; for the latter whereof Laurembergius notes that the English are as
expert as most Nations, quoting Hampton Court as remarkable for them Petri
Laurembergii Horticultura Lib. 1. cap. 29. and 37.
: and so is Brewood-Hall the Seat of Mr Ferrers Fowk of this County, where in
the whitethorn hedge between the Garden and Court before the house, there are
several Animals, Castles, etc. formed art Topiaria, not unlike those engraven
by Laurembergius Locis supra citatis
. The Wrens-nest in the Hort-yard is a neat piece of work, cut in that form
likewise out of a whitethorn, and capacious enough to receive a man to sit on a
seat made within it for that purpose. And in the Garden there is a Yew tree
that from diverse branches issuing out of it about a yard from the ground,
forms a fair spacious Arbor of a square figure, each side without measuring
about 5 yards, but within not exceeding above ten foot; cut on the top with
loop and crest, like the battlements of a Tower, adorned at each corner with a
pinnacle, over which is wrought a Canopy out of the middle branches about 2
yards diameter, which is carried up again first to a lesser gradation, and then
terminates at the top in a small pinnacle. There is also near the pale
enclosing the Hortyard a fine Yew-tree cut up gradually from greater to lesser
rounds to the number of twenty; in which sort of Ornament the people of this
County seem to take great delight, there being others of them at Mear, Aspley,
Moreton, and Willbrighton, of 21, 22, 23 stories high.

86. In the Garden of the worthy Mr Scot of great Bar, there is a Yew-tree cut
conically like the Spire of a Steeple, 8 or 9 yards high. And for plantations
of Trees and Walks there are very fair ones at the right Honorable the Lord
Visc. Massereens at Fisherwick; and at the right Worshipful Sr Francis Lawleys
at Cannal; there are also fine young ones of the Silver Firr at Mr Chetwynds at
Ingestre; but of all I met with in the County there are none that are
comparable either for breadth or length to those above mentioned at Sr Richard
Astley's at Pateshull See 52. of this Chap.
some of them being 11 and 14 yards broad, and 148 or 150 yards long, curiously
planted on each side with double rows of Elmes. In many of their parks and
woods in this County, they much affect cutting vista's or pleasant Lawns here
and there through them, whereof the most eminent are those in Littewood, which
may be seen about the Country at a great distance, and afford pleasure to the
travellor a far off, as well as near; and there are very fine ones designed,
East of Pateshull house. The manage of the Woods in this County also belongs to
this place, which if Underwood, in the Moorelands they order thus; the brush
they use for brewing, and heating the Oven where they have it; and where there
are Rivers (if needful) they preserve the banks with it: but if of bigger
growth, they generally charr it for the Iron Mills, in the manner as described
by the learned Mr Evelyn Joh. Evelyn's discourse of Forest trees Chap. 31.
.

87. And so they do the loppings of their timber trees, which they extend even
to Oaks, not sparing to lop them when young, at some distance from the tree,
which in process of time will be covered again with the bark, in which they
think they give advantage to the Underwood in its growth (as doubtless they
do) and hurt not the timber at all: though they are of opinion, if they should,
that the Underwood will pay them better for its growth, than their Timber ever
would: which yet they let grow to as vast a bigness here, as was shown above,
as in any part of England See Chap. 6. 27.30. and 53.
. In the felling whereof they have this very good custom, that they flaw it
standing about the beginning or middle of May, which I first observed in some
fences near Norton in the moors, Milton, Badiley, etc. where there were
several Oaks stood naked, divested of their bark, which they told me would not
be felled till Michaelmass following at soonest, or perhaps not till mid
Winter, or the ensueing Spring. which I take to be a way of so valuable a
consideration, that perhaps it may deserve the debate of a Parliament, whether
it might not be worth while to enforce this custom to be strictly observed all
over the Nation? for though by a reserve in the Act for due felling Oaken timber,
it may be done at any time for building or repairing Houses, Ships, and Mills;
yet for any other uses none may fell it (in consideration of the tan) where
bark is worth but two shillings per load, over and above the charges of barking
and pilling, but between the first of April and last of June Jos. Keeble's
Statutes at large. An. 1o Jac. 1. Chap. 22. 20.
, when the sap is up, and the bark will run; which causes the out side of the
timber to rott away quickly, and to grow worm-eaten: whereas these being felld
in or near the winter, and having stood naked all the Summer drying in the Sun,
become in a manner as hard and sound without as within, being as it were all
heart, and not so subject to worms: by which means there would be a great deal
of good timber saved, and no other could be used; nor would the use of the bark
be lost to the Tanner, as I suppose is presumed in the present Act it would,
should it have admitted felling Oaks in the Winter season, when the bark will
not run.

88. Their Timber when felled they dispose of for diverse uses, as in other
places, some being cleft into pales which they make use of here, not only for
fencing, but to lay their thatch on, instead of laths, as I observed about
Hanford and great Fenton, which I take to be a strong and very good way. It may
be reckoned amongst the Arts too relating to Timber, that there have been very
long structures made in this County out of short pieces of Timber: I shall not
compare them with the floores, roofs, etc. made of the like in Oxfordshire Not:
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 9.. 148.
, having not seen the thing it self I am about to mention: but it is certainly
true that there was a large bridge standing within memory over the Castle ditch
at Tutbury (for I spoke with one there that remembered it pulled down) that was
made of pieces of Timber whereof none were much above a yard in length, and yet
was not supported underneath either with pillars or archwork, or any other prop
whatsoever. Which yet is not so curious a piece of Art, but that it seems to
have been known as long ago as Friar Bacon, who amongst other stupendous
artifices, seems to mention such an one: Infinita alia, says he, possunt fieri,
ut Pontes ultra flumina sine columna, aut aliquo sustentaculo, and Machinae and
ingenia inaudita Rog. Bacon de mirabilib. Artis and Naturae Epist. 4.
, i. e. that Bridges were made over Rivers unsupported either by pillars or any
other prop, with many other such Machines, and unheard of Curiosities. It is
remarkable also that in the Hall at Chartley the Shuffle-board table though ten
yards, 1 foot, and an inch long, is made up of about 260 pieces, which are
generally about 18 inches long, some few only excepted, that are scarce a foot;
which being laid on longer boards for support underneath, are so accuratly
joynted, and glewed together, that no shuffle-board whatever is freer from
rubbs, or casting.

89. There is a joint also in the Shuffleboard at Madeley Manor exquisitely
well done. But of all the Joyners work I met with in this County, there is none
comparable to that of the new dining room at Sr Charles Wolseley's at Wolseley,
the carved work whereof is also very good, both done by one Pierce; and the
Prebends Stalls at Lichfield (which perhaps may be the best of their kind in
England) are no mean piece of work, being lately rebuilt most of them at the
charge of the Gentry of the County, each Stall bearing the Arms of the
Benefactor that gave it: but the most difficult piece of wood work, that was
shown me here, was a Book-desk at the Worshipful Walter Chetwynd's Esquire said to
be the original of the kind now dispersed over the nation, made by Mr John
Ensor of Tamworth out of a solid piece of wood with a turning joint to raise it
higher or lower as convenience shall require, which joint yet is cut so even
and close, that it moves not without a strong screaking pressure of the parts,
the thinnest groat not being to be thrust betwixt the Commissures of it. And
for Turners work, I have seen nothing equal to that of the same person, who
has contrived an Engine to turn wreath work such as that represented Tab. 32.
Fig. 5. which he sent me as one of the meanest pieces of his Art, in comparison
of what he can do of this kind; being able to make such not only of two, but
of 3 or 4 twists, or more if he pleases; and that in so little time, that he
can turn 20 of these, whilst one is cut or rasp't, the only ways they could
make such at London and Oxford, that I could by any means hear of. He also cuts
wreathed pillars with the same Engine (that are not through-work) which plainly
demonstrate that he does turn the other, the furrows whereof are so very deep
and narrow, that it is impossible they should be cut by any other tool, but by
some Engine for turning, whereof there is a Specimen in the legs of the Altar
in University College Chapel, in the University of Oxford.

90. Of the Arts they use here in ordering their Fruit trees, some concern them
whilst young and tender; others when grown old: as to the former of these, I
observed at Purton in a new plantation of Sr Walter Wrottesleys, where there
was earth cast up about each tree in form of a basin to receive the benefit of
the rains and dews, that he had also planted beans upon the same raised earth
round every one of them: which he told me did not only prevent other grasses or
weeds which would else grow there; but also preserve the root of the tree from
the parching heat of the Sun in a due moisture: which no question may be a way
very advantageous to young plantations in great and lasting droughts. And
betwixt Wrottesley and Patingeham not far from Nurton, whereabout they are
arrived to that height of planting, that I found some of their hedges set with
fruit trees, and diverse stocks new grafted: I observed the feathers of Crows
and other foul stuck in the clay which was put round the graffs, to prevent
all sorts of birds from lighting on them, especially those of any great bulk,
which many times break them with their weight: a device not to be contemned,
though perhaps some may imagine it an over nice provision. For enlivening old
trees, the experienced Sr Simon Degg in a paper he sent me concerning
improvements, etc. seems to favor the laying Lime to their roots when old,
which indeed in all likelihood may be agreeable enough; it having this
influence upon Cherry-trees as Pliny asserts, that it hastens the ripening
their fruit, Caerasos praecoces facit, cogitque maturescere, calx admota
radicibus C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 17. cap. 27.
, which I suppose ought to be done in a moderate quantity.

91. And it being an ordinary distemper especially of old trees to be overrun
with Moss, which sucks away some of the best of the Sap, and so weakens the
tree that it bears little or nothing; they cure it here as elsewhere, by
emuscation, which they do not with the Marra of Laurembergius Pet.
Laurembergii Horticulturae Lib. 1. cap. 3.
, the wooden instrument, or hair-cloath of Mr Evelyn, after a sobbing rain Joh.
Evelyn's discourse of Forest trees. Chap. 27. 8.
: but as they think at least a much better way, viz. as I was told by that
prudent Gent. Mr Swynfen of Swynfen, by setting fire to it with a wisp of straw
at diverse places, which will quickly run all over the tree, and so quite free
it of that annoyance. And this they generally choose to do about Christmas
time, if it prove a dry season, and more particularly at Twelftide to make a
show about the Country, that being also the time they make fires upon the hills
in many places in memory of our deliverance from the Danish Yoke, which yet
Henry of Huntington expressly says was celebrated elsewhere-on the feast of St
Brice, i. e. the 13th of November Hen. Huntindoni Historiar. Lib 6. sub. mitium.
. This setting fire to the trees they call a blase, and possibly might be the
time of keeping the feast of St Blase in this Country, though in other places it
was observed on the 3d of February Minshew's (...) in verbo Hock-tide.
: for I find that many of these memorials were celebrated at different times
pro more loci, as the deliverance from the Danes above mentioned was; and so
the feast of Hock-tide, as is amply made appear in the History of Oxfordshire
Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 8.. 26, 27.
.

92. Next the Vegetables, the Arts relating to Brutes fall under consideration,
amongst which, first of such as concern the winged Kingdom, under which head I
reckon all flying Insects, as well as feathered foul, and therefore must
account for a sort of Beebives they have in this County, quite different from
any used in the South of England, which they make of Osier-twiggs interwoven
like a basket, and then plastered over with a mixture of Clay and Cow Dung, or
as I saw some at Mr Rudyards at the Abbey of Dieu le Cresse, daubed over with a
composition of Cow Dung and turff-Ess, and over that again with Lime, Which
seem only to be the hives of ancient times, still retained here, Virgil,
Columella, and Palladius all testifying that they were made of such twiggs in
their days, Alvearia vimine texta, and not only of Osiers, but of the ferula,
withy, etc Pub. Virgil. Georgic. Lib. 4. v. 34. Jun. Mother. Columellae de re
Rustic. Lib. 9. cap. 6 and Pallad. Rutilii de re Rustic. Lib. 1. tit. 38.
. and as Mr Butler affirms of privet and hasle Char. Butlers History of Bees
Chap. 3.
; which Pliny too advises should be coated over with Cow Dung, circumlini
Alveos fimo bubulo utilissimum C. Plinii 2di. Not. Hist. Lib. 21. cap. 14.
, being his very words; to which Mt Butler, in the forecited Chapter, adds lime
and ashes. Over all this they put a straw hood, as in the Southern Counties, to
keep the wax and honey from melting in the Summer, and to cast of the rain and
keep the bees warm in winter.

-- nam frigore mella
Cogit hiems, eademque calor liquefacta remittit,
Vtraquevis apibus pariter metuenda Pub. Virgilii Georgic. Lib. 4. v. 35, 36,
37.
--
over which they pegg a square piece of wood at the top, as I saw some in the
garden of the Reverend Mr Rhodes Rector of Blithefield, which cast of the rain
upon the more spreading part of the hood, which must needs otherwise enter in
some measure in at the top of it, where the hollow ends of the straw are open
to the weather.

93. And such as these for the most part they use all over the Country, but at
the Worshipful John Whitehall's of Pipe-Ridware Esquire who is a most intelligent
Bee-Master, I was shown great variety of hives most of his own contrivance:
some being made square, others round, both placed over one another, with
drawers of wood between, like the Colony hives described in Oxfordshire Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 9.. 120.
: others he had made out of hollow-trees, which were sawn asunder at due
distances, which no doubt on it are as agreeable as any kind whatever, these
being the first natural hives for bees, before they were brought under an
artificial regimen; and therefore it was no doubt, that both Columella and
Palladius commend them for this purpose, ligno cavatae Arboris fabricentur,
let-their hives be made of hollow trees, say both those grave Authors, in their
Chapters of Bee-houses Locis supra citatis.
. And Virgil tells us they delighted to live, exesaeque arboris antro Pub.
Virgilii Georgic. Lib. 4. v. 44.
. But the hives he preferred before all the rest, he made of brick, there being
several stalls or gallerys of them divided into squares of brick, on three
sides, with windows behind and before to see their working; the fore- South
windows in Summer, being covered with Matt to preserve the honey. Within these
squares of brick he sets his frames of wood, for the bees to work on, which he
can take away as they work downward. He makes use notwithstanding both of straw
and wicker hives covered with Cowdung and Lime, but neither of them made after
the ordinary manner, viz. not conical at top, but cylindraceous, and open at
top and bottom, which he places first on the top of the brick-work, and
underneath again to receive the bees at last, so as to be conveyed again to the
top of the brick-work as at first. Of which brick-hives he has some single,
others many together: but the single he counts best, because the most
manageable.

94. But the nicest piece of Art that ever I saw, any way relating to the
feathered Kingdom, and indeed the most curious, was an instrument shown me by
the right Worshipful Sr Richard Astley of Pateshull Baronet, of his own
Invention, only to match game-Cocks, discovering their sizes both as to lengh
and girth, to so great an accuracy, that there cannot be easily any the least
mistake: for the better apprehension of which Instrument I have here annexed it
Tab. 32. Fig. 6. with a Cock put in it at full stretch; where the Letter a,
shows the Collistrigium or pillory, standing upon a pedestall fixed to the plate
of brass below, 24 inches long, which opens by the handles at b, and shutts
close of it self by the help of springs fastn'd within the ring; c, a hollow
plate placed also upon a pedestall, but moveable in a groove 'twixt d and e,
when drawn by the coard f, wound about the wheel g; h h, show the Pedicae or
stocks set also upon a movable pedestall opening and shutting as the pillory,
which drawn out as far as the length of the Cock will permit, by the coard i,
that is wound round the wheel k, by a key or winder applied to the Axis l, (as
the wheel g also is) both being stopped by the springs m m, which fall into the
teeth of the wheels at no, give an exact measure of the length of the Cock to
the eighth part of an inch, according to the divisions upon the latter part of
the plate. Then for the Size of its body, it is measured by the girth, either
by the brass ring described Fig. 7. which may be taken in, or let out, likewise
to the eighth part of an inch, according to the divisions on the plate; or else
by a Girdle and buckle, as may be seen upon the cock: all which have been
approved by the best Masters.

95. Relating to four-footed beasts, they have a pretty device here, which I
first espied at Over-Bradnup, and near Ashenburst house (formerly the seat of
an ancient family of the same name) to prevent their hogs from rooting; which
they do hereabout (and as I found after in most parts of the County) not with
rings as elsewhere, but with a forked Iron armed at each end with a fin, or
half-barb of an arrow, which being thrust through the Selvedg of a hog's nose,
can by no means return, the bottom or square part of the fork that lies upon
the nose being also coated with a hollow cylindraceous moveable ring as in Fig.
8. so that he cannot take hold enough to turn up the earth. I also met in this
Country with another useful experiment relating to this sort of Animals at
great-Heywood, where I was shown by Mrs Whitby the virtuous wife of my worthy
friend Mr Thomas Whitby (whose assistance in this work I must ever acknowledge)
the Runnet of Ranton (so called as they told me because thence they first had
it) made of the innermost membran of a Calves Stomach or Mawe, which being
washed clean from all filth, salted, and hung up in brown papers, when they
have occasion to use it, they only wash off the Salt, and steep a bit about the
breadth of a shilling in 4 or 5 spoonfulls of fair water all night, and this
water put to milk; will turn it to curds, which being so useful a thing in
houswifry, I could not but mention it.

96. Another odd sort of Art I was told of in this County, which must not be
omitted, of curing the disease in Cattle they here call the Foul, that
proceeds as it is though from their excessive fatness, which sometimes falling
into their legs and feet, causes such impostumes or cores of putrifyed matter,
that they cannot go far: upon which account though the beef of them be never
the worse for the shambles, yet being rendered hereby incapable of being
brought to a profitable Market, their owners are therefore forced to have
recourse to some remedy, which is commonly this. They stricktly observe the
turf, where the Ox, Cow, or Heifer that is thus distempered, sets his sick
foot when he first rises in the morning, upon which they usually find some of
the Sanies or matter of the impostume presst out by his weight; this very turf
with the impression upon it, they cut up and hang upon a tree or hedge toward
the North wind, which blowing upon it the beast becomes cured in three or four
days: and this I was told about Tamworth was frequently practiced there with
good success to this day. Which as Sr Kenelm Digby thinks seems indeed to be
done, by a Sympathetic return of the Spirits of this impostumated matter, now
mixed with the cold and dry Atoms of the North wind, to their first source in
the ulcerated foot of the Animal; the malady indeed requiring no other help,
than to be well dried and refresh't, which is effectually done by the cold
nitrous particles of the Air coming from that quarter Sr Kenelm Digbys
discourse of Sympathetick powder, sub finem.
. And these are all the Arts relating to quadrupeds worthy notice here, but
that at Pateshull in the stables, I observed the Mangers were somewhat
extraordinary, being so placed that the range of them headed the end of the
barn, whence the Oats might be put into them through tunnels in the partition,
without bringing them round out of the barn into the Stable.

97. Lastly we come to the Arts that respect Mankind, amongst which as
elsewhere the civility of precedence must be allowed to the women, and that as
well in punishments as favors. For the former whereof, they have such a
peculiar artifice at New Castle and Walsall, for correcting of Scolds, which it
does too so effectually, and so very safely, that I look upon it as much to be
preferred to the Cucking-Stoole, which not only endangers the health of the
party, but also gives the tongue liberty 'twixt every dipp; to neither of which
this is at all liable: it being such a Bridle for the tongue, as not only quite
deprives them of speech, but brings shame for the transgression, and humility
thereupon, before it is taken off. Which being an instrument scarce hard of,
much less seen, I have here presented it to the Readers view Tab. 32. Fig. 9.
as it was taken from the original one, made of Iron, at New Castle under Lyme.
Wherein the Letter a, shows the joynted collar that comes round the neck; b, c,
the loops and staples, to let it out and in, according to the bigness and
slenderness of the neck; d, the joynted semicircle that comes over the head,
made forked at one end to let through the nose; and e, the plate of Iron that
is put into the mouth, and keeps down the tongue. Which being put upon the
offender by order of the Magistrate, and fastened with a padlock behind, she is
lead round the Town by an Officer to her shame, nor is it taken off, till
after the party begins to show all external signs imaginable of humiliation
and amendment. And as for any other Arts that concern this Sex, in one of the
lodging rooms at Trentham Hall I was shown a most delicate linen suit of
hangings, which being made by Nunns, and most artificially done, belong to this
place, and must not be omitted; though I must confess my inability to describe
them to that advantage they really deserve, the whole consisting all of square
panes; some great, others little, yet preserving uniformity; the one half
plain, the other wrought in cheque with a topiary sort of Needlework of so
great variety, that it is hard (if at all) to find two alike, though they are in
number great and small, as well as I could tell them, 3317 Squares.

98. As for the Arts relating to Men, it must not be expected that any great
improvements, much less any new Inventions should have been made here in those
we call Liberal: but amongst the Mechanics, I met with several useful and
curious things: particularly at a Smiths shop a little South of Mole-Copp, I
found an Engine that managed a large Sledg to so great advantage, that it
frequently supplied the defect of a man ordinarily had elsewhere for that
purpose, the Sledg being set in an Axis of wood, from whence goes a rodd of
Iron fastened to a pallet, that reaches out a little beyond the Anvil, which
being drawn down by the foot of the Smith, who keeps time to it with his
Hand-Hammer, is returned again by three springs of holly, that clasp the Axis
the contrary way. The same I also found at Betley, Caverswall, and elsewhere,
but somewhat different from that near Mole-Copp, the Sledg being returned by
two poles above it, like the pole of a turning-lat he, whereas the springs of
the former were fastened below it. For the better understanding whereof, and
because altogether unknown in the Southern parts, I have caused its figure to
be exhibited Tab. 32. Fig. 10. In which the Letter a shows the Sledg fixed in
the Axis b, hanging between two jambs or standards c c, d the rodd of Iron that
comes down to the pallet e coming out beyond the Anvill, f the place where the
Smith sets his foot when he draws down the Sledg, g g the poles above that
return it. With which Engine I saw a Smith make a Horse-shooe, as they can also
any other smaller sorts of wares, almost as quick as if another had struck the
Sledg to him.

99. In the Coopers trade at the right Honorable the Lord Wards at Dudley
Castle I was shown barrells in the Cellar having holes bored in the top of the
head just under the rim of them, opposite to the tap holes, to let forth the
working of the drink, which seems much better than that at the bung, the
Spirits of the drink which naturally fly upward, being hereby preserved; scarce
any of them passing with the froth through this hole; which when the drink has
done working, is closed up with clay, as the bung usually is. And in Cookery at
the Worshipful Walter Chetwynds of Ingestre Esquire I tasted potted Otter so
artificially ordered by his excellent Cook, that it required a very nice and
judicious palate to distinguish it from Venison. And now I am fallen in amongst
the meats and drinks (which are no where better, or more plentiful, than in
this County) I cannot forget a piece of Art, that I found in the Hall of the
right Honorable William Lord Paget at Beaudesart, made for punishment of the
disorders, that sometimes attend feasting in Christmas time, etc. called the
finger-Stocks; into which the Lord of misrule, used formerly to put the fingers
of all such persons as committed misdemeanors, or broke such rules, as by
consent were agreed on for the time of keeping Christmas, amongst the Servants
and others of promiscuous quality: these being divided in like manner as the
stocks for the legs, and having several holes of different Sizes fit for the
scantlings of all fingers, as represented in the Table Fig, 11.

1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


To the right Worshipful S. RICHARD ASTLEY of P^t^^^^ull K^ and Baronet This
32 Table of unusual things of Art where of the 6 and 7 relate to HIMSELF is
humbly offered to his generous Patron^g^ by R.P. LL. D.



MBurg De^ in et s.


100. And these are all the Arts that concern Mankind, unless it be also worth
notice that at the right Honorable the Lord Gerards at Gerards Bromley, there
are the pictures of Henry the great of France and his Queen, both upon the same
indented board, which if beheld directly, you only perceive a confused piece of
work; but if obliquely, of one side you see the Kings, and on the other the
Queens picture, which I am told (and not unlikely) were made thus* The board
being indented according to the magnitude of the Pictures, the prints or
paintings were cut into parallel pieces, equal to the depth and number of the
Indentures on the board; which being nicely done, the parallel pieces of the
Kings picture, were pasted on the flatts that strike the Eye beholding it
obliquely, on one side of the board; and those of the Queens on the other; so
that the edges of the parallel pieces of the prints or paintings exactly
joining on the edges of the Indentures, the work was done. To which let me add
(it being a Curiosity much of the same kind) that Mrs Rebeckah Normansell of
Wolverhampton, has so excellent a hand in the management of her Cisers, that
she has curiously cut out the Tomb abovementioned See Chap. 8.. 76.
of that eminently Loyal Gent. Coll. John Lane with all the Trophies,
Inscriptions, etc. in paper: to which I never saw any thing equal; but some few
such pieces in the Musaeum at Oxford Vid. Scrinium Listerianum in Musaeo
Ashmoleano.
, and part of a Greek Chapter I once saw at London cut out of white paper,
which laid upon black, was as legible as the same in any printed
Greek-Testament.

CHAP. X. Of Antiquities.
1. FOR Satisfaction of the Reader, upon what terms I add this Chapter of
Antiquities to my Natural History, it seeming to some altogether foreign to
the purpose: I take leave to acquaint him, before I advance any further, that I
intend not to meddle with the pedigrees or descents either of families or
lands, knowing a much abler pen now employed about it Walter Chetwynd of
Ingestre Esquire
; nor of the antiquities or foundations of Religious houses, or any other pious
or Civil performances: it being indeed my design in this Chapter, to omit, as
much as may be, both persons and actions, and chiefly apply my self to things;
and amongst these too, only of such as are very remote from the present Age,
whether found under ground, or whereof there yet remain any footsteps above it;
such as ancient Medalls, Ways, Lows, Pavements, Vrns, Monuments of Stone,
Fortifications, etc. whether of the ancient Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes, or
Normans. Which being all made and fashioned out of Natural things, may as well
be brought under a Natural History as any thing of Art: so that this seems
little else but a continuation of the former Chapter; the subject of that,
being the Novel Arts exercised here in this present age; and of this, the
ancient ones; whereof in the same order as in the History of Oxfordshire Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10.. 1.
.

2. And yet the first thing that offers it self to my consideration, is the
original people that inhabited this Country before the coming of the Romans: I
know both Ptolomy and Mr Camden jointly agree, that they were the Cornavii that
were spread over this, and Warwic, Worcester, Salop, and Cheshires: but Tacitus
mentioning a British people hereabout that were called Iceni, who took distaste
at the Propraetor Ostorius Scapula's blocking up their Countrymen between the
Rivers Antona and Sabrina Corn. Taciti Annalium Lib. ^2. cap. 31.
, I cannot but suspect they belonged in part to this place: for that the Simeni
of Norfolk, etc. whom Mr Camden would have to be the only Iceni, they seem to
be too remote to be concerned at such an action; and so does the River Nen to
be the Antona of Tacitus, as both Sr Hen. Savil Sr Hen. Savil's Translat. of
the 12. Book of Ta^itus's. Annals.. 8.
, and Mr Camden would have it Camden in Northamptonshire.
, which perhaps may be a corruption through frequent transcribing for one of
the Avona's, betwixt which and Severn they might easily be coped up; but not so
betwixt it and the River Nen, which is so far from joining with it, that it
holds a quite contrary course. Beside it seems pretty probable that these
Iceni, were neighbors to the Congi or Cangi, against whom the Roman Army was
presently lead after the defeat of the Iceni, whose Territories reached, as
Tacitus himself also confesses, almost to the Irish Sea Corn. Taciti Annalium.
Lib. 12. cap. 32.
, wherein in a manner he comes up to Ptolomy, who places the (...) or
Promontorium Ganganorum at Ormeshead-point or Lheyn Gogarth in Caernarvonshire
Claud. Ptolomaei Geograph. Lib. 2. cap. 3. Edit. Bertii.
: the Cangi in all likelihood also held all Denbighshire, and a piece of
Cheshire, where the old Condate now Congleton, and Conghull, seem to preserve
the Memory of them.

3. But that which moves me most to think there was such a people as the Iceni
both in Worcestershire and Staffordshire, is the Roman Consular way which
remains to this hour, and passes through both those Counties by the name of
Ickenild-street, which how it should come by, but from the people whose
Territories it was made through, I cannot imagine. If it be objected that the
Iceni, which Tacitus there mentions, must needs be the same with those of
Norfolk, etc. for that at the same place he speaks of a Colony of veteran
Soldiers posted at Camalodunum, a City of the Trinobantes next neighbors to
the Iceni of Norfolk, etc. to repress the rebel Britans upon all occasions,
which were drawn out at that time against the Silures Corn. Taciti Annalium.
Lib. 12. cap. 32, 33.
. I answer that if we may believe Ptolomy there were two Camalodunums, one in
the Country of the Trinobantes, and another in the Territories of the Cornavii
or Cangi, about the South parts of Cheshire, whence he might much more probably
draw out these Veteran Soldiers, being much nearer to the Silures, than from
the Camalodunum of the Trinobantes: not to mention that Ptolomy calls that of
the Trinobantes (...) Camudolanum, and not Camulodunum as he does that of the
Cangi, which is more agreeable to Tacitus Claud. Ptolomaei Geog. loco supra
citato.
.

4. It being thus made at lest probable, that the original Inhabitants of this
County might also be Iceni, as well as those of Norfolk, etc. who though they
at first carried temselves fair to the Romans, yet seeing them use their
neighbors in that manner as they did, thus stoutly interposed: let us next
take a view of what marks there yet remain, of their places of habitation,
defense, etc. to one or both of which I think I cannot but referr that noble
antiquity near Wrottesley in this County, where there yet remains, either the
foundation of some ancient British City, or other fortification, of great
extent; it including above a moiety of Wrottesley, and part of Pateshull,
Pepperhill, and Bonningal parks; also some parcel of the two Commons of
Kingswood and West-bach, the whole containing in circuit about 3 or 4 miles,
lyeing part in Staffordshire and part in Shropshire, as marked out by the
shaded line in the Map. Within the limits whereof there are several partitions
yet visible, running diverse ways like the sides of streets, though hard to be
fully traced, because interrupted both by the mattock and plow, the foundations
being daily dugg up by the former, to mend highways, make enclosures, and
pavements; and then all levelled by the latter: which together with the large
hinges for doors, an antique dagger, that have been found here, and some of
the stones squared; make me rather think it some ruinated City, than a
fortification only: otherwise I could have been content to have thought it some
such British vallum, or encampment, as Tacitus acquaints us Caractacus made
upon a hill in Shropshire, upon the banks of the River Clun, with great stones
rudely heap't upon one another, to defend him from the impressions of the Roman
Army, Corn. Taciti Annalium Lib. 12, cap. 33, 34, 35,
, the remains whereof, says Camden, are to be seen at this day Camden's
Britannia in Shropshire.
.

5. Such a Rampire as this, I say, I could have easily believed it, there
having been just such great stones found hereabout, as we read Caractacus, and
other British Princes, were used to fortify withal: whereof I was told of one,
that contained 100 loads; another so great, that after 10 loads of stone were
hewed off it, required 36 yoaks of Oxen to draw it, and made the great Cistern
in the Mault-house at Wrottesley, which though left very thick both at bottom
and sides, is yet so capacious, that it will wet 37 strike of barley at a time.
Or at lest I could have thought it some Camp of the Danes, who as Simeon
Dunelmensis Sim. Dunelmensis Hist. de gestis Reg. Angl. in An. 911.
, John Brompton Chron. Johan. Brompton Abb. Jornal. in vita Edwardi Sen.
, and Florentius Wigorniensis Florent. Wigorn Chron. ex. Chron. in An. 911.
all testify, were overthrown at Totenhale, Teotenhale, or Theotfanhele, now
Tettenhall not far off Vid.. 36. infra.
; the whole, or greatest part of it, being I think in that parish at this very
day: but that the parallel partitions within the out wall, whose foundations
are still visible, and represent streets running different ways, put it I think
out of doubt, that it must have been a City, and that of the Britans, for that
I could hear of no name it ever had, nor have the Inhabitants hereabout any
tradition concerning it, of any sort whatsoever, somewhat whereof would have
certainly been preserved, had it either been Roman; or so late as either the
Saxon, or Danish conquests of this nation.

6. And this is the only Antiquity that seems to have any pretense of ever
having been a British habitation, unless the tradition concerning Willbrighton
in this County, viz. that the Romans, when they came against it, termed it
Villam Britonum (which name it still keeps with little alteration) may pass for
one: but there being no footsteps remaining of its ever being tenible, though it
lies high, I much question whether this tradition, have not been broached of
late years, by some fond Etymologist. Though it cannot be denied that the Romans
had indeed some action hereabout, there being a raised work here at Morton not
far off, which seems to be of their fashion; and no question the large Mere
that lies just below it, had its name of Aqualat [quasi aqua lata] from them;
and the banks on the N. N. E. side of it, the name of Anc's-hills, from some
Roman Captain that lay upon them, whose name or at lest praenomen perhaps might
be Ancus. Not to mention that all these are in or near the parish of Forton,
and that there is a village not far off also called Warton, which are both
thought to derive their names from some such actions, as are presumed by the
story, to have happened hereabout. But I do by no means prescribe to my Reader
in this matter, desiring him to believe no more than he thinks these grounds
will fairly admit of; every body being left in this, and all other matters
whatever in this History to his own creed.

7. But though I could certainly meet with no other places of habitation of the
Britans, either fortified with great stones, or otherwise fenced; yet there are
several fortifications made of earth, cast up into high banks, with
entrenchments round them, in such manner and form as the places would best
admit of, that may be presumed to be theirs. For that the Britans did fortify
after this manner too, as well as with stones, we have also the testimony of
Tacitus, who tells us that the Iceni abovementioned did choose a place for
fight, septum agresti aggere, aditu angusto, ne pervius equiti foret, fenced
with a bank of earth, having a narrow entrance, to keep off the horse Corn.
Taciti Annalium Lib. 12. cap. 31.
: such as that about a quarter of a mile to the Westward of over Stonall, where
there is an old fortification situate upon a hill, called in ancient writings,
relating to the lands hereabout, as I was told by Mr Brown of Footerley hard
by, Castle-old-ford, which perhaps should be rather written Castle-old-fort,
like the Blaestium of Antonine, in British, Castle-hean, or Castrum vetus
Camden's Britannia in Herefordshire.
, being encompassed with a double trench, in diameter between the entrances
(that seem to have been on the SE and NW sides) 160 paces. Which I am willing
to think to be a British Rampire because of the ancient name, and that I cannot
account for any action hereabout of later date: though I must confess the
spear-heads, and other warlike instruments plowed up within it, all of Iron,
seem to argue it of less standing.

8. For though Caesar acquaints us that the Britans had Iron, yet they finding it
then by the Sea side only, and in such small quantities, that they made their
Money of it C. Jul. Caesaris Commentarior. de bello Gallico Lib. 5.
; we have reason to believe that for the most part at lest they sharpened their
warlike instruments rather with stones than metal, especial in the more
Northerly and inland Countries, where they sometimes meet with flints in shape
of arrow-heads, whereof I had one sent me by the learned and ingenious Charles
Cotton Esquire found not far from his pleasant Mansion at Beresford, exactly in the
form of a bearded arrow, jagg'd at each side, with a larger stemm in the
middle, whereby I suppose it was fixed to the wood, as in Tab. 33. Fig. 1.
These they find in Scotland in much greater plenty, especially in the
prefectury of Aberdeen, which as the learned Sr Robert Sibbald informs us, they
there call Elf-Arrows, Lamiarum Sagittas, imagining they drop from the clouds,
not being to be found upon a diligent search, but now and then by chance in the
high beaten roads D. Roberti Sibbaldi Prodrom. Not. Hist. Scotiae. part. 2.
Lib. 4. cap. 7.
(like the transparent Ombriae, or hexangular Chrystals of Italy above
mentioned Chap. 5.. 5, 6.
) upon which account it is too, that the noble Veronese Ludovicus Moscardus,
calls them Pietre Ceraunie, whereof he has given us several Sculptures, not
unlike to ours, as represented above Musai Ludovici Moscardi Lib 2. cap. 50.
.

9. Nor did the Britans only head their arrows with flint, but also their
matarae or British darts, which were thrown by those that fought in Essedis C.
Jul. Caesaris Commentarior. de bello Gallico Lib. 4.
, whereof I guess this is one I had given me, found near Leek, by my worthy
friend Mr Thomas Gent, curiously jagg'd at the edges with such like teeth as a
Sickle, and otherwise wrought upon the flat, as in Tab. 33. Fig. 2. by which we
may conclude, not only that these arrow and Spear-heads, are all artificial,
whatever is pretended; but also that they had anciently some way of working of
flints by the tool, which may be seen by the marks, as well as they had of the
Egyptian Porphyry: which as the aforesaid worthy Gent. Sr Robert Sibbald thinks
they learned of the Romans Cl. D. Rob. Sibbaldi Prodromi loco supra citato.
, who as Aldrovandus assures us anciently used such weapons made of stones
Vlyss. Aldrovandi Musaei Motall Lib. 4. cap. 17.
. However still it not being hence deducible, but they may be British, they are
not ill placed here, whatever original they have had from either Nation. Either
the Britans, Romans, or both, also made them Axes of Stone, whereof there was
one found on the Wever-hills made of a speckled flint ground to an edg, in the
form as described Tab. 33. Fig. 3. and I heard of such another that was met
with on the Morridg; which how they might be fastened to a helve, may be seen in
the Musaeum Ashmoleanum, where there are several Indian ones of the like kind,
fitted up in the same order as when formerly used.

10. Near Seasdon in this County upon the edg of Shropshire, at a place now
called Abbots or rather Ape-wood Castle, without all doubt there was a very
ancient, and no less considerable fortification; it standing very lofty on a
round Promontory, and having a vast prospect to the South-West into Shropshire,
at which very place though the entrenchment be but small, yet the whole steep
ridg of the bending bank all along 'twixt it and Chasphill, for a mile
together, having hollows cut in the ground, over which it is thought anciently
they set their Tents, the whole seems but one continued fortification, the two
hills at each end being the principal bastions: which I am also inclined to
believe to have been a British work, for the reasons before alleged in the case
of Castle-old-fort: and that the Lows on Womborn heath not far distant, may
have been raised over some eminent Roman Commanders, lost in the conflicts they
might have with the Britans hereabout. And for other British antiquities that
are any way probably such, I met with none, unless the great stone in a field
South of Cannock Church; and that other of a square figure a little tapering
toward the top, 2 yards and an inch high, and near 4 yards about, having two
chops in the top of it, so that at a distance it appears a triceps, standing in
a leasow near the two Comptons in the parish of Kinfare, by some called Baston,
by others Bolt-stone, there being a story that a Giant threw it from Aston (a
place under Kinfare edg) hither; may be accounted such.

11. Which perhaps they may, and not without reason; whether we esteem them as
British Dieties, as the Devil's bolts in Yorkshire, and Devils coits in
Oxfordshire, have been proved to be at large Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10.
from.. 101. to. 106.
; or some memorials of battles fought thereabout; that at Kinfare being also
called by the more knowing sort of people, by the name of the battle-stone: the
Britans usually erecting such monuments as these, upon a civil, as well as a
religious account. Witness Kits-Coty-house in Kent; Roll-wright in Oxfordshire;
and Stonebenge in Wiltshire; the two former I think being certainly set up in
memory of battles Will. Lambard's perambulation of Kent in Aylesford. and Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10.. 95.96.
: and the latter most probably as some British Forum or Temple, and not of any
Roman pagan Diety, as Inego Jones would have it Inigo Jones's Stonebenge
restored. and Joh. Webb's vindication of Stonhenge restored.
: the Romans at that time being skillfull in Architecture, and most other Arts,
and therefore no question had they built it, would have made a much more
artificial structure, than this appears to have ever been; nor should it have
wanted an inscription; or being some way or other transmitted in their writings
down to all posterity. Nor is it less unlikely, that it should ever be erected
for a Danish forum for inauguration of their Kings as Dr Charleton would
persuade us Walt. Charleton's Chorea Gigantum, or Stonhenge restored to the
Danes.
; for then certainly all the Kings of the Danish race had been crowned either
there, or else at Rollwright, or some other such like Cirque of stone
elsewhere; whereas we find Canutus crowned at London, Harold Harefoot at
Oxford, and Hardi-canute likewise at London Sr Richard Baker's Chronicle of the
Kings of England in their respective reigns.
. Not to mention that the Danish transactions here in England are of so late a
date, that our Historians have given us a tolerable account of them from their
very first entrance; and would not certainly have been silent of so
considerable a structure, had they been the Authors of it, either as a Forum,
or upon any other account.

12. Nor have I more to add of British antiquities but that a ground called
Christianfield near Stitchbrook in this County, is said to be the place where
St Amphibalus taught the British Christans converted by the Martyrdom of St
Alban, who flying from the bloody persecution of Maximian raised in Britan An.
286, followed him hither 84 miles, as Ross affirms it, from the place of their
conversions Ex libro Johannis Rufi MS. de Episcopis Wigorn.
; where the Romans that were sent after them (some say from Verulam, others
from Etocetum now Wall as the tradition goes here) finding them in the exercise
of their Religion, took them and carried them to the place where Lichfield now
is, and martyred 1000 of them there, leaving their bodies unburyed to be
devowered by birds and beasts Ibidem.
, whence the place yet retains the name of Lichfield or Cadaverum campus, the
field of dead bodies to this very day, the City bearing for their Device,
rather than Arms, an Escocheon of Landscape with many Martyrs in it, in
several manners massacred: amongst which yet we must not reckon St Amphibalus,
whom they carried away with them to Verulam, and martyred him at Redburn a
place between that and Annable which took its name from him Vid. Jacob.
Vsserium de Britanicar. Ecclesiarum. primordiis.
, as Lichfield from his Disciples. And this I take to be the utmost antiquity
of that City, which yet seems older than Stafford, though it give denomination to
the whole County, whereof we hear nothing till about 200 years after in the
time of Merlin the British Prophet who flourish't about the year 480, and wrote
that two Kings should dubium praelium committere propter Leenam in Vado Baculi
Inter collect. Joh. Lelandi MS. in Bib. Bod. NE. F. 11:18.
, which I know not how to expound, unless he meant they should contend for a
Mistress there. Of the later Antiquities of which two places, the Reader may
expect more hereafter.

13. Of the Roman Antiquities yet remaining in this County, the most
considerable of any are their public ways, there being two of the four eminent
Basilical stratae, otherwise called Praetorian, and sometimes Consular or
Military ways, viz. Watlingstreet and Ickenildstreet, yet remaining high and
lofty, being but little decayed, or any way interrupted either by time or the
plow: the privileges whereof, and manner of making them, being discoursed of in
Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10.. 19, 20, 21.
, I shall wave them here, only noting by the way, that they seem not here to
have used the same Method prescribed by Statius, i. e. first digging a deep
trench till they come to a good bottom, and then raising a high ridg upon a
firm foundation of other materials than what they found upon the place Papin.
Statii Silvar Lib. 4. in via. Domition.
: these seeming only to be made of gravel dugg all along by the sides of each
way, as may be seen upon the Watlingstreet, as you pass between Wall and
Frog-Homer, Occamsley pitts near Knaves-Castle seeming to have been made upon
this account only; and more plainly upon the Ickenildstreet near little-Aston:
the former entering the County at Faseley bridge and running from ESE to WNW as
far as 4 Crosses, where it turns a little, and bears somewhat nearer the West,
about W and by N, and so goes into Shropshire at Crackley-bank; and the latter
entering Staffordshire a little to the Westward of Sr Charles Holt's park, and
running from S SW to N NE to a little beyond Shenston, where it crosses the
Watlingstreet, and then bears away N E and by N, and so enters Darby-shire over
the Dove at Monks-bridg: both lyeing within the County in manner and form, and
bearing to the Villages placed on each hand, as described in the Mapp perfixt
to this Essay by two shaded lines.

14. Now that the former of these is the true Watlingstreet, though Holinshead
mentions another that passes through Yorkshire k, I think so very evident that
there needs no debate: but whether the latter be the true Ickenildstreet, or
that mentioned in Oxfordshire Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10.. 22.23.
deserves consideration; both retaining the same name to this very day, and
perhaps for the same reason, as either leading to, or passing through the
Countries of the Iceni, there seeming to have been two Colonies of British
people that enjoyed the same name: those mentioned by Tacitus, who took distaste
at Ostorius's blocking up the Britans between Antona and Sabrina, being more
likely the inhabitants of this County and Worcestershire, than of Norfolk, etc.
as was shown above. So that the Ickenildstreet of Oxfordshire seems to have
been so called, for that it tends toward the Iceni of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Huntington, and Cambridgshires; and this, for that it was made through the
Country of the other Iceni, both being rightly so called; only I look upon this
of Staffordshire, as the more remarkable of the two, and so to be that
Ickenildstreet which is usually reckoned one of the four basilical or great
ways of England, and not that of Oxfordshire: this being raised all along,
paved at some places Upon Burton Moore.
, and very signal almost wherever it goes; whereas that of Oxfordshire is not
so there, whatever it may be in other Counties; which also seems to hint that
the Iceni of these Counties were a more considerable people too, than those of
Norfolk, etc.

15. Upon these Consular, Praetorian, or military ways, the Romans established
their Itineraries, Stations, or Mansions at certain distances, which seem to
have been the extent of the daily marches of their Soldiers; the length whereof
as they were seldom under ten, so they as rarely exceeded thirty Italian miles.
Of which Stations or Mansions I find but two certain, within the limits of this
County, and these both upon Raphael Holinshead's Hist. descript. of Britan.
Vol. 1. Chap. 19.
the Watlingstreet, viz. Etocetum and Pennocrucium, the former whereof Mr
Camden computes, and that rightly, to be the village of Wall, about a mile and
to the SSW of Lichfield Camdens Britannia in Staffordsh.
, where just at the same distance that Antonine setts betwixt it and
Manuessedum or Mancester in Warwickshire, there remains in the Lane upon the
north side of the street-way some small fragments of a wall, which it is
supposed gave the present name to the village, and in the corn-field now called
the butts between the village and some small cottages on the brook below, I was
shown two pavements one above the another at lest 4 foot, the uppermost (which
lay within 18 inches of the surface) being made for the most part of Lime and
rubble-stone; and the lowermost, of pebbles and gravel knit together with a
very hard cement about 4 inches thick, laid upon a foundation of Roman brick;
and under them boulder-stone of a foot thick more. Above the uppermost of these
they often meet with Roman money, whereof I was shown 3 pieces, one of Nero,
another of Domitian, and a third so eaten with rust, that it could not be
distinguished. On the other side the way in a ground belonging to Chesterfield,
there are also antiquities found in digging, amongst which they lately met with
the pedestall of an antique broken pillar very well wrought, which lay pretty
deep just on the brink of the way, and now remains at the widow Smiths in
Chesterfield, where I took the draught of it, in order to be engraven, as in
Tab. 33. Fig. 4.

16. But though Mr Camden be right in the situation of the old Etocetum, yet I
think him not so, in his placing Pennocrucium at Penkridg in this County: for
though the name be more agreeable, than of any other place, yet it not lying upon
the Watlingstreet, but two miles off it, nor at the distance assigned in the
Itinerary of Antonine, I cannot but rather think it to have been at Stretton,
so called by the Saxons ( quasi the Town upon the street) after it came into
their possession, which lies just upon the way, and answers the distance very
exactly, for though it measure but eleven Staffordshire miles, yet they may very
well be esteemed 12 Italian ones, which is the just distance assigned by
Antonine 'twixt those two Stations Antonini Itinerar. Britan. Sec^ndum Ald.
Manutium. Jos. Simlerum. Jerome. Suritam.
. Nor lies there any objection against this conjecture, but that no Roman
coins or other antiquities are found thereabout; to which I have this to
reply, that neither are there at Penkridg, either where it now stands, or where
it stood anciently, on the other side the River, further off the street way.
Upon the Ickenild street there are none of these military stations mentioned by
Antonine, yet doubtless there were such, though not mentiond in the Tables, these
ways being raised for avoiding the trouble and danger of marching in strange
Countries, and the Mansions settled on them at convenient distances, for the
safe repose of their Armies at night: whereof it is like Streethey near
Lichfield was one: and Streeton near Burton another; these two being near as
far distant on the Ickenild, as Wall and Streeton on the Watlingstreet.

17. I know that the Reverend Dr. Fulk of Cambridg makes the tenth journey of
Antonine, a Glamoventa Mediolano, to pass through this County, as may plainly
be seen in the second Edition of the said Itinerary by William Harrison, which
he makes run Northwestward from Coventry, which he says is the old Alone, to
Galacum which he makes Lichfield, and thence to Bremetonacis which he says was
Trentham, and so to Coccium or Congleton in Cheshire See Bartons Commentary on
Antonines Itinerary, in the 2 Edition of that Itinerary by Will. Harrison.
: but there appearing no footsteps (that I can remember) of this, he must
pardon me if I do not subscribe to his opinion, till better informed. Beside
these Basilical or Consular ways there were others of like erection, though less
extent, called Vicinales, quod in vicos ducebant; whereof I scarce met with any
in this County: unless I may take leave to account the high paved way at
Wootton near Eccleshall a part of one of these, which seems not to have been
made by reason of any wet or dirty way, it being raised between two other deep
ways, which lie dry enough too. Also at Edingal in this County, about a mile E
N E of the Town, there remains a part of such a raised way, pointing toward
Lullington in Darbyshire, but whether it should tend after, I cannot imagine,
unless to the old town of Repandune now Repton, so famous for the burial of the
Mercian Kings.

18. Near this way at Edingal there also yet remains a barrow or Low, such as
were usually cast up over the bodies of eminent Captains, or other Commanders
in the wars, and commonly placed by the Romans by their military ways, for the
reasons alleged in the History of Oxfordshire, whither I referr the Reader for
the general account of them Not. Hist. of Oxfordsh. Chap. 10. from. 40. to. 48.
; in particular I take this to be a Roman barrow, because thus placed near a
street way; and so perhaps the great tumulus on the Watlingstreet near Hynts,
though now a Rock of stone, it being possible that a heap of earth as bigg as
that, may in process of time be turned into stone, as shall be shown hereafter
Vid.. 34. infra.
so the barrow called Catts-hill; also near the Watlingstreet, about midway
betwixt the Shire-Oaks and Frog-hall; and so the two Lows on Calves-heath, near
the road side that leads from Sommerford to 4 Crosses; to which add another in
some enclosed grounds East of great Sarden. But the most eminent of any upon
this way, is that near Swinfen called Offlow, which though placed very near it,
yet for the name sake, I dare not reckon amongst the Roman lows, it being no
question the burial place of some eminent Saxon, of whom more anon. Neither
must the tumulus upon the Ickenildstreet near Queislet in this County, called
Kingsstanding, be numbered amongst these, neither of them owning their rise to
the Romans, as shall be shown hereafter.

19. But their being placed on Streetways, is not the only sign of Roman
tumuli: for where we find Roman money, or any of their instruments of war
within or near them, we have also reason to judge them cast up by the Romans,
though remote from any of their Consular ways: for which reason I shall reckon
the Low near Bushbury of Roman erection, a brass head of the bolt of a
Catapulta having been found in a wood of that parish called the burchen Lesow;
another of this kind was also found near Fetherstone, but in the parish of
Brewood by Mr John Huntbach in a ground called the Laches, and by him presented
to Sr William Dugdale; a third in the biggest of the three Lows of Morridg; and
a fourth at Handsworth, all of brass, and well enough represented by that one
draught, Tab. 33. Fig. 5. Which having the shape of a small Axe, without any
Eye for a helve to pass through it, made all people wonder what use it could be
off: little imagining it could be any thing of the nature of a bolt: the exact
figure whereof I find engraven in the Musaeum Moscardi, the wooden steem being
to be fitted into the hollows of each side it, the edg being placed foremost for
execution, and there declared to have been for that use Musai Lud. Moscardi.
Lib. 3. cap. 174.
. Upon which account I say I cannot but determine that at Bushbury, and those
three upon the Morridg, to be Roman Lows; it being plain by these instruments
that all those places, as well where Lows, as not, were sometime visited by the
Roman militia, and places of some action.

20. And so for the same reason the parish of Ilam, where was found near the
spring called St Bertram's well, an instrument of brass, somewhat like (only
larger than) a Lath-hammer at the edg end, but not so on the other, the form
whereof is here expresst Tab. 33. Fig. 6. which I take to have been the head of
a Roman Securis with which the Popae slew their Sacrifices, notwithstanding it
have no Eye for the manubrium to pass through, the Securis it self being
sometimes only stuck through it, as may be seen at many places amongst the
Roman antiquities of Bartolus and Bellorius Vid. admiranda Romanar.
Antiquitatum vestigia, per Joh. Petr. Bellorium and Petr. Sanct. Bartolum.
. The small brass instrument sent me by the Worshipful Charles Cotton Esquire
found somewhere near him, here represented Fig. 7. argues also that the Roman
arms were advanced even into the Northern parts, it seeming to have been the
head of a Roman rest, used to support the Lituus, not that crooked staff used
by the Augurs in their divinations, to point out the quarters of the heavens;
but the Trombe-torte, crooked Trumpet or horne-pipe used in the Roman armies,
as may be seen in Choul's discourse of the Castrametation of the Romans
Discorso sopra la Castra metatione di Romani per il. S. Guglielmo Choul.
And from the brass head of the Roman Venabulum or hunting spear, found
somewhere betwixt Yarlet and the foot of Pyrehill, which is here likewise
engraven Fig. 8. one may probably conclude that the Romans had at last some
residence here, with leisure to follow such sports, as the Country would afford.

21. Whence it may reasonably be concluded, as also from some Roman money that
has been sometimes found in Dale-close 'twixt Okeover and Mathfield, and a
Roman Urn dugg about 10 years ago out of a bank in Church-towne field in upper
Mathfield, etc. that the Lows hereabout, may for the most part at lest be
esteemed Roman: particularly Harlow-greave a little mile NW of Mathfield; and
that other in a field near the left hand the way, as you pass between Mathfield
and Ellaston near Colwich-common, without name; and another larger over against
it, at the other end of the common, which they call Rowlow, perhaps the
Sepulcher of some petty King, Rowlow importing as much as Regale Sepulchrum. To
these add the Low in Arbour-close, 2 or 3 bows shoot North-westerly from
Okeover Chapel; the 3 Lows upon the Weever-hills; and 3 others they call
Queen-Low, Gallows knoll, and Castlow-cross; together with the Lows on Ribden,
Reeden, and Cauldon hills; and so Cocklow and the rest near the town of Leek;
those on the hills near Warslow; on Ecton hill; and another on a hill that is a
Cowpasture betwixt that and Oncot: most of which upon examination, as well as
those on the Morridg, have been found made of stones, and not gravel or earth,
as usually elsewhere; which

1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


12


To the right Worsp. S. THOMAS WILBRAHAM of WESTON under SYZARD Baronet This
33d. Table Representing some few of the ANTIOUITIES of STAFFORD SHIRE with the
sincerest gratitude is humbly presented by RP. LL. D.



Mburgese de. et sc.
depictions of antiquities

yet must not be wondered at, because we find they were made also in other
Countries of such materials as the places best afforded, particularly ex
lapidibus in saxosis locis Ol. Wormii Monument. Danicorum. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
, such as these are.

22. The Lows near Elford and Wiginton in this County, must also be reckoned
amongst the Roman tumuli: for the former of these being opened at my instance
October. 7 and 8. An. Dom. 1680. at the charge of the generous Madam Bows of
Elford, there was found in it level with the surface of the ground about it, a
moist blackish sort of earth without any mixture of gravel or stones, about 2
yards diameter, and a foot and half deep in the middle, lyeing much in the same
form with the tumulus it self, on the edg whereof, were Ashes and Charcoal in
their true colors, and several pieces of bones in the middle of it, so friable
that they would crumble betwixt the fingers: the Low it self which coverd these
Ashes and black earth, being made of gravel mixed with pebbles, as the soil it
self there about is, and so it was also under the said black earth. Whence it
could not but be concluded that this tumulus must needs be Roman (though there
were no coins, pieces of Vrns, or Armor found in it) the bodies buried under
it having been certainly burnt, which I do not find either the Saxons or Danes
ever did after their arrival here, whatever they might before. Otherwise I
should have thought they might have been cast up, about the year 755, when
Ethelbald King of Mercia being invaded by Cuthred King of the West Saxons; met
and fought him at Segeswald Florent. Wigorn. Chron. ex Chron. in An. 755.
, Sacchenda Matthew. Westmonast. Flor. Historiar. in eodem An.
, or Secandune Joh. Brompton Abb. Jornal. in vita Ethelbaldi.
, now Sekindon in Warwicksh. yet hard by; where the proud King Ethelbald, in
arto positus as Brompton tells us Ibidem.
(which perhaps should be in arcto) disdaining to fly was slain by Beornred one
of his own Commanders (as we are informed by Malmesbury Will. Malmesburienfis
de gestis Regum Angl. Lib. 1. cap. 4.
) and his whole Army broken: for though the King did not (who was buried at
Repton) some of the Nobles notwithstanding might perhaps have sought to save
themselves by a swift flight, yet have been slain in the pursuit, and buried
under these Lows here at Elford and Wiginton.

23. Now the reason why such Lows, and warlike instruments, certainly Roman,
are so often found remote from their military ways, was I suppose that the
Natives drew them frequently off, and skirmish'd with them any where, as
occasion presented: upon which account too we find the Romans, to have pitched
their tents in places far distant from their ways, as one may plainly perceive
by the Valla that went round them, which, as Polybius and Vegetius both teach
us, being often made square Polybii Historiarum Lib. 6. de Castrametatione. and
Flav. Vegetii de re militari Lib. 1. cap. 23.
, especially, says Stewechius, when they would have their armies appear great
Godesc. Stewechii Cornment. in Lib. 1. cap. 23. Flav. Vegetii de re militar.
; I have reason to suspect that entrenchment near the bridge upon Ashwood heath,
in the parish of Kings-Swinsord, commonly known by the name of Wolverhampton
Churchyard, which measures about 140 paces over, has been one of these Roman
Castrametations. And so I am willing to believe those remains of a
fortification at the East end of Longdon Church, which it is plain were also
square, the East and South sides being still apparent; not being able after a
long and diligent search, to give a better account of either of them. Though it
must not be denied that the Saxons also fortified in a square form, as may be
seen at Tamworth and diverse other places, of which in due time, so that I must
desire the Reader to take special notice, that I am not so positive, but I can
yield it possible they may be Saxon notwithstanding, cast up upon the frequent
incursions of Canutus, or the neighboring Saxons into the Mercian Kingdom, of
which more anon: only I think that had they been made so late, we should have
had some account of them, whereof because none, I have chose rather to place
them in remoter times. However they give me a fair transition.

24. To the Saxon antiquities, amongst which first of such as relate to the
Heptarchy, in treating whereof I shall observe as near as may be the order of
time, and therefore must begin with the History of Berry-bank (as they call it)
near the village of Darlaston in the parish of Stone, where on the top of a
hill there yet remain the ruins of a large Castle fortifyed with a double
vallum and entrenchments about 250 yards diameter, the gate seeming to have
been on the west part of it, where the side banks on each hand yet plainly
appear: others fancy there was a second gate on the East side too, though I could
not perceive any probability for it: but on the South side there is a round
conical hill, much like a tumulus, cast up higher than all the rest of the
work. Which according to the tradition of the Country thereabout, was the Seat
of Wlferus King of Mercia, who murdered his two Sons for embracing
Christianity, one at Stone hard by, and the other at Burston but a little
further off: but I do not so much depend upon that, as on what Mr Sampson
Erdeswic asserts, viz. that he had seen an old writing relating to the
foundation of the Priory of Stone that affirms as much Erdeswick's view of
Staffordsh. in Darlaston.
: which perhaps may be that of R. de Suggenhill and Petronil his wife, whereby
they gave to the Church of St Mary and St Wlfade of Stone, Messuagium juxta
montem qui dicitur Wlferecester in territorio de Derlaston D. Gul. Dugdali
Monast. Anglican. vol. 2. p. 129.
, which indeed proves fully that this was the royal mansion of the said
Wlferus, who governd Mercia from the year of Christ 657 to 676, the Low
adjoining in all probability being the place of his sepulture.

25. Within the limits of whose reign fall the dates of the foundations as
well of Lichfield as Stone: for though the place where Lichfield now is, were
enobled with the martyrdoms of a 1000 Christians, near 400 years before, yet we
hear nothing more of it till Oswy King of Northumberland, having beaten and
killed Penda King of the Mercians, converted the Country to Christianity, and
after a while made this place (perhaps in memory of these Martyrs) a Bishops
seat, building a Church and nominating one Duina a Scotchman the first Bishop
of it Matthew. Westmonasteriens. Flor. Historiarum in An. 655, 656, 657.
: which yet it is like might be a place but of small account (many of the
Bishops seats in ancient times being small villages) till after the time of St
Ceadda, who as Rossus Warwicensis plainly tells us, came at first hither as
into a private place, in secretum locum Staffordiensis provinciae (though now a
Bishops seat) where he lived (as the Legend says) only upon the milk of a Do,
which being hunted by Wlfade son of Wlfere King of Mercia brought him to the
Cell of St Ceadda, who first converted him to the Christian faith, and his
brother Ruffine after Ex Libro Johannis Rufi. M. S. de Epise. Wigorn.
, whilst he lived as it were a Hermitical life, by a Spring side yet remaining
by the Church of Stow, near the City of Lichfied: which being too remote from
Wlfercester the Seat of their Father, they entreated the holy man to remove a
little nearer them, for the easier waiting on him to receive further
instruction, and performing their devotions together with him D. Gul. Dugdals
Manast. Augl. Vol. 2. p. 122.
.

26. To which request of the young Princes I find the holy Sr Ceadda readily
complied, and came to another Secret place not far off them, whither under
pretense of hunting, to avoid their fathers anger who was yet a Pagan, they
constantly came to him and were instructed accordingly: but being observed by
one Werebod one of their fathers evil Counselors, they were quickly found out
and accused of Christianity to him, who came from Wlfercester above mentioned,
and finding them at their devotions in this new Oratory, in the midst of his
wrath slew them both Ibidem. page 122, 123.
; one, at Stone, where a Church being erected over the place of his Martyrdom,
gave both name and original to that town; and the other at Burston where there
was erected a Chapel which as Mr Erdeswic asserts was but lately standing
Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in Burweston.
. In this conjuncture St Ceadda fled away from the fury of the bloody minded
King, and returned to his Cell near Lichfield again, where he had not retired
long, but King Wlfer was grievously struck with remorse, and being sore
afflicted for the fact he had done, according to the council of his Queen
Ermenilda, repaired to St Ceadda, by whom he was converted, and forthwith
banished all idolatrous worship out of his dominions D. Gul. Dugdali Monast.
Angl. locis supra citat.
; and upon the death of Jarumannus which happened quickly after An. 667, made
the holy St Ceadda Bishop of Lichfield, from whom it received so great honor,
that it increased quickly after to a considerable Town, and was not long,
before advanced to a Metropolitical See, by the great King Offa, who out of
spite to Lambert Arch Bishop of Canterbury, got it exempt from his
jurisdiction, obtaining a pall for it of Pope Adrian the first: the Sees of
Worcester, Chester, Sidnacester, Hereford, Helmham and Dorchester, being made
subject to it: in which state it continued from the year 766 to 797, in all 31
years, in which time there sat three Archbishops of Lichfield, Ealdulfus,
Humbertus, and lastly Higbertus, in whose time the Sea of Canterbury was
restored again to its pristin dignity by Kinulf or Kenwolf also King of the
Mercians Matthew. Westmonast. Flor. Historiar. in An. 766.794.795.797.
.

27. The next Antiquities, that follow in order of time, of Saxon original, are
Dudley Castle built upon a lofty hill, and so named by one Dudo an English
Saxon about the year of our Salvation 700 Camden's Britannia in Staffordsh.
. the present prospect whereof was represented above Tab. 3. ad page 39. and an
old fortification in the parish of Mear or Mere, that they call the Bruff
(which perhaps may be only a corruption of Burgh) fenced at some places with a
double trench and rampire, the agger above the trench seeming at some places to
have been made up with stone, the whole being of a very irregular form,
according as the figure of the hill would admit: over against this, on the
heath, there is a place they call Camp-hills, where it is supposed there was
anciently likewise a Camp, though no signs of it now; only there are two round
hills which may pass for harrows, and many other longish hillocks like graves,
in which form I find these Sepulchral monuments were also sometimes made Ol.
Wormii Monument. Danicor. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
: betwixt which and the Bruff there is likewise a large round conical hill that
they call Coplow, which no doubt was the Sepulcher of some considerable
Commander slain here about, when these rampires were made and used. Which though
at first sight they appeared difficult to account for, who? and when? being
very hard questions at this distance of time: yet I think I may safely, and
with some confidence answer, that this fortification was here made in the days
of the wicked Osrid King of Northumberland, about the year of Christ 705, who
as Henry Huntingdon testifies was slain at Mere; Osrid vero Rex belli
infortunio juxta Mere pugnans interfectus est, being his very words Hen.
Huntindoniensis Historiar. Lib. 4. cap. 4.
: though he tells us not by what enemy, nor upon what occasion, yet I suppose it
must be Kenred King of Mercia, whom he seems to have invaded, and not his Cousin
Kenred who succeeded him, as S. Cressy would have it S. Cressy's Church. Hist.
of Britan. Book. 21. chap. 26.
, there being no foundation that I can find in History, for such an
imagination: Cop-low being the tumulus in all probability under which the
unfortunate Osrid was buried, and those other lows and hillocks upon Camp-hills
of his inferior officers: and the Bruff the Castle or strong hold, that Kenred
had raised against him.

28. About this time the place of Island where the Town of Stafford now stands,
anciently called Bethnei (what was said of it before being only prophesy) began
first to be inhabited, by St Bertelline the son of a King of this Country, and
Scholar to St Guthlac, with whom he tarryed till his death: after which, though
now unknown to his Father, he begged this Island of him, where he led a Hermits
life for diverse years, till disturbed by some that envyed his happiness, when
he removed into some desert mountanous places, where he ended his life Jo.
Capgravii nova Legend. Angl. in vita S. Bertellin:
; leaving Bethnei to others, who afterward built it, and called it Stafford,
there being a shallow place in the River hereabout, that could easily be passed
with the help of a Staff only Gul. Somneri Dictionar Sax. Lat. Angl. in verbo,
. Now whereabout this desert place should be, that St Bertelline went to, though
Histories are silent, yet I have some grounds to think that it might be about
Throwley, Ilam, and Dovedale: and that this was the St Bertram who has a well,
an Ash, and a Tomb at Ilam: for if as Capgrave says, the Town of Bertamly in
Cheshire took its name from a miracle that St Bertelline did there Nova legenda
Anglias loco supra citat.
, I know not why the people about Ilam, Throwley, etc. might not corrupt his
name as much as they in Cheshire, and call him St Bertram instead of St
Bertelline. If it be objected that the Tomb here is of too late a date for his
time, it seeming by no means above 300 years old; I must own the thing: but
then it must be allowed that such great men's Tombs were often rebuilt,
especially if any great occasion were administered, as there was by this Saint
about that time viz. An. 1386. when there was a wonderful miracle wrought at
his Altar in Stafford, if we may believe Capgrave Ibidem in fine.
; which might possibly give occasion for the rebuilding of it by the people of
Stafford in the form it now stands.

29. Near Alveton in this County upon a lofty situation, in the lands of the
right Honorable Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, a most noble encourager of this
work, there still remains, near the Lodge, just such another fortress, as that
near Mear, only much larger, which they call Bunbury, of no regular figure,
encompassed with a double and sometimes treble trench, according as the natural
situation of the place, seems to have required, on the North, NW, and NE sides,
all the rest being naturally inaccessible, the whole including about an hundred
acres: which I doubt not to have been made by Ceolred King of Mercia, the
successor of Kenred abovementioned, when he was invaded (in likemanner as
Kenred by Osrid) in the seventh year of his reign, by the potent Ina King of
the West Saxons, in the year of Christ 716. Cujus anno septimo Ina Rex
West-Saxiae, magno Exercitu congregato contra Eum apud Bonebury strenue
praeliavit. i. e. that in the seventh year of Ceolreds reign, Ina King of the
West Saxons having raised a great Army fought him stoutly at Bonebury says the
Abbot of Jourvall Joh. Brompton Abb. Jornallens. in Regno Merciorum.
: where yet Ceolred (by the advantage of this his strong fortification) so
warmly received him, that he was glad to withdraw upon equal terms, neither
having much reason to bragg of a victory.

30. Of what antiquity the Town of Tamworth may be, does not plainly appear,
but it must certainly have been a place of some repute of very ancient times,
though we hear nothing of it till An. Dom. 781. when the great King Offa granting
lands in Sapie to the Monks of Worcester concludes thus -- Hanc autem
praescriptam vicissitudinem terrarum and meae donationis pro domino libertatem,
ego Offa Rex sedens in Regali palatio in Tamoworthige secundo die nativitatis
Domini, concedens donavi An. 781. And after him Ceonulf whose Charter ends thus
-- Acta est haecdonatio An. 816. in vico celeberrimo qui vocatur Tomoworthig,
etc Sr William Dugdale's antiquities of Warwicksh. illustrated. p. 816, 817.
. Now if the Mercian Kings had their Palaces here so very early, it must needs
have been a Town of some repute long before, and perhaps a fortified place;
there still remaining a square trench called Kings-ditch of large extent, that
in a manner encompasses the whole town, beginning on the bank of the River Tame
west of the Lady-bridg, and running up thence in a straight line till it comes
NW of the Church, where there seems to have been a mount or a bastion somewhat
higher than the rest of the work, in the angle where it joins to the following
line; which runns straight all along N of the Church till it comes NE of it,
where another mount also in the angle; whence it runns again in a straight line
to the banks of the Anchor; enclosing the town on the West, North, and East; the
Rivers securing it Southward: but whether these were made, before, after, or in
the days of King Offa, is not easy to determine.

31. Next Tamworth the most ancient place of any in the County, whereof there
are any footsteps yet remaining, perhaps may be a large old fortification near
the village of Billington in the parish of Bradeley, 300 yards diameter doubly
entrenched, as may be seen at diverse places, though the outmost indeed be filled
up in some: which I could willingly believe to have been the place of battle,
between Duke Wada and the rest of the murderers of King Ethelred, and King
Eardulf his successor; which Matthew of Westminister Matthew. Westmonasteriens.
Flor. Historiar. in An. 798.
, Roger Hoveden Rog. de Hoveden Annalium part priori. p. 233.
, and Simeon Dunelmensis Sim. Dunelmens. Hist. de gestis Reg. Ang. in An. 798.
all agree, was at a place called Billingabo or Billingagoth juxta Wallalega
An. Dom. 798. the old Etocetum, by the Saxons called Wall, not being far off:
but that it is hard to think that a King of Northumberland or any Conspirators
against him, should bring a war so far out of their own Country; or that the
valiant Kenulf then King of the Mercians would admit of it, unless it were
done in his absence, when he went into Kent against Eadbert Pren, whom he
overthrew, and brought away captive Mat. Westmonast. loco supra citat.
. Wherefore I shall take leave anon to make another conjecture, concerning the
original of this fortification: and in the mean time proceed to the life,
martyrdom, and buryal, of the young St Kenelm King of the Mercians, the Scene
whereof seems to have layn in this County, of which in their order. Yet I shall
relate no more than what is absolutely necessary to understand the remains that
I find of them here.

32. Let it therefore suffice that upon the death of King Kenulf An. Dom. 819.
the Kingdom of the Mercians fell to his only Son Kenelm a child of 7 years old,
whose elder Sister Quendred desirous of rule, practiced with the young Kings
guardian, one Aschebert, to make him away, as in the Histories of his life
written by Matthew of Westminster Idem in An. 821.
, John Brompton Joh. Brompton Abb. Jorn. in Regno Merciorum.
, and Capgrave Joh. Capgravii nova Legenda Angl. in vita S^i. Kenelmi.
, where the Reader if he please may see the particulars: which that he might
do the more secretly, he had the young King into Clent wood in this Country,
under the fair pretense of taking pleasure in hunting, and when he had gotten
him into a suitable place, he cut off his head, and buried him where no man
knew but himself, till discovered by a certain Cow of a widow woman, that
would feed no where but beside St Kenelms grave; and a Scrole dropped by a white
Dove upon the altar of St Peter at Rome, as Pope Leo minor or Leo the third was
celebrating Mass, containing these words: In Clent kau bathe Kenelin Kinebearn
lies under thorn heaved by reaved: which none of the Romans understanding, it
was showed to the people of the several nations, amongst which an Englishman
there present, rendered it into Latin, which the Poets of after ages put into
this distick. In Clenc sub spina, jacet in convalle bovina,
Vertice privatus, Kenelmus rege creatus Matthew. Westmonast. Flor. Historiar.
loco supra citat.

Englished thus In Clent in Cow-bach under a Thorn
Lies King Kenelm his head off shorn Erdeswicks view of Staffordsh. in Clent.

by which means it being understood at Rome (as some say before it was in
Britan) how he was murdered and where buried, order was presently sent by the
Pope to Wolfred then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the English
Bishops to search and take up his body, which was accordingly done and carried
in great state to the Abbey of Winchelcomb in Glocestershire of his Fathers
foundation, and there honorably buried.

33. Now the antiquities that I find yet remaining upon the place relating to
this History, are first, Cowbach otherwise Cowdale as Brompton calls it Loco
supra citato.
, so named from the Cow that attended his grave, which remains a pasture-ground
to this very day, being situate in a valley, under Warton hill, about half a
mile N E of Clent Church, as most of the ancient men of the town agreed; there
being now no thorn, nor had there been any that I could learn, within memory;
so that the exact place where he was buried is now unknown: nor is there any
Spring here, which as the Legend says immediately gush't out where the body had
layne, as soon a 'twas taken forth Locis supra citatis.
; St Kenelm's well being a mile off, near the Chapel yet standing dedicated to
him, in the parish of Hales-Owen and County of Salop; and not in the parish of
Clent or County of Stafford; so that whether this be the true Cow-bach or not,
the Legend must be false: unless we shall say that the precincts of Clent are
contracted since, and that the true Cowbach was, where the spring now is, in
the County of Salop: which if so, I have said to much of it already, it being
without the pale of the History. However half a mile N N E of Clent Church or
there about, there is a list of grass greener than ordinary, called St
Kenelms-furrow running up to the Knoll-hill a great length, that still remains
both in the parish and County, the grass whereof indeed is somewhat more
verdant and luxuriant than at other places, which they intend for the furrow
made by the Oxen, which run away with the woman's plow, and were never again
heard of, who in contempt of the feast of St Kenelm would make them work on
that day, loosing her Eyes into the bargain, as the Legend says Job. Capgravii
nova Legenda Angl. in vita Sti. Kenelmi.
, but enough of this. I found also 3 Lows on Clent-heath, but these relate
nothing to our former history, being raised as I guess on some conflict
hereabout, when the fortifications were made on Whichbury-hill, not far off
them, but in the parish of Pedmoore and County of Worcester, which being extra
oleas, I am not concerned either when, or by whom they were made.

34. Beside these, there are other Antiquities here that may be presumed to be
Saxon, though there can be no particular account given of them, as there has of
the former. Such as the old fortification on Kinfare edge of an oblong square
figure, about 300 yards long, and 200 over, having an artificial bank cast up
round it, fenced with a deep ditch on the N N E and S S W sides; the edg or
hill on the other two sides being naturally inaccessible. Concerning which the
tradition of the town is, that it was a Danish fortification: but the name
seeming rather to make it a Saxon one, where some King was killed from cyne
Regium and papan nutare, vacillare or obire Vid. Gul Somneri Dictionar.
Saxonico-Lat. Angl. in verbis.
, importing as much as a royal failure or place where a King had failed or
dyed, I have rather chosen to place it among the Saxon antiquities. Upon this
account too I am inclined to believe, the Lows on the heath underneath betwixt
it and the Comptons are also Saxon; and so that at the end of Kinfare heath,
near the Lane leading to Enfield; there seems also to be another under Meg a
foxhole; which though now all stone, may possibly have been formerly earth, now
turned into stone by subterraneal heats; especially if that be true which is
asserted from experiment by Gabriel Plat, viz. that if you half fill a Retort
with brimstone, Seacoale, and other bituminous substances, and the remainder of
the neck also half way with pure earth, and set it to distill with a temperate
open fire, the earth will be petrifyed or turned to stone Gabr. Plat's
discovery of subterraneal treasure Chap. 1.
; as it is also by nature, where bituminous substances kindled in the bowels
of the earth, send up such vapors, as perhaps they may have done also at
Barrow-hill in the parish of Kings-Swinford, where there are two uniforme
barrows all rock; and so at the rocky round hill on the Watlingstreet near
Hynts.

35. There are many other Lows too, not placed upon any of the military ways or
old fortifications, whereof no such particular account can be given, as there
was of the former, which yet seem to have been of Saxon erection, but these
upon a civil, not military score: for they often raised such Lows over
considerable men that dyed in peace, as well as in war; but then they placed
them in Campo plano juxta defuncti praedium sito Olai Wormii Monument. Danicor.
Lib. 1. cap. 7.
, somewhere in a plain beside the Mansion of the deceased. And of this kind I
judge that at Stramshall in this County; and that other in a place called
Low-field about a quarter of a mile West from Combridg; amongst these we may
also reckon that at Tatenhill wood-Lane, about half a mile westward of
Callingswood hall, supposed to be Rudlow, of which more anon; and so Totmonslow
though now not extant; as well as Offlow, which also gives name to the hundred in
which it is situate; which though not the Sepulcher of King Offa, who as
Florilegus tells us was buried in Bedfordshire upon the bank of the river Ouse
Matthew. Westmonasterien. Flor. Histor. in An. 797.
, yet it must certainly be the monument of some great person of the same name,
either buried here alone, or else in company with diverse others perhaps slain
with him, this seeming indeed erected, not like the former upon a civil, but a
military account; and yet of Saxon original, as the name testifies, though placed
near the Watlingstreet: which sort of large tumuli cast up over many slain
together, the Danes called Voloaster as Wormius informs us Olai. Wormii Loco
supra citat.
. But herein I am not positive.

36. Having hitherto considered such antiquities only, as (...) think have been
occasioned by the conflicts of the Saxons amongst themselves: I come next to
treat of such as are the deplorable remains of the bloody wars 'twixt the
Saxons and Danes: amongst which the first in order of time, are the ruins
abovementioned in Wrottesley park. 4 and 5 of this Chapter, which upon second
considerations I am inclined to believe, if Theotenhall do import the
habitation of heathens as Camden informs us Camden's Britannia in Staffordsh.
sub. initium.
, are no Roman antiquity, but the true remains of the old Theotenhall of the
Danes, who I suppose having resided there for some time, built them this City
or place of habitation, which in the year of our Lord 907 as Roger Hoveden
Rogeri de Hoveden Annalium part priori.
, but not till An. 911 as Simeon Dunelmensis, John Brompton, and Florentius
Wigorn, in all probability was finally rased by Edward Senior in that signal
victory he there obtained over them, whereof we have an account in all those
Historians In An. 911.
but a more particular one in Hen. Huntindon, who makes this battle so
terrible, that he spares not to cry out, Quis autem cuneorum horrendos
aggressus, ignitas collisiones, formidabiles tinnitus, feras irruptiones,
miserabiles occasus, clamores horrisonos, scriptis exequetur Hen.
Huntindoniens. Historiar. Lib. 5. cap. 5.
? i. e. so very terible, that he thought it could not be fully described by the
most exquisite pen.

37. To revenge whose quarrel, another Army of them that possessed
Northumberland, breaking a league they had formerly made with King Edward,
invaded Mercia in the very same year, pillageing the Country wherever they
came: against whom king Edward bringing a powerful Army both of West Saxons
and Mercians, overtook them in their return at the village of Wednesfield, not
far from Theotenhall, and overthrew them again in another bloody battle,
wherein he killed Eowills and Halfden or Hildein two of their Kings, and Ohter
and Scurfa two of their Earls, and 9 other Noblemen Florent. Wigorn. Chron. ex
Chron. in An. 911. and Matthew. West. in eodem Anno.
. to whom Ethelverdus adds Juvar or Hinguar another of their Kings Chronicor.
Ethelwerdi Lib. 4. cap. 4.
. Of which great slaughter yet there are no more remains but a Low in a ground
called South Low field, which has lately had a windmill set upon it, the Low
being there before as within memory. There is another ground here too called
North-Low field, which no question heretofore has had also a Low in it, though
now it be gone. Which doubtless were cast up over some of those kings, or
Danish or Saxon nobles, then slain here; and so it is like was Stowman's hill on
the road betwixt Wolverhampton and Walsall, half a mile S W of the village of
Nechels.

38. In the year following 912 dyed the noble Duke Aethelred Viceroy of
Mercia; after whom his most renowned Lady Aegelfleda alias Elfleda daughter of
King Alfred, governed the kingdom of Mercia with so great conduct, so much to
the advantage and increase of her own dominions, and terror of her enemies: ut
non solum Domina vel Regina, verum etiam Rex ad laudem and excellentiam a
pluribus vocaretur, i. e. that she was not only called Lady and Queen, but also
King by way of praise and extreme excellence, as the Abbots Ethelred and
Brompton affirm Ethelredi Abbatis Rieval. Genealog. Regum Angl. and Joh.
Brompton Abbat. Jornal. in vita regis Edvard. Sen.
. And indeed all things considered she deserved no less; for she not only
subdued the Britans and Danes, and all that opposed her; but took Darby and
Leicester and added them to her Kingdom: building and repairing so many Castles
and Towns, that it would be endless to recount them. Wherefore I shall content
my self only in relating what she did in this County, remitting the Reader for
the rest to the ancient Historians: particularly about the year 916 she
fortifyed Weadbirig now Wednesbury in this County Florent. Wigorn Chron. ex
Chron in An 916.
; and rebuilt Tamworth destroyed by the Danes, where she after dyed in the year
919 Matthew. Westmonast. Flor. Historiar in An. 919.
; She also built a Castle at the Town of Stafford, on the North side of the
River Sow Florent. Wigorn in An. 914.
, whereof I could not hear of any footstepps remaining; that upon the hill
above the Town, at near a miles distance, the Prospects whereof are both here
annexed Tab. 34. being built long after by Ranulf or Ralph the first Earl of
Stafford: though Mr Erdeswick tells us he had a certain deed dated apud Castrum
juxta Stafford long before the days of the said Earl Ralph, whence he concludes
that he did but reedify the Castle, and not new build it Samps. Erdes. wick's
view of Staffordsh. in Stafford.
, which perhaps may be true: but for my part I conjecture that the first
Stafford-Castle mentioned in that deed, might rather stand within the
Entrenchment at Billington, which perhaps may be only the remains of this
Castle, and not of the battle between King Eardulf and Duke Wada, as was
thought above. 31. in which opinion I am not a little confirmed, the lands
wherein these entrenchments are, being not far distant, and still remaining a
part of the demesne land of the Barony of Stafford.

39. Of what antiquity the Town of Hampton may be is very uncertain, it not
being mentioned in any record that I could either meet or hear of, till the
pious Wulfruna the relict of Althelm Duke of Northampton, in the days of King
Ethelred (and not of King Edgar as Mr Erdeswick thought Idem in Wolverhampton.
) in the year 996 built and endowed the Church or Monastery there D. Gul.
Dugdal. Monast. Angl. Vol. 1. p. 988.
, in reguard of which pious action of hers, it was ever after called
Wulfrunes-Hampton, since by corruption of speech Wolverhampton. In which new
foundation she placed a Dean and Prebends, or secular Canons, as Mr Erdeswick
calls them Locosupra citat.
, with other suitable Officers, for the increase of Religion: wherein yet it
seems she mist of her aim for some time at lest, for before it had stood near
200 years, these Prebends grew so enormous in their lives, as Petrus Blesensis
(who was their Dean) testifies, ut cantabantur eorum turpitudines in triviis,
that their wickedness was made known by Songs in the streets; which of what
kind it was he afterward tells us, ipsi vero public and aperte fornicantes
praedicabant peccata sua, i. e. that they were not ashamed of public
fornication; of which when he admonish't them, though he did it he says toto
charitatis affectu, with all imaginable mildness, yet being as deaf as adders
they despised his reproof Pet. Blesensis Epistolar. Lib. Ep. 152. ad Innocent 3.
.

40. Whereupon complaining to the King and Archbishop of Canterbury, he
obtained terrible threatening Letters to them, importing that they would
endeavor to persuade the Pope utterly to dissolve them, but still all to
little purpose, for they grew hereupon but the more contumacious. Nay he
further tells us that they were advanced at last to that height of wickedness,
that having married interchangeably one another daughters and neeces, if upon
the death of a Canon he put in an honest man (for the donation and institution
of these Prebends then belonged to the Dean) the Son or Nephew of the deceased
would challenge notwithstanding the Patrimony, as they called it, and flying
into the woods would join with thieves and robbers, and invade the right of the
new Canon. From which evil practices the good Dean being unable to reclaim
them, he humbly besought the King and Archbishop, to turn out these Prebends,
and place Cistercians in their room; in order whereunto, being tired out with
their incorrigibility, he resigned his Deanery into the hands of the
Archbishop, circa An. Dom. 1200; and wrote a Letter to Pope Innocent the third,
beseeching him that he would further and confirm whatever the Archbishop had
done in this matter, who it seems in the mean time had admitted some of the
said Order Ibidem.
. But I suppose either the Pope interposed in this design, or some other
inconvenience not then foreseen, prevented its execution: for there yet remains
some umbrage of a Dean and Prebends here to this very day.

41. About this time, the Danes under Swain and his Son Canutus, had got good
footing in England, the latter of which, after diverse vicissitudes, or fortune
of the wars in the reigns of King Ethelred and Edmund Ironside, obtained the
whole Kingdom: during which altercations he made several inrodes into Mercia,
especially in the years 1013 and 1016 Matthew. Westmonast. Flor. Historiar. in
dictis Annis. and Florent. Wigorn. Chron. ex Chron. in iisdem.
. and amongst other places possessed himself of that Forest or Chase in this
County called still by his name Canc or Cannock-wood, quasi Canuti Sylva: upon
the edge whereof, in the Park at Beaudesart, W S W of the house, at about half
a miles distance, there still remains a large fortification called the
Castle-hill, encompass't with a double agger and trench, which are in a manner
circular, except on the S E side. Which runs pretty straight, so that it seems
to hold the figure of a Theater of about 270 paces diameter: and this for name
sake only, because within the verge of Canutus's wood, I take leave to presume
might be cast up by him, when he made his incursions into this Country, and
those horrible divastions mentioned by the Historians in the years above
mentioned Ibidem.
, unless one should rather think it might be cast up by the Mercians, in
defense of their Country. The little hill upon Ickenildstreet way must likewise
be cast up in all probability about this time, the Danish Kings usually
speaking to their Armies from such elevated places, which they most times made
of stone, but sometimes of earth, as appears by the little hill without the
Forum of stone at Leir in Seland Olai. Wormii Monum. Dan. Lib. 1. cap. 5.
, and another such like hillock called Trollebarolhoy near Lundie in Scania
Idem. Lib. 1. cap. 12.
, it being indifferent whether the King ascended a stone, or mount of earth, so
thence he might be seen and heard by the people, either of which they called
the Kongstolen, i. e. the Kings-stool, or as here the Kings-standing.

42. Not long after this in the year 1017, King Edmund Ironside dying at London
according to Florentius Wigorniensis, at Oxford according to Matthew of
Westminster Mat. West. and Florent. Wigorniens. in dicto An.
; Canutus took possession of the whole kingdom, and reigned sole King of
England for 20 years: during which time and the reigns of his two successors
also Danish Kings of England, many of their Customs and Vtensills, no doubt
on it, obtained here, amongst which I guess I may reckon an ancient sort of
Almanacks they call Cloggs, made upon square sticks, still in use here amongst
the meaner sort of people, which I cannot but think must be some remains of the
Danish government, finding the same with little difference to have been used
also formerly, both in Sweden and Denmark, as plainly appears from Olaus
Magnus Olai Magni. de ritu Gent: Sept. Lib. 1. cap. 34. and Lib. 16. cap. 20.
and Olaus Wormius Olai. Wormii Fast. Danic. Lib. 2. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5.
: which being a sort of Antiquity so little known, that it has scarce been yet
heard of in the Southern parts of England, and understood now but by few of the
Gentry in the Northern, I shall be the more particular in my account of them.
And shall consider 1. the diverse names of them; 2. the variety of materials out
of which they have been made; 3. the kinds of them; 4. the figures that are
inscribed in them; and 5. the diverse uses of those inscriptions: of all which
in their order.

43. And first as to the diverse names of them, they are here called Cloggs, for
what reason I could not learn, nor indeed imagine, unless from the English Logg
(a term we usually give to any piece of wood) or from the likeness of some of
the greater sorts of them to the Cloggs, wherewith we usually restrain the
wild, extravagant, mischeivous motions of some of our dogs. Secondly from
their use they are more properly called Almanacks, quasi Al-mon-aght, that is
to say Al-mon-heed, viz. the reguar'd or observation of all the Moons: because
by these squared sticks, says Verstegan, they could certainly tell, when the
new mons, full moons, and other changes should happen, and consequently
Easter, and the other moveable feasts m: which doubtless is as significant an
Etymology of the word, as any can be thought of, though perhaps not so true as
those of Salmasius Claud. Salmasii de An. Climactericis and antiq. Astrolog. p.
605, 606. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1648.
and Skinner Steph. Skinneri Etymolog. in verbo.
, deduced from the Persian and Arabic tongues. Thirdly by the Danes they are
called Rimstocks, not only because the Dominical Letters were anciently
expressed on them in Runick Characters; but also for that the word Rimur
anciently signified a Calendar Olai. Wormii Fast. Danic. Lib. 1. cap. 2.
, whence the word Rimstock (denoting likewise the matter of which they were
commonly made) importes no more than a wooden-Almanack, such as ours are.

44. Fourthly, by the Norwegians (with whom they are still in use) they are
called Primstaves Ibidem.
, and that for good reason too, the principal and most useful thing inscribed
on them, being the Prime or golden number, whence the changes of the Moons are
understood, which because usually done amongst them upon the staves they walk
with (whereof there are good Patterns in the Musaeum at Oxon) they most
properly, from both the uses they had of them, called them Primstaves. And
Rich. Verstegan's restitution of decayed Antiq. chap. 3.
lastly by the Swedes, as Olaus Magnus delivers (who also made them of this
form) they are as significantly termed Baculi annals, with which the Laics
being sustained in their long journeys to Church, at their weekly congress did
usually debate and conclude from them, the Lunar conjunctions and oppositions,
and thence the moveable feasts Olai Magni de. ritu Gent. Sept. Lib. 16. cap.
20. and 24.
. Though they sometimes likewise made them ex asseribus oblongis, of little
oblong boards, as Wormius testifies (whereof we have also a Pattern in the
Musaeum) upon which account he reprehends Olaus Magnus, for giving them the
name abovementioned, as too narrow an appellation Olai Wormii Fast. Danic. Lib.
1. cap. 3.
: but I think with little reason, it being as proper a name for the kind he
there speaks of, as the Primstaf of the Norwegians, which he does not find
fault with. And so much for the names.

45. As to the matter of those of them I met with in this County, there are
some few of brass, whereof I had one sent me by the most ingenious Charles
Cotton of Beresford Esquire but the most of them of wood, and these chiefly of box,
others there are of Firr, and some of Oak, but these not so frequent. Wormius
tells us that in Denmark there are some of them made ex ossibus oblongis
tessellatim sectis and colligatis Idem Lib. 1. cap. 4. and Lib. 3. in proaem.
, and others inscribed in a hollow-bone Idem Lib. 2. cap. 3.
; He acquaints us also with some ancient ones, made of horn Idem Lib. 1. cap.
17.
; but I met with none of these in this County, though all people, no question,
made them of such materials, as they thought fittest for their purpose. And
thirdly as to the kinds of them; some are perfect, containing the Dominical
Letters, as well as the Prime and marks for the feasts, engraven upon them, and
such are our Primestaves in the Musaeum at Oxford. Others imperfect, having
only the Prime and the immovable feasts on them, and such are all those I met
with in Staffordshire; which yet are of two kinds also, some public, of a
larger size, which hang commonly here at one end of the Mantletree of their
Chimneys, for the use of the whole family, as Wormius likewise acquaints us
they usually do in Denmark Olai Wormii Fast. Danic. Lib. 1. cap. 4.
; and others private, of a smaller size, which they carry in their pockets; as
we have them now since the invention of printing: some Almanacks being fitted
to hang up in our houses, and others for private use, which we carry about us.

46. Fourthly for the better understanding of the figures inscribed upon these
Cloggs, I have caused one of them (which is a family Clogg) to be represented
in plano Tab. 35. each To the Worsp^^: ELIAS ASHMOLE Esquire. This Ancient
ALMANAC. yet still in use in his native Country of Stafford shire, in memory
of his favors is gratefully dedicated. by RP. LL^.

THE CLOG. or STAFFORDSHIRE Perpetual ALMANAC.

almanac ^. Brown sc^^.
angle of the square stick, with the moiety of each of the flat sides belonging
to it, being expressed apart; which I took to be the most useful and most
clear method, it could possibly be done in. But to descend to particulars, it
being first premised that all these Almanacks follow the Julian form, let it
first be noted that there are 3 Months contained upon every of the 4 edges, and
that the number of the days in them are represented by the notches, that which
begins each month having a patulous stroke turned up from it, every seventh
notch being also of a larger Size, which stands for Sunday, or perhaps for A,
or any other Letters, as they may come in their turn to be either Dominical or
Cycle of the Sun, is not so much reguarded in this Almanac, but committed to
memory, the Sundays and other Days here being fixed; whereas the Dominical and
other Letters vary every year in a retrograd order, for one Letter at lest, and
sometimes two, upon account that every common Julian year contains 52 week and
one day over, and every Bissextile the same number of weeks, and two days over:
whence it comes to pass that every year ending upon the same day of the week it
began, the next always begins on the following day, altering the Dominical one
Letter backward (and consequently all the Letters of the working days too) in
the common year, and two Letters on the Leap-year: the first Letter serving
from the 1 of Jan. to the 24. of March, and the latter ever after to the end of
the year.

47. Which Dominical and other Letters are all engraven in Vlfila's later
Gothic Characters, upon all the Danish Rimstocks of Wormius Idem. Lib. 2. cap.
2.
, and the aforesaid Swedish or Norwegian Primstaves (which I therefore said
were of the perfect kind) in Olaus Magnus Olai Magni de ritu Gent. Sept. Lib.
1. cap. 34.
, and the Ashmolean Musaeum; their Dominicals and weekday Letters being, (...)
frey, (...) ur, (...) thor, (...) os, (...) reid, (...) kaun, (...) hagl Olai
Verelii Runographiae Scandicae Cap. 7.
, the first seven of their alphabet, as ours are; but not answering the powers
of our first seven, but of f, u, tzh, o, r, k, h. Which constantly altering, as
I said before, upon account that the following year never began on the same day
of the week with the former year, but with the following day, and so altering
the Dominical and other Letters: Our ancestors I suppose did not think it worth
while, to inscribe such moveable Characters at all, upon their Cloggs or
Almanacks (the knowledge of the Cycle of the Sun too, being but of little use to
them) but rather to commit such an easy observation, as the removeal of Sunday
or any other day one or two days backward, to the care of their memories: these
larger notches being sufficient to intimate, that a seventh part of time must
always be allotted (however it fall out) for divine services.

48. Over against many of the notches, whether great or small, that stand in
the Clogg for the days of each Month, there are placed on the left hand several
marks or Symbols denoting the golden number or cycle of the Moon, which number
if under 5, is represented by so many points, and that perhaps as naturally as
by so many strokes; but if 5, a line is drawn from the notch or day to which it
belongs, with a hook returned back against the course of the line, that, if cut
off at due distance, may be taken for a V, which being the fifth vowel,
antiquity perhaps has been pleased to make use of, to represent the number 5,
as X for ten, which is nothing else but a composition of two V's turned tail to
tail, as the learned Dr Wallis has very well noted Joh. Wallisii Arithmeticae
cap. 8.
: but to proceed, if the golden number be above 5, and under 10; it is then
marked out to us by the hooked line, which is five, and with one point, which
makes 6; or two, which makes 7; or 3, for 8; and 4, for 9; the said line being
cross't with a stroke patulous at each end, which represents an X, when the
golden number for the day, over against which it is put, is ten; points being
added (as above over the hook for five) till the number arises to 15, when a
hook is placed again at the end of the line above the X, to show us that number.

49. Above these, the points are added again till the number amounts to 19,
where the line issuing from the day is cross't with two patulous strokes (as if
it were 20) as may be seen on the Clogg Jan. 5. and so against every day of
each month, whose golden number is 19: in which number of years, the Moon
returning again to be in conjunction with the Sun, on the very same day (though
not hour) it was before, as was first observed by Meton the Athenian 431 years
before the birth of Christ Christoph. Clavii Calendar. Gregor. cap. 8. 3.
, there needs no more numbers than 19, to express the absolution of its whole
Cycle, and therefore we find no more on the Clogg, which why it should be
represented by the Symbol of twenty, when it might have been as easily done by
its own, I cannot imagine, unless it may pass for a reason, that our ancestors
thought, that an even round number did more graceful set forth, or denote the
completion of the Moons cycle, than an odd number could. However hence it
appears, that these Symbols are no such Hieroglyphical Characters confusedly
placed, as they seem at first sight, but have a more rational orderly texture
than the Runae upon the Danish Rimestocks, or the Swedish or Norwegian
Primstaves, where the sixteen simple Runae, and the three compound ones in
their alphabetical order, stand as well for the golden number of 19, as the
seven first did, for so many Dominical Letters: Frey being put for 1. Vr (...)
for 2. Thor (...) for 3. Os (...) for 4. Reid (...) for 5. Kaun (...) for 6.
Hagl (...) for 7. Naud (...) for 8. Is (...) for 9. Ar (...) for 10. Sun (...)
for 11. Tyr (...) for 12. Biark (...) for 13. Laugur (...) for 14. Madur (...)
for 15. Aur (...) for 16. Aurlaugr (...) for 17. Twimadur (...) for 18.
Belgtzhor (...) for 19. Which three last are compound Characters, and rather
Syllables than letters Christoph. Clavii Calendar. Gregor cap. 9.
: than which (I say) the Symbols set on our Cloggs have a more rational
texture, these being put to signify numbers ad placitum, whereas ours are as
orderly made off from one another, and with as much dependence, as any of our
numbers, expressed either by the Arabic or barbarous figures, or numeral
Letters, now in use.

50. Nor are these numbers set so confusedly against the days of each Month, as
they appear at first sight, for they are placed in method, whether we consider
them, as they immediately precede and follow one another, or the distances
interceding each figure of the same value or denomination. For proof whereof,
let it be observed first, that every following number is made by adding 8 to
the preceding, and every preceding number by adding 11 to the following one,
and casting away 19, when the addition shall exceed it: for Example, if to 3
set against the first of Jan. you add 8, it makes 11 set against the 3d. of the
same Month, to which add 8 again, and it makes 19, whence 8 it self comes to be
the following figure, and 16 the next. On the contrary if to 16 you add 11, it
makes 27, from which if you deduct 19 there remains 8 the number above it, and
so onwards Christoph. Clavii Calendar. Gregor cap. 9.
; and this I find a rule without exception through the whole distribution of
these golden numbers. And for the distances of the numbers of the same
denomination, it may also be noted that they stand either 30 or 29 days
asunder, and this not at pleasure, but for the most part interchangeably: for
Example, after 3 which is set over against the first of Jan. at 30 days stance
you will find 3 again on the last of the same Month; and at 29 days distance on
the 1 of March 3 again; so on the last of March at 30 days distance 3 again,
and so of all the rest interchangeably, except where an Embolismal Month is
inserted, whereof immediately in the account I am about to give of the reason of
these things.

51. Which that I may do with all imaginable perspicuity, let it be noted
first, that the Sun finishing its course, i. e. returning to the same point in
the Zodiac in 365 days, and 6 hours proxime; and the Moon in 29 days and 12
hours proxime, the Moon must finish her course or pass through the Zodiac 12
several times in every common Julian solar year; 29 days and, or 354 days,
being so many times to be found in 365 days; and 11 days over. Now because it
was not easy to determine in the Calendar the half days of the Moons, there
being as I said 29 days 1 from one New-Moone to another, it was thought
convenient (to balance the matter) to make the distances betwixt the New Mons
to be interchangeably 29 and 30 days, and to place the golden numbers
accordingly, the Months having 30 days being termed Menses pleni, and those but
29, Cavi; the Pleni, or Lunar Months of an even number of days, being
ordinarily found in the Solar months that have odd days; and the Cavi or
Lunar-months of odd days, in the Solar months of even days; according to the
old verse.

Impar Luna pari, par fiet in impare Mense. January, March, May, July,
September, and November, being the menses pleni; February, April, June, August,
October, and December, the Cavi; upon account of which alternate reckoning of
the Lunar months, it comes to pass that all the figures on the Clogg (as I
noted above) do for the most part interchangeably stand at the distance of 30,
and 29 days asunder.

52. It being thus fully agreed on, the Lunar months should consist of 29 and
30 days apiece, alternatim: that the times of the new-moones might be for ever
stated, the Christians of Alexandria, as Dr Newton tells us, An. 323, two years
before the Council of Nice, observing that the new mood next the Vernal Equinox
was upon the 27th day of the Egyptian month Phamanoth, answering to the 23d of
our March, placed against that day (it being the first year of their
observation of this Cycle) the golden Number, 1, and so again at 29 days
distance, the same number, against the 26 day of Pharmuthi, answering to our 21
of April, that being the mensis cavus; and at 30 days distance, the same again
opposite to the 26 of the month Phacon, answering to our 21 of May; and so
onward through the whole year Newton's Cosmograph. Part. 2. Chap. 2.
. Upon which ground by the like progression, are all the golden numbers set
also in the margins of the Roman Calendars: the golden number 1. being placed,
as I said, against March the 23d, April 21, May 21, June 19, July 19, Aug. 17,
Sept. 16, Oct. 15, Nov. 14, Dec. 13, as they are found upon the Clogg. But then
because in the following year the golden number was to be 2, reckoning 30 days
from the 13 of December. (that being ordinarily mensis cavus, and Jan. plenus)
the golden number 2 was therefore set to Jan. 12, Febr. 10, March 12, Apr. 10,
May 10, June 8, July 8, Aug. 6, Sept. 5. October. 4, Nov. 3, and Dec. 2. From
whence reckoning 30 days as before, the golden number 3 comes in course in the
third year to be placed against the first of January.

53. In which year the Fathers of the Nicene Council, being about to settle the
time for the Christian observation of Easter, and that (as the learned Dr
Wallis notes) as near as they could to the time of the Jewish Passover, which
was always celebrated on the 14 day of the first month at Even, i. e. according
to their computation (who began their day at Sun set) at the beginning of the 15
day, the day of full moon Dr Wallis's Treatise concerning the Paschal Tables
in the book of Common Prayer. MS. presented to the R. Society.
: they were necessitated for this purpose to settle the golden number or cycle
of the Moon, which having been rightly used two years before by the Christians
of Alexandria, they thought not fit to alter it, but to go on from the time of
their first having used it, as the Church of England has ever since observed,
whence it came to pass that the number 3 is placed against the 1 of Jan. and
not the number 1, which, had the Fathers pleased then to have begun the Cycle,
might have as well been done: but not thinking fit (as I said before) so to
do, they continued the number 3 in the margins of their Calendars (as we see
it also in the Clogg) against the 1 of Jan. which number by reckoning 30 and 29
days to each Lunation interchangeably, falls also upon Jan. 31, Mar. 1, and 31,
Apr. 29. May 29, June 27, July 27, Aug. 25, Sept. 24, Oct. 23, Nov. 22, Dec.
21. Whence going on as before, and counting 4 for the golden number of the next
year, it will be likewise found on Jan. 20, Febr. 18, Mar. 20, Apr. 18, May 18,
June 16, July 16, Aug. 14, Sept. 13, October. 12, Nov. 11, Dec. 10. And thus, had
the Lunar and Solar years been equal, the Rule had held on through the whole
Decennovennal Cycle, without exception.

54. But the Lunar falling short of the Solar year full 11 days, it must needs
follow, that going on as above, and taking 5 for the golden number in the third
year from the settlement by the Council of Nice, that the Moon must have
fallen short thrice 11, or 33 days, so that the Lunar months being run so far
backwards as to be almost out of the Solar months, to which they were reputed
to belong; an Embolisme of 30 days or a full Month must needs be made somewhere
this year, to bring matters in a tolerable posture again: and for this reason
the number 5 is set before Jan. 9, Febr. 7, Mar. 9, Apr. 7, May 7, June 5, July
5, Aug. 3, Sept. 2, and also before the 2 of October. and not the first, that so
there may be two Lunations together of 30 days, the same number 5 being set
notwithstanding to the 31 of the same October. to make the Lunation to consist
again of 29 days, and to the 30 of November. instead of the 29, that so a
Lunation of 30 may again succeed as it ought. In like manner in the 6 year (the
golden number being 8) having gone through the 4th and 5st as common years, the
golden number is set opposite to the 5 of Apr. which should have been upon the
4; and in the 9th year, the golden number 11 is set to the 2 of Febr. which
should have been upon the first; and so as often as 30 days will arise out of
the 11 supernumerary days in the whole Cycle of the 19 years.

55. Now because these 11 days do in 19 years amount to 209 days, there must
needs be 7 Embolismal months, which by a kind of injection or interposition
must be somewhere reckoned within the 19 years, whereof 6 may contain 30 days
apiece (as will be found upon the division) and one 29 days; the years in which
they are intercalated being styled Embolismal years, to distinguish them from
the common years, which always contain 354 days, whereas 6 of these Embolismal
years do each of them take up 384 days; and the 7th (in which the 29 days are
reckoned) 383 days. Which Embolismal years, had the Nicene Fathers began the
Cycle at the time they settled it, and prefixed the golden number 1. to the
first of Jan. had been properly these seven 3.6.9.11.14.17.19 Dr Newton's
Cosmograph. Part. 2. Chap. 2.
. But because they thought convenient (as was shown above) to continue what was
before begun by the Christians of Alexandria, and to commence their settlement
on the 3d. year of the Moons cycle, therefore the Embolismal years in this
Cycle are 5.8.11.13.16.19.2. which according to Robert Grostest Bishop of Linc.
Johannes de Sacro Bosco, and most of the ancient Computists (as quoted by Dr
Wallis Dr Wallis's treatise concerning the Paschal Tables in the Book of Common
Prayer. M S.
) were expressly declared to be thus inserted.

Beginning Ending Golden Numb. I. Sept. 2. October. 1. 5. II. Mar. 6. April. 4. 8.
III. Jan. 3. Febr. 1. 11. IV. Nov. 2. Dec. 1. 13. V. Aug. 2. Aug. 31. 16. VI.
Mar. 5. Apr. 3. 19. VII. Dec. 2. Dec. 31. 2.

Which yet in effect are the same (as the Reverend Dr Newton makes it plainly
appear Joh. Newton's Cosmog. Part. 2. chap. 2.
) as if they had been inserted according as they should, if the Nicene Fathers
had begun the Moons Cycle in the year they settled it, and placed the golden
number 1. before the first of January.

56. And this is all worthy notice relating to the distribution of the golden
numbers, Embolismal months, etc. but that there is a peculiar reguard in
ordering these matters to be had in placing the golden numbers from the 8 of
March. to the 5 of Apr. within which compass none of the Lunations must exceed
29 days, because no Paschal Lunation may consist of more; whence it is that
from the 8 of March to the 6 of Apr. (to both which days the golden number 16
is prefixed) there are but 29 days; and from the 9th. of March to the 7. of
April. (to both which days the golden number is 5) are also but 29 days; and so
of the rest, till you come to the fifth of April, all the Paschal Lunations and
golden numbers falling out, and being expressed, between those two days. Nor
must it be forgot that the 7th and last Embolismal month, which never can
consist of above 29 days (19 times 11 being but 209, whereas 210 are requisite
for 7 times 30) is intercalated notwithstanding as a month of 30, from Mar. the
5 to Apr. 4. where are two months together of 30 days, in the year when the
golden number is 19, as well as in any of the rest, which could not be unless
the intercalation were there: in compensation whereof the Moon for July, which
should have been of 30 days, they make this year but of 29, counting from July
1. to July 30; the golden number 19 being put to July the 30, which should have
been set before the 31: so that here are 3 months together of 29 days, the
tricesima Luna, that should have been in July, being skipt over, which they
call Saltus Lunae; which it was absolutely necessary must be somewhere, by reason
the intercalatory months were all of 30 days.

57. Thus having shown the reason of the distribution of the golden number in
general, it remains that I give a more particular account how it comes to pass,
that the following golden number should be made by adding 8 to the preceding;
and the preceding by adding, 11 to the following: for the first whereof, I take
the reason to be, that in 8 Solar years, allowing to each 365 days and 6 h.
which are 2922 days, there happen to be 99 Lunations wanting one day, 12 h. 41.
15 9; upon which account after 8 years the Lunations do not begin upon the
same day they did 8 years before, but one day and later, proxime; wherefore
after every golden number through the whole Calendar, another is written next
it which exceeds it by eight, to show that after 8 years the New Moons will not
fall upon those days, upon which the antecedent golden numbers are written, but
upon those to which the numbers are prefix't, that are made off them by eight.
And because in twice 8 years, the twice 12 hours and odd minutes make another
day and better, therefore the golden numbers are not always immediately put
after each other upon all days of the months, but every third day, for the most
part, is left vacant for these twice 12 hours; so that every two golden numbers
have ordinarily 3 days allowed them, otherwise the Lunations in each 16 years
time, would be always anticipated one day at lest.

58. And the reason why every preceding golden number is formed of the
subsequent by adding 11 is, because in 11 Solar years, in which are 417 days,
there are 136 Lunations and one day, 14 h. 8. 47. 4. for that in 136 Lunations
there are required only 4016 days 3 h. 51. 12. 56. and therefore the New Moons
after 11 years, fall not on the same days they did the said 11 years before,
but one day and almost half another sooner: upon which account before every
golden number, is set another golden number that exceeds it by 11, to show that
after 11 years, the New Moons will not fall upon those days they did 11 years
before, but sooner, viz. upon those to which the numbers are prefixed, that are
made off them by the addition of 11. Whence Clavius concludes that Campanus and
many others of the ancient Computists, did not rightly set two golden numbers
before December 2 Christoph. Claevii Calendar. Gregor. cap. 9.. 8.
for that after 11 years the New Moons that fell upon that day (the golden
numbers being 13 or 2) will necessarily happen one day and near sooner, as was
shown above; for evidence whereof, if these were rightly set, there must also
be two other golden numbers put the day preceding, viz. 5 and 13. and so two
more again for them, and so quite through the Calendar: so that every day that
has any, must have two golden numbers as well as this, and two New Moons
falling on it within the cycle; whereas no other day but this even by these
Computists is allowed above one, and these sufficient too, to take up all the
New Mons. Upon which account I rather close with Clavius, and place the number
13 upon the first of December. and 2 alone upon the second, as I find them upon
several of these Cloggs, though not in that represented above, 13 in that being
put down to the second, and 2 to the third, in which point I therefore count it
defective, nor can I see any inconvenience that will follow hence, but that the
Embolismal month (the golden number being 13) must then be reckoned from Dec.
1. to the 31. as Clavius does Idem Calendar. Gregor cap. 17.
, which perhaps may be none: but I forbear to lanch further into this
controversy, having already I fear tired the Readers patience.

59. And proceed next to the Inscriptions, issuing from the notches, to the
right hand of them, some peculiar notches having figures set against them on
this hand too, but all of different kinds, and not repeated like the former:
which though they are marks or symbols of the festival days, expressed after the
Egyptian Hieroglyphical manner, non literis, aut syllabarum compositione as
Diodorus tells us Diodori Siculi de Aegyptiacis Lib. 4.
sed imaginum forma, not with Letters or Syllables, yet they are not set at
random, but all carry with them a rational importance, some of them pointing
out the offices or endowments of the Saints, before whose festivals they are
put; others the manner of their Martyrdoms; and others only some eminent action
or other matter some way relating to the Saint, or else the work, or Sport, in
fashion about the time when the feast is kept. Thus from the Notch which
represents the 13 of Jan. or the feast of St Hilary, there issues a Cross or
badg of a Bishop such as St Hilary was; from the first of March a harp, showing
the feast of St David, who used to praise God on that instrument; against June
the 29 the Keys for St Peter, reputed the Ianitor of heaven; and a pair of
shoes against the 25 of October. the feast of St Crispin the Patron of the
Shoomakers. Of the second kind, are the Axe set against the 25 of January or
feast of St Paul, who was beheaded with an Axe; and a Sword against the 24 of
June for St John Baptist's day, who perhaps was beheaded in the prison with
such a weapon; So a Gridiron upon the 10 of August or feast of St Laurence, who
suffered martyrdom upon one; and a wheel on the 25, with a decussated cross on
the last of November. for St Catharine and St Andrew, who are said also to have
suffered upon such instruments of death.

60. And of the last kind, are the marks against the first of January, somewhat
resembling the cutting off of the prepuce, for the Circumcision; the Starr on
the 6 of the same Month to denote the Epiphany; a true Lovers knot against the
14 of Febr. for Valentines day, importing the time of marryage or coupling of
birds; a bough against the 2 of March for St Ceadda, who lived a Hermits life
in the woods near Lichfield; also a bough on the first of May, such as they
usually set up about that time with great solemnity; and a rake on the 11 of
June being St Barnabies day, importing that then it is hay-harvest. So a pot
against the 23 of November. for the feast of St Clement, from the ancient custom
of going about that night, to beg drink to make merry with; and for the
Purification, Annuntiation, and all other feasts of our Lady, always the figure
of a heart, which what it should import relating to Mary, unless because upon
the Shepherds relation of their Vision, Mary is said to have kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart Luke 2. v. 19.
, I cannot imagine; lastly for Dec. 25. or Christmas day, a Horn; the ancient
vessel in which the Danes use to Wassayle, or drink healths; signifying to us
that this is the time we ought to rejoice and make merry, cornua exhaurienda
notans, as Wormius will have it Olai Wormii Fastor. Danicor. Lib. 1. cap. 18.
. Many such Symbols there are too, for other festivals, which not being so
constantly the same as these are, but varying almost upon every Clogg, I
forbear any further exposition of them; only adding that the marks for the
greater feasts solemnly observed in the Church have a large point set in the
middle of them, and another over against the preceding day, if vigills or fasts
were observed before them.

61. Thus having done with the Inscriptions on both sides the notches, it
remains only that I show what were the uses of each: for the former whereof (I
mean the prime or golden number) its only use anciently before the birth of
Christ, was to show the times the New Mons would happen: but after his death
it was applied by the Church to an Ecclesiastical use, viz. to show the true
time of celebrating Easter, which it does to this day: that being to be
esteemed the Paschal Moon, whose 14th day does fall upon or after the Vernal
Equinox, which in the days of the Nicene Fathers (as they were informed by the
Astronomers of those times) was upon the 21 of March; or which comes to the
same purpose: that was to be reputed the Paschal Moon, whose Full fell not on,
but next after the Vernal Equinox or 21 of March, on which day if Sunday, or
else the next Sunday following, Easter was always to be observed. So that the
years of the Moons Cycle being settled as above, no body had then, nor has now
more to do, to find the time of Easter, but to consult in their Calendars the
golden number for the year within that compass, which shows the time of the
Paschal New-Moone, and to count 14 from it; or to find out the next Full-Moone
after the Ecclesiastical Equinox; upon which day if Sunday (as I said before)
or the next Sunday after, Easter is to be kept. Whence it is that these numbers
are sometimes called the Prime, because they do indicare primas Lunas, and not
only near Easter, but through the whole year; which was esteemed by our
ancestors a thing of so excellent use, that they scrupled not to set them in
the margins of their Calendars in characters of gold, whence they are styled to
this day, also the golden number.

62. But you will object perhaps and say, that upon observing of the New
Moons, you find them not now to fall on those days the Prime does direct, but
ordinarily four, and sometimes five days before; which is so great a truth,
that in the Breviaries and Missals corrected by Pius quintus, the primes are
removed 5 days upwards Christoph. Clavii Calendar. Gregorian. cap. 9.. 12.
and so we find them in the Scotch Common Prayer Book printed at Edinborough
An. 1637, which I suppose was done, that the primes might agree with the
New Mons, as they fell at those times, which by reason the Cycle of the Moon
is 1 h. 27. 31. 55. shorter then 19 Julian years, had then gone back since the
Council of Nice, near 5 days, this (...) or anticipation, amounting to a day,
in 312 years and, as Clavius computes it r. Which remedy of Pius quintus, and
the Church of Scotland, had been agreeable enough, had the use of the prime
been only to find the Astronomical New Moons. But our Church of England having
not yet though fit, to alter the observation of Easter from the time appointed
by the Nicene Council, the primes cannot be so altered without great confusion,
as the learned Dr Wallis has showed at large Ibidem. cap. 8.. 4.
, but must be still continued where they were then, and still remain on the
Clogg: which now rather serve indeed, only for the ready finding of the
Ecclesiastical New-Moones, than the Astronomical; though they may be computed
too, only by reckoning them to fall about 4 days before; the Cycle of the Moon
having so much anticipated the course of the Sun since the time of that
Council. Dr. Wallis's Treatise concerning the Paschal Tables in the Books of
Common Prayer M S.
Which I take to be all the use that the primes are put to; but that by the
following numbers being made by adding 8 to the preceding, and the preceding by
adding 11 to the following; they also understand that every following prime
will be in use 8 years after the preceding; and every preceding 11 years after
the following. And as for the Symbols on the right hand the notches, their only
use is for finding the immovable feasts (as the primes were chiefly for the
moveable) as was hinted above.

63. Nor did the Danish government only bring in these Cloggs, but their manner
of buryal, which was to erect over the graves of all persons of quality tall
pyramidal stones, such as those in the Church yards of Leek, Draycot, and
Chebsey, which I took indeed at first to be only the Epistylia of so many
Crosses, till coming to Ilam and finding two in the same Churchyard, and three
close together at Checkley, I then began to think they must have some other
original, and that most probably they might be funeral monuments of the dead;
with which agrees the tradition of theirs at Checkley, the Inhabitants
reporting them the memorials of 3 Bishops slain in a battle fought here about
of a mile ENE from the Church, in a place still called Naked Fields, for that
the bodies lay there naked and unburyed for some time after the fight: what
they were funeral monuments, and of Danish original, I am fully confirmed, not
only from the like still remaining in Denmark Olai Wormii Monument. Danicor.
Lib. 5. and 6. inter Ripensia and Norvagica.
but here in England too; the Reverend and Learned William Nicolson Archdeacon
of Carlisle, having lately given us an account of much such another as most of
ours are, at Beaucastle in Cumberland, with Runic characters still remaining
upon it, inclining in figure to a square pyramid or obelisk, with many pictures
of Saints in Sacerdotal habits, and a great deal of Chequer-work engraven upon
it, which he styles a notable emblem of the tumuli of the Ancients Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 178.
.

64. All which (but the Runic characters) are also found upon some of ours, as
may plainly be seen upon those of Checkley, if the Reader please to look back
to Tab. 33. where they are purposely represented for his satisfaction Fig. 9,
10, 11. which are the three stones mentioned by Mr Camden Camden in Stafford.
, whereof the two that stand furthest from the Church, are finely carved into
fretwork and imagery, but the next it, plain; the tallest (now not above 6
foot) is that in the middle, the biggest being that most remote from the
Church, but they all seem to have been formerly higher; I am sure the biggest
has, for I could perceive the feet of an image on the top of it, whose head was
higher on the stone when whole. That at Leek is much taller than these, and has
also much fretwork and some imagery upon it, but I do not remember any upon
the rest. Which are all the Antiquities I found here remarkable that are
certainly Danish, unless it be worthy notice, that it is very probable that
Leofric Earl of Mercia, husband to the famous Godeva, who rodd through Coventry
naked, and obtained thereby many large privileges of her husband for them, dyed
at his village of Bromleyg Henr. de Knyghton Canon of Leycester. de Eventibas
Angl. Lib. 1. cap. 12.
, or Bromleage as Dunelmensis calls it Simeon. Dunelmensis Hist. de gestis
Regum Angl. in An. 1057.
, in this County, though buried at Coventry.

65. Yet there are many old Customs in use within memory, of whose originals I
could find no tolerable account, that possibly might commence as high as these
times; such as the service due from the Lord of Essington in this County to the
Lord of Hilton, about a mile distant, viz. that the Lord of the Manor of
Essington (now one St John's Esquire late Sr Gilbert Wakering) shall bring a goose
every New Years day, and drive it round the fire in the Hall at Hilton, at lest
3 times (which he is bound to do as mean Lord) whilst Jack of Hilton is
blowing the fire. Now Jack of Hilton, is a little hollow Image of brass of
about 12 Inches high, kneeling upon his left knee, and holding his right hand
upon his head, and his left upon Pego or his veretrum erected, as in Tab. 33.
Fig. 12. above mentioned; having a little hole in the place of the mouth, about
the bigness of a great pins head, and another in the back about of an inch
diameter, at which last hole it is filled with water, it holding about 4 pints
and, which, when set to a strong fire, evaporates after the same manner as in
an Aeolipile, and vents it self at the smaller hole at the mouth in a constant
blast, blowing the fire so strongly that it is very audible, and makes a
sensible impression in that part of the fire where the blast lights, as I found
by experience May the 26. 1680. After the Lord of Essington, or his Deputy or
Bailiff, has driven the goofe round the fire (at lest 3 times) whilst this
Image blows it, he carrys it into the Kitchen of Hilton-Hall, and delivers it
to the Cook, who having dressed it, the Lord of Essington or his Bailiff, by
way of further service, brings it to the Table of the Lord paramount of Hilton
and Essington, and receives a dish of meat, from the said Lord of Hiltons
table, for his own Mess. Which service was performed about 50 years since, by
James Wilkinson then Bailiff of Sr Gilbert Wakering, the Lady Townsend being
Lady of the Manor of Hilton, Tho. a Stokes and John. a Stokes brothers, both
living An. 1680. then being present.

66. At Abbots, or now rather Pagets Bromley, they had also within memory, a
sort of sport, which they celebrated at Christmas (on New-year, and Twelft-day)
called the Hobbyhorse dance, from a person that carried the image of a horse
between his legs, made of thin boards, and in his hand a bow and arrow, which
passing through a hole in the bow, and stopping upon a sholder it had in it, he
made a snapping noise as he drew it to and fro, keeping time with the Music:
with this Man danced 6 others, carrying on their shoulders as many Rain deers
heads, 3 of them painted white, and 3 red, with the Arms of the chief families
(viz. of Paget, Bagot, and Wells) to whom the revenews of the Town chiefly
belonged, depicted on the palms of them, with which they danced the Hays, and
other Country dances. To this Hobbyhorse dance there also belonged a pot,
which was kept by turns, by 4 or 5 of the chief of the Town, whom they called
Reeves, who provided Cakes and Ale to put in this pot; all people who had any
kindness for the good intent of the Institution of the sport, giving pence a
piece for themselves and families; and so forraigners too, that came to see it:
with which Money (the charge of the Cakes and Ale being defrayed) they not only
repaired their Church but kept their poor too: which charges are not now
perhaps so cheerfully boarn.

67. It seems too, to be pretty certain that the Town or Castle of Chesterton
under Lyme, as Mr Camden calls it, given by King John to the last Randall E. of
Chester, must be a place of note before the Conquest, it goeing to decay as
long ago as the Reign of King Hen. 3. when the Earl of Lancaster built
another near by, in the midst of a great poole, which he called the New Castle,
that gave original (no doubt) to the Town of that Name close by it: whereof
yet there is now almost as little remaining as of the Walls of Chesterton,
which were so firmly built, that as Mr Camden Camdens Britannia in Staffordsh.
, and Mr Erdeswick both own, there remained so much of the rubbish of them in
their days, that it might be perceived thereby, that they were of a mavelous
thickness Mr Sampson Erdeswick's view of Staffordshire, in Chesterton.
: but all was gone before I came there, nothing now being to be seen but some
faint footsteps of them, in the place where the mark is set in the Map. Nor is
there much more of the New Castle in the poole, though the Town near by be grown
considerably large, being governed by a Mayor and sending Burgesses to
Parliament, and flourishing reasonably well to this very day; yet had certainly
its original from this decayed Castle, there being no account of any such Town,
as Mr Erdeswick acquaints us, in Doomsday book Ibidem in Newcastle.
, or any other writings relating to this County, before the building of that
New Castle.

68. Quickly after the Conquest, Henry de Ferrars a noble man of Normandy (as
Mr Camden styles him Camden's Britannia in Staffordsh.
) who came in with Duke William, and had large possessions allotted him in this
County, built Tutbury Castle, upon that hill of Alabaster where it now stands,
which continued in his family till Robert de Ferrars Earl of Darby (after
pardon obtained for a former rebellion) revolted a second time and joined with
Simon Montford against King Henry the third, by whom being taken prisoner he
was fined for his offense 50000 l Sterling (a vast Sum in those days) to be
paid simul and semel in uno die, sc. in quindena Joh. Bap. which fine the King
gave to his son Edmund Earl of Lancaster; Earl Robert obliging himself upon
non payment, to forfeit all his lands except Chartley in Staffordshire, and
Holbroc in Darbyshire, to the said Edmund Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in
Tutbury.
: which (because such a Sum could then by no means be raised) was accordingly
done; and so Tutbury came to the family of Lancaster, and at length to be the
head seat of the Duchy, in which it flourish't till the rebellion of Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, An. 1322. temp. Edw. 2. who fortifyed it against the King,
but could not hold it; when, as Mr Erdeswick thinks, this first Castle was
brought to decay, and not reedifyed till it came into the possession of John of
Gaunt, who built the present Castle, walling it on all sides but one, where the
hill is so steep that it needed no such fence Ibidem.
: from whose time it continued in some tolerable condition till the late civil
war, temp. Car. 1. when it was taken and for the most part demolish't by the
Rebels, as may be seen by the ruins Tab. 36. it remaining much in the same
condition they left it, to this very day.

69. During the time of which ancient Earls and Dukes of Lancaster, who were
ever of the blood Royal, great men in their times, had their abode, and kept a
liberal hospitality here, at their Honor of Tutbury, there could not but be a
general concourse of people from all parts hither; for whose diversion all
sorts of Musicians were permitted likewise to come, to pay their services:
amongst whom (being numerous) some quarrels and disorders now and then arising,
it was found necessary after a while they should be brought under rules, diverse
Laws being made for the better regulating of them, and a Governor appointed
them by the name of a King, who had several Officers under him to see to the
execution of those Laws, full power being granted them to apprehend and arrest
any such Minstrells appertaining to the said Honor, as should refuse to do
their services in due manner, and to constrain them to do them: as appears by
the Charter granted to the said King of the Minstrells, by John of Gaunt King
of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, bearing date the 22 of August in
the 4 year of the reign of King Richard the second, entitled, Carta le Roy de
Ministralx, which being written in old French D. Gulielmi Dugdale Monast. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 355.
, I have here translated, and annexed it to this discourse, for the more
universal notoriety of the things, and for satisfaction how the power of the
King of the Minstrells and his Officers is founded: which take as follows.

JOHN By the Grace of God King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, to all
them who shall see or hear these our Letters greeting. Know ye we have ordained
constituted and assigned to our well beloved the King of the Minstrells in our
Honor of Tutbury, who is, or for the time shall be, to apprehend and arrest all
the Minstrells in our said Honor and Franchise, that refuse to do the Services
and Minstrelsy as appertain to them to do from ancient times at Tutbury
aforesaid, yearly on the days of the Assumption of our Lady: giving and
granting to the said King of the Minstrells for the time being, full power and
commandment to make them reasonably to justify, and to constrain them to do
their Services, and Minstrelsies, in manner as belongs to them, and as it
has been there, and of ancient times accustomed. In witness of which thing, we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Given under our privy Seal at
our Castle of Turbury the 22 day of Aug. in the 4th. year of the reign of the
most sweet King Richard the second.

70. Upon this, in process of time the defaulters being many, and the
amercements by the Officers perhaps not sometimes over reasonable; concerning
which, and other matters, controversies frequently arising: it was at last
found necessary, that a Court should be erected to hear plaints, and determine
Controversies, between party and party, before the Steward of the Honor, which
is held there to this day on the morrow after the Assumption being the 16th. of
Aug. on which day they now also do all the services mentioned in the above
said grant; and have the Bull due to them, anciently from the Prior of Tutbury,
now from the Earl of Devon; whereas they had it formerly on the assumption of
our Lady, as appears by an Inspeximus of King Henry the sixth, relating to the
Customs of Tutbury, where amongst others, this of the Bull is mentioned in
these words. Item est ibidem quaedam consuetudo quod Histriones venientes ad
matutinas in festo assumptionis beatae Mariae, habebunt unum Taurum de Priore
de Tuttebury, si ipsum capere possunt citra aquam Dove propinquiorem Tuttebury;
vel Prior dabit eis xld. pro qua quidem consuetudine dabuntur domino ad dictum
festum annuatim xxd. i. e. that there is a certain custom belonging to the
Honor of Tutbury, that the Minstrells who come to Matins there on the feast of
the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, shall have a Bull given them by the Prior
of Tutbury, if they can take him on this side the River Dove which is next
Tutbury; or else the Prior shall give them xld. for the enjoyment of which
custom they shall give to the Lord at the said feast, yearly xxd Ibidem.
.

71. Thus I say* the services of the Minstrells were performed, and Bull
enjoyed, anciently on the feast of the Assumption; but now they are done, and
had, in the manner following, on the Court day or morrow of the assumption
being the 16 of August, what time all the Minstrels within the Honor come first
to the Bailiffs house of the Manor of Tutbury (who is now the Earl of
Devonshire) where the Steward for the Court to be holden for the King, as Duke
of Lancastar (who is now the Duke of Ormond) or his deputy meeting them, they
all go from thence to the parish Church of Tutbury, two and two together,
Music playing before them, the King of the Minstrells for the year past
walking between the Steward and Bailiff, or their deputies; the four Stewards
or under Officers of the said King of the Minstrells, each with a white wand in
their hands, immediately following them; and then the rest of the company in
order. Being come to the Church, the Vicar reads them divine service, choosing
Psalms and Lessons suitable to the occasion: the Psalms when I was there An.
1680. being the 98.149.150; the first Lesson 2. Chron. 5. and the second, the
5. chap. of the Epistle to the Ephesians, to the 22 verse. For which service
every Minstrel offered one penny, as a due always a paid to the Vicar of the
Church of Tutbury, upon this Solemnity.

72. Service being ended, they proceed in like manner as before, from the
Church to the Castle-hall or Court, where the Steward or his deputy takes his
place, assisted by the Bailiff or his deputy, the King of the Minstrells
sitting between them; who is to oversee that every Minstrell dwelling within
the Honor and making default, shall be presented and amerced: which that he may
the better do, an O yes is then made by one of the Officers being a Minstrel,
3 times, giving notice by direction from the Steward to all manner of
Minstrells dwelling within the Honor of Tutbury, viz. within the Counties of
Stafford, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester and Warwick, owing suit and service to
his Majesty's Court of Music here holden as this day, that every man draw near
and give his attendance upon pain and peril that may otherwise ensue, and that
if any man will be assigned of suit or plea, he or they should come in, and
they should be heard. Then all the Musicians being called over by a Courtroll,
two Juries are impannell'd, out of 24 of the sufficientest of them, 12 for
Staffordshire, and 12 for the other Counties; whose names being delivered in
Court to the Steward and called over, and appearing to be full Juries, the
Foreman of each is first sworn, and then the residue, as is usual in other
Courts, upon the holy Evangelists.

73. Then to move them the better to mind their duties to the King, and their
own good; the Steward proceeds to give them their charge: first commending to
their consideration the original of all Music, both Wind and string Music,
the antiquity and excellency of both, setting forth the force of it upon the
affections, by diverse examples; how the use of it has always been allowed (as
is plain from holy writ) in praising and glorifying God; and the skill in it
always esteemed so considerable, that it is still accounted in the Schools one
of the liberal Arts, and allowed in all Godly Christian Commonwealths; where
by the way he commonly takes notice of the Statute, which reckons some
Musicians amongst Vagabonds and Rogues Joseph Kebles Statutes at large. 39. of
Eliz. chap. 4.. 2.
, giving them to understand that such Societies as theirs, thus legally founded
and governed by laws, are by no means intended by that Statute, for which
reason the Minstrells belonging to the Manor of Dutton in the County Palatine
of Chester are expressly excepted in that Act Ibidem.. 10.
. Exhorting them upon this account (to preserve their reputation) to be very
careful to make choice of such men to be Officers amongst them, as fear God,
are of good life and conversation, and have knowledge and skill in the practice
of their Art. Which charge being ended, the Jurors proceed to the Election of
the said Officers, the King being to be chosen out of the 4 Stewards of the
preceding year, and one year out of Staffordshire, and the other out of
Darbyshire interchangeably: and the 4 Stewards two of them out of
Staffordshire, and two out of Darbyshire; 3 being chosen by the Jurors, and the
4th by him that keeps the Court, and the deputy Steward or Clerk

74. The Jurors departing the Court for this purpose, leave the Steward with
his assistants still in their places, who in the mean time make themselves
merry with a banquet, and a noise of Musicians playing to them, the old King
still sitting between the Steward and Bailiff as before: but returning again
after a competent time, they present first their chiefest Officer by the name
of their King; then the old King arising from his place, delivers him a
little white wand in token of his Sovereignty, and then taking a cup filled
with Wine drinks to him, wishing him all joy and prosperity in his Office. In
the like manner do the old Stewards to the new, and then the old King rises,
and the new takes his place, and so do the new Stewards of the old, who have
full power and authority by virtue of the Kings Stewards warrant, directed from
the said Court, to levy and distrain in any City, Town Corporate, or in any
place within the Kings dominions, all such fines and amercements as are
inflicted by the said Juries that day upon any Minstrells, for his or their
offenses, committed in the breach of any of their ancient orders, made for the
good rule and government of the said Society. For which said fines and
amercements so distrained, or otherwise peaceably collected, the said Stewards
are accountable at every Audit: one moiety of them going to the Kings Majesty,
and the other the said Stewards have, for their own use.

75. The Election, etc. being thus concluded, the Court rises, and all persons
then repair to another fair room within the Castle, where a plentiful dinner
is prepared for them, which being ended; the Minstrells went anciently to the
Abbey gate, now to a little barn by the Town side, in expectance of the Bull to
be turned forth to them, which was formerly done (according to the Custom above
mentioned) by the Prior of Tutbury, now by the Earl of Devonshire: which Bull,
as soon as his horns are cut off, his Ears cropped, his tail cut by the stumple,
all his body smeared over with Soap, and his nose blown full of beaten pepper;
in short, being made as mad as it is possible for him to be; after Solemn
Proclamation made by the Steward, that all manner of persons give way to the
Bull, none being to come near him by 40 foot, any way to hinder the Minstrells,
but to attend his or their own safeties, every one at his peril: He is then
forthwith turned out to them (anciently by the Prior) now by the Lord
Devonshire or his deputy, to be taken by them and none other, within the County
of Stafford between the time of his being turned out to them, and the setting
of the Sun the same day: which if they cannot do, but the Bull escapes from
them untaken, and gets over the River into Darbyshire, he remains still my Lord
Devonshires bull: but if the said Minstrells can take him, and hold him so
long, as to cut off but some small matter of his hair, and bring the same to
the Market cross in token they have taken him, the said bull is then brought to
the Bailiffs house in Tutbury, and there coller'd and roap't, and so brought to
the Bull-ring in the high street, and there baited with dogs: the first course
being allotted for the King; the second for the Honor of the Town; and the
third for the King of the Minstrells. Which after it is done, the said
Minstrells are to have him for their own, and may sell, or kill and divide him
amongst them, according as they shall think good.

76. And thus this Rustick-sport which they call the Bull-running, should be
annually performed by the Minstrells only, but now a days they are assisted by
the promiscuous multitude, that flock hither in great numbers, and are much
pleased with it, though sometimes through the emulation in point of manhood, that
has been long cherish't between the Staffordshire and Darbyshire men, perhaps
as much mischief may have been done in the trial between them, as in the Jeu
de Taureau or Bull-fighting practiced at Valentia, Madrid, and many other
places in Spain Fran. Willughby's voyage through Spain. p. 499.
, whence perhaps this our Custom of Bull-running might be derived, and set up
here by John of Gaunt who was King of Castile and Leon, and Lord of the Honor
of Tuthury; for why might not we receive this sport from the Spaniards, as well
as they from the Romans, and the Romans from the Greeks? wherein I am the more
confirmed, for that the (...) amongst the Thessalians, who first instituted
this game, and of whom Julius Caesar learned it, and brought it to Rome, were
celebrated much about the same time of the year, our Bull-running is, viz.
pridie Idus Augusti on the 12 of August Humph. Prideaux in notis ad Marmor
(...). inter Marmora Oxoniens.
; which perhaps John of Gaunt in honor of the Assumption of our Lady being but
3 days after, might remove to the 15; as after ages did (that all the
Solemnity, and Court might be kept on the same day, to avoid further trouble)
to the 16 of August.

77. Nor is this the only remarkable Custom that anciently belonged to this
Honor of Tutbury, for I find that Sr Philip de Somervile 10 of Edw. 3. held the
Manors of Whichnovre, Scirescot, Ridware, Netherton, and Cowlee, all in Com.
Stafford of the Earls of Lancaster Lords of the Honor of Tutbury, by these
memorable Services, viz. By two small fees E. Rot. Membr. penes Joh. Turton de
Alrewas in Com. Staff.
; That is to say, when other Tenants pay for Relief one whole Knight's fee,
One hundred Shillings, he the said Sir Philip shall pay but Fifty shillings:
and when Escuage is assessed throghe owtt the land; or to Aid for to make the
eldest son of the Lord, Knight; or for to marry the eldest daughter of the
Lord, the said Sir Philip shall pay bott the motye of it that other shall pay.
Nevertheless, the said Sir Philip shall find, meyntienge, and susteingne one
Bacon flyke, hanging in his Hall at Whichenovre, ready arrayede all times of the
year, bott in Lent; to be given to everyche mane, or woman married, after the
day and the year of their marriage be passed: and to be gyven to everyche mane
of Religion, Archbishop, Bishop, Prior, or other Religious: and to everyche
Priest, after the year and day of their profession finished, or of their
dignity reseyved, in form followyng; whenever that any such byforenamed,
will come for to enquire for the Baconne, in there own person; or by any
other for them, they shall come to the Baillyfe, or to the Porter of the
Lordship of Whichnovre, and shall say to them, in the manner as ensewethe;
Bayliffe, or Porter, I do you to know; that I am come for my self [or, if he
be come for any other, showing. for whome] to demand one Bacon flyke, hanging
in the Halle, of the Lord of Whichenovre, after the form thereunto belongyng.

After which relacioun, the Baillyffe or Porter shall assign a day to him, upon
promise, by his feythe to return; and with him to bring tweyne of his
neighbors. And, in the meyn time, the said Bailliffe shall take with him
tweyne of the Freeholders of the Lordship of Whichenovre; and they three, shall
go to the Manoir of Rudlowe, belonging to Robert Knyghtleye, and there shall
somon the forseid Knyghteley or his Baillyffe; commanding him, to be ready at
Whichenovre, the day appointed, at pryme of the day, with his Caryage; that is
to say, a Horse and a Sadylle, a Sakke, and a Pryke, for to convey and carye
the said Baconne, and Corn, a journey owtt of the Countee of Stafford, at his
costages. And then the said Baillyffe, shall, with the said Freeholders, somone
all the Tenaunts of the said Manoir, to be ready at the day appointed, at
Whichnovre, for to do and perform the services which they owe to the Baconne.
And, at the day assigned, all such as owe services to the Baconne, shall be
ready at the Gatte of the Manoir off Whichnovre, from the Sonne-rysing to
None, attendyng and awatyng for the coming of him, that fetches the Baconne.
And, when he is common, there shall be delivered to him and his felowys,
Chapeletts; and to all those which shall be there: to do their services deue
to the Baconne: And they shall led the seid Demandant with Trompes and
Tabours, and other manner of Mynstralseye, to the Halle-dore, where he shall
find the Lord of Whichenovre, or his Steward, ready to deliver the Baconne, in
this manner.

78. He shall enquere of him, which demands the Baconne, if he have brought
tweyn of his Neghbors with him. Which must answer; They be here ready. And
then the Steward shall cause thies two Neighbors to swear, if the said
Demandaunt be a weddyt man; or have be a man weddyt: and, if sithe his
Marriage, one year and a day be passed: And if he be a freeman, or a villeyn.
And if his seid neghbours make Oath, that he has for him all thies three
points rehearsed; then shall the Baconne be take down, and broghte to the
Hall-dore; and shall there be laid upon one half a Quarter of Wheatte; and
upon one other of Rye. And he that demands the Baconne shall kneel upon his
knee; and shall hold his right hand upon a book; which book shall be laid
above the Baconne, and the Corn; and shall make Oath, in this manner.

Here ye, Sir Philippe de Somervile, Lord of Whichenovre, mayntener and gyver
of this Baconne; That I A. sith I Wedded B. my wife, and sithe I hadd her in
my keeping, and at my will by a year and a day, after our Marriage; I would not
have changed for none other; farer, ne fowler; rycher ne pourer; ne for none
other descended of greater lynage; slepying, ne waking, at no time. And if the
feyd B. were sole, and I sole, I would take her to be my Wife, before all the
wymen of the world; of what condiciones soever they be; good or evylle, as
help me God and his Seyntys; and this flesh, and all fleshes.

And his neighbors shall make Oath, that they trust veraly he has said truly.
And, yff it be found by his neighbors, beforenamed, that he be a Freeman;
there shall be delyvered to him half a Quarter of Wheat, and a Cheese. And, if
he be a villeyn, he shall have half a Quarter of Rye, without Cheese. And then
shall Knyghtleye, the Lord of Rudlowe Rudlow seems to be that at Taten-hill
Wood-Lane near the house of Joseph Sutton as Tenant. A^. 1680.
, be called for, to carrye all thies things, to fore rehearsed: And the said
Corn shall be laid upon one horse, and the Baconne above ytt: and he to whom
the Baconne apperteigneth, shall ascend upon his Horse; and shall take the
Cheese before him, if he have a Horse: And, if he have none, the Lord of
Whichenovre shall cause him have one Horse and Sadyll, to such time as he be
passed his Lordshippe: and so shall they depart the Manoir of Whichenovre,
with the Corn and the Baconne, tofore him that has won itt, with Trompets,
Tabouretts, and other manoir of Mynstralce. And, all the Free-Tenants of
Whichenovre shall conduct him, to be passed the Lordship of Whichenovre. And
then shall all they return; except him, to whom apperteigneth to make the
carryage and journey, wythowtt the Countye of Stafford, at the Costys of his
Lord of Whichenover. And, yff the said Robert Knightley, do not cause the
Baconn and Corn, to be conveyed, as is rehearsed; the Lord of Whichenovre shall
do it be carried, and shall dystreigne the said Robert Knyghtley for his
defaulte, for one hundred shyllings, in his Manoir of Rudlowe; and shall keep
the distres, so takyn, irreplevisable.

79. Moreover, the said Sir Philippe holds of his Lord, the Earl, the Manoir
of Briddeshalle, by thies services; that, art such time, that his said Lord
holds his Chrystemes at Tutbury, the said Sir Phelippe shall come to Tutbury,
upon Chrystemasse Evyn; and shall be lodged in the Town of Tutbury, by the
Marshall of the Erlys house: and upon Chrystymesse-day, he himself, or some
othyr Knight (his Deputye) shall go to the Dressour; and shall sewe to his
Lordys meese: and then shall he kerve the same met to his said Lord: And this
service shall he do as well at Souper, as at Dynner: and when his Lord has
etyn; the said Sir Philippe shall fit down, in the same place, wheir his Lord
satt: and shall be served at his Table, by the Steward of the Erlys house.
And, upon Saint, Stevyn-day, when he haith dyned, he shall take leve of his
Lord, and shall kiss him: and, for his service he shall nothing take, ne
nothing shall gyve. And all thyes services, tofore-rehersed, the said Sir
Philippe has do, by the space of xlviii. years; and his ancestors before him,
to his Lordys, Erlys of Lancastre. Item, the said Sir Philippe holds of his
seid Lord, the Earl, his Manoirs of Tatenhull and Drycotte, en percenerye, by
thies services; that the seid Sir Phelippe, or his Attorney for him, shall come
to the Castle of Tutburye, upon Saint Petyr day, in August, which is called
Lammesse; and shall show the Steward, or Receiver, that he is come thither to
hunt, and catch his Lord's Greese, at the costages of his Lord. Whereupon the
Steward or the Receiver shall cause a Horse and Sadylle to be deliveryd to the
said Sir Phelippe, the price Fifty shillings; or Fifty shillings in money, and
one Hound; and shall pay to the said Sir Phelippe, everyche day, fro the said
day of Saint Peter, to Holy Roode-day, for himself Two shillings six pence a
day; and everyche day for his servant, and his Bercelett, during the said time
twelve pence. And all the Wood-masters of the Forest of Nedewode and Duffelde,
with all the Parkers and Foresters, shall be commandyd to awatte, and attend
upon the said Sir Phelippe, while their Lord's Greese be takyn, in all places
of the seyde Forestys, as upon their Master, during the said time. And the said
Sir Phelippe, or his Attorney, shall deliver to the said Parkers, or Foresters,
that shall belong to their Lordys Lardere; commandyng them to convey itt to
the Erlys Lardyner, abiding at Tutbury: and with the remenant, the said Sir
Phelippe shall do his plesoure. And, upon Holy-Rood-day the said Sir Phelippe
shall return to the Castle of Tutbury, upon the said Horse, with his
Bercelet; and shall dyne with the Steward or Receyver: and after Dynner he
shall delyver the Horse, Sadylle, and Bercelett to the Steward or Receyvour;
and shall kiss the Porter and depart Sr. Will, Dugdales Baronage of England,
Tom. 2. p. 106, 107, 108.
.

80. There was much such another Custom as that of the Bacon, also instituted
at the Priory of Dunmow in Essex, by Robert Fitzwalter a potent Baron of the
Realm Temp. Hen. 3. the Sum whereof was contained in this old distic. viz,

That He that repents him not of his Marriage in a year and a day either
sleeping or wakeing,

May lawfully go to Dunmow and fetch a gammon of Bacon History of Robert
Fitzwalter. Land. 1616.
.

or else a flych, as appears by the Register of the said Abbey some enjoyed;
but neither, unless they would swear kneeling upon two hard pointed stones set
in the Priory Churchyard for that purpose, before the Prior and Covent, and
the whole Town, in this form

You shall swear by Custom of Confession,
If ever you made nuptial transgression:
Be you either married man or wife,
By household brawles or contentious strife,
Or otherwise in bed, or at board,
Offend each other in deed, or word;
Or since the parish Clerk said Amen,
You wished your selves unmarried again:
Or in a twelve months time and a day
Repented not in thought any way:
But continued true and just in desire
As when you joined hands in the holy quire.
If to these conditions without all fear,
Of your own accord you will freely swear,
A whole Gammon of Bacon you shall receive,
And bear it hence with love and good leave.
For this is our Custom at Dunmow well known,
Though the pleasure be ours, the Bacon's your own Ibidem in fine
.
81. The next considerable antiquity after the Castle of Tutbury, that I met
with in this County, whereof there are yet some footsteps remaining, is Heyley
Castle, built upon a lofty rock with the very stone that was dugg forth the
ditches, which was given to Henry de Aldithleg, as Mr Camden says, by Harvey
Lord Stafford, temp. Regis Johan. when the whole Country seemed in a manner to
conspire to make a great man, as may be seen by the Copy of confirmation made
by Hen. 3. of all the Lands contributed by diverse great men for the advancement
of this family. Which Henry indeed seems to have built this Castle: but upon
perusal of the Record, I find they were the heirs of one William de Bettelegh
or Betley, qui dederunt totam terram de Heylea cum pertenentiis, i. e. that
gave the whole land of Heyley to this Henry; and that Harvey Lord Stafford gave
only the land quae jacet sub Castro de Heleghe, that lay somewhere near under
the Castle; as Nicholas, and not (as he says) Theobald Verdun gave Aldithelege
it self Samps. Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in Audley.
, where also there seem to be the footsteps of a Castle. built by some of this
family, or of the Verduns before them. About this time the advowson of the
Church of Penckridg in this County, anciently Pencriz, settled before by King
Stephen upon the Church of Lichfield D. Guliel. Dugdale Monast. Augl. vol. 3.
p. 235.
, being endowed with lands, and made Collegiat, by one Hugo Huose, was given by
King John in the last of his reign, to the Archbishops of Dublin, in whose
Diocese it remains to this very day; which being a thing somewhat strange, and
known but to few how it came to pass, for their better satisfaction I have here
annexed a Copy of King John's Charter taken out of the black book of the said
Archbishops Registery at Dublin, and sent me by the Reverend and learned Mr
William King Chancellor of St Patricks, which take as follows.

JOHANNES Dei gratia Rex Angl. Dominus Hibernie Dux Normanie and Aquitan. and
Com. Andeg. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baron. Justic.
Vicecom. Preposit. and omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis salutem. Sciatis nos
concessisse and hac presenti carta confirmasse venerabili Patri nostro Henrico
Dublin. Archiepiscopo and successoribus suis, terr. and tenement. subscript.
que habet ex dono Hugon. Huose; scil. Manerium de Penkeriz cum villa de
Cungrave, and villa de Culega, and villa de Wuolgareston, and villa de
Beffecot, and cum terra de Duun cum feria ejusdem ville de Penkeriz, and cum
omnibus ad predic. terr. and tenement. pertinen. sicut carta ipsius Hugonis
Huose (quam inde habet) rationabiliter testatur. Preterea concessimus de dono
nostro, intuitu Dei, and prosalute animae nostrae, and antecessorum, and
successorum nostrorum regum Angl. dict. Archepiscopo Dublin. and successoribus
suis advocationem Ecclesiae de Pencriz cum pertinen. in perpetuum. Ita quod cum
dicta Ecclesia vacare contigerit, dictus Archepiscopus and successores sui eam
cum pertinen. pro voluntate sua possint ordinare. Quare volumus and firmiter
precipimus quod predic. Henric. Dublin. Archiepiscopus, and successores sui
habeant and teneant predic. terr. and tenement, and advocationem dicte
Ecclesiae cum omnibus pertinentiis suis been and in pace, libere and quiet,
integre and plenarie cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus, ad
predic. terr. and tenement. and predic. advocationem pertinen. sicut predictum
est. Testibus, Dominis P. Wynton. W. Coventry, Epis. Magistr. Pando. Norwic.
Electo; and Abbate Cirencest. Huberto de Burgo Justic. nostro Angl; Wide
Cireton; Ric. de Burgo; Johanne Russelle. Dat. per man. Magistri Richardi de
Marisco Cancellar. nostr. apud Dowvre, tertio decimo die Septembris, Anno regni
nostri septimo decimo E Libro nigro in Registrar. Reverendis. in Christo Patris
D. Franc. Archiep. Dublin. part 1. fol. 116.
.

82. In short, the History of this Church stands thus, as well as I can
discover it from the Records of Lichfield and Dublin, viz. it was first given,
as I said above, to the Church of Lichfield, by King Stephen; not long after
being endowed with the lands mentioned in King John's Charter, it was made
Collegiat, having 4 Chappells, one whereof was strangely lost (viz. Capella de
Canoto, sive Cannock) tempore Episcopi Hugonis de Novant in the reign of Hen.
2 Ibidem. part. 1. fol. 114.
. and not recoverd till the 2 of Edw. 1 Ibid. part. 1. fol. 31. latere. 2.
. In the mean time being a free Chapel of the Kings, the advowson of it was
settled by King John upon the Archbishops of Dublin, and confirmed to them by
Pope Alexander the 4. temp. Edw. 1. the Archbishops of Dublin collating the
Prebends as often as they fell, and holding the Deanery themselves, upon account
there was then no revenew annexed to the Deanery, for the support of any other,
they should give it to; in which posture it stood for 30 years: wherefore the
said Pope Alexander upon the petition of the Archbishop then being, by his
Bull bearing date at Anagni (the place of his birth) Nov. 11. Pontif. sui An.
5. annexed this Deanery to the Archbishopric for ever Ibidem. part. 2. fol. 10.
. Yet I find afterward by a taxation of the Prebendaries, and other Officers
belonging to this Church, that the Dean did enjoy the benefit of a Prebend:
which Taxation, that the number and places of the Prebends, and the names of
the persons, that then held them, might be known, I have here annexed.

Taxatio Praebendarum and Officiorum apud Pyncriche exempt.
Ib. s. d. Ib. s. d. Imprimis Prebenda Decani 1. 6. 8. 2. 0. 0. Item Prebenda
de Copnall -- Trygram 7. 0. 0. 10. 13. 4 Item Prebenda de Sharisull-Fr. Symmons
5. 0. 0. 6. 0. 0. Item Prebenda de Sutton-Richards 4. 0. 0. 6. 13. 4. Item
Prebenda de Dunstone-Tatton 5. Marks 6. 6. 8. Item Prebenda de Penkrich-Elice
2. 0. 0. 4. 0. 0. Item Prebenda de Congreife-Willowe 5. Nobles 2. 6. 8. Item
Prebenda de Longegrigge-Gardon 0. 8. 0. 0. 16. 0. Item Canonicus residentiar.
absque Prebenda- Webb 2. 13 4. Item alter Canonicus silicet residentiarius sine
Prebenda Gytton. 2. 13. 4 Item Officium Sacriste, Canonicus perpetuum est and
Vicarius Decani in mortuariis and aliis casualibus 3. 6. 8. Item Officialis
Jurisdictionis peculiaris, and ad visitandum Comissarius specialis prout 1o.
subscribitur. Item Vicarii residentes omnium dict. Prebend. quorum salaria sunt
been diminuata In eodem Lib. nigro. in Registrar, D. Archiep. Dublin.
.

By which Charter and taxation it is easy to conclude, not only how this Church
came to be in the Diocese of Dublin, but of what value it was whilst in its
flourishing condition. But how the lands came after to be alienated, whether by
fee-farmes (as it seems most of the Irish Bishoprics were) or otherwise, and
how the Jurisdiction neglected; I list not to declare, it not becoming a
Natural Historian either to enquire in titles, or make reflections on Church
government, wherefore manum de Tabula.

83. Not long after this settlement of the Church of Penckridg, Randall the
third, surnamed Blundevill, Earl of Chester, An. 1218.2. Hen. 3. built the
Castle of Chartley Tho. Mills Catalogue of Honor. p. 570.
, where he lay, says Leland, during the time of his building the Abbey of Dieu
la Cress Joh. Lelandi Itinerar. vol. 7.
; but this sure could not be, unless it were long in building, that Abbey being
founded, as appears in the History of it, An. 1214 D. Gul. Dugdali Monast.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 890.
. before the Castle. And in the reign of his Son King Edw. 1. Walter de
Longton Bishop of Lichfield, and Lord high Treasurer of England, some say
built, others repaired, Eccleshall Castle; and the Manor of Shoubrough or
Shuckborough, which before says Leland belonged to one Shuckborough with the
long beard, by whom it was given to the Miter of Lichfield Joh. Lelandi.
Itinerar. vol. 7.
. Quickly after in the beginning of Edw. 2. Alveton Castle seems to have been
built by Theobald de Verdun, as may pretty plainly be collected from the
Annals of Croxden. And not long after, in the latter end of the same Kings
reign, the goodly Castle of Caverswall (as Mr Erdeswick calls it) by Sr
William de Caverswall, it being all built of Masonry, and so the damms of the
pooles near by it, as was anciently expressed upon his monument in the Church,
his Epitaph being this. Castri structor eram, domibus fossisque Cemento
Vivus dans operam, nunc claudor in hoc monumento D. Gul. Dugdali Monast. Angl.
vol. 1. p. 913.
.
which some body rendering in English Sr William of Caverswall here lie I,
Who built the Castle, and made the pooles by.
as the report goes, was thus burlesqu'd by another hand, Sr William of
Caverswall here you lie,
Your Castle is down, and your pooles are dry.
as indeed they are, all but the deep moat about the Castle, in place whereof a
fair house has been since built of squared stone, not altogether unlike a
Castellated mansion, the walls about it being flank't with hexangular Towers,
as in its prospect here annexed Tab. 37. it being at present the seat of that
generous Gent. William Jullife Esquire a cordial encourager of this work.

84. The original of Terley, and Stourton Castles, I could no where meet with,
but believe them both of good Antiquity; nor of that treble entrenchment on the
South side of the Watlingstreet, near Frogg-Homer, called Knaves-Castle, which
yet is not all above 40 yards diameter, or 50 at most: in the middle whereof
there is a round hill, now excavated, which for what use it has been (being so
very small) I cannot imagine. The tradition is, that this heath being formerly
all wood, and much infested with robberies, here was a watch set to guard
strangers over it, for which the passengers allowed some small gratuity. Others
say that the Robbers themselves harbored here, and that therefore it was
called Knaves-Castle. Some other such Entrenchments are also here and there
still in being, in several parts of the Country, without any building now
remaining within them, which I suppose were only the Castellated mansions of
some principal families (which were absolutely necessary during the Barons
wars) now decayed and gone: such as that called the moats near Kinnerston in
this County, but anciently Rodbaston, enclosed with a double trench, the inner
banks yet remaining very high, of a square figure, each side about 50 paces
long, the corners being much higher than the rest, as if there had been round
Towers or bastions there: which was only the seat of John de Sandersted, as
appears by the entail of the Lordship of Chesterton in the County of Warwick 9.
Edw. 3. by the Kings special command, upon him and his heirs, in case John de
Warrewyk the possessor of it dyed without issue Sr William Dugdales Antiquities
of Warwicksh. illustrated. p. 375.
.

85. About a quarter of a mile South of Okeover near the parkpale, I was also
shown a deep entrenchment of a square figure, now called the Hallsteds, which I
suppose might be likewise some castellated mansion in the Barons wars, the
tradition being, that it was anciently the seat of the family of Cockain; and
there are others of the like kind at many other places: but these being but of
a late date, in comparison of the former, and scarce deserving the name of
Antiquities, I leave them to the consideration of a more modern Historian, and
shall content my self with the mention but of one Antiquity more, which is the
stone set up upon Blore heath in memory of the fall of James Lord Audley, slain
just in that place, in the quarrel of Hen. 6. valiantly fighting for his
Sovereign against the Earl of Salesbury, which fight was long and bloody, no
less then 2400 being slain upon the spott, Queen Margaret looking on all the
while (as the tradition goes) from the tower of Muckleston hard by: whence she
fled, says Leland, (the Victory falling upon the death of the Lord Audley, to
the Earl of Salesbury) to Eccleshall Church, by direction of John Halse, alias
Hales Bishop of Lichfield, who caused her to lie there Joh. Lelandi Itine^ar.
vol. 7.
.

86. And this is all I have to offer the Reader, but that it should have been
remembered Chap. 8.. 54. that Ralph Basset of Chedle was chief Justice of
England An. 2. Hen. 1. his Son Richard An. 4. of the same King Hen. and that
his grandchild William was also Justice in Itinere, 22 of Hen. 2. Bertram de
Verdun, eodem tempore; and perhaps Simon de Pateshull 70. Rich. 1. and 10.
Johannis Mr Samps. Erdeswick's view of Staffordsh. in Blore. vid. etiam D. Gul.
Dugdali Orig. Juridic. in Chronica serie Cancellarior. in dictis An.
. Nor must it be forgot, that one Thomas Dalton (as Norton tells us) had store
of the Medicina rubra Philosophorum, or the Elixir of life, which he owned was
left him for his service by his Master, who was one of the Canons of Lichfield,
that dyed An. 1477. temp. Edw. 4 Vid. Ordinale Secretorum Tho. Norton. MS.
Laud. in Bib. Bod. K. 61. p. 14.
. Which at last (after many long and tedious journeys; a large expense of time,
and money; and many other difficulties undergon in the mean time) concludes this
History of Staffordshire: in the writing whereof, though I dare not think, much
less can by any means assure the Reader, that I have made no mistakes in any of
my Relations; yet I am inclined to believe there are none very material, I am
sure none wilful: wherefore I hope all Readers will deal so heartily with
me, as only to reprove me calmly, for what is done amiss, which sort of
Chastisement I shall cheerfully receive; sincerely promising never to offend in
the like manner again, being pretty fully resolved, never to publish any more
of these Histories (though I think I was never so fit as now) unless commanded by
a power that I must no resist.

ERRATA.
PAGE 63. line 25. read Conservatories. p. 63. l. 27. r. 1/10 part. p. 66. l.
4. r. Ieeland. p. 69. l. 17. r. Colanders. p. 82. l. 34. for Parabolical r.
elliptical. p. 152. l. 42. dele 6. p. 185. l. 36 r. Conchites. p. 196. l. 25.
r. Sculpture. p. 198. l. 15. r. Wolstanion. p. 199. l. 16. r. somewhat. p. 200.
l. penult. r. Hollandicus. p. 240. l. 12. r. (...). p. 263. l. 38. r. Juvenci.
p. 264. l. penult. r. Shamois. p. 270. l. 7. r. the. p. 286. l. 24. r. 37. p.
340. l. 9. r. Commonwealth. p. 349. l. 13. r. hereby (as Gerard expounds it) p.
370. l 10. r. 10 n. p 424. l. 38. r. against.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
Wherein the first figure signify the Chapter; the next the Paragraph; to which
if etc. be added, it imports that some other following Sections relate to the
same matter.
A
A Abbots, or Ape-wood Castle Chap. 2. 14. chapter 10.. 10. Abies, conis sursum
spectatibus. chapter 6. 24. Achat, the black kind chapter 4. 47. Acorns, how best sown.
chapter 9. 84. Adarce, chapter 5.. 28. Aetites, Plinii. chapter 4.. 11. Aegagropila,
Velschii. chapter 7.. 73. Age, very great of several persons. chapter 2.. 25. Chapter 8..
91, 92, 93, etc. to. 106. Agriculture, its esteem anciently. chapter 9.. 14, 15.
improved in all sorts of land. in clay ground.. 16. in sandy and gravelly.. 19.
in heathy land.. 22. in broomy, gorsy, hot sandy land.. 25. in gouty, moorish,
cold black land.. 26.48. Air, of it self all equally pure. chapter 2.. 1. as
variously qualifyed, does affect the spirits and humors.. 2. which the most
healthy and unhealthy.. 3. not good, if too much heated.. 4. hot, brings old
age. Ibid. bad, if filled with vapors.. 6, 7. worse, if stagnating amongst
trees.. 8. good, its qualities.. 9, 10.18. Alabaster, chapter 4.. 42. its uses..
43, 44. Ale, the art of fineing it. chapter 9.. 12. Alectoricardites. chapter 5.. 7.
Almanacks, or Cloggs a large account of them, chapter 10.. 42, 43, etc. Alveton
Castle, its antiquity. chapter 10.. 83. Amblecot-clay. chapter 3.. 24. Ammochrysos
friabilis, chapter 3.. 20. Amphibalus, S. his Martyrdom. chapter 10.. 12. Amygdaloides
Aldrov. chapter 5.. 38. Anc s-hills, whence so called. chapter 10.. 6. Andrapodites.
chapter 5.. 41. Animals, discovered in brine chapter 2.. 110. shining in the dark. chapter
3.. 16, 17, etc. Anser Cygnoides, chapter 7.. 2. Antiquities, how considered in
this History, chapter 10.. 1. the British.. 2, 3, etc. the Roman.. 13, 14, etc. the
Saxon. 24, 25, etc. Antona, chapter 10.. 2. Aple tree, of excessive growth chapter 6..
57. Apewood, or Abbots Castle chapter 10.. 10. Aqualat, mere its vast extent. chapter
2.. 22. why so called. chapter 10.. 6. Argyrodamas. chapter 3.. 20. Arrow-heads,
anciently of flint. chapter 10.. 8. Arsfoot, or Loon. chapter 7.. 6. Arts, how
considered in this work. chapter 9.. 1. of making salt. chapter 2.. 103, 104, etc. of
Pottery. chapter 3.. 25, 26, etc. of making Iron. chapter 4.. 22, 23, etc, Ash, bearing
narrow leaves. chapter 6.. 19. of quick and large growth.. 26. 7 or 8 yards in the
girth. Ibid. with white leaves.. 56. Ash-balls, used in washing buckings. chapter
9.. 6. Ashes, a great improvement for Medows. chapter 9.. 46. Ashmole Esquire the place
of his Nativity and Character. chapter 8.. 18. Asteria. chapter 5.. 3, 4. Asthma, a
very odd one. chapter 8.. 63. Audley Castle. chapter 10.. 81. Avena nuda, and rubra.
chapter 6.. 13. Avosetta Italorum. chapter 7.. 6. Axes, anciently made of Flint. chapter
10.. 9.
B
BAcon, often Whichnor, an account of it. chapter 10.. 77 of Dunmow.. 80. Barbells,
will prey upon Dace. chapter 7. 34. Bare-Barley. chapter 6.. 14. Barley and Rye in the
same Ear. chapter 9.. 34. degenerates into Oats, and Darnel. Ibid. Barometers,
why they fall in wet weather. chapter 2.. 27. Barrells, of a peculiar fashion. chapter
9.. 99. Bathes hot, whence they receive that quality. chapter 3.. 57. cold ones.
chapter 2.. 124. Beaudesart, chapter 2.. 14. the fortification there. chapter 10.. 41.
Beef, noted to to shine in the dark. ch, 7.. 75. Bee-hives, the great variety
of them in this County. ch 9.. 92, 93. Bellows, made wholly of wood. chapter 4.. 28.
Bells, 7 rung in peal. chapter 9.. 71. Berry-bank, a Saxon Castle. chapter 10.. 24.
Bertram St. his Ash. chapter 6.. 19. who he was. chapter 10.. 28. Bethnei, now
Stafford. chapter 10.. 28. Bezoar equinum. chapter 7.. 72. Germanicum.. 73.
Billington-berry, an account of it. chapter 10. 31.38. Birch, with leaves spotted
red. chapter 6.. 21. Birds, how prevented from eating Corn. chapter 9.. 40. Birth, a
monstrous one chapter 8.. 8, 9. Bishops, Stones why so called. chapter 4.. 13, 14.
twice married. chapter 8.. 79. Bitch, with whelps in her Abdomen. chapter 7.. 53, 54.
Black-cap, or Mire-crow. chapter 7.. 7. Blase, what so called in this County. chapter
9.. 91. Blasting and smutting prevented. chapter 9.. 37. Blindness, recompensed
with extraordinary sagacity of other Senses. ch, 8.. 60, 61. Blore-heath, the
Battle there chapter 10.. 85. Bolderbourne. chapter 2.. 99. Bole, a red kind. chapter 3..
29. Bolt-stone, or Baston, a British monument. chapter 10.. 10. Bones, taken out of
the Omentum of a Sow. chapter 7. 56. out of the Matrixes, of Does, a Hare, a Cow, a
Woman. chapter 7.. 63, 64, 70. found in the heart of a beef, and Staggs. 74. found
in graves of extraordinary size. chapter 8.. 109. Book-desk, ingeniously contrived.
chapter 9.. 89. Borasco's, what. chapter 1.. 32. Borow English, in this County. chapter 8..
20. the reason of it.. 21. Boulimy, a very inordinate one. chapter 8.. 62. Boy of
Bilson, a notorious Impostor. chapter 8.. 25, 26. Brambling or Mountain Chaffinch.
chapter 7.. 5. Bricks, a peculiar kind. chapter 9.. 50. Bridge of Burton. chapter 9.. 72.
one made of short pieces of timber, yet without support. chapter 9. c. 88. Bridles,
great variety of them. chapter 9.. 79. to correct. scolding women.. 97. Brontiae,
chapter 5.. 5. transparent ones how produced.. 6. Bruff, an old fortification. chapter
10.. 27. Brutes, how considered in this History. chapter 7.. 1. Buckles, the great
variety of them. chapter 9.. 80. Bucks, without heads. chapter 7.. 65. with but one
horn. Ibid. with very irregular heads.. 66. Buildings, an account of the most
remarkable in the County. chapter 9.. 51, 52, etc. and 68, 69, etc. Bull-running
its original. chapter 10.. 70. by whom instituted.. 76. Bunbury, an ancient Saxon
fortification. chapter 10.. 29. Buprestis. chapter 6.. 52. Burbot, or Birdbolt. chapter 7..
27, 28. Butcher bird. chapter 7.. 4. Butter, it great plenty here. chapter 3.. 3. made
of Women's milk. chapter 8.. 34.
C
CAdites, a formed Stone. chapter 5.. 42. Calves, that had others before a year
old. chapter 7.. 68, 69. pregnant with others, Ibid. of a monstrous shape.. 70.
calved with horns. Ibid. a Sceleton of one found in the Matrix of a Cow. Ibid.
Camalodunum, two Cities of that name, chapter 10.. 3. Camp-hills, chapter 10.. 27.
Cangi, what people they were. chapter 10.. 2. Cannock, or Canck-wood, Canuti Sylva.
chapter 10.. 41. Cape long Venetorum. chapter 7.. 46. Carps, in some waters will not
spawn. chapter 7.. 30. one taken out of a pike, recoverd when put in the water..
37. two of a vast magnitude.. 38. Carts, some unusual ones. chapter 9.. 44.
Castle-old fort, or Castlehen, chapter 10.. 7. Castle hill, near Beaudesart. chapter
10.. 41. Castrametations, Roman. chapter 10.. 23. Catapultae, diverse found here.
chapter 10.. 19. Catbrain, chapter 9.. 28. Cats-hill, vid. Lows. Cattle, their color
changed. chapter 3.. 8. Caverns, inhabited. chapter 4.. 40. several other notable ones.
41 Caverswall Castle, an account of it. chapter 10.. 8 3. Ceadda St. his History.
chapter 10.. 25, 26. etc. Center, of gravity in the earth, different from that of
Magnitude. chapter 2.. 88. Cepphus, Gesneri. chapter 7.. 7. Chalk, black. chapter 3.. 29.
Chama lapidea. chapter 5.. 18. Chappells vid. Churches. Cheese, its great plenty in
this County. chapter 3.. 3. Cherrys, black of a peculiar taste. ch-6,. 22. much
cultivated here.. 61. Chesterton, the antiquity of it. chapter 10.. 67. Child,
having no distinction of Sex. chapter 8.. 2. born with teeth.. 7. Chimney, one with
8 tunnells. chapter 9.. 53. Christianfield. chapter 10.. 12 Crystal, chapter 5.. 8, 9.
Chubbs, known to eat Toads. chapter 7.. 34. Church, of Lichfield, its excellent
Workmanship. chapter 9.. 50. not placed due East and West, Ibid. nor the Church of
Alveton,. 57 why anciently placed so,, 58, 59, 60, etc. now not reguarded,. 67
Churches, and Chappells built by private men. at Ashley, chapter 8.. 53. at Barton,.
54 at Okeover,. 55 at Broughton, Ibid. at Ingestre,. 56, 57, 58, etc. at
Pateshull, chapter 9.. 68 Churchyard, a very extraordinary one, chapter 9.. 71
Cicindela, five Lampyris. chapter 7.. 18, 19, etc. Cider, the Art of fining it, chapter
9.. 12 Clay, for Tobbaccopipes. chapter 3.. 24. for bricks,. 23 for Potters use,.
25 Cloggs, or old Almanacks, a large account of them, chapter 10.. 42, 43, etc. of
what materials made,. 45 of the Symbols or marks upon them,. 46, 47, etc. to.
63. Clouds, sometimes above the middle region. chapter 1.. 12 Coal, the several
sorts of it. chapter 3.. 31 Cannel coal, its excellency,. 31, 32 Peacock coal,. 33
Wednesbury, etc. the best.. 34 the bedds how thick, Ibid. the several uses of
them.. 35 the manner of working them. 36, 37, etc. the signs of it.. 60, 61,
etc. Coal-pitts, how they take fire. chapter 3.. 53, 54, 55, etc. how laid dry..
64 Coccothraustes, chapter 7.. 5 Cochleomorphites. chapter 5.. 39 Cocks, an instrument
to match them. chapter 9. 94. Coleworts, turn into Rapes. chapter 9.. 36 Colt, of a
monstrous shape. chapter 7.. 76 Columnetta Imperati. chapter 5.. 35. diverse kinds of
them.. 36, 37* Colymbus, cristatus, cornutus, barbatus. chapter 7.. 3. Colymbus
major chapter 7.. 6 Comets, when they generally happen chapter 1.. 60. their effects.
Ibid. Compost or Manures, their kinds and application. chapter 9.. 27, 28, etc.
vid. Manures. Concha (...) Columnae. chapter 5.. 15. Conchites striatus. chapter 5.. 18
Copper Ores, chapter 4.. 28 Corallium fossile, sive lapis Coralloides. chapter 5.. 28.
Cornavii, not the original people of this County. chapter 10.. 2. Corn, the husks
thicker in cold Countries, than elsewhere. chapter 6.. 10. how ordered in the
blade. chapter 9.. 42. how ordered in harvest.. 43 thrash't as anciently sub dio..
45. Cow, that had an entire calf, and the bones of another in her. chapter 7.. 64.
that had 9 Calves in three years.. 68 that had 10 in the same time. Ibid. that
had the Sceleton of a Calf in her.. 70. with balls of hair in their stomachs..
71. Cowbach, where it is. chapter 10.. 53. Coins, Roman. chapter 10.. 15 found in
Dale-Close.. 21 Crabtree, containing rose-leaves in the body of it. chapter 6.. 49
Crevices, that do not boil red. chapter 7.. 29 that breed in ponds.. 30 Crows,
white. chapter 7.. 13 hatched in winter. 17 Crow-stones chapter 4.. 47 Customs, of
borow-English chapter 8.. 20 of Lotherwits or Lyerwits. 23 in Christenings,. 24 the
extraordinary effects of them.. 66. in marrying amongst themselves.. 80 at
Gnosal,. 81. at Walsall,. 82, 83 of adorning their Wells,. 89. at Hilton. chapter
10.. 65. at Abbots-Bromley.. 66 Cuthbert St. his beads. chapter 5.. 30, 31 Cygnets,
as white as old Swannes. chapter 7.. 2 Cygnus, Anseroides. chapter 7.. 2
D
DAgger, found near Wrottesley. chapter 10. 4. Damps, their several kinds, and
histories of them all. chapter 3.. 42, 43, etc. to. 52. some very mortal in the
open Air.. 52. Danes, their way of buryal. chapter 10.. 63. remains of it here,.
64. Daws, hatched in winter. chapter 7.. 17. Days, their increase and decrease
sensible in the Summer-Solstice. chapter 1.. 3. Deaf, men and women that understood
what was said by the motion of the lips. chapter 8. 41, 42, 43, etc. Death,
wonderful escapes of it, in Women. chapter 8.. 46 47, etc. in Men.. 71, 72, etc.
signal warnings before it.. 107. Deer, with jaws so short they cannot suck. chapter
7.. 63. Denns, vid. Caverns. Denshiring, or burnbeating land. chapter 9.. 5.
Deterrations, proved. chapter 3.. 11, 12, and chapter 6.. 46. Devils, commonly appear
of a small stature. chapter 1.. 24, 25, 26. they leave impressions behind them..
23, 24. Digitalis flore albo. chapter 6. 9. Digamy, in Bishops considered. chapter 8..
79. Diseases, caused by sucking in Animals with the breath. chapter 2.. 7. Dogs,
two very extraordinary ones. chapter 7.. 55. a stone in the form of one. chapter 5..
39. Dole, of Walsall an account of it. chapter 8.. 82. Dredg-Mault. chapter 9.. 83.
Draining, several new ways. chapter 9.. 47, 48. Dromedary, buried in this County.
chapter 7.. 78. Ducks, laying eggs twice in a night. chapter 7.. 16. Dudley Castle. chapter
2.. 14. its Antiquity. chapter 10.. 27. Duina, the first Bishop of Lichfield. chapter
10.. 55. Dunmow bacon, an account of it. chapter 10.. 80. Dyallng, a new Method of
it. chapter 9.. 2, 3. Dyspnaea, a very remarckable one chapter 8. 63.
E
EArth, inducing a golden armature. chapter 3.. 7. changing the color of cattle..
8. giving a blood red tincture.. 9. they receive augmentation.. 11, 12. shining
in the dark.. 15, 16. shining in the light.. 20. good for brick or tile.. 23.
good for Tobacco-pipes.. 24. for pots for the glass-houses. Ibid. how many
sorts in the world.. 30. Earthquakes, whence. chapter 3.. 55. Earewigg, a white
one. chapter 7.. 21. Eccleshall-Castle, by whom built. chapter 10.. 83. Echo, that
returns a syllable in 14. yards. chapter 1.. 54. that depends upon a frost.. 55.
polysyllabical.. 56. tantological.. 57. tremulous.. 58. Eeles, they are
viviparous. chapter 7.. 31. produced equivocally. Ibid. will travel over land.. 31,
32. are dugg out of the ground.. 33. Eggs, of Insects discovered in Oak balls.
chapter 6.. 55. of hens with white yolks. chapter 7.. 15. Elder, with white berrys. chapter
6.. 17. Elephants jaw. chapter 7.. 78. Elf-arrows. chapter 10.. 8. Elfieda, the valiant
Duchess of Mercia, an account of her. ch, 10.. 38. the Towns she built in this
County. Ibid. Elixir of Life. chapter 10.. 86. Elm, [witch] 40 yards high. chapter 6..
28. containing 100 tuns of timber.. 29. Emery, chapter 4.. 46. Engine, that strikes
a sledg to the Anvil, in stead of a man. chapter 9.. 98. Enhydros, chapter 5.. 10.
Entrochus. chapter 5.. 30. its texture.. 32. Ephippites Aldrovandi. chapter 5.. 42.
Equisetum coralloides. chapter 5.. 26. Eruca glabra candata, aquatico-arborea. chapter
7.. 25. Etocetum, an account of it. chapter 10.. 15,
F
FAiryes, what they are. chapter 1.. 24. they are male and female.. 25, 26.
Fairy-Circles, some 40 or 50 yards diameter. chapter 1.. 17. the several sorts of
them.. 18. sometimes made by witches and devils.. 23. the nature of the earth
under them.. 28. the effects of lightening.. 29.33. two rare sorts of them, and
how made.. 30. their grass, why so green.. 31. why many of them so imperfect..
35. that they grow. and why.. 34.36, 37. Fasting, some very strange instances
of it. chapter 8.. 37, 38, etc. Fawns, cast with such short lower jaws that they
cannot suck, prove all white. chapter 7., 63, 64. Fences, some new kinds. chapter 9..
49. Fenns, vid. Mosses. Fingerstocks, for what use. chapter 9.. 99. Fire, a globe
of it flying. ch 1,. 40. another standing still.. 42. land improved by it. chapter
9.. 4, 5. Fire-stone, the best. chapter 4.. 4. Firrs, natives of England. chapter 6..
25. one 47 yards high.. 31. others 76 yards high. Ibid. Fish, breeding in
Coal-pitts. chapter 7.. 29. traveling on the land.. 32, 33. that are dugg out of
the ground. Ibid. their variety of feeding.. 34. that have lived after they
have been swallowed by others.. 37. Fleas, discovered to be viviparous. chapter 7..
22. Flowers, why they change their colors. chapter 6.. 9, 10. of various colors
on the same stalk. Ibid. Flies, a sort viviparous. chapter 7.. 21. Fools, of
strange sagacity in some particulars. chapter 8. 66, 67. Forficula alba. chapter 7..
21. Fortifications, made by the Britans, of Earth chapter 10.. 7. Foul, a disease,
how to cure it. chapter 9.. 96. Fountains, intermitting. chapter 2.. 30, 31. that break
forth with a noise.. 31, 32. that foretell events.. 33, 34. that ebb and flow
with the Sea.. 68. Fraxinus bubula, the Quicken tree. chapter 6.. 52. their
superstitious use of it. Ibid Free-masons, their Society. chapter 8.. 85, 86.
Froggs, their bones found in springs. chapter 2.. 100. Fruits, lately much
cultivated here. chapter 6.. 60, 61. Fruit Trees, how ordered. chapter 9.. 90.
Fryingpans, the great art in making them. chapter 9.. 7, 8, etc. Fullers earth, chapter
3.. 23. Fungites. chapter 5.. 25. Fungus lapideus coralloides. chapter 5.. 25. Fungus,
digitatus minimus, etc. chapter 6.. 3. pulverulentus cute membran. etc.. 4.
phalloides.. 5. Furnaces, of the Ironworks. chapter 4.. 23, 24. Furse, or gorse how
destroyed, chapter 9.. 25. a hedge of it.. 84.
G
GAbriels hounds. chapter 1.. 44. Galls, of the Oak, have eggs in them. chapter 6.. 55.
Game-Cocks, an instrument to match them. chapter 9.. 94. Gardens, some curious
hedgworks. chapter 9.. 85, 86. Gavelkind, some account of it. chapter 8.. 20. Geese,
with black bills. chapter 7.. 2. Generations, how many may be existent together.
chapter 8.. 104, 105. many living together in the same house.. 106. Genii, how they
appear. chapter 1.. 26. Geodes Dioscor. chapter 4.. 11, Glowworm, the flying kind. chapter
7,. 18. Glum-metall, what. chapter 4.. 4. God, his most special presence, where chapter
9.. 58, 59. Gold, formed like trees. chapter 5.. 19, 20. growing in stalks amongst
Corn.. 43. like threads about vines. Ibid Goose, with three legs. chapter 7.. 14.
Gorcock, or red game. chapter 7.. 4. Graffing, a new device in it. chapter 9.. 90.
Grain, what sorts cultivated here. chapter 9.. 30, 31, etc. how secured from
birds.. 40. Grapes, will change their color. chapter 6.. 18. Grinding stones chapter
4.. 31.34. Grous, or black-game. chapter 7.. 4. Gudgeons, breed in pooles. chapter 7..
30. of an extraordinary Size.. 38. Gulfs in the Sea. chapter 2.. 72. Gur, a potable
white liquor, found in Ironstone. chapter 4.. 18. the matter of all Metalls.. 19.
H
HAematites, chapter 4.. 27. Hailstones, as bigg as pullets eggs. chapter 1.. 46. that
brake windows. Ibid. that spoiled corn. Ibid. Hair, supposed to be nothing
else, but imperfect. horn. chapter 7.. 59. Hallsteds. chapter 10.. 85. Halo, a strange
one about the Sun. chapter 1.. 11. that appeared several days together.. 12.
Hangings, of Linen curiously wrought. chapter 9.. 97. Hardishrews, what they are.
chapter 6.. 51. Hare, an extraordinary accident attending one in breeding. chapter 7..
52, 53. Hawthorn, bearing yellow leaves. chapter 6.. 22. Hearing, of a blind man
very extraordinary. chapter 8.. 60.61. Heath, used instead of hopps. chapter 9.. 83:
Heats, great ones under ground. chapter 2.. 83. Hens, laying 3 eggs in a natural
day. chapter 7.. 16. Heyley Castle, its antiquity. chapter 10.. 81. Hills, most of them
diminish. chapter 3.. 11, 12, chapter 6.. 46. in rainy weather above the Clouds. chapter
3.. 6. Hippolithos. chapter 7.. 72. Hippomanes. chapter 7.. 77. Hirundo apus. chapter 7,.
5. riparia. Ibid. Hoggs, an instrument to prevent their rooting. chapter 9.. 95.
Holly, striped. chapter 6.. 56. Hony-comb-stone. chapter 5.. 39. Hordeum nudum. chapter 6..
14. Horns, their relation to the Testicles. chapter 7.. 58, 59. Hound [bitch] an
extraordinary accident attending one in breeding. chapter 7.. 53. Hourglass, its
sand strangely stopped. chapter 9.. 3. House, built of turf. chapter 9.. 51. Houses, of
best note. chapter 9.. 52. Husbandry, several improvements in it. chapter 9.. 4.. 14,
15, 16, etc. the instruments used in it.. 41.
I
JAcks, or Pikes; of a vast magnitude. chapter 7.. 38. Jack of Hilton, an ancient
Aeolipile, an account of it. chapter 10.. 65. Iceni, the ancient Inhabitants of
this County. chapter 10.. 2, 3.14. Ickenildstreet, a Roman Consular way. chapter 10..
3.13. there were two of them.. 14. Imitating qualities, some very strong. chapter
8.. 33. Joyners work, very good. chapter 9.. 88, 89. Iris, in the South, and very
irregular. chapter 1.. 8, 9. two Lunar ones.. 13. before, and after the Full-moon..
13.14. Iron-moulds, what they are. chapter 4.. 10. Iron Ores, the several measures
of it. chapter 4.. 16, 17. one including a liquor.. 18.19. the several uses of
them.. 20, 21. Iron, how made. chapter 4.. 22, 23, 24. and. how to harden it. chapter
9.. 73, 74, etc. how to soften it.. 77. how preserved from rust.. 83. Islands,
floating. chapter 3.. 13. Judges, born in this County. chapter 8.. 12.110. chapter 10.. 86.
Judgment of God, a strange one upon a wicked man. chapter 8.. 68, 69, etc. Ivy,
growing without a support. chapter 6.. 17.
K.
KEnelm, King and Martyr, his Legend. chapter 10.. 32. his furrow, etc.. 33.
Kermes, what it is. chapter 6.. 54. found here in England. Ibid. Keys, very curious
ones. chapter 9.. 78. Kinfare-edg, an account of it. chapter 10.. 34. King Charles, 2.
his miraculous preservation in this County. chapter 8.. 73, 74, etc. King Wlfer, of
Mercia his Roial Seat. chapter 10.. 24. he kills his two Sons. 26. embraces the
Christan faith. Ibid. Kings-standing, an account of it. chapter 10.. 41. Kits-Coty
house. chapter 10.. 11. Knaves-Castle, an account of it. chapter 10.. 84.
L
LAbiomancy, several famous for it. chapter 8.. 41.42, etc. Lacerta terrestris
squamosa Angl. chapter 7.. 49. Lagopus altera Plinii. chapter 7.. 4. Lakes, with
Seafish in them. chapter 2.. 69, 70. Lamb, yean'd with the two hind legs wreathed
together. chapter 7.. 62. pregnant with another. chapter 7,. 69. Lambs-bourn, a Rivulet
dry in Winter, profluent in Summer. chapter 2.. 46, 47. Lamps, perpetual a guess at
their oil. chapter 3.. 57. Lampyris, vid. Cicindela. Land, of all sorts how
improved. Rye and barley land. chapter 9.. 4. Clay land.. 16, 17, etc. Sandy
gravelly land.. 19, 20, etc. Heathy land.. 22, 23, etc. Broomy, gorsy, hot
sandy land.. 25, 26, etc. Gouty, moorish, cold black land. Ibid. Lanius
cinereus major. chapter 7.. 4. Lanthorn-flye, in Staffordsh. chapter 7.. 18.
Larch-tree, vastly great. chapter 6.. 31. Larus cinereus tertius Aldrov. chapter 7.. 7,
8, 9. etc. Leaden Coffin, observed to swim. chapter 4.. 30. Lead-Ores. chapter 4.. 29.
of a peculiar form. chapter 5.. 24. Learned men, born in this County. chapter 8.. 15,
16, 17, 18. etc. Leofric, Earl of Mercia, where he dyed. chapter 10,. 64. Lers, a
horary fountain. chapter 2.. 41. Lichfield, whence so denominated. chapter 10.. 12. its
former name.. 17. it foundation.. 25. made a Metropolis.. 26. Lightening, in
the winter quarter. chapter 1.. 15. a strange effect of it.. 16. Lignum Fossile,
Moss-wood, or Noah's Ark. chapter 6.. 35, 36, 37, etc. to 48. Limestone. chapter 4.. 5,
6. the way of burning it.. 7, 8. causes wool to grow long. chapter 7.. 61.
Lithophyton, incerti generis. chapter 5.. 27. Lituus, not the ordinary kind. chapter
10.. 20. Lizard, an undescribed sort. chapter 7.. 49, 50. Loadstone, chapter 4.. 37.
Locks, very extraordinary ones. chapter 9.. 78. Lotalty, rewarded. chapter 8.. 14.76.
Longdon, the fortification there. chapter 10.. 23. Loon, or Arssoot. chapter 7.. 6.
Lotherwits in Staffordsh. chapter 8.. 23. Lows, on Womborn heath. chapter 10.. 10. at
Edingale.. 18. near Hynts. Ibid. Cats-hill, with diverse others.. 19, 20, 21. of
what materials made.. 21. why sometimes remote from the military ways.. 23.35.
sometimes all of solid stone, and why.. 34. Ludus Paracelsi. chapter 5.. 23.
M
MAalstroom, an account of it. chapter 2.. 72. Madrepora Imperati. chapter 5.. 26.
Maggots, produced by rain. chapter 1.. 48, 49. Manors, of Hilton and Essington, the
Customs there. chapter 10.. 65. of Whichnor.. 77, 78, 79. of Dunmow.. 80. of
Shutborough, to whom it belonged anciently.. 83. Manures, for Meadow, Rye and
Barley land chapter 9.. 4, 5. for Clay land.. 16. for clay or light mould.. 18. for
heathy land.. 22. for broomy, gorsy land.. 25. the quantities laid on.. 27, 28.
several unusual sorts.. 29. Maple, with stripped leaves chapter 6.. 56. Marble, chapter
4.. 45, 46. Marcheta mulierum in England. chapter 8.. 21, 22. Mare, with 5 feet chapter
7.. 76. that had two Colts at a time. Ibid. but one yard 3 inches high. Ibid.
that had a bone grew out of her ear Ibid. Marle, chapter 3.. 21. the several kinds
of it here.. 22, 23. Marryages, at 100 years old. chapter 8. 3. otherwise
extraordinary. 80. Martlets, in Staffordsh. chapter 7.. 5. Matarae, darts, headed
with flint. chapter 10. 9. Malt, made of Oats, chapter 9.. 83 Meadows, their
extraordinary fertility. chapter 3. 2 how cured of Mosses, rushes, etc. chapter 9.. 46.
Medicina universalis. chapter 10.. 86. Medicinal waters. chapter 2.. 115, 116, etc.
some not answering the usual Experiments.. 129. Meers, of great extent. chapter 2..
22. of Magdalea, where. 23. of Morridg, 24. its wonders all false. Ibid.
Melanoleucus. chapter 4,. 47. Meldews, how prevented. chapter 9.. 37, 38. their
original. 39. Men, non Adamical. chapter 1. 25. Men, may get children, at 100, or
104, chapter 8. 3. eminent in the Church born here.. 10.11. eminent Lawyers..
12.110. eminent for their valor.. 12, 13, 14. for learning.. 15, 16, 17, etc.
one that fasted 30, 40, 50 days together.. 37. hanged 13 times, yet lived.. 47.
eminent for great strength. 48, 49. for excessive stature 50, 51, etc. for
pious deeds. 53, 54, etc. chapter 9.. 68. that rarely or never spit.. 64, 65. that
wonderfully escaped death.. 71, 72, etc. as old now as ever, since Jacobs time.
96. 97, 98, etc. many ancient ones living together.. 106. Meteors, vid. Fire.
Mica aurea, and nigra. chapter 4.. 15. Mice, found in the body of a solid Oak. chapter
6.. 51 how they came there.. 52. Mills, for slitting Iron. chapter 4.. 25. for
raising water. chapter 9.. 10. for husking, winnowing, and grinding Oats. Ibid. for
turning spitts.. 11. Mill-damms, how made here. chapter 9.. 10. Millstones. chapter
4.. 31.35, 36. Mimicks, very natural ones. chapter 8.. 32. sometimes involuntary.
33. Minstrells Court, the Charter for it. chapter 10.. 69. the manner of keeping
it.. 71, 72, 73, etc. Mire-crow, or black-cap. chapter 7.. 7. Mock-Suns, one with a
ray tending upward. chapter 1.. 6. diverse in the same Almicantar with the true.. 5.
once in the same Azimuth. Ibid. and at noone.. 6, 7. with a ray tending
downward.. 8. Monstrosities, in Men and Women. chapter 8.. 7, 8, etc.
Montifringilla. chapter 7.. 5. Money, Roman where found. chapter 10.. 21. Moorelands,
their product. chapter 3.. 1. their arable fit only for oats and barley.. 4.
Morton, the fortification near it. chapter 10.. 6. Moss, in fruit trees, how
destroyed. chapter 9. 91. in Medows.. 46. Mosses and fenns, how made. chapter 6..
45.46. how fast they grow.. 48. Mountains, their several names for them here.
chapter 3. 6. Musaeum Ashmoleanum. chapter 8. 18. Musca apiformis chapter 6,. 50. Muscus,
plurifariam pyxidatus, apicibus coccineis. chapter 6.. 2. Music, in the Air. chapter
1.. 45. Mustelae fluviatilis species. chapter 7.. 26.
N
NAked Oats. chapter 6.. 13. Narrow dale, the Sun not seen there for one quarter
of the year. chapter 3.. 6. Natron of Egypt. chapter 2.. 43. Nautilus lapideus. chapter
5.. 12. Needwood, the richest forest land of England. chapter 3.. 2. New Castle
under Lyme, its original and antiquity. chapter 10.. 67. Newts, found in a solid
stone. chapter 7.. 47. Nile, an account of its overflowing. chapter 2.. 42, 43, etc.
Niter, the rise of Nile occasioned by it. Ibid. Noises, in the Air, chapter 1.. 44.
strange effects of small ones.. 59. Nursrows, what they are. chapter 6.. 51.
Nursrow trees, how made.. 52. Nymphae, of bees. chapter 6.. 50.
O
OAks, of quick growth. chapter 6.. 26. of 6.9. and 15 yards in girth.. 27, 28.
vastly large and great.. 30. their balls have eggs in them.. 55. with stripped
leaves. 56. having a great privilege. chapter 8. 23. Oats, of a reddish color.
chapter 6.. 13. found in an ear of wheat, chapter 9.. 34. Obelisic's, in the
Churchyards, of Leek, Draycot, Chebsey, Ilam, and Checkley-ch. 10.. 63, 64.
Occamsley-pitts. chapter 3. 10. Ochus or Oxus, a River of Salt water chapter 2. 96.
Offa alba Helmontii. chapter 4. 2. Oil, used to prolong life. chapter 2.. 4, 5.
frequently found with Salt. chapter 2.. 124, 125. Oker, yellow. chapter 3.. 29. red, or
ruddle. Ibid. Ombriae. chapter 5.. 5. transparent ones, how produced.. 6.
Ophiomorphites, chapter 5.. 13. Orchites, chapter 5.. 40. Ormus, Island, a rock of
Sait. chapter 2.. 96. Ostracites, chapter 5.. 14. Otter, potted, good meat. chapter 9.. 99.
Ovens, at a distance from their houses. chapter 9.. 54. Ozena, a fish that lives at
land. chapter 7.. 33.
P
PAper, curious work in it. chapter 9.. 100. Parelia, vid. Mock-suns. Parks, their
great number in this County. chapter 3.. 5. Patellae Kermiformes. chapter 6.. 54.
Peartree, of a very odd growth. chapter 6.. 57. flowering at Christmas.. 58.
bearing fruit twice a year.. 59. Peace, sown not to be reapt. chapter 9.. 29. Peat,
or turfe how ordered chapter 9.. 5. Pebbles, how they grow. chapter 4.. 11, 12, 13.
heaps upon Weeferd heath, an account of them. 13, 14. transparent, set in
rings.. 47. Pectinites, chapter 5.. 14. Pectunculites trilobus anomius, chapter 5.. 16.
Penckridg, how it came to be in the Diocese of Dublin, chapter 10.. 81. the Charter
of its donation. Ibid. Confirmed by Pope Alexander,. 82. a taxation of the
Prebends. Ibid. Pennocrucium, an account of it. chapter 10.. 16. Perches, will eat
Crevices, chapter 7.. 34. Perry [Will] of Bilson, a notorious cheat, chapter 8.. 25,
26, etc. Petrifications. chapter 2.. 114. Pewits, their History. chapter 7.. 7, 8, 9,
etc. one with 4 legs. 14. Phallus Hollandicus. chapter 6.. 5. Pica, an odd disease
in Women, chapter 8: 4. some very extraordinary.. 62. sometimes found in Men. Ibid.
Pictures, a very odd kind, chapter 9.. 100. Pigeon, with two heads. chapter 7.. 14.
Pikes, will swallow froggs, toads. chapter 7.. 34. also ducks, and goslins.. 35.
will fasten upon dogs, horses, and women.. 35, 36. of a vast magnitude.. 38.
Pila mansae. chapter 7.. 73. Pillars, curiously wreathed. chapter 9.. 89. an ancient
one well wrought. chapter 10.. 15. Pin, in the flesh of a Lady's arm, chapter 8.. 44.
Pisum album majus, sown in the fleds, chapter 6.. 12. Planting, a new device in it.
chapter 9. 90. Plants, how considered in this History. chapter 6.. 1 sometimes alter
their species. chapter 9.. 33. Ploughs, some uncommon ones. chapter 9. 41. their
manners of plowing here. Ibed. Po, River how much water it empties into the
Adriatic. in a year. chapter 2.. 59. Poland Wheat. chapter 6.. 16. Pooles, of great
extent. chapter 2.. 22. one that prognosticates rain.. 26. that prognosticates
dearth.. 29. Poppinjay, white. chapter 7.. 13. Potters art, chapter 3.. 25, 26, etc.
Poxstone. chapter 5.. 29. Prelates, born in this County. chapter 8.. 10, 11. Primrose,
improves into an Oxlip. chapter 9.. 36. Primestaves, an account of them. chapter 10..
44. Pullet, the flesh of one shining in the dark. chapter 7.. 75. Push-Plough, its
use. chapter 3.. 14. Pygmies, what they are supposed to be. ch, 1.. 25. Pyramids,
in the Churchyards of Leek, Draycot, Chebsey. chapter 10.. 63. of Ilam, and
Checkley.. 63, 64. Pyrites aureus, a formed kind. chapter 5.. 22, 23. takes fire
with water. chapter 3.. 54.
Q
QUarries, of stone for building. chapter 4.. 31. at Penford.. 32. at Purton. Ibid.
at Bilston.. 33. Queen, so valiant, as to be styled King. chapter 10.. 38.
R
RAbbit, with monstrous teeth. chapter 7., 51. Rain, several prodigious sorts of
it. chapter 1.. 45.47. that it does not rain froggs.. 48. the difficulties about it
solved.. 49. a new way of prognosticating it.. 50. why ducks, etc. clap their
wings before it. chapter 2.. 28. the quantity of it that falls measured.. 53, 54,
55, etc. whence they come.. 80. Rainbows, in the South. chapter 1.. 8, 9. with
shanks not terminating in the Horizon Ibid. on the same side the Hemisphere
with the Sun.. 10. Rarefaction, its strength. chapter 9.. 3. Rats, an approved way
to drive them from houses, barns, etc. chapter 9.. 45. Raven, with a cross bill.
chapter 7.. 14. hatched about Christmas.. 17. Rest, a strange effect of it. chapter
1.. 59. Rimstocks, an account of them. chapter 10.. 43. Rings, found about the
stalks of furse. chapter 5.. 43. Rivers, the chiefest of this County. chapter 2.. 20,
21. some very rapid. Ibid. one navigable to the fountain.. 58. great ones
sometimes quite dry. 66, 67. that run under ground.. 97, 98. that are hot.. 61.
that are bitter and salt. Ibid. Roaches, not agreeing with some waters. chapter 7..
30. Roaps, made of hemp, mixed with hair. chapter 9.. 83. of the pillings of rushes.
Ibid. Rocks haunted by Pigeons. chapter 4.. 3. vastly great.. 38. proved to grow..
39. Rock-salt, great quantities in the Earth. chapter 2.. 96. Rodbaston, an account
of it. chapter 10.. 84. Rolls, for gardens, a new sort. chapter 4.. 26. Roman ways,
consular. chapter 10.. 13, 14, etc. Vicinal.. 17. Rosemary stones. chapter 4.. 9.
Rouncival peace, sown in common fields chapter 6.. 12 Rowlow, what it signifies. chapter
10.. 21. Rufine, his conversion. chapter 10.. 25. martyrdom and burial.. 26. Runnet
of Ranton. chapter 9.. 95. Rust-balls, what. chapter 4.. 10. Rye, and barley in the
same ear. chapter 9.. 34. improves it self into wheat.. 35.
S
SAlt springs of this County, colder ar the bottom than top. chapter 2.. 95. the
most considerable, those at Weston.. 103. Salt, the process of making it.. 104,
105, 106, etc. the water always mixed with sand.. 109, 110. and with oil.. 124,
125. Sambucus, fructu albo. chapter 6.. 17. Sand, of exquisite fineness. chapter 4.. 9.
for the glass houses. Ibid. to whet Sithes. Ibid. Sardachates. chapter 4.. 47.
Scolds, how corrected at New Castle, and Walsall. chapter 9.. 97. Screw stones. chapter
5.. 35, 36, 37. Sea, the Eastern much lower than the Western. chapter 2.. 20.
salter at bottom than top.. 95. colder at bottom than top. Ibid. not so salt as
inland brines.. 96. distinguished from the deep.. 76. some higher than others..
85, 86, etc. Seamen, eminent ones born in this County. chapter 8.. 14. Seat, a
healthy one described. chapter 2.. 11, 12. Examples of several here.. 12, 13, 14,
etc. Securis, such as the Popa used in sacrificeing. chapter 10.. 20. Seeds, the
most proper for each land, and their increase. for Clay land. chapter 9.. 17. for
mixed land, or light mould.. 18. for sandy gravelly ground.. 20, 21. for heathy
land.. 22.23. for broomy, gorsy. land.. 25. the variety of seed sown here.. 30,
11. their manner of chuseing it.. 32, 33: that they sometimes change their
species's.. 34, 35, 36. Selenites. a peculiar kind. chapter 5.. 2. Sheep, with
black noses chapter 3.. 4. chapter 7.. 61. having 4, 6, or 8 horns a piece.. 60
admitting coition after impregnation.. 62. bearing 3, at 3 yeanings within the
year, and 4 within 13 months. Ibid. Ship, a whole one dugg out of a mine. chapter
2.. 71. Shooting, Prince Rupert's excellency in it. chapter 9.. 9. Shreik or French
Pie. chapter 7.. 4. Shuckborough Manor, to whom it belonged anciently. chapter 10.. 83.
Silver Ore, formed like Escallops shells. chapter 5.. 19. Silver native, formed
like a vine. chapter 5.. 21. like an armed man. Ibid. like stalks, amongst Corn..
43. like threads about vines. Ibid. Skulls, with frontal sutures. chapter 8.. 108.
Sleg, a new kind, struck without a Man. chapter 9.. 98. Sleep, one that slept 14
days. chapter 8.. 35. another that slept 7. days.. 36. Smiths, of Wolverhampton
excellent Workmen. chapter 9.. 78. so at Walsall.. 79. Smut, a sign of Coal. chapter
3.. 60. Smutting, vid. blasting. Society of Freemasons. chapter 8.. 85, 86, etc.
Soludiers, eminent ones born here. chapter 8.. 12, 13, etc. 110. Spaniel, seeming
naturally trimmed. chapter 5.. 55. Sparrows, white, and speckled. chapter 7.. 13.
Spart-balls. chapter 7.. 73. Spearheads, and other warlike instruments, where
found. chapter 10.. 7. Spiders, how they dart their threads, and sail. chapter 7.. 23,
24. Spittle, some wholly wanting it. chapter 8.. 64, 65. Spritts, turned by a Mill.
chapter 9.. 11. Springs, that prognosticate dearth. chapter 2.. 10, 11, 12. 34. that
break forth with a noise.. 31, 32. that foretell events.. 33, 34. how many
sorts in the world.. 36. that depend on rains.. 37. that depend not on rains..
41, 42, 43, etc. that abate not in droughts.. 50, 51, 52. the proportion 'twixt
them, and rains, stated.. 53, 54, 55. rains not sufficient for some of them..
59, 60. hot, salt, and bitter.. 61, 62. springs where no rains.. 63. none
sometimes where rain enough.. 64. some certainly from the Sea.. 65, 66, 67,
etc. on the tops of hills.. 78, 89, 90. that rise in plains.. 79. not
indifferently any where.. 92, 93, 94. some properties of them.. 99. some cold
ones, that will not freeze.. 101.102. Spurrs, the great variety of them. chapter
9.. 79. how many Artisans concur to the making a spurr. Ibid. Stafford, its
utmost antiquity. chapter 10.12.28. Stafforde-Castle, how many there were of them..
38. Staffordshire, its bounds and productions. chapter 3.. 1. Staircase, a very
extraordinary one. chapter 9.. 68. Stalagmites, chapter 5. 10. Steel, how made. chapter 9..
75, 76. Stelechites. chapter 5.. 29. stibii facie. Ibid. Steeples, eight square.
chapter 9.. 68. Stirrops, the variety of them. chapter 9.. 80. Stocks, for the fingers
chapter 9.. 99. Stonehenge in Wiltsh. a British forum. chapter 10.. 11. Stone, town its
antiquity. chapter 10.. 26. Stone, upon Blore-heath. chapter 10.. 85. Stones, shining
in the dark. chapter 3.. 17. their origin. chapter 4 1, 2. useful for the Iron
furnaces.. 4. for building. 32. for grinding edged tools.. 34. for Mills.. 35.
transparent.. 47. Stones, formed, how. chapter 5.. 1. like a Partridges skull.. 7.
containing a white or red liquor.. 10. like the middle part of a barbel.. 11.
like a Nautilus.. 12, 13. like Cockles, Escallops, Oysters.. 14, 15, 16, etc.
like a fungus, or toadstool.. 25. like coral.. 26. like Moss or Equisetum..
27, 28. like truncks of trees.. 29. like wheels. 29, 30. like pillars.. 35, 36,
37. like a pear.. 38. like the seed of Verbascum. Ibid. like the combs of
bees.. 39. like snails, and diverse other animals.. 40, 41. like a
Tobacco-pipe.. 41. like a button, a barrel, rings.. 42, 43. Stones pyramidal,
in the Churchyards of Leek, Draycot, Chebsey. chapter 10.. 63. of Ilam, and
Checkley.. 63, 64. Storms, of hail and rain very extraordinary. chapter 1.. 46.
Stourton-Castle, chapter 4.. 3. chapter 10.. 84. Strawberrys, ripe before Christmas.
chapter 6.. 11. Street hey, a Roman Mansion. chapter 10.. 16. Streeton, supposed to be
the old Pennocrucium. Ibid. Strombites. chapter 5.. 13. Sulphur, its vast quantity
in the Coalmines. chapter 3.. 55. Sulphur wells, at Ingestre chapter 2.. 115, 116, etc.
at Codsall. 119, 120. at Willowbridge. 121, 122, 123, etc. others at Tatenhill,
Willenhall, Bently, Sandon. etc.. 126. Sun, never stationary to sense. chapter 1..
3, 4. Swanns, not with black, but red feet. chapter 7.. 2. Swine, of prodigious
growth. chapter 7.. 56. their rooting prevented. chapter 9.. 95.
T
TAble, made of 260 pieces. chapter 9.. 88. Talcum aureum. chapter 3.. 20. Tallow,
shining in the dark. chapter 7.. 75. Tamworth, its antiquity. chapter 10.. 30. Teeth,
of sheep, and Oxen gilded. chapter 3.. 7. Tellenites. chapter 5.. 14. Terley-Castle.
chapter 8.. 23. chapter 10.. 84. Testicles, a relation betwixt them and horns. ch: 7..
57, etc. Theotenhall, or Theotfanhele, an account of it. chapter 10., 5.36. Thorn,
with yellow leaves. chapter 6.. 22. hedges of it curiously* formed. chapter 9.. 85.
Thunder, it kills though it touch not. chapter 1.. 38. sometimes at a great distance.
Ibid. Tiles, burnt in an unusual manner. chapter 9.. 9. Timber, in Staffordsh. its
greatness, goodness, and quantity. chapter 6.. 53. how and when best felled. chapter
9.. 87. Tin, how laid upon Iron-wares. chapter 9.. 81. how upon copper-wares.. 82.
Tithymalus Characias Monspel. chapter 6.. 7. Toads, found alive in solid stones.
chapter 7.. 39, 40, 41. in solid Oaks.. 42, 43, etc. how thus included, and
supplied with Air and aliment.. 43, 44, 45, etc. Tobacco-pipe-clay. chapter 3.. 24.
Tooth, of a bore, with another issuing from it. chapter 7.. 65. of a man, very
great. chapter 8.. 109. Topho di Giovenca, Imperat. chapter 7.. 71, 72. Tophus
Vaccinus, voided by seige. chapter 7.. 72. equinus, eodem modo. Ibid. Topiary
works. chapter 9.. 85, 86. Tornado blasts. chapter 1.. 48.53. Tragopyrum. chapter 6.. 15.
Trees, the best about a seat. chapter 2.. 17. of excessive height. chapter 6.. 26, 27.
of great force in their growth.. 32. of different kinds uniting in their
growth. ch, 6.. 33, 34. subterraneous.. 35, 36. whether mineral or vegetable..
37, 38. whether firrs or alders.. 39, 40, 41, etc. how thus buried.. 43, 44,
47. their trunks filled with cartrages.. 49. made by bees.. 50. fruit trees,
how ordered. chapter 9.. 90: Trentham, its ancient name. chapter 10.. 17. Trichites.
chapter 5.. 40. Tripoleum minus Germanicum. chapter 6.. 8: Tritico-Speltum. chapter 6.. 14.
Triticum multiplex.. 16. Polonicum. Ibidem. Trochita. chapter 5.. 30. its texture..
32. a new sort.. 33. larger than ordinary:. 34. Trombe Torte. chapter 10.. 20.
Trouts, eat Crevices, and Efts or Newts. chapter 7.. 34. Tuberoides. chapter 5.. 25.
Turfe, used for fuel how ordered. chapter 3.. 14. for improvement of land. chapter 3..
14. and chapter 9.. 4. Turners-work, very extraordinary chapter 9.. 89. Tutbury Castle.
chapter 2.. 14. its antiquity. chapter 10.. 68. Minstrels court there, the Charter for
it.. 69. the manner of keeping the Court.. 71, 72, etc. the Bull-running, its
original.. 70. by whom instituted.. 76. Typhon. chapter 1.. 53.
U
VEal, observed to shine in the dark. chapter 7.. 75. Venabulum, the head of a
Roman one. chapter 10.. 20. Vetches, sown for manure only. chapter 9.. 29. Vicia
sylvestris, cultivated in Staff. chapter 6.. 12. Vines, observed to change the
color of their fruit. chapter 6.. 18. Vineyards, anciently in England. chapter 9.. 84.
Vista's, or lawns in woods. chapter 9.. 86. Vitriolic waters. chapter 2.. 113.127, etc.
Umbilicus lapis. chapter 5.. 39. Undercurrents in the Mediterranean and elsewhere.
chapter 2.. 73, etc. Unguents, used to prolong life. chapter 2.4, 5. Universal Medicin.
chapter 10.. 86. Volcaster, what it is. chapter 10.. 35. Urns, where found. chapter 10..
21. Urogallus minor. chapter 7.. 4. Use or Custom, its extrrordinary effects. chapter
8.. 66, 67.
W
WAlks, of pleasure, chapter 9.. 86. Wallsal, the Dole there. chapter 8.. 82. Waters
which the best, and which the worst. chapter 2.. 18. the qualities of good water..
18, 19. it ascends above its level.. 81, 82.84.91. that petrifie.. 114. that
are medicinal.. 115, etc, sulphurous. Ibid. Vitriolic.. 113.127. Waterworks,
at Trentham. chapter 9.. 13. at Pateshull. Ibid. Watling street. chapter 10.. 13. Ways,
Roman how made. Ibid. Waynes, or Wagons, some unusual ones. chapter 9.. 44.
Wednesfield, the battle there. chapter 10.. 37. Wells, produceing bones. chapter 2..
99, 100. adorned with flowers. chapter 8.. 89. Wheat, degenerates into Darnel. chapter
9.. 34. into Oats. Ibid. into Rye.. 35, 36. Whelps, found in the abdomen of a
bitch. chapter 7.. 53, 54. Whichnor, bacon an account of it. chapter 10.. 77, 78, 79.
Whitesmiths, who they are. chapter 9.. 77. Wierangle or Butcher-bird. chapter 7.. 4.
Wild-geese, how they fly. chapter 1.. 44. Willbrighton, its antiquity. chapter 10.. 6.
Willowbridg-wells, a large account of them. chapter 2.. 121, 122, 123, etc. Winds,
a new way of prognosticating them. chapter 1.. 51. not above 40 yards broad, or 3
or 4 miles long.. 53. that burn, and stifle. chapter 2. 4. Wine, good made in this
County. chapter 9.. 84. Witches, vid. Wizards. Witch-Elm. 40 yards long, containing
100 tuns of timber. chapter 6.. 28, 29. Wizards, and Witches how they dance. chapter
1.. 19, 20, 21, etc. how they worship the Devil. Ibid. Wlfade, and Ruffine
converted to Christianity chapter 10.. 25. Wlfer, vid. King. Wlfercester, an
account of it. chapter 10.. 24. Welverhampton Churchyard, an ancient
fortification. chapter 10.. 23. Wolverhampton, Town its antiquity. chapter 10. 39. of
the Dean and Prebends there.. 39, 40. Woman, having a child taken forth her
abdemen. chapter 7.. 54. brought to bed twice within 4 or 5 months.. 62.
impregnated after a Faetus had dyed within her.. 64. with the figure of a Mouse
on her cheek. chapter 8.. 4. that brought forth a child without a right hand.. 5.
having the signs of a pregnant woman though past childbearing.. 6. another
none, though really pregnant. Ibid. extraordinary prolific.. 19. butter made of
their milk.. 34. one that slept 7, another 14. days.. 35, 36. of a very slender
diet.. 39. skilled in Labiomancy.. 41. hanged, that came to life again.. 47.
that never spit.. 65. as old now; as ever since Jacobs time.. 90.91, 92, etc.
Woodbine, growing erect without any support. chapter 6.. 17. Woodlands of Staff.
its chiefest product. chapter 3.. 1. Woods, how managed. chapter 9.. 86. Wool, thought
to be but imperfect horn. chapter 7.. 59. World, its center of gravity different
from that of its magnitude. chapter 2.. 88. Wreathed pillars, a way of turning
them. chapter 9.. 89.
Y
YEW-tree with bright yellow leaves. chapter 6.. 20. curiously formed. chapter 9.. 85.
Z
ZEopyrum sive Triticospeltum. chapter 6.. 14. Zirchnitzer See, an account of it.
chapter 2.. 45.
FINIS.
A Copy of the Proposalls of the Author of this History, here annexed for the
Satisfaction of all Subscribers, that they are fairly dealt with.
WHEREAS Robert Plot, Doctor of Laws of the University of OXFORD, has with
great Industry and Charge trave^l'd over the whole County of Stafford, and
co^lected great variety of Materials in order to its History of nature and
Arts; and has made a most accurat Map of the said County, with all the Arms of
the Nobility and Gentry put in Colors in the Limb of it, as in his Map of
Oxfordshire, but in a new, and much more useful Method: Which intending to
publish with all convenient speed, He the said Doctor proposes,

That whoever subscribeth for six Copies of the said History in Quires, or
procures Subscriptions for so many, shall receive Seven such Copies Imprinted,
with a fair Letter, upon very good Paper in Folio; every Book containing near
40 half sheet Cutts wrought off from Copper Plates, beside the Map, which will
be larger than that of Oxfordshire; to be prized at no more than a penny per
sheet, and a penny per Plate, and the Map at Sixpence, which for each Copy (he
guesses will amount to about Ten or Twelve shillings, for those of ordinary
Paper, and so proportionably more for the larger and finer Paper.

All which Subscribers are desired to take Notice.

I. That it being intended that the said History shall be with all convenient
speed published, it will be expedient that all Subscribers Names be returned to
the same Doctor at his Chamber at University College in Oxford, by the first of
March next, 1680, about which time the said Book will be put into the Press,
that He may know what number to Print, it being intended that the Copies shall
not much exceed the number of Subscriptions.

II. That there shall be places assigned in the Gazett when the Impression of
the said Book is finished, in London, Oxford, Cambridge, and Staffordshire,
where all such Subscribers may call or send for their Books, and pay their Money.

III. That tho the said Book in the ordinary Paper be prized no higher than ten
or twelve shillings, yet at the usual and ordinary price of Books so full of
Cuts, it will be well worth near twenty shillings.

IV. That all Subscribers intending to have Books of the larger and finer
Paper, are desired to signify it by an Asterisk affixed to their Names, that
provision may be made for them accordingly.

V. That all Subscribers whatever, shall have their Names registered to
Posterity, in a Printed Catalogue annex't to the Book, as Benefactors to the
Work, and Promoters of the Honor of their Country, as follows.

JAMES Earl of ABBINGTON. ARTHUR Earl of ANGLESEY. * THOMAS Earl of ALISBURY. *
Mary Countis of ARDGLAS. WILLIAM Lord Bishop of St. ASAPH. JACOB Lord ASTLEY
George Abbot Esquire * William Abnet, Gent. Thomas Ackworth M. A. Student of Chapter
Chapter * Fitz-Herbert Adams D. D. Rector of Linc. Col. Samuel Adams M. A. Fellow
of Exon. Col. Thomas Aldersey Gent. Hen. Aldrich D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter * John
Aldridge Gent. * Charles Allestree M. A. Student of Chapter Chapter * James Almond
Alderman of Rochester. * Roger Altham M. A. Student of Chapter Chapter * Richard
Amphlet, Gent. Edward Arblaster. Gent. Sr Henry Archbold Knight. Francis Ashenhurst
Rector of Kings Swinford. Daniel Ashford M. A. of Heart Hall. * Elias Ashmole,
Esquire * Sir Richard Astley, Knight and Baronet. * Jonas Astley, Gent. Walter
Aston, Esquire Sr James Astry Knight. * John Atfield M. D. * Hatton Aucher Esquire *
James Axe M. A. Minister of Strood Kent. * Jofeph Ayloff Gent. of Chapter Chapter
Philip Airs, Esquire *
B
LOUIS de BOURBON Comte de la CASE of Chapter Chapter * JONATHAN Ld. Bishop of
BRISTOLL. * Hon. ROBERT BOOTH Esquire of Chapter Chapter * Hon. ROBERT BOIL, Esquire for six
Copies* whereof two * Zachary Babington Gent. John Bagnall of Jesus Coll. Camb.
John Bagnal, Gent. Sir Walter Bagot, Baronet. * Robert Balch M. A. Fellow of
Wadham Coll. * Leicester Harbor Gent. Harry Barker M. A. of Trin. Coll. Robert
Barker Esquire of Mert. Coll. William Bernesley, Gent. Francis Barrel Esquire of Bras.
Coll. Samuel Barton M. A. fellow of C. C. C. Thomas Bateman M. A. fellow of Un.
Coll. Ralph Bathurst, M D. President of Trin. Coll. Oxon. and Dean of Wells,
for six Copies one* Daniel Batwell Gent. Thomas Bailey D. D. Fellow of Magd
Coll. * James Bailey M. A. Fellow of Magd. Coll. Thomas Bailey M. A. Princip. of
New Inn Hall. Marmad. Beak M. A. Fellow of New. Coll. John Beal D. D. Fellow of
C. C. C. Samuel Beck B. D. Fellow of C. C. C. Camb. Henry Beeston LL. D. Warden
of New-Coll. for two Copies. *. William Belcher M. B. * William Bendy, Gent.
Robert Beresford Clerk. * Edward Bernard, D. D. Savilian Prof. Astron. Oxon.
William Bernard, D. D. Fellow of Mert. Coll. John Berrington, Gent. Richard
Biddulph, Esquire * Michael Biddulph, Esquire * Lewis Billingsley, Esquire John Binfield B.
A. Peter Birch M. A. of Chapter Chapter * Sir John Bland Bart. of University Coll.
Jonath. Blagrave M. A. Sir George Blundell Knight...... Blunt Esquire * Robert Bosvile,
Esquire Thomas Boteler Fellow of Trin. Coll. Came. John Bott, Gent. Thomas Bouchier
LL. D. Principal of St Alban-Hall, and Kings Professor of Law in Oxon. Mons.
Claud. de la Bourd. Edward Bourne M. A. Madam Mary Bows. Sir John Bowyear,
Baronet. * William Bowyear Esquire * Robert Bowyer Esquire Nathaniel Boyse M. A. Fellow
of Univ. Col. Joseph Bradeley Clerk. Hugh Brawn M. A. of Univ. Coll. William
Brereton of Jesus Coll. Cambr. William Briggs M. D. Isaac Bringhurst D. D.
Charles Brittiff, Gent. of Univ. Col. William Brom, Gent. of C. C. C. *
Charles Bromfield, Esquire Sir William Bromley Knight. of the Bath. Tho. Brook, Esquire *
Thomas Broughton Esquire * Sampson Shelton Broughton Esquire Brian Broughton, LL. B.
Fellow of All Souls Coll. * Thomas Brown, Gent. Joseph Brown. John Bryan Esquire
Mayor of Rochester 81 * Gilbert Budgeli M. A. Fellow of Trin. Col. Robert
Burdet Esquire * Michael Burgers Arthur Bury D. D. Rector of Exeter Col. Oxon.
Ralph Buffkin Esquire Edward Byrd.
C
HENRY Earl of CLARENDON Ld. Leivetenant of Ireland. * DONNA Earl of CLANCARTIE
of Chapter Chapter RICHARD L. V. CHOLMONDELEY. * CHARLES Lord CHEYNEY. ALMERIC Lord
GOURCY of Chapter Chapter Valentine Calton M. A. Alexander Carnegie. * John Castillion
D. D. Dean. of Rochester. * Charles Chadwick, Gent. John Chambers B. D. Fellow
of Magd. Col. Richard Chapman Gent. of Chapter Chapter Villiers Charnock Esquire * Walter
Chetwynd, Esquire * William Chetwynd, Esquire Sir Thomas Clayton Knight, M. D. Warden
of Merton Col. for two Copies, whereof one * Henry Clerk M. D. President of
Magdalen Col. for six Copies, whereof two * John Clerk Esquire M. A. Rector of
Harietsham Kent. Archibald Clinkard Esquire John Clotterbuck LL. D. Fellow of
All Souls Coll. * Richard Coffin, Esquire Sir Thomas Colepepyr Baronet. * Henry
Collins Gent. * Christopher Collyer, Gent. James Collyer, Gent. Daniel Colwall,
Esquire John Connant LL. D. Fellow of Mert. Col. Robert Conny M. D. of Mag. Col. *
Benjamin Conquest Esquire * Robert Cooper M. A. Fellow of Pemb. Col. Madam A^n
C^pe. John Coppin Esquire * Thomas Corbin Esquire * Charles Cotton Esquire * Daniel Cox M.
D. William Crabbe M. A. Fellow of Exon. Col. John Cromp of Rochester, Gent. *
William Crompton, Esquire James Crompton B. D. Fellow of Jesus Col. Camb. Charles
Cross, Gent. * Thomas Crosthwait D. D. Fellow Que^ns Col. * Nicholas Crouch M.
A. Fellow of Bal. Col. Jos. Crowther M. A. Fellow of Oriel Col. Ames Crimes B.
D. Fellow of Exon Col. John Cumberlege, M. B. Richard Cumberlege
D
WILLIAM Earl of DEVON: * JOHN Ld. Bp. of St DAVID'S and Principal of Jesus Col.
Oxon. William Daniel Esquire * Edward Darby Rector of Allington Kent. James
Davenant M. A. Fellow of Oriel Col. Thomas David's B. A of Jesus Col. Richard
Davies, Gent. Thomas Dawson, M. D. Samuel Day, Gent. Thomas Deane M. A. of
Univ. Col. Robert Devenish, Esquire York Herald. * Tomyns Dickins, Gent. Kenelm
Digby LL. D. Fellow of All Souls Col. * Samuel Dilke, Esquire William Dingley M. A.
Fellow of New. Col. Tho. Dixon M. A. Fellow of Queens Col. * Richard Drakeford
Gent. Robert Dowse of St John's Col. Camb. John Dowsing M. A. * Richard
Duckworth B. D. Sir William Dugdale Knight Garter K. at Arms. * William Duke M, A.
Stud. of Chapter Chapter Sir John Duncombe Knight. * Thomas Dunster M. A. Fellow of Wadham
Col. Bartholomew Dutton Gent. Gravenor Dyson, Gent.
E
Timothy Edge, Gent. Jonathan Edwards, B. D. Fellow of Jesus Col. John Edwards,
M. A. Fellow of M^rt. Col....... Edwards M. A. of St Ed. Hall Francis Eld,
Gent. John Eldred Esquire of New Col. J^hn Eliot, M. D. * Nath. Ellison M. A.
Fellow of C. C. C. and Prebend of Lichfield. William Elward Rector of Bignor
Kent. Phi. Elwood M. D. Fellow of C. C. C. Sir Nich. L' Estrange, Bar. of Chapter
Chapter * Michael Evans M. A. Stud. of Chapter Chapter Henry Eve Esquire * John Evelyn, Esquire
George Evelyn Esquire of Trin Col. *
F
ROBERT Lord FERRERS. * NARCISSUS Ld. Bp. of FERNS and LAGHLIN. Hon. CHARLES
FINCH, Esquire Fellow of All Souls Coll. * Hon. LEOPOLD FINCH Esquire Fellow of
All Souls Coll. * Henry Fairfax. D. D. Nathaniel Fairfax M. D. William Feak,
Gent. John Feak B. A. of Jesus Col. Cambr. Nicholas Fenay, Gent. of Univ. Col.
Edward Filmer, LL. D. Fellow of All Souls Coll. * George Fitz-Rowlandson. John
Fitz-Williams, D. D. of Magd. Col. * Edward Flemming, Esquire Sir Daniel Flemming
Knight. Sir John Floyer Knight. Matthew Floyer, Esquire Samuel Foden B. A. of Jesus Coll.
Camb. Philip Foley Esquire * John Foley, M. D. John Foster Fellow of All souls
Coll. * Phineas Fowke M. D. Ferrars Fowke, Gent. Walter Fowler, Esquire Walter
Fowler, Gent. James Frazier, Esquire for six Copies. Rowland Frith, Gent. Stephen
Fry M. D. of Trin. Col. Daniel Furzer, Gent. Francis Fulford Esquire of Exon. Col.
G
JANE Lady GERARD, Baroness Gerard of Gerard's Bromley. * DIGBY Lord GERARD, of
Bromly. * Hon. JOHN GRENVILE, Esquire of Chapter Chapter Thomas Gale D. D. Secretary of the
Royal Society. Simon Gale M. A. * Thomas Gardener, Alderman of Norwich Samuel
Gardener M. A. Fellow of C. C. C. Cambr. Thomas Garfoot, Gent. * Gilbert Geer
M. A. Fellow of Exon Col. William G^rard. M. A. William Gibbons M. D. Fellow of
St. John's Col. John Giffard Esquire Thomas Giffard Esquire John Giles M. A. Fellow of
Univ. Col Joseph Girdler, Gent. Andrew Glen of J^^us Col Camb. Sir William
Godhold, Knight * Richard Godden Gent. John Godfrey Sen. Gent. Sir John Godwin
Knight. Commissioner of his Majesty's Yard at Chatham. * George Goodai B D. Fellow
of Exon. Col. * Francis Geodwyn M. A. of C. C. C. Lovet Goring Genesis for six
Copies. Richard Got^bed M. A. Sir Henry Gough, Knight. * Sir Thomas Gower
Baronet of Univ. Col. William Leveson Gower Esquire * Harry Gray Esquire * Mr Hugh
Green. Nath. Greenwood B. D. Fellow of Bras. Col. Edward Gregory Gent. *
Nehemiah Grew, M. D. for 12 Copies. John Griffith, Esquire of Jesus Col. John Guise
M. A. Fellow of C. C. C.
H
Hon. CHARLES HATTON, Esquire * Robert Hadsal Gent. John Hall, D. D. Master of
Pembro^^ Col. and Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity in Oxon. Henry Hall, Esquire
Anthony Hall, Gent. Timothy Halton, D. D. Provost of Queens Col. and
Vice Chancellor of Oxon for six Copies. * John Halton M. A. Fellow of Queens
Col. * James Hamer B. D. Fellow of Bras. Col. Willam Hammond Esquire of St Albans
Kent. John Hammond D. D, Canon of Chapter Chapter * William Hanbury M. A. Francis
Hanbury, Gent. William Hanmer M. A. of Bras. Col. Emathen Hannam. Fred. Adolph
Hanson an Anglish. Gent. * Samuel Hanson, Esquire of Wadham Col. * Alexander
Harcourt, Esquire Michael Harding M. A. Fe^low of Trin. Col. Daniel Harvey, Esquire of
Chapter Chapter William Harvey M. A. Fellow of Orie. Coll. Nicholas Harvey Gent.
Griffith Hatley M. D. * William Hawe, Gent. Charles Hawles M. A. Fellow of
Magda^en Col. * Edward Haynes, Esquire * Marrit Head D. D. Rector of Leybourt.
K^nt. * Charles Hedges LL D. William Helyar, Esquire of Trin. Col. * Anthony Hen^ey
Esquire * Thomas Henshaw, Esquire John Herbert, Esquire Walter Heveningham Esquire John
H^y^r^ft M. A. Fellow of Bal. Col. Henry Hibbins M. A. Fellow of Bal. Col.
George Hicks D. D. Dean of Worcester. Charles Hickman D. D, Stud. Chapter Chapter
Francis Hildyard for six Copies. Christopher Hill of Jesus Col. Cambr. John
Hinkley M. A. of Univ. Col, Abraham Hill, Esquire William Holder, D, D. Sub-Dean of
the Chapel, and Prebend of St Paul's. Matthew Hole B.D. Fellow of Exon. Co.
Philip Hollins, Gent. Edward Homewood, Gent. * John Hoo, Gent. Robert Hook, M.
A. G^om. Prof. Gresh. John Hook M. A. of C. C. C. Walter Hooper, Esquire * William
Hopkins, B, D, Prebendary of Worcester. Charles Here Esquire of Exon. Col. *
Anthony Hornick B. D. Preacher at the Savoy. Daniel Horsmanden M. A. of Magd.
Hall. John Houghton Gent. Jos. How B. D. Fellow of Trin. Col. Robert Howard,
Esquire Walter Howell B.D. Fellow of Jesus Col. for two Copies. John Howell M. A.
of Trin. Col. William Hugessen, Esquire * Edward Hulse, M. D. John Hungerford. John
Huntbach Gent. Robert Huntington D. D. Provost of Trinity Col. near Dublin.
Martin Hurst LL. B. Register of Canterb. Nicholas Hurt, Esquire William Hussy
Merchant * Matthew Hutton B. D. of Bras. Col. Timothy Huxley M. A. of Jesus
Col. James Hyde, M. D. Principal of Magdalen Hall, and Kings Professor of
Physic in Oxon for two Copies, one *
I
William Jackson, Gent. Edward James, Gent. John James M. A. Student of Chapter Chapter
* William Jane D. D. Kings Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Chapter Chapter in Oxon,
for two Copies, one * Thomas Jeams, D. D. Warden of All Souls Col. for two
Copies, one * James Jeffreys D D. Fellow of Jesus Col. and Preb. of Cant.
William Jervis, Gent. William Ing, Gent. John Jodrell, Gent. William Jollife
Esquire * David Jones Gent. * George Jones Vicar of Sittingbourn Kent. Nathamel
Johnson M. D. for six Copies. Humphrey Jorden M. A. Fellow of Pemb. Col. John
Irish LL. D. Fellow of All Souls Col. * Gilbert Irensyde D. D. Warden of Wadham
Col. for two Copies, one * Z. Isham, M. A. Student of Chapter Chapter
K
PHILIP CRISTOPHER KONIGSMARCK, Earl of WESTER WICK and STEGHOLM. * Nicholas
Kendall M. A. Fellow of Exon. Col. * Samuel Kimberley, M. D. of Pemb. Col.
Jonathan Kimberly, M. A. Fellow of Pem. Col. Edmund King, M. D. * ^ Robert
Kinsey M. A. Fellow of Oriel Col. Thomas Kirk Gent. for six Copies. Thomas
Kynnersley, Esquire
I.
THOMAS Lord Bishop of LINCOLN. * William Lake M. A. Student of ChapterChapter *
Richard Lambert Gent. for six Copies. John Lamphire, M. D. Principal of Heart
Hall, and Mr Camden's Professor of History in Oxon. William Lancaster M. A.
Fellow of Queens Col. * Thomas Lane, Esquire * Tho. Lane M.A. and Fellow of Mert.
Col. Joseph Lane, Esquire Comptr. of the Chamb. of London. John Lawson, M. D. John
Leach, Esquire Edward Lancelot Lee, Esquire Richard Lee, Esquire of great Delce. Henry
Legh, Esquire Thomas Legh, Gent. Theophilus Leigh, Esquire Robert Leveson, Esquire William
Levet, D.D. Principal of Magd. Hall in Oxon, and Dean of Bristol. Richard
Leving Esquire William Levinz, M. D. President of S^ John's Col. Oxon: for two
Copies, one * Christopher Ley, Gent. Martin Lister M. D. Sir Edward Littleton
Baronet. Edward Littleton, Esquire John Lock, M. B. Stud. of Chapter Chapter Fisher
Littleton LL. D. and fellow of All Souls Col. Joseph Lodge M.A. Fellow of Univ.
Col. Thomas Long of Jesus Col. Cambr. Will LLoyd, M. A. Fellow of Jesus Col.
Spencer Lucy, Esquire of Queens Col. * John Ludford, Esquire John Ludwell, M. D. of
Wadh. Col. * Francis Lutterell, Esquire * Narcissus Lutterell, Esquire Charles Lybb. M.
D. Sir Henry Lyttleton Baronet *
M
Hon. HENRY MAYNARD, Esquire of New Col * JOHN Lord Viscount MASSEREENE. * BAPTIST
Lord Bp of MAN. Ralph Macro M. D. Sam. Des Masters, M. A. Fellow of Oriel Col.
Thomas Manley, Esquire Richard Manley, Esquire * Joseph Martin, Merchant John Ma^on,
Gent. John Massey, M. A. Fellow of Merton Col. for two Copies. John Massey, Esquire
John Merry for two Copies. Walter Mills, M. D. Edward Mills, Esquire John Mitchel,
Esquire * John More, Esquire of Exon. Col. * John Mordent, Gent. Edward Moreton, Esquire
Francis M^rley, M. A. Stud. of Ch Chapter * David Morton D. D. Fellow of St John's
Col. in Cambr. Sylvanus Morgan, H. P. Richard Morton, M. D. ^ Rog. Mostyn, M.
A. of Chapter Chapter Edward Mountfort, Esquire William Musgrave Fellow of New Col for 2
Copies. Robert Mynors Esquire Governor o^ Upnor Cast. Kent. *
N
GEO. Earl of NORTHAMPTON. Hon. WRIOTHESLY BAPTIST NOEL, Esquire of Magd. Col. *
John Nash. Clerk. John Naylor M. A. Fellow of Univ. Col. Robert Newlin, D. D.
President of Corpus Christi College Oxon, for two Copies, both * Laurence
Newton M. A. John Nicholas, Esquire John Nicholas, M. A. Fellow of All Souls Coll.
*..... Nichols M. A. of Eman. Col. Camb. William Nicolson, M. A. Fellow of
Queens Col. * Sir Thomas Noel, Baronet of Exon, Col. * Tho. Norbury M. A. of
Magd. Hal. John Norleigh, Gent of Exon. Col. * Richard Normasell, Secundary. Mr
William Not. Thomas Novel, M. D. John Nourse, Esquire
O
JOHN Ld. Bishop of OXFORD for six Copies, a l * John Offley, Esquire Rowland
Okeover, Esquire * Richard Old, M. A. Stud of Chapter Chapter for two Copies. Charles Otway
M.A. Fellow of St John's Col. Cant. * George Orlebar M. A. Fellow of All Souls
Col. Robert Orrin, Gent. John Owen, Gent. * Sir James Oxinden, Knight. *
P
HENRY Earl of PETERBOROUGH. * WILLIAM Lord PAGET *....... Lord PASTON. *
Philip Packer, Esquire John Packer M. A. of Univ. Col. William Parker, Esquire Timothy
Parker of Lincolns Inn, Esquire for 3 Copies * Robert Parsons, M. A. of Univ. Col.
William Pain Rector of White-Chappel Land. William Paynter B. D. Fellow of
Exon. Col. Henry Pelham, Gent. of Chapter Chapter Edward Penny, M. A. Fellow of C. C.C.
Stephen Penton, M. A. Captain Thomas Persehowse. Mrs Elizabeth Persehowse.
Edward Persehowse, Gent. John Persehowse, Gent. Mr William Petit. Montague
Pickering, Esquire * Thomas Pigot, M. A. Fellow of Wadh. Col. Samuel Pipe, Gent.
Rob. Pit, M D. Fellow of Wadh. Col. * George Pit, Esquire of Wadh. Col. * Thomas
Plot, Esquire Gonor Plot, Esquire Tho. Plume D. D. Arch deacon of Ro^^^ ^ John Port,
Esquire Richard Porter, Gent. Littleton Powys, Esquire John Priaulx M. A. of Univ. Col.
Peter Prideaux, M. A. Fellow of Allseuls Col. * Thomas Pudsey, Esquire Alexander
Pudsey. D. D. Fellow of Magd. Col. Josiah Pullen, M. A. of Magd. Hall. * John
Pullen Clerk Preacher to the English Factory at Hanborough. Timothy Puller. D.
D.
R
Nordash Rand, Esquire John Reynell, D. D. Fellow of C. C. C. Sebright Repington,
Esquire Edward Reynolds D. D. Archdeacon of Norfolk, and Preb. of Worcester.
Richard Richardson, Esquire of Univ. Col. William Road, Gent. John Roberts of Jesus
Col. Richard Robinson, M. D. William Richards M. A. for six Copies. Richard
Roderick M. A. Stud. of Chapter Chapter Thomas Rudyerd, Esquire
S
ROBERT Lord SPENCER of Chapter Chapter * Hon. JOHN STAWELLE Esquire of St John's Col. Oxon.
Humphrey Samford M. A. Fellow of St. John's Col. Camb. Henry Sampson, M. D. John
Saunders, Clerk. Robert Say, D. D. Provost of Oriel Col. for two Copies. John
Scarborow. C. Albert Schmidt a Holstein Gent. * Edward Sclater, M. A. Fellow of
Mert. Col. * Thomas Scot, Gent. John Sargeant, Gent. Edward Seymour, Gent. of
Chapter Chapter * Charles Shaw of Trim. Col. Camb. R^ger Sheldon Esquire Gilbert
Sherrington M. A. Follow of Bras. Col. Ralph Sheldon of Beoly, Esquire George
Shires, Gent. of Exon. Col. * Edward Short, Gent. Valentine Short. Nathaniel
Siddon, Esquire Edwin Skrymshire, Esquire * Sir Charles Skrymshire, Knight. * Walter
Skrymsher, Gent. John Smith, Gent. * Henry Smith, D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter *
Thomas Smith D. D. Fellow of Magd. Col. * Thomas Smith, B. D. Fellow of Jesus
Col. William Smith, M. A. Fellow of Univ. Col. Edward Smith, Clerk. William
Sneyd, Esquire * Ralph Sneyd, Esquire * Thomas Spark, M. A. Stud. of Chapter Chapter * John
Specot, Esquire of Exon Col. * William Speak, Esquire of Wadh. Col. * Henry Spencer,
Gent. William Stanley, B. D. Fellow of C. C. C. Camb. Thomas Stapley, M. A.
Rector of Burham, Ken. Charles Stewkeley, Gent. William Strickland, Esquire of
Exon. Col. * John Swynfen, Esquire Thomas Sykes, B. D. Fellow of Trin. Col. Samuel
Symmonds, Rector of Murston, Kent.
T
John Tayleur, Gent of C. C. C. Thomas Tailor, LL. D. * Thomas Tailor, Gent. *
Nicholas Tempest LL. B. e. Col. Univ. Thomas Tennison, D. D. Francis Thomson D.
D. Ralph Thoresby. William Thornton, M. A. Fellow of Wad. Col. for two Copies,
one * Richard Thornton. Gent. Philip Tilney, Gent. of Heart Hall. * Hugh Todd,
M. A. Fellow of Univ. Col. * Anthony Tonstall, M. A. Fellow of Queens Col. *
John Torksey, M. A. of Chapter Chapter William Trafford, Gent. John Trevers, Gent.
Francis Turner. D. D. Prebend of St Paul's. John Turton, Esquire Philip Turton,
Gent. Edward Tyson, D. D. Physician to the Hospitals of Bethlehem and
Bride-well, Land.
V
Daniel Vanly, Esquire Robert Udal of Enfield. John Ven D. D. Master of Baliol Col.
John Ventris, Esquire * George Vernon Esquire * Edward Vernon, Esquire * Henry Vernon, Esquire
Thomas Villiers, Esquire Henry Ullock Canon of Rochester. Thomas Underwood, Gent.
Benjamin Unwyn, Gent. Stephen Upman, Fellow of Eaton Col.
W
THOMAS L. V. WEYMOUTH. * PETER Lord Bp. of WINCHESTER. EDWARD Lord WARD *
John Wallis, D. D. Savilian Professor of Geometry and President of the
Philosophical Society in Oxon. Obadiah Walker, Master of Univ. Col. Joshua
Walker M. A. and Fellow of Bras-Henry Walker, Gent. * Richard Waller, Gent.
George Walls M. A. Stud. of Chapter Chapter John Walton, Esquire of St John's Col. Cant. *
Sr Peter Warburton Baronet. * William Ward, M. A. Fellow of Queens Col. *
Richard Watkins Rector of Whichford Warwic. Rich Weever Alderman of New Castle
under Lyme. Mrs Elizabeth Wegewood. John Wells M A. * Thomas Whestlake, Gent.
Edmund Wheeler, Gent. * Thomas Whincop D. D Fellow of C C. C. Came. Francis
White, M. A. Fellow of Bal. Col. John Whitehall, Esquire Francis Wightwick, Gent.
Sir Thomas Wilbraham, Baronet * John Wills D. D. Fellow of Trin. Col. for two
Copies, both * Hugh Willoughby M. A. of All Souls Col. Robert Wilmot, Esquire John
Wilshire, B. A. of Magd. Hall. Sir Francis Wingate. Knight. * Richard Wit Register
of the Chancellours Court of the University of Oxon. * Robert Witty, M. D.
Francis Wolserstan, Esquire for six Copies. Sir Charles Wolseley, Baronet. * Jos.
Woodward M. A. Fellow of Oriel Col. Sir Christopher Wren, Knight, LL. D.
Surveyor General * George Wren M. A. Minister of Hoo. Kent. Sir Henry Wright
Baronet of Dagenhams Essex. * Laurence Wright, Gent. * Sir Walter VVrottesley,
Baronet. * William Wyat, M. A. Student of Chapter Chapter and Public Orator to the
University of Oxon. * William Wind, Esquire * William Wyndham, Esquire of Wadh. Col. *
Thomas Wyndam Esquire Wadh. Col. * Robert Wynn, B. A. of Jesus Col. Sir John
Wyrley, Knight, * John Wyvill M. A. Prebend of Rochester. *
Y
Henry Yerbury, M. D. Fellow of Magd. Col. for six Copies, all * Robert Young,
Conon of Windsor. John Young, M. B. Henry Young, Gent. * Mrs Catharine Young.
John Young, Gent. John Younger, D. D. Fellow of Magd. Col. and Prebend of
Canterbury.


To the most Honble. Potent and truly Noble C^^^R^S^^L^CT^ a^^ of SHREWSBURY
WATERFORD and WEXFORD^ TUBOT STRINGE of Blademere GIFFORD of Brim^field
FVRNIVAL VERDON LOVETOFT etc. H^^ Maj^^^ L. Lieutenant of the County of
STAFFORD. (...) MAP of STAFFORDSHIRE newly delincated after a new manner with
all imaginable Submission is humbly dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

The Explication the Mark.
A CITY and C: Church. Bishops Seat. G: Great. A Mereat town. L: Little. A
Parish. Lo: Long. A Village. M: Middle. Ancient for^^. siea^tons. Ne: Nether.
R^li^ious houses N: North. Ancient Seats of Kings. S: South. and of Baronios U:
Upper.


map of Staffordshire

To the right Kon^^^. EDWARD Lord WARD Baron of BI^KINGHAM Heir apparent of
Barony of DUDLEY of DUDLEY CASTLE. This 3. Table being the E. S. E. Prospect of
the said CASTLE, in Testimony of his Gratitude in humbly dedicated by R. P. L.
L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Dudley Castle

To the right Hon.ble the learned and most virtuous Lady LANE Lady GERARD
Baroness GERARD of GERARDS BROMLEY This 4. Table Being the E.S.E. Prospect of
SANDON HALL Her Ladyships own Inheritance wit^ all possible submission is
gratefully dedicated by R.P.L L.D.

Burghers deli. et sculp.
depiction of Sandon Hall

To the right Hon.ble and truly Noble Lord ROBERT Lord FERRERS of CHARTLEY This
5. Table showing ye. inner Prospect, of the goodly Manor place of CHARTLEY (as
Leland calls it) in memory of his Lord Ps signal favors, is humbly dedicated
by R.P.L.L.D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Chartley Manor

To the right Hand and truly Noble Lord DIGBY Lord GERARD of GERARDS Bromley
This 6. Table Showing the W. N. W Prospect of his Lord Ps. Magnificent Seat at
BROMLEY with ye deepest sense of Gratitude is humbly presented by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp
depiction of Bromley

To the Hon.ble the judicious and much esteemed Gent. HERRY GRAY of ENFIELD Esquire
This 7. Table Showing the Southern Front of ENFIELD Hall in Remembrance of his
favors is gratefully dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin et sculp.
depiction of Enfield Hall

To the right Hon.ble WILLIAM Lord PAGETT. Baron of BEAUDESART This 8. Table
Shering the Ea^tern Front of BEAUDESART House with all dutiful Observance is
humbly presented by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Beaudesart House

To the Worsp.^t the Generous and much esteened Gent^ PHILIP FOLEY of PRESTWOOD
Esquire This 9. Table Showing the N. E. Prespect of PRESTWOOD Hall as a grateful
rememorance of his singular Favors is humbly offered by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Prestwood hall

QVARTA PERENNIS ERIT. To the right Hon.ble JOHN Visc: MASSEREEN Baron of
LOUGH-NEAGH one of his Maj.tie most Hon.ble Privy Council in ye. Kingdom of
IRELAND This 15. Table Showing the S.S.E. Prospect of his Lordships Seat at
FISHERWIK as a pledge of my gratitude is humbly presented

Mb. delin. et sculp.
depiction of Fisherwik

To the Worsp.tt the generous and much honored Gent. JOHN OFFLEY of MADESEY
Esquire. This 10 Table Showing the S.E. Prospect of MADESEY MANOR taken from the
Garden side, ^5.^h the lowest obeisance is humbly presented by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Madesey Manor

To the right Worsp. the virtuous and most accomplished Gent: S.r WALTER BAGOT
Bar.t This 17. Table Being the W. and by N. Prospect of BLITHFIELD HALL taken
from the Tarras in the Garden, in memory of his Beneficence is thankfully
dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Blithfield Hall

To the Worsp^. the ingenious KoHiging Gent. ROWLAND OKEOVER of OKEOVER Esquire.
This is Tab. Showing the Prospect of his ancient Seat at OKEOVER as a testimony
of gratitude is humbly presented by R. P. L L. D.

Mburgesse invent. et sculp.
depiction of Okeover

To the right Worsp^. Sr. CHARLES SKRYMSER His Martin. hiah SHERRIFF and of
STAFFORD SHIRE 1684 This 19 Table Showing the EME. Pro^pect of NORBVRY MANOR
and of SHEBBEN POOLE where the Pewets annually breed, in Testimony of his
Munificence is thankfully dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers dedin. et sculp.
depiction of Norbury Manor

To the Worsp^. the Learned and ingenious Gent. EDWIN SKRYMSHER of AQUALATE
Esquire. This 20 Table being ye N.N. West Prospect of AQUALATE House, as a
thankful acknowledgment of his Singular favors is gratefully dedicated by R.
P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp
depiction of Aqualate House

To the Wprsp^. the Learned and ingenious Gent. THOMAS BROUGHTON Esquire Son and
Heir of the right Worsp. Sr. BRIAN BROUGHTON of BROUGHTON Bart This 21. Table
Showing the beautiful Front of BROUGHTON House wit^ ye. sincerest gratitude is
humbly presented by R. P. L L. D.

MBurghers delin. et s;culp.
depiction of Broughton House

To the right Honbl^. the virtuous and most accomplished Lady, the Lady LANE
LEVESON GOWER This 24. Table showing ye. Front of TRENTHAM HALL Delineated
within the Gate of the inner court 20th. all imaginable devotion is humbly c^ss
grated by R ^Su^.

Burghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Trentham Hall

To the Worsp^. the ingenious and most obligeing Gent. WILLIAM LEVESON GOWER
Esquire This 23 Table Showing the W and by S. Prospect of TRENTHAM HALL Taken from
ye Hill near ye. Cistern with the highest resentment of his many and great
favors is gratefully offered by R. P. L. L. D.

depiction of Trentham Hall (...) s delin et sculp.


To the Worshipful, the Learned and most ingenious Gent. WALTER CHETWYND of
INGESTRE Esquire. This 26. Table being the SSE Prospect of INGESTRE HALL, and the
beautiful CHURCH newly erected at his sole charge, in Testimony of his many
and Singular favors, as in duty bound, is gratefully dedicated by R. P. L. L.
D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp
depiction of Ingestre Hall

To the Worsp.tt the Loyal and much Hon.d Gent. THOMAS LANE of BENTLEY Esquire.
This 27. Table Showing the Southern Prospect of BENTLEY Hall His Maj.ties A
SULUM in his greatest Extremity as a grateful Recognition of his many favors
is humbly presented by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Bentley Hall

To the Worsp.tt the prudent, and most obligeing Gent: WILLIAM SNEYD of KEEL
Esquire. This 28. Table, being the South-West Prospect of KEEL-HALL, his principal
Mansion; in memory of his favors is gratefully dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

Burghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Keel Hall

To the right Hon^^. and truly Noble WALTER Lord ASTON Baron of FORFARE in the
Kingdom of SCOTLAND This 29. Table Showing the Front of I^XALL-HALL with all
dutiful acknowledgment of his Lordships many favors, is gratefully dedicated
by R. P. L. L. D.

Mburgesses sculp.
depiction of Tixall Hall

To the right Honble. and trul^ Noble Lord THOMAS Vi^um WE^MOUTH and Baron of
^ARMISTER This ^^ Table Showing the W^W. Prospect of the fair City LICHFIELD
taken near ^NITS. Well with all dut^ll observance is humble presented by R. ^.
L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et salp.
depiction of Lichfield

To the Worsp^ SAMUEl ^NDERS of CALDWALL in ^ERBYSHIRE Esquire but Native of
S^AFFORDSHIRE. This 3^ Table Showing the ^ront of the TOWN HALL of STAFFORD
with all imag^^able respect is humbly dedicated by R. P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp.
depiction of Town Hall of Stafford

To the right Honbl^. and truly noble Lord ROBERT Lord FERRERS Master of ^^ORSE
to (...). QUEEN and high St^^ and of the Town of S^^FFORD. Th^^ 34 Table Being
the E. N. E. Prospect of the said Tow^^, taken from Coton Hill, with all
immaginable ^eneration is humbly consecrated by R. P. L. L. D.

Mburg. delin. et sculp.
depiction of Stafford

To t^^ ^or^^. EDWARD VERNON Esquire Deputy (...) Steward of the ^^^OP of TU^^^^Y
and dep^^^ ^^^tenant of the (...) of NE^^^OOD This (...) Table Showing the
(...) ^^^^^ct of TU TBU^^ C^STLE is (...) ^^^d by (...)

MBurgess delin. et sculp.
depiction of Tutbury Castle

To the Worsp^. the prudent and most courteous Gent. WILLIAM IOLLIFE of
CAVERSWALL Esquire This 37. Table Showing the E.S.E. Prospect of CAVERSWALL CASTLE
with the lowest observance is humbly dedicated by R.P. L. L. D.

MBurghers delin. et sculp
depiction of Caverswall Castle


