The KING AND THE COBBLER,



Printed for C. Dennisson, at the Stationers-Arms within Aldgate.

THE Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF King Henry 8th. AND A COBBLER, RELATING
How he came acquainted with the Cobbler, and the Pleasant Humors that happened
thereupon, etc. To which is added, The Cobler's Song in the Kings Celler.

Printed for C. Dennisson, at the Stationers-Arms, within Aldgate.

Price Twopence.

A PLEASANT and Delightful Story OF King HENRY the VIII. AND A COBBLER:
CHAP. I. How King Henry the 8th. used to visit the Watches in the City, and
how he came acquainted with a merry and a Jovial Cobbler.
IT was the Custom of King Henry the Eigth, to Walk late in the Night into the
City Disguised, to take notice how the Constastables and Watch performed their
(...) full Guarding the City Gate, but also in diligent Watching the inward
parts of the said City, that so they might prevent those Disturbances and
Casualties which often happens in great, and Populous Cities in the Night. This
he did oftentimes, without the least discovery who he was, returning home to
White Hall early in the morning. Now in his return home through the Strand, he
took notice of a certain Cobbler, who was constantly up and at Work, Whistling
and Singing every morning; he therefore resolved to see him, and be acquainted
with him; in order to which he immediately knocks off the Heel of his Shoe, by
hitting it against the Stones: Having so done, he bounced at the Cobblers Stall;
who is there, cries the Cobbler? Here is one* said the King. With that the Cobbler
opened his Stall door, and the King asked him, if he could set on his Heel
again? Yes that I can, says the Cobbler. Come in honest Fellow, and (...) thee
down by me, and I will do it for you strait; the Cobbler scraping his Awls and
Old Shoes to one side, to make room for the King to sit by him. The King being
hardly able to forbear Laughing at the kindness of the Cobbler, asked him if
there was not a House hard by which sold a Cup of Ale, where the People were
up? Yea, (said the Cobbler) there is an Inn over the way, where I believe the
folk of the house are up; for the Carriers go from thence very early in a
Morning. With that the King borrowed an old Shoe of the Cobbler, and went over
to the Inn, desiring the Cobbler to bring his Shoe to him thither, so soon as
he had put the Heel on again; the Cobbler promised he would. So making what
haste he could to put the Heel on, he carried it over to the King, saying;
Honest Blade, here is thy Shoe again; I Will warrant it will not come often in
haste. Very well, said the King, What must you have for your pains? A Couple of
Pence (answered the Cobbler.) Well, said the King, because (...) merry Fellow,
here is a Tester for thee. Come sit thee down by me, I will drink to thee a
whole Pot, here is a good Health to the King: with all my heart, said the
Cobbler, I will pledge thee were it Water. So the Cobbler sat himself down by the
King, and was very merry, and drank often his Liquor very freely. He also sung
some of his merry Songs and Catches, whereat the King Laughed heartily, and was
very Pleasant and Iocuno with the Cobbler; telling him withal, that his Name was
Harry Tudor, and that he belonged to the Court, and if he would come and see
him there, he would make him very welcome, because he was such pleasant merry
Company, and charged him to be there, and not to forget his Name, but to ask
any one for him about the Court, and they will bring you to him: For (said the
King) I am very well known at the Court. Now the Cobbler little dreamed that it
was the King which spoke to him, much less that the Kings Name was Harry Tudor:
Therefore with a great deal of Confidence, he stands up and pulls off his Hat,
and makes two or three fine scrapes with his Legs, gives the King many thanks,
withal telling him, that he was one of the honestest Fellows he ever met withal
in his Lifetime. And though (he had never been at Court) yet it should not be
long before he would make a Holiday to come and see him. Hereupon the King
discharging the House for what he had drank, would have taken his leave of the
Cobbler. But the Cobbler taking him by the hand, said, By my faith, you must not
go yet, you shall first go and see my poor Habitation; I have there a Tub of
good Nappy Ale was never Tapt yet, you must needs go and taste of it; for you
are the honestest Merriest Blade that I ever met withal, and I love an honest
merry Companion with all my heart.

CHAP. II. How the Cobbler Entertained the King in his Celler, and of the
Disturbance they had by the Cobblers Wife Joan.
SO the Cobbler took the King with him over the way, where he had a Celler
adjoining to his Stall, which was handsomely and neatly Furnished for a poor
Man of his profession: Into this Celler he had the King, there, says he, sit
down, you are Welcome: But I must desire you to speak softly, for fear of
wakeing my Wife Joan, who lies here hard by (showing the King a close Bed, made
neatly up at one corner of the Celler, much like unto a Closet) and if she
awake, she will up with a Juniper Lecture, will make your Ears ding again. At
which Speech of the Cobblers, the King Laughed, and told him, He would be
mindful to observe his Directions. With that the Cobbler kindled a Fire, and
fetched out his Brown Loaf, from which he cut a lusty Toast, which he set a
Baking at the Fire; then he brought out his Cheshire Cheese; Come (says the
Cobbler) will you eat some Cheshire-Cheese? there is as good Fellowship in
Eating, as there is in Drinking; which made the King admire the Honest Freedom
of the Cobbler. So having eat a bit, the Cobbler began a Health to all true
hearts and merry Companions: at which the King smiled, saying, God-a-mercy,
Friend, I will pledge you. In this manner they eat together, until it was
almost break of Day: the Cobbler being very free of his Liquor, and delighting
the King with several of his Old Stories, insomuch that the King was highly
pleased with the manner of the Cobblers entertainment. When on a sudden, the
Cobblers Wife Joan began to awake: E'faith (says the Cobbler) you must be gone
now my Wife Joan begins to Grumble, she will wake presently, and I would not
for half the Shoes in my Shop, she should find you here. So taking (...) by
the Hand, he led him up Stairs, saying, Farewell honest Blade, it shall not be
long before I will make a Holidy, and come see thee at Court: You shall be
welcome, replied the King: So they both parted, the King on his way to
White Hall, and the Cobbler to his Celler, putting all things to rights again
before his Wife Joan arose, went to work again, Whistling and Singing, as
merrily as he used to do: Being much satisfied that he had happened on so good
a Companion, and much pleasing himself in his thoughts how Merry he should be
when he came to Court.

CHAP. III. How the Cobbler prepared himself to go to the Court, and how he was
set out after the best manner, by his Wife Joan.
NOw as soon as the King came home, he sent out Orders about the Court, That if
any enquired for him by the Name of Harry Tudor, they should immediately bring
the Person before him what ever he was, without any further Examination of him.
Now the Cobbler thought every Day a Month till he had been at Court to see his
new acquaintance, and was much troubled how he should get leave of his Wife
Joan, for he could not go without her knowledge, by reason he did resolve to
make himself as Fine as he could; for his Wife always kept the Keys of his
Holiday Clothes. Whereupon one Evening as they sat at Supper, finding her in a
very good humor, he began to lay open his mind to her, telling her the whole
Story of his new acquaintance, repeating it over and over again, that he was
the honestest Fellow that ever he met withal. Husband (quoth she) because you
have been so ingenious to tell me the whole truth, I will give you leave to
make a Holiday for this once; you shall go to the Court, and I will make you as
Fine as I can: So it was agreed that he should go the next day. Whereupon Joan
arose betimes the next morning, to Brush up her Husbands Holiday Clothes, and
to make him look as smug as she could: She Washed and Iron'd his Lace Band, and
made his Shoes shine that he might see his Face in 'em. Having done this, she
made her Husband to rise and pull off his Shirt, then she washed him with warm
Water, from Head to foot, putting him on a clean Shirt, afterward she dressed
him in his Holiday Clothes, pinning on his Lace-Band in Pimlico.

CHAP. IV. The Cobblers Reception at Court, with the manner of his Behavior
before the King.
THe Cobbler being thus set forth, strutted through the Street like a Crow in a
Gutter, thinking himself as fine as the best of them all. In this manner he
came to Court, staring on this body, and that body, as he walked up and down,
and not knowing who to ask for Harry Tudor, at last he espied one as he
thought, in the Habit of a Serving-Man, to him he makes his Address, saying,
Do thou hear honest Fellow, do you know one Harry Tudor, which belongs to the
Court? Yes, said the Man, follow me and I will bring you to him: with that he
had him presently up into the Guard-Chamber, telling one of the Yeomen of the
Guard there was one that enquired for Harry Tudor. Replied the Yeoman, I know
him very well, if you will please to go along with me, I will bring you to him
immediately. So the Cobbler followed the Yeoman, much admiring the Finery of the
Rooms he went through, he thought within himself, that the Yeoman was mistaken
in the person whom he enquired after: he therefore pulled him back by the Coat,
and told him, that he did believe he was mistaken in the Person whom he
enquired after. For (said he) him who I look for, is a plain merry honest
Fellow, his Name is Harry Tudor: We drank two Pots together, not long since, I
suppose he may belong to some Lord or other about the Court. I tell you Friend,
replied the Yeoman, I know him very well, do but follow me, and I shall bring
you to him straight. So going forward, he came at last to the Room where the
King was, accompanied with several of his Nobles who attended him.

As soon as the Yeoman had put by the Arras, he spoke aloud, saying; May it
please your Majesty, here is one that enquires for Harry Tudor. The Cobbler
hearing this, thought he had committed no less than Treason, therefore he up
with his Heels and run for it. But not being acquainted with the several
turnings and Rooms through which he came, he was soon overtaken, and brought
before the King, whom the Cobbler little thought to be the Person he enquired
after: Therefore in a trembling condition, he fell down upon his knees, saying;
May it please your Grace, may it please your Highness, I am a poor Cobbler, and
enquired for one Harry Tudor, who is a very honest Fellow, I mended the Heel of
his Shoe not long since, for which he paid me nobly, and gave me two or three
Pots to boot: And I had him over afterward to my Celler* where we drank part
of a Tub of nappy Ale, and was very Merry, until my Wife Joan began to Grumble,
which put an end to our Merriment for that time. But I told him, I would come
to the Court and see him as soon as conveniently I could. Well, said the King,
be not troubled; do you know this honest Fellow again if you see him? Yea, that
I do from a thousand (replied the Cobbler.) Then said the King, stand up and be
not afraid, but look well about you, peradventure you may find this honest
Fellow amongst this Company. Whereupon the Cobbler arose and looked wishfully
upon the King, and the rest of his Nobles, but to little or no purpose. For
though he saw something in the Kings face which he thought he had seen before,
yet he could not imagine him to be Harry Tudor, whose Heel of his Shoe he had
mended, and who had been so merry with him, both at the Inn and at his own
Celler. He therefore told the King, he did not expect to find Harry Tudor among
such fine Folks as he saw there; but that the person that he looked for, was a
plain honest true-hearted fellow. Adding withal, that he was sure, that did
Harry Tudor but know that he was come to Court, he would make him welcome. At
which Speech of the Cobblers, the King had much ado to forbear laughing
outright: But keeping his Countenance as steady as he could, he spoke to the
Yeomen of the Guard, here (says he) take down this honest Cobbler into my
Celler, and let him drink my Health, I will take order that Harry Tudor shall
come to him presently; so away went the Cobbler ready to leap out of his skin
for joy, not only that he had come off so well, but also that he should find
his Friend Harry Tudor.

CHAP. V. The Cobblers Entertainment in the King's Celler; and how he met with
his new Friend Harry Tudor, and how he come to know him to be the King.
THe Cobbler had not been long in the King's Celler, before the King came to him
in the same Habit which he had on when the Cobbler mended his Shoe; whereupon
the Cobbler knew him, and run and embraced him, saying, Honest Harry, I have
made a Holiday on purpose to come and see you; but I had much ado to get leave
of my Wife Joan, who was loath I should loose so much time from my work; but I
was resolved to see you, I therefore made my self as fine as I could. But (i will
tell you Harry) when I came to the Court I was in a peck of troubles how to
find you out; but at last I met with a Man who told me he knew you very well,
and that he would bring me to you; but instead of doing so, he brought me
before the King, which had almost frightened me out of my seven senses. But in
good faith (added the Cobbler) I am resolved to be Merry with you, since I have
the good fortune to meet with you at last. I that you shall, replied the King,
we will be as merry as Princes. With that he called for a large Glass of Wine,
and drank to the Cobbler the King's good Health. God-a-mercy, said the Cobbler,
honest Harry, I will pledge thee with all my heart. Now after the Cobbler had
drank about four or five good Healths, he began to be Merry, and fell a singing
his old Songs and Catches, which pleased the King very much, and made him laugh
heartily. When of a sudden several of the Nobles came into the Celler,
extraordinary rich in Apparel, who all stood bare to Harry Tudor, which put the
Cobbler into a great amazement at first, but recovering himself, he looked more
wishfully upon Harry Tudor: when presently he knew him to be the King, which he
saw in the Presence Chamber, though in other Habit, he immediately fell down upon
his knees, saying, May it please your Grace, may it please your Highness, I am
an honest poor Cobbler, and mean no harm: No, no, said the King, nor shall
receive none here. He commanded him therefore to rise up, and be as merry as he
was before: and though he knew him now to be the King, yet he should use the
same freedom with him, as he did when he mended the Heel of his Shoe. This
kind Speech of the Kings, and three or four Glasses of Wine more, made the
Cobbler to be in as good humor as he was before, telling the King several of
his pretty Stories, and singing some of his best Songs; very much to the
satisfaction of the King and his Nobles.

The COBBLERS Song in the KING'S Celler.
To the Tune of, Ienny Gin.
COme let us drink the the other Pot,
our sorrows to confound,
We Will laugh and sing before the King,
so let this Health go round:
For I am bold as bold can be,
no Cobbler e're was Ruder,
Then here good fellow, here is to thee,
remembering Harry Tudor.
When I am at work within my Stall,
upon him I shall think,
His kindness I to mind will call,
where e're I eat or drink:
His kindness was to me so great,
the like was never known,
His kindness I will still repeat,
and so shall my Wife Joan.
I Will laugh when I sit in my Stall,
and merrily i will Sing,
That I with my poor Last and Awl,
am fellow with the King:
But it is more I must confess,
then I at first did know,
But Harry Tudor ne'rtheless,
resolves it shall be so.
And now farewell unto White Hall,
I homewards must retire,
To Sing and Whistle in my Stall,
my Joan will me desire:
I do but think how she will laugh,
when she hears of this thing,
How he that drank her Nut-brown Ale,
was Englands Royal King.
CHAP. VI. How the Cobbler became a Courtier.
NOw the King considering the pleasant humor of the Cobbler, how innocently
merry he was, and free from any Designs, and that he was a person that labored
very hard, and took a great deal of pains for a small Livelihood, was pleased
out of his Princely Grace and favor, to allow him a liberal Annuity of forty
Mark a year, for the better support of his jolly humor, and the maintenance of
himself and his Wife Joan; and that he should be admitted one of his Court, and
that he might have the freedom of his Celler when ever he pleased, which being
so much beyond the Cobblers expectation, did highly extenuate the Cobblers
humor, much to the satisfaction of the King. So after a great many Legs and
Scrapes, he returned home to his Wife Joan, with the joyful News of his kind
Reception at Court, which so well pleased her, that she did not think much at
the great pains she took in Tricking him up for that Journey.

FINIS.
Charles Dennisson, Bookseller,

printer's or publisher's device

At the Sign of the Stationers-Arms within Aldgate, Furnishes any Country
Chapmen or others, with all sorts of BOOKS and BALLADS at Reasonables Rates.


