Plutarch Lives vol: 2d*



THE Second Volume OF PLUTARCH'S LIVES.

Translated from the Greek, BY SEVERAL HANDS.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges-Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street.1688.

A Chronological Table to the Second Volume of Plutarch 's Lives.
The Julian Period. Before the Coming of Christ. After the Worlds Creation.
After the building of Rome. The Year of the Olympiad. The Olympiad. Alcibiades.
90 3 335 3532 416 4296 C. M. Coriolanus his Banishment. 73 2 266 3463 485 4227
Timoleon. 108 4 408 3605 343 4369 Paulus Aemil. overcame K. Perseus. 152 3 583
3780 168 4544 Pelopidas the Battle at Leuctrum. 102 3 383 3580 368 4344
Marcellus took Syracuse. 142 2 542 3739 209 4503 Aristides. 72 1 261 3458 490
4222 Marcus Cato. 144 2 550 3747 201 4511 Philopoemen. 147 3 563 3760 1884 524
T. Quintius Flaminius Consul. 145 3 555 3752 196 4516

The LIVES contained in the Second Volume.
ALcibiades, page 1 Coriolanus translated by Dr. Blomer, p. 81 Paulus Emilius,
Mr. Arrowsmith, 171 Timoleon, Dr. Blomer, 241 Pelopidas, Mr. Creech, 317
Marcellus, Dr. Charlton, 369 Aristides, Mr. Cooper, 433 Marcus Cato, Mr.
Lydcot, 485 Philopoemen, Dr. Short, 549 Titus Flaminius, Mr. Whitaker, 583
ALCIBIADES.
M. Burgers sculp.

See with what joy the Exile is restored,
So Hated once, and now so much adored;
His fortune various, and noe less his mind,
Where every vice with every virtue joined.
Nothing seemed hard to his courage, will, or pride,
Success still following as he changed his side.

THE LIFE OF ALCIBIADES. Translated from the Greek. Volume II.
ALcibiades, as it is supposed, was anciently His Family and Education.
descended from Eurysaces, the Son of Ajax, by his Fathers side, and by his
Mothers side from Alcmeon, for Dinonache, his Mother, was the Daughter of
Me^acles. His Father Clinias, having fitted out a Gally at his own expense,
gained great Honor in a Sea Fight near Artimisium, and was afterward slain in
the Battle of Coronea, fighting against the Baeotians. Pericles and Ariphron,
the Sons of Xantippus, being nearly related to Alcibiades, were his Guardians.
It Is said, and not untruely, that the Kindness and Friendship which Socrates
showed to him, did very much contribute to his Fame. Hence it is, that though we
have not an account from any Writer, who was the Mother of Nicias or
Demosthenes, of Lamachus or Phormio, of Thrasybulus or Theramenes,
notwithstanding they were all of them Illustrious Persons, and of the same Age;
yet we know even the Nurse of Alcibiades, that her Country was Lacedaemon, and
her Name, Amyclas; and that Zopyrus was his Schoolmaster; the one being
recorded by Antisthenes, and the other by Plato.

It is not perhaps material to say any thing His Beauty.
of the Beauty of Alcibiades, only that it lasted with him in all the Ages of
his Life, in his Infancy, in his Youth, and in his Manhood; and thereby rendered
him lovely and agreeable to every one. For it is not universal what Euripides
says, that, Of all Fair things the Autumn is most Fair. But this happened to
Alcibiades, amongst few others, by reason of his happy Composition, and the
natural Vigor of his Body. It is said, that his Lisping, when he spoke, He
lisped.
became him well, and gave a Grace to his Pronunciation. Aristophanes takes
notice, that he lisped in those Verses wherein he jeers Theorus, because
Alcibiades, speaking of him, instead of (...) pronounced (...), and so called
him Flatterer unawares to himself. From whence the Poet takes occasion to
observe, How very luckily he lisp'd the Truth. Archippus also makes mention of
it, thus reflecting upon the Son of Alcibiades: His Father he will imitate in
all;
Like one dissolved in Ease and Luxury,
His long loose Robe he seems to draw with pain,
Carelessly leans his Head, and in his Talk Affects to lisp.


His Manners were very different, nor is it strange that they varied according
to the many and wonderful Vicissitudes of his Fortune.

He was naturally subject to great Passions, but the most prevailing of all was
his Ambition, and Desire to be esteemed the first: He was naturally Ambitious.
which appeared by several memorable Things spoken by him whilst he was a
Child. Once being hard pressed in Wrestling, and fearing to be thrown, he got
the Hand of the Person who strove with him to his Mouth, and bit it with all
his sorce; his Adversary loosed his hold presently, and said, Thou bitest,
Alcibiades, like a Woman: No, replied he, I bite like a Lion. Another time as
he played at Cockal in the Street, being then but a Boy, a loaded Cart came
that way, when it was his Turn to throw; at first he required the Driver to
stay, because he was to cast in the way over which the Cart was to pass; but
the rude Fellow did not hearken to him, and driving on still, when the rest of
the Boys divided and gave way, Alcibiades threw himself on his Face before the
Cart, and stretching himself out, bid the Carter drive on, if he would: This so
startled the Man, that he put back his Horses, while all that saw it were
terrified, and crying out, ran to assist Alcibiades. When he began to study, he
obeyed all his other Masters with great Respect, but refused to learn upon the
Flute, as a sordid thing, and not becoming He refuses to learn to play on the
Flute.
a Gentle man; for he would say, To play on the Lute or the Harp, does not
disorder the Posture of a man's Body, or the Air of his Face; but one is hardly
to be known by his most intimate Friends, when he play on the Flute. Besides he
who plays on the Harp, may discourse or sing at the sam^ time; but the use of
the Flute does so contract the Mouth, that the Voice is intercepted, and all
Speech taken away. Therefore said he, let the Theban Youths pipe, because they
know not how to discourse; but we Athenians, (as our Ancestors have told us,)
have Minerva for our Patroness, and Apollo for our Protector, one of which
threw away the Flute, and the other stripped off his Skin who played upon it.
Thus between Raillery and good Earnest, Alcibiades not only kept himself but
others from learning upon that Instrument; for it presently became the Talk of
the young Gentlemen, that Alcibiades with good Reason despised the Art of
playing on the Flute, and ridiculed those who studied it. Whereupon it quickly
ceased to be reckoned amongst the Liberal Arts, and became universally exploded.

It is reported in the Invective which Antiphon wrote against Alcibiades, That
once when he was a Boy, he fled to the House of Democrates, one of his Lovers,
and that Ariphron had determined to cause Proclamation to be made for him, had
not Pericles diverted him from it, by saying, That if he were dead, the
Proclaiming of him could only cause it to be discovered one day sooner, and if
he were safe, it would be a Reproach to him whilst he lived. Antiphon does also
say, That in the public Place of Exercises in Syburtius, he slew one of his
own Servants with the blow of a Staff. But it may be unreasonable to give
Credit to all that is objected by an Enemy, who makes profession of his Design
to defame him.

It was manifest, that the many Persons of The ground of Socrates 's love to
Alcibiades.
Quality who were continually waiting upon him, and making their Court to him,
were surpised and captivated by his extraordinary Beauty only. But the
Affection which Socrates expressed for Alcibiades, was a great Evidence of his
Virtue and good Disposition, which Socrates perceived to appear and shine
through the Beauty of his Person; and fearing lest his Wealth and Quality, and
the great Number both of Strangers and Athenians, who flattered and caressed
him, might at last corrupt him, he therefore resolved to interpose, and take
care to preserve so hopeful a Plant from perishing in the Flower, and before
its Fruit came to perfection. For never did Fortune surround and enclose a Man
with so many of those things which we vulgarly call Goods, whereby to keep him
from being touched or approached, by the free and clear Reasonings of
Philosophy, as she did Alcibiades: who from the beginning was softened by the
Flatteries of those who conversed with him, and hindered from harkening to such
as would advise or instruct him. Yet such was the happiness of his Genius, that
he discerned Socrates from the rest, and admitted him, whilst he drove His
Reverente for Socrates.
away the Wealthy and the Noble who made Court to him. And in a little time
they grew into a Familiarity; Alcibiades observing that his Discourses aimed
not at any effeminate Pleasures of Love, nor sought any thing wanton or
dishonest, but laid open to him the Imperfections of his Mind, and repressed
his vain and foolish Arrogance. Then like the Craven Cock he hung his Wings.
Esteeming these Endeavors of Socrates, as Means which the Gods made use of,
for the Instruction and Preservation of Youth. So that he began to think meanly
of himself, and to admire Socrates; to be pleased with his Kindness, and to
stand in awe of his Virtue: and unawares to himself there was formed in his
Mind an Idea of Love, or rather of that mutual Affection whereof Plato speaks.
Insomuch that all men wondered at Alcibiades, when they saw Socrates and him eat
together, do their Exercises together, and lodge in the same Tent, whilst he
was reserved and rough to all others who made their Addresses to him, and
carried himself with great Insolence to some His Insolence to others.
of them. As in particular to Anytus the Son of Anthemion, one who was very
fond of him, and invited him to an Entertainment which he had prepared for some
Strangers: Alcibiades refused the Invitation; but having drank to excess at his
own House with some of his Companions, he went thither to play some Frolic;
and as he stood at the Door of the Room where the Guests were treated, and
perceived the Tables to be covered with Vessels of Gold and Silver, he
commanded his Servants to take away the one half of them, and carry them to his
own House; and then disdaining so much as to enter into the Room himself, as
soon as he had done this, he went away. The Company was extremely offended at
the Action, and said He behaved himself rudely and insolently toward Anytus:
But Anytus made Answer, That he had used him kindly and with great Humanity, in
that he left him part, when he might have taken all. He behaved himself after
the same sort to all others who courted him, except only one Stranger, who (as
it is reported) having but a small Estate, sold it all for about a 100 Staters,
which he presented to Alcibiades, and besought him to accept: Alcibiades
smiling and well pleased at the thing, invited him to Supper, and after a very
kind Entertainment, gave him his Gold again, withal requiring him, not to fail
to be present the next day, when the public Revenue was offered to Farm, and
to out-bid all others. The Man would have excused himself, because the Farm was
so great, and would be let for many Talents; but Alcibiades, who had at that
time a private Picque against the old Farmers, threatened to have him beaten if
he refused. The next morning the Stranger coming to the Marketplace, offered a
Talent more than the old Rent: The Farmers were enraged at him, and consulting
together, called upon him to name such as would be Sureties for him, concluding
that he could find none. The poor Man being startled at the Proposal, began to
retire; but Alcibiades, standing at a distance, cried out to the Magistrates,
Set my Name down, he is a Friend of mine, and I will undertake for him. When
the old Farmers heard this, they perceived that all their Contrivance was
defeated; for their way was, with the Profits of the present year, to pay the
Rent of the year preceding; So that not seeing any other way to extricate
themselves out of the Difficulty, they began to entreat the Stranger, and
offered him a Sum of Money. Alcibiades would not suffer him to accept of less
than a Talent; but when that was paid down, he commanded him to relinquish the
Bargain, having by this Device relieved his necessity.

Tho Socrates had many and powerful Alcibiades addicted to pleasure.
Rivals, yet he still prevailed most with Alcibiades, by reason of the
excellency of his natural Parts. His Discourses mastered him to that degree, as
not only to draw Tears from his Eyes, but to change his very Soul. Yet
sometimes he would abandon himself to Flatterers, when they proposed to him
varieties of Pleasure, and would desert Socrates* who then would pursue him, as
if he had been a fugitive Slave. The truth is, Alcibiades despised all others,
and did reverence and stand in awe of him alone. And therefore it was that
Cleanthes said, He had given his Ears to Socrates, but to his Rivals, other
Parts of his Body, with which Socrates would not meddle. For Alcibiades was
certainly very much addicted to Pleasures, and that which Thucidides says,
concerning his Excesses in his course of Living, gives occasion to believe so.
But those who endeavored to corrupt Alcibiades, took advantage chiefly of his
Vanity and Ambition, and thrust him on to undertake unseasonably great things,
persuading him, that as soon as he began to concern himself in public Affairs,
he would not only obscure the rest of the Generals and Statesmen, but exceed
the Authority and the Reputation which Pericles himself had gained in Greece.
But in the same manner as Iron which is softened by the Fire, grows hard with
the Cold, and all its Parts are closed again; so as often as Socrates observed.
Alcibiades to be misled by Luxury or Pride, he reduced and corrected him by his
Discourses, and made him humble and modest, by showing him in how many things
he was deficient, and how very far from perfection in Virtue.

When he was past his Childhood* he went once to a Grammar School, and asked
the Master for one of Homer's Books; and he making Answer, that he had nothing
of Homers, Alcibiades gave him a Blow with his Fist, and went away. Another
Schoolmaster telling him, that he had Homer corrected by himself; How, said
Alcibiades, and do you employ your time in teaching Children to read? You who
are able to amend. Homer, may well undertake to instruct Men. Being once
desirous to speak with Pericles, he went to his House, and was told there, that
he was not at leisure, but busied in considering how to give up his Accounts to
the Athenians; Alcibiades as he went away, said, It were better for him to
consider how he might avoid giving up any Accounts at all.

Whilst he was very young, he was a Soldier His first Appearng in Arms.
in the Expedition against Potidaea, where Socrates lodged in the same Tent
with him, and seconded him in all Encounters. Once there happened a sharp
skirmish, wherein they both behaved themselves with much Bravery; but
Alcibiades receiving a Wound there, Socrates threw himself before him to defend
him, and most manifestly saved him and his Arms from the Enemy, and therefore
in all Justice might have challenged the Prize of Valor. But the Generals
appearing earnest to adjudge, the Honor to Alcibiades, because of his Quality,
Socrates, who desired to increase his Thirst after Glory, was the first who
gave Evidence for him, and pressed them to Crown him, and to decree to him the
complete Suit of Armor. Afterward in the Battle of Delium, when the Athenians
were routed, and Socrates with a few others was retreating on Foot, Alcibiades
who was on Horseback observing it, would not pass on, but stayed to shelter
him from the danger, and brought him safe off, though the Enemy pressed hard upon
them, and cut off many of the Party. But this happened some time after.

He gave a Box on the Ear to Hipponicus, the Father of Callias, whose Birth and
Wealth made him a Person of great Power and Esteem. And this he did unprovoked
by any Passion or Quarrel between them, but only because in a Frolic he had
agreed with his Companions to do it. All men were justly offended at this
Insolence, when it was known through the City: But early the next Morning
Alcibiades went to his House, and knocked at the Door, and being admitted to
him, stripped off his Garment, and presenting his naked Body, desired him to
beat and chastize him as he pleased. Upon this Hipponicus forgot all his
Resentment, and not only pardoned him, but soon after gave him his Daughter
Hipparete in Marriage. His Marriage.
Some say, that it was not Hipponicus, but his Son Callias, who gave Hipparete
to Alcibiades, together with a Portion of 10 Talents, and that after, when she
had a Child, Alcibiades forced him to give 10 Talents more, upon pretense that
such was the Agreement if she brought him any Children. And yet after, Callias
for fear of being assassinated by him, in a full Assembly of the People did
declare, that if he should happen to die without Children, Alcibiades should
inherit his House and all his Goods. Hipparete was a virtuous Lady, and fond of
her Husband; but at last growing impatient of the injuries done to her
Marriage Bed, by his continual entertaining of Curtezans, as well Strangers as
Athenians, she departed from him, and retired to her Brother's House. His Wife
leaves him.
Alcibiades seemed not at all concerned at it, and lived on still in the same
Luxury; but the Law requiring that she should deliver to the Archon in Person,
and not by Proxy, the Instrument whereby she sought a Divorce; when in
obedience to the Law, she presented her self before him to perform this,
Alcibiades came in, and took her away by force, He takes her again by force.
and carried her home through the Marketplace, no one all this while daring to
oppose him, nor to take her from him. And she continued with him till her
death, which happened not long after, when Alcibiades made his Voyage to
Ephesus. Nor was this Violence to be thought so very enormous or unmanly. For
the Law, in making her who desires to be divorced, appear in pubblick, seems to
design to give her Husband an opportunity of discoursing with her, and of
endeavoring to retain her. Alcibiades had a Dog which cost him 70 Mina, and
was a very great one, and very handsome; his Tail, which was his principal
Ornament, he caused to be cut off; and his Acquaintance childing him for it,
and telling him, that all Athens was sorry for the Dog, and cried out upon him
for this Action; he laughed, and said, It is then come to pass as I desired,
for I would have the Athenians entertain themselves with the Discourse of this,
lest they should be talking something worse of me.

It is said, that the first time he came into The occasion of his first
Appearance in Public.
the Assembly, was upon occasion of a Largess of Money which he made to the
People. This was not done by Design, but as he passed along he heard a Shout,
and enquiring the Cause, and having learned that there was a Donative made to
the People, he went in amongst them, and gave Money also. The Multitude
thereupon applauding him, and shouting, he was sotransported at it, that he
forgot a Quail which he had under his Robe and the Bird being frighted with
noise, fled from him: Thereupon the People made louder Acclamations than
before, and many of them rose up to pursue the Bird; but one Antiochus, a
Pilot, caught it, and restored it to him, for which he was ever after very dear
to Alcibiades.

He had great Advantages to introduce Alcibiades eloquent.
himself into the Management of Affairs: His noble Birth, his Riches, the
personal Courage he had shown in diverse Battles, and the multitude of his
Friends and Dependents. But above all the rest, he chose to make himself
Considerable to the People by his Eloquence: That he was a Master in the Art of
Speaking the Comic Poets bear him witness; and Demosthenes, the most eloquent
of men, in his Oration against Midias, does allow, that Alcibiades, among other
Perfections, was a most exact Orator. And if we give Credit to Theophrastus,
who of all Philosophers was the most curious Enquirer, and the most faithful
Relator, he says, that Alcibiades was very happy at inventing Things proper to
be said upon the Occasion. Nor did he consider the Things only which ought to
be said, but also what Words and what Expressions were to be used; and when
those did not readily occur, he would often pause in the middle of his
Discourse for want of apt words, and would be silent and stop till he could
recollect himself, and had considered what to say.

His Expenses in Horses kept for the public His Victories at the Olympic
Games.
Games, and in the number of his Chariots, were very magnificent; for never any
one besides himself, either private Person or King, sent seven Chariots to the
Olympic Games. He carried away at once the first, the second, and the fourth
Prize, as Thucydides says, or the third, as Euripides relates it; wherein he
surpassed all that ever pretended in that kind. Euripides celebrates his
success in this manner. Thee lovely Son of Clinias will I sing,
Thy Triumphs down to future Ages bring.
Thou Pride of Greece! which never saw till now,
So many Crowns adorn one conquering Brow.
With how much ease the threefold Prize he gains,
And smiles to see from far his Rivals Pains.
Their Chariots lagging on the distant Plains,
His Temples thrice the willing Judges crown,
And general Shouts do the just sentence Own.
The Emulation which those who contended with him, expressed in the Presents
which they made to him, rendered his Success the more illustrious. The Ephesians
erected a Tent for him adorned magnificently: The City of Chios furnished him
with Provender for his Horses, and with great numbers of Beasts for Sacrifice.
And the Lesbians sent him Wine and other Provisions, for the many great
Entertainments which he made. Yet in the midst of all this, he escaped not
without Censure, occasioned either by the Malice of his Enemies, or by his own
ill Carriage. For it is said, that one Diomedes, an Athenian, a good man, and a
Friend to Alcibiades, passionately desiring to obtain the Victory at the
Olympic Games, and having heard much of a Chariot which belogned to the State
^t Argos, where he had observed that Alcibiades had great Power and many
Friends, ^e prevailed with him to undertake to buy ^he Chariot. Alcibiades did
indeed buy it, ^ut then claimed it for his own, leaving ^iomedes to rage at
him, and to call upon he Gods and Men to bear witness of the ^njustice. There
was a Suit at Law comnenc'd upon this Occasion, and there is ^et extant an
Oration concerning a Cha^ot, written by Iscrates in Defense of Al^^biades, then
a Youth. But there the ^laintiff in the Action is named Tisias, and ^ot
Diomedes.

As soon as he began to intermeddle in Niclas and Pheax his Rivals in the
Pecptes Favor.
(...) Government, which was when he was very young, he quickly lessened the
Credit of all who pretended to lead the People, except Pheax the Son of
Erasistratus, and Nicias the Son of Niceratus, who alone durst contend with
him. Nicias was arrived at the Age which is proper for War, and was esteemed an
excellent General; but Pheax was but beginning to grow in Reputation, (as
Alcibiades was.) He was descended of noble Ancestors, but was inferior to
Alcibiades, as in many other things, so principally in Eloquence. He could
speak well, and had the Art of Persuading in private Conversation, but could
not maintain a Debate before the People; that being true which Eupolis said of
him, That he could talk well, but was not good at making Speeches. There is
extant an Oration written against Pheax and Alcibiades, wherein, amongst other
things, it is said, that Alcibiades made daily use at his Table of many gold
and silver Vessels, which belonged to the Commonwealth, as if they had been
his own.

There was one Hyperbolus, a Native of The Sentence of Ostracism pronounce
against Hyperbolus.
Perithoide, (of whom Thucydides makes mention, as of a very ill man) who
furnished Matter to all the Writers of Comedy in that Age for their Satyrs. But
he was unconcerned at the worst things they could say, and being careless of
Glory, he was also insensible of Shame. There are some who call this Boldness
and Courage, whereas it is indeed Impudence and Madness. He was liked by no
body, yet the People made frequent use of him, when they had a mind to disgrace
or calumniate any Persons in Authority. At this time the People by his
Persuasions were ready to proceed to pronounce the Sentence of ten years
Banishment, which they called Ostracism. This was a way they made use of to
lessen and drive out of the City such Citizens, as exceeded the rest in Credit
and Power, therein consulting their envy rather than their fear. And when at
this time there was no doubt but that the Ostracism would fall upon one of
those three, Alcibiades contrived to unite their several Factions, and
communicating his Project with Nicias, he turned the Sentence upon Hyperbolus
himself. Others say, that it was not with Nicias but Pheax that he consulted,
and that by the help of his Party he procured the Banishment of Hypenbolus
himself, when he suspected nothing less. For never any mean or obscure person
fell under that Punishment before that time. Which gave occasion to Plato the
Comic Poet, speaking of this Hyperbolus, to say that he was, Worthy to suffer
what he did and more,
But not in such an honorable way:
The abject Wretch the Sentence did disgrace.
But we have in another place given a fuller account of all that History has
delivered down to us of this Matter.

Alcibiades was not less disturbed at the Alcibiades breaks the Nician Peace.
Reputation which Nicias had gained amongst the Enemies of Athens, than at the
Honors which the Athenians themselves paid to him. For though Alcibiades was the
Person who did publicly receive the Lacedaemonians when they came to Athens,
and took particular Care of such of them as were made Prisoners at the Fort of
Pylos, yet after they had obtained the Peace and Restitution of the Captives by
the Procurement of Nicias, they began to respect him above all others. And it
was commonly said in Greece, that the War was begun by Pericles, and that
Nicias made an end of it, and therefore as being his Work, this Peace was by
most men called the Nician Peace. Alcibades was extremely troubled at this, and
being full of Envy, set himself to break the League. First therefore observing
that the Argives, as well out of fear as hatred to the Lacedaemonians, sought
for protection against them, he gave them a secret Assurance of a League
offensive and defensive with Athens And transacting as well in Person as by
Letters, with those who had most Authority amongst the People, he encouraged
them neither to fear the Lacedaemonians, nor submit to them, but to betake
themselves to the Athenians, who, if they would expect but a little while,
would repent of the Peace, and soon put an end to it. And afterward when the
Lacedaemonians had made a League with the Baeotians, and had not delivered up
Panactum entire, as they ought to have done by the Treaty? but defaced and
slighted it, which gave great offense to the People of Athens, Alcibiades laid
hold of that opportunity to exasperate them more highly. He exclaimed fiercely
against Nicias, and accused him of many things, which seemed probable enough:
As that when he was General, he would not seize upon those men who were
deserted by the Enemies Army, and left in the Isle of Sphacteria; and that when
they were afterward made Prisoners by others, he procured them to be released,
and sent back to the Lacedaemonians, only to get favor with them; that he
would not make use of his Credit with them, to prevent their entering into this
Confederacy with the Baeotians. and Corinthians; and yet on the other side he
sought to hinder those Grecians who were inclined to make an Alliance and
Friendship with Athens, if the Lacedaemonians were not pleased with it.

It happened at the very time when Nicias was by these Arts brought into
disgrace with the People; that Ambassadors arrived from Lacedaemon, who at
their first coming said what seemed very satisfactory, declaring that they had
full power to concert all Matters in difference upon equal terms. The Council
received their Propositions, and the People was to assemble on the morrow to
give them Audience. Alcibiades grew very apprehensive of this, and ordered
Matters so, that he had a secret Conference with the Ambassadors. When they
were met, he said; What is it you intend, you Men of Sparta? Can you be
ignorant, that the Council always carry themselves with Moderation and Respect
toward Ambassadors, but that the People are haughty, and affect great things?
So that if you let them know what full Powers your Commission gives you, they
will urge and press you to yield to unreasonable Conditions. Quit therefore
this indiscreet Method, if you expect to obtain equal Terms from the Athenians,
and would not have things extorted from you contrary to your Inclination; and
begin to treat with the People upon some reasonable Articles, not owning at the
first that you are Plenipotentiaries, and I will be ready to assist you, as
being very zealous to serve the Lacedaemonians. When he had said thus, he gave
them his Oath for the performance of what he promised, and by this way drew
them from Nicias to rely entirely upon himself, and to admire him as a Person
extraordinary for Wisdom and Dexterity in Affairs. The next day when the People
were assembled, and the Ambassadors introduced, Alcibiades with great Civility
demanded of them, with what Powers they were come? they made answer, That they
were not come as Plenipotentiaries.

Instantly upon that Alcibiades with a loud Voice, (as though he had received,
and not done the wrong) began to call them faithless and inconstant, and to
show that such men could not possibly come with a purpose to say or do any
thing that was sincere. The Council was highly incensed, the People were in a
rage, and Nicias, who knew nothing of the Deceit and the Imposture, was in the
greatest Confusion imaginable, being equally surpised and ashamed at such a
Change in the Men. So that without more ado, the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors were
utterly rejected, and Alcibiades was declared General, who presently drew the
Argives, the Elians, and those of Mantinoea, into a Confederacy with the
Athenians.

No man commended the Method by which Alcibiades effected all this, yet it was
a great reach in the Politics, thus to divide and shake almost all
Peloponnesus, and to bring together so many men in Arms against the
Lacedaemonians in one day before Mantinoea; thereby removing the War and the
Danger so far from the Frontier of the Athenians, that even success would
profit the Enemy but little should they be Conquerors, whereas if they were
defeated, Sparta it self was hardly safe.

After this Battle at Mantineoea, the Officers of the Army of the Argives
attempted Alcibiades restores the Democracy et Argos.
to destroy the Government of the People in Argos, and make themselves Masters
of the City; and by the Assistance of the Lacedaemonians they abolished the
Democracy. But the People took Arms again, and having gained some Advantage,
Alcibiades came in to their Aid, and made their Victory complete. Then he
persuaded them to build long Walls, and by that means to join their City to the
Sea, that so at all times they might more securely receive Succor from the
Athenians. To this purpose he procured them many Masons and Hewers of Stone
from Athens, and in all things made show of the greatest Zeal for their
Service, and thereby gained no less Honor and Power to himself, than to the
Commonwealth of Athens. He also persuaded the Patroeans to join their City to
the Sea, by lengthening their Walls; and when they were warned, That the
Athenians would swallow them up at last; Alcibiades made Answer, that possibly
it might be so, but it would be by little and little, and beginning at the
Feet, whereas the Lacedoemonians will begin at the Head, and devour you all at
once. He did also advise the Athenians to make themselves strong at Land, and
often put the young Men in mind of the Oath which they had made at Agraulos,
and excited them to the effectual performance of it; for there they were wont
to swear, that they would repute Wheat and Barley, and Vines and Olives, to be
the Limits of Attico; by which they were taught to claim a Title to all Lands
that were manured and fruitful.

But with all these excellent Things which he said and did, with all this
Wisdom His Luxury.
and Eloquence, he intermingled exorbitant Luxury in his Eating and Drinking,
and in his Loves, joined with great Insolence, and Effeminacy. He wore a long
purple Robe, which dragged after him as he went through the Marketplace. He
caused the Planks of his Galley to be cut away, that so he might lie the
softer, his Bed not being placed on the Boards, but hanging upon Girths. And
his Shield, which was richly gilded, had not the usual Ensigns of the
Athenians, but a Cupid holding a Thunderbolt in his Hand, was painted upon it;
which when those of the best Quality in the City saw, they did not only detest
it, and resent it highly, but were afraid of his dissolute Manners, and
insolent Contempt of Laws, as things monstrous in themselves, and tending to a
Change of the Government. Aristophanes has well expressed in what manner the
People stood affected toward him: They hate him, yet they love to see him too,
Still Popular amidst his wild Debauches.
And in another place he does more plainly discover the Jealousy which was
conceived of him: It Is folly to breed up an infant Lion,
But to provoke him after, downright Madness.
The truth is, his Liberalities, his public Shows, and other Munificence to
the People, (which were such as nothing could exceed,) the Glory of his
Ancestors, the Force of his Eloquence, the Loveliness of his Person, his
Strength of Body, joined with his great Courage, and extraordinary Knowledge in
Military Affairs, prevailed upon the Athenians to endure patiently his
Excesses, to indulge many things to him, and to give the softest Names to his
Faults, attributing them only to his Youth and good Nature. He kept Agatharcus
the Painter a Prisoner, till he had painted his whole House, but then dismis'd
him with a Reward. He publicly struck Taureas, who exhibited certain Shows in
opposition to him, and contended with him for the Prize. He took to himself one
of the captive Melian Women, and had a Son by her, whom he took care to
educate. This the Athenians styled great Humanity: and yet he was the principal
Cause of the Slaughter of all the Inhabitants of the Isle of Melos, who were of
Age to bear Arms, by speaking in favor of that cruel Decree. When Aristophon
the Painter had drawn Nemea the Curtezan, sitting and holding Alcibiades in her
Arms, the Multitude seemed pleased with the Piece, and thronged to see it, but
the graver sort were highly offended, and looked on these things as great
Enormities, and savouring of a Tyranny. So that it was not said amiss by
Archestratus, that Greece could not bear two Alcibiades. Once when Alcibiades
Timon's Opinion of him.
succeeded well in an Oration which he made, and the whole Assembly attended
upon him to do him Honor, Timon, surnamed the Man-hater, would not pass
slightly by him, nor avoid him as he did others, but purposely met him, and
taking him by the Hand, said, Go on boldly, my Son, may thou increase in
Credit with the People, for thou will one day bring them Calamities enough.
Some that were present laughed at the Saying, and some reproached Timon; but
there were others upon whom it made a deep Impression: So various was the
Judgment which was made of him, by reason of the Inequality of his Manners.

The Athenians in the Lifetime of Pericles Alcibiades pr^^^tes the Sicilian
Expedition
had cast a longing Eye upon Sicily, but did not attempt any thing in relation
to it, till after his Death. For then, under pretense of aiding their
Confederates, they sent Succors upon all Occasions to those who were oppressed
by the Syracusans, and thereby made way for the sending over of a greater
Force. But Alcibiades was the Person who inflamed this Desire of theirs to the
height, and prevailed with them no longer to proceed secretly in their Design,
and by little and little, but to set out a great Fleet, and undertake at once
to make themselves Masters of the Island. To this purpose he possessed the
People with great Hopes, whilst he himself had much greater; and the Conquest
of Sicily, which was the utmost Bound of their Ambition, was but the beginning
of those things which he thought of. Nicias endeavored to divert the People
from this Expedition, by representing to them, that the taking of Syracuse
would be a work of great Difficulty. But Alcibiades dreamt of nothing less than
the Conquest of Carthage and Lybia, and by the Accession of these, fancied
himself already Master of Italy and of Peloponnesus; so that he seemed to look
upon Sicily as little more than a Magazine for the War. The young Men were soon
raised with these Hopes, and heark'ned gladly to those of riper years, telling
them strange things of this Expedition; so that you might see great Numbers
sitting in Rings in the Places of Exercise, some describing the Figure of the
Island, and others the Situation of Lybia and Carthage. But it is said, that
Socrates the Philosopher, and Meton the Astrologer, never hoped for any good to
the Common wealth from this War: The one, (as it is probable,) presaging what
would ensue, by the Assistance of his Demon, who conversed with him
familiarly; and the other, either upon a rational Consideration of the Project,
or by making use of the Art of Divination, was become fearful of the success:
and therefore, dissembling Madness, he caught up a burning Torch, and seemed as
if he would have set his own House on fire: Others report, that he did not take
upon him to act the Mad man, but that secretly in the night he set his House on
fire, and the next morning besought the People, that for his Comfort after such
a Calamity, they would spare his Son from the Expedition. By which Artifice he
deceived his fellow-Citizens, and obtained of them what he desired.

Together with Alcibiades, Nicias, much Is made General, together with Nicias
and Lamachus.
against his Will, was appointed General for he endeavored to avoid the
Command as disliking his Colleague. But the Athenians thought the War would
proceed more prosperously, if they did not send Alcibiades free from all
Restraint, but tempered hi^* Heat with the Caution of Nicias. Thi^ they chose
the rather to do, because Lamachus the third General, though he was in hi^
declining years, yet in several Battles had appeared no less hot and rash than
Alcibiades himself. When they began to deliberate of the number of Forces, and
of the manner of making the necessary Provisions Nicias made another Attempt to
oppose the Design, and to prevent the War; but Alcibiades contradicted him, and
carried his Point with the People. And one Demostrates, an Orator, proposing to
them, that they ought to give the Generals absolute Power, both as to the
greatness of the Preparations, and the management of the War, it was presently
decreed so. But just when all things were fitted for the Voyage, many unlucky
Omens appeared. At that very time the Feast of Adonis happened, in which the
Women were used to expose in all Parts of the City, Images resembling dead men
carried out to their Burial, and to represent Funeral Solemnities by their
Lamentations and mournful Songs. The maiming also of the Images of Mercury,
most of which in one night had their Faces broken, did terrify many persons
who were wont to despise things of that nature. It was given out, that this was
done by the Corinthians, for the sake of the Syracusans, who were a Colony of
theirs, in hopes that the Athenians observing such Prodigies, might be induced
to repent of the War. Yet this Report gained not any Credit with the People,
nor the Opinion of those, who would not believe that there was any thing
ominous in the Matter, but that it was only an extravagant Action, committed by
some wild young men coming from a Debauch; but they were both enraged and
terrified at the thing, looking upon it to proceed from a Conspiracy of
persons, who designed some great Commotions in the State. And therefore as well
the Council, as the Assembly of the People, which upon this Occasion was held
frequently in a few days space, examined diligently every thing that might
administer ground for Suspicion. During this Examination, Androcles, one of the
Demogogues, produced certain Slaves and Strangers before them, who accused
Alcibiades and some of his Friends for defacing Is suspected of breaking the
Mercuries, and accused for profaning the Mysteries.
other Images in the same manner, and for having profanely acted the sacred
Mysteries at a drunken Meeting. Wherein one Theodorus represented the Herald,
Polytion the Torch-bearer, and Alcibiades the Chief Priest, and that the rest
of his Companions were present, as persons initiated in the holy Mysteries, and
acting the Part of Priests. These were the Matters contained in the Accusation,
which Thessalus the Son of Cimon, exhibited against Alcibiades, for his impious
Mockery of the Goddesses, Ceres and Proserpina. The People were highly
exasperated and enraged against Alcibiades upon this Accusation, which being
aggravated by Androcles, the most malicious of all his Enemies, at first
disordered him exceedingly. But when he perceived that all the Seamen designed
for Sicily, were fond of him, and that at the same time the Forces of the
Argives and the Mantineans, which consisted of a 1000 men at Arms, spared not
to say openly, that they had undertaken this tedious maritime Expedition for
the sake of Alcibiades, and that if he was ill used, they would all presently
be gone, he recovered his Courage, and became eager to make use of the present
opportunity for justifying himself. At this his Enemies were again discouraged,
as fearing lest the People should be more gentle toward him in their Sentence,
by reason of the present Occasion which they had for his Service. Therefore to
obviate this Mischief, they contrived that some other Orators, who did not
appear to be Enemies to Alcibiades, but really hated him no less than those who
avowed themselves to be so, should stand up in the Assembly, and say, that it
was a very absurd thing, that one who was created General of such an Army with
absolute Power, after his Troops were completed, and the Confederates were
come, should lose the present Opportunity, whilst the People were choosing his
Judges by Lots, and appointing times for the hearing of the Cause. And that
therefore he ought to set Sail presently, (and may good Fortune attend him,)
but when the War should be at an end, he might then in Person make his Defense
according to the Laws.

But Alcibiades soon perceived the Malice of this Delay, and appearing in the
Assembly, represented to them, that it was a very grievous thing to him, to be
sent forth with the Command of so great an Army, when he lay under such
Accusations and Calumnies, that he deserved to die, if he could not clear
himself of the Crimes objected to him. But when he had purged himself, and
appeared to be innocent, he should then cheerfully apply himself to the War, as
standing no longer in fear of false Accusers. But he could not prevail with the
People, Departs for Sicily.
who commanded him to sail immediately. So he departed together with the other
Generals, having with them near 140 Galleys, 5100 men at Arms, and about 1300
Archers, Slingers, and light armed men, and all the other Provisions were
answerable, and every way complete.

Arriving on the Coast of Italy, he landed at Rhegium, and there proposed his
Advice in what manner they should manage the War. Wherein he was opposed by
Nicias, but Lamachus being of his opinion, they sailed for Sicily forthwith,
and took Catana. That was all which was done while he was there, for he I^
retall'd to answer the accusaion.
was soon after recalled by the Athenians, to abide his Trial. At first, (as we
before said,) there were only some slight suspicions offered against
Alcibiades, and accusations by certain slaves and strangers. But afterward in
his absence his Enemies attacked him more fiercely, and confounded together the
breaking the Images with the pro(...)anation of the holy Mysteries, as though
Span^ been committed in pursuance of the ^ame Conspiracy for changing the
Government. Thereupon the People imprisoned all that were accused, without
distinction, and without hearing them, and repented themselves exceedingly,
that having such pregnant Evidence, they had not immediately brought Alcibiades
to his Trial, and given Judgment against him. And if any of his Friends or
Acquaintance fell into the Peoples hands, whilst they were in this Fury, they
were sure to be used very severely. Thucydides has omitted to name his
Accusers, but others mention Dioclides and Teucer. Amongst whom is Phrynichus
the Comic Poet, who introduces one speaking thus: Hear Hermes thy deceived
Athenians call!
Preserve thy Image from a second fall.
Lest Dioclydes once again accuse,
And sacred Justice by false Oaths abuse.


To which he makes Mercury return this Answer. Safe from Affronts my Statues I
will guard,
False Teucer shall not meet with new Reward,
Nor shall his impious Lies obtain Regard.
The truth is, his Accusers alleged nothing that was certain or solid against
him. One of them being asked, How he knew the men who defaced the Images; when
he said, He saw them by the light of the Moon, was grossly mistaken, for it was
just New Moon when the Fact was committed. This made all men of Understanding
cry out upon the thing as a Contrivance, but the People were as eager as ever
to receive further Accusations, nor was their first Heat at all abated, but
they instantly seized and imprisoned every one that was accused. Amongst those
who were detained in Prison in order to their Trials, there was Andocides the
Orator, whom the Historian Hellanicus reports to be descended from Ulysses. He
was always looked upon to hate the Popular Government, and to affect an
Oligarchy. The chiefest ground of causing him to be suspected for defacing the
Images, was because the great Mercury which was placed near his House, and was
an ancient Monument of the Tribe of the Aegeides, was almost the only Statue,
of all the remarkable ones, which remained entire. For this Cause it is now
called the Mercury of Andocides, all men giving it that Name, though the
Inscription is an Evidence that it belongs to another Tribe. It happened that
Andocides, above all others who were Prisoners upon the same account, did
contract a particular Acquaintance and Friendship with one Timaeus, a Person
not equal to Andocides in Quality, but very extraordinary both for Parts and
Boldness. He persuaded Andocides Andocides accuses himself and other of
breaking the Mercuries.
to accuse himself and some few others, of this Crime, urging to him, that upon
his Confession he would be secure of his Pardon, by the Decree of the People,
whereas the event of Judgment is uncertain to all men, but to great Persons, as
he was, most terrible. So that it was better for him, if he regarded himself,
to save his Life by a Falsity, than to suffer an infamous Death, as one really
guilty of the same Crime. And if he had a regard to the public Good, it was
commendable to sacrifice a few suspected men, by that means to rescue many
excellent Persons from the Fury of the People. The Arguments used by Timaeus so
far prevailed upon Andocides, as to make him accuse himself and some others,
and thereupon, according to the Decree of the People, he obtained his Pardon,
and all the persons which were named by him, (except some few who saved
themselves by Flight) suffered Death. To gain the greater Oredit to his
Information, he accused his own Servants amongst others. But notwithstanding
this, the Peoples Anger was not appeased; and being now no longer diverted by
those who had violated the Images, they were at leisure to pour out their whole
Rage upon Alcibiades. And in conclusion, they sent the Galley called the
Salaminia, to recall him. but they gave it expressly in Command to those that
were sent, that they should use no violence, nor seize upon his Person, but
address themselves to him in the mildest terms, requiring him to follow them to
Athens, in order to abide his Trial, and purge himself before the People. For
indeed they feared a Mutiny and a Sedition in the Army in an Enemy's Country,
which they knew it would be easy for Alcibiades to effect, if he had a mind to
it. For the Soldiers were dispirited upon his departune, expecting for the
future tedious delays, and that the War would be drawn out into a lazy length
by Nicias, when Alcibiades, who was the Spur to Action, was taken away. For
though Lamachus was a Soldier, and a Man of Courage, yet being poor he wanted
Authority and Respect in the Army. Alcibiades just upon his departure prevented
Messina from falling into the hands of the Athenians. There were some in that
City who were upon the point of delivering it up, but he knowing the persons,
discovered them to some Friends of the Syratusans, and thereby defeated the
whole Contrivance. When he arrived at Thuria he Alcibiades escapes from those
who were to bring him task.
went on shore, and concealing himself there, escaped those who searched after
him. But to one who knew him, and asked him, If he durst not trust his native
Country? he made Answer, Yes, I dare trust her for all other things; but when
the Matter concerns my Life, I will not trust my Mother, lest she should
mistake, and unwarily throw in a black Bean instead of a white one. When
afterward he was told, that the Assembly had pronounced Judgment of Death
against him, all he said was. I will make them sensible that I am yet alive.

The Information against him was conceived The Information against him.
in this Form:

Thessalus, the Son of Cimon, of the Town of Laciades, does accuse Alcibiades,
the Son of Clinias, of the Town of Scambonides, to have offended the Goddesses
Ceres and Proserpine, by representing in derision the holy Mysteries, and
showing them to his Companions in his own House. Where being habited in such
Robes as are used by the Chief Priest, when he shows the holy things, he named
himself the Chief Priest, Polytion the Torch-bearer, and Theodorus, of the Town
of Phy^ea, the Herald, and saluted the rest of his Company as Priests and
Novices. All which was done with design to expose the Rites and Institutions of
the Eumolpides, and the Priests, and other Officers of the holy Mysteries of
the Temple at Eleusis. He was He is condemned.
condemned as contumacious upon his not appearing, his Estate confiscated, and
it was decreed that all the Priests and Priestesses should solemnly curse him.
But one of them, Theano, the Daughter of Menon, of the Town of Agraulos, is
said to have opposed that part of the Decree, saying, That her holy Office
obliged her to make Prayers, but not Execrations,

Alcibiades lying under these heavy Decrees and Sentences, when first he fled
from Thuria, passed over into Peloponnesus, and remained some time at Argos,
But being there in fear of his Enemies, and seeing himself utterly rejected by
his native Country, he sent to Sparta, desiring Letters of safe Conduct, He
goes to Sparta.
and assuring them, that he would make them amends by his future Services for
all the Mischief he had done them, while he was their Enemy. The Spartans
giving him the Security he desired, he went thit her cheerfully, and was well
received. At his first coming he brought it to pass, that laying aside all
further Caution or Delay, they should aid the Syracusans, and he quickn'd and
excited them so, that they forth with dispatched Gylippus into Sicily at the
Head of an Army, utterly to destroy the Forces which the Athenians had in
Sicily. Another thing which he persuaded them to do, was to make War also upon
the Athenians, on the side of Peloponnesus. But the third thing, and the most
important of all the rest, was to make them fortify Decelea, which above all
other things did streighten and consume the Commonwealth of Athens.

As Aloibiades gained Esteem by the Services Takes up the Laconic way of living.
which he rendered to the Public, so he was no less respected for his manner of
living in private, whereby he wholly captivated the People, and made them dote
on him. For he conformed himself entirely to the Laconic way, so that those who
saw him shaved close to the Skin, and bathe himself in cold Water, and feed
upon a course Cake, and use their black Broth, would have doubted, or rather
could not have believed, that he ever had a Cook in his House, or had ever seen
a Perfumer, or had worn a Robe of Milesian Purple. For he had (as it was
observed) this peculiar Talent and Artifice, whereby he gained upon all men,
that he could presently conform himself to, and take up their Fashions and way
of Living, more easily than a Chamaelion can change himself into new Colors.
For a Chamaelion, they say, cannot imitate one Color, that is, White; but
Alcibiades, whether he conversed with debauched or virtuous persons, was still
capable of imitating and complying with them. At Sparta he was diligent at his
Exercises, frugal, and reserved. In Ionia he was luxurious, frolic, and lazy.
In Thracia he was always drinking, or on Horseback. And when he transacted
with Tisaphernes, the King of Persia's Lieutenant, he exceeded the Persians
themselves in Magnificence and Pomp* Not that his natural Disposition changed
so easily, nor that his Manners were so very variable, but being sensible that
if he pursued his own Inclinations, he might give offense to those with whom he
had occasion to converse, he therefore transformed himself into such. Shapes,
and took up such Fashions, as he observed to be most agreeable to them. So that
to have seen him at Lacedaemon, if a Man judged by the outward appearance, he
would say of him: It Is not Achilles Son, but it is He,
The very man the wise Lycurgus taught.
But if one looked more nearly into his Manners, he would cry out, according to
the Proverb: It Is the old Woman still, still lewd as ever. For while King Agis
was absent, and abroad He ^ the ^^ King
with the Army, he corrupted his Wife Timaea, and got her with Child. Nor did
she deny it, but when she was brought to Bed of a Son, called him in public
Leotychides, but when she was amongst her Confidents and her Attendants, she
would whisper that his Name ought to be Alcibiades. To such a degree was she
transported by her passion for him. But he on the other side would say in
sport, he had not done this thing out of Revenge or Lust, but that his Race
might one day come to Reign over the Lacedoemonians.

There were many who acquainted Agis with these Passages, but the time it self
gave the greatest Confirmation to the Story. For Agis being frightened with an
Earthquake, fled out of Bed from his Wife, and for ten months after never lay
with her, and therefore Leotychides being born after those ten months, he would
not acknowledge him for his Son; which was the Reason that at last he never
came to the Kingdom.

After the Defeat which the Athenians received in Sicily, Ambassadors were
dispatched to Sparta at once from Chios, and Lesbos, and Cyzicum, to signify
their purpose of deferting the Interests of the Athenians. The Boeotians
interposed in favor of the Lesbians, and Pharnabazus of the Cyzyanians, but
the Lucedoemonians, at the persuasion of Alcibiades, chose to assi^^ those of
Chios before all others. He himself also went instantly to Sea, and procured
almost all Ionia to revolt at once, and joining himself to the Lacedaemonian
Generals, did great mischiof to the Athenians. But Agis was his Enemy, hating
him for having dishonored his Wife, which he resented highly, and also not
able to bear patiently the Glory he acquired, for most of the great Actions,
which succeeded well were universally ascribed to Alcibiades. Others also of
the most powerful and ambitious amongst the Spartans, were ready to burst with
Envy against Alcibiades, and labored it so, that at last they prevailed with
the Magistrates in the City to send Orders into The Lacedaemonians design his
Death.
Ionia that he should be killed. But Alcibiades had secret Intelligence of it,
and was afraid, so that though he communicated all Affairs to the Lacedaemonians,
yet he took care not to fall into their hands. At last he retired He flees to
Tisaphernes.
to Tisaphernes, the King of Persia's Lieutenant, for his security, and
immediately became the first and most considerable Person about him. For this
Barbarian not being himself sincere, but artificial and full of deceit, admired
his Address and wonderful subtilty. And indeed his Carriage was so agreeable in
their daily Conversations and Pleasures; that it could not but soften the worst
Humor, and take with the roughest Disposition. Even those who feared and
envied him, could not but take delight and have a sort of Kindness for him,
when they saw him, and were in his Company. So that Tisaphernes, who was
otherwise fierce, and above all other Persians hated the Greeks, yet was so won
by the Flatteries of Alcibiades, that he set himself even to exceed him in
Civility; to that degree, that being owner of some Gardens which were extremely
delightful, by reason that they were near Fountains and sweet Meadows, wherein
there were Apartments and Houses of Pleasure, royally and exquisitely
furnished, he caused them to be called Alcibiades, and afterward every one
gave them that Name. Thus Alcibiades, quitting the Interests of the Spartans,
as those whom he could no longer trust, because he stood in fear of Agis,
endeavored to do them all ill Offices, and render them And does ill Offices in
the Lacedaemonians.
odious to Tisaphernes, who by his means was hindered from assisting them
vigorously, and from finally ruining the Athenians. For his advice was to
furnish them but sparingly with Money, whereby he would wear them out, and
consume the^ insensibly, and when they had waste^ their strength upon one
another, they would both become an easy prey to (...) King. Tisaphernes did
readily pursue (...) Counsel, and did so openly express the Value and Esteem
which he had for him, that Alcibiades was considered highly by the Grecians of
all Parties. The Athenians now in the midst of their Misfortunes, repent^^ them
of their severe Sentence against him* And he on the other side began to be
troubled for them, and to fear, lest if th^^ Commonwealth were utterly
destroyed he should fall into the hands of the Lacedaemonians, his mortal
Enemies. At that time the whole Strength of the Athenia^ was at Samos. And
their Fleet which ro^^ there, was employed in reducing such (...) had revolted,
and in protecting the rest of their Territories, for as yet they were in a
manner equal to their Enemies at Sea. But they stood in fear of Tisaphernes and
the Phaenician Fleet, consisting of an 150 Galleys, which was said to be
already under Sail, and if those came, there remained then no hopes for the
Commonwealth of Athens. When Alcibiades understood this, he sent secretly to
the chief of the Athenians, who were then at Samos, giving them hopes that he
would make Tisaphernes their Friend, Alcibiades makes Offers to the Athenians.
not with any Design to gratify the People, whom he would never trust, but out
of his Respect to the Nobility, if like men of Courage, they durst attempt to
repress the Insolence of the People, and by taking upon them the Government,
would endeavor to save the City from Ruin. All of them gave a ready Ear to
the Proposal made by Alcibiades, except only Phrynichus, one of the Generals,
who was a Native of the Town of Dirades. He opposed him, suspecting, as the
truth was, that Alcibiades concerned not himself, whether the Government were
in the People or the Nobility, but only sought by any means to make way for his
Return into his native Country, and to that end inveighed against the People,
thereby to gain the Nobility, and to insinuate himself into their good Opinion.
But when Phrynichus found his Counsel to be rejected, and that he was now
become a declared Enemy of Alcibiades; he gave secret Intelligence of this to
Astyochus, Phrynichus Treachery.
the Enemy's Admiral, cautioning him to beware of Alcibiades, and to look upon
him as a double Dealer, and one that offered himself to both sides, not
understanding all this while that one Traitor was making Discoveries to
another. For Astyochus, who was zealous to gain the Favor of Tisaphernes,
observing the great Credl^ which Alcibiades had with him, reveal^^ to
Alcibiades* all that Phrynichus had sai^ against him. Alcibiades presently
dispatch^^ away some to Samos, to accuse Phrynich^^ of the Treachery. Upon this
all the Commanders were enraged at Phrynichus; and (...) themselves against
him, and he seeing no ^^ther way to extricate himself from the pr^sent Danger,
attempted to remedy one Ev^^ by a greater. For he sent away to Astyoch^^ to
reproach him for betraying him, and (...) make an Offer to him at the same time
(...) deliver into his hands both the Army (...) the Navy of the Athenians. But
neither di^ this Treason of Phrynichus bring any Damage to the Athenians, by
reason that Astyochus repeated his Treachery, and revea^^^ also this proposal
of Phrynichus to Alcibiades This was foreseen by Phrynichus, who fea^ing a
second Accusation from Alcibiades to prevent him, advertised the Athenia^^
beforehand that the Enemy was ready to sail, in order to surprise them, and
therefore advised them to fortify their Cam^ and to be in a readiness to go
aboard the^^ Ships. While the Athenians were inten^ upon doing these things,
they received other Letters from Alcibiades, admonishing them to beware of
Phrynichus, as one who designed to betray their Fleet to the Enemy, to which
they then gave no credit at all, conceiving that Alcibiades, who knew perfectly
the Counsels and Preparations of the Enemy* made use of that Knowledge, in
order to impose upon them in this false Accusation of Phrynichus. Yet
afterward when Phrynicus was stabbed with a Dagger in the Marketplace by
Hermon, who was then upon the Watch, the Athenians, entering into an Examination
of the Cause, solemnly condemned Phrynichus of Treason, and decreed Crowns to
Hermon and his Associates. And now the Friends of Alcibiades carrying all
before them at Samos, they dispatched Pisander to Athens, to endeavor a Change
in the State, and to encourage the Nobility to take upon themselves the
Government, and destroy the Republic, representing to them, that upon those
Terms, Alcibiades would procure that Tisaphernes should become their Friend and
Confederate.

This was the Color and the Pretense made use of by those, who desired to
reduce The Government changed in Athens.
the Government of Athens to an Oligarchy. But as soon as they prevailed, and
had got the Administration of Affairs into their hands, they took upon
themselves the Name of the 5000. whereas indeed they were but 400. and began to
slight Alcibiades extremely, and to prosecute the War with less Vigor than
formerly. Partly because they durst not yet trust the Citizens, who secretly
detested this Change, and partly because they thought the Lacedaemonians, who
did ever affect the Government of the Few, would now press them less vehemently.

The People in the City were terrified into a Submission, many of those who had
dared openly to oppose the 400 having been put to death. But they ^^ho were at
Samos, were enraged as soon as they heard this News and resolved to set Sail
instantly for the Piraeum. And sending for Alcibiades, they declared him
General, requiring him to lead them on to destroy these Tyrants. But in that
Juncture he did not act like one raised on a sudden by the Favor of the
Multitude, nor would yield and comply in every thing, Alcibiades made General
of the Athenians at Samos.
as being obliged entirely to gratify and submit to those, who from a Fugitive
and an Exile, had created him General of so great an Army, and given him the
Command of such a Fleet. But as becmae a great Captain, he opposed himself to
the precipitate Resolutions which their Rage led them to, and by restraining
them from so great an Error as they were about to commit, he manifestly saved
the Commonwealth. For if they had returned to Athens, all Ionia and the Isles
of the Hellespont, would have fallen into the Enemies hands without opposition,
while the Athenians, engaged in Civil Wars, destroyed one another within the
Circuit of their own Walls. It was Alcibiades principally who prevented all
this Mischief, for he did not only use Persuasions to the whole Army, and
inform them of the Danger, but applied himself to them one by one, entreating
some, and forcibly restraining others. And herein he was much assisted by
Thrasybulus of Stira, who having the loudest Voice of all the Athenians, went
along with him, and cried out to those who were ready to be gone. Another great
Service which Alcibiades did for them was, his undertaking that the Phaenician
Fleet, which the Lacedaemonians expected to be sent to them by the King of
Persia, should either come in Aid of the Athenians, or otherwise should not
come at all. He went on board with all expedition in order to perform this, and
so managed the thing with Tisaphernes, that though those Ships were already come
as far as Aspendos, yet they advanced no farther, so that the Lacedaemonians
were disappointed of them. It was by both sides agreed that this Fleet was
diverted by the Procurement of Alcibiades. But the Lacedaemonians openly
accused him, that he had advised this Barbarian to stand still, and suffer the
Graecians to waste and destroy one another, For it was evident that, the
Accession of so great a Force to either Party, would have enabled them to have
ravished entirely the Dominion of the Sea from the other side. Soon after this
the 400 Usurpers were driven out, the Friends of Alcibiades vigorously
assisting those who were for the popular Government. And now the People in the
City not only desired, but commanded Is recalled by the Athenians.
Alcibiades to return home from his Exile. However he disdained to owe his
Return to the mere Grace and Commiseration of the People, and therefore
resolved to come back with Glory, and upon the Merit of some eminent Service.
To this end he sailed from Samos with a few Ships, and cruis'd on the Sea of
Gnidos, and about the Isle of Coos, and got Intelligence there that Mindarus,
the Spartan Admiral, was sailed with his whole Army into the Hellespont, in
pursuit of the Athenians. Thereupon he made haste to succor the Athenian
Commanders, and by good fortune arrived with 18 Galleys at a critical time. For
both the Fleets having engaged near Abydos, the Fight between them had lasted
from morning till night, the one side having the Advantage on the right Wing,
and the other on the left. Upon his first Appearance, both sides conceived a
false opinion of the end of his coming, for the Enemy was encouraged and the
Athenians terrified. But Alcibiades Alcibiades defeats the Lacedaemonians at
Sea.
suddenly advanced the Athenian Flag in the Admiral Ship, and with great Fury
fell upon the Peloponnesians, who had then the Advantage, and were in the
pursuit. He soon put them to flight, and followed them so close that he forced
them on shore, broke their Ships in pieces, and slew the men who endeavored to
save themselves by Swimming; although Pharnabazus was come down to their
Assistance by Land, and did what he could to cover the Ships as they lay under
the shore. In fine, the Athenians having taken 30 of the Enemies Ships, and
recovered all their own, erected a Trophy. After the gaining of so glorious a
Victory, his Vanity made him affect to show himself to Tisaphernes, and having
furnished himself with Gifts and Presents, and an Equipage suitable to so great
a General, he set forwards toward him. But the Thing did not succeed as he had
imagined, for Tisaphernes Is made Prisoner by Tisaphernes.
had been long suspected by the Lacedaemonians, and was afraid to fall into
Disgrace with his King upon that account, and therefore thought that Alcibiades
arrived very opportunely, and immediately caused him to be seized, and sent
away Prisoner to Sardis; fancying by this Act of Injustice, to purge himself
from all former Imputations. But about 30 days after Alcibiades escaped from
his Keepers, and having go^ a Horse, fled to Clazomene, where he accus'^
Tisaphernes as consenting to his Escape. From thence he sailed to the Athenian
Camp, and being informed there that Mindarus and Pharnabazus were together at
Cyzicum, he made a Speech to the Soldiers, showing them that it was necessary
to attack the Enemies both by Sea and Land, nay even to force them in their
Fortifications; for unless they gained a complete Victory, they would soon be
in want of necessary Provisions for their subsistence. As soon as ever he go^
them on Shipboard, he hasted to Proconesus, and there gave Command to place
all the smaller Vessels in the midst of the Navy, and to take all possible care
that the Enemy might have no notice of his coming, and a great Storm of Rain,
accompanied with Thunder and Darkness, which happened at the same time,
contributed much to the concealing of his Design. So that it was not only
undiscovered by the Enemy, but the Athenians themselves were ignorant of it,
for he suddenly commanded them on board, and set Sail before they were aware.
As soon as the Darkness was over, he perceived himself to be in sight of the
Peloponnesian Fleet, which Destroys the Lacedaemonian (...) at Cyzicum.
rode at Anchor before the Port of Cyzicum. Alcibiades fearing lest if they
discovered the number of his Ships, they might endeavor to save themselves by
Land, commanded the rest of the Captains to slacken their Sayls, and follow
after him slowly, whilst he advancing with 40 Ships, showed himself to the
Enemy, and provoked them to fight. The Enemy being deceived in their Number,
despised them, and supposing they were to contend with those only, made
themselves ready and began the Fight. But as soon as they were engaged, they
perceived the other part of the Fleet coming down upon them, at which they were
so terrified that they fled immediately. Upon that Alcibiades with 20 of his
best Ships breaking through the midst of them, hastened to the shore, and
suddenly making a Descent, pursued those who abandoned their Ships and fled to
Land, and made a great Slaughter of them. Mindarus and Pharnabazus coming to
their Succor, were utterly defeated. Mindarus was slain upon the Place,
fighting valiantly, but Pharnabazus saved himself by flight. The Athenians slew
great Numbers of their Enemies, won much Spoil, and took all their Ships. They
also made themselves Masters of Cyzicum, it being deserted by Pharnabazus, and
put to death all the Peloponnesians that were there, and thereby not only
secured to themselves the Hellespont, but by force drove the Lacedaemonians
from out of all the other Seas. They intercepted als^ some Letters written to
the Ephori, which gave an account of this fatal Overthrow* after their short
Laconic manner. Our Hope^ are at an end. Mindarus is slain. The Soldiers
starve; and we know not what Measures to take. The Soldiers who followed
Alcibiades in this last Fight, were so exalted with the Success, and come to
that degree of Pride, that looking on themselves as Invincible, they disdained
to mix with the other Soldiers, who had been often overcome. For it happened
not long before, Thrasyllus* had received a great Defeat near Ephesus, and upon
that Occasion the Ephesians erected a brazen Trophy to the Disgrace of the
Athenians. The Soldiers of Alcibiades reproached those who were under the
Command of Thrasyllus, with this Misfortune, at the same time magnifying
themselves and their own Commander, and it went so far at last, that they would
not do their Exercises with them, nor lodge in the same Quarters. But soon
after Pharnabazus with a great Strength of Horse and Foot, falling upon the
Soldiers of Thrasyllus, as they were laying waste the Territory of the
Abydenians, Alcibiades coming to their Aid, routed Pharnabazus, and together
with Thrasyllus, pursued him till it was night. Then their Troops united and
returned together to the Camp, rejoicing and congratulating one another. The
next day he erected a Trophy, and then proceeded to lay waste with Fire and
Sword the whole Province which was under Pharnabazus, where none durst appear
to oppose them. In this Action he took diverse Priests and Priestesses, but
released them without Ransom. He prepared next to make War upon He makes War
upon the Chalcedonians.
the Chalcedonians, who had revolted from the Athenians, and had received a
Lacedaemonian Governor and Garrison. But having Intelligence that they had
removed their Corn and Cattle out of the Fields, and had sent all to the
Bithynians, who were their Friends, he drew down his Army to the Frontier of
the Bithynians, and then sent a Herald to accuse them of this Procedure. The
Bithynians being terrified at his Approach, delivered up to him the whole
Booty, and entered into an Alliance with him. Afterward he proceeded to the
Siege of Calcedon, and enclosed it with a wall from Sea to Sea. Pharnabazus
advanced with his Forces to raise the Siege, and Hippocrates, the Governor of
the Town, at the same time gathering together all the strength he had, made a
Sally upon the Athenians. Alcibiades divided his Army so, as to engage them
both at once, and not only forced Pharnabazus to a dishonorable flight, but
slew Hippocraces, and a great number of the Soldiers which were with him.
After this he satl'd into the Hellespont, in order to raise supplies of Money,
and took the Cit^ of Selybria, in which Action through hi^ Takes the City of
S^lybria.
precipitancy, he exposed himself to great Danger. For some within the Town had
undertaken to betray it into his hands, and by Agreement were to give him a
Signal by a lighted Torch about midnight. But one of the Conspirators beginning
to repent himself of the Design, the rest for fear of being disover'd, were
driven to give the signal before the appointed hour. Alcibiades as soon as he
saw the Torch lifted up in the Air, though his Army was not in readiness to
march, ran instantly toward the Walls, taking with him about 30 Men only, and
commanding the rest of the Army to follow him with all possible Diligence. When
he came thither, he found the Gate opened for him, and entered with his 30 Men,
and about 20 more light armed Men, who were come up to them. They were no
sooner fallen into the City, but he perceived the Selybrians all armed coming
down upon him: so that there was no hope of escaping if he stayed to receive
them; and on the other side, having been always successful till that day,
wherever he commanded, his Glory would not suffer him to fly. But on the sudden
he thought of this Device: he required Silence by sound of a Trumpet, and then
commanded one of his Men to make Proclamation, that the Selybrians should not
take Arms against the Athenians. This cooled such of the Inhabitants as were
fiercest for the Fight, for they supposed that all their Enemies were got
within the Walls, and it raised the hopes of others who were disposed to an
Accommodation. Whilst they were parlying, and Propositions made on one side and
the other, Alcibiades whole Army came up to the Town. But then conjecturing
rightly that the Selybrians were well inclined to Peace, and fearing lest the
City might be sacked by the Thracians, (who came in great Numbers to his Army
to serve as Volunteers, out of their particular Kindness and Respect for him)
he commanded them all to retreat without the Walls. And upon the Submission of
the Selybrians, he saved them from being pillaged, and only taking of them a
Sum of Money, and placing an Athenian Garrison in the Town, he departed.

During this Action, the Athenian Captains who besieged Chalcedon, concluded a
Treaty Treaty between Pharnabazus and the Athenians.
with Pharnabazus upon these Articles: That he should give them a Sum of Money:
That the Chalcedonians should return to the Subjection of Athens, and that the
Athenians should make no Inroad into the Province whereof Pharnabazus wa^
Governor; and Pharnabazus was also to provide safe Conducts for the Athenian
Ambassadors to the King of Persia. Afterward when Alcibiades returned thither,
Pharnabazus required that he also should be sworn to the Treaty* but he refused
it, unless Pharnabazus would swear at the same time. When the Treaty was sworn
to on both sides, Alcibiades He besieges and takes Byzantium.
went against the Byzantines, who had revolted from the Athenians, and drew a
Line of Circumvallation about the City. But Anaxilaus and Lycurgus, together
with some others, having undertaken to betray the City to him, upon his
Engagement to preserve the Lives and Estates of the Inhabitants, he caused a
Report to be spread abroad as if by reason, of some unexpected Commotion in
Ionia, he should be obliged to raise the Siege. And accordingly that day he
made a show to depart with his whole Fleet; but returned the same night, and
went ashore with all his Men at Arms, and silently and undiscovered marched up
to the Walls. At the same time his Ships were rowed into the Haven with all
possible Violence, coming on with much Fury, and with great Shouts, and
Outcries. The Byzantines being thus surpised, and quite astonished, while they
were universally engaged in defense of their Port and Shipping, gave
opportunity to those who favored the Athenians, securely to receive Alcibiades
into the City. Yet the Enterprise was not accomplished without Fighting, for
the Peloponnesians, Baeotians, and Megareans, not only repulsed those who came
out of the Ships, and forced them to get on board again, but hearing that the
Athenians were entered on the other side, they drew up in order, and went t^
meet them. But Alcibiades gained the Victory after a sharp Fight, wherein he
himself had the Command of the right Wing, and Theramenes of the left, and took
about 300 of the Enemy Prisoners. After the Battle, not one of the Byzantines
was slain, or driven out of the City, according to the Terms upon which the
City was put into his hands, that they should receive no prejudice in their
Persons or Estates. Whereupon Anaxilaus being afterward accused at Lacedaemon
for this Treason, he neither disowned nor was ashamed of the Action: For he
urged that he was not a Lacedaemonian, but a Byzantine, and that he saw not
Sparta, but Bysantium in extreme Danger; the City so straightly begirt, that it
was not possible to bring in any new Provisions, and the Peloponnesians and
Baeotians which were in Garrison, devouring their old Stores, whilst the
Byzantines with their Wives and Children were ready to (...)* That he had not
betrayed his Country to En^mies, but had delivered it from the Calamit^^^ of
War, wherein he had followed the Example of the most worthy Locedaemonians, wh^
esteemed nothing to be honorable and jus^ but what was profitable for their
Countr^^* The Lacedaemonians upon the hearing h^ Defense, were so well pleased,
that they di^^harg'd all that were accused.

And now Alcibiades began to desire to (...) Alcibiades returns ^o. Athens.
his native Country again, or rather to show his fellow-Citizens a Person who
had gain so many Victories for them. To this (...) he set Sail for Athens, his
Ships being adorn^ on every side with great Numbers ^^ Shields and other
Spoils, and towing after them many Galleys taken from the Enemy and the Ensigns
and Ornaments of many others which he had sunk and destroyed; all of them
together amounting to 200. But there is little Credit to be given to what Daris
the Samian (who pretended himself to be descended from Alcibiades) does add
that Chrysogonus, who had won the Prize at the Pythian Games, played upon his
Flute as the Galleys passed on, whilst the Oars kept time with the Music; and
that Calipides the Tragaedian, attired in his Buskins, his purble Robes, and
other Ornaments which he used in the Theater, excited those who labored at the
Oars; and that the Admiral Galley entered into the Port with a purple Sail. For
these things are such kind of Extravagances as are wont to follow a Debauch,
and neither Theopompus, nor Euphorus, nor Xenophon, mention them. Nor indeed is
it credible, that one who returned from so long an Exile, and such variety of
Misfortunes, should carry himself with so much Insolence and Luxury. On the
contrary he entered the Harbor full of Fear, nor would afterward venture to go
on shore, till standing on the Deck, he saw Euryptolemus his Nephew, and others
of his Friends and Acquaintance, who were ready to receive him, and invited him
to Land. As soon as he was landed, the Multitude His Reception there.
who came out to meet him, disdained to bestow a Look on any of the other
Captains, but came in Throngs about Alcibiades, and saluted him with loud
Acclamations, and still followed him. They who could press near him, crowned
him with Garlands, and they who could not come up so close, yet stayed to
behold him a far off, and the old Men pointed him out, and showed him to the
young ones. Nevertheless this public Joy was mixed with some Tears, and the
present Happiness was allayed by the remembrance of all the Miseries they had
endured. They made Reflections, that they could not have so unfortunately
m^^carri'd in Sicily, or been defeated in any (...) those things which they had
ever hoped (...) if they had left the management of their A^fairs, and the
Command of their Forces, (...) Alcibiades. Since upon his undertaking (...)
Administration, when they were in a manner ruined at Sea, and could scarce
defen^ the Suburbs of their City by Land, and the same time were miserably
distract^^ with intestine Factions, he had raised the^ up from this low and
deplorable Conditi^^ and had not only restored them to their a^cient Dominion
of the Sea, but had (...) made them every where victorious ov^^ their Enemies
at Land. There had b^^n decree for recalling him from his Banishme^^ already
passed by the People, at the Instanc^ of Critias, the Son of Calleschrus, as
appea^ by his Elegies, in which he puts Alcibiad^ in mind of this Service: From
my proposal the Decree did come, (hom^
Which from your tedious Exile brought yo^
That you're restored, you to my Friendship ow^
I was the first durst press it should be so.
The People being summoned to an Assembly, Alcibiades came in amongst them and
first bewailed and lamented his ow^ Sufferings, and gently and modestly
complained of their Usage, imputing all to hi^ hard Fortune, and some ill
Genius that attended him. Then he discoursed at large of the great Assurance of
their Enemies, but withal exhorted them to take Courage. The People crowned him
with Crowns of Gold, and Created him General both at Land and Sea with absolute
Power. They also made Decree, that his Estate should be restored to ^im, and
that the Eumolpides and the holy Heralds should again absolve him from the
Curses which they had solemnly pronounced against him, by Sentence of the
People. Which ^hen all the rest obeyed, Theodorus the High^riest excused
himself, For, said he, I never ^enounc'd any Execration against him, if he have
^one nothing against the Commonwealth.

But notwithstanding the Affairs of Al^^biades succeeded so prosperously, and
so ^uch to his glory, yet many were still much ^^sturb'd, and looked upon the
time of his ^rrival to be ominous. For on the same ^ay that he came into the
Port, the Feast ^f the Goddess Minerva, which they call (...) Plynteria, was
kept. It is the 25th. ^ay of September, when the Praxiergides ^o solemnize
those Mysteries which are ^ot to be revealed, taking all the Orna^ents from off
her Image, and keeping (...) Image it self close covered. Hence it that the
Athenians esteem this day most ^auspicious, and never go about any thing of
Importance upon it: and therefore th^^ imagined, that the Goddess did not
recei^^ Alcibiades graciously and propitiously, ^h^ hid her Face from him, and
rejected hi^^ Yet notwithstanding every thing succeed^^ according to his Wish.
When the 100 G^^leys Alcibiades conducts the Procession to Eleusis with his
Army.
were fitted out and ready to sail, (...) honorable Zeal detained him till the
Cel^bration of those Mysteries was fully pa^^^^ For since the time that Decelea
was fortii^^ the Enemies had made themselves Masters (...) the Ways which lead
from Athens to El^^sis, and by reason thereof, the Processio^ being of
necessity to go by Sea, could not (...) performed with Solemnity; but they we^^
forced to omit the Sacrifices, and Dance^ and other holy Ceremonies, which were
us^^ to be done in the way, when they brin^ forth Iacchus. Alcibiades therefore
judged (...) would be a glorious Action, whereby h^ should do Honor to the
Gods, and gai^ Esteem with Men, if he restored the ancien^ Splendour to these
Rites, in conducting the Procession again by Land, and protectin^ it with his
Army from the Enemy. For thereby he was sure, if Agis stood still an^ did not
oppose him, it would very much diminish and obscure his Glory, or otherwise
that he should engage in a Holy War in the Cause of the Gods, and in defenc^ of
the most sacred and solemn Ceremonie^ and this in the sight of his Country,
where he should have all his fellow-Citizens Witnesses of his Valor. As soon
as he had resolved upon this Design, and had communicated it to the Eumolpides,
and other holy Officers, he placed Sentinels on the ^ops of the Mountains, and
at the break of day sent forth his Scouts. And then taking with him the
Priests, and consecrated Persons, and those who had the Charge of ^nitiating
others in the holy Mysteries, and compassing them with his Soldiers, he
conducted them with great Order and profound Silence. This was an august and
venerable Procession, wherein all who did not envy him said, He performed at
once the Office of an High Priest and of a General. The Enemy durst not attempt
any thing against them, and thus he brought them back in safety to the City.
Upon which as he was exalted in his own Thought, so the opinion which the
People had of his Conduct, was raised to that degree, that they looked upon
their Armies as irresistible and invincible while he commanded them. He so won
upon the lower and meaner sort of People, that they passionately desired he
would take the Sovereignty upon him, some of them made no difficulty to tell
him so, and to advise him to put himself out of the reach of Envy, by
abolishing the Laws and Ordinances of the People, and suppressing those ill
affected persons who would overturn the State, that (...) he might act and take
upon him the management of Affairs, without standing in fea^ of being called to
an Account. How far hi^ own Inclinations led him to usurp soveraig^ Power, is
uncertain, but the most consid^rable Persons in the City were so much afrai^ of
it, that they hastened him on Ship boa^^ all they could, granting him Liberty
(...) choose his own Officers, and allowing hi^ all other things as he desired.
Thereupon (...) set Sail with a Fleet of an 100 Ships, an^ He defeats the
Lacedaemonians at Andros.
arriving at Andros, he there fought with an^ defeated as well the Inhabitants,
as the L^cedaemonians who assisted them. But yet (...) took not the City, which
gave the first occasion to his Enemies for all their Accusat^ons against him.
Certainly if ever (...) was ruined by his own Glory, it was Alcibiades. For his
continual Success had bego^ such an opinion of his Courage and Conduct* that if
he failed in any thing he undertook, (...) was imputed to his Neglect, and no
one would believe it was through want of Power. For they thought nothing was
too hard for him, if he went about it in good earnest* They fancied also every
day that they should hear News of the reducing of Chios and of the rest of
Ionia, and grew impat^ent that things were not effected as fa^ and as suddenly
as they imagined. They never considered how extremely Money was wanting, and
that being to make War with an Enemy, who had Supplies of all things from a
great King, he was often forced to forsake his Camp, in order to procure Money
and Provisions for the Subsistence of his Soldiers. This it was which gave
occasion for the last Accusation which was made against him. For Lysander being
sent from Lacedaemon The Athenian Fleet is defeated in his absence.
with a Commission to be Admiral of their Fleet, and being furnished by Cyrus
with a great Sum of Money, gave every Mariner four Oboles a day, whereas before
they had but three. Alcibiades could hardly allow his Men three Oboles, and
therefore was constrained to go into Caria to furnish himself with Money. He
left the Care of the Fleet, in his absence, to Antiochus, an experien'd
Seaman, but rash and inconsiderate, who had express Orders from Alcibiades not
to engage, though the Enemy provoked him. But he slighted and disregarded the
Orders to that degree, that having made ready his own Galley and another, he
presently stood for Ephesus, where the Enemy lay, and as he sailed before the
Heads of their Galleys, used the highest Provocations possible both in Words
and Deeds, Lysander at first manned out a few Ships, and pursued him. But all
the Athenian Ships coming in to his Assistance, Lysander also brought up his
wh^^ Fleet, which gained an entir^ Victory. H^ flew Antiochus himself, took
many Men and Ships, and erected a Trophy.

As soon as Alcibiades heard this News* he returned to Samos, and loosing from
thence with his whole Fleet, he came an^ offered Battle to Lysander. But
Lysander c^^tent with the Victory he had gaind, (...) not stir. Amongst others
in the Arm^ who had a malice to Alcibiades, Thrasybul^^* the Son of Thrason,
was his particular E^^my, and went purposely to Athens to acc^^^ Alcibiades is
accused again at Athens.
him, and to exasperate his Enemies in the City against him. In an Oration to
the P^^ple he represented that Alcibiades had ruin'^ their Affairs, and lost
their Ships, by insolently abusing his Authority, committi^^ the Government of
the Army in his absen^^ to such as by their Debauchery and scur^lous Discourses
were got most into Cre^^ with him, whilst he wandered up and down (...) pleasure
to raise Money, giving himself up (...) all Luxury and Excesses amongst the
Abyd^nian and Ionian Curtezans, at a time wh^^ the Enemy's Navy rode at Anchor
so (...) his. It was also objected to him, that he h^^ fortified a Castle near
Byzanthe in Thr^^ for a safe retreat for himself, as one th^^ either could not,
or would not live in (...) own Country. The Athenians gave Cred^^ to these
Informations, and discovered the Resentment and Displeasure which they had
conceived against him, by choosing other Generals.

As soon as Alcibiades heard of this, he immediately forsook the Army, being
afraid of He fors^k^s the Army.
what might follow. And getting many Strangers together, he made War upon his
own account against those Thracians who pretended to be free, and acknowledged
no King. By this means he amassed to himself a great Treasure out of the Spoils
which he took, and at the same time secured the bordering Graecians from the
Incursions of the Barbarians.

Tydeus, Menander and Adimantus, the new made Generals, were at that time
riding The Atheniars create new Generals.
in the River Aegos, with all the Ships which the Athenians had left. From
whence they were used to go out to Sea every Morning, and offer Battle to
Lysander, who lay at Anchor near Lampsachus: and when they had done so,
returning back again, they lay all the rest of the day carelessly, and without
order, as Men who despised the Enemy. Alcibiades who was not far off, did not
think so slightly of their Danger, nor did neglect to let 'em know it, but
mounting his Horse, he came to the Generals, and represented to them, that they
had chosen a very inconvenient Station, as wanting a safe Harbor, and far
distant from any Town: so that they were constrained to send for their
necessary Provisions as far as Sestos. He als^ reproved them for their
Carlesness, in suffe^ing the Soldiers when they went ashore, (...) disperse
themselves, and wander up and down at their pleasure, when the Enemies Fleet,
which was under the Command of one General, and strictly obedient to
Discipline, lay so very near them. Alcibiades admonished them of these things,
and advised them to remove the Fleet to Sestos. But the Admirals did not only
disregard what he said, but Tydeus with great Insolence commanded him to be
gone, saying, that now not he, but others had the Command of the Forces.
Whereupon Alcibiades suspecting something of Treachery in them, departed. But
he told his Friends who accompanied him out of the Camp, that if the Generals
had not used him with such insupportable Contempt he would within a few days
have forced the Lacedaemonians, however unwilling, either to have fought the
Athenians at Sea, or to have deserted their Ships. Some looked upon this as a
piece of Ostentation only, but others said, the thing was probable, for that he
might have brought down by Land great Numbers of the Thracian Cavalry and
Archers, to assault and disorder them in their Camp. The Event did soon make it
evident, how very rightly he judged of the Errors which the Athenians
committed. For Lysander fell upon them on a sudden, when they least The
Athenians finally overthrown.
suspected it, with such Fury, that Conon with 8 Galleys only escaped him, all
the rest, (which were about 200) he took and carried away: together with 3000
Prisoners, which he afterward put to death. And Athens taken.
within a short time after he took Athens it self, burnt all the Ships, which
he found there, and demolished their long Walls.

After this Alcibiades standing in dread of Alcibiades flies into Bithynia.
the Lacedaemonians, who were now Masters both at Sea and Land, retired into
Bithynia. He sent thither great Treasure before him, took much with him, but
left much more in the Castle where he had before resided. But he lost great
part of his Wealth in Bithynia, being robbed by some Thracians who lived in
those Parts, and thereupon he determined to go to the Court of Artaxerxes, not
doubting but that the King, if he would make trial of his Abilities, would find
him not inferior to Themistocles, besides that he was recommended by a more
honorable Cause. For he went, not as Themistocles did to offer his Service
against his fellow-Citizens, but against their Enemies, and to implore the
King's Aid for the defense of his Country. He concluded that Pharnabazus would
most readily procure him a safe Conduct, and therefore went into Phrygia to
him, and continued to dwell there some time, paying him great Respect, and
being honorably treated by him. The Athenians in the mean time were miserably
afflicted ^^ Lysander sets 30 Governors over Athens
their loss of Empire, but when they were deprived of Liberty also, and
Lysander had imposed 30 Governors upon the City, and their State was finally
ruined, then they began to reflect on those things, which they would never
consider whilst they were in a prosp^rous condition: then they did acknowledge
and bewail their former Errors and Follies, and judged this second ill Usage of
Alcibiades to be of all others the most inexcusable. For he was rejected,
without any Fault committed by himself, and only because they were incensed
against his Lieutenant, for having shamefully lost a few Ships, they much more
shamefully deprived the Commonwealth of a most valiant and most accomplished
General. Yet in this sad state of Affairs they had still some faint Hopes left
them, nor would they utterly despair of the Athenian Commonwealth while
Alcibiades was safe. For they persuaded themselves before when he was an Exile,
he could not content himself to live idly and at ease, much less now (if he
could find any favorable opportunity) would he endure the Insolence of the
Lacedaemonians, and the Outrages of the 30 Tyrants. Nor was it an absurd thing
in the People to entertain such Imaginations, when the 30 Tyrants themselves
were so very solicitous to be informed, and to get Intelligence of all his
Actions and Designs. In fine, Critias represented to Lysander, that the
Lacedaemonians could never securely enjoy the Dominion of Greece, till the
Athenian Democracy was absolutely destroyed. And though now the People of Athens
seemed quietly and patiently to submit to so small a number of Governors, yet
Alcibiades, whilst he lived, would never suffer them to acquiesce in their
present Circumstances.

Yet Lysander would not be prevailed upon by these Discourses, till at last he
received secret Letters from the Magistrates of Lacedaemon, The Lacedaemonians
send Orders that Alcibiades should be slain.
expressly requiring him to get Alcibiades dispatched. Whether it was that they
feared the vivacity of his Wit, or the greatness of his Courage in enterprizing
what was hazardous, or whether it was done to gratify King Agis. Upon receipt
of this Order, Lysander sent away a Messenger to Pharnabazus, desiring him to
put it in execution. Pharnabazus committed the Affair to Magaeus his Brother,
and to his Uncle Susamithres. Alcibiades resided at that time in a small
Village in Phrygia, together with Timandra, a Mistress of his. As he slept, he
had this Dream: He thought himself attired in his Mistresses Habit, and that
she, holding him in her Arms, dressed his Head, and painted his Face, as if he
had been a Woman. Others say, he dreamed that Magaeu^ cut off his Head, and
burnt his Body. And it is said, that it was but a little while before
The-manner of his Death.
his Death, that he had these Visions. They who were sent to assassinate him,
had not Courage enough to enter the House, but surrounding it first, they set
it on fire. Alcibiades as soon as he perceived it, getting together great
Quantities of Clothes and Furniture, threw them upon the Fire, with a Design to
choke it, and having wrapped his Robe about his left Arm, and holding his naked
Sword in his right, he cast himself into the middle of the Fire, and escaped
securely through it, before his Clothes were burnt. The Barbarians, as soon as
they saw him, retreated, and none of them durst stay to expect him, or to
engage with him, but standing at a distance, they slew him with their Darts and
Arrows. When he was dead, the Barbarians departed, and Timandra took up his
dead Body, and covering and wrapping it up in her own Robes, she buried it as
decently and as honorably as her present Circumstances would allow. It Is said,
that the famous Lais, (who was called the Corinthian, though she was a Native of
Hyccaris, a small Town in Sicily, from whence she was brought a Captive) was
the Daughter of this Timandra. There are some who agree with this Relation of
Alcibiades Death in all things except only that they impute not the Cause of it
either to Pharnabazus, Lysander, or the Lacedaemonians. But they say, that he
kept a young Lady of a noble House, whom he had debauched, and that her
Brothers not being able to endure the Indignity, by night set fire to the House
where he dwelt, and as he endeavored to save himself from the Flames, slew him
with their Darts, in the manner before related.

CORIOLANUS.
M Burghers sculp.


THE LIFE OF CAIUS MARCIVS CORIOLANVS.
Translated from the Greek: By Thomas Blomer D. D.
Volume II.
THE House of the Marcii in Rome, did produce many noble Patricians, that were
Men of great Renown; and among the rest, Ancus Marcius, Grandson to Numa by his
Daughter, who reigned there after Tullus Hostilius. Of the same Family were
also Publius, and Quintus Marcius, which two conveyed into the City the best
Water the^ have at Rome, and that in the greatest quantity. As likewise
Censorinus, who having been twice chosen Censor by the People did afterward
himself persuade them t^ make a Law, that no body should bear th^^ Office a
second time. But Caius Marcius* of whom I now write, being left an Orphan, and
brought up under the Widowhood of his Mother, has shown by Expe^^ence, that
although the early loss of a Father may be attended with other disadvantages,
yet it can hinder none from being either virtuous or eminent in the Wor^^ and
that it is no obstacle to true Goodne^^ and Excellence; however bad men (...)
pleased to lay the blame of their corruption and debauched lives upon that
misfortun^ and the neglect of them in their Minority* as if they fell into Vice
and Meanness, rathe^ by a loose and careless Education, than (...) degenerate
and ignoble Mind. And (...) very Man comes in as a Witness to the trut^ of
their Opinion, who conceive that a generous and worthy Nature, if it want
Discipline and Breeding, (like a fat Soil which lies unimprov'd and without
Culture ^^ does with its better productions bring forth a mixture of vicious
and faulty things For as the force and vigor of his Soul and a persevering
Constancy in all he undertook, did supply him with great and effective
Instincts for many handsome Actions, so likewise on the other side by indulging
the vehemence of his Passion, and through an obstinate stiffness which knew not
how to yield, or accommodate his Humors and Sentiments to those of other men,
he became harsh and disagreeable, and wholly unfit for the easiness of
Friendship, and the gentler parts of Conversation; insomuch that those who did
esteem his other good Qualities, and admired to see that he was the same equal
proof against all the softnesses of Pleasure, and the hardships of Travel, and
the allurements of Gain, allowing that universal Firmness of his, the
respective Names of Temperance, Fortitude and Justice, yet as to the Virtues of
Humanity and civil Intercourse, he was so defective therein, that they could
not choose but be disgusted at him for the hateful Severity, and unpleasant
Ruggedness of his stern deportment, as being one of an over-bearing, haughty,
and imperious Temper. It was therefore a thing much to be desired, that Marcius
had spent some time in Philosophy, and studying the Art how he might sweeten
his Address, and polish his Demeanor; for indeed men can draw no great
Advantage from the Mildness and Benignity of the Muses than to civilize and
cultivate their Nature by Rules of Prudence, and the Precepts o^ Morality,
while they observe those Limit^ and Boundaries which are set by Reason, (...)
as always to embrace the sober mean, and avoid the wildness of Extremities.

Now those were the Times wherein tha^ kind of Worth and Gallantry was in high
Credit, and preferred at Rome above all the rest, which did appear in martial
Deeds an^ military Atchievments; as an Evidenc^ whereof, the Latin word for
Virtue came the^ to signify Prowess, and as if Valor and a^ Virtue had been
the same thing, they di^ confine the general notion, and appropriate the common
term to that particular Excellence. But Marcius having a more passionate
Inclination, than any of that Age for Feats of Chivalry, began presently from
his Childhood to handle Arms, and being o^ opinion, that adventitious
Implements and artificial Arms would effect little, and b^ of small use to such
as have not their native and congenite Weapons well fixed and prepared for
Service, he did so exercise and inure his Body to all sorts of Activity, and
the different ways of Encounter, that he became swift and nimble to pursue, and
beside the lightness of a Racer, had that weight and heaviness in close
Seizures and Wrestlings with an Enemy, from which it was hard for any to get
loose, or forcibly clear and disengage himself; so that his domestic Rivals,
and those that stood ^n competition with him for true Courage and Magnanimity,
being loath to own themselves inferior in that respect, were fain to excuse
their Foyls and Deficiencies, by saying he had a robust, inflexible Body, that
was hardened against all Fatigues, and the utmost stress of Opposition.

The first time he went out to the His first going to the Wars*
Wars, being yet a Stripling, was when Tar^uinius Superbus (who had been King
of Rome, but driven thence for his Pride and Lewdness) after many Skirmishes,
and no fewer Defeats, did now enter upon his last Effort, and hazard all as it
were upon a single Throw; for a great number of the Latins, and other People of
Italy, had joined their Forces, and were marching with him toward the City, as
resolved to procure his Restoration and Settlement in the Regal Throne; but
this however not so much out of a desire to serve and oblige Tarquin, as to
gratify their own Fear and Envy, at the growth and increase of the Roman
Greatness, which they did intend to pull down from its late Advancements, under
a pretense of raising him to his ancient Royalties. The Armies then being met
and engaged in a decisive Battle, which had diverse Turns and Variations on both
sides, Marcius fighting bravely in the Dictator's presence, saw a Roman
Soldier struck down at a little distance, whom he did not abandon in that
posture, but immediately stepped in, and stood before the Man, and made so
vigorous a defense, that he slew the Aggressor which bore furiously upon him.
The General having gotten the Victory, did not forget how well he had behaved
himself, whom he therefore crowned* one of the first with (...) Garland of
Oaken branches; for it was the Roman Custom thus to adorn those wh^ had
protected a Citizen; whether that Law did intend some special Honor to the
Oak, in memory of the Arcadians, (...) People the Oracle had made famous by the
Name of Acorn-eaters; or whether the Reason of it was, because they might
easily and in all places where they fought, have plenty of Oak* for that
purpose; or last o^ all, the Oaken Wreath, being otherwise sacred to Jupiter,
the great Guardian of their Cities, they might therefore think it the most
proper Ornament for him who had preserved a Citizen; Beside that the Oak, as it
is a Tree which bears the most and the prettiest Fruit of any that grow wild
and without Improvement, so likewise is it stronger than any of those which are
dressed and manured by us; its Acorns too were the principal Diet of the old
Mortals, and the Honey which was lodged there, did help to make them a pleasant
Liquor; yea, I may say, it furnished out Fowl and other Creatures for their
Dainties, in producing Misselto for Birdlime, that artful Instrument to ensnare
them. But that I may return from these wandering Speculations, and keep the way
of my History, it is reported, that Castor and Pollux appeared in the Battle
before mentioned, and that presently after it they were seen at Rome, just by
the Fountain where their Temple now stands, upon Horses all foaming with a
white frothy Sweat, as if they had rid Post to bring tidings thither of the
Victory, on which account the 15th. of July, (being the day of this Conquest)
became a solemn Holiday to the kind and Officious Brethren.

Now from the Grace which was then done Coriolanus, and the manner how it did
affect him, I may observe in general, That when young Men do arrive at Fame and
Reputation betimes, if they happen to be of a Nature that is but slightly
touched with Emulation, this early Attainment does soon extinguish their
thirst, and satiate the desire they have for Glory; whereas the first Honors
that dignifie and illustrate those who ar^ of a more solid and weighty Mind,
make them study to grow still in merit, and to shine the brighter, and are so
far from dulling, that they even whet their appetite, and carry them on, like a
fair wind, in the pursuit of every generous thing and applauded Enterprise;
while they look upon these Marks and Testimonies of their Virtue, not as a
recompense received for what they have already done, but as a Pledge given by
themselves of what they will perform hereafter, being ashamed now to forsake or
under-live the Credit they have won, yea, not to exceed and obscure all that is
gone before, by the luster and worthiness of their following Actions. Marcius
therefore, having a Spirit of this noble Make, was ambitious always to get the
better of himself, and did nothing how extraordinary soever, but thought he was
bound to outdo it at the next occasion, so that his own deeds provoked him
daily to* excel, and being infinitely desirous to give some fresh Instance, and
new Experiment of his prowess, he added one Exploit to another piece of
Bravery, and heaped up Trophies upon Trophies, by all which he brought in many
rich Spoils from the Enemy. This also became the Matter of a glorious Contest
among the Roman Generals, the latter still striving with the former, which of
them should pay him the greatest Respect, and speak highest in his
Commendation; for there being frequent Wars and numerous Conflicts in those
days, Marcius was present at them all, and returned back from none without
Laurels and without Rewards; and whereas others made Glory the end of their
daring, the end of his Glory was his Mothers gladness; for the delight she took
to hear him praised, and to see him crowned, and her weeping for joy in his
Embraces, did render him in his own thoughts the most honorable and most happy
Person in the World. An Affection or Sentiment not unlike that of Epaminondas,
who made no scruple to profess, that he reckoned it the greatest Felicity of
his whole Life, that his Father and Mother did still survive to behold his
Conduct and Victory in the Plains of Leuctra; he had the Advantage indeed to
have both his Parents partake with him, and enjoy the pleasure of his good
Fortune; but Marcius believing himself obliged to pay his Mother Volumnia, all
that Gratitude and Duty which belonged to his Father, had he also been alive,
could never satisfy his mind, or think he did enough, in all the Consolations
and Caresses she received from him, but took a Wife also at her motion and
entreaty, and lived still with his Mother, without parting Families, wh^^ she
had brought him Children. The ^^pute of his Integrity and Courage, had (...)
this time gained him a considerable Inter^^^ and Authority in Rome, when the
Senate favoring the wealthier sort of Citizens, happened to be at odds and
variance with the common People, who made very sad Complaints, touching that
rigorous and inhuman* Usage they found among the Usurers which had lent them
Money; for as many as were behind with them, and had any small matter in
possession, they presently stripped even o^ that little Stock, by the way of
Pawns and Auctions; but such as through former Exactions were reduced already
to extreme Indigence, and had nothing more to be deprived of, these they led
away in person, and put their Bodies under constraint, notwithstanding they did
expose the Scars and Slashes of their Wounds, and show their mangled Limbs, as
a proof of that Service they had done the Public in several Expeditions, the
last whereof was against the Sabins, which they undertook upon a promise made
by their rich Creditors, that they would treat them with more Gentleness for
the future, Marcus Valerius the Consul, having by Order from the Senate,
engaged also for the performance of it; but seeing, that after they had fought
courageously, and acquitted themselves so well in the late Action, as to
vanquish the Enemy, there was however no such Moderation and Forbearance used,
as they had reason to expect, since the Senate also did pretend to remember
nothing of that Agreement, and sat without testifying the least concern to see
them dragged away like Slaves, and their Goods seized upon as formerly, there
began now to be open Mutinies, and dangerous Factions in the City, insomuch
that the Enemy being aware of that popular Tumult, did invade and lay waste the
Country; upon which when the Consuls gave notice, that all who were of an age
to bear Arms, should make their personal Appearance, and no body for all that
did regard the Summons, the chief Magistrates then coming to consult what
course should be taken, were again of several minds, and still differed in
opinion: for some thought it most advisable to comply a little, and yield
somewhat in favor of the poor Plebeians, by relaxing their over-s^rain'd
Rights, and that excessive ridgedness of the Law, whereas others did withstand
this Proposal, but Marcius in particular, and with more vehemence than the
rest, alleging that the business of money on either side was not the main
thing in question, or to be most minded, but he looked upon this disorderly
proceeding as an Essay and Rudiment of the Peoples Insolence, and their
hardiness to affront and defy the stablish^ Laws, that it would therefore
become the wisdom of the Government to stop them* in their first Career, and
stifle those unruly heats that were now flaming out into a Combustion.

There had been frequent Assemblies of the whole Senate, and that within a
small compass of time, about this ticklish Affair, but without any certain
issue or final resolution: the poor Commonalty perceiving then there was like
to be no redress of their grievances, came suddenly together in a body, and
after some warm discourses among themselves, forsook the City with one accord,
and marching up that Ascent which is now called the Holy Mount, they sat down
by the River Anien, doing no sort of violence or seditious outrage all the
while, only they made loud and heavy outcries as they went along, that the rich
men, havin^ endeavored it of old, did now actually expel and thrust them out
of Rome, but that Italy however would every where afford them the benefit of
Air and Water for the small remainder of their days, and a place of burial,
when they died, which was all they could expect by their continuance in the
City, beside the privilege of being cut and killed in a time of War for the
defense of those cruel Banquiers. The Senate apprehending the dangerous
consequence of this Rupture, sent away the gravest of their own Order, and such
as had been most moderate, and were most gracious among the people, to treat
with them.

Menenius Agrippa their chief Spokesman, after much Courtship to the Rabble,
and no less freedom used on behalf of the Senate, came at length to conclude
his discourse with this celebrated Fable. It once happened, says he, that all
the other Members of a man fell to mutiny against the Stomach, which they
accused as the only idle uncontributing part in the whole Body, while the rest
were put to mighty hardships, and the expense of much labor to supply that and
minister to its Appetites: but the provident and painful stomach hearing such a
senseless charge brought against her, could not choose but laugh at the
ignorance and ill breeding of those dissatisfied members, who either wanted the
wit to understand, or else the civility to acknowledge that she receives the
nourishment into her Office out of mere charity to the public, which she
returns ever with advantage, that being prepared by the art of her Chemistry,
it may pass and circulate to all, and so furnish them with spirits for life and
acti^^^ Now this is exactly the case betwixt you a^^ the Senate, O ye Roman
Citizens, and the very image of its care and kind dealing as (...) your regard;
for there they mingle counsels and digest matters, which become the strength
and maintenance of the whole state, and that secretly disperse and bring home
all manner of support and convenience to every one of you.

This ingenious and sensible representatio^ of things, did pretty well pacify
and reconcile the Multitude, the Senate too having granted their request for an
annual choice o^ five Patrons or Protectors of such among them as should need
assistance, which Patron^ are now called the Tribunes of the People; the two
first they pitched upon were Junius Brut^^ and Sicinnius Vellutus the prime
Authors o^ that Apostasy.

The City being thus united, the Commo^^ stood presently to their Arms, and
follow'^ their Commanders to the War with great alacrity. As for Marcius,
though he w^^ not a little vexed himself to see the Populace prevail so far, and
get ground of the Senators, and might observe many other Patrician's have the
same dislike of their late Concessions, yet he besought them after all not to
yield at least to the common people in that zeal and forwardness they now
showed for their Countries service, but make it evidently appear that they were
superior to them, not so much for their power and riches, as their heroic
minds and noble resolutions.

The Romans were now at War with The Romans besiege Corioli.
a Nation called the Volscians, whose principal Seat or City of the greatest
note and eminence, was that of Corioli; when therefore Cominius the Consul had
invested this important Place, the rest of the Volscians, fearing it should be
taken, mustered up what ever force they could make from all parts, in order to
relieve it, designing to give the Romans Battle before the City, and so attack
them on both sides: Cominius to avoid this Inconvenience, divided his Army,
marching himself with one body to encounter those Volscians that made toward
him from without, and leaving Titus Larcius (the bravest Roman of his time) to
command the other, and still carry on the Siege. Those within Corioli despising
now the smalness of that number, made a brisk sally upon them, wherein they
prevailed at first, and pursued the Romans into their Trenches: Here it was
that Marcius flying out with a slender Company, and cutting those in pieces
that were nearest and did first engage him, obliged the other Assailants to
slacken the speed they were making to fall on, and then with a strong forcible
Cry, did as it were sound in the Romans to renew the Skirmish; for he was a man
(that which Cato required in a Warrior) not only dreadful to meet with in the
Field by reason of his hand and stroke, but insupportable to an Enemy for the
very tone and accent of his voice, and the sole terror of his aspect. Diverse
of his own party then rallying and making up to him the Enemies soon retreated
for fear of a smarter onset from those they had but now routed; but Marcius
not content to see them draw off and retire, pressed hard upon the Rear, and
drove them, as they fled away in haste, to the very Gates of their City; where
perceiving the Romans to fall back from the pursuit, beaten off by a multitude
of Darts poured in upon them from the Walls, and that none of his followers had
the hardiness to think of falling in Pell-mell among the Runnagates, or forcing
an entrance into the City, which had a strong Garrison armed at all points, and
ready to give them a warm reception; he was however instant with, and did
mightily encourage them by his words and actions, crying out, That Fortune had
now set open Corioli, not so much to shelter the Vanquished, as to receive the
Conquerours; which he had no sooner spoken, but seconded by a few that were
willing to venture with him, he bore along the Crowd, and made good his
passage, and thrust himself into the Gate through the midst of them, no body
daring to resist, or sustain the violence of his first impressions; but after
he had looked well about him, and could discern but a very small number of
Assistants who had slipped in to engage in that hazardous service, and saw that
Friends and Enemies were now mingled together, he was said to commence a
Combat within the Town, wherein he performed the most extraordinary and
incredible things, as well for the mightiness of his force, as the nimbleness
of his motion, and the audacity of his mind, breaking thorough all he made any
attempts upon, constraining some to shift for themselves in the farthest
corners of the City, and others to throw down their Weapons as despairing they
should be able to oppose him: By all which he gave Titus Lartius a fair
occasion to bring in the rest of the Romans with ease and safety.

Corioli being thus surpised and taken, Corioli taken.
the greater part of the Soldiers fell presently to spoil and pillage it, and
were employed still in Rapine, or carrying off their Booty: that which Marcius
was highly offended at, and reproacht them for it as a dishonorable and
unworthy thing, that when the Consul and their fellow-Citizens had now perhaps
encountered the other Volscians, and were hazarding their lives in Battle, they
should basely mispend the time in running up and down for Pelf and Treasure,
and under a pretense of enriching themselves, decline the present jeopardy; yet
for all he could allege, there were not many that would leave plundering for a
share in glory: Putting himself then at the head of those generous Spirits that
were still ready to deserve well, he took that Road where the Consuls Army had
marched before him, often exciting his Companions, and beseeching them as they
went along that they would not falter and give out, praying often to the Gods
too, that he might be so happy as to arrive before the Fight was over, and come
seasonably up to assist Cominius, and partake in the peril of that action.

It was customary with the Romans of that Age, when they stood in Battel-array,
and were now taking up their Bucklers, and girding their Gowns about them, to
make a^ the same time an unwritten Will or mee^ verbal Testament, and to name
who should be their Heirs in the hearing of three or fou^ Witnesses: In this
posture did Marcius fin^ them at his arrival, the Enemy being advanced within
view.

They were not a little disordered by his first appearance, seeing him all over
bloody and sweating as he was, and attended with a small Train; but when he
hastily made up to the Consul with an air of gladness in his looks, giving him
his hand, and recounting to him how the City had been taken; when they saw
Cominius also embrace and salute Marcius upon that discourse, then every one
took heart a fresh, and both such as were near enough to hear the Relation of
his Success, and those that, being at a greater distance, could only guess what
had happened by the manner of their greeting, besought the Consul with a loud
voice, that he would lead them on to engage the Enemy: but, before he did that,
Marcius desired to know of him, how the Volscians had disposed the order of
their Battalia, where they had placed the Men of Metal, and the more stout and
pugnacious part of their whole Army; who answering, that he took those Troops
of the Antiates in the middle Rank to be their prime Warriors, and that would
yield to none for Prowess and Bravery; let me then demand and obtain of you,
says Marcius, that I may be directly confronted to these daring People. The
Consul then favored him in that request, admiring much the forwardness and
ardor of his mind; when the Conflict was begun by darting at each other, and
Marcius sallied out before the rest, the Vant-guard of the Volscians was not
able to make head against him, for wheresoever he fell in, he presently broke
their Ranks, and made a Lane through them; but the Parties turning again, and
enclosing him on each side with their Weapons, the Consul, who observed the
danger he was in, dispatched some of the choicest Men he had for his speedy
rescue. The Dispute then growing warm and sharp about Marcius, and many falling
dead in a little space; the Romans bore so hard upon the Enemies, and pressed
them with such violence, that they were forced at length to abandon their
Stations, and to quit the Field; and going now to prosecute the Victory, they
besought Marcius, tired out with his Toyls, and faint and heavy through the
loss of Blood, that he would retire himself to the Camp; but he replying, that
Weariness was a thing which did not befit Conquerors, joined with them in the
pursuit; the rest of the Volscian Army was in like manner defeated, a The
Volscian Army is routed.
great multitude being slain, and no less taken. The day after, Marcius, with a
numerous Assembly of other Persons; appearing at the Consuls Tent, he mounted
up to his Chair of State, and having rendered al^ due Gratulation and
Acknowledgment to the Gods for the prosperity of that Enterprise, he applies
himself immediately to Marcius, and first of all he made an admirable
Panegyric upon his rare Exploits, which he had partly been an Eyewitness of
himself in the late Battle, and had partly known from the Testimony of T.
Lartius, reporting what had been done at the Siege and Conquest of Corioli. And
then he required The tenth part of the Spoils offered to Marcius.
him to choose a tenth part of all the Treasure, and Horses, and Captives, that
had fallen into their hands, before any division should be made to others;
beside which, he made him the Present of a goodly Horse with Trappings and
Military Ornaments, as a mark and cognizance of his signal Fortitude; which
being highly applauded by the whole Army, Marcius stepped forth, and declared his
thankful acceptance of that single Horse, and how extremely satisfied he was
with the Praise and Elogy which his General had vouchsafed to bestow upon him,
but as for other things, which he looked upon rather as Mercenary Accruements,
than any significations of Honor, he did wave them all, and should be content
that his proportion of such Rewards might not He nobly refuses 'em.
exceed that of the meanest Soldier. I have only, says he, one singular Grace
to beg, and this, Sir, I hope you will not deny me: There was a certain
hospitable and courteous Friend of mine among the Volscians, a Person of great
Probity and Virtue, who is now become a Prisoner, and from the Wealth and
Freedom wherein he lived, reduced to Poverty and present Servitude; the man has
fallen under many Misfortunes, but he would think it a sufficient Deliverance,
if my Intercession shall redeem him from this one at least, that he may not be
sold as a common Slave. Now so handsome a Refusal in Marcius, was followed still
with louder Acclamations, than the Consuls Offer had been before, and he had
many more Admirers of that generous Resolution whereby he conquered Avarice,
than of the warlike Stoutness he had shown in subduing Enemies; for those very
persons who did conceive some Envy and Despite, to see him thus infinitely
honored, could not choose then but acknowledge, that he was worthy to receive
the greatest things, even for his noble declining the reception of them; and
they were more deeply in love with that Virtue of his, which made him despise
so many fair Advantages, than any of his former Actions, whereby he did so well
deserve they should be conferred on him; for it is much more commendable to be
dextrous and skilful in the use of Riches than of Arms, and yet a man shall
have higher Veneration still, who does not w^nt or desire Money, than he that
understands how to use and employ it as he ought.

When the noise of Approbation and Applause ceased, Cominius turning to the
Company: There is no way, says he, Fellow Soldiers, to force and obtrude those
other Gifts of ours, on a person who seems to be above such Gratuities, and is
so unwilling to accept them; let us therefore give him that which is so proper
and suitable to the Service he has done, that he cannot well reject it; let us
pass a Vote, I mean, that he shall hereafter be called Coriolanus, unless you
think that his performance at Corioli has it self prevented us in decreeing him
the privilege of that Title. Hence therefore he came to acquire his third Name
of Coriolanus; by which it is manifest, that Caius The Name of Coriolanus is
given to him.
was a personal proper Name, that the second or Surname of Marcius, was a Name
in common to his House and Family, and that the third Roman Appellative was a
peculiar Note of distinction, drawn afterward and imposed either from some
particular Fact, or Fortune, or Signature, or Virtue of him that bore it; for
thus also the Grecians in old time, were wont to fix an additional Character on
their great Men, for any famous Achievement, such as Soter, that is, a
preserver, and Callinicus, one renowned for his Victories; or to express
something remarkable in their shape and figure, as Physcon a Gorge-belly, and
Grypus, Eagle-nos'd; and then upon the account of their Virtue and Kindness, as
Euergetes, a Benefactor, and Philadelphus, a lover of his Brethren; or because
of their unusual Felicity and good Fortune, as Eudaemon, the prosperous or
happy, an Epithet given to the second Prince of the Race of Battus; yea, and
several Monarchs have had Names appropriated to them in reproach and mockery,
as Antigonus that of Doson, or one that was liberal only in the future, since
he did always promise, but never came to performance; and Ptolemy who was
styled Lamyrus for the fond opinion he had of his own wit and pleasantness;
which latter kind of denomination by way of rail, lery the Romans did very much
delight in; for one of the Metelli was surnamed by them Diadematus, because he
had for a long time together walked about with his head bound up by reason of an
Ulcer in his Forehead.

Another of the same Family they called Celer, i. e. the swift or nimble, for
that expedition and dispatch he made to procure them a Funeral Entertainment of
so many pair of Gladiators within a few days after his Fathers death, the have
and magnificence of which provision was thought very strange and extraordinary
for so short a time: there are some that even at this day derive Names from
certain casual Incidents at their Nativity; one for instance, who happens to be
born when his Father is abroad in a foreign Country, they term Proculus, but if
after his decease, they style him Posthumus; and when two Twins come into the
World, whereof one dies at the Birth, the Surviver of them is called Vopiscus;
nay, they use to denominate not only their Sylla's and Nigers, that is, men of
a pimpled or swarthy Visage, but their Caeci and Claudii, the blind and the
lame from such corporal blemishes and defects; thus wisely accustoming their
people not to reckon either the loss of sight, or any other bodily misfortune,
as a matter of ignominy and disgrace to them, but that they should ansswer to
such Names without shame or confusion, no otherwise than the most familiar and
civil Compellations: But to treat of these things is not so proper to the
Argument I have now in hand.

The War against the Volscians was no sooner at an end, but the popular
Tribunes and factious Orators fell again to revive domestic troubles, and
raise another Sedition, without any new cause of complaint or just grievance to
proceed upon; but those very mischiefs that did unavoidably ensue from their
former differences and contests, were then made use of as a ground and pretense
to quarrel with the Nobility: The greatest part of their Arrable Land had been
left unsown and without tillage, and the time of War allowing them no means or
leisure to fetch in Provision from other Countries, there was an extreme
scarcity of things in Rome: The Movers of the People then observing that there
was neither Corn brought into the Market, or if there had been Grain to supply
them, yet they wanted Money to buy it, began to calumniate the Wealthy with
false stories, and whisper it about, as if they out of an old grudge,, and to
revenge themselves, had purposely contrived it thus to bring a Famine upon
them. While these things were in agitation, there came an Embassy from the
Velitrani, who delivered up their City to the Romans, desiring that they would
send some new Inhabitants to people it, inasmuch as a late Pestilential Disease
had swept away so many of the Natives, and made such havoc and destruction
among them, that there was hardly a tenth part remaining of their whole
Community. Now this sad necessity of the Velitrani, was considered by the more
prudent sort as a seasonable relief unto themselves, and seemed to happen very
opportunely for the present state of their Affairs; for not only the dearth of
Victuals had made it needful to ease and unburden the City of its superfluous
Members, but they were in hope also at the same time, and by this means to
scatter and dissolve the Faction which now threatened them, through a purgation
and discharge of the more restless and inflamed Party, that like a redundancy
of morbid humors, put them all into so dangerous a ferment. Such as these
therefore the Consuls singled out to supply the desolation at Velitrae, and
gave notice to others that they should be ready to march against the Volscians,
which was politickly designed to prevent intestine Broyls by employing them
abroad. And there was some reason to presume, that, when as well the rich, as
the poor, those of the Plebeian side, and the Patrician Interest, should be
mingled again in the same Army, and the same Camp, and engage in one common
service and jeopardy for the Public, it would mutually dispose them to
reconciliation and friendship, and to live upon gentler terms, and after a more
sweet and benign fashion with each other.

But Sisinius and Brutus, a couple of seditious Tribunes, did presently
interpose here, crying out, That the Consuls went about to disguise the most
cruel and barbarous action in the World, under that so mild and plausible name
of a Colony, for no other end, but that they might precipitate so many poor
Citizens, as it were, into the very gulf of Perdition, by removing them to
settle in an infectio^s Air, and a place that was covered with noisome
Carcasses, and sending them to sojourn, not only under a strange Deity, but an
angry and revengeful Genius; and then, as if it would not satisfy their
hatred, to destroy some by hunger, and expose others to the mercy of a Plague,
they must proceed to involve them also in a needless War of their own choosing,
that all other Calamities might fall upon the City at once, because it did
refuse to bear that of being any longer in slavery to the rich.

By which kind of discourses, the people were so filled with aversion and
insolence, that none of them would appear upon the Consular Summons to be
listed for the War, and they did as little relish the Proposal for a new
Plantation; This put the Senate into such perplexity that it was utterly at a
loss what to say, or do. But Marcius, who began now to swell and bear himself
higher than ordinary, and to take more Spirit and Confidence from his noble
Actions; being admired too by the best and greatest men of Rome, did openly
oppose the harangues and practices of these Popular Incendiaries; so that in
spite of them a Colony was dispatched to Velitrae, those that were chosen by
lot, being obliged to depart and repair thither upon high Penalties; but when
he saw them obstinately persist in refusing to Inroll themselves for the
Volscian Service, Marcius then mustered up his own Clients, and as many others
as could be wrought upon by persuasion, and with these he made an inroad into
the Territories of the Antiates, where finding a considerable quantity of
Coriolanus invades the Antiates.
Corn, and lighting upon much booty both of Cattle and Prisoners, he reserved
nothing for himself in private, but returned safe and empty to Rome, while
those that ventured out with him were seen laden with rich Pillage, and
driving their Prey before them; which made the rest that staid at home repent
of their perverseness, and envy such as had sped so well by the Enterprise; yea,
and to be aggrieved and repine at Marcius, and the power and reputation he
still got, as that which did increase and rise only to the lessening and ruin
of the Peoples Interest. It was not long after that he stood for the Stands for
the Consulship.
Consulship, when the people however did relent and incline to favor him, as
being sensible what a shame it would be to repulse and affront a man of his
Family and Courage, and that too after he had done them so many signal
Services, and been the Author of so much good and benefit to the Public; for
it was the custom of those that pretended to Offices and Dignities among them,
to solicit and caress the people at their General Assemblies, clad only in a
loose Gown without any Coat under it, either to promote their Supplications the
better, by suing in such an humble Habit, or that such as had received Wounds
might thus more readily demonstrate the visible tokens of their fortitude: for
it was not from any suspicion the people then had of bribery and corruption,
that they required such as did petition them to appear ungirt and open without
any close Garment; for it was much later, and many Ages after this that buying
and selling crept in at their Elections, and Money was an Ingredient into the
Public Suffrages; but Gifts and Presents had no sooner shown what influence
they had, and what Parties they could make for choosing Magistrates, but the
same practice came to attempt their Tribunals, and even attack their Camps,
till by hiring the Valiant, and enslaving Iron to Silver, it grew Master of the
State, and turned their Commonwealth into a Monarchy; for it was well and
truly said by him, who did affirm that the person who began to give Treats and
Largesses to the people, was he that first deprived them of their strength and
power; but the mischief it seems stole secretly in and by little and little,
not being presently discerned and taken notice of at Rome; for it is not
certainly known who the Man was that did there first either bribe the Citizens,
or corrupt the Bench; but in Athens it is said, that Anytus the Son of
Anthemion, was the first that gave Money to the Judges toward the latter end of
the Peloponnesian War, he being then accused of Treachery, for delivering up
the Fort of Pylus; while those of the pure golden kind did as yet preside and
give sentence in the Roman Courts: Marcius therefore, as the fashion of
pretenders was, laying open the scars and gashes that were still extant in his
body, from those innumerable Skirmishes and Conflicts wherein he had
successively engaged, and always signalized himself for seventeen years
together; they had a certain reverence for his Virtue, and told one another
that they ought in common modesty create him Consul; but when the day of
Election was now come, and Marcius appeared at the place where they were to
give their Votes with a pompous Train of Senators attending him, and all the
Patricians did manifestly express a greater concern, and acted more vigorously
in his particular, than they had ever done before on the like occasion; the
Commons then fell off again from all the kindness they had conceived for him,
and in stead of their late Benevolence, were carried to Indignation and Envy on
the sudden: the Malignity of which Passions was assisted too by the general
fear they were in, that if a man who was clearly to have the Senate govern, and
was so mightily respected by the Nobles, should be invested with all the Power
which that Office would give him, he might employ it to their prejudice, and
utterly deprive the People of that Liberty which was yet left them: Being
therefore so ill affected, and reasoning thus among themselves, in conclusion,
they rejected Marcius; but when Is rejected.
two other Persons were declared Consuls, the thing was taken very hainously by
the Senate, as reckoning that the Indignity of such a Slur did reflect rather
upon it self than Marcius, who for his part was more sensibly nettled at their
proceeding, and could not bear that disgrace with any temper or patience,
having commonly used himself to follow the more wrathful and stickling motions
of the Soul, as if there were somewhat of Grandeur and bravery in those
Transports, without a due mixture of that gravity and meekness, which are the
effects of Reason and Discipline, and Virtues so necessary for Civil Conduct,
and not considering that whoever undertakes to manage public Business and
Converse with men, should above all things avoid opiniateness and pertinacy in
his own way, which (as Plato speaks) belong to the Family of Solitude, and
become a lover of that forbearance, and those enduring qualities that are so
much derided by some ridiculous persons; whereas Marcius being plain and
artless; but ever rigid and inflexible, and strongly persuaded that to prevail
and vanquish all he had to do with, was the proper work of Fortitude, and not
rather a weakness and effeminacy of mind, which pushes out Fury from within,
like the swelling of a bruised and painful part, flung away in great disorder,
and bitterly enraged against the People: Those also of the young sparkish
Gallants that did most flourish and flutter it in the City upon the score of
their Noble Birth, as they had been always marvellously devoted to his
Interest, so adhering to him at that time, and unhappily present when he was
thus slighted, did by their Resentments and Condolence much aggravate the
Baffle, and blow up his heat into a flame; for he was not only their Captain
and Leader, but a kind Instructor of the Roman Gentlemen, when they went out
with him, as to all that did belong unto the Art of War; and taught them a true
virtuous Emulation, how they should mutually exalt, and without Envy extol one
another for any brave Achievement.

In the midst of these Distempers, a great A great quantity of Corn brought to
Rome.
deal of Corn happened to come into Rome, a considerable part whereof had been
bought up in Italy, which was equaled by another Stock arriving from Syracuse,
as a Present from Gelo, the King of Sicily; insomuch that many began now to
hope well of their Affairs, supposing the City by this means would be delivered
at once both of its Wa^ and Discord. A Council therefore being presently held,
the People came flocking about the Senate House, and did there eagerly attend
the issue of that Deliberation, a^ expecting that the Market Rates would be
more gentle and easy, for that which should be exposed to sale, and also that
which wa^ sent in as a Gift, should come on free cost and be distributed gratis
among them, for there were some within who advised the Senate thus to moderate
the price of one, and give such Orders for the disposal of the other. But
Marcius standing up, did sharply inveigh Coriolanus 's Speech against its being
distributed among the People.
against those who spoke in favor of the Multitude, calling them Flatterers of
the base Rabble, but downright Traitors to the Senate and alleging that by
such mean and foolish Gratifications, they did nothing else (...) cherish those
ill seeds of Boldness and Petu^^ance that had been sown among the People,
against themselves and to their own prejudice, which they should have done well
to observe and stifle at their first appearance, and not have suffered the
Plebeians to grow so strong, by giving such Authority to their Tribunes; for
now they were become formidable, through a compliance with their humor in all
they did demand and insist upon, and for want of constraining them to any thing
which was contrary to their own will; so that living, as it were, in Anarchy,
they would no longer obey the Consuls, or acknowledge any superior Magistrate,
but the Heads and Leaders of their own Faction. And when things are come to
such a pass, for us to sit here, and decree Largesses and Dividends for them,
like those Grecians where the Populace is supreme and absolute, what would it
be else, says he, but to foster and supply their Stubbornness for the common
ruin of us all? for sure they will not look upon these Liberalities as a
Reward of public Service, which themselves know they have so often deserted; nor
yet of those Apostacies and Departures from us, whereby they did openly
renounce and betray their Country, and much less of the Calumnies and Slanders
they have been always so ready to entertain, against the just and honorable
Proceedings of this Senate, but will rather conclude that a Bounty, which seems
to have no other visible Cause or Reason, must needs be the effect of our Fear
and Flattery; so that hoping we shall go on to yield and condescend still to
any further Submissions, which may serve to pacify and gain them, they will
come to no end of their Disobedience, nor ever cease from Riots and Uproars,
and seditious Practices. It is therefore a direct madness in us to be so tame
and coming, as we have hitherto shown our selves; nay, if we had but the Wisdom
and Resolution which becomes those of our Rank and Order, we should never rest
till we had retrieved that Tribunitian Power they have extorted from us, as
being a plain subversion of the Consulship, and a perpetual ground of
separation in our City, that is no longer one as heretofore, but has thereby
received such a Wound and Rupture, as, for ought I can foresee, is never likely
to close and unite again, or suffer us to be of a joint Body and the same Mind,
and so much in our right wits, as to leave heightening our own Distempers, and
being a Plague and Torment to each other.

Marcius discoursing many things to this purpose, did strangely inspire the
brisk Youngsters with the same furious Sentiments, and had almost all the
wealthy on his side, who cried him up as the only Person their City had, that
was both insuperable by Force and above Flattery; but some of the more grave
and elderly sort did (...) him herein, suspecting the ill consequence of his
Procedure, as indeed there came no good of it; for the Tribunes that were
present at this Consultation, perceiving how the Proposal of Marcius took and
carried it against them, ran out into the Crowd with Exclamations, calling on
the Plebeians to stand together, and come in to their assistance. The Assembly
then being grown tumultuous, and the sum of what Marcius had spoken, having
been reported to them, the Rabble fell into such a Rage, that they were The
People rise against him.
ready to break in upon the Senate; but the Tribunes prevented that, by laying
all the blame on Coriolanus, whom therefore they cited by their Messengers to
come before them, and give an account of his late violent Oration; and when he
contemptuously repulsed the Officers who brought him such a Summons, they came
presently themselves with the Aediles, or Overseers of the Market, designing to
carry him away by force, and accordingly began to lay hold on his Person; but
the Nobility striking in to his rescue, did not only thrust off the Tribunes,
but also beat the Aediles that were their Seconds in the Quarrel, and then the
Night approaching, put an end to their present Scuffle. But as soon as it was
day, the Consuls observing the People to be highly exasperated, and that they
ran from al^ ^^arters, and met together in the Marketplace, were afraid for
the whole City, lest the business should come to a general Uproar; so that
convening the Senate afresh, they desired them to advise how by gentle Speeches
and more benign Edicts, they might best qualify and compose that incensed
Multitude: for if they did wisely consider the state of Things, they must needs
find that it was no longer time to stand upon terms of Reputation, and that the
matter of this Contest was not a mere point of Glory, but that such a ticklish
and critical Conjuncture did oblige them to kind Methods, and require temperate
and good-natured Counsels. The majority therefore of the Senators submitting to
new Measures and a milder Sentence, the Consuls proceeded to bespeak and
pacify the People in the best manner they were able, answering gently to such
Imputations and Charges as had been cast upon the Senate, and using much
Tenderness and Modesty in those Admonitions and Reproofs they gave them for
their late exorbitant Demeanor. And as for a supply of the Market with
Provisions, or the moderate and reasonable Rates of what should be there
exposed to Sale, they said, there should be no difference at all between them
upon that Subject. When a great part of the Commonalty was grown cool, and it
appeared from their orderly and peaceful Audience, that they had been wrought
upon, and very much appeased by what was spoken, the Tribunes standing up
declared in the name of the People, that since the Senate was pleased to act
soberly, and do them Reason, they likewise should be ready to condescend in all
things that were fair and equitable on their side; however they did
peremptorily insist that Marcius should give in his Answer to the several
particulars he was accused of; as first, whether he could deny that he did
instigate and provoke the Senate to confound the Government, and dissolve the
Authority of the People; and in the next place, if being called to account for
it, he did not insolently slight and disobey their Summons; and last of all,
whether by the blows and other public affronts given to the Aediles, he did
not as much as in him lay, introduce and commence a Civil War, and become a
Leader to the rest of the Citizens to take up Arms one against another.

Now these Articles were brought in against him, with a design either to humble
Marcius, and make it appear he was one of a mean Spirit, if contrary to his
nature he should now Court and Caress the people; or, if he did still maintain
the usual haughtiness of his mind, (which they did rather hope and expect as
guessing rightly at the man) he might work up their Choler to such a height,
that they should remain implacable, and never more be reconciled to him.

He came therefore as it were to make his Apology, and clear himself from the
Impeachment; in which belief the People kept silence, and gave him a quiet
hearing: But when, in stead of the submissive and deprecatory language was
expected from him, he began to use not only an offensive kind of freedom,
wherein he seemed rather to accuse then apologize; but, as well by the tone and
sierceness of his Voice, as the stern and searless air of his Countenance, did
demonstrate a security that was not far from disdain and contempt of them, the
whole multitude then was ruffled and incensed to purpose; and gave sufficient
indication of their uneasiness and disgust, and that they could no longer
endure the pride and arrogance of such a scornful Orator; hereupon Sicinnius
the T^ibune pronounces Sentence of Death against Co^iolanus.
Sicinnius the most hardy and violent of all their Tribunes, after a little
private Conference with the rest of his Colleagues, did solemnly pronounce
before them all that Marcius was condemned to die by the Tribunes of the
People, and without more ado, bid the Aediles hurry him up to the Tarpeian
Rock, and presently throw him headlong from that precipice; but when they, in
compliance with their Order, came to seize upon his body, the action did appear
horrible and insolent to many even of the Plebeian Party; but the Patricians
being wholly beside themselves, and infinitely affected with it, began to cry
out for help; and while some made use of their hands to hinder the Arrest, and
surrounding Marcius, got him in among them, others stretched out theirs unto the
multitude, beseeching them that they would not proceed to such furious
Extremities; but in so great a hurly-burly and tumult, there was no good to be
done by words and out-crys, till at length the Friends and Acquaintance of the
Tribunes wisely perceiving how impossible it would be to carry off Marcius to
punishment without much bloodshed and slaughter of the Nobility, persuaded them
to take off that which was unusual and odious therein, and that they would not
dispatch him by such a sudden violence, or without regular Process and the due
Forms of Justice, but refer what did concern the life of so eminent a Person to
the general Suffrage of the People: Sicinnius then after a little sober pause,
turning to the Patricians, demanded what their meaning was thus forcibly to
rescue Marcius out of the Peoples hands as they were going to punish him for
such high Misdemeanors; when it was replied by them on the other side, and the
question put, yea rather, how came it into your mind? and what is it you
design, thus to hale one of the chief and the worthiest men of Rome, to such a
barbarous and illegal Execution, and not allow him so much as a free Trial,
which is the right and privilege of the meanest Citizen? Very well, said
Siccinnius, i^ that be all, it shall be no ground of your squablings and
factious differences with the People, which grants all you require as to this
particular; namely, that your swaggering Hero may be judged and sentenced
according to the course of Law: And as for you, Sir, directing his speech to
Marcius, we assign you the third Term of Judicature which shall next ensue, to
make your appearance and defense in, and to try if you can satisfy the Roman
Citizens of your Innocence, who will thoroughly examine the Case, and then put
it to a Vote, which shall decide your doom. The Noblemen were content with
such a Truce and respite for that time, and gladly returned home; having
weathered the present storm, and brought off Marcius in safety.

During the Interval of that appointment, (for the Romans hold their Sessions
every Ninth day, which from thence are called Nundinae in Latin) there fell
out a War with the Antiates, which, because it was like to be of some
continuance, gave them hope they might one way or other elude the Judgment, as
presuming the People would become mild and tractable, and that their
Indignation must needs lessen and languish by degrees in so long a space, if it
did not totally cease while they were taken up with the business of that
Enterprise; but when contrary to expectation; they quickly made an agreement
with those of Antium, and the Army came back to Rome, the Patricians were again
in great perplexity about the affair of Marcius, and had frequent Meetings and
Consultations among themselves, the subject whereof was, how things might be so
ordered, that they should neither abandon him, nor yet give an occasion to
those that did influence the People to put them into new disorders. Now Appius
Claudius, whom they reckoned among those Senators that were most of all averse
to the Popular Interest, made a solemn Declaration, and told them before hand,
that the Senate would utterly destroy it self, and betray the Government if
they should once suffer the People to become their Judges, and assume the
Authority of pronouncing Capital Sentence upon any of the Patricians; but then
the most aged and most inclined to Popularity, did allege on the other side,
and deliver it as their Opinion that the People would not be so harsh and
severe upon them, as some were pleased to imagine, but rather become more
gentle and courteous through the concession of that Power, since it was not
their contempt of the Senate, but the fear of being despised by it, which made
them pretend to such a Prerogative of judging, the allowance whereof would be a
Testimony of Respect, and a means of Consolation to them; insomuch, that at the
very time of receiving a liberty to Vote in these Cases, they would presently
dismiss and let fall their Animosities and Displeasures.

When therefore Coriolanus saw that the Senate was in no little pain and
suspense upon his account, divided as it were betwixt the kindness they had for
him, and their apprehensions from the People, he desired to know of the
Tribunes, what the Crimes were they did intend to charge him with, and what the
Heads of that Indictment they would oblige him to plead to before the People;
and being told by them, that he was to be Impeacht for a tyrannical Usurpation,
and that they would His Accusation.
prove him guilty of designing to introduce Arbitrary Government; Stepping
forth hereupon, let me go then, says he, to clear my self from that Imputation
before an Assembly of them, and as I do freely expose my person to any sort of
Cognizance touching this Article, so neither will I refuse any kind of
Punishment whatsoever, if I be convicted of it; only, says he, let what you now
mention, be made the true Title of my Accusation, and be sure you do not
falsify or impose upon the Senate in this matter: when they gave consent
thereto, and promised they would stick to that as the chief ground of their
prosecution; he came to his Trial upon these terms. But the People being met
together, the Tribunes, contrary to all former practice, did extort and obtain
first, that Voices should be given, not according to their Hundreds, but their
Tribes; by which Inversion of Order, the indigent and factious Rabble, that had
no respect for Honesty and Justice, and would be sure to carry it by Number at
the Poll, were to have a Precedence in Voting before the rich and eminent, and
military sort of men, who did serve and support the Public with their Lives
and Fortunes: And then in the next place, whereas they had engaged to prosecute
Marcius upon no other head but that of Tyranny (which could never be made out
against him) they did wave and relinquish this Plea, and instead thereof, fell
to repeat and aggravate some words of his which had been formerly spoken in the
Senate; as, that he did there oppose and dissuade an abatement of the price of
Corn, but advise and encourage them to resume the Tribunitian Power; adding
further as a new Impeachment, the distribution that was made by him of the
spoil and booty he had taken from the Antiates, when he overrun their Country,
which upon his own head, and to gain the Soldiery, he had divided among those
that were readiest to follow him; whereas it ought rather to have been brought
into the public Storehouse, and disposed of by Authority of the Senate for
the common Interest; which last Accusation did, they say, more surprise and
discompose Marcius than all the rest, as not expecting he should ever be
questioned upon that subject, and therefore less provided to give a plausible
and satisfactory Answer to it on the sudden; but when, by way of excuse, he
began to magnify the Merits of those who had been Partakers with him in the
Action, such as staid at home being more numerous than the other, and not
enduring to hear them commended, did so disturb him by the noise they made,
that he could not proceed upon that Argument: In conclusion, when they came to
Vote, there were three entire Tribes that did condemn him more than those that
gave their Suffrage in his Favor, and the Penalty they adjudg'd him to, was
perpetual banishment. The Sentence of his Condemnation being pronounced, He is
banished.
the People went away with greater joy and triumph, and exaltation of mind,
then they had ever shown for any Victory against their Enemies: But the Senate
was all in heaviness, and a deep dejection, repenting now and vexed at the very
Soul that they had not done and suffered all things rather than give way to the
insolence of the People, and permit them to assume and abuse so great an
Authority: there was no need then to look upon their habit or other marks of
distinction, for discerning a Senator from any vulgar Citizen, for it did
plainly appear that the brisk and jocund were all Plebeians, and you might
presently know a Nobleman by his sad Countenance; only Marcius himself was not
struck or humbled in the least by that severe Judgment which had past upon him,
appearing still by his gesture and motion, and aspect to be the same steady
person, and when all others of the same Rank were so passionately touched
therewith, he alone did not seem t^ be any whit affected at his own misfortune*
but this however was not so much an effec^ of reason, and the meekness of his
Tempe^* or because he bore the Accident with Patience, as a certain Transport
of Fury and profound Displeasure, which with ordinary an^ ignorant Judges does
not then pass for a grie^ of Mind, for when this passion lighting (...) a fiery
Nature, does as it were kindle an^ flame out into Choler, it throws off all
th^^ depression and sluggishness, which is otherwise so proper to it; from
whence it happen^ that an angry Man is sometimes thought t^ be extreme vigorous
and active; just as o^ in a Fever, may seem to have a hot Const^tution, when
all this high beating is no mo^^ than a disorderly Pulse and Palpitation (...)
the heart, or as it were a painful Distentio^ and shooting Tumor of the Soul:
Now, the such was the Distemper of Marcius, it immediately appeared by his
following Actions for upon his return home, after saluting hi^ Mother and his
Wife, that were all in Tea^ and full of loud Lamentations, and exhorting them
to moderate the sense they had of hi^ Calamity, he presently went toward the
Cit^ Gates, whither all the Nobility did atten^ him, and so not so much as
taking ough^ with him, or making any Request to the Company, he departed from
them, having He leaves Rome.
only three or four Clients about his Person. He continued solitary and musing
for a few days in some Villages he had, tossed and distracted with great
variety of Counsels, such as Rage and Indignation did suggest to him; in all
which therefore he did not propose to himself any honorable or useful end, but
only how he might best satisfy his Revenge in persecuting the Romans, and for
this purpose he resolved at length to raise up a heavy War against them from
their nearest Neighbors.

In order hereunto, his business was in He goes to the Volscians.
the first place to make trial of the Volscians, whom he knew to be still
vigorous and flourishing enough both in Strength and Treasure, and did imagine
their Force and Power was not so much abated, as their Spite and wrathful
Pertinacy was increased, by the late Overthrows they had received from the
Romans. Now there was a Man of Antium, called Tullus Ausidius, who, for his
Wealth and Prowess, and the Splendour of his Family, had the Respect and
Privi^edge of a King among all the Volscians, but ^ne whom Marcius knew to have
a particular Pique and an inveterate Malice against him above any Roman
whatsoever; for ^here having frequent Menaces and Challenges passed between
them, as they met together in the Field, and by often defying each other
through a competition of their Valor (as the Strife and Emulation of youthful
Spirits does usually prompt them to such Braveries) they had, beside the common
Quarrel of their Country, conceived a mutual Enmity and private Hatred to each
other; but for all this, considering the great Generosity of Tullus, and that
none of the Volscians did so much desire an occasion, to return back upon the
Romans some part of the Evils they had done them, he ventured at a thing, which
mightily confirms that Saying of the Poet: Hard and unequal is with Wrath the
Strife,
Which makes us buy its pleasure with our life.
For putting on such Clothes and Habiliments, by which he might appear most
unlike the Person he was, to all that should see him in that Equipage, as Homer
says of Vlysse^* The Town he entered of his mortal Foes. His Arrival at Antium
was about Evening His Arrival at Antium.
and though several met him in the Street^ yet he passed along without being
know^ to any, and went directly on to the Hou^^ of Tullus; where stealing in
undiscovered he presently made up to the Fire-heart^ (a Place that was sacred
to their Lares and seated himself there without speaking a word, or using any
motion, after he had covered his Head, to prevent observance. Those of the
Family could not choose but wonder at the man's Confidence, and yet they were
afraid either to raise or question him, (for there was a certain air of Majesty
about him, which showed it self both in his Posture and his Silence) but they
recounted to Tullus (being then at Supper) the strangeness of this Accident,
who immediately rose from Table, and coming to Coriolanus, asked him, who he
was, and for what business he came thither: whereupon Marcius unmuffling
himself, and pausing a while, If, says he, you cannot His Speech to Tullus
Aufidius.
yet call me to mind, Tullus, if you do not believe your eyes concerning me, I
must of necessity be my own Accuser; know therefore that I am Caius Marcius,
the same Man that has been Author of so much Mischief to the Volscians, which
if I should offer to deny, the Surname of Coriolanus I now bear, would be a
sufficient Evidence against me, for I have no other Recompense to boast of, for
all the Hardships and Perils I have gone through during the Wars between us,
but a Title that proclaims my Enmity to your Nation, and this is the only thing
which ^s still left me; as for other Advantages, I have ^een stripped and
deprived of them all at once by ^he Envy and Outrage of the Roman People, and
through the Cowardice and Treachery of the Magistrates, and those of my own
Order; so the I am driven out as an Exile, and become as humble Supplicant
before your household Gods, not so much for safety and protection, (for wh^^
should make me come hither had I been afra^^ to die?) as to seek and procure
Vengeance against those that did expel me from my Country, which, methinks, I
have already obtained, by putting my self into your hands; if therefore you
have really a mind to attack and defeat you Enemies, come on, noble Sir, make
use of the Affliction you see me in to assist the Enterprise and let my
personal Infelicity prove a comm^^ Blessing to the Volscians; for I am like to
be s^ much more serviceable in fighting for, than against you, as they who
understand the Secrets ^^ their Enemies, do manage the War better, th^^ such as
are unacquainted with the way and manner of their Conduct: But if you despond
(...) give out, and refuse to make any further Attempts upon them, I am neither
willing to li^^ my self, nor will it be safe and prudent in (...) to preserve a
Person who has been your Ri^^ and Adversary of old, and now, when he offe^^ you
his Service, is so far slighted, as to ^^ thought unprofitable and useless to
you.

Tullus having heard the Discovery an^ Discourse he made, was wonderfully
pleas^ with it, and giving him his right Hand, ^rise, says he, Marcius, and be
of good Courag^ for it is a considerable Happiness you bring (...) Antium, in
that welcome Present you do here make us of your self, and you may look for all
manner of Civility and respectful Usage from the Volscians; and so for that
time he did only feast and entertain him with great Kindness, but for several
days after they held private Conference, and were in close Deliberation
touching the Means and Requisites of a War. While this Design was forming,
there were great Troubles and Commotions at Rome, from the Animosity of the
Senators against the People, which came to be heightened too at present by a new
Grudge, for the late Condemnation of Marcius; beside that their Soothsayers and
Priests, and even private Persons, brought in fearful tidings of Signs and
Prodigies, that were very much to be regarded, one whereof I shall mention
here, which they report to have happened in this manner. Titus Latinus, one of
ordinary Condition, but yet a sober and virtuous man, free from all
superstitious Fancies on one hand, and much more from Vanity and Boasting on
the other, had an Apparition in his Sleep, as if Jupiter came within view and
bid him tell the Senate, that they had sent a very uncouth and disagreeable
Dancer, to march before the Pomp of that Supplication they designed him; but
having beheld the Vision, he said, he did not much mind it, or the words spoken
at the first Appearance, and having seen and slighted it a second and third
time, he then saw the most hopeful Son he had, expire before his Eyes, and his
own Body was so struck and loosened on a sudden, that himself became utterly
impotent. These things he related, being brought hastily into the Senate on a
Couch, and the Story goes, that he had no sooner delivered his Message there,
but he presently felt his Strength and Vigor to return, insomuch that he got
upon his Legs, and went home alone, without need of any assistance or support,
which the Senators much wondering at, made a diligent search into the Matter.
Now that which his Dream alluded to was this: A Person whose Name I know not,
had for some heinous Offense, given up a Servant of his to the rest of his
Fellows, with charge to whip him first through the Market, and then to kill
him; while they were executing this Command, and scourging the poor Creature,
that skrew'd and turned himself into all manner of Shapes and unseemly Motions,
through the Pain and Torture he was in, a solemn Procession made in Honor of
Jupiter, chanced to follow at their heels; several of the Assistants therein
were very much scandalized at such a sight, the horrible sufferings and the
indecent postures of that Wretch, being equally offensive to the Spectators,
and detested by them; yet no body would interpose, or call the Actors to
account for it, they did only spend some Reproaches and Curses on the Master,
who was so bitter and barbarous in his Inflictions: for the Romans treated
their Servants with much Humanity in those days, because they did then work and
labor themselves, and live together among them, and so were apt to be more
gentle and familiar with their own Domestics; for it was one of the greatest
Pennances for a Servant who had highly misdemean'd himself to take up that
piece of Wood upon his shoulders wherewith they did support the Thill of a
Wagon, and carry it round about through the Neighborhood, and he that had
once undergone the shame of this, and was seen by those of the Household and
other Inhabitants of the place, with that infamous burden, had no longer any
trust or credit among them, but was styled Furcifer by way of ignominy and
reproach; for what the Greeks in their Language call Hypostates, i. e. a Prop
or Supporter, is by the Latins termed Furca, from the forked Figure of that
rustical Instrument.

When therefore Latinus had given in such a Relation of his Dream, and all the
Senators were devising who this disagreeable and ungainly Dancer should be,
some of the Company (having been much affected with the strangeness of his
punishment) did call to mind and mention the miserable Slave which was lasht
through the Streets, and afterward put to death; the Priests then being
consulted in the Case, did all unanimously agree, that this must be the same
ungraceful and odious Tripper, which Jupiter complained of; whereupon his
Master was punished, and they renewed the Supplication to their God, with all
the Shows and Solemnities of that Performance. By which it appears, that Numa
was both in other respects a very wise Author of what did belong to holy
Offices, and that this in particular was an excellent institution of his, to
make the People attentive at their Religious Ceremonies; for when the
Magistrates or Priests do perform any Divine Worship, there is a Herald goes
before, and proclaims with a loud voice, Hoc age, which signifies, Do this you
are about, and so warns them heedfully to mind whatever Sacred Action they are
engaged in, not suffering any other business, or worldly avocation to come in
between, that may disturb their thoughts, and interrupt the Exercise; and this
he judged to be the more necessary here, inasmuch as most of the things which
men do, especially of this kind, are in a manner forced from them, and effected
by constraint. Now it is usual with the Romans to begin their Sacrifices, and
Processions, and Sights afresh, not only upon such a Cause as this, but for any
slighter reason; for if but one of the Horses which drew the Chariots called
Tensae, upon which the Images of their Gods were placed, did happen to fail and
falter, or if the Coachman took hold of the Reins with his left hand, they
made a Vote that the whole Operation should commence anew; and in latter ages
one and the same Sacrifice was performed thirty times over, because there
seemed always to be a defect or mistake, or some vicious and offensive Accident
in that Service; so great was the Reverence and Caution which the Romans then
showed toward the Deity in all things.

But Marcius and Tullus did now secretly discourse of their Project before the
chief men of Antium, advising them to invade the Romans while they were at odds
among themselves, and embroiled in Dissentions and Contests with each other;
and when the Respects of Shame and Decency did hinder them from embracing the
motion, inasmuch as they had agreed and sworn to a Truce and Cessation of Arms
for the space of two years, the Romans* themselves soon furnished them with a
Pretense, by making Proclamation (out of a certain jealousy, or slanderous
report) in the midst of their Shows and Exercises, that all the Volscians who
came thither to see them, should depart the City before Sunset: there are some
who affirm, that all this was a Contrivance and Trick of Marcius, who sent one
privately to the Consuls that should falsely accuse the Volscians, as if they
did intend to fall upon the Romans while they were at their Plays and Pastimes,
and set the City on fire. Now so public an Affront did extremly nettle those
of that Nation, and dispose them more than ever to Hostility and hatred against
the Romans; which Tullus perceiving, made his advantage of it, much aggravating
the Fact, and working on their present Indignation, till he did provoke and
persuade them at last to dispatch Ambassadors to Rome, that should require them
to restore that part of their Country, and those Towns which they had taken
from the Volscians in the late War: When the Romans heard such a Message, they
were in great wrath, and smartly replied, That if the Volscians were the first
that did take up Arms, the Romans should be the last that would lay them down.
This Answer being brought back, Tullus made a General Assembly of the Volscian
States, in which Convention the Vote passing for a War; he did propose that
they should call in Marcius, laying aside the remembrance of former grudges,
and assuring themselves that the Services they should now receive from him as a
Friend and Associate, would abundantly outweigh any harm or damage he had done
them when he was their Enemy: Marcius having made his Entrance, and spoken to
the People, he was thought to be a shrewd Warrior no less by his Discourse
than by his Deeds, and to excel in Prudence as well as Courage; whereupon they
joined him in Commission with Tullus, to have full Power as General of their
Forces in all that related to the War; who fearing lest the time that would be
requisite to bring all the Volscians together, with their Ammunition and
Equipage for that Service, might be so long as to make him lose the opportunity
of some considerable Action; he left order with the chief Persons and Rulers of
the City to provide and furnish out other things, while he himself, prevailing
upon the most brisk and forward, to assemble themselves, and march out with him
as Volunteers, without staying to be enrolled, made a sudden Inroad into the
Roman Confines when no body did expect him, by which nimble surprizal he
possessed himself of so much Booty, that the Volscians were encumbered with their
Prey, as unable to drive away and carry it all off, or when they had done so,
to consume and spend it in their Camp; but the abundance of Provision which he
gained, and that waste and havoc of the Country which he made, were of
themselves and in his account, the smallest things in that Invasion, the great
mischief he intended, and for the sake whereof he did all the rest, was to
increase at Rome their slanders and jealousies of the Nobles, and to make them
still upon worse terms with the People; for which end, in ^poyling all the
Fields, and destroying the Goods of other men, he took special care to preserve
their Farms and Villages untoucht, and would not allow his Soldiers to ravage
there, or seize upon any thing which belonged to them; from whence their
Invectives and Quarrels against one another, broke out afresh, and rose to a
greater height than heretofore; the Senators reproaching those of the
Commonalty, with their late injustice to Coriolanus, as if they were rightly
served for banishing a man of so great Importance; while the Plebeians on their
side did not stick to accuse them for having, out of mere spite and revenge,
solicited Marcius to this Enterprise, and that, when others were involved in
the miseries of a War by their means, they sat like unconcerned Spectators, as
being secure themselves, and furnished with a Guardian or Protector abroad of
their own Wealth and Fortunes, in the very person of him who was a Mortal Enemy
to the People. After this Incursion and Exploit which was of great use and
singular advantage to the Volscians, inasmuch as they learnt by it to grow more
hardy, and then first of all to contemn those Enemies they so much dreaded
before, Marcius drew them off, and returned in safety. But when the whole
strength of the Volscians was with great Expedition and Alacrity brought
together into the Field, it appeared so considerable a body, that they agreed
to leave part thereof in Garrison for the security of their Towns, and with the
other Moiety to march against the Romans: Coriolanus then desired Tullus to
consider which of the two Charges would be most agreeable to him, and that he
would choose accordingly; to which Tullus make answer, That since he knew
Marcius to be equally valiant with himself, but far more fortunate in all
Rencounters, he would have him take the Command of those that were going out to
the War, while he made it his care and business to defend their Cities at home,
and provide all Conveniences for the Army abroad. Marcius therefore, being thus
reinforced, and much stronger than before, moved first toward the City called
Circaeum, that was a Roman Colony, which being freely delivered up, he did not
the least harm there to the Place or its Inhabitants: And passing thence, he
entered and laid waste the Country of the Latins, where it was expected the
Romans should have come in to their assistance, and fought against him in
behalf of the Latins, who were their Confederates and Allies, and had often
sent to demand Succors from them; but because as well the People on their part
showed little inclination for the Service, and the Consuls themselves were
unwilling now to run the hazard of a Battle, when the time of their Office drew
so near its end, and was almost ready to expire, they dismissed the Latin
Ambassadors without any effect: So that Marcius finding no Army to oppose him,
marched up to their very Cities themseives, and having taken by force that of
the People called Tolerienses, and of the Vicani and Pedani, and of the Belani
too, who stood it out against him; he not only plundered their Houses, but made
a Prey likewise of their Persons: But he had a particular regard for all such
as came over to his Party, and was so tender of them, that for fear they might
sustain any damage against his will, he encampt still at the greatest distance
he could, and wholly abstained from the Lands of their Propriety. After he had
made himself Master of Bola, a City that was not above a hundred Furlongs from
Rome, where he met with great Treasure, and put almost all to the Sword that
were of an age to carry Weapons; the other Volscians that were ordered to stay
behind as a safeguard to their Cities, hearing of his Achievements and
Success, had not the patience to remain any longer at home, but came running
with their Arms to Marcius, and saying, that he alone was their General, and
the sole person they would own as a Commander in Chief over them; upon which he
had a mighty Name, and the Renown of him spread throughout all Italy, with a
mavelous Opinion of his single Prowess; who, by changing sides, had himself
alone given that sudden turn to the Affairs of two Nations, and made such a
strange and notable alteration in the state of things.

All was at Rome now in very great disorder, for they were utterly averse from
Fighting, and spent their whole time in Cabals and Conspiracies, and seditious
words, and perpetual Bandyings against each other; until News was brought that
the Enemy had laid close Siege to Lavinium, wherein were all the Images and
Sacred things of their tutelar Gods, and from whence they did derive the
Original of their Nation, that being the first City which Aeneas built in
Italy; which tidings did produce great variety of Sentiments, and wrought a
wonderful difference all at once as to the Thoughts and Inclinations of the
People, but a very odd and unexpected change of Mind among the Patricians; for
the former now was for repealing the Sentence against Marcius, and calling him
back into the City; whereas the Senate, being assembled to deliberate and
resolve upon that Point, did finally dislike and oppose the Proposition; either
out of a cross humor, to contradict and withstand the People in whatever they
should motion, or because they were unwilling perhaps, that he should owe his
Restoration to their Kindness; or having now conceived a Displeasure against
Marcius himself, who did harass and plague them all alike, though he had not
been ill treated by all, and was become a declared Enemy to the whole Country,
though he knew well enough that the principal Men, and all the better sort, did
condole with him, and suffer in his Injuries.

This Resolution of theirs being made public, the People was utterly at a
loss, and could proceed no further, as having no Authority to pass any thing by
Suffrage, and enact it for a Law, without a previous Decree from the Senate.
But when Marcius came to hear of that Vote for prohibiting his Return, he was
more exasperated than ever, insomuch that quitting the Siege of Lavinium, he
marched furiously toward Rome, and encamped at a Place called Fossa Claelia,
about five miles from the City; but as the nearness of his Approach was
terrible, and did create much Trouble and Disturbance, so likewise did it
surcease their Animosities and Dissentions for the present; for no body now
wheth^^ Consul or Senator, durst any longer contradict the People in their
design of recalling Marcius; but seeing their Women run frighted up and down
the Streets, and the old Men at Prayer in every Temple with Tears and earnest
Supplications, and that, in short, there was a general defect among them both
of Courage and Wisdom, to provide for their own safety, they came at last to be
all of one mind, that the People had been very much in the right, to propose
and endeavor, as they did a Reconciliation with Marcius, but that the Senate
was extremely out, and guilty of a fatal Error, then to begin a Quarrel with,
and provoke Marcius, when it was a time to forget Offenses, and they should
have studied rather to appease him. It was therefore unanimously agreed by all
Parties, that Ambassadors should be dispatched away, offering him the liberty
of a Return to his former state at home, and desiring he would free them from
the Apprehensions and the Straits of that War. The Persons sent by the Senate
with this Message, were chosen out of his Kindred and acquaintance, who did
therefore expect a very kind Reception at their first Interview and Audience,
upon the score of that Relation, and their old Familiarity and Friendship with
him; but it seems they were very much mistaken in their Count, for being led
through the Enemies Camp, they found him sitting in great State amidst a crowd
of Officers, with insupportable Arrogance and a sullen Gravity; the Chief of
the Volscians being then present, he bid them openly declare the Cause of their
coming, which they did in the most gentle and benign terms, and with a
Behavior suitable to the modesty of that Language. When they had made an end of
speaking, he returned them a sharp Answer, full of Bitterness and angry
Resentments, as to what concerned himself, and the ill Usage he had received
from them; but as General of the Volscians, he demanded restitution of the
Cities and the Lands they had seized upon during the late War, and that the
same Rights and Franchises should be granted them at Rome, which they had
before accorded to the Latins, since there could be no assurance that a Peace
would be firm and lasting, without fair Condition^ on both sides, and if it had
not Justice and Equality to secure it; and having made these Proposals, he
allowed thirty days to consider and resolve about them. The Ambassadors being
departed, he prefently withdrew hi^ Forces out of the Roman Territory; that
which those of the Volscians, who had long envied his Reputation, and could not
endure to see the Interest and Sway he had with that People, did lay hold of,
as the first matter of an Impeachment against him. Among his chief Maligners
was even Tullus himself, not for any personal Offense or private Injury, but
out of humane passion, and a Vice so incident to Mankind, he felt an inward
Pique, to find his own Glory thus totally obscured, by that of Marcius, and
himself overlookt and neglected now by the Volscians, who had so great an
Opinion and Esteem of their new Leader, that he alone was instead of all to
them, and they would have other Captains be content with that share of
Government and Power, which he should think fit to vouchsafe them. From hence
the first Seeds of Complaint and Accusation were scattered about in secret, and
the Heads of that Conspiracy assembling together, did help to raise and
heighten each others Indignation, saying, that to retreat as he did, was in
effect to betray and deliver up, though not their Cities and their Arms, yet
the proper Times and Opportunities for Action, which is a damage of no smaller
consequence than the other, inasmuch as the preservation or the loss of all
these, and every thing else, does naturally depend on them, seeing in less than
thirty days space, for which he had given a respite from the War, there might
happen the greatest changes in the World. Albeit Marcius spent not any part of
the time idely, but did attack and damnifie the Confederates of the Enemy, yea,
and took from them seven great and populous Cities in that Interval. The Romans
in the mean while durst not venture out to their relief, but were of a sluggish
and unactive Spirit, feeling no more disposition or Capacity for the Affairs of
War, than (...) their Bodies too had been struck and benumbed with a dead
Palsy, and so become utterly destitute of sense and motion: Bu^ when the
thirty days were expired, an^ Marcius appeared again with his whole A^my, they
sent another Embassy to besee^^ him that he would moderate his Displeasu^^ and
marching off with the Volscians conside^ what was fit to be done, and propose
th^^ which he judged most agreeable to the ^nterest of both Parties, remembering
alway^ that the Romans were not men to be wrough^ upon by Menaces, or that
would yie^^ any thing out of Fear, but if it were (...) Opinion that the
Volscians ought to have some favor shown them, upon laying dow^ their Arms,
they might obtain all the^ could in reason desire and fairly prete^^ to.

The Reply of Marcius was, That (...) should answer nothing thereto as General
of the Volscians, but in the quality still of a Roman Citizen, he would advise
and exhort them, as the case stood, not to carry it so high, but think rather
of a just Compliance, and return to him before three days were at an end, with
a Ratification of those equal demands he had formerly made, and did insist
upon; for otherwise they should not have the same freedom and security of
passing through his Camp again upon such idle Errands, and for like impertinent
and fruitless Treaties. When the Ambassadors were come back and had acquainted
the Senate with this resolute Answer, seeing the whole State now threatened as
it were by a Tempest, and the Waves ready to overwhelm them, they were forced
as we say, in extreme Perils, to handle and let down the Sacred Anchor; for
there was a Decree made, that the whole Order of their Priests, with such as
did initiate in Mysteries, or had the care and custody of Holy Things, or the
skill of Prophesying by Birds (an ancient way of Divination among the Romans)
should all and every one of them go in full Procession to Marcius with their
Pontifical Array, and the same Dress and Habit which they respectively used in
their several Functious or Religious Ceremonies; which venerable Orators were
to bespeak him as before, and recommend the former Request; that, upon their
instance at least, he would be persuaded to surcease the War, and then
discourse with his Countrymen about the Volscian Articles; he consented so far
indeed as to give these reverend and peaceful persons an Admittance into his
Camp, but granted nothing at all out of respect and complaisance for them, nor
did he so much as behave or express himself with more civility or smoothness
upon their account; but without capitulating further, or receding from his main
point, bid them once for all choose whether they would yield or fight, for the
old terms were the only terms of Peace. When there was no better effect of such
a solemn Application, (the Priests too returning unsuccessful) they determined
to sit still within the City, and keep Watch about their Walls, intending only
to repulse the Enemy, should he offer to attack them, and placing their hopes
chiefly in the strange and extraordinary Accidents of Time and Fortune: for as
to themselves, they had neither the Wit to contrive, nor the Courage to
undertake ought for their own deliverance, but confusion and terror, and
ill-boding Reports run through the whole City; till a certain thing did arrive,
not unlike those we so often read of in Homer, (which however most people will
hardly believe) for when he upon great occasions, and some rare and unusual
events does affirm and exclaim in this manner. -- But him the Goddess Pallas
did inspire. -- And elsewhere, But some Immortal being turned their mind,
Who left another tale and bruit behind. --
And then, Whether 'twere his own thought, or God's Command. Men are ready here
to despise or censure the Poet, as if he went about to destroy the Credit and
the use of Reason, and indeed the very freedom of their Choice, by submitting
all to such impossible things and absurd Fictions; whereas Homer can no way be
supposed to attempt or design this, for what is probable and usual, and brought
about by the ordinary way of Reason, he ascribes that to humane performance,
and leaves it wholly to our own power and management, frequently discoursing to
this effect, -- But I consulted with my own great Soul. And in another passage.
This said, Achilles was with grief possessed,
And various thoughts did bustle in his breast*
And then again, Yet brave Bellerophon her charms withstood,
On Virtue fixed, and ever true to good.
But in such things and actions as are unaccountably daring, and of a
prodigious and transcendent kind, and therefore need some touches of Enthusiasm
and divine hardiness that may instigate and carry us thereto: Here, I say, he
does introduce God not as taking away the liberty of our Will, but as moving it
to act freely; neither as working in us the Inclinations and Pursuits
themselves* but as offering those Phantasms and Objects to our Minds, from
whence the Impulse is conceived, and the Resolution taken; by which
Representments however, he makes not the Deed involuntary, but only gives a
beginning to spontaneous Operations, and superadds confidence and good hope to
what is thus willingly undertaken: for we must either totally discharge and
remove God from all manner of causality as to what we do, and a prime Original
Influence on our Affairs, or be forced to confess that there is no other way of
Insinuation beside this whereby he does secretly assist men and cooperate with
them; for sure the help which he affords us, cannot be imagined to consist in
fashioning the postures of our body, or directing the motions of our hands and
feet, so as they may be serviceable to us for the use of life, but in exciting
the practical part, and the elective powers of our Soul, by initial overtures
and certain Images and Instincts from above; or else on the contrary, in a
sudden aversion or seasonable restraint of them from other*things, and that
also by hints and apprehensions of his sending.

Now in this perplexity of Affairs which I before mentioned, the Roman Women
went some of them to other Temples, but the greater part, and the Ladies of
best quality were at high Devotion about the Altar of Jupiter Capitolinus;
Among these Supplicants was also Valeria, Sister to the great Publicola, a
person who had done the Romans that eminent service both in Peace and War:
Publicola himself was now deceased (as I have written in the History of his
Life) but Valeria lived still with a mighty Reputation and Esteem at Rome, as
one whose Conduct was thought not to disparage her Kindred, or any way shame
the Relation she had to him. She therefore being suddenly seized with an
instinct or emotion of mind not unlike those I but now spoke of, and happily
lighting (not without Divine Guidance) on the right Expedient, both arose her
self, and caused the rest of the Votaries to get up, and made directly with
them toward the House of Volumnia, the Mother of Marcius; when she came in, and
found her sitting with her Daughter-in-law, and having her little
Grandchildren on her Lap, Valeria then surrounded by her Female-companions,
spoke in the name of them all to this purpose. --

We that now make our appearance, O Volumnia, Valeria 's Speech to Volumnia,
etc.
and you, Madam Vergilia, approach as women unto women, being come hither not
by direction of the Senate, or an Order from the Consuls, or the appointment of
any other Magistrate; but God himself, as I conceive, moved first to compassion
by our Prayers, has consequently moved us to visit you in a body, and request a
thing wherein our own and the common safety is concerned, and which, if you
consent to it, will raise your Glory above that of the Daughters of the
Sabines, who, by hazarding themselves, did reduce their Fathers and their
Husbands from mortal enmity to peace and friendship. Come along then, my good
Ladies, and join with us in our Supplication to Marcius, and do your Country
the right of giving him this true and just testimony on her behalf; that
notwithstanding the many mischiefs and calamities she has suffered, yet she did
never outrage your Persons, nor could so much as think of treating you ill, in
the midst of all her Resentments, but does now restore and present you safe
into his hands, though there is small likelihood she should obtain from him any
better terms for her self, or the least favorable and gentle usage on that
account.

This Discourse of Valeria was seconded by loud Approbations and Incentives of
the other women; to which Volumnia made answer. --

Both I my self, Ladies, and my Daughter Volumnia 's Answer.
Vergilia, have an equal share with you all in the common miseries, beside this
particular affliction which is wholly ours, that we have lost the merit and the
fame of Marcius, and may perceive his person to be secured, rather then
protected by the Arms of the Enemy; but I reckon this the greatest of all
Misfortunes, if indeed the Affairs of Rome be sunk to that desperate and feeble
state, as to have its last dependence upon two simple insignificant women; for
it is hardly imaginable he should have any consideration left for us, when he
has no regard for his Country, a man who was wont to prefer that before his
Mother, and Wife and Children put together. Yet notwithstanding this, if it be
your opinion that we may do any good here, vouchsafe to make use of our
service, and lead us to him, who, if we fail of every thing else, at least can
die for, though not redeem our Country, and spend the last breath we have in
making suit to him for its deliverance.

Having spoken thus, she took Vergilia by the Hand, and the young Children, and
so accompanied those other Ladies to the Volscian Camp. So lamentable a sight
did very much affect the Enemies themselves, and create in them a respectful
Silence. Marcius was then sitting in an elevated Place* with his chief Officers
about him, and seeing that female Party advance toward them, he wondered what
should be the Matter; but came to perceive at length that his own Wife Vergilia
was at the head of their Company; whereupon he endeavored to harden himself in
his former obstinacy, and would fain have kept up the same inexorable Stiffness
against all Entreaties; but overcome by Affection, and strangely disordered at
such an Appearance, he could not endure they should approach him sitting in
that Stately posture, but came down hastily to meet them, saluting his Mother
first, and embracing her a long time, and then his Wife and Children, sparing
neither* Tears nor Caresses on this occasion, but suffering himself to be born
away, and carried headlong as it were by the impetuous Torrent, and the
pleasing Violence of his present Passion. When he had taken his fill of these
Sweetnesses and Indearments and observed that his Mother Volumnia was desirous
to say something, the Volscian Council being first called in, he heard her
Discourse before them to this effect: You may easily conjecture, Son, though we
should say nothing our Volumnia 's Speech to her Son Marcius.
selves, and might conclude from the very form and habit of these wretched
Bodies you behold here, in how forlorn a condition we have lived at home since
your unhappy Banishment and Absence from us; and now consider with your self,
whether we are not to pass for the most unfortunate of Women, and if ours be
not the hardest of all Cases, seeing that, which ought to prove the most
delightful thing, and a very gladsome Spectacle, is, through I know not what
Fatality, become of all others the most formidable and dreadful to us, when
poor Volumnia has the Displeasure to see her Son, and that sad Vergilia the
Regret to find her Husband now planting his Batteries against the Walls of
Rome; yea even the business of Prayer it self, from whence others do fetch
Comfort and Relief in all manner of Misfortunes and Distresses, is that which
adds to our Confusion, and does entangle and perplex us above all the rest; for
our best wishes are grown inconsistent with themselves, nor can we at the same
time petition the Gods for Rome's Victory, and your Preservation; but what the
worst of our Enemies would imprecate as a Curse, that is the very Subject of
our Vows, or at least is interwoven and mingled with them; for your Wife and
Children lie under this w^ful necessity, that they must either be deprived of
you, or of their native Soil. As for my self, I am resolved not to live till
Fortune put an end to this War, and determine the Advantage for one side; but
if I cannot prevail with you to prefer Amity and Concord before Quarrelling and
hostile Practices, and shall not persuade my Son Marcius to become a Benefactor
to both Parties, rather than a Plague to either, be assured of this from me,
and reckon steadfastly upon it, that you shall not be able to stir a foot
toward treading down your Country, unlest you trample first upon the dead
Corpse of her, that brought you into the World, and who will deserve to be so
treated for having given you Life; for it will be indecent for me to wait and
loiter in the World till that dismal day come, wherein I shall see a Child of
mine either led in Triumph by his own Countrymen, or else erecting Trophies on
the Waste and Ruin of that City where he was born. Did I require you at once
to save your Country, and destroy the Volscians, here, I confess, the Case
would be a little hard, and you might well pretend some difficulty to resolve
it; for as it seems unnatural and barbarous to slaughter our fellow Citizens,
so likewise it is unjust and perfidious to betray those who have placed their
Confidence in us. But now without doing the least harm to others, we desire
only a Deliverance from our own Evils; and though the thing be equally
expedient for them and us, yet will it look more handsome and honorable on the
Volscian side, who having so much the better of us at present, will be thought
freely to bestow the two greatest Blessings of Peace and Friendship, even when
they receive no less at our hands than is conferred by them. If we obtain
these, the common Thanks and Acknowledgement will be chiefly owing to you, as
the principal Cause of such a Reconciliation between us; but if they be not
granted, you alone must expect to bear the blame of that, and whatever Mischief
does ensue, from both Nations. And when the Chance of all War is uncertain,
this will be the certain Event of that you are engaged in, that, by conquering
the Romans, you shall only get the reputation of having undone your Country;
but if the Volscians happen to be defeated under your conduct, then the World
will say, that to satisfy a revengeful Humor, you have been the Author of the
greatest Misery to your Friends and Patrons, and procured the Overthrow even of
a kind and obliging People. Marcius listened to his Mother, while she went on
with her Discourse, and answered not a word; but Volumnia seeing him stand mute
for a long time after she had left speaking, fell again to press him: O my Son,
says she, why will you not vouchsafe to answer me, or what can be the meaning
of this profound Silence? Does it become you thus to comply with Passion, and
yield all things to a sense of Injuries? And will you not think it fit to
gratify your Mother, that does now appear i^ so worthy a Cause, and solicit
Matters of such weight and consequence? Can it pass for the property of a noble
Mind and a gallant Person, to preserve the memory of Affronts and ill Usage?
And shall we not reckon it the Character and Business of a great and a good Man
to remember Benefits, and own the Obligation which Children receive from
Parents, by a return of Honor and Reverence to the Authors of them? But you
above all Persons in the World, ought to show a very grateful Resentment of the
Fovours have been done you, since no body living did ever punish Ingratitude,
and persecute that Vice in others, with so much Severity as your self; and, to
say the truth, you have been sufficiently avenged of your Country, for
requiting your services so ill, but the amends of al^ mine toward you is
behind still, and I wait now for the Recompense of a Mothers Care and Kindness;
the most sacred Ties both of Nature and Religion, without any other constraint,
should methinks oblige you to grant me things that are so fair and equal; but
if, after all, I am s^ unhappy as to be denied, why should I spare my self any
longer, and to what purpose do I spi^ out my last Hope? Having said this, she
threw her self down at his Feet, and so did his Wife and Children; upon which
Marcius crying out, O Mother! what is it you have done to me, and whither am I
reduced by it? raised her up from the ground, and pressing her right Hand with
more than ordinary vehemence, You have gained a Victory, says he, over me, that
is fortunate enough for the Romans, but destructive to my self, for I am
preparing to depart hence, as vanquished and driven away by you only. After
which, and a little private Conference with his Mother and his Wife, he sent
them back again to Rome, as they desired of him.

The next Morning he discamp'd and led the Volscians homeward, who were
variously affected with what was done, nor did they all testify a like Concern
at it; for some of them did both complain of the man, and condemn the action;
while others inclining to reconciliation and a peaceable composure of things,
did blame neither; and there was a third sort, which very much disliked his
proceedings; yet they could not look upon Marcius as a treacherous person, but
thought it pardonable in him, to be thus shaken and broke, and forced to
surrender at last, through the stress and pressure of so many violent assaults
and redoubled applications; however none were so hardy as to contradict his
orders, but they did all obediently follow him, moved rather by the admiration
of his Virtue, then any regard they now had to his Authority. As for the Roman
people they did more effectually discover how much fear and danger they had
been i^ while the War lasted, by the manner o^ their deportment after they were
freed from it; for those that guarded the Walls had ^^ sooner given notice that
the Volscians were dislodged and drawn off, but they set open all their Temples
in a moment, and began to Crown themselves with Flowers, and prepare for
Sacrifice, as they were wo^^ to do upon Tidings brought of any signa^ Victory:
But the joy and transport of the whole City became chiefly remarkabl^ from that
honor and courtship of the Women, which was jointly paid them (...) well by
the Senate as the Vulgar, every one declaring it his Opinion, that they were
evidently the Causes and Instrument^ of their public safety; and the Senate
having past a Decree, that whatsoever they would ask by way of Recompense as a
Memorial and acknowledgment of their Fame and Merit, should be allowed and done
for them by the Magistrates; they demande^ nothing else but that a Temple might
b^ erected to Female Fortune, all the Expense whereof they did offer to defray
out of their own Stock, if the City would be at the cost of Sacrifices, and
furnis^ them with other things which appertain to the due Honor of the Gods,
out of their common Treasury. The Senate then very much commending the
Forwardness and Bounty of their Minds, caused the Temple to be built, and a
Statue to be set up therein at the public Charge; nevertheless they would
needs make a Purse among themselves, for another Image of Fortune, which as the
Romans say, at the time of Dedication and placing of it, spoke to this purpose:
O ye Ladies, great is your Piety and Devotion in the Present you have made of
me. And they fabulously report that the same words were repeated a second time,
endeavoring to make us believe things that were never done, and so like
Impossibilities, that it is very hard to credit them. For I think it possible
enough, that Statues may seem both to sweat, and to run with Tears, yea, and
stand with certain dewy drops of a sanguine Dye; for Timber and Stones are
frequently seen to contract a kind of Scurf and Rottenness, that does produce
moisture; and they do not only send forth many different Colors of themselves,
but receive variety of Tinctures from the ambient Air, by which it is not
absurd to imagine, that the Deity may advertise and forewarn us of several
things. It may happen also, that these Images and Statues shall sometimes make
a noise not unlike that of a Squeak or Groan, through a rupture at the bottom,
or the violent separation of their inward Parts; but that articulate Voice, and
such express words, and so clear and accurate, and even Language, should be
thus formed by inanimate beings, is, in my judgment, a thing utterly
unfeasible; seeing it was never known, that either the Soul of Man, or even God
himself, did utter vocal Sounds and Discourse alone, without an organized Body,
and Instruments fitted for Elocution. But where History does in a manner force
our Assent by the Concurrences of many credible Witnesses, in this Case we are
to conclude, that an Impression not unlike that which does affect Sense,
falling then upon the Fancy, draws in the Imaginative part to comply therewith,
and take it for a true Sensation; just as it happens to us when we are fast
asleep, our Eyes and Ears seem to be entertained with those things which we
neither see nor hear. As for those Persons who, out of good will toward God,
and their friendly inclination for him, and a great Tenderness as to all
religious Matters, are so over-fond and passionate herein, that they cannot
easily persuade themselves to despis^ or reject any thing of this kind, they
have the admirable efficiency of divine Power (which surpasses our
Comprehension) as a mighty Motive and Support to the belief thereof. For God
has no manner of Resemblance, either as to his Nature, or his Motion, or his
Skill, or his Ability, with what is humane, and therefore it is no wonder at
all if he should devise and perform that, which cannot be contrived or
accomplished by any Mortal; and though he differs from, and does infinitely
excel us in all things else, yet the dissimilitude and distance betwixt Him and
Men appears no where so much, as in the Prodigiousness of his Working, and the
strange Effects of his Omnipotence; however a considerable part of the Divine
Operations (as Heraclitus affirms) do pass by unobserved, and escape our
Knowledge, because we are Infidels in the Point, and have not Faith enough to
believe them.

But let us now look after Marcius, and enquire how he was treated upon his
Return to Antium; where we shall find Tullus, a Man that did perfectly hate
him, and could not longer endure one he was so much afraid of, consulting how
he might immediately dispatch him, who, if he did escape at present, was never
like to afford him such another Advantage for that purpose. Having therefore
got together, and suborned several Partisans against him, he required Marcius
to resign his Charge, and give the Volscians an account of his Administration
of Affairs; who apprehending the danger of a private Condition, if Tullus
should be made Commander in Chief, that of all others had the greatest Power
and Interest with those of Antium, made Answer, That he was ready to lay down
his Commission, whenever the Volscian States, from whose common Authority he
had received it, should think fit to command him, and that in the mean time he
did not refuse to give the Antiates satisfaction, as to all Particulars of his
Conduct, if they were desirous of it.

An Assembly then being called, there arose certain Orators, appointed for that
Design, who by their popular Harangues did exasperate and incense the
Multitude; but when Marcius stood up to answer those Objections and
Impeachments they had brought against him, the more unruly and tumultuous part
of the People waxed calm and quiet on the sudden, and out of Reverence to his
Person, gave him liberty to speak without the least disturbance; beside that
all the better sort of Antium, and such as were most delighted with a Peace,
made it evident by their whole Composure, that they would give him a favorable
Hearing, and then judge and pronounce according to Equity.

Tullus therefore began to dread his Apology, and suspect the issue of that
Defense he was going to make for himself; for he was an excellent Spokes-man,
and one of singular Eloquence; and the former Services he had done the
Volscians, did procure and still preserve for him a much greater Kindness, than
could possibly be out-weigh'd by that new Displeasure, and the Blame of his
late Conduct; yea, the very Crime and Accusation it self, was a proof and
testimony of the greatness of his Merits, for that People could never have
complained or thought that he had been injurious to them, because Rome was not
then brought into their Power, without a plain Confession, that by his means
only they were so near taking it. For these Reasons the Confederates judged it
prudent not to make any further Delays, or Attempts upon the Vulgar, and so the
boldest of their Faction crying out, that they ought not to listen to a
Traitor, nor allow him still to bear Rule, and play the Tyrant among them, fell
upon Marcius in a Body, and slew him there, none of those that were present so
much as offering to defend him. But it quickly appeared, that this base and
unworthy Action was in no wise approved by the Majority of the Volscians, for
they came running out of their several Cities, to show Respect unto his Corpse,
which they did by an honorable Interment of it, adorning his Sepulcher with
Arms and Trophies, as the Monument of a noble Hero and a famous General. When
the Romans heard tidings of his death, they gave no other signification either
of Honor or of Anger toward him, but only granted this Request of the Women,
that they might put themselves into Mourning, and bewail him for ten Months, as
their Custom was upon the loss of a Father, or a Son, or a Brother; that being
a period set for the longest Lamentation in such Cases, by the ancient Laws of
Numa Pompilius, as it is more amply related in what I have written of his Life
and Actions. Now Marcius was no sooner deceased, but the Volscians came to need
his Assistance, and wish for him again; for they fell to swabble first with the
Sicani, (their Confederates and their Friends) about the nomination of a
^^neral, that should be Commander in Chief of their joint Forces, which Dispute
for Pre-eminence was carried on with so much fierceness, that it came at length
to Bloodshed and Slaughter on both sides. After this they were defeated by the
Romans in a pitched Battle, where not only Tullus lost his Life, but the
principal Flower of their whole Army was cut in pieces; so that they were
forced to submit, and accept of Peace upon very dishonorable terms, promising
to observe the Roman Orders, and obey their Enemy in whatever he should impose.

See where Emilius does a couqueror stand
While at his feet ye once great Perseus lies*
A generous valor may ye world command
And Kings may fall thus low by Avarice*

THE LIFE OF PAULUS EMILIUS.
Englished from the Greek: By Mr. Joseph Arrowsmith, late Fellow of Trin. Coll.
Camb.
Volume II.
I First undertook this History, that I The use of History.
might be serviceable unto others, but go on and persevere in my Design, that I
may advantage my self; whilst the Virtues of these great Men are as a
Looking-glass, by which I learn how I ought to order and adorn my own Life. For
by this means I enjoy the greatest Familiarity, and am no less conversant with
them all by Turns, than if the same Table and Bed were common to us both. When
I read their Story, each particular Virtue and Excellence makes a deep
Impression in my Mind, and hence I gather, how great and valuable the Owner of
these Accomplishments must needs have been, and with Care collect the most
beautiful and remarkable Passages of their Lives, as Patterns for Imitation. A
greater Pleasure than which, the Gods can scarce grant us, or a more ready way
to teach us Virtue. Democritus laid it Democritus his Opinion of Phantasms.
down as a Principle in his Philosophy, (though utterly false, and tending to
endless Superstitions,) That there were Phantasms appearing in the Air, and
tells us that we ought to pray, that such may present themselves as are
propitious, and that we may see those that are agreeable to our Natures, and
would instruct us in that which is good, rather than such as are unfortunate,
and would lead us into Vice. But my Method is, by daily conversing with
History, and a diligent Collection of what I read, to fix in my Mind things
worthy Memory of the best and most virtuous of Men. For thus am I enabled to
free my self from that Contagion of Idleness and Vice, which I may have
contracted from the ill company I am sometimes forced to converse with; it
being a powerful Remedy, with a sedate and quiet Mind, seriously to consider
such noble Examples. Of this kind are those of Timoleon the Corinthian, and
Paulus Emilius, to write whose Lives is my present Business; Men not only
equally famous for their Virtues, but Success; insomuch that they have left it
doubtful, whether they owe their greatest Atchievments to good Fortune, or
their own Prudence and Conduct.

Almost all Historians agree, That the Family of the Emilii was one of the most
ancient Emilius his Extraction.
of the Roman Nobility; and those Authors who affirm that King Numa was Pupil
to Pythagoras, tell us, that the first who gave the Name to his Posterity was
Marcus, the Son of that wise Man, who for his particular Eloquence and grace in
Speech was called (...), Facundia lepor.
Emilius. The greatest part of this Race that have been celebrated for their
Virtue, which they with Zeal pursued, have been crowned with Success; and even
the Misfortune of Lucius Emilius at the Battle of Canna, gave ample Testimony
of his Wisdom and Valor. For not being able to persuade his Colleague from
hazarding the Battle, he, though against his Judgment, engaged with him, but
was no Companion in his flight: on the contrary, when he that was so resolute
to engage, deserted him in the midst of danger, (...) kept the Field and died
fighting. This Emilius had a Daughter named Emilia, that (...) married to
Scipio the Great, and a Son Paul^^, who is the Subject of my present History.

His Youth fell out, and he was remarkable, His way to Honor.
in a time which flourished, by reason of the Virtues and Reputations of most
excellen^ and great Persons, though he followed not the ordinary Studies with
the young men of Quality of that Age, nor trod the same Paths to Fame. For he
did not exercise himself in pleading Causes, nor would he stoop to salute,
embrace, and entertain the Vulgar, which were the usual insinuating Arts by
which many grew Popular. Not that he was incapable of either, but chose to
purchase a much more lasting Glory by his Valor, Justice and Integrity, and
'twas by these Virtues he soon outstript all his Equals.

The first honorable Office he pretended Is chosen Edile.
to was that of Edile, which he carried against twelve Competitors of such
considerable Worth and Quality, that all of them in process of time were
Consuls. Being afterward chose into the number of Priests called Augurs, who
amongst the Romans Then Augur.
were to observe and register such Divinations as were made by the flight of
Birds, or Prodigies in the Air; he with such Intention studied the ancient
Customs of his Country, and so thoroughly understood the Religion of his
Ancestors, that his Office which was before only esteemed a Title of Honor,
and upon that account sought after, by his means appeared to be one of the most
sublime Arts: and that definition of the Philosophers of Religion true, that it
was the knowing how we ought to worship the Gods. When he performed any part of
his Duty he did it with great Skill and utmost Care, making it his only
Business, not omitting any one Ceremony, or adding the least Circumstance, but
always contending with his Companions of the same Order, about things that
might seem inconsiderable, and instructing them, that though they might think
the Deity was easily pacified, and ready to forgive Faults of Inadvertency and
Negligence, yet would such Favor and Pardon be dangerous for a Commonwealth to
grant. Because no Man ever began the Disturbance of his Countries Peace, by a
notorious breach of its Laws, but they by degrees grew negligent in things of
greatest concern, who gave themselves liberty in Matters of lesser moment. Nor
was he less severe, in requiring His strictness in Military Discipline.
and observing the ancient Roman Discipline in military Affairs; not
endeavoring, when he had the Command, to ingratiate himself with his Soldiers
by popular flattery, though this Custom prevailed at that (...) amongst many,
who by their Courtship and seeming affable and mild to those (...) were under
them in their first Employmen^ sought to be promoted to a second; but (...)
instructing them in the Laws of militar^ Discipline, with the same Care and
Exa^^ness a Priest would teach his Ceremonies an^ dreadful Mysteries, by being
severe to suc^ as transgressed and contemned those Law^ he reestablished his
Country in its form^^ Glory, esteeming Victory it self but as a^ accession to
the well disciplining of Soldiers.

Whilst the Romans were engaged in a (...) with Antiochus the Great, against
whom the^ most experienced Commanders were employed, there arose another War in
the West, an^ they were all up in Arms in Spain. Thither they sent Emilius, in
the Quality of Praetor, not with six Axes, which number other Emilius sent
Praetor into Spain.
Praetors were accustomed to have carried before them, but with twelve, so that
in hi^ Praetorship he was honored with the dignity of a Consul. Twice he
overcame the Ba^barians in Battle, of whom 30000 were slain; which Victory is
chiefly to be ascribed to the Wisdom and Conduct of the Commander, who by his
great Skill in choosin^ the Advantage of the Ground, and makin^ the Onset at
the Passage of a River, led (...) Soldiers to an easy Conquest. Having made
himself Master of 250 Cities, whose ^nhabitants voluntarily yielded and obliged
themselves by Oath to Faithfulness, he left ^he Province in peace, and returned
to Rome, ^ot enriching himself a Dram by the War. The truth is, he never
gave himself ^he trouble of heaping up Riches, but always ^^v'd splendidly and
generously on the pre^ent Stock, which was so far from being ^reat, (as was
evident after his death) that ^here was scarce enough left to answer his Wives
Dowry.

His first Wife was Papiria, the Daugh^er His Wives and Children.
of Masso, who had formerly been Con^^l, with whom he lived a long while in
Wedlock, and afterward divorced her, ^^ough she bare him a beautiful and
illu^^rious Offspring, for she was Mother to ^^e so renowned Scipio, and
Fabius Maxi^us. The Reason of this Separation is not ^^me to our Knowledge; but
there seems to (...) truth in another Roman's being divorced ^^om his Wife,
which may be applicable to (...) purpose. This Person being highly ^^am'd by
his Friends, who demanded, ^as she not chaste? Was she not fair? ^as she not
fruitful? Putting forth his ^oe, asked them, Whether it was not new, and ^ell
made? Yet, added he, none of you (...) tell where it wrings me. Certain it is,
that great and open Faults are the usu^^ occasions of Men's putting away their
Wive^* yet do liatle Jarrings and private Distast^ which arise from the
disagreeableness of the^^ Tempers, and peevishness of Dispositions though they
may be concealed from other^ often make so great an estrangement an^ alteration
in affections, that it is not possible for them to live together with any
content.

Emilius having thus put away Papyri^^ married a second Wife, by whom he h^^
two Sons, which he brought up in hi^ own House, adopting the two former into
the greatest and most noble Families (...) Rome. The elder was adopted by
Fabi^^ Maximus, who was five times Consul; (...) younger by the Son of Scipio
African^s his Cousin-german, and was by him named Scipio. One of Emilius his
Daughte^ was married to the Son of Cato, the ^ther to Elius Tubero, the very
best of Me^ The Character of Elius Tubero.
and one who knew how to support ev^^ his Poverty with Magnificence. For the^^
were 16 near Relations all of them of (...) Family of the Elii, who were
possessed of (...) one Farm, which sufficed them all, whi^^ a small House or
rather Cottage contain^^ them, their numerous Offspring, and (...) Wives:
amongst whom was the Daught^^ of our Emilius, who although her Father (...)
been twice Consul, and twice triumphed, was so far from being ashamed of her
Husbands Poverty, that she admired his Virtue, that had reduced him to that
condition. Far otherwise it is with the Brothers and Relations of this Age, who
if different Countries, or at least, Walls and Rivers, part not their
Inheritances, and they live at a distance, never cease ftom mutual Quarrels.
This History will suggest good Counsel to ^uch as endeavor to make their
Improvement of it, by well considering and weigh^ng things.

But to proceed. Emilius being chosen He is chosen Consul, and wages War with
the Ligurians.
Consul, waged War with the Ligurians, ^r Ligustines, a People dwelling near
the Alps. They were a valiant and warlike Nation, and from their Neighborhood
to the Romans, well skilled in the same Di^cipline and Arts of War. For they
pos^ess'd the utmost Bounds of Italy, which bor^ers upon the Alps, and that
part of the ^ame Mountain which is washed by the Tuscan ^ea, and were mingled
with the Gauls and Spaniards, who inhabited the Coasts. Besides ^t that time
they were busy at Sea, and ^ayling as far as the Streights mouth, in light
Vessels fitted for that purpose, robbed and ^estroy'd all that traffick'd in
those Parts. These waited the coming of Emilius with ^n Army of 40000, who
brought with him not above 8, so that the Enemy was (...) to one when they
engaged; yet did he vanquish and put them to flight, forcing them (...) retire
into their walled Towns, and in (...) condition gave them hopes of an
Acco^modation; it being the Policy of the R^mans not utterly to destroy the
Liguri^^ whilst they were as a Guard and Bulwark against the Gauls, who made
such frequent A^tempts to overrun Italy. Trusting who^^ therefore to Emilius,
they delivered up the Towns and Shipping into his hands: ^^ras'd only the
Fortifications, and deliver'^ their Towns to them again, but all the Shipping
he took away with him, lea^ing them no Vessels bigger than those (...) three
Oars, and set at liberty great numbers of Prisoners they had taken both by
(...) and Land, Strangers as well as Romans, Th^^ were the things most worthy
of Remark, the first year of his Consulship.

Afterward he frequently declared (...) Desire of being a second time Consul,
a^ He stands to be Consul a second time, but is ^^puls'd.
was once Candidate; but meeting with Repulse, and being passed by, moved no
(...) in it, but was wholly intent upon his (...) of Augur, and the Education
of his Children whom he not only brought up as he hims^^^ was, in the Roman and
ancient Discipli^^ but also in that of Greece, which was steemed more genteel
and honorable. (...) this purpose he not only entertained Masters The
Education of his Children.
to teach them Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric, but the Arts of making Statues
and Painting, and also such as were skilful in breeding Horses and Dogs, and
could instruct them in Hunting and Riding. And if he was not hindered by public
Affairs, he himself would be with them at their Studies, and see them perform
their Exercises, being the most indulgent of Fathers amongst the Romans.

As to Matters relating to the Commonwealth, The Romans at War with Perseus,
King of Macedon.
at that time the Romans were engaged in a War with Perseus, King of the
Macedonians, and highly blamed their Commanders, that either through their want
of Skill or Courage, they so ill and shamefully managed the Concerns of the
Commonwealth, that they did less hurt to the Enemy than they received from
him. For they that not long before had forced Antiochus the Great to quit the
^est of Asia, and driving him beyond Mount ^aurus, confined him to Syria, glad
to buy his ^eace with 15000 Talents. They that not ^ong since had vanquished
King Philip in Thes^aly, and freed the Greeks from the Ma^edonian Yoke, nay,
had overcome Han^ibal himself, who far surpassed all Kings (...) Bravery and
Courage, thought it scorn that Perseus should think himself an Ene^y fit to
match the Romans, and to be ^ble to wage War with them on equal terms, with the
remainder only of his Father's routed Forces; but they little weighed, that the
Macedonian Army was become much more powerful and expert after the Overthrow of
Philip. To make which appear, I shall briefly recount the Story from the
beginning.

Antigonus, who was the most potent a^ongst the Captains and Successors of
Alexander, Perseus his Extraction.
having obtained for himself and his Posterity the Title of King, had a Son
named Demetrius, Father to Antigonus, called Gonatu^, and he, to Demetrius, who
reigning some short time, died, and left a young Son called Philip. The
Nobility of Macedon fearing great Confusions might arise in the Minority of
their Prince, trusted the Government in the hands of Antigonus, Cousin german
to the late King, and married him to his Widow the Mother of Philip. At first
they only styled him Regent and General, but when they found by experience that
he governed the Kingdom with Moderation, and to their Advantage, they gave him
the Title of King* This was he that was sirnam'd (...), q^an ^aturus.
Doson, as if he was only a promiser, not a performer of his words. To him
succeeded Philip, who in his Youth gave great hopes of equalling the best of
Kings, and that he one day would restore Macedon to its former State and
Dignity, and be alone able to give a stop to the Power of the Romans, which was
now a general Oppression to the World. But being vanquished in a pitched Battle
by Titus Flaminius, near to Scotusa, his Resolution was dashed, and he yielded
himself and all that he had to the Mercy of the Romans, well contented that he
could escape with paying a small Tribute. Yet afterward recollecting himself,
he bore it with great Regret, and thought he lived rather like a Slave that was
pleased with ease, than a Man of Sense and Courage, whilst he held his Kingdom
at the pleasure of his Conquerors, which made him resolve upon a War, and
prepare himself with as much Cunning and Privacy as possible. To this end, he
left his Cities on the high-Roads and Sea-Cost ungarrison'd, and almost
desolate, that they might seem inconsiderable; in the mean time furnishing his
mid-land Castles, strongholds and Towns, with Arms, Money, and Men fit for
Service, he provided himself for War, and yet kept his Preparations close. He
had in his Armory Arms for 30000 Men; in Granaries, in Places of Strength, 8
millions of Bushels of Corn, and as much ready Money, as would defray the
Charge of maintaining 10000 mercenary Soldiers, to defend his Country for 10
years. But before he could put these things into motion, and bring his Designs
to effect, he died for grief and anguish of Mind, being sensible he had put his
innocent Son Demetrius to death upon the Calumnies of one that was far more
guilty. Perseus his Son that survived inherited his Hatred to the Romans as
well as his Kingdom, but was very unfit to carry on his Designs, through his
want of Courage, and the viciousness of his Manners, especially when amongst
the Vices and Diseases of his Mind of all sorts, Covetousness bore the chief
sway. There is a Report also of his not being legitimate, but that the Wife of
King Philip took him from his Mother Grathania, (a Woman of Argos, that earned
her living by Botching) as soon as he was born, and brought him up privately as
her own. And this might be the chief Cause of his contriving the Death of
Demetrius, for the might well fear, that whilst there was a lawful Successor in
the Family, his being illegitimate would not lie concealed.

Notwithstanding all this, and though his Spirit was so mean, and temper so
sordid, yet trusting to the strength of his Preparations, he engaged in a War
with the Romans, His War with the Romans.
and for a long time maintained it. Some of their Captains, and those of
Consular Dignity and great Armies and Fleets he repulsed, and some of them he
vanquished. For he overcame Publius Licinius, who was the first that invaded
Macedonia, in a Battle of Horsemen; He over-comes Licinius.
in which he slew 2500 stout Soldiers, and took 600 Prisoners: and surprising
their Fleet, as they rode at Anchor before Orcum, Surprises their Fleet.
he took 20 Ships of Burden, with all their Lading, and sunk the rest that were
fraighted with Corn. Besides this, he made himself Master of 4 Galleys, with 5
Oars in a Seat; and fought another Battle with Hostilius the Consul, Fights
with Hostilius.
who making an Inroad into his Country by the way of Emilia, he forced to
retreat; and when he afterward by stealth designed an Invasion through
Thessaly, he urged him to fight, which the other feared to hazard. Nay more, to
show his Contempt of the Romans, and that he wanted Employment; as a War by the
By, he made an Expedition against the Dardanians, in which he slew 10000 of
those barbarous People, and brought a very great Spoil away with him. He
privately also solicited the Gauls, (they are also called Basternae) Soli^its
the Barbarians to join with him.
a warlike Nation, and famous for Horsemen, dwelling near the Danube; and
practiced with the Illyrians, by the means of Genthius their King, to join with
him in this War. It was also reported that the Barbarians being allured by him
through the promise of Rewards, were to make an Irruption into Italy, through
the lower parts of Gallia Cisalpina, near the Adriatic Sea.

The Romans being advertised of these things, thought it necessary no longer to
choose their Commanders for Favor or Solicitation, but to pitch upon one for
their General, that was a Man of Wisdom, and versed in the management of great
Affairs. And such was Paulus Emilius, one Emilius a 2d. time Consul.
well stricken in years, as being near threescore, yet vigorous in his own
Person, and surrounded with his valiant Sons and Sons-in-law, besides a great
number of very considerable Relations and Friends, who all of them persuaded
him to yield to the Desires of the People, who called him to the Consulship.
But he at first carried it nicely to the Vulgar, and as one averse to govern,
refused both the Honor and Care that attended it; yet when they daily came to
him to his Gate, urging him to come forth to the place of Election, and
prosecuting him with noise and clamor, he granted their Request. When he
appeared amongst such as were Candidates, he did not look as if he were about
to receive the Consulship, but to bring Victory and Success to the War; and as
soon as he yielded to come down into the Field, they all received him with so
great hopes and cheerfulness of mind, that they unanimously chose him a second
time Consul; nor would they suffer the Lots to be cast as was usual to
determine which Province should fall to his share, but immediately decreed him
the Command of the Macedonian War. It is reported, that when he was General
against the Macedonians.
designed General against Perseus, and was honorably accompanied home by great
numbers of People, he found his Daughter Tertia, a very little Girl, weeping,
and making A good Omen.
much of her, demanded why she cried? She catching him about the Neck and
kissing him, said, O Father, know you not that our Perseus is dead? meaning a
little Dog of that Name that was brought up in the House with her: to which
Emilius replied, Good Fortune, my Daughter, I embrace the Omen. This Cicero the
Orator relates in his Book of Divination.

It was the Custom for such as were chosen Consuls, from a Pulpit designed for
such purposes, kindly to bespeak the People, and return them thanks for their
Favor. Emilius Emilius his Speech to the People.
therefore having gathered an Assembly, spoke as follows. That he sued for the
first Consulship, because he himself stood in need of such Honor; but for the
second, because they wanted a General; upon which account he thought there was
no thanks due: if they judged they could manage the War by any other to more
Advantage, he would willingly yield up his Charge; but if they confided in him,
they were not to make themselves his Colleagues in his Office, or raise
Reports, and censure his Actions, but without Reply, and to their utmost, to
obey such Commands as were necessary to the carrying on the War; for if they
endeavored to gover^ him who was to command, they would render this Expedition
more ridiculous than the former* By this Speech he imprinted a Reverence for
him amongst the Citizens, and great expectations of future Success, being all
of them well pleased, that they had passed by such as sought to be preferred by
Flattery, and pitched upon a Commander endu'd with Wisdom and Courage to tell
them the truth. Thus the People of Rome were Servants, and obedient to Reason
and Virtue, that they might Rule, and make themselves Masters of the World.

Now that Emilius, setting forward to His Success not to be ascribed to Fortune.
the War, by a prosperous Voyage and successful Journey, arrived with speed and
safety at his Camp, I attribute to good Fortune: but when I consider the
Concerns of the War and his Government, managed partly by his own daring
Boldness, partly by his good Counsel, partly by the ready administration of his
Friends, partly by his presentness of Mind, and skill to embrace the most
proper Advice in the extremity of danger, I cannot ascribe any of his
remarkable and famous Actions, (as I can those of other Commanders) to his so
much celebrated good Fortune; unless you will say, that the Covetousness of
Perseus was the good Fortune of Emilius. The truth is, the fear Perseus ruined
by his Covetousness.
of spending his Money, was the destruction and utter ruin of all those
splendid and great Preparations, by whose Help the Macedonians were in hopes to
carry on the War with Success. For there came at his Request 10000 Horsemen of
the Basternae, and as A Description of the Basternae.
many Foot, who were to keep Peace with them, and supply their Places in case
of failure, all of them mercenary Soldiers, a People neither skilled in
tilling of Land, or Merchandise, or able to get their Livings by Grasing, but
whose only business and perpetual study it was to fight and conquer those that
resisted them. When these came near Medica, and were encamped and mixed with
the King's Soldiers, being Men o^ great Stature, admirable at their Exercises,
great Boasters, and loud in their Threats against their Enemies, they added
Courage to the Macedonians, who were ready to think, the Romans would not be
able to abide their coming, struck with terror at their Looks and Motions, they
were so strange and terrible to behold. When Perseus had thus encouraged his
Men, and puffed them up with so great Hopes, as soon as a 1000 Crowns were
demanded for each Captain, he was so astonished and besides himself at the
vastness of the Sum, that his Covetousness made him send them back, and refuse
their Assistance, as if he had been the Steward, not the Enemy of the Romans,
and was to give an exact account of the Expenses of the War, to those with whom
he waged it. Nay, when he had his Foes for his Tutors, to instruct him what he
had to do, who besides their other Preparations, had a 100000 Men drawn
together, and in a readiness, when occasion should require their Service; yet
he that was to engage against so considerable Force, and in such a War, whose
necessary Expenses must needs be very great, weighed and sealed up his Money,
as if he feared or had no right to touch it. And all this was done by one, not
descended from the Lydians or Phoenicians, but who challenged to himself the
Virtues of Alexander and Philip, from his Alliance to them; Men who conquered
the World by judging, that Empire was to be purchased by Money, not Money by
Empire; whence it grew a Proverb, that not Philip but his Gold took the Cities
of Greece. And Alexander, when he undertook an Expedition against the Indians,
and found his Macedonians encumbred, and to march heavily with their Persian
Spoils, first set fire to his own Carriages, and thence persuaded the rest to
imitate his Example, that thus freed, they might proceed to the War without
hindrance. Whereas Perseus, abounding in Wealth, would not preserve himself,
his Children, and his Kingdom, at the expense of a small part of his Treasure;
but amongst a great many others, our wealthy Slave chose to be carried away
Captive, and show the Romans what great Riches he had husbanded and preserved
for them. For he did not only falsify with the Gauls, and send them away, but
also alluring Genthius, King of the Illyrians, by the He cheats Genthius.
hopes of 300 Talents, to assist him in the War, he caused the Money to be told
out by his Ambassadors, and suffered it to be sealed up. Whereupon Genthius
thinking himself possessed of what he desired, committed a wicked and dreadful
Crime; for he imprisoned the Ambassadors which were sent to him from the
Romans. Whence Perseus concluding that there was now no need of Money, to make
Genthius an Enemy to the Romans, but that he had given a lasting Earnest of his
Enmity, and by his great injustice sufficiently involved himself in the War,
defrauded the unfortunate King of his 300 Talents, and without any Concern
beheld him, his Wife and Children, in a short time after carried out of their
Kingdom, as from their Nest, by Lucius Anicius, who was sent against him with
an Army.

Emilius coming against such an Adversary, made light of his Person, but
admired his Preparations and Force. For he had 4000 Perseus his strength.
Horse, and not much fewer than 40000 (...).
Macedonian Foot, and planting himself along the Seaside, at the foot of Mount
Olympus in a Place impossible to be approached, and on all sides fortified with
Fences and Bulwarks of Wood, remained in great security, thinking by Delay and
Charge to weary out Emilius. But he in the mean time, Emilius his Conduct.
wholly intent on his Business, weighed all Counsels, and all ways of Attack,
and perceiving his Soldiers, from their former want of Discipline, to be
impatient of Delay, and ready on all turns to teach their General his Duty,
angerly reproved them, and commanded that they should not intermeddle with what
was not their Concern, but only take care that they and their Arms were in a
readiness, and to use their Swords like Romans, when their Commander should
think fit to employ them. Further, he ordered, that the Sentinels by Night
should watch without Javelins, that thus they might be more careful and able to
resist Sleep, having no Arms proper to withstand the Assaults of their Enemies.

That which most infested the Army, was the want of Water, (for only a little,
and His Army wants W^ter, how supplied.
that foul, flowed out, or rather came by drops from a Spring near the Sea;)
but Emilius considering that he was at the foot of the high and woody Mountain
Olympus, and conjecturing by the flourishing of the Trees, that there were
Springs that had their course under ground, dug a great many Holes and Wells in
the side of the Mountain, which were presently filled with pure Water, by the
current and force of that, which being freed from restraint, had now space to
unite. Although some deny, that Of the Original of Springs.
there are any Sources of Water ready provided and concealed in the Places from
whence they flow, which by their course are discovered and break forth; but
affirm, that they owe their Being and Consistance to the Matter that then grows
liquid: now this change is made by Density and Cold, when the moist Vapor by
being closely pressed together, becomes fluid. As Women's Breasts are not like
Vessels full, of Milk, always prepared and ready to flow from them; but their
Nourishment being changed in their Breasts, is there made Milk, and from thence
strained. In like manner, the Places of the Earth that are cold and stored with
Fountains, do not contain any hidden Waters or Receptacles which are capable as
from a Source always ready and furnished, to supply so many Brooks, and the
depths of so great Rivers; but pressing by crowding together, and condensing
the Vapors and Air, they turn them into that Substance. Whence those Places
that are opened, by that means do flow and afford more plenty of Water, as the
Breasts of Women do Milk by their being sucked) by moistning the Vapor, and
rendering it fluid; whereas the Earth that remains idle and undug, is not
capable of producing any Water, whilst it wants that motion which is the true
Cause of it. But those that assert this Opinion, give occasion to the doubtful
to argue, that on the same ground there should be no Blood in living Creatures,
but that it must be formed by the Wound, some sort of Spirit or Flesh being
changed into a Matter that is liquid, and proper to flow. Moreover, these are
refuted by such, who digging deep in the Earth to undermine some strong-Hold,
or search for Metals, meet with Rivers, which are not collected by little and
little, (which must necessarily be, if they had their Beings at the very
instant the Earth was opened) but break out at once with violence; and upon the
cutting through a Rock, there often gushes out great quantities of Water, and
then as suddenly ceases. But of this enough. This Place is still called
Pythagone in the modern Gre^k* Emilius sends Nasica to surprise the Enemy by
the way of Perrebia.


Emilius lay still for some days, and it is said, that there were never two
great Armies so nigh, that enjoyed so much Quiet. When he had tried and
considered all things, he was informed, that there was y^^ one Passage left
unguarded through Perrebi^ (...).
by the Temple of Appollo, and the great Pea^ Having therefore more Hopes, by
reason the Place was left defenseless, than Fears, because of the roughness and
difficulty of the Passage, he proposed it to be consulted on. Amongst those
that were present at the Counsel, Scipio surnamed Nasica, Son-in-law to Scipio
Affricanus, who afterward bore such great Sway in the Senate House, was the
first that profer'd himself to command those that should be sent to encompass
the Enemy. Next to him Fabius Maximus, eldest Son of Emilius, although yet very
young, offered himself with very great Cheerfulness. Emilius rejoicing at this,
gave them, not so many as Polybius relates, but as many as Nasica himself tells
us he took, in that short Epistle he writ to a certain King concerning this
Expedition: for he had 3000 Italians that were not Romans, and his left Wing
consisted of 5000; besides these, taking with him 120 Horsemen, and 200
Thracians and Cretans intermixed, that Harpalus had sent, he began his Journey
toward the Sea, and encamped near the Temple of Hercules, as if he designed to
embark, and so to sail round and environ the Enemy. But when the Soldiers had
supped, and that it was dark, he made the Captains acquainted with his real
Intentions, and marching all night a quite contrary way to that of the Sea,
till he came under the Temple of Apollo Pithius, he there rested his Army. In
this Place, Mount Olympus stretches it self in To height of Mount Olympus.
height more than ten Furlongs, as appears by this Epigram made by him that
measured it. Thy top, Olympus, measured from the Place,
The Pythian Temple does so nobly grace,
Ten complete Furlongs does in height exceed.
-- Xenagoras this did leave upon Record,
He traveled here, here he that God adored.
It Is confessed, Geometricians affirm, that no Mountain in height or Sea in
depth, exceeds ten Furlongs; yet it seems probable, that Xenagoras took not his
Measures at all adventures, but according to the Rules of Art, and with
Instruments fit for that purpose. Here it was that Nasica passed the night.

A traitorous Cretian who fled to the Enemy in the March, discovered to Perseus
Nasica his Design discovered.
the Design which the Romans had to incompass him: who seeing Emilius lay
still, mistrusted no such Attempt. He was startled at the News, yet removed not
his Camp, but sent 2000 mercenary Soldiers, and 2000 Macedonians, under the
Command of Milo, with Order to hasten with all Diligence, and possess
themselves of the Streights. Polybius relates, that the Romans set upon them
whilst they slept; but Nasica, that there was a sharp and dangerous Conflict on
the top of the Mountain; that he himself encountered a mercenary Thracian,
pierced him through with his dart and slew him; and that the Enemy being forced
to retreat, and Milo stripped to his Coat, shamefully flying without his Armor,
he followed without danger, and all the Army marched down into the Country.

These things happening to Perseus, now grown fearful, and fallen from his
Hopes, he removed his Camp in all haste, yet Perseus removes his Camp.
was it necessary for him either to stop before Pydne, and there run the hazard
of a Battle, or disperse his Army into Cities, and there expect the event of
the War, which being once entered into his Country, could not be driven out
without great Slaughter, and Bloodshed. But Perseus being told by his Friends,
that he was much superior in number, and that such as fought in the defense of
their Wives and Children, must needs be endued with great Courage, especially
when all things were done in the sight of their King, who himself was engaged
in equal danger, was again encouraged, and pitching his Camp, prepared himself
to fight, viewed the Country, Prepares to fight.
gave out the Commands, as if he designed to set upon the Romans as soon as
they approached. The Place was a Field both proper The Places of Battle.
to draw up a Phalanx, which required a plain Valley and even Ground, and also
had diverse little Hills one joined to another which served for a Retreat to
such as were lightly armed, and fitted to skirmish, and gave them withal
Opportunities to incompass the Enemy; through the middle ru^ the Rivers Eson
and Leucus, which though not very deep, it being the latter end of Summer, yet
were they likely enough to give the Romans some trouble.

As soon as Emilius was joined to Nasica Emilius joins again with Nasica.
he advanced in Battel-array against the Enemy; but when he found how they were
drawn up, and the number of their Force^ he stood still as one amazed, and
considering within himself. But the young Commande^^ being eager to fight,
pressed him earnestly not to delay, and most of all Nasica flushed with his
late Success on Olympus. To whom E^^lius answered with a Smile: So would I d^
were I of your Age, but my many Victories have taught me the Miscarriages of
the Conquered and forbid me to engage such as are weary with their long March,
against an Army so well dra^^ up and prepared for Battle.

Then he gave Command, that the Front of his Army, and such as were in sight of
the Emilius incamps.
Enemy, should imbattel themselves, as ready to engage, and those in the Rear
should cast up the Trenches, and fortify the Camp; so that the foremost of his
Men still wheeling of^ by degrees, their whole Order was changed, the Battle
insensibly broke, and all his Army encamped without noise.

When it was Night, and no Man after his An Eclipse of the Moon.
Supper thought of any thing but Sleep and Rest, all on a sudden the Moon,
which was then at Full, and great height, grew dark, and by degrees losing her
Light, cast diverse sort of Colors, till at length she was totally eclipsed.
The Romans, according to their Custom, with the noise of brass Pans, and
lifting up a great many Firebrands and Torches endeavored to recover her
Light: whilst the Macedonians behaved themselves far otherwise; for Horror and
Amazement seized their whole Army, and a Rumor crept by degrees into their
Camp, that this Eclipse portended no less than that of their King. But Emilius,
that was no Novice in these The Reason of an Eclipse.
things, but very well understood the seeming Irregularities of Eclipses, and
that in a certain Revolution of Time, the Moon in her Course was obscured and
hid by the Shadow of the Earth, till passing that Region of Darkness, she is
again enlightened by the Sun. Yet being very devout, a religious Observer of
Sacrifices, and well skilled in the Art of Divination, as soon as he perceived
the Moon regained her former Luster, he offered up to her a 11 Heifers; at the
break of day he sacrificed 20 to Hercules, without any token that his Offering
was accepted; but at the one and twentieth the Signs promised Victory to such
as were forced to defend themselves. Then he vowed a Hecatomb and Solemn Sports
to Hercules, and commanded his Captains to make ready for Battle, staying only
till the Sun should decline, and come about to the West, lest being in their
Faces in the Morning, it should dazzle the Eyes of his Soldiers; so he whil'd
away the time in his Tent, which was open toward the Valley where his Enemies
were encamped. When it grew The Rise of the Battle.
toward Evening, some tell us, Emilius himself laid the following Design, that
the Enemy might first begin the Fight: he turned loose a Horse without a
Bridle, and sent some of the Romans to catch him, upon whose following the
Beast, the Battle begun. Others relate, that the Thracians, under the Command
of one Alexander, set upon the Roman Carriages that brought Forage to the
Camp: that to oppose these, a Party of 700 Ligurians were immediately detached
and that Relief coming still from both Armies, the main Bodies were at last
engaged. Emilius, like a wise Pilot, foreseeing by the present Waves and Motion
of the Armies, the greatness of the following Storm, came out of his Tent, went
through the Legions, and encouraged his Soldiers Nasica in the mean time, who
was advanced to the Place where the Skirmish began, saw the whole force of the
Enemy preparing to engage. First marched the Thracians, who, The Army of the
Macedonians, and Order of their March.
he himself tells us, were very terrible to behold; for they were Men of great
Stature, with bright and glistering Shields, their Cassocks were black, their
Legs armed with Greaves, and as they moved, their weighty long Spears shook on
their Shoulders. Next the Thracians, marched the mercenary Soldiers, armed
after the different Fashions of their Countries; and with these the Peonians
were mingled. These were followed by a 3d. Body of Macedonians, all chosen Men,
of known Courage, and all in the prime of their Age, who glittered in their
gilt Armor, and new scarlet Coats. Behind these were the old Bands drawn out
of the Camp, all armed with brass Targets; the whole Plain shined with the
brightness of their Arms, and the Mountains rang with their Noises and Shouts,
by which they gave mutual Encouragement one to the other. In this Order they
marched, and that with such Boldness and Speed, that those that were first
slain, died but at two Furlongs distance from the Roman Camp. The Battle being
begun, Emilius The Battle between Emilius and Perseus.
came in, and found that the foremost of the Macedonians, had already pitched
the end of their Spears into the Shields of his Romans, so that it was
impossible to come near them with their Swords. When he saw this, and that the
rest of the Macedonians took the Shields that hung on their Backs, and brought
them before them, and all at once stooped their Pikes against their Enemies
Bucklers, and well considered the great Strength of their united Targets, and
dreadful Appearance of a Front so armed, he was seized with Amazement and Fear,
as not having seen any thing more terrible, nor would he stick afterward to
give a Relation of this Sight, and his own Dread. But this he dissembled, and
rode through his Army without either Breast Plate or Helmet, with a pleasant
and cheerful Countenance.

On the contrary, (as Polybus relates) no sooner was the Battle begun, but the
Macedonian Perseus his Cowardice.
King basely withdrew to the City Pidne, under a pretense of sacrificing to
Hercules; a God that is not wont to regard the faint Offerings of Cowards, or
grant such Requests as are unjust, it not being reasonable, that he that never
shoots, should carry away the Prize; he triumph, that sneaks from the Battle;
he that takes no pains meet with success, or the wicked man prosper. But to
Emilius his Petitions the God listened, for he prayed for Victory with his Sword
in his hand, and 'twas fighting that he implored his divine Assistance.

But Possidonius, who writ the History of Perseus vindicated by Possidonius.
Perseus, and tells us he lived at that time, and was himself in this Battle,
denies that he left the Field either through fear or pretense of Sacrificing,
but that the very day before the Fight, he received a Kick from a Horse on his
Thigh; that though very much indisposed, and dissuaded by all his Friends, he
commanded one of his Pads to be brought, and entered the Field unarmed; that
amongst an infinite number of Darts that flew about on all sides, one of Iron
lighted on him, and though not with the point, yet by a glance hit him with
such force on his left Side, that it rent his Clothes, and so bruised his
Flesh, that the Scar remained a long time after. This is what Possidonius says
in defense of King Perseus.

The Romans not being able to make a Salius flings his Ensign amongst his
Enemies.
Breach in the Phalanx, one Salius, a Commander of the Pelignians, snatched the
Ensign of his Company, and threw it amongst the Enemies; which as soon as the
Pelignians perceived, (for the Italians esteem it base and dishonorable to
abandon their Standard) they rushed with great violence toward that Place, and
the Conflict was very fierce, and the Slaughter terrible on both sides: for
these endeavored to cut their Spears a sunder with their Swords, or to beat
them back with their Shields, or put them by with their Hands; on the other
side, the Macedonians held their Pikes in both hand^ and pierced those that
came in their wa^* and their Armor quite through, no Shield or Corslet being
able to resist the force of their Spears. The Pelignians were thrown headlo^^
The Romans forced to retreat.
to the Ground, who against all Reason, and more like Bruits than Men, had run
upon unavoidable Dangers, and certain Death: and their first Ranks being (...),
those that were behind were forced to give back; it cannot be said they fled,
but that they retreated toward Mount Olocrus. When Emilius sa^ The Phalanx
broken by Emilius.
this (as Possidonius relates) he rent his Clothes, for some of his Men were
ready to fly, the rest were not willing to engage with a Phalanx, into which
they could hope for no Entrance, but seemed altogether unconquerable, and as
secure as if entrenched, whilst guarded with such great numbers of Pikes, which
on al^ sides threatened the Assailers. Nevertheless the Unequalness of the
Ground, would not permit the Body that was long, to be so exactly drawn up, as
to have their Shield^ every where joined: but Emilius perceived, that there
were a great many Interstices and Breaches in the Macedonian Phalanx; as it
usually happens in all great Armies, according to the different Efforts of the
Combatants, whilst in one part they press forward with eagerness, and in
another are forced to giv^ back. Wherefore taking this Occasion, with all speed
he divided his Men into small Companies, and gave them Order to fall into the
Intervals, and void Places of the Enemies Body, and to make their Attack not in
any one Place with them all, but to engage, as they were divided into Parties,
in several. These Commands Emilius gave to his Captains, and they to their
Soldiers; who had no sooner entered the Spaces, and separated their Enemies,
but some charged them on their sides where they were naked and exposed, others
fetching a Compass, set on them behind, and these destroyed the force of the
Phalanx, which consisted in their mutual Help, and being closely united. And
now come to fight Man to Man, or in small Parties, the Macedonians smote in
vain upon firm and long Targets with their little Swords, whilst their slight
Shields were not able to sustain the weight and force of those of the Romans,
which pierced through all their Armor to their Bodies, so that at length they
fled. Very sharp was the Fight, in the Place where Marcus, the Son of Cato, and
Son-in-^aw of Emilius, whilst he showed all possible The Valor of Marcus Cato.
Courage, let fall his Sword: for he being a young Man, educated according to
the Principles of Honor, and as Son of so renowned a Father, obliged to give
Testimonies of more than ordinary Virtue, thought his Life but a burden, should
he live and permit his E^^mies to enjoy this Spoil. Wherefore (...) speeded
through the Army, and wher^ever he spied a Friend or Companion, (...) declared
his Misfortune, and begged (...) Assistance: the number of these being great
and valiant, they with one accord made their way through their Fellows after
their Leader, and fell upon the Enemy; who^ after a sharp Conflict, many
Wounds, and much Slaughter, they repulsed, possessed the Place that was now
deserted and free, and set themselves to search for the Sword, which at last
they found covered with great heap^ of Arms and dead Carcasses. Overjoyed with
this Success, they sang Songs of Triumph, and with more eagerness than eve^
charged the Foes that yet remained firm and unbroke. In the end, 3000 of the
chose^ Men, who kept their Stations, and foug^^ valiantly to the last, were all
cut in piece^ and very great was the Slaughter of such (...) fled, insomuch as
the Plain and the (...) were filled with dead Bodies, and the Water of the
River Leucus, which the Romans did not pass till the next day after the B^ttel
was then mingled with Blood; for it is said there fell more than 25000 of the
Enemy of the Romans, as Possidonius relates, a 100^ as Nasica, only fourscore.
This Battle though so great, was very quickly decided it being Three in the
Afternoon.
9 of the Clock when they first engaged, and not 10 when the Enemy was
vanquished; the rest of the day was spent in the pursuit of such as fled, whom
they followed 120 Furlongs, so that it was far in the Night when they returned.

All the rest were met by their Servants with Torches, and brought back with
Joy and great Triumph to their Tents, which were set out with Lights, and
decked with Wreaths of Joy and Laurel. But the General himself was overwhelmed
with Grief; Emilius his grief for the supposed loss of his S^n Scipio.
^or of the two Sons that served under him ^n the War, the youngest was
missing, whom he held most dear, and whose Courage and good Qualities, he knew,
much excelled those of his Brethren; and though yet a Stripling, that he was
valiant, and thirsting ofter Honor, which made him conclude he was lost,
whilst for want of Experience he had too far engaged himself amongst his
Enemies. The whole Army was sensible of his Dejection and Sorrow, and quitting
their Sup^ers, ran about with Lights, some to Emilius his Tents, some out of
the Trenches, to seek him amongst such as were slain in the first Onset. There
was nothing but Grief in the Camp, and the Valley was filled with ^he Cries of
such as called out for Scipio; for from his very Youth, he was endu'd above
Scipio his Character.
any of his Equals, with all the good Qualities requisite either to command or
Counsel. At length when it was late, and they almost despaired, he returned
from the Pursuit, with only two or three of his Companions, all covered with
the fresh Blood of his Enemies, having, like a well-bred Dog followed the Chase
with too eager pleasure of Victory. This was that Scipio that afterward
destroyed Carthage and Numantiu^, that was, without Dispute, the valiantest of
the Romans, and had the greatest Authority amongst them. Thus Fortune deferring
the execution of her Spite at so brave a^ Exploit, to some other time, let
Emilius at present enjoy this Victory, with full Satisfaction and Delight.

As for Perseus, from Pydne he fled to Pell^, Perseus flies in Disg^ise.
with his Horsemen, which were as yet almost entire. But when the Foot met
them, and upbraiding them as Cowards and Traitors, threw them off their Horses,
and fell to Blows, Perseus, fearing the Tumult, forsook the common Road, and
lest he should be known, pulled off his Purple, and carried it before him, and
took his Crown in his hand, and that he might the better convers^ with his
Friends, alighted from his Hors^ and led him. Of those that were about him, one
pretended to tie his shoe that was loose, another to water his Horse, a thi^^
to drink himself; so that thus lagging behind they by degrees left him, as
having not so much reason to fear their Enemies, as his cruelty, who fretted at
his misfortune, sought to His Cruelty.
free himself, by laying the cause of the overthrow upon every body else. He
arrived at Pella in the night, where Eactus and Eudeus two of his Treasurers
came to him, and what with their reflecting on his former miscarriages, and
their free and mistimed admonitions and counsels, so exasperated him, that he
killed them both, stabbing them with his own dagger. After this, no body stuck
to him but Evander the Cretan, Archedemus the Etolian, and Neo the Beotian: and
of the common Soldiers there followed him only those from Crete, not out of
any good will, but that they were as constant to his Riches, as the Bees to
their Hive. For he carried a great treasure with him, out of which he had
suffered them to take Cups, Bowls, and other vessels of Silver and Gold, to the
value of fifty talents. But when he was come to Amphipolis, and afterward to
Alepse, and his fears were a little abated, he relapsed into his old and
natural disease of Covetousness, and bewailed to his Friends that he And
Covetousness.
had through inadvertency distributed the gold Plate belonging to Alexander the
Great amongst the Cretans, and beseeched those that had it, with tears in his
eyes, to exchange with him again for money. Those that understood him thoroughly
knew very well he only played the Cretan with those of Crete, but those that
believed him, and restored what they had, were cheated; for he not only did not
pay the Money, but by craft got thirty Talents more of his friends into his
hands; (which in a short time after fell to the Enemy) and with them sailed
into Samothracia, and there fled to the Temple of Castor and Pollux for refuge.

The Macedonians were always accounted great lovers of their Kings, but now, as
if their chief prop was broken; they submitted All M^cedonia de ^ver'd up to
Emilius.
themselves with an unanimous consent to Emilius, and in two days made him
Master of their whole Country. Which seems to confirm their opinion, who
ascribe whatsoever he did to his good fortune; to which agreed the Omen that
happened to the Sacrifice at Amphipolis, where Emilius being about to offer,
and the holy Rites begun, on a sudden the Lightning fell upon the Altar, set
the Wood on fire, and sanctified the Sacrifice. But above all, that of Fame
does far exceed all they tell us of the Gods, or his good Fortune: for the 4th.
day after Perseus was vanquished at Pydne, whilst the People were beholding the
running of the Horses in the Place designed for those Games, there arose This
News miralously conveyed to Rome.
an unexpected Report at the entrance of the Theater, that Emilius had overcome
Perseus, and brought all Macedonia under his Power, and from thence, when the
Rumor was spread amongst the People, there was a general Joy, with Shoutings
and Acclamations for that whole day through the City. But when no certain
Author was found of the News, and every one alike had taken it on trust, it
vanished for the present and came to nothing, till within a few days after
these tidings came certainly confirmed, and then the first Intelligence was
looked upon as no less than a Miracle, whilst it could be no other than
feigned, though it contained in it what was real and true. It is reported
Examples of the like.
also, that the News of a Battle that was fought in Italy, near the River
Sagra, was carried into Peloponnesus the same day, and of that nigh Mycala,
against the Medes, to Platee. When the Romans had defeated the Tarquins, who
were combined with the Latins, there were almost at the same time at Rome seen
two goodly tall Men, who themselves brought the News from the Camp. The first
Man that spoke to them in the Marketplace near the Fountain, where they were
refreshing their Horses which were all of a Foam, much wondered at the Report of
the Victory, when, it is said they both smiled and gently strok'd his Beard with
their hands, the Hairs of which from being black, was on the Spot changed to be
yellow. This Circumstance gave credit to what they said, and fixed the Name of
Enobarbus (which is as much as yellow Beard) on the Man. But that which
happened in our own Time, will make all these credible? for when Antony
rebelled against Domitian, and Rome was in a Consternation, expecting great
Wars in Germany, all on a sudden, and no body knows upon what account, the
People spread abroad a Rumor of the Victory, and the News ran current through
the City, that Antony himself was slain, his whole Army destroyed, and that not
so much as a part of it escaped: nay this belief carried with it such Clearness
and Force, that many of the Magistrates offered up Sacrifices. But when at
length the Author of this Report was sought, and none was to be found, it
vanished by degrees, whilst every one shifted it off, from himself to another,
and at last was lost in the numberless Crowd, as in a vast Ocean, and having no
solid Ground to support its Credit, was in a short time not so much as named in
the City. Nevertheless when Domitian marched out with his Forces to the War, he
met with Messengers and Letters, that gave him a Relation of the Victory; and
the Fame of this Conquest came the very day it was gained, though the distance
of the places was more than 2500 miles. The truth of this no Man amongst us can
be ignorant of.

But to proceed: Cneius Octavius, who was Perseus surrenders himself.
joined in Command with Emilius, came to an Anchor with his Fleet under
Samothrace, where out of his Devotion to the Gods, he permitted Perseus to
enjoy the benefit of Refuge, but took care that he should not escape by Sea.
Notwithstanding Perseus secretly practiced with Oroandes of Crete, who was
Master of a Bark, to convey him and his Treasure away. He, making use of the
common Arts of his Country, took in the Treasure, and advised him to come in
the Night with his Wife, Children, and necessary Attendants, to the Port called
Demetrius, but as soon as it was Evening, set Sail without him. Miserable was
now the Fate of Perseus, who was forced to let down himself, his Wife and
Children, through a narrow Window by a Wall, People altogether unaccustomed to
hardship and Flying. But that which yet fetched deeper Sighs from his Heart
was, when he was told by one, as he wondered on the Shore, that he saw Oroandes
under Sail in the Main Sea, for now it was Day. So that there being no Hopes
left of Escaping, he fled back again to the Wall, which he and his Wife
recovered (though they were seen by the Romans) before they could reach them.
His Children he himself had delivered into the hands of Ion, one that had been
his Favorite, but now proved his Betrayer, and was the chief Cause that forced
him (and it is no other than Beasts themselves will do when their young ones are
taken) to come and yield himself up to those that had them in their Power. His
greatest Confidence was in Nasica, and 'twas to him he called, but he not being
there, he bewayl'd his Misfortune, and seeing there was no possible Remedy,
surrendered himself to Octavius. And here it was that he made it manifest, that
he was possessed with a Vice more sordid than Covetousness it self, to wit* the
fondness of Life; by which he deprived himself even of Pity, the only thing
that Fortune never takes away from the most wretched: for he desired to be
brought to Emilius, who arose from his Seat, and accompanied with his Friends,
went to receive him with Tears in his Eyes, as a great Man fallen by the Anger
of the Gods, and his own ill Fortune; whilst Perseus, which was the most
scandalous of Sights, threw himself at his Feet, embraced his Knees, and
uttered such unmanly Cries and Petitions, as Emilius was not able to bear, or
would vouchsafe to hear: but looking on him with a sad and angry Countenance;
What Emilius his Speech to Perseus.
(says he) miserable as thou art, do thou thus discharge Fortune, of what
might seem her greatest Crime? for by these Actions thou appearest worthy of
thy Calamity, and that it is not your present Condition, but your former
Happiness, that was more than your Deserts. What! do you thus take away from my
Victory, and make my Conquest little, by proving your self a Coward and a Foe
below a Roman? The most unhappy Valor challenges a great Respect, even from
Enemies; but Cowardice, though never so successful, from the Romans always met
with Scorn. Yet for all this he took him up, gave him his Hand, and delivered
him into the Custody of Tubero.

After this, he carried his Sons, his Sons-in-law, and others of the chiefest
Quality, especially those of the younger sort, back with him into his Tent,
where for a long time he sat down without speaking one word, insomuch that
they all wondered at him. At last, he began to discourse of Fortune and humane
Affairs. Is it meet (says His Speech to the young Men.
he) for him that knows he is but a Man, in his greatest Prosperity to pride
himself, and be exalted at the Conquest of a City, Nation, or Kingdom, and not
rather well to weigh this Change of Fortune, which proposes a great Example to
all Warriors of our common Frailty, and teaches them this Lesson, that there is
nothing to be accounted durable or constant? For what time can Men choose to
think themselves secure, when that of Victory it self must chiefly force us to
dread our own Fortune, and a little Consideration of the Fate of Things, and
how all are hurried round, and each man's Station changed, will introduce
Sadness in the midst of greatest Mirth? Or can you, when you see before your
Eyes the Succession of Alexander himself, who arrived at the height of Power,
and ruled the greatest Empire, in the short space of an hour trodden under
foot? When you behold a King, that was but even now surrounded with so numerous
an Army, receiving Nourishment to support his Life, from the Hands of his
Conquerors: can you, I say, believe, there is any Certainty in what we now
possess, whilst there is such a thing as Chance? No, young Men, cast off that
vain Pride, and empty Boast of Victory; sit down with Modesty, and always think
on what is to come, and what, through the spite of Fortune, may be yet the end
of this our present Happiness. It Is said, Emilius having spoke much more to the
same purpose, dismissed the young Men well chastised, and with this Oration, as
with a Bridle, curbed their Vainglory and Insolence.

When this was done, he put his Army into Garrisons, to refresh themselves, and
went himself to visit Greece; a Pleasure Emili^s goes in^o Gree^^.
not more honorable, than conducing to the Benefit of Mankind. For as he
passed, he eased the Peoples Grievances, reformed their Government, and
bestowed Gifts upon them; to some Corn, to others Oil out of the King's
Storehouses, in which (they report) there was so vast Quantities laid up, that
there sooner wanted Receivers, and such as needed, than they could be
exhausted. In Delphos he found a great square Pillar of white Marble, designed
for the Pedestal of King Perseus his Statue, on which he commanded his own to
be placed, alleging, that it was but just, that the Conquered should give
place to the Conquerors. In Olympia he is said to have uttered that so known
Speech, That Phidias had carved Homers Jupiter. When the ten Commissioners
arrived from Rome, he delivered up again to the Macedonians their Cities and
Country, granting them to live at liberty, and according to their own Laws,
only yielding to the Romans the Tribute of a hundred Talents, when they were
wont to pay double the Sum to their Kings. Then he celebrated all manner of
Shows, and Games, and Sacrifices to the Gods, and made great Entertainments and
Feasts; the Charge of all which he liberally defrayed out of the King's
Treasury; and showed that he understood the ordering and placing of his Guests,
and how every Man should be received, answerable to their several Ranks and
Qualities, with such nice Exactness, that the Greci^^^ very much wondered, that
the Care and Experience of these things of Pleasure should not escape him, and
that a Man involved in so great Business, should observe the Decency of such
little Matters. That which very much satisfied him was, that amidst such
magnificent and splendid Preparations, he himself was always the most grateful
Sight, and greatest Pleasure to those he entertained. And he told them that
seemed to wonder at his Diligence, That there was the same Spirit shown in
marshalling a Banquet as an Army, whilst the one was to be rendered very
dreadful to the Enemy, the other very acceptable to the Guests. Nor did Men
less praise his Liberality, and the greatness of his Mind, than his other
Virtues: for he would not so much as see those great Quantities of Silver and
Gold, which were heaped together out of the King's Palaces, but delivered them
to the Questors, to be put into the Public Treasury. He only permitted his own
Sons, who were great Lovers of Learning, to take the King's Books; and when he
distributed such Rewards as were due to extraordinary Valor, he gave his
Son-in-law, Elius Tubero, a Bowl that weighed five pounds: this is that Tubero
we have already mentioned, who was one of the sixteen Relations that lived
together, and were all maintained out of one little Farm: and it is said, that
this was the first Plate that ever entered the House of the Elians, and that
brought thither, as an Honor and Reward of Virtue; for before this time,
neither they nor their Wives would ever make use either of Silver or Gold.

Having thus well settled Things, taking his leave of the Grecians, and exhorted
the Macedonians, that mindful of that Liberty they had received from the
Romans, they should endeavor to maintain it, by their Obedience to the Laws,
and Concord amongst themselves, he departed for Epire; He goes into Epire.
for he had Orders from the Senate, to give the Soldiers that followed him in
the War against Perseus, the Pillage of the Cities of that Country. Wherefore
that he might set upon them all at once, and that by Surprise and unawares, he
summoned ^en of the principal Men out of every City, whom he commanded on such
an appointed day, to bring all the Gold and Silver they had either in their
private Houses ^or Temples; and with every one of these, as if it were for this
very purpose, and under a pretense of searching for and receiving the Gold, he
sent a Centurion, and a Guard of Soldiers; who, the set day being come, rose
all at once, and at the very self-same time fell upon them, and set themselves
to invade and ransack their Enemies so that in one hour a hundred and fifty
thousand Persons were made Slaves, and threescore and ten Cities sacked. Yet
what was given to each Soldier, out of so vast Destruction and utter Ruin,
amounted (...) no more than eleven Drachms; which made all Men dread the Issue
of a War, when the Wealth of a whole Nation thus divided, turned to so little
Advantage and Profit to each particular Man.

When Emilius had done this, which was perfectly contrary to his gentle and
mild Nature, he went down to Oricum, where he embarked his Army for Italy. He
sailed He returns into Italy.
up the River Tibur in the King's Galley, that had sixteen Oars on a side, and
was richly adorned with the Armor of the Prisoners, and with Clothes of Purple
and Scarlet; so that rowing the Vessel slowly against the Stream, the Romans
that crowded on the Shore to meet him, had a taste of his following Triumph.
But the Soldiers who had cast a covetous Eye on the Treasures of Perseus, when
they did not obtain what they thought they so well deserved, were not only
secretly enraged and angry with Emilius for it, but openly complained, that he
had been a severe and tyrannical Commander over them; no^ were they ready to
show their desire of his Triumph. When Servius Galba, who was Galba endeavors
to hinder his Triumph.
Emilius his Enemy, though he commanded a thousand Men under him, understood
this, he was so hardy, as plainly to affirm, that a Triumph was not to be
allowed him, and sowed diverse Calumnies amongst the Soldiers, which yet
further increased their ^ll will? nay more, he desired the Tribunes of the
People, because the four hours that were remaining of the day, could not
suffice for the Accusation, that he would put it off till another. But when the
Tribunes commanded him to speak then, if he had any thing to say, he began a
long Oration, stuffed with all manner of Reproaches, in which he spent the
remaining part of the time, and the Tribunes, when it was dark, dismissed the
Assembly. The Soldiers growing more vehement by this, thronged all to Galba,
and entering into a Conspiracy, early in the Morning again beset the Capitol,
where the Tribunes had appointed the following Assembly to be held. As soon as
it was day, it was put to the Vote, and the first Tribe with a general Consent
rejected the Triumph. When what was done, was spread about, and understood by
the rest of the Assembly, the common People declared themselves very much
grieved, that Emilius should meet with such Ignominy: but this was only in
words, which had no effect: whilst the chief of the Senate exclaimed against it
as a base Action, and excited one another to repress the Boldness and Insolence
of the Soldiers, which, if not timely prevented, would in a while become
altogether ungovernable and violent, when they sa^ already they went about to
deprive Emilius of his Triumph. Wherefore driving away the Crowd, they came up
in great Number^ and desired the Tribunes to defer Polling till they had spoken
what they had to say to the People. All things thus suspended, and Silence
being made, Marcus Servili^^ stood up, a Man of Consular Dignity, and who had
killed 23 of his Enemies, that had challenged him in single Combat. It Is (...)
Servilius his Speech.
more than ever (says he) that I understa^^ how great a Commander our Paulus
Emilius it when I see he was able to perform such (...) and great Exploits,
with an Army so full of Sedition and Baseness: nor can I enough admire, that a
People that seemed to glory i^ the Triumphs over the Illyrians and Africans
should now through Envy refuse to see the Macedonian King led alive captive,
and all the Glory of Philip and Alexander subdued by the Roman Power. For is it
not a strange thing for you, who upon a slight rumor of Victory, th^^ came by
chance into the City, did offer Sacrifices, and put up your Requests unto the
Gods that you might see the Report verified, now when the General is returned
with an undoubted Conquest, to defraud the Gods of Honor, and your selves of
Joy, as if you feared to behold the greatness of his warlike Deed, or were
resolved to spare the King. And of the two, much better were it to put a stop
to the Triumph, out of pity unto him, than out of envy to your General: yet to
such a height of Power is Malice arrived amongst you, that one in a whole Skin,
shining fat with Ease, and nicely bred in Shades, dares talk of the Office of a
General and a Triumph, and that before you, who by your own many words, have
learned to judge of the Valor or the Cowardice of your Commanders. And at the
same time putting aside his Garment, he showed an infinite number of Scars upon
his Breasts, and turn^ng about, discovered those Parts which it ^s not decent
to expose. Then applying himself to Galba: You (says he) deride me for these,
in which I glory before my fellow-Citizens, for it is in their Service in which
I have rode night and day, that I received them; but go on to collect the
Votes, whilst I follow after, and note the base and ungrateful, and such as
^hoose rather to obey the Rabble in War, than to be commanded by their General.
It Is said, ^his Speech so stopped the Soldiers Mouths, and altered their
Minds, that ^ll the Tribes decreed a Triumph for Emilius; which was performed
after this manner:

The People erected Scaffolds in the Market, Emilius his Triumph described.
and Places where the running of Horses used to be seen, (they are called by
them Cirques) and in all other Parts of the City, where they could best behold
the Pomp* The Spectators were clad in white Garments* all the Temples were
open, and full of Garlands and Perfumes, the Ways cleared and cleans'd by a
great many Officers and Tip staves, that drove such as thronged the Passage, or
straggled up and down. This Triumph lasted three days. On the first, which was
scarce long enough for the Sight, was to be seen the Statues, Pictures, and
Images, of an extraordinary bigness, which were taken from the Enemy, drawn
upon 750 Chariots. On the second, was carried in a great many Wains, the
fairest and richest Armor of the Macedonians, both of Brass and Steel* all
newly furbish'd and glistering; which although pil'd up with the greatest Art
and Order, yet seemed to be tumbled on heaps carelessly and by chance; Helmets
were thrown upon Shields, Coats of Male upon Greaves, Cretian Targets, and
Thracian Bucklers, and Quivers of Arrows, lay huddled amongst the Horses Bits,
and through these there appeared the points of naked Swords, intermixed with
long Spears. All these Arms were tied together with such a just liberty, that
they knocked against one another as they were drawn along, and made a harsh and
terrible noise, so that the very Spoils of the Conquered could not be beheld
without dread. After these Wagons laden with Armor, there followed 3000 Men,
who carried the Silver that was coined, in 750 Vessels, each of which weighed
three Talents, and was carried by four Men. Others brought silver Bowls, and
Goblets, and Cups, all disposed in such Order as to make the best Show, and all
valuable, as well for their bigness as the thickness of their engraved Work. On
the 3d. day, early in the Morning, first came the Trumpetters, who did not
sound as they were wont in a Procession or solemn Entry, but such a Charge as
the Romans use when they encourage their Soldiers to Fight. Next followed
young Men girt about with Girdles curiously wrought, which led to the Sacrifice
sixscore stall'd Oxen, with their Horns gilded, and their Heads adorned with
Ribbands and Garlands, and with these were Boys that carried Platters of silver
and gold. After this was brought the gold Coin, which was divided into Vessels,
that weighed three Talents, like to those that contained the silver; they were
in number fourscore wanting three. These were followed by those that brought
the consecrated Bowl, which Emilius had caused to be made that weighed ten
Talents, and was all be^e^ with precious Stones. Then were exposed to view the
Cups of Antigonus and Seleucus, and such as were made after the fashion
invented by Thericles, and all the gold Plate that was used at Perseus his
Table. Next to these came Perseus his Chariot, in the which his Armor was
placed, and on that his Diadem. And after a little intermission, the King's
Children were led Captives, and with them a Train of Nurses, Masters, and
Governors, who all wept, and stretched forth their Hands to the Spectators,
and taught the little Infants to beg and entreat their Compassion. There were
two Sons and a Daughter, who by reason of their tender Age, were altogether
insensible of the greatness of their Misery, which Insensibility of their
condition, rendered it much more deplorable; insomuch that Perseus himself was
scarce regarded as he went along, whilst Pity had fixed the Eyes of the Romans
upon the Infants, and many of them could not forbear Tears, all beheld the
Sight with a mixture of Sorrow and Joy, until the Children were past. After his
Children and their Attendants came Perseus himself, clad all in black, and
wearing Slippers after the fashion of his Country; he looked like one
altogether ^stonish'd and deprived of Reason, through the greatness of his
Misfortunes. Next followed a great Company of his Friends and Familiars, whose
Countenances were disfigured with Grief, and who testified to all that beheld
them, by their Tears, and their continual looking upon Perseus, that it was his
hard Fortune they so much lamented, and that they were regardless of their own.
Perseus sent to Emilius to entreat, that he might not be led in Pomp, but be
left out of the Triumph; who deriding (as was but just) his Cowardice, and
fondness of Life, sent him this Answer; That as for that, it was before, and is
now, in his own power; giving him to understand, that this disgrace was to be
prevented by Death: which the faint-hearted Wretch being not able to sustain,
and made effeminate by I know not what Hopes, became a part of his own spoils.
After these were carried 400 Crowns, all made of Gold, and sent from the Cities
by their respective Ambassadors to Emilius, as a Reward due to his Valor. Then
he himself came seated on a Chariot magnificently adorned, (a Man worthy to be
beheld, even without these Ensigns of Power) he was clad in a Garment of
Purple, inter woven with Gold, and held out a Laurel Branch in his right hand.
All the Army in like manner with Boughs of Laurel in their hands, divided into
Bands and Companies, followed the Chariot of their Commander, some singing Odes
(according to the usual Custom) mingled with Raillery; others, Songs of
Triumph, and the Praise of Emilius his Deeds; who was admired and accounted
happy by all Men, and unenvied by every one that was good: only that it seems
the Province of some God, to lessen that Happiness which is too great and
inordinate, and so to mingle the Affairs of Humane Life, that no one should be
entirely free and exempt from Calamities; but (as it is in Homer) that those
should think themselves truly blessed, to whom Fortune has given an equal share
of Good and Evil.

Emilius had four Sons, of which Scipio and Two of Emilius his Sons die about
the time of his Triumph.
Fabius (as is already related) were adopted into other Families; the other
two, which he had by a second Wife, and were yet but young, he brought up in
his own House. One of these died at 14 years of age, five days before his
Father's Triumph; the other at 12, three days after: so that there was no Roman
without a deep sense of his Suffering, and every one dreaded the Cruelty of
Fortune, that did not scruple to bring so much Sorrow into a House replenished
with Happiness, Rejoicing and Sacrifices, and to intermingle Tears and
Complaints, with Songs of Victory and Triumph. But Emilius reasoning according
to Judgment, considered that Courage and Resolution was not only requisite to
resis^ Armor and Spears, but also to withstand all the Shocks of ill Fortune,
and so did he adapt and temper the necessity of his present Circumstances, as
to overbalance the Evil with the Good, and his private Concerns with those of
the public, that thus they might neither take away from the Grandeur, nor
sully the Dignity of his Victory. For as soon as he had buried the first of his
Sons, (as we have already said) he triumphed; and the second deceasing almost
as soon as his Triumph was over, he gathered together an Assembly of the
People, and made an Oration to them, not like a Man that stood in need of
Comfort from others, but of one that undertook to support his fellow Citizens,
who grieved for the Sufferings he himself underwent.

I (says he) that never yet feared any Emilius his Speech upon the death of his
Sons.
thing that was humane, amongst such as were divine, have always had a dread of
Fortune as faithless and unconstant, and on the very account that in this War
she had been as a favorable Gale in all my Affairs, I still expected some
Change and Reflux of Things. For in one day (says he) I passed the Ionian Sea,
and arrived from Brundisium at Corsica; thence in five more I sacrificed at
Delphos, and in other five days came to my Forces in Macedonia, where after I
had finished the usual Sacrifices for the purifying of the Army, I fell to my
designed Business, and in the space of 15 days put an honorable period to the
War. But when I still had a jealousy of Fortune, even from the smooth Current
of my Affairs, and saw my self secure and free from the Danger of an Enemy, I
chiefly dreaded the Change of the Goddess at Sea, whilst through my Success I
brought home with me so great and victorious an Army, such vast Spoils, and
Kings themselves Captives. Nay more, after I was returned to you safe, and saw
the City full of Joy, Congratulating and Sacrifices, yet still did I suspect
Fortune, as well knowing, that she never conferred any Benefits that were
sincere; and without some Allay. Nor could my mind (that was still as it were
in Labor, and always foreseeing something to befall this City) free it self
from this Fear, until so great a Misfortune befell me in my own Family, and that
in the midst of those days set apart for Triumph, I carried two of the best of
Sons one after another to their Funerals. Now therefore am I my self safe from
Danger, at least as to what was my greatest Care, and I trust and am verily
persuaded, that for the time to come Fortune will prove constant and harmeless
unto you; for she has sufficiently wrecked her Envy at our great Exploits on me
and mine; nor is the Conqueror a less famous Example of humane Frailty, than
the Man he led in Triumph, with this only difference, that Perseus though
conquered does yet enjoy his Children, and the Conqueror Emilius is deprived
of his. This was the generous and magnanimous Oration Emilius is said to speak
to the People, from a Heart truly sincere, and free from all Artifice.

Although he very much pitied Perseus Perseus his Death.
his condition, and studied to befriend him in what he was able, yet could he
procure no other Favor, than his removal from the common Prison, into a more
cleanly and humane Place of Security, where whilst he was guarded, (it is said)
he starved himself to death. Others relate a very particular and unheard of
manner of his dying: That the Soldiers that were his Guard, having conceived a
Spite and Hatred against him for some certain Reasons, and finding no other way
to grieve and afflict him, kept him from Sleep, with all diligence disturbed
him when he was disposed to rest, and found out Contrivances to continue him
still waking, by which means at length he was quite tired out, and gave up the
Ghost. Two of his Children also died soon after him; the third, who was named
Alexander, (they say) proved an exquisite Artist in turning and graving in
little, and withal learned so perfectly to speak and write the Roman Language,
that he became Clerk to the Senate, and behaved himself in his Office with
great Skill and Conduct.

They ascribe to Emilius his Conquest in Macedonia, this most acceptable
Benefit to the People, viz. that he brought so vast a quantity of Money into
the public Treasury, that they never paid any Taxes, until Hircius and Pansa
were Consuls, which was in the first year of the War between Anthony and
Caesar. There was this peculiar and remarkable in Emilius, That though he was
extremely Emilius always* sided with the Nobles.
beloved and honored by the People, yet he always sided with the Nobles, nor
would he either say or do any thing to ingratiate himself with the Vulgar, but
constantly adhered to the Nobility, and Men of the chiefest Rank, in all
matters of Government. Which thing in aftertimes was cast in Scipio Africanus
his Teeth by Appius; for these two were in their Time the most considerable Men
in the City, and stood in Competition for the Office of Censor. The one had on
his side the Nobles and the Senate, (to which Party the Family of the Appians
were always true;) the other, although his own Interest was great, yet did he
make use of the Favor and Love of the People. When therefore Appius saw Scipio
come to the Marketplace surrounded with Men of mean Rank, and such as were but
newly made free, yet were very fit to manage a Debate, gather together the
Rabble, and carry whatsoever they designed by Importunity and Noise, crying out
with a loud voice: Groan now, (says he) O Paulus Emilius, if you have knowledge
in your Grave of what is done above, that your Son pretends to be Censor, by
the help of Emilius a common Crier, and Licinius, a Barriter. As for Scipio, he
always had the Good will of the People, because he was still heaping up Favors
on them; but Emilius, although he still took part with the Nobles, yet was he
as much their Darling, as he that was esteemed most popular, and sought by
little Arts to ingratiate himself with the Multitude. and this they made
manifest, when amongst other Dignities, they thought him worthy of the Office
of Censor, a Trust accounted most sacred, and of very great Authority, as well
in other things as in the strict examination into men's Lives: for the Censors
had power to expel a Senator, and inrol whom they judged most fit in his room,
and to disgrace such young Men as lived licentiously, by taking away their
Horses. Besides this, they were to value and cess each Man's Estate, and
register the number of the People: there were numbered by Emilius, 337452 Men.
He declared Marcus Emilius Lepidus, Prince of the Senate, who had already four
times arrived at that Honor, and removed from their Office three of the
Senators of the least Note. The same Moderation he and his fellow -Censor,
Marcius Philippus, used at the Muster of the Horsemen.

Whilst he was thus busy about many and weighty Affairs, he son sick of a
Disease, Emilius his Sickness and Death.
which at first seemed hazardous; and although after a while it proved without
Danger, yet was it very troublesome and difficult to be cured: so that by the
Advice of his Physicians he sailed to Velia, a Town in Italy, and there dwelt a
long time near the Sea, where he enjoyed all possible Quietness. The Romans in
the mean while longed for his Return, and often times by their Speeches in the
Theaters, gave public Testimonies of their great Desire and Impatience to see
him. When therefore the time drew nigh, that a solemn Sacrifice was of
necessity to be offered, and he found, as he thought, his Body strong enough,
he came back again to Rome, and there performed the Holy Rites with the rest of
the Priests, the People in the mean time crowding about him, and congratulating
his Return. The next day he sacrificed again to the Gods for his Recovery; and
having finished the Sacrifice, returned to his House, and set him down to
Dinner, when all on a sudden, and when no Change was expected, he fell into a
raving Fit, and being quite deprived of his Senses, the third day after ended
his Life, in which he had wanted no manner of thing, which is thought to
conduce to Happiness. Nay, his very Funeral Pomp had something in it
remarkable, and to be admired, and his Virtue was graced with the most solemn
and happy Rites at his Burial; for these did not consist of Gold and Ivory, or
in the usual Sumptuousness and Splendour of such Preparations, but in the
Good Will, Honor and Love, not only of his fellow-Citizens, but of his Enemies
themselves. For as many Spaniards, Ligurians, and Macedonians, as happened to
be present at the Solemnity, that were young, and of vigorous Bodies, took up
the Bed and carried it, whilst the more aged followed, calling Emilius the
Benefactor and Preserver of their Countries. Nor did he only at the time of his
Conquest, demean himself to all with Kindness and Clemency, but through the
whole course of his Life continued to do them good, and look after their
Concerns, as if they had been his Familiars and Relations. They report, that
the whole of his Estate scarce amounted to three hundred threescore and ten
thousand Drachms, to which he left his two Sons Coheirs; but Scipio, who was
the youngest, being adopted into the more wealthy Family of Africanus, gave it
all to his Brother. Such is said to have been the Life and Manners of Emilius.

TIMOLEON Compared with PAULUS EMILIUS.
IF we consider these two Heroes, as Historians have represented them to us,
without doubt in the Comparison very little difference will be found between
'em. They made War with two powerful Enemies: The one against the Macedonians,
and the other against the Carthaginians, and the Success was glorious. One
conquered Macedon from the seventh succeeding Heir of Antigonus; the other
freed Sicily from usurping Tyrants, and restored that Isle to its former
Liberty. Unless this be disputed for, that Emilius engaged with Perseus, when
his Forces were entire, and composed of such Men as had often with Success
fought with the Romans: And that Timoleon found Dionysius in a despairing
condition, his Affairs being reduced to the last Extremity. On the contrary,
this may be said in favor of Timoleor: That he vanquished several Tyrants, and
a powerful Carthaginian Army, with an inconsiderable number of Men gathered
together from all Parts: Not with such an Army as Emilius had, of well
disciplined Soldiers, experienced in War, and accustomed to obey; but such as
through the hopes of Gain resorted to him, unskilled in Fighting and
ungovernable. And when Actions are equally glorious, and the means to compass
them unequal, the greatest Esteem is certainly due to that General who conquers
with the smaller Power.

Both have the Reputation of behaving themselves with an uncorrupted Integrity,
in all the Affairs they managed: But Emilius had the advantage of being from
his Infancy, by the Laws and Customs of his Country, brought up to the well
management of public Affairs, which Timoleon wanted, but by use brought
himself to. And this is plain; for at that time all the Romans were educated
with the greatest Modesty and Temperance, and paid an inviolable Observance to
the Laws of their Country: Whereas it is remarkable, that not one of the Grecian
Generals commanding in Sicily, could keep himself uncorrupted, except Dion, and
of him they entertained a Jealousy, that he would establish a Monarchy there
after the Lacedaemonian manner. Timaeus writes, that the Syracusians sent
Gylippus home laden with infamy, for his unsatiable Covetousness, and the many
Bribes he took when he commanded the Army. Diverse Historians mention, that
Pharax the Spartan, and Calippus the Athenian, committed several wicked and
treacherous Acts, designing to make themselves Kings of Sicily. -- But what
were these Men, and what strength had they to nourish so vain a Thought? For
the first of them was a Follower of Dionysius, when he was expelled Syracuse,
and the other a hired Captain of Foot under Dion, and came into Sicily with
him. -- But Timoleon at the Request and Prayers of the Syracusians, was sent to
be their General, not seeking for the Command, but when placed in his hands,
managing it to the best advantage, and no sooner had he restored Sicily to her
Liberty, but he willingly resigned his Charge.

This is truly worthy our Admiration in Emilius, That though he conquered so
great and so rich a Realm as that of Macedon, yet he would not touch, nor see
any of the Money, nor did he advantage himself one farthing by it, though he
was very generous of his own to others. -- This is not mentioned to reflect on
Timoleon, for accepting of a fair House and handsome Estate in the Country,
which the Syracusians presented him with; for on that occasion it was not
dishonest to receive 'em: But yet there is greater glory in a Refusal; and that
is the supremest Virtue, which lets the praise of good Men be the Reward of its
actions, and refuses all gifts, how well soever it may have deserved them. And
as that Body is without doubt, the most strong and healthful, which can the
easiest support extreme Cold, and excessive Heat, in the change of Seasons; and
that the most firm and collected Mind, which is not puffed up with Prosperity,
nor dejected with Adversity: so the Virtue of Emilius was eminently seen, in
that his Countenance and Carriage was the same upon the loss of two dear Sons,
as when he achieved his greatest Victories and Triumphs. But Timoleon, after
he had justly punished his Brother, a truly heroic Action, let his Reason
yield to a causless Sorrow, and, dejected with Grief and Remorse, he forbore
for 20 years to appear in any public Place, or meddle with any Affairs o^ the
Commonwealth. It Is truly very commendable to shun and abhor the doing o^ any
base Action; but to stand in fear o^ the Peoples Censure or common Talk, may
argue a harmless and peaceable Mind, bu^ never a brave and truly heroic Soul.

Timoleon.
T. Sturt sculp:


THE LIFE OF TIMOLEON.
Translated from the Greek: By Tho. Blomer, D. D.
Volume II.
THE Affairs of the Syracusians, before Timoleon was sent into Sicily, were in
this posture: After Dion had driven out Dionysius the Tyrant, he was slain by
Treachery, and those that had assisted him in delivering Syracuse were divided
among themselves, so that the City, by a continual change of Governors, and a
train of Mischiefs that succeeded each other, became almost desolate and
forsaken. As for the rest of Sicily, part thereof was now utterly destroyed and
ruined, through a long continuance of the Wars, and most of the Cities that had
been left standing, were seized upon by a mixed Company of Barbarians, and
Soldiers under no Pay, that were ready to embrace every Turn of Government.
Such being the state of Things, Dionysius takes the Opportunity, and in the
tenth year of his Banishment, by the help of some foreign Troops he had got
together, forces out Nysaeus, then Master of Syracuse, recovers all afresh, and
was again settled in his Dominion. And as he had been at first strangely
deprived, of the greatest and most absolute Power that ever was, by a very
small Party, so now after a more wonderful manner, being an Exile, and of mean
condition, he became the Sovereign Lord of those that did eject him. All
therefore that remained in Syracuse, were made to serve under a Tyrant, who at
the best was of an ungentle Nature, and that exasperated them to a greater
degree of Savageness, by the late Misfortunes and Calamities he had suffered
But those of the better sort, and such as were of Note and Eminence, having
timely retired thence to Icetes, that bore sway over the Leontines, put
themselves under his Protection, and chose him for their General in the War; a
Person hardly preferrable to any of those that were open and avowed Tyrants:
but they had no other Sanctuary at present, and it gave them some ground of
confidence, that he was both of a Syracusian Family, and had an Army besides
able to encounter that of Dionysius. In the mean time the Carthaginians
appeared before Sicily with a great Navy, watching when and where they might
make a Descent upon the Island; the terror of which Fleet, made the Sicilians
incline to send an Embassy into Greece, that should demand Succors from the
Corinthians, whom they did address to and confide in rather than any others,
not only upon the account of their near Kindred, and by reason of the great
Benefits they had often received by trusting them heretofore, but because
Corinth had ever shown her self an entire Lover of Freedom, and the most averse
from Tyranny, by the many noble Wars she had engaged in, not upon the score of
Empire and Avarice, but for the sole Liberty of the Greeks. But Icetes, who
made it the business of his Command, not so much to deliver the Syracusians
from other Tyrants, as to enslave them to himself, had already held some secret
Conferences with those of Carthage, while in public he commended the Design of
his Syrac^sian Clients, and dispatched Ambassadors from himself, together with
those which they sent into Peloponnesus; not that he really desired there
should come any Relief from thence, but, in case the Corinthians (as it was
likely enough) should, by reason of the Troubles of Greece, and those
Diversions that were given them at home, refuse their Assistance, hoping then
he should be able with less difficulty to dispose and incline things for the
Carthaginian Interest, and so make use of these foreign Pretenders, as
Instruments and Auxiliaries for himself, either against the Syracusians, or
their common Enemy Dionysius, as occasion served; which Project and Subtilty of
his was discovered a while after. But the foresaid Ambassadors being now
arrived, and their Request known, the Corinthians, who were wont to have a
particular Concern for all their Colonies and Plantations, but especially for
that of Syracuse, since by good fortune too there was nothing to molest them in
their own Country, but they enjoyed Peace and leisure at that time, did
readily and with one accord pass a Vote for their Assistance. And when they
were deliberating about the choice of a Captain for that Expedition, and the
Magistrates of their City did nominate and propose several Persons, that had
made it their Care and Study to be esteemed among them, one of the Plebeians
standing up, happened to name Timoleon, the Son of Timodemus, who had long ago
left off to concern himself in public Business, and had neither any hopes of,
nor the least pretension to an Employment of that nature; insomuch that the
thing was thought to proceed from a divine Instinct, and that some God or other
had put it in the man's heart to mention him; so great an indulgence of Fortune
did then immediately appear at his Election, and so much of her Favor did
accompany his following Actions, as it were on purpose to recommend his worth,
and add some grace and ornament to his personal Virtues. If you regard his
Parentage, both Timodemus his Father, and his Mother Demariste, were of a Noble
and Illustrious Rank in that City; as for himself, he was a mighty Lover of his
Country, and one of admirable Meekness toward all, excepting that extreme
hatred he bore to Tyrants and wicked men. His Natural Abilities for the War
were so happily tempered, and of that excellent and even mixture, that, as a
rare and extraordinary Prudenee might be seen in all the Enterprises of his
younger years* so a strange firmness of Mind, and the most undaunted Courage
did attend him still, even to the last Exploits of his declining Age. He had an
Elder Brother, whose Name was Timophanes, one of a different Make, and every
way unlike him, being indiscreet, and rash, and corrupted with a Love of
Monarchy, by the suggestion of some lewd Friends and foreign Soldiers, which
he kept always about him. He seemed to have a certain Force and Vehemence in
all Attempts, and even to delight in Dangers, whereby he took much with the
People, and upon that account did not only aspire, but was advanced to the
highest Charges, as a vigorous and effective Warrior; for the obtaining of
which Offices and Promotions, Timoleon did very much assist him, who either
helped wholly to conceal his Errors and Defaults, or at least to lessen and
diminish those he was thought guilty of, and beside this, took care to magnify
and adorn whatever was commendable in him, and set off his good Qualities to
the best advantage. It happened once in a Battle of the Corinthians, against
those of Argos and Cleone, that Timoleon served among the Infantry, when
Timophanes, commanding their Cavalry, was brought into extraordinary danger,
for his Horse being wounded fell forward, and threw him head long amidst the
Enemies, whereupon part of his Companions were presently dispersed through a
sudden fear, and the small number that remained, bearing up against a great
Multitude, had much ado to maintain the Fight, and make any long Resistance. As
soon therefore as Timoleon was aware of that Accident, he run hastily in to his
Brother's rescue, and covering the fallen T^nophanes with his Buckler, after
having received abundance of Darts, and several Strokes by the Sword into his
Body and his Armor, he at length with much difficulty obliged the Enemies to
retire, and brought off his Brother alive and safe out of that desperate
extremity. But when the Corinthians, for fear of losing their City a second
time, by taking in Associates, (a thing they had formerly suffered from them)
made a Decree to entertain 400 Strangers for the security thereof, and gave
Timophanes the Command over them, he, without any regard to Honor and Equity,
put all those things in speedy Execution, whereby he might become absolute, and
bring the Place under his own Power; and having cut off many principal
Citizens, uncondemn'd and without Trial, that were most likely to hinder his
Design, declared himself to be King of Corinth; a Procedure that did infinitely
afflict the good Timoleon, as reckoning the Wickedness of such a Brother, to be
his own Reproach and Calam^ty. He therefore undertook to persuade him by his
Discourse, that, desisting from that (...) and unhappy Ambition, he would
bethi^k himself how he should make the Corinthians some Amends, and find out an
Exp^^^ent to remedy and correct the Evils he had done them. But when his single
Admonition was rejected and contemned by him, he makes a second and more
powerful Attempt, taking with him one Aeschylus his Kinsman, Brother to the
Wife of Timophanes, and a certain Prophet or Diviner, that was his Friend, whom
Theopompus in his History calls Satyrus, but Ephorus and Timaeus mention in
theirs by the Name of Orthagoras. After a few days then he returns to his
Brother with this Company, all three of them surrounding and earnestly
importuning him upon the same Subject, that now at length he would listen to
sober Counsel, and use Reason, and be of another mind. But when Timophanes
began first to laugh at the Men's simpl^city, and being vehemently pressed, fell
afterward into Rage and Indignation against them, Timoleon stepped aside from
him, and stood weeping, with his Face covered, while the other two, drawing out
their Swords, dispatched him in a moment. The rumor of this Fact being soon
scattered about, the better and more generous sort of the Corinthians did
highly applaud Timoleon for his detestation of Improbity, and extol the
greatness of his Soul, that being of a sweet and gentle Disposition, and having
so much Love and Kindness for his Family, he should however think the
Obligations to his Country much stronger than the Ties of Consanguinity, and
prefer that which is handsome and just, before Gain and Interest, and his own
particular Advantage; for the same Brother, which with so much Bravery had been
saved by him, when he fought valiantly in the Cause of Corinth, he had now as
nobly sacrificed, for enslaving her afterward by his base and treacherous
Usurpation. But then on the other side, those that knew not how to live in a
Democracy, and had been used to make their humble Court unto the Men of Power,
though they did openly pretend to rejoice at the death of such a Tyrant, yet
secretly reviling Timoleon, as one that had committed the most impious and
abominable Act, they cast him into a strange Melancholy and Dejection. And when
he came to understand how heavily his Mother took it, and that she likewise did
utter the saddest Complaints and terrible Imprecations against him, he went to
satisfy and comfort her as to what had happened; who would not endure so much
as to look upon him, but caused the Doors of her House to be shut, that (...)
might have no admission into her prese^^^ the grief whereof did so disorder his
(...) and make him grow so hugely disco^^^late, that he determined to put an
end (...) that perplexity with his Life, and sta^^ himself by abstaining from
all manner (...) Sustenance; but through the Care and Diligence of his Friends,
who were very instant with him, and added force to th^^ Entreaties, he came to
resolve and prom^^ at last, that he would endure Living, provided it might be
in Solitude, and remo^^ from Company: so that quitting all civ^^ Transactions,
and his former Commerce (...) the World, for a long while after his first
R^tirement, he never came into Corinth, but wandered up and down the Fields,
full of anxio^ and tormenting Thoughts, and spent his tim^ in those desert
Places, that were at the farthest distance from society and humane Intercour^^*
Which Behavior of his may give us occasion to observe, that the Minds of Men
are easily A moral reflection.
shaken and carried off from their own Sentiments, through the casual
Commendation or Reproof of others, unless the Judgments that we make, and the
Purposes we conceive, be confirmed too by Reason and Philosophy, which give
strength and steadiness to our Undertakings, for an Action must not only be
just and la^dible in its own nature, but it must proceed likewise from solid
Motives, and a lasting Principle, that so we may fully and constantly approve
the thing, and be perfectly satisfied in what we do: for otherwise having once
finished a Design, and brought our Resolution to Practice, we shall out of pure
weakness come to be troubled at the Performance, when the grace and goodliness
thereof begins to decay and wear out of our Fancy, which rendered it before so
amiable and pleasing to us. As it happens to those liquorish sort of People,
that seizing on the more delicious Morsels of any Dish with a keen Appetite,
are presently disgusted when they grow full, and find themselves oppressed and
uneasy now, by what they did before so greedily desire: for a succeeding
Dislike is enough to spoil the very best of Actions, and Repentance makes that
which was never so well done, ^o become base and faulty; whereas the Choice and
Procedure that is founded upon Knowledge and wise Reasoning, does not change by
Disappointment, or suffer us to re^ent, though it happen perchance to be less
prosperous in the issue. And therefore Phocion of Athens, having still
vigorously opposed ^he Attempts of Leosthenes, which how^ver did succeed
contrary to his Opinion, and all the appearance of things, when he (...) the
Athenians fall to sacrifice, and look very big and haughty upon a Victory that
^^gotten by him, I should have been glad* (...) he to them, that I my self had
been the ^thor of what Leosthenes has achieved for (...) but cannot wish that
I had offered you ^^^ther Advice than what I always gave, and then appear to be
most reasonable. But A^^des the Locrian, one of Plato's Companion made a more
sharp and severe Reply to D^onysius the elder, who demanding one (...) his
Daughters in Marriage, I had (...) says he to him, see the Virgin in her
G^^^than in the Palace of a Tyrant. And wh^ the same Dionysius, enraged at the
(...) made his Sons be put to death a while (...) and did then again
insultingly ask, (...) he were still in the same mind as to the (...) of his
Daughters? His Answer was (...) cannot but grieve at the cruelty of your dee^
but am not a whit sorry for the freedom of (...) own words. Now such
Expressions as the may peradventure pass for the Effects of more sublime and
accomplished Virtue.

But as for that passionate Disorder of T^moleon upon the late Fact, whether it
(...) from a deep commiseration of his Brother Fate, or the Reverence he bore
his Mother it did so shatter and dissolve his Spirits, the for the space of
almost 20 years, he had (...) offered to concern himself in any honou^^ble or
public Action. When therefore (...) was pitched upon for a General, and
joyfully accepted as such by the Suffrages of the People, Teliclides, one of
the greatest Power and Reputation in Corinth, began to exhort him, that he
would act now like a Man of Worth and Gallantry: For, says he, if you appear
magnanimous, and do bravely in this Service, we shall then believe that you
delivered us from a Tyrant; but if you behave your self basely, and come off
ill, it will be thought by all that you killed your Brother. While he was yet
preparing to set Sail, and listing Soldiers to imbark with him, there came
Letters to the Corinthians from Icetes, that plainly discovered his Revolt and
Treachery; for his Ambassadors were no sooner gone for Corinth, but he openly
joined himself to the Carthaginians, and furthered them in their Designs, that
they likewise might assist him to throw out Dionysius, and become Master of
Syracuse in his room. And fearing he might be disappointed of his Aim, if any
considerable Force and a skilful Leader should come from Corinth before this
were effected, he sent a Letter of Advice thither in all haste to prevent their
setting out, telling them, they needed not be at any cost and trouble upon his
account, or run the hazard of a Sicilian Voyage, especially since the
Carthaginians would dispute their Passage, and lay in wait to attack them with
a numerous Fleet, (...) he had now engaged himself, (being (...) thereto by the
slowness of their motions) ^^lend him all necessary Assistance against
^^onysius. This Letter being publicly (...) if any had been cold and
indifferent (...) as to the Expedition in hand, yet that (...) dignation they
conceived against the (...) of Icetes, did now exasperate and (...) them all,
insomuch that they willingly ^^^tributed to supply Timoleon, and jointly (...)
deavour'd to hasten his departure.

When the Vessels were equipped, and (...) Soldiers every way provided for,
the ^^male Priests of Proserpina had a Dream^ Vision, wherein she and her
Mother (...) appeared to them in a traveling Garb, (...) were heard to say,
that they would sail (...) Timoleon into Sicily; whereupon the Co^^^thians
having built a sacred Galley, it (...) devoted to them, and called the Galley
(...) the Goddesses. Timoleon went in Person (...) Delphi, where he sacrificed
to Apollo, (...) descending into the Place of Prophecy, (...) was surpised
with this mavelous Occ^^rence: A Wreath or Garland interwov^^ with Crowns and
Trophies, slipped off (...) among the Gifts that were there consec^^ted and
hung up in the Temple, which (...) directly down upon his Head; so that ^^pollo
seemed already to crown him with Success, and send him thence to conquer and
triumph in that Enterprise. He put to Sea only with seven Ships of Corinth, two
of Corcyra, and a tenth which was furnished out by the Leucadians; being now
entered into the deep by night, and carried with a prosperous gale, the Heaven
seemed all on a sudden to be rent in sunder, and a bright spreading Flame to
issue from the division, and hover over the Ship wherein he was, which having
formed it self into a Torch, not unlike those that are used in their religious
Mysteries, began to steer the same course, and run along in their company,
guiding them by its light to that Quarter of Italy where they designed to go
ashore. The ^oothsayers affirmed, that this Apparition did agree with that
Dream of the holy Wo^en, and make good what they had hap^ily foretold, since
the Goddesses did now ^^sibly join in the Expedition, and set up that heavenly
Lamp to march before them ^s a Convoy; Scicily being thought sacred (...)
Proserpina, for Poets feign, that the Rape ^as committed there, and that the
Island ^as given her in Dowry when she married ^luto. Now these early
demonstrations of ^ivine Favor did mightly encourage his ^hole Army; so that
making all the Sail ^ey were able, and nimbly crossing the ^ea, they were soon
brought upon the Coast of Italy: but the tidings that came (...) Sicily did
very much perplex Timoleon, (...) dishearten his Soldiers, for Icetes have
already beaten Dionysius out of the Field, (...) reduced the greater part of
Syracuse it (...) did now, straiten and besiege him in the ^^tadel, and that
Remnant which is called (...) Isle, whither he was lately fled for his (...)
Refuge; while the Carthaginians by Agr^^ment, were to make it their business to
(...) Timoleon from landing in any Port (...); so that he and his Party being
driv^^ back, they might with more ease and (...) their own leisure divide the
Island (...) themselves. In pursuance of which (...) the Carthaginians send
away 20 of their ^^leys to Rhegium, having aboard them (...) Ambassadors from
Icetes to (...) that carried Instructions suitable to (...) Proceedings, which
were nothing else (...) specious Amusements and plausible (...) to color and
conceal his knavish (...) for the Men had Order to propose and ^^mand, that
Timoleon himself (if he (...) Offer) should come to advise with (...) and
partake of all his Conquests, but tha^ he might send back his Ships and Forces
unto Corinth, since the War was in a (...) finished, and the Carthaginians had
block'^ up all the Road, as resolving to oppose then if they should press
toward the Shore. When therefore the Corinthians met with these ^nvoys at
Rhegium, and received their Mes^^ge, and saw the Punick Vessels riding at
^nchor in the Bay, they became deeply ^^nsible of the Abuse that was put upon
them, and had a general Indignation against ^^etes, and mighty Apprehensions
for the ^oor Sicilians, whom they now plainly ^erceiv'd to be as it were a
Prize and Re^^mpence betwixt the Falsehood of Icetes ^n one side, and the
Ambition of Carthage (...) the other; for it seemed utterly impos^ble to force
and overbear the Carthaginian ^hips that lay before them, and were dou^^e their
number, as also to vanquish the (...) victorious Troops which Icetes had ^ith
him in Syracuse, for the Conduct and ^^ief whereof they had undertaken that
^^yage. The Case being thus, Timoleon, (...) some Conference with the Legates
Icetes, and the Carthaginian Captains, ^ld them, he should readily submit to
^^eir Proposals, (for it would be to no pur^ose to refuse Compliance) he was
desi^^us only before* his Return to Corinth, ^^at what had passed between them
in pri^ate, might be solemnly declared before the people of Rhegium, which was
a Grecian ^ity, and a common Friend to the Parties; ^r this would very much
conduce to his ^wn Security and Discharge; and they likewise would more
strictly observe such Articles of Agreement, on behalf of the Syra^^sians,
which they had obliged themselves to in the presence of so many Witnesses. The
Design of all which was, only to give them Diversion, while he got an
opportunity of ^lipping through their Fleet: a Contrivance that all the
principal Rhegians were pri^^ and assisting to, who had a great desire that the
Affairs of Sicily should fall into Corinthian hands, but dreaded nothing so
much as the consequence of a Punick Neighborhood. An Assembly was therefore
called, and the Gates shut, that the Burghers might have no liberty to scatter
and apply themselves to other Business: being met together, they made tedious
Harangues, and spoke one by one upon the same Argument, without driving the
Matter to any certain Head, but purposely spinning out the (...) by that and
other artificial ways, till the Corinthian Galleys should get clear of the
Haven, the Carthaginian Commanders being detained there without any suspicion,
because Timoleon was still present, and gave Signs as if he were just now
preparing to make an Oration. But upon secret notice that the rest of the
Galleys were already gone off, and that his only remained waiting for him, by
the Help and Concealment of those Rhegians that were about the Chair, where
they made Speeches, and favored his Departure, he made a shift to slide away
through the Crowd, and running down to the Port, hoised up Sail with all speed,
and having reached his other Vessels, they came all safe to Taurome^^^m in
Sicily, whither they had been formerly invited, and where they were now kindly
received by Andromachus, the Guardian and Ruler of that City. This Man was
Father of Timaeus the Historian, and incomparably the best of all those that
bore Sway in Sicily at that time, for he governed his Citizens according to Law
and Justice, and had ever openly professed an Aversion and Enmity to all
Tyrants; upon which account he gave Timoleon leave to muster up his Troops
there, and to make that City the Seat of War, persuading the Inhabitants to
join their Arms with the Corinthian Forces, and assist them in the Design of
delivering Sicily. But the Carthaginians who were left in Rhegium perceiving,
when the Assembly was dissolved, that Timoleon had given them the Go-by, were
not a little vexed to see themselves outwitted, which did occasion much
Pastime and Pleasantness to the Rhegians, who could not choose but smile and
rally them, when they heard those exquisite Masters in all Cunning and
Subtilty, to complain, forsooth, of such slippery Tricks, and testify their
dislike of Fraud, and Fetches, and deceitful Doings. However they dispatched a
Messenger aboard one of their Galleys to Tauromentum, who after much
Blustering, in the Barbarick way, and mighty Menaces to Andromachus, if he did
not forthwith send the Corinthians packing, stretched out his Hand with the
inside upward, and then turning it down again, threatened he would handle their
City just in that fashion, and turn it topsy-turvy in as little time, and with
as much ease. Andromachus then laughing at the Man's boisterous Confidence,
made no other Reply, but in contempt thereof fell to imitate his Legerdemain,
and bid him presently be gone, unless he had a mind to see that kind of
Dexterity practiced first upon the Galley which brought him thither. Icetes
being certifi'd, that Timoleon had made good his Passage, he was in great fear
of what might follow thereupon, and sent to desire the Carthaginians, that more
Galleys might be ordered to attend and secure the Coast. And now it was that
the Syracusians began wholly to despair of Safety, seeing the Carthaginians
possessed of their Haven, and Icetes Master of the City, and Dionysius
commanding in the Fortress; whereas Timoleon had as yet but a very slender hold
of Sicily, which he only seized upon as it were by the Fringe or Border in that
small City of the Tauromenians, with a feeble Hope and a poor Company; for he
had but a 1000 Soldiers at the most, and no more Provisions either of Corn or
Money, than were just necessary for the Maintenance and the Pay of that
inconsiderable number. Nor did the other Towns of Sicily confide in him, being
lately overrun with Violence and Outrage, and then exasperated against all
that should offer to lead Armies, for the sake chiefly of Calippus an Athenian,
and Pharax a Lacedaemonian Captain, and the Mischiefs they had suffered by
their Treachery; for both of them having given out that the design of their
coming was to introduce Liberty, and depose Tyrants, they. did so tyrannize
themselves, that the Reign of former Oppressors seemed to be a Golden Age, if
compared with the Lordliness and Exaction of these pretended Deliverers, who
made the Sicilians reckon them to be far more happy that did expire in
Servitude, than any that had lived to see such a dismal Freedom; so that
looking for no better Usage from this Corinthian General, but imagining that
the same Devices and Wheadles were now again set a foot, to allure and sweeten
them by fair Hopes and kind Promises into the Obedience of a new Master, they
did all generally (unless it were the People of Adranum) suspect the
Exhortations, and reject the Overtures that were made them in his (...). Now
these were Inhabitants of a small City, but that consecrated to Adra^us, (a
certain God that was in high Veneration throughout Sicily) and they happened
then to be at variance among themselves, insomuch that one Party called in
Icetes and the Carthaginians to assist them, while the other sent addresses to
Timoleon, that he would come and espouse their Quarrel. Now it so fell out,
that these Auxiliaries, striving which should be there soonest, did both arrive
at Adranum about the same time; Icetes brought with him at least 5000 Fighting
Men, but all the Force Timoleon could make, did not exceed 1200: with these he
marched out of Tauromenium, which was above 42 miles distant from that City.
The first day he moved but slowly, and took up his Quarters betimes after a
short Journey; but the day following he much quickened his pace, and having
passed through many difficult Places, toward Evening he received Advice, that
Icetes was newly come to Adranum, and lay encamped before it: upon which
Intelligence, his Captains and other Officers caused the Vanguard to make a
halt, that the Army being refreshed, and having reposed a while, they might
engage the Enemy with greater Briskness. But Timoleon coming up in haste,
desired (...) not to stop for that Reason, but rather use all possible
Diligence to surprise the Icet^ans, whom probably they would now find in
Disorder, as having lately ended their March, and being taken up at present in
erecting Tents, and preparing Supper; which he had no sooner said, but laying
hold on his ^^ckler, and putting himself in the Front, he led them on as it
were to a certain Victory; the braveness of such a Leader made them all follow
him with a like Courage and Assurance. They were now within less than 30
Furlongs of Adranum, which having soon got over, they immediately fell in upon
the Enemy, that was seized with Confusion, and begun to retire at their first
Approaches; whence also it came to pass, that amidst so little Opposition, and
so early and general a Flight, there were not many more than 300 slain, and
about twice the number made Prisoners, but their Camp and Baggage was all
taken. The Fortune of this Onset soon obliged the Adranitans to unlock their
Gates, and embrace the Interest of Timoleon, who recounted to him in a strange
Affrightment, and with great Admiration, how at the very minute of that
Encounter, the Doors of their Temple flew open of their own accord, that the
Javelin also which their God held in his hand, was observed to tremble at the
Point, and that drops of Sweat had been seen running down his Face; which
prodigious Accidents did not only presage the Victory that was then gotten, but
were an Omen it seems of all his future Exploits, to which the leading Felicity
of this Action gave him so fair an Entrance. For now the neighboring Cities
and Potentates sent Deputies one upon another, to seek his Friendship, and make
the Offer of their Service; among the rest, Mamercus, the Tyrant of Catana,
both a stout Warrior and a wealthy* Prince, struck up an Alliance with him;
and, what was of greater Importance still, Dionysius himself being now grown
desperate, and well nigh forced to surrender, began to despise Icetes, as one
shamefully baffled; but much admiring the Valor of Timoleon, found means to
advertise him and his Corinthians, that he should be content to deliver up
himself and the Arsenal into their hands. Timoleon, gladly embracing this
unlooked for Advantage, sends away Euclides and Telemachus, two Corinthian
Captains, with 400 Men, for the Seizure and Custody of the Castle, who had
Directions to enter not all at once, or in open view, (for that was not to be
done while the Enemy kept a Guard upon the Haven) but only by stealth, and in
small Companies. And so they took possession of that Fortress, and the Palace
of Dionysius, with all the Stores and Ammunition he had prepared and laid up,
as useful to maintain the War; for there was found within a good number of
Horses, and all manner of Engines, and a multitude of Darts, and Weapons to Arm
out 70000 Men, that had been the Magazine of old, beside 2000 Soldiers that
were then with him, which he gave up likewise among the rest for Timoleon's
Service. But Dionysius himself putting his Treasure aboard, and a few Friends,
sailed away without the knowledge of Icetes, and being brought to the Camp of
Timoleon, he there appeared first in the lowly Guise and ignoble Equipage of a
private Person, and was shortly after sent to Corinth with a single Ship, and a
small sum of Money. He who had been born and educated in the most splendid
Court, and the most absolute Monarchy that ever was, which he held and kept up
for the space of ten years after his Father's Death, and since the Attempts of
Dion, who constrained him to quit the Empire, had spent twelve years more in a
continual Agitation of Wars and Scufflings, and great variety of Fortune,
during which time, all the Mischiess and Vexations ^^ his former Reign, were
abundantly (...) and outdone by those Evils and Calam^ties which he then
suffered; for he lived ^^ see both the Funeral of his Sons, being now about the
Prime and Vigor of th^^ Age, and the Rape of his Daughters; ^^ the flower of
their Virginity: he had a^^ther mortifying sight too, from the (...) and
prostitution of his own Sister that b^came his Wife, who being first
villaino^^y treated, and her Person exposed to all the Lust and Lewdness of the
common So^^diery, was then murdered with her Children, and their Bodies cast
into the (...); the Particulars whereof I have more exa^^^y related in the Life
of Dion.

Upon the fame of his landing at Corin^^, there was hardly a Man in Greece,
which had not the Curiosity to come and (...) the late formidable Tyrant, and
discour^e with him: some, rejoicing at his Disasters, were led thither out of
mere (...) and Hatred, that they might have the pleasure of seeing him in such
a despicable state, and of trampling on the Ruins of his broken Fortune; but
others who (...) a ferious and good-natured use of that Accident, did so
consider the Change, as ^^ reflect upon it with Pity and Compassion (...) him,
contemplating withal that marvello^^ and mighty Power, which invisible and
divine Causes do exercise here below, in the great and notorious Examples of
humane Weakness. For neither Art or Nature did in that Age produce any thing,
comparable to this Work and Wonder of Providence, which showed the very same
Man, that was not long before supreme Monarch of Sicily, holding Conversation
now, perhaps with a greazy Cook, or sitting whole days in a Perfumer's Shop, or
drinking the diluted Wine of Taverns, or squabbling in the Street with common
Strumpets, or pretending to instruct the Musical in their Odes, and seriously
disputing with them, about the measure and harmony of certain Airs that were
sung in the Theater. Which Behavior of his met with different Censures; for
being lustful and vicious in himself, and of an immodest Temper, he was thought
by many to do this, out of pure compliance with his own natural Inclinations:
but the ^iner sort of Judges were of Opinion, that all this while he was acting
a sly politic Part, with design hereby to be more contemned among them; that
the Corinthians might not suspect or dread him, as if he did ill brook such a
Vicissitude of Fortune, and were secretly contriving ways to undermine the
State, or advance himself to his former Dignity. For prevention of which
Surmises; and those Dangers they might create him, he did purposely seem
delighted with many sordid things that were against his Genius, and affect an
appearance of much ridiculous Folly, in the choice and manner of all his
public Divertisements. However it be, there are certain Sayings and Repartees
of his left still upon Record, which sufficiently declare, that he was not
dejected under so great a Fall, and whereby it seems he did handsomely
accommodate himself to his present Circumstances; as may appear in part from
the Ingenuity of that Confession* when being come to Leucadia, which* was a
Corinthian Colony as well as Syracuse* he told the Inhabitants thereof, that he
found something in himself not unlike the Passion and Humor of those Children*
which had been guilty of some Misdemeanour; for as they did cheerfully converse
among their Brethren, but were ashamed to come into their Father's presence; so
likewise should he gladly reside with them in that Island, having a certain awe
upon his Mind, which made him fearfully decline the sight of Corinth, that was
a common Mother to them both. But the thing is further evident, from that Reply
he once made to a Stranger in Corinth, who deriding him in a very rude and
scornful manner, about the Conferences he used to have with Philosophers, whose
company had been so delightful to him, while yet a Monarch, and demanding, in
fine, what his Highness was the better now for all those wise and learned
Discourses of Plato? Do you think, says he, I have made no advantage of his
Philosophy, when you see me bear the late Alteration in my Fortune, and this
Insolence of yours, with such an even Temper? And when Aristoxenus the
Musician, and several others, desired to know wherein Plato had offended him,
and what was the ground of his Displeasure to that worthy Man, he made Answer,
That the condition of Sovereign Princes, being attended with many other
Misfortunes, had this great Infelicity above all the rest, that none of those
who were accounted their Friends, and had the liberty of Favorites, would
venture to speak freely, or tell them the plain honest truth, and that by means
of such he had been deprived of Plato 's Kindness, the only Person from whom he
was like to hear it. At another time, one of those pleasant Companions, that
are desirous to pass for Wits or Humourists, in Abuse and Mockery to Dionysius,
as if he were still the same guarded and suspicious Tyrant, fell himself to
examine and shake his own Cloak, as he was entering into the Room, where he was,
to show there were no hidden Daggers or concealed Weapons about him. But
Dionysius wounded the Man with the sharpness of his own Jest, in retorting
smartly, Do you hear, Friend, it would be more satisfactory from one of your
thievish Looks, and I should like it much better, if you would th^^ open and
shake your Garment, when you d^part hence, that I might be sure you had stolen
nothing out of my Chamber. And when Philippus Macedo, as they two were to(...)
it together, began to talk, after a dro(...) way, about the Verses and
Tragedies which his Father, Dionysius the elder, had left behind him, and
pretended to wonder how he could get any time from his other ^^siness, to
compose such elaborate and in^^nious Pieces, he replied very much to the
purpose, It was at those leisurable ho^^* when such as you and I, and all that
see^ or count themselves the happy men, were e^ploy'd in Merriment and
Revelling, and the sottish Follies of Intemperance. Now Pl^^^ had not the
opportunity to see Dionysius (...) Corinth, being already dead before he came
thither; but Diogenes Sinopensis at their first meeting in the Street there,
saluted him with this ambiguous expression, O Dionysius, how little do thou
deserve to live thus. Upon which Dionysius stopped and replied I am much
obliged to thee, Diogenes, that thou do so kindly commiserate my case, and
seem to be concerned for the Disasters that have befallen me: Do thou imagine
then, says Diogenes, that I condole with thee for what has happened? and am not
rather heartily vexed, that such a Slave as thou, who, if thou had thy due,
should have been let alo^e to grow old, and die in the wretched state of
Tyranny, as thy Father did before thee, does now enjoy the quietness and ease
of private Persons, and is here at his own disposal, to s^^rt and frolic it in
our Society. So that when I compare with the words of this Philosopher, those
sad Stories of Philistus, touching the Daughters of Leptines, where he makes
pitiful moan on their behalf, as fallen from all the Blessings and Advantages
of powerful Greatness, to the Miseries of an humble Life, they seem to me like
the Lamentations of a poor Lady, who had lost her Box of Ointment, and her
purple Coloring, and her golden Trinkets. Now that which I have inserted here,
is agreeable enough to my Design of writing Lives, and representing the true
Characters of Men, neither will it, I presume, be thought useless and
impertinent, by such Readers as are not in too much haste, or busi'd and taken
up with other Concerns.

But if the unhappiness of Dionysius appear strange and extraordinary, we shall
have no less Reason to admire at the good Fortune of Timoleon, who within 50
days after his landing in Sicily, both recovered the Citadel of Syracuse, and
sent Dionysius an Exile into Peloponnesus. Which lucky beginning, did so
animate the Corinthians, that they ordered him a supply of 2000 Foot, and 200
Horse, who being come as far as Thuriu^, intended to cross over thence into
Sicily; but finding all beset with Carthaginian Ships, which made the Road
unpassable, they were constrained to stop there, and watch their opportunity:
which time however was employed in a noble Action; for the Thurians going out
to war against those of Brutium, left their City in charge with these
Corinthian Strangers, who defended it as carefully as if it had been their own
Country, and then resigned it up again with the Justice and Faithfulness of
honest Guardians.

Icetes in the interim continued still to besiege the Castle of Syracuse, and
hindered all Provisions from coming in by Sea, to relieve the Corinthians that
were in it. He had engaged also, and dispatched toward Adranum, two unknown
Foreigners to assassine Timoleon, who at other times did not use to have any
standing Guard about his Person, and was then altogether secure, diverting
himself without Jealousy or Caution, among the Citizens of that Place, through
the Confidence he had, not only in them, but in the Favor and Protection of
their God Adranus. The Villains that were sent upon this Enterprise, having
casually heard that Timoleon was about to sacrifice, came directly into the
Temple with Poniards under their Cloaks, and pressing in among the Crowd, by
little and little got up close to the Altar; but as they were just looking for
a Sign from each other to begin the Attempt, a third Person struck one of them
over the Head with a Sword, who suddenly falling down, neither he that gave the
Blow, nor the Partisan of him that received it, kept their Stations any longer;
but the one making way with his bloody Sword, put no stop to his Flight, till
he gained the top of a certain lofty Precipice, while the other laying hold of
the Altar, besought Timoleon to spare his Life, and he would reveal to him the
whole Conspiracy; his Pardon being granted, he confessed, that both himself and
his dead Companion, were sent thither purposely to slay him. While this
Discovery was made, he that killed the other Conspirator, had been fetched down
from his Sanctuary of the Rock, who loudly and often protested as he came
along, that there was no Injustice in the Fact, for he only took righteous
Vengeance for his Father's Blood, of a Man that had murdered him before in the
City of Leontium; the truth whereof was attested by several there present, who
could not choose but wonder too at the curious Intrigues, and the rare
management of Providence, which does so dexterously proceed, and work in that
admirable Order, as to make this little Event the Spring and Motion to that
great Emergency, uniting every scattered Accident, and loose Particular, and
remote Action, and interweaving them together to serve its purposes: from
whence we see it frequently arrive, that things otherwise extremely different,
and that seem to have no connection or dependence among themselves, do
interchangeably and by turns become the end and the beginning of each other.
The Corinthians therefore being satisfied as to the Innocence and Equity of
this seasonable Feat, did honor and reward the Author with a Present of 10 l.
in their Money About 31 l. 5 s. sterling.
, because he made use of his own just Indignation, to gratify the good Genius
or guardian-Angel of Timoleon, and did not spend those Resentments he had
treasured up of old before that time, but luckily defer the Revenge of a
private Quarrel for his preservation.

But this so fortunate an Escape had Effects and Con^equences beyond the
present, for it inspired the Corinthians with mighty Hopes and future
Expectations of Timoleon, seeing the People now reverence and protect him as a
sacred Person, and one sent by God to avenge and redeem Sicily. Icetes having
missed of his aim in this enterprise, and perceiving also that many went off,
and sided with Timoleon, he began to chide himself for his foolish Modesty,
that when so considerable a Force of the Carthaginians lay ready to be
commanded by him, he should employ them hitherto by degrees and in small
numbers, introducing their Auxiliaries by stealth, and after a sneaking
clandestine manner, as if he had been ashamed of the Action. Therefore now
laying aside his former Niceness and Caution, he calls in Mago, their Admiral,
with his whole Navy, who presently set Sail, and seized upon the Port with a
formidable Fleet of at least a 150 Vessels, landing there 60000* Foot, which
were all lodged within the City of Syracuse: so that in all men's opinion, the
time anciently talked of, and long expected, wherein Sicily should be overrun
by a barbarous People, was now come to its fatal period; for in all their
preceding Wars, and so many desperate Conflicts with those of Sicily, the
Carthaginians had never been able, before this, to take Syracuse; but Icetes
then receiving them, and putting the City into their hands, you might see it
become now as it were a Camp of these Barbarians. By this means the Corinthian
Soldiers that kept the Castle, found themselves brought into great Danger and
Hardship; for beside that their Provision grew scarce, and they began to be in
want, because the Havens were strictly guarded and blocked up, the Enemy did
exercise them still with Skirmishes and Combats about their Walls, and they
were not only obliged to be continually in Arms, but to divide and prepare
themselves for Assaults and Encounters of every kind, and to sustain the shock
of all those forcible Engines and Instruments of Battery, which are devised and
made use of by such as besiege Cities.

Timoleon however made a shift to relieve them in these Straits, sending Corn
from Catana by small Fisher-Boats and little Skiffs, which commonly got a
Passage through the Carthaginian Galleys in the most tempestuous season,
creeping over the Waves and Billows, and stealing up to the Castle, when those
other were driven and dispersed by the stress of weather: which Mago and Icetes
observing, they agreed to fall upon Catana, from whence these Supplies were
brought in to the Besieged, and accordingly put off from Syracuse, taking with
them their prime chosen Men, and the stoutest Soldiers in their whole Army.
Then Leo the Corinthian, (who was Captain of those that kept the Citadel)
taking notice that the Enemies which stayed there behind, were very negligent
and careless in keeping Guard, made a sudden Sally upon them as they lay
scattered, wherein killing some, and putting others to Flight, he took and
possessed that Quarter which they call Acradina, and was thought to be the best
and strongest, and the most entire part of Syracuse, a City made up and
compacted as it were of several Towns put together: having thus stored himself
with Corn and Money, he did not abandon the Place, nor retire again into the
Castle, but fortifying the Precincts of Acradina, and joining it by certain
Works to the Citadel, he undertook the defense of both. Mago and Icetes were
now come near to Catana, when a Horseman dispatched from Syracuse, brought
them tidings that Acradina was taken; upon which they returned in all haste
with great Disorder and Confusion, having neither been able to reduce the City
they went against, nor to preserve that they were Masters of.

Now these Adventures were such, as might leave Foresight and Courage a
pretense still of disputing it with Fortune, which did contribute most to the
Success of them. But the following Event seems altogether an Effect of good
Luck, and can be ascribed to nothing but pure Felicity; for the Corinthian
Soldiers which stayed at Thurium, partly for fear of the Carthaginian Galleys,
which lay in wait for them under the Command of Hanno, and partly because of
the tempestuous Weather which had lasted for many days, took a resolution to
march by Land over the Brutian Territories, and what with Persuasion and Force
together, made good their Passage through those Barbarians to the City of
Rhegium, the Sea being still rough and raging as before. But Hanno not
expecting the Corinthians would venture out, and supposing it would be in vain
to wait there any longer, be thought himself, as he imagined, of a very notable
Stratagem, and such a cunning Invention, as would be apt to delude and ensnare
the Enemy; in pursuance of which Subtilty, he commanded the Seamen to crown
themselves with Garlands, and adorning his Galleys with Bucklers both of the
Greek and Carthaginian Make, he sailed away for Syracuse in this triumphant
Equipage, and using all his Oars as he passed under the Castle with much
Clapping and Laughter, he cried out on purpose to dishearten the Besieged, that
he came from vanquishing and taking the Corinthian Succors, which he fell upon
at Sea, as they were passing over into Sicily. While he was thus trifling and
playing his Tricks before Syracuse, the Corinthians, now come as far as
Rhegium, observing the Coast clear, and that the Wind was laid as it were by
Miracle, to afford them in all appearance a quiet and smooth Passage, went
immediately aboard on such little Barques and Fisher-boats as were then at
hand, and got over to Sicily with so much safety and such a strange calmness,
that they drew their Horses by the Reins, swiming along by them as the Vessels
were under Sail. When they were all landed, Timoleon came to receive them, and
presently took in Messina by their means, from whence he marched in good order
to Syracuse, trusting more to his late prosperous Achievements, than his
present strength, for the whole Army he had then with him, did not exceed the
number of 4000; however Mago was troubled and fearful at the first notice of
his coming, but grew more apprehensive and jealous still upon this occasion.
The Marshes about Syracuse, that receive agreat deal of fresh Water, as well
from Springs and Fountains, as from Lakes and Rivers, discharging themselves
into the Sea, do breed abundance of Eels, which may be always taken there in
great quantities, by any that will fish for them. Now the mercenary Soldiers
that served on both sides, were wont to follow the Sport together at their
vacant hours, and upon any cessation of Arms; who being all Greeks, and having
no Cause of private Enmity to each other, as they would venture bravely in
Fight, so in the times of Truce, they did meet and converse amicably together;
and at that season, happening to be employed about the common business of
Fishing, they fell into various Conference, some expressing their admiration as
to the nature and fruitfulness of that Sea, and others telling how much they
were taken with the Convenience, and commodious situation of the adjacent
Places, which gave a hint to one of the Corinthian Party to demand thus of the
others: And is it possible that you who are Grecians born, should be so forward
to reduce a City of this Greatness, and endu'd with so many rare Advantages,
into the state of Barbarism? and lend your Assistance to plant Carthaginians,
that are the worst and bloodiest of men, so much nearer to us; whereas you
should rather wish there were many more Sicilies to lie between them and
Greece: have you so little sense as to believe, that they come hither with an
Army from Hercules his Pillars, and the Atlantic Sea, to hazard themselves for
the establishment of Icetes? who if he had had the Consideration which becomes
a General, would never have thrown out his Ancestors and Founders, to bring in
the Enemies of his Country in the room of them, but might have enjoyed all
suitable Honor and Command, with consent of Timoleon and the rest of Corinth.
The Greeks that were in Pay with Icetes, noising these Discourses about their
Camp, gave Mago some ground to suspect (who had long sought for a Pretense to
be gone) that there was Treachery contrived against him; so that albeit Icetes
entreated him to tarry, and made it appear how much stronger they were than the
Enemy, yet conceiving they came far more short of Timoleon, both as to Courage
and Fortune, than they did surpass him in number, he presently went aboard, and
set Sail for Africa, letting Sicily escape out of his hands with dishonor to
himself, and for such unknown Causes, that no humane Reason could give an
account of his departure. The day after he went away, Timoleon came up before
the City, appointed for a Battle; but when he and his Company both heard of
their sudden Flight, and saw the Haven empty, they could not forbear laughing
at the Cowardice of Mago, and by way of Mockery caused Proclamation to be made
throughout, that he should have a good Reward for his Intelligence, who could
bring them tidings whither it was that the Carthaginian Fleet had conveyed it
self from them. However Icetes resolving to fight it out alone, and not
quitting his hold of the City, but sticking close to those Quarters he was in
possession of, as Places that were well fortified, and not easy to be
attacked, Timoleon divided his Forces into three parts, and fell upon that side
himself, where the River Anapus run, and which was most strong and difficult of
access, commanding others that were led by Isias, a Corinthian Captain, to make
their Assault from the Post of Acradina, while Dinarchus and Demaretus, that
brought him the last Supply from Corinth, should with a third Division attempt
that Quarter which is called Epipolae. So that a forcible Impression being made
from every side at once, by which the Soldiers of Icetes were beaten off and
put to flight, that the City now came to be taken by Storm, and fall suddenly
into their hands, upon such a Defeat and Recession of the Enemy, we must in all
justice ascribe this to the Valor of the Combatants, and the wise Conduct of
their General; but that not so much as a Man of the Corinthians was either
slain or wounded in the Action, that the Good Fortune of Timoleon seems to
challenge for her own Work, and boast of the Protection, as striving out of a
jealous Fondness, to exceed and obscure his Fortitude by her extraordinary
Favors, that those who hear him commended for his noble Deeds, may rather
admire the Happiness, than the Merit of them: for the Fame of what was done,
did not only pass through all Sicily, and run over Italy in a trice, but even
Greece it self after a few days came to ring also with the greatness of his
Exploit, insomuch that those of Corinth, who could hardly believe their
Auxiliaries were yet landed on the Isle, had tidings brought them at the same
time that they were safe and Conquerors; in so prosperous a course did Affairs
run, while Fortune added haste and quickness as a new Ornament, to set off the
native Lustres of that Performance. Timoleon being Master of the Citadel, did
avoid the Error which Dion had been guilty of before; for he spared not that
Place for the beauty and sumptuousness of its Fabric, but declining the Causes
of that Suspicion, which did first slander, and then destroy him, he made a
public Crier give notice, that all the Syracusians who were willing to have a
hand in the Work, should bring Pick-axes and Mattocks, and other Instruments,
and help him to demolish that Fortress of Tyranny. When they all came up with
one accord, looking upon that order and that day, as the surest foundation of
their Liberty, they not only pulled down the Castle, but overturned the Palaces
and Monuments adjoining, and whatever else might preserve any Memory of former
Tyrants. Having soon levelled and cleared the Place, he there presently erected
a Common Hall, for the Seat of Judicature, gratifying the Citizens by this
means, and building Popular Government on the Fall and Ruin of Tyranny. But
since he had recovered a City, that was now destitute of Inhabitants, some of
them perishing in their Civil Wars and Insurrections, and others being fled to
escape Tyrants, through Solitude and want of People, the great Marketplace of
Syracuse was overgrown with such quantity of rank Herbage, that it became a
Pasture for their Horses, the Grooms lying along in the Grass as they fed by
them; inasmuch also as other Towns, (very few excepted) were become full of
Stags and Wild Boars, and such as had nothing else to do, went frequently a
Hunting, and found Game in the Suburbs and about the Walls: but not a Man of
those who had possessed themselves of Castles, or made Garrisons in the
Country, could be persuaded to quit their present Abode, or would accept an
Invitation of returning back into the City, so much did they all dread and
abhor the very Name of Assemblies, and Corporations, and Tribunals, that did
produce the greater part of those Usurpers, which had successively assumed a
Dominion over them. Timoleon therefore, with the Syracusians that remained,
considering that vast Desolation, and how little hope there was to have it
otherwise supplied, thought good to write unto the Corinthians, that they would
send a Colony out of Greece to re-people Syracuse, for else the Land about it
would lie fallow and unimprov'd; and beside this Inconvenience, they did expect
to be involved in a greater War, from Africa, having News brought them, that
when Mago had killed himself, the Carthaginians, out of Rage for his ill
Conduct in the late Expedition, did cause his Body to be nailed upon a Cross,
and that they were raising a mighty Force, with design to make their Descent
upon Sicily the next Summer. These Letters from Timoleon being delivered at
Corinth, and the Ambassadors of Syracuse beseeching them at the same time,
that they would take upon them the Care of their poor City, and once again
become the Founders of it, the Corinthians were not tempted by a greedy Humor
to lay hold of that Advantage, nor did they seize and appropriate such a famous
City to themselves, but going about first to those Games and Exercises, which
they term sacred in Greece, and their solemn Meetings of greatest Confluence,
they made Publication by Heralds, that the Corinthians having destroyed the
Usurpation that was at Syracuse, and driven out the Tyrant, did thereby call
home the Syracusian Exiles, and any other Sicilian that would come and dwell in
the City, to an enjoyment of freedom under their own Laws, with promise that
the Land should be divided among them in just and equal Proportions. And after
this, sending Messengers into Asia, and the several Islands, where they
understood that most of the scattered Fugitives did then reside, they made it
their Request, that they would all repair to Corinth, upon assurance that the
Corinthians would afford them Vessels, and Commanders, and a safe Convoy, at
their own Charges; which noble Atchievment of theirs, and such a generous
Proposal, being thus spread about, they had the due Tribute, and most
honorable Recompense of Praise and Benediction, for delivering the Country
from Oppressors, and saving it from Barbarians, and restoring it at length to
the rightful Owners of the Place; who when they were assembled at Corinth, and
found how insufficient their Company was, besough^ the Corinthians, that they
might have a Supplement of other Persons, as well out (...) their City as the
rest of Greece, to cohab^^^ with them, which being made up to the number of
10000, they sailed together unto Syracuse. By this time great Multitudes from
Italy and Sicily had flocked in to Timoleon, so that, as Athanis reports, their
entire Body did amount now to 60000 Men: among these he divided the whole
Territory, and sold the Houses for 1000 Talents; by which Contrivance, he both
left it in the power of the old Syracusians to redeem their own, and made that
an occasion too of raising a Stock for the Community, which had been so much
impoverished of late, and was so unable to defray other Expenses, and
especially those of a War, that they exposed their very Statues to Sale, a kind
of regular Process being formed in the Business, and sentence of Auction passed
upon each of them by most Voices, as if they had been so many Criminals and
Condemned Persons: but it is said, the Syracusians did then agree to exempt and
preserve the Statue of Gelo, one of their ancient Kings, when all the rest were
doomed to suffer a common Sale, in Admiration and Honor of the Man, and for
the sake of that Victory he got over the Carthaginian Forces at the River
Himera.

Syracuse being thus happily revived, and replenished again by a general
Concourse of its Inhabitants from all Parts, Timoleon was desirous now to
rescue other Cities from the like Bondage, yea even wholly and once for all to
extirpate Arbitrary Government out of Sicily; and for this purpose, marching
into the Territories of those that used it, he compelled Icetes first to
renounce the Carthaginian Interest, and further to consent, that, demolishing
the Fortresses which were held by him, he should live among the Leontinians as
a private Person. Leptines also, the Tyrant of Apollonia, and diverse other
little Towns, after some Resistance made, seeing the danger he was in to be
taken by Force, surrendered himself; whereupon Timoleon spared his Life, and
sent him away to Corinth, counting it a very glorious thing both for himself
and Country, that their Mother-City should expose those Sicilian Tyrants to
the view of other Greeks living now in an Exiled, and a low condition. After
this he returned to Syracuse, that he might have leisure to attend the
Constitution of their Community, and assist Cephalus and Dionysius (who were
sent from Corinth to make Laws) in establishing the principal Things, and the
best Orders for a public Settlement. In the mean while, having a mind that his
hired Soldiers should not want Action, but rather enrich themselves by some
Plunder from the Enemy, he dispatched Dinarchus and Demaretus with a select
Body of them, into a certain Province that belonged to the Carthaginians, who
obliging several Cities to revolt from the Barbarians, did not only live in
great abundance themselves, but raised Money from their Captives and their Prey
to carry on the War. But when these Matters were transacting, the Carthaginians
landed at the Promontory of Lilybaeum, bringing with them an Army of 70000 Men,
aboard 200 Galleys, besides a 1000 other Vessels, laden all with Engines of
Battery, and Chariots, and quantity of Corn, and other military Preparations,
as if they did intend not to manage the War by piecemeal, and in parts as
heretofore, but to drive the Grecians altogether and at once out of all Sicily.
And indeed it was a Force sufficient to seize and subdue the Sicilians, though
they had then had the Entireness and the Strength of a perfect Union among
themselves, and much more when they were so infeebled through their own
Distempers, and harassed in pieces by one another. Hearing therefore that a
Territory of their Dependence was laid waste, they presently made toward the
Corinthians with great Fury, having. Asdrubal and Hamilcar for their Generals;
the report of whose multitude and Approach flying suddenly to Syracuse, they
were so terrified there at the greatness of such a Power, that hardly 3000,
among so many Myriads of them, had the Courage to take up Arms, and join
themselves with Timoleon. The Strangers that served for Pay, were not above
4000 in all, and about a 1000 of those grew faint-hearted by the way, and
forsook Timoleon in his March toward the Enemy, looking on him as a frantic
and distracted Person, destitute of that Sense and Consideration, which might
have been expected from one of his Age* who must needs venture out against an
Army of 70000 Men, with no more than 5000 Foot, and a 1000 Horse, and when he
should have stayed to defend the City with the small Forces which he had, chose
rather to remove them eight days journey from Syracuse, so that if they were
beaten out of the Field, there was no Place of Retreat whither they might
retire with safety, or, if they happened to die upon the spot, there would be
none to take care of their Burial. Timoleon however reckoned it some kind of
Advantage, that they had thus discovered themselves before the Battle, and
encouraging the rest, he led them with all speed to the River Crimesus, where
it was told him the Carthaginians were drawn together; and as he was marching
up an Ascent, from the top of which they might take a view of the Army, and
strength of the Enemy, there met him by chance a company of Mules laden with
Parsley, that which his Soldiers conceived to be an ominous Occurrence or
ill-boding Token, because this is the very Herb wherewith we usually adorn the
Sepulchers of the Dead, which Custom gave birth to that desparing Proverb, when
we pronounce of one who is dangerously sick, that he has need of nothing but
Parsley, which is in effect to say, He is a dead Man, and ready for his Grave.
Now that Timoleon might ease their Minds, and free them from these
superstitious Thoughts, and such a fearful Expectation, he put a stop to his
March, and having alleged many other things in a Discourse suitable to the
Occasion, he concluded it by saying, That a Garland of Triumph was here luckily
brought them, and had fallen into their hands of its own accord, as an
Anticipation of Victory; inasmuch as the Corinthians do crown those that get
the better in their Isthmian Games, with Chaplets of Parsley, accounting it a
sacred Wreath, and proper to their Country; for Parsley was ever then the
conquering Ornament of the Isthmian, as it is now of the Nemean Sports, and it
is not very long that Branches of the Pine Tree came to succeed, and be made
use of for that purpose.

Timoleon therefore, as I said, having thus bespoke his Soldiers, took part of
the Parsley, wherewith he made himself a Chaplet first, and then his Captains
and their Companies did all crown themselves with it, in imitation of their
Leader. The Soothsayers then observing also two Eagles on the wing toward them,
one of which bore a Dragon struck through with her Talons, and the other, as
she flew, made a great and terrible kind of noise, which argued Boldness and
Assurance, they presently showed them to the Soldiers, who with one consent
fell to supplicate the Gods, and call them in to their Assistance. It was now
about the beginning of Summer, and conclusion of the Month called Which answers
to our May.
Thargelion, when the season of the year inclines toward the Solstice, the
River then sending up a thick Mist, all the adjacent Plain was first darkened
with the Fog, so that in a while they could discern nothing from the Enemies
Camp, only a confused Buz and undistinguished mixture of Voices came up to the
Hill, from the distant Motions and Clamours of so vast a Multitude. When the
Corinthians were mounted and stood upon it, and had laid down their Bucklers to
take breath and repose themselves, the Sun coming about, and drawing up the
Vapors from below, the gross foggy Air that was now gathered and condensed
above, did overcloud the Mountains, and all the under Places being clear and
open, the River Crimesus appeared to them again, and they could easily desery
the Enemies passing over it, who moved in this order: First with their warlike
Chariots, that were terribly appointed for the Conflict; after these came 10000
Footmen, with white Targets on their Arms, whom they guessed to be all
Carthaginians, from the splendor of their Weapons, and the slowness of their
motion, and the order of their March; and when several other Nations, flowing
in behind them, did throng for Passage in a turbulent and unruly manner,
Timoleon perceiving that the River gave them opportunity to single out as many
of their Enemies, as they had a mind to engage at once, and bidding his
Soldiers observe how their Forces were divided into two separate Bodies by the
intervention of the Stream, some being already got over, and others still to
ford it, he gave Demaretus Command to fall in upon the Carthaginians with his
Horse, and disturb their Ranks, before they should be cast into a form of
Battle: and coming down into the Plain himself, he made up his right and left
Wing of other Sicilians, intermingling a few Strangers in each, but placed the
Natives of Syracuse in the middle, with the stoutest Mercenaries he had, about
his own Person, and then stayed a little to observe the Action of his Horse;
but when he saw they were not only hindered from grapling with the
Carthaginians, by those armed Chariots that run to and fro before their Army,
but forced continually to wheel about, to avoid the danger of having their
Ranks broken, and then to make frequent Careers, as they had means to return
upon them, he took his Buckler in his hand, and crying out to the Foot, that
they should follow him with Courage and Confidence, he seemed to speak with a
more than humane Accent, and a Voice stronger than ordinary; whether he
strained it to that loudness, through an apprehension of the present danger,
and from the vehemence and ardour of his mind to assault the Enemy, or else (as
many then were of opinion) some God or other did exclaim with him in such a
thundering Utterance. When his Soldiers gave a dreadful Echo thereto, and
besought him to lead them on without any further delay, he made a sign to the
Horse, that they should draw off from the Front where they had placed the
Chariots, and fetching a side compass, attack the Enemies in the Flank; then
making his Vantguard firm, by joining Man to Man, and Buckler to Buckler, he
caused the Trumpet to sound, and so bore in with the Carthaginians; who did
stoutly receive and sustain his first Onset; for having their Bodies armed with
Breast-plates of Iron, and Helmets of Brass, beside great Bucklers to cover and
secure them, they could easily repel the force of their Javelins: but when the
business came to a decision by the Sword, where Mastery depends no less upon
Art than Strength, all on a sudden there broke out terrible Thunders and fiery
Flashes, darting forth from the Mountain tops; after which, the Gloominess that
hovered about the upper Grounds and the rocky Cliffs, descending to the Place
of Battle, and bringing a Tempest of Rain, and of Wind and Hail along with it,
was driven upon the Greeks behind, and fell only at their Backs, but discharged
it self in the very Face of the Barbarians, and through the stormy Showers, and
continual Flames pouring down together from the Clouds, did dazzle and confound
their sight: in which Accident, there were many things that did sorely afflict
them all, but chiefly their unexperienced Men, who had not been used to such
Hardships, among which the very Claps of Thunder, and the sounding noise of
their Weapons, beaten with the violence of Rain and Hailstones, were not their
least Annoyance, as that which kept them from hearing the Commands of their
Officers. Beside this, the very Dirt also was a great hindrance to the
Carthaginians, as lest expedite and nimble in their Harness, they being, as I
said before, all laden with heavy Armor; and then their Jackets too, drenched
through with Water in the foldings thereof about their Bosom, grew unweildy and
cumbersom to them as they fought, but gave the Greeks an Advantage of
overturning them with ease, and when they were once down, it was impossible
under that weight, to disengage themselves from the Mire, and rise again with
Weapons in their Hand: for the River Crimesus swollen partly by the Rain, and
partly by the stoppage of its Course, from the multitude of those that were
passing through, did overflow its Banks, and the Level on each side lying under
several Cavities and Confluences of Water, was filled with Rivulets and
Currents that had no certain Channel, which the Carthaginians rolling about in,
were very hardly bestead; so that in fine, the Storm and Torrent bearing still
upon them, and the Greeks having cut in pieces 400 Men of their first Ranks,
the whole Body of their Army began to fly, great numbers of which being
overtaken in the Plain, were put to the Sword there; and many of them as they
fled, falling foul upon others that were yet coming over, they all tumbled and
perished together, born down and overwhelmed by the impetuousness o^ the River;
but the major part attempting to get up the Hills, and so make their Escape,
were prevented and slain by those that were lightly armed. It is said that of
10000 which lay dead after the Fight, 3000 at least were all Natives of
Carthage, a lamentable and uncommon loss to that City, for those that fell
therein were inferior to none among them, as to the quality of their Birth, or
the wealthiness of their House, or the reputation of their Courage: nor do
their Records mention that so many natural Carthaginians were ever cut off
before in any one Battle; for they did usually employ the Africans, and
Spaniards, and Numidians, in their Wars, so that if they chanced to be
defeated, it was still at the cost and damage of other Nations. Now the Greeks
did easily discover of what condition and account the Slain were, by the
richness of their Spoils; for when they came to seize upon the Prey, there was
very little reckoning made either of Brass or Iron, so great was the plenty of
better Metals, and that abundance of Silver and Gold which fell into their
hands, for passing over the River, they became Masters of their Camp and
Carriages: as for the Captives, a great many of them were filch'd away, and
sold privately by the Soldiers, but about 5000 were brought in, and delivered
up for the benefit of the Public; they took beside 200 of their warlike
Chariots. The Tent of Timoleon did then afford a very graceful Sight and
magnificent Appearance, being heaped up and hung round with all variety of
Spoils and military Ornaments, among which there were a 1000 Breast-plates of
rare workmanship and Beauty, and 10000 Bucklers exposed to view: but the
Victors being but few to strip so many that were vanquished, and meeting too
with great Boo^y, it was the 3d day after the Fight before they could erect and
finish the Trophy of their Conquest. Timoleon sent tidings of his Victory to
Corinth, with the best and goodliest Arms he had taken, as a Proof of it, that
he might render his Country an object of Emulation to the whole World, when of
all the Cities of Greece, men should there only behold their chief Temples
adorned, not with Grecian Spoils, nor Offerings that were got by the Bloodshed
and Plunder of their own Countrymen and Kindred, (which must needs create very
unpleasing Remembrances) but such as had been stripped from Barbarians, and
Enemies to their Nation, with the most handsome Titles inscribed, which did
manifest the Justice as well as Fortitude of the Conquerours, namely, that the
People of Corinth, and Timoleon their General, having redeemed the Grecians
that dwelt in Sicily, from Carthaginian Bondage, did make an Oblation thereof
to the Gods, in acknowledgment of the Advantage they had gained by their
Favor. Having done this, he left his hired Soldiers in the Enemies Country,
to drive and carry away all they could throughout the Province of Carthage, and
so marched with the rest of his Army to Syracuse, where he made an Edict for
banishing the 1000 Mercenaries, which had basely deserted him before the
Battle, and obliged them to quit the City before Sunset, who sailing into
Italy, lost their Lives there by the hands of the Brutians, though they had
given them the assurance of public Faith; thus receiving from God (the avenger
of Perfidiousness and Falsehood) a very just Reward of their own Treachery. But
Mamercus the Tyrant of Catana, and Icetes after all, either envying Timoleon
the Glory of his Exploits, or fearing him as one that would keep no Agreement,
nor have any Peace with Tyrants, made a League with the Carthaginians, and
pressed them very much to send a new Army and Commander into Sicily, unless
they would be content to hazard all, and to be wholly ejected out of that
Island. Whereupon they dispatched Gisgo with a Navy of 70 Sail, who took
several Grecians into Pay, that being the first time they had ever been listed
for the Punick Service; but then it seems they began to admire them, as the
most insupportable and pugnacious of Mankind. The Inhabitants of Messina
entering now with one accord into a general Conspiracy, slew 400 of those
Strangers which Timoleon had sent to their Assistance; and within the
Dependencies of Carthage, at a Place called Hierae, (i. e. Sacred) the
Mercenaries that served under Euthymus the Le^cadian, were all cut off by an
Ambush that was laid for them: from which Accidents however the Felicity of
Timoleon grew chiefly remarkable, for these were the men that with Philodemus
of Phocis and Onomarchus, had forcibly broke into the Temple of Apollo at
Delphi, and were partakers with them in the Sacrilege; so that being hated and
shunned by all, as so many execrable Persons, they were constrained to wander
about in Peloponnesus, when for want of others, Timoleon was glad to entertain
them in his Expedition for Sicily, where they happened to be successful, in
whatever Enterprise they engaged under his Conduct. But the most and greatest
of those Rencounters being now ended, he sent them abroad for the relief and
defense of his Party in several Places, and here they were lost and consumed at
a distance from him, not altogether, but in small parcels; the Vengeance then
inflicted making Timoleon's Prosperity an excuse of its delay, that good Men
might not suffer any harm or prejudice, by the punishment and ruin of the
wicked; insomuch that the Benevolence and Kindness which the Gods had for
Timoleon, came to be discerned and admired no less, from his very Miscarriages
and Disasters, than any of those former Atchievments he had been the most
fortunate and successful in.

But amidst their late Misadventures, that which did vex and provoke the
Syracusians most, was their being affronted too by the insolent Behavior of
these Tyrants; for Mamercus in particular valuing himself much, upon the
faculty he had to make Poems and Tragedies, took occasion to boast of that and
his Victory together, when coming to present the Gods with the Bucklers of
their hired Soldiers that were slain by him, he caused such an abusive Elegy
or Epigram to be underwritten. These Shields, with Purple, Gold, and Ivory
wrought,
Were taken by us that with poor ones fought.
After these things, while Timoleon marched to Calauria, Icetes made an Inroad
into the Borders of Syracuse, where he met with considerable Booty, and having
done great mischief and havoc, he returned back even by Calauria it self, in
contempt of Timoleon, and the slender Force he had then with him, who suffering
Icetes to pass along before, pursued him with his Horsemen and light Infantry,
which Icetes perceiving, crossed the River Damyrias, and then stood as it were
in a posture to receive him; for the difficulty of that Passage, and the
height and steepness of the Bank on each side, gave advantage enough to make
him thus confident. But there happened a strange Contention and Dispute among
the Officers of Timoleon, which did a little retard the Conflict, for there was
none of them that would let another pass over before him to engage the Enemy,
but every one did challenge it as a Right, to venture first and begin the
Onset* so that their fording over was like to be tumultuous and without order,
while they did mutually justle and press forward, striving which should be the
foremost. Timoleon therefore desiring this Controversy might be decided by
Lot, took a Ring from each of the Pretenders, which he cast into his own Robe,
and having shak'd them together, the first he drew out and exposed to view, had
by good Fortune the Figure of a Trophy engraven for the Seal of it, which when
the younger Captains saw, they all shouted for joy, and without waiting any
longer, to see how Chance would determine it for the rest, every man took his
way through the River with all the speed he could make, and fell to buckle with
the Enemies, who were not able to bear up against the violence of their Attack,
but running away in haste, they left their Arms behind them all alike, and a
1000 dead upon the Place. It was not long after that Timoleon marching up to
the City of Leontium, took Icetes alive, and his Son Eupolemus, and Euthymus
the Commander of his Horse, that were bound and brought to him by their own
Soldiers: Icetes, with the Stripling his Son, were then executed as Tyrants
and Traitors; and Euthymus, though a brave Man, and one of singular Courage,
was slain without Mercy, being charged with some contemptuous Language that had
been used by him, in disparagement of the Corinthians; for it is said, that
when they first sent their Forces into Sicily, he told the People of Leontium
in a Speech of his, That the News did not sound terrible, nor was any great
danger to be feared -- If the Corinthian N.
Dames were come abroad. Now, from hence we may remark, that men are usually
more stung and galled by a few reproachful words, than many hostile actions;
for they bear the slightings of Disdain and Affront with less patience, than
they will Harm, or Mischief, since to plague and damnifie by Deeds, is what the
World does allow and count pardonable from Enemies, because it is a necessary
thing, and no less can be expected in a state of War; whereas the Virulence and
Contumely of the Tongue, is an Argument and Expression of needless Hatred, and
seems to proceed from a superfluity of Malice and excessive Rancor. When
Timoleon came back to Syracuse, the Citizens brought the Wives and Daughters of
Icetes and his Son to a public Trial, who, being there condemned to die, did
all suffer accordingly; which seems to have been the most disagreeable and
unhandsom Action of Timoleon's Life, for if he had interposed his Authority to
hinder it, the poor Women doubtless had never come to this unhappy End; but he
was thought to connive thereat, and give them up to the incensed Multitude,
that did thus revenge the Injuries of Dion, who expelled Dionysius; for it was
this very Icetes which took Arete the Wife, and Aristomache the Sister of Dion,
with a Son of his, that had not yet passed his Childhood, and threw them all
together into the Se^ alive, as I have related that Villainy in the Life of
Dion. After this he moved toward Catana against Mamercus, who giving him
Battle near the River Abolus, was overthrow^ and put to flight, losing above
2000 men, (...) considerable part of which were the Punick Troops, that Gisco
sent in to his Assistance.

Upon this Defeat, the Carthaginians besought him to make a Peace with them,
which he consented to, under the observance of these Articles: 1. That they
should confine themselves to that part of the Country, which lies within the
River Lycus. 2. That such as were desirous to transplant themselves, and remove
thence to the Syracusians, should have the liberty of doing it with their whole
Family and Fortune. And last of all, That they of Carthage should from that day
forward renounce all Leagues and Associations, whereby they might any ways
stand engaged to succor and relieve the Sicilian Tyrants. Mamercus, forsaken
now, and despairing of Success, went aboard for Italy, with a Design to bring
in the Lucanians against Timoleon, and the People of Syracuse: but when those
of his Company tacked about with their Galleys, and landing again at Sicily,
delivered up Catana to Timoleon, he was forced to shift for himself, and make
his Escape to Messina, that was under the Tyranny of Hippo. Timoleon then
coming up against them, and besieging the City both by Sea and Land, Hippo,
fearful of the Event, endeavored to slip away in a Vessel, which the People of
Messina surpised as it was putting off, who seizing on his Person, and
bringing his Children from School into the Theater, to be entertained as it
were with the most goodly Spectacle of a Tyrant punished, they first publicly
scourged, and then put him to death. Whereupon Mamercus made Surrender of
himself to Timoleon, with this Proviso, that he should be tried at Syracuse,
and Timoleon have no hand in his Accusation: whither he was brought
accordingly, and appearing to plead before the People, he essayed to pronounce
an Oration he had long before made in his own Defense; but finding himself
interrupted by Noise and Clamours, and observing from their Aspect and
Demeanor, that the whole Assembly was inexorable, he threw off his upper
Garment, and running cross the Theater as hard as he could drive, violently
dashed his Head against one of the Posts where they were sitting, with
intention to have killed himself; but he had not the fortune to perish, as he
designed, but was taken up alive, and hurried to the same Execution by which
they dispatch Robbers.

After this manner did Timoleon cut the Nerves of Tyranny, and put a period to
their Wars: for whereas at his first entering upon Sicily, the Island was all
savage and hateful to the very Natives, by reason of the Evils and Miseries
they suffered there, he did so civilize, and quiet, and reform the Country, and
render it so desirable to all men, that even Strangers now came by Sea to
inhabit those Towns and Places, which their own Citizens had forsaken and left
desolate: for Agrigentum and Gelo, two famous Cities, that had been ruined and
laid waste by the Carthaginians after the Attick War, were then peopled again,
the one by Megellus and Pheristus, that came from Elea in Peloponnesus, the
other by Gorgus from Cea, one of the Isles called Cyclades, who having picked
up some of the old Inhabitants among other Company, brought them back with the
rest to their former Dwellings; to all which Timoleon did not only afford a
secure and peaceable Abode in their new Settlement, after so obstinate a War,
but making provision of other Necessaries, and giving them a cheerful
Assistance in all things, he had the same Love and Respect from them, as if he
had been their Founder; which Inclination and Esteem for him running through
all the rest of the Sicilians, there was no Proposal for Peace, nor Sanction by
Law, nor Assignation of Dwelling, nor any Form and Order of Government, which
they did acquiesce in, or could think well of, unless he were at the end of it,
as a chief Architect to finish and adorn the Work, supperadding some graceful
Touches from his own Hand, which might render it agreeable and pleasing both to
God and Man: for although Greece had produced several Persons of extraordinary
Worth, and much renowned for their Atchievments in his time, such as Timotheus,
and Agesilaus, and Pelopidas, and the great Epaminondas, whom Timoleon did
admire, and most endeavor to imitate, above all the rest, yet the luster of
their brightest Actions, was mingled with an allay of certain Violence and
Labor, insomuch that some of them became matter of Reproof, and a Subject of
Repentance; whereas there is not any one Fact of Timoleon's (setting aside the
necessity of that in reference to his Brother) whereunto, as Timaeus does
observe, we may not fitly apply that Exclamation of Sophocles: -- O Gods! what
Venus, or what Grace divine,
Touched the Performance here, and made it shine?
For as the Poetry of Antimachus, and the Painting of Dionysius, both Natives
of Colophon, having force and vigor enough in them, did yet appear to be
strained and claborate Pieces, when the Pictures of Nicomachus, and the Verses
of Homer, besides other Advantages of Strength and Beauty, have this peculiar
Excellence, that they seem to come readily from them, and to be wrought off
with ease, and a stroke of Mastery; so likewise if with the Expeditions and
Conduct of Epaminondas, or Agesilaus, that were full of Toil and Struggling, we
compare that of Timoleon, which had much smoothness and facility, joined with
the Splendor and worthiness of what he did, it will appear to all that
consider well, and judge rightly, to be the effect not of simple Fortune, but
rather of a prosperous and happy Courage; though he himself did modestly
ascribe the great Success of his Undertakings to the sole Favor of Providence;
for both in the Letters which he wrote to his Friends at Corinth, and in those
Speeches he made to the People of Syracuse, he would say, That he was very
thankful unto God, who (having a mind to preserve Sicily) was pleased to honor
him with the Name and Title of that Deliverance he vouchsaft it; and having
built a Chapel in his House, he there sacrificed to good Hap, as a Deity that
much favored him, and devoted the House it self to the same sacred Genius,
that being a Fabric which the Syracusians had raised for him, as a Reward and
Monument of his brave Exploits, whereunto they annexed the most delicious and
goodly Manor of their whole Country, where he kept his Residence for the most
part, and enjoyed a sweet Privacy with his Wife and Children that came to him
from Corinth, for he returned thither no more, as unwilling to be concerned in
the Broyls and Tumults of Greece, or expose himself to the public Envy, (that
ever fatal Mischief which many great Commanders do run upon, from an unsatiable
Appetite of Honor and Authority) but wisely chose to spend the remainder of
his days in Sicily, and there to partake of those Blessings he had brought
among them, the greatest whereof was, to behold so many Cities flourish, and so
many thousands of People live happy through his means and procurement. But
seeing not only all the Larks of that tufted sort which the Latins call
Cassitae, must, as Simonides Proverbially speaks, have a Crest growing on their
Heads, but in every Republic there will start up some lewd Sycophant to raise
Calumnies, it so happened at Syracuse, that two of their popular Spokesmen,
Laphystius and Demaenetus by Name, fell to slander Timoleon; the former of
which requiring him to put in Sureties, that he would answer to a certain
Indictment should be brought against him, Timoleon would not suffer the
Citizens who were incensed at his Demand, to oppose the Man, and hinder him
from proceeding, since he of his own accord had been at all that trouble, and
run so many dangerous Risks for this very end and purpose, that every one of
them who had a mind to try Matters by Law, should freely have recourse to it.
And when Demaenetus, in a full Audience of the People, laid several things to
his charge, which had been done while he was General, he made no other reply to
him, but only said, He was much indebted to the Gods, for granting the Request
he had so often made them, namely, that he might live to see the Syracusians
enjoy that liberty of Speech, which they now seemed to be Masters of. Timoleon
therefore having by confession of all, done the greatest and the noblest things
of any Grecian of his Age, and alone gotten the pre-eminence in those Actions,
to which their Orators did always exhort the Greeks, by such Harangues and
Panegyricks as they usually made at their solemn National Assemblies, and being
carried off thence by Fortune unspotted and without blood, from the Calamities
of Civil War, wherein ancient Greece was soon after involved; having also given
sufficient proofs, as of his sage Conduct and manly Courage to the Barbarians
and Tyrants, so of his Justice and Gentleness to the Greeks, and all his
Friends in General; having raised too the greater part of those Trophies he won
in Battle, without any Tears shed, or any Mourning worn, by the Citizens either
of Syracuse or Corinth, and within less than 8 years space delivered Sicily
from its old Grievances and Mischiefs, and intestine Distempers, and given it
up free to the native Inhabitants, his Eyes began to fail him, as he grew in
Age, and a while after he became perfectly blind; not that he had done any
thing himself which might occasion this Defect, or was deprived of his Sight by
any outrage of Fortune, but it seems to have been some inbred and hereditary
weakness that was founded in natural Causes, which by length of time came to
discover it self; for it is said, that diverse of his Kindred and Family were
subject to the like gradual Decay, and lost all use of their Eyes, as he did,
in their declining years, but Athanis the Historian tells us, that even during
the War against Hippo and Mamercus, while he was in his Camp at Myloe, there
appeared a white Speck within his Eye, from whence all did foresee the total
Blindness that was coming on him; however this did not hinder him then from
continuing the Siege, and prosecuting that War, till he got both the Tyrants
into his power; but upon his coming back to Syracuse, he presently resigned the
Authority of sole Commander, and besought the Citizens to excuse him from any
further Service, seeing things were already brought to so fair an issue. Now it
is not so much to be wondered, that he himself should bear the Misfortune
without any marks of Trouble, but that Respect and Gratitude which the
Syracusians showed him when he was stark blind, may justly deserve our
Admiration, going themselves to visit him in Troops, and bringing all the
Strangers that traveled through their Country, to his House and Manor, that
they also might have the pleasure to see their noble Benefactor; making it the
great matter of their Joy and Exultation, that, when, after so many brave and
happy Exploits, he might have returned with Triumph into Greece, he should
despise all the glorious Preparations that were there made to receive him, and
by a strange kind of Endearment, chose rather to abide there, and end his days
among them: whereas therefore several other things were decreed and done in
honor of Timoleon, I reckon this Vote of the Syracusians, to be a signal
Testimony of their value for him, viz. that whenever they did happen to be at
War with any foreign Nation, they should make use of none but a Corinthian
General; and the method of their proceeding in Council, was a handsome
demonstration of the same Deference for his Person; for determining Matters of
less Consequence themselves, they ever called him to advise in the more
difficult Cases, and such as were of greater moment; who being carried through
the Marketplace in a Litter, and that brought with him sitting into the
Theater, the People with one Voice saluted him by his Name; then returning that
Civility, and pausing for a time, till the noise of their Gratulations and
Blessings began to cease, after hearing the Business in Debate, he delivered
his Opinion, which being confirmed by a general Suffrage, his Servants went
back with the Litter through the midst of their Assembly, the People waiting on
him out with Acclamations and Applauses, and so returning to consider of such
public Causes, as they used to dispatch in his absence; being thus cherished
in his old Age, and with that Honor and Benevolence as if he had been their
common Father, he was seized with a very slight Indisposition, which however
did assist and enable Time to put a period to his Life. There was an Allotment
then of certain days given, within the space whereof the Syracusians were to
provide whatever should be necessary for his Burial, and all the neighboring
Inhabitants and Sojourners were to make their Appearance in a Body; so that the
Funeral Pomp was set out with great Splendour and Magnificence in all other
Respects, and the Hearse being decked with rich Ornaments and Trophies of War,
was born by a select number of young Gentlemen, over that Ground where the
Palace and Castle of Dionysius stood, before they were demolished by Timoleon.
There attended on the Solemnity several thousands of Men and Women, all crowned
with Flowers, all aray'd in fresh and cleanly Attire, which made it look like
the Procession of a public Festival; the Discourse of all which, and their
Tears mingled with the Praise and Benediction of the dead Timoleon, did
manifestly show, that it was not any superficial Honor, or commanded Homage,
which they then paid him, but the testimony of a just sorrow for his Death, and
the expression and recompense of true Kindness. The Bier at length being placed
upon the Pile of Wood that was kindled to consume his Corpse, Demetrius, one of
their loudest Cryers, began to read a Proclamation or written Edict to this
purpose: -- The People of Syracuse has made a special Decree to interr
Timoleon, the Son of Timodemus, that noble Corinthian, at the common Expense of
200 Attick valued at 625 l. in our Money.
pounds, and to honor his Memory for ever by an Appointment of annual Prizes
to be celebratee in Music, and Horse-races, and all sorts of bodily Exercise,
and that, because he destroyed Tyrants, and overthrew the Barbarians, and
replenished many great Cities, that were ruinous and desolate before, with new
Inhabitants, and then restored the Sicilians to a State of Freedom, and the
Privilege of living by their own Laws. Beside this, they made a Tomb for him
in the Marketplace, which they afterward built round with Galleries, and
joined certain Cloisters thereto, as a Place of Exercise for their Youth, which
had the Name of Timoleont^um; and then keeping to that Form and Order of Civil
Policy, and observing those Laws and Constitutions which he left them, they
lived themselves a long time in all manner of Prosperity.

PELOPIDAS.
(...).

M Burg. sculp.


THE LIFE OF PELOPIDAS.
Translated from the Greek: By Thomas Creech of Wadham College in Oxon.
Volume II.
CAto Major hearing some commend one that was rash, and inconsiderately daring
in a Battle, said, There is a difference between a man's prizing Valor at a
great rate, and valuing Life at little: an excellent Saying; for Antigonus had
a Soldier, a venturous Fellow, but of an ill Complexion, and very meager; and
the King asking the Cause of his Paleness, and understanding from him that
'twas a secret Disease, he strictly commanded his Physicians to employ their
utmost Skill, and recover him, if possible: but this brave Fellow being cured,
never afterward sought Danger, never appeared venturous in a Battle; insomuch
that Antigonus wondered, and upbraided him with his Change: but the Man told him
the Reason, and said, Sir, You are the Cause of my Cowardice, by freeing me
from those Miseries, which made me despise Life. And upon the same account, the
Sybarite seems to have said concerning the Spartans, That 'twas no commendable
thing in them to die in the Wars, since by that they were freed from such hard
Labor, and miserable Diet; but in truth the Sybarites, a soft and dissolute
People, might imagine that they hated Life, because in their eager pursuit of
Virtue and Glory they were not afraid to die: yet the Lacedaemonians esteem it
a Virtue to be willing either to die or live, as that Epicedium testifies: They
died, but not as lavish of their Blood,
Or thinking Death it self was simply good;
Or Life, both these the strictest Virtue tried,
And as that called, they gladly lived, or died.
For an Endeavor to avoid Death is not discommendable, if we do not basely
desire to live; nor willingness to die good and virtuous, if it proceeds from a
Contempt of Life: and therefore Homer always takes care to bring his brave and
stout Men well armed into the Battle; and the Greek Lawgivers punished those
that threw away their Shields, but not him that lost his Sword or Spear,
intimating, that they should be more careful to defend themselves, than offend
their Enemies. This every one ought to mind, but especially a Governor of a
City, or a General; for if, as Iphicrates divides, the light armed are the
Hands; the Horse the Feet; the Infantry the Breast; and the General the Head;
when he puts himself upon danger, he does not only venture his own Person, but
all those whose safety depend on his; and so on the contrary. And therefore
Callicratides, though in other things a great Man, did not answer the Augur
well, who advised him, the Sacrifice being unlucky, to be careful of his Life;
Sparta, says he, does not consist in one Man: it is true, Callicratides in any
Engagement either at Sea or Land, was but a single Person, but being General,
he seemed to contain the Life of all, and so must be more than one, since by
his Death so many must be ruined. But better was the Saying of old Antigonus,
who when he was to fight at Andros, and one told him, The Enemies Ships are
more than ours; replied, For how many then will thou reckon me? intimating,
that a stout and experienced Commander is highly to be valued, whose principal
care it is to save him that preserves the rest: and therefore I applaud
Timotheus, who when Chares showed the Wounds he had received, and his Shield
pierced by a Dart, told him, Indeed I should have been ashamed, if when I
fought against Samos, a Dart should have fallen near me, as behaving my self
more rashly than became a General of such an Army. Indeed where the General's
hazarding himself will do a great deal of good, there he must fight and venture
his Person, and not mind their Maxims; who would have a General still die with
Age, or at least an old Man; but when the Advantage will be but small if he
gets the better, and the Loss considerable if he falls, who then would desire
that good which a common Soldier might perform, with the danger of the
Commander? This I thought fit to premise before the Lives of Pelopidas and
Marcellus, who were both great Men, but both ruined by their Rashness; for
being stout Men, and having gotten their Country great Glory and Reputation by
their Conduct, and fighting against terrible Enemies, the one (as History
delivers) overthrew Annibal, who was till then invincible; the other in a set
Battle beat the Lacedaemonians, the Commanders at Sea and Land; but they
ventured too far, and were heedlesly prodigal of their Lives, when there was
the greatest need of such Men, and such Commanders: and this Agreement in their
Tempers and their Deaths, is the Reason why I compare their Lives.

Pelopidas, the Son of Hippoclus, was descended, as likewise Epaminondas was,
from an honorable Family in Thebes; and being Pelopidas of a good Family.
bred in Gallantry, and having a fair Estate left him whilst he was young, he
made it his business to relieve the good and deserving amongst the Poor, that
he might show himself Lord and not Slave to his Estate. For amongst Men, (as
Aristotle observes) some are too narrow-minded to use their Wealth, and some
are loose, and abuse it; and these live perpetual Slaves to their Pleasures,
the others to their Gain. Others permitted themselves to be obliged by
Pelopidas, and thankfully made use of his Liberality and Kindness; but amongst
all his Friends, he could never persuade Epaminondas to be a sharer in his
Wealth; therefore he stepped down into his Poverty, and pleased himself in mean
Attire, spare Diet, unwearied diligence in labor, and plain-dealing in the Art
of War: like Capaneus in Euripides, who had abundance of Wealth, but no Pride
with it; he was ashamed any one should think that he spent more upon his Body
than the meanest Theban. Epaminondas made his familiar and hereditary Poverty
more light and easy, by his Philosophy and single Life, but Pelopidas was
matched to a Woman of a good Family, and got Children; but yet still forgetful
of the main Chance, Careless of his Estate.
and spending all his time on the Public, he ruined his Estate; and when his
Friends advised him, and told him, That Money, which he now neglected, was a
necessary thing; Yes, he replied, it is necessary to that same Nicodemus,
pointing to a Cripple. Both seemed equally born to all sorts of Virtue, but
Exercise chiefly delighted Pelopidas, Learning Epaminondas, and the one spent
his spare hours in Hunting, and the Palestra, the other in hearing Lectures or
Philosophizing. And though there are a thousand Excellencies which commend
both, yet the judicious esteem nothing equal to that constant Benevolence and
Friendship, which they inviolably preserved in all their Expeditions, T^^
Friendship (...) and (...).
public Actions, and Administrations of the Commonwealth: for if any one
looks on the Administrations of Aristides and Themistocles, of Cimon and
Pericles, of Nicias and Alcibiades, good Gods! what Confusion, what Envy, what
mutual Jealousy appears? And then if he casts an eye on the Kindness and
Reverence that Pelopidas showed Epaminondas, he must needs confess, that these
are more truly and more justly styled Companions in Government and Command
than the others, who strove rather to overcome one another, than their Enemies.
But the true cause of this was their Virtue; upon whose account they did not
make their Actions aim at Wealth and Glory, which troublesome and contentious
Envy necessarily attends, but both from the beginning being inflamed with a
divine desire of seeing their Country glorious by their Endeavors, they used
to that end one another Excellencies as their own. Many indeed think, this
strict and entire Friendship is to be dated from the Battle at Mantinea, where
they both fought being part of those Succors that were sent from Thebes to the
Lacedaemonians, their then Friends and Allies; for being placed together
amongst the Infantry, end engaging the Arcadians, when the Lacedaemonian Wing,
in which they fought, gave Ground, and many fled, they joined one another, and
resisted the Invaders. Pelopidas having received seven Wounds in the forepart
of his Body, fell upon an heap of slain Friends and Enemies; but Epaminondas,
though he thought him past recovery, advanced to defend his Arms and Body, and
singly fought a Multitude, resolving rather to die than forsake his helpless
Pelopidas. And now he being much distressed, wounded in the Breast by a Spear,
in the Arm by a Sword, Agesipolis, the King of the Spartans, came to his
Succor from the other Wing, and beyond hope, delivered both. After this, the
Lacedaemonians pretending themselves Friends to Thebes, but in truth having an
eye on the Designs and Power of the City, and chiefly hating the Combination of
Ismenius and Androclides, in which Pelopidas also was an Associate, as tending
to Liberty, and Advancement of the People, Archias, Leontidas, and Philip, all
rich Men, and of Oligarchical Principles, and immoderately ambitious, persuaded
Phaebidas the Spartan to surprise the Phaebidas surprizeth the Cadmea.
Cadmea with a considerable Force, and banishing the contrary Faction,
establish an Oligarchy, and by that means make the City obnoxious to the Power
of the Spartans. He accepting of the Motion, and at the Festival of Ceres
unexpectedy falling on the Thebans, made himself Master of the Castle: Ismenius
was taken, carried to Sparta, and in a short time murdered; but Pelopidas,
Pherenicus, and many more that fled, were publicly proclaimed Outlaws.
Epaminondas stayed at home, being not much looked after, as one whom Philosophy
had made unactive in Affairs, and Poverty unable to pursue a Design. the
Lacedaemonians cashiered Phaebidas, and fined him 100000 Drachmas, yet still
kept a Garrison in the Cadmea, which made all Greece wonder at the
Inconsistency of their Actions, since they punished the Doer, but approved the
Deed. Now though the Thebans, having lost their Polity, and being enslaved by
Archias and Leontidas, had no Hopes to get free from this Tyranny, which they
saw supported by the Spartan Commonwealth, and no means to break the Yoke, but
such as was sufficient to beat them from the Command of Sea and Land, yet
Leontidas and his Associates understanding that the Exiles lived at Athens,
were gracious with the People, and honored by all the good and virtuous, they
formed secret Designs against their Lives, and dispatching some unknown
Fellows, they snapp'd Androclides, but were not successful on the rest;
besides, Letters were sent from Sparta to Athens, warning them neither to
receive, nor cherish the Exiles, but expel them as declared common Enemies by
their Allies. But the Athenians, besides their natural Inclination to be kind,
to make a grateful return to the Thebans, (who had very much assisted them in
restoring their Democracy, and publicly enacted, that if any Athenian would
march armed through Beotia against the Tyrants, that no Beotian should either
see or hear it) did the Thebans no harm. Now Pelopidas, though one of the
youngest, privately excited each single Exile, Pelopidas ex^ites the (...) to
fr^e their Count^^y.
and often told them at their Meetings, that 'twas both dishonorable and
impious to neglect their enslaved and ingariso^'d Country, and lazily
contented with their own Lives and Safety, depend on the Decrees of the
Athenians, and for fear fawn on every smooth-tongu'd Orator, that is able to
work upon the People: no, they must venture for this great Prize, taking
Thrasybulus his bold Courage for Example, that as he advanced from Thebes, and
brake the Power of the Athenian Tyrants, so they should march from Athens, and
free Thebes. When by this method he had persuaded them, they privately
dispatched some Persons to those Friends they had left at Thebes, and
acquainted them with their Designs. They applauded the Contrivance, and Charon,
a Man of the greatest Quality, offered his House for their Reception: Philidas
had contrived to get himself Secretary to Archias and Philip, who were then
Captains of the Militia; and Epaminondas had already inflamed the Youth, for in
their Exercises he advised them to challenge and wrestle with the Spartans, and
when he saw them puffed up with Victory and Success, he sharply told them,
'twas the greater shame to be such Cowards, as to serve those whom in Strength
they so much excelled. But the day for Action being set, it was agreed upon by
the Exiles, that Pherenicus with the rest should stay at Thriacium, and some
few of the younger Men try the first Danger, by endeavoring to get into the
City, and if they were surpised by their Enemies, the others should take care
to provide for their Children and Parents. Pelopidas first undertook the
Business, then Melon, Damoclides, and Theopompus; Men of noble Families, He
goes to Thebes.
and in other things loving and faithful to one another, but constant Rivals in
Glory, and courageous Exploits. They were twelve in all, and having taken leave
of those that stayed behind, and sent a Messenger to Charon, they went forward,
clad in short Coats, and carrying Hounds and hunting Poles with them, that they
might be taken for Hunters beating over the Fields, and prevent all suspicion
in those that met them on the way. Now when the Messenger came to Charon, and
told him they were approaching, he did not change his Resolution at the ^ight
of Danger, but being a Man of his word, offered them his House. But one
Hipposthenides, a Man The Plot almost ruined.
of no ill Principles, and a Lover of his Country, and a Friend to the Exiles*
but not of as much Resolution, as the shortness of Time, and the quality of the
Action required, as it were dizzy'd at the greatness of the approaching
Enterprise, and not able to comprehend, how relying on that weak Assistance
which could be expected from the Exiles, they should be strong enough to shake
the Spartan Government, and free themselves from that Power, went privately to
his House, and sent a Friend to Melon and Pelopidas, desiring them to forbear
for the present, but return to Athens, and expect a better opportunity. The
Messenger's Name was Clidon, who going home presently, and bringing out his
Horse, asked for the Bridle; but his Wife being at a Stand, and when it could
not be found, telling him she had lent it to a Friend, first they began to
chide, then curse one another, and his Wife wished the Journey might prove ill
to him, and those that sent him; insomuch that Clidon's passion made him spend
most of the day in these Brawls, and then looking on this Chance as an Omen, he
laid aside all thoughts of his Journey, and heeded other Business: so near had
these great and glorious Designs, even in their very Birth, lost their
opportunity. But Pelopidas and his Companions dressing themselves like Clowns,
divided, and whilst it was yet day, entered at several Quarters of the City;
besides it was a stormy day, and it began to snow, which contributed much to
their Concealment, because most of the Citizens kept within doors to avoid the
Weather; but those that were concerned in the Design, received them as they
came, and presently conducted them to Charon's House, and together with the
Exiles made up forty eight in number. Now the Tyrants Affairs stood thus:
Secretary Philidas (as I have already observed) was an Accomplice in, and privy
to all the Contrivance of the Exiles, and he a while before had invited Archias
with others to an Entertainment on that day, to drink freely, and accompany
some married Whores, on purpose that when they were drunk, and softened with
Pleasures, he might deliver them over to the Rage of the Conspirators. But
before Archias was thoroughly heated, notice was Archias informed that the
Exiles were come.
given him that the Exiles were privately in Town; a true Report indeed, but
obscure, and not well confirmed: nevertheless though Philidas endeavored to
divert the Discourse, Archias sent one of his Guard to Charon, and commanded
him presently to attend. Now it was Evening, and Pelopidas, and his Friends
with him in the House, were putting themselves into a fit posture for Action,
having their Armor on already, and their Swords girt: but at the sudden
knocking at the door, one stepping forth to enquire the Matter, and learning
from the Sergeant that Charon was sent for by the Officers, in great confusion
he returned, and acquainted those within; and this made all presently
conjecture, that the whole Plot was discovered, and they should be cut in
pieces, before any Action worthy Men of their Bravery was performed; yet all
agreed that Charon should obey, and attend the Officers, to prevent Suspicion.
Now though Charon was a Man of Courage and Resolution in all Dangers, yet in this
Case he was extremely concerned, lest any should suspect that he was the
Traitor, and the Death of so many and so brave Citizens be laid on him. And
therefore when he was ready to depart, he brought his Son out of the Women's
Apartment, a little Boy as yet, but very pretty, and stronger than his Equals,
Charon 's bravery.
and delivered him to Pelopidas with these words: If you find me a Traitor, use
that Boy as an Enemy, and be cruel in the Execution. This Concernment and
Affection of Charon drew Tears from many: but all were extremely troubled, that
any one of them should be thought so mean spirited, and grown so base, at the
appearance of approaching danger, as to suspect or blame him; and therefore
desired him not to involve his Son, but set him out of harms way, that so
scaping the Tyrants Power, he might live to revenge his City, and his Friends.
But he refused to remove him, and said, What Life, what Safety can be more
honorable, than to die bravely with his Father, and such generous Companions?
Thus imploring the Protection of the Gods, and saluting and encouraging them
all, he departed, considering with himself, and composing his Voice and
Countenance, that he might look like one not at all concerned in the Design.
When he was come to the Door, Archias with Philidas came out to him, and said,
I have heard, Charon, that there are some come to Town, and lurk here, and to
whose Cabal some of the Citizens resort. Charon was at first disturbed, but
presently returned, who are they? and who conceals them? But finding Archias
did not thoroughly understand the Matter, he conjectured, that none that was
privy to the Design, had made this Discovery, and therefore told them, Perhaps
it is an empty Rumor that disturbs you, yet however I^le examine, for no Report
in such a Case is to be neglected. Philidas that stood by, commended him, and
leading back Archias, drank him to a pitch, still prolonging the Entertainment
with the hopes of the Women's Company at last. But when Charon was returned, and
found the Men prepared, not as if they hoped for Safety and Success, but to die
bravely, and with the Slaughter of their Enemies, he told Pelopidas the truth,
but deceived the rest, pretending that Archias discoursed him about other
Matters. This Storm was just blown over, when Fortune brought another; for a
Messenger came with a Letter from one Archias, A Letter sent to Archias
concerning the Design.
the Pontifick of Athens, to his Namesake Archias, who was his Friend and
Guest: this Letter was not filled with an idle and feigned Suspicion, but as
appeared afterward, discovered each particular of the Design. The Messenger
being brought in to Archias, who was now pretty well drunk, and delivering the
Letter, said to him, He that sent this, desires you to read it presently, for
it contains Matters of Concern; but Archias smilingly returned, Matters of
Concern to morrow: and so receiving the Letter, he put it under his Pillow, and
then fell to his ordinary Discourse with Philidas; and these words of his are a
Proverb to this day amongst the Greeks. Now when the Opportunity seemed
convenient for Action, they marched out in two Companies; Pelopidas and
Damoclides with their Party went against Leontidas and Hypates, that lived near
together; Charon and Melon against Archias and Philip, having put on Women's
Apparel upon their Armor, and thick Garlands of Fir and Pine to shade their
Faces; and therefore as soon as they came to the Door, the Guests clapped and
gave an Huzza, thinking those had been the Women they expected. But when the
Conspirators had looked about the Room, and diligently viewed all that were at
the Entertainment, they drew their Swords, and making at Archias and Philip
Archias and Philip killed.
over the Table, presently discovered what they were: Philidas persuaded some
few of his Guests to sit still, and those that stirred, and endeavored to
assist their Officers, being all drunk, were easily dispatched. But Pelopidas
and his Party met with a harder Task; for they attempted Leontidas, a sober and
stout Man, and when they came to his house, they found his Doors shut, he being
already gone to Bed: they knocked a long time before any one would answer, but
at last a Servant that heard them, coming out* and unbarring the Door, as soon
as the Gate gave way, they rushed in, and over-turning the Man, made all haste
to Leontidas his Chamber. But Leontidas guessing at the Matter by the noise and
running, leaped from his Bed, and drew his Dagger, but forgot to put out the
Lights, and by that means make them fall foul on one another in the dark. But
now being easily seen by reason of the Light, he received them at his
Chamber Door, and stabbed Chephisidorus, the first Man that entered: he
falling, the next that he engaged was Pelopidas; between whom, the Passage
being narrow, and Chephisidorus his Carcass lying in the way, there was a
fierce and dangerous dispute. But at last Pelopidas prevailed, and having
killed Pelopidas kills Leontidas and Hypates.
Leontidas, he and his Companions went in pursuit of Hypates, and after the
same manner broke into his House; but he perceiving the Design, and flying to
his Neighbors, they closely followed, and caught and killed him. This done,
they joined Melon, and sent to hasten the Exiles they had left in Attica: they
proclaimed Liberty to the Citizens, and taking down the Spoils from the
Porches, and breaking open all the Shops of Armoury that wear near, they armed
those that came to their Assistance. Epaminondas and Gorgidas came in provided
with a gallant Train of young Men, and best of the old. Now the City was in a
strange Confusion, a great noise and hurry, Lights set up in every House, Men
running here and there; yet the People did not gather into a Body, but all
amazed at the Actions, and not clearly understanding the Matter, waited for the
Day. And therefore the Spartan Officers are to be blamed for not falling on
presently, since their Garrison consisted of about 1500 Men, and many of the
Citizens ran to them; but terrified with the noise, the Fires, and the confused
Running of the People, they kept quietly within the Cadmea. As soon as day
appeared, the Exiles from Attica came in armed, and there was a general
Assembly of the People: Epaminondas and Gorgidas brought forth Pelopidas and
his Party, encompassed by the Priests, who held out their Garlands, and
exhorted the People to fight for their Country and their Gods. The Assembly
excited at this Appearance, with Shouts and Acclamations received the Men as
their Deliverers and Benefactors. Then Pelopidas being chosen Governor of
Beotia, together with Melon and Charon, presently blocked Pelopidas r^gains the
Cadmea.
up the Castle, and stormed it on all sides, being extremely desirous to beat
out the Lacedaemonians, and free the Cadmea, before an Army could come from
Sparta to their Relief; and he was so quick, that they surrendering upon
Articles, met Cleombrotus at Megara marching toward Thebes with a considerable
Force. The Spartans condemned and executed Hermippides and Acissus, two of
their Governors at Thebes, and Duscoridas the third being severely fined, fled
to Peloponnesus. This Action being so like that of Thrasybulus, in the Courage
of the Actors, the Danger, the Encounters, and equally crowned with Success, is
called its Sister by the Greeks; for we can scarce find any others, who being
few and weak, by their bold Courage overcame their more numerous and more
powerful Enemies, and brought greater Blessings to their Country. But the
following change of Affairs made this Action the more famous; for that War
which brake the Spartan's Power, and for ever ruined their Pretensions to
command, proceeded from that night, in which Pelopidas not surprising any
Castle, Garrison, or Town, but coming the twelfth Man to his own private House,
loosed and broke (if we may speak Truth in Metaphor) the Chains of the Spartan
Government, which before seemed Adamant, and indissoluble. Now when the
Lacedaemonians invaded Beotia with a great Army, the Athenians frighted The
Athenians refused to assist Thebes.
at the Danger, declared themselves no Allies to Thebes, and prosecuting those
that stood for the Beotian Interest, some they executed, some they banished,
and fined some: and thus the Affairs of Thebes, having no Allies for their
Support, seemed in a desperate condition. But Pelopidas and Gorgidas being
Governors of Beotia, and designing to breed a Quarrel between the Spartans and
Athenians, made this Contrivance: One Sphodrias, a Man famous indeed for
Martial Exploits, but of no sound Judgment, full of ungrounded Hopes and
foolish Ambition, was left with an Army at Thespia, to receive and succor the
Theban Renegades. Pelopidas privately sent a Merchant, a Friend of his, to
carry him Money, and what proved more prevalent, advice, that it more became a
Man of his Worth, to set upon some great Enterprise; and making Sphodrias the
Spartan designs against the Athenians
a sudden Incursion on the unprovided Athenians, surprise the Pireum; for
nothing could be so grateful to Sparta, as to take Athens, and to be sure, the
Thebans would not stir to their Assistance, whom they now hated, and looked
upon as Traitors. Sphodrias being at last wrought upon, with his Army marched
into Attica by Night, and advanced as far as Eleusina; but there his Soldiers
Hearts failing, and his Design discovered, when by this Action he had engaged
the Spartans in a dangerous War, he retreated to Thespia: for upon this the
Athenians very readily sent Supplies to Thebes, and putting to Sea themselves,
sailed to many Places, and received and engaged those who were willing to
revolt. Now The Thebans prevailed against the Spartans.
the Thebans singly having many Skirmishes with the Spartans, and fighting some
Battles, not great indeed, but fit to train them up, and instruct them, their
Minds were raised, and their Bodies inured to Labor, and they got both
Experience and Courage by these frequent Encounters: insomuch that it is
reported Antaclides the Spartan said to Agesilaus returning wounded from
Beotia, Indeed, Sir, the Thebans have given you a very fair Reward, for
instructing them in the Art of War against their Wills: but in truth, Agesilaus
was not their Master in this, but those that did prudently and opportunely, as
Men do young Mastiffs, set them on their Enemies, and then cherish them after
they had tasted the Sweets of Victory and Resolution. Of all those Leaders,
Pelopidas deserves the most Honor; for after they had once chosen him General,
he was every year in Command as long as he lived; either Captain of the sacred
Band, or, what was most frequent, Governor of Beotia. About Platea and Thespia
the Spartans were routed and fled, and Phebidas, that surpised the Cadmea,
slain; and at Tenagra they worsted a considerable Force, and killed the Leader
Panthoides. But these Encounters, though they raised the Victors Spirits, did
not quite dishearten the Unfortunate; for there was no set Battle, or regular
Fighting, but Incursions on Advantage, Charges and Pursuits, and thus they
fought and got the better. But the Battle at Tegura, which seemed a Praeludium
to Leuctra, won Pelopidas a great Reputation; Pelopidas beats the Spartaus at
Tenagra.
for none of the other Commanders could pretend an hand in the Design, nor the
Enemies a show of Victory: for the City of the Orchomenians siding with the
Spartans, and receiving two Companies for their Guard, he kept a constant Eye
upon them, and watched his Opportunity. Now when he heard that the Garrison drew
off to Locris. hoping to find Orchomenum defenseless, he marched with his
sacred Band, and some few Horsemen; but when he approached the City, and found
that a reinforcement of that Garrison was on its March from Sparta, he fetched a
Compass round the foot of the Mountains, and retreated with his little Army
through Tegura, that being the only way he could march; for the River Melas,
almost as soon as it rises, spreads its self into Marshes and navigable Pools,
and makes all the Plain unpassable: a little below the Marshes stands the
Temple of Apollo Tegureus, now forsaken, nor was it famous long, but flourished
till the Medes Wars, Echecrates being then Priest. Here they report that the
God was born; the neighboring Mountain is called Delos, and there the River
Melas comes again into a Channel; behind the Temple rise two Springs, admirable
for the sweetness, abundance, and coolness of the Streams; one they call
Phaenix, the other Elaea, as if Lucina had not been delivered between two
Trees, but Fountains: besides there is a Place hard by called Ptoum, where they
say she was affrighted by the appearance of a Boar; and all the Stories of the
Python, Tytius, and the like, these Places apply to the Birth of the God. I
omit a thousand other Conjectures, for our Tradition does not rank this God
amongst those that were born, and so made immortal, as Hercules and Bacchus,
whom their Virtue raised above a mortal and passible condition; but he is one
of the eternal, if we may gather any certainty concerning these things, from
the Discourses of the oldest and wisest in these Matters. Now the Thebans
retreating from Orchomenum toward Tegura, the Spartans at the same time
marching from Locris, met them, and as soon as they had passed the Straits, and
came in view of one another, and one told Pelopidas, We are fallen into our
Enemies hands, he replied, And why not they into ours as well? and presently
commanded his Horse to advance from the Rear, and charge, and he himself drew
his Infantry, being three hundred in number, into a close Body, hoping by that
means, whatsoever way he pressed, he should make the greater Slaughter on his
more numerous Enemies. The Spartans had two Divisions, (each consisted, as
Ephorus reports, of five hundred; Calisthenes says seven hundred; others, as
Pollybius, nine hundred) and their Leaders, Gorgoleon and Theopompus, confident
of success, pressed upon the Thebans. The Charge being made against the Leaders
of both Divisions with much Fury and Bravery, the Spartan Captains that engaged
Pelopidas, were first killed, and then their Companies being most wounded or
slain, the whole Army was disheartened, and a Lane opened for the Thebans, as if
they desired to pass through and escape. But when Pelopidas entered, and turning
against those that stood their ground, still went on with a bloody Slaughter,
there began an open Flight amongst the Spartans. They pursued but a little way,
because they feared the neighboring Orchomenians, and the Reinforcement from
Lacedaemon, but they pressed on to a full Victory, and a total Rout of the
flying Army; then erecting a Trophy, The Spartans Courage.
and spoiling the slain, they returned home extremely raised with the Success:
for in all the great Wars managed against the Greeks or the Barbarians, the
Spartans were never before beaten by a smaller Company than their own, nay, nor
when their Number was equal; and thus their Courage seemed irresistible, their
Fame wounded their Enemies before the Battle, and made them afraid to venture
an Engagement, though on equal terms. But this Battle first taught the other
Greeks that not only Eurotas, or the Country between Bubace and Cnacion,
breeds Men of Courage and Resolution; but wherever the Youth is ashamed of
Baseness, and would venture in a good Cause; wherever they fly Disgrace more
than Danger, there are the stoutest Men, then the most dreadful to their
Enemies. Gorgidas (as some report) first formed the sacred Band of three
hundred chosen Men, to whom being a Guard for the Castle, the City allowed
Provision, and all things necessary* for Exercise: and hence they were called
the City Bands, for Castles of old were usually called Cities. Others say, that
it was composed of Lovers and their Beloved; and there goes a merry Saying of
Pammenes, that Homer's Nestor was not well skilled in ordering an Army, when he
advised the Greeks to rank Tribe and Tribe, and Family and Family together: he
should have joined Lovers and their Beloved, for Men of the same Tribe or
Family, little value one another when Dangers press; but a Band cemented by
Friendship grounded upon Love, is never to be Broken, and The sacred Band of
Lovers.
invincible, since the Lovers, ashamed to be base in sight of their Beloved,
and the Beloved before their Lovers, willingly rush into Danger for the Relief
of one another: and Reason good, since they have more Regard for their absent
Lovers than others present; an Instance of which that Man gave, who, when his
Enemy was ready to kill him, earnestly requested to run him through the Breast,
that his Lover might not blush to see him wounded in the Back. It Is reported
likewise, that Iolaus, being the Lover of Hercules, assisted him in his
Labors: and Aristotle observes, that even in his Time, the Lovers plighted
their Faith at Iolaus his Tomb. It Is likely therefore this Band was called
sacred on this account; as Plato calls a Lover, a divine Friend; and Fame says,
that it was never beaten till the Battle at Cheronaea: and when Philip after
the Fight took a view of the slain, and came to that Place where the three
hundred that fought his Phalanx, lay dead together, he wondered, and
understanding that 'twas the Band of Lovers, he wept, and said, Let them be
damned, who suspect that these Men either did or suffered any thing that was
base. Indeed it was not the Disaster of Laius, as the Poets imagine, that first
raised these Lovers amongst the Thebans, but their Lawgivers, who designing to
soften, whilst they were young, their natural Fierceness, brought the Pipe into
great Esteem both in serious and ludicrous Concerns, and encouraged an
excellent Love in their Palestra's, to temper the Manners of the Youth: and
therefore they did very well to make Harmony, the Daughter of Mars and Venus
their Tutelar, because where Force and Courage is joined with Gracefulness, and
winning Behavior, the most admirable and best contrived Government is framed.
All things being then Harmoniously disposed, Gorgias dividing this sacred Band
into the Front Ranks of his Infantry, their Courage seemed not so conspicuous;
for not being ordered in one Body, they were weakened, by being mingled with
others of lesser Resolution. But Pelopidas having sufficiently tried their
Bravery at* Tegura, and that they kept their Ground, and fought well, he never
afterward divided them, but keeping them entire, as one Body, he gave the
first Charge in the greatest Battles: for as Horses run brisker in a Chariot
than single, not that their joint Force divides the Air with greater ease, but
because they run together, and their Emulation raises their Courage; thus he
thought, stout Men provoking one another to commendable Actions, would prove
more useful, and more resolved, in an Enterprise where they were all concerned.
Now when the Lacedaemonians had made Peace with the other Greeks, and warred
upon the Thebans only, and their King Cleombrotus marched with 10000 Foot and
1000 Horse, and not only Slavery, as heretofore, but total Destruction
threatened, and Beotia was in a greater fear than ever, Pelopidas going out of
his own House, and his Wife bringing him on his way, and with tears begging him
to be careful of his Life, he replied, Wife, Private Men should be Pelopidas
his Saying.
advised to look to themselves, Generals to save others. And when he came to
the Camp, and found the Generals disagreeing, he first joined with Epaminondas,
who advised to fight the Enemy; he was not then Archon* but Captain of the
sacred Band, and a Man in Trust, as 'twas fit he should be, who had given his
Country so great proof of his sincere Endeavors for their Freedom. Well then,
when a Battle was agreed on, and they faced the Spartans at Leuctra, Pelopidas
saw a Pelopidas his Vision.
Vision, which very much discomposed him: for in that Plain lie the Bodies of
the Daughters of one Scedasus, called from the Place, Leuctridae, for there
they were buried, having been ravished by some Spartan Strangers. When this
base and impious Deed was done, and their Father could get no Satisfaction at
Lacedaemon, with bitter imprecations on the Spartans, he killed himself at his
Daughter's Tombs: and from that time the Prophesies and Oracles still warned
them to have a great Care of the Gods Revenge at Leuctra; but many did not
understand the meaning, being uncertain of the Place, because there was a
little maritime Town of Laconia called Leuctron, and near Megalopolis in
Arcadia a Place of the same Name; and the Villainy was committed long before
this Battle. Now Pelopidas being asleep in the Camp, thought he saw the Maidens
weeping about their Tombs, and cursing the Spartans, and Scedasus commanding,
if they desired the Victory, to sacrifice a red Virgin to his Daughters.
Pelopidas looking on this as an harsh and impious Injunction, rose, and told it
to the Prophet, and Commanders of the Army, some of which contended, that 'twas
fit to obey, and brought for Examples from the Ancients, Meneceus, the Son of
Creon; Macaria, Of Men-Sacrifices.
the Daughter of Hercules: and from latter Times, Pherecydes, the Philosopher,
slain by the Lacedaemonians, and his Skin, as the Oracles advised, still kept
by their Kings: that Leonidas, warned by the Oracle, did as it were sacrifice
himself for the Good of Greece: that Themistocles offered some to Bacchus
Omestes, before the Engagement at Salamis, and that the Success showed their
Actions to be good. On the contrary, Agesilaus going from the same Place, and
against the same Enemies that Agamemnon did, and being commanded in a Dream at
Aulis to sacrifice his Daughter, he being too fond, denied it, and therefore
his Expedition was unsuccessful and inglorious. But some on the other side
urged, that such a barbarous and impious Oblation could not be pleasing to any
of those above: that Typhons and Giants did not preside over the World, but the
Father of the Gods and Men: that 'twas absurd to imagine, any Demons delighted
in Slaughter and Sacrifices of Men; or if there were any such, they were to be
neglected, as weak and unable to assist; for unreasonable and impious Desires
could only proceed from, and live in weak and depraved Minds. The Commanders
thus disputing, and Pelopidas being in a great Perplexity, a Mare*Colt breaking
from the Herd, ran through the Camp, and when she came to the place where they
were, stood still; and whilst some admired the sparkling Redness of her Color,
others her Mettle, or the strength and fury of her Neighing, Theocritus the
Augur having considered the Matter, cried out to Pelopidas, Happy Man! look,
the Sacrifice is come, expect no other Virgin, but use that which the Gods have
sent thee: with that they took the Colt, and leading her to the Maidens
Sepulchers, with the usual Solemnity and Prayers, offered her with joy, and
then told the whole Army Pelopidas his Dream, and how they had given the
required Sacrifice. Now in the Battle Epaminondas bending his Phalanx to the
left, The Battle at Leuctra.
that, as much as possible, he might divide the right Wing, composed of
Spartans, from the other Greeks, and distress Cleombrotus, by a brisk Charge on
that Wing, the Enemies perceived the Design, and began to change their Order,
to open their right Wing, and far exceeding him in Number, incompass
Epaminondas. But Petopidas came briskly up before Cleombrotus could open, and
close his Divisions, and so fell upon the disordered Spartans; though the
Lacedaemonians are the most expert The Spartans very expert.
and cunning in the Art of War, and are trained up, and accustomed to nothing
more, than to keep themselves from Confusion, when their Order is disturbed;
but to follow any Leader, or Right hand Man, and order themselves, and fight on
what part soever Dangers press, in this Battle Epaminondas his Phalanx
neglecting the other Greeks, and charging them alone, and Pelopidas coming up
with such incredible speed and fury, so brake their Courage, and baffled their
Art, that there began such a Flight and Slaughter amongst the Spartans, as was
never before known: and so Pelopidas being neither Archon nor General, but only
a Captain of a small Band, got as much Reputation by the Victory, as
Epaminondas who was both General and Archon. The two Archons marched into
Peloponnesus, and recovered many Places from the Spartans; Elis, Argos, all
Arcadia, and much of Laconia it self. Now it was the dead of Winter, and but
few days remained of the last declining Month, and in the beginning of the next
new Governors were to succeed, and whoever refused to deliver up his Charge,
forfeited his Head: therefore the other Archons fearing the Law, and to avoid
the sharpness of the Winter, advised a Retreat. But Pelopidas joined with
Epa^inondas, and encouraging his Citizens, led them against Sparta, and passing
the Eu^^tas, took many of their Towns, and wasted their Country as far as the
Sea. This Army consisted of 70000 Greeks, of which number the Thebans could not
make the 12th part; but the Reputation of the Men made all their Allies
contented to follow them as Leaders, though no Articles had been made; for it
seems the first and chiefest Law, That he that wants a Defender, is naturally a
Subject to him that ^s able to defend: as Mariners, though in a Calm (...) in the
Port they grow insolent, and brave the Pilot, yet when a Storm comes, and
Danger is at hand, they all attend, and put their Hopes in him; so the Argives,
Eleans, and Arcadians, in their Consults, would contend with the Thebans for
Superiority in the Army, yet in a Battle. or any hazardous Undertaking, they
willingly followed their Captains. In this Expedition they united all Arcadia
into one Body, and destroying the Spartans that inhabited Messenia, they called
back the old Messenians and gave them Ithone to possess, and returning through
Cenchrea, they dispersed the Athenians, who designed to set upon them in the
Streights, and hinder their March. For these Exploits, all the other Greeks
loved their Courage, and admired their Success; but their Citizens Envy still
increasing with their Glory, provided for them no pleasing nor agreeable
Reception: for both were tried for their Pelopidas t^y'd for his Life.
Lives, because they did not deliver up their Command in the first Month
(Bucation) as the Law required, but kept it four Months longer, in which time
they did all those memorable Actions in Messenia, Arcadia, and Laconia:
Pelopidas was first tried, and therefore in greatest danger, but both were
freed. Epaminondas bore the Accusation and Trial very patiently, esteeming it a
great piece of Courage and Generosity, not to resent the Injuries of his
Citizens; but Pelopidas being a Man of a fiercer Temper, and stirred on by his
Friends to revenge the Affront, took this occasion: Meneclides the the Orator
was one of those that caball'd with Melon and Pelopidas at Charon's House; but
not receiving a suitable Reward, and being powerful in his Speech, but loose in
his Manners, and ill-natured, he abused his natural Endowments, even after this
Trial, to accuse and calumniate his Betters. He put by EPaminondas from the
Archonship, and a long time kept the upper hand of him: but he was not powerful
enough to bring Pelopidas out of the Peoples Favor, and therefore endeavored
to raise a Quarrel between him and Charon: and since it is some Comfort to the
Envious, to make those Men whom themselves cannot excel, to appear worse than
others, he studiously enlarged upon Charon's Actions in his Speeches to the
People, he made Panegyricks on his Expeditions and Victories; and of that
Victory which the Horsemen wan at Platea, before the Battle at Leuctra, under
Charon's Command, he endeavored to make this sacred Memorial: Androclydes, a
Cyzicenian, undertaking to paint another Battle for the City wrought at Thebes;
but when the Revolt began, and the War came on the Thebans kept the Picture
that was then almost finished: this Picture Menaclides persuaded them to
dedicate, and subscribe Charon's Name, designing by that means to obscure the
Glory of Epaminondas and Pelopidas. Now this was an absurd Ambition, to prefer
a single Victory, where only one Gerandias, an obscure Fellow, and 40 more were
slain, before so great and noble Encounters. This Motion Pelopidas opposed, as
Pelopidas generous.
contrary to Law, alleging that it was not the Custom of the Thebans to honor
any single Man, but attribute the Victory to their Country; yet in all the
Contest, he extremely Commended Charon, and showed Menaclides to be a
troublesome and envious Fellow, earnestly asking the Thebans, if they had done
nothing that was excellent: insomuch that Menaclides was severely fined, which
he being not able to pay, endeavored afterward to disturb the Government; and
these things give us some light into Pelopidas his Life. Now when Alexander,
the Pherean Tyrant, made open War against some of the Thessalians, and had
Designs against all, the Cities sent an Embassy to Thebes, to desire Succors
and a General; Peloptdas knowing that Epaminondas was detained Pelopidas
assists the Thessalians against Alexander.
by the Peloponnesian affairs, offered himself to lead the Thessalians, being
unwilling to let his Courage and Skill lie idle, and thinking it unfit that
they should be destitute of a Leader, till Epaminondas could be ready. When he
came into Thessalia with his Army, he presently took Larissa, and endeavored
to reclaim Alexander, who submitted, and bring him from being a Tyrant, to
govern gently, and according to Law; but finding him untractable and brutish,
Pelopidas began to be severe, and used him roughly, insomuch that the Tyrant
stole away privately with his Guard. But Pelopidas leaving the Thessalians
fearless of the Tyrant, and Friends amongst themselves, marched into Macedonia,
for Ptolomy then warred with Alexander, the King of Macedon, and both sent for
him to hear and determine their Differences, and assist him that appeared
injured. When he came, he Settles Macedon.
reconciled them, called back the Exiles, and receiving for Hostages, Philip,
the King's ^rother, and 300 Children of the Nobles, ^e brought them to Thebes,
showing the other Greeks, how much the Thebans had gained by the Reputation of
their Honesty and Courage. This was that Philip, which Of Philip of Macedon.
afterward endeavored to enslave the Gre^ians: then he was a Boy, and lived
with one ^ammenes; and hence some conjecture, that be took Epaminondas his
Actions for the Rule of his own; perhaps indeed he observed his Conduct, and
Excellence in the Art of War, which was but a small portion of that Man's
^^rtue; but of his Temperance, Justice, Ge^^rosity and Mildness, in which he
was ^ruely great, Philip enjoyed no share, either (...) Nature or Imitation.
After this, upon a ^^cond Complaint of the Thessalians against Alexander the
Pherean, as a Disturber of the Cities, Pelopidas was joined with Ismenius,
(...) an Embassy to him; he led no Forces from ^^ebes, not expecting any War,
and therefor was necessitated to make use of the Thessalians in those urgent
Affairs. At the same time also Macedon was in confusion again, for Ptolomy had
murdered the King, and seized the Government: but the King's Friends sent for
Pelopidas, and he being willing to be meddling in the Matter, but having no
Soldiers of his own, listed some Mercenaries in the Country, and with those
marched against Ptolomy. Now when they faced one another, Ptolomy corrupted
these Mercenaries with a sum of Money, and persuaded them to revolt to him; but
yet fearing the very Name and Reputation of Pelopidas, he came to him as his
Superior, submitted, begged his Pardon, and protested that he kept the
Government only for the Brothers of the dead King, and would prove a Friend to
the Friends, and an Enemy to the Enemies of Thebes; and to confirm this, he
gave his Son Philoxenus, and 50 of his Companions for Hostages. These Pelopidas
sent to Thebes; but he himself being vexed at the Treachery of the Mercenaries,
and understanding that most of their Goods, their Wives and Children, lay at
Pharsalus, (so that if he Pelopidas go^s to Pharsalus.
could take them, the Injury would be sufficiently revenged) he got together
some of the Thessalians, and marched to Pharsalus. When he was just entered the
City, Alexander the Tyrant appeared before it with an Army; but Pelopidas and
his Friends thinking that he came to purge himself from those Crimes that were
laid to his charge, went to him, and though they knew very well that he was
profligate and cruel, yet they imagined that the Authority of Thebes, and their
own Dignity and Reputation, would secure them from Violence. But the Tyrant
Pelopidas taken by Alexander.
seeing them come unarmed, and alone, seized them, and made himself Master of
Pharsalus. Upon this, his Subjects were extremely afraid, that after so great
and so bold an Injury, he would spare none, but behave himself toward all, and
in all Matters, as one just despairing of his Life. The Thebans, when they
understood this, were very much enraged, and dispatched an Army, Epaminondas
being then in Disgrace, under the Command of other Leaders. Now when the Tyrant
brought Pelopidas to Phera, at first he permitted those that desired it, to
speak with him, imagining that this Disaster would break his Spirit, and make
him appear contemptible. But when Pelopidas advised the complaining Phereans to
be comsorted, Pelopidas his Bravery in Prison.
as if the Tyrant in a short time would smart for his Injuries, and sent to
tell him, That 'twas absurd, daily to torment and ^^rder his wretched innocent
Subjects, and yet spare him, whom, he well knew, if ever he got his Liberty,
would be bitterly revenged; the Tyrant wondering at his Bravery, replied, And
^hy is Pelopidas in haste to die? And he hearing of it, returned, That thou
might be the sooner ruined, being then more hated by the Gods than now. From
that time he forbad any to discourse him; but Thebe, the Daughter of Jason, and
Wife to Alexander, understanding from the Keepers, the Bravery and generous
Carriage of Pelopidas, had a great desire to see and speak with him. Now when
she came into the Prison, and, as a Woman, could not presently perceive his
Greatness in his Calamity, but guessing by the meanness of his Attire and
Provision, that he was used basely and not befitting a Man of his Reputation,
she wept. Pelopidas at first not knowing who she was, stood amazed; but when he
understood her Quality, he saluted her by her Father's Name, for Jason and he
had been Friends and Familiars; and she saying, I pity your Wife, Sir; he
replied, And I you, that being not in Chains, can endure Alexander. This
touched the Woman, for she already hated Alexander for his Cruelty and
Injustice, for his other Debaucheries, and for abusing her younger Brother to
his Lust; and therefore going often to Pelopidas, and speaking freely of the
Indignities she suffered, she grew more enraged, and more exasperated against
Alexander. The Theban Generals that were sent into Thessaly did nothing, but
being both unskilful and unfortunate, made a dishonorable Retreat, for which
the City fined each of them 10000 Drams, and sent Epaminondas with their
Forces. The Thessalians raised with the Fame of this General, presently began
to stir, and the Tyrants Affairs sank into a very dangerous condition, so great
was the fear that possessed his Captains, and his Friends, so eager the desire
of his Subjects to revolt; so much they rejoiced at Alexanders approaching
Ruin, which they so passionately expected. But Epaminondas being more
solicitous for the Safety of Pelopidas than his own Glory, and fearing that if
things came to Extremity, Alexander would grow desperate, and like a wild
Beast, turn and worry him, did not vigorously prosecute the War: but hovering
still over him with his Army, he so handled the Tyrant, as not to make him
despair, nor exasperate his Fury; for he understood his Savageness, and the
Alexander's Savageness
little Value he had for Right and Just; insomuch that sometimes he buried Men
alive, sometimes he dressed them in Bears and Boars Skins, and then baited them
with Dogs, or shot at them for his Divertisement. At Melibea and Scotusa, two
Cities, his Allies, he called all the Inhabitants to an Assembly, and then
surrounded them, and cut them to pieces with his Guards. He consecrated the
Spear with which he killed his Uncle Polyphron, and crowning it with Garlands,
sacrificed to it as a God, and called it Tychon. And once seeing a Tragaedian
act Euripides his Troades, he went out of the Theater, but sending for the
Actor, bad him not to be concerned at his Departure, but go on with the Play,
for 'twas not in Contempt of him that he departed, but he was ashamed that his
Citizens should see him, who never pitied any Man that he murdered, weep at the
Sufferings of Hecuba and Audromache. This Tyrant, startled at the very Name,
Glory and Appearance of an Expedition under the Conduct of Epaminondas,
presently sent an Embassy to entreat and offer Satisfaction; but Epaminondas
refused to admit such a Man for an Ally to the Thebans, but granted him a Truce
of 30 days, and Pelopidas and Ismenius being delivered, he returned. Now the
Thebans understanding Pelopidas set free.
that the Spartans and Athenians had sent an Embassy to the Persian for
Assistance, they likewise sent Pelopidas; an excellent Design Pelopdas goes
Ambassador to Persia.
to increase his Glory, no Man of so great Fame and Reputation, having ever
before entered the Dominions of the King: for the Glory that he won against the
Spartans, did not creep slowly or obscurely, but after the Fame of the first
Battle at Leuctra was gone abroad, the Report of some new Victories continually
following, exceedingly increased and far and near spread his Reputation* When
he came to the Nobles and Captains that waited at the King's Palace, he was the
Object of their Wonder and Discourse; This is the Man, said they, who has
beaten the Lacedaemonians from their Principality of Sea and Land, and confined
Sparta within Geta and Eurotas, which but a little before, under the Conduct of
Agesilaus fought the great King about Susa and Ecbatana. This pleased
Artaxerxes, and he increased Pelopidas his Reputation and Honors, being
desirous to seem reverenced, and sought to by the greatest. But when he saw
him, and heard his Discourse, more solid than the Arthenians, and not so
haughty as the Spartans, his Love was heightened, and truly acting like a King,
he concealed Is honored by Artaxerxes.
not the Respect that he had for him: and this the other Ambassadors perceived,
tho'he seemed to have done Antaclidas, the Spartan, the greatest Honor, by
sending him that Garland dipped in Ointment, which he himself had worn at an
Entertainment. Indeed he did not deal so wantonly with Pelopidas, but according
to the Custom, gave him the most splendid and considerable Presents, and
granted him his Desires; that the Grecians should be free; Messena inhabited;
and the Thebans accounted the King's ancient Friends: with these Answers, but
not accepting one of the Presents, except what was a Pledge of Kindness and
Goodwill, he returned. This Behavior of Pelopidas ruined the other
Ambassadors: The Athenians condemned and executed their Timagoras, and indeed
if they did it for receiving so many Presents from the King, their Sentence was
just and good; for he not only took Gold and Silver, but a rich Bed, and Slaves
to make it, as if the Greeks were unskilful in that Art; besides 80 Kine and
Herdsmen, as if he needed Cows Milk for some Distemper; and lastly, he was
carried in a Chair to the Seaside, and 4 Talents given to the Chairmen by the
King. But the Athenians were not so much concerned at his greediness for the
Presents, (for one Epicrates a Scullion, did not only confess to the People,
that he had received Gifts from the King* but made a Motion, that instead of 9
Governors, they should yearly choose nine poor Citizens to be sent Ambassadors
to the King, and enriched by his Presents, and the People only laughed at the
Motion) but were vexed that the Thebans obtained their Desires, never
considering, that Pelopidas his Fame was more powerful than all their
Rhetorical Discourse, with a Man who still inclined to the most victorious; and
this Embassy having obtained the Restitution of Messena, and the Freedom of the
other Greeks, got Pelopidas a great deal of Love at his Return. At this time
Alexander Pelopidas goes against Alexander
the Pherean falling back to his old Nature and having seized many of the
Thessalians and put Garrisons upon the Pthiotae, Achaian and Magnesians, the
Cities hearing that Pelopidas was returned, sent an Embassy to Thebes,
requesting Succors, and him for their Leader. The Thebans willingly granted
their desire; and now when all things were prepared, and the General beginning
to march, the Sun was eclipsed, and darkness spread over the City at Noonday.
Now when Pelopidas saw them startled at the Prodigy, he did not think it fit to
force them on who were afraid, and out of heart, nor to hazard 7000 of his
Citizens; and therefore only with 300 Horse Volunteers, he set forward to
Thessaly, much against the will of the Augurs and his Citizens, who all
imagined this considerable Accident to portend somewhat to this great Man. But
he was fierce against Alexander for the Injuries he received, and hoped
likewise by the Discourse which formerly he had with Thebe, that his Family by
this time was divided, and out of order. But the Glory of the Expedition
chiefly excited him; for he was extremely desirous at this time, when the
Lacedaemonians assisted Dionysius, the Sicilian Tyrant, and the Athenians took
Alexander's Pay, and honored him with a brazen Statue as a Benefactor, to show
the other Greeks, that the Thebans alone undertook their Cause, who were
oppressed by Tyrants, and destroyed* the violent and Illegal Forms of
Government in Greece. When Pelopidas was come to Pharsalus, he formed an Army,
and presently marched against Alexander; and Alexander understanding that
Pelopidas had few Thebans with him, and that his Inafntry was double the number
of the Thessalians, faced him at Thetidium: and when one told Pelopidas, The
Tyrant meets us with a great Army; So much the better, he replied, for then we
shall overcome the more. Between the two Armies lay some steep high Hills about
Cynocephale, which both Parties endeavored to take by their Footmen. Pelopidas
commanded his Horse, which were good and many, to charge The Battle.
the Enemies, and those they routed, and pursued through the Plain. But
Alexander took the Hills, and charging the Thessalian Footmen that came up
later, and strove to climb the steep and craggy Ascent, killed the foremost,
and the others much distressed, could do the Enemies no harm. Pelopidas
observing this, sounded a Retreat to his Horse, and gave Orders, that they
should charge the Enemies that kept their ground; and he himself taking a
Shield in his hand, quickly joined those that fought about the Hills, and
advancing to the Front, filled his Men with such Courage and Alacrity, that the
Enemies imagined they came with other Spirits and other Bodies to the Onset.
They stood 2 or 3 Charges, but finding they came on briskly, and the Horse
returning from the pursuit, they gave ground, and retreated in order. But
Pelopidas perceiving from a rising ground, that the Enemies Army was not yet
routed, though full of Disorder and Confusion, he stood, and looked about for
Alexander; and when he saw him in the right wing, encouraging and ordering his
Mercenaries, he could not moderate his Anger, but inflamed at the sight, and
blindly and heedlesly following his Passion, he advanced far before his
Soldiers, crying out, and challenging the Tyrant: he did not dare to receive
him, but retreating, hid himself amongst his Guard. The foremost of the
Mercenaries that came hand to hand, were cut down by Pelopidas, and many
killed, but many at a distance shot through his Ar^our and wounded him, till
the Thessalians deeply concerned at the Matter, ran down from the Hill to his
Relief. Now when he was slain, the Horse came up, and routed the Phalanx,
Pelopidas slain.
and following the pursuit a great way, filled the whole Country with the
slain, which were above 3000. It Is no wonder, that the Thebans then present,
were very much grieved for the Death of Pelopidas, calling him their Father,
Deliverer, and Instructor, in all that was good and commendable. But the
Thessalians and the Allies, exceeding by their public Edicts, all the just
Honors that could be given to Courage, by their Concernment gave more certain
demonstrations of the Kindness they had for him; for it is reported, that none
of the Soldiers when they heard of his Death, would put off their Armor,
unbridle their Horses, or dress their Wounds, but still hot and with their Arms
on, ran to his Carcass, as if he had been yet alive; they heaped up Spoils
about his Body, cut off their Horses Mains, and their own Hair, and many
kindled no Fire in their Tents, took no Supper, and Silence and Sadness was
spread over all the Army, as if they had not gotten the greatest and most
victorious Victory, but were overcome by the Tyrant, and enslaved. As soon as
this was noised about the Cities, the Magistrates, Youth, Children, and Priests
came out to meet the Body, and brought Trophies, Crowns, and Suits of golden
Armor: and when he was to be int^^r'd, the Elders of the Thessalians came and
begged the Thebans, that they might give the Funeral; and one of them said,
Friends, we ask a favor of you, that will prove both an Honor and Comfort to
us in this our great Misfortune; for the Thessalians shall never again wait on
the living Pelopidas, never give Honors, of which he can be sensible, but if
we may have his Body, adorn his Funeral, and interr him, we shall certainly
show th at we esteem his Death a greater loss to the Thessalians than the
Thebans: you have lost only an expert General, we a General and our Liberty,
for how shall we desire from you another Captain, since we cannot restore
Pelopidas? The Thebans granted their Request, and there was never a more
splendid Funeral in their opinion, who do not think the Glory of such
Solemnities consists only in Gold, Ivory and Purple; as Phili^^us, who
extravagantly celebrates the Funeral of Dionysius, where his Tyranny concluded
like the pompous Exit of some great Tragedy. Alexander, at the Death of
Hephesti^^, did not only cut off the Mains of his Horses and his Mules, but
took down the Battlements from the City-Walls, that even the Towns might seem
Mourners, and instead of their former beauteous Appearance, look bald at his
Funeral. But these things being commanded and forced from the Mourners,
attended with the Envy of those that enjoyed them, and hatred of those that
compelled them, were no Testimonies of Love and Honor, but of the barbarous
Pride, Luxury, and Insolence of those, who lavished their Wealth in these vain
and inimitable Fancies. But that a Man of common Rank, dying in a strange
Country, neither his Wife, Children, nor Kinsmen present, none either desiring
or compelling it, should be attended, buried, and crowned by so many Cities,
that strove to exceed one another in the Demonstrations of their Love, seems to
be the height of Happiness: for (as Aesop observes) the Death of the happy Men
is not the most grievous, but most blessed, since it secures their Felicity,
and puts it out of Fortunes Power. And that Spartan advised well, who embracing
Diagoras, who had himself been crowned in the Olympian Games, and saw his Sons
and Grandchildren Victors, said, Dye Diagoras, for thou can not be a God: and
yet who would compare all the Victories in the Pythian and Olympian Games with
one of those Enterprises of Pelopidas, of which he successfully performed many,
and having spent his Life in brave and glorious Actions; he died fighting for
the Liberty of the Thessalians? His Death, as it brought Grief, so likewise
Profit to the Allies; for the Thebans as soon as they heard of his fall,
delayed not their Revenge, but presently sent 7000 Foot, and 700 Horse, under
the Command of Malcitus and Diogiton: and they finding Alexander weak, and
without Forces* compelled him to restore the Cities he had taken; to draw his
Garrisons from the Magnesians, Pthiotae, and Achaians, and swear to assist the
Thebans against whatsoever Enemies they should require. This contented the
Thebans, but Punishment followed the Tyrant for his wickedness, and the Death
of Pelopidas was revenged in Alexander 's death
this manner: Pelopidas (as I have already mentioned) taught his Wife Thebe,
not to be afraid of the outward Bravery and Guard of the Tyrant, since she was
within his Arms, and Slaves. Now she feared his Inconstancy, and hated his
Cruelty, and therefore conspiring with her three Brothers, Tisiphonus,
Patholaus, and Lychophron, dispatched him in this manner: All the other
Apartments were full of the Tyrants Night-Guards, but their Bedchamber was an
upper Room, and before the Door lay a chained Dog to guard it, which would fly
at all but the Tyrant, and his Wife, and one Servant that fed him: now when
Thebe had a mind to kill him, she hid her Brothers all day in a Room hard by,
and she going in alone, according to her usual custom, to Alexander, that was
asleep already, in a little time came out again, and commanded the Servant to
lead away the Dog, for the Tyrant would take some rest; she covered the Stairs
with Wool, that the young Men might make no noise as they came up; and then
bringing up her Brothers, and leaving them at the Chamber Door, she went in,
and brought away the Tyrants Sword that hung over his head, and showed it them,
for a confirmation that he was fast asleep: now the young Men appearing
fearful, and unwilling to do the Murder, she chid them, and angrily swore she
would wake Alexander, and discover the Conspiracy; so with a Candle in her
Hand, she conducted them in, being both ashamed and afraid, and brought them to
the Bed, one of them caught him by the Feet, the other pulled him backward by
the Hair, and the third ran him through. The Death was more speedy than was
fit, but in that he was the first Tyrant that was killed by the contrivance of
his Wife, and his Carcass abused, thrown out, and trodden under foot by the
Phereans, he seems to have suffered what his Villainies deserved.

Marcellus.

THE LIFE OF M. MARCELLUS.
Englished from the Original, by Walter Charleton, Dr. of Physic, and Fellow
of the Royal College of Physicians, London.
Volume II.
THey say, that MARCUS CLAUDIUS, who was five times Consul of the Romans, was
the Son of Marcus: and that he was the First of his Family called MARCELLUS,
that is, Martial, Posidonius affirms. For he was by long experience skilful in
the art of War, of a strong body, valiant of his hands, and by natural
inclination addicted to War. This great fierceness therefore, and heat he
brought with him to battles: in other things modest, obliging, and so far
studious of Greek and Learning Discipline, as to honor and admire those that
were therein excellent; but he attained not to a proficiency in them equal to
his desire, by reason of his employments. For if God ever destined any other
men, as Homer says, To be from their first years to their last day, Viers'd in
fierce War; he certainly destined the Roman Princes of that time. Who in their
youth had War with the Carthaginians, in their middle age in Sicily, with the
Gauls in the defense of Italy it self; at last, being now grown old, strugled
again with Hannibal and the Carthaginians, and wanted in their old age, what is
granted to the Vulgar, vacation from the toils of War; because they were
according to their Nobility and Virtue, advanced to the management of Wars, and
to Empire: And Marcellus, ignorant or unskilful of no kind of fighting,
contending in single Combat upon a Challenge, overcame himself. Wherefore by
whomsoever he was challenged, he declined not the provocation, and killed all
by whom he was challenged. His Brother Oracilius circumvented in Sicily, he
protected and saved, and slew the Enemies that pressed him; for which facts he
was by the Generals, while he was yet but young, presented with Crowns and
other honorable Rewards. But when his Virtue more and more shined forth, the
people created him Aedilis Curulis; and the Highpriests, Augur (which is that
Priesthood to which chiefly the Law assigns the procuration and observation of
Auguries) In his Aedility, by a certain mischance he was brought to a necessity
of commencing a Suit, and bringing an impeachment into the Senate. He had a Son
named Marcus, both of excellent beauty in the flower of his Age, and of such
sweet manners, and rare Erudition, that the Citizens admired him. This Youth,
one Capitolinus, a lascivious and audacious man, Marcellus his Colleague,
vehemently loved, and attempted. Whose temptation the Lad at first by himself
rejected: but when the other again solicited him, he discovered the thing to
his Father. Marcellus highly offended with the indignity, accuses the man in
the Senate. Who having appealed to the Tribunes of the people, endeavored by
various shifts, and various exceptions to elude the impeachment: and the
Tribunes not receiving the appeal, by flat denial rejected the charge. But
because there was no witness of the fact, Capitolinus having attempted the
Youth privately and alone; therefore the Senate thought fit to call the Youth
himself before them. Whose blushing, and tears, and bashfulness mixed with
highest indignation, when the Fathers observed, seeking no farther evidence of
the Crime, they condemn Capitolinus, and set a fine upon him according to the
estimation of the injury; of the money of which mulct, Marcellus caused to be
made a Silver Table, (...), mensam argentariam reddit interpres Latinus, verum
rectius reddi potest, in usum eorum qui nummorum commutationem exercent in
foro. Nam (...) retributionem, permutationem, commercium, and poenae
responsionem indicat.
which he dedicated to the Gods. But after the end of the first Punic War, that
lasted one and twenty years, the Seeds of the Gallic tumults sprang up, and
began again to trouble Rome. The Iberes, a people inhabiting the Subalpine
region of Italy, strong in their own forces, raised out of the rest of the
Gauls aids of mercenary Soldiers, which are called Goesatoe [from the heavy
Darts or Javelins used by them in Fights.] And it was a miracle, and the good
fortune of Rome, that the Gallic War was not coincident with the Punic, but
that they had with fidelity stood quiet as Spectators, while the Punic war
continued, that they might with their whole power set upon the Conqueror; and
deferred their invasion till the Romans were at leisure to resist them. Yet the
Neighborhood and ancient renown of the Gauls struck no little fear into the
minds of the Romans, who were about to undertake a War so near home and upon
their own borders. For that they feared more than any other Nation the Gauls,
because they had once taken their City, is apparent. From which time it was by
a special Law provided, that the High Priest should enjoy an exemption from all
military Offices, except only in Gallic insurrections.

The great preparations made by the Romans for War (for it is not reported that
the people of Rome ever had at one time so many Legions in Arms, either before
or since) and their extraordinary Sacrifices, were plain arguments of their
fear at that time. For though they were most averse from the Institutions and
Rites of barbarous and cruel Nations, and above all had with the Grecians pious
and reverent Sentiments of the Gods; yet when this year was coming upon them,
they then, from some Prophesies in the Sibyls Books, put alive under ground a
pair of Greeks, one male, the other female; and likewise two Gauls, one of each
Sex, in the Market called the Beast-market: continuing even to this day the
same secret and abominable Sacrifices of Greeks and Gauls, in the month of
November. In the beginning of this War, when the Romans sometimes obtained
remarkable Victories, sometimes were shamefully beaten; nothing was done toward
the final determination of the Contest, until C. Quintius Flaminius, and P.
Furius Philo being Consuls, brought mighty forces against the Insubres, a
people of Gallia on the farther side of the River Po. Then they saw the River
that runs through the Country of Picenum, flowing with blood. There was a
report, that three Moons had been seen at once at Ariminum. And in the Consular
Assembly, the Augurs declared, that the Consuls had been unduly created. The
Senate therefore immediately sent Letters to the Camp, recalling the Consuls to
Rome with all possible speed; and commanding them to desist from acting farther
against the Enemies, and to abdicate themselves from the Consulship on the
first opportunity. These Letters being brought to Flaminius, he deferred to open
them till having defeated and put to flight the Enemies forces, he wasted and
ravaged their borders: Wherefore the people went not forth to meet him
returning with huge spoils; nay, because he had not instantly obeyed the
command in the Letters, by which he was recalled, but slighted and contemned
them, they wanted not much of denying him the honor of a Triumph. Nor was the
Triumph sooner passed, than they deposed him with his Colleague from the
Magistracy, and reduced them to the state of private Citizens. So much did all
things at Rome depend upon Religion. Though the course of their Affairs were
smooth and prosperous, yet if their Enterprises met not with successes happy
enough to answer their wishes; presently they gave out, that the Auspices and
ancient Rites were neglected; thinking it to be of more importance to the
Public Safety, if the Magistrates reverenced the Gods, than if they overcame
their Enemies. And so Tiberius Sempronius, whom for his probity and Virtue the
Citizens highly esteemed, created Scipio Nafica and Caius Martius Consuls,
successors [to those that had been exauctorated.] When these were gone into
their Provinces, he lighted upon books concerning the Religion of the people,
where he found somewhat he had not known before; which was this. When the
Consul made his solemn Auspice, he sat without the City in a house, or
Tabernacle hired for that occasion: but if it happened that he, for any emergent
cause, returned into the City having not yet seen any certain signs; he was
obliged to leave that first Tabernacle, and to seek another, out of which he
might survey the Heaven round about, and finish his Contemplation. This having
(as I conceive) deceived Tiberius, who twice used one and the same Tabernacle;
he renounced or protested against the Consuls, [as not legitimately and with
due Ceremonies elected.] And afterward understanding his error, he referred
the matter to the Senate: nor did the Senate neglect this minute fault, but
soon wrote expressly of it to Scipio Nasica and C. Martius; who leaving their
Provinces, and without delay returning to Rome, laid down their Magistracy. But
these things followed afterward. At the same time the Priesthood was taken away
from two men of very great honor, Cornelius Cethegus and Q. Sulpitius: from
the former, because he had not rightly held forth the entrails of a Beast slain
for Sacrifice; from the latter, because while he was immolating, the little
woollen tuft, which the Flamens wear on the top of their Cap, had fallen from his
head. Minutius the Dictator, who had named C. Flaminius Master of the Horse,
they deposed from his Command, because the noise of a gnawing Rat was heard:
and they put others into their places. And yet notwithstanding, by observing so
anxiously these punctillios and little niceties, they stumbled not upon any
Superstition, because they neither varied nor exceeded the Institutes of their
Ancestors. So soon as Flaminius with his Colleague had resigned up the
Consulate, M. Marcellus is by the Regents or Viceroys during the interregnum or
vacancy, declared Consul; who entering into the Magistracy, chose Cn. Cornelius
his Colleague. There was a report that the Gauls endeavoring a pacification,
and the Senate also inclining to peace, yet still Marcellus inflamed the people
to War. But notwithstanding a Peace was agreed upon, which the Gesatae are said
to have broken: who to the number of thirty thousand passing the Alps, stirred
up the Insu^^es, and conjoined themselves with them; of whom there were far
more Legions, and proud of their strength, they marched directly to Acerrae, a
City seated on the bank of the River Po. From thence Viridomarus, (...).
King of the Gesatae, taking with him ten thousand Soldiers, harassed the
Country round about. Of which the news being brought to Marcellus, leaving his
Colleague at Acerrae with the foot, and all the heavy Arms, with a third part of
the Horse, and carrying with him the rest of the Horse, and six hundred light
armed Foot, marching night and day without remission, he staid not till he came
up to the Enemy near to a Village of Gallia, called Clastidium (...).
, which not long before had been subjected to the Roman jurisdiction. Nor had
he time to refresh his Soldiers, or to give them rest. For the Barbarians that
were then present, immediately seeing his approach, contemned him, because he
had very few foot with him. And the Gallic Horse being singularly skillful in
Horsmanship, and therefore thought to be therein excellent; and at present in
number also exceeding Marcellus, made no account of him. Instantly therefore
they rush upon him, as if they would trample him under their Horses feet,
threatening all kind of cruelties. Before their Ensigns rode the King. But
Marcellus because his Men were few, that they might not be encompassed and
charged on all sides by the Enemy, extended his wings of Horse, and riding
about, made thinner and drew forth in length his wings of Foot, till he came
near to the Enemy. Then, while he directed his Vanguard to charge the Enemy,
his Horse, frighted by their yelling and shouts, gave back, and by force
carried Marcellus aside. He fearing lest this accident, converted into an Omen,
might discourage his Soldiers; quickly turning his Horse to the left, again
confronted the Enemy, and adored the Sun, as if he had wheeled about his Horse,
not by chance, but out of Devotion. For it was customary to the Romans, when
they adored the Gods, to turn themselves round in a circle. When they came up
now to charge, it is reported he vowed the best of the Enemies Arms to Jupiter
Feretrius or the Helper. Then the King of the Gauls beholding Marcellus, and
from the signs or badges of his Authority, conjecturing him to be the General,
advanced far before his embattled Army, and with a loud voice challenged him,
and brandishing his Lance, fiercely ran with a full carreer at him; exceeding
the rest of the Gauls in stature, and by reason of his Armor, that was adorned
with gold and silver, and painted with various colors, shining like lightning.
These Arms seeming to Marcellus, while he viewed the Enemies Army drawn up in
Battalia, to be the best and fairest, and he thinking them to be those he had
vowed to Jupiter; instantly ran upon the King, and pierced through his
Breast*plate with his Lance; then pressing upon him with the weight of his
Horse, threw him to the ground, and with two or three strokes more slew him.
Immediately he leaped from his Horse, laid his hand upon the dead Kings Arms,
and looking up toward Heaven, thus spoke: O Jupiter Feretrius, Arbiter of the
remarkable Exploits of Captains, and of the acts of Emperors in War and
Battles, thou being witness, I a General have slain a General, I a Consul have
slain a King with my own hand: to thee I consecrate these first and most
excellent of the Spoils. Give thou to us now proceeding to dispatch the
relics of the War, the same course of Fortune. Then the Roman Horse joining
Battle not only with the Enemies Horse, but also with the Battalion of Foot
charging upon them; obtained a singular, and even now a new and stupendous
Victory. For never before or since have so few Horse and Foot defeated so
numerous forces; at least no such achievement is recorded in History. The
Enemies being to a great number slain, and the Spoils collected, he returns to
his Colleague: who managing the War against the Enemies at the greatest and most
populous City of Gallia (they call it Millan) had ill success. This City the
Gauls on this side the Alps have for their Head City. Wherefore fighting
valiantly in defense of it, they were not so much besieged by Cornelius, as
they besieged him. But Marcellus returned and the Gaesatae, so soon as they
were certified of the death of the King, and the defeat of his Army, retiring;
Milan is taken. The rest of their Towns, and all they had, the Gauls deliver up
of their own accord to the Romans, Peace upon conditions equitable enough was
granted to the Gauls. Marcellus alone by a decree of the Senate triumphed. The
triumph was in magificence, opulency, spoils, and the gigantic Bodies of the
Captives, exceeding noble and memorable. But the most grateful and most rare
Spectacle of all was the General himself, who carried the Arms of the barbarous
King to the God [to whom he had vowed them.] Of a tall and straight stock of an
Oak lop'd off, he had prepared a bearer shaped like a Trophy. Upon this he
bound, and hung round about the Arms of the King, fitly and decently ^ying on
every piece of them. The pomp advancing solemnly before, he carrying this
Trophy ascends the Chariot; and being himself the fairest and most graceful
triumphant Image, was carried into the City. The Army adorned with shining
Armor followed in order, and with Verses on that occasion composed, and with
songs of Victory, celebrated the praises of Jupiter and of their General. Then
entering the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, he dedicated his gift: the third, and
to our memory the last that ever did so. The first, Romulus, who having slain
Acron King of the Coeninenses, brought home and dedicated rich spoils: the
second, Cornelius Cossus, from Voluminous the Hetruscan: after them Marcellus,
from Viridomarus King of the Gauls; after Marcellus, no man. The God to whom
they are consecrated, is called Jupiter Feretrius, from the Trophy carried on
feretrum, [a bearer, on which spoils were carried in triumph] the name being
deduced from the Greek Language, which at that time was every where confused
with the Latin. Others affirm that this Surname of Jupiter fulminans is derived
a feriendo, from striking; because Lightning strikes, and to strike, is in the
Roman Language ^erire. Others there are, who would have this name to be deduced
from the strokes that are given in fight; for now also in all conflicts when
they press upon their Enemies, they mutually encourage each other to strike.
These Spoils are properly called Opima, i. e. magnify and ample; though in
their Commentaries they say, that Numa Pompilius made mention of first, second,
and third opime Spoils; and that he prescribes, that the first taken be
consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, the second to Mars, the third to Quirinus; as
also that the reward of the first be three hundred asses or half-pennies; of
the second, two hundred: of the third, one hundred: but fame has obtained,
that those Spoils only are honorable, which the General first takes in Battle,
and takes from the Enemies chief Captain whom he has slain with his own hand.
But of these things enough.

This Victory and the ending of the War was so highly grateful to the people of
Rome, that they sent to Apollo of Delphos, in testimony of their gratitude, a
Present, a golden Cup of an hundred pound weight; and gave a great part of the
prey to their associate Cities, and took care that many Presents should be
carried also to Hiero King of the Syracusans their Friendand Allie. But at what
time Hannibal made an irruption into Italy, Marcellus was dispatched with a
Fleet into Sicily. Soon after, the Roman Army having suffered that sad defeat
in the Battle of Cannae, in which many thousands of them perished, when few had
saved themselves by flying to Cannusium, and all feared lest Hannibal, who had
destroyed the strength of the Roman Army, should straight post with his
Victorious Troops to Rome: Marcellus first sent for a guard of the City 1500
Soldiers, which were designed for the Fleet. Then by decree of the Senate
going to Cannusium, having heard that many of the Soldiers had come together
in that place, he brought them out of the Fortifications to prevent the Enemies
ravaging and depopulation of the Country. And the Princes and chief Noblemen
of Rome had most of them fallen in Battles. But the Citizens complained, that
the anxious care of Fabius Maximus, (who for his Faith and Prudence was of
greatest authority) in bewaring lest the Commonwealth might sustain any
detriment, (...) too slow for the management of Affairs, and full of fear. They
thought him indeed ^t, and confided in him for providing for the^ safety: yet
they held him not to be a Captain brisk and daring enough to repel the Enemy.
Wherefore converting their though^ upon Marcellus, and tempering and
compounding his boldness, confidence, an^ promptitude with Fabius's caution and
providence; they sent one while both wit^ Consular command, otherwhile one as
Consul, the other as Proconsul, against the Enemy. Posidonius writes, that
Fabius wa^ called the Buckler, Marcellus the Sword o^ Rome. Certainly Hannibal
himself confessed that he feared Fabius as a Schoolmaster, Marcellus as an
Adversary: the former, lest he should be hindered from doing mischief; the
latter, lest he should receive harm* And when among Hannibal's Soldiers, proud
of their late Victory, licentiousness and cruelty was grown to a great height;
Marcellus setting upon them dispersed without their Camp, and laden with prey
and plunder gotten in the Country, cut them off, and by little and little
diminished his Forces* Hence bringing aid to the Neapolitans and Nolans; he
confirmed the minds of the former, of their own accord faithful enough to the
Romans. But entering Nola, he there found discord: the Senate not being able ^o
rule and keep in the common people, ^ho were generally favorers of Hannibal.
There was in the Town one Bantius (...).
, a man renowned for Nobility and Virtue. This man, after he had fought most
fiercely at Cannae, killed many of the Enemies, and at last lying in a heap of
dead bodies, covered with Darts, being found and brought ^o Hannibal; Hannibal
so honored him, that he not only dismissed him without ran^om, but also
contracted an entire friend^hip with him, and became his guest. In gratitude
for this great favor, he became ^ne of those that drew all things to
Han^ibal's interest, and being powerful in Ri^hes, solicited the people to
Sedition. Mar^ellus could not be induced to put this man to death, a man so
eminent, and who had passed so great dangers in fighting on the Romans side:
but knowing that himself was able, not only by singular humanity, ^ut also by
gentle and winning Speech to ^eeten and endear men, and to gain upon even a
proud mind; when Bantius came ^ne day to salute him, he asked him who ^e was;
not that he knew him not be^^re, but seeking an entrance and occasion ^f
conference. When Bantius had told who he ^as, Marcellus seeming surpised with
joy and wonder, replied; art thou that Bantius whom the Romans commend above
the rest that fought at Cannae, and praise as the person that did not only not
forsake the Consul Paulus Aemilius, but receive in his own body many Darts
thrown at him? Bantius owning himself to be that very man, and showing his
Scars: why then, says Marcellus, did not thou, having so great marks of thy
good affection toward us, come to me at my first arrival here? Do thou think
that we are unwilling to requite with favor those who have well deserved, and
who are honored even by our Enemies? Besides this obliging courtesy of
Speech, embracing the young Gentleman, he gave him an excellent Horse, and five
hundred Bigates [that is, pieces of money stamped with a Chariot drawn by two
Horses.] From that time Bantius became a most faithful Assistant and Allie of
Marcellus, and a most sharp Discoverer and Delator of those that attempted
Innovation and Sedition. These were many, and had entered into a Conspiracy to
plunder the Wagons and other Carriages of the Romans when they should make an
eruption against the Enemy. Wherefore Marcellus, having marshaled his Army
within the City, placed the baggage near to the Gates, and by an Edict forbad
the Nolans to go to the Walls. Without the City no Arms appeared, by which
prudent device he allured Hannibal to move with his Army in some disorder, to
the City, thinking that there all things were full of tumult. Then Marcellus,
the next Gate being, as he had commanded, thrown open, issuing forth with the
flower of his Horse in front, fights with the Enemy. By and by the Foot
sallying out of another Gate, with a loud shout ran up to them. And while
Hannibal opposes to these part of his forces, the third Gate also is opened,
out of which the rest break forth, and on all quarters charge the Enemies
surprised with fear at this unexpected encounter, nor strongly enough resisting
those with whom they had been first engaged, because of their attack by others
that sallied later. Here it was that Hannibal's Soldiers with huge
consternation and many wounds beaten back even to their Camp, first turned
their backs to the Romans pursuing them. There fell in this Action, as it is
related, of them more than five thousand; of the Romans, not above five
hundred. Livy affirms, that neither the Victory, nor the slaughter of the
Enemies, was so great: but certain it is, that the adventure brought great
glory to Marcellus, and to the Romans mighty confidence after their Calamities;
because they now conceived a strong hope, that the Enemy with whom they
contended, was not invincible, but obmoxious to Defeats. Therefore, the other
Consul being deceased, the people recall absent Marcellus, that they might put
him into his place, and in spite of the Magistrates obtained, that the
Consular Assembly should be prorogued till his arrival; and that he was by all
the Suffrages created Consul. But because it happened to thunder, the Augurs
muttering that he was not legitimately created, and yet not daring, for fear of
the people, to declare this their Sentence openly; Marcellus voluntarily
resigned the Consulate, but declined not the Sovereign Command of the Army. So
being created Proconsul, and returning to the Camp at Nola; he with fire and
Sword wasted the fields of those that followed the Party of the Carthaginian.
Who coming with speed to succor them, Marcellus, though provoked by Hannibal,
declined fighting a set Battle with him. But when Hannibal had sent forth a
Party to plunder, and now expected no Fight; Marcellus brake forth upon him
with his incensed Army. He had distributed to the Foot long Lances, such as are
commonly used in Naval fights; and instructed them to throw them with great
force at convenient distance against the Enemies unexperienced in that way of
Darting, and used to Fight with short Darts. Which seems to have been the cause
why in that conflict the Carthaginians, as many as were engaged, turned their
backs, and shamefully fled. There fell of them five thousand. Of Elephants four
were killed, two taken. But what was of greatest moment, on the third day after
more than three hundred Horse, Spaniards and Numidians mixed, fled over to him,
a disaster that had never to that Day happened to Hannibal, who had long kept
together in highest Concord a fierce Army gathered out of the sink and dregs of
dissonant and disagreeing Nations. Marcellus and his Successors in all this War
made good use of the faithful service of these Horsemen. Now he a third time
created Consul sailed over into Sicily. For the success of Hannibal had excited
the Carthaginians to lay claim to that whole Island; chiefly because after the
murder of the Tyrant Hieronymus, all things had been in tumult and confusion
at Syracuse. For which reason the Romans also had sent before to that City some
Legions under the conduct of Appius, Praetor. While Marcellus was receiving
that Army, the Roman Soldiers in great numbers cast themselves at his feet,
upon occasion of this calamity. Of those that survived the Battle at Cannae,
some had escaped by flight, some were taken alive by the Enemy, in so great a
multitude, that it was thought there were not remaining Romans enough to defend
the walls of the City. And yet the magnanimity and constancy of the City was so
great, that it would not redeem the Captives from Hannibal, though it might
have done so for little ransom; nay by a decree of the Senate denied it, and
chose rather to leave them to be killed by the Enemy, or sold out of Italy: and
commanded that all who had saved themselves by flight, should be transported
into Sicily, nor permitted to return into Italy, until the War with Hannibal
should be ended. These therefore, when Marcellus was arrived in Sicily,
addressed to him in great numbers: and casting themselves at his feet, with
much lamentation and tears humbly besought him to admit them into the
honorable Order of Soldiers, and promised to make it appear by their future
fidelity and services, that that defeat had been received rather by some
misfortune than by any cowardice of theirs. Marcellus pitying them, petitioned
the Senate by Letters, that he might have leave at all times to recruit his
Legions out of them. But after much debate about the thing, the Senate Decree^,
They were of opinion, that the Commonwealth ought not to be committed to
Cowardly Soldiers: if Marcellus perhaps thought otherwise, he might make ufe
o^ them; provided no one of them be by the General honored with a Crown or
military Gift, as a reward of his Virtue or Courage. This Decree pinched
Marcellus, who being returned to Rome, after the Sicilian War was ended,
smartly upbraided the Senate, that they had denied to him, who had so highly
deserved of the Republic, Liberty to relieve so great a number of Citizens in
great calamity. About the same time Marcellus first incensed by injuries done
him by Hippocrates Praetor of Syracuse (who to give proof of his good affection
to the Carthaginians, and to acquire the Tyranny to himself, had made a great
slaughter of the Romans upon the borders of the Leontins) besieged and by force
took the City of the Leontins: yet violated none of the Townsmen. Only
Deserters, as many as he took, underwent the punishment of the Rods and Ax. But
Hippocrates, first sending a report to Syracuse, that Marcellus had put all the
young men to the Sword; and then coming upon the Syracusans risen up into a
tumult upon that false Report, surpised the City. Hereupon Marcellus moved
with his whole Army to Syracuse, and encamping near the Wall, sent Ambassadors
into the City to relate to the Syracusans the truth of what had been done in
Leontium. When these could not prevail by Treaty, the Syracusans being now no
longer at their own will and pleasure, because the whole power was in the hands
of Hippocrates; the City began to be oppugned both by Land and by Sea. All the
Foot, Appius brought up. Marcellus with LX. Galleys each with five Oars in a
Seat, furnished with all sorts of Arms and Weapons to be thrown, and a huge
Bridge of Planks laid upon eight Ships chained together, upon which he carried
the Engine to cast stones and Darts, assaulted the Walls: animated with
confidence by the abundance and magnificence of his preparations, and by his
own glory. All which were easily eluded by Archimedes and his Machines. Of
these he had designed and contrived none as worth the pains and cost, but to
divert and sport himself in the exercise of his skill in Geometry. A good while
before King Hiero had courted and induced Archimedes to put into practice some
part of his admirable speculations in this Art, to show some example of the
power of it, and to exhibit to the sense an experiment accommodated to use. For
Eudoxus and Archytas had first begun to set on foot this celebrated and admired
Machinal Science, by this elegancy illustrating Geometry and Propositions by
demonstration, that may be explicated by reason and clear evidence; and
confirming the more remote by examples of Organs or Instruments objected to
Sense. As both of them brought to light that abstruce and by demonstration
inexplicable Proposition of two middle lines (an Element necessary to delineate
many things) by contriving Instruments, by certain intermediate lines
deflecting from Curve Lines and Sections. But as Plato being offended sharply
inveighed against these eminent Geometricians, saying, that they corrupted and
destroyed the good of Geometry, which leaving those things that are free from
body, and consist only in notion of the mind, was now converted to things
obnoxious to sense, and forced to reassume bodies, where much of odious and
sordid idleness would be required: So the Mechanics or Art of making Engines
came to be rejected and separated from Geometry, and being despised by
Philosophers, lay long hid among Arts military. But Archimedes wrote to King
Hiero, whose near kinsman and friend he was, that by little force any weight
how great soever might be moved. He boasted also, relying on the strength of
Demonstration, that if there were another Earth, he going into it would remove
this out of its place. Hiero struck with amazement at this, and entreating him
to make good this Problem by some effect, and show some great weight to be
moved by a small Engine: he fixed upon a Ship of burden bought out of the
Kings Arcenal, which could not be drawn out of the Dock without mighty labor
and many men; and loading her with many Passengers and a full freight, sitting
himself the while far off, with no great endeavor, but only holding the head
of the Pully in his hand, and drawing the Cord by degrees, he drew the Ship in
a straight line, without stop or sticking, nay swiftly sliding along, as if she
had been in the Sea. The King astonished at this, and convinced of the power of
the Art; prevailed upon Archimedes to make for him Engines accommodate to all
ways of assaulting an Enemy, by which he might either beat off danger, or
Batter Cities. These the King himself never made use of, because he spent
almost all his life in a profound quiet and highest affluence of fortune. But
then this apparatus was in a most opportune time ready at hand for the
Syracusans, and with it also the Engineer himself. When therefore the Romans
assaulted the Walls in two places at once, fear and consternation so stupefied
the Syracusans, that nothing was able to resist that violence and those forces.
But when Archimedes played his Engines, he at once shot against the Landforces
all sorts of missile Weapons, and huge stones with horrible noise and violence:
against which no man could stand, but they knocked down those in heaps, upon
whom they fell, and brake their Ranks and Files. The arms of Main-sail Yards
suddenly put forth from the Walls, [and catching hold of Ships] they sunk some
by mighty weight let down from on high upon them; others they lifted up into
the Air by an iron hand or beak like a Cranes beak, and when they had hung them
up by the Prow, and set them an end upon the Poop, they plu^ged them to the
bottom of the Sea; or else the Ships drawn by Engines within, and whirled
about, were dashed against steep Rocks, that stood jutting out under the Walls,
with great destruction of the Soldiers that were aboard them. A Ship several
times lifted up to a great height in the Air (a dreadful thing to behold) was
rolled to and fro, and kept swinging, until the Mariners being thrown down and
struck against the Wall, at length it was dashed against the Rocks, or let
fall. At the Engine that Marcellus brought upon the Bridge ('it was called
Sambuca from some resemblance it had of an Instrument of Music, [in respect
chiefly of the many chords by which it was bent]) when it was from afar d^iven
to the Wall, was discharged a piece of a Rock of ten Talents weight, then a
second and a third, which striking upon it with mighty force and thundering
noise shook the Basis of it, loosened the joints of the Engine, and tore it
from the Bridge. So Marcellus, doubtful what counsel to pursue, drew off his
Ships to a safer distance, and sounded a retreat to his forces on Land. Then
they took up a resolution of coming up close under the Walls, if it were
possible in the night; thinking that because Archimedes was necessitated to use
Ropes stretched at length in playing his Engines, the Soldiers would be under
the shot, and the Darts would, for want of sufficient distance to throw them,
fly over their heads without effect. But he had long before framed for that
purpose Engines accommodate to any distance, and shorter Weapons, but such that
might be thrown thicker, to give many and frequent wounds at a blow. He had
already provided also small Scorpions, not to be perceived by the eyes of the
Enemies, by which they might be wounded near at hand. As they therefore, who
thought then to deceive the Defendants, came close up to the Walls; instantly a
shower of Darts and other missile Weapons was again cast upon them. And when
stones tumbled down as it were perpendicularly upon the heads of the
Assailants, and Arrows from all parts of the Wall were shot at them; they
retired. Of whom, as they were going off, by Arrows and Darts discharged at
greater distance great slaughter was made, and their Ships knocked one against
another; while themselves were not able to offend their Enemies in the least.
For Archimedes had provided and fixed most of his Engines under the Wall.
Whence the Romans, seeing that a Sea of mischiefs o^^er whelmed them from a
concealed source, thought they fought with the Gods. Yet Marcellus escaped
unhurt, and deriding his own Artificers and Carpenters; What, says ^e, do we
proceed to fight with this Geometrical Briareus, who fitting still has
shamefully eluded our Naval assault by Sea? Truly (...) that at one time has
poured upon us so great a power of Weapons, excels those fabulous Giants with
an hundred hands. And doubtless the rest of the Syracusans were all but the
body of Archimedes's apparatus, which one Soul moved and governed: for the
Enemies, laying aside all other Arms, did with his alone both infest the
Romans, and protect their own safety. In fine, when so great terror had seized
upon the Romans, that if they had but seen a little Rope or a piece of wood
from the Wall, instantly crying out that Archimedes was about to let fly some
Engine at them, they turned their backs and fled: Marcellus desisted from the
Conflicts and Assaults, putting all his hope in a long Siege. But Archimedes
had so high a Spirit, so sublime a Wit, and such a treasure of Theorems
Mathematical; that having now by those Engines of his Invention acquired to
himself Renown, and the Fame of not human, but Divine Science, he could not
condescend to leave any Commentary or Writings concerning them behind him: but
repudiating as vile and ^^^did, that industry in contriving Engi^es* and the
Art of Mechanics accomodating Mathematick knowledge to use and prof^^^ble
practice, placed his whole study and delight only in those Speculations, which
being noble and excellent in themselves, nor tied to any necessity, not indeed
to be compared with others, but which may raise a contest with matter for
Demonstration; since that excels in bulk and show, but this in exquisite
certainty and incredible power. For in Geometry you cannot find more implicate
and entangled questions or hypotheses, written in more simple and clearer
Elements. This some attribute to the dexterity of his Wit: others think it
ought rather to be referred to his indefatigable labor, by which it is
probable that he was able with ease and without sweat to effect any thing. For
if you seek, you will not by your self find a demonstration of his Questions:
but when you have once learned it, you will think that you might by your own
Wit have found it; so plain and smooth is the way, by which he leads to what he
intends to demonstrate. Wherefore those things are not to be rejected, which
are reported of him; that he was perpetually soothed and charmed by a certain
familiar Siren, so that he was wont to forget his food, and neglect the care of
his body, and when he was now and then carried against his will to have his
body Anointed and Bathed, he would draw Geometrical Figures in the ashes, and
lines with his finger; so much was he taken with the sweetness of the Art, and
his mind so ravished with the intellectual delight of the Theorems thereof. And
after he had found out many and excellent things, he is said to have begged of
his friends, that they would after his death put upon his Sepulcher a Cylindre
comprehending a Sphere, and inscribe the proportion, how much a solid
containing exceeds the contained. And Archimedes being this great man [we have
described] rendered himself, and, as much as lay in him, the City also
invincible. While the Siege is prolonged, Marcellus takes by assault Megara the
most ancient City of Sicily. He expugns also the Camp of Hippocrates, and
coming upon them fortifying themselves, slew above eight thousand. He also runs
through all Sicily: At which time he reduced many Towns from the Carthaginians,
and overcame all that dared to encounter him. During the Siege, one Damasippus
(...).
a Lacedaemonian putting to Sea in a Ship from Syracuse, was taken by
Marcellus. When the Syracusans much desired to redeem this man, and there were
many meetings and Treaties about the matter betwixt them and Marcellus; he
takes exact notice of a Tower that might receive Soldiers into it secretly, by
reason that the Wall near to it was not difficult to be passed over, and he
observed it to be neglected. Coming often thither, and entertaining Conferences
[with the Commissioners about the Redemption of Damasippus] the height of the
Tower was exactly calculated, and Ladders prepared. The Syracusans celebrated a
Feast to Diana. This juncture of time, when they were given up entirely to Wine
and Sport, Marcellus laid hold of, and before the Citizens perceived it, not
only possessed himself of the Tower, but before the break of day filled the
Wall round with Soldiers, and brake open the Hexaphylum [or place with six
Gates.] The Syracusans now beginning to stir, and trembling at the Tumult, and
the sound of the Trumpets, so soon as they heard it; he frighted them all into
flight, and vehemently amazed them, thinking that all places of the City were
already won. But the most fortified and the fairest, and most ample part
remained still ungained. It is called Arcadina, because it was by a Wall
divided from the outward City, one part of which they call Neapolis, [or the
new City] the other Tycha [or Fortune.] These being possessed, Marcellus, about
break of day, entered from the Hexaphylum into the City, all his Praefects
congratulating him. Who looking down from higher places upon the most beautiful
and very great City below, is said to have wept much, commiserating the
calamity that hung over it, when his thoughts represented to him, how dismal
and foul the face of the City would in a few hours be, when plundered and
sacked by the Soldiers. For among the Praefects [or chief Officers of his
Army] there was not one man that durst deny the plunder of the City to the
Soldiers demanding it; nay, many were instant that the City might be set on
fire and laid level to the ground. But this Marcellus plainly denied. Yet he
granted, but with great unwillingness and reluctance, that the money and
bondmen should be made prey. And he sent forth an Edict, that none should
violate any free body, nor kill any Citizen, nor ravish or drag any into
servitude. Though he had used this moderation, yet he esteemed the condition of
that City to be miserable, and even in so great a congratulation of his friends
for the Victory, expressed grief of mind and sorrow, beholding all the riches
^ccumulated during a long felicity, now dissipated in a moment of an hour. For
it is related tbat no less of prey and plunder was taken here, than afterward
in Carthage. For not long after, they furiously plundered also the other parts
of the City, taken by treachery, leaving nothing untouched but the Kings money,
which was brought into the public Treasury. Of all these doleful events
nothing afflicted Marcellus his generous Soul so much as the death of
Archimedes. Who was [then as Fate would have it] with his mind intent upon some
Diagramms or Geometrical figures: and having fixed not only his mind upon that
Speculation, but his eyes also upon the lines he was drawing, perceived not the
hurry of the Romans, nor that the City was taken. In this transport of study
and Contemplation, a Soldier unexpectedly coming up to him, commanded him to
follow him to Marcellus: which he declining to do before he had finished his
Problem or Proposition, and fitted it to demonstration; the Soldier, enraged
with anger, drew his Sword, and ran him through. Others write, that a Roman
Soldier running upon him with a drawn Sword offered to kill him; and that
Archimedes, looking back, earnestly besought him to hold his hand a little
while, that he might not leave what he was then searching for, imperfect and
rude; but the Soldier, nothing moved by his entreaty, instantly killed him.
Others again relate, that as Archimedes was carrying to Marcellus Mathematical
Instruments, Horologes, or Dialls, Spears, Angles, by which the magnitude of
the Sun might be measured to the sight; some Soldiers seeing him, and thinking
that he carried Gold in a Vessel, slew him. Fer certain it is, that his death
was highly afflicting to Marcellus, and that Marcellus ever after hated him
that killed him as a nefarious Murderer, and having sought for his kindred
honored them with signal favors. Indeed foreign Nations held the Romans to be
excellent Soldiers and formidable in fights; but since they had given no
memorable example of gentleness, or humanity, or civility, Marcellus seems
first to have shown to the Grecians that the Romans were more illustrious for
their justice. For such was his moderation to all with whom he had any thing to
do, and such his benignity also to many Cities and private Men; that if any
thing too hard or sever was decreed concerning the Aetnensians, or
Megarensians, or Syracusans, the blame thereof seems to belong rather to them
upon whom the storm fell, than to those who brought it upon them. One example
of many I will commemorate. In Sicily there is a Town, called Enguium, not
great indeed; but very ancient and ennobled by the presence of the Goddesses
called the Mothers. The Temple, they say, was built by the Cretians; and they
show some Spears and brazen Helmets, partly of Merion, partly of Ulysses, who
consecrated them to the Goddesses. This City highly favoring the party of the
Carthaginians, Nicias the most eminent of the Citizens counseled them to make
a defection to the Romans; to that end acting most freely, and openly in
Harangues to their Assemblies, arguing the Adversaries guilty of imprudence and
madness. They fearing his wealth, power, and authority, resolved to deliver him
in bonds to the Carthaginians. This their design when he had smelt out, and
knew it to be kept secret: he spoke irreligiously to the vulgar of the Mothers,
and showed many signs of disrespect, as if he denied and contemned the received
Opinion of the presence of those Goddesses; his Enemies the while rejoicing,
that he of his own accord sought the destruction hanging over his head. When
they were just now about to lay hands upon him, the people were assembled
together to hear him haranguing. Here Nicias making a Speech to the people
concerning some Affair then under deliberation in the midst of his Speech
cast himself upon the ground, and soon after, while amazement (as usually it
happens on such surprising occasions) held the Assembly immovable, raising and
turning his head round, he began in a trembling and deep Tone, but by degrees
sharpened his Voice. When he saw the whole Theater struck with horror and
silence, throwing off his Mantle, and rending his Tunick, he leaps up half
naked, and runs toward the Door, crying out aloud that he was driven by the
Furies of the revenging Mothers. When no man durst, out of religious fear, lay
hands upon him, or stop him, but all gave way to him, he ran out of the Gate,
not omitting any shriek or gesture of men possessed and mad. His Wife conscious
of his counterfeiting, and privy to his design, taking her Children with her,
first cast her self a supplicant before the Temple of the Goddesses; then
pretending to seek her wandering Husband, no man hindering her, went out of the
Town in safety; and by this means they all escaped to Marcellus at Syracuse.
Now after many other such practices and affronts offered him by the men of
Enguium, Marcellus having taken them all Prisoners, and cast them into bonds,
resolved to inflict upon them the last punishment; Nicias with tears in his
eyes addressed himself to him. In fine, casting himself at Marcellus's feet,
and deprecating for his Citizens, begged most earnestly their lives, chiefly of
his Enemies. Marcellus herewith relenting, set them at liberty, and rewarded
Nicias with ample Lands and rich Presents. This History Posidonius the
Philosopher has committed to memory. Marcellus at length recalled by the
people of Rome to a near and suburban War, to illustrate his Triumph, and adorn
the City, carried away with him very many and the most beautiful Ornaments of
Syracuse. For before that, Rome neither had, nor had seen any thing of those
polite and exquisite Rarities; nor were there any pieces of workmanship of the
like Elegancy and Skill. Stuffed with barbarous Arms and Spoils, stained with
blood, and every where crowned with triumphal Ornaments and Trophies: she was
no pleasant or delightful Spectacle, fit to feed the eyes of peaceful or
delicate Spectators: But as Epaminondas named the Fields of Boeotia, the Stage
of Mars; and Xenophon called Ephesus, the workhouse of War; so in my judgment,
may you call Rome, at that time, (that I may use the words of Pindarus) the
Temple of Mars rustling in Armor. Whence Marcellus was more grateful to the
People, because he had adorned the City with delights that had the Grecian
gracefulness, and symmetry of parts, exhibiting grateful variety to the
beholders. Fabius Maximus touched not, nor brought away any thing of this kind
from Tarentum, when he had taken it. The Money and Riche^^e carried thence, but
forbad the Statues to be moved: adding withal, as it is vulgarly related, Let
us leave to the Tarentines these offended Gods. But they reprehended Marcellus,
first that he had raised up envy against the City, in which there was now a
Triumph, not only over men, but also over the Gods as Captives: then that he
had cast into idleness, and prattling about the curious Artifices and
Artificers, the common people, which bred up in Wars and Agriculture, had never
tasted of Luxury and Sloth, and as Euripides said of Hercules, Rude in ill Arts,
Skilful in things of Use;
so that now they misspent much of their time (in gazing upon, and prattling
about these new-induced Monuments of the Grecian Magnificence and Delicacy.)
And yet notwithstanding this Reprimand, Marcellus gloried even before the
Greeks themselves in this, that he had taught the Romans, till then rude and
unskilful in such Masterpieces of Art, to esteem and admire the Elegant and
wonderful things of Greece. But when the Envious opposed his being brought
triumphant into the City, because there were some relics of the War in
Sicily, and a th^^ triumph would offer it self to the eyes of men, he gave way.
He triumphed in monte Albano, thence entered the City in Ovation; but in this
Ovation, he was neither carried in a Chariot, nor crowned with Laurel, nor
ushered by Trumpets sounding; but went a foot with shoes on, many Flutes or
Pipes sounding in consort the while he passed along, wearing a Garland of
Myrtle; as peaceable, with an aspect raising rather love and respect than fear.
Whence I am by conjecture led to think, that heretofore the difference betwixt
Ovation and Triumph was, not from the greatness of Achievements, but from the
manner of performing them. For they who having fought a set Battle, and slain
the Enemies, returned Victors; led that Martial, and (in my judgment) cruel
Triumph, and as the custom then was, in lustrating the Army, adorned their Arms
and Soldiers with a great deal of Laurel: but they who without force, by
benevolence, favor, and civil Language had done the business (and prevented
shedding of human blood) to these Captains custom gave the honor of this
Pacate and plausible Ovation. For a Pipe is the Ensign or badg of Peace, and
Myrtle the plant of Venus, who more than the rest of the Gods and Goddesses
abhors force and War. It is called Ovation, as most think, (...), because they
act it with shouting and Songs of Bacchus. But the Greeks have wrested the word
to their own Language, thinking that this honor also ought to be in part
referred to father Bacchus, whom we called (...) and (...). But the thing is
otherwise. For it was the custom for Emperors in their triumph to immolate an
Ox, but in their Ovation, a Sheep: hence they named it Ovation. But it is worth
our labor to contemplate the Laconic Legislator, who instituted Sacrifices
contrary to the Roman. For at Lacedaemon, a Captain, who had performed the work
he undertook, by cunning or courteous Treaty, laying down his Command,
immolated an Ox; he that did the business by Battle, offered a Cock: the
Lacedaemonians, though most warlike, thinking an Exploit performed by Eloquence
and subtilty, to be more excellent and more congruous to man, than one effected
by mere force and courage. But whether of these two is to be preferred, I leave
to the determination of others. Marcellus being the fourth time Consul, his
Enemies suborned the Syracusans to come to Rome to accuse him, and to complain
that they had suffered indignities and hostile wrongs, contrary to the League.
It happened that Marcellus was in the Capitol offering Sacrifice, when the
Syracusans petitioned the Senate yet sitting, that they might have leave to
accuse him and present their grievances. Marcellus's Colleague put them out of
the Court, taking it extremely ill, that the business was moved Marcellus being
absent. Which when he understood, he made haste thither. And first presiding as
Consul, he referred to the Senate the cognizance of other matters: but when
that charge against him came to be explicated, rising from his Seat, he passed
as a private man into the place where the accused were wont to make their
defense, and gave free liberty to the Syracusans to impeach him. But they
struck with vehement consternation by his Majesty and confidence, stood
astonished: and the power of his presence now in his Robe of Estate appeared
far more terrible and severe, than it had done when covered with Armor. Yet
reanimated at length by Marcellus's Rivals, they began their impeachment, and
made an Oration composed of Lamentation and Complaint, whereof this was the
sum. That being Allies and Friends of the people of Rome, they had
notwithstanding suffered those things, which other Emperors had abstained from
inferring upon many Enemies. To this Marcellus answers; That though they had
committed many acts of hostility against the people of Rome, yet they had
suffered nothing but what Enemies conquered by War, and by force taken
Captives, cannot possibly be defended from suffering. That it was their own
fault they had been made Captives, because they refused to give ear to him
attempting all fair and gentle means; neither were they by the power of Tyrants
drawn into War, but rather imposed upon the Tyranny, to the end they might make
War. The Orations ended, and the Syracusans, according to the custom turned out
of the Court; Marcellus left his Colleague to ask the Sentences [of the
Senators] and together with the Syracusans went out of the Temple, and staid
expecting at the folding Doors of the Court; not in the least discomposed in
Spirit, either by the accusation, or by anger against the Syracusans; but with
high civility and modesty attending the issue of the cause. The Sentences at
length all asked, and a decree of the Senate made in Vindication of Marcellus,
the Syracusans with tears flowing from their eyes, cast themselves at his
knees, beseeching him to forgive them present, and to be moved by the misery of
the rest of their City, which would ever be mindful of and grateful for his
benefits. Thus Marcellus softened by their tears and distress, was not only
reconciled to them, but most generously received the rest of the Syracusans
into his faith and protection. The Liberty which he had restored to them, and
their Rights, Laws, and Goods that were left, the Senate confirmed. Upon which
account the Syracusans both decreed other Honors to Marcellus, and made a Law,
that if Marcellus should at any time come into Sicily, or any of his Posterity,
the Syracusans crowned should offer Sacrifices to the Gods. After this he moved
against Hannibal. Now whereas the other Consuls and Emperors since the defeat
received at Cannae, had all made use of the same stratagem against Hannibal,
namely to decline coming to a Battle with him; and that none had the courage to
encounter him in the Field, and put themselves to the decision by the Sword:
Marcellus entered into a diverse way of Counsel, thinking that Italy would be
destroyed by the very same thing, viz. delay, by which they looked to consume
Hannibal; and that Fabius who was excessively cautious, expecting that the
Enemies forces by length of time wasting away, the War would at length fall of
it self without blows, after the manner of timid and fearful Physicians, who
dreading fo administer opportune Remedies, stay waiting till the decay of the
Patient's strength put an end to the Disease; took not a right course to heal
the sickness of his Country. And first, great Cities of the Samnites, which
had revolted, came in to his power: in which he found a huge quantity of Corn
and Money, and three thousand of Hannibal's Soldiers, that were left for the
defense of those places. After this, the Proconsul Cn. Fulvius, with eleven
Tribunes of the Soldiers being ^ain in Apulia, and the greatest part of the
Army also at the same time cut off: he by Letters dispatched to Rome, bad the
people ^e of good courage, for that he was now upon his march against Hannibal,
to drive him out of that Country. These Letters being read, Livy writes that
the people were not only not encouraged, but more discouraged than before. For
the Romans expected so much a greater danger than the ^ast, by how much
Marcellus excelled Fulvi^s in Virtue and Conduct. He, as he had written,
advancing in the Territories of the Lucans, came up to him at Numistro, and
(...) a plain place, the Enemy keeping him^^lf upon the Hills, pitched his
Camp, and he next day drew forth his Army in or^er for Fight. Nor did Hannibal
refuse the ^hallenge. They fought stoutly and long ^n both sides; Victory yet
seeming un^^solv'd on which to place the Laurel: and after three hours
Conflict, Night hardly parted them. The next Day as soon as the Sun was risen,
he again brought forth his Troops, and ranged them among the dead bodies of the
slain, challenging Hannibal to decide the question, to which of the two Fortune
would give the Victory. When he disloged and drew off, Marcellus gathering up
the spoils of the Enemies, and burning the bodies of his slain Soldiers,
closely followed him. And though Hannibal often used stratagems, and laid
Ambushes to entrap Marcellus, yet he could never circumvent him. By tumultuary
fights and skirmishes, which were all successful to Marcellus, he raised so
great a fame of himself, that when the time of the Comitia at Rome was near at
hand, the Senate thought fit rather to recall the other Consul from Sicily,
than to recall Marcellus pursuing Hannibal. At his return to Rome, the Fathers
enjoined him to name Q. Fabius Dictator. For the Dictator is created neither by
the people, nor by the Senate; but either the Consul or Praetor before the
Assembly pronounces him to be Dictator, whom he has approved. Wherefore that
great Magistrate is called Dictator a dicendo. Others affirm that he is named
Dictator, not from a decree of the Senate, nor from an Order of the
common people; but because his word is a Law, and he commands what he pleases.
For the Romans call the Magistrates Commands, Edicts. But now because
Marcellus's Colleague, who was recalled from Sicily, had a mind to name another
Man Dictator, and would not be forced to change his Opinion, he sailed away by
Night into Sicily. So the common people made an Order, that Q. Fabius should be
chosen Dictator: and the Senate by an express commanded Marcellus to nominate
him. He obeying, proclaimed him. Dictator acccording to the order of the common
people; but the Office of Proco^^^^ was continued to himself for a Year. (...)
when he had before resolved with Fabius, that while he besieged Tarentum,
himself would by following and drawing up and down Hannibal, detain him from
coming to the relief of the Tarentins; he overtook him at Cannusium: and as
Hannibal, often shifted his Camp, and still declined the Combat, he every where
attended to engage him. At ^ast pressing upon him encamping, by light
^kirmishes he provoked him to a Battle; but Night again divided them in the
very heat of the Conflict. The next day Marcellus again showed himself in Arms,
and brought up his Forces in array. Hannibal enraged with extreme grief, calls
his Carthaginians *********** together to an Harangue; and vehemently prays
them, to enter into Battle with courage, that they might maintain the honor
and renown they had formerly acquired; For you see, says he, how after so
great Victories we have not liberty to respire, nor to repose our selves,
though Victors; unless we drive this man back. Then the two Armies joining
Battle, they fought most fiercely; when the event of an untimely stratagem
showed that Marcellus was guilty of an Error. The Right wing being hard pressed
upon, he commanded the twelfth Legion to be brought up to the front of his
engaged (...). This change perturbing the (...) and posture of the Legions,
gave the Victory to the Enemies: and there fell two thousand seven hundred
Romans. Marcellus, after he had retreated into his Camp, calling his Soldiers
together; I see, said he, many Roman Arms and Bodies, but I see not so much as
one Roman* To them imploring his pardon, he refused to give it while they
remained beaten, but promised to give it so soon as they should overcome; and
that he resolved to bring them into the Field again the next day, that the fame
of their Victory might arrive at Rome before that of their flight. Dismissing
the Assembly, he commanded Barley instead of Wheat to be given to those
Companies of Foot that had turned their ba^^^s. These things were so bitter to
the Soldiers, that though a great number of them were grievously wounded, yet
they report, there was not one to whom the Generals Oration was not more
painful and smarting than his wounds. The Day breaking, a Scarlet Cassock, the
sign of instant Battle, was shown forth. The Foot-Companies marked with
ignominy, begged they might be posted before the Ensigns, and obtained their
request. Then the Tribunes, [or Collonels] bring forth the rest of the forces,
and strengthen the first Battle with aids or reserves inserted. Whereof
Hannibal being advertised, O strange says he, what will you do with this man,
who can bear neither good nor bad fortune? He is the only man, who neither
suffers us to rest when he is Victor, nor rests himself when he is overcome.
Shall we perpetually fight with him, who both in prosperous and adverse
successes has modesty to cover his fierceness and boldness? Then the Armies
rush upon each other. When the Fight was doubtful, Hannibal commanded the
Elephants to be brought into the first Battalion, and to be driven upon the Van
of the Romans. When the Beasts, trampling upon many, soon disordered the
Ensigns, Flavius, a Tribune of Soldiers, snatching an Ensign, meets them, and
wounding the first Elephant with the Ensign-staff, puts him to flight. The
Beast turned back upon the next, averts both him and the rest that followed.
This Marcellus seeing, pours in his Horse with great force upon the disordered
Elephants; and commands terror to be added to their confusion, that they might
tread and crush each other under their feet. The Horse making a fierce
impression, pursued the Carthaginians home to their Camp, cutting down a great
number in the pursuit. The Elephants also wounded and running upon their own
Party, made a very great slaughter of the Enemies. It Is said; more than eight
thousand were slain; of the Roman Army three thousand were slain, and almost
all wounded. This was the thing that gave Hannibal opportunity to dislodge in
the silence of the Night, and to remove to greater distance from Marcellus;
whom care and solicitude for his wounded men kept from pursuing him, though he
vehemently desired so to do. Wherefore by soft and small Marches he removed
into Campania, and to refresh his Soldiers, he kept them during the heat of
the Summer lodged in Houses But because Hannibal, having disentangled himself
from Marcellus, rambled with his Army round about the Country, and wasted
Italy, as now free from all fear; at Rome Marcellus was evil spoken of. Whose
Detractors induced C. Publicius Bibulus Tribune of the People, a man Eloquent
and fierce, to undertake his accusation. He by assiduous Harangues prevailed
upon the People to abrogate from Marcellus the command of the Army; Seeing that
Marcellus, says he, a little time exercised in the War, has retired himself
to take care of his Body, as if from the wrestling place to hot Baths.
Marcellus hereof advertised, appointed Lieutenants to govern his Camp, and
hasted to Rome to refute the Crimes charged upon him: and he there found ready
drawn up against him an Impeachment consisting of those Calumnies. At the Day
prefixed, in the Flaminian Circus, into which place the people had assembled
themselves, Bibulus from a higher place accused him. Marcellus answered, using
a succinct and plain Speech. But the Lords and Princes of the City discoursed
many things of the greatness of his Exploits and Achievements, very freely
advising the People not to show themselves worse Judges than the Enemy,
condemning Marcellus of timidity, from whom alone of all their Captains the
Enemy fled, and perpetually endeavored, not to come to blows with him, but to
fight with the rest. When they made an end of speaking, the Accuser's hope to
obtain Judgment [on his side] so far deceived him, that Marcellus was not
only absolved, but the fifth time created Consul. No sooner had he entered upon
the Consulate, but he surpressed a huge commotion in Hetruria, that had
proceeded near to a Defection, and entering the Towns softened the minds of the
Citizens. Hence, when the dedication of the Temple, which he had vowed out of
the Sicilian Spoils to Honor and Virtue, was hindered by the Priests, because
they denied that one Temple could be lawsully dedicated to two Gods; he began
to adjoyn another to it, highly resenting the Priests Objection, and almost
converting the thing into an Omen. And truly many other Prodigies also
affrighted him; as some Temples struck with Lightning, and that in Jupiter's
Temple Mice had gnawn the Gold. It was reported also, that an Ox had spoke, and
that a Boy born with a head like an Elephant's was yet living. All which
Predigies were indeed expiated, but no Atonement succeeded, nor was peace and
reconciliation obtained from the Gods. Wherefore the Aruspices [or Diviners
from the entrails and vital parts of the Sacrifices] detained him at Rome
glowing and burning (with desire to return to the War.) For no man was ever
inflamed with so great desire of any thing, as that man was to fight a Battle
with Hannibal. That was the Object of his Dreams in the Night, the subject of
all his Discourses with his friends and familiars, nor did he present to the
Gods any other wish, but that he might take Hannibal in fight. And I think,
that he would most gladly have set upon him, both Armies being environed with a
Wall or Trench. Had he not been even loaded with Honors, and given proofs many
ways of his maturity [of judgment] and prudence above other Emperors; you
might have said, that he was agitated by a juvenile ambition, above what became
a man of that age: for he had passed the sixtieth year of his life when he
began his fifth Consulship. The Sacrifices offered, and all things that belong
to the propitiation of the Gods, performed according to the prescript of the
Diviners; he with his Colleague went to carry on the War. Many ways he provoked
Hannibal at that time having a standing Camp betwixt Bantia and the City
Venusia [in Apulia.] But he held it not safe to commit the Dispute to the
hazard of a Battle. And when he had gotten intelligence, that some
Foot-Companies were sent to the Locri Epizephyrii [a people of the Brutii in
Italy, seated near the Promontory of Zephyrium, whence they are called
Epizephyrii, i. e. the Western Locrians] placing an ambush under the little
Hill of Pitetia [a City of the Brutii, now called Policastro] he slew two
thousand five hundred Soldiers. This incensed Marcellus to revenge. Wherefore
he removed his Camp nearer to Hannibal. Betwixt the two Camps was a little
Hill, affording a station not enough secure, but woody, and having watch-Towers
overlooking both sides: and below were Fountains of Rivulets sliding down in
sight of the Spectators from above. This place so fit and advantageous, the
Romans admired that Hannibal, come thither before them, had not seized upon,
but left it to the Enemies. But to him the place seemed commodious indeed for a
Camp, yet more commodious for an Ambuscade: and to that use he chose to put it.
So in the lawns of the Wood and the hollows he hid a great power of Archers and
Spearmen, most confident that the commodiousness of the place would allure the
Romans. Nor was he deceived in his expectation. For presently in the Roman Camp
they muttered and disputed as if they had all been Captains, that that place
was to be feiz'd, and how great opportunities they should thereby snatch from
the Enemies beforehand, chiefly if they transferred their Camp thither, and
strengthened the place with a fortress: and they moved Marcellus to go with a
few Horse to view it. He, having called a Diviner to him, sacrificed. In the
first slain Beast the Aruspex showed him the Liver without a head; in the
second the head appeared grown above measure great, and all the rest fair and
highly promising good success. When these seemed to free them from the dread of
the former, the Diviners declared that they were more terrified by the latter:
because entrails too fair and promising, when they appear after maimed and
monstrous, render the Novity of the change of doubtful signification. But Nor
fire nor brazen Wall can keep out fate; as Pindarus observes. Marcellus
therefore taking with him his Colleague Crispinus, and his Son a Tribune of
Soldiers, with two hundred and twenty Horse at most, among whom there was not
one Roman, but all were Hetruscans, besides forty Fregellans, of whose courage
and fidelity he had in all occasions received full proof; goes to view the
[inviting] place. The Hill was full of high woods, and darksom; on the top of
it sat a Sentinel, covered from the sight of the Enemy, but having the Roman
Camp exposed to his eyes. Upon a sign received from him, they that were placed
in Ambush, stirred not till Marcellus came near. Then all rising up in an
instant, and encompassing him from all sides, they fell to invade him with
Darts, to strike, and wound the backs of those that fled, to press upon those
who bravely resisted. These were the forty Fregellans. And though the
Hetruscans fled in the very beginning of the fight, the Fregellans cast
themselves into a Ring, bravely defending the Consuls, till Crispinus, struck
with two Darts, turned his Horse to fly away; and Marcellus's side was pierced
through with a Lance with a broad head. Then the Fregellans also, the few that
remained alive, leaving the fallen Consul, and rescuing young Marcellus,
wounded also, got into the Camp by flight. There were slain not many above
forty; five Lictors, and twelve Horsemen came alive into the Enemies hands.
Crispinus also died of his wounds a few days after. This Defeat, in which both
Consuls fell together, was the first of that kind that ever befell the Romans.
Hannibal little valuing the other events, so soon as he was told of Marcellus's
death, immediately hasted to the Hill. From him viewing the Body, after he had
long considered the strength and shape thereof, there fell not a word
expressing the least of pride or arrogance, nor did he show in his countenance
any sign of gladness, as another perhaps would have done, when his fierce Enemy
had been taken away: but amazed by the so sudden and unexpected fall of so
great a man, and taking off his Ring, gave order to have the Body, most
magnificently clad and adorned, honorably burned. The Relics, put into a
silver Urn, with a Crown of Gold to cover it, he sent back to his Son. But some
of the Numidians setting upon those that were carrying the Urn, took it from
them by force, and cast away the bones. Which being told to Hannibal, How
impossible is it, says he, to do any thing against the will of God! Then he
punished the Numidians with Death: but took no farther care of sending or
recollecting the bones; conceiving that Marcellus so rashly fell, and lay
unburied, by a certain fate. So Cornelius Nepos and Valerius Maximus have left
upon Record: but T. Livius and Augustus Coesar affirm, that the Urn was brought
to his Son, and then carried forth with a magnificent Funeral. Besides the
Monuments raised for him at Rome, there was dedicated to his memory at Catana
in Sicily an ample Wrestling-place called Gymnasium Marcelli. Statues and
Pictures, of those he took from Syracuse, were set up in Samothracia in the
Temple of the Gods named Cabiri [Phaenician Gods, chiefly worshipped at Berytus]
and in the Temple of Minerva at Lindum [one of the three best Towns in the
Island Rhodes] where to a Statue of his was added (as Posidonius delivers) this
Epigram. This (Stranger) was to Rome a Glorious Star,
Noble by Blood, but nobler much by War,
Marcellus Claudius; seven times Consul made,
His Sword sent Foes in millions to the shades.
The Author of this Epigram accounts to Marcellus's five Consulates, his two
Proconsulates. His Progeny continued in high honor even to Marcellus Son of
Octavia Sister of Augustus, whom she brought to her Husband C. Marcellus. He
deceased a Bridegroom in the year of his Aedileship, having not long before
married Caesar's Daughter. His Mother Octavia dedicated a Library to his honor
and memory: and Caesar, the Theater, on which he caused to be engraven Theatrum
Marcelli.

The PARALLEL.
THESE are the memorable things I have found in Historians of Marcellus and
Pelopidas. Betwixt which two [great Men] though in Wit, Inclinations, and
Manners they nearly resembled each other; because both were valiant, and
diligent, and daring, and haughty: there was yet some diversity in this, that
Marcellus in many Cities that he reduced into his Power, committed great
slaughter; but Epaminondas and Pelopidas, when they had gotten a Victory, never
killed any Man, nor deprived the Citizens of their Liberty. They report, that
the Thebans also would not, when they were present, have so resolved against
the Orchomenians. Marcellus's Exploits against the Gauls are admirable and
ample: when guarded by a few Horse he defeated and put to flight a vast number
of Horse and Foot together (an action you cannot easily in Historians find to
have been done by any other Captain) and took their King Prisoner. To which
honor though Pelopidas aspired, he attained not to it, but was killed by the
Tyrant, and prevented. But to these you may perhaps oppose those two most noble
and very great Battles, the one at Leuctra, the other at Tegyrae. But there is
extant no Memoir of any Achievement of Marcellus, by stealth, or treachery, or
Ambuscade: such as were those of Pelopidas, when he returned from Exile, and
killed the Tyrants at Thebes. But in this he seems to be worthy of
commendation, more than for all his Achievements performed in the dark and by
cunning and stratagems. Now Hannibal, a terrible Enemy, and a hard, urged the
Romans: as in truth the Lacedaemonians did then the Thebans. But that these
were in the Fights of Leuctra and Tegyrae beaten and put to flight by
Pelopidas; is confessed. Polybius writes, that Hannibal was never so much as
once vanquished by Marcellus, but remained in all Encounters invincible until
Scipio (managed the War against him.) But we believe rather Livius, Caesar,
Cornelius Nepos, and among the Greeks King Juba, who all expressly affirm, that
the whole Army of Hannibal was in some Fights routed and put to flight by
Marcellus, though these defeats conduced little to the sum of the War. And it
appears, that the Carthaginians cunning and stratagems deceived him in those
Conflicts. But this may seem truly admirable, that Marcellus made the Romans,
after the defeat of so many Armies, the slaughter of so many Captains, and in
fine, the confusion of almost the whole Roman Empire, valiant still, and of
courage equal to their losses, and fit to engage in new Battles. For Marcellus
was the only man, that took from them that great and inveterate fear and dread,
and revived, raised, confirmed the Spirits of the Soldiers fighting with the
Enemies for Glory and Victory, to that degree of bravery, that they would not
easily yield the Victory, but contend for it [to the last.] For the same men,
whom assiduous Defats had accustomed to think themselves happy, if they coud
but save themselves by running from Hnnibal; These he taught to esteem it base
and ignominious to return safe after a loss of the Victory; lest thereby they
should implicitly confess, that they had given back in the ardor of the Fight;
and to grieve to extremity, they had not forced the Palm out of the Enemies
hands. Truth is, though Pelopidas was never overcome in any Battle, where
himself was present, and commanded in Chief; and Marcellus referred many
Victories to his equals: truly he that could not be easily overcome^^ was of
right to be compared with the most invincible. But Marcellus took Syracuse;
whereas Pelopidas was frustrated of his hope to reap the spoils of Sparta. But
in my judgment, 'twas more difficult to advance his Standard even to the Walls
of Sparta, and to be the first of Mortals that ever passed the River Eurotas in
Arms, than it was to tame Sicily; unless it be your judgment, that that
Adventure, is with more of right to be attributed to Epaminondas, as was also
the Leuctrick Battle. Whereas Marcellus's Renown, and the glory of his brave
Actions came entire and undiminished to him alone. For he alone took Syracuse;
and without a Companion or Rival, fought with Hannibal; and quite changing the
face of the War, was the first Captain that durst attempt any thing memorable
upon him, even at a time when all other Captains declined to fight him. The
Gauls in like manner he routed and put to most shameful flight, without his
Colleague. I commend not the death of either of these, nay rather I sigh and
groan, and am truly afflicted for their sudden and unexpected fall. But I much
admire, that in so many sharp Conflicts, more than can be reckoned in one day,
Hannibal received not so much as one wound. I commend also Chrysantes (in
Xenophon's Cyrot^dia) who having lost his Sword, and about to strike his Enemy,
so soon as a Retreat was sounded, left his Enemy, and retired himself sedately
and modestly. Yet the anger, which provoked Pelopidas to pursue revenge in the
heat of fight, may excuse him. The first thing for a Captain is to gain
Safe Victory; the next to be with honor slain.
as Euripides teaches. For then no incommodity is offered, but Death is called
the action of him going off. Now the end of Pelopidas's Victory, which
consisted in the slaughter of the Tyrant, besides the flame presenting it self
to his eyes, did not wholly carry him away unadvisedly: because it was not
easy to lay hold of another glorious occasion conjoined with matter so
honorable and splendid. But Marcellus, when it made little to his advantage,
and when no violent ardour (as it usually falls out in present danger)
transported him to passion, throwing himself into danger, fell into an
unexplored Ambush: he who had born five Consulates, three Triumphs, won the
spoils and glories of Kings and Victories, to act the part of a forerunner,
Scout, or Sentinel, and to expose all his Achievements to be trod under foot
by the mercenary Spaniards that served the Carthaginians, and by Numidians; so
that even themselves envied to themselves that unhoped success, that they had
oppressed among a few Fregellans, that were Scouts, the most Valiant, the most
Potent, and most Renowned man among the Romans. Let no man think that we have
said these things out of design to accuse, but of freely reprehending, in their
names, those and their Virtue and Courage, or to which when they despise Life,
and refer the rest of their noble Endowments; they perished not more to their
Country, Allies and Friends, than to themselves. After Pelopidas his death,
his friends, for whom he died, made a Funeral for him; the Enemies, by whom he
had been killed, made one for Marcellus. That was to be wished for, and
fortunate. For he that honors Virtue pursuing him with enmity, is more noble
and excellent, than he that requites a benefit. Since virtue alone challenges
to it self the honor of the former: but in the latter, profit and private
advantage is rather beloved, than Virtue.

Asked by the illiterate Clown his vote to wit
Tho against himself does ye Good man submit
Noe wrong. to him had Aristides done,
But he was just and that disgusts the Clown
Thus where ye Rabble rule ye Great th'y erislave,
And virtues self's destructive to the Brave*

THE LIFE OF ARISTIDES.
Translated from the Greek, by John Cooper, Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridg.
Volume II.
ARISTIDES the Son of Lysimachus was of the Tribe Antiochis and Borough of
Alopece; but concerning what Estate he had there are various Discourses: some
that he passed his Life in extreme Poverty, and left behind him two Daughters,
whose Indigence long continued them unmarried. But Demetrius the Phalerian
opposing this general Report in his Socrates, professes to know a Farm at
Phalera, going by Aristides's Name, where he was interred, and as marks of the
plentiful Condition of his Family supposes first the (...): Because at Atbens
they reckoned the years by their Archons, as the Romans by their Consuls. One
of the (...) was to this purpose chose by lot out of the rest, and his Name
Inscribed in the public Records.
Office of Archon to be one, which he obtained by the lot of the Bean drawn
amongst those Families of the most considerable Possessions whom they called
Pentacotiomedimnos. Secondly the Ostracism, accustomed to be inflicted on none
of the poorer sort but those of great Houses, and who were by their eminent
Quality exposed to Envy; The third and last, that he left certain Tripodes in
the Temple of Bacchus Offerings for his Victory in the Stage Plays, which are
even in our Age to be seen retaining this Inscription upon them, The Tribe
Antiochis obtained the Victory: ARISTIDES defrayed the Charges: ARCHESTRATUS 's
Play was Acted. But this Argument, tho in appearance the greatest, is of the
least moment of any. For Epaminondas, whom all the World knows was Educated and
lived in much poverty, and Plato the Philosopher exhibited very Magnificent
shows, the one setting forth an Entertainment of Flutenists, the other of the
Singers of Dithigrambicks: Dion the Syracusian supplying the expenses of the
latter, and Pelopidas those of Epaminondas. For good men are not
irreconcilable Enemies to the receiving Presents from their friends, but
looking upon those that are taken to hoard, and with an avaritious intention as
sordid and mean, refuse not such as are had on the score of Ambition and
Splendor whence no gain accrueth. But Panaetius shows that Demetrius was
mistaken concerning the Tripode through the likeness of the Name. For from the
Persian War to the end of the Pelopennesian there are upon Record only two by
the Name of Aristides, who have set sorth Plays and carried the Prize, neither
of which was the same Son of Lysimachus; but the Father of the one was
Xenophylus, and the other much more modern; As the way of writing by the
Grammar in use since the time of Euclid, and the addition of the Name of
Archestratus prove, whom in the time of the Wars with the Medes no one Writer
mentions, but several during those of Peloponnesus Chronicle as a Dramatick
Poet. But this of Panaetius ought to be more nearly considered. As for the
Ostracism; every one was liable to it, who for his Reputation, Quality, or
Eloquence; was esteemed above the common Level; In so much as even Damon
Praeceptor to Pericles was banished thereby because he seemed a man of more
than ordinary Sense. And more Idomeneus says, that Aristides was not made
Archon by the lot of the Bean but the free Election of the People. And if he
governed after the Battle of Plateae, as Demetrius himself has written, it is
very probable that by reason of his so great Reputation and success in the
Wars, he was preferred to that for his Virtue which others received in
consideration of their wealth. But Demetrius manifestly endeavors not only
to exempt Aristides, but Socrates likewise from Poverty as a great Ill; for he
says the latter had not only an House of his own, but also seventy Minae put
out to use with Crito.

But Aristides being the familiar acquaintance of that Clesthenes, who settled
the Government after the Expulsion of the thirty Tyrants, and above all
Politicians imitating and admiring Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian, adhered to the
Aristocratical way of Government; but had Themistocles Son to Neocles his
Adversary in behalf of the Populacy. Some say that, being Boys and bred up
together from their Infancy, they were always at variance with each other in
all their Words and Actions as well serious as divertive, and that from this
their contention they soon made discovery of their natural Inclinations; the
one being ready, adventurous and subtle, soon and with much ease carried to any
thing: the other a stayed and settled Temper and intent on the exercise of
Justice, not admitting in any degree falsifying, ill language or deceit, no not
so much as at his play. Aristo of Chios says, their Enmity had its beginning
from Love, and thence increased to so great an height; for being both enamoured
of Stesilaus of Cea, the most beautiful of Youths, they were passionate beyond
all moderation, neither laid they down their Rivalship even with the decaying
Beauty of the Boy; but as it were exercised therein, they immediately applied
themselves to public business with Heats and Differences.

Themistocles therefore joined to a Party fortified himself with no
inconsiderable strength, insomuch as to one who told him were he impartial he
would govern Athens well; I wish, replied he, I may never sit on that Tribunal
where my Friends shall not plead a greater Privilege than strangers. But
Aristides was in a manner singular in his Politics, being unwilling in the
first place to go along with his Associates in ill doing, or by not gratifying
them therein to become displeasing to them; secondly, observing that many were
encouraged by the Authority of their Friends to act injuriously; he was
cautious; being of Opinion that the integrity of of his Words and Actions was
the only security to a good Citizen. Howbeit Themistocles making many
dangerous alterations, and withstanding and interrupting him in the whole
Series of his Actions, he also was necessitated to set himself against all
Themistocles did, partly in consideration of his Revenge, and partly to impede
his Power still increasing by the favor of the Multitude; esteeming it better
to forget some public conveniences rather than he by prevailing should be
powerful in all things. In fine, when he once opposed Themistocles in an Action
that was expedient and had the better of him, he could not refrain saying when
he left the Assembly, that unless they sent Themistocles and himself to the A
Prison or Dungeon in Athens.
Barathrum there could be no safety for the Affairs of Athens. Another time
moving a certain matter to the people, though there were opposition and
stirring against it, yet he carried it. But the President of the Assembly being
about to put it to the Vote, perceiving by the Debates the inconvenience
thereof, he let it fall. Also he often brought in his Bills by other persons,
lest Themistocles, through his strife with him, should be any hinderance to the
good of the Public.

In any alteration of Affairs his Constancy was admirable, as not being puffed
up with Honor, and demeaning himself undisturbed and sedately in Adversity,
and also of Opinion that he ought to offer himself to the service of his
Country unmercinary and without the Reward not only of Riches but even glory
it self. Whence it is likely, at the recital of these Verses of Aeschylus in
the Theater relating to Amphiaraus.

He aims at being just, not seeming so:
Profound of Mind the fruit thereof to show;
Where sage Advice, and prudent Counsels grow.
The eyes of all the Spectators were converted on Aristides, as if this Virtue
did in a most especial manner appertain unto him. For he was a most strong
Champion for Justice, not only against Friendship and favor but wrath and
malice. Therefore it is reported of him that prosecuting the Law against one
who was his Enemy, and the Judges after accusation refusing to hear the
Criminal, but immediately proceeding to pass Sentence upon him, he rose in
haste from his Seat, and joined in Petition with him for a hearing, and that he
might enjoy the privilege of the Law. Another time Judging between two private
persons, the one declaring his Adversary had very much injured Aristides;
Relate rather good Friend, he said, what wrong he has done thee. For it is thy
cause, not my own, which I now sit Judge of. Being chosen public Treasurer, he
made it appear, that not only those of his time, but the preceding Officers
had alienated much Treasure, and especially Themistocles. For he was a wise
Man, but light fingered. Wherefore [Themistocles] associating several persons
against Aristides and impeaching him when he gave in his Accounts, caused him
to be condemned of robbing the Public; but the best and chiefest men of the
City ill resenting it, he was not only exempt from the Fine imposed upon him,
but likewise again designed to the same Employment. But pretending to repent
him of his former practices, and carrying himself with more remissness, he
became acceptable to such as had pillaged the Treasury, by not detecting or
calling them to an exact account. So that those who had had their fill of the
public Cash began highly to applaud Aristides, and sued to the people, making
it their business to have him once more chosen Treasurer. But being upon the
point of Election he reproved the Athenians. When I discharged you my Office
well and faithfully, said he, I had dirt thrown in my face; but now I pass over
many things in those who rob the Treasury, I seem an admirable Patriot. I am
more ashamed therefore of this present Honor than the former Sentence, hut I
commiserate your condition, with whom it is more praiseworthy to oblige ill
men, than conserve the Revenue of the Public. By saying thus and discovering
their Thefts, he stopped the mouths of those who cried him up and vouched for
him, but gained a real commendation from the best men.

When Datis (being sent by Darius under pretense of revenging upon the
Athenians. their burning of Sardis, but in reality to subjugate the Grecians to
his Dominion) put in at Marathon and laid waste the Country, among the
Commanders set over the Athenians to manage the War. Miltiades was of the
greatest Authority; but the second place, both for Reputation and Power, was
possessed by Aristides: and when his Opinion to join Battle was added to that
of Miltiades, it did not a little incline the Balance. Every Leader by his Day
having the Command in chief: When it came to [Aristides] his turn, he delivered
it into the hands of Miltiades, giving his Fellow-Officers to understand that
it is not dishonorable to obey and follow men of good Conduct, but the
contrary and safe. So appeasing their contention, and exho^^ing them to
acquiesce in one and the best Advice, he confirmed Miltiades in the strength of
an undivided Authority. For now every one quitting their Day of Command had
regard to him only. During the Fight the the main Body of the Athenians being
the hardest put to it, the Barbarians for a long time making opposition there
against the Tribes Leontis, and Antiochis, Themistocles and Aristides being
ranged together fought valiantly; for the one was of the Tribe Leontis, the
other of Antiochis. But after the had beaten the Barbarians back to their
Ships, and perceived that they sailed not for the Isles, but were driven in by
the force of Sea and Wind toward the Country of Attick; fearing lest they
should take the City [of Athens] unprovided of defense, they speeded away
thither with nine Tribes, and reached it the same Day. But Aristides being left
with his Tribe at Marathon to guard the Plunder and Prisoners deceived not the
Opinion they had of him. For the abundance of Gold and Silver, of all sorts of
Apparel, and an infinite number of other things that were in the Tents and
Vessels they had taken, he had no desire to meddle with himself, nor suffered
any else to do it, unless there were such who took away any thing unknown to
him. Of this number was Callias the (...)
Torch-bearer; [in the Sacrifices of Ceres.] One of the Barbarians it seems
prostrated himself before this man, supposing him to be a King by his Hair and
Fillet: and when he had so done, taking him by the hand showed him a great
quantity of Gold hid in a Ditch. But Callias the most cruel and impious of men,
took away the Treasure but slew the Person, lest he should reveal it to any
other. Hence they say the Comic Poets gave his Family the name of Laccopluti,
or enriched by the Ditch, reflecting upon the place where Callias found the
Gold. Aristides soon after this was Archon, although Demetrius the Phalerian
says he governed a little before he died, after the Battle of Plateae. But in
the Records after Xanthippides in whose Year Mardonius was overthrown at
Plateae, amongst very many there mentioned, there is not so much as one of the
same Name as Aristides: But immediately after Phanippus, during whose Regency
they obtained the Victory of Marathon, Aristides is Registered.

Of all his Virtues the Vulgar were most affected with his Justice, because of
its continual and common use. Whence being a Person of mean fortune and Birth,
he possessed himself of the most Kingly and divine Appellation of Just. Which
no King or Tyrant ever sought after; who have taken delight to be surnamed,
Demetrius, Polycrates,
Overcomers of Cities, Seleucus, Ptolomeus Ceraunus,
Thunderers, Demetrius Nicanor,
Conquerours, and some Pyrrhus is surnamed (...), in the following Account of
his Life.
Eagles, and Antiochus (...) etc.
Hawks; Affecting it seems the Reputation which proceeds from Power and
Violence, rather than that of Virtue. Although the Divinity (to whom they
desire to compare and assimilate themselves) excels in three things,
Immortality, Power, and Virtue; but the most venerable and Divine is Virtue.
For the Elements and Vacuum have Immortality; Earthquakes, Thunders, Storms,
and Torrents, have great power; but as for Justice and Equity, nothing
participates thereof except what is Divine, by the means of Sapience and
Ratiocination. Wherefore there being three ways the Vulgar stand affected
toward the Deity, an esteem of his happiness, a fear and honor of him; they
seem to think him blessed and happy for his want of Death and Corruption: to fear
and reverence him for his Power and Dominion: But to love, honor, and adore
him for his Justice. Nevertheless being thus disposed they covet that
Immortality which our Nature is not capable of, and that Power the greatest
part of which is at the disposal of Fortune; but foolishly postpone the only
Divine good in us, Virtue: For as much as Justice makes such as are in
Prosperty, Power and Authority to lead the life of a God, the contrary that of
a Beast. Aristides therefore had, at first, the fortune to be beloved for this
surname, but at length envied. Especially when Themistocles spread a Rumor
amongst the people, that by determining and judging all matters by himself,
having destroyed the Courts of Judicature, he secretly made way for a Monarchy
in his own person without the assistance of Guards. Now the spirits of the
people grown high, and set on great matters by reason of their late Victory,
were offended at all of eminent Fame and Reputation. Coming together therefore
from all parts into the City, they banished Aristides by the Ostracism, giving
their Envy to his Reputation the Name of Fear of Tyranny. For it was not the
punishment of any flagitious Act, but speciously termed the Depression and
Restraint of exceeding Greatness and Power. It was a gentle mitigation of Envy,
determining its malice to work Injuries in no intolerable thing, only a 10
years Banishment. But after the People began to subject base and villainous
Fellows hereunto, they desisted from it; Hyperbolus being the last whom they
banished by the Ostracism.

The cause of Hyperbolus his banishmen^ is said to be this, Alcibiades and
Nieias, Men that bore the greatest sway in the City were of different factions.
As the people therefore were about to Vote the Ostracism and apparently to
decree it against one of them; consulting together, and uniting their Parties,
they contrived the Banishment of Hyperbolus. Whereupon the people being
offended, as if some Contemp^ or Affront was put upon the thing, lest off and
quite abolished it. It was performed, to be short in this manner, Every one
taking the (...), or Shell, and writing upon it the Citizen's Name he would
have banished, carried it to a certain part of the Marketplace surrounded with
wooden Rails. First, the Magistrates numbered all the Shells in gross; (for if
there were less than six hundred the Ostracism was imperfect,) then laying
every Name by it self, they pronounced him whose Name was written by the major
part banished for ten Years, enjoying his Estate. As therefore they were
Inscribing their Shells, it is reported that a very illiterate clownish Fellow
giving Aristides his Shel^ as to one of the Mobile, entreated him to write
Aristides upon it; but he being amazed and asking if Aristides had ever done
him any injury, None at all, said he, neither know I the man, but am troubled
to bear him spoken of every where, as a just Person. Aristides hearing this is
said to have made no Reply but returned the Shell with the Inscription of his
own Name. At his departure from the City, lifting up his Hands to Heaven, he
prayed, as appears, contrary to Achilles, that the Athenians might never have
any occasion which should constrain them to remember Aristides. Nevertheless
three Years after, when Xerxes marched through Thessaly and Baeotia into the
Country of Attica, Repealing the Law, they Decreed the return of the Banished;
chiefly fearing Aristides, lest, joining himself to the Enemy, he should
corrupt and bring over many of his Fellow Citizens to the party of the
Barbarians, being mistaken in the Man, who, even before the Decree, was
continually exciting and encouraging the Grecians to the defense of their
Liberty; And afterward when Themistocles was [General of the Athenians] he
assisted him in all things both of Action and Council; rendering the greatest
Enemy he had the most glorious of men in consideration of the common security.
For when Eurybiades was deliberating to desert the Isle of Salamis, and the
Galleys of the Barbarians putting out by Nigh^ to Sea, surrounded and beset the
narro^ passage and Islands; no body knowing ho^ they were environed; Aristides
undauntedly sailed from Aegina through the Enemies Fleet, and coming by Night
to Themistocle^ his Pavilion, and calling him out by himself: If we are Wise,
said he, Themistocle^ laying aside at this time our vain aad childis^
contention, let us enter upon a safe and honorable dispute, contending with
each other for the preservation of Greece; you in the Rulin^ and Commanding, I
in the Executive and Advising part. For as much as I now understan^ that you
alone adhere to the best Advice in counselling without any delay to engage in
the Streights. And though our own party oppose^ yet the Enemy seems to assist
you herein. For the Sea behind, and all around us is covered with their Fleet:
so that we are under a necessity of approving our selves men of Courag^ and
Fighting, whether we will or no; for there is no room left us for flight. To
which Themistocles answered, I would not willingly Aristides, be overcome by
you on this occasion: and shall endeavor, in emulation (...) this commendable
beginning to go beyond the same in my Actions. Also relating to hi^ the
Stratagem he had framed against the Barbarians, he entreated him to persuade
Eurytiades and show him, how it was impossible they should save themselves
without an Engagement. For he gave more to him. Whence in the Council of War,
Cleocritus the Corinthian telling Themistocles that Aristides did not like his
Advice, for he was present and said nothing: Aristides ^nswered, That he should
not hold his peace if Themistocles did not speak that which was ^ost expedient,
but that he was now silent not ^ut of any good will to the person, but in
ap^robation of his Counsel. In this sort were ^he Grecian Captains busied. But
Aristides ^erceiving Psyttalia a small Island that lies ^ithin the streights
over against Salamis whol^ taken up by the Enemy, he put aboard ^is Tenders the
most forward and coura^ious (...).
of his Countrymen, and went ashore upon it; and joining Battle with the
bar^arous people, slew them all, except such ^emarkable Persons as were taken
alive. A^ongst these were three Children of Can^auce the King's Sister, whom he
immedi^tely sent away to Themistocles, and it is re^orted, that according to a
certain Oracle, ^hey were by the Command of Euphrantides ^he Seer, s^crificed
to Bacchus Omestes, or ^he Devou^er. But Aristides surrounding ^he Island with
Armed Men, lay in wait ^r such as were cast thereon, to the intent none of his
Friends should perish, or any of his Enemies escape. For the greatest
engagement of the Ships, and the main fury of the whole Battle, seems to have
been about this place. Wherefore a Trophy was erected in Psyttalia.

After the fight Themistocles, to sound Aristides, told him they had performed
a good piece of service, but there was a better yet to be done, the keeping
Asia in Europe by sailing forthwith to the Hellespont and cutting in sunder the
Bridge. But Aristides exclaiming, desired him to let fall the Discourse, but to
deliberate and Essay, as soon as possible, to remove the Mede out of Greece,
lest being enclosed through want of means to escape, necessity should convert
him to force his way with so great an Army. So Themistocles once more
dispatched Arnaces the Eunuch his Prisoner, giving him in Command privately to
advertise the King that he had diverted the Greeks from their intention o^
setting Sail for the Bridges out of a desire h^ had to preserve him. Xerxes
being much terrified herewith, immediately speeded t^ the Hellespont. But
Mardonius was le^^ with the most serviceable part of the Army, about three
hundred thousand (...) and was formidable, through (...) great confidence he
had reposed in his Infantry menacing the Grecians and writing to the^ in this
manner, You have overcome by Sea Men accustomed to sight on Land and unskilled
at the Oar; but now there is in the Champaign Country of Thessaly, and the
Plains of Beeotia convenient for the Valiant, either Horse or Foot to contend
in. But he sent privately to the Athenians both by Letter and word of Mouth
from the King, promising to re-edifie their City, to give them a vast sum of
Money, and constitute them Lords of all Greece, on condition they were not
engaged in the War. The Lacedaemonians being advertised hereof, and fearing,
dispatched an Embassy to the Athenians, entreating that they would send their
Wives and Children to Sparta, and receive Alimony from them for their
superannuated. For being spoiled both of their City and Country an extreme
poverty oppressed the people. Having given Audience to the Ambassadors, they
returned an Answer upon the motion of Aristides, which was to admiration,
declaring that they forgave their Enemies if they thought all things
^urchasable by wealth, than which they knew nothing of greater value; but that
they were high^y offended at the Lacedaemonians, because they ^ad respect only
to their present poverty and ^xigence, without any remembrance of their ^alour
and Magnanimity, when they ex^ort them to fight in the cause of Greece for the
reward of their Bread. Aristides making this Proposal, and bringing back the
Ambassadors into the Assembly, charged them to tell the Lacedaemonians, that
all the Treasure in the whole World was (...) of that value with the people of
Athens as the liberty of Greece. And showing the Su^ to those who came from
Mardonius, as long as that retains the same course, so long said he, shall the
Citizens of Athens wage War with the Persians for that Country which has been
wasted, and those Temples that have been profaned and burnt by them. Moreover,
he preferred a Decree that the Priests should Anathematize him who sent any
Embassage^ to the Medes, or deserted the Alliance of Greece.

When Mardonius made a second Incursion into the Country of Attica, The
Athenians.
they passed over again to the Isle of Salamis. But Aristides being sent to
Lacedaemon, reproved in them their delay and neglect, as abandoning Athens once
more to the Barbarians but demanded their assistance for that part of Greece
which was not yet lost. The Ephori, hearing this, made show of sporting all
Day, and carelessly keeping Holy Day (for they celebrated the Hiacynthia.) But
in the night selecting five thousand persons, each o^ which was attended by
seven Ilotes, they sent them forth unknown to those o^ Athens. And when
Aristides came again to reprehend them, they told him in derision that he
either doted or dreamed, for the Army was already at Oresteum in their march
toward the Strangers; (for so they called the Persians.) But Aristides said
they jested unseasonably, deluding their Friends instead of their Enemies. Thus
says Idomeneus. But in the Decree of Aristides, not himself but Cimon,
Xanthippus and Muronides are appointed Ambassadors. Being chose General of the
War, he repaired to Plateae with eight thousand Athenians, where Pausanias
Generalissimo of all Greece, joined him with the Spartans, and the forces of
the other Grecians came in to t^em. The whole Camp of the Barbarians being
extended all along the Bank of the River Asopus, their numbers were so great
there was no bounding them, but their Carriages and most valuable things they
surrounded with a square Bulwark, each side of which was the length of ten
^urlongs.

Now Tisamenes of this had prophesied ^o Pausanias and all the Grecians, and
fore^old them the Victory if they made no at^empt upon the Enemy, but stood on
their defense. But Aristides sending to Delphos, ^he God answered, that the
Athenians should overcome their Enemies, in case they made supplication to
Jupiter and Juno of Citheron, Pan and the Nymphs Sphragitides, and s^crificed
to the Heroes Androcrates, (...), Pisander, Damocrates, Hypsion, Actaeon, and
Polyidus; and if they fought within their own Territories in the Plain of Ceres
Eleusina and Proserpina. Aristides was perplexed at the return of this Oracle:
for the Heroes to whom it commanded him to S^crifice, had been Chieftains of
the Plataeans, and the Cave of the Nymphs Sphragitides was on the top of Mount
Citheron, on that side which in the Summer season in opposed to the setting
Sun; In which place, as Fame goes, there was formerly an Oracle, and many that
dwe^^ (...) those parts were inspired with it, whom t^^y called Nympholepti,
possessed with the Nymphs; But the Plain of Ceres Eleusina and giving Victory
to the Athenians, if they fought in their own Territories, recalled again and
transferred the War into the Country of Attica. In this Juncture Arimnestu^ who
commanded the Plataeans, dreamed that Jupiter the Savior, asking him what the
Grecians had resolved upon; he answered* To morrow, Lord, we march our Army to
Eleusis and there give the Barbarians Battle according to the directions of the
Oracle of Apollo; And that the God replied they were utterly mistaken, for that
the places spoken o^ by the Oracle were within the bounds of Plateae, and if
they sought there they should find them. These things appearing plainly to
Arimnestus, when he awoke, he sent for the most aged and experienced of his
Countrymen, with whom communicating and examining the matter, he found that
near Nysia at the foot of Mount Citheron, there was a very ancient Temple
called the Temple of Ceres Eleusina and Proserpina: therefore he forthwith took
Aristides to the place, as being very convenient to embattel an Army of Foot,
because the bottom of the Mountain Citheron rendered the Plain, where it comes
up to the Temple, inaccessible to those whose strength consisted in Cavalry.
Also in the same place there was the Fane of Androcrates environed with a thick
shady Grove. And that the Oracle might be accomplished in all particulars for
the hope of Victory, the Platoeans decreed, Arimnestus motioning the thing,
that the frontiers of their Country toward Attica should be removed, and the
ground where the bounds were set given to the Athenians that they might fight
in defense of Greece in their own proper Dominions. This liberality of the
Plataeans became so famous, that Alexander many years after having obtained the
Dominion of all Asia, when he erected the Walls of Plataea, caused Proclamation
to be made by the Herald at the Olympic Games, that the King did the Plataeans
this favor in consideration of their good deed and magnanimity, because in the
War with the Medes they freely gave their Land to the Grecians.

The Tegeatae striving with the Athenians for place, demanded, That, according
to custom, the Lacedaemonians being ranged in the right Wing of the Battle,
they might have the left, alleging several things in commendation of their
Ancestors. But the Athenians being moved to indignation, Aristides coming forth
into the midst of them; To contend with the Tegeatae, said he, for good Quality
and Valor the present time permits not: but this we say to you, O you Spartans,
and you the rest of the Greeks, that the place neither takes away nor
contributes courage: But we shall endeavor by crediting and maintaining the
Post you design us, to reflect no dishonor on our former performances. For we
are come, not to differ with our Friends, but, fight our Enemies; not to extol
our Ancestors, but to behave our selves toward Greece as valiant Men: For as
much as this Battle will manifest what esteem each City, Captain and private
Soldier is to bear in the Opinion of the Grecians. This the Council of War
hearing, applauded the Athenians, and gave them the other Wing of the Battle.

All Greece being in suspense, and especially the affairs of the Athenians
unsettled, certain persons of great Families and Possessions, having been
impoverished by the War, and seeing all their Authority and Reputation in the
City vanished with their Wealth; others being possessed of their Honors and
Places, convened privately at a House in Plataea and conspired the dissolution
of the Commonwealth. And if the Plot should not succeed, to ruin things, and
betray all to the barbarous people. These matters being in agitation in the
Camp, and many persons already corrupted; Aristides perceiving the design, and
dreading the present juncture of time, determined neither to let the business
pass unanimadverted upon, nor yet totally to detect it, not knowing how many
the Accusation might reach; willing rather to set bounds to his Justice than
the public convenience. Therefore, of many that were concerned, he apprehended
eight only, two of which, who were first proceeded against and most guilty
(Aeschines of Lampra, and Agesias of Acharnae) made their escape out of the
Camp. The rest he dismissed; giving opportunity to such as thought themselves
concealed to be bold and repent; declaring that they had the War the great
Tribunal to clear their guilt by manifesting their sincere and good intentions
toward their Country.

After this Mardonius made Trial of the Grecian courage, by sending a very
great number of Horse, wherein he thought himself much the stronger against
them, who were all pitched at the foot of Mount Citheron, in strong and rocky
places, except the Megareans. But they being three thousand in number were
encamped on the plainer ground, by which means they were damaged by the Horse
charging and making inroads upon them on all hands. They sent therefore in
haste to Pausanias, demanding relief, as not being able alone to sustain the
great numbers of the Barbarians. Pausanias hearing this, and perceiving the
Tents of the Megareans already covered with a multitude of Darts and Arrows,
and they contracted into a narrow space, was at a loss himself how to aid them
with his Battalion of heavy-armed Lacedaemonians. But to the other Captains and
Commanders about him, he proposed it as a subject of Emulation in Valor and
Glory, if any would voluntarily take upon them the defense and succor of the
Megareans. The rest being backward, Aristides undertook the enterprise for the
Athenians, and sent Olympiodorus the most valiant of his inferior Officers
with three hundred chosen Men and some Archers under his Command. These persons
being soon in readiness, and running upon the Enemy, as soon as Masistius who
commanded the Barbarians Horse, a man of wonderful str^^gth and extraordinary
Bulk and comeliness of person, perceived it, turning his Steed he made toward
them. And they sustaining the shock and joining Battle with him, there was a
sharp Conflict, as if by this Encounter they were to try the success of the
whole War. But after Masistius his Horse being wounded with an Arrow, flung
him, (and he falling could hardly raise himself through the weight of his
Armor, and the Athenians pressing upon him with blows, was not without
difficulty to be wounded, being armed completely with Gold, Brass, and Iron,) a
certain person running him in at the Visour of his Helmet, slew him, and the
rest of the Persians, leaving the Body, fled. The greatness of the Grecians
success was known, not by the multitude of the slain (for an inconsiderable
number were killed) but the sorrow the Barbarians expressed. For they shaved
themselves, their Horses and Mules for the death of Masistius, and filled the
Plain with howling and lamentation; having lost a Person who next to Mardonius
himself, was by many degrees the Chief among them both for Valor and Authority.

After this skirmish of the Horse they kept from fighting a long time; for the
Sooth sayers by the Sacrifices foretold the Victory both to Greeks and Persians
if they stood upon the defensive part only, but if the Aggressors the
contrary. At length Mardonius when he had but a few days provision, and the
Grecian forces increased continually by some or other that came in to them,
impatient of delay determined to lie still no longer; but, passing Asopus by
day break, to fall unexpectedly upon the Grecians, and signified the same over
Night to the Captains of his Host. But about Midnight a certain Horseman stole
into the Greek Camp, and coming to the Watch desired them to call Aristides the
Athenian to him, who with speed obeying the Summons; I am, said he, Alexander
King of Macedonia, but am arrived here through the greatest danger in the World
for the good will I bear you, lest a sudden Onsent should so dismay you, that
you behave your selves in the fight worse than usual. For to morrow Mardonius
will give you Battle, not moved thereto by any hope of success or Courage, but
want of Victuals. For the Prognosticators by their ill-aboding Sacrifices and
Oracles prohibit him the Battle. And the Army is in great despair and
Consternation; but necessity emboldens him to try his Fortune, or sit still and
endure the last extremity of want. Alexander thus saying, entreated Aristides
to take notice of and remember the same, and not reveal it to any other. But he
told him, it was not convenient to conceal the matter from Pausanias (because
he was General) but as for any other, he determined to keep it secret from them
till such time as the Battle was fought; but if the Grecians obtained the
Victory, that then no one should be ignorant of Alexander's good will and
kindness toward them. After this, the King of Macedonia rode back again, and
Aristides went to Pausanias his Pavilion and told him what had been said; and
they sent for the rest of the Captains, and gave Orders that the Army should be
in Battle Array.

Here (according to Herodotus) Pausanias spoke to Aristides, desiring him to
transfer his Athenians to the right Wing of the Army opposite to the Persians
(for that they would do better service against them, having been experienced in
their way of Combat, and emboldened with their former Victories) and give him
the left, where the Medizing Greeks were to make their Assault. The rest of the
Athenian Captains therefore looked upon Pausanias as very unjust and arrogant,
because permitting the rest of the Army to keep their stations, he removed them
only from place to place like so many Slaves opposing them (...).
********** to the greatest strength of the Enemy* (...) Aristides said, they
were altogether (...) if they of late contended with the ^^geatae for the right
Wing, and gloried in ^^ing preferred before them; but now wh^^ the
Lacedaemonians give them place in the l^ft, and yielded them in a manner the
leading of the Army, they neither are contented with the honor that is done
them, nor look ^^on it as an advantage not to fight against their Countrymen
and Kindred, but Bar^arians, and such as were by nature their Enemies. Hereupon
the Athenians very ^^dily changed places with the Lacedaemonians, and there
went a great talk amongst them as they were encouraging each other, that the
Enemy approached with no better Arms or stouter Hearts than those who fought
the Battle of Marathon; but had the same embroidered Coats and Gold upon their
delicate Bodies and effeminate Minds: but we have the same Weapons and Bodies,
and our Courage augmented by our Victories; and fight not like them The
Lacedaemonians.
in defense of our Country only, but for the Trophies of Salamis and Marathon;
that they may not be looked upon as due to Miltiades or Fortune, but the people
of Athens. Thus therefore were they making haste to change the Order of their
Battle. But the Thebans understanding it by their Fugitives, forthwith acquaint
Mardonius; and he, either for fear of the Athenians, or a desire to engage the
Lacedaemonians, marched over his Persians to the Right, and commanded the
Greeks of his party to be posted opposite to the Athenians. But this
Transposition being mainifest, both Pausanias, wheeling about again, ranged
himself in the Right, and Mardonius, as at first took the left Wing over
against the Lacedaenians. So the day passed without Action.

After this the Grecians determined in Council to remove their Camp something
further, to possess themselves of a place convenient for watering, because the
Springs near them were troubled and polluted by the Barbarian Cavalry. But
Night being come, and the Captains marching toward the place designed for
their encamping, the Soldiers were not very ready to follow, and keep in a
Body, but as soon as they passed the first fortifications made toward the City
of Plateae, and a great Tumult was there caused by those who were dispersed,
and pitched their Tents in disorder. The Lacedaemonians, though against their
wills, had the fortune to be left by the rest. For Amompharetus a brave and
daring Man, who being a long time before fired with a desire of the Fight, and
ill resenting their many lingrings and delays, calling the removal of the Camp
a mere running away and flight, protested (...) would not desert his Post, but
there to (...) main with his Company, and sustain the charge of Mardonius. And
when Pausanias came to him and told him he did the^^ things by the Votes and
determinations of the Grecians, Amompharetus taking up a great stone and
flinging it at Pausanias his feet, and by this token, said he, do I give my
suffrage for the Battle, not minding the cowardly Consultations and Decrees of
other Men. Pausanias not knowing what to do in the present juncture sent to the
Athenians, who were drawing off, to stay and accompany him; so he himself
marched the rest of the Army to Plateae to the intent to make Amompharetus move.

In the interim Day came upon them, and Mardonius (for he was not ignorant of
the Grecians deserting their Camp) having his Army in Array, fell upon the
Lacedaemonians with great shouting and noise of the barbarous people, as if
they were not about to join Battle, but spoil the Greeks in their flight. Which
within a very little time came to pass. For Pausanias perceiving what was done
made a halt, and commanded every one to put themselves in order for the Battle,
but (either through his anger with Amompharetus, or the disturbance he was in
by reason of the sudden approach of the Enemy) forgot to give the Grecians the
Word. Whence it was that they came not immediately, or in a body, to their
assistance, but by small Companies and straggling when the Fight was already
begun. [For Pausanias] offering Sacrifice, he found it not acceptable to the
Gods, so commanded the Lacedaemonians, laying down their Shields at their feet
to abide quietly and attend his directions, making no resistance to any of
their Enemies. And offering a second time, as the Hors^ charged, one of the
Lacedaemonians was (...). At this time also Callicrates, who, by report, was
the most comely proper man in the Army, being shot with an Arrow and upon the
point of expiring, said, that he lamented not his death (for he came from home
to lay down his life in the defense of Greece) but that he died without Action.
The case was hard, and wonderful the forbearance of the Men; for they Repel^ed
not the Enemy that charged them, but expecting their opportunity from the Gods
and their General, suffered themselves to be wounded and slain in their ranks:
some ^y, that Pausanias being at Sacrifice and Prayers some space out of the
Battle, that cer^ain Lydians falling suddenly upon him plun^ered and squandered
the Sacrifice. But that Pausanias and his Company having no Arms beat them with
Staffs and Whips. W^^^^fore at this day in imitation of this Inva^^^^ the
whipping the boys about the (...) in Sparta, and after that the Lydian
^^^cession is performed Pausanias (...) being troubled at these things, the
(...) offering one Sacrifice after another, (...) himself toward the Temple
with (...) his eyes, and lifting up his hands to ^eaven, beseeched Juno of
Citheron and the ^ther tutelar Gods of the Plataeans, if it (...) not in the
(...) the Grecians to (...) the Victory, that ^^nt might perish, performing
some remarkable thing, by their Actions demonstrating to their Enemies, that
th^^ waged war with men of Courage and Soul^^ers. These Prayers of Pausanias
being heard (...) he made his Supplications, the Sacrif^^^ appeared propitious,
and the Southsay^^ foretold the Victory. The word being ^ven, the
Lacedaemonian* Battalion of (...) seemed on the sudden like some one fierc^
Animal, setting up his Bristles and betak^^^ himself to the Combat. Then it was
th^^ the Barbarians considered they encountre^ with men who would fight it to
the death wherefore holding their Targets before them they shot their Arrows
amongst (...) Lacedaemonians. But they keeping together in the order of a
Phalanx, and ^^^ling upon them, forced their Targets (...) of their hands, and
smiting the breasts and faces of the Persians overthrew many of them, who fell
not either unrevenged or without courage. For taking hold of the Spears with
their bare hands, they brake many of them, and betook themselves not in vain to
Swords drawing, but making use of their Battel-Axes and Falchions, and wresting
the Lacedaemonians Shields from them, and grapling with them, it was a long
time that they made resistance.

In the mean time the Athenians stood still in expectation of the
Lacedaemonians. But when they heard the noise of those that were engaged in the
Fight, and a Messenger, ^s they say, came from Pausanias to adver^ise them of
what was done, they soon spee^ed to their assistance. And as they passed
^^rough the Plain to the place where the ^oise was, the Greeks who took part
with ^he Enemy came upon them. But Aristides (...) soon as he saw them going a
considerable ^^ce before the rest, cried out to them, con^^ing them by the
Guardian Gods of Greece (...) forbear the fight, and be no impediment (...)
stop to them, who were succouring per^^^s that fought in defense of Greece. But
^^en he perceived they gave no attention (...) him, and had prepared themselves
for (...) Battle, then turning from the present (...) (of the Lacedaemonians)
he engaged them being five thousand in number. But the gr^^test part soon gave
way and retreated, for the Barbarians also were put to flight. The sharpest
Conflict is said to have been against the Thebans, the chiefest and most
powerful persons among them at that time ^^ding with the Medes, and leading the
multitude not according to their own inclinations, but as being subjects of an
Oligarchy. The Battle being thus divided, the Lacedaemonians first beat off the
Persians; and a Spartan named Arimnestus, slew Mardonius by a blow on the head
with a stone, as the Oracle in the Temple of Amphiaraus, foretold him. For
Mardonius sent a Lydian thither, and another person a Carian to the Cave of
Trophonius. This latter, the Priest o^ the Oracle answered in his own Language*
But the Lydian sleeping in the Temple o^ Amphiaraus, it seemed unto him that a
certain Minister of the Gods stood before him and commanded him to be gone; but
refusing to do it, he flung a great stone at (...) Head, so that he thought
himself slain wit^ the blow. In this manner are these things said to come to
pass. But they The Lacedaemonians.
blocke^ up those that fled within their Walls (...) Wood: and a little time
after the Atheni^^ put the Thebans to flight, killing three hundred of the
chiefest and of greatest not among them in the Fight. For when the began to
fly, news came that the Army of the Barbarians was besieged within their
Rampires. So giving the Greeks opportunity to save themselves, they marched to
assist them at the fortifications. And coming in to the Lacedaemonians who were
altogether unhandy and unexperienced in Storming, they took the Camp with great
slaughter of the Enemy; for of three hundred thousand, forty thousand only are
said to escape with Artabasus; but on the Grecians side there perished in all
thirteen hundred and sixty: of which were fifty two Athenians all of the Tribe
Aiantis that fought (says Clidemus) with the greatest courage of any,
(wherefore those of that Tribe, according ^o the Oracle of Apollo, offered
Sacrifice ^^r the Victory to the Nymphs Sphragitides at the expense of the
public.) There were ninety one Lacedaemonians and sixteen Tegeatae. It is
strange therefore upon what grounds Herodotus says, that they only, ^^d none
other, encountered the Enemy; ^or the number of the slain and their Monu^ents
testify that the Victory was obtained ^y all in general: and if the rest
standing ^ill, the Inhabitants of three Cities only had ^een engaged in the
fight, they would not ^ave set this Inscription on an Altar.

The Persians chased by valiant deeds of War, This common Altar the freed
Greeks did rear, Sacred to Jupiter the (...).
Deliverer.

They fought this Battle on the fourth day of the Month Boedromion, according
to August.
the style of the Athenians, but in that of the Boeotians the twenty seventh of
Pa^^(...)s; on which day there is still a Convention of the Greeks at Plateae,
and those of that place offer Sacrifice for the Victory to Jupiter the
Deliverer. As for the difference of Days it is not to be wondered at, seeing at
this time when there is a more accurate search made into matters relating to
Astronomy, some make one some another beginning and ending of the Month.

After this the Athenians, not yielding the honor of the Day to the
Lacedaemonians, nor consenting they should erect (...) Trophy, things were well
nigh ruined by a dissension amongst the armed Greeks had not Aristides by much
soothing and counselling the Commanders, especially Leocrites and Muronides,
pacified and persuaded them to leave the thing to the Decision of the Grecians.
And they debating the matter; Theogiton the Megarean declared the honor of the
Victory was to b^ given some other City, if they would prevent a Civil War.
After him Cleocritus of Corinth rising up, made people think he would ask the
Palm for the Corinthians (for next to Sparta and Athens Corinth was in greatest
estimation;) But he delivered his Opinion, which had the good liking and
Admiration of all, in favor of the Plataeans; and counseled to take away all
contention by giving them the Reward and glory of the Victory, whose being
honored could be disgusted by neither Party. This being said, first Aristides
gave consent in the name of the Athenians, and Pausanias for the
Lacedaemonians. So being reconciled, they set apart fourscore Talents for the
Plataeans, wherewith they built a Temple and dedicated an Image to Minerva, and
adorned the Temple with Pictures which even to this very day retain their
Lusture. But the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, each erected a Trophy apart by
themselves. Consulting the Oracle about offering of Sacrifice, Apollo answered,
that they should dedicate an Altar to Jupiter the Deliverer, but not to
sacr^^^ce, till extinguishing the Fire throughout the Country, as having been
defiled by the Barbarians, they kindled unpolluted Fire at the Common Altar at
Delphos. The Magistrates of Greece therefore went forthwith and compelled such
as had Fire to put it out; and Euclidas a Plataean, promising to fetch Fire,
with all possible speed, from the Altar of the God, went to Delphos, and having
sprinkled and purified his body, crowned himself with Laurel, and taking the
fire from the Altar ran back to Plateae, and returned before Sun set:
performing the same day a Journey of a thousand Stadiums; but saluting his
fellow Citizens, 125 Italian Miles.
and delivering them the fire, he immediately fell down, and in a short time
after expired. Bu^ (...) Plataeans taking him up interred him (...) the Temple
of Diana Euclia, setting this Inscription over him, Euclidas ran to Delphos and
back again in one Day; Many are of Opinion that Euclia is Diana and call her by
that Name. But some say she was the Daughter of Hercules and Myrto the Daughter
of Menaetius and sister of Patroclus, who dying a Virgin was worshipped by the
Baeotians and Locrians. Her Altar and Image are set up in all their
Marketplaces, and those of bot^ Sexes that are about Marrying, Sacrifice to
her before the Nuptials.

A general Assembly of all the Greeks being called, Aristides proposed a
Decree, that the Deputies of Greece and the Overseers of things Holy might
assemble annually at Plateae, and every fifth Year celebrate the Games of
Liberty. And that there should be a Levy upon all Greece, for the War against
the Barbarians, of ten thousand Spearmen, one thousand Horse, and an hundred
Sail of Ships; but the Plataeans to be exempt and sacred to the service of the
Gods, offering Sacrifice for the welfare of Greece. These things being
ratified, the Plataeans undertook the performing an Annual Sacrifice to such as
were slain and buried in that Place; which they still perform in this manner.
On the sixteenth day of Septem-
Maimacterion (which with the Baeotians is Alalcomenius) they make their
Procession, the which, beginning by break of Day, is led by a Trumpeter
sounding a Point of War; then follow certain Chariots laden with Myrrh and
Garlands, and a black Bull: then come the young men of free Birth carrying
Libations of Wine and Milk in large two-eared Vessels, and Jars of Oil and
precious Ointments (for it is not permitted any of servile condition to have
any hand in this Ministration, because the men died in defense of their
Liberty) after all comes the chief Magistrate of Plateae (for whom although it
be unlawful at other times either to touch Iron or wear any other colored
Garment but wh^^e) at that time apparelled in a Purple (...); and taking a
Water-pot out of the City Chamber, proceeds, bearing a Sword in his Hand
through the middle of the Town to the Sepulchers: Then drawing Water out of a
Spring he washes and anoints the ^^lars of the Monuments, and sacrificing the
Bull upon a Pile of Wood, and making supplication to Jupiter and Mercury of the
Earth, invites those Valiant Men who perished in the defense of Greece to the
Banquet and Parentations; After this filling a Bowl with Wine, and pouring it
out, he says, I drink to those persons who lost their lives for the liberty of
Greece. These Solemnities even to this day do the Plataeans observe.

Aristides perceived that the Athenians after their return into the City
endeavored at a Democracy, and as well deeming the People worthy his care in
consideration of their valiant behavior, as also that it was a matter of
difficulty, they being powerful and much conceited of their Victories, to deal
with them by force, he makes a Proposal that every one might share in the
Government, and Magistrates be chosen out of the whole body of the Athenians.
Themistocles telling the People in Assembly that he had some Advice for them,
which was not to be given in Public, but of great advantage and security to
the City; they commanded Aristides only to hear and consider of it with him.
And he acquainting Aristides that his intent was to set fire on the Grecian
Fleet (for by that means should the Athenians become most powerful and Lords of
all) Aristides returning to the Assembly, told them, that nothing was more
advantageous than what Themistocles designed, nor nothing more unjust; The
Athenians hearing this, gave Themistocles order to desist; Such lovers of
Justice were the People, and such Credit and confidence did they repose in this
Man.

Being sent in joint Commission with Cimon to the Wars, he took notice that
Pausanias and the other Spartan Captains were morose and crabbed to the
Confederates, and by being himself gentle and courteous in his Conversation,
and making Cimon agreeable and sociable in his Expeditions, he stole away the
chief Command from the Lacedaemonians neither by Weapons, Ships, or Horses, but
by his civility and good behavior. For the Athenians being endeared to the
Grecians by the justice of Aristides and Cimon's moderation, the Tyranny and
Austerity of Pausanias rendered them yet more desirable: for he always
discoursed the Commanders of the Confederates hastily and roughly, and the
Common Soldiers he punished with stripes, or standing under the Iron Anchor
for a whole day together, neither was it permitted any to provide straw for
themselves to lie on, or forage for their Horses, or come near the Springs to
Water before the Spartans were furnished, but servants with Whips drove away
such as approached. Concerning which things when* Aristides once was about to
expostulate with and reprimand Pausanias, he told him with an angry look that
he was not at leisure, and gave no attention to him. Hereupon, both the Sea
Captains and Commanders of the Land Army of the Grecians coming to Aristides
persuaded him to be their General, and receive the Confederates into his
Command who had long desired to relinquish the Spartans and come over to the
Athenians. But he answered, that he saw both Equity and Necessity in what they
said, but their fidelity stood in need of some Action, the performance of which
might keep the multitude from changing their minds, Vliades the Samian, and
Antagoras of Chios, conspiring together boarded Pausanias his Gally, getting
her between them as she was sailing before the rest. But when Pausanias
beholding them rose up, and furiously threatened soon to make them know that
they had not attempted upon his Gally, but their own natural Country, they
willed him to depart and thank Fortune that fought for him at Plateae; for
hitherto in reverence to that the Grecians did not inflict condign punishment
upon him. In the end they revolted to the Athenians. And here the magnanimity
of the Lacedaemonians was wond^rful. For when they perceived that their
Generals were corrupted by the greatness of their Authority, they voluntarily
laid down the chief Command, and left off sending any more of them to the Wars,
choosing rather to have Citizens of Moderation and perseverance in their
Customs and Manners than to possess the Dominion of all Greece.

Now even during the Command of the Lacedaemonians, the Grecians paid a certain
Contribution toward the maintenance of the War; and being desirous to have all
particular, Persons, Town by Town, rated their due proportion, they desired
Aristides of the Athenians, and gave him Command, surveying the Country and
Revenue, to Sesse every one according to their ability and what they were
worth. But he being so largely empowered, Greece as it were permitting all her
Affairs to his sole management, went out Poor, and returned Poorer; laying the
Tax not only without corruption and injustice, but with the good liking and
convenience of all. For as the Ancients c^lebrated the age of Saturn; so did
the Confederates of Athens, Aristides his Taxation* terming it the happy Time
of Greece, and that more especially, the same being in a short time doubled,
and soon after trebled. For the Assessment which Aristides made was four
hundred and sixty Talents. But to this Pericles added very near one third part
more, for Thucydides says, that in the beginning of the [Peloponnesian] War,
the Athenians had coming in from their Confederates six hundred Talents. But
after Pericles his death, the Demagogues increasing by little and little,
raised it to the sum of thirteen hundred Talents, not through the Wars being so
expensive and chargeable, either in the length or ill success thereof, as by
their exciting the people to Largesses, Play-House-expences, and the erecting
of Statues and Temples. Aristides therefore acquiring a wonderful and great
Reputation by his levying the Tribute, Themistocles is said to deride him as if
this were not the commendation of a Man but a Money-bag, making a dislike
return to the free speech of Aristides. For he, when Themistocles once was
saying, that he thought the chiefest Virtue of a General was to understand and
foreknow the Measures the Enemy would take, replied, This indeed, Themistocles,
is necessary, but abstinence from bribes is an excellent thing and truly worthy
a General.

Moreover, Aristides made all the people of Greece swear (to keep the League)
and himself took the Oath in the name of the Athenians, flinging Wedges of red
hot Iron into the Sea after Curses [pronounced against them that should make
breach of their Vow.] But afterward, it seems, when things were at such a pass
as constrained them to govern with a stronger hand, he advised the Athenians,
throwing the Perjury upon him, to manage Affairs as their convenience required.
Upon the whole matter Theophrastus tells us, this Person was in his own private
affairs, and those of his fellow Citizens nicely just, but that in public
matters he did many things according to the state and condition of his
Country, as frequently requiring acts of injustice. It is reported of him,
that he should say to one who was in debate whether he should convey the
Treasure from Delos to Athens contrary to the League at the persuasion of the
Samians, that the thing indeed was not just but expedient.

In fine, having established the Dominion of his City over so many people, he
himself remained indigent; and always delighted as much in the glory of being
Poor, as in that of his Trophies. And it is evident from this: Callias the
Torch-bearer (...) related to him: This Person his Enemi^^ prosecuting in a
Capital cause, when they had slightly argued the matters whereof they indicted
him; thus, nothing to the point, bespoke the Judges: You know, said they,
Aristides the Son of Lysimachus, who is the Admiration of all Greece: In what
(...) condition do you think his Family is in at his House, when you see him
appear in public in such a threadbare Cloak? Is it not probable therefore,
that, not keeping the cold from him abroad, he wants food and other necessaries
at home? yet this Man, though his Cousin-German, does Callias the most wealthy
of the Athenians take no care for, being with his Wife and Children in a
necessitous condition; having made use of him in many cases, and often reaped
advantage by his Interest with you. But Callias perceiving the Judges were
moved hereby, and exasperated against him, Subpoena'd Aristides, requiring him
to testify that when he frequently offered him diverse presents, and entreated
him to accept them, he refused, answering, that it became him better to be
proud of his Poverty than Callias of his Wealth: for there are many to be seen
that make a good and bad use of Riches, but it is hard to meet with one who
bravely suffers Poverty; but that they should be ashamed of it who sustained it
against their Wills. Aristides deposing these things in favor of Callias,
there was none who heard them that went not away desirous rather to be Poor
like Aristides, than Rich as Callias. Thus Aeschines the follower of Socrates
writes. But Plato of all the great and renowned Men in the City of Athens,
declares this person only worthy of consideration; for Themistoles, Cimon, and
Pericles filled the City with Porticoes, Treasure, and many other vain things,
but Aristides squared his Actions by the Rule of Justice. Great were the
manifestations of his Moderation even toward Themistocles himself. For though
he was his Adversary in all his undertakings, and the cause of his Banishment,
when he afforded an opportunity of Revenge being accused to the City he bore
him no malice; but Alcmaeon, Cimon, and many others, Prosecuting and Impeaching
him; Aristides only neither did nor said any ill against him, nor insulted over
his Enemy in his Adversity, as he never envied him his Prosperity.

Some say Aristides died in Pontus, going by Sea upon the Affairs of the
Public. Others that he died of Old Age at Athens, being in great Honor and
Veneration amongst his fellow Citizens. But Craterus the Lacedoemonian speaks
of his Death in this manner. After the Banishment of Themistocles, he says,
the people growing insolent, there arose a great number of Evidences, who
impeaching the Nobility and principal men in the City, subjected them to the
Envy of the multitude, swelled with their good fortune and Power. Amongst which
Aristides was condemned of Bribery, upon the Accusation of Diophantus of
Amphitrope, for taking Money from the Ionians, when he was Collector of the
Tribute. But of this Craterus brings no written proof neither the Sentence of
his Condemnation nor the decree of the People; though he is wont fairly to set
down such things, and cite^ his Authors: almost all others who have discoursed
of the miscarriages of the People toward their Generals, collect together and
treat of the Banishment of Themistocles, Miltiades his Bonds, Pericles his
Fine, and the death of Paches in the Judgment-Hall, who upon receiving
Sentence, slew himself before the Tribunal, with many things o^ the like
nature; and they add the Banishment of Aristides; but of this his condemnation
they make no mention. Moreover, h^^ Monument is to be seen at Phalera, which
they say was built him by the City, a^ not leaving enough even to defray
Funeral Charges. And Story says, that h^ two Daughters were publicly married
o^ of the Prytaneum or Common Treasur^ by the City, decreeing each of them
three hundred Drams for her Portion; But upon his Son Lysimachus the people
bestowed an hundred Minae of Silver, and a Plantation of as many Acres of
ground, and ordered him besides, upon the motion of Alcibiades, four Drams
a day. Furthermore, Lysimachus leaving a Daughter named Policrite, ^s
Callicrates says, the People Voted her ^lso the same provision of Corn with
those that obtained the Victory in the O^ympic Games. But Demetrius the
Phalerian, Hieronymus the Rhodian, Aristoxenus the Musician and Aristotle (if
the Treatise ^f Nobility is to be reckoned among the genuine Pieces of
Aristotle) say that Myrto Aristides his Granddaughter was married ^o the wise
Socrates having another Wife, ^ut taking her as remaining a Widow by ^^ason of
her Indigence, and wanting the ^ecessaries of life. But Panaetius sufficiently
^onfuteth this in the Books he has written ^oncerning Socrates. And Demetrius
the ^halerian in his Socrates says, he knew one ^ysimachus Son to the Daughter
of Aristides ^^treamly necessitated, who sitting at a ^ace called the Jaccheum,
sustained himself ^y a Table to interpret Dreams, and that ^e being the Author
of the Decree induced ^e People to give his Mother and Aunt ^alf a Dram a
Day. Moreover, the same Demetrius says, that reviewing the Laws he decreed
each of these Women a Dram a Day. And it is not to be wondered at, that the
People of Athens should take such care of those that live in the City, since
hearing the Granddaughter of Aristogiton was in a low condition in the Isle of
Lemnos, and so poor no body would marry her, they brought her back to Athens,
and marrying her to a Person of great Quality, gave with her a Farm in the
Borough of Potam, of which Bounty and Humanity this City of Athens, even in
this our Age, giving diverse Demonstrations is had in Admiration, and celebrated
deservedly.

Labor and pain did Catoes years employ
The Country gave his youth an honest joy
Sometime he little Villages would see
And plead ye poor man's cause wthout a fee

THE LIFE OF MARCUS CATO THE CENSOR.
By Sir John Litcott, late Fellow of King's College in Cambridge.
Volume II.
MArcus Cato (as it is reported) was born at Tusculum, though (till he betook
himself to Civil and Military Affairs,) he lived and was bred up in the
Country of the Sabines, where his Father's Estate lay. His Ancestors seeming
to almost every one unknown, he himself is fain to praise his Father Marcus as
a Worthy and Valiant Person, and Cato his great Grandfather too, as one who had
often obtained the Military Prizes, and who, having lost five Horses under him,
received, on the account of his Valor, the Worth of them out of the Public
Exchequer. Now it being the custom among the Romans to call those (who, having
no luster by Birth, made themselves Eminent by their own Worth) Freshmen or
Vpstarts, they called even Cato himself so, and so he confessed himself to be,
as to any public Eminency or Employment, but yet asserted that in reference to
the Exploits and Virtues of his Ancestors, he was very ancient. His third name
formerly was not Cato, but Priscus, though afterward he had the Surname of
Cato, by reason of his great Abilities; for the Romans signified by Cato a
Prudent or Experienced Man. He was of a Ruddy complexion, and gray eyed, as he
hints to us, who, with no good will, made the following Epigram upon him.
Porcius, who snarls at all in every place,
With goggling gray eyes, and his fi^ry face,
Even after Death, will not received be
By Proserpin, the Infernal Deity.
He contracted even from his Childhood a very good habit of Body by his
Exercises, so that he seemed to have an equal portion both of Health and
Strength: But he exerted and used still his Eloquence through all the
Neighborhood and little Villages, it being as requisite as a second Body, and
a necessary Organ to one who has great business. Nor would he ever deny to be
Council for those who needed him, and he was indeed early reckoned a good
Lawyer, and quickly after an Eminent Orator.

Hence his Wisdom and depth of Capacity did appear more and more to those who
used his Conversation, which Talents required an Employment in the management
of great Affairs, and those even of the Roman Commonwealth it self. Nor did he
only abstain from taking Fees for his Counsel and Pleading, but did not so
much as affect the honor which proceeded from such kind of Combats, seeming
much more desirous to signalize himself in the Camp and in real Fights; for
being yet but a youth, his Breast was full of the scars he received from the
Enemy; being (as he himself says) but seventeen years old when he (...).
made his first Campaign: About which time Hannibal burnt and pillaged all
Italy. In Engagements he would use to strike lustily, without the least
flinching stand firm to his ground, with a fierce countenance stare upon his
Enemies, and with a harsh threatening voice accost them. Nor was he out in his
Opinion, whilst he taught, That such a rugged kind of Behavior sometimes does
strike the Enemy more than the Sword it self. In his Marches he bore his own
Arms on foot, whilst one only Servant followed, to carry the Provisions for his
Table, with whom he is said never to be angry or hasty whilst he made ready his
Dinner or Supper, but would sor the most part, when he was free from Military
Duty, assist and help him himself to dress it. Moreover, when he was with the
Army, he used to drink only Water; but, when thirsty he would mingle it with a
little Vinegar; or if he found his strength fail him, take a little Wine.

The little Countrey-house of Marcus Curious, who had been thrice carried in
Triumph, happened to be near his Grounds; so that going thither often, and
contemplating the small compass of the Place, and littleness of the Dwelling,
he could not but wonder at the mind of the Person, who being one of the
greatest of the Romans, and having subdued the most Warlike Nations, nay and
driven Pyrrhus out of Italy, should himself after three Triumphs dig in so
small a piece of ground, and live in such a kind of Cottage. Here it was that
the Ambassadors of the Samnites finding him boiling of Turnips in the
Chimney-corner, offered him a good present of Gold; but he sent them away with
this Saying; That He, whom such a Supper did suffice, had no need of Gold; and
he thought it more honorable to conquer those who possessed the Gold, than to
possess the Gold it self. Cato reflecting much upon these things, went his way,
and reviewing his Farms, Servants and Housekeeping; increased his Labor, and
retrenched all superfluous Expenses. (...).


When Fabius Maximus took Tarentum, Cato, being then but a youth, was a
Soldier under him, and being lodged once with one Nearchus a Pythagorean, he
desired to understand some of his Doctrine, so that hearing the man discourse
of a few Sentences which Plato uses, as, That Voluptuousness is the greatest
Bait for Vice; The Body is the principal Calamity of the Soul; and that those
Thoughts which do most separate and take it off from the Affections of the
Body, do most affranchise and purify it; he indeed fell in love the more with
Frugality and Temperance. Farthermore, He is said to have learned Greek late,
and when he was pretty old; and that as to his Rhetoric, he profited a little
by Thucydides, but much more by Demosthenes: and indeed his Writings are
handsomely mixed both with Greek Sayings and Histories, nay many of them
translated word for word, are interwoven with his own Apophthegmes and
Sentences. Now there was a certain Nobleman, and one very powerful among the
Romans, called Valerius Flaccus, who was wonderful skilful in discerning a
budding Virtue, and also very much disposed to nourish and advance it: He, it
seems, had Grounds bordering upon Cato's; nor could he but admire, when he
understood by his Servants the manner of his Living, how he labored with his
own hands, went on foot betimes in the morning to the Pleading Courts to assist
them who wanted his Counsel; how returning home again when it was Winter, he
would throw a little Jacket over his shoulders; but in the Summertime work
bare with his Domestics, sit down with them, eat of the same Bread, and drink
of the same Wine. Whilst they related also his other Affabilities, and great
Moderation, together with some of his Wise Sayings; he ordered, That he should
be invited to him to Supper; from which time being well acquainted with his
agreeable and facetious disposition, which, like a Plant, seemed to require
cultivating, and to be grafted in a more eminent place: He did exhort and
persuade him to apply himself to the study of State Affairs at Rome. Thither
therefore he went, and straight by his pleading got many Friends and Admirers;
but Valerius chiefly promoting him to Honor and Power. He first of all got a
Colonel's Place, and afterward was made Questor or Treasurer. And now becoming
eminent and noted he ran with him through the greatest Commands, (...).
being first his Fellow-Consul, and then Censor. But among all the ancient
Senators, he did most keep company with Fabius Maximus; not so much for the
honor of his Person, and greatness of his power, as that he might set before
him his particular Worth and manner of life, as the best Examples to follow,
whereupon he made nothing to oppose Scipio the Great, (...).
who being then but a young man, seemed to envy and set himself against the
Power of Fabius; for being sent together with him as Treasurer, when he saw him
according to his natural custom make great Expenses, and distribute among the
Soldiers without sparing; he freely told him, That the Expense in it self was
not the greatest thing to be considered, but that he corrupted the ancient
Frugality, giving occasion to the Soldiers to abandon themselves to
unnecessary Pleasures and Pastimes: But Scipio answered, That he had no need of
too accurate a Treasurer, for he resolved to go, as it were, full sail to the
War, and that he ought to give the People an account of his Actions, and not of
the money he spent. Hereupon Cato returned from Sicily, and together with
Fabius, made a huge noise in the open Senate against Scipio's lavishing of
unspeakable Sums, and his childish loytering (...).
away his time in Wrestling-Matches and Comedies, as if he were not to make
War, but Holy Day; so that he caused some of the Tribunes of the People to be
sent to call him back to Rome, in case the Accusations should prove true: But
Scipio demonstrating as it were to them, an ensuing Victory, and appearing
only to live pleasantly with his Friends, when there was nothing else to do,
showing also he was not by his Liberality the more negligent in things of
consequence and moment, he forthwith set sail toward the War.

Now Cato grew more and more powerful by his Eloquence, so that most called him
the Roman Demosthenes, but his manner of Life was yet more famous and talked of;
for Eloquence was as an Exercise commonly studied and affected by all the
Youth, but he was very rare who would (...)
endure bodily Labor, a light Supper, and a Dinner which never saw the Fire;
or be (...).
in love with a poor thin Garment, and a homely Lodging, nay and did more
esteem a mind that wanted not great things, than the real possession of them:
For now the State (unable to keep its Purity, by reason of its Greatness, and
having so many Places and People from all Parts under its Government) was fain
to receive many mixed customs, and new fashions of living: With reason
therefore did every body admire Cato, when they saw others sink under their
Labors, and grow quite effeminate by Pleasures; and yet beheld him unconquered
by either, and that not only when he was young and desirous of Honor, but
also when Old and Bald, after his Consulship and Tri^mphs. As a true Victour
too in Wrestling, he would persevere and carry on that Exercise to his very
last. He himself also says, That he never wore a Garment which cost more than a
hundred Drachms, and that when he was General and Consul, he drank the same
Wine which his Workmen did; and that the Provision which was bought in the
Market for his Dinner cost not (usually) above thirty Asses. Now all this was
for the sake of the Commonwealth, that so his Body might be the more Robust and
Hardy for the War. Having a piece of the finest mixed Babylonian Tapestry left
him, he sold it; for that none of his Country Houses were so much as Plastred.
Nor did he ever buy a Slave for above 1500 Drachms, or seek for effeminate
handsome ones, but able, sturdy Workmen, such as are Ostlers and Neat-herds:
And these he thought ought to be sold again, when once they grew old; nor would
he allow them so much as Victuals, when they became useless. In short, He
reckoned nothing a good penn'oth, which was superfluous; but whatever it was,
though sold for a farthing, he would think it a great Price, if you had no need
of it. He purchased also good Arable and Pasture-ground, rather than your well
swept Gardens with their fine Waterworks. Some did impute these things to the
sordid Avarice of the Man, but others approve of him therein, as if he did
only the more strictly deny himself for the rectifying and amending of others:
But for my part, I impute it to an unnatural temper, when a Person uses his
Servants like brute Beasts, by turning off and selling them in their old Age,
and thnks there ought to be no farther Commerce between man and man, than
whilst there arises some profit thereby. Besides, we see that good Nature or
Humanity has a larger Field than bare Justice to exercise it self in; for
naturally indeed we are born to deal with men according to Law and Justice; but
we may extend our Goodness and Charity even to irrational Creatures, and such
Acts flow from a mild good nature, as Water from an exuberant Fountain; so that
it is doubtless the part of a good natured man to keep even cast Horses and
Dogs, and not only take care of them when they are Foles and Whelps, but also
when they are grown old. The Athenians, when they built their Hecatompodon,
turned those Mules loose to feed freely, which they had observed to have
undergone the greatest labor. One of these (they say) came once of it self to
offer its service, and ran along with, nay and went before, the Teams which
drew the Carriages up to the Castle, as if it would incite and encourage them
to draw more stoutly; upon which there passed a Vote, That the poor Mule should
be kept at the Public Charge even till it died. The Graves of Cimon's Horses,
which won thric^ the Olimpian Races, are yet to be seen next his own Monument.
Old Xantippus too (as well as many others who buried the Dogs they had bred up)
entombed his which swam after his Gally to Salamina, when the People fled from
their City [Athens] on the top of a Cliff, which they call the Dog's Tomb to
this day. Nor are we to use Living Creatures like old Shoes or Platters, and
throw them away when they are worn out or broken with service; but if it were
for nothing else but to express the respect we have for Humanity, a man ought
always to show himself in these things to be of a kind and sweet disposition.
As to (...).
my self, I would not so much as sell my Draught-Ox on the account of his Age,
much less for a small piece of money sell a poor old man, and so chase him, as
it were, from his own Country, by turning him not only out of the place where
he has lived a long while, but also out of the manner of living he has been
accustomed to, and that more especially when he would be as useless to the
buyer as to the seller. Yet Cato for all this gloried that he left that very
Horse in Spain, which he used in the Wars when he was Consul, only, because he
would not put the Pubto the charge of his Freight. Now whether these things are
to be ascribed to the greatness or poorness of his spirit, let every one argue
as they please: However as to the Temperance he himself used, he was really to
be admired, it being beyond even the ordinary course of nature; for when he
commanded the Army, he never took for himself, and those that belonged to him,
above three Bushels of Wheat for a Month, and about a Bushel, and a half a day
for his Carriages and Horses: Nay when he entered upon the Government of
Sardinia, though his Predecessors there used to require Tents, Bedding and
Clothes upon the public account, and to charge them heavily by furnishing
Provisions and Entertainments for a great Train of Servants and Friends; He, on
the contrary, by his Frugality showed an incredible difference, for in nothing
wanted he the Contribution of the Public; nay he would walk without a Coach to
visit the Cities, and with one only of the Common Town-Officers, who carried
his Garment, and a Cup to offer Sacrifice in; yet though he seemed thus easy
and sparing to all who were under his Power, he, on the other hand, showed
great severity and strictness, being always inflexible in what related to
Public Justice, and most upright and severe in what concerned the Ordinances
of the Commonwealth; so that the Roman Government, where he was, never seemed
more terrible, and yet more mild. Nay his very manner of speaking seemed to
have such a kind of Idea with it, for it was Courteous, and yet Grave; Pleasant
and Piercing; Facetious and Austere; Sen^entious, and yet Pithy: And (as Plato
says) he was like Socrates, who seemed outwardly to those about him to be but a
simple, blunt and sullen Fellow; whilst at the bottom he was full of such
Gravity and Matter, as would even move Tears and touch the very Hearts of his
Auditors. Wherefore I know not what has persuaded some to say, That Cato's
Style was chiefly like that of Lysias; however, let us leave those to judge of
these things, who profess most to distinguish between the several kinds of
Roman Styles; whilst we write down some of his memorable Sayings; being of the
opinion with some others, That a Man's Parts appear much more by his Words,
than Looks.

Being once desirous to dissuade the common people of Rome from their
unseasonable and impetuous Clamor for Largesses and Distributions of Corn, he
began thus to harangue them: It Is a difficult task, O Citizens, to make
Speeches to the Belly, which has no Ears. Reproving also the ill managery of
Affairs, he said, 'Twas hard to preserve that City, where a Fish was sold for
more than a^ Ox. He had a Saying also, That the Roman People were like Sheep;
for they, when single obey not; but when altogether in a Flock they follow
their Leaders: So ye (said he) are guided by those got together in a Body
though singly you would not use the Counse of a man of 'em. Discoursing of the
Power of Women: All men, quoth he, usually command Women; We command all Men,
and the Women command us. But this indeed is taken out of the Sayings of
Themistocles, for he being in many things governed by his Son, by means of the
Mother: Wife (says he) the Athenians govern the Greeks; I govern the Athenians,
but thou govern'st me, and thy Son governs thee; wherefore pray let him use his
Power sparingly, whereby as simple as he is, he can do more hurt than all the
Athenians together. Another Saying of Cato's was, That the Roman People did not
only prize such and such Purple Dies, but such and such Studies and Exercises
also; For, said he, as Dyers do most of all dye such Colors which they see
most agreeable, so the young men learn, and zealously affect what is most cried
up. He did also exhort them. That if they were grown Great by their Virtue and
Temperance, they should not change for the worse; but if by Intemperance and
Vice they became Great, they should change for the better, for by that means
they were grown indeed too too great. He would say likewise, That they who
endeavored to have a share in the Government, ought like those who know not
their way to go along with Beadles, who have long Sticks, ^est they should go
astray. He did also reprove (...)
the Citizens for choosing still the same Governors; for ye will seem (said he)
either not to esteem the Government worth much, or that many are not worthy to
Govern. Speaking too of a certain Enemy of his, who lived a very base and
discreditable life: This Blade's Mother (quoth he) when she prays that he may
survive her, is looked upon rather to curse than to pray. Pointing at one who
had sold the Land which his Father had left him, lying near the Seaside, He
made as if he wondered at him, being stronger even than the (...)
Sea it self; for what it washed away with a great deal of labor, he with a
great deal of ease drank away. When the Senate with a (...)
greet deal of splendor received King Eumenes at his entrance into Rome, and
the chief Citizens strove who should be most about him; Cato seemed only to
stare upon, and watch him as it were at a distance. One that stood by too, took
occasion to say, That he was a very good Prince, and a great Lover of the
Romans; It may be so, (quoth Cato) but by Nature that same Animal of a King, is
a kind of Man-Eater. Nor were there ever Kings so fortunate as to be compared
with Epaminondas, Pericles, (...)
Themistocles, Marcus Curious, or Amilcar, surnamed Barcas. He used to say too,
That his Enemies did envy him because he would rise before day, and neglected
his own Business to follow that of the Public. He would also tell you, That he
had rather be deprived of the Reward for doing well, than not to suffer the
Punishment for doing ill; and that he could pardon all Offenders but himself.
The Romans having sent three Ambassadors to Bithynia, of which one was Gouty,
another had his Scull trepan'd, and the other seemed little better than a Fool;
Cato laughing, gave out, That the Romans had sent an Embassy, which had neither
Feet, Head nor Brains. Being entreated by Scipio, on the account of Polybius,
for those who were banished out of Achaia, and there happening to be a great
Dispute in the Senate about it, some being for, and some against their Return;
Cato standing up, thus delivered himself: Here do we sit all day long, as if we
had nothing to do but beat our brains whether these old Greeks should be
carried to their Graves by the Bearers here, (...)
or by those in Achaia; But the Senate voteing their Return, it seems that a
few days after Polybius's Party did farther request, that it should be moved in
the Senate, that the said Banished Persons should again receive the honors
which they first had in Achaia, and to this purpose they sounded Cato for his
Opinion, but he smiling, answered, That Polybius, Vlysseslike, (...).
seemed to have a mind to go back to the Cyclop's Den, as having forgot his Cap
and Belt behind him. He would use to assert also, That wise Men profited more
by Fools, than Fools by Wise Men; for that Wise Men would avoid the Faults of
Fools, but that Fools would not imitate the good Examples of Wise Men. He would
profess too, That he was more taken with young Men that blushed, than with
those who looked pale; and that he never desired to have a Soldier that would
use his hands too much in marcbing, and his feet too much in fighting; or
snor'd louder in his sleep, than he hallowed in an Engagement: Intending to
put-upon a huge fat Fellow; How (quoth he) can that Body be profitable to the
Commonwealth, when all the space between the Throat and Groyn is taken up by
the Belly? When one who was much given to Epicurism, desired his acquaintance,
Begging his pardon (he said) He could not live with a Man whose Palate was of a
quicker sense than his Heart or Brains. He would likewise say, That the Soul of
a Lover lived in the Body of another; and that in his whole life he did most
repent him of three things; One was, That he had trusted a Secret to a Woman;
Another, That ever he went by Water when he might have gone on Foot; The third,
That he had remained one whole day without doing any business (...).
of moment. Applying himself to an old Man who was committing some Vice, Honest
man (quoth he) being old age has of it self Blemishes enough, do not you add to
it the deformity of Vice. Speaking to a Tribune, who was reputed a Poisoner,
and was very violent for the bringing in of a Bill, in order to make a certain
Law; Young man (cried he) I know not which would be better, to drink what you
mix, or confirm what you would put up for a Law. Being reviled by a Fellow who
lived a profligate and wicked life; A Contest (replied he) is unequal between
thee and me, for thou can hear ill words easily, and can as easily give
them; but it is unpleasant to me to give such, and unusual to hear them: And
this was his manner of expressing himself in his memorable sayings.

Now being chosen Consul, with his Friend and Acquaintance Valerius Flaccus,
the Government of that part of Spain which the Romans call the Interior Spain,
fell to his Lot; Having overthrown the people hereabouts, some by force, and
overcome others by good words, a great Army of Barbarians fell in upon him, so
that there was danger of being disgracefully forced out again. Wherefore he
called upon his then neighbors the Celtiberians for help; but they demanding
Two hundred Talents for their Auxiliaries, every body made as if it were
intolerable that ever the Romans should promise Barbarians a Reward for their
Assistance; but Cato said, There was no discredit or harm in it; for if they
overcame, they would pay them out of the Enemies Purse, and not out of their
own; but if they were overcome, there would be no body left to demand the said
Reward. But he stoutly won that Battle, and after that, all his other affairs
succeeded splendidly; for Polybius says, That by his command the Walls of all
the Cities, on this side the River Baetis, were in one days time demolished,
and yet there were a great many of them full of stout and warlike men. Cato
himself says, That he took more Cities than he stayed days in Spain. Neither is
this a Rhodomantado, if it be true, that the number was Four hundred. Now
though the Soldiers themselves had gotten much in the fights, yet he
distributed a pound of silver to every man of them, saying, It was better, that
many of the Romans should return home with Silver, rather than but a few with
Gold.

But he affirms, That of all the things that were taken, nothing came to him
besides what he ate and drank. Neither do I find fault (continued he) with
those that seek to get by these spoils, but I had rather strive with the Best
for Valor's sake, than for Wealth with the Richest, or with the most covetous
for love of Money. Nor did he only keep himself clear from taking any thing,
but even all those who more immediately belonged to him.

Now he had five servants with him in the Army; one of them, called Paccus,
bought three Boys, out of those who were taken Captive; which Cato coming to
understand, the poor fellow, rather than he would venture into his presence,
hanged himself, so that Cato again sold the said Boys, and carried the Price he
got for them into the public Exchequer.

Scipio the Great being his enemy, and desiring, whilst he carried all things
so successfully, to obstruct him, and take the affairs of Spain into his own
hands, accordingly brought about his own ends, so as to be appointed his
Successor in the Government, making therefore all possible haste he put an end
to Cato's Authority; but he, taking with him a Convoy of five Companies of
Foot, and five hundred Horse to attend him home, overthrew by the way the
Lacetanians, and taking from them six hundred Deserters, he caused them all to
be beheaded; Upon which Scipio seemed to be in Indignation, but Cato smiling,
said, Thus Rome would become great indeed, if the most honorable and great men
would not yield up the first Place of Valor to those who were more obscure,
and when they who were of the Commonality (as he himself was) would contend in
valor with those who were most eminent in Birth and Honor. Now the Senate
having voted to change nothing of what had been established by Cato, that
Government passed away under Scipio to no manner of purpose, in idleness and
doing nothing; and so diminished his credit much more than Cato's. Nor did
Cato, even after he had triumphed, remit, and slacken the Reins of Virtue, as
many of those do, who strive not so much for Virtue's sake, as Vainglory; and
having attained the highest Honors, as the Consulship and Triumphs, pass the
rest of their Life in Pleasure and Idleness, and so quit all affairs relating
to the Public. But he, like those who are just got into Office, and thirst
after Honor and Glory, would stretch himself, as if he were but just setting
out; and offering still publicly his service to his Friends and Citizens, he
would give over neither his pleadings or Soldiery. He did also as an
Ambassador accompany and assist Tiberius Sempronius, when he went into Tracia
and Istria; and in quality of a Colonel went along with Manlius Aquilius into
Greece, against Antiochus the Great, who, after Hannibal, did more than any one
strike terror into the Romans; for having taken as much of Asia as Seleucus
Nicanor possessed, and having brought under his obedience many and warlike
Nations of the Barbarians, he longed to fall upon the Romans, as if they only
were now worthy to fight with him: So on h^ came with his Forces, pretending as
a specious Cause of the War, that it was to free the Grecians, who had indeed
no need thereof, they having been but newly delivered from the power of King
Philip and the Macedonians, and made Masters of their own Laws, and that by the
goodness even of the Romans themselves; so that hereupon all Greece was in a
Commotion and elevated, having been corrupted by the mighty hopes which the
Governors of their Cities put them into. Manlius therefore sent Ambassadors
to the said Cities, and Titus Flaminius (as it is written among the Affairs
concerning him) did compose and quiet most of the Attempts of the Innovatours,
and that without any trouble. Cato did also suppress the Corinthians, those of
Patras, and the Aegians, and spent too a good deal of time at Athens. There is
also an Oration of his said to be extant, which he spoke in Greek to the
people, and wherein he highly commended the Virtue of the ancient Athenians,
and signified, that he came with a great deal of pleasure to be a spectatour of
the Beauty and Greatness of their City. But this is not true; for he spoke to
the Athenians by an Interpreter, though he was able to have spoken himself; but
his intention thereby was to keep up the Fashion of his own Country, and as it
were scornfully laugh at those who admired nothing but what was in Greek.
Wherefore jesting upon Posthumous Albinus, who had written a Greek History, and
begged pardon for doing so, he said, Pardon indeed ought to have been given him
had he not undertook the Work by the Votes or Order of the Amphictyones. The
Athenians, they say, did admire the quickness and celerity of his Speech, for
an Interpreter would be very long a repeating what he expressed with a great
deal of brevity. In short, he made them believe, that the words of the Greeks
came only from their Lips, whilst those of the Romans came from their Hearts.

Now Antiochus having guarded with his Army the narrow passages about the
Mountains, called Thermopyloe, and added Trenches and Walls to the natural
Fortifications of the place, sat down there thinking he had done enough to
divert the War from thence, so that the Romans seemed wholly to despair of
forcing the Passage; but Cato calling to mind the Compass and Circuit which the
Persians had formerly made to come at this place, went forth in the night,
taking along with him part of his Army; after which, whilst they were climbing
up, the Guide who was a prisoner went out of his way, and wandering up and down
by unpassable and crooked paths, struck the Soldiers with a terrible fear and
consternation. Cato perceiving the danger commanded all the rest to hault, and
stay where they were, whilst he himself, taking along with him one Lucius
Manlius, a wonderful man at climbing of Mountains, went forward with a great
deal of labor and danger, in the dark night, and without the least Moonshine,
over the wild Olive Trees, and steep craggy Rocks, there being (as has been
hinted) nothing but Precipices, and darkness before their eyes, till they fell
into a little pass which they thought might lead down into the Enemies Camp;
There they put up marks upon some of the most conspicuous tops which hung over
the Mountain Callidromus, so that returning again they led the Army along with
them to the said Marks, till they got into their little Path again, and there
once made a halt; but when they began to go farther, the Path did (as it were)
leave them, and a great Precipice seemed to receive them, and put them in
another strait and fear; nor did they perceive all this while that they were
near the Enemy. And now the day began to give some light, when they seemed to
hear a noise, and presently after to see the Greek Trenches and Guard at the
foot of the Rock. Here therefore Cato staid his Forces, and commanded the
Firmians only without the rest to stick by him, for them he had found always
faithful and ready, and straight they stood round him at their close order,
whilst he thus spoke to them. I desire (said he) to tak^ one of the Enemy
alive, that so I may understand what kind of Blades they are who guard the
Passage; their number; and with what Discipline, Order and Preparation they
expect us: but to bring about this Feat (continued he) you must snap him with a
great deal of quickness and boldness, such as the courageous Lions use, when
unarmed they fall upon the timorous Beasts. Cato had no sooner thus expressed
himself, but the Firmians forthwith rushed down the Mountains, and that in the
very posture they were in upon the Guard, so falling unexpectedly in upon them,
they frighted and dissipated them all; one armed man too they took, and brought
to Cato, who quickly learned from him, That the rest of the Forces lay in the
narrow Passage about the King; That those who kept the tops of the Rocks were
Six hundred choice Aetolians; Now Cato despising the smallness of their number
and carelessness, forthwith drawing his sword, fell upon them with a great noise
of Trumpets and shouting. The Enemy perceiving them thus tumbling as it were
upon them from the Precipices, flew to their Main Guard, and put all things
into Disorder. In the mean time whilst Manlius was forcing the Works below, and
pouring the thickest of his Forces into the narrow Passages, Antiochus was hit
in the mouth with a stone, so that his teeth being beaten out thereby, he felt
such excessive pain, that he was fain to turn tail with his Horse; nor did any
part of their Army stand the shock of the Romans.

Now though there seemed no hopes of Fight by reason of the inaccessible ways
and Bypath, as also of the deep Marshes and steep Rocks, which looked as if
they were ready to receive those who should tumble down; the Athenians
nevertheless crowding and pressing together in the strait Passages, destroyed
even one another whilst they seemed afraid of the Swords and Blows of the
Enemy. Cato (as it plainly appears) was never oversparing of his own Praises,
and seldom shunned boasting of any Exploit, which quality indeed seems much to
accompany great Actions, and with any such kind of Actions he was indeed
usually puff't up; nay, he would say, That those who saw him pursue and slay
his Enemies, stickt no^ to assert, That Cato owed not so much to the Public,
as the Public did to Cato: nay, and adds, that Manlius the Consul, coming hot
from the Fight, embraced him for a great while, when all over in a sweat, then
cried out with a deal of joy, That neither he himself, no, nor all the People
together could make him Recompenses equal to his great Actions. After the Fight
he was sent to Rome, that he himself might be the Messenger of it; so that with
a favorable Wind he sailed to Brandusium, and in one day got from thence to
Tarentum; and having traveled four days more, upon the fith, counting from the
time he came from Sea, hearriv'd at Rome, and so he himself brought the first
news of the Victory; whereby he filled the whole City with Joy and Sacrifices;
and the People with an opinion, that they were able to conquer both Sea and
Land.

Now these are almost all the Eminent Actions of Cato, relating to military
Affairs: but as to Civil Policy, he was of opinion, that a great part of it
ought to be employed in accusing and enditing Malefactors; for he himself did
prosecute many, and would also assist others who prosecuted them likewise; nay
would even procure such, as he did Petilius's Party against Scipio; but not
being able to destory him, by reason of the greatness of his Family, and the
integrity of his mind, he at last would meddle no more with him, yet joining
with the Accusers against his Brother Lucius, he cast him in a great sum which
was forfeited to the Public; but he being insolvent, and in danger of being
thrown into Goal, was by a Petition to the Tribunes of the People with much
ado, dismissed. It Is also said of Cato, that when he met a certain youth, who
had with disgrace overthrown one of his Father's Enemies, walking in the
Marketplace; He shak'd him by the hand, telling him, That we ought to
sacrifice to our dead Parents, not Lambs and Goats, but the Tears and Mulcts of
our Adversaries. But neither did he himself 'scape scot-free in his Managery of
Affairs; for if he gave his Enemies but the least Hold, he was still in danger,
and ready to be brought to Justice, for he is reported to have escaped at least
50 Enditements; and one above the rest, which was the last, when he was
fourscore and six years old, about which time, he had this remarkable Saying,
That it was hard for him who had lived contemporary with others a great while
ago, to plead now before a new Race of Men. Neither did he make this the last
of hi^ Lawsuits, for four years after, when (...) was fourscore and ten, he
accused Servil^^ Galba: So that he arrived [we see, as N^^tor did] to three
usual Ages of Man, and that in continual Action, for [as is (...) of him]
having had several Suits with Scipio the Great, about Affairs of (...) he
stretched them down even to Scipio (...) younger, who was his adopted Grand
(...) and the Son of that Paulus, who ov^^ threw Perseus and the Macedonians.
Now Cato, ten years after his Consulship, pu^ (...) for the Office of Censor,
which was indeed the Top of all Honor, and in (...) manner the highest step in
Civil Affairs ^ for besides all other Power, it had also that of an Inquisition
into any ones (...) (...).
and Manners; for the Romans though^ that not so much as a Marriage, or (...)
nights lodging for the Procreation (...) Children, nay not a Feast or Drinking
bout ought to be permitted according (...) every ones Appetite or Fancy,
without ^^ing censured and inquired into; being therefore of opinion, That a
Man's ^^mour was much sooner perceived in these kind of things, than in what is
done p^^lickly and in open day, they chose two Persons; (...).
one out of the Patricians, the other out of the Commons, who were to watch
correct and punish, if any one ran too much after Voluptuousness, or
transgressed the usual manner of living in the place where he was: And these
they called Censors. They had power to take away a Horse, or expel out of the
Senate any one who lived intemperately and out of order. 'Twas also their
business to take an estimate of what every one was worth, and to put down in
Registers every bodies Birth and Quality: The said Office had also many other
Prerogatives, wherefore the chief Nobility opposed his Pretensions to it; for
Emulation vexed the Patricians, who thought that it would be (...) stain to
every bodies Nobility, when men of no honor originally should rise to the
^ighest Dignity and Power. Others, con^cious of their own evil Practices, with
the Violation of the Laws and Customs of their own Country, were afraid of the
Au^terity of the Man; which, when he was ^n Power, was very uneasy and
inexorable. Wherefore consulting among themselves, they set up in opposition to
Cato, ^even Competitours, who with obsequiousness and fair hopes soothed the
People, which seemed desirous of such a kind of Magistracy, which would govern
gently, and serve their Pleasures. Now Cato on ^he contrary promising no such
mildness, but openly threatening evil Livers, from the very speaking Desk he
thus expressed himself, and cried out, That the City wanted great Reformation,
therefore persuaded the people, if they were wise, not to choose one of the
gentlest, but roughest of Physicians; and that such a one he was; and Valeri^^
Flaccus, one of the Patricians, another; so that, together with him, he doubted
not (he said) but he should do something worth the while, and that by cutting
to pieces, and burning like a Hydra, all Luxury and Voluptuousness. He added
too, That he saw all the rest endeavoring after the Office with ill intent,
because they were afraid of those who would exercise it justly, as they ought.
Upon this occasion the People of Rome did really express themselves Great, and
worthy also of great Officers* showing, that they feared not the severity and
grim countenance of Cato, for rejecting those soothing Blades who seemed to do
all things to ingratiate themselves, they took him, together with Flaccus; nay
forth with hearkened to, and obeyed him, not ^ one who stood for the Place, but
as if he ha^ had the actual power of Commanding an^ Governing already.

By these means [I say] he put down the name of this his friend Lucius Valerius
Flac^^ to be his Colleague in that Office, and thre^ out of the Senate (among
several others Lucius Quintus, who had been Consul seven years before, and
(which was greater honor to him than the Consulship) Brother to that Titus
Flaminius, who overthrew King Philip. Now the reason he had for the Expulsion
was this; Lucius it seems took along with him a youth, whom he had kept always
as a Minion from the very flower of his Age, and to whom he gave as much power
and respect as to the chiefest of his Friends and Domestics.

Now it happened that Lucius being Governor of one of the chief Provinces, the
youth clapping himself down by him, as he used to do, among other Flatteries
with which he did easily turn and wind him, when he was in his Cups, he thus
expressed himself; I love you so dearly (quoth he) that though there was a
prize to be seen of the Gladiators at home [viz. Rome] of which nature I never
beheld one in my life; and though I, as 'twere longed to see a Man killed, yet
did I make all possible haste to come to you. Upon this, Lucius mutually
caressing him, replied, Pri^hee sit not so melancholy, for that longing of
yours I will cure: Ordering there-fore forthwith one of those condemned to (...)
dye to be brought to the Feast, together with the Heads-man and Axe: He asked
his Paramour, if now he desired to see the ^ellow executed? The Boy answering
that he did: Lucius commanded the Executioner to cut off his Neck: and this
several Historians mention; nay Cicero himself in his Dialogue de Senectute
brings in Cato expressing the same thing; but Livy says, That he that was
killed was a French Renegade, and that Lucius did not execute him by the stroke
of the Public Executioner, but even with his own hand. And all this is written
in a Speech of Cato's. Now Lucius being thus expelled out of the Senate by
Cato, his Brother took it very ill, and addressing himself to the People,
desired that Cato should declare how the said Execution was; which when he
began to relate, and bring in the Transactions of the Feast, Lucius, with
lifted up (...)
hands, eadeavour'd to deny it; but Cato calling him to his Oath, he fell off
and refused it, so that he was then acknowledged to suffer deservedly.
Afterward when there was some show at the Theater, he passed by the seat,
where those who had been Consuls used to be placed, and sat a great way off,
whereby he moved Compassion in the common people, who presently with a great
noise made bim go on forward, and so as much as possibly they could did set
right and salve what had happened. Manilius also, who according to the public
vogue, would have been next Consul, he threw out of the Senate, and that
because in the presence of his Daughter, and in open day he was a little too
sweet upon his own Wife. He would use to say too, That his Wife never hugged
him so close as when there was a great Thunder; therefore when he had a mind to
rally, he would add, That he was happy when Jupiter thundered. Lucius likewise,
the Brother of Scipio, and one who had been honored with a Triumph,
occasioned some Envy against Cato for taking his Horse from him, and seeming to
do it with a design of putting an affront on Scipio Africanus; but most of all
he chock'd the people, by retrenching from their Luxury, though (most of the
youth being thereby already corrupted) it seemed almost impossible to take it
away with an open hand and directly; wherefore going, as it were, obliquely
round the hedge, he caused all Victuals, Voitures, Women's Apparel, Utensils of
Housevvifery, whose price exceeded a Thousand and five hundred Drachms, to be
rated at ten times as much as they were vvorth; intending by thus making the
said Rates greater, to make greater also the public Tributes. He did also
ordain, that for every thousand Asses, three should be paid; so that they who
were pressed with these Taxes (and savv others, of as good Estates, more
frugal and sparing, pay less into the public Exchequer) should be tired out of
their prodigality. Hereby, on the one side, not only they were disgusted at
Cato who bore the Taxes for the sake of their Luxury, but those too who on the
other side laid by their Luxury for fear of the Taxes; for the common people
reckon, That an Order not to show their Riches, is equivalent to the taking
away their Riches; because Riches are seen much more in superfluous, than in
necessary things, though this made Aristo the Philosopher, much wonder that we
should account them who possessed superfluous things more happy than those who
abounded with what was necessary and useful. In troth, replied he, in these
unuseful and unnecessary things am I happy and rich. Thus the ardent desire of
Riches, proceeds not from any natural Passion within us, but arises rather from
some vulgar and extrinsick opinion. Cato notwithstanding being little
sollicitous as to those who exclaimed against him, grew more stiff in his
Austerity: He therefore caused the Pipes, through which some persons brought
the public Water into their own Houses and Gardens to be cut, and threw down
all the Porches which jetted out into the common streets. He beat down also the
price of public Works, and, on the other side, raised the Imposts on all
things that were sold; by which proceedings he contracted a great deal of
hatred to himself. Now those who were of Titus Flaminius's Cabal, vacated in
open Council all the Bargains and Contracts made by him for the repairing and
carrying on of the sacred and public Buildings, as bringing no profit to the
Commonwealth: They did incite also the boldest of the Tribunes of the people to
accuse him to the Rabble, and to fine him two Talents. They did likewise very
much oppose him in building the Palace which he caused to be erected at the
common charge, just by the Senate House, in the Marketplace, and called it by
his own name, Porcia House. However the people it seems did like his
Censourship wondrous well, for setting up a Statue for him in the Temple of the
Goddess of Health, they put an Inscription under it, not of his Warlike Feats
and Triumphs, but such a one as signified, That this was Cato the Censour, who
by his good Discipline and Ordinances reclaimed the Roman Commonwealth when it
was declining and supinely tumbling into Vice.

Now before this Statue-honour was done to himself, he used to laugh at those
who loved such kind of things, saying, They were not sensible that they gloried
chiefly in the Workmanship of Engravers and Painters, but that the Citizens
bore about his fairest Image in their Breasts. When any seemed to wonder at
him, that he should have never a Statue, when many ordinary persons had one; I
would (said he) much rather be asked why I have not one, than why I have one.
In short, He would not have any honest Citizen endure to be praised, except it
might prove advantageous to the Commonwealth; yet still he most of all
commended himself; for he would often intimate, that they who were of an ill
life, and found fault with, used to say, It was not sure so great a feat to
blame them, for they pretended not all to be Cato 's. He would also add, That
they who did awkardly mimick some (...).
of his Actions, were called left handed Cato's; and that the Senate in most
perilous times would cast their eyes on him, as upon a Pilot in a Ship, and
that often when he was not present would they put off Affairs of greatest
consequence. These things are indeed too testified of him by others; for he had
a great Authority in the City, both for his Life, Eloquence and Age. He was
also a good Father, an excellent Husband to his Wife, and an extraordinary
Oeconomist; nor did he manage all these his Affairs carelessly, and as things of
little moment. Wherefore I think I ought to run over a little farther, whatever
was commendable in him.

He married a Wife more noble than rich; being of opinion nevertheless, that
both of them so qualified are usually haughty and proud: but yet that those of
noble blood, would be more ashamed of base things, and consequently more
obedient to their Husbands in all that was fit and handsome for them. Him that
beat his Wife or Child, he esteemed as one that laid violent hands on what was
most sacred; and a good Husband he reckoned worthy of more Praise than a great
Senator; wherefore he did in nothing more admire old Socrates, than that with
a scolding Wife and block-headed Children, he lived contented and quiet.

As soon as ever his Son was born, though he had never such urgent business
upon his hands, (if it related not to the Public) he would be by when his Wife
did unswaddle and wash it; for she her self suckled it, nay did often too give
her Breast to her Servants Children, to beget by sucking the same Milk a kind
of natural Love in them to her Son. Now when he began to come to years of
Discretion, Cato himself would teach him his Book, although he had a Servant, a
very honest fellow and a good Grammarian, called Chilo, who also taught a good
many others; but he thought not fit, as he himself said, to have his Son
reprimanded by a Servant; or pulled it may be, by the Ears when found tardy in
his Lesson: Nor would he have him owe to a Servant the obligation of so great a
thing as his Learning; wherefore he himself (as we were saying) taught him
Grammar, Law and Fencing: Nor did he only show him too how to throw a Dart, to
fight with other Arms, and to Ride, but even to play at Fisty-cuffs, to endure
both heat and cold, and to swim over the most rapid and rough Rivers. He says
likewise, that he wrote Histories, in great Characters, with his own hand, that
so his Son without stirring out of the House, might learn the Experience and
virtuous Exploits of his Forefathers: Nor did he less abstain from speaking any
thing obscene before his Son, than if it had been in the presence of those
sacred Virgins, which we call Vestals: Nor would he ever go into the Bagno with
him, which seems to be according to the common custom of the Romans; for
Sons-in-Law avoided still bathing with Fathers-in-Law, being ashamed to see one
another naked: But having in time learned of the Greeks to strip with the Men,
they have since taught the Greeks to do it even with the Women themselves.

Thus Cato formed and fashioned his Son to Virtuous Inclinations, who was not
to be found fault with as to his spritefulness; but being of too weak a
constitution for hardships, he required not of him any austere or hard way of
living.

However, though he was thus tender and delicate, he proved a stout man in the
Field, and valiantly behaved himself when Paulus Aemilius fought against
Perseus, where when his Sword was struck from him by a blow, or rather slipped
out of his hand by reason of the moistness thereof; He so far resented it, that
he turned to some of his friends about him, and taking them along with him
again fell upon the Enemy; and having by along Fight and much force cleared the
place at length found it among great heaps of Arms, and the dead Bodies of his
Friends as well as Enemies pil'd one upon another. Whereupon Paulus the
Governor very much recommended the youth; and there is even a Letter of Cato's
to his Son, which does very highly praise this his honorable Exploit and
Prowess for the Recovery only of his Sword. Afterward he married, Tertia
Paulus Aemilius's Daughter, and Sister to Scipio; nor did he match into this
Family less for his own Worth than his Father's, so that Cato's care in his
Sons Education had an effect suitable. He purchased still a great many Slaves
out of the Captives taken in War, but chiefly he bought up the young ones, who
were capable to be (as it were) broken and taught like little Whelps and Colts;
but none of these ever went into another man's house, except sent either by
Cato himself or his Wife. If any one of them were asked what Cato did; they
answered, Nothing that they knew of. When a Servant was at home, he was obliged
either to do^ some work, or sleep; for indeed Cato loved those most, who used
to lie down often to take a nap, accounting them mure docile than those who
sat up much, and more (...) for any thing when they were refreshed with a
little slumber. Being also of an opinion, that Servants would take the greatest
pains imag^nable to satisfy their Venery; he set a certain price to be paid by
those who consorted with his Bondwomen, but would suffer none to be concerned
with any others abroad. At first when he was but a poor Soldier, he would not
be difficult in any thing which related to his Diet, but looked upon it as a
pitiful (...) thing to quarrel with a Servant for the (...) of his own belly;
but afterward, when (...) grew richer, and made any Feasts for his Friends and
Comrades, presently when Supper was done, would he with a Leathern Thong
scourge those who had waited and dressed the meat carelessly. He always
contrived too, that his Servants should have some difference one among another,
always suspecting and fearing a good Understanding between 'em* Now those who
had committed any thing worthy of Death, he accordingly punished, if in the
opinion of their Fellow Servants they were found guilty. But being after all
much given to an extravagant desire of Gain, he looked upon Agriculture rather
as a pleasure than Profit; resolving therefore to lay out his money in lasting
and solid things, he purchased Ponds, Hot baths, Grounds full of Fullers Earth,
Pastures and Wood, whereby a great Revenue flowed in unto him, and such a one
(he used to say) as Jupiter himself could not hurt. He was also given to a most
blameable Usury in his Trafick by Sea; and that thus: He would that those whom
he put out his money to, should have many Partners; now when the number of them
and their Ships came to be Fifty, he himself would put in but one share; for
which Quintion, whom he had made a Freeman, and who traded and sailed along
with the said Adventurers, was to be his Factour; so that thus there was no
danger of losing his whole stock, but only a little part, and that with a
prospect of great profit. He likewise lent money to those of his Slaves, who
would borrow any, with which they bought also other young ones, whom, when they
had taught and bred up at his Charges, they would sell again at the years end;
but some of them Cato would keep for himself, giving just as much for them as
another had offered. To incline his Son to be of this kind of Temper, he would
use to say, That it was not like a solid man to lessen an Estate, but rather
like a weak W^^dow. But a farther Argument of Cato's av^ricious humor, was,
when he took the boldness to affirm, That he was a most wonderf^l^ nay a
God-like man, who left more behind him than he received.

He was now grown old, when Carneades the Academick, and Diogenes the Stoic
came Ambassadors from Athens to Rome, with request of releasing a Fine of 500
Talents laid on the Athenians; in which the Oropians were Plaintiffs, and the
Sicyonians Judges. Now all the most studious Youths straight waited on the old
Gentlemen, and frequently with admiration, heard them speak: But the
Gracefulness of Carneades his Oratory (which had greatest force, and was not
inferior to the Fame of it) (especially when he had a great and good natured
Auditory) filled, like a sudden Wind, all the City with the sound of it; so
that it soon flew about, that a Grecian, famous even to Admiration, winning
upon, and carrying all before him, had impressed so strange a Love upon the
young men, that quitting all their Pleasures and Pastimes, they ran mad, as it
were, after Philosophy, which indeed did much (...)
please all the Romans in general; nor could they but with much pleasure see
the Youth receive so welcomely the Greek Literature, and frequent the company
of these Learned men: But Cato on the other side, seeing this same Zeal for the
Greek flowing into the City, did, from the beginning, take it in dudgeon,
fearing lest the youth should be diverted that way, and so prefer the Glory of
Speaking well before that of Arms, and Doing well: Now when the Fame of these
Philosophers increased in the City, and Caius Aquilius, one of the principal
Senators, at his own Request became their Interpreter, Cato resolved under
some specious pretense to have all Philosophers sent packing out of the City;
and coming into the Senate, did, as it were, accuse the Magistrates, That the
Ambassadors stayed a long time without being dispatched, they being persons
that could easily persuade the People to what they pleased; that therefore in
all haste something should be concluded as to their Embassy, that so being sent
home again to their own Schools, they might declaim to the Grecian Children,
and the Roman Youth, might, as they formerly did, be obedient to their own Laws
and Governors. Yet this he did not out of any anger (as some think) to
Carneades; but because he wholly despised Philosophy, and out of a kind of
Pride, scoffed at the Greek Muses and Literature; for indeed he would use to
say, That Socrates was a prating seditious fellow, and endeavored by all means
possible to tyrannize over his Country, to violate the ancient Customs, and to
entice and withdraw the Citizens to Opinions contrary to the Laws; then
scoffing at Socrates's School, he would add, That his Scholars grew so old
before they had done Learning with him, as if they were to use their Art and
plead Causes in the next World; and to fright his Son from any thing that was
Greek, he used a much harsher tone than was usual with one of his age,
pronouncing, as it were, with the voice of an Oracle, That the Romans would
certainly be destroyed when they began once to be infected with Greek, though
time showed the Vanity of this his way-ward Saying; for in truth, the City of
Rome grew never (...).
greater than when they entertained the Grecian Learning; nor had he an
aversion only against the Grecian Philosophers, but the Physicians also, for
having it seems heard, how Hippocrates should say, when the King of Persia sent
for him, and would have feed him even with several Talents; That he would never
assist Barbarians, who were Enemies to the Grecians; he affirmed, that this was
now become a common Oath to be taken by all Physicians, and so enjoined his Son
to have a care and avoid them; for that he himself had written a little
Treatise; whereby he gave Prescriptions, and cured those who were sick in his
Family; that he never enjoined Fasting to any one, but ordered them a little
Duck, Pigeon or Levret, such kind of Diet being of light digestion, and fit for
sick folks, only it made those who eat it, rave and dream a little too much;
and by the use of this kind of Physic, he would tell them, he did not only
make those about him well, but kept them so: However, for this his presumptuous
bragging, he seemed not to escape unrevenged; for he lost both (...).
his Wife and his Son, though he himself being of a strong robust constitution,
held out longer, so that he would often, even in his old days, make use of
Women, nay when he was past a Lover's Age, he married a young Woman, and that
upon this pretense: You must know, that having lost his own Wife, he married
his Son to the Daughter of Paulus Aemilius, who was Sister to Scipio; so that
being now a Widower himself, he made use of a small Girl, who came privately to
him; but the House being very little, and a Daughter-in-law also in it, the
Intrigue was quickly discovered; for the young wench seeming once to pass by a
little too boldly to Cato's Bedchamber, the youth, his Son, though he said
nothing, seemed to look a little grim upon her; the old man perceiving it a
little offensive, without finding any fault, or saying a word, away he goes, as
his custom was, with his usual company to the Market: Among the rest, he
called aloud to one Salonius, a Clerk of his, and asked him whether he had
married his Daughter? He answered no, nor would not, till he had consulted him:
Quoth Cato, then by Jove I have found out a fit Son-in-law for thee, if he may
not displease by reason of his Age, for in all other things there is no fault
to be found in him: but he is indeed, as I said, a little Old. However,
Salonius straight desired him to undertake the business, and to give the Virgin
to whom he pleased, she being an humble Servant of his, and one who stood in
need of his Care and Patronage: Upon this Cato, without any more ado, told him,
he desired to have the Damosel himself. These words did (as you may well
imagine) at first astonish the fellow, conceiving that Cato was as far off from
marrying, as he from a likelihood of being allied to the Family of one who had
been Consul, and triumphed; but perceiving him in earnest, he took hold of it
willingly; and going onwards to Market, they quickly struck up the match.

Now whilst this same Marriage was in hand, Cato's Son taking some of his
friends along with him, went and asked his Father for what offense he brought
in a Mother-in-law upon him? but Cato presently cried out, Soft and fair, good
Son, what thou do is a greeable enough to me, nor do I find any fault with
it; only I desire to have many Children, and to leave the Commonwealth more
such Citizens as thou art. Pisistratus, the Tyrant of Athens, made, they say,
such a kind of Answer to his Sons, when they were grown men, and when he
married his second Wife Timonassa of Argos, by whom he had (as is reported
also) Jophon and Thessalus. Now Cato had a Son by this same second Venture, to
whom from his Mother, he gave the Surname of Salonius; in the mean time his
eldest died in his Pretorship, of whom Cato makes often mention in his Books,
as having been a very good man: Hovvever, he is said to have born the Loss
moderately, and like a Philosopher, and that he was never the more remiss in
minding Affairs of State; so that he did not, as Lucius Lucullus and Metellus
did, afterward grow languid in his old Age under the burden of Public
business, looking still upon that as a sacred (...).
Duty incumbent upon him.

Nor did he, as Scipio Africanus had done before, who because Envy had struck
at his Glory, turned from the Public, and so changed and passed away the rest
of his Life without doing any thing. But as one persuaded Dionysius, that the
most honorable Tomb he could have, would be to dye in the exercise of his
Dominion; so he thought that Age to be the most honorable, which was busied
in public Affairs, though he would now and then, when he had leisure,
recr^rate himself with Husbandry and Writing* and indeed he composed several
Books and Histories, nay in his youth addicted kimself to Agriculture, and that
for Profit's sake; for he used to say, he had but two ways of getting by,
Agriculture and Parsimony; the first of which gave him, in his old Age, both
Pleasure and Contemplation. One Book he wrote of Countrey-affairs, in which he
treated particularly of making Cakes, and preserving Fruit; being emulous to be
excellent, and singular in all things. His Suppers at his Countrey-house used
also to be plentiful, for he daily invited his Friends and Neighbors about
him, and passed away the time merrily with them; so that his company was not
only agreeable to those of the same Age, but even to the younger Fry; for he
had experience in a great many things, and had been concerned in much Business
and Conversation worth ones hearing. He looked upon a good Table, for the most
part, to be fittest to make Friends with, where the Commendations of brave and
good Commonwealths-men was usually introduced, but not a word of base and ill
ones; for Cato would. not give leave in his company to have either good or ill
spoken of such kind of men.

Some will have the Overthrow of Carthage to have been one of his last Feats of
State, when indeed Scipio the younger did by his Valor give it the
Necking-blow, though indeed chiefly by the Counsel and Advice of Cato. The War
happened upon this occasion, Cato was sent to the Carthaginians and Massanissa,
King of Numidia, who were at War with one another, to know the cause of their
difference. He, it seems was a Friend of the Romans from the beginning; and
they too, since they were conquered by Scipio, were their Confederates, and
kept in awe by taking away their Dominion, and laying a heavy Tax upon them.
Now he finding Carthage, not (as the Romans thought) low and in an ill
condition, but well manned, full of Riches, all sorts of Arms and Ammunition,
and perceiving the Carthaginians thereupon carry it high, he conceived that the
Romans had not time to adjust Affairs between them and Massanissa, but rather
that they themselves would fall into danger, except they kept under that same
City, which had of old been an Enemy, and still bore a grudge to Rome, and grew
incredibly stronger and stronger: Wherefore returning quickly to Rome, he
acquainted the Senate, That the former Defeats and Blows given to the
Carthaginians, had not so much diminished their Strength, as it had abated
their Imprudence and Folly; that they were not become weaker, but more
experienced in War, and did only skirmish with the Numidians, to exercise
themselves the better to cope with the Romans: That the Peace and League they
had made was but a kind of Suspension of Arms, till they expected a fairer
opportunity to break again. Moreover they say, That shaking his Gown, he took
occasion to let drop some Africa Figs before the Senate. Now they admiring the
bigness and fairness of them, he presently added, That the Place that bore them
was but three days sail from Rome; Nay, he never after this gave his Opinion;
but at the end he would be sure to come out with this Sentence, CARTHAGE
METHINKS OUGHT UTTERLY TO BE DESTROYED. But P. Scipio Nasica would always
declare his opinion to the contrary, in these words, It seems requisite to me
that Carthage should still stand. Now P. Scipio seeing the Romans very haughty,
and by reason of their prosperity, growing obstinate and disobedient to the
Senate; as also drawing the whole City whither they would after them. He would
have had the Fear of Carthage to serve as a Bit to hold in the Contumacy of the
Multitude; for though he looked upon the Carthaginians too weak to overcome the
Romans, yet he thought them too Great to be despised. On the other side, it
seemed a dangerous thing to Cato, that a City which had been always great, and
was now grown sober and wise by reason of its former Calamities, should still
lie as it were upon the Catch with the Romans, who were now become wanton and
faulty by reason of their Power; so that he thought it the wisest course to
have all outward dangers removed when they had so many inward ones among
themselves.

Thus Cato (they say) stirred up the third and last War against the
Carthaginians: But no sooner was the said War begun, but he died, prophesying
of the Person that should put an End to it (viz. Scipio the second) who was
then but a young man; but being a Colonel, he in several Fights gave proof of
his Courage and Conduct. The news of which being brought to Cato's Ears at
Rome, he thus expressed himself.

He only breathes courageously,
Whilst others like swift shadows fly.
This same Prophecy Scipio soon confirmed by his Actions. In fine, Cato left no
Posterity, besides one Son, by his second Wife, who was named (as we said) Cato
Salonius; and a little Grandson by his Eldest Son, who died. Cato Salonius died
when he was Praetor, but his Son Marcus was afterward Consul, and Grandfather
of that Cato the Philosopher, who for Virtue and Renown was one of the most
Eminent Personages of his time.

THE COMPARISON OF ARISTIDES With MARCUS CATO.
By Edward Blount, Esquire.
HAving mentioned the most Memorable Actions of these Great Men, if the whole
Life of this be compared with that of the other, it will not be easy to
discern the difference between them, being involved under so many like
circumstances, by which they resemble each other; But if we examine them
apart, as we should consider a piece of Poetry, or some Picture, we shall find
this common to them both, that they advanced themselves to great Honor and
Dignity in the Commonwealth, by no other means than their own virtue and
industry: But it seems when Aristides appeared, Athens was not in its grandeur
and plenty, the chief Magistrates and Officers of his time being Men only of
moderate and equal fortunes among themselves: The estimate of the greatest
Estates then, was 500 A Measure containing six Bushels.
Medimns; The second of Knights 300; The third andlast, called Zeugitae, 200.
But Cato out of a petty Village from a Country life, leapt into the
Commonwealth, as it were into a vast Ocean; at a time when there were no such
Governors as the Curit, Fabricii, and Hostilii: Poor laboring Men were not
then advanced from the Plough and Spade to be Governors and Magistrates; but
greatness of Families, Riches, profuse Gifts, large Distributions among the
People, Ambition and Power were the only things regarded, keeping a high hand,
and in a manner insulting over (...)
those that courted them for Preferment: It was not equal to have Themistocles
for an Adversary, a Person of mean extraction, and small Fortune, (for he was
not worth, The difference between their Adversaries.
as it is said, more than four or five Talents when he first applied himself to
Public affairs) and to contest with Scipio Africanus, Sergeus. Galba and
Quintius Flaminius, having no other aid but a Tongue free to assert right:
Besides Aristides at Marathon, and again at Plateae, was but the tenth
Commander; whereas Cato was chosen second Consul, having many Competitours, and
was preferred before seven most Noble and Eminent pretenders to be second
Censor too: But Aristides was never Principal in any Action, for Miltiades
carried the day at Marathon, at Salamis Themistocles, and at Plateae, Herodotus
tells us, Pausanias got the glory of that Noble Victory; Moreover Sophanes, and
Aminias Callimachus, and Cynaegyrus behaved themselves so well in all those
Engagements, that they contended with Aristides even for second place.

Now Cato not only in his Consulship was esteemed as Chief for Courage and
Conduct, Cato always esteemed for his Courage and Counsel.
but even whilst he was only Colonel at Thermopylas, under another's Command,
he gained the glory of the Victory, for having, as it were, opened a large Gate
for the Romans to rush in upon Antiochus, and brought War on his back, whilst
he only minded what was before him: For that Victory, which was beyond dispute
all Cato's own work, cleared Greece of Asia, and by that means made way thither
afterward for Scipio: Both of them indeed were always Victorious in War; but
at home Aristides Aristides supplanted by Themistocles.
stumbled, being banished and oppressed by the faction of Themistocles; yet
Cato, notwithstanding he had almost all the chief and most powerful of Rome his
Adversaries, and wrastled with them even to his old age, kept still his
footing; engaged also in many public Suits, sometimes Plaintiff, sometimes
Defendant; he cast the most, and came off clear with all; thanks to his
Eloquence, that bulwark and powerful instrument of life, to which more truly,
than to chance or his fortune, he owed, that he sustained his Dignity to the
last: for Antipater gives this high commendation to Aristotle the Philosopher,
writing of him after his death, That among his other Virtues, he was endowed
with a faculty of persuading people which way he pleased; questionless there is
no perfecter endowment in man than Politics, whereof Oeconomicks is commonly
esteemed not the least part; for a City which is a Collection of private
houses, grows into a Commonwealth by the particular manners of the Citizens
that compound it. Also Licurgus prohibiting Gold and Silver in Sparta, made the
Citizens money of Iron spoiled by the fire, did not discharge them from minding
their household Affairs, but cutting off Luxury, the corruption and tumor of
riches, he provided there should be an abundant supply of all necessary and
useful things for all persons, as much as any other Lawmaker ever did; always
being more apprehensive of a poor, needy, and indigent Citizen, than of one
that was rich and haughty: And truly Cato seemed no less Cato 's excellent
husbandry.
wise in the management of domestic concerns, than in the government of
public affairs; for he increased his Estate, and became a Master to others in
Economy and Husbandry; concerning which he collected in his Writings many
useful things: But on the contrary, Aristides by his poverty made Aristides an
ill manager of his own private concerns.
Justice odious, as if it were the Pest and Impoverisher of a family, and more
beneficial to all, rather than those that were endowed with it; yet Hesiod said
many things to exhort us both to Justice, and a care of our own private
concerns, and inveighs against idleness as the Origin of injustice; and Homer
excellently sung, -- (...) Vid. Homer in his 14 Odyss.

(...),
(...),
(...).
-- I loved not Work,
Nor house affairs, or breeding up fine boys,
But well rig'd Ships were always my delight
And Wars, keen Darts and Arrows --
As if those were alike that carelessly imbezled their own Estates, and who
lived by Rapine; for it is not as the Physicians say of Oil; that outwardly
applied it is very wholesome; but taken inwardly very destructive; so a just man
provides carefully for others, and is heedless of himself and his own affairs:
but in this Aristides's Politics seemed to be defective; for (as most say) he
took no care to leave his Daughters a Portion, or himself enough to defray his
Funeral-charges: whereas Cato's family produced Senators and Generals to the
fourth generation, for his grandchildren and their Children came to the
highest preferments: But Aristides, who was the principal man of Greece,
through extreme poverty reduced some of his to get their living by showing
Juglars-tricks, others for want, to hold out their hands for public Alms;
leaving none means to perform any noble Action, or worthy his Dignity: But why
must this needs follow? for poverty is dishonorable not in it self, but when
it is a sign of laziness, intemperance, luxury and carelessness; yet in a person
that is temperate, industrious, just and valiant, employed in public affairs,
furnished with all manner of Virtues, it shows a great and lofty mind; for he
is unfit for great matters, who concerns himself with petty ones; nor can he
relieve many needy, who himself needs many: But the main inablement to serve
the Public is not wealth, but a self-sufficiency; which virtue requiring no
superfluity at home, distracts not the mind from the Commonwealth: For God is
entirely exempt from all want: of humane Virtues, that which needs least, is
the most absolute and most divine: For as a Body bred* to a good habit,
requires no exquisite, either clothes or food; so a man and a sound house keep
themselves up with a small matter. Now Riches ought to be proportioned to the
use we have of them; for he that scrapes together a great deal, making use of
but little, is not content; but whether he wants them not, he is vain in
preparing those things he relishes not; or if he does relish them, and
restrains his enjoyment out of sordidness, he is miserable: I would fain know
of Cato himself, if we therefore seek riches, that we may enjoy them; why does
he boast in that having a great deal, he is contented with little? But if it be
noble, as it is, to feed on course Bread, and drink the same Wine with our
Hinds, and not to covet Purple and Plastered Houses; neither (...)
Aristides nor Epaminondas, nor Manius Curious, nor Caius Fabricius wanted
necessaries, who took no pains to get those things whose use they approved not;
for it was not worth his while who esteemed Turnips a most delicate food, and
who boiled them himself, whilst his Wife baked the Bread, to brag so often of a
halfpenny, and write how (...), three Asses made two pence.
a man may soonest grow rich; for its a vast good to be contented with very
little; because at once it cuts off the desire and care of superfluities:
Therefore they say Aristides thus delivered himself in Callias's case; It is
for them to blush at poverty, who are poor against their wills, they, who like
him, are willingly so, may glory in it; for it is ridiculous to think
Aristides's neediness imputable to his sloth, who might handsomely enough by the
spoil of one Barbarian, or seizing one Tent, have become wealthy: But enough of
this.

Moreover Cato's Expeditions added no great matter to the Roman Empire, which
already was so great, as in a manner it could receive no addition; but those of
Aristides are the noblest, most splendid and prime actions the Grecians ever
did, viz. the Battles at Maratha, Salamis and Plateae: Nor indeed is Antiochus,
nor the Walls of the Spanish Towns demolished at the cost of innumerable
Legions both by Land and Sea, to be compared with Xerxes; in all which noble
exploits Aristides yielded to none but he left the Glory, the Laurels, the
Wealth and Money to those who needed and thirsted more greedily* after them for
that he was above all those things I don't blame Cato for perpetually boasting
and preferring himself before all others, though in one of his Orations h^
says, It Is equally absurd to praise and dispraise ones self: yet he seems to me
more perfectly virtuous, who does not so much as desire others praises, than he
who is always extolling himself; for a mind free from Ambition is a main help
to Meekness: Ambition, on the contrary, is rough, and the greatest fomenter of
Envy, from which Aristides was wholly exempt, Cato very subject to it; for
Aristides assisted Themistocles Ambition odious in a Commonwealth.
in matters of highest importance, and as his Officer, in a manner, raised
Athens: Cato, by opposing Scipio, almost broke and defeated his expedition
against the Carthaginians, in which he overthrew Hannibal, who till then was
even invincible; and at last by raising always Cato 's worst actions reckoned
up.
some suspicions and calumnies or other of him, he chased him from the City,
and basely condemned his Brother for robbing the State: Finally that temperance
which Cato always highly cried up, Aristides preserved truly pure and
untainted: But Cato's Marriage unbecoming his Dignity Cato 's second marriage
condemned.
and Age, drew upon him no slight or improbable aspersion; for it was not at
all decent for him at that age to bring home to his Son and his Wife, a young
woman, the Daughter of an Apparitour, and one that worked publicly for wages:
(...).
But whether he did this out of Lust or Anger, to be revenged of his Son, for
his Harlots sake, both the fact and the pretense were unhandsome; for the
reason he pretended to his Son was false: for if he desired to get more as
worthy Children, he ought to have married some Person of Quality, and one well
looked on from the beginning, not to forbear as long as he could conceal his
keeping her a Miss; and when it was discovered, to choose such a Father-in-law
as was easiest to be got, instead of one whose affinity might be a credit to
him.

The End of the Comparison of Aristides with Marcus Cato, the Censor.
PHILOPAEMEN.

THE LIFE OF PHILOPOEMEN.
Translated out of the Greek, By Thomas Short, M. D.
Volume II.
CAssander was a Man of great quality and power in the City of Mantinea, but by
the revolution of Fortune happened to be driven from thence. There being an
intimate friendship betwixt him and Crausis, the Father of Philopoemen, who was
a Person of extraordinary Worth; he settled at Megalopolis, where while his
friend lived, he had all he could desire. When Crausis dyed, he repaid the
Father's hospitable kindness in the care of the Orphan-Sons; by which means
Philopoemen was Educated by him, as Homer says Achilles was by Phoenix, and
from his Infancy molded to great and virtuous Inclinations. But Ecdemus and
Demophanes had the principal tuition of him, after he was past the years of
Childhood. They were both Megalopolitans; who had been Scholars in the
Academick Philosophy, and friends to Arsesilaus, and above all men of their
time, applied Learning to Action, and State Affairs. They had freed their
Country from slavery, by the death of Aristodemus, whom they caused to be
killed: They had assisted Aratus in driving out the Tyrant Nicocles from
Sycione; and at the request of the Cyreneans, where the Public was in much
confusion, went thither by Sea, instituted for them excellent Laws, and settled
their Commonwealth in exact Discipline. Of all their Actions, they most valued
the Education of Philopoemen, thinking they had done a general good to Greece,
by training him to so much Worth. And indeed all Greece (which looked upon him
as a kind of latter brood, brought sorth, after so many famous Captains in her
decrepit age,) loved him wonderfully; and as his Glory grew, increased his
Power. A certain Roman, to praise him, calls him the last of the Grecians; as
if after him Greece had produced no great man, nor who deserved the name of
Grecian.

His Person was not, as some fancy, deformed; for his Statue is yet to be seen
at Delphos. As for the mistake of the Hostess of Megara, they say it was
occasioned by the meanness of his habit, the homeliness of his garb, and the
easy plainness of his conversation. This Hostess having word brought her that
the General of the Achaeans was coming to her House in the absence of her
Husband, was all in a hurry about providing of his Supper. Philopoemen, in a
threadbare unfashionable Cloak, arriving in this point of time, she took him
for one of his own train, and prayed him to lend her his hand in her
Houshold-work: He presently threw off his Cloak, and fell to Cleaving of Logs:
The Husband returning, and catching him at it, Why, what, says he, may this
mean, my Lord Philopoemen? I am, replied he in his Dorick dialect, paying the
fine of my deformity and ungraceful presence. Flaminius seeming to rally the
fashion of his body, told him one day, he had well-shap'd hands and feet, but
no belly: And he was indeed slender in the waste. But this railery was meant to
the poverty of his fortune; for he had good Horse and Foot, but often wanted
money to entertain and pay them. And these pleasant stories go about of
Philopoemen.

As he was insatiably covetous of honor, his conditions were somewhat rough
and choleric, and not altogether free from censure. He strove to be like
Epaminondas, and came not much behind him in Valor, good conduct and
uncorruptible integrity: But his boiling contentious humor not suffering him
in civil Contests, to keep within the bounds of gravity, sweetness and obliging
condescendence, he was thought more proper for the Camp than for the City; for
he was strongly inclined to War, even from his childhood, he both studied and
practiced things belonging to it, taking great delight in managing of Horses,
and handling of Weapons. Because he was naturally disposed for Wrestling, his
Friends and Tutours persuaded him to bestow some pains that way. But he would
first be satisfied whether it would not hinder him from becoming a Soldier.
They told him as it was, that the one was directly opposite to the other, their
ways of living, and exercises quite different: the Wrestler sleeping much, and
feeding plentifully, punctually regular in his set-times of exercise and rest,
and apt to spoil all by every little excess, or breach of his usual method;
whereas the Soldier by all variety of irregular changes was, to bring himself
to endure hunger, and watching without difficulty. Philopoemen hearing this,
not only laid by all thoughts of Wrestling and contemned it then, but when he
came to be General, discouraged it by all marks of reproach and infamy he could
imagine, as a thing which made men, otherwise excellently fit for War, to be
utterly useless and unable to fight on necessary occasions:

When he left off his Masters and Governors, and began to bear Arms in the
incursions which his Citizens used to make upon the Lacedaemonians for pillage
or sudden surprises, he would always march out the first, and return the last.
When there was nothing to do, he sought to harden his body, and make it strong
and active by hunting or laboring in his ground: For he had a good Estate
about 20 furlongs from the Town, and thither he would go every day after Dinner
and Supper; and when night came, throw himself upon the first Mattras in his
way, and there sleep as one of the Laborers. At break of day he would rise
with the rest, and work either in the Vineyard or at the Plow, from thence
return again to the Town, and employ his time with his friends, or the
Magistrates in public business. What he got in the Wars, he laid out on
Horses, Arms, or redeeming Captives; but endeavored to improve his own Estate,
the justest way, by Tillage. And this not slightly, by way of diversion, but
thinking it precise duty, so to manage his own fortune, as to be out of the
temptation of wronging others.

He spent much time on Eloquence and Philosophy, but selected his Authors, and
cared only for those by whom he might profit in Virtue. In Homer's fictions he
attentively minded whatever he thought apt to raise the Courage. But he
studdied principally the Commentaries of Evangelus for the Marshalling of
Armies. He took delight also in the Histories of Alexander at leisure hours,
still considering how to bring what he read into practice: For never heeding
what such Books use for speculation sake to draw out in figures; He loved to
see, and discourse of what the nature of places and their situations would
bear. So that he would be exercising his thoughts, and considering, as he
traveled, and arguing with those about him of the difficulties of steep or
broken ground; what might happen at Rivers, Ditches or Straits; in marching
close or open; in this or that particular form of battle. The truth is, he was
too much addicted to War, which he passionately loved as the means to exercise
all sorts of virtue, and utterly contemned those who were not Soldiers, as
Drones and useless in the Commonwealth.

When he was thirty years of age, Cleomenes, King of the Lacedaemonians,
surpised Megalopolis by ^^ght, forced the Guards, broke in, and seized the
Marketplace. Philopoemen ran in at the noise, and fought with extreme courage
and danger, but could not beat the enemy out again. Yet he saved the Citizens,
who got away while he made head against those who pursued them, and amused
Cleomenes, till after he had lost his Horse, and received several wounds, he
had much ado to get off himself, being the last man in the retreat. The
Megalopolitans saved themselves at Messene, whither Cleomenes sent to offer
them their Town and goods again. Philopoemen perceiving them transported with
the news, and eager to return, stopped them with a Speech, in which he made them
sensible that what Cleomenes called restoring the City, was taking the
Citizens, and holding it with more security. That bare solitude would without
more ado force him presently away, since there was no staying for him to guard
empty Houses and naked Walls. These reasons stayed the Megalopolitans, but gave
occasion to Cleomenes to pillage and destroy a great part of the City, and
carry away a great booty.

A while after King Antigonus coming down to succor the Achoeans, they marched
with their united forces against Cleomenes; who having seized the Avenues, lay
advantageously posted on the Hills of Sellacia. Antigonus drew up close by him,
with a resolution to force him in his strength. Philopoemen with his Citizens,
was that day placed among the Horse, followed by the Illyri^^ foot, a great
number of tried and able m^ who brought up the rere of the Army. The Orders
were to keep their ground, and not i^gage till from the other wing where t^
King fought in person, they should see a r^^ Coat of Arms lifted up on the
point of a Spe^^ The Achaeans obeyed their Orders, and sto^^ fast; but the
Illyrians fell briskly in. Euc^^das the Brother of Cleomenes, seeing the Fo^^
thus severed from the Horse, detacht the be^ of his light armed men, commanding
them t^ wheel about, and charge the naked Illyrian^ behind, This charge putting
things in confusion, Philopoemen considering those light armed men would be
easily squandered went first to the King's Officers to make them sensible what
the occasion required. But they not minding what he said, but slighting hi^ as
hare-brain'd, because he was yet of sma^^ credit, and not reputed a man of
Conduc^ he charged upon them with his own Cit^zens, and at the first encounter
disordered and soon after put those men to flight wit^ great slaughter. Then to
encourage the King's Army, to bring them all upon the Enemy while he was in
confusion, he quitte^ his Horse, and fighting with extreme difficu^ty in his
heavy Horse-arms, in rough uneve^ ground, full of Springs and Bogs, ha^ both
his thighs below the buttock struc^ through with a Thong'd Javelin. It was
thrown with a good will, so that the head came out on the other side, and made
a great, though not a mortal wound. There he stood a while, as if he had been
shackled and unable to remove. The Thong in the middle of the Weapon hindered
it from being drawn out, nor would any about him venture to do it. But the
fight being now at the hottest, and like to be quickly over, he was transported
with desire of Combat, and strugled and strained so long, setting one leg
forward, the other back, till at last he broke the Staff, and made the pieces
be pulled out. Being in this manner set at liberty, he caught up his Sword, and
running through the midst of those who were fighting in the first ranks,
strangely animated his Men, and set them a fire with emulation. Antigonus,
after the Victory, asked the Macedonians, to try them, how it happened the Horse
had charged without order before the Signal? They answering, that they were
against their wills forced to it by a young Gentleman of Megalopolis, who had
fallen in before his time; that young Gentleman, replied Antigonus smiling, did
like an experienced Commander.

This, as needs it must, brought Philopoemen into great repuration. Antigonus
was earnest to have him in his service, and offered him very advantageous
conditions both as to Command and Pay. But Philopoemen, who knew that his
nature brooked not to be under another, would not accept them; yet not enduring
to live idle, and hearing of Wars in Crete, he passed over thither. He spent
some time among those very warlike, but withal sober, temperate men,
improving much by experience in all sorts of service, and then returned with so
much fame, that the Achoeans presently chose him General of the Horse. These
Horse at that time had neither experience nor heart, having gotten a custom to
serve on pitiful Jades, the first and cheapest they could procure, when they
wereto march, which too they seldom did, but hired others in their places, and
staid at home themselves. Their former Commanders winkt at this, because it
being a degree of honor among the Achoeans to serve on Horseback, they had a
great deal of power in the Commonwealth, and were able to gratify or molest
whom they pleased. Philopoemen finding them in this condition, yielded not to
such respects, nor would pass it over as formerly. But went himself from Town
to Town, where speaking with the young Gentlemen man by man, he endeavored to
bring them in love with praise and honor, and making a handsome appearance in
the Field, setting Fines on them who came unfurnished of what was requisite for
their parade. Where they were like to have most Spectatours, there he would be
sure to exercise them, and make them skirmish in sport one with another. In a
little time he made them wonderful strong and bold, and which is reckoned of
greatest consequence in War, quick and vigorous. With use and industry they
grew so perfect, to such a command of their Horses, such a ready exactness in
wheeling whole or half turns, and all motions, that in the change of postures
the whole body seemed as easily and as steadily moved as one Man. In the great
Battle which they fought with the Aetolians and Elians by the River Larissus,
he set them an example himself. Demophantes, General of the Elian Horse,
singled out Philopoemen, and ran with full speed at him. Philopoemen prevented,
and with a violent blow of his Spear overthrew him dead to the ground: Upon
whose fall the Enemy fled immediately. And now Philopoemen's name was in every
bodies mouth, as a man who in fighting valiantly with his hands yielded not to
the youngest, nor to the oldest in good conduct, and than whom there came not
into the Field a better Soldier or Commander.

Aratus indeed was the first who raised the Achoeans, inconsiderable till then,
into reputation and power, by uniting the divided Cities into one Commonwealth,
and settling a way of Government moderate, and becoming Grecians. Whence it
happened as in running waters, where when few and little bodies once stop, others
stick to them, and one part strengthening another, the whole becomes firm and
solid; So in a general weakness, when every City relying only on it self, all
Greece lay exposed to an easy destruction. The Achaeans first united
themselves into a body, then drawing in their neighbors round about, some by
protection, others by Naturalization, designed at last to bring all
Peloponnesus into one Community. Yet while Aratus lived, they depended much on
the Macedonians, courting first Ptolomy, then Antigonus and Philip, who had a
great influence on the affairs of Greece. But when Philopoemen came to command,
the Achaeans growing strong enough for the most powerful of their Enemies,
would march no longer under Foreigners. The truth is Aratus, as we have written
at large in his Life, was not of so Warlike a temper, but did most by
sweetness, and his taking carriage and friendship with Foreign Princes. But
Philopoemen being a man both of Execution and Command, a great Soldier, and
fortunate in his first attempts, wonderfully heightened both the Power and
courage of the Achaeans, accustomed to Victory under his Conduct.

But first he altered what he found amiss in their Arms, and form of battle.
Formerly they used light, thin Bucklers, too narrow to cover the body, and
Javelins much shorter than Pikes. By which means they were practiced in
skirmishing at a distance, but in a close Fight had much the disadvantage. Then
in their form of Battle, they understood nothing of fighting in a Ring, nor any
figure but a Square; To which too not allowing front enough, nor closing it
strongly, as in the Macedonian Phalanx, where the Soldiers shoulder close, and
their Bucklers touch, they were easily opened and broken. Philopoemen reformed
all this, persuading them to change the narrow Target and short Javelin, into a
large Buckler and long Pike; to arm their heads, bodies, thighs and legs; and
instead of loose skirmishing, fight firmly and foot to foot. After he had
brought them all to wear Armor, and by that means, into the confidence of
thinking themselves now invincible, he turned their wanton riotous profusions
into an honorable expense. For being long used to vie in Clothes, furniture of
their Houses, and service of their Tables, and to glory in out-doing one
another, the disease by custom was grown incurable, and which there was no
thinking to take quite away. But he diverted the humor, and brought them,
instead of these superfluities, to love useful and more manly bravery, and
sparing from other things, to take delight in appearing magnificent in their
Equipage of War. Nothing then was to be seen in the shops but Plate breaking or
Melting down, gilding of Backs and Breasts, studding Bucklers and Bits with
Silver: Nothing in the places of Exercise, but Horses managing, and young men
Exercising their Arms: Nothing in the Ladies hands, but Helmets and Crests,
Feathers of all colors, Embroidered Coat-armours, and Caparisons for Horses.
The sight of which bravery quickening and raising their Spirits, made them
contemn dangers, and ready to venture on any honorable dangers.

Their former Gallantry did indeed please; but withal effeminate: the tickling
of the sense slackning the vigor of the mind; but in these it strengthened and
heightened their courage, as Homer makes Achilles at the sight of his new Arms
springing with joy, and on fire to use them. When Philopoemen had obtained of
them to Arm, and set themselves out in this manner, he proceeded to Train them,
Mustering and Exercising them perpetually, and they obeyed him with great
exactness. For they were wonderfully pleased with their new form of battle,
which being so knit and cemented together, seemed almost impossible to be
broken. And then their Arms, which for their Riches and Beauty they wore with
pleasure, becoming light and easy with constant use, they longed for nothing
more than to try them with an Enemy, and fight in earnest.

The Achaeans at that time were at War with Machanidas the Tyrant of
Lacedaemon, who having a strong Army, watched all opportunities of becoming
entire Master of Peloponnesus. When intelligence came that he was fallen upon
the Mantineans, Philopoemen presently took the field, and marched toward him.
They met near Mantinea, and drew up in sight of the City. Both, besides the
whole strength of their several Cities, had a good number of Mercenaries in
pay. When they came to fall on, Machanidas, with his hired Soldiers, beat the
Darts and Lances which Philopoemen had placed in the Front. (...).
But when he should have charged immediately into the main Battle, which stood
close and firm, he hotly followed the chase; and instead of routing the
Achaeans Army, disordered his own. With so untoward a beginning the rest of the
Confederates gave themselves for lost; but Philopoemen seemed to slight, and
make it a matter of small consequence: And observing the Enemies oversight, who
left his main body undefended behind, and the ground clear, would not make head
against him, but let him pursue the chase freely, till he had run himself a
great distance from his main body. Then seeing the Lacedaemonians before him
deserted by their Horse, with their flanks quite bare, he charged suddenly, and
surprised them without a Commander, and not so much as expecting an Encounter:
For when they saw Machanidas driving the beaten enemy before him, they thought
the Victory already gained. He overthrew them with great slaughter, for they
report above 4000 killed in the place, and then faced about against Machanidas,
who was returning with his Mercenaries from the pursuit. There happened to be a
broad deep ditch between them, where both strove a while, one to get over and
fly, the other to hinder him. It bore a resemblance of wild beasts, forced to
fight for their Lives, when pressed by so eager a Huntsman as Philopaemen, rather
than of Generals in a field. The Tyrant's Horse was mettled and strong; and
feeling the bloody Spurs in his sides, ventured to take the ditch. He had
already planted his hinder-feet on the bank, and raised his fore-feet to leap,
when Simmias and Polyaenus, who used to fight by the side of Philopoemen, came
up on Horseback to his assistance. But Philopoemen, preventing both, stood
Machanidas himself; and perceiving that the Horse with his head high reared,
covered his Master's body; he turned his own a little, and striking at the
Tyrant with all his force, tumbled him dead into the ditch.

The Achaeans wonderfully taken with his Valor in this single Combat, and
conduct the whole day, set up his Statue in Brass at Delphos, in the posture in
which he killed the Tyrant. The reports goes, that at the Nemaean-games, a
little after the Victory, Philopoemen being then General the second time, and
at leisure by reason of the solemnity, first showed the Grecians his Army,
drawn up as if they were to fight, with all the motions occurring in a battle
performed with wonderful order, strength and nimbleness. After which he went
into the Theater, while the Musicians were singing for the prize, waited on by
Gentlemen in their Leaguer-cloaks, and Scarletarming Coats, all handsome men and
in the flower of their age, and all carrying a great respect to their General;
yet breathing out a noble confidence in themselves, raised by success in many
glorious Encounters. At their coming in, by chance one Pilades, with a voice
well suited to the lofty style of the Poet, was Singing this Verse out of the
Persians of Timotheus.

Under his Conduct Greece was free and great. The whole Theater presently cast
their eyes on Philopoemen, and fell a clapping with wonderful joy, and ravished
with hopes to recover again their former fame, and a confidence little short of
their ancient virtue.

Now it was with the Achaeans, as with young Horses, which go quietly with
their usual riders, but boggle and grow unruly under strangers. The Soldiers,
when any hot service was toward, and Philopoemen not at their head, grew
dejected, and looked about for him; but if he once appeared, came presently to
themselves, and recovered their confidence and courage. Of which their very
Enemies being sensible, they could not endure to look him in the face; but as
appeared in several occasions, were frighted with his very name.

Philip, King of Macedon, thinking to terrify the Achaeans into subjection
again, if he could rid his hands of Philopoemen, employed some privately to
assassinate him. But the treachery coming to light, he became infamous, and
mortally hated through all Greece. The Baeotians besieging Megara, and ready to
carry the Town by Storm, upon a groundless feigned rumor, that Philopoemen was
at hand with succor, ran awy, and left their scaling Ladders at the Wall
behind them. Nabis, (who was Tyrant of Lacedemon after Mechanidas) had
surpised Messene at a time when Philopoemen was out of Command. He tried to
persuade Lysippus, then General of the Achaeans, to succor Messene: but not
prevailing with him, because he said the Enemy being now within it, the place
was irrecoverably lost, resolved to go himself, without order or commission,
but followed by his own Citizens, who went all with him as their General by
commission from nature, which had made him fittest to Command. Nabis hearing of
his coming, though his Army quartered within the Town, thought it not
convenient for him to stay; but stealing out of the farthest gate with his men,
marched away with all the speed he could, thinking himself a happy man if he
could get off with safety. And he did escape, but Messene was rescued.

All hitherto makes for the praise and honor of Philopoemen. But when at the
request of the Gortynians he returned again into Crete to Command for them, at
a time when his own Country was distressed by Nabis, he was taxed either of
cowardice, or unseasonable ambition of honor amongst Foreigners. For the
Megalopolitans were then so pressed, that the Enemy being master of the Field,
and encamping almost at their Gates, they were forced to keep themselves within
their Walls, and sow their very Streets. And he flying from a War at home, and
commanding in chief in a foreign Nation, furnished his ill-willers with matter
enough for their reproaches. Some said he took the offer of the Gortynians,
because the Achaeans chose other Generals, and left him but a private man. For
he could not endure to sit still, but looking upon War, and commanding in it as
his great business, always coveted to be employed. And this agrees with what he
once said smartly of K. Ptolomy. Somebody was praising him for keeping his
Army and himself in perpetual exercise: And what praise, replied Philopoemen,
for a King of his years, to be always preparing, and never performing? However,
the Megalopolitans thinking themselves betrayed, took it so ill, that they were
about to banish him. But the Achaeans dash't that design, by sending their
Praetor Aristanetus to Megalopolis, who though he were at difference with
Philopoemen about affairs of the Commonwealth, yet would not suffer him to be
banished. Philopoemen being upon this account out of favor with his Citizens,
cajoll'd diverse of the little neighboring places from obeying them, putting in
their heads to say, that from the beginning they were not subject to their
Taxes, or Laws, or any way under their Command. In these pretenses he openly
took their part, and at the same time fomented seditions in the City against
the Achaeans. But these things happened a while after.

While he stayed in Crete, in the service of the Gortynians, he made War not
like a Peloponnesian or Arcadian fairly in the open Field, but fought with them
at their own vveapon, and turning their strategems and tricks against
themselves, showed them to play Craft against Skill, and were but Children to
an experienced Soldier. Having managed it then with great bravery, and great
reputation to himself, he returned into Peloponnesus, where he found Philip
beaten by T. Quintius, and Nabis at War both with the Romans and Achaeans. He
was presently chosen General against Nabis, but venturing to fight by Sea,
seemed to have split upon the same Rock with Epaminondas, and by a success very
different from the general expectation, and his own fame, lost much of his
former reputation. But for Epaminondas, some report he was backward by design,
to disgust his Countrymen with the Sea, lest of good Soldiers, they should by
little and little turn as Plato says, ill Mariners. And therefore returned from
Asia and the Islands without doing any thing on purpose. Whereas Philopoemen
thinking his skill in Land-service would prevail likewise at Sea, learnt how
great a part of valor experience is, and how much it imports in the management
of things to be accustomed to them. For he was not only put to the worst in the
fight for want of skill, but having rigged up an old Ship, which had been a
famous Vessel forty years before, and shipped his Citizens in her; she
foundring, he had like to have lost them all. But then finding the Enemy, as if
he had been driven out of the Sea, had, in contempt of him, besieged Gytheon,
he presently set sail again, and taking them unexpectedly, disperss'd, and
careless after their Victory, Landed in the night, burnt their Camp, and killed
of them a great number.

A few days after, as he was marching through rough ways, Nabis came suddenly
upon him. The Achaeans were dismayed, and in so strait a place, and which was
seized by the Enemy, despaired to get off with safety. Philopoemen made a
little halt, and when he had viewed the ground, made it appear, that the
greatest thing in War is skill in drawing up an Army. For by advancing only a
few paces, and without any confusion or trouble altering his order according to
the nature of the place, he presently took away all apprehension from his men,
and then charging, put the enemy to flight. But when he saw they fled not
toward the City, but dispersed every man a several way all over the Field,
which for Wood and Hills, Brooks and Ditches was not passable by Horse, he
sounded a retreat, and encamped by broad daylight. Then foreseeing the enemy
would endeavor to steal scatteringly into the City in the dark, he posted
strong parties of the Achaeans all along the Banks and Hillocks near the Walls.
Many of Nabis's men fell into their hands. For returning not in a body, but as
the chance of flight had disposed of every one, they were caught like birds
ever they could enter into the Town.

For these things he was wonderfully loved, and was also honored in all the
Theaters of Greece, but got the secret ill will of Titus Flaminius, a man
covetously ambitious of glory. For he thought it but reasonable a Consul of
Rome should be otherwise esteemed by the Achaeans, than a Gentleman of Arcadia;
especially seeing there was no comparison between what he, and what Philopoemen
had done for them. For he by one Proclamation had restored all Greece, as much
as had been under Philip and the Macedonians, to liberty. After this Titus made
peace with Nabis, and Nabis was circumvented and slain by the Aetolians. Things
being then in confusion at Sparta, Philopoemen laid hold on that occasion, and
coming upon them with his Army, prevailed with some by persuasion, with others
by fear, till he brought the whole City over to the Achaeans. As it was no
small matter for Sparta to become a member of Achaia, this action gained him
infinite praise from the Achaeans, for strengthening the Union by the addition
of so great and powerful a City, and not a little good will from the Nobility
of Sparta it self, who hoped they had now procured a General who would defend
their freedom.

Wherefore having made 120 Silver Talents Above 2000 pound.
by sale of the House and Goods of Nabis, they decreed him the money, and sent
some in the name of the City to present it. But here the honesty of Philopoemen
appeared as it was, a real uncounterfeited virtue. There was not a man among
them durst mention the matter to him, but every one excusing himself, and
shifting it off to his fellow, they laid it at last on Timolaus, with whom he
had lodged at Sparta. Timolaus came to Megalopolis, and was entertained by
Philopoemen, but struck into admiration with his grave manner of discourse, his
thrifty and upright way of living, judged him not a man to be tempted, and, so
pretending other business, returned without a word mentioned of the Present. He
was sent again, and did just as formerly. But the third time with much ado, and
faltring in his words, he acquainted Philopoemen with the good will of the City
of Sparta to him. Philopoemen harkned to him obligingly and gladly, and then
went himself to Sparta, where he advised them not to bribe good men and their
friends, of whose virtue they might be sure without charge to themselves; but
buy off and silence ill Citizens, who were perpetually disquieting the City
with their seditious Speeches in the Senate, or to the People. For it was
better to bar liberty of speech in Enemies, than Friends. Thus it appeared how
much Philopoemen was above bribery.

Diophanes being afterward General of the Achaeans, and hearing the
Lacedaemonians were bent on new commotions, resolved to chastise them. They on
the other side being set upon War, embroiled all Peloponnesus. Philopoemen did
what he could to sweeten Diophanes, and make him sensible that as the times
went, while Antiochus and the Romans were disputing their vast Pretensions with
vast Armies in the heart of Greece, it concerned a man in his employment to
keep a watchful eye over them, and dissembling and putting up many injuries to
preserve all quiet at home. Diophanes would not be ruled, but joined with
Titus, and both together falling into Laconia, marched directly to Sparta.
Philopoemen was so netled, that he did an action, in it self not justifiable,
but which proceeded from a great spirit, and involved in it a great design. For
getting into the Town himself, he, a private man as he was, kept out both the
Consul of Rome and General of Achaia, quieted the disorders in the City, and
reunited it once again to the Achaians.

Yet afterward, when he was Praetor himself, upon some new misdemeanour of the
Lacedaemonians, he brought back those who had been banished, put, as Polybius
writes 80, according to Aristocrates 350 Citizens to death, razed the Walls,
took away a good part of their Territory, and laid it to the Megalopolitans,
forced out of the Country, and carried into Achaia all who had been made free
of Sparta by Tyrants, except 3000 who would not submit to Banishment. Those he
sold for Slaves, and with the money, as if to insult over them, built a Porch
at Megalopolis. Lastly, Unworthily trampling upon the Lacedaemonians in their
calamities, and even glutting his hatred with a most cruel and inhumane action;
he abolished the Laws of Lycurgus, and forced them to educate their Children,
and live after the manner of the Achaeans. For while they kept to the
Discipline of Lycurgus, there was no pulling down their haughty spirits but now
their calamities had given Philopoemen opportunity to cut the sinews of their
Commonwealth asunder, they were brought low, and grew tame and humble. Yet this
lasted not long; for applying themselves to the Romans, and getting their
consent, they soon threw off their new Achaian fashions; and as much as in so
miserable and depraved a condition they could, re-establish their old
discipline.

When the War betwixt Antiochus and the Romans broke out in Greece, Philopoemen
was a private man. At which he repined grievously, when he saw Antiochus lay
idle at Calcis, spending his time in unseasonable Courtship and Weddings, and
his Men disperc'd in several Towns without Order or Commanders, and minding
nothing but their pleasures. He used to tell the Romans that he envied their
Victory; and that if he had had the fortune to be then in Command, he would
have surpised the Enemy, and cut all their throats at their debauches.

When Autigonus was overcome, the Romans pressed harder upon Greece, and
surrounded the Achaeans with their power; The leading men in the several Cities
grew out of heart; the the great strength of the whole body insensibly
vanished, and the rolling of fortune began to settle on the Roman basis.
Philopoemen in this conjuncture carried himself like a good Pilot in a high
Sea, sometimes shifting sail, and sometimes yielding, but still steering
steady; and omitting no opportunity nor earnestness to keep all who were
considerable, whether for eloquence or riches, fast to the defense of their
Common liberty.

Aristaenetus, a Megalopolitan of great credit among the Achaeans, but always a
favourer of the Romans, said one day in the Senate, that the Romans were not to
be displeased, or refused any thing. Philopoemen heard him with an impatient
silence: But at last, not able to hold longer, said angerly to him, And why in
such haste, wretched Man, to behold the Grecian ruin? Manlius, the Roman
Consul, after the defeat of Antiochus, moved the Achaeans to restore the
banished Lacedaemonians to their Country, which motion was seconded and
supported by all the interest of Titus. But Philopoemen crossed it, not for any
ill will to the men, but because they should be beholding to him and the
Achaeans, not to Titus and the Romans. For when he came to be Praetor himself,
he restored them. So impatient was his great Spirit of doing things by command,
and so prone his nature to shock and contend with men in power.

Being now Threescore and ten, and the eighth time General, he was in hope to
pass in quiet not only the year of his Magistracy, but his remaining life. For
as diseases are weaker in weaker bodies, the quarrelling humor of the Grecians
abated much with their power. But envious Fortune threw him down in the close
of his life, like one who with unmatchable speed runs over all the race, and
stumbles at the Goal. It Is reported, that being in company where one was
praised for a great Commander, he replied, There was no great account to be
made of a man, who had suffered himself to be taken alive by his Enemies.

A few days after, news came that Dinocrates a Messenian, a particular Enemy to
Philopoemen, and for his wickedness and villainies generally hated, had brought
Messene to revolt from the Achaeans, and was about to seize upon a little place
called Colonis. Philopoemen lay then sick of a Fever at Argos. Upon the news he
hasted away, and reached Megalopolis, which was distant above 400 furlongs
Fifty Miles.
in a day. From thence he presently drew out the Horse, the chiefest of the
City, and who in the vigor of their age and mettle were forward in the matter,
both for their extraordinary love to Philopoemen and compassion of the case. As
they marched toward Messene, they met with Dinocrates about Evander's Tomb,
charged and routed him. But five hundred fresh men, who being left for a guard
to the Country came late in, happening to appear, the flying Enemy rallied again
about the hills. Philopoemen fearing to be enclosed, and solicitous for his
men, retreated over ground extremely disadvantageous, bringing up the rere
himself. As he often faced, and ran upon the Enemy, he drevv them all upon
himself; yet they caracoll'd aloof, and shouted about him, no body daring to
approach him. With care to save every single man, he left his main body so
often, that at last he was left himself alone among the thickest of his
Enemies. Yet even then none durst come up to him, but being pelted at a
distance, and driven to stony steep places, he was fain with much spurring to
vvind up and down as he was able: His age was no hinderance to him, for
with perpetual exercise it was both strong and active. But being weakened with
sickness, and tired with his long journey, his Horse stumbling, threw him
encumbered with his arms, and faint upon a hard and rugged piece of ground. His
head being grievously bruised with the fall, he lay a while speechless, so that
the Enemy thinking him dead, began to turn and strip him. But when they saw him
lift up his head, and open his eyes, they threw themselves in crowds upon him,
bound his hands behind him, and carried him off with all the provoking scorn
and opprobrious language of insulting insolence; him (I say) who had never so
much as dreamt of being led in triumph by Dinocrates.

The Messenians wonderfully pufft up with the news, thronged in swarms to the
City gates. But when they saw Philopoemen in a posture so unsutible to the
glory of his great Actions and famous Victories, most of them struck with
grief, and cursing the deceitful vanity of humane fortune, fell a weeping with
compassion. Their tears by little and little turned to kind words, and 'twas
almost in every bodies mouth that they ought to remember what he had done for
them and the Common liberty, which by driving away Nabis, he had perserv'd.
Some few, to make their court to Dinocrates, were for tormenting, and putting
him to death as a dangerous and irreconcilable Enemy; and who, if he once got
loose, Dinocrates was lost, who had taken him prisoner, and used him basely.
They put him at last into a Dungeon underground, which they called the
Treasury, a place into which there comes no air nor light from abroad; and
which having no doors, is closed with a great stone; which rolling to the
entrance, they fixed; and placing a guard about it, left him. In the mean time
Philopoemen's Soldiers recovering themselves after their flight, and fearing
he was dead when he appeared nowhere, made a stand, calling him with loud
cries, and reproaching one another with their unworthy and shameful escape;
and, betraying their General, who to preserve their lives, had lost his own.
Then they fell to searching curiously everywhere, till hearing at last he was
taken, they sent away Messengers round about with the news. The Achaeans
resented the misfortune deeply, and decreed to send and demand him, and in the
mean time drew their Army together for his rescue.

While these things past in Achaia, Dinocrates fearing all delay would save
Philopoemen, and resolved to be beforehand with the Achaeans, as soon as dark
night had dispersed the multitude, sent in the Executioner with poison, and
order not to stir from him till he had taken it. Philopoemen was then laid
down, wrapped up in his Cloak, not sleeping, but oppressed with grief and trouble.
But seeing light, and a man with poison by him, strugled to sit up; and taking
the Cup, ask't the Hangman if he heard any thing of the Horsemen, particularly
Lycortas? The fellow answering, that the most part had got off safe, he
nodded, and looking cheerfully upon him, It Is well, says he, that we are not
every way unfortunate. And without a word more drank it off, and laid him down
again. His weakness struggling but little with the poison, it dispatched him
presently.

The news of his death filled all Achaia with grief and lamentation. The Youth,
with some of the chief of the several Cities met at Megalopolis with a
resolution to take revenge without delay. They chose Lycortas General, and
falling upon the Messenians, put all to fire and sword, till the City by common
consent yielded. Dinocrates with as many as had voted for his death; prevented
their revenge, and killed themselves. Those who would have had him tormented,
Lycortas put in Chains. They burnt his Body, and put the ashes into an Urn, and
then marched homeward, not in a disordered hurry, but with a kind of solemn
pomp, half Triumph, half Funeral, Crowns of Victory on their heads, and tears
in their eyes, their Captive Enemies in Fetters by them. Polybius, the
General's Son, carried the Urn, whereof there was hardly any thing to be seen
but Garlands and Ribons. The chief of the Achaeans went round about it. The
Soldiers followed bravely armed and mounted, with looks neither altogether sad
as in Mourning, nor lofty as in Victory. The people from all Towns and Villages
in their way, flocked out to meet him, as at his return from conquest, and
saluting and touching the Urn, fell in with the Company, and followed on to
Megalopolis. Where when the old Men, the Women and Children were mingled with
the rest, the whole City was filled with sighs, complaints and cries, looking
upon the loss of Philopoemen as the loss of their Greatness, and on themselves
as no longer Chief among the Achaeans. So he was honorably buried according to
his Worth, and the Prisoners stoned about his Tomb.

Many Statues were set up, and many Honors decreed him by the several Cities:
all which a certain Roman, who after the destruction of Corinth, prosecuted him
as if he had been alive for an Enemy to the Romans, would have removed. The
business made a noise, and Polybius ansvver'd the Sycophant at large. But
neither Mammius nor the Legates would suffer the honorable Monuments of so
great a Man to be defaced, though he had often crossed both Titus and Manlius.
They distinguished well in my opinion, and as became honest men, betwixt
Interest and Virtue, Honest and Profitable, when they thought thanks and reward
due to him who does a benefit, from him who receives it, and Honor never to be
denied by the good to the good. And so much concerning Philopoemen.

T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

THE LIFE OF TITUS Q. FLAMINIUS.
Englished from the Original, By Charles Whitaker, of the Inner Temple, Esquire.
Volume II.
TItus Quintius Flaminius (whom we pitch upon for a Parallel to Philopoemen)
what he was to his outward appearance, they who are led with a Curiosity that
way, may view him in his Brazen Statue, which stands in Rome next that of the
Great Apollo, brought from Carthage, opposite to the Circus Maximus, with a
Greek Inscription upon it. But for the Temper of his mind, it is said to have
been somewhat (...). Titus his Character.
of the hottest both in his angry and in the kinder expressions of himself, but
not to an equal pitch or continuance in both; for when he came to Punishing, he
was ever moderate, not inflexible. But whatever courtesy or good turn he set
about, he went through with it. So civil, so obliging was he always to them on
whom he poured his Favors, as if they, not he, had been the Benefactours; he
practiced as much observance and care toward all that had tasted of his
Beneficence, as if in them had been lodged his choicest Treasures: But being
ever thirsty after Honor, and a mighty affecter of Glory, if any thing of a
greater and more extraordinary nature, were to be done, he would be sure to be
the doer of it himself: He took more pleasure in those that needed, than in
those that were capable of conferring Courtesies; looking on the former as
proper objects for his virtue, and on the latter as his Competitors in Glory.

Rome had then many and sharp Contests abroad, and her Youth betaking
themselves early to the Wars, learned betimes the Art of Commanding; when
Flaminius, having passed through the Rudiments of Soldiery, began his first
Charge in the War against Hannibal, as Commander of 1000 Foot under Marcellus
the then Consul. Marcellus, indeed, falling into an Ambuscade, was cut off. But
Titus getting the Governourship as well of Tarentum (then re-taken a second
time) as of the Country about it, grew no less famous for his Administration
of Justice, than for his military Skill. This raised him to the Triumvirate
Dignity of Leader and Chieftain of those two Colonies which were sent into the
Cities of Narnia and Cossa; which filled him with loftier thoughts, and made
him step over those previous Honors which such young Candidates use to pass
through of Tribune, Praetor and Aedile, and level his first aim at the
Consulship. Having therefore these Colonies, and all that Interest ready at his
Devotion, without more ado, he stands for it: But the Tribunes of the People,
Fulvius and Manlius, and their Party, strongly opposed Live. L. 2. Dec. 4.
him; alleging how undecent a thing, how ill a Precedent 'twas, that a Man of
such raw years, one who was yet, as 'twere, untrain'd, never initiated in the
first sacred Rights and Mysteries of Government, should, in contempt and
opposition of their Laws, intrude and force himself into the Sovereignty.

However the Senate remitted it to the Peoples choice and suffrage; who Elect
him (though not then arrived as his Thirtieth year) and Sextus Aelius Consuls.
The Chosen Consul at thirty
War against Philip and the Macedonians fell to Titus by Lot, and surely some
kind Genius propitious at that time to the Roman affairs (...) But I read (...)
for (...).
had a hand in the drawing it; for the Macedonians were not men of that
stubborn nature, as to need a General to be sent against them, who would always
be upon the point of force and dry blows, but were rather reducible by
persuasion and gentle usage. It Is true that the Kingdom of Macedon furnished
supplies enough to Philip to enable him to adventure on ^ single Battle with
the Romans: But to maintai^ a long and lingering War, he must call in Ai^ from
Greece; from Greece must he recruit hi^ strength; from Greece replenish his
stores; from thence must he borrow his Strongholds and retreating-places; and
in a word, all the Materials of War must the Macedonian Army fetch from thence.
Unless therefore that the Grecians could be taken off from siding with Philip,
this War with him must not expect its Decision from a single Battle. Now Greece
(who had not hitherto held much Correspondence with the Romans, but first began
an Intercourse under this Scene of affairs) would no^ so soon have embraced a
Foreign Authority instead of the Governors she had been enured to; Had not the
Roman Consul been of a sweet and winning nature, one who worked rather by fair
means than force; of a most insinuating address in all Applications of himself
to others, and no less easy* courteous, and open to all Addresses of others to
him. But above all, had a constant Eye to Justice; (...).
but the after-account of his Actions will best illustrate him as to these
Particulars.

Titus finding that as well, Sulpitius, as Publius, who had been his
Predecessors in that Command, had not taken the Field against the Macedonians
till late; and when their Consulships were on the point of Expiring: And then
Sets out immediately for the War.
too set their hands but tenderly to the War, but stood skirmishing and
scouting here and there for Passes and Provisions, and never came to close
fighting with Philip. He thought it not meet to trifle away an year, as they
did, at home in Ostentaton of their new-gotten Honors, and in the
Administration of Civil Affairs, and after, in the close of the year, to betake
themselves to the Army, a mere artifice to eke out their Dignity and Government
a year longer, acting the Consul in the first, and the General in the latter.
But Titus was withal infinitely desirous to employ his Authority with effect
upon the War; which made him slight those Home-Honours and Prerogatives.
Requesting, therefore, of the Senate, that his Brother Lucius might go Admiral
of the Navy, and taking with him 3000 gallant and stout men (...). ^IV. Ibid.
as so many sure Cards, which he drew out of those who, under Scipio, had
defeated Asdrubal in Spain.
Iberia, and Hannibal in Africa, he got safe into Epirus; and finding Publius
encamped with his Army over against Philip, who had long made good the Pass
over the River Apsus, and the Straits there; Publius not having been able, for
the the natural strength of the place, to effect any thing upon him. Titus
therefore takes upon him the Conduct of the Army, and Takes the Army of Publius.
having dismissed Publius, views the Coast.

The place is no less inaccessible and (...).
impregnable than the craggy Rocks of Tempe, but falls short of that goodly
Ornament of Trees, that Verdant prospect of the Woods; it lacks Tempe's
pleasant Fields and Walks at the foot of it; for the Apsus (falling from those
great and The Apsus.
lofty Mountains, which, standing as a mighty Bank on each side the River, make
a deep and large Chanel in the midst) is not unlike the River Peneus, either
for the swiftness of its Current, or the manner of it; for it swells over, and
covers the foot of those Hills, insomuch that there is left only a cragged
narrow path cut out hard by the stream, not easily passable at any time for an
Army, but not at all when guarded by the Enemy. There were some, therefore, who
would fain have had Titus fetch a Compass through Dassaretis, along the River
Lycas, which was a passable and easy Tract. But Live. ibid.
he fearing, if he should engage himself too far from the Sea, into barren and
untilled Countries, and Philip should decline Fighting, he might, through want
of Provisions be constrained to march back again to the Seaside without
effecting any thing, as his Predecessor had done before him. This put him upon
a resolution of forcing his way over the Mountains. But Philip, having
possessed himself of them with his Army, show'rd down his Darts and Arrows from
all parts about the Romans Ears. Sharp were the skirmishes, and many fell
wounded and slain on both sides, and small appearance there was of thus ending
the War. When some of the men, who fed their Cattle thereabouts, came to Titus
with a Live. ibid Herdsmen discover a way to Titus to bring his Men up the
Mountains.
Discovery, that there was a Round-about-way which the Enemy neglected to
Guard; through which they undertake to conduct his Army, and to bring them,
within three days at farthest, to the top of the Hills; and to gain the surer
credit with him, they alleged that Charops of Machara, was not only privy
unto, but would make good all they had promised (this Charops was at that time
Prince of Epirus, and a Well-willer to the Romans, and one that gave them
assistance, but underhand, for fear of Philip.) Titus, crediting the
Intelligence, sends away a Captain with 4000 Foot, and 300 Horse: These
Herdsmen were their Guides, but kept in Bonds. In the daytime, they lay still
under the Covert of the hollow and woody places, but in the night they marched
by Moonlight (for the Moon was then at full:) Titus having detached off this
Party, lay still afterward with his main body, unless it were that he
sometimes galled and incommoded the Enemies Camp by shooting up amongst them.

But when the day arrived, that those who stole round, were expected upon the
top of the Hill, he drew up his Forces early into Battalia, as well the
light-armed as the heavy, and dividing them into three Parts; Himself led the
Van, marching his Men along the Bank, up the narrowest point of those Straits,
darted at by the Macedonians, and engaging, amidst those Rocks, hand to hand
with all his Assailants. Whilst the other two Squadrons, on either side of him,
with a Transcendent Alacrity and Courage clinging to the Rocks, as if they had
grown to them, contended all they could to come to Action. But when the Sun was
up, a thin smoke discovers it self rising afar off, (like Mists that usually
hang upon the Hills,) but unperceived by the Enemy (for 'twas behind them who
were at top already,) And the Romans as yet under a doubt and suspense in the
toil and difficulty they were in, construed their Hopes according to their
Desires. But as it grew thicker and thicker, spreading Darkness over the Air,
and mounting to a greater height, they no longer doubted but 'twas the
Fiery-signal of their Companions; whereupon they give a mighty shout, and
climbing up stoutly and courageously, they drove the Enemy into the most craggy
places; in the interim those behind the Enemy Ecchoed back their Acclamations
from the top of the Mountain. Quickly then did the Macedonians (...)
fly with all the heels they could make; there fell not more than 2000 of them,
for the difficulties The Macedonians routed.
of the place rescued them from a long and close pursuit. But the Romans
pillaged their Camp, seized upon their Wealth and Slaves, becoming absolute
Masters of those Straits, traversed over all Epirus; but with such Order and
Discipline, with such Temperance and Moderation, that though they were far from
the Sea, at a great distance from their Vessels, and stinted of their Monthly
allowance of Corn, and the like Provisions, and wanting the opportunities of
Markets to furnish themselves from; yet plundered they not the Country which
had Provisions Titus plunders not the Country.
enough of all sorts in it. For Titus receiving an Intelligence that Philip
rather fled than marched through Thessaly, that he forced the Inhabitants from
the Towns to take shelter in the Mountains, that the Towns themselves he burnt
down, that a great part of their goods, which for the quantity or cumbersomness
of them, they could not carry with them was left a Prey to the Victour; in so
much that the whole Country in a manner was quitted to the Roman Army: He
therefore was very desirous, and entreated his Soldiers, that they would pass
through it as their own; as a Place put into their hands: and indeed they
quickly perceived by the Event what Benefit they derived from that Orderliness.
For they no sooner set Foot in Thessaly, but the Cities Surrender to him, and
the Graecians, within the Pylae, did perfectly long for and were quite
transported with a Zeal of Committing themselves into the hands of Titus. The
Acheans not only broke their League with Philip, but, at the same time, voted
to join with the Romans in actual arms against him. As for the Opuntians; the
Aetolians (who though they then acted with a mighty forwardness and Valor in
Confederacy with the Roman) did strongly Solicit them to put their City under
their protection, but they embraced not the Proposition; But sending for Titus,
to him they entrust and commit themselves.

It Is reported of Pyrrhus, that when at first from an adjacent Hill or
Watchtower which gave him a full prospect of the Roman Army, he descryed them
so orderly drawn up; he should openly declare, "he espied no "Barbarity in the
Barbarians Ranks. All that came near Titus, could not choose but say as much of
him, at their first view. For they who had been told by the Macedonians of an
Invader at the head of a Barbarian Army, (...).
carrying every where Slavery and Destruction on his Sword's point; when in
lieu of such an one, they meet a man, in the Flower of his Age, of a graceful
Aspect, and full of Humanity, a Grecian in his Voice and Language, and a lover
of true Honor, they were most wonderfully pleased and satisfied in him; and
when they left him, they filled the Cities and all places where they came with
a value and esteem for him, as reckoning they had now got a Leader to Liberty.
And when afterward Philip made as if he would Titus proffers Philip a peace,
on condition that Greece be left free.
condescend to Terms of Peace, ^^tus came, and made a Tender to him o^ Peace
and Friendship, upon the Conditions that the Grecians be left to their own Laws
and Liberties, and that he withdraw his Garrisons thence. This he refused to
comply with. But (...).
now after these easy proposals, the general voge of all, even of the
Favorers and Partisans of Philip, was, that the Romans came not to fight
against, but for the Grecians, and against the Macedonians. As for the rest of
Greece, all closed with him in a yiedling Peaceable way.

As he marched into Boeotia, without committing the least act of Hostility, The
Nobility The Nobles of Thebes come to meet Titus.
and Chief-men of Thebes came out of their City to meet him. These Thebans, by
the Influence of Brachyllelis and his Faction, favored the Macedonian State,
but however complimented, and paid their Honor and deference to Titus; for
they were, yet, at Amity with both parties. Titus received them in the most
obliging and courteous manner, but keeps going gently on, Questioning and
Inquiring of them, after this and that, and sometimes entertaining them with
Narratives, and apposite Replies and Relations of his own, till his Soldiers
might a little recover the weariness of their Journey. Thus passing easily on,
He and the Thebans came together into their City, not much to their
Satisfaction; But to deny him Entrance they durst not, for a good competen^
^umber of his men followed him in. Titus s^^ll Proceeded by way of address to
them, as if he had not had the City at his mercy, and set a persuading them to
take in with the Roman Interests. King Attalus, joins with him in the same
requests, pressing the Thebans so to do. But Attalus, being ambitious to give
Titus a Specimen of his Rhetorical faculty beyond what, it seems, his age could
bear; a Dizziness or Flux of Rheum surprising him in the midst of his Speech,
he swouned away, and, being not long after conveyed by Ship into Asia, dyed
there. As for the Boetians, they sided with the Romans.

But now when Philip sent an Embassy to An Embassy sent to Rome.
Rome, Titus dispatched away Agents on his part too, to Solicit the Senate to
decree him a Continuance in his Command, if they did so, to the War; or if they
determined an end to that, that he might have the Honor of striking up the
Peace. For having a great Itch after Glory, his fear was, that if another
General were Commissioned to carry on the War, the Honor even of what was past
would be lost to him; but his Friends transacted matters so well on his behalf,
that neither Philip prevailed in his Proposals, and the management of the War
was confirmed in his hands. He no sooner received the Senat's (...).
Determination in this point, and the Ratification of his Authority; But, big
with hopes, he marches directly into Thessaly, Titus advances with an Army
against Philip.
to Engage Philip. His Army consisted of 26000 Men, whereof the Aetolians
furnished 6000 of the Foot and 400 of the Horse. The Forces of Philip were much
about the same Number. In this Eagerness to encounter they advance each against
the other, till both drew near unto Scotusa, where they resolved to hazard a
Battle. The Vicinity of two such Puissant Armies had not the Effect that might
have been easily supposed, to strike into the Generals a mutual Terror of each
other, but rather inspired them with Ardour and Ambition; on the Romans part'
to be the Conquerours of Macedon; a name which was Famous and Formidable
amongst them, for strength and Valor on the score of Alexander's Grandeur:
whilst the Macedonians on the other hand, esteeming of the Romans as
another-guess Enemy than the Persian, hoped, that if Victory stood on their
side, to make the name of Philip shine brighter in the Annals of Fame than that
of Alexander. Titus therefore presses and incites his Soldiers to play the
part of Valiant and Daring men for that they were now to enter the Lists upon
the most glorious Theater of the World, Greece, and with Champions that stand
in Competition with the foremost for Valor. Philip on the other side begins an
Harangue to his Men, as is usual to do just before an Engagement, to whet and
call up their Courage: and in order to his being the better heard (whether
'twere merely accidental, or out of an unseasonable haste, not observing what
he did;) he mounts upon an Eminence without their Camp, which proved indeed a
Burying-place. Philip himself was not a little concerned for the strange Damp
and Despondency that seized his Army at the unluckiness of the Omen, in so much
that all that day he kept in his Camp, and declined Fighting. But on the
morrow, as day came on, after a slabby, wet night, the Clouds changing into a
mist filled all the Plain with a mighty Darkness; and a foggy thick Air
descending, by that time 'twas full day, from the adjacent Mountains betwixt
the two Camps, covered their Stations from each others view: Whereupon the
Parties sent out on either side, some for an Ambuscade, some for Discovery;
these falling in upon one another, quickly after they were thus detached from
their main Bodies, began the Fight at the The second Engagement betwixt Titus
and Philip.
narrow Passage called Cyno-cephalae (that is, Dogs-heads, which are sharp tops
of Hills that stand thick and close to one another, and have gained the name
from the Likeness of their shape to a Dog's-head.) Now many turns and changes
happening, as may well be expected in such uneven passages, sometimes hot in the
Pursuit, and sometimes the same Party flying as fast; each General commands out
Succors and Recruits from their Camp, as they see their own pressed or giving
ground, till at length the Heavens clearing up, let them into a fairer Prospect
of all that passed; upon which the whole Armies became Engaged. Philip who was
in the Right Wing, from the advantage of the hanging ground which he had,
poured down his Forces upon the Romans with such briskness that the stoutest of
them could not stand the roughness of the Shock, nor bear up against the
pressure of so close-compacted Files. But the Left Wing being, (...).
by reason of the Hilliness of the Place, more shattered and broken, Titus
observing it, and cherishing little or no hopes on that side where his own gave
ground, makes in all haste to the other; and there charges in upon the
Macedonians; who, in regard of the Inequality and Roughness of the Country,
could not keep their Body Entire, nor line their Ranks to any great Depth
(which is the Principal point of their strength) but were forced to fight man
for man, under heavy and unwieldy Armor: For the Macedonian Phalanx is, for
its strength, like some masterless Beast, whilst it is embodyed into one as
'twere, and keeps locked together, Target to Target, all as in a Piece; but, if
once broken, every single Soldier that composed it looses of his own private
strength; the nature of their Armor is such; and besides, each of them is
strong, rather, as he among the rest makes a part of the whole, than in his
single self. When these were routed, some gave chase to the Flyers, others
charged those Macedonians in the Flanks who were still Fighting, so that the
conquering Wing was quickly shattered, put to Flight, and threw down their
Arms. There were then slain no less then 8000, and about 5000 were taken
Prisoners. The Aetolians were the main occasion that Philip himself got safe
off. For whilst the Romans were yet in Pursuit, these fell to ravaging and
plundring the Camp to that degree, that when the others returned they found no
booty in it. This bred at first hard words, Quarrels and misunderstandings
betwixt them. But ever after they galled Titus more, in ascribing the Victory
to themselves, and Prepossessing the Graecians with Reports on their own
behalf; in so much that their Poets, and the vulgar sort in the Pamphlets and
Songs that were Sung or written of this action, still rank't the Aetolians
foremost: but the Verses that were most in every body's mouth were these;
Without a Tear, without a Sigh
Without a Monument or Grave
Here, Passenger! thou may descry
On heaps we thrice ten Thousand Lie,
Alas! no Burial we could have.
Aetolian Prowess was our overthrow
And Latian Bands
Which Titus did Command
From the broad Italian Strand
Has laid us Low.
Sad Fate of Macedon! Philip's daring Soul,
Which Lion like when first he took the Field
Thought that he might the Universe, Control;
But when, alas! he once began to yield,
Like Stags pursued, he fled away,
But far more Swift and more afraid than they.
This was of Alcaeus his Composing which he did in a Jear and mockery to
Philip, though indeed he belyed him in it, as to the number of the slain.
However being frequently repeated and by almost every body, Titus was more
netled at it than Philip, for the latter played upon. Alcaeus again, annexing
the following verses by way of Elegy upon him. What, Traveller! on yonder Hill
you see
A Lofty Bark-less, Leave-less Gallow-tree
Stands to reward Alcaeus's Poetry.
But such little matters heinously fretted Titus, who affected a Reputation
among the Grecians, and therefore he managed all after occurrences by himself,
and had but a very slender regard for the Aetolians. This stuck in their
Stomachs; and when Titus listened to terms of accommodation, and had admitted of
an Embassy upon the proffers of the Macedonian King; these Aetolians made it
their business to divulge it through all the Cities of Greece, that he sold
Philip his Peace, and that, at a time, when 'twas in his hand to have cut up
all the springs and roots of War, and have laid waste that Empire which first
put the yoke of servitude upon Greece. But whilst, with these and the like
Rumors, the Aetolians labored to shake the Roman Confederates; Philip, making
overtures of Submission of himself and Kingdom to the Discretion of Titus and
the Romans, puts an end to those Jealousies; as Titus, by accepting them, did
to the War; for he re-instated Philip in his Kingdom of Macedon, but Enjoins
him at the same time, that he Quit Greece, that he pay 1000 Talents; and
withal, he took from him all his shipping, save 10 Vessels; and sent away
Demetrius, one of his Sons, Hostage to Rome; Improving that short time of the
Treaty to the best advantage could then be made of it, and by way of Provision
against an after -clap. For Hannibal the African, a professed Enemy to the Roman
name, an Exile from his own Country, and not long since arrived at King
Antiochus his Court, lay at that Prince, not to be wanting to the good Fortune
that had been hitherto so propitious to his Affairs: for his Arms as yet had
never wanted a Success, and the Grandeur of his actions had purchased him the
Surname of GREAT; in so much that he began to level his aim at the Universal
(...).
Monarchy, but above all to make some attempt upon the Romans. Had not
therefore Titus upon a principle of Prudence and Foresight lent an Ear to
Peace, but, instead of that, Antiochus had found Philip holding the Romans play
in Greece; and these two the most Puissant and Warlike Princes of that age, and
confederated for their common Interests against the Roman State, Rome might
once more have run as great a Risk and been a-fresh reduced to no less
extremities than she had felt under Hannibal. But now Titus opportunely
clapping in this Peace between the Wars; pruning away thereby the present
danger, before that which was but in expectation had sprouted out: He at once
disappointed Antiochus of his first Hopes, and Philip of his last Refuge; now
when the ten Commissioners, delegated to Titus from the Senate, advised him to
restore the rest of Greece to their Liberty, but that Corinth, Chalcis and
Demetrias should be kept Garrisoned for a Bulwark and protection against
Antiochus.

The Aetolians, ever (...).
eminent in the way of slandering, shook the Faith of the Cities here in an
eminent degree, for they call upon Titus to knock off the Shackles of Greece
(for so Philip used to term the aforesaid three Cities.) They ask the Grecians,
whether 'twere not matter of much consolation to them, that, though their
Chains weighed heavier, yet they were now neater and better polish't than
formerly? Whether Titus were not deservedly admired by them as their
Benefactour, who had unshackled the feet of Greece, and tied her up by the
Neck? Titus vexed and angry hereat, made it his Request to the Senate, and at
last prevailed in it, that the Garrisons in these Cities should be dismantled,
that so the Grecians might be no longer Debtors to him, for a partial, but
entire Favor. The Isthmian Games were now renewed, and multitudes set crowded
in Live. Dec. 4. L. 3.
the Theater to see the Exercises; for Greece, who of late days not only found
Respite from War, and was in a full Possession of Peace, but entertained
farther hopes of regaining their Liberty too, made Holiday for it; as these
were in celebrating, silence was commanded by sound of Trumpet; and the Crier,
stepping forth amidst the Spectatours, makes Proclamation, That the Roman
Senate, and Titus Quintius the Proconsular General, having vanquished King
Philip and the Macedonians, restored the Corinthians, Locrians, Phocaeans,
Eubaeans, Achaians, Pthiotaeans, Magnetians, Thessalians, and Perraebians to
their own Country, Laws and Liberty; took off all Impositions upon them, and
withdrew their Garrisons thence. At the first, many heard not at all, and
others not Distinctly, what was said; but an odd kind of Bustle and Stir there
was in the Theater, some wondering, some asking, some calling out to the Crier;
Repeat that again, Repeat that again. When therefore fresh silence was made,
the Crier raising his Voice, his Speech more easily reached the Ears of the
Company. The shout which in that Ecstasy of Joy they gave was so incredibly
great that 'twas heard to Sea. The people all jump up upon their Legs, there
was no farther regard to the Diversions they came for; but all fell a leaping,
and Dancing, and hugging one another. And all salute Titus with the Title of
Savior and Defender of Greece. (...).
The strength there is in Voices and the many Relations we have, speaking
excessive things that way, were seen verified upon this occasion. For the
Crows, that were then accidentally flying over the Stage, fell down dead into
it upon the shout. The breaking the Air must needs be the cause of it, for the
Voices being numerous, and the Acclamation violent, and the air thereby
scattered and routed thence as 'twere, it could no longer give support to the
Birds but lets them tumble, like one that should (...).
attempt to walk upon a Vacuum, or such empty space, which affords nothing to
set the Foot upon, unless we should rather imagine these Crows to fall and die,
shot with the noise as with a Dart. And withal, there may possibly be a
circular agitation of the air, acquiring (like Marine Vortexes) an additional
strength from the excess of its Fluctuation which whirls it round.

But for Titus; (The sports being now quite at an end) so beset was he on every
side, and by such multitudes, that had he not, spying the throng and concourse
of the people, timely withdrawn, he would scarce it is thought have ever got
clear of them. But when they had tired themselves with Acclamations all about
his Pavilion, and night was now come, whatever Friends or Fellow-Citizens they
saw, they fell embracing and hugging them, and from that, to Feasting and
Carousing together. At which, no doubt, redoubling then their Joy, they begin
to recollect and talk of the State of Greece, what Wars She had run through in
defense of her Liberty, yet was ever perhaps Mistress of a more settled or
grateful one than what others arms put into her hands: that by the Bounty of
Titus She now bears away without, almost, one-drop of Blood, without the
mournful effects of War, the most glorious of rewards, and best worth the
contending for. That courage and wisdom are, indeed, Rarities amongst men. But
of all that is good, a just man is the most scarce. For such as Agesilaus,
Lysander, Nicias and Alcibiades, knew how to play the General's part how to
manage a War, how to bring off their men Victorious by Land and Sea; but how to
employ that Success to generous and honest purposes, they were far enough to
seek. For should a man except the achievement at Marathon, the Sea Fight at
Salamis, the Engagements at Plataeae and Thermopylae, Cimon's Exploits at
Eurymedon, and on the coasts of Cyprus, Greece fought all her other Battles
against and to enslave her self. She erected all her Trophies to her own shame
and misery, and was brought to ruin and desolation by the Villainy and ambition
of her Rulers. But a Foreign Nation who might rather be expected to retain some
small Sparks, something of a Tincture derived to them from their ancient Sires;
a Nation from whom it may be wondered that Greece should (...).
reap any designed benefit, or indeed a good word; yet these are they who have
retrieved Greece from her severest Pressures, and deepest Extremities; have
rescued her out of the hands of insulting Lords and Tyrants and reinstated her
in her former Liberties.

Thus they entertained their tongues and thoughts; whilst Titus his actions
made good what had been Proclaimed. For he immediately dispatched away Lentulus
to Asia, to set the Bergillians free, Titillius to ^^r^ce, to see the Garrisons
of Philip removed out of the Towns and Islands there; Publius Julius set Sail
in order to the treating with Antiochus about the freedom of the Grecians under
him. Titus himself passed on to Chalcis, and after sailing thence to Magnesia
he dismantled the Garrisons there, and surrendered the Government into the
peoples hands. At Argos he was chosen Judge or Moderatour of the Nemaean Games,
and did his part in the management of that Solemnity extraordinary well; there
he made a second Publication by the Crier, of Liberty to the Grecians: And
still through all the Cities he passed, he pressed upon them conformity to their
Laws; A constant practice of Justice, and Unity and Friendship one toward
another. The Seditious among them he Quelled, the Banished he reduced, and in
short, his conquest over the Macedonians, gave him not a more sensible
pleasure, than to find himself prevalent in reconciling Greeks with Greeks, so
that their Liberty seemed now the least part of the kindness he conferred upon
them.

The story goes that when Lycurgus the Orator had rescued Xenocrates the
Philosopher from the Collectors who were hurrying him away to Prison for the
Metoecia (Taxes which Strangers residing at Athens were to pay) and prosecuted
them at Law for the (...).
affront offered to the Philosopher, he afterward meeting the Children of
Lycurgus, Children (says he) I am not now behind-hand with your Father in point
of gratitude; for all THE WORLD cries him up for what he did for me. But the
Returns which attended Titus Quintius and the Romans, for their beneficence to
the Greeks terminated not in empty Praises only, for these proceedings gained
them a deserved Credit and Trust in the World, and opened a new door to Empire.
For now many Nations not only admitted of the Governors set over them by
Rome, but even sent and entreated to be under their Protection. Neither was
this done by the Populacy alone, by some petty Commonwealths, or single
Cities. Bu^ King oppressed by Kings cast themselves into their Protecting hand.
In so much that in a very short time, (though perchance notwithout the finger
of God in it) all the World did Homage to them. Titus also himself valued
himself most upon the Liberty he restored to Greece, for having dedicated
silver Targets, together with his own Shield, to Apollo at Delphos, he
Inscribed upon them the following Verses. Triumph, ye Spartan Kings, ye Royal
Twins,
The equal Sons of Tyndarus and Jove,
Who in swift Horsemanship have placed your Love;
Titus, sprung from the Great Aeneas Loins,
Presents to you, of Grecian Progeny,
The best of Gifts, a regained Liberty.
He offered also to Apollo a golden Crown, with this Inscription on it,

This Golden Crown upon thy locks Divine,
Thou bright Latona's Son, did Titus place;
Titus, the Leader of the Aenean Race:
Bestow on him some equal strength to Thine,
Thou distant-striking God! that he
May share a Glory with thy Deity.
Now has the same thing twice betided the Grecians in the City of Corinth; For
Titus then, and Nero again in our days, both at Corinth, and both alike, at the
Celebration of the Isthmian Games, permitted the Grecians to enjoy their own
Laws and Liberty. The former (as has been said) proclaimed it by the Crier,
but Nero did it in the public Meeting Place, from the Tribunal, in an Oration
he there made to the People. (But this happened a good while after:) Titus after
this commences a gallant and just War upon Nabis, that most Profligate and
Villainous Tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, but herein at long-run he failed the
expectations of the Grecians. For when he had an opportunity of taking him, he
Industriously slipped it, and struck up a Peace with him, leaving Titus made
Peace with Nabis.
Sparta to bewail an undeserved Slavery: whether it were that he feared, if the
War should be protracted, Rome would send a new General who might rob him of
the Glory of it; or that the Emulation and Envy of Philopoemen's wreaths, (a
Man that had signalized himself among the Grecians upon all other occasions,
but in that War especially had done wonders both for matter of Courage and
Counsel; one whom the Grecians celebrated in their Theaters, and put into the
fame Balance of Glory with Titus,) touched him to the Quick. For he scorned
that an Arcadian; a Captain and Leader, in a few Rencounters upon the confines
of his Country should be looked on by them with an equal admiration to the
Roman Consul, who Warred on the behalf of all Greece. But besides, Titus was
not without an Apology too for what he did, (to wit,) that he put an end to the
War only then when he foresaw that the Tyrant's Destruction must have been
attended with a sweeping train of Ruin upon the other Spartans.

The Achaeans indeed decreed, and studied, to honor Titus in many things, but
none seemed to come up to the height of the Actions that merited them, unless
it were one Present they made him, which affected and pleased him beyond all
the rest; and 'twas this: The Romans, who in the War with Hannibal had the
misfortune to be taken Captives, were sold about here and there, and dispersed
into Slavery; 1200 in number, were at that time in Greece. That turn of their
Fortune always rendered them Objects of Compassion, but more particularly then,
as well it might, when some met their Sons, some their Brothers, some their
Acquaintance; Slaves, Freemen; Captives, Conquerours, Titus though deeply
concerned on their behalf, yet took none of them from their Masters by
Constraint. But the Achaeans redeeming them at five Pounds a Man, brought them
altogether into one place, and made a Present of them to Him, as he was just
going on Shipboard, so that he now Sailed with a full Gale of Satisfaction;
His generous Actions procured him as generous Returns, worthy of so brave a
Man, and so intimate a Lover of their Country. This seemed the most Pompous
part of Titus his triumph.
all his succeeding Triumph, for these Redeemed Romans, (as it is the custom for
Slaves upon their manumission, to shave their Heads and wear a peculiar kind of
Caps,) followed in that Habit, Titus's Triumphant Chariot; But to add to the
Glory of this Show, there were the Grecian Helmets, the Macedonian Targets and
Javelins, and the rest of the Spoils bore along in Pomp and Ostentation before
him; besides vast Sums of Money, for as Itanus relates it, there was carried in
this Triumph 3713 pounds weight of Massy Gold, 43270 of Silver, 14514 pieces
of coined Gold, called Philipicks, all this over and above the 1000 Talents
which Philip owed, and which the Romans were afterward prevailed upon, but
chiefly by the agency and mediation of Titus, to remit to Philip, withal
declaring him their Allie and Confederate, and sending him home his Hostage-Son.

After this Antiochus makes an Expedition into Greece attended with a numerous
Fleet, and powerful Army, soliciting the Cities there to Sedition and
Rebellion: The Aetolians did abet and second him, for they of a long time had
born a grudge and secret Enmity to the Romans, and now suggest to him as matter
of manifesto, for a cause and pretext of War, that he came to bring the
Grecians Liberty. When alas! they never less wanted it, for they were free
before, but, for lack of a more smooth and specious Pretense, they entrust him
to use a word of the nearest and dearest Import: The Romans, in the interim,
(fearing from them, an Insurrection and Revolt; and, from him, the Reputation
of his Puissance) Dispatched away the Consul Manius Attilius to take the charge
of the War, with regard to Antiochus; and Titus, as Ambassador, out of regard
to the Grecians; some of whom he no sooner saw but he confirm's them in the
Roman Interests: others who began to falter (like a Physician that prescribes
Remedies in time, before the Disease seize the Vitals) he (...).
underprop't, and kept their affections and good will they had born to him,
from warping. Some few there were whom the Aetolians were beforehand with, and
had so wholly tainted and perverted that he could do no good on them; yet
these, howsoever angry and exasperated he was against them before, he saved and
Protected, when the Engagement was over. For Antiochus, receiving a Defeat at
Thermopylae, not only fled the Field, but hoisted Sail instantly for Asia.
Manius the Consul laid Siege himself to some of the Aetolians; others he
allowed King Philip to ravage and waste at his pleasure; for instance the
Dolopi and Magnetians on one hand, the Athamani and Aperanti on the other were
harassed and ransackt by the Macedonians, whilst Manius laid Heraclae waste,
and besieged Naupactus, then in the Aetolians hands. But Titus still with a
commiserating care for Greece, makes over from Peloponnesus to the Consul; at
first he falls a chiding him, that the Victory should be owing alone to his
arms, and he to suffer Philip to bear away the Prize and profit of the War: he
to sit lazily wreaking his anger upon a single Town, whilst the Macedonians
overran several Nations and Kingdoms. Titus happened to stand then in view of
the Besieged, they no sooner spied him out, but they call to him from their
Wall, they stretch forth their hands, they supplicate and entreat him; at that
time he said not, a word more, by way of answer to them or otherwise, by
turning himself above with tears in his Eyes, he went his way; some little
while after, he discoursed the matter so effectually with Manius, that he
wrought him off from his Passion, and prevailed with him to give a Truce and
time to the Aetolians, to send Deputies to Rome to Petition the Senate for
terms of Moderation. But the hardest task, and that which put Titus to the
greatest plunge* was to entreat with Manius for the Chalcidians, who had
incenc'd him on account of a Marriage, which Antiochus had made in their City,
even whilst the War was on Foot: A match no-ways suitable for their Age, he an
ancient man, she a very Girl; and as little proper for the time, for a General
to Marry at the Head of an Army, and unbend his thoughts, to such dalliances,
in the midst of a War. But deeply smitten and charmed he was with the Damsel.
She was the Daughter of Cleoptolemus, and none of the young Ladies there, were
comparable to her for Beauty: on this occasion, the Chalcidians both embraced
the King's Interests with zeal and alacrity, and yieded him their City for his
Retreat and Refuge during the War. Thither therefore he made with all speed
when he was routed and fled; and sheltered himself in Chalcis, but without
making any stay, for taking this young Lady, and his Money and Friends with
him, away he Sails to Asia. And now Manius's Indignation carrying him in all
haste against the Chalcidians, Titus posts after him, endeavoring to assuage
and divert the Stream; at length what with much Entreaties to him, what with a
sedulous application to others of the greatest Quality and Interest in Rome, he
work't upon him.

The Chalcidians thus deriving their fafety from Titus, dedicated to him all
the best and most magnificent of their Structures which they had before
consecrated to other (...).
Gods, whose Inscriptions may be seen to run thus to this Day. THE PEOPLE
dedicate THIS The place where the Exercises of Wrestling and the like were
performed.
GYMNASIVM TO TITUS AND TO HERCULES: so again, THE PEOPLE consecrate THIS The
Tem^ of Apollo.
DELPHINIVM TO TITUS AND TO HERCULES, and what is yet more, even to our time,
there is a Priest of Titus formally Elected and Declared; besides, they
Sacrifice to him as to a God, and when their Eati^g and drinking in a Festival
w^y, of part of the things Sac^ifi^ed, and after the ^ffering thereof.
Libations are over, they sing a set Song, much of which for the length of it
we omit, but shall transcribe what they have in the close of this Sonnet, Roman
Faith we all adore.
A Faith so white, a Faith so pure:
By all that is Sacred we our selves adjure
To honor Roman Faith for evermore.
Sing, Muses, sing of mighty Jove,
Sing of Rome 's and Titus 's Love,
Repeated Io's, Poean's too,
All to Roman Faith are due
O Savior Titus, and to you.
Other parts of Greece also heaped Honors upon him suitable to his merits, but
that which conferred Honor on his very Honors, and stamped sincerity and
truth upon them, was the wonderful heartiness and affection they did them with,
upon a sense of that Moderation and Equity that was natural to him. For if he
were at any (...).
time at variance with any body upon the account of business, or in point of
Emulation and Honor (as once with Philopoemen, and another time with Diophanes
Praetor of the Achaeans*) his Resentments (...)
went not far, nor did they ever break out into acts, but when it had vented it
self with a civil boldness in words, there was an end of it. In fine, no body
charges malice or bitterness upon his Nature, but many have imputed Hastiness
and Levity to it; but otherwise he was the most complaisant, sweet man, for
Conversation in the World; and spoke the most pleasant obliging things, with a
great Titus bis witty answers.
deal of acuteness and wit. For instance, defigning once to divert the Achaeans
from their purpose, who had the Conquest of the Isle Zacynthus in their Eye, If
(says he) they but put their Head out of Peloponnesus, they may hazard
themselves as much as a Tortois out of its shell. Again when he and Philip
first met to treat of a Cessation and Peace, The latter complaining that Titus
came with a mighty train, but himself came ALONE, and unattended: Yes, replies
Titus smartly, you have made your self ALONE, by killing your Friends Polybius
(in his 17 book p. 747 Ed. Cause.) tells this, a little differently*
and Relations out of the way. At another time Dinocrates the Messenian, having
been fudled at a merry meeting in Rome, danced there in a Woman's habit, and
the next day addresses to Titus for assistance in his design to get Messene out
of the Achaeans hands. I shall (says he) consider of it, but cannot but wonder
that you who are enterprizing Designs of that moment can find leisure to revell
and sing in your Cups. When again the Ambassadors of Antiochus were recounting
to those of Achaea, the various multitudes of their Royal Master's Forces, and
ran over a long Catalogue of hard and sundry names tht they had: Isupp'd once,
(says Titus) with mine Host, and could not but chide him for that choice of
Dishes he had got me, and withal I admired whence he had so readily furnished
himself with that store and variety; Mine Host tells me, Sir, to confess the
truth it is all Hogs-meat, but the Sauce and Cookery has made it as so many
several things. My Advice to you is the same, ye men of Achaea, stand no more
amazed at Antiochus his might when ye hear tell of Pikemen, Pioneirs,
Halberdiers and the like, for they are all but STRIANS differently armed.

After these his Gallantries performed in Titus made Censor.
Greece, and that the War with Antiochus was at an end; Titus was created
Censor, (which is the most eminent Office, and in a manner the Top-preferment,
in that Commonwealth.) The Son of Marcellus, who had been fiive times Consul,
was his Colleague. These by virtue of their Office cashiered four of the
Senators, for not having Nobility enough of Birth to qualify them for the
Place: They admitted all that offered themselves, to be Enrolled free Denizens
of Rome, whose Parents had Enjoyed a Freedom before. But this was more by
constraint, than their cum Choice; for, Terentius Leo, the then Tribune of the
People, to spite the Nobility, spurred on the Populacy to order it to be done.
There were at this time in the City two most Eminent and brave Persons,
Africanus Scipio, and Marcus Cato, but there was no good understanding betwixt
them: The former Titus made President of the Senate, as a man of principal
Dignity and worth, but grew an Enemy to Cato upon this unlucky an Enemy to Cato.
occasion; Titus had a Brother Lucius Flaminius, in no respects of a Nature
comparable to his, but withal highly dissoluteand licentious in point of his
Pleasures, and a Scoffer at all Sobriety: There was a Youth whom he loved, for
a vicious purpose, and used to be naught with: Him Lucius carried with him not
only Cum Consul esset in Gallia.

Say^ Cato. in Cicero de senectute.


when he had the Army under him, but even when the charge of a Province was
committed to him, this Lad still accompanied him thither: one day at a
drinking-bout, the Youngster wantoning with Lucius; I love you, Sir, so dearly
(says he) that, preferring your satisfaction before my own, I have forebore
seeing the Sword-Players, though I have never seen a Man killed in my Life.
Lucius delighted with what the Boy said; Let not that trouble thee, my Dear
(says he) for if thou have a mind to see a Man killed I Will quickly satisfy thy
longing; and with that, orders a condemned Man to be fetched out of the Prison,
and the Executioner to be sent for, and commands Cicero in his Cato Major
ag^ees with Antias, the words are, Exoratus in Convivio a Scorto est.
him to strike off the Malefactour's Head in the midst of their Jollity, before
they rose from Table. Valerius Antias varies the story a little, in that he
tells us Lucius did not this to gratify his Boy, but his Miss. But Livy out of
the Oration of Cato, relates it, that a revolted Gaul coming with his Wife and
Children to the Door, Lucius took him into the Banqueting-Room and killed him
with his own hand to gratify his Paramour Boy. Cato it is probable, might say
this by way of aggravation of the Crime he stood charged with: But that the
slain was no such Fugitive, but a Prisoner, and one Condemned to die, as well
Cicero, (as others,) in his Treatise of Old Age confirms; where he brings in
Cato himself giving that account of the matter. However this is certain, Cato
during his Censorship, made a narrow and severe scrutiny into the Senators
Lives, in order to the Purging and Reforming the House, and then put Lucius
out, though he had been once Consul before: His Brother looks upon this as a
Proceeding that reflected Dishonor upon himself; Hereupon both of them come
out, and appeal to the People in a suppliant submissive manner, not without
tears in their Eyes, requesting (...).
barely that Cato might but show the reason and cause of his fixing such a
Stain and Infamy upon so honorable a Family. The Citizens thought it a modest
and moderate request. Cato for all this, never shrinks for the matter, but out
he comes, and standing up with his Colleague, Interrogates Titus whether he knew
the Story of the Treat. Titus answering in the Negative, Cato gives him a
Relation of it, conjuring withal his Brother Lucius to say, whether every
syllable of it were not true. Lucius made no reply, whereupon the People
adjudg'd the disgrace just and suitable to his Demerits, and waited upon Cato
home from the Tribunal in great State. But Titus still so deeply resented his
Brother's degrading, that he struck in with those who had born a long grudge to
Cato; and winning over a major part of the Senate to him, he revoked and made
void all the Contracts, Leases and Bargains made formerly by Cato, relating to
the public Revenues, and stirred up many and violent actions and accusations
against him: But how well, and how like a good Citizen, I know not, for a
person to reserve an Inveterate hatred against a lawful Magistrate, an
excellent Common-wealths-man, and in the cause of a private man, who stood
indeed related to him, but unworthy to be so, and a man that had but his
Desert. But notwithstanding all this, when afterward a Show was exhibited to
the people in the Theater, the Senators sitting orderly up above as they were
wont, Lucius was spied at the lower end, set in a mean dishonorable place: it
made an Impression upon the people, nor could they longer endure the sight, but
set a crying, up, up, up, till he was got in among those of Consular Dignity,
who received him into their Seat. This natural Ambition of Titus was well
enough looked upon by the World, whilst the Wars we have given a Relation of,
afforded competent Fuel to feed it (for after the expiration of his Consulship
he had a command of Military Tribune, which no body pressed upon him:) But being
now out of all Employ in the Government, and advanced in years, he stands more
condemned, that that poor remainder of Life, wholly unfit for action, should
(...).
strut and swell with thoughts of Glory, and put on such youthful passions
which made him not master of himself. Some such transport, it is thought, set
him against Hannibal, an action, which lost him the love and hearts of many.
For Hannibal having fled his Country, first took Sanctuary with Antiochus; but
he having been glad to strike up a Peace, after the Battle in Phrygia, Hannibal
was put to shift for himself by a second Flight, and, after a Ramble through
many Countries, fixes at length in Bithynia, (...).
profering the Service of his Sword to their King Prusias. None at Rome, but
knew where he was, but they looked upon him, at the same time, with contempt,
for his little Power, and great Age; one whom Fortune had quite cast off.
Titus, coming Ambassador thither, (though it is true he was Titus Ambassador
to Prusias, Procures the death of Hannibal.
sent from the Senate to Prusias upon another Errand,) yet, seeing Hannibal
resident there, it stirred up Resentments in him to think that he was yet
alive. And though Prusias used much Intercession and Entreaties in favor of
him, as a man of his acquaintance, a Friend, a Suppliant that cast himself into
his arms for refuge, Titus was not to be entreated. There was an ancient Oracle
it seems, which prophesied thus of Hannibal's End. Libyssan Earth shall
Hannibal Enclose. He interpreted this to be meant of Libia that is Africa, and
that he should be Buried in Carthage, as if he might yet expect to return and
live there again, and only there to Die. But there is a Sandy place in
Bithynia bordering on the Sea, and near that a little Village called Libyssa.
Hither 'twas Hannibal's chance to retire himself, and having ever from the
beginning had a distrust of the easiness and ductile Nature of Prusias, and a
fear of the Romans, he had long before, ordered seven Vaults, as so many
Outlets, to be dug in his house, leading from his Lodging, and running a
great way under ground, and so many several ways opposite to one another, but
all undiscernible from without; As soon, therefore, as he heard what Titus had
ordered, he attempted through these Caves to make his Escape; but finding them
beset with the King's Guards, he resolved upon making away with himself. Some
say that wrapping his outward Garment about his Neck, he commanded his Servant
to set his Knee against his Back-parts, and not to leave twisting, and pulling
of it, till he had quite strangled and killed him. But others say, he drank
Bulls-blood after the Example of Themistocles and Midas: Livy writes that he
had Poison in a readiness which he mix't for the purpose, and that taking the
Cup into his hand, Let us ease (says he) the Romans of their continual dread
and care, who think it long and tedious to await the Death of an Hated Old man.
Yet shall not Titus bear away a Glorious Victory, nor worthy of those
Ancestors who sent to caution Pyrrhus, an Enemy, and a Conqueror too, against
the Poison prepared for him by Traitors. Thus various are the Reports of
Hannibal's Death, but when the News of it came to the Senators Ears, some had
an Indignation against Titus for it, blaming as well his officiousness, as his
Cruelty; who, when there was neither Reason of State, nor other Circumstance to
oblige it, but out of Preposterous affectation of Glory, and to raise himself a
Name from his dead ashes, sent him to his Grave, who, like a Bird that hangs
his Wings, or has moulted his Tail through age, was let alone to live Tamely.

Then began they to set out, with fresh Eulogies, the Clemency, the Courage,
the Gallantry of Scipio Africanus; they admire him The Commendations of Scipio.
now more than ever, for when he had vanquished in Africa the till then
Invincible and Terrible Hannibal, he neither banished him his Country, or
exacted it of his Countrymen, that they should put him into his hands. Nay at
a Parley just before they joined Battle, Scipio embraced him, and in the Peace
made after it, (...).
he put no hard Article upon him, nor insulted over his declined Fortune.
Report goes, that they had another meeting again at Ephesus, and, as they were
walking together, Hannibal Industriously took the upper hand, Africanus let him
alone, and kept walking on without the least Concern: Afterward they fell to
talk of Generals; Hannibal affirming that Alexander was the bravest Commander
the World had ever seen, but next to him Pyrrhus, and the third was Himself:
Africanus, with a Gentle smile, asks, What would you have said, if I had never
Vanquished you? O Scipio (says he) I would not then have made my self the third,
but First Commander. The Generality of Rome had Scipio in Veneration for these
Gallantries. But they observed so wide a Disparity in this Deportment of Titus,
that they reviled him, as one, who had put his Sickle into other men's Corn, had
laid his hands upon another's dead Corpse. Not but that there were them, who
put a better Construction upon, and applauded the action, who looked upon a
living Hannibal as Fire, which wanted only Bellows to blow it into a Flame.
For when he was in the Prime, and Flower of his Age, 'twas not his Body, 'twas
not his Hand that struck Terror into the Roman Eagles, but his Headpiece, his
experience and skill in Martial Affairs, joined with an innate malice and
inveterate rancour against the Roman name, which does not impair with Age. For
the Temper and bent of the Soul keeps to its Pole, and Participates (...).
of the same Nature still; but Fortune varies her Points, and even in her
greatest Declination, upon new hopes of Success, rallies together for new
attempts, all such whom Hatred and Revenge keep ready listed for Action. But
the After games that were played Rome make yet farther to the Justification of
Titus. For first Aristonicus the Son of a Fidler's Daughter, upon the
Reputation of being the natural Son of Eumenes, filled all Asia with Tumults
and Rebellion. Then again, Mithridates, after a Total Rout given him by Sylla
and Fimbrias, and so vast a slaughter, as well among his prime Officers, as
common Soldiers, made head again against Lucullus, with a puissant Army both
by Sea and Land. Besides, Hannibal was never reduced to so contemptible a State
as Caius Marius, for the former had something reserved to him, the amity of a
King, a Pension and subsistence under him, the Enjoyment of his Friends, and,
what was yet more dangerous a trust and Charge in the Navy, and over the Horse
and Foot of Prusias. Whereas the condition of Marius was so Despicable, as to
be looked upon by Rome with Laughter and Contempt, whilst he wandered about
Africa Destitute and Beggarly; and yet a little after, when in their own
Streets, their Backs were exposed to the Rods, and (...).
their Necks to the Axe, they Prostrate themselves to the same Marius. So that
there is nothing either Great or Little at this Moment, which will hold so to
all Futurity; for nothing puts an end to the mutability (...).
and vicissitude of things, but what does so to their very Being: Some
therefore tell us, that Titus did not this of his own head, but, that he was
joined in Commission with Lucius Scipio, and that the whole affair of the
Embassy, was to effect Hannibal's Death. But now that we find no farther
mention in History, of any thing done by Titus, either in point of War, or in
the Administration of the Government, but that he Died in Peace; It Is time to
look upon him as he stands in parison with Phelopoemen.

THE COMPARISON OF TITUS Q. FLAMINIUS, AND PHILOPOEMEN.
FIrst then for Greatness of Good-Turns which Titus conferred on Greece,
neither Philopoemen, nor many Braver men than he, can make good the Parallel:
For, under him, Greece drew upon Greece to her Ruin; But, in Titus, a Stranger
to Greece, fought for her Defense. And at the time when Philopoemen went over
into Crete, destitute of any means, whereby to succor his Besieged
Countrymen, then did Titus, by a defeat given to Philip in the heart of
Greece, set both them, and all their Cities free. Again, if we examine into the
Battles fought by each of these; Philopoemen, whilst he was the Achaeans
General, slew more Grecians, than Titus in aiding the Grecians slew
Macedonians. As to their Failings. Ambition was Titus his Weak-side, and
Obstinacy Philopoemen's; in the former anger was easily kindled, in the other,
'twas as hardly quenched. For Titus reserved to Philip the Royal Majesty, and
dignity of his Kingdom; besides, he Pardoned the Aetolians, and stood their
Friend again: But Philopoemen, exasperated against his own Country, took from
them the Contributions which the adjacent Villages paid. Titus was ever
constant to those he had once befriended, the other upon any grudge, as prone
to Cancel kindnesses; for he who had afore-time been a Benefactour to the
Lacedaemonians, afterward laid their Walls Level with the Ground, wasted their
Country, and in the end changed and destroyed the whole frame of their
Government: He seems, in truth, to have Prodigall'd away his own Life, through
Passion and Perverseness; for he fell upon the Messenians with an eagerness as
unsuitable, as unseasonable, not with that Conduct and Caution that Titus led
on his men with. But the many Battles he fought, the many Trophies he won, got
Philopoemen a deeper Experience for Titus decided the matter betwixt Philip and
him in two Engagements, but Philopoemen came off Victorious, in more than ten
thousand Rencounters, to all which Fortune had almost no Pretense, so much was
owing to his skill. Besides, Titus got his Renown, assisted by the power of a
flourishing Rome, the other flourished under a declined Greece, so that this
Man's Gallantry was owing to himself alone; Rome (...).
shared in the Glory of the other. The one had Brave men under him, the other
made his Brave, by being over them; and though all Philopoemen's actions,
having no other Scene than his own Country, no other Enemy than Grecians to
Cope with, afford no Instances of a His misfortune 'twas to have always his
arms employed against some part of Greece.
Virtue Fortunate in the Subject of it; yet, they do of one Prevalent in its
Success, and where all other advantages are Equal, Courage is sure to bring
Victory over to her side. He had, indeed, to do with two the most Warlike
Nations of all Greece, the Cretans on the one hand, and the Lacedaemonians on
the other; the craftyest of them, he mastered by art and subtilty, the stoutest
he made to stoop to his Valor. It may be said withal, that Titus, having his
men armed and disciplined to his hand, (...), Conquered upon the stock of
former preparations.
reaped Laurels ready wreathed for him: Whereas Philopoemen was forced to
Introduce a Discipline, and Tacticks of his own, and to new-mould and model his
Soldiery in those Points; so that, that which is of greatest Import toward
ensuring a Victory, (they being defective therein before,) was owing to his
Invention, whilst the other had it put into his hand, to help him on to
Conquest. Philopoemen, therefore, effected many Gallant things with his own
hand, but Titus, none; Insomuch that one Archedemus an Aetolian one day played
upon him, That whereas, Philopoemen ran with his drawn Sword, where he saw the
Macedonians keep closest locked and pressed him hardest; Titus stood still,
fell a Praying, and with hands stretched out to Heaven, called to the Gods for
aid: It Is true, Titus acquitted himself excellently well, both as a Governor,
and as an Ambassador; but Philopoemen was no less serviceable and useful to
the Achaeans in the capacity of a private man, than in that of a Commander. For
when he was General, he restored the Messenians to their Liberty, and cleared
their City from Nabis. But when he rescued the Lacedaemonians, and shut the
Gates of Sparta against the General Diophanes and Titus who would have entered
it, he was then but a private Person. He had a nature so adapted and cut out
for Empire and Command, that, when occasion served, or the public good
required it, he knew how to Govern the Laws themselves, and not always to
Govern himself by the strict rules of them, for he waited not the Formality of
being elected into Command by the Governed, but put them presently upon
Service, if the case required it. Esteeming of him as the truer General, who
consulted and understood their Interests, not who was chosen to the Employment.
In Fine, the Equity, Clemency, and Humanity of Titus toward the Grecians speak
a Great and Generous nature in him; but the actions of Philopoemen, full of
Courage, and forward to assert his Countries Liberty against the Romans, carry
something Greater in them. For it is not a task of that difficulty, to gratify
the Indigent and distressed, as it is to bear up against, and adventure angring
the Powerful. To conclude, since it is hard to draw from the Premises, the true
difference of their merits, and to which a Preference is due; Consider, Reader,
whether we may seem to judge amiss betwixt them, if we let this Grecian Hero
bear away the Crown for Military conduct, and Warlike skill, and the Roman for
Justice and Clemency.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Have in the foregoing Translation, taken a Liberty (Common with many
Translatours of old Authors into modern Languages) to add, by way of
Explanation and Paraphrase. beyond what I shall undertake to show to a word in
the Original. It Is true, that such Versions which are but Subsidiary, (as the
Latin, for the most part) and not intended to be read apart, but to help out
the Reader of an Original by a Glance upon occasion, are, or may be, most
Commendable when most (...), and give you word for word. But where a
Translation is calculated for other purposes, and to let the present age, into
the Sense, and knowledge of the ancient, who have no Curiosity, or no time to
learn their words, a looser Interpretation may be best, provided it be faithful
to the Author's Sense, it is certainly more palatable, where it is well Cooked,
and greater skill and caution is required in the dressing it: But yet, all that
is addition, ought to be so distinguished (either in Parenthesis, or by a
different Character, or the like) that the Reader may not be misled; for not
only he, who passes over part untranslated (as the Abbot of Tellemont does,
not only words, but Sentences and entire passages in this very Life) but he who
adds (as the ancient and better French Interpreter Amyot does) leaves the
Reader at a loss for Plutarch in Plutarch; The one by not exhibiting himself
whole and entire to the view, the other, by showing himself for him; as
therefore I have been faithful in giving all Plutarch, so my additions are to
be found in a different Letter. I have not loaded the Margent with the various
constructions, I suspected my self might be given to some places, as not
thinking them of that Import, be the truth which way 'twill. This only I would
advertise the Reader that in page 658. what I render, something of a Tincture
derived to them -- the Latin renders exigua antiquae Propinquitatis cum iis
vincula. Amyot, no Communication. Tellemont, no Communication nor alliance,
taking in both the former Interpretations. But I do not conceive that either of
them has reached the Author's meaning: for, if I mistake not, Plutarch aludes
to Rome's original deduced from Aeneas and the Trojans, who came with him into
Italy, from whom not only Romulus descended in a right line, but all the Romans
after him were called Aeneadae from Aeneas, and twice so called in this very
Life. Now, how the Trojans and Grecians had been affected to each other, is a
known Story, and Plutarch from thence takes an handsome occasion to magnify
the Romans, that they who might seem to have (...), ad verbum, Tenacious
Participations: i. e. Something of an Enemies Blood running in their veins, as
they are of the Trojan Race, should do such great things for Greece. So that I
understand the (...) to be Trojan not Grecian Ancestors. Though the Latin
Translatour means, I suppose, the latter, with reference to those ancient
Colonies of Greeks, which seated themselves in several parts of Italy before
Aeneas his time, and thence had the Romans and Grecians a remote Relation in
Blood one to another. And the meaning must be then, that it is a wonder, that
the Romans having a small relation to them, should do them a great kindness,
etc. Which is neither so High, nor Genuine a Sense, in my mind as the former.

FINIS
Books Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet.
POETRY.
MIltons Paradise Lost, in Folio, with 13 Copper Cuts.

The Works of that famous English Poet, Mr. Edmond Spencer, viz. The Fairy
Queen. The Shepherds Calendar. The History of Ireland, etc. with an account of
his Life, and several Pieces of his, never Printed till the year, 1679.

Ovid's Love Epistles: Translated into English by The Earl of Mulgrave, Sir
Carr Scrope, Mr. Dryden, and several other Eminent Hands: Adorned with variety
of Copper Cuts.

The Odes, Satyrs, and Epistles of Horace, Translated into English by Mr.
Creech of Oxford.

Missellany Poems, containing a new Translation of Virgil's Eclogues, and
several parts of the Eneids: Ovids Love Elegies, several Odes of Horace, and
Parts of Lucretius; with variety of Original Poems: Written by the most Eminent
Hands, and Published by Mr. Dryden.

Syphilis; Or a Poetical History of the French Disease: Written in Latin by
Fracastorius, and Englished by Mr. Tate.

Poems upon several Occasions, with a voyage to the Island of Love: Written by
Mrs. Bhen.


