A PLEA TO THE DUKE's Answers.
Fiat justitia, ruat Coelum. Anglice, The Bill in the Honorable the late House
of Commons against the D. was their Duty.
WHoop, Weighty Considerations, etc.! what noise is this? the Devil's, it is
doubt besides's Adhererents, Heirs and Successors disturbed what is the matter?



Ans. Wellow day; but what then?



Ans. Is that it? pity, but why, how, or where?



Ans. Oh, oh; but must not we endeavor, use the means, etc. as God has enabled
us? the Husbandman sows, the Mariner sets sail; must we tempt God, be stupid,
supine, expose our selves, seek giving you an occasion of, etc?

Asa deposed Mahacah, because of'r Idolatry; Jehu dethroned Joram, and Jeroboam
Rehoboam; but these are Examples only to read, not imitate.

King. c. 11. the Prophet A^hijah told Jeroboam, Jehovah says it, He will rend
this Kingdom, and give thee ten Tribes; and in 1 King. 12. God himself owns
what Jeroboam did as his own Act, in dispossessing King Rehoboam, and making
himself King. The Prophets in God's Name anointed Jehu King over Israel, with
special direction to destroy the King and's whole Line, 2 King. 9. And when
Jehu had done so, God approves of it, c. 10. v. 30. And in 2 Chronicles. 15. when v.
16. says Asa did so, next v. says, Asa was an upright man [and that too] all is
life.

France assisted the Protestant King of Navarre, to be theirs.



Cook says* he is Heir apparent, and its nonsense to say Heir apparent is not
an Heir. And so does the Scripture too call him Heir, Genesis 15.13. 2 Samuel 14.7.
Mat. 21.38. Mark 12.17 Luke 20 14. Gal. 4.1.

Jac. 4.] may plainly see the words nor sense in any wise warrant thy Case, if
yet he were Heir, as thou would have him. And besides, he is no Heir. Genesis says
only -- shall be my Heir [which proves he is not] In Sam. and Gall. the
Father's dead when Son's called so.

Matthew. Mark and Luke?

Abraham said, Lot was his Brother as he was Son of his Brother, and's Wife
Sarah was his Sister, as being's Brother's Daughters; what now, is it commonly
taken with us that our Brother's Son is our Brother, etc? In Civil Law, no
body's said Heir but when succeeds his friend in's estate: in our Law he is said
Heir which succeeds by right of blood; thus, till he succeeds, he is no Heir and
he cannot succeed till his friends death. It Is a maxim, solus Deus haeredem
sacere potest; that is, only death makes Heirs. But for example, By agreement I
am to pay your Heirs money, or they me: does any body expect any payment during
your life? is it Jesuitical to say no? sure the sense is plain. Heir apparent
is only and peculiarly a Law-term, little used, barbarous, improper and absurd
enough. Heir apparent is at best an Heir but as the Logician's posse is esse.
Now they will say, suppose thee never so honest a man in esse, yet thou art worst
of Knaves, etc. in posse; while, methinks, it is hard to call thee worst of
Knaves, etc. because thou art so in posse. Besides, the Law makes distinctions
and degrees of Heirs, as proximi, the Sons, remotiores, Nephews. etc. and
lastly Brothers. Who ever heard a Brother (which is of so remote a degree)
called Heir apparent? Lastly, how wild is this? If we were bound as aforesaid
to the D. because he may be Heir; so there being thousands may be Heirs, we are
bound to them too, though so much as know'm not. Thus, are we bound to serve
God and Mammon too? then poor we! Ecquis possit servire ducbus? Thus Faith,
Allegiance, and Defense of and to a Subject, yea Subjects, God knows how many
which was never heard of, and yet without any salvo to the King too; which is
so much against Law, See Co. L. 65. monstr. horrend. etc! the D. may as well
pretend to have a present share of all the Taxes granted by Parliament to the
King, his Heirs and Successors.



as he is a Subject, consenting to, what is he robbed, when by's consent? by's
inferiors, when by King, etc?



Israelites gave the Power to Moses] over all Parties, their Lives, Estates,
and every thing; else Justice must fail, Faults go unpunished, and Deserts be
unrewarded, nor could any thing otherwise be improved or maintained for the
common Good, or private either, but all must necessarily fall, and run to
Confusion, etc. This Power with us is in the Parliament, and sure placed, the
best it can be. Thus it is either in our selves, or since we cannot be all at
Parliament, we choosing others to do there* what we could if were there our
selves, as we do choosing Parliament Men, it is in our Representatives these Men
we thus entrust, together with the King and Lords. Now suppose the Skies may
fall, and such Act as the Objection speaks of should come, yet since before any
such Act can be against the King. He must give His own Consent Himself to it;
and before against any other, it must be with this other person's consent
immediately, or by consent of whom he has chose to represent him, and give's
consent. Can we say any Act does us wrong, any of us? No more than that a Man's
injured and displeased with his own good will and liking, absurd, and against
the most undeniable Maxim, Volenti non sit injuria. Furthermore. How contrary
to Religion, Justice, or Law, any wise? It Is well enough known, every King at
first was created and elected under Laws and Conditions, by and with the free
general Votes of the people, subjecting themselves to Him, as some Notable Man
amongst them for Equity and Justice, to govern them, and defend their Laws,
Liberties, Persons and Estates, Con^^rru. in c. 1. pract qq. n. 4. Ludovic.
Velazquez de Avendam. l. 40. Taur. gloss. 1. n. 9. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. ad pop.
Antioch. Fortese. de laud. etc. c. 13, 14. so Bodinus in several places. And
Hom. l. 7. Odyss. calls a Kingdom a Reward of Virtue and Merit, of the peoples
giving. Thus a King is not for's own, but's Subjects sake only: and we have in
truth rather title, etc. to Him, than He to us: see 1 Samuel 9.16. 1. Kings 10.9.
Thus when Kings themselves be ill ones, God not only approves of their removal,
but even himself does it, etc. 2 Kings 24.2. etc. 2 Cr. c. 10. and 11. 1 Kings
11. etc. c. 16.14, 15. c. 21. c. 16.4, 5, 6. 2 Kings 9.25. Job 34.30. Sed
praestat cu il ela, quam medela; Care beforehand's, better than Cure after. God
commands choose a King; but not according to that which Man respects, [ viz.
the outward circumstances] but the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. see the like in several
places. Kingdoms are what but politic things; then, under the Government of
the Laws: Hence some be Hereditary, others Elective, according to the Politic
Customs thereof, and with as much difference in the methods, etc. of
Succession, and the like of Elections* as there is between Succession and
Election; which could never be, if Title to Crowns were beyond, or not under
the power of the Laws of the people. Elective are the Empire of Germany,
Kingdom of Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, [when Kingdoms] AEthiopia, of the Goths,
of the Tartars* of Arrogoza, Lacaedemonia, Tratia, Traprobana; Fez, and some
say Spain, de Jure; so France will have no Queen, etc. and keep us out. Why may
not then, all considered, our King, Lords and Commons, the whole Nation (Huic
ego nec metas rerum nec tempora pono. Virgil) make another Successor, and not
the D. especially not taking the Crown out of the Line, as David did? He, a Man
after God's own Heart, in like case, made not his next Heir, but Solomon, so
far distant, his Successor, 1 Kings 1.30. etc. 1 Cr. 28. and likewise did the
people make Hazariah King, 2 Kings 14.21. were to have made Roboam King, 1
Kings 12.1. and did make Jeroboam. v. 20. and all this without God's
contradiction, yea, with his approbation; besides so many other like Examples
everywhere, though here, King and people did it either of them, and we do it
altogether.

It may be Objected, There being a general Law or Custom for Kingdoms going by
Succession, people cannot choose a King Conarru, Archid, Gregor. Lup. and
others; But what, say they, is the Reason? only 'cause the continuance of such
custom, etc. implies the peoples consent to it.

Truly the Reasons of our Adversaries, methinks, implicitly acknowledge the
power of altering the Succession; (Huic ego nec tempora pono) the like has often
been practiced in England; see the Statures, 25 H. 8.22. 26 H. 8.2. 28 H.
8.7*16 35 H. 8.1. 1 Ed. 6.12. 1 Mar. 1. 1 El. 3. 13 El. 1. nothing more plain!
What impudence would cast dirt in the face of so many of our Reverend
Ancestors, and say they did they knew not what, or they could not do what they
said they could, after the Succession? The very words of the Statute of 13 El.
cap. 1. are:

It shall be High Treason, to affirm the Laws and Statutes do not bind the
Right of the Crown, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, or Governance
thereof, Note, this part of the Act is in force yet, against our Pamphleteer,
which says it is not, and the rest is only expired as relating but to the
Queen. Nay, is it not a Maxim amongst Papists, Not only that the Pope may at
his pleasure depose Kings, and dispose of Crowns; but further, That the People
may ever choose a King, when He should else be an Heretic, etc? so Frater
Alfonsus de Castro. so Didac Septiman. in Cathol. Inst. T. 46. n. 75. Then if
the D. be a Papist, as none deny him, now; he is a Heretic as to or from us,
and what shall we do, not do by the Papists, as they would by us? Nec Lex est
justior ulla quam necis artifices art perire sua. Withal consider his
Principles, All be Heretics resist the Authority of the Church of Rome [which
is as large as the Infallible Pope pleases] or that differ with it in any point
of Faith; Fides Haereticis non adhibenda, He Is to keep neither Word or Oath
with us; nor is it any matter hence, what he says or swears to us; it is not
only lawful and conscientious to kill us, etc. but a duty. Like this, the late
Papist French King, raising and encouraging that dreadful Massacre of
Protestants at Paris, etc. and thousands of such like Examples. Then consider's
humor so fierce, revengeful, and resolute; but I Will say no more: Who knows not
how improper it is, to make a Wolf, a Shepherd? Who Is so thoughtless, as not
see under a Papist King, how our Religion is hazarded all the World over? first
lost here, consequently with ease elsewhere. How all our Lives, Estates, and
Souls be hazarded, sure nothing can be more; some for fear, some by force, and
others to fa^ter, will or must comply with him, or do worse, if possible. An
ill King, says Solomon, over the poor People, is like a roaring Lion, and a
Bear seeking's prey, Prove. 28.15. In fine, Is it not better one James live, but
like the greatest Prince of the world, in stead of actually being King, than
Three whole Kingdoms, together with several other Nations, should utterly
perish? Nay, Is it not better to pull down one House to save, than let a City
perish? Nay, Had you not rather cut off any of your own Members, than hazard
your whole Body? Res ipsa loquitur; The thing speaks it self.

See other Papers wrote before to this effect; what in any is for the D. is
answered all here; all the rest, is here omitted as needless to repeat.

FINIS.

