The PLOT. A POEM.
LAte in St. Germain's Court, the Royal Station
Of the great Jacobite, Lord of Abdication,
Sat great Divan, on a more great Occasion:
Where Crowns, Crown'd-Heads, Power, Empire, Domination;
Descents and Vengeance, Transports and Invasion;
Fire, Sword and Battle, Death and Desolation;
Even down to the diminitive Preparation
Of Poyniards, Musquetoons, (sweet titillation,)
Dear Russians, Ambuscades, Assassination,
The whole Rich Magazine of Heretic Damnation,
Were all the high Debates of this grand Consultation.
Here First, for their Divine Illumination,
Behold a Beam of Sacred Revelation,
St. Granvall and St. Ruth's great Inspiration.
Nor did there want a gentler Invocation
Of Fair St. Levaliers bright Coruscation:
All Heavenly warming Lights to this great Caballation.
Here Female Statesman, at her high Helm-Station,
Great Maintenon, began, in Learned Oration,
The Welsh Prince Panegyric Declamation:
Whilst a bent Knee went round, and lowest Adoration.
Behold, she cried, --
The little Pillar of the great British Nation;
Fair Albions Hopes to endless Generation;
The Peter-stone to her whole Church-Foundation;
His shortliv'd Fathers Glories Consummation.
Wonders she spoke! 'Twas all to Admiration!
Even truths more great than Legend Demonstration;
Up to the very inmost Penetration,
Into the mystic Oracles of his Procreation,
His very Warming-Pan, and Cradles Consecration.
This tender Bud of British Expectation,
That infant Theme her first Initiation,
She now advanced to the loftier Elevation
Of Copes and Crosiers, Tripple Coronation:
Through all the Streams of Sanguin Desperation,
From Blood and Murder, Scarlet Romes Plantation;
Those well known mounting steps to Papal instauration;
From Guido's Lanthorn Light, she moved by due Gradation.
Even up to the Divine, Pontifick Radiation.
Great Lewis here, with proudest Exultation,
To give the Fiat to this vast Creation,
Bid the bold J -- s, his Pupil Preservation,
Prepare for an immediate Embarkation.
For Honor lay before him, Triumphation,
Dressed in her proudest Crimson Decoration;
No less than the High-noon bright Glorification,
TO his Phosphor Barclay's ruddy morning Lumination.
Great were the sounds, and sweet the Consolation;
For, oh, the tickling dear Imagination
Of Universal Maudlin Reformation!
Despotick Scepters, Absolute Regnation!
Priests, Jesuits, Dragoons, (an inundation!)
Fire, Faggot, the whole Jaccobite Propagation!
A total Heretic Eradication!
All in the golden days of joyful Restoration.
And for our foolish Fears full Dissipation,
Our empty Jealousies Evaporation;
Kind Lewis's wondrous Service, free Donation,
Bound with a solemn Gallick Protestation,
He swore (and with a Stygian Imprecation)
Was far from any mental Reservation,
His own Ambitions utter Abjuration.
Thus Vowed great Lewis, Mahomet's Transmigration,
The Cresent-Champion for the Cross's Exaltation,
All from his Heart as true as Transubstantiation.
But here Fames Trump must stop --
Here change thy Ayrs, no more thou sweet Musician;
Sing, sad Molpomene, Sobs, Sighs, Contrition,
Woes, Waylings! Some kind melancholy Titian,
Draw Wilds and Ruins; all our vast Ambition,
Laid low in Dust; our poor Plots lost Condition.
For, oh, our Barclay's dear Divine Commission
Lies quasht: Our hopes all empty Apparition,
And honest poor Jack Ketch, our sorrows last Physician.
Our Calais Transports for the Grand Decision,
All under an Embargo of Misprision;
A mark for Heretic Bombs, and Williamite Derision.
Nay, our great Jehu J -- s, from his Transition
To Albion Shore, for Regal Readmission;
Stroll'd back to Bulloign Cloisters, to petition
The minor Saints, to wail a Jacobite Politician!
This the Reduced Britannia's new Submission?
Instead of our once Glorious Expedition;
Egyptian spoils, and Heretic Division;
Now made their Hiss and Grin (Fates weak tuition!)
Fallen from our Laurel Wreaths, to a rueful Vision
Of Ax, Hemp, Cord, the whole Tyburn Ammunition;
To our whole rampant Cause, a woeful Circumcision.
And have we pil'd and heaped, left no omission
For Roman Givets, Jacobite Provision;
All for one Conflagration? Dire Perdition!
But above all (what is Death the very Repetition,)
Is this our little Warbecks Royal Recognition!
And to conclude our whole Eternal Abdication,
Our thunderbolt of Fate is the Association.
London, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. 1696.


