A LITTLE VIEW OF THIS OLD WORLD, IN TWO BOOKS.

I. A Map of Monarchy, Wherein the state of the World is represented under
Kings, with their entrance, Reign, and Ends, from King Saul, to King Charles.

II. An Epitomy of Papacy, Wherein is discovered the rise of Antichrist, with
the Entrance, Reign, and Ends of the Popes of Rome for 740 years, till the Pope
was fully declared to be the Antichrist.

A Work fitted for the Press Five years agone, and now published, by Tho.
Palmer, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Nottingham.

LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1659.

To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England.
Honorable Worthies:
THe Lord God Almighty is the original of all Created beings, and his glory is
the great end he is carrying on both in Earth and Heaven. Wisdom, Grace, and
Power are the Essence of God, and from himself he made and governs the whole
Creation independently, and none can say, Why have thou done thus? There is
some parity between a Saints Soul-state, and the true Church State: Darkness
and bondage precedes light and comfort; sufferings go before rest; Abraham's
true Seed are in Egypt, they Genesis 15. 13. Exodus 12. 40, 41.
pass the red Sea, and wander in a houling Wilderness, before they can possess
the promised Land of Canaan: and all these former dealings of God with his
people in Covenant, were written for examples 1 Cor. 10 11.
and types for us upon whom the ends of the world are come. Jehovab has not
usually made great promises to his people, and enriched them with his Free
Grace, but he has brought them to live upon him by faith for the performance
of the word that went out of his mouth; yet as God saw the state of future
times, he was pleased still to discover and foretell to his suffering Saints
the enemies fall, and the Churches advance and glory in this world. The state
both of the Jewish and Christian Church, as to their sufferings, union and
glory, were fully represented in Daniels Visions, and John's Revelations. When
Jesus Christ was in the Flesh he was frequently Preaching, and in Parables
representing the Churches suffering, and raised estate, and after him the
Apostles taught the same things. The Prophets and Apostles spoke not only of
the Churches future sufferings under the Beasts and false Prophet, the Dragon
and the Whore, but God was pleased also to compute and measure the time of
Saints sufferings to their promised Redemption.

In Christ's foretelling the events of time after his Resurrection, he gives
not his Disciples the number of years, but leaves with them several foregoing
signs of their promised Redemption, that both by computation of time, and by
signs, the Saints might the better find the time of the Beasts reigns, and the
appearing and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Indeed Chronologies are imperfect, and
I judge the very year of the Beasts fall, and Churches deliverance, Mat. 24. 36
cannot be asserted by man; yet I humbly conceive, that both from computations
and signs, God has begun his Churches deliverance in these Nations.

The Churches Restoration is as fully promised, as her afflicted state
foretold; and when the Dragon and the Whore have had their time of tyranny
over the Saints, why should we not certainly believe and look for promised
rest? If you please here to take a view of the Kings of the Earth, and examine
Antichrists plots and practices, they have fulfilled the Word of God by the
mouths of his Prophets, and answer them exactly, as face answers face in a
Glass.

Great Senators, I may be bold to say, God has honored England above all the
Nations of the earth, and you above many Sons of men, in making use of you to
begin (and prosess your resolutions) for the establishment of Truth and
Holiness in these Lands; it was only the Lords free mercy that brought, and
has continued the Gospel in England above any Country and Kingdom in Europe;
and may we not upon that ground believe, that appearing, and kingdom of the Son
of Man promised shall here begin, and from hence run from Nation to Nation,
till all the Vials of Gods Wrath be poured out upon the Churches enemies, and
that great voice out of the Temple in Heaven be fulfilled, saying, The Kingdoms
Rev. 11. 15.
of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever? Truly the night is not yet past, and the Lords
work in your hands is attended with great difficulty, yet you shall ever have a
Pillar and a Cloud to guide and defend, if you keep your eye upon them. I think
I may say, God now calls you to an unwonted work, the bringing in of the New 2
Pet. 3. 13 Dan. 7. 26, 27.
Heavens, and New Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, which is the Kingdom
of Saints in this World. Carnal Counselors, and worldly Politicians know
little of the Lords designs at this day, and will do as little in his work.
God is now staining worldly glory, God is now fulfilling promises to his Son,
and his Saints, and none but the Spiritualwise Dan. 12. 10
understand the work before you. I beseech you look much to God, hearken after
the teaching and light of the Spirit in the Churches of Christ, and so act that
you may render up your account with joy, and not with fear. This is the end,
and all of my desires in this little piece I humbly present you with, who shall
rejoice to be found serviceable in his generation, to promote the great design
of Jesus Christ, and shall abide

Your Honors real and faithful Servant in my Lords Work, Tho. Palmer.
From my Lodging upon London Bridge, the 4th. Mon. 1659.
To all that believe, and look for the Kingdom of Christ, and glory of the
New-Testamen-Church in this World.
Precious souls,
IT was the providence of my dear Father, when he took me from more rough
employment in the Wars of England, to call me to preach the Gospel of Light in
a dark corner; which was not without success and comfort to my soul, and
refreshing to many at home and abroad: but after a little time Satan raised so
great opposition against some few painful Servants of the Lord, who (with my
self) joined freely to preach the Gospel on weekdays from Town to Town where
we were invited by any of the Lords people; that after the continuance of this
course for about two years, and some light (especially in the order of the
Gospel) brake forth, the Parish Ministers shut the doors of the Comman
Meeting-places against us, and by degrees put an end to those fruitful and
blessed exercises. My more public Ministration of the Gospel being so
prevented, and my preaching in my Parish-relation by the same spirit of
Antichrist made very ineffectual, that young Converts were staggered about
Church Order, and many Christians drew back; It was upon my heart to employ my
spare hours to prepare something for the Press, and preach in Print, when I
could not preach in other men's Pulpits. I was (for some time) unresolved of a
Subject to write upon, but seeking to the Lord in Prayer, God set the sense of
the old Dragons, and the Whore of Babylons long-continued Tyranny over the
Saints much upon my soul, and I judged it was now a time seasonable, and a Work
necessary afresh to take a view of this old World under Monarchical Tyranny in
States, and under mystical Babylons usurpations over the Church of Christ. In
the time of the Jewish Church State, and for some time after the
New-Testament-church-state was begun, Daniels four parted terrible Image, and
his four monstrous Beasts, had all their answerable times and terms, that with
Christ's Incarnation, John's Serpent, or Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns,
the Heathen Roman Empire was entered the stage of this World, and acted like
himself. But as this Beast grew weak, and fell in power, the great Whore,
Mystery, Babylon, took her opportunity to get up, and rides that
Scarlet-colored Rev. 17. 3
Beast to this day. Since the Pope, or Papacy has ridden the Dragon or earthly
Monarchy, the Whore has made great use of the Kings of the Earth to exercise
her bloody cruelty upon the Saints, that have owned and sought those
privileges wherewith the Lord Jesus Christ has made them free.

What the Dragons and the Whores time and Tyranny has been, is not unknown to
many Saints, and light will break forth more and more to the perfect day.

Large and vast are those Volumes which have been written upon these four great
Empires of the World, and the Papacy of Rome; but these (for the greatest part)
have been written in strange Tongues, and are in the studies of great Scholars,
to little Spiritual use.

When Nebuchadnezzar had taken Jerusalem, and settled the Empire of Babylon in
himself, his desires were to know what after should come to pass in the latter
days; His mind being thus busied, he had a Vision of a great and terrible
Image, whose head was of Gold, his breast and arms of Silver, his belly and his
thighs of Brass, his legs of Iron, his feet part of Iron and part of Clay; a
stone cut out without hands, smote the Image upon his feet -- and brake them to
pieces -- that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote the Image
became a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth.

This Vision was revealed from the Lord to Daniel, and by Daniel to King Dan.
2. 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
Nebuchadnezzar, wherein is presented the future state of the world from that
time to the Kingdom of Christ, or Kingdom of the Stone, and end of this old
World. From that time the world was to be under the successive government of
four Kingdoms, of which Babylon was the first. And in the days of these Kings
shall the God of Verse. 38.
Heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed -- but it shall break
Verse. 44.
in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. The
Lords revealing this dream, and the interpretation Verse. 46, 47, 48.
of it to Nebuchadnezzar, caused that Heathen King to give glory to God, as God
of gods, and greatly honored Daniel (as honored of the Lord) to reveal the
secret. I may hence infer, its now a work becoming the Lords people to be
inquiring after light in this Prophecy, and be saying to the Lords Watchmen,
as those of Sier, Watchman, what of the night? Isa. 11. 11
watchman, what of the night? that is, how much of the time of these four
Kingdoms are run out, or what remains yet to be fulfilled of them? when the
fifth Kingdom is to begin? and the watchmen may answer, The morning comes,
also the Verse. 12.
night; that is, the morning for Saints, and the night for sinners.

It was a mercy that the Lord should have this Prophecy as a ground for faith,
and prayer to his people; but God has abundantly foretold the suffering state
of his Church under these four Kingdoms, has by his Prophets and Apostles,
which are now so plain, that Saints do run and ^ead them.

God Omniscient foreseeing the need saints would have of support under so long
^^me of sufferings, gives a further discovery of these four Kingdoms to the
Prophet Daniel, in the first year of Belshazzer Dan. 7. 1
King of Babylon. In this Vision, these Ver. 3, 4, etc.
^^ur Kings or Kingdoms are represented under four monstrous Beasts, and these
^^eat Beasts which are four, are (inter^^eted Ver. 17.
of) four Kings, which should arise Ver. 18.
^^t of the earth; and for a support to the The Kingdom of the Saints begins
with the fall of the four Monarchies
^^rds people, the Angel also further adds, ^^at the Saints of the most High
shall ^^ke the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and
ever.

The Babylonian Monarchy, the Median Dan. 2. 38
and Persian Monarchy, and the Dan. 8. 20, 21.
Grecian Monarchy, are three of these four Kingdoms, expressly sonamed by, and
to Daniel. And the fourth Beast which Dan. 7. 7
was dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly, can be no other than the
Empire of Rome. Time has now interpreted who the fourth Beast is, but Daniels
fourth Rev. 12. 3
Beast, and the Apostle John's Dragon, ar^ one and the same, and generally
understood to represent the Roman Monarchy.

Earth and Sea, Corruption and Confusion The original of earthly Monarchy
was the original of these Kingdoms and I may as truly say, Pride and
Contention are the support of earthly Kings and Crowns. For the sake of Saints
I have gathered this Compendium of these four Kingdoms of Babylon, Media, and
Persia, Greece, and Rome, out of large an^ vast Volumes, to give light into
Daniel Visions, and John's Revelations. They that with serious thoughts shall
read these few pages, and run down the line of Monarchy in the several Beasts
reigns, do no^ need Spiritual light, to discover what implacable enmity has
(at all times) run the veins of Kings against King Jesus and his Saints.

The Popes and Prelacy had the same original with earthly Monarchy, and no less
an enemy to the intrest of Christ and his Saints; the Papacy is a Beast arising
out Rev. 13. 11.
of the earth as well as Monarchy, yet has Horns like a Lamb, but speaks as a
Dragon. This Whore has not only drunk but Rev. 17. 6
has been drunken with the blood of Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus, as well
as Monarchy, and the time is now near that the Saints shall have commission
from the Lord Jesus Christ, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, not only to give
Babylon Rev. 18. 5, 6.
blood to drink, but to reward her double, according to her works, in the Cup
which she has filled, fill to her double; I say, this time is near in the
whole, and in part begun in England. I say again, and again, (this is my faith)
That the hour of Gods Judgments is come, to turn the waters of his indignation
upon his Churches enemies. Believers have the Word, Covenant, and Oath of the
erernal God for all this, they have the engagement of the faithful Almighty God
that cannot Iye, and why should we not expect it? Surely the work is upon the
wheel that turns fast, and nothing but Voices, and Thunders, and Earthquakes;
nothing but shakings, and changes, and over-turnings can be expected in
Churches and States, till he come Eze. 21. 27 Psalm. 2. 8, 9 Rev. 15. 3 Hag. 2.
6, 7
and be lift up, whose right alone it is to rule as King of Saints, and King of
Nations.

As yet the Lords people see little into this great Mystery of the Prophets,
and if you find slips and failings in my Computations Rev. 10. 7
of years, or application of Prophecies, cover them, or correct them in love,
considering my love to Christ and his Saints has engaged me in this Work, and
as yet it is neither dark nor light. I confess, the whole Book is little more
than a Transcript of Divine and profane Histories, in all which I have been
faithful to God and Men; which Mite I now cast into the poor Saints Treasury,
and if the Lord Jesus Christ shall make it a seasonable word of truth to
Saints, it will be the comfort and crown of him who waits, and prays for the
promised Redemption of Sion.

T. P.

A MAP of MONARCHY. LIB. I.
ALL the dealings of God with man, are works of wonder. As the Lords electing
Love has been cast upon a few of old Adams children to evidence the freedom
and riches of his grace: So the infiniteness of his Almighty power, is manifest
in his guidance, preservation and protection of these chosen ones, through the
oppositions and difficulties they meet with in this world. For the sake of
these was Christ promised, Laws, Ordinances and Government given. For the first
2000. years sin reigned, and there were few Acts 7. 2. 3. Genesis 12. 1, 2.
persons whom the Lord approved of as godly. About which time, the Lord singled
out Abraham, and made a special Covenant with him, and his seed after his
faith. Abraham had one Isaac descending from him, Isaac had but one Genesis 17. 1,
Jacob coming out of his Loins: but Romans 4. 11, 12.
from Jacob came the twelve Patriarchs. Genesis 21. 1, 2, 3.
I will omit many passages of Gods providence in those times: yet it is manifest
Genesis 25. 26.
that the Church of God then was contained Genesis 49. 1, etc.
in one Family; and though Jacobs Isreal's going into Egypt.
Family had in it seventy souls at his going into Egypt, (amongst themselves)
these were only under houshold-Government. Genesis 46. 26, 27.


The time of Isreal's bondage until their full deliverance, was 430. years: Exo.
12. 40, 41.
all which time (till near the end) Israel (in civil things) were under the
Government of the Kings of Egypt. But when Exo. 3. 7, 11.
Isreal's oppressions brought them to their prayers, the Lord heard their cries,
and Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, was about
made provision for their deliverance by the hand of Moses, to whom the Lord
gave the Government of his people Israel Ann. mun. 2398.
as Judge. I cannot here let pass the glorious appearance of God in the
multiplying of these people, that in the Land of their sad afflictions and hard
bondage, Genesis 46. 26.
the number of seventy souls entering Egypt, were multiplied to six hundred
thousand, and 3000. and 550. men of Number. 1. 46, 47.
War, besides the Tribe of Levi.

The Lord now having made good his Isreal's increase in Egypt.
promise to Abraham in so great a measure, that from a Family they were
increased into a Body Politic, or Commonwealth. For the well-ordering of The
first institution of Judges.
whom, God in his wisdom gave to them a sweet fatherly Government under the
name and title of Judge (many or most of which were Prophets and Highpriests,)
elected by the people; not to have a violent, proud arbitrary or absolute
dominion over them; but to minister justice, and guide them by the counsel of
God. Under this happy Government the Lord blessed this people about Act. 13.
20, 1 Samuel 8. 1, 3, 4.
450. years.

It is too manifest that upon the corruptions of some in Government, the people
would not be satisfied until they had cast off that Government the Lord had
given them, and blessed to them, and Verse. 5.
would have a King to Judge them like The Original of kingly Government
Heathenish.
all the Nations. This Heathenish request sadly grieved good Samuel, and much
displeased the Lord: yet God in Verse. 6.
his unsearchable wisdom, (having great Kings first given with a curse.
designs to accomplish in the world) granted Israel their desires, though to
be Verse. 7.
a scourge and a curse to them; and commanded Samuel to tell them what
oppressors and Tyrants these Kings should Ver. 11, 12, etc.
be to them. And Israel groaned woefully under this Kingly Monarchical
Government Ver. 19, 20. etc.
for about 517. years, which ended with the last and great Captivity in
Babylon: but upon their restoration and return, they again set up the
Government Note.
by Judges according to the institution of God, and so continued it; many of
which Judges ruling after the Captivity (as before) were Highpriests.

Now as Kingly, Monarchical Government, Rev. 12.
has been most general in the world, and these Kings and Emperors Rev. 16.
13, 15.
implacable enemies, and bloody persecutors of Christ and the interest of the
Psalm. 2. 12. etc.
Saints; yea, and such as have been the great instruments of the Devil to keep
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23.
down or keep out Christ from his Kingly, Isa. 2. 2. etc.
Monarchical visible Government over the Saints and Churches, which God the
Father has promised to him, and conferred upon him; I will therefore spot a
little Paper, and spend a little time to run down the line of Monarchy, to give
a touch upon the entrance, reign, and ends of some Kings, Emperors, and Kings
again in the latter times. I will begin with the Kings of Israel: at their
ending, I will come to Daniels four Kings; and fall in with the Histories of
the Kings of England, until that name was taken away at White Hall West-minster.

The Map of Monarchy.
WHen nothing but a King would Saul first King of Israel. 2848.
content Israel, Samuel caused all the Tribes of Israel and all the People to
gather to Mizpeh, where they chose Saul the son of Kish for chief 1 Samuel 10.
17, 21.
Captain. This was a free election of Kings by Election of the people.
the People, and no secret combination of any party. Yet I cannot but note the
modesty of the young man (seeming) to judge himself unfit for so great an
honor, and high trust, hid himself from the Crown. If we may judge affections
by actions, Saul sought the Asses with more desire, then a Kingdom: And
possibly Kingly Office has made good men bad.
if he had continued in his Native employment, his life might have been longer,
and his sin less. But being now lift up to the Throne, Saul ruffles in the
world, and did something while God was with him: yet when the Lord took from
Saul the spirit of Government and courage, he fell into gross wickedness; and
in the lifetime of Saul, David was anointed 1 Samuel 13. 13.
King over Israel. I will not insist upon 1 Samuel 31. 4.
the vile practices of this ungodly man which came to miserable end: for not
finding a man willing to separate his distracted soul from his miserable body,
he fell upon his own sword, and became his own executioner. But this I must
further add, the lusts of Saul cost Israel dear; for he spent much treasure,
spilt much of their blood, and reigned with Samnel Act. 13. 21. 2888.
40. years about Anno mun. 2888.

For the wickedness of Saul, the Lord David second King of Israel.
rejected him, took away the spirit of Government he had, and commanded Samuel
to anoint David the son of Jesse, 1 Samuel 16. 12.
when Saul had reigned but a few years: Verse. 13.
yet David was not set upon the Throne until the death of Saul, and then David
2 Samuel 2. 4.
was only Crowned King of Judah at Hebron by a small party of Israel, the
greater number following Ishbosheth the son of Saul, who was made King of
Israel Verse. 8.
by Abner Captain of Saul's Host: and now they fell to war and bloodshed. In
this war David's party got the better; Ver. 12, 13, 16.
but a little after, Ishbosheth reproving Abner for lying with one of his
fathers Ishboshet set up by Abner.
Concubines, Abner was displeased, and thereupon sought to betray Ishbosheth: 2 Samuel 3. 7.
Kingdom to David, and had audience Verse. 12.
with David about it. But Joab Captain Ver. 17. 20.
of David's Host returning from pursuit Verse. 22.
of the enemy, and hearing that Abner had been at David's Court, and was newly
departed, Joab sent for him back, and being returned, Joab took Abner aside
Abner killed by Joab.
as if he would speak privately to him, and secretly stabbed him to the heart,
in revenge upon Abner for killing Asahel Ver. 27.
Joabs brother. The death of Abrer did 2 Samuel 4. 1.
greatly astonish those that followed Ishbosheth; Vile treason.
and as his Kingdom was declining, Ver. 2.
Baanah and Rechab, two false brethren, finding an opportunity, secretly
murdered Ishbosheth, cut off his head, and Verse. 7.
carried it to David. These wretches Verse. 8.
hoped now to have been greatly advanced Ishbosheth murdered.
by David for this bloody cruelty; but good David troubled at their sin, Verse.
12.
gave them the just reward of traitors: The due reward of treason.
yet upon the death of Ishbosheth, at the end of 7. years, all Israel came into
David, and the whole Kingdom was settled 2 Samuel 5. 1.
in him.

There is no question but David was a very godly and precious man, neither Psa.
51. 4.
will I afresh rake amongst his many and great sins over which he deeply
mourned, and which free grace pardoned: yet this may be observed, that his sin
brought much misery upon all Israel, and because of blood the Lord 1 Chro. 22.
8.
denied him the honor to build his House; neither do we find since David,
that great Warriers have done much in 2 Samuel 5. 4. 5.
Church-reformation. David was 30. years old when he was Crowned King Note.
of Judah: He reigned over them 7. years and six months, and over all Israel
33. years; In all 40 years and six months, 1 King. 1.
and left Solomon his son upon his Throne. About Anno mundi 2929. 2929.


Solomon succeeded his father David: Solomon the third King of Israel.
In the fourth year of his reign was the foundation of the House of the Lord
laid, in the month Zif, or 1 Kin. 6. 37.


And in the 11. year, in month Bull, Verse. 38.
or October, which is the eighth month, The first Temple 7. years in building.
was the house finished: so was he seven years in building it. About Ann. mund.
2940. Solomon walked long with the 1 King. 10. 23.
Lord, and the Lord made him glorious in the world, yet in his old age (which
should have been most fruitful in holiness) his wives turned his heart after
other 1 King. 11. 4. 5.
gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord. This sin of Solomon, a sin
against so many and high engagements Verse. 11.
of love and obedience, greatly provoked the Lord to alter his purposes
concerning him and his house; upon which God threatened certainly to rend Verse.
12.
the Kingdom from him, and to give it to his servant. Yet this sad sentence was
sweetly mixed with mercy, That the Lord would not do it in his days, for David's
Verse. 13.
sake; Nor rend away all the Kingdom, but leave one Tribe to his son, for his
fathers sake, and Jerusalem sake, whom he had chosen. But to all the rest,
Solomon was a great oppressor of his brethren, as will appear more anon, and
reigned over all Israel 40. years, about An. mund. 2969. 2969.


Upon the death of Solomon, all Israel Rehoboam the first King of Judah after
the division.
came to Shechem to Crown Rehoboam son of Solomon. Against which time they
called Jeroboam home, who fled for his life from Solomon into Egypt. And being
1 King. 12. 1, 2, 3.
returned, Jeroboam was speaker for the Congregations of Israel, who required
ease of Rehoboam from that grievous yoke put upon them by Solomon his father,
before they would establish him in Verse. 4.
the Throne. Rehoboam desired time to Kings by agreement with the people.
give them answer; to which they willingly granted. In the interim Rehoboam
consulted with his fathers old Counselors, and they advised him to consent
Verse. 7.
to the people. But this not well suiting to Rehoboams humor, he also called
his young Courtiers, who Counseled Verse. 8.
him to keep his Prerogative, and Evil Counsel.
keep them under. Rehoboam (upon the next meeting) returns this full answer: My
little finger shall be thicker then my fathers loins, etc. Though here
appeared Ver. 10, 11.
a visible just cause that Israel Solomon's Kingdom rent, etc.
should provide for their own safety against oppression, yet assuredly it was
of the Lord, to make good that same word he had threatened against Solomon; and
therefore Israel refusing to submit to Rehoboam, only the Tribe of Judah set
him up King of Judah, the rest set up Jeroboam King of Israel (of which in its
place.) But this was occasion of a sad 1 King. 14. 30.
breach in the bowels of Israel, and there was War between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all their days; and to the rest, this was a woeful consequent that
fell out upon that unnatural strife about a King; while brethren were letting
out the blood of brethren, and one weakened by another, they gave occasion to
the common enemy to accomplish his design upon them all: for Shishake King of
Egypt came against Verse. 25.
Jerasalem, and made a great spoil upon the Lords house, and the Kings 26.
house, and took away rich prizes of golden The first spoilling of the Temple.
shields made by Solomon, which never again were made good. But above all,
Judah provoked the Lord by Idolatry, and they suffered Sodomites in the Ver.
22, 23. 2
land, and did commit the same abominations that the Heathen did that the Lord
cast out before them. Yet Rehoboam Verse. 21.
reigned 17. years in Jerusalem, and slept 2 Chro. 12.
with his fathers. About Anno mund. 2986. And to the rest, the Lord has set
2986.
this black brand upon this King, That he Chro. 12. 14.
did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.

In the 18. year of Jeroboam, Abijam, Abijah second King of Judah.
or Abijah began to reign over Judah; he walked in all the sins of Rehoboam his
father: yet for David's sake the Lord 2 Chro. 13. 1, 2.
gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, and set up 1 King. 15. 1, 2, 3.
his son after him in the Throne. But Abijah reigned only 3. years: 2989.

In the 20. year of Jeroboam King of Asa the third King of Judah.
Israel, Asa son of Abijah was set up over Judah: the Holy Ghost has left this
glory upon his name still, that he did 1 King. 15. 9.
that which was right in the eyes of the Verse. 11.
Lord; and expresses this as a great mark of the uprightness of his heart to
God, Verse. 13.
that he spared not his Queen Mother who was an Idolater, but put her down from
being Queen, and burnt her grove. Verse. 16. ^
The bloody War between the house of Judah and Israel was not yet ended, but
lasted between Asa and Baasha (the third King of Israel) all their days: and
Asa reigned 41. years, about Anno Verse. 10.
mund. 3020. 3020.
But yet the high places were not removed. Verse. 14. Note.


Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to Jehoshaphat the fourth King of Judah.
reign over Judah, in the fourth year of Ahab King of Israel; he walked in all
the ways of Asa his father, and took out of the land those Sodomites that
remained 1 King. 22. 41, 43.
in his fathers days. In his time he Verse. 46. 44.
made peace with Israel, by matching his son with Ahabs daughter; and by that 2
Chro. 18. 1. and 19. 2.
near affinity to that wicked King, joined with him to fight his battles: which
It Is ill siding with bad men.
sin of his was deeply threatend, and soundly reproved from the Lord.

This good man had great infirmities, 2 Chro. 17. and 18. and 19.
yet did more in reforming his people then any King after Solomon to his time,
and reigned 25. years, about Ann. mund. 1 King. 22. 42, 43.
3045. 3045.
Nevertheless the High places were not taken away.

Jehoram succeeded his father Jehoshaphat Jehoram the fifth King of Judah.
in the Kingdom, but not in his piety: when he was settled in the Throne, he
murdered his six brethren, 2 King. 8. 16.
the sons of his father, and diverse Princes. This was a woeful beginning, and
yet the 2 Chro. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4.
holy Penman gives this account of him, that he walked in the ways of the
Kings of Israel like as did the house of Ahab: Verse. 6.
for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. Marriage with Idolatrous wives has
Note.
been the ruin of many men and Nations. Verse. 11.
And to all the rest of this wickedness, Idolatries commanded by the King.
Jehoram set up Idols, and compelled Judah to worship them. I shall omit some
things, but I may not pass the miseries God brought upon his people and this
vild person, as the just reward of his sin, yet less then he deserved, though
eternity may pay for all. In his Verse. 8.
time the Edomites revolted, and set up a King amongst themselves: at the same
Verse. 9.
time also Libnah revolted, because Jehoram The ground of revolt.
had forsaken the Lord. But Jehorams sad doom was sent to him in writing from
the Prophet Elijah; possibly it Verse. 12.
might be in this extraordinary way, either to give the full certainty of the
sad judgments determined against him, or rather to prevent some bloody design
of of this wicked King against the Prophet for the discharge of his duty. But
soon Verse. 16.
after, the Lord stirred up the Philistines and Arabians, who came to judah,
and carried away all the substance that was 17.
Jound in the Kings house, and his sons, and his wives, so that Jehoahaz the
youngest son was saved. And after all this, the Verse. 18.
Lord smote Jehoram with an incurable disease in his bowels, of which he
languished Verse. 19.
for the space of two years, and in Jehorams miserable end.
the end his bowels fell out, and so died; but Judah buried him not in the
Sepulchers of their Kings. Thus he lived wickedly, dyed miserably, and was
buried 20.
shamefully, when he had reigned (or 2 Chro. 21. 5.
rather raged) 8. years. About Ann. mun. 3053. 3053.


In the 12. year of Joram King of Israel, Azariah the sixth King of Judah.
the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Azariah the youngest son of Jehoram (who was
lest alive) King of Judah: This 2 King. 8. 25, 26, 27.
is the general account the Holy Ghost gives of him, That he walked in the 2
Chro. 22. 1. 2. 3.
ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother Athaliah the daughter of Omri King
of Israel was his Counselor to do wickedly. In 2 King. 8. 26. it is said
Azariah was 22. years old when he began to reign: but 2 Chronicles. 22. 2. it is
said, he was 42. years old when he began to reign. This deserves further
thoughts to reconcile: yet in both places it is said, he reigned but one year.
Azariah had but a short reign, and the Holy Ghost adds this as a further reason
which is worth observing, he did evil in the sight An observation for Kings.
of the Lord like the house of Ahab, for they were his Counselors to his
destruction. About Anno mund. 3054. An. 3054


Ahaziah going to visit Joram King Athaliah Queen of Judah.
of Israel, son of his grandfather Ahab, when Jehu came to execute judgment
upon Ahabs house, he found Ahaziah 2 King. 9. 27, 28.
King of Judah, hid in Samaria, and put 2 Chro. 22. 6, 8, 9.
him to death with the rest; this news being brought to Athaliah his mother,
she 2 King. 11. 1.
set up her self Queen of Judah, and at first she murdered the seed Royal of
Cruel murder of children to get the Crown.
her own son, to sit quietly in the Throne. Yet to make good his word to David,
the Lord preserved Joash, who was secretly 2 King. 11. 2, 3.
stole away from amongst the Kings children by Jehosheba, Ahaziahs sister, and
hid five years with his Nurse in the A Priest married the Kings sister.
house of the Lord. Jehosheba was wife to Jehoiada the Priest, by whose Counsel
and help Joash was saved alive. In the 2 Chro. 22. 11.
seventh year, Jehoiada made Joash known to the Captains of the Army; 2 King.
11. 4.
and taking an Oath of them, Guards were appointed, the Kings son was brought
forth and Crowned, at which there was great rejoicing: when Athaliah heard the
great noise in the Temple, Ver. 11, 12.
she came forth to know the matter; 13.
But seeing the King stand by the Pillar (according to the usual manner of the
14. 15.
Kings of Judah at their Coronation) she rent her clothes, and cried, Treason,
Treason: But Jehoiada commanded to lay hold on her, and to have her out of the
range of the Temple and to kill her: which they did, when she had reigned Ver.
20.
7. years; about Anno 3061. An. 3061


Joash or Jehoash was seven years old Joash the seventh King of Judah.
when he began to reign, which was the seventh year of Jehu: so soon as Joash
was Crowned King, Jehoiada caused a 2 King. 12. 1.
Covenant to be made between the King and the people, and between the King, 2
King. 11. 17.
people and the Lord; and presently all Verse. 18.
the people went into the house of Baal, The King in covenant with the people.
and they destroyed it thoroughly. Joash reigned well while Jehoiada lived; yet
the High places were not taken away: but after the death of Jehoiada, the 2
King. 12. 2.
Princes of Judah had full recourse to the King, and by their flatteries the
King was drawn to Idolatry, that both the The King corrupted by evil counsel,
the worship of God was laid down.
King and his Courtiers left off to worship God in the Temple, and served
Groves and Idols. The Lord in mercy sent Prophets to reprove their sin, and
bring them back again: but they would not harken to these; then the Lord sent 2
Chro. 24. 17, 18.
Zachariah the son of Jehoiada the Verse. 19.
Priest, who dealt plainly both with the King and people: he told them, Because
yea have forsaken the Lord, the Lord also Verse. 20.
has forsaken you; and that was the reason they could not prosper. This home
preaching they could not digest, They cannot prosper that forsake God.
and by the command of the King the good man was stoned to death in the Court
of the Lords house, though he was an extraordinary Prophet sent by God, and the
son of Jehoiada. It Is a known Verse. 21.
truth, Tyranny can know no relations Zachariah killed for the discharge of his
duty.
when they are not any thing; yet Zachariah left his blood at their doors, and
appealing to the righteous God, and Verse. 22.
Judge of all the earth, who upon his death said, The Lord look upon it and
require it; And the Lord did so. For about Verse. 24.
the end of the year, the Syrians came to Jerusalem with a small company, and
the Lord delivered a very great Verse. 25.
Host into their hand, (because they had forsaken the Lord God:) thus God
executed 2 Chro 24. 23, 24.
his judgment against Joash. At this time Hazael King of Syria destroyed all
those wicked Princes from among the Wicked Kings will undo a Nation, to keep a
Crown.
people; and to pacify him, Joash King of Judah took all the holy things
dedicated by Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, and Ahazia his father, with all the gold
found in the 2 King. 12. 17, 18.
Treasury of the Temple, and in the Kings house, and sent them to Hazael, and
he carried them to Damascus; this was a just and dreadful misery that the Kings
sin (especially) brought upon the Jews. But the Lords hand stayed not there:
For Joash himself was afflicted The Lord ordin^^ily gives blood for blood.
with great diseases, and for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the Priest, his
own servants conspired against him and killed him in his bed. And after they 2
Chro. 24. 25.
buried him, but not in the Sepulchers of the Kings. This I would leave to
consideration, That none can stand long when they leave the Lord, and the Lord
forsakes them; but a shameful end shall 2 King. 12. 1.
follow a wicked life: this King reigned 40. years, about Ann. mun. 3100. An.
3100


In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz Amaziah the eighth King of Judah,
(...).
King of Israel, Amaziah son of Joash King of Judah was set up King: at his
first coming to the Crown, he did some good things in hypocrisy, as his 2
King. 13. 10. with the 14. 1. ver. 3, 5.
father did; but when he was settled in the Kingdom, he put to death those
servants that killed his father. After this Amaziah raised an Army of three
hundred thousand choice men to make War 2 Chro. 25. 5, 6.
with the Edomites; yet thinking himself too weak, he hired also 100 thousand
mighty men of valor out of Israel. But Verse. 7.
by a Prophet the King was admonished not to join with that Army of Israel,
because God was not with those Idolatrous wicked people: upon which Amaziah
Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13.
dismissed them; but in much discontent they returned, and (taking the time) they
fell upon many Cities of Judah as they went, flew 3000. of them, and took much
spoil. Amaziah prospered in this battle, and smote 10000. men; and 10000. men
which they took prisoners, they carried to the top of a steep Rock, and threw
them down, that they were broken in pieces.

Amongst the spoil of the Edomites, Verse. 14.
Amaziah took their gods, and set them up to be his gods, and burnt Incense to
Note.
them. Good Lord! what folly will not wise and great men commit, when God
leaves them? Amaziah was exceedingly lift up in this Victory, and now he thinks
to revenge the wrong done to 2 King. 14. 8.
him by the Army of Israel, and therefore he sent a Challenge to Joash King of
Israel. The King of Israel was unwilling to meet Amaziah, and dissuaded him
from it. But Amaziah would not be so satisfied: therefore Joash King of Israel
Ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.
went to Bethshemesh in the land of Judah, and gave battle to Amaziah. In this
battle Judah was worsted, and Amaziah taken prisoner. The King of Israel now
having the field, he marched his Army to Jerusalem, brake down the Wall, took
Jerusalem sacked the third time.
all the gold, silver, and vessels in the Lords house, with the Treasures of
the Kings house; He also took Hostages for subjection, and so lest Amaziah in
Jerusalem. This was in the 14. year of Amaziahs reign: but Amaziah after this
The King slain for his wickedness.
sell from the Lord, and the people conspired against him in Jerusalem, upon
which 2 Chro. 2^. 27.
he sled to Lachish; yet they sent after him and flew him there, when he had 2
King. 14 2.
reigned 29 years: about Anno mundi 3129. An. 3129


After the Death of Amaziah, Judah Between Amaziah and Azariah there was in
internal of 13 years.
was without a King 13. years; which this appears. In the 15 year of Amaziah
the son of Joash King of Judah, Jeroboam son of Joash King of Israel began Ann.
3142.
to reign. And in the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel, began Azariah son of
Amaziah King of Judah to reign. Now from the 15. of Amaziah to the 29. is 14.
years to Jeroboams reign; so that to the 27. of Jeroboam there must needs be an
interval of 13. years to the 2 King. 14. 23. with 15. 1.
Crowning of Amaziah, about An. mun. 3142. 3142.


The People of Judah took Azariah Amaziah the ninth King of Judah
son of Amaziah, and made him King in his fathers stead. At 16. years old
Azariah was Crowned King of Judah, in 2 King. 14. 21.
the 27. year of Jeroboam King of Israel. Azariah (or Uzziah) did well in all 2
Chro. 26. ^, 4, 5.
the former part of his reign; He was a man of War, built diverse Forts in
Jerusalem, Verse. 9, 10.
and both built and took in several Cities: he also did much in reformation of
Religion; and so long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper. But when
he was strong, his heart was lifted Verse. 16. etc.
up in him to his destruction. For he transgressed against the Lord his God, by
going into the Temple (and usurping the Priests Office) to burn incense upon
the Altar. Azariah the Priest, with The King was judged by God for usurping the
Prists Office.
80. Priests of the Lord, went in after the King, and withstood him, and said,
It pertains not to thee Uzziah to burn Incense to the Lord, but to the
Priests the sons of Aaron that are consecrated for it. Go out of the Sanctuary:
for thou have transgressed; neither shall it be for thy Honor. Then was the
King wroth with the Priests, and presently the Leprosy rose upon his forehead;
and the Priests discerning of it, they thrust him out from thence: and he
himself also hasted to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. After the King
dwelt in a house several from others, and was a Leper until the day of his
death; and Jotham his son was over the Kings house, judging the people of the
land^ Uzziah, or Azariah, reigned 52. years, about Verse. 3.
An. mund. 3194. An. 3194


In the second year of Pekah King of Jotham the 10. King of Judah, was not
crowned till a year after his fathers death.
Israel, Jotham began to reign over Judah: Jotham did according to all that his
father Uzziah did before him, but yet the High places were not taken away, and
the people did corruptly. In his time he built the high Gate of the house of 1
King. 15. 52. with verse. 27.
the Lord, and built Cities and Forts. Jotham became mighty, because he
prepared his ways before the Lord his God: he was 25. years old when he began
to reign, and reigned 16. years, about An. 3200. An. 3200


In the 17. year of Pekah King of Isreal, Ahaz the 11. King of Judah, Ruled two
years with his father.
Ahaz the son of Uzziah King of Judah began to reign: He was 20. years old when
he began to reign; but he did wickedly, and walked in the ways of the Kings of
Israel, and made his son to pass 2 King. 15. 32, 33. ver. 27. with
through the fire according to the abomination of the Heathen: he made Moulten
Images for Baalim, and burnt Incense in the high places: then Rezin King of
Syria, and Pekah son of Remaliah 2 Chro. 28. 2, 3, etc.
King of Israel, joined their forces, and came up and laid siege to Jerusalem:
at this time the King of Syria recovered Verse. 6.
the City Elah which was taken from his Kingdom by Azariah King of Judah: and
between Rezin and Pekah they almost destroyed the Kingdom of Judah, for the
Lord delivered them into their enemies hands. The King of Syria smote the Army
of Ahaz, and carried away a great multitude of them to Damascus: And Pekah slew
in Judah 120000. valiant men in one day (and this Judahs first Captivity.
was the reason) because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. Sin
un-mans men, and renders. Champions slaves.

Here was a woeful slaughter, yet Israel took also captive 200000. women with
Verse. 8.
their sons and daughters, and much spoil, Verse. 9.
and brought them to Samaria. But Obed a Prophet of the Lord in Samaria, went
out to meet the Army of Israel, and said, Behold, because the Lord God of your
fathers was wroth with Judah, he has delivered them into your hands, and ye
have slain them in a rage that reaches up to heaven. And now you purpose to
keep them bondmen and bond-women to you: But are there not Ver. 10, 11.
with you, even with you, sins against the God uses bad men to punish they,
sin of others.
Lord your God? Now hear me therefore, and deliver them again, for the fierce
wrath of God is upon you. Wonderful, O wonderful wisdom and bowels of God! that
the sin of his people should bring them to the sword, and slavery, and yet this
misery the sin of those that are the Lords executioners. Sin divides, and
raises war amongst brethren; yet the Lords fierce wrath is upon those
brethren, who execute Gods wrath upon their sinful brethren, because they have
sinned against God themselves. But in Ver. 16, 17.
these straits King Ahaz sent to the King of Assyria to help him: for (to all
the rest) the Edomites had again smitten Judah, and carried away captives; The
Captivity by Edom.
The Philistines also invaded the Cities of the low Countries, and took away
many Verse. 18, 19
Towns and Villages, and dwelt in them; Sin raises enemies round about.
for the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel. Kings seldom
sin alone; And dreadful are the sins of great men, when the sin of the chief
Magistrate may bring National judgments.

The more effectually to engage the King of Assyria, Ahaz took a part of the
Verse. 21.
Treasure out of the house of the Lord, and out of the house of the King and of
the Princes (which I find not done before) and gave it to Tilgath-Pilneser
King of Assyria: But he helped him not. Note.
Certainly the strength of man cannot deliver the Nation that God will break
down. But in the time of this distress, the King did trespass yet more against
the Lord (and above others, the Holy Ghost has left this black brand upon Ver.
22, 23, 24.
him) This is that King Ahaz: And the reasons follow; he sacrificed unto the
When God leaves a man, he knows not what he shall do. None can save when God
will destroy.
gods of Damascus which smote him, saying, Because the gods of the Kings of
Assyria helped them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me.
But the text says, They were the ruin of him, and of all Israel. 2. Reason,
for that Ahaz gathered together the Vessels of the house of God, and cut The
Temple shut up.
in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house
of the Lord, and made him Altars in every corner of Jerusalem; and in every
several City of Judah, he made High places to burn Incense to the gods, and
provoked the Lord to anger. When Ahaz had thus run out 16. years in these
abominations, 2 King. 16. ^.
he died, and they buried him in the City, but not in the Sepulchers of the
Kings, about Ann. mun. 3216. An. 3216


In the third year of Hoshea King of Hezekiah, the 12. King of Judah, ruled one
year with his father.
Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz King of Judah began to reign: he was 25. years
old when he came to the Crown, and did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that David 2 King. 18. 1. with 2 King. 17. 1. and 16.
12. 2. 3. 5.
did. Hezekiah excelled all the Kings from David, that went before him, and
after was none like to him. In the first year of his reign, in the first
month, he began to reform, and opened the doors of the Lords house, and
restored Religion: he removed the High places, brake 2 Chro. 29. 3, 4.
down the Images, and took away the A through Reformatition.
Brazen Serpent set up by Moses, to which the people burnt Incense, and
reformed thoroughly: yet in the 14. year of Hezekiah, Sennacherib King of Assyria
3 King. 18. 12, 13.
came with a mighty Army, against all the fenced Cities of Judah, and took
them: Then Hezekiah sent an humble submissive message to the King of Assyria,
desiring of him to draw ^way his Army, and he would pay him what he A low
spirit, the effect of sin.
would lay upon him.

Sennacherib appointed Hezekiah to Verse. 14.
give him 300. Talents of Silver, and 30. Talents of Gold. Whether Hezekiah was
able to raise the same, is not certain: but he did what he could; Hezekiah
Verse. 15.
took all the silver that was found in the The Temple pild to bribe the
Assyrians.
Lords house, and in the Kings Treasury: At that time also Hezekiah cut off the
gold from the doors of the Temple, and Verse. 16.
from the pillars, and gave it to the King of Assyria. But as pride has no
bowels, and a covetous heart knows no pity, Sennacherib is unsatisfied with all
the Treasure Hezekiah could scrape up, though he pilled and defaced the house
of God for it, and therefore sent an insolent 2 King. 19. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7.
Army up against Jerusalem. This put all Jerusalem into a terrible fear, and
Straites drive to God.
now they have none to slay to but the Lord; Hezekiah sent away Messengers
presently with his sad complaints to the Prophet Isaiah, to pray to the Lord
for them: And Isaiah comforts them with a sweet and seasonable answer from the
Lord, that the Lord will send a blast upon Rabshakeh, and he should hear a
rumor Verse. 8.
and return to his own Land, and Faith and prayer does much with God.
there he should fall by the sword, in his own Land. So Rabshakeh returned from
Jerusalem, for he heard that Sennacherib was gone from Lachish, and Rabshakeh
found him warring against Libnah. After this Sennacherib brought his Army into
Judah a second time, and then sent Messengers with a Letter to Hezekiah, Verse.
9, 10. 14, etc.
stopped full of pride and blasphemy. When Hezekiah had received the Letter, he
went into the Lords house, and in prayer, spread it before the Lord, and begged
his help; and the Lord promised him that the King of Assyria should not lay
siege, or shoot an Arrow into Jerusalem, but he would defend it and save it:
And that very night the Lord sent an Angel, who smore in the Assyrians Camp
185000. So Sennacherib departed, and went to Niniveh. In these days Hezekiah 1
King. 20. 1, ^.
fell sick, and near to death. But upon his prayer the Lord restored him, and
Verse. 1^, 13, etc.
added 15. years more to his days. Upon Hezekiahs recovery, the King of
Babylon sent a present unto him, which he accepted: and to gratify the
Messengers, Hezekiah showed them the house of his precious things, the house of
his Armor, and his Treasures, etc. But the Prophet Isaiah sadly reproved his
pride and vainglory, that he who had such abundant experience of an
allsufficient God, in the Creatures nothingness, should have his The Captivity
of Babylon threatened.
heart going out to his wealth and works. And therefore the Prophet foretold
Hezekiah of the woeful Captivity which Verse. 14.
should come from Babylon. Herein Hezekiah 2 Chro. 32. 31.
fell sadly: but God left him, to see Prosperity tries men's hearts.
what was in his heart: and this lesson we have all to learn, That the best of
Saints stand not longer then the Lord Note.
sustains and keeps them. When Hezekiah had reigned 29. years, he went to the
Lord: about Anno mund. 3245. An. 3245


In the reign of Hezekiah, Israel was Note.
carried away Captive; and the Kings of Israel ceased, and so not mentioned
after.

Manasseh succeeded his father Hezekiah, Manasseh the 13.
and was 12. years old when he began to reign: But he did evil in the sight
King of Judah.
of the Lord, and was a gross Idolater. 1 King. 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
In the former part of his reign, he builded again the High places, reared
Altars for Baal, sacrificed his own son, etc. and did worse then the Heathen.
In his time the Lord left not Manasseh and Judah without reproof: But they
hearkened not, Therefore the Lord threatened to bring the same destruction upon
Manasseh and Jerusalem, as he had brought upon Samaria, and the house of Ahab,
and to wipe them clean from all their filthiness, Afflictions upon Gods people
are to make them clean.
as a man wipeth a dish, and turns inside down to keep it from dust: and soon
after the Lord brought up the King of Assyria, the Rod of his anger, who took
Manasseh among the thorns (whither he was run to hide himself) and 2 Chro. 33.
11, 12, 13.
bound him in fetters, and carried him to No hiding from God.
Babylon. In this low estate Manasseh humbled himself greatly before the Lord,
Repentance does much with God.
and the Lord heard his prayer, and restored him again to his Kingdom: And now
Manasseh knew (out of real experience) that the Lord was God. After this
Manasseh repaired and reformed, yet the people still sacrificed in the High
places: Bad Kings denied honorable burial.
and when Manesseh had reigned 55. years, he slept with his fathers, and they
brought him not into the Sepulchers of 2 King. 21. 1.
the Kings, but buried him in the Garden of his own house at Uzza: about Anno
mund. 3300. An. 3300


Amon the son of Manasseh at the age Amon the 14. King of Judah.
of 22. years was Crowned King of Judah: he again destroyed Religion, set up
Idolatry, 2 King. 21.
and walked in all the wicked ways of his father: and his own servants
conspired Amon killed by his own servants.
against him, and slew him, in his own house, when he had reigned 2. years:
about Anno mun. 3302. An. 3302.


Amon coming to the Crown at 22. Note.
years of age, reigning but 2. years, and his son Josiah 8. years old when he
came to the Crown, unless Amon had Josiah at 15. years of age (which is not
ordinary) there must be an interval between Amon and Josiah.

After the death of Amon, the people Josiah the 15. King of Judah.
took Josiah his son, when he was 8. years old, and made him King. Josiah
walked in all the ways of David: he again destroyed 2 King 21. 24. and 22. 1,
2. and 23. 3. ver. 26, 27.
Idolatry, repaired the Temple, and was a choice Reformer: Josiah also renewed
the Covenant with the Lord, and all the people, to be the Lords people,
Repentance would not prevent judgment
and keep his Commandments. Nevertheless the Lord turned not from his fierce
and great wrath, before denounced Veis. 29.
against Judah, because of the sin of Manasseh whereby he provoked the Lord: in
Josiahs days the King of Egypt went to War against the King of Assyria at
Euphrates, and Josiah went out against him. I do not find the ground of his
quarrel: but probably Josiah might 2 Chro. 35. 20, 21, etc.
take offense at the King of Egypt for passing through his Land: yet Pharaoh
Necho King of Egypt, sent Ambassadors to Josiah, to let him know he intended
not to War against him, but against the house against which God had commanded
him to fight; and charged Josiah not to meddle with him, left God should
destroy him. But Josiah being a man of courage, would not be said to turn his
face upon any: yet his resolution being not rightly ordered, and not harkening
to the words of Necho from the mouth of God, Josiah was shot in the sight, and
his servants brought him in his Chariot to Jerusalem, and he died there; and
all Judah and Jerusalem, and the Prophet Jeromiah lamented Josiah, who reigned
2. King. 22. 3.
31. years: about Anno mund. 3333. An. 3333


Upon the death of Josiah the people took Jehoahaz a younger son, and Crowned
Jehoahaz the 16. King of Judah.
him King when he was 23. years old. Jehoahaz did evil in the sight of the Here
again (upon the former ground) it is probable was an interval.
Lord, according to all that his fathers had done. But Pharaoh Necho King of
Egypt came up, put Jchoahaz in bonds, when he had reigned 3 months; laid a
Jerusalem taken by the King of 2 King. 23. 30, 31, etc. Egppt.
Tax upon the Land, of 100. talents of Silver and one Talent of Gold, and made
Eliakim, (Jehoahaz his elder brother) King of Judah, in the room of Josiah his
father, and called his name Jehoiakim; but took Jehoahaz into Egypt, and he
died there.

Jehoiakim now succeeded, being 25. Jehoiakim the 17. King of Judah.
years old. Jehoiakim seems to be well pleased to have the Crown: and to
gratify his new Master, he forthwith gave 2 King. 23. 36. and 35. Sia makes
great confusion, and sad changes.
the Tribute of silver and gold to Pharaoh, but taxed all the Land for it. It Is
an easy matter to grant large sums of Money, when they lay it upon others to
pay: and this the holy Penman notes Note.
in general, that Jehoiakim did evil according Verse. 37.
to all that his fathers did; so Nebuchadnezzer 2 King. 24. 12, etc.
came up against him, and Jehoiakim became his servant, and submitted Sin makes
men slaves.
to him. Ah, how does sin unman men, and render them low slavish spirits! When
men leave God, they will stoop to any bondage. But Jehoiakim after three years
rebelled against the King of Babylon, and the Lord sent against him the
Caldees, the Syrians, the Moabites and Amonites, to destroy Judah, for the sins
of Manasseh, and for the Blood, is punished with blood. ver. 4.
innocent blood he brought upon Jerusalem, which the Lord would not pardon: 2
King. 23. 36.
so Jehoiakim ended his days in trouble, when he had been King, (but hardly
reigned) 11. years, about Anno mund. 3344. An. 3344


Jehoiachim the son of Jehoiakim succeeded Jehoiachim the 18.
his father, in the Throne, and in his sin: but the King of Babylon came King
of Ju: 1 King. 24. 9, 10.
up with an Army, and laid siege to Jerusalem, and Jehoiachim and his Princes
Ver. 11, 12.
went out, rendered themselves prisoners, and delivered up the City, when he had
reigned three months, in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzers reign. At this
Nebuchadnezzers 8. year ver. 12
time the King of Babylon made havoc of the Temple, took away the Treasures of
the Lords house, and the Kings house, Jerusalem taken ver. 13, 14, etc.
and carried all away Captives, but the poor of the Land, and made Mattaniah
Verse. 8.
Jehoiakims brother King of Judah, and called his name Zedekiah.

Zedekiah was 21. years old when he Zedekiah the 19. and last King of Judah.
came to the Throne, and did according as his fathers had done before him: And
after some time he also rebelled against 2 King. 24. 18, 19.
the King of Babylon; and in the 9. year of Zedekiahs reign, in the 10. day of
the 10. month, Nebuchadnezzer brought up all his Army and laid siege to
Jerusalem. In the 11. year of Zedekiah, on 1 King. 25. 1, 2.
the 9. day of the 4. month (June) the Siege was laid to Jerusalem, December
10. Anno 3353. and taken the 9. of June 3355. which was one year five months
and 24. days.
Famine prevailed in the City (which was exceeding great) the City was broken
up, and the men of war fled by a back way, and the King went toward the plains
of Jericho: But the Chaldeans pursued him, and brought him to the King of
Babylon to Riblah, where they gave sentence upon him: so they put the sons of
Zedekiah to death before his eyes, then put out his eyes, bound him in fetters
of Brass, and led him to ver. 2. 3. etc.
Babylon. And in the 5. month, the 7. Verse. 7.
day (in the 19. year of Nebuchadnezzer) Jerusalem burnt.
Nebuzaradan the Captain General of the Army made a full destruction of the
Verse. 8. 9.
glorious City; and amongst the rest, he Ver. 10, 11.
took also those that fell away to the Jerusalems last and great Captivity
under Zedekiah,
King of Babylon, and carried them Captives all together. It is very
remarkable, that when perfidious men have served the turn of Tyrants,
themselves will equally An. 3355.
suffer with their brethren. This was the last and great Captivity, which
continued 70. years.

Thus we have the sad estate of Judah under their Kings which they so much
desired: and whether they have not been as dreadful a scourge to this people,
as 1 Samuel 8. 9, to 18.
God foretold they should be, I leave others to judge. I have only this further
to tender to examination, whether the grounds of those intervals of Government
mentioned, after the Race of the Kings of Israel ended, have any weight; and if
they have, then there are more years to be added.

The Kings of Israel after the Division, which begun Ann. 2969.
I Have here run down the Line of the Kings of Judah, from first to last, so
Israel under Kings 516. years, from first to last.
that you have the beginning and end of Kingly Government amongst the Jews
(which were the peculiar Church and People of God under the Old Testament)
which lasted from the beginning of Readiness reign, unto the Captivity in the 11.
year of Zedekiah, which was 516. years, viz. from Anno 2948. to Anno 3365. the
year (or near the time) of Judahs last and great Captivity mentioned before.

In the next place I will make out a little, to take a brief view of the Kings
of Israel after the Division, which began with Jeroboam, about Ann. mund. 2969.

The King and Kingdom of Israel 1 King. 11. 11.
(consisting of 10. Tribes) was but the testimony of Gods wrath, and the
punishment of Solomon's sin, which in some measure came to pass in Rehoboams 1
King. 12. 4, 5, etc.
time: when Rehoboam resused to ease the Taxes of the Land, the people refused
to take him and make him their King; and so the people called Jeroboam, and
made him first King over Israel, about Anno mundi 2969.

Jeroboam was now the first King of Jeroboam the first King of Israel after the
division.
Israel after the Division; But he fearing in his heart that the minds of the
people might change, and fall off again from him, he turns Politician, and
letting go 1 King. 12. 20, 26, etc.
the fear and conscience of God, set up Idolatry, and the worship of Calves, to
Jeroboam gave the people liberty in Religion, to preserve his Crown.
please the people, and keep them from going to worship at Jerusalem. O when
men leave God, and live upon humane policy to uphold a carnal interest, they
will break all the bonds of Religion, to preserve their own standing. I will
not gather up the Catalogue of this vile man's miscarriages; The black brand the
Holy Ghost has so often set upon him, shows what he was; Jeroboam the son 1
King. 22 52.
of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Yet under all his abominations, the Lord
permitted 1 King. 14.
Jeroboam to reign 22. years, about Ann. mund. 2991. An. 2991


In the second year of Asa King of Nadab the second King of Israel killed
Judah, Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel; He walked in the
way of his father, and in his sin 1 King. 15. 25, 26, etc.
wherewith he made Israel to sin: and when Nadab lay in siege against
Gibbethon, Baasha murdered him in the third Ver. 28.
year of Asa, and reigned in his stead, aabout Anno mund. 2993. An. 2993


In the third year of Asa King of Judah, Baasha the third King of Israel.
Baasha set up himself King of Israel: and to clear his title to the Crown,
Baasha 1 King 15. 28, 29.
murdered all the house of Jeroboam, he left not any to breath. Oh the dreadful
Verse. 30.
sins the gain of a Crown brings some men to! Baasha destroyed the house of
Jeroboam; yet Baasha walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin, wherein he
made Israel to sin, and reigned 24. years, Ver. 33, 34.
Ann. 3017. An. 3017


In the 26. year of Asa King of Judah, Elah the fourth King of Israel, ruled
one year with his father.
Elah the son of Baasha, began to reign. About this time the Lord sent the
Prophet Jehu to denounce evil against Baasha and his house, in being like the
house of Jeroboam, and yet killed him. Though 1 King. 16. 8.
God raised up Baasha to execute his judgments upon Jeroboams house, yet Ver.
7.
the Lord charged this for sin of Murder upon Baasha, because Baasha lived in
the sins of Jeroboams house. Oh, oh, oh, that this were set deep upon the
hearts of all that God makes executioners of his justice Gods rod is ost burnt
when his work is done.
upon others! This came suddenly, upon Baasha's house: for Zimri (Captain of
half Elah's Chariots) conspired against Elah; and when he had drank himself
drunk in the house of Arza his Steward, 1 King. 16. 9, 10.
Zimri smote him, and killed him in the 2. year of his reign, and reigned in
his stead, about Anno 3018. An. 3018


In the 27 year of Asa King of Judah, Zimri the 5. King of Israel.
Zimri set up himself King of Israel; and as soon as he sat on the Throne, he
killed all the house of Baasha, he left him 1 King 16. 11, 12.
not one to piss against the wall, Neither kinsfolks nor friends. Zimri thought
Crowns were got and kept by blood and murder.
now to establish the Throne in his own posterity, by removing all that stood
in the way: But when the Army that was encamped against Gibbethon heard what
Zimri had done, they made Omri Verse. 16.
Captain of the Host, King over Israel, in the Camp, and presently went up and
17. 18.
laid siege against the City Tirzah where King Zimri was. When Zimri saw the
City was taken, he went into the Palace of the Kings house, set it on fire, and
Observe the end of bloody Tyrants.
was burnt with the house, when he had reigned but 7. days. Oh, what will not
carnal proud men do, for a fleeting uncertain Verse. 15.
Crown!

The people of Israel upon the death Israel had two Kings for four years.
of Zimri were divided; half followed Tibni the son of Ginah to make him King,
And half followed Omri. Much confusion continued amongst them for four years:
but Tibni dying, Omri came to the Crown alone, about An. 3023. An. 3023


In the 31. year of Asa King of Judah, Omri alone, the 6. King of Israel.
Omri began to reign over Israel; Omri bought the Hill Shomeron or Samaria, of
Shemel, for two Talents of silver. 1 King. 16. 23, 24, 25.
But Omri did worse then all that were before him. It is said he reigned 12.
years: yet he began to reign alone the 31. year of Asa, and died the 38. of
Asa: by which it appears, that the Kings account the year wherein they are Note.
Crowned, for the first year of their reign: and so accounting the former four
years to Omri's time, Omri reigned 12. years, about An. 3031. An. 3031


In the 38. year of Asa King of Judah, Ahab the 7. King of Israel
Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel: Ahab was a very wicked man,
but I will only give you 1 King. 16. 29, 30.
what is recorded in general of him, That Verse. 33.
he did evil above all that were before him: And Ahab did provoke the Lord to
anger, above all the Kings of Israel that were before him. One would judge (who
reads the lives of all the other Kings) that a man could not exceed in sin
those who had gone before him: yet we must give credit to the sacred word. 1
King. 22. 34, etc.
But it is manifest the Lord brought dreadful judgments upon Israel in Ahabs
reign: and Ahab being seduced by false Prophets, was slain at Ramoth-Gilead,
according to the word of the Lord 2 King. 16. 29.
by the Prophet Micaiah, when he had reigned 22. years, about An. 3053. An. 3053


Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to Ahaziah the 8. King of Israel, reigned in the
last year of his father.
reign over Israel, the 17. year of Jehoshaphat King of Judah. He walked in the
way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. 1 King. 22. 51, 52.
But the judgment of God was upon 2 King. 1. 2.
him, for he fell down from an upper Chamber in Samaria, and was sick: In which
sickness he sent to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, whether he should
recover of his sickness? As the Messengers were going, the Lord spoke to Elijah
the Prophet, and bad him go meet the Messengers, and say to them, Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the
God of Ekron? Now therefore thus says the Lord, Thou shall not come down from
that bed which thou art gone up to, but shall surely die. So Ahaziah died
according to the word of the Lord, when he had reigned two years, about An.
3055. An. 3055


Ahaziah King of Israel had no son, Joram the 9. King of Israel.
and so Joram or Jehoram the second son of Ahab reigned in his stead. Jehoram
did evil in the sight of the Lord, yet not 2 King 3. 1.
like his father and mother; for he put away 2 King. 3. 2, 3.
the images of Baal, though he clave to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin. In the 23. year of his reign, and in the first year of
Ahaziah King of Judah, Joram persuaded Ahaziah (his brother in law) to go out 2
King. 8. 25, etc.
to War with him against Hazael King of Syria at Ramoth-Gilead. In that battle
Joram was wounded, and went to Jezreel to be healed. But the measure of the 2
King. 9. 4, 5, etc.
sins of Ahabs house being now full, the God makes one wicked man to be a
scourge to another.
Lord called out Captain Jehu, and makes him King of Israel, to be his
executioner upon Ahabs family. The Soldiers had a grudge in their hearts
against Joram, Ver. 13, 14, etc.
and so soon complied with Jehu; and Jehu as readily conspired against Joram
his Master. Yet Jehu consulted his confederates, and presently gave charge when
he was proclaimed King, that none should go to tell the news at Court; but Ver.
15, 16.
Jehu himself drives on furiously to Jezreel to put Joram to death. When Jehu
came near to Jezreel, Joram went out to meet him: but discovering treachery,
Joram Joram killed by Jehu his own captain.
turned and fled: yet Jehu drew a bow with all his might, and sent a speedy
messenger of Death after him, and the arrow 2 King. 3. 1.
went out at his heart. Thus Joram died in the 12. year of his reign, about An.
3067. An. 3067


In the first year of Ahaziah King Jehu the 10. King. 2 Kin. 9. 24.
of Judah, Jehu came to be King of Israel, and effectually fulfilled the word
of the Lord in the destruction of Ahabs house. 2 King. 10. 28, 29.
But he kept Ahabs sin, which also proved his ruin. Jehu was mighty zealous to
Sin will destroy the house of the destroier.
fulfill the word of the Lord in the total destruction of Ahabs family, as it
concurred with his own interest, for the establishing Verse. 13.
the Crown in his Posterity. But (when Jehu had got the Crown) he took no heed
to walk in the Law of the Honor soon discovers hypocrites.
Lord God of Israel with all his heart (but played the hypocrite) and hugged the
Hos. 1. 4.
sins of Jeroboam which made Israel to 2 King. 10. 36.
sin. So (though he was the Lords executioner) yet the Lord charged that blood
upon him as a Murderer. In his sin he died, when he had reigned 28. years,
about An. 3095. An. 3095


In the 23. year of Joash King of Judah, Jehoahaz the 11. King of Israel.
Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel. Here is a difference in 2
Kin. 13. 1.
sacred accounts to be considered: Joash 2 Kin. 12. 1.
began his reign in the 7. year of Jehu, Jehu reigned 28. years: And Jehoahaz
son to Jehu began not his reign till the 23. year of Joash: By which it
appears, Here was an interval between Jehu and Jehoahaz for two years.
Jehoahaz the son of Jehu came not to the Crown for two years after his fathers
death. And when he was set up, Jehoahaz followed the sins of Jeroboam the son
of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; 2 King. 13. 2, 3, etc.
he departed not therefrom. In his time the Lord delivered Israel into the
hands of the Syrians; so that of the great Armies that Israel had formerly
raised, now the King had only 50. horsemen, A wicked King brought misery upon
the people.
10. Chariots, and 1000. foot: For the King of Syria had destroyed them. Now
Jehoahaz sought to the Lord, and the Lord raised them help, pitying their woeful
oppression: but yet Israel departed 2 Kin. 13. 1.
not from the sins of Jeroboam, and kept the Grove in Samaria. Jehoahaz reigned
17. years, about An. 3114. An. 3114


Between Jehu and Jehoahaz there was an inter-reign, for two years: which were
to be placed above; but I have added those two years to the 17. of Jehoahaz.

In the 37. year of Joash King of Judah, Jehoash the 12. King was taken into
Government three years with his father.
Jehoash son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel. Jehoahaz began to reign in
the 23. year of Joash, and reigned 17. year (which makes 40. years:) yet it is
said, Jehoash began his reign the 37. year of Joash; By which it appears,
Jehoash was Crowned in the life of his 2 King. 14. 13. 10. with 2 Kin. 13. 1.
father, and so those years accounted to his reign. Little is said of this
King: but this is recorded, that he departed not Verse. 11.
from the sins of Jeroboam, but walked Verse. 10.
therein, and run out 16. years, about An. 3130. An. 3130


In the 15. year of Amaziah King of Jeroboam the 13. King 2 King. 14. 23.
Judah, Jeroboam the son of Jehoash or Joash, reigned in his stead: here again
is a different account, as thus: Joash began to reign in the 37. year of Joash
King of Judah, who reigned 40. years; and Jeroboam began to reign in the 15. of
Amaziah This is noted in the reign of Amaziah.
(which are 18. years) whereas Joash King of Israel reigned but 16. years; here
are two years difference, which time Amaziah did reign, with his father Joash.
Jeroboam departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin: yet the Lord made him victorious, for the delivery of Israel
from very bitter afflictions, and restored them to much liberty: he reigned
Verse. 23.
41. years, about An. 3171. An. 3171


In the 38. year of Azariah King of Zachariah the 14. King of Israel.
Judah, Zachariah the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel: here again is
2 King. 15. 8. with Verse. 1.
the like case as before. Azariah King of Judah, began to reign the 27. year of
Jeroboam King of Israel. Jeroboam reigned 41. years: from 27. to 41. is 14.
years of Azariah's reign; and in the 38. year of Azariah, Zechariah began his
reign. So that Israel was 24. years An interval of 24. years between Jeroboam
and his son Zachariah.
without a King 3195.

Zechariah followed his fathers, and departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; and Shallum flew him before the Verse. 9,
10.
people, and reigned in his stead, when Zachariah had reigned but six months,
about An. 3195. An. 3195


Now sin was high, and judgment Zachariah murdered.
near; Shallum had lost shame and Conscience, Verse. 22.
to murder the King openly: yet this was the fulfilling the word of the Lord,
and the end of Jehu's race. Note.


In the 39. of Azariah or Uzziah King Shallum the 15. King of Israel for one
month.
of Judah, Shallum began to reign over Israel; and Menahem smote him, and flew
him, when he had reigned a just 2 King. 15. 13, 14.
month. Now it was ordinary to murder Kings for a Crown, and the people
Shallum killed.
woefully slaved by Tyranny: yet all the fruit of sin, An. 3195. An. 3195


In the 39. year of Azariah King of Menahem the 16. King of Israel.
Judah, Menahem began to reign over Israel. I may not omit to mention the
bloody beast-like cruelty of this wretched 2 King. 15. 17.
Tyrant, which was great. When Menahem came up from Tirzah (which was formerly
the chief City, and the seat of the Kings of Israel) with purpose to murder the
King at Samaria, the City Tizrah refused to open the gates Bloody, beastly
cruelty. ver. 16.
to him. Thereupon he destroyed the City, and all the Coasts thereof, and ripped
up all the women who were with child. But though he murdered the King, to sit
on his Throne, yet he departed not (all his days) from the sins of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. It Verse. 18.
does appear this bloody Tyrant sat not Verse. 19.
quietly in his new aspired seat: for upon discontents amongst the people, Pull
King of Assyria took the opportunity of that division to bring up his Army
against Verse. 20.
Israel: In this strait Menahem gave Pull 1000. Talents of silver to be on his
side, to confirm the Kingdom in his hand: And Menahem exacted it of the people,
especially of the wealthyest Wonderful slavery.
of them. Oh the woeful bondage and slavery Israel were now brought to! A bloody
Tyrant kills their King, and exacts money from them, to confirm himself in the
Throne he got by murder: yet thus he reigned 10. years, about Anno Verse. 19.
3205. An. 3205


In the 50. year of Azariah King of Pekaiah the 17. King. 2 King. 15. 23, 24,
25.
Judah, Pekaiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel: he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: But Pekah
the son of Remaliah a Captain of Pekaiah murdered.
his conspired against him, and killed him, when he had reigned two years,
about An. 3207. An. 3207


In the 52. year of Azariah King Pekah the 18. King. 2 King. 15. 27, 28, etc.
of Judah, Pekah began to reign over Israel: he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. In his days came Here was
murder upon murder.
Tiglah Pilneser King of Assyria, and took from him a great part of his
Kingdom, even eight Cities and Countries: and Hoshea the son of Elah conspired
against Verse. 27.
Pekah, and slew him, when had reigned 20. years, about An. 3220. An. 3220


In the 12. year of Ahaz King of Judah, Hoshea the 19. King of Israel, and last.
Hoshea began to reign over Israel: He was bad, but not so bad as the Kings
that were before him. This we must 2 King. 17. 1, 2. with 2 King. 1.
believe, because it is sacred Scripture: But the Lord would let us know, that
many of the Kings of Israel were more then bloody Murderers. It is plain Hoshea
did murder Pekah, yet stands nine No King in Israel for 9. years.
years before he took the Crown of Israel; and became King, about Anno 3229.

In his time Shalmanezer King of Assyria, 2 King. 17 3, 4, etc.
came up against him, and Hoshea subjected to him, and paid him tribute as a
sub-King: but the King of Assyria not having his tribute paid for some years,
and finding that Hoshea did hold confedracy with the King of Egypt, Shalmaneser
shut up Hoshea in prison. After which he brought up his Army, and besieged
Samaria three years: The siege was laid in 2 King. 18. 9, 10, and c. Sin the
destruction of Israel.
the 7. year of Hoshea, continued the 8. year, and Samaria was taken in the 9.
year of Hoshea, which was the 6. year of Hezekiah King of Judah. This was the
final Captivity of the Kingdom and people of Israel, and the sad fruit of their
own doings, which is largely expressed by the sacred Penman of this History: so
that Isreal's destruction, which they brought upon themselves by their vile
Isreal's Captivity.
abominations, was finished about Anno mun. 3238. An. 3238


What dreadful miseries these desperate Thus the word of the Lord spoken by
Samuel was made good to the ruin of Israel.
Idolaters and vile Murderers (called Kings) brought upon this people Israel,
who were the Lords peculiar people, I leave to sad and serious thoughts. But to
gather the better account of these times (which seem greatly to differ, I will
here put down a very brief Chronology 1 Samuel 8. 10, 11, etc.
of the beginning and time of the reign of the Kings of Judah and Israel, etc.

Kings of Judah.
IN the 18. year of Jeroboam, Abijam son of Rehoboam began to reign, 1 King.
15. 1, 2. and reigned 3. years, In the 20. year of Jeroboam, Asa son of Abijam
reigned, 1 King. 15. 9, 10. he reigned 41.

In the 4. year of Ahab, Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign, and
continued 25. years, 1 King. 22. 41, 42.

In the 5. year of Joram, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat was crowned in his
fathers lifetime, and reigned 8. years, 2 King. 8. 16, 17.

In the 12. year of Joram, the people crowned Azariah (the youngest son of
Jehoram) King, who reigned one year, 2 King. 8. 25, 26.

Athaliah destroyed the seed Royal, and set up her self, and continued 7.
years, 2 King. 11. 1, 4.

In the 7. year of Jehu, Jehoash began to reign, and reigned 40. years, 2 King.
12. 1.

In the 2. year of Joash, Amaziah son of Joash King of Judah began to reign,
and continued 29. years, 2 King. 14. 1, 2. and was then killed by a conspiracy,
verse. 19.

In the 27. year of Jeroboam, all the people took Azariah, and made him King in
his fathers stead, 2 King. 14. 21. he reigned 52. years, 2 Chro. 26. 3.

Before him Judah had no King for 12. years.

In the 2. year of Pekah, Jotham the son of Azariah, or Uzzah, began to reign,
and continued 16. years, 2 King. 15. 32, 33. Consider 52. and 2. of Pekah.

In the 17. year of Pekah, Ahaz the son of Jotham began to reign, and continued
16. years, 2 King. 16. 1, 2.

In the 3. year of Hoshea, Hezekiah the son of Ahaz began to reign, and reigned
29. years.

Kings of Israel.
IN the 2. year of Asa, Nadab the son of Jeroboam reigned, 1 King. 15. 28. he
reigned 1. year.

In the 3. year of Asa, Baasha set up himself King, 1 King. 15. 28. he reigned
24. years, verse. 33.

In the 26. year of Asa, Elah the son of Baasha reigned, 1 King. 16. 8. he
reigned 2. years.

In the 27. year of Asa, Zimri set up himself, 1 King. 16. 10. seven days,
verse. 15.

In the 31. year of Asa, Omri set up himself, and reigned 12. years, 1 King.
16. 23.

In the 38. year of Asa, Ahab son of Omri began to reign, and continued 22.
years, 1 King. 16. 29.

In the 17. year of Jehoshaphat, Ahaziah son of Ahab began to reign, and
continued part of 2. years, 1 King. 22. 51. and had no son.

In the 18. year of Jehoshaphat, Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign, and
continued 12. years, 2 King. 3. 1.

In the 12. year of Joram King of Israel, Jehu killed him, and set up himself,
and reigned 28. years, 2 King. 9. and 10. 36.

In the 23 year of Joash, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign, and
continued 17. years, 2 King. 13. 1.

In the 37. year of Joash, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign, and
continued 16. years, 13. 10.

In the 15. year of Amaziah, Jeroboam the son of Jehoash began to reign, and
continued 41. years, 2 King. 14. 23.

In the 38. year of Azariah, Zachariah the son of Jeroboam began to reign, and
continued but 6. months, 2 King. 14. 13.

In the 39. year of Azariah, Shallum killed Zachariah, and set up himself, and
reigned one month, 2 King. 15. 13. 10.

In the 39. year (or same) of Azariah, Menahem killed Shallum, and set up
himself, and continued 10. years, 2 King. 1 h. 14, 17.

In the 50. year of Azariah, Pekaiah son of Menahem began to reign, and
continued 2. years, 2 King. 15. 23.

In the 52. year of Azariah, Pekah killed Pekaiah, and set up himself, and
reigned 20. years, 2 King. 15. 25, 27.

In the 12. year of Ahaz, Hoshea began to reign, and all Israel was taken
Captives the 9. year of his reign, 2 King. 17. 1, 6. and 18. 10, 11.

This was the final Captivity of Israel.

Thus you have the several Kings of Judah and Israel gathered up in a few
words: but for the better finding out of a true computation of these times, I
will yet give them more briefly.

Kings of Judah.
1. Saul 40. years 2888. 2. David 40. years and 6. months: he began his reign
2929 3. Solomon 40. years 2969 1. Rehoboam 17. years After the Division.
2986 2. Abijam 3. years 3989 3. Asa 41. years 3020 4. Jehoshaphat 25. years
3045 5. Jehoram 8. years 3053 6. Ahaziah 1. year 3054 7. Athaliah 7. years 3061
8. Joash 40. years 3100 9. Amaziah 29. years 3129 10. Azariah 52. years 3194
11. Jotham 16. years 3200 12. Ahaz 16. years 3216 13. Hezekiah 29. years 3245

Thus far the Kings of Judah have the beginning of their Reigns accounted from
the reigns of the Kings of Israel, except the four first Kings.

Manasseh 55. years 3300 14. Amon 2. years 3302 15. Josiah 31. years 3333 16.
Jehoahaz 3. months 17. Jehoiakim 11. years 3344 18. Jehoiakin 3. months 19.
Zedekiah 11. years, which with Zedekiahs reign is 3355

These were Kings of Judah after the division, and before, who ended, about An.
mun. 3355.

By this account, this kingly race lasted 519. with Saul, and from David 477.
years.

Kings of Israel.
1. Jeroboam 22. years: he began his reign with Rehoboam 2969 2. Nadab 1. year
2971 3. Baasha 24. years 3017 4. Elah 2. years 3011 5. Zimri 7. days 3019 6.
Omri 12. years 3031 7. Ahab 22. years 3053 8. Ahaziah 2. years 3055 9. Jehoram
12. years 3067 10. Jehu 28. years 3095 11. Jehoahaz 17. years 3112 12. Jehoash
16. years 3130 13. Jeroboam 41. years 3171 14. Zachariah 6. months 3195 15.
Shallum one month 3195 16. Menahem 10. years 3205 17. Pekaiah 2. years 3207
18. Pekah 20. years 3227 19. Hoshea 9. years 3236

These were the Kings of Israel after the division, which began about Anno mun.
2969. and lasted 267. years.

The Monarchy of Chaldea.
CHaldea is a Country or Province in that part of the World called Asia: it
has on the East Assyria, on the West Syria, on the North Armenia, and on the
South Arabia Deserta.

The chief Cities were, Ur, Erech, Genesis 10. 8, 10.
Accad, Carnel, and Babel, or Babylon. Nimrod was the first founder of the
Tower of Babel, and of the City Babylon near Euphrates, and was the first that
ever took the title of King, about 150. years after the Flood, and Anno mundi
1807.

Belus succeeded in the Kingdom. Belus Note.
was called Jupiter Babylonious; the image of whom was worshipped, and had the
name of Bell and Baal.

Historians give account of the growth of this Monarchy, and record the names
of 44. Kings from Belus, to Nebuchadnezzer the Great, who subdued all Syria,
part of Egypt, and Judea: of whom Daniel speaks, etc.

Nebuchadnezzer the first of that name, Sleidan,
was son to Merodach-Baladan Lieutenant of Babylon, under Assaradon King of
Assyria. But having his opportunity, he revolted; and overcoming Assaradon in
the 12. year of his reign, Merodach possessed the Empire, and after lest
Nebuchadnezzer his son to reign in his stead. Nebuchadnezzer began his reign in
the fourth year of Jehoiakim King of Jer. 25. 1. An. 3346 2 King. 24. 1, 7.
Judah, Ann. mund. 3346. In the fourth year of his reign, and in the eighth
year of the reign of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzer made War with Pharaoh-Necho King
of Egypt, and took all from him (which he had gotten) from the River of Egypt
unto the River Euphrates; and so Jehoiakim King of Judah became a servant, and
was tributary to Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon three years. In the 11. year of
Jehoiakim he rebelled against the King of Babylon, who came up and bound him in
fetters, and carried him to Babylon; 2 Chro. 36. 6.
and Jehoiakim his son reigned in his stead.

In the 18. year of Nebuchadnezzer he 2 Kin. 25. 1. Jer. 52. 5.
came up against Jerusalem, and laid siege to it, in the 9. year of Zedekiah
King of Judah, and took the City in the 11. year 2 Chro. 3. 6.
of Zedekiah, which was the 19. year of Nebuchadnezzer. At which time he made
the Temple and City desolate: and this was the last and great Captivity of the
Jews, Anno mundi 3365. An. 3365 Sleidan.


In the 23. year of Nebuchadnezzer (when he had subdued the Kings of the
Ammonites, Moabites, etc.) he led his Army into Egypt; and having gotten the
whole Country, Nebuchadnezzer began his Monarchy, and was now the first of the
four Kings. In the second year of Nebuchadnezzers Empire, he had the Note.
Dream expounded by Daniel, for the 2. Dan. 2. 38.
year of his reign as King of Assyria, was 17. years before the last Captivity.

After this Nebuchadnezzer, reigned as Emperor of Babylon 22. years, and in
all 45. which I thus compute: Nebuchadnezzer began to reign in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim: Jehoiakim reigned 7. 7.
years more: Jehoiakin three months, but was not taken away until the end of 1.
the year.

Zedekiah reigned 11. years: In the 11.
37. year of Jehoiakins captivity, Evilmerodach began to reign, Jer. 52. 31. so
that Nebuchadnezzer had reigned 19. years, at the captivity, and after swayed
26. which make 45.
the Scepter 26. years, in all 45.

After Nebuchadnezzer succeeded Evilmerodach his son, who reigned 30. years. I
find Chronologers differ much about the successors of Evilmerodach: yet I
Judge from the word of the Prophet Jeremiah, Belshazzer only succeeded Jer. 17.
6. 7.
37. years; so that more years of necessity then 30. are to be allowed to
Evilmerodach, to complete the 70. years of the Jews Captivity in Babylon.
Authors speak of others; But the sacred History says, The Jews were servants 2
Chro. 36. 20.
to Nebuchadnczzer, (and his sons) until the reign of the Kingdom of Persia,
Dan. 5. 31, 32.
3435.

The Monarchy of Media and Persia.
MEdia and Persia are two Regions in Heylin.
in Asia: Media is limited on the East with Parthia, on the West with Armenia,
on the South with Persia, on the North with the Caspian Sea.

The chief Cities of old in this Country, were Laodicea, Appannia, Rhaga,
Tauris.

Persia is bounded on the East with the River Indus, on the West with the
Persian Gulf, on the North with the Caspian Sea, on the South with the main
Ocean.

Persia has 10. several Provinces, and many Cities, of which as chief were
Persepolis, Casbin and Susis.

Media and Persia were distinct Kingdoms, but were united under Cyrus King of
Persia, which after became the second Monarchy.

This Kingdom is signified by the Dan. 2. 32.
breast and arms of Silver, in Nebuchadnezzers Dan. 8. 20.
image. But in regard Cyrus was the chief King and Monarch, and yet the taking
of the Kingdom of Babylon is given to Darius King of the Medes, it is necessary
to reconcile this in the first Dan. 5. 31, 32.
place.

Darius of the Medes (called Cyaxares the son of Astyages) or as Daniel named
him Ahasuerus) the eighth King of the Dan. 9. 1.
Medes, being old, and having no son, and withal finding his Soldiers
unconstant to him; Darius gave Mandana his daughter unto Cyrus King of Persia,
who was his sisters son, and joined him in the Government with him, and so
united the Kingdoms of Media and Persia: but how long time they reigned
together, is not certain. Darius called to his help, Cyrus his son in law, and
at that time won the most mighty City of Babyon, and so brought the Empire to
Media and Persia. This Victory is given to Darius as the chief in Government,
and Dan. 5. 31.
aged about 62. years, who (it is thought) lived not passing one year after this
Victory, and then Cyrus came to be sole Emperor of Persia, where began the
second Monarchy.

Historians agree not about the Kings of Persia, neither for number, names or
times of their Reigns; neither need we much to seek after them, since now the
Computation of times falls into Daniels Numbers. Therefore I will forbear to
set down any of them, but refer the Reader to a further view of these, in the
Annotations I give upon Dan. 9.

But all Writers with one consent agree, That Alexander son of Philip Mar. 2.
12. Sleidan.
King of Macedon made War against Darius, and overcame him in three Battles,
where Alexander took Darius his Mother, his Wife and Children; but Darius
himself was murdered by his own Soldiers in flying to save himself. So the
Empire of Persia had its end, and was translated to Grecia.

The Monarchy of Grecia.
GRrecia or Greece is a Country in Europe, bounded on the East with Heilen.
the AEgean Sea, the Hellespont on the West, Italy and the Adriatique Sea, on
the North with Mount Hemus, on the South with the Jonian Sea. Greece is parted
into Provinces, Peloponnesus, Athalia, Epirus, Albania, Macedonia, Migdonia,
and Thracia.

Peloponnesus is in compass 600. miles, and rounded with the Sea; only it joins
to the main Country by a neck of land of five miles in breadth.

1. Peloponnesus contains five Countries, and many Cities, of which were
Lacedemon, in Laconia, and Corinth.

2. Achaia contains seven Countries, and beautified with many Cities, of which
was famous Athens in Attica, Thebes in Boetia, Delphos in Phocis, Lepanto in
Lacris.

3. Epirus was famous (amongst other things) for Mount Pindus.

4. Albania.

5. Macedonia had also Countries and Cities. This Province was famous for the
Birth of Alexander the great.

6. Migdonia: this Province has many Cities, of which are Apollonia, Neapolis,
and Thessalonica.

7. Thracia, in which are the famous Cities of Adrianopolis, and
Constantinople. Grecia continued a Kingdom for the Heylin.
reign of 22. Kings to Alexander the great, who became Monarch of the World.

Alexander son to Philip King of Macedonia, in the 7. year of his reign fully
overthrew Darius of Persia, and brought the Empire to Grecia, and after reigned
Monarch 5. years, some say 7. years. It is said that Alexander reigned 12.
years, Scriptures Harmony. Mat. 1. 7.
but it is supposed 12. years as King of Macedon, not as Emperor of Grecia. But
Alexander going to Babylon, there Sleidan.
died of an Ague, others say of Poison, at 30. years of age. However, in this
sickness perceiving he should dye, He called his servants, such as were
honorable, and had been brought up with him from his youth, and parted his
Kingdom among them whilst he was yet alive. Of Mar. 1. 5, 6.
which the chief are these four: Seleucus Dan. 11. 2.
had Syria, Ptolomeus Egypt, Antigonus Asia the less, and Cassander had
Macedonia: All these put Crowns upon themselves, and each affecting Soverainty
over the rest, they soon fell to great and continual Wars amongst themselves:
but the main conflicts were between the Kings of Syria and Egypt, called by
Daniel, The Kings of the North and South, Dan. 11. This was the third Kingdom
represented in Nebuchadnezzer's image, etc. and in Daniel vision by, etc. But
amongst Dan. 2. 32.
all these I will only mention the Race of Dan. 5. 8.
the Syrian Kings, as most sit for us to consider, and gives the most light to
understand the 11. Chap. of Daniel.

Syria has on the East Euphrates, on Heylin.
the West the Mediterranean Sea, on the South Palestine or Canaan, and on the
North Cilicia and other parts of the lesser Asia. This Country is thought (in
part or in whole) to be the very place of Paradise, the Garden of Eden. Syria
Paradise.
contains three Provinces. 1. Phoenicia, lying upon Canaan, where are these
Cities; Ptolomais, Sarepta, Sidon, Tyrus. 2. Province is Coelosyria, the chief
City of which, was Damascus the Royal seat: and of these Kings of Syria,
Scriptures speak much. The 3. Province is Syro-Phoenicia, whose chief Cities
were Beritus, Aleppo, or Sabab, Biblis, Tripolis, and Antiochia. There was also
Palmyra, which was a City and Province. The Kings of this Country were as
follows.

Seleucus Nicanor was the first King of Heylin.
Syria, and reigned 32. years.

2. Antiochus Soter 19. years.

3. Antiochus Theos 15. years.

4. Seleucus Gallinicus 20. years.

5. Selences Ceraunius 3. years.

6. Antiochus Magnus 36. years.

7. Seleucus Philopater 12. years.

8. Antiochus Epiphanes son to Antiochus Magnus succeeded his brother Seleucus,
and is the vile person Daniel speaks of, Dan. 11. 21. and that wicked root
Antiochus (surnamed) Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the King, and he reigned in
the 137. year of the Kingdom of the Greeks, 1 Mac. 1. 10. On the 15. day of the
month Casleu (by the Romans, November), in the 145. year of the Grecian
Kingdom, they set the abomination of desolation upon the Altar, and burnt the
Abomination of desolation set up by Antiochus.
books of the Law, 1 Mac. 1. 54. etc. Joseph. Antiq. 12. lib. 7. chap. Dan. 8.
9. to 12. Thus Antiochus prevailed against the Jews, and fulfilled the word of
the Lord spoken by Daniel: but the Lord again appearing in mercy to a few of
his own people, (who had kept themselves from the abominations of those evil
times, and deeply mourned over the sins and sufferings of their brethren, and
especially the woeful desolations of the Temple and worship of God) gave them 1
Mac. 4. 41, 52,
a glorious deliverance from the Armies of Antiochus, and liberty again to
restore the pure worship of God. This news being brought to Antiochus, he was
astonished; and lying down upon his bed, fell sick with grief, and in his
trouble lamented his cruelty against the Jews, whom he destroyed without
cause; acknowledging the just hand of the Lord was upon him for it. So giving
order for the education of his son, he died 1 Mac. 6. 16
in the 149. year of the Kingdom of Grecia, and in all reigned 12. years.

9. Antiochus named Eupater succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes his father in the
Kingdom, and reigned two years.

10. Demetrius son of Seleucus came from Rome, and gathered an Army whereby he
surprised Antiochus in his 1 Mac. 7. 1. and 10. 50.
Palace, and reigned in his stead 9. years.

11. Alexander the son of Antiochus Epiphanes got an Army, and came against
Demetrius, who had slain his brother Eupater, and possessed the Kingdom, and in
a set battle, Alexander overthrew the Army of Demetrius, where he also was
slain, and Alexander sat upon the Throne. When Alexander was now established in
the Kingdom, he sent Ambassadors to Ptolomy King of Egypt, to make a league of
amity with him, and to 1 Mac. 10. 51.
give him Cleopatra his daughter to wife. Ptolomy King of Egypt seemed to
rejoice in the motion, and appointed Ptolomais to be the place of their meeting
for to accomplish the Marriage; which was done with great glory. But both these
Kings hearts were to do mischief (and according to Daniels Prophecy) they Dan.
11. 27
spoke lies at one Table: for Ptolomy went about through deceit to get
Alexanders Kingdom, and join it to his own.

12. In the 165. year, Demetrius Nicanor, son of Demetrius, who was overcome by
Alexander, came out of Crete 1 Mac. 10. 67.
with an Army against Alexander: but Ptolomy King of Egypt having by deceit got
into many of Alexanders Cities, left Garrisons therein, and in the mean time
offers a league with Demetrius, and to 1 Mac. 11. 8, 9, 10.
give his daughter Cleopatra to him, (whom he had given before to Alexander)
which was done. Thus Ptolomy quieted Demetrius, and so took the opportunity to
set the Crown of Asia and Egypt both upon his own head. When Alexander heard of
this, he came with his Army out of Cilicia, and made War with Ptolomy, but was
worsted; and flying into Arabia, Zabdiel the Arabian took off Alexanders head,
and sent it to Ptolomy: but Ptolomy died the third day after, and so Demetrius
came to the 1 Mac. 11. 17, 18, 19
Crown in the 167 year of the Kingdom.

Demetrius Nicanor came thus to the Kingdom, yet enjoyed little peace: for
Tryphon, who had been of Alexanders party, finding Demetrius his Army murmuring
against him, set up Antiochus the son of Alexander, and lav sore upon Sinialcus
the Arabian to deliver young Antiochus, that he might reign in his fathers Mac.
11. 38, 39, 40, 54, 55.
stead. At last Tryphon got Antiochus Crowned; and drawing unto him Here was
killing to get a Crown
many Soldiers who were discontented from Demetrius won Antioch, and so got
much power. All this was done in 1 Mac. 13. 31, 32. and 14. 1, 2, 3.
policy by Tryphon: for when opportunity served, he killed Antiochus, and set
the Crown upon his own head: by this means Demetrius was full of trouble all
his days; and going with his Army toward Media to get help to fight with
Tryphon, Arsaces King of Persia smote his Host, and took Demetrius prisoner, in
the year of the Kingdom 172.

13. Antiochus Sadetes son of Demetrius 1 Mac. 15. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
the King, gathered a great Army in the Isles of the Sea, to recover his
Kingdom from Tryphon. He came up in the 174. year, at which time most of
Tryphons forces left him, and joined with Antiochus. Tryphon seeing troubles
coming upon him, fled to the City Dora, where Antiochus laid siege against him
with an Army of 120000. foot and 8000. horsemen, and beset the Town by Land and
Sea. But Tryphon got away, Ver. 37, 39 1 Mac. 16. 8, 9.
and went by Sea to Oethosias: and the King pursued him. At this time Antiochus
brake his Covenant with the Jews, and made War upon them; where Judas was
slain. Yet John his brother pursued the Victory, and gave an utter overthrow to
the Army of Antiochus. How long Antiochus reigned, is not left certain; but he
is thought to reign 3. years.

14. Antiochus Pius 12. years.

15. Demetrius Nicanor 4. years.

16. Alexander 2. years.

17. Antiochus Gryphius 29. years.

There now arose much strife amongst the Nations, which continued about 10.
years: but the Syrians (to end the strife amongst the Princes) chose Tygranes
King of Armenia, to govern them, who reigned about 18. years. And now the
Syrian Monarchy being thus weakened through strife and division, Pompey the
Roman General came up with an Army, overcame Tygranes, conquered Syria, and
brought all in subjection to the Roman Empire, about Ann. mund. 3902.

A View of the Roman Empire.
THis Empire had it is Original from Rome, as is well known. Italy is Maginus.
a Country in this part of the World called Europe, and lies thus: Italy is
rounded with the Ionian and Adriatique Seas, except toward France and Germany,
from whom it is parted by the Alps. This Region was distinguished into four
parts. 1. Hesperia, 2. Latium, 3. Ausonia, Merula.
and 4. Oenotria. Of all the Cities wherewith Italy was beautified, Rome had
the first place, and became Mistress of the World. This City is supposed to be
founded by Romulus and Rhemus, in Romes first building, about Anno mun. 3230.
the reign of Hezekiah King of Judah, about Ann. mund. 3230. This City in her
glory spread her lines to the compass of 50. miles: But this City felt the fury
of the Gauls, and by them was laid in Sleidan.
heaps. So that now Rome stands lower upon the Bank of Tiber, and is drawn
Funke.
into narrower bounds. This Empire has (according to Daniels Prophecy,) Dan.
7. 7.
differed greatly from the other three, and in nothing more then in the several
changes of Government: yet as the Lord described to Daniel this fourth and last
earthly Kingdom in several parts and properties, it is apparent that no City or
Empire of the World has answered the Vision, like this of Rome. Daniels fourth
beast is described with 10. horns; but John in the Revelation having a Vision
Rev. 12. 3.
of the same beast, saw him with seven Rev. 17. 9, 12.
heads, and ten horns: where the Holy Ghost there interprets the seven heads
to be seven mountains, and the ten horns, ten Kings. Both which, time has
proved true in Rome. First, Rome in her plantation was built upon seven hills,
which are thus named and numbered. Rome built upon seven hills.
1. Palatinus. 2. Capitolinus. 3. Viminalis. 4. Aventinus. 5. Exquilinus. 6.
Caelius. Rome had 7. several Governments Abbot.
7. Quirinalis. Secondly, Rome has been eminent for seven changes in the
Government of the Empire, every of which in their time had Supreme Authority.
1. By Kings. 2. Consulls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Dictators. 5. Tribunes. 6. Senate.
7. Emperors or Caesar's. But though ambition and avarice did cause these
changes in the Roman State, yet the word of the Lord has been fulfilled in it
and upon it, that there is little to be accomplished. I shall wholly pass over
the State of Rome under all these former Governments, and only speak to the
Imperial.

When the Romans had ended their Note.
War in France, Civil War arose amongst themselves between Julius Caesar, and
En. Pompey his kinsman. Pompey and Caesar were both Roman Generals, and had
great interest in the people. But Pompey laying his design to get into sole
power, would have Caesar put out of his Consulship, unless he would disband
his Army. Caesar could not think himself safe to dismiss his Soldiers: yet did
offer, that he would do it, if Pompey would do the like. Yet this equal motion
not being accepted, Caesar presently speeded to his Army in France, marched
into Italy, and there possessed himself of diverse strong Holds. This news being
brought to Pompey, he rallied his Army, and gave Battle to Caesar. But in this
Fight Pompey's Army was routed, and Pompey himself fled into Egypt. But where
Pompey looked for requital of former A false friend.
kindness, his low estate was now despised, and Ptolomy King of Egypt fearing
uprores in his Country by harboring Pompey, he caused Pompey to be
treacherously slain, and so Caesar came to sole power.

In the 5. year of this Civil War, Julius Caesar returned to Rome: and now
enemies being vanquished abroad, and the Plutarch.
people pacisied at home, Julius Caesar had the honor of Dictator; but having
the power of the sword, he assumed Supreme Authority to himself, chose Senators
of his own party, and conferred honors and Offices of the Weale-publike, upon
whom he pleased. By this usurpation, Caesar was lost much in the affections of
the people in general, and hated by diverse. So that conspiracies were made
against him, and at last he was murdered in the Senate, the 15. of March, the
5. month after he came to Rome, by those he had shown great kindness to. The
Roman Monarchy here took beginning, and from hence I intend to trace the
Emperors so long as the Roman Empire lasted, and give a view to the world what
beastly Monsters most of them were, according to the Visions of them to Daniel.

After the death of Julius Caesar, Octavius Augustus first Emp. of Rome.
Augustus, Caesar's sisters son, drew the Soldiers after him, and pretended to
put himself into Arms for the Wealepu An. mun. 3848.
like. At this time the Government of Triumviri were established, and the Rule
given to Augustus, and two of his friends. But the greedy ambition of sole
Authority engendered strife amongst the three Governors. M. Lepidus was soon
deposed, for conspiring against Augustus. And not long, after Augustus made War
upon Antonius, (who had married the sister of Augustus) for putting her away,
and marrying the Queen of Egypt. In this War Augustus overcame, and made
Antonius, and Cleopatra his new wife, to kill themselves. And thus Augustus
came to the Empire of Rome. Historians say, Our Savior Jesus The birth of
Christ. 3891 Luke 2. 1.
Christ was born of the Virgin, in the 42. year of the reign of Augustus. That
Christ was born in the reign of Augustus, the Scripture assures us; but to
find out the particular year of his reign, we must consult Chronologers. John
Sleidan says, It was the 29. year of Augustus, etc. Yet these may be thus
reconciled: accounting 13. years of Augustus his reign as Triumviri, and 29. in
sole Government as Emperor, the birth of Christ falls in the 42. year of
Augustus; after which he reigned 14. years, and in all 56. and died Anno
Christ. 15. An. 15.


After Augustus, Tiberius (his son in Tiberius the 2. Emp Sleidan.
law) took the Empire. At first he seemed hard to be persuaded to accept the
Crown, and for some time did nothing of moment without the Senate. But Luke 3.
1, 21, 23.
when he was well settled in the Throne, he did what he pleased. In the 15. year
Mat. 3. 13. and 4. 1, 15. Christ's Bapt. and Death.
of Tiberius, Jesus Christ was Baptized, and entered upon his public Ministry,
and suffered death in the 18. or beginning of the 19. of the reign of Tiberius.
Cytreus upon the 21. of Mat. has it thus: Our Savior Christ Jesus, when
Cytreus.
he had lived here on earth 33. years, and something more, suffered death for
the Salvation of mankind the 25. day of March, in the 18. year of the reign of
Tiberius. In his reign also Steven was stoned, John Baptist beheaded, and Paul
called. In all, Tiberius reigned 22. years, and odd months, An. Christ. 37.
An. 37.


Caius Caligula now took the Imperial Scepter: This Emperor abounded in Caius
the 3. Emperor.
cruelty, Idolatty, and pride; forgetting he was but dust, he claimed to
himself the honor of God, causing the people to pray to him, and dedicated the
Lords holy Eusebius.
Temple in Jerusalem (never before so Sleidan.
defiled) to new Caius, as a famous God. In the time of Caius, Pilate who past
The miserable end of Pilate, who condemned Jesus Christ.
Sentence of death upon Christ, fell into a tormenting disease, and to end his
misery killed himself: Also Herod that beheaded John was put down and banished:
Caius himself was also slain by his own Guard, when he had reigned 3. years and
10 months, An. 42. An. 42.


Claudius Uncle to Caius came next to Claudius the 4. Emperor.
the Throne: He was a great Warrior, and reduced many Countries to obedience to
the Roman Scepter; amongst others, this Nation of England, and married Flor.
Hist.
his daughter to Arviragus the King: and in memory of that great solemnity,
Eusebius.
he built Kaerlow, now Gloucester, An. 44. When Claudius had borne the Crown 13.
years, 8. months, and 20. days, he died, An. 56. An. 56.


Nero took the next turn: He past the Nero the 5. Emperor.
former part of his reign quietly. But after he was settled, he fell into
abominable wickedness; his malice carried him beyond the bounds of humanity,
that he tormented to death his own mother, his brethren, and his wife. Nero (to
all other The first persecution.
evils) raised the first persecution against the Christians: In this
persecution Peter and Paul the Apostles suffered Martyrdom, and by this means
the Gospel was much spread; at which time it is said, The Gospel was brought
into England The Gospel brought to England. Eusebius.
by Joseph of Arimathea. Upon the cruelty of Nero, diverse Countries rebelled,
and great troubles were raised in the Roman State: but to prevent a deserved
death by the sentence of the Senate, Nero became his own executioner, when he
had reigned 13. years and 8. days, An. 69. An. 69.


The Empire at the death of Nero was Galba the 6. Emperor.
in great disorder, and the Sword bare the greatest sway. By this means Galba
was set upon the Throne; yet he kept it but 7. months and 7. days, but was
beheaded.

Otho succeeded Galba, yet he continued Otho the 7. Emperor.
his honor but for 3. months, and he was slain.

Vitellius took the next turn, who was Vitellius the 8. Emperor.
Emperor but 8. months, and he was dispatched.

Vespatian being now General of the Vespatian the 9. Emperor.
Roman Armies sent against the Jews, the Army proclaimed Vespatian Emperor of
Rome. Hereupon the Emperor left the Government of the Army to his son Titus,
and himself returned to Rome. At this time the Lord fulfilled the word of
Prophecy in a great measure Jerusalems destroyed by fire and sword. Joseph.
Eusebius.
upon the Jews: for under Titus, Jerusalem was sacked, the Temple burnt, and
the most dreadful slaughter of the miserable Jews, that ever happened to them,
or any other people, the 8. day of September, An. 73. In the reign of
Vespatian, Timothy was put to death at Ephesus, by the worshippers of Diana.
Vespatian reigned 10. years, and died of a Lask, An. 81.

Titus succeeded his father Vespatian, Titus the 10.
and reigned two years and two months, An. 83.

Domitian second son to Vespatian, followed Domitian the 11. Emperor. The
second persecution.
his brother Titus. Domitian began the second persecution against the
Christians in his fathers reign, but prosecuted it when he came to the Empire.
Domitian was taken into Government with his brother Titus, whom he soon
murdered; and falling from one wickedness to another, in the hight of his sin,
he caused himself to be worshipped as God. This vile monster respected neither
estate, age, or sex, but exercised great cruelty to all. In his time the
Apostle The Revelation given to John.
John was put into a vessel of boiling oil, but the Lord miraculously
preserving his life, after which he was banished into the Isle Patmos, where he
had the Revelation. After Domitian Rev. 1. 9. Eusebius.
had shed much blood, he was murdered, and his Corpse mangled by his own
servants, when he had reigned 15. years, An. 98.

Nerva was now called to the Empire. Nerva the 12. Emper.
At this time the Senate made void all the honors conferred by Domitian, and
proclaimed liberty to all in exile: By which Peace to the Church.
John was restored in the first year of Nerva, and openly preached the Gospel.
John lived to the age of 120. years; and going into a grave which he had made
with his own hands, he laid himself Dorotheus.
down and slept with the Lord. Nerva reigned 1. year and 4. months, Anno 100.

Trajan a Spaniard (the adopted son of Trajan the 13. Emper.
Nerva) had the Crown. Trajan was very fair in the first part of his reign, but
about the 10. year of his reign he began the third bloody persecution against
the The third persecution.
Christians. Trajan died of a Lask when he had reigned 19. years and 6.
months. An. 118.

AElius Adrianus succeeded in the Empire, Adrian the 14. Emp.
and for some time continued the persecution against the Christians, but after
gave them their liberty. In the 18. year of his reign, he sent an Army into
Judea against the Jews who had revolted, and by woeful slaughters they The
Jews dispersion, etc. Ann. 136.
were overcome, and banished their own Country, so that by the Emperors
decree, the Jews were not to come so near Judea, as to stand upon the top of
an hill, and look to their own native Country. At this time the Jews were
dispersed, that unto this day they have not been a Nation, nor enjoyed the
common privilege of Laws and Government amongst themselves as a Commonwealth.
And upon this dispersion of the Jews, Jerusalem was dedicated to idol-worship;
the worship of God, the daily sacrifice wholly ceased, and Jerusalem called by
the name of AElia, Eusebius. Joseph.
after the Emperors own name. In all, Adrian reigned 21 years, and died An.
139. An. 139.


Antoninus Pius was next chosen to the Pius the 15 Emperor.
Empire by the Senate, upon the desire of Adrian. He lived peaceably, and died
in the 23. year of his reign, Anno 162. An. 162.


Antoninus Verus succeeded his father Verus the 16. Emperor, raised the fourth
persecution.
Pius in the Empire, but not in his piety or peaceableness. He raised the
fourth persecution against the Christians, and continued 19. years, An. 181.
An. 181.


Commodus came next to Imperial Rule: Commodus the 17. Emp.
He continued the former persecution; but the Lord doing a miracle upon the
prayers of his people, the Emperor staid that persecution. Commodus reigned
13. years, and died by poison, Anno 194. An. 194.


Pertinax succeeded in the Empire. Pertinax the 18. Emp.
He was a friend to Christians, and in his time the Church had peace, and
flourished much. Pertinax reigned but 6. months.

Severus took the Scepter. He was favorable Severus the 19. Emp. raised the
fifth persecution.
to the Christians, for ten years; but being stirred up against them by
malicious accusations, he raised the fifth persecution. He reigned 18. years,
and died at York, An. 212. An. 212.


Caracalla succeeded his father Severus Caracalla the 20. Emperor.
in the Empire, and in his persecution of the Christians, but was slain when he
had reigned 7. years and 6. months, Anno 220. An. 220.


Macrinus succeeded, and died in the Macrinus 21.
first year, An. 221.

Antonius Heliogabalus reigned 4. Heliogabalus 22.
years, An. 225.

Alexander Severus took the next Alexander the 23 Emp.
turn. He was a valiant Warrior, and reduced diverse Countries to obedience: But
going against the Germans, he was Sleidan.
slain by his own Soldiers, when he had reigned 13. years, An. 238. An. 238.


Maximinus succeeded Alexander. He Maximinus the 24. Emperor.
began the 6. persecution up on the Christians, and his main design was upon
the Teachers, thinking thereby the better to root out Religion. Maximinus did
subject some Countries to the Roman Eusebius.
Empire, but for his cruelty the Soldiers hated him, and in his absence chose
Gordianus Sleidan.
Emperor, whom the Senate confirmed. Maximinus thus deposed, thought upon
revenge, and raising what strength he could, laid siege to Aquileia. But the
Senate sent out an Army against him, and both Maximinus and his son were
presently slain by his own Soldiers, in 3. year of his reign, An. 241. An. 241.


Gordianus was now established in the Gordianus the 25. Emp. Eusebius.
Emperial seat; yet after by the Treason of Philip chief Governor under
Gordianus, Gordianus was betrayed and murdered by his own Soldiers, in the 6.
year of his reign, An. 247. An. 247.


Philip now ascended the throne, but Philip the 26.
was paid in his own coin, when he had reigned 7. years, An. 254. An. 254.


Decius was now chosen to be Emperor Decius the 27. Emp.
by the Army. He raised the seventh persecution against the Christians. He left
the Government of the Public Weal to the Senate, and went forth to Eusebius.
Sleidan.
War against the Scythians; but both he and his son were traitorously slain,
when he had reigned something more then a year, An. 255. An. 255.


Gallus was presently made Emperor Gallus the 28. Emp.
by the Army; and the better to keep his new Crown, made a dishonorable peace
with the Scythians. But Amilianus Governor of Mysia stirred up the Soldiers
to prosecute the War against Sleidan.
the Scythians, who were put to flight, and hereupon the Soldiers made him
Emperor. This stirred Gallus, who forthwith raised an Army against Amilianus
his competitor: but in that battle Gallus was slain, and so ended the strife,
when he had reigned about a year, An. 257. An. 257.


Amilianus was next to succeed; but Amilianus the 29. Emp.
while Gallus and he were contending for the Crown, another Army which lay
about the Alps, called Valerian (a man of Sleidan.
a Noble family) to the Emperial dignity. Whereupon Amilianus his Soldiers
soon took away his life, when he had held the Throne but 3. months, and joined
with the new Emperor.

Valerian now settled in the Empire, took Gallienus his son into Government
Valerian the 30. Emperor.
with him. At first, Valerian greatly favored the Christians, and had many in
his Court. But after being incensed against them by an Egyptian Enchanter,
raised the eighth persecution, about An. The eighth persecution.
259. Yet the righteous God made him feel the smart of Tyranny. Valerian going
to War against the Persians, was taken Clarks Martyr.
prisoner, where he was made the Kings footstool when he got upon his horse,
and after flayed alive and salted, and so ended this miserable life.

Galienus left in Government, still continued Gallienus the 31. Emp.
Emperor; but he gave himself up to his pleasure, and neglected the Public
Weal, by which many Provinces took their opportunity to provide Sleidan.
for their own safety, and set up Emperors of their own. In his reign also the
Goths made invasions upon the Romans: all which together, Gallienus grew into
hatred, and was soon slain. Yet it is said, Gallienus stayed the persecution
Eusebius.
against the Christians, about An. 262. and with his father kept the Imperial
Throne 15. years, An. 272. An. 272.


Claudius next had the Empire. But Historians Claudius the 32. Emp.
agree not in the time of his reign, or who succeeded; therefore I follow Mr.
Heylin, who gives to Claudius one year, An. 272. An. 272.


Quintilius had the Throne for one Quintilius 33.
year, and left it, An. 273.

Aurelianus then took his turn. At Aurelius the 34. Emp. The ninth persecution,
add how it was suddenly stayed. Eusebius.
first he favored the Christians, but after raised the ninth persecution
against them. It is said, When this Emperor was about to sign his Edict
against the Christians, the Lord stroke that arm, that he could not write his
name: upon which he was so terrified, that he stayed that persecution; and
after this sign from heaven, the Church had peace through diverse Emperors
reigns. Aurelius was a valiant Warrior, and subdued diverse Provinces to the
Roman State. Yet was after murdered by pretending friends, when he had reigned
6. years, An. 278.

After Aurelius, the Empire was vacant, The Empire vacant.
and no Emperor chosen for some time: which never happened from Romulus to
that instant. Yet at length Tacitus was chosen Emperor, and reigned 6.
months. Tacitus 35


Florianus then took the Scepter, and Florianus 36.
held it 80. days.

Probus was chosen to the Empire, as Probus the 37. Emp.
some say, By the nomination of Tacitus, and confirmed both by the Army and
Senate. He by his wisdom so settled the Nations in such peace, that on a time he
said, We shall not shortly need Armies Sleidan.
or Garrisons. But this speech of the Emperor so greatly offended the
Soldiers, Eusebius.
that they consulted new troubles; and not long after, Probus died, when he had
held the Crown 6. years, An. 286. An. 286.


Carus succeeded Probus. He took Carus the 38.
into Government with him his two sons, Carinus and Numerianus: Carus
Numerianus the 39.
soon died, and Numerianus following the Wars, was slain by his father in law.
Upon this, Dioclesian was chosen Emperor, and raised an Army against Carianus;
but in battle Carianus Carianus 40.
lost his life, when all three Emperors had reigned but 3. years, Anno Eusebius.
Sleidan.
289. An. 289.


Dioclesian now succeeded in the Empire Dioclesian the 14. Emp.
; and finding troubles and tumults arising in many places, he took Maximinian
into Government with him, and The division of the Empire.
divided the Empire into East and West. That the Public Weal might be yet
more stable, and better ordered, Dioclesian adopted Galerius to succeed him,
and Maximinian chose Constantius Clorus to follow him: Yet Galerius was sent to
command in the East, and Constantius kept the West. These Emperors by this
Policy kept peace at home, and got Victories abroad, by which they were
exceedingly lift up in pride. In such height was Dioclesian, that he would be
Dioclesian worshipped as God. The tenth persecution.
worshipped as God. And to the rest of his sin, he raised the tenth persecution
against the Christians, which rose very high. In the 19. year of his reign,
near the Feast of Easter, the Emperor sent out his Edict, by which he
commanded all Churches to be laid even with the ground, the holy Scriptures to
be burnt, Scriptures burnt.
the Pastors of Churches first to be imprisoned, and then forced to offer
sacrifice to idols, or suffer death, etc. It cannot be said, how much Christian
blood was shed in a little time. Yet the righteous God suffered not these
bloody persecutors to go in peace to their graves. In the 20. year of these
Emperors Government, they grew weary of their honors, and resigned their
Emperial trust to their Companions. But The woeful end of persecutors.
Maximinus grew mad, and hanged himself: And Dioclesian fell into a horrible
Disease, his intrails and flesh rotting, Eusebius.
with innumerable lice swarming upon him, and so wasted away, An. 309. An. 309.


Though now the Empire be divided into East and West, or West and East; I shall
only follow the Western Empire, and speak only of the Eastern Emperors
occasionally, as this History requires.

Constantius now Emperor of the Constantius the 42. Emp. of Rome.
West, had his abode in England, and married Helena, daughter of King Coel.

Constantius was greatly affected with Religion, and the worship of God, which
he much promoted; but in the 7. year of his Government, after the Resignation
of the former Emperors, he departed this life at York, An. 316.

Constantius being now dead, Galerius Emperor of the East adopted Severus and
Maximinus to succeed next in Government. In the interim, the Nobles and
Soldiers at Rome elected Maxentius to be Emperor. Upon this, great troubles
did arise; and to quier both the parties up in arms, the Nobility called
Constantine son of Constantius out of France, to deliver Rome from the Tyranny
of Maxentius: Constantine forthwith drew into Italy with his Army, where he got
the first Battle, and after totally routed Maxentius near to Rome. Constantine
was Proclaimed Emperor after the death of his father in England: Constantine
the great the 43. Emp. Sleidan. Socrates.
But now he had overcome his enemies, he was established in the Imperial Throne.

Constantine bearing great affection to Licinius, took him into Government, and
married his sister Constantia to him, out of this respect, that Licinius
favored the Christians. But after some time his hypocrisy was discovered, and
it appeared that he intended secretly to murder Constantine, and to raise
persecution against the Christians. Yet the All-wise God prevented the one, and
stayed the other begun: For this malicious bloody cruelty being brought to
light, Constantine went against Licinius, overcame him, and after ruled alone.
Constantine now settled the afflicted Church in much peace, and the Romans gave
him the title of Constantine the Great.

It is Historied by Socrates, That when Constantine was drawing up of his Army
to relieve Rome from the Tyranny of Maxentius, that he was yet unsettled in
Religion: But in the daytime there appeared a lightsome Pillar in the heavens
like a Cross, with this inscription, In this overcome. But this appearance was
of these Greek characters (...), which are the name of Christ; As Eusebius. This
In the life of Constantine. lib. 1. c. 22. 25.
at first amazed the Emperor: Yet he being assured by the restimony of others
as well as himself, of the reality of the vision, Constantine did fully believe
in Christ, and in that strength prospered.

I will not spot paper with reciting the Popish fables reported of Constantine.
But without question, he was a pious and peacable man, and did much for the
Church of God. He was converted to Socrates.
the faith about the 41. year of his age. Yet was not Baptized of long,
purposely deferring his baptism, to be baptized in Jordan where Christ was
baptized.

Constantine had three sons, to whom he divided his Empire. First, Constantine,
whom he made Emperor over the Western parts of his Empire, in the 10. year of
his reign. Secondly, Constantius, whom he set over the Eastern parts of his
Empire, in the 20. year of his reign. Thirdly, Constans had his Empire assigned
to him, in the 30. year of his fathers reign. The division of the Roman Empire
is given more particularly, Thus: Sleidan. The division of the Empire by
Constan.


1. Constantine had the Alps, France, Spain, England, Ireland, the Isles of
the Orchades, and Thile.

2. Constantius had the Countries of Asia, and Thracia.

3. Constans had Italy, Afric, with the Isles, Sclavonia, Macedonia, Achaia,
Peloponnesus, and Grecia.

Of all the Empire, Constantine the great delighted in Byzantius, a City in
Thracia, which he made the Emperial seat, and called it Constantinople. In the
65. Constantines Baptism.
year of his age, and the 31. of his reign, Constantine fell sick, and for the
recovery of his health, went to the hot Baths in Helenopolis: But finding his
sickness to increase, he left the Baths, and came to Nicomedia, and without the
walls of the City was baptized into the faith of Christ, by Eusebius Pastor of
the Church in Nicomedia. Constantine greatly rejoiced in his baptism, and after
made his Will; and the 22. day of May, in the 65. year of his Age, and the 31.
of his reign, he departed this life, An. 340. An. 340.


Though the Empire was divided by Constantine in his life time to his three
sons, and each had large Dominions; Yet (as ambition can keep no bonds)
Constantine made War upon his brother Constans, and invaded some of his
Countries. This stirred up Constans, who went against his brother, where
Constantine (the Elder brother) lost his Army and life together. This gave
encouragement to Constans, who past the Mountains, and in two years possessed
himself of all his brothers Dominions. But upon the death of Constantine, the
Soldiers chose Magnentius Emperor, who prosecuted the War against Constans,
and in a short time had him murdered by conspiracy. Thus in a little time the
Eldest and youngest of Constantines sons came to sudden if not sad ends.

Constantius (the only son of Constantine Constantius the 2. the 44. Emp.
now living) having knowledge of these things, left Gallus his brother in law,
his Lieutenant in Asia, and with a great Army came into Italy against
Magnentius. Upon the first Battle, the Army of Magnentius was totally routed,
but himself escaped away with life: Magnentius in this low condition sent
Ambassadors to Constantius for peace: But that being refused by Constantius,
Magnentius resolved to try his fortune in another pitched battle, which also
proved unhappy to him; and not finding now a way open to save his life, he slew
The Roman Empire again united.
himself, and so the whole Empire came into the hand of Constantius. But in the
absence of Constantius, Gallus rebelled, and set up himself Emperor of the
East. Yet Constantius by a wile, got Gallus into France; and when he had him
there, soon took off his head, and so ended that strife.

Constantius then took Julian his brothers son into Government, and left him in
France. Julian prospered in War, and growing into the affection of the
Soldiery, they elected him Casar Augustus. The news of this sorely displeased
Constantius, who was drawing down his Army against Julian: But in the way
Constantius died of an Apoplexia, the 3. day of November, in the year 45. of
his Socrates.
age, when he had reigned 11. years with his father Constantine, and 25. years
after him, An. 365. An. 365.


Julian now succeeded in the Empire, Julian called the Apostate, the 45. Emp.
and the 11. day of December following the death of Constantius, was proclaimed
Emperor. At Julians first coming to the Empire, he found the people greatly
divided; but being unsound in Religion, (to which he much pretended, to please
his Uncle, and get the Crown,) now he set himself to please men.

In Policy he applied himself to every Socrates.
sort, and framed his behavior to every humor. He slattered some, he allured
others with gifts, and places of preferment, and gave all their liberty in
Religion, Devilish Policy.
to establish himself. Julian's hypocrisy, and dissembling of the Christian
Religion, was undiscovered until this time. But now having got his design, and
settled in the Throne, he manifested himself a desperate Apostate, soon opened
the Idol Temples, and offered sacrifice therein. After this, the Christians
were banished his Court, and the vilest persons taken into favor. Julian now
persecuted the Christians with bitter hatred, Julians persecution.
and studied how to root out Religion. He would not put Christians to death,
because Martyrs had so great honor; but as Learning was a great help to
maintain the Doctrine of the Gospel, Julian made a Law, that Christians should
not be trained up in the Schools of Literature. And further, to trouble The
last building, and utter destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.
the Christians, he called in again the Jews, and gave them Authority and
supplies to build the Temple in Jerusalem, there to offer sacrifice. The
unbelieving Jews rejoicing in this opportunity, set themselves busily to work.
But though the seasonable word of Cyril was slighted by them, yet the righteous
hand of God was upon them, by which the word of the Lord was fulfilled. In that
very night following, the Lord caused Socrates.
an Earthquake, by which the very foundations of the Temple was cast up, and
fire (as lightening) which burnt the Tools of the Workmen, etc. About this
time Julian drew his Army into Persia, where he was shot with a poisoned Arrow,
of which wound he died the 26. of June, the 31. year of his age, in the 3. year
of his reign alone, An. 367. An. 367.


Jovinian was next chosen Emperor Jovinian the 46. Emp.
by the Army. He gave some liberty to the Christians, but died the 17. of
February, in the 33. year of his age, when he had reigned but 7. months.

Valentinian was chosen Emperor by Valentinian the 47. Emperor.
the Soldiers the 25. day of February. This Emperor being married, and yet
having a mind to a beautiful Maid that pleased him much, he made a Law, That
Sleidan.
as many men as would, might have two wives; and so took Justina to be his
second wife. After this, he broke a Vein in his Lungs, whereat the blood
streamout Socrates.
until he died thereof, which was the 16. of November, in the 45. year of his
age, and the 13. of his reign, An. 380. An. 380.


After the death of Valentinian, there Valens the 48. Emp.
arose great strife between his sons. Some chose Gratian, who came by the first
wife; and some chose Valens, who was by the second wife: But the bastard
carried it. Valens was an Arrian by profession, and sadly persecuted the
Christians. In his reign the Goths driven out of their own Country by the Huns,
were taken into protection by the Roman Emperor, Socrates.
and placed in Thracia. But soon after, the Goths laid siege against the
Imperial City of Constantinople; and the Emperor coming against them in
battle, was slain the 9. of August, in the 3. year of his reign, An. 383. An.
383.


Gratian now came to the Throne. Gratian the 49. Emp.
The Roman State was now greatly weakened, and the barbarous people
strengthened: so Gratian took into Government to him Theodosius a Spaniard. But
Maximus a Captain under Gratian Sleidan.
conspired the death of Gratian, who was murdered, when he had reigned 15.
years. An. 391.


Theodosius being established in the Theodosius the 50. Emp.
Government with Gratian, set himself to suppress this bloody Tyrant, and
therefore drew his Army near to Maximus: But when the Soldiers of Maximus
understood that the Emperor Theodosius came against them with a mighty Army,
Socratos.
they soon took Maximus, bound him, and brought him to Theodosius, who as soon
caused the Tyrant to be executed. Theodosius was very laborious, and in his
time called several Councils to find out the truth, and to advance the purity
of Religion. This Emperor had two sons, Arcadius and Honorius, whom he took
into Government, when they were both young. Theodosius being at Millain, and
finding bodily sickness increase, he sent for his son Honorius, who came to his
father forthwith: but he departed this life, the 17. of January, the 60. year
of his age, when he had reigned 16. years, An. 414. An. 414.


Arcadius and Honorius, after the death Honorius the 1. Emp. of Rome.
of their Father, divided the Roman Empire. Arcadius went to the East, and
Honorius ruled the West. At this time Christian Religion began greatly to
flourish and spread, so that the greatest troubles did arise from the ambition
of Bishops, which after I shall speak more to. In the reign of Honorius, by the
treachery of Stilicus, the Goths took The Empire again divided.
Rome, but stayed not long. I find no certain account given of Honorius his
death, or the time of his reign.

Valentinian had the Empire of Rome, Valentinian the 52. Emp.
and desired in Marriage his Cousen Endoxia daughter to Theodosius the second
Emperor of the East. The motion being accepted, Valentinian went to
Constantinople, where the Marriage was solemnized. Long it was not but
Valentinian was slain by the treason of Maximus; and to revenge this treason,
Endoxia called in Genzericus King of the Vandals: but by him Rome was burnt,
and the Western Empire brought to great desolation.

After the death of Maximus, Avitus Avitus the 53. Emp.
took the Imperial power, but was taken away by the Plague, when he had reigned
8. months.

The Empire now was vacant for some Majorinus the 54. Emp.
time, but in the year following Majorinus took the Government upon him, but
was soon murdered by Severus.

Severus now come to the Imperial Severus the 53. Emp.
Diadem, and Rome lying in her ashes, he made Ravenna the chief seat. Woeful
confusions now wasted the Western Empire, yet Severus kept the Crown 4. years.

In the distractions and distresses of the Roman State between Genzericus and
others, Ambassadors were sent to Leo the second Emperor of the East, to
desire him to send an Emperor to Rome. Hereupon Leo sent Anthemius, and with
Anthemius the 56. Emp.
him a great Army, to settle him in the Roman Empire. But Anthemius was slain,
when he had governed 5. years.

Olimbrius then ascended the Imperial Olimbrius the 57. Emp.
Throne, and was dispatched in seven months.

Glicerius next succeeded in the Roman Empire, but after 5. years was deposed
Glicerius the 58. Emp.
by Nepos.

Nepos took the Crown, but had it taken Nepos the 59. Emp.
again from him by Orestes, when he had worn it but 56. days.

Orestes possessed the Empire, but gave it to Orestes the 60.
his son Augustulus.

Augustulus was the last Emperor of Augustulus the 61. and last Emp. of Rome.
Rome, and reigned but one year.

It is said that Odoazer succeeded Augustulus; but so low was the Roman State,
that he refused the title of Emperor, and took only the style of King.

Thus this Roman Empire, which had been the glory and terror of the World, for
the space of 500. years, was now through sedition, pride, and cruelty, brought
to woeful ruin. In these distractions several Provinces of the Empire fell off,
and set up Kings amongst themselves: and here the Roman Empire ceased.

The Monarchy of England.
IT is agreed by Writers, that England was a Province of the Roman Empire.
Stowe.
Some suppose it was first subjected England one of the Dragons ten horns.
by the Emperor Severus, who in the 18. year of his reign was slain at York,
Ann. Christ. 213. But it is granted Sleidan.
that Constantine the great, upon the division of the Empire to his three sons,
France, Spain, England and Ireland, were sub-Kingdoms given to his eldest son
Constantinus, about An. 343. Our Chronologers acknowledge Britain continued a
Roman Province, until the time of Theodosius the second. At this time the
Camden.
Emperor had drawn the strength of this Nation over into France, and in those
Stowe.
Wars were much wasted, so that Britain was very weak of men; and upon this
advantage the Picts and Scots made Inroads into England, and invaded some
Countries, and did great hurt. Hereupon the Britains required aid of the
Romans: But the Roman Empire was This Horn took the Crown.
now brought very low; and they having at that time Wars in Italy and in
France, they neglected poor Brattain, who were forced to provide for themselves
as well as they could; and so Britain cast off the England cast off the Roman
Government,
Roman Government, about the 16. year of Theodosius the 2. about Anno Christi
441. An. 441.


The Britains (when left to themselves) continued in doubtful Wars with the
Picts and Scots, about 6. years, and Vortiger the 1. King of Britain,
then with one consent they Elected Vortiger to be their King, An. Christi 447.
An. 447.


Vortiger was the first British King. Stowe.
In whole time the Land was greatly wasted by a destroying Plague, that the
living could scarcely bury the dead. This woeful mortality gave the cruel Picts
and Scots advantage again to enter England, who did make great spoil while
there was no strength to resist them. Hereupon The first coming of the Saxons
into England
Vortiger sent for aid into Germany, from whence came Hingest and Horsus, with
some Saxons. When Vortiger had beat back the Picts and Scots, He gave the An.
452.
Isle of Thanet in Kent to the Captains, and their Companies to inhabit, as the
reward of their good service. Captain Hingest grew into great favor, and King
Vortiger married to him his daughter Rowan, who was a very beautiful creature.
Upon this match the Saxons did come into the Land abundantly, and carried so
high, that the British people complained to the King, fearing they might
invade the Land. But by the Queens interest the peoples complaints were
slighted, and the Saxons encouraged. Whereupon the people deposed Vortiger from
the Crown, and made King Vortiger deposed.
Vortimer their King in his fathers stead, when Vortiger had reigned 7. years,
An. 454. An. 454.


Vortimer hotly pursued the growing Vortimer the 2. King of Brit. poisoned by
his mother in law.
Saxons, who as stiffly stood it out. But he got the better of them in diverse
battles: yet in revenge, Rowan his Stepmother poisoned him, when he had reigned
6 years, An. 460. An. 460.


Vortiger the father of Vortimer once Vortiger King the second time.
again obtained the Crown, and shortly after Hingest entered the Land again,
with an Army of Saxons. Hingest finding a great preparation of the Britains
The treachery of Hingest.
against him, desired a Treaty for peace; and while they were treating, he
treacherously slew 440. Earls and Barons upon Salsbury Plain, and took the
King prisoner. In this low condition, the King was constrained to give Kent,
Sussex, The first Kingdom of the Saxons in England
Suffolk, and Norfolk, to Hingest, and there he set up his Kingdom. In this
interim of time, Aurelius Ambrosius (son to Constantine) brought over an Army
out of France to recover his right; and falling upon Vortiger, burnt him in his
Castle in Wales, when he had reigned 6. years more, An. 466. An. 466.


Aurelius Ambrose being set in the Ambrose 3 King of Brit.
Throne, hasted speedily with an Army against Occa son of Hingest at York. In
The setting up of the stones upon Salisbury Plain, about An. 467.
that battle he took Occa prisoner, and soon after set up the great stones upon
Salisbury Plain, in memory of the Britains that were buried there, who were
treacherously murdered by the Saxons, as before.

In this Kings time the Saxons grew fast. They set up the South Kingdom of
Saxons, containing Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, and Cornwall: Also Porthe set
up the East Kingdom of the Saxons, containing Norfolk and Suffolk. Not long
after, Aurelius Ambrose was poisoned, Ambrose poisoned.
when he had reigned 32. years, An 498. An. 49^.


Uter Pendragon then bare the royal Uter Pandragon the 4. Brit. King
Diadem. No Lady would please him but the Duke of Cornewall's wife; and on her
he begat Arthur Pendragon, and reigned 18. years, An. 516. An. 516.


Arthur the son of Uter succeeded his Arthur the 5. King of Brit.
father. He fought twelve battles with the Saxons: when Arthur had much subdued
these enemies at home, he committed the Government of Britain to one Mordred,
and followed the Wars beyond Sea. But in his absence Mordred confederated with
the King of the West Saxons, and set up himself King of The just end of an
Usurper.
Britain. The news of this coming to Arthur, he speedily returned to Britain
with an Army, and gave battle to Mordred in Cornewal, where Mordred was slain,
and Arthur deadly wounded: yet they brought him to Glastenbury, where he died,
when he had governed 16. years, An. 532. An. 532.


Constantine a kinsman of Arthur got Constantine 6. King of Brit.
the Crown after him; But Aurelius a Britain, raised War against him, and slew
him, when he had reigned 3. years, An. 535. An. 535.


Aurelius Conan, (Nephew to Arthur) was crowned King of Britain, about An.
545. There was now great strife for the Kingdom; and it appears that for some
time, one King was killed before another got to the Throne. At this time
Arthurs brother was next heir to the Crown; but Aurelius his Couzin got it by
great hand (having the longer While diverse did strive for the Crown, the Saxon
got the Kingdom.
Sword) and kept his Uncle a prisoner. In the time while these were striving
for the Crown, the Saxons got ground, and set up the fifth and sixth Kingdoms
of the Saxons: Aurelius reigned 33. years, An. 578. An. 578.


Vortipor succeeded his father Conan. Vortipor the 8. King of Brit.
He was a vile person; he put away his wife, and kept his daughter for his
Concubine. He reigned 4. years, An. 582. An. 582.


Malgo-Conan then had the rule. He Malgo the 9. King.
delighted in the filthy sin of Sodomy; he killed his wife, and took his
brothers daughter. In wickedness he reigned 4. years, An. 586. An. 586.


Cara next got the Crown. This King Cara the last King of Brit.
was so vile, abominable and wicked, that the people moved the Saxons, and the
King of Ireland, to make War against him: and after two years, they drove him
out of his Kingdom, An. 588. An. 588.


The Britains were now exceedingly wasted, the Christian faith before received
near worn out. The Saxons prevailing The Saxons poss^ss^d of all Eng. land.
against the Britains, drive them to the desolate Mountains in Wales, and got
the whole Dominion of this Land. In the time of the Saxons, the Inhabitants of
this Land were called Angles or Anglishmen, and now Englishmen, and the
Britains Stowe.
Welch-men. But though the Britains were driven into Wales, yet there they
elected Kings over them, and as they had strength made War upon the Saxons
until King Cadwalladar, Anno 687.

The Saxons being now masters of Angland or England, they set up their The
Saxons Heptarchy.
Heptarchy or seven several Kingdoms, and every King had his Dominion. But when
other competitors were gone, Ambition, and a varice, set them at variance,
until one Kingdom had swallowed up all the other. Alas, alas, It Is not Towns,
or Countries, or some Nations that will satisfy aspiring spirits! Time and
great experience has proved this. Possibly, it may be expected that I should
go through the Lines of these several Saxon Kings. But I find them treading in
the same steps of those that went before them; and those that follow after, are
the right sons of their Progenitors. Therefore I will enter again with
Monarchy, and pass all the rest (from the expulsion of the Britains into
Wales, and the whole Land as divided amongst the The Saxon Heptarchy lasted
284. years.
Saxons) until the Nation was again run up into one Monarchy, which was from
An. 588. to 872.

In the time of the Saxon Heptarchy the Danes made their first inroad into
Danes first entered England.
England, by Portland Island in the West; but were then repulsed, An. 800. Yet
after they came with redoubled force, and entered in Northumberlaud; against
whom Ethreldred King of the West Saxons (who had greatest strength of the Saxon
Kings) gave them battle: but the The Danes second coming to England.
King was there slain, when he had reigned 5. years; and the Danes still kept
their hold, about An. 871. An. 871.


Alfred or Alured last King of the West Saxons, began the first Monarchy Alfred
1. Monarch of England.
of the Saxons in England. He put the Saxons Laws into English; he restored and
repaired the City of London, and made it again habitable, which was wasted and
burnt by the Danes, An. 839. It is The university of Oxford founded. Stowe.
thought also that this King was the first Founder of the University of Oxford.
He reigned 29. years and 6. months, Ann. 900. An. 900.


Edward the elder succeeded his father Edward the 2. Saxon Monarch.
Alfred. He subdued the Kings of Scotland and Wales. He built diverse Towns, and
Nottingham-Bridge, and reigned 24. years, An. 924. An. 924.


Adelstain or Athelstain, son to Edward, Athelstain 3. Saxon Monarch.
took the Throne, and did much in his time. He expelled the Danes out of the
Land, and reigned 15. years, Anno 939. An. 939.


Edmund succeeded his brother Athelstain, Edmund 4. Saxon Monarch.
and was slain, when he had reigned 5. years, An. 344. An. 944.


Edmund left two sons young, and Eldred brother to Edmund took on him the
Eldred Protector made himself King.
Government as Protector: but soon after he was Crowned King, and reigned 9.
years, An. 953. An. 953.


Edwin the son of Edmund succeeded Edwin 6. Saxon King.
his Uncle Eldred; and in the day he was Crowned, he ravished his own
kinswoman, the wife of a Noble man, and put her husband afterward to death,
that he might have her: For this and some other abominable acts, his Subjects
deprived The King deposed.
him of his Royal dignity, when he had reigned 4. years, An. 957. An. 957.


After Edwin, Edgar his brother was Edgar 7. Saxon King.
set on the Throne. He was a good Commonwealths-man, and reigned 16. years, An.
973. An. 973.


Edward the second son of Edgar succeeded Edward the 8. King murdered.
his father, but was murdered, when he had reigned 3. years, Anno 976. An. 976.


Etheldred the second son of Edgar, Etheldred the 9. Saxon King.
murdered his brother, and set up himself in the Throne. But by this bloody
act, and other ill carriages, he lost the hearts of his people. This division
gave A wicked King was the ruin of the Nation.
hope again to the Danes to set up themselves in the Nation; and in a little
time they grew so great, Etheldred was content to give them yearly tribute of
1000. li. to purchase his peace to sit in the Throne. But the Danes finding
Etheldred willing to lie down to the burden, while his people had money to
pay, by degrees they enhanced the 1000. li. per. an. to 48000. li. per. an. and
when the King could not pay the tax, he secretly The Lur-Danes (or Lord Danes)
murdered.
laid a plot (to which the people oppressed readily complied) to pay the Danes
for all together. So upon the 12. day of November. 1012. the Saxons killed all
the Danes in the night. In revenge The Danes Conquered England.
of this Massacre, Swain King of Denmark invaded England, with fire and sword,
and possessed himself of this Monarchy. All the strength that Etheldred could
raise, was no ways able to repel these conquering Danes; but King Swain
tyrannized over the Saxons, and Etheldred died, when he had reigned 38. year,
An. 1014. An. 1014


Swain King of Denmark left his son Swain the first Danish King left Canutus in
Rule.
Canutus to rule in England. But Edmund (called Iron-side) a valiant man, son
to Etheldred, set up himself in the Kingdom after his father, and made War upon
Canutus the new King of the Danes. Many bloody battles were fought between the
Danes and the Saxons, and neither part prevailed: so that the Kings agreed to
end the quarrel for the Empire between them. These stout Kings fought hand to
hand for the Crown: In which Combat they manifested their skill in arms, as
well as courage, and wearied out themselves in fighting, but neither overcame;
and so they agreed to divide the Nation England divided between the Danes and
Saxons.
between them: this was accordingly done. But not long after Edmund, was
treacherously murdered by one, that thought thereby to be preferred by Canutus.
Yet Canutus (like a man of worth) hated that wicked murder of so gallant a
Prince, and for his reward caused the The just reward of a Traitor. England
reduced again to the Danes.
Murderer to be tormented to death, and cast into a Ditch: Yet here the Kingdom
of England was only reduced under Canutus, An. 1018.

Canutus having thus brought the Nation of England unto the Government of the
Danes. He put to death the next Canutus murdered the heir apparent of the
Saxons.
heir apparent of the Saxons which was in England. But the better to confirm
the Kingdom to him, he propounded a motion of a Marriage with the Widow of
Etheldred, who was fled into Normandy Canutus married the Widow of Etheldred.
with two of her sons. Emma the widow agreed to match with Canutus, upon
condition that the Kingdom of England should be confirmed unto the children
begotten of her. Shortly after she bare a son to Canutus, called Hardy
Canutus. By this Affinity, Canutus strengthened himself greatly; and subduing
the Scots, was King of England, Scotland, Denmark and Norway, and reigned 20.
years, An. 1028.

Hardy Canutus having his residence Harold 2. Danish King of England
in Denmark, Harold son to Canutus by a former wife, by assistance of the
Danes, set up himself King of England. Harold knowing by what interest he was
Kings rule by might, and not right.
brought in, and settled in the Throne, he displaced the English, and put the
Danes into places of Honor and Trust. He banished Emma, and put Alured her
youngest son by Etheldred to death, and reigned 3. years, An. 1041. An. 1041


Hardy Canutus after the death of his Hardy Canutus the 3. Dan. King and last.
brother Harold, possessed the Crown of England, and in hatred of his brothers
wickedness, caused Harolds body to be dug out of the earth, and cast in into
the Thames. But Hardy Canutus being at a marriage feast, died suddenly in the
midst of his cups, in the third year of his reign in England, An. 1043. An. 1043


Here ended the Line of the Danish Kings, and the Saxons again restored.

Edward the remaining son of King Edward the 4. the 11. Saxon King
Etheldred, was again brought into England, and crowned at Winchester. He
released the money paid to the Danes, called Danes-gift. He also collected a
body of Common Laws. He cured the The Kingsevil first healed by the King.
swelling of the Throat, since called the Kings evil. And for holiness of life,
was called Sr. Edward, and Edward the Consessor. King Edward took to wife
Edgi^ha the daughter of Earl Godwin; but died without issue, when he had
reigned 23. years, and 6. months and odd days, An. 1067. An. 1067


In the life time of Edward, he made Harold the 2. King.
Harold son to Earl Godwin Regent of England, in the nonage o^ Edgar
grandchild to Edmund Ironside, who was the heir apparent to the Crown, until
he should come to age. Unto which, Edward the Confessor took an Oath of Harold.
But when Edward was dead, Harold refused the Regentship, and crowned himself
King of England: which It is a dreadful thing, to break a solemn Oath, to get a
Crown.
shortly after brought distraction upon him, and misery to all the Nation. Yet
for all, I may not pass in silence the good nature of the man, that he had some
respect to Prince Edgar. For though he took his Kingdom, yet Harold gave him
the Earldom of Oxford, and above all, spared his life.

But the righteous God soon raised black clouds, and sad storms, to disquiet
England punish^d for Harolds perjury.
Harold with his dear purchased Crown, and the whole Nation for their wicked
compliance with a sorsworn King. Harold King of Norway came with a great Army
to fall upon England both by Sea and Land: And while Harold of England was
preparing to encounter the King of Norway, William Duke of Normandy landed a
complete Army in England, the 28. of September, An. 1067. and claimed the right
to the Crown of England, by gift from Edward the Confessor. This the Duke
pretended; and what small probability there is to assert Small pretenses will
serve to claim a Kingdom.
the truth of it, men may easily judge, by Edwards care to set up Edgar, the
next in succession of blood. Harold of England at this time had much wasted his
men in a great battle fought with Harold of Norway: But having got the better
of that enemy, he rallied his wearied Soldiers to fight William Duke of
Normandy, a new competitor for his ill got Crown. In this battle Harold was
Gods speedy and sad recompense upon Harold, for breaking Oath made before God.
slain, and the Normans got the Victory, and the Kingdom together, where there
fell with their King 66654. English Soldiers, when Harold had reigned but 3.
months, An. 1067.

Here ended the Race of Saxon Kings in England.

Normans, Kings of England.
WIlliam Duke of Normandy (called William a Bastard the 1. K. of the Norman
Race in England. Stowe.
William the, Conqueror) was a Bastard-son of Robert Duke of Normandy; who
began his reign over England, the 14. day of October 1067. or by many, 1066.
Upon these Wars, Edgar the true heir to the Crown of England, fled into
Scotland, and many English men with him, who after raised an Army, and came
into England, and besieged York, It Is ordinary to swim through blood, to a
Crown.
where William had a Garrison for himself. Edgar got the City, and possessed it.

But William came with a great Army, and d^ave Edgar back to Scotland. At
Williams first coming to the Crown, very considerable Cities in England stood
against him: so that he was established in the Throne by shedding of blood, of
much innocent blood, which God has and will yet judge some for. In the 4. year
A great Famine in England. An. 1071
of his reign was a dreadful Famine, in which people eat man's flesh. In the 8.
year he subdued Scotland, and made them do homage. In England he left no
natural Noble man to bear rule: but so impoverished the Nation by great Taxes,
England reduced to extreme misery.
that much Tillage was laid, down, and good ground laid wast many miles
together. When the Tyrant had brought the nation into extreme poverty, he
imposed upon them an Oath of allegiance, and went into Normandy; and not long
after falling to War with the King of France, he was over-heat in his fat body
by his harness upon him, and got a The King sweatted.
painful disease, and dyed the 9. of Sept. when he had reigned 20. years, 10.
months, and about 25. days, Anno 1008. An. 1088


William Rufus the 3. son of Duke William, William Rufus Norm King.
took advantage of his elder brother Roberts absence, stepped into the Royal
Throne, and began his reign from the death of his father. Most of the Nobility
stood for Robert, and raised war against William: But by pleasing words and
fair promises, he gained some of them to him, and then subdued the rest by
force. After Robert claimed his right to the Crown; and William refusing to
surrender, they fell to War, and at length agreed, that if either of them had
not issue, the Crown should descend to the survivers. In the 11. year of
Williams The family and (...) judged by God.
reign, all the Lands belonging to Earl Godwin (whose son proved a perfidious
perjured man) by the breaking in of the Sea, was utterly. overwhelmed with
water, which is added to the vast Ocean, and still bears the name of Goodwins
sands. King William was one that fulfilled the curse of God upon that kind of
Government; for it is recorded of him, that he did not only shave, but slay the
people of England. But the just had of God found The just judgment of God upon
William for his fathers and his own op pression.
him out, and at last Sir Walter Terril shooting at a Deer (in New Forest,
which his father had made a Forest by the destorying the People and Town 30.
miles together) the King being there hunting, the righteous Lord guided the
Arrow to Williams breast, of which wound he fell dead, and spoke no word. Some
of his men laid the dead body upon a Colliers Cart, drawn with one poor horse,
which came by accident; which carried him to Winchester, where he was buried
the day after: at whose burial men Tyrants dead, are basely esteemed.
could not weep for joy. He reigned 12. years, 10. months, and about 22.
days, An. 1101. An. 1101


Henry brother to Rufus, the 4. son of Henry 1. the 3. Norm. King.
William Duke of Normandy (who for his learning was called Beau-Clark) got into
the Throne after his brother William Rufus. At first he abated the taxes, and
reformed the Laws. But Robert Duke of Normandy returning from the holy Wars,
made War upon his brother Henry for the Crown of England. At this time Robert
was appeased with money; A cruel butcherly brother, to take his Crown, liberty,
and life.
but upon this quarrel was raised a second and third War. Till at last, Henry
took Robert prisoner, and Duke Robert endeavoring escape, was taken, and then
Henry caused his brothers eyes to be put The first King that bad power over the
Clergy in England.
out, and kept close prisoner to his death. King Henry in a Council or
Parliament, had power given him over the Clergy: But he took their Money, and
suffered them to do what they pleased. And unto all other his black sins, It Is
plain, he was a whore-monger: for he made Robert his Bastard-son first Earl of
Golcester. Many dreadful judgments, and great signs of Gods displeasure, were
manifested upon the Land about these times. Yet Henry ruled 35. years and 4.
months, and died the first day of December, An. 1136. An. 1136


Steven Earl of Bulloin, son to Alice Steven the 4. Norm. King.
daughter to William the Conqueror, claimed the Crown of England, and succeeded
his Uncle Henry. He was a gallant Soldier, and much favored and eased the
people. But the Nobles of England sent for Maud King Henry's daughter, who was
married to the Emperorr England has paid dear for the pride, averice and
murder of Kings.
of Rome (of the French line) and promised her to possess her in the Throne of
England. At this time also the King of Scots invaded the North parts, and woeful
desolations were made in the Land by Armies on all sides. But at last Steven
made peace, by adopting Henry, son to Maud, to succeed him in the Kingdom: so
Steven died in peace, the 25. day of October, when he had reigned 18. years,
10. months, and odd days, An. 1155. An. 1155


Henry the 2. called Henry Plantagenet, Henry the 2.
next took the Royal Scepter: And now again the Saxon line was restored.

Maude daughter to King Henry, son to William the Conqueror, was first The
Saxon line again restor^d by marriage.
married to the Emperor, and after to Geffery Plantagenet Earl of Angeou, and
Duke of Normandy, by whom he had this Henry, who married Elianor descended from
Malcolme a Saxon. It was observed of this King, that he was unsteadfast, or
unfaithful in his promises, and a wedlock breaker. He caused his son Henry to
be Crowned in his lifetime, who married the King of France's daughter. But
Henry and his brethren raised great Wars against their father, who died the A
Crown s^ts the children against their father
6. day of July, An. 1189, when he had reigned 34. years, 9. months, and 12.
days. An. 1190


Richard the 2. son to Henry the 2. Richard the 1. The Kings fraud to get money.
took the Crown of England. He sold great possessions and immunities from the
C^own; and after pretending that he had (...) his Seal, caused all that had
purchased to have their Deeds and Patents sealed again. Richard left the
Government of England with a Chancellor, and went into Normandy, and there he
agreed with the King of France to go to Jerusalem. In his absence, John John's
endeavor to get the Crown.
his brother set up himself King: But upon Richards return, John was persuaded
by his mother to lay down the Crown, and Richard was again crowned Richard
crowned the 2. time.
King of England the 12. day of March; and then he entered again upon all the
Lands he had sold, unless they would An. 1194
buy them again. How this man loved An unconscionable King, had a sad end.
Money, and let go Conscience, any may judge: But after he was shot with a
poisoned dart, of which he died the 6. day of April (or the second month) An.
1200. An. 1200
when he had reigned 9. years and 9. months.

John now succeeded his brother Richard. John.
He was divorced from his wife, and married another. Amongst other the great
evils he brought upon England, this was not the least, That he resigned England
first resigned to the Pope.
his Crown, with the Realms of England and Ireland to the Pope. The Barons fell
at difference with the King, and obtained help from France; upon which the King
sleeing up and down, ended his miserable The Kings miserable end.
life at Newark Castle (as some say by poison.) But when he was dead, his
servants divided what he had, not leaving enough to cover his dead body, and
then left him. He died the 19. of October. Ann. 1217. when he had run out 17. An.
1217
years, and 6. months, with some odd days.

Henry the eldest son of Richard, by a second wife or Concubine, was set upon
Henry the 3. by a Concubine.
the Throne at 9. years of age. Upon this the French withdrew out of the
Nation. He took to wife Elianor daughter of Raymond, Earl of Provence. In his
time The beginning of the Barons Wars
there fell great strife between the King and the Barons. At first they kept
Parliaments apart, and after their consultations raised Armies; and in a
battle, the King with his sons Edward and Richard, and many Nobles, were taken
prisoners: But Edward being set at liberty, got up an Army, and fell on afresh:
so at last the Earl of Leicester and many great ones were slain in the battle
of Evesham.

This begot bloody wars, and brought woeful desolations to poor England. And
Many dreadful judgments upon England.
to the merciless sword, the Lord brought fearful judgments of Plagues,
Famine, Earthquakes, and many other strange wonders in heaven and earth. But
Henry resigned all to death the 16. of November 1273. when he had reigned 56.
An. 1273
years and 28. days.

Edward the eldest son of Henry, succeeded his father. He married Elianor
Edward the first.
the daughter of the King of Spain, in his fathers lifetime, Ann. 1254. King
Edward The Jews banished England, Ann. 1254.
banished the Jews this Nation. In the memory of Queen Elianor, he built
stately Crosses, where the Corpse Crosses built upon the ways from Lincoln to
Westminster.
rested every night.

In his reign there was great wars with the French, Welsh, and especially with
the Scots, who often rebelled, but were as often subdued: yet in those wars the
King got a bloody Flix, of which he died the 7. of July, An. 1308. when he had
reigned An. 1308
34. years, 7. months, and odd days.

Edward the 2. succeeded his father. Edward the second.
He was said to be a dissolute Prince, hated of his Nobles, and contemned of
the Common people. He married Isabel A miserable man.
daughter to the French King. In his time also the Scots rebelled, vanquished
the Kings Army, and after besieged him in York, and burnt the Suburbs. The
Barons also raised War against the King for defending Piercy, and the Spencers
(his creatures) against justice. In which straits the King sent the Queen to
mediate with her brother the French King: She took with her, her son Edward.
But she not returning so soon as her husband appointed her, and with all
discovering some compliance with some Nobles, sled out of England to France,
the King proclaimed them all to be banished. But the Queen, her son Edmund
Woodstock: all of Kent, (the Kings brother) with many Nobles, came into
England, and joined with the Barons and City of London, by which they raised a
great Army, took diverse strong Holds, and at last the King and his creatures.

The King was committed prisoner to The King for protecting evil m^n against
justice, was himself deposed, and they executed.
the Earl of Lancaster; but the creatures were hanged, headed and quartered.
The Queen, her son, and Barons, came presently to London, and the next day
called a Parliament, where the King was deposed, when he had reigned 19. years,
6. months, and some days, An. 1328. An. 1328


Edward the eldest son of Edward the Edward the third.
2. was set up in his fathers stead at 14. years of age. It is said, His father
was soon after murdered in Corfe-Castle. King Edw. murdered in prison by the
Queen. A marriage with Scotland.
But the young King was much ordered by his mother. A peace was made with the
Scots, and Davi^^ Scotland married Joan, King Edwards ^^ster. But to keep all
quiet at home, the old Queen, who contrived the death of King Edward her
husband, also plotted the death of his brother the (...) of Kent, and caused
him to be beheaded at Winchester, the Earl of Kent murdered.
3. year of King Edward the 3 's reign. In the 6. year of Edward, the Scots
rebelled, and possessed Barwick. The King laid siege before them, and the Scots
endeavored A great Victory over the Scots.
with their Forces to raise the siege; But were overcome in battle, An. 1335
where were shin of the Scots 8. Earls, with 1300 horse, and 35000. footmen.
Upon this, Barwick was delivered: the King placed Edward Baliol Governor, who
was after King of Scotland. About the 11. year of this King, War arose with
France: King Edward ^^ised a Navy of about King Edw. the 3. took the title of
King of France.
200. sail of Ships, and went to Flanders, where in a Sea-sight he overcame the
French and Normans, and styled himself King of England and France. Thi^ King
took Calice, and made great inroads, and wo^^ desolations in France; and the
(...) i^ the Scots upon The Scots did great hurt in England.
England. They burnt Calice, Penneth, and came killing and burning down to
Durham: But after King Edward made peace both with the French and Scots upon
honorable terms. After this the King of Spain was driven out of his Kingdom by
his Bastard brother, and Edward Prince or Wales went to the King Edw. relieved
the K. of Spain.
Kings relief with a great Army, and in a battle put the Bastard to flight.
King Edward reigned 50. years and 4. months, who departed this life the 21. of
June, An. 1378. An. 1378


Richard the son of Prince Edward, Richard the 2. the 8. and last King of
Plantagenets race.
(his father being dead) succeeded his Grandfather Edward the 3. He came to
the Crown at 11. years of age: As he was young, he hearkened to young
Counselors, and neglected his old and wise Council, which brought sad
troubles to The woe of young Counsel.
the Nation, and woeful misery to himself. In the first year of his reign, the
French made great inroads, and wasted many Towns in England: and at this time
Guns were invented. The King Guns first invented.
in these straits, laid a great Tax upon the Nation: Upon which, some Countries
rose in Arms, went to London, and did great hurt, but were after appeased by
the King through fair promises. This Richard married Anne daughter to the King
of Bohemia, who brought hither the use of women riding side-ways on horseback.
Some Earls and Barons seeing Oppression often the ground of civil war.
the King missed, and the Nation misgoverned by a few persons, they considered
how it might be reformed, and thereupon raised an Army of 40000. and came to
London to the King: upon this the King called a Parliament suddenly, in The
Lord chief Justice Tresilian, put to death for betraying the Law of England
which Parliament Sir Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, and diverse
others, were convicted of Treason, and put to death, An. 1388.

Richard sent to the City of London, Ann. 1392. to borrow of them 1000. li. An.
1388.
but they refusing, he called the Mayor, The Kings revenge upon London for
refusing to lend him 1000.
Sheriffs, and Aldermen of London to a Council at Nottingham; and there
appearing, the King Arrested and imprisoned them, and nulled all their
liberties. Queen Anne dying, the King took Isabel the King of France's daughter
to wife, and so made peace there. The King now grew high again, and put to
cruel death The Kings revenge upon the Barons.
the Earl of Arundel, and diverse others, for dealing with him about his ill
Government. This King shed much blood of the Nobility, and Bishops, besides
others (which lay in the bosoms of many, and not forgot) though he carried it
with a high hand. But the King going into Ireland, Henry Duke of Hereford and
Lancaster, with others, who were out of the Land, came into Yorkshire, to whom
went the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Westmerland, and many Lords: and
gathering up an Army they laid siege to Bristol, where they took the Lord
Treasurer, and some others, and beheaded them. The King hearing of this, hasted
out of Ireland, and landed in Wales; and more fully understanding the Dukes
strength, took to the Castle of Conway, and desired a Treaty. The Duke of
Lancaster met the King: but the issue was, the King was sent to the Tower to be
tried by Parliament, where he was deposed and murdered; or (as some write) The
just desert of a Tyrant.
the King resigned the Kingdom to Henry Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, much
confessing his mis-government, when he had ruled 22. years, 3. months and some
days, An. 1400. An. 1400


Henry the 4. son of John of Gaunt Henry the fourth 1. King of the Line of
Lancaster.
Duke of Lancaster, was now elected and crowned King of England. He was
descended of Edward the 3. though not next in succession of blood: and here
comes in the Line of Lancaster.

King Richard quickly deposed, was sent to Pomfret Castle, and (as some write)
there quickly murdered King Richard King Richard murdered.
had yet a great party of Nobility, and others that still appeared for him,
when he was deposed; and many conspiracies there were against Henry, to have
killed or poisoned him. Indeed King Henry cut them off apace; but it is
probable, these were the death of Richard. Henry put men to death for words.
About this time the Welsh on one part, and the Scots in the North, did wast
greatly. In the 3. year of Henry, Henry Percie son to the Earl of
Northumberland, The Crown of England, has cost England dear.
Thomas Percie Earl of Worcester, with a great part of the Barons and Commons,
fought a great battle against King Henry. In this battle at Shrewsbury many
fell on both parts; but there Sir Thomas Percie was taken prisoner, and after
beheaded. It was a sad time with England, by frequent Mutinies amongst them,
and great judgments of Plague and Earthquakes upon them. And when Henry had
sat upon the royal Throne 13. years, 6. months and odd days, he died the 20.
of March, An. 1414. An. 1414


Henry the 5. now bare the Crown. Yet Henry the 5.
the Earl of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Gray, with others, conspired his death: but
being discovered, he took off their heads.

The King prepared a great Army, and with a Fleet of 1000. sail of Ships, he
past A Fleet of 1000 Ships.
to Normandy, and got great Victories. After this, Henry was made Regent of
France, and then married Katherine the Kings daughter. Katherine bare Henry the
Kings son, but Henry died himself in France, the last day of August, Anno 1423.
when he had reigned 9. years, 5. months and odd days. An. 1432


Henry, son to Henry the 5. succeeded Henry the 6.
his father, and was crowned at 8. months old. In his Infancy, the Government
of the Nation was committed to the Duke of Gloucester, the guard of his person
to the Duke of Excester, and the guidance of France to the Duke of Bedford. In
this year Charles King of France died, and the Kingdom descended to Henry the
6. and so the most of the Nobility delivered the possession thereof to the Duke
of Bedford for the Kings use. After, in An. 1432. Henry was crowned Hen the 6.
crowned K. of France in Paris.
King of France in Paris, and so returned to England: Yet to make all sure, he
took to wife Margret the Kings daughter of Cicily, An. 1445.

But this glorious rising Sun soon declined. After the death of the Duke of
Bedford in France, France fell off, and the Old Court-Policy.
Dukedom of Normanday lost. And here at home the Duke of Gloucester, by order of
Parliament, was Arrest; upon which in sorrow he soon died. Also the Duke of
Suffolk was banished; but as he was passing the Sea, a Ship of war met him, and
there they beheaded him, and cast his body into the Sea. These things brought
discontents and mutinies: at which time came up to London the Commons of Kent,
who made fearful slaughters by fire and sword. After this, the Duke of York
began commotions, and the Barons were divided. The King, the Duke of
Buckingham, the Duke of Somerset, the Earls of Pembrook, Northumberland,
Devonshire, Stafford, Dorset, and Wiltshire, The battle at St. Albanes between
the King and Duke of York.
with many Barons, marched to St. Albans; and in the Town of St. Albanes, in
Peter's street, was a fierce and cruel battle fought, where on the Kings side
were slain the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Clifford, and many others, and the
King taken: whom the Duke of York, Printing was brought into England.
the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury brought to London, and in a Parliament the
Duke of York was made Protector, the Earl of Salisbury Chancellor, and the
Earl of Warwick Captain of Calice. But by the Queens interest, the Duke of
York was dismissed the Protectorship. These evil sparks for a time were
concealed, and a feigned agreement seemed to be amongst them. But about a year
The battle at Northampton between the K. and Duke of York.
after, the Duke of York and his party appeared again, with a puissant Army in
the field, and gave the King battle at Northampton, where his Army was routed,
and the King taken prisoner in the field. The Duke of York now claimed the
Crown, and by Parliament he was proclaimed heir apparent. But the Queen
gathered up a company of Northern men, who near Wakefield in a sharp fight
killed the Duke of York and his son Edmund. Also the Queen routed the Earl of
Warwick, and the Duke of Norfolk near St. Albanes, and delivered King Henry her
husband. The Earl of Warwick A battle between the Barons in Wales.
fled into Wales to the Earl of March, who had in a battle put to flight the
Earl of Pembrook and Wiltshire; and with the Earl of Warwick went most of the
South Country people. Upon these Earls joining, they marched toward London;
and the King having intelligence of it, drew away toward the North, and went
to York. But the Earls marched on to London, where they were joyfully
entertained; and the 4. day of March, Edward Earl of March was proclaimed King
of England. And thus Henry the 6. lost the Crown, when he had reigned 38.
years, 6. months and odd days, An. 1462. An. 1462


Edward Earl of March (called Edward Edw the 4. first K. of the line of York
the 4.) was son to Richard Duke of York, descending from the fourth son of
Edward the 3. and so brought in the house of York to the Crown. When Edward had
adorned his Temples with the Crown, he now endeavored to keep it on his head,
and presently drew his Army toward King Henry at York. Near Todcaster a bloody
battle was The bloody battle of Todcaster.
fought, where many Nobles fell, and in all were slain 35711. persons. But
Edward had the field. Upon this fearful rout, the Duke of Exceter, the Duke of
Somerset, with many others, fled to the King at York; and then King Henry, his
Queen, and their party left York, and fled to Scotland.

Yet after this, King Henry came into In the battle of Hexam King Henry was the
fourth time overcame.
England to venture the hazard of another fight, and was again routed at the
battle of Hexam, where many Nobles were slain, but King Henry escaped with
life: yet he and some others lived in Woods and Caves unknown about a year. Now
King Edward was quiet, he took to wife the Widow to Sir John Gray. In the 5.
year of Edward, King Henry was taken near York, and carried prisoner to the
Tower of London. But now the Duke of Clarence raised an Army in the North
against King Edward his brother, and to him fell in the Earl of Warwick; which
brought great trouble to the Nation. King Edward hearing this, left his Army at
Nottingham, and fled into Flanders. The Duke of Clarence followed the King to
London, where King Henry the 6 the 2. time crowned King of England.
they set King Henry again at liberty after 9. years imprisonment, and newly
elected and crowned him King. But soon after, King Edward returned again to
England, with some Soldiers; and then the Duke of Clarence his brother turned
to him, and so greatly increased the Kings strength, that he came to London,
and took King Henry prisoner, and then followed the Earl of Warwick, whom he
also overcame and slew, with his brother the Marquess of Mountacute. When
Warwick was down, the King pursued Queen Margaret wife to King Henry; and
getting the Victory in a battle at The battle of Tewksbury.
Tewksbury, he took the Queen prisoner, with Prince Edward her son: And soon
after, King Henry was murdered in the Tower. And after him the Duke of Clarence
Murder upon murder.
was murdered in the Tower: a sad, but just reward of a turn-coat. To all other
the blood and Tyranny mentioned of this Usurper, sad is the story recorded of
Mr. Burdet of Arrow. The King hunting in his Park with others, killed one white
Deer, of which he set some esteem; and for Mr. Burdets saying, I would the
Horns of the Buck was in the belly of him that showed him the King, the said
Mr. Burdet was accused, and condemned, and executed for a Traitor, Deep
severity.
and so lost both life and estate. Indeed his words (being a curse) were
sinful; But yet a small offense to the King, to have so sharp a censure: But
not long after, the Lord shot the Dart of death at him, summoning of him to
appear before Divine Justice, the 9. of April, An. 1484. An. 1484
when he had reigned 22. years, 1 month and odd days.

Edward the 5. about the age of 13. years, was to succeed his father Edward the
4. But about 3. months after his fathers death, his Uncle Richard Duke of
Gloucester, caused him to be secretly murdered. Edw. the 5. murdered.
and conveyed away, that it was not known where he was buried; and so set up
himself, An. 1484. Richard the 3. Richard the 3.
brother to Edward the 4. to get the Crown, murdered Prince Edward, and Richard
Duke of York, his brothers sons, This Tyrant ^^^^ered by (...), and ^^^^ded in
blood.
in the Tower, with George Duke of Clarence his own brother; also Henry Duke of
Buckingham, Hastings, Rivers, Va^ghan, Gray, and very many others, and his own
wife Anne, that so he might make way to marry his Cousen Elizabeth. Yet this
wicked Tyrant raged but a short time. For Henry Earl of Richmond the heir
apparent, came out of France, with the Earl of Pembrook his Uncle, the Earl of
Oxford, and many others, to whom some of the Nobility joined in England, who
gave battle to Richard, the 22. of August, near Bosworth, where Richard was
slain, when he had born his usurped Crown 2. years, and 2. months, Ann. 1486.
An. 1486


Henry the 7. who was heir to the house of Lancaster, when he came to Henry the
7. united the houses of Lancaster and York.
the Crown, married Elizabeth the daughter of Edward the 4. (whom Richard
intended to have taken) and so united the houses of Lancaster and York. Henry
had also a strain of the British Race, and of the French blood. In this Kings
time were great Tumults and Taxes; and Taxes brought Tumults, and the shedding
of much blood. And when Taxes were not England was yet a free people.
willingly paid, the King craved or begged benevolence, or something of their
own good will. Diverse rebellions there were, some from without, and some within
the Nation; and it is noted that Lambert was a chief rebel in these times. The
Scots also made inroads into the North parts: But to quiet them, the King gave
his eldest daughter in Marriage A marriage with Scotland to make peace.
to the King of Scots. When Henry had reigned 23. years, and 8. months, he
died, An. 1510. An. 1510


Henry the 8. succeeded his father Henry the 8.
Henry the 7. He enjoyed the Crown in much quiet by union of the Families, for
which there had been fought 17. pitched battles, in which were slain 8. Kings,
40. Kingly Soverainly has spilt abundance of blood in England. King Henry
first wife.
Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, besides Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, and about
200000. common people. This King married his brother Arthur's widow, which
Arthur died before his father. And so Henry began: he was for Religion a Roman
Catholic, and in his zeal writ against Luther, for which great Defender of the
Faith, a title given by the Pope to the Kings of England King Henry the 8. cast
off the Popes Supremacy, and took the Government of State and Church.
act his father the Pope gave him the Title of Defender of the Faith, which the
Kings and Queens held to the last: Yet when Henry the 8. grew great, he cast
off the Popes Supremacy over England, and judged himself fit enough to be head
in Church and State. The King going to War in France, James King of Scots came
with a great Army into England, but in a bloody battle was repulsed. About this
time Mary the Kings sister was contracted to Lewis the 12. King of France, but
was before promised to the King of Castile. Yet after, Charles Duke of Suffolk
wedded the Lady, Anno 1516. About Ann. 1533. King Henry put off Katherine, and
married Anne Bullin King Henry's 2. wife.
, and she was proclaimed Queen. Upon this divorce many were discontented, but
the King sent out an Oath to be taken by all people, especially to the Priests,
to swear fidelity to the King, Queen Anne, and their heirs. But the High
Tyranny, to inslave men's Consciences to a wicked man's lusts.
Lord Chancellor, some Bishops, and many others, for refusing this ungodly
oath, were committed to the Tower, and other prisons. But to the rest of this
Kings sins, when he had cast off the Popes Supremacy, he became Pope of
England, Horrid Blasphemy, to usurp the diginity of Christ. Tenths and first
fruits taken by the King.
and was made head of the Church of England, having full authority over the
same: And withal, took the first fruits and tenths, An. 1535. In the next year,
the 2. of May, Queen Anne was committed to the Tower, and there beheaded. Also
the Queens brother, with 18. of the Kings Privy Chamber were put to death the
17. of May; and the 20. of May, the King married Lady Jane Seymor. King Henry's
3. wife.
The 12, of October 1537. Queen Jane brought forth Prince Edward, and Prince
Edward born.
lost her life the 14. day. The 3. of January 1539. the King married Anne of
Cleve. Thomas Cromwell Secretary to King Hen. 4. wife.
the King was a rising Favorite, and promoted to places of trust and honor
above any in his time, beginning about An. 1536. and An. 1540. he was beheaded
Great changes.
at Tower Hill, and the new Queen Anne of Cleve divorced. The King had another
wife in good readiness, if not already married: for the 8. of August following,
the Lady Katherine Howard appeared openly as Queen. But King Hen. 5. wife.
he made as speedy dispatch with her; for the 13. of February following, she
was beheaded in the Tower: yet after the Queen Katherine beheaded.
King had cut off that Katherine, the 12. of july following, the King married
the Lady Katherine Parr, late wife to the Lord Latimer, 1543. and the 35. year
King Hen. 6. wife.
of the Kings reign. All this Kings time were mutinies, heading, hanging, and
abundance A sad time of blood in England.
of bloodshed continually, of all sorts, Nobles, Bishops, Priests, and people:
He cut down all that stood in his way, who answered not his desires. Thus this
King spent 37. years, 9. months and odd days, An. 1548. An. 1548


Edward the 6. succeeded his father Edw. the 6.
Henry the 8. and was crowned at 9. years of age. In the 2. year of his reign,
he did so much toward reformation, that the Church Service was turned into
English. In the Kings Minority, the The first reformation from gross Popery in
England.
Duke of Somerset was made Lieutenant Protector, but not long after was
committed to the Tower, and after was beheaded at Tower Hill. King Edward about
16. years of age fell sick, and died, The Protector beheaded.
when he had reigned 6. years, 5. months and odd days, An. 1554. An. 1554


After the death of Edward, Lady Jane, Lady Jane Clifford was proclaimed Queen.
Queen. Mary.
wife to the Lord Clifford, fourth son to the Duke of Northumberland, was
proclaimed Queen, as given to her by Edward the 6. But Lady Mary, eldest
daughter to King Henry, had the grater party, and so came to the Crown. She
soon restored the Pope, Cardinal, etc. to his former Supremacy over England,
The Hierarchy of Rome restored in England.
and dashed the reformation begun, and appointed the Church Service again in
Latin. To make sure, Queen Mary beheaded the Lady Jano Clifford, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Lord Clifford and others, Lady Jane beheaded. D. of Suffolk, etc.
to take them off from laying claim to the Crown. Yet she did not sit quiet in
the Throne. But to complete her sin, she drunk deep of the blood of the A
bloody persecution.
Saints, and sent many multitudes to heaven in fiery chariots. The Queen
married Philip Prince of Spain: Yet the Lord shut up her womb, that she had no
child; and cut her off, when she had raged over the Saints in this Nation 5.
years, 4. months and odd days, Anno 1559. An. 1559


Elizabeth sister to Queen Mary, now Queen Elizabeth. Elizabeth restored the
Reformation of Edw. the 6.
came to the Crown: she again rejected the Pope; and did something toward
Reformation of Religion. She had great honor in the hearts of the people, and
was a terror to forain Nations, and reigned 45. years, An. 1604. An. 1604.


After Queen Elizabeth, James King James King of Scotland
of Scots, descended from Margaret daughter to Henry the 7. came to the Crown
of England. He was a man of much learning, and writ diverse Books. But his
practice answered not his light and professions. How he passed over the death
of his son Prince Henry, was observed by many; and how the Lord reached him at
last, many have said more then I will write. King James sawyed the Scepter of
England, Scotland, and Ireland 22. years, 3. days, An. 1626. An. 1626


Charles succeeded his father James. Charles 2. King of the Scottish race.
Contrary to the counsel once given by King James to Heary his son, Charles did
marry with Henerietta Maria of France a Papist, and gave her the liberty of her
Religion by Articles A wosul wedding to England.
of Marriage. By her interest, Popery was advanced through corrupt Bishops, and
the true worship of God was little known in England: what the life of Charles
was, is yet fresh in the memory of most alive at this day. He set all the three
Nations on a fire, that yet is not quenched, nor is like to be. In England,
Ireland, and Scotland, the sword has spilt the blood of many thousands; and as
he was worthy, the Lord gave him blood to drink, who was beheaded at White Hall
West minster, January 30. An. King Char-beheaded.
1649. An. 1649
when he had born the Crown 24, years, 10. months and 7. days.

Thus, as in a Map, I have represented some remarkable passages in the rise and
succession of Kings, from Saul to our present Age. If this little be laid up in
the minds of men, by this taste you may judge much of all their Lives, and
Reigns that is veiled under the Curtain. To my best skill, I have only run down
sacred and profane History, and have taken the relations of others, and
written their Stories. But if so much wickedness came to light, what was done
in the dark, that is open to the all-seeing eye of Heaven? Surely a woeful sad
burden have this sort of men (I may well say, Monsters) been to all People and
Nations wherever they were. And that the Dragon, the Beast, and all their
limbs, shall be utterly destroyed by Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, I
question not: I am persuaded the work is now upon the wheel; and as Jesus
Christ is embraced, here will appear more and more, Note.
to clear up to the Saints another way of governing his people, then yet we
see. There is nothing hinders, but our unworthiness. But if I may discover what
I see yet afar off, I conceive the Governors called and set up by Jesus
Christ, shall be like Jesus Christ himself, humble, self-denying Saints, such
as shall set up a public, and not a self-interest. Such as shall ease burdens,
and not oppress. Such as shall deliver the poor, and not seed upon them. Such
as shall guide the people by the rule of Gods sacred word, and not make lust
and self-will their law, and force it by a long Sword. For certain, if the Lord
did not leave A caution for Kings.
wisemen to themselves, they could not but easily read their own ruin by
multiplied examples in all times: God is the same yesterday, to day and for
ever: And in the same way that God did manifest his righteousness and justice
under the sacred Scriptures, the same has been the Lords providence and
dispensations in the world, ever since the Scriptures were written; and as the
Apostle expresses it, These things were written for our 1 Cor. 10, 11.
examples, upon whom the ends of the world are come. I may say, sin was the
rise of Monarchy, sin has been the strength of Monarchy: and Monarchy has
been the punishment of sin, ever since it was. Therefore when the sin of Kings
grew high, the Lord stirred up some to punish and pull down these Kings, by the
shedding of much blood, and exhausting of treasure. But when such had got into
the Kings State, they did the same that the King did before them; and when
their sin again was full, the Lord raised up others to destroy them and their
Families. And this is the track of times. But when Isa. 2. 2, 3, etc.
Jesus Christ is truly received, there shall be an end of this proud,
oppressing sort of Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 26, 27.
men; the Saints shall rule, and then judgment and righteousness shall run
down Isa. 32. 1. Act. 17. 31.
like mighty streams. Now for the accomplishment of these blessed promises,
wait and pray, till Christ say, It Is done.

AN EPITOMY OF PAPACY.
THat there was a Gospel Church in the City of Rome Rom 1. ^
in the times of the Apostles, is clear by Divine authority: And that this
Church of Christ had ordinary Church Officers, Bishops, and Deacons, I think
there is no question. But the better to discover the Roman Antichrist, two
things have been in debate amongst the godly.

1 Whether the first Bishops of the Churches of Christ, had, and did exercise
(by power given from Jesus Christ) a Lordly and Sovereign Jurisdiction over the
Saints in their particular Churches?

2 Whether the power of one Bishop or Pastor, by the institution of Jesus
Christ, did extend to diverse Churches? The judgments of many learned men are
published to the World, upon these needful questions; yet I desire to assert my
thoughts in this place.

First, That ordinary Church Officers The power of Bishops or Pastors.
ought not, nay may not, put out a Lordly Sovereign power over the Church, or
Brethren, is plain to all that will read it, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.

Secondly, That ordinary Church Officers, have not any power or charge given
them over diverse Churches, is plain from Scripture and Reason. When Paul
called the Bishops together, and spoke to them all present, yet he presses
every one to take care of his own particular Flock, Acts 20. 28. If any through
prejudice should seek other glosses to put upon this text, to hold their own
opinions, they let go natural reason, and deal worse with Christian souls,
than they are willing to do by their flocks of Sheep. Certainly a Shepherd
that takes charge of diverse flocks in several places, is very Note.
like to Rot them all. But my business is to gather an Epitomy of the Papacy,
that the rise and growth of this proud scarlet. Whore (who rides the Roman
Empire) may be yet more perfectly discovered, and that the Antichrist of Rome
may appear to be the very Whore of Babylon, shadowed out in Types and Figures
unto John in his Revelations.

The Gospel was no sooner preached by the Apostles, but Satan had some
ministers ready to pervert the truth of it, and turn away Disciples. The
Apostle Paul not only describes, but discovered the working of Antichrist in
his time; Paul said then, the Mystery of iniquity does already work, 2 These. 2.
7. that is, in that very age, pride, end usurpation of false teachers,
corruption of Doctrine and Discipline, grew fast on, and many were drawn off
from the simplicity of the Gospel, to Idolatrous and Superstitious practices,
through ignorance and blind devotion.

It cannot be denied, but that the first Bishops of the Church of Christ in
Rome, were many of them sound in the faith, and sealed the truth of the Gospel
with their blood in Martyrdom, yet in those times Heresies, and Sects in
Religion grew fast, and after more and more. I shall pass in silence all the
first Bishops, and begin with Elutherius the twelfth Bishop of Rome.

Elutherius was chosen Bishop of the Church at Rome, in the fifteenth year
Elutherius the 12 Bishop of Rome, and dyed, Anno 191. Eusebius.
of Antonius Verus the Emperor, Anno 178. and governed that Church thirteen
years; until this time the same Doctrine, and Order in the Church which was
left by the Apostles, was observed in the Church of Rome. In his England
received the Christian Faith.
time England received the Christian Faith, and when Lucius the British King
sent to Rome (as a famous Christian Church) and desired Elutherius to send them
the Roman Laws, the good Bishop (not dreaming then of a Supremacy) modestly
refused it, and referring of the Christians to the Books of the Old and New
Testament, to gather out Laws from thence, urged this reason; The Roman Laws,
and the Emperors Laws we may ever reprove, but the Law of God we may not --
out of them take ye a Law, and by that Law rule your Realm of Britain. At this
time there was a Sect followed Marcus, who denied the real suffering of Christ,
and that there was no resurrection of the Flesh, and therefore lived in
Adultery.

Victor succeeded Elutherius; In his Victor the 13 Bishop. The difference about
Easter. Eusebius. Murnie.
time there fell a great difference between the Eastern and Western Churches
about the time of Easter, or the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Some observed it
upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, after the Jewish Passover, some upon the
Sunday following. Upon this contention many Synods of Bishops were called in
all parts; and so Victor called a Synod at Rome, where he himself sat
President. In this Synod at Rome, Victor took upon him to Antichrist appears.
Excommunicate the Churches in Asia, because they conformed not to the practice
of the Western Churches; But this insolent attempt of Victor was stoutly
opposed, and Victor overcome. Soon after this Victor dyed, when he Anno 203
had governed twelve years, anno 203.

At this time sprung the Heresy of Eusebius.
Artemon, the Disciple of Theodotus a Tanner, who denied the Divinity of Christ.

Zephyrinus was the next Bishop of Zepherinus the 14 Bishop. Anno 221. Eusebius.
Rome, and governed eighteen years, Anno 221. In his time was Neotus, who
denied the Trinity of the Deity: He called himself Moses. There were also the
Sect, Melchisedechiani, who held Melchisedech to be greater than Christ. Some
taught also, that the Soul dyed with the Body, yet rose again at the general
resurrection.

Calistus now took the Chair, and continued five years, and dyed, Anno Calistus
the 15 Bishop. Anno 226
226.

Urbanus followed Calistus, and governed eight years, Anno 234. Urban the 16.
Anno 234


Pontanus succeeded Urban, and continued six years, Anno 240. Pontanus the 17.
Anno 240


Anterus came next to the place. It is Historied, that when the Church was met
upon the death of Pontanus, for a Anterus the 18. Bish Eusebius. A lying Wonder.
new Election, a Dove settled upon the head of Anterus, and so the multitude
cried out, Anterus is worthy of the Bishopric. I repeat this as a Popish
relation, yet possibly this might be one of Antichrists Miracles to deceive,
which after were more frequent: But however Anterus entered. he held his honor
but one Month, and gave way to Fabian.

Fabian was Bishop of Rome, and dyed Fabian the 19 Bish. Anno 254
a Martyr in the seventh Persecution, raised by the Emperor Decius, Anno 254.

Cornelius followed Fabian, and ruled Cornelius the 20. 257.
three years, Anno 257.

Lucius followed Cornelius, and kept the Sea not full eight months. About
Lucius, the 21 Bish. Eusebius.
this time was Novatus, who called the Sect following him Puritans. He refused
to receive into their Fellowship again those that fell, though they showed
their repentance. He also denied second Marriages.

Stephen was chosen next Bishop of Rome, and ruled two years, Anno 260. Stephen
the 22 Bish. Anno 260 Eusebius.
In his time it was much controverted, whether Heretics converted, or persons
baptized by Heretics, should be again baptized.

Also in Stephens Government, some Bishops deposed in Spain and Africa, fled to
Rome, and sought to be restored by the authority of Stephen. It seems Stephen
was willing to close with Mystery of iniquity. The beginning of Romes Supremacy.
such an opportunity, or else in a brotherly way; the Bishop of Rome writ to
the Bishops of Spain and Africa, to receive again those Bishops deposed, and
the Bishops of Rome made other use of it in after times. But whether Stephen
writ to command, or desire, yet the Bishops to whom Stephen did write, returned
answer, That the offenders running to Rome, could not have those just Censures
past upon them, reversed, etc.

Xystus came next in place, and governed Xystus the 23 Bishop. Anno 271 Eusebius.
eleven years, Anno 271.

About this time the Heresy of Novatus was revived, and some Bishops corrupted
with it.

Dionysius governed nine years, and died, Anno 280.

In this time were the Sect Origeniani: These denied Marriage, yet lived worse
than Beasts, using vile ways to keep Women from conceiving with child.

Faelix had the next turn, and ruled Faelix the 25. Anno 285 Eutychianus the 26
Bish.
five years, Anno 285.

Eutychianus followed Faelix, yet governed but ten Months.

Caius then had the rule of the Roman Church, and continued fifteen Caius the
27 Bishop. Anno 300 Eusebius.
years, Anno 300.

At this time the Heresy of the Origeniani was broached afresh by Adamantius a
Priest in Alexandria, and much increased. These held there was no Resurrection;
that Christ and the Holy Ghost were only Creatures; that the Souls of men were
first in Heaven, and came down into bodies, etc.

Marcelinus followed Caius, who in Marcellus the 28 Bishop.
the Persecution under Dioclesian, denied Christ to save himself; but soon
after he sorely repented his great sin, and under the same Emperor dyed a
Martyr for Christ. Historians agree Sleidon, Anno 305
not about the time of this Bishops Government, but it is said to be five
years, Anno 305.

Though this was a sad time of persecution, yet then sprang the Heretic Manes,
of whom came the Maniches. This Heretic Manes called himself Socrates.
Christ, and chose twelve Disciples.

Eusebius followed Marcellus, and governed one year and seven months, Anno 307
Anno 307.

Miltiades next had the Ecclesiastical Chair; he was Bishop of Rome Miltiades
the 30 Bish.
when Constantine the Great was Emperor, as appears by a Letter written from
Constantine unto Miltiades, about the beginning of Constantines reign; until
this time the Bishops of Rome were poor and low in the world: But as
Constantine affected Religion, Eusebius.
and greatly tendered the growth of it, so he gave revenues unto Christian
Churches, and especially to that of Rome. I find no Chronologers setting down
the time of Miltiades Government, but by computation, I judge he continued six
years, and dyed in the fourth year of Constantines reign, Anno 313. Anno 313


Sylvester succeeded Miltiades, in Sylvester the 31 Bishop.
the Church of Rome, in the time of Constantine the Great.

In the time of Sylvester, Arias, or Arrias, born in Lybia, a Priest in
Alexandria, made great opposition against the Bishop of Alexandria, and
bestirred himself to get Disciples; his Heresy he held was, That the Son of
God had a beginning of Essence, etc. This grew, and spread much, and brought
great trouble to the Churches; whereupon Constantine summoned a The first
Council of Nice. Eusebius. Sleidan. Socrates.
general Council at Nice: some say, Anno 325. some say, 326. some 328, etc. But
in that Synod there was gathered together the chief Ministers of God, of all
the Churches of Europe, Africa, and Asia, also Syrians, Cilicians, etc. there
were present also many of the Laity. In this Council Arrias was condemned, and
the Creed ratified. Sylvester continued his government twenty years, and dyed,
anno 333. Anno 333


Mark was Bishop of Rome after Sylvester Mark the 32.
eight months.

Julius followed Mark, and Governed Julius the 23 Bish. Anno 348
fifteen years, Anno 348. Heresies did now spread much, especially the Arian
Heresy; whereupon the Sons of Constantine, by consent, called the general
Council of Sardis. This Council was summoned in the eleventh year after the
death of Constantine, and from the going forth of the Proclamation to the
meeting of the Synod, The general Council of Sardis. Anno 350 Sleidan. Socrates.
was one year and six months. There met three hundred Bishops and Brethren of
the West, and but seventy six of the East. The occasion of this Council was in
behalf of Paulus, Bishop of Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria. These were deprived of their bishoprics by the Arrians, and
because these two Bishops were admitted to sit in the Council, many of the
Eastern Bishops rose and departed the Synod; yet in that Council the Nicen
Creed was confirmed, Paulus and Athanasius restored, and their accusers deposed.

It is said, Julius Bishop of Rome writing to the Eastern Bishops, blamed
Mystery of Iniquity.
them for depriving Paulus and Athanasius, in assuming that power to The first
open appearing of Antichrist.
them that was committed to the Bishop of Rome by Divine command. This was like
Antichrist himself, and the Popish Proctors have made great use of this, to
plead it for a sufficient proof of the Popes Supremacy. But Socrates. Council
of Antioch. Anno 336
this attempt of Julius was condemned in the Council of Antioch, about Anno 336.

About this time also Monastical life began, and many idle Fopperies, Marriage
was forbid, strange Garments brought up, the eating of Flesh forbid, and many
persuaded to leave their Sleidan.
Possessions.

Liberius was chosen next Bishop of Liberius, the 34. Anno 366
Rome. Some Historians say well of him, some say ill, but it appears he
continued seventeen years, Anno 366.

By this time Supremacy had got some footing, in this manner, as the The
original of Episcopal Jurisdiction.
Christian Churches multiplied, Sects and Seditions grew fast, and to prevent
these, the Churches near Rome, and other eminent Cities, were made Provinces,
and consociated for Order and Government; upon this account the Bishop of Rome
(with others) became Metropolitan, and chief Bishop in the Province, and called
Synods. After in a Council at Antioch it was Sleidan.
ordered, That if in matters of importance the Bishops accord not, that then
the Metropolitan should call some Bishops of the next Province to judge, and
give definitive sentence.

Damasus followed Liberius, but got Damasus the 35 Bishop.
the Chair with great difficulty; the Sea of Rome was now greatly increased in
wealth and pomp, and so became a Bait to ambitious spirits, and the dignity
hardly obtained. In the vacancy of the Sea, Ursinus a Deacon of the Church made
a strong Party against Damasus, Strife about election of the Bishop. Mystery of
Iniquity.
and the Faction was so great at the Election, that the House of Prayer floated
with blood, where there were left one hundred thirty seven dead bodies.

The pride and Usurpation of the Roman Bishops does plainly appear, by The
Bishops began to usurp power in Civil affairs.
the several Laws made by the Emperors to restrain them; it is very manifest
by the Epistles of Damasus, that he claimed a Supremacy in the Sea of Rome, in
Ecclesiastical affairs: but it seems the Bishops were ambitious also of the
Civil Sword, yet by the Emperors they were forbid to hear and determine The
Mystery of Iniquity.
offenses between Person and Person, except in matters of Religion.

Until this time the People had the The peoples liberty to choose their Pastor
first denied.
Election of Bishops or Pastors, but this great privilege was taken from them
by a Council held at Laodicea; also that Lessons should be read between
certain Psalms, that the Gospel should be read, and other Scriptures, upon
the Sunday, etc. Here abominable Superstitions and Corruptions thronged fast
in, which I forbear to mention.

Now were the Sect of the Dimeritae, who denied that Christ had a Soul, etc.
Also the Massiliani, a sort of idle Monks; these said, The Body of Christ in
the Sacrament did neither good nor harm, etc. These were also, call Euchitae,
etc. Socrates.


It is said, that Damasus kept the Episcopal Chair eighteen years, and dyed,
Anno 384. Anno 384


Sericius succeeded Damasus; He is Sericius the 36 Bishop.
said to be the first that forbid the Marriage of Priests; now the name of
Priest grew into fashion, and was the ordinary style of all common or inferior
Bishops. Sericins governed fifteen years, Anno 399. Anno 399


In this age were the Heresy of Proclianites, who denied that Christ came in
the Flesh, also the Patriciani, who say that God made not man's flesh, but the
Devil; and therefore Murder themselves and others, to be out of the flesh.

Anastatius was chosen next Bishop of Rome, and continued but three years,
Anastatius the 37 Bishop. Anno 402
Anno 402.

Innocentius next entered the stage of the Roman Sea, and acted the part of
Innocent the 38 Bishop.
Antichrist himself. Damasus in an Epistle to the Bishop of Mauritiania, styled
the Sea of Rome, the Firmament of all Bishops, the Top of all Churches; and
Sericius in an Epistle to the Socrates.
Bishop of Arragon, said, It was not lawful for any Priest of the Lord to be
ignorant of the Decrees of the Sea Apostolic. And, Innocent would not so wrong
Peter's Chair as to let any Papal Dignity fall in him, and therefore claimed
Authoritative Censures in all greater matters, to be only in the Apostolic
Sea. This Innocent begged what would not be granted for fifteen years, and
ceased, Anno 417.

Zosimus was the Successor of Innocent, Zosimus the 39 Bishop. Socrates.
and strongly followed his Plea for Supremacy; He supposed, having had three
Predecessors before him that had begged hard for Supremacy, he might well
require it. In the first year The sixth council of Carthage.
of his Government was held the sixth Council of Carthage, where were assembled
two hundred twenty seven Bishops: To this Council Zosimus sent three Legates,
requiring the Bishops of Africa to appeal to the Sea Apostolic. But Zosimus
obtained it not from the Council, and dyed in the second year, Anno 419. Anno
419


Boniface the First succeeded Zosimus; He was also the first Bishop of Boniface
the first, the 40 Bishop. The first Bishop that exercised Secular power.
Rome, that assumed and exercised Kingly Authority over Secular people, which
he put out in banishing the Novatians, and seizing their estates. He pursued
the claim of Zosimus in the Council of Carthage, but obtained it not; yet that
I may the better discover the shameless impudence of the Bishop, and the
working of Antichrist in this age, Zosimus pretended to the Council, that this
Supremacy was given The Bishop forged a Lie to get Supremacy.
to the Sea of Rome by the Council of Nice; but the Bishops knowing of no such
Canon past in that Council, sent Letters presently to the Bishops of
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, desiring them to send the Acts of the
Nicen Council sealed up. In this interim Zosimus dyed, and Boniface came to the
Sea; but the Council finding no such Canon in the Nicene Council, it was not
granted, and so Boniface only pursued it, yet saw no end of it, and dyed in the
third year of his Government, anno 422. Anno 422


Coelestine was chosen next to the Episcopal Coelestine the 41 Bish.
Dignity; now the Bishops of Rome exalted themselves exceedingly, and affected
great swelling Titles. Coelestine blushed not to take into protection such
Bishops and Priests as were justly excommunicate, and banished for Heresy and
Scandal, out of Africa and other Countries, and took up the names of Blasphemy
that these flattering Parasites put upon him, the very Titles of God himself;
yea and sent out his roaring Bulls, much threatening those Churches, if they did
not again receive the banished Bishops. Whereupon St. Augustine writ a tart
Letter to Coelestine, saying, we are threatened with a Posse comitatus, and
force of arms, to put the sentence of the Apostolic Sea into execution. Let
August. 261 Epist.
not these things be so, I do conjure thee by the blood of Christ, and by the
memory of the Apostle Peter (who warns those that are set over Christian
Assemblies, to be meek and humble) not to domineer with violence over your
brethren. But Coelestine was above brotherly admonition, and beat on boldly
through all opposition to establish Supremacy in the Roman Sea, yet after nine
years deceased, Anno 431. Anno 431


In this time Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople broached his Heresy against
the union of the two Natures in Christ; Cyril now Bishop of Alexandria opposed
this Heretic; but to determine the Controversy, the Emperors The Council of
Ephesus.
Valentinian and Theodosius the second of the East, called the General Council
of Ephesus, Anno 431. in Anno 431
which Council, Nestorius was condemned and banished.

Sextus came next to the Sea of Rome, Sextus the 42 Bishop. Socrates.
he was accused of several Crimes laid to his Charge before the Emperor
Valentinian, and was put to purge himself in a Synod called at Rome. This
Bishop kept the Sea eight years, Anno Anno 439
439.

Leo the first had the next turn, and Leo the first, the 43 Bishop.
in his time he mightily advanced the Supremacy of the Roman Sea.

In the Government of Leo, a Provincial Council was called at Constantinople,
about Eutiches an Abbot, who maintained the Heresy of Nestorius, in which
Council Eutiches was condemned and degraded; yet by another Council of corrupt
Bishops held at Ephesus, Eutiches was again restored. The General Council of
Chalcedon.
But after, there was a general Council called at Chalcedon, of six hundred and
thirty Bishops, to re-examine the Case of Eutiches; in this Council the Heresy
of Nestorius was again damned, and Diascorus with other Bishops deprived, the
thirteenth of October. Anno 453. Unto this Council Leo sent his Legates to accuse
Diascorus, and the main matter of his complaint against Diascorus, was, that
he had rejected the Decrees of the Roman Church. In this Council also it was
ordered, that no Pluralities of Benefices forbid.
Clerk should be admitted into two Churches.

By this time the Bishops of Rome had got some pre-eminence, and in this Counil
had the title of Pope. The The first title of Pope given to the Bishop of Rome.
Empire of Rome was now in great confusion, Enemies made invasions, and (to
fulfill the Word of the Lord) Leo took his time to raise the Episcopal Throne,
by the woeful distractions in the Civil State, the Emperor had little power,
and all he could do was to preserve himself. But now Leo took his opportunity
to advance the Sea of Rome, and though he could exercise but little
Jurisdiction, yet he took upon him the Title of Pope of the Roman Catholic
Church, and universal Bishop. Thus Leo continued one and twenty years, Anno
460. Anno 460


Hillary was Successor to Leo, of Hillary the 44.
whom I find little mentioned; he had the Government six years, Anno 466. Anno
466


Simplicius followed. Hillary; but now there arose much strife between
Simplicius the 45 Bish.
the Church of Rome, and the Church of Constantinople, which should be
supreme; but Leo Emperor of the East, gave the Supremacy to Constantinople, as
being his royal City. Simplicius used his utmost endeavor to reverse the Edict
of the Emperor, Evagri.
and dyed in pursuit of desired Supremacy, when he had ruled fifteen years,
Anno 481. Anno 481


Faelix followed Simplicius in his Papal Faelix the 46 Bishop.
Dignity, and in his eager pursuit for Supremacy in the Roman Chair, but left
the Work undone, and departed in his ninth year of Government, Anno 490. Anno
490


Gelasius came next to the Chair, but Gelasius the 47 Bish.
was a man of more modesty than many that went before him: He neither pleaded
his Supremacy from the Nicene Council, or the ancient custom of Mystery of
Iniquity.
the Church, but held to the text, Tu es Petrus. This goes not (said Gelasius)
Gelasius in Epist. ad Dardanos.
by Synodal Decrees, but by the very voice of the Gospel. Therefore he spoke
it openly, that the Sea of Rome might either absolve such as were wrongfully
condemned by any Council, or condemn such as deserved it; yet after (forgetting
himself) he pleaded Synodal authority, saying, The Canon has so ordained it,
that all Churches ought to appeal to this Sea, and not from it. Thus Gelasius
labored subtly to advance the Roman Sea, yet held it but four years, Anno
494. Anno 494


Anastatius the second followed Gelasius; Anastatius the second the 48.
To all other evils in this man, he held the Nestorian Heresy, and favored
that Party, but was taken away by the hand of Gods Justice, when he had
governed two years, anno 496. Anno 496


Upon the death of Anastatius, Symachus was set up by one Party, and Symachus
the 49 Bish. Two Popes together.
Laurence by another Party; at this time, Zeno Emperor of the East, had sent
Theoderick King of the Ostrogothes with an Army into Italy, who in two Battles
overcame Odoazer King of Rome, and in the last slew him.

Theoderick now coming to Rome, complaint was made to him of the undue Sleidan.
Election of Symachus to the Sea of Rome. To end this quarrel, Theoderick
Mystery of Iniquity.
calls a Synod at Rome of the Bishops of Italy, who gave the Chair to Symachus,
and banished Laurence. But after four years, the Party for Laurence brought him
back again to Rome, and now the Faction grew from words to blows, that much
blood was spilt, and great mischief done. At this Theoderick was greatly
offended, deposing of them both, and made Peter Bishop of Altin Bishop of Rome,
in the fifteenth year of Symachus, anno 509. Anno 509


Peter continued (as some think) six years, and dyed, anno 515. Anno 515


Hormisda was taken into the Pontifical Hormisda the 51 Bishop.
Chair, and did much for the Papal interest. He made many Bishops his Vicars
over the Western Provinces, which for honor sake was well accepted by such as
looked for pre-eminence over others. Hormisda Governed nine years, and dyed,
anno 524. Anno 524


John the first now took his turn; John the first the 52 Bishop.
Theoderick sent Bishop John Ambassador to the Emperor Justine, at
Constantinople, who gave him great honor, and although he was crowned Sleidan.
before by the Patriarch of Constantinople, yet had John also to put on his
Crown a second time. This extraordinary This was an evil Omen to the Emperor.
entertainment of John Bishop of Rome, with the Emperor, caused Theoderick to
suspect some confederacy against him, so that when John returned, Theoderick
clapped him up in Prison, and after there beheaded him, when he had born his
Honor two years and ten months, anno 527. Anno 527


There was a great division upon the Faelx the second the 53 Bishop.
next Election, and so great, that the Sea was void fifty eight days: but then
Theoderick put in, and carried it for Faelix the second, who governed but two
years, anno 529. Anno 529


Upon the death of Faelix new strife Boniface the second the 54 Bish.
arose about the Election of another Bishop; some stood for Boniface, and some
for Diascorus, and neither Party would yield: But about eighteen days after
Diascorus dyed, and the Dignity was left to Boniface the second. Great
mischiefs did now arise at every Election Great strife about Electing of
Bishops.
of a new Bishop; but to prevent this, Boniface called a Council, and there it
was ordered, That a Successor should be created in the lifetime of the
present Bishop; and upon that order Boniface nominated, Vigillius a Deacon, for
his Successor. But soon after Boniface grew suspicious of his Successor, and
called another Synod, to whom he accused Vigilius for Treason, and so voyded
the nomination. The woeful troubles of these times were very great, yet the
pride and avarice of the Clergy no whit abated; but to all the rest of their
abominations, the Worship of God was corrupted, Latin Service used.
and their Service, or Liturgy in Latin; yet Boniface kept the Chair but two
years, and departed, anno 531. Anno 531


John the second succeeded Boniface John the second the 55 Bishop.
the second. Now the Bishops took the Titles of Holiness, Archbishops,
Patriarks, and some of them, Popes; Justinian Emperor of the East, being newly
come to the Crown, had a desire to keep fair with the Bishop of Rome (who was
now grown great) the better to regain Italy, which Theoderick had got to
himself; and thereupon sent an Ambassador to John, with a Gratulatory Epistle,
as here follows. To the Holy John, Archbishop The Bishops willingly took on
them the names of Blasphemy.
of Rome, and Patriarch. We will that your Holiness know all matters which
belong to the State Ecclesiastical, etc. And the same Emperor writing to the
Bishop of Constantinople, gives him yet a higher style, as thus; The most holy
Archbishop of this royal City, and universal Patriarch. We will that your
Holiness know all matters which belong to the State Ecclesiastical, and we
Sleidan.
have written to the same effect to the Pope of old Rome, etc. Its beyond an
Epitomy to gather up the wickedness of these times, yet this I may not omit to
insert. Some to get voices upon Election for Bishop, promised such large bribes
to Senators, and Courtiers, that when they came to be Bishop, they sold the
very Vessels of the Church to pay, etc. John the second ruled two years, anno
533. Anno 533


Agapete followed John; so soon as he was settled, he also was sent Ambassador
Agapete the 56 Bish
to Justinian, to Constantinople, while Agapete was there, he presided in a
Council, yet lived but one year, anno 534. Anno 534


Upon the death of Agapete, Theodatus Silverius the 57 Bish.
set up Silverius in the Episcopacy, and by fear and force, caused many Priests
to subscribe to it. Silverius Sleidan.
came in by force, and was thrust out by fraud; the Empress Theodora being of
the Eutychian Heresy, thought Vigilius (before mentioned) a fit subject for a
bad design, and therefore she promised to make him Pope of The plot of a wicked
woman.
Rome, and give seven hundred marks of Gold, if when he was Pope he would
abrogate the Council of Chalcedon, and confirm the faith of Theodosius,
Anthymius, and Severus (Heretics of the same profession.) And withal she
promised to send to Belisarius at Ravena to set him in the Sea. Vigilius was
willing to accept the motion, and the more effectually to engage Belisarius in
the expedition, Vigilius promised Belisarius two hundred marks for his part.
Bellisarius went presently to Rome, and forthwith charged the Bishop of
Treason, in holding secret intelligence with the Goths to surprise the City of
Rome, and Letters were forged to the same purpose, as written by Silverius.
Upon this accusation the Bishop was first clapped up in Prison, and then secretly
banished. The Sea being thus voyded, the next day an Election of a Bishop was
called, and Vigilius put into the Roman Chair. Now when Vigilius was installed,
Belisarius Vigilius the 58 Bish.
requires his Fee; but when Vigilius was in, he refused to pay the money,
unless Belisarius would give Silverius into his hand; this made a little
pause, but at last Belisarius gave up Silverius to the rage of Vigilius, who
shut him up close Prisoner, and there Cruel murder.
starved him to death. And now for his engagement to the Empress, Vigilius did
as much as he could; he that blushed not wilfully to break the Commandments of
God to get the Episcopal Seat, made no scruple to deny the Faith of Christ.
This was so gross, that Baronius (the Papal Champion) was Baronius.
ashamed of him, and with open mouth, calls him a Wolf, a Thief, and
Antichrist. But if Antichrist appeared so Note.
early in the Roman Sea, where is the Antichrist confessed. The fifth general
Council at Constantinople.
Apostolical succession so much boasted on by Papists and some others amongst
our selves. Vigilius grew hateful for his wickedness with all good People, and
was at last complained of to the Emperor, and accused in the Council at
Constantinople, where by the Emperor and Council, Vigilius was deposed and
banished, anno 556. Anno 556


By the power of the Emperor Justinian, Pelagius the first the 59 Bish.
Pelagius the first succeeded in the Sea of Rome; this offended the Bishops of
Italy, upon which they called a Synod at Aquilia to consult about it; but
Pelagius sent to them a Confession of his Faith, and so pacified them, and
governed eleven years, anno 567. Anno 567


John the third followed Pelagius, he John the third the 60 Bishop.
strongly pursued the Plea of his Predecessors for Supremacy, at home and
abroad; Pelagius sent his Mandates to the Bishops in France, and Germany: We
will and command all Bishops and Mystery of Iniquity.
Priests whatsoever, to observe all the Decretals and Ordinances of our
Predecessors in matters belonging to the Church; and if any shall attempt the
contrary, let A sad threatening.
him know there is no place left for repentance to him, etc. If John may be
believed, it was now a dreadful thing to transgress the commands of the Roman
Church; yet these high words did not affright the Bishops, and when he had
continued twelve years he dyed, anno 579. Anno 579


Benedict the first took the next turn, Benedict the first the 61 Bishop.
but in his time Narses Lieutenant of Italy, being discontented with the
ingratitude of the Emperor, invited the Lumbards into Italy, who presently came
in and laid siege to Rome, in which time Benedict dyed, anno 579. Anno 579


In the same year, and during the Pelagius the second the 62 Bish.
same siege, Pelagius the second was chosen Bishop of Rome. Rome being now
besieged, and Italy in uproars, John Bishop of Constantinople having John
Bishop of Constantinople was first Universal Bishop.
the favor of the Emperor Maurice, got the Title of Universal Bishop, and
called a Council at Constantinople, anno 580. but the siege of the Lumbards
being now raised from the walls of Rome by violence of weather, Pelagius sent
presently to the Council at Constantinople, and charged the Bishops to break
up, being no Council, but a Conventicle without him, and also that if they did
not forthwith depart, they should The pride of Pelagius
be Excommunicate by the Sea Apostolic. And further, Pelagins forbids them to
acknowledge John Universal Bishop, for says he, If the chief Patriarch (meaning
himself) should be called Universal, by that profane Title, the name of
Patriarch would be taken from all other Bishops; but God forbid that it should
ever fall into the heart of a Christian to assume to himself that, whereby the
honor of his Brethren may be abased. And consider my Brethren what is like to
ensue. He comes near unto him of whom it is written, This is he which is King
over all the Children of Pride, and so John went about to attribute to himself,
that which was only due to Christ, etc. Thus Pelagius preached a pithy Lecture
but sought only with words, and John mattered not such windy weapons; Pelagius
continued ten years and left the Chair of Rome to Gregory the first, anno 590.
Anno 590


Gregory the first, surnamed the Grogory the first the 63 Bishop.
Great, took up the Weapons against John of Constantinople, but John being
backed by the Emperor Maurico, stood stiffly to uphold his new Title; and the
Emperor (further) in favor of John, writ his Letters to Gregory, and
commanded him to keep peace. This greatly troubled Gregory, and thereupon he
writ Letters to the Emperor, and the Empress. To the Emperor he wrote thus:
All those who have read the Gospel, know well what the Lord said to Peter, etc.
The care and primacy of the whole Church was committed to him, yet behold my
Fellow Priest, John, seeks to be called the Universal Bishop? I am now
forced to cry, Oh the times, oh the manners of men! Europe is now exposed for a
prey to the Barbarians, and yet the Priests who should lie down in the dust,
weeping and rolling themselves in ashes, seek after names of vanity, and boast
in their new found profane titles, etc. And Gregory to the Empress, thus;
Maurice indeed has done like a godly man, and a religious Prince, to command
due observance to men of the Church: But far be it that your time should be
defiled by the exalting of one Antichrist described.
man above others, neither let it ever be said, that you gave way to that
crooked name of universal. By this Arrogance and Pride, whas does it else
portend, but that the time of Antichrist is now at hand, in that (he) imitates
Lucifer, who making light of that happiness he possessed with others, would
needs aspire to a singularity above the rest, lost all, etc. I should exceed my
bounds to follow Gregory in his invectives against John of Constantinople, for
getting Supremacy before him; and while John delighted himself in his new
title, Gregory took up to himself the style of Servant of the Servants of God.
But in Gregory's The title of Servant of Servants.
time the Emperor Maurice grew into hatred of the Soldiers, and fearing the
conspiracy of Phocas, Maurice fled to Chalcedon; Phocas heading the Mutineers,
was by them proclaimed Emperor, and after the solemnity he pursued Maurice,
where he first in a barbarous manner killed his Wife and Children before his
face, and then The murder of the Emperor.
murdered him. Notwithstanding all this bloody cruelty of Phocas, Gregory writ
abominable flattering Letters to him, and his new Empress, of which I must
give you a taste. Gregory begins Gregory's Hypocrisy discovered.
his Epistle thus to Phocas: Glory be to God on high, which changes times,
and translateth Kingdoms, who sometimes in his Justice sends Princes to
afflict his people, and at other times in his Mercy those that lift them up
again; for which cause we rejoice that thou art come to the Empire, let the
Heavens rejoice, and the Earth leap for joy, and let all the people be glad
thereof, etc. but in the conclusion, Gregory prays, that the Emperor would
take the Church of Rome into protection, and be mindful of Tu es Petrus,
assuring of him, that for his requital St. Peter would take him and his
Empress into protection, and keep him in the Empire. Now you have the bottom
of Gregory's heart opened, and his Hypocrisy fully brought to light; but he
soon dyed, and saw not the accomplishment of his desires, anno 605. Anno 605


Sabinian followed Gregory, but dyed Sabinian the 64 Bishop.
quickly.

Boniface the third now had the Roman Sea, and all things concurring to
accomplish Boniface the third the first Pope. Usurpers often find trouble.
the old design, and especially (to fulfill the Word of God) it so happened, that
Phocas was left by Cyriachus patriarch of Constantinople, and was hated by all
good people for his bloody cruelty, that the Empire was sore shaken, and Italy
ready to revolt. Phocas now being in great straights, and not knowing how to
keep all quiet: In this nick of time Boniface offered his service to Phocas,
which was so well accepted, that he conferred this Honor The Supremacy of
Rome, the Douation of Phocas, Anno 606
upon the Church of Rome, that She should be the head of all other Churches,
and the Bishop of Rome to be called, the Sovereign and Universal Bishop.
Boniface now got the desired primacy, and brought in the Antichrist, yet
continued but eight months, and dyed, Anno 607. Anno 607


Boniface the fourth succeeded, and governed six years, Anno 613.

Deus-dedit came next to the Sea, and governed three years, Anno 616.

Boniface the fifth now took his turn; these times were troublesome, and
Boniface the fifth the fourth Pope.
these Popes found much opposition, but to all the rest they did greatly
corrupt the Worship of God, and in a little time, they brought in Prayers for
Prayers for the dead, etc.
the dead, Invocation of Saints, the Liturgy in a strange Language, and
abundance of Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies. This Pope continued five years,
Anno 621. Anno 621


Honorius the first came next to the Honorius the first the fifth Pope.
Papal Dignity; but though the name and title of universal Bishop was given to
the Sea of Rome, yet Papal Jurisdiction was much resisted by the Bishops.
Honorius hoping to subject the Bishops, The Popes policy to subject the Bishops.
sided with Adelwaldus fifth King of the Lumbards, who raised an Army against
them, but the Bishops had the better in that Battle, and Honorius carried not
his design at that time. To give a demonstration that infallibility was not yet
tied to Peter's Chair, Pope Honorius fell into the Heresy of the Monothelites,
and denied two Natures, and two Wills in Christ. For this Heresy he The
Council of Toledo condemned the Pope.
was condemned in the fourth Council of Toledo by 289 Bishops. Also in this
Council it was decreed, That the Book of the Revelation should be read in time
of Mass, that all men might the Note.
better know, and arm themselves against Antichrist, who gave life to the
Beast, the Roman Empire. This Pope was said to rule 13 years, anno 634. Anno 634


Severinus the first came next to rule; Severinus the first the sixth Pope.
as yet the Pope was under the jurisdiction of the Emperor, and every Pope
confirmed by the Exarch for the Emperor, lying at Ravenna. Upon the election
of Severinus, the Exarch made him stay a year and half for confirmation, and
he lived but half a year more, and dyed, anno 636. Anno 636


Boniface the sixth succeeded Severinus, Boniface the 7 Pope. Theodore the
first the 8 Pope.
and ruled two years, anno 638.

Theodore the first had the Papal seat; he strongly pursued the claim of
Jurisdiction over the Bishops, but was stoutly denied it; yet Victor Bishop of
Carthage gave him this Title, stuffed with Blasphemy; To the most blessed
Blasphemy.
Lord, and our Honorable Holy Brother, Pope Theodore, etc. Theodore had the
Sea five years, and dyed, anno 643. Anno 643


Martin the first followed Theodore; Martin the first the 9 Pope.
he was a great undertaker, and thought to carry great things; but assuming too
much upon the Bishops of the East, the Emperor Constans gave a check to his
ambition, who caused him to be brought Prisoner to Constantinople, where he
dyed in banishment, when he had kept Peter's Chair eight years, anno 651. Anno
651


Eugenius succeeded Martin; but in Eugenius the 10. Pope
his time diverse Councils were held without his privity, and he could not help
it. He governed two years and dyed, anno 653. Anno 653


Vitalion had the Government, and Vitalion the 11 Pope.
not inferior to any of his Predecessors for a high mind; John Bishop of
Lampeon being condemned by a Synod under Paul Archbishop of Candia, John
appealed to the Bishop of Rome, who retracted the sentence of the Synod, and
absolved him; but John was still kept out of his Sea. At this time also the
Archbishop of Ravenna (under the Popes nose) rejected the Supremacy of Rome.
But the Pope being repulsed in all the Countries about him, purposed to seek
honor in places further remote. It is said, about this time Austine the Monk
was sent into England, but instead of spreading the Gospel, and converting
souls, they here broached their Popish Fopperies; the Latin Altars, Organs,
Tapers, etc. brought into England.
Service, Organs, Altars, Tapers, etc. were brought into England. The Popes
Agents also stirred ignorantly devout Princes to enforce their Subjects to use
and practice this way of seigned Worship, Note.
and the better to advance the main design, as the Agents found ambitious men
thirsting for pre-eminence above their brethren, these were taken into favor,
and honored with preferment. But the issue was, by these means to bring in the
Pope, and transfer Causes to Rome. Vitalion bare rule 15 years, and dyed,
anno 668. Anno 668


Adeodate followed Vitalion: the Adeodate the twelfth Pope. The Pope
Excommunicated by the Bishop of Ravenna.
Archbishop of Ravenna coming to that Sea, refused to be Consecrated by the
Pope of Rome; and for that offense Adeodate Excommunicated the Archbishop; and
the Archbishop paid him in his own coin, and excommunicated the Pope of Rome:
and this was all the Pope yet got. This Pope kept the Sea five years, anno 675.
Anno 675


Domnus came next to the Pontifical Throne; he continued to fight the Papal
Domnus the 13 Pope
Combat for desired Supremany, and what by power, and what by policy, he at
last subjected the Archbishop of Ravenna to Peter's Chair, Anno 680, Domnus
rejoiced in this addition, and lived two years after it, anno 682. Anno 682


Agatho next took Peter's pretended Agatho, the 14 Pope.
Chair, and being lift up in Domnus his uniting Ravenna to the Roman Sea, he
openly pronounced, That all Decrees made by the Sea-Apostolick, ought to be
received, as if they had proceeded Blasphemy.
from St. Peter's own mouth. But the pride of the Prelate staid not here, but
writing to the Bishops, he styled himself, Head of all the Churches: and in a
Letter to the Emperor, he blushed not to The Popes Lie.
say, That unto that day the Church of Rome had never been stained with any
Error, neither would be, by virtue of that promise made heretofore by our
Savior to Peter. Agatho kept his happy place but two years, anno 684. Anno 684


Leo the second held the Apostolic Leo the second 15.
Sea but ten months.

Benedict the second followed Leo; in Benedict the second the 16 Pope
his time he obtained of the Emperor, That he who should be elected Pope by
the Clergy, People, and Soldiers, The Emperors Patent.
should have all the power at Rome, and not seek to the Emperor for
confirmation. This was no small step to lift up the Dignity and Tyranny of the
Roman Sea, into the Imperial Throne, but Benedict lived not out the year.

John the fifth was chosen according John the fifth the 17 Pope. Anno 687
to the new establishment, but dyed quickly, anno 687.

Upon the death of John, there fell a division about the election, the Clergy
chose Peter, the Army chose Theodore; the contention was great, and neither
Party would yield; but at last they all pitched upon Conon, a third person, and
Conon the 18.
he was made Pope, yet lived but eleven months, anno 688. Anno 688


While Conon was yet sick, Paschal an Archdeacon, made a Party for Sergius the
19 Pope
him, and promised large moneys for Voices: but at the Election there were many
stood for Theodore, and some for Paschal. The division was great, and so lasted
for two months; and to prevent blood and mischief, they took Sergius The Pope
cast off the Emperor. Anno 700
a poor Priest out of the throng, and made him Pope. When Sergius was lift up
to this high Dignity, he had now the spirit of a Pope, so that when the
Emperor Justinian sent to him the Books of the general Councils to subscribe
to them, Sergius denied it. Hereupon the Emperor was justly displeased, and
sent to apprehend him; but Sergius so played his Game, that by the help of the
Soldiery he kept his Chair, and slighted the Emperor, and continued his
government 13 years, anno 701. Anno 701


John the sixth followed Sergius; he John the sixth the 20 Pope,
still sought to promote the Papal Dignity, as not having what was aimed at.
The better to persuade John to subscribe the General Councils, Justinian
General Councils rejected by the Pope.
sent to him a Confession of his Faith; but John also refused it, and gave this
reason, Because of certain Articles in them which were contrary to the Church
of Rome. This Pope ruled three years, anno 704. Anno 704 John the seventh the
21 Pope.


John the seventh took the next turn, but by this time, the Popes of Rome began
to grow great in the world, and did cause others to know it. The Eastern Empire
was now brought low by the Lumbards in the West, and the Saracens in the East,
that the Emperor was constrained quietly to put up all affronts from the Pope,
and speak him fair too. It is said also, that Aripert The Donation of Aripert.
King of the Lumbards, to keep John on his part, gave to the Sea of Rome the
Cottian Alps, Anno 705. yet John kept the Sea but three years, anno 707. Anno
707


Zosimus the second came next to the Zosimus. the 22 Pope,
Papal Dignity, yet held it so little time, that some Historians pass him by
without naming.

Constantine followed next, but did Constantine the 23 Pope.
improve his time above many his Predecessors. Upon offense given by the
Patriarch of Constantinople to the Emperor, he sent the Patriarch prisoner to
Rome, thinking thereby the more to please the Pope, Anno 708. as yet the
Emperors Exarchs at Ravenna kept the Pope under that he could not work his
will: but in this Popes time, the Soldiers conspired against Justinian, slew
him, and made Philipicus Bardanes Imageworship enjoined by the Pope.
Emperor. By this means the Eastern Empire was brought near to ruin, and a
door was opened for the second Beast to enter; Philipicus coming thus to the
Empire, thought to do some eminent act to please the good people, and so made
an Edict, That all Images should be pulled down in the The occasion the Pope
took to reject the Emperor, and set up himself.
Churches; upon this, the Pope took occasion to cast off the Emperor,
pronounced him an Heretic, and forbad the people of Rome to receive the
Emperors Commands, his Image on their Coin, or mention him in their Service.
This was not so much an Excommunication, as a final Deposition of the Emperor,
and soon after he had his The wosul end of an Usurper.
eyes put out, and thrust out of the Empire. This was the first Pope that
proceeded so high against the Emperors, and this does sufficiently evidence,
that Antichrist come.
the Antichrist is now come, and has taken his Throne. All this was
accomplished by Constantine, who governed seven years, Anno 714. Anno 714


Gregory the second succeeded Constantine, Gregory the second the 24 Pope
and was not inferior to any that went before him, in Pride, Policy, or
Tyranny. It is said, that this Pope was so expert in Conjuring, that he was
called Gregory the Diabolist. At this time Gregory ae Cryurer.
Leo Isaurius General of the Emperors Army, put down Theodotius from
government, and set up himself Emperor, and having a little respit from the
Saracens, he renewed the Edict of the former Emperor against Images, and hoped
to maintain it in Italy. But Gregory Treachery and blood has raised Antichrist.
called in the Lumbards, and by their help routed the Emperors. Army; now
Gregory and the Lumbards shared Italy, and by this means a huge Dominion was
added to the Church. Though the Lumbards had done the Pope great service in
this expedition, yet Gregory casts how to clear Italy to the Sea of Rome. It
seems the Pope feared a compliance of the Lumbards, with Charles Martil of
France, who now grew great: and to engage him for the Church, Gregory sent an
Ambassador The Keys of the Holy Sepulcher, and Peter's Chain.
to Charles, with a present of the Keys of the Holy Sepulcher, and St. Peter's
Chain. These unheard of Relics were greatly accepted, and Charles Martil
ratified an accord with the Pope. Gregory did this for the Sea, and after he
had ruled seventeen years departed, Anno 731. Anno 731


Gregory the third succeeded Gregory Gregory the third, the 25 Pope
the first; He Decreed in a Synod, That whosoever would not do religious
honor unto Images, should be cut off from the Body and Blood of Christ, and
the unity of the whole Church. At this time Thrasamond Duke of Spoleto,
intending to revolt from Luitprand King of the Lumbards, he fell in with
Gregory, and to engage the Church on his Party, Thrasamond delivered into the
Popes handsome strong Holds which he had kept for the Lumbards, and upon this
ground the King of Lumbards raised an Army, and came against the Duke, and
worsted him in that Battle. The Duke fled to Rome, and the King demanded him of
the Pope, but the Pope refused to deliver him, and thereupon he laid siege to
Rome. Gregory was now sore puzzled, and sent for Charles Martil to interpose;
upon the persuasion of Charles, the King of Lumbards raised his siege, and
returned into Pavia, and in that year Gregory dyed, when he had ruled ten
years, Anno 741. Anno 741


Zachary next took place, and carried on the main design stoutly, and now an
Zachary the 26 Pope
opportunity was offered to complete the work. Pipin, Master of the Kings House
to Childrick King of France, had a great desire to get into the throne, yet had
some scruples how to be absolved from his Oath; but in a little time Pipin was
informed that the Pope had the power of Christ and St. Peter, and could do all
things. Pipin dispatches away Ambassadors to Pope Zachary about the business.
At first the Pope made a pause, and thought the attempt vile, but considering
of what advantage this might be to the Roman Sea, he put on impudence, and
exercised all his power. Zachary deposed Childrick, absolved The King of France
deposed by the Pope, and the Kingdom given to Pipin.

Anno 750 The Pope and Pipin court each other.


the French people from their Allegiance, and gave the Kingdom to Pipin. This
was such an engagement upon Pipin, that he must not refuse the commands of his
new Father the Pope, and as a requital to Zachary, Pipin drove the Lumbards out
of Italy, and gave the whole Dominion to the Church of Rome. This Booty did so
please Zachary, that in token of thankfulness, he confirmed Pipin in the
Kingdom of France, and gave him the title of most Christian King; and to answer
this new kindness, Pipin prostrated himself, kissed the Popes feet, and swear
Fealty to The original of kissing the Popes Toe.
him. Thus you have the advance of Antichrist, and the engagements of the
French Crown to Peter's Chair.

I need not seek further for the discovery of that Man of Sin, that Son o
Perdition spoken of by the Prophet and Apostles, nor need any a sharp sight to
discern him sitting in the Sea of Rome. Now was that word of the Lord perfectly
fulfilled spoken by the Prophets and Apostles, who described the Antichrist by
several marks, some of which I will here observe. These are the Prove. 8. 15
Psalm. 75. 7 Mar. 2. 7
Prerogative Royal of God Almighty, to dispose of Kingdoms, and pardon Sin; so
that he who shall assume these out of the Hand of God, is the Antichrist, as
described at large by the Apostle Paul; and both these Pope Zachary took upon
him at this time, when he absolved Pipin, and the French people from their
Allegiance to Childrick King of France, and when he deposed Childrick, and set
the Crown upon Pipin. I might give the particular Characters the Holy Ghost
has set upon Antichrist, and show how clearly they are fulfilled in the Popes
of Rome, above any other order of men in the world, but this would swell my
Discourse too much; neither do I need to go further than what I have here
noted, for though some Emperors have deposed Kings, and disposed of their
Kingdoms, yet Emperors have not taken upon them to absolve from Oaths, and
pardon Sin; though some Priests have taken upon them to pardon sin, yet they
have not taken upon them power to dispose of Kingdoms; these only have been
assumed by the Popes of Rome, and so the The Pope is the Antichrist.
Pope is the Antichrist. I have now attained my end in this Epitomy, to wit, to
discover the Antichrist, and therefore will not detain the Reader with any
farther relation of this abominable, blasphemous Beast, yet these two things in
general I may not pass, which evidence the Popes Pride, and fulfill the Word
of God.

First, when Zachary had brought about that design which had been so long in
hatching, he was clothed in his Pontifical Robes, and caused himself to be
carried in Triumph upon men's shoulders, to the Church of St. Lateran. He
appointed Lettanies to be said in every Church of Rome; He also caused the
Sculls of the Apostles (if you can believe it) and other like Relics to be
openly showed, which were not before; and from this time the Popes of Rome have
been carried upon men's shoulders.

Secondly, this is considerable, the unsatisfied ambition of the Popes ceased
not till they had perfectly inflaved the Roman Empire, to make good tha Word of
the Lord spoken by the Apostle John, I saw a Woman sit upon a scarlet-colored
Beast, full of Names of Revel. 17. 3
Blasphemy etc. At the first the Bishops of Rome contended only for a priority
of piace in Councils; then for Jurisdiction over the Bishops of their Province,
but after they took upon them to call Councils, to depose and translate
Emperors and Kings at their pleasure; so that while they bare the Title of
Christ's Vicars, they blushed not to assume the Prerogatives of God Almighty,
and put upon their heads a Triple Crown, as King of Heaven, Earth and Hell. All
these things are published at large, both by Protestant and Popish Writers, to
whom I refer those who desire a fuller relation in the particulars.

FINIS.

