ARMA ^ PACIS ^ FVLCRA

blazon of the Honorable Artillery Company
A PANEGYRIC ON THE LATE HONORABLE Sir ROBERT PEAKE Knight, VICE PRESIDENT
and LEADER of the Honorable ARTILLERY COMPANY.
THis Man of Courage and Heroic worth,
And high in Knowledge, sound you Muses forth;
Sound ye with loudest voice his most Just Due's,
Who of Himself was able to infuse
Spirit into the Brain-pan of the Dullest
To cast by Prose, and write in Verse, the fullest.
We need not voice his Service in the Wars,
And brave Atchivements, when he earned the Spurs
Of honored Knight hood, it is enough to speak
We sing the Praises of Renowned PEAKE:
For should we trace his Virtues thorough all
Their courses, from their first Original,
One Sheet would never hold them; for the Theme
Would be so large, as to demand a Ream.
His Care he showed at Basing-House was such
That after Ages cannot Praise too much:
And his true zeal to Our deceased KING,
Does an example unexampled bring.
These were the Steps by which He first did rise,
To be observed by all Virtuous eyes;
And by degrees of Fortune did begin
To place him in the Sphere he late was in:
As Leader and Vice President to be
O'th Company of the Artillery
Under the Mighty Duke of YORK, whose Grace
Chose him his Second in so great a Place.
Of all Applanded, and Beloved of those
Whose Fate it was to be his greatest Foes:
The Tongue most fault'ring, and the Eye most dim,
Did speak and find all Loyalty in Him.
Nor of his Praises is it the least, that He
So careful was to keep such Unity
Amongst his Armed Numbers, that no Noise
Was heard amongst them, to alarm their Joys:
Silence and Peace did show that it is not Jarrs,
But Order makes men Conquerours in Wars.
But above all, and this alone was it
Which in his Place spoke him so exquisit,
His wise Conduct; And then his all, not part
Of Knowledge in the Military Art,
Made all great Chiefs their worth in Him to see,
And Mars himself in Noble PEAKE to be.
These great perfections, and by all desired,
Made him by all to be so much admired,
That no detraction from the impurer sort
Shall ere control or silence this report:
But Fame shall make his Praises be enrolled,
Not in loose papers, but bright leaves of Gold.
For Truth reports, that whatsoere is due
To Prowess, Skill, or to stour Mars his Crew,
Was sound in Him beyond all parallel;
And Fame does know, his Knowledge did excel.
All that the Arts could promise, or the Alarms
Of Drums and Trompets, and the Feats of Arms;
All that deep Knowledge, or Fell force could try,
Are buried now; and in his Grave do lie.
London, Printed by W. G. for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Gresham-Colledge,
leading from Bishopsgate-street. 1667.


