PANEGYRIC On the Author of Absalom and Achitophel, occasioned by his former
writing of an Elegy in praise of Oliver Cromwell, lately Reprinted.
WHEN Old Philosophers wrote the Worlds Birth,
And from wild Chaos brought great Nature forth;
The self-same Atoms as they different ran,
Club'd to a Lion, Monky, Bear or Man:
From such thin Sires such solid Offsprings grew,
So Divine Wite, like the First Matter Thou:
Thy subtle Sparks do such strange Products make,
That Thou just nothing, yet all Forms can take.
So justly thou have deserved thy long-worn Bays,
That as a Trophy to thy Endless Praise,
Let that great Poem its long Silence break;
The worthyest of thy vast Creation speak.
Methinks I fancy how bold Mu^^^^ Dart
Was levelled at Porsenna's Royal Heart,
And in defeated Rage I see him doom
His erring Hand t'its flaming Martyrdom.
Let his poor Deeds in dull Oblivion dye;
Thy Vengeance with a surer Aim lets fly:
In keen Iambicks against thy Sovereign Lord,
Thy Pen was more Successful than his Sword.
So vast a Pile thy lofty Numbers raise
Those Babel-Builders to great MOLOCHS praise;
A Pile which to thy Honor will surpass
Even thy own Corah's Monumental Brass.
Thou writest with so much Flame, Flame so refined,
That Poetry's the Fever of thy Mind:
And Feaver-like in those bleak days of Yore,
When Loyalty was Naked left and Poor,
Thy Aguish Veins Chilled at a Starving Door.
But Burning high thy active Spirits run
At prosperous Rebellions warmer Sun.
When Phaeton misled the Day, and hurled
His scattered Fires around the scorching World:
How would his Glories in thy Meeter Chime,
The Groans of Worlds thus softened into Rhyme?
Or when great Nero set his Rome on Fire,
And Tuned its Ruin to his jocund Lyre;
How with his Music would thy Notes agree,
A Song, great Bard, fit to be Set by Thee.
Such Wonders have thy powerful Raptures shown*
Pythagoras Transmigration thou'st outdone.
His Souls of Heroes and great Chiefs Expired,
Down into Birds and Noble Beasts retired.
But thou to Savages and Monsters dire,
Can infuse sparks, even of Celestial Fire:
Make Treason Glory, Murderers Heroes live;
And even to REGICIDES can GOD-HEADS give.
Thus in thy Songs, the yet warm Bloody Dart,
Fresh r^aking in a Martyred Monarchs Heart,
Burnish't by Verse, and polisht by thy Lines,
The Rubies in imperial Crowns out-shines,
Whilst in Applause to that sad days Success,
So Black a Theme in so Divine a Dress;
Thy Soaring Flights Prometheus Thefts excel;
Whilst Thou Steal'st Fire from Heaven t'enlighten HELL.
But stay, my Muse, here change thy gaudy strain,
And show a New, no less Prodigious Scene.
That Lawrell'd Head, whose sweet Melodious Tongue,
To Curse ye Meroz IO PAEAN Sung,
A Bag-pipe Drone to the old Priestcraft Cant:
Who once did Consecrated Daggers chant,
And Englands great Ravilliac sung before;
Now Tunes his Pipe to David's Righteous Lore.
In Scaevolas Stump the Convert Pen he brings,
And his Burnt Hand now writes the Praise of Kings.
Thus Bold, thus Great, and all in the Extreme,
His Panegyricks are like Daniel's Dream;
This Tribute now to David's Glory pay.
A Head of Gold to his old Feet of Clay.
No wonder then so Feelingly he tells
Of Corahs, Shimeis and Achitophells.
Such Characters he may well gild so fine,
Who 'has their Rich Ore from his own Native Mine.
How vast an Orb has a Poetic Soul?
Grasps all from East to West, and Pole to Pole.
Its warbling Voice, Right, Wrong, Truth, Falsehood Sings.
Tuned to all States, Religions, Gods or Kings.
Oh Wit how wide is thy Circumference?
Where thy Attractive Center's Bread and Pence.
Pence did I say! oh they have charming skill,
To rowze the Gall of an Heroic Quill.
Is there not mighty sound and mighty sense,
In great Iscariots thirty chinking Pence!
By this Lucina have thou born with pain,
The numerous Offsprings of thy teeming Brain:
More various Issues in Nile's slimy Bed,
Not thy own Patron Phoebus ever bred.
Thy pregnant Heats, like Isreal's wanton Lust,
First mould thy Golden Calves, then pound them into Dust.
Write on, and more then Winds or Frenzy Range,
Keep still thy old Prerogative to Change.
It Is poor Humanity that is kept in bound,
Whilst power unlimited is God-like found:
Then thy Great self, thou wondrous Poet show:
Honor and Principles disdain; for know
Thy Mercurye's too proud to fix so low.
All Laws and Bounds let thy wild Muse despise,
And reign the Prince oth'Air, in which it flies.
London, Printed for Charles Leigh. 1681.


